Principles and Practice of Psychiatric RehabilitationPrinciples and Practice of
PSYCHIATRIC
REHABILITATION
THIRD EDITION
Promoting Recovery and Self- Determination
Patrick W. Corrigan
Nicolas Rüsch
Amy C. Watson
Kristin Kosyluk
Lindsay Sheehan
THE GUILFORD PRESS
New York London
THIRD EDITIONTo mentors, colleagues, and friends with lived experience 
of recovery, who have been essential teachers as we have 
come to understand psychiatric rehabilitation
Copyright © 2024 The Guilford Press
A Division of Guilford Publications, Inc.
370 Seventh Avenue, Suite 1200, New York, NY 10001
www.guilford.com
All rights reserved
No part of this book may be reproduced, translated, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording, or 
otherwise, without written permission from the publisher.
Printed in the United States of America
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Last digit is print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
The authors have checked with sources believed to be reliable in their efforts to provide 
information that is complete and generally in accord with the standards of practice that are 
accepted at the time of publication. However, in view of the possibility of human error or changes 
in behavioral, mental health, or medical sciences, neither the authors, nor the editor and publisher, 
nor any other party who has been involved in the preparation or publication of this work warrants 
that the information contained herein is in every respect accurate or complete, and they are not 
responsible for any errors or omissions or the results obtained from the use of such information. 
Readers are encouraged to confirm the information contained in this book with other sources.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Corrigan, Patrick W., author. 
Title: Principles and practice of psychiatric rehabilitation : promoting recovery and self￾determination / Patrick W. Corrigan, Nicolas Rüsch, Amy C. Watson, Kristin Kosyluk, 
Lindsay Sheehan.
Description: Third edition. | New York, NY : The Guilford Press, [2024] | Includes bibliographical 
references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2023045081 | ISBN 9781462553709 (paperback ; acid-free paper) | 
ISBN 9781462553716 (hardcover ; acid-free paper)
Subjects: BISAC: PSYCHOLOGY / Psychopathology / Schizophrenia | MEDICAL / Nursing / 
Psychiatric & Mental Health
Classification: LCC RC439.5 .P74 2024 | DDC 616.89—dc23/eng/20231103
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023045081
Guilford Press is a registered trademark of Guilford Publications, Inc. v
AboUT THE AUTHoRS
Patrick W. Corrigan, PsyD, is Distinguished Professor of Psychology at the Illinois Insti￾tute of Technology. Previously, he was Professor of Psychiatry and Executive Director 
of the Center for Psychiatric Rehabilitation at the University of Chicago. Dr. Corrigan 
has spent most of his career providing and evaluating services for people with psychiat￾ric disabilities. He has served as principal investigator of the National Consortium on 
Stigma and Empowerment and led the team that developed the Honest, Open, Proud pro￾gram. In addition to the impact of stigma on psychiatric disabilities and rehabilitation, 
his research interests center on the role of social determinants of health such as ethnicity, 
gender identity, poverty, and criminal justice involvement. The author of more than 450 
journal articles and 20 books, Dr. Corrigan is editor of the journal Stigma and Health.
Nicolas Rüsch, MD, is Professor of Public Mental Health at Ulm University in Ulm, Ger￾many, and Consultant Psychiatrist in a home treatment team in nearby Günzburg. Dr. 
Rüsch is one of the editors of the journal Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiol￾ogy. His research interests include mental illness stigma; antistigma interventions, such 
as the Honest, Open, Proud program; self- concept and disclosure of mental illness; and 
mental illness and unemployment.
Amy C. Watson, PhD, is Professor in the School of Social Work at Wayne State Univer￾sity, Michigan. She is a past president of CIT International and is currently President of 
Crisis Response Programs and Training. Dr. Watson’s work since the 1990s has centered 
on people with psychiatric disabilities who have contact with the criminal legal system, 
with a focus on police encounters and the Crisis Intervention Team (CIT) model. She is 
currently examining models to reduce/eliminate the role of police in mental health cri￾sis response. Dr. Watson has authored over 100 publications. Earlier in her career, she 
worked as a probation offi cer on a team serving clients with serious mental illnesses.
Kristin Kosyluk, PhD, is Assistant Professor of Mental Health Law and Policy at the Uni￾versity of South Florida, Faculty Affi liate of the Louis de la Parte Florida Mental Health 
Institute, and Director of the Stigma Action Research (STAR) Lab. Her research focuses 
on understanding and addressing the stigma surrounding behavioral health conditions. 
More recently, Dr. Kosyluk has begun to work in the areas of stigma around HIV and 
substance use. She is also researching the impact of technology-based antistigma inter￾ventions. She is Vice President of the National Alliance on Mental Illness–Hillsborough 
County and board member at large of the Florida Rehabilitation Association, and serves 
on the editorial board of Stigma and Health.
AboUT THE AUTHoRSvi About the Authors
Lindsay Sheehan, PhD, is Assistant Professor of Psychology and Associate Director of 
the Center on Health Equity, Education, and Research at the Illinois Institute of Tech￾nology. With over 30 peer-reviewed publications, Dr. Sheehan conducts research on the 
stigma of mental illness, suicide, health equity, and the evaluation of peer services for 
people with mental illness. She developed the Inspiring Change community-based par￾ticipatory research (CBPR) curriculum and has extensive experience implementing CBPR 
programming. She is director of a state-funded program to train certified recovery sup￾port specialists and certified peer recovery specialists. Dr. Sheehan also has a decade of 
experience working in community mental health care, including provision of counseling, 
case management, residential support, and vocational training services. vii
PREFACE
Who are people with psychiatric disabilities? How do these disabilities 
interrupt the successful achievement of their life goals? What are the fundamental prin￾ciples that guide rehabilitation, and what are the basic practices that embody these 
 principles? Complex questions like these are the foundation of this book, which seeks to 
educate readers about various frameworks for understanding the disabilities that chal￾lenge many with mental illness. Approaches to psychiatric rehabilitation are grounded 
in recovery: The ups and downs of mental health with its challenges are nonetheless a 
process characterized by hope and aspiration. Self- determination is fundamental to this 
process. The heart of this book describes the repertoire of services, interventions, and 
resources that help people enjoy recovery.
AN EVOLVING PERSPECTIVE
Psychiatric rehabilitation is maturing at light speed. In the past three decades, constructs 
related to recovery, hope, self- determination, and well-being have joined intervention 
strategies that teach skills and provide support to help people achieve their goals. Note 
that the kinds of goals driving psychiatric rehabilitation are the same as those that are pri￾orities for most adults: employment, education, residence, relationships, and health (both 
physical and mental health). Proponents of rehabilitation and recovery avoid framing life 
problems and objectives as somehow diff erent from and less than the “norm.” A lesson 
stressed throughout this book is that the challenges faced by persons with psychiatric dis￾abilities are not distinct from, but rather fall on a continuum with, challenges faced by the 
rest of the population. Hence, broad practices constituting psychiatric rehabilitation are 
equally meaningful for the general population in dealing with the day-to-day problems 
that pop up in everyone’s lives.
Let us consider in more depth two principles that are central to rehabilitation: self￾determination and recovery. The fi rst principle is simply that people with disabilities 
should have personal power over all aspects of their lives and rehabilitation. This kind of 
self- determination ensures the development of life decisions that are consistent with the 
individual’s overall sense of self. Misguided programs that take away personal decision 
making not only undermine the possible benefi ts of rehabilitation but also may actually 
harm the person.
Related to empowerment is the principle of recovery; multiple models describe recov￾ery and include recovery as outcome versus recovery as process. Recovery as outcome
means that the symptoms, dysfunctions, and impairments experienced by many peo￾ple with serious mental illness will remit entirely, and that these persons will acquire 
PREFACEviii Preface
personally satisfying lives. Long-term follow-up research that tracks people with serious 
mental illnesses for 30 years or more shows that large numbers of these individuals over￾come their disabilities altogether. In addition, recovery is viewed as a process and rein￾troduces important values into rehabilitation such as hope and well-being. For too long, 
mental health services have been dominated by gloomy prognoses that robbed people 
of their future. Serious mental illnesses such as schizophrenia were known as “kiss-of￾death” diagnoses, in which any plans made for the future were set aside so that people 
could assume the feckless role of patient. This perspective is now replaced with hope that 
people can and will master their disabilities and resume the pursuit of their individual 
priorities. It is driven by the preposition despite; despite having ongoing symptoms and 
disabilities, people with serious mental illness can pursue the breadth of their goals, and 
should do so within an empowering service system.
Many of the barriers associated with psychiatric disabilities are not explained solely 
by impairments that result from mental illness; they also evolve from the community’s 
reactions to people with these impairments—that is, from stigma. Many people with 
psychiatric disabilities are unable to find satisfactory jobs or good housing because of 
the prejudices of employers and landlords. Social determinants of health are additional 
factors that impact recovery. These include variables that reflect diversity, equity, and 
inclusion (e.g., ethnicity, religion, gender identity, sexual orientation, and age) and social 
disadvantage: poverty, homelessness, and criminal justice involvement. Additional solu￾tions to limitations caused by psychiatric disabilities are targeting insidious effects of 
stigma and discrimination.
AN EVIDENCE BASE
Like many other areas of health care, mental health services have had their share of prin￾ciples touted as important to the field without research to support them. Without these 
data, people with disabilities may waste their time on irrelevant services or participate 
in treatments that are actually harmful. For example, approaches of the past such as 
mesmerism, phrenology, and psychoanalysis have no utility in understanding psychiatric 
disabilities and yield no benefits for addressing the needs of people with serious mental 
illness. Interventions such as hydrotherapy, hypnosis, and insulin shock therapy have 
actually harmed people. Most examples like these were based on good intentions of men￾tal health care providers who relied on misunderstood clinical experience to support their 
perspectives. We now know that good intentions and clinical lore are not sufficient for 
discerning what is and is not helpful in treating serious mental illness.
Practices highlighted in this book rest on sound evidence (i.e., these approaches have 
survived empirical tests across multiple studies). Evidence-based approaches to the devel￾opment of rehabilitation practices are not new ideas; many research programs over the 
past 50 years have adopted such paradigms. What is new is the public embrace of evi￾dence and research in identifying practices. Mental health authorities are looking closely 
for the evidence base that will enable them to discover effective interventions. Over the 
next decade, we should expect to find more practices that have met the evidence-based 
standard.
Equally important in the evidence-based agenda are dissemination strategies. How 
do real-world care providers learn evidence-based approaches and then incorporate them 
into day-to-day practices? Future research on technology transfer that tests dissemination 
strategies is important. Specification of how practices vary with macro-level variables Preface ix
such as ethnicity and the public mental health care system will play a prominent role in 
the further development of dissemination.
WHO ARE OUR READERS?
We had three groups in mind as we updated this book. First, we wished to educate stu￾dents of psychiatric rehabilitation. Several academic disciplines are dedicated to under￾standing psychiatric disabilities; they are embedded within mental health counseling, 
psychology, social work, occupational therapy, nursing, and psychiatry programs. Stu￾dents who will be future practitioners will benefit from the book’s cautious review of 
principles and practices. Some students are also training as social scientists. The volume’s 
focus on evidence-based approaches is an excellent model for nascent investigators.
Students here may also include people with psychiatric disabilities. As addressed in 
several places in the book, peer recovery support providers offer a special relevance and 
elegance to rehabilitation programs. There seems to be a form of affirmative action impel￾ling mental health care programs to hire more people with psychiatric disabilities as job 
specialists, education coaches, and case managers. The information provided in this text 
should enhance the career goals of students with psychiatric disabilities.
This book is also meant to be a sourcebook for practitioners. It is a comprehensive 
review of rehabilitation principles and practices. A practitioner with this book on the 
shelf has a well-organized resource to review when questions emerge. It is equally rel￾evant to administrators whose responsibility includes identifying the best interventions. 
The literature review in this book provides the essential research foundation for admin￾istrative decisions.
ADDENDUM FOR THE THIRD EDITION
Our understanding of psychiatric disabilities and rehabilitation continues to evolve. 
Much has happened since the publication of the second edition of Principles and Prac￾tice of Psychiatric Rehabilitation. A careful review of the empirical literature since then 
guided this revision. Notable additions include the following:
•	 Understanding life goals by diversity, equity, and inclusion.
•	 Recognizing barriers wrought by social disadvantage such as poverty and criminal 
justice involvement.
•	 Describing intersectionality of multiple diversity and disability experiences.
•	 Broadening focus to include physical health and wellness.
•	 Grounding innovations with community-based participatory research.
•	 Expanding the workforce through peer recovery support providers.
The book is illustrated with personal experiences of people with lived experience, 
service providers, or agencies, written for readers at all levels who want sense of the ideas 
herein “in action.” All illustrations are composites of individuals whose personal infor￾mation, including demographic details, has been altered to protect their identities.
A note on language. How do we refer to the people who constitute the main group of 
this book’s subjects: clients, patients, service recipients? We adopt what has become stan￾dard usage in recovery-based approaches: Because “they” are people first, person-first x Preface
language is used. The book refers to individuals with disabilities, people with schizo￾phrenia, or persons who are homeless, for example. Other subjects of this book are 
usually referred to as service providers. We sometimes depart from this generic category 
because people from varied backgrounds—rehabilitation counseling, psychology, psychi￾atry, nursing, or social work—may provide rehabilitation services. We are also mindful 
of pronouns throughout, respecting both traditional and nonconforming approaches to 
gender identity. In this book we use the pronouns they/them/their.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Feedback from several experts in the field contributed to the development of this edi￾tion. These included Deborah Becker, Jeffrey Draine, Larry Davidson, Ken Gill, How￾ard Goldman, Michael Green, Paul Holmes, Chow Lam, Jon Larson, Nannette Larson, 
Robert Liberman, Bruce Link, Daniel Luchins, Stanley McCracken, Dinesh Mittal, Scott 
Morris, David Penn, Bernice Pescosolido, Jo Phelan, Carlos Pratt, Lisa Razzano, Mark 
Salzer, Andrea Schmuck, Georg Schomerus, Katrina Scior, David Smelson, Karyn Bolden 
Stovall, Hector Tsang, and Charles Wallace. We appreciate the wisdom of coauthors from 
the first edition: Kim Mueser, Gary Bond, Robert Drake, and Phyllis Solomon.
From P. W. C.:
I have been privileged to mentor and guide several scholars over my career who 
have gone on to make their mark in psychiatric rehabilitation. These include the four 
coauthors of this book—Kristin Kosyluk, Nicolas Rüsch, Lindsay Sheehan, and Amy 
Watson—some for more than 30 years! Thank you dearly for your partnerships. xi
CoNTENTS
PART I
UNDERSTANDING PSYCHIATRIC DISABILITIES 
IN THE PERSON AND THE WORLD
CHAPTER 1 Who Are People with Psychiatric Disabilities? 3
CHAPTER 2 Stigma and Mental Illness 28
CHAPTER 3 What Is Psychiatric Rehabilitation? 48
CHAPTER 4 Psychiatric Disability and Equity 7 0
PART II
REHABILITATION STRATEGIES
CHAPTER 5 Assessment 85
CHAPTER 6 Erasing Stigma and Promoting Empowerment 117
CHAPTER 7 Wellness Self- Management and Recovery 135
CHAPTER 8 Care Coordination 153
CHAPTER 9 Medications 164
CHAPTER 10 Housing and Citizenship 176
CHAPTER 11 Employment and Education 192
CHAPTER 12 Family 211
CHAPTER 13 Psychosis and Cognitive Challenges 231
CHAPTER 14 Criminal Justice 254
CoNTENTSxii Contents
CHAPTER 15 Physical Health and Wellness 270
CHAPTER 16 Co-Occurring Mental Illness and Substance Use Disorder 287
CHAPTER 17 Peer Supports and Services 300
REFERENCES 315
INDEX 395PART I
UNDERSTANDING 
PSYCHIATRIC DISABILITIES 
IN THE PERSON 
AND THE WORLD 3
CHAPTER 1
Who Are People 
with Psychiatric Disabilities?
People with psychiatric disabilities are as complex and diverse as the popu￾lation in general. Hence, the way to start a discussion on psychiatric rehabilitation is 
by understanding who persons with psychiatric disabilities are. People with psychiatric 
disabilities are, because of mental illness, unable to attain age- and culture- appropriate 
goals for extended periods of time. This defi nition contains three parts. First, psychiat￾ric disabilities are based on diagnosable mental illness. This chapter reviews important 
components of psychiatric diagnosis, focusing on those diagnoses that are most relevant 
to psychiatric rehabilitation. Second, a person with a psychiatric disability is not able to 
pursue signifi cant life goals because of the mental illness. Goals make sense in context, 
in terms of the community and culture in which the person lives. “Appropriateness” of 
goals may vary by age (e.g., schooling for young people, employment for adults) and cul￾ture (e.g., Asian cultures may view family involvement diff erently than European cultures 
do). Examples of important life goals relate to income, work, and vocation; relationships, 
intimacy, commitment, and family; physical, dental, and mental health; and recreation 
and spirituality. Rehabilitation providers need to be vigilant about sensitivity to context. 
What might seem like an odd goal in one context might make sense in another. Ulti￾mately, people decide for themselves which goals they wish to pursue.
Third, both the mental illness and its interference with the attainment of goals persist 
for signifi cant periods of time, in most cases for years. Some people experience illnesses 
that might be considered serious but quickly adapt and move on. Because of illness or 
context, disabilities have a major impact on people for signifi cant portions of their lives.
Four conceptual domains are important for understanding the nature of psychiatric 
disabilities.
1. Diagnoses represent the collections of symptoms and dysfunctions that cohere 
to form meaningful psychiatric syndromes. Typically, diagnoses that are the foci of psy￾chiatric rehabilitation include schizophrenia, the mood disorders (e.g., major depression 
and bipolar disorder), some anxiety disorders and related disorders (e.g., posttraumatic 
stress disorder [PTSD] and obsessive– compulsive disorder [OCD], which were formerly 
classifi ed with the anxiety disorders but now have their own categories in the fi fth, text 
CHAPTER 14 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
revised edition of Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders [DSM-5-TR]; 
American Psychiatric Association [APA], 2022), and some personality disorders.
2. Course. Psychiatric syndromes are not static phenomena. They vary among indi￾viduals in terms of onset and trajectory. A syndrome also varies within an individual over 
time in terms of the severity of symptoms and dysfunctions.
3. Co-occurring disorders. Psychiatric disorders rarely occur in isolation, without 
associated disorders. Instead, many people with psychiatric disabilities experience mul￾tiple diagnoses, which interact to impede their life goals significantly. Substance use dis￾orders, in particular, frequently co-occur with serious mental illness to worsen disease 
course.
4. Disabilities, as indicated earlier, refer to the inability of people to meet life goals 
that are appropriate for their age and culture. These tend to be macro-level goals that 
include obtaining a satisfactory job, living independently, developing intimate and mature 
relationships, managing physical and mental health needs, and enjoying life through rec￾reational and spiritual pursuits. Note that it is disability per se that defines a person as 
being in need of psychiatric rehabilitation.
People can have psychiatric diagnoses—some that are severe, and others that are 
long-lasting—that do not interfere with their life goals. What distinguishes rehabilitation 
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Four Life Stories
Veronica Howard had lived on the streets since she was 18. She had neither a steady job nor 
a regular income. She preferred the cold pedestrian tunnels under the freeway to the home￾less shelters, because she was deathly afraid of other people. Veronica wore dirty clothes 
and had poor hygiene. She also had difficulty managing her diabetes because of lack of 
access to healthy food.
Joel Jenkins was 22 years old when he was brought into the emergency room of the 
state psychiatric hospital by the police. He was extremely agitated, shouting at imaginary 
demons, and thrashing at the officers. This was his third admission to the hospital in the past 
6 months. His parents were frightened of Joel’s recurring “craziness” and feared they would 
soon have to “put him away” in an institution. The police officers in the small town where Joel 
lived were afraid that the next time they were called to his home, the arrest could escalate 
into someone getting hurt. They were also concerned that Joel might be using marijuana, 
because some was found in his pants pocket during his last arrest.
George Miller rarely comes out of his apartment. It’s not that he is afraid of people; rather, he 
just seems to have no interest in them. He does not particularly care about working with oth￾ers, making small talk when he meets neighbors at the park, or joining friends and family for 
a holiday meal. For that matter, he has no interest in finding a girlfriend or intimate partner.
Harriet Osborne wants to get a job, live on her own, find a husband, and have a family. But 
she has been hospitalized six times for mental illness and is afraid she will not be able to 
handle these goals. So, instead, she goes to a recreational program each day, where she is 
bored with doing the same routine of crafts and board games.1. People with Psychiatric Disabilities 5
from other forms of psychiatric care is the focus on helping people achieve life goals that 
are blocked by symptoms and dysfunctions. Each of these four conceptual domains is 
reviewed more fully in the remainder of this chapter.
There can be significant problems in discussions that focus on diagnoses, symptoms, 
dysfunctions, and disabilities: Such discussions can reduce people to the sum of their 
problems. Although a pathology-based perspective is useful for understanding mental 
disorder and its impact on a person, pathology ignores the individual’s strengths, and this 
omission has unintended consequences (Stein et al., 2022). Focusing on limitations adds 
to the person’s feeling of incompetence and stigmatization. Moreover, ignoring strengths 
misses resources that the person and rehabilitation team may use to advance the person’s 
goals. Given the importance of a strengths-based perspective, the chapter ends with a 
fuller discussion of this area.
PSYCHIATRIC DIAGNOSIS
Many countries use the International Classification of Diseases and Related Health 
Problems (now in its 11th revision and known as ICD-11; World Health Organization 
[WHO], 2019) as a resource for psychiatric diagnosis. Although ICD-11 is a reference 
for all disease, the section on mental disorders is specific to psychiatric diagnosis. Psy￾chiatric rehabilitation practitioners in the United States and some other countries rely on 
the DSM, which is currently in a text revision of its fifth edition (DSM-5-TR), an update 
of DSM-5, published in 2013 (APA, 2013). Although there are some minor differences 
across manuals, researchers have attempted to make sure that DSM and ICD correspond 
as the references continue to develop. DSM-5-TR specifies criteria for making diagnoses; 
for example, two or more of the following need to be exhibited during a 1-month period 
for a person to be diagnosed with schizophrenia: delusions, hallucinations, disorganized 
speech, grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior, or negative symptoms. Other criteria 
(regarding the duration of the symptoms, the resulting level of functioning, etc.) must 
also be met.
Although DSM includes diagnoses relevant to all age groups, disorders of interest 
to psychiatric rehabilitation are generally dominated by adult syndromes. In part, this is 
the case because the onset of many major mental illnesses (e.g., schizophrenia and the 
mood disorders) occurs in late adolescence or young adulthood. The focus on adult dis￾orders also occurs because disabilities (defined as blocked life goals) are most meaningful 
in adulthood, when various goals such as work, relationships, and independent living 
are ordinarily achieved. Hence, psychiatric disorders related to children (e.g., attention￾deficit/hyperactivity disorder or developmental disabilities) and those with onset in later 
life (e.g., major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease) are typically 
not the focus of psychiatric rehabilitation.
WHO (2001) developed the International Classification of Functioning, Disabil￾ity, and Health (ICF) to parallel the goals of the contemporaneous ICD, and DSM. ICF 
integrates medical and social aspects of a disorder into a single classification. It echoes 
the earlier statement that problems can only be understood in terms of context. Hence, 
ICF describes disability and functioning in terms of health conditions (diseases, disor￾ders, and injuries) and contextual factors. It further divides context into environmental 
factors (e.g., social attitudes, architectural characteristics, legal structures, climate, and 
terrain) and internal personal factors (e.g., gender, age, coping styles, social background, 6 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
education, and profession). These descriptors are then used to classify people into more 
than 50 core sets. For the most part, ICF has not been used in rehabilitation practice in 
the United States. However, it is an important set of guidelines that reminds the provider 
of the importance of context in describing disabilities.
CHARACTERISTIC DIAGNOSES
Diagnoses in DSM represent syndromes, or collections of symptoms that have meaning 
for an understanding of etiology (causes of a disorder) and treatment. In addition, spe￾cific disorders tend to be associated with dysfunctions (e.g., poor social skills) that, when 
combined with symptoms, prevent persons from achieving life goals. Finally, diagnosis 
is fundamental for answering epidemiological questions—namely, questions about the 
distribution of mental disorders in the population and associated risk factors. DSM refers 
to the various diagnoses as disorders. A psychiatric disorder is a clinically significant
behavioral or psychological syndrome that is associated with distress or dysfunction, or 
with increased risk of death, disability, pain, or loss of freedom (APA, 2022). Describing 
a condition as clinically significant generally means that the condition is severe enough 
that treatment would be recommended or sought out.
Symptoms and Dysfunctions
Although DSM is largely silent about the difference between symptoms and dysfunctions, 
symptoms tend to be the additional negative experiences that occur because of an illness, 
while dysfunctions represent the absence of normal functioning. Both of these are evi￾dent in four fundamental spheres of human psychology: affect; perception and cognition; 
motivation and behavior; and interpersonal functioning. Note that reviewing symptoms 
and dysfunctions in terms of these four spheres implies that symptoms are not necessarily 
linked to specific disorders. For example, hallucinations and depression occur in several 
different disorders. Although psychopathology researchers formerly looked for the single 
symptom that unequivocally signaled a specific disorder, these efforts have been largely 
unsuccessful. It is the collection of symptoms, with corresponding course and disabilities, 
that defines a diagnosis.
Affect
Four types of mood-related symptoms may constitute a psychiatric disorder: depression, 
euphoria, anxiety, and anger. These are distinguished from the normal range of positive 
and negative emotions by their severity or the length of time for which they have been 
experienced. For example, feeling anxious before a test is common and perhaps adaptive, 
because it motivates a person to be prepared. Feeling anxious about a test all semester is 
likely to be overwhelming and to interfere with activities outside of school.
Depression is a feeling of sadness, or being blue; commonly associated with depres￾sion is anhedonia (a lack of enjoyment in life activities, especially those that were previ￾ously enjoyable). On the opposite end of the continuum from depression is euphoria, an 
overwhelming feeling of intense pleasure and well-being that can lead to uncontrollable 
excitement and regrettable behavior. Anxiety has both cognitive and physical compo￾nents. Worrying or ruminating over a stressor is the cognitive component. The physio￾logical or autonomic components of anxiety include rapid heartbeat, shortness of breath, 1. People with Psychiatric Disabilities 7
profuse sweating, and/or muscle ache (especially in the head and neck). Finally, some 
people have significant anger problems, marked by sudden and uncontrollable rage that 
can escalate into violence.
Alternatively, affective symptoms may appear in terms of disordered modulation. 
Inappropriate affect refers to emotions that are not consistent with the situation (e.g., 
uncontrollable laughter when learning of the death of a friend, or sobbing while watch￾ing a comedy). Affective lability means rapid change from one emotion to the next. An 
emotionally labile person may swing from crying to anger to laughter during the course 
of a 3-minute conversation. Dysfunctions in affect are also evident in some psychiatric 
disorders. Most common among these is flat affect, or responding to normally emotional 
situations with almost no signs of emotion. For example, a person with flat affect may 
seem to show no grief at the death of a loved one and no joy at winning the lottery.
Perception and Cognition
Distortions in perception that lead to significant disability are observed in several psy￾chotic disorders, or mood disorders with psychotic features. These distortions include 
four types of hallucinations: auditory (which are the most commonly experienced in 
schizophrenia and are often reported as voices), olfactory (which are more commonly 
associated with major depressive disorder and include reports of putrid odors of decay), 
tactile, and visual. Psychosis is also associated with two cognitive symptoms: delusions, 
which are erroneous beliefs that might include grandiose, religious, persecutory, ref￾erential, or somatic content; and disorganized speech, in which syntax and semantics 
that govern the meaning of discourse are absent, and content may approach nonsense. 
Depression is associated with world views and self-views of helplessness, hopelessness, 
and worthlessness. Anxiety is often associated with another kind of cognitive symptom: 
obsessive thoughts. Obsessions are persistent ideas, impulses, or images that are experi￾enced as intrusive and cause marked distress.
Two dysfunctions may be observed in the perceptual and cognitive sphere. First, peo￾ple with some psychiatric disorders may show deficits in attention and other information￾processing abilities. This may include problems with maintenance, span, and selectiv￾ity of attention. People with manic episodes may have diminished attention because of 
distractibility (i.e., attention easily drawn to irrelevant stimuli). Additional deficits have 
been found in such cognitive functions as short- and long-term memory, and the execu￾tive functions that help people organize individual processes into an efficient decision￾making system (Habtewold et al., 2020; Kriesche, Woll, Tschentscher, Engel, & Karch, 
2022). In addition, some people show problems with impoverished thought: They are 
unable to generate many ideas spontaneously in response to an issue. Alogia is common 
for a person with impoverished thought: speech marked by minimal words and little 
initiation of conversation.
Motivation and Behavior
Symptoms and deficits related to motivation manifest themselves in different ways. First, 
people with mood disorders typically show motivational problems. For instance, those 
with overwhelming euphoria may experience an expansive approach to life; namely, they 
feel that there are no limits to what they might accomplish. Conversely, those who are 
depressed may be lethargic and have difficulty completing everyday activities, such as 
basic hygiene and work duties. Some people may experience inhibitions because of their 8 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
disorders. Those with significant anxiety disorders or related disorders are unable to 
accomplish daily activities because they avoid situations that make them anxious, or 
because they are overwhelmed with worry. Disinhibition is common in some other impor￾tant disorders; these include some sexual and eating disorders. Disinhibition-related syn￾dromes of particular concern to psychiatric rehabilitation are the various substance use 
disorders (e.g., inability to inhibit inappropriate impulses because of intoxication).
Symptoms related to behavior are also listed under motivation. These include the dis￾organized or catatonic behavior found in some psychotic disorders. Catatonic behavior 
includes opposite ends of the same spectrum—motoric immobility or excessive motoric 
activity. Grossly disorganized behavior, seen in some forms of schizophrenia, includes 
childlike silliness or unpredictable agitation. Behavior-related symptoms also include 
manic or hypomanic activities, which are found in the corresponding phases of bipolar 
disorders. These symptoms include pressure to keep talking, marked increase in goal￾directed activity, and/or excessive involvement in pleasurable activity. Depression is also 
associated with behavior change: psychomotor agitation, in which the individual paces 
or cannot sit still; and the opposite, psychomotor retardation, in which the individual 
moves, thinks, and talks more slowly than usual. Perhaps the major dysfunction most 
related to motivation is avolition, which is characterized by an inability to initiate and 
persist in goal-directed activities. People manifesting this symptom rarely show interest 
in work or social activities.
Interpersonal Functioning
Social relationships are at the heart of psychological functioning and are fundamental to 
most life goals. Many psychiatric disorders have a significant impact on the ability to form 
or maintain these relationships. Interestingly, most of the symptoms and dysfunctions in 
interpersonal relationships represent interactions with the three previous spheres of func￾tioning: affect, cognition, and motivation. In terms of affect, social anxiety can cripple a 
person’s abilities to engage in and enjoy interpersonal transactions. Depression can rob a 
person’s interest in others or make others unrewarding to be around. Euphoria can change 
interactions into overly energetic and unpredictable affairs. Anger and rage can fill others 
with dread or leave them feeling victimized. Hallucinations and delusions can make it dif￾ficult for people to form close and intimate bonds because their perspectives on the world, 
including a shared reality, fail to correspond with the perspectives of others.
Symptoms and dysfunctions in cognition also undermine a person’s interpersonal 
experiences (Horan & Green, 2019). They may prevent the person from correctly per￾ceiving the social cues of a situation, or from understanding the roles and goals that gov￾ern it. Problems with motivation may also have an impact on interpersonal activities. The 
loss of motivation common to some disorders leaves some individuals with a total lack of 
interest in social interactions. People with this deficit, called schizoid symptomatology, 
do not necessarily fear others or have their interpersonal drive suppressed by depression. 
Rather, they seem to have no natural desire for any aspect of the multilevel benefits of 
human interaction.
Significant work has focused on understanding the deficits and dysfunctions related 
to social functioning and social skills (Gardner, Filia, Killackey, & Cotton, 2019; Smart, 
Brown, Palmier-Claus, Raphael, & Berry, 2020). Social functioning deficits can prevent 
people from attaining age-appropriate social roles. For young to middle-age North Amer￾ican adults, these roles may include employee, head of household, spouse/partner, parent, 
neighbor, and member of a religious community. People with some psychiatric disor￾ders lack the social skills that would enable them to achieve social roles. These include 1. People with Psychiatric Disabilities 9
interpersonal skills such as basic conversation, assertiveness, conflict management, and 
dating skills. They also include personal and instrumental skills, such as hygiene, money 
management, and basic work skills.
Suicidal Thoughts and Behaviors
Many people with psychosis or other serious mental illnesses struggle with suicidal 
thoughts and behaviors; hence, this is an important concern for rehabilitation providers, 
who should be aware of and ready to intervene in all such cases. Recent epidemiological 
research has shown that each year in the United States, more than 45,000 reported deaths 
are attributed to suicide (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020). Prevalence 
of suicidal ideation is particularly high in adults with major depression and substance 
use disorders. Suicidal ideation or attempt is one of the criteria for the diagnosis of major 
depression, though not all people who qualify for this diagnosis are suicidal. Two points 
on suicide assessment are important to emphasize:
1. Past suicidal ideation or attempts serve as important information for determining 
whether a person is at increased risk of suicide and for developing an appropriate 
intervention plan.
2. Risk of suicide does not necessarily mean that a person should be hospitalized or 
rule the person out from pursuing other rehabilitation goals.
Answers to difficult issues like these need to involve the person with disability, his or her 
family, and the complete rehabilitation team.
Dangerousness
Some people with serious mental illness also pose a danger to others. This danger can 
vary from homicide (which is very rare) to yelling at loved ones. Epidemiological research 
suggests that, depending on diagnosis, people with serious mental illness are up to six 
times more likely to be violent than the rest of the population; however, only 1–5% of 
violent acts are attributable to people with mental illness (Ahonen, Loeber, & Brent, 
2019), and people with mental illness are more likely to be victims of crimes than perpe￾trators (Sariaslan, Arseneault, Larsson, Lichtenstein, & Fazel, 2020). Individuals who are 
experiencing psychosis and concomitant use of alcohol and other drugs are at the highest 
risk of perpetrating violence. Moreover, symptoms related to paranoia and threat/control 
override also exacerbate violence (Song, Corcoran, & Gillespie, 2022). Interview items 
that assess threat/control override include the following:
1. How often have you felt that your mind was dominated by forces beyond your 
control?
2. How often have you felt that thoughts were put into your head that were not your 
own?
3. How often have you felt that there were people who wished to do you harm?
The two cautions about suicide also apply to an understanding of violence. First, any 
previous history of violence and threats should be considered in developing an appropri￾ate intervention plan. Second, the presence of anger or threat does not necessarily pre￾clude pursuit of other rehabilitation goals. Rather, the person and his or her family and 
rehabilitation team need to make this issue a priority in pursuing life goals.10 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
Insight into Symptoms
One might think that psychiatric symptoms and related dysfunctions would dominate a 
person’s awareness. It might be assumed that people with mental illness would be con￾cerned about problems with emotion, perception, cognition, motivation, interpersonal 
relations, or danger, and therefore would be highly motivated to participate in treatment 
to resolve these problems. However, many people with psychiatric diagnoses are unaware 
that specific experiences are symptomatic of mental illness (Lysaker, Pattison, Leonhardt, 
Phelps, & Vohs, 2018). Lack of insight may occur for three reasons. First, it may be the 
direct result of the biological deficits caused by the illness. For example, deficits in the 
frontal lobes of the cerebral cortex commonly found in some people with schizophrenia 
are associated with diminished insight. This area of the cortex is associated with meta￾cognitive processes related to the observing self—that is, the cognitive process that helps 
the person check how well they are (Lysaker et al., 2018).
Second, alternatively, not recognizing symptoms as mental illness may have second￾ary gain. Namely, labeling oneself as “mentally ill” may evoke both public and internal 
stigma. If the person does not admit that certain experiences are symptoms of mental ill￾ness, thereby denying the psychiatric disorder, the person can escape the stigma (Holder, 
Peterson, Stephens, & Crandall, 2019). Third, what mental health professionals perceive 
as symptoms may be experienced as consistent with a person’s image of themself. For 
example, frequent rage and angry interactions with others may be perceived as “normal 
life” by some people. This misperception of symptoms may be influenced by cultural fac￾tors (Vovou, Hull, & Petrides, 2021).
What implications does lack of insight have for treatment? Poor insight into one’s 
disease predicts poor outcome; that is, people are less able to use interventions to control 
their symptoms and meet their life goals (Rozalski & McKeegan, 2019). In addition, lack 
of insight undermines full understanding and participating in treatment plans (Coffey et 
al., 2019). The traditional notion of psychiatric care was that people had to recognize and 
admit their mental illness for significant treatment benefits to occur. In its absence, some 
people might resist participating in effective interventions. Most rehabilitation providers 
now realize that focusing on disease acceptance can lead to an unnecessary struggle. For 
example, the perception that people who did not admit their schizophrenia would not 
progress until they did so, and that a provider “should” motivate such a person into rec￾ognizing their illness, is considered dated (Corrigan, Liberman, & Engel, 1990). Today’s 
rehabilitation providers avoid this battle, instead partnering with these persons by help￾ing them to identify life goals and develop rehabilitation plans to achieve these goals. 
People can go back to work whether or not they admit they have schizophrenia.
Epidemiology
Epidemiologists seek to address public health questions about how many people meet cri￾teria for specific disorders (Baxter, Patton, Scott, Degenhardt, & Whiteford, 2013). Inci￾dence rates represent new cases that emerge in a healthy population within a fixed time 
frame (often 1 year). Prevalence rates represent the proportion of the population meeting 
criteria for a disease at a specified point or period of time. Working at the population 
level allows researchers to understand the biological, behavioral, psychological, social, 
and economic variables that predict risk and course of various disorders. Public health 
officials use this information to set priorities in treatment policy and to track the impact 
of specific approaches on the diagnosis in the population.1. People with Psychiatric Disabilities 11
Etiology
One purpose of diagnosis in medicine is to classify people with similar disorders into 
groups that share similar etiologies or causes. For example, people with respiratory 
symptoms and with test results suggesting a bacterial infection may be diagnosed with 
pneumonia, which may be effectively treated by antibiotics. Psychiatry has been less suc￾cessful in developing a diagnostic system that corresponds with etiology. Being diagnosed 
with major depressive disorder, for example, does not automatically suggest a specific set 
of causes. Despite this limitation, psychiatry has made huge strides in identifying what 
causes and exacerbates the serious mental illnesses that lead to psychiatric disabilities.
Biological Factors
Clearly, research has not substantiated the out-of-date notions that mothers, fathers, or 
other family members cause mental illnesses because of bad parenting. Instead, research 
has identified biological processes that may explain the development of these disorders. A 
complete discussion of these processes is beyond the scope of this text. In brief, research 
has suggested two sets of factors that may yield a diagnosis consistent with disorders such 
as schizophrenia:
1. Genetic factors. Population approaches to genetics, as well as the newer field 
of molecular genetics, have clearly implicated genetic inheritance as a primary cause of 
schizophrenia and the mood disorders. Research at this point seems to support a complex 
multifactorial pattern of inheritance rather than a single gene (Sullivan & Geschwind, 
2019).
2. Obstetric complications. Adverse intrauterine events are associated with later 
onset of schizophrenia (Al-Haddad et al., 2019). For example, mothers who contract 
influenza during the second trimester of pregnancy are significantly more likely to give 
birth to children who later show signs of schizophrenia than are comparison groups of 
mothers. Other prenatal infection exposures increase the risk of developing depression.
The Stress–Vulnerability Model
Biological factors are not sufficient to explain the onset and course of most serious men￾tal illnesses, however. Researchers developed a stress–vulnerability model (see Figure 
1.1) that integrates biological vulnerabilities with environmental stressors to explain how 
serious mental illnesses such as schizophrenia occur (Zubin & Spring, 1977). Accord￾ing to this model, genetic and other biological factors may make some people vulner￾able to stress. When this vulnerability is overwhelmed, typically in late adolescence or 
young adulthood, the person experiences prodromal symptoms (the subtle, usually non￾psychotic signs of an illness that precede the first episode). Continued stress yields a full￾blown psychotic episode and onset of the disorder. With treatment, the psychosis may 
remit; however, subsequent stress may cause relapse or residual symptoms.
Research on this model has shown that common events that occur as part of “nor￾mal” life development can cause sufficient stress to overwhelm a vulnerable person 
(Taylor, Grove, Ellingrod, & Tso, 2019). Such events may include leaving home when 
launching from one’s family of origin, starting a job, or getting married. Adverse child￾hood experiences (ACEs) such as abuse, neglect, or parental divorce seem to increase 
vulnerability to mental illness in adulthood, with exposure to multiple and prolonged 12 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
ACEs increasing this risk (Hughes et al., 2017). Moreover, some stressful family interac￾tions can overwhelm a person’s vulnerability (Pruessner, Iyer, Faridi, Joober, & Malla, 
2011). Protective factors that can diminish the person’s vulnerability to stress may pre￾vent subsequent relapses. Broadly speaking, these factors include psychiatric medication, 
interpersonal and instrumental skills, and social support. In some ways, these protective 
factors are the basic foundation on which rehabilitation is provided.
COMMON DIAGNOSES AMONG PSYCHIATRIC DISABILITIES
Four general diagnostic syndromes are commonly associated with psychiatric disability: 
schizophrenia, mood disorders, anxiety and related disorders, and personality disorders 
such as borderline personality disorder. (Note that we continue to use the still-common 
term mood disorders throughout this text for the depressive disorders and bipolar disor￾ders, although DSM-5-TR has now divided these two groups into separate categories. We 
also continue to consider PTSD and OCD together with the anxiety disorders, although, 
as noted earlier, these two disorders now have their own categories in DSM-5-TR.) We 
do not mean to imply that these are the only diagnoses relevant to psychiatric rehabilita￾tion. Many DSM diagnoses may be considered the cause of psychiatric disabilities and 
be relevant for psychiatric rehabilitation. Still, these four groups of disorders account for 
the vast majority of people with psychiatric disabilities, and therefore are most common 
in rehabilitation practice.
Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is one of the psychotic disorders that lead to psychiatric disabilities. DSM￾5-TR defines psychosis at various levels. The narrowest definition is restricted to evidence 
of delusions or prominent hallucinations, with the person not having insight into the 
FIGURE 1.1. The stress–vulnerability model. Originally developed to explain the course of 
schizophrenia, its broad principles are applicable to the other disorders that lead to psychiat￾ric disabilities.1. People with Psychiatric Disabilities 13
pathological nature of hallucinations. A broader definition includes other positive symp￾toms such as disorganized speech or grossly disorganized behavior (positive symptoms 
are the florid signs of psychosis). Many people with schizophrenia are challenged by sig￾nificant disabilities and struggle to achieve life goals in most domains. In fact, inherent 
to the definition of schizophrenia are psychotic symptoms that interfere with major life 
functions. Schizophrenia is more accurately considered a spectrum disorder—namely, a 
variety of disorders that may vary in course and outcome but share similar symptoms and 
dysfunctions. Epidemiological research has shown less than 1% lifetime prevalence for 
psychotic disorders (Moreno-Küstner, Martin, & Pastor, 2018).
Other diagnoses on the schizophrenia spectrum include schizoaffective and schizo￾phreniform disorders. Schizoaffective disorder combines a period of schizophrenia with 
either a major depressive or a manic episode. The differential diagnosis between schizoaf￾fective disorder and schizophrenia may have important medication implications. Namely, 
individuals with schizoaffective disorder may benefit from mood stabilizers, as well as 
antipsychotic medication, to address the affective components of their illness. People 
with schizophreniform disorder meet the diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia except for 
length of the disorder. Schizophreniform disorder is shorter in duration than schizo￾phrenia, with the course lasting between 1 and 6 months. People with schizophreniform 
disorder typically have a much more benign course than those with schizophrenia.
In addition to spectrum diagnoses and subtypes, schizophrenia has been defined in 
terms of positive and negative symptoms (Carrà et al., 2019). Positive symptoms repre￾sent the florid signs of psychosis and include hallucinations, delusions, grossly disorga￾nized behavior, and inappropriate affect. Negative symptoms are sometimes called the 
deficit syndrome and represent the absence of normal functioning seen in many peo￾ple with schizophrenia (i.e., alogia, avolition, and affective flattening). Typically, posi￾tive symptoms are episodic and fluctuate more over time than do negative symptoms. 
Although, originally, positive and negative symptoms were thought to be mutually exclu￾sive syndromes representing different etiological processes (Crow, 1982), research now 
indicates that people with schizophrenia can manifest both clusters of symptoms (Carrà 
et al., 2019). Of more relevance to rehabilitation practitioners, research has suggested 
that assessment of positive and negative symptoms has been useful for prognosis and 
treatment planning. Research suggests that positive symptoms, as opposed to negative 
symptoms, respond well to traditional antipsychotics, as well as to many of the atypi￾cal antipsychotic medications (Galderisi et al., 2021); see Chapter 9 for a more complete 
discussion of medications. Noticing this trend, researchers have sought to improve the 
impact of some antipsychotics on negative symptoms. Research also suggests that the 
prognosis for negative symptoms is worse than that for positive symptoms, especially in 
the psychosocial treatments that often constitute psychiatric rehabilitation (Galderisi et 
al., 2021). Nevertheless, there is no indication that the presence or severity of positive 
and/or negative symptoms precludes someone from participating in and benefiting from 
rehabilitation programs.
Mood Disorders
Symptoms related to mood define major depression: People have long periods of time with 
prominent sadness and/or have significant anhedonia (i.e., loss of enjoyment of almost 
all human activities and interactions, including those that were previously reported 
as pleasurable). In addition, people with major depression may experience cognitive, 
motivational, and interpersonal symptoms and dysfunctions. Many people with major 14 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
depression also experience vegetative signs. These are changes in major life functions 
(e.g., sleep, appetite, and energy). Interestingly, these changes can represent either an 
increase or a decrease from a person’s typical baseline. Thus, many people with major 
depression report either sleeping significantly more or not being able to sleep as much; 
either eating more than usual (leading to noticeable weight gain) or decreased appetite; 
and either having little energy or experiencing high levels of agitation.
Mood disorders are among the most common of psychiatric disorders (Substance 
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration [SAMHSA/NSDUH], 2021). Approx￾imately 8% of the adult population will meet criteria for major depressive episode each 
year (SAMHSA, 2021). Some of these people, however, will not suffer long-term dis￾abilities because of their illness. People with bipolar disorders are more likely to experi￾ence significant disabilities. Typically, people with bipolar disorders experience separate 
periods of major depression and of mania, interspersed with periods of normal mood. 
Manic and depressed episodes can last weeks or even months. Periods longer than several 
months are atypical, especially in terms of mania, and might represent the more benign 
cyclothymic disorder. Episodes as short as a few days followed by an episode of opposite 
polarity are not uncommon.
DSM-5-TR distinguishes bipolar disorders into two major types: bipolar I and bipo￾lar II. Both disorders are marked by interspersed periods of major depression and some 
version of mania or hypomania. People with bipolar I, the more severe of the two types, 
experience full-blown manic episodes, typically with psychosis. People with bipolar II 
experience hypomanic episodes, which include many of the “sped-up” symptoms and 
dysfunctions of mania but in less severe forms (i.e., there are no psychotic symptoms, 
little need for hospitalization, and less impairment of functioning). Although people with 
either form of bipolar disorder may experience psychiatric disabilities, those with bipolar 
I disorder are more likely to need the assistance of rehabilitation programs.
Anxiety and Related Disorders
Anxiety disorders and related disorders (PTSD and OCD, which, as noted earlier, now 
have their own categories in DSM-5-TR) are frequently viewed by the public as less dis￾abling than the schizophrenia spectrum disorders and the mood disorders. Epidemiologi￾cal research tends to support this notion for the population (Weye et al., 2021). However, 
individuals with these disorders may still struggle with significant life disabilities for 
prolonged periods of time. In addition, anxiety and related disorders frequently co-occur 
with one of the schizophrenia spectrum disorders or mood disorders, and such a combi￾nation is likely to yield significant life disabilities (Weye et al., 2021). Although any of the 
anxiety or related disorders alone can lead to disabilities requiring psychiatric rehabilita￾tion, three in particular may present themselves in rehabilitation clients.
The essential features of OCD are recurrent obsessions (persistent thoughts that are 
experienced as intrusive) or compulsions (repetitive behaviors that a person feels driven 
to perform), which are sufficiently severe to be time-consuming or cause significant 
impairment. Common examples of obsessions include thoughts about contamination 
or cleanliness, repeated doubts, need for order, aggressive impulses, and sexual images. 
Common compulsions include washing, counting, checking, requesting assurance, or 
repeating actions. Typically, people with OCD recognize that their obsessions or com￾pulsions are unreasonable or excessive. The time spent on obsessions or compulsions, as 
well as the distress they cause, can significantly interfere with persons’ pursuit of their 
life goals.
Agoraphobia involves anxiety about being in places or situations from which escape 1. People with Psychiatric Disabilities 15
is difficult or embarrassing. For many people, this manifests as an unwillingness to leave 
home, so as not to risk these kinds of situations. Avoidance of situations frequently 
impairs a person’s ability to travel outside the home, thereby undermining work and 
other independent living goals. PTSD occurs following exposure to an extreme traumatic 
stressor that involves actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence to self 
or others, and that leads to intense fear, helplessness, or horror. The subsequent experi￾ence of symptoms may happen immediately after the traumatic event or may be delayed 
months or years. The symptoms that correspond with PTSD include some form of reliv￾ing the event, accompanied by intense emotional arousal. Research suggests that many 
persons with a diagnosis of schizophrenia or a mood disorder have a history of trauma 
or full-blown PTSD, which worsens their disabilities considerably (Grattan et al., 2019; 
Lippard & Nemeroff, 2020). Alternatively, significant trauma or PTSD can interfere with 
life goals in its own right, leading to the need of rehabilitation practices.
Personality Disorders
As outlined in DSM-5-TR, personality disorders are ways in which people relate to and 
think about their environment and themselves. Symptoms and dysfunctions of the per￾sonality disorders are frequently inflexible or otherwise maladaptive manifestations of 
typical personality traits. Personality disorders are organized into three clusters. Cluster 
A includes paranoid, schizoid, and schizotypal personality disorders; individuals meet￾ing criteria for these diagnoses often appear eccentric or odd. Cluster B comprises anti￾social, borderline, histrionic, and narcissistic personality disorders; people with these 
diagnoses may seem dramatic or emotional. Cluster C includes avoidant, dependent, and 
obsessive–compulsive personality disorders, in which individuals appear anxious or fear￾ful. Although any of these 10 disorders can lead to significant disabilities and the need for 
rehabilitation, much has been written in particular about psychosocial services for people 
with borderline personality disorder (BPD; Stoffers-Winterling et al., 2022).
BPD is marked by a pervasive pattern of instability in social relationships, self￾image, and emotions, exacerbated by severe impulsivity. Impulsive behaviors can include 
self-harm or suicide. Because their relationships are so tumultuous, people with this dis￾order frequently lack a support network of individuals who can help them cope with even 
the most minor problems. As a result, minor depression and anxiety can explode into 
overwhelming stress. People with BPD may have significant difficulty in accomplishing 
employment, relationship, and other independent life goals because of these symptoms, 
and thus in benefiting from rehabilitation.
Additional Information for an Accurate Psychiatric Diagnosis
Presence or absence of diagnostic criteria as assessed during a single interview is usually 
not sufficient to enable a provider to make a diagnosis. It is almost impossible to decide 
whether a person presenting with depression and psychotic symptoms at a single clinic 
visit has major depressive disorder, schizophrenia with depression, schizoaffective disor￾der, a bipolar disorder, a substance-induced disorder, or some combination thereof. Com￾plete diagnosis requires two additional elements in addition to assessment of symptoms 
and dysfunction.
1. History. What kind of impact have the symptoms and dysfunctions had on the 
person over time? The next section of this chapter examines this question in terms of the 
course of the disorder.16 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
2. Depth of impact. How much does the illness interfere with the person’s life? Does 
it lead to an occasional acute crisis, followed by significant periods where symptoms are 
in remission and life goals are accomplished? Or does the illness significantly disrupt the 
person’s functioning and their life plans? This chapter ends with a consideration of the 
various kinds of disabilities that may be associated with psychiatric disorders.
COURSE OF THE PSYCHIATRIC DISORDER
The symptoms, dysfunctions, and disabilities that constitute psychiatric disorders are 
dynamic phenomena; that is, they change throughout a person’s life. Key milestones help 
to explain disease course, including onset of the disorder and the prodromal period lead￾ing up to it; ongoing disease trajectory once the illness has begun; and end state. As 
outlined in Figure 1.2 for schizophrenia, each milestone may be described as one of two 
types. The onset may occur over a slow and chronic course, or it may be sudden or acute. 
The trajectory may be simple and unchanging, or it may represent undulating waves that 
vacillate between significant symptoms and remission. The end state may be severe and 
unremitting, or recovery may occur. Each of these milestones is reviewed more fully in 
this section.
Disease Onset
Onset for most of the mental illnesses that lead to psychiatric disabilities and rehabilita￾tion often occurs in late adolescence or early adulthood. The period preceding the onset 
of the full-blown disease is known as the prodrome. As outlined in Figure 1.2, the pro￾dromal course may be brief and acute or it may be chronic and insidious. Onset of the 
disease is more of a shock to the people with acute onsets and their families. Typically, 
the person was experiencing few psychiatric problems prior to the full-blown set of symp￾toms characteristic of the illness.
FIGURE 1.2. The different elements of course and their presentations, based on Ciompi’s 
(1980) model of schizophrenia. As in most serious mental illnesses relevant to psychiatric 
rehabilitation, the course here is described as starting in late adolescence or young adulthood.1. People with Psychiatric Disabilities 17
For those with an insidious and chronic onset, the prodrome can be a brief period of 
months or can extend over several years. Because it is slow and insidious, the person and 
their family often do not identify the prodrome as signaling psychiatric illness. In this 
case, the prodrome is marked by subtle forms of the symptoms that characterize the ill￾ness. For example, people who end up with schizophrenia may show signs such as ideas of 
reference (rather than delusions), odd beliefs or magical thinking, and unusual perceptual 
experiences (e.g., body illusions). Presence of symptoms like these during adolescence or 
young adulthood does not necessarily mean that the person’s disorder will develop into a 
full-blown psychotic disorder. Alternatively, such symptoms may signal onset of the less 
disabling schizotypal personality disorder.
Early and accurate assessment of the onset of serious disorders like schizophrenia is 
important for the subsequent impact of interventions. Research has shown that the dura￾tion of untreated psychosis (the period in which the prodrome is not correctly identified 
as leading up to psychosis) is positively associated with poor outcome in terms of relapse 
and inversely associated with remission (Albert & Weibell, 2019). Hence early interven￾tion programs have been developed and evaluated to treat people soon after psychosis 
first emerges. One possible goal of these kinds of programs is to help people avoid dis￾abilities by learning to manage their illness from the start. For this reason, early interven￾tion programs typically do not fall under the rubric of psychiatric rehabilitation. These 
issues are discussed more fully in Chapter 7.
Ongoing Trajectory
Although some serious mental illnesses are short in duration, most disorders that are rel￾evant to psychiatric rehabilitation last for years. The trajectory of serious mental illness 
is described by two patterns. Some people experience a relatively simple or flat trajectory, 
in which symptoms, dysfunctions, and disabilities do not change much from the onset. 
Alternatively, many people with serious mental illness experience an undulating pattern, 
in which symptoms, dysfunctions, and disabilities wax and wane. Undulating patterns 
can be regular and episodic—that is, described by regular shifts from disease states to 
remission (Modestin, Huber, Satirli, Malti, & Hell, 2003). Research has not clearly deter￾mined what might account for these rhythms, but possible factors may include biological 
patterns (e.g., monthly hormonal changes; Green & Graham, 2022), social schedules 
(e.g., regular stresses at work), or anniversaries of earlier traumatic events (Bruce & 
Weaver, 2021). Irregular patterns are more common, however, in which recurring wax￾ing and waning are not predictable.
Decreases of symptoms and dysfunctions from the acute and severe level are 
described by two phases. During the residual phase, symptoms and dysfunctions have 
markedly decreased from the acute level, but the person still experiences problems that 
result from attenuated versions of the disorder. Hence, the person has less severe psychi￾atric problems than in the acute phase of the illness but is still likely to experience dis￾ability. In other instances of serious mental illness, a person experiences total remission
of symptoms and dysfunctions during benign periods of the course; in other words, the 
person returns to preprodromal levels. Generally, evidence of remission during the trajec￾tory suggests a better end state than when only residual phases are experienced.18 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
End State
What becomes of people with serious mental illnesses? Early psychiatric models mostly 
predicted negative results. Schizophrenia, for example, was thought to result in a progres￾sive downhill course. Kraepelin (1919/1971) called schizophrenia dementia praecox, or 
a “precocious dementia,” because he believed that the loss of function was irretrievable, 
as in most dementing illnesses. Several long-term follow-up research projects were com￾pleted to test this assertion; most of this research was done on schizophrenia. In these 
types of studies, people with schizophrenia were typically identified while in a psychiatric 
hospital and then followed from 10 to 30 years to determine end state. Findings from 
prominent studies of this kind are summarized in Table 1.1. The table lists the criteria 
used by each study to determine improvement or recovery.
If Kraepelin were correct, we would expect the vast majority of (if not all) people 
with schizophrenia still to be symptomatic and dysfunctional, and not to be working or 
living independently at follow-up. Instead, each of the studies found that schizophrenia 
has a heterogeneous range of end states, from severe cases requiring repeated or con￾tinuous hospitalization to cases in which a single illness episode is followed by complete 
remission of symptoms. The findings reported in these studies as a whole indicate that 
roughly half of participants recovered or significantly improved over the long term, sug￾gesting that remission or recovery is much more common than originally thought.
Early Intervention
Researchers and clinicians realize that the earlier a serious mental illness is addressed 
in the course of the disorder, the better the outcomes. For example, a person experi￾encing the onset of schizophrenia who becomes engaged in a psychiatric rehabilitation 
program within the first year of the disorder is likely to respond better to interventions 
than will a person who waits longer. Clinicians have described duration of untreated 
psychosis—the period between first experiencing symptoms and receiving services—as 
a key metric for early intervention (Callaly, 2014). Early consideration of identification 
and intervention first emerged for schizophrenia (Petersen, Bhana, Lund, & Herrman, 
2014) but has been extended to depression and anxiety disorders (Nazareth & Kendrick, 
2014), substance use disorders (Newton, Deady, & Teesson, 2014), and eating disor￾ders (Pinhas, Wong, & Woodside, 2014). Clinicians and researchers have even proposed 
strategies for the perinatal period (St-Andre, Schwartz, & Yoshida, 2014), as well as for 
infancy and early childhood (Barlow, 2014). Early intervention has required a paradigm 
shift in which providers partner with community members or institutions (e.g., schools) 
to respectfully identify people with these challenges and engage them in interventions 
(O’Connell et al., 2022). The nature of these interventions is reviewed in Chapter 7 on 
illness self-management.
CRITERIA FOR RECOVERY
Different dimensions of outcome and end state, such as symptom levels and psychosocial 
functioning, have generally been found to intercorrelate to only a modest degree (e.g., 
Chien, Thompson, Leung, & Bressington, 2022). For this reason, the choice of which 
dimensions to use as criteria for recovery is important. Some scholars advocate the use 
of multiple dimensions to provide a comprehensive and valid picture (see Van Weeghel, 1. People with Psychiatric Disabilities 19
van Zelst, Boertien, & Hasson-Ohayon, 2019). However, one may also argue that pres￾ence of symptoms within an otherwise functional life should not disqualify an individual 
from being judged as “recovered.” Psychosocial functioning is arguably a more important 
criterion of recovery than being symptom-free, and an overreliance on symptom-based 
criteria, together with the false assumption that symptoms and functioning are strongly 
correlated, may partially explain why the pessimistic Kraepelinian view of schizophrenia 
TABLE 1.1. Summary of Long-Term Follow-Up Studies on Schizophrenia
Name of study
Recovered 
or improved
Average 
follow-up Improvement/recovery criteria
Burgholzli Study 
(Bleuler, 1978)
53% 23 years 5-year “end state” determined through 
clinical interview by Bleuler.
Iowa 500 Study 
(Tsuang & Winokur, 
1975)
46% 35 years Marital, residential, occupational, and 
symptom status rated on 3-point scales and 
combined into a global measure.
Bonn Hospital 
(Huber et al., 1980)
56% 22 years Symptoms and social functioning assessed 
by exam. Social recovery was defined as full￾time employment.
Lausanne Study 
(Ciompi, 1980)
49% 37 years Bleuler’s 5-year “end state” criteria.
Chestnut Lodge 
(McGlashan, 1984)
36% 15 years Personal interview in which examiner rated 
subject on hospitalization, employment, 
social activity, psychopathology, and a 
global functioning score that combined these 
factors.
Japanese Study 
(Ogawa et al., 1987)
57% 21–27 years Follow-up interviews emphasizing social 
relationships and residential status.
Vermont Study 
(Harding et al., 
1987a, 1987b)
68% 32 years Interviews using structured instruments for 
the collection of data on social functioning, 
hospital records, various symptom-based 
measures summarized with the Global 
Assessment Scale.
Cologne Study 
(Steinmeyer et al., 
1989)
36% 25 years Interviews using the Global Assessment 
Scale, the Disability Assessment Schedule, the 
Psychological Impairment Rating Schedule, 
and the Bonn criteria for categorization of 
psychopathological outcome.
Maine Sample 
(DeSisto et al., 1995)
49% 36 years Criteria replicated the Vermont Study. The 
Global Assessment Scale provided a global 
measure of psychological and social status.
International Study 
of Schizophrenia 
(Harrison et al., 
2001)
56–60% 15 and 25 
years
Bleuler global assessment based on all 
information on course, symptoms, and 
functioning.
Note. Data from Corrigan and Calabrese (2005).20 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
has persisted. Reliance on global ratings of outcome collapses these differences, making 
the exact nature of outcomes unclear.
In many cases, persons with schizophrenia have learned ways to cope with and man￾age symptoms when they arise. In cautioning against the criterion of presence versus 
absence of symptoms, Liberman, Kopelowicz, Ventura, and Gutkind (2002) have argued 
that positive symptoms experienced during a given follow-up period may last only days 
or weeks, and may have a minimal impact on social or occupational functioning. In addi￾tion, the International Study of Schizophrenia (Harrison et al., 2001) found that 20% 
of participants maintained employment despite persisting symptoms and/or disabilities. 
In any case, we certainly should not limit outcome to positive psychotic symptoms given 
that negative symptoms, anxiety, and depression may be much more disabling than posi￾tive symptoms in a given case (Carrà et al., 2019).
COURSE PREDICTORS AND MODIFIERS
Research has identified several factors that either predict or modify the course of serious 
mental illness, including family history, stress, and substance use, as well as some demo￾graphic characteristics (e.g., age of onset, gender) and socioeconomic variables. These 
are relevant concepts to keep in mind as rehabilitation plans are developed to help people 
achieve their life goals. However, neither a person with a psychiatric disability nor the 
person’s rehabilitation team should feel bound by predictions that correspond with indi￾vidual factors. A person with serious mental illness who is motivated to achieve work, 
independent living, and other life goals will be able to achieve these goals regardless of 
course predictors or modifiers with appropriate rehabilitation services. The factors of 
family history, stress, and substance use are reviewed more fully below.
Family History
Having biological relatives with serious mental illness is probably the best predictor of 
disease onset, because it is a proxy for probability that a person has inherited a genetic 
vulnerability (Pettersson et al., 2019; Sullivan & Geschwind, 2019). For example, hav￾ing a first-degree relative (a parent or sibling) with schizophrenia increases the person’s 
likelihood of schizophrenia 10-fold (Kendler & Diehl, 1993). Individuals with an identi￾cal twin diagnosed with schizophrenia have a 50% chance that they too will contract 
the disorder (Gottesman & Erlenmeyer-Kimling, 2001). Note, however, that only a 50% 
risk rate in a genetically identical person implicates nongenetic factors such as stress as 
important in terms of the onset and trajectory of serious mental illness.
Stress
As discussed earlier in this chapter, people with serious mental illnesses are thought to be 
vulnerable to stress. Psychosocial stressors are frequently implicated in both the onset of 
a disorder and in causing relapse when a person is in remission (Shields & Slavich, 2017). 
Psychosocial stressors may take the form of everyday life events—that is, the kind of life 
demands arising from work, independent living, and intimate relationships. Life events 
are particularly stressful at times of loss (e.g., being fired from a job or getting a divorce) 
or change (e.g., moving residences or offices). Stressful relationships can also overwhelm 
a person’s vulnerability and cause symptom relapse (Blixen et al., 2016).1. People with Psychiatric Disabilities 21
Substance Use
People who use alcohol and other drugs are likely to have a more severe course and end 
state. In fact, the impact of co-occurring substance use and the prevalence of this problem 
among people with psychiatric disabilities has become a dominant issue among rehabili￾tation providers. The problem is described more thoroughly in the next section, and cor￾responding interventions are addressed in Chapter 16.
DISABILITIES
Disabilities are the definitive foci of psychiatric rehabilitation, and are what distinguish 
it as an approach to services from approaches based more on psychopharmacology or 
psychotherapy. As noted earlier, disabilities are those psychological phenomena that arise 
from psychiatric illness to block goals in the key life domains. Perhaps most important 
about the focus on disability is the way it defines the mission of psychiatric rehabilitation. 
Other approaches to psychiatric care may target diminishing symptoms or dysfunctions. 
The goal of psychiatric rehabilitation is to help people overcome their disabilities, so that 
they are able to achieve their life goals. People may be able to achieve life goals in this 
manner while still experiencing significant symptoms and dysfunctions.
Age and Culture Defined
What are appropriate life goals? Consistent with rehabilitation’s commitment to personal 
empowerment, persons with psychiatric disabilities are best able to answer this question 
for themselves. However, most cultures have age-defined goals that are benchmarks of 
achievement; these are defined in terms of role attainment in North America. The proto￾typical young to middle-aged adult in the United States and Canada is assumed to pursue 
and/or accomplish the following goals:
•	 Launch from family of origin and set up an independent household.
•	 Complete the necessary education and training to pursue a vocation.
•	 Obtain at least an entry-level position commensurate with vocational goals.
•	 Begin to achieve income goals so that the person can be self-sustaining.
•	 Find a mate with whom to share an intimate, long-term relationship.
•	 Develop personally meaningful approaches to address recreational and spiritual 
needs.
Note that these goals are defined as age-specific. Hence, we would expect younger 
adults to be first engaging in the pursuit of some of these goals, while older adults might 
be moving away from the pursuit of others. The goals are also defined in terms of culture: 
Those listed here largely represent a mainstream North American/Western European 
ethos. It is up to rehabilitation providers to understand culture-specific goals within the 
culture(s) of the people they serve. Suffice it to say here that cultural definitions of life 
goals are likely to change across national borders, as well as within ethnically diverse 
countries. In the United States, for example, the goal of launching from the family is 
likely to differ for Black people, Hispanics, and Asian Americans. Even with these addi￾tional guidelines, the rehabilitation provider must remember that ultimate definitions of 
specific goals depend on people’s experience with their culture, and on their personal 
desires given these experiences.22 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
Disability Domains and Life Goals
Absence of symptoms and dysfunctions does not a good life make. Instead, quality of life
depends on achieving goals in the major life domains (Isaacs et al., 2022). At a minimum, 
these goals should include satisfaction of basic needs (e.g., safe, private, and comfortable 
housing); stimulating and financially beneficial work; comprehensive physical, dental, 
and mental health care; sufficient financial resources; transportation and access through￾out one’s community; and adequate legal counsel. A good quality of life also requires 
some sense of satisfaction with more transcendent desires: support networks including 
family, friends, and coworkers (or fellow students, depending on the situation); recre￾ation, both alone and with others; intellectual stimulation; and spiritual life (Davis & 
Brekke, 2014; Isaacs et al., 2022). I define a good quality of life in the remainder of this 
section in terms of five domains: independent living, education and employment, relation￾ships, health, and spiritual life and recreation. Goals in these domains are goals that are 
blocked by disabilities. Note that these five domains are at the heart of the chapters on 
service approaches.
Independent Living
Most adults in Western cultures seek to launch from their families of origin and set up 
households that reflect their adult tastes and interests; for the typical adult, this means 
renting or buying a residence. Housing goals usually include safe neighborhoods, dwell￾ings of a reasonable size and with appropriate amenities, and housing in good condition. 
Sometimes people with psychiatric disabilities need support from rehabilitation providers 
to live successfully in their own homes. Rehabilitation providers need to make sure that 
the institutional demands of their agencies do not interfere with this goal. For exam￾ple, agency regulations should not limit people’s options in regard to the neighborhoods 
where they live or the types of housing they wish to obtain.
An equally important part of independent living is deciding with whom a person 
resides. Options include family members (either family-of-origin members or members of 
a family created in adulthood—e.g., spouse and children), friends, roommates who help 
defray costs, or no one. In all cases, people need to decide for themselves with whom they 
want to live. Rehabilitation providers do not impose roommates on individuals because of 
institutional necessity. Adults are changeable creatures; desires about whom they choose 
to live with change over time. Perhaps a divorce is necessary. Perhaps older parents must 
move into assisted living, and people with disabilities must learn to live alone. Whatever 
the reasons, rehabilitation providers need to assist people with the evolution of their 
independent living needs.
Education and Employment
Work serves many goals in North American culture. It is the basis on which most adults 
obtain an income to achieve their independent living goals. It is a source of identity; 
many people describe themselves in terms of their jobs. Indeed, work-related issues often 
dominate conversations with friends and family members, and take up major portions 
of individuals’ time and energy. Work also provides a sense of place within the larger 
context of society. In no way is place meant here to suggest caste (i.e., the notion that 
some jobs denote better status than others). Rather, place is meant in the concrete sense, 
as defining where a person goes daily and with whom the person associates. In addition, 1. People with Psychiatric Disabilities 23
work is frequently the source of vocation—namely, the belief that “I, as an individual, 
am involved in personally meaningful industry.” Industry does not refer here to an eco￾nomic sector, but rather to the psychological life function of being industrious or busy. 
For reasons like these, work is a significant priority for the general adult population and 
for people with psychiatric disabilities alike (Khare, Mueser, & McGurk, 2016).
Education is the typical path many people take to begin accomplishing work goals. 
It provides the general credentials, such as a high school or college diploma, necessary for 
most jobs. Education teaches basic skills that are needed to be successful on the job. It 
also may provide work-specific talents that are necessary for jobs in varying sectors (e.g., 
computer skills needed in an information technology position). Moreover, education pro￾vides nonspecific gains that are important for many young adults. It provides many with 
a sense of competence and mastery. Intellectual stimulation is also of interest to many 
adults and may continue in adult education programs after the needs for credentials and 
certification have passed.
Relationships
Most adults have broad and significant interests in interpersonal relationships. They 
seek to change the form of interactions with their family-of-origin members from one of 
dependence to launching, becoming independent, and setting up an ongoing, mutually 
loving relationship with parents and siblings. Adults search for significant others with 
whom they can be intimate and develop long-standing relationships. In many cases, these 
intimate relationships yield children, with all the promise and challenges they entail. 
Adults also seek to extend their networks of friends, neighbors, and coworkers.
Health
All adults have physical, dental, and mental health problems that vary in severity. People 
with psychiatric disabilities seem to have a significant number of physical illnesses, which 
may be related to lifestyle issues, social disadvantage, and psychiatric medications (Liu 
et al., 2017). Rehabilitation programs seek to help them work closely with the general 
medical system to address not only these immediate illnesses but also the lifestyle habits 
that may be exacerbating these illnesses. Although, by definition, people with psychiatric 
disabilities have significant mental illness, not all mental illness may cause distress. For 
example, some aspects of mania are experienced as pleasant, and some experiences of 
personality disorder are not viewed as mental illness. Similarly, some hallucinations or 
delusions may not be disturbing to an individual, even though they are signs of psychosis. 
The rehabilitation provider’s task is to assist the person with psychopharmacological and 
psychotherapeutic interventions for symptoms that are distressing.
Health is not just an issue of avoiding illness. Adults also seek wellness. This includes 
physical issues related to diet and exercise. In addition, it includes those physical, psycho￾logical, and spiritual experiences that help a person achieve what they view as a person￾ally full and meaningful life.
Spiritual Life and Recreation
Work, relationships, health, and housing are not enough for a meaningful adult life. Rec￾reation provides an opportunity to broaden one’s interaction with and enjoyment of the 
world. Recreation may involve formal planned activities (e.g., hobbies) or spontaneous 24 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
experiences. Family, friends, and others are sometimes important for recreation. Some 
forms of recreation require significant resources, while others can be enjoyed without 
such assets. The rehabilitation provider helps the person survey activities that may be 
recreational for them, and obtain access to these activities. The rehabilitation provider 
also problem-solves with the person on how they can obtain the necessary resources to 
enjoy a specific type of recreation.
Social thinkers have distinguished religiousness, or participating in a community of 
people who gather around common ways of worshiping, from spirituality, or thinking 
about oneself as part of a larger spiritual force (Oxhandler, Narendorf, & Moffatt, 2018). 
People with psychiatric disabilities describe spiritual pursuits as a way to express their 
identity, make meaning out of life experiences, cope with symptoms, and discuss their 
experiences (Milner, Crawford, Edgley, Hare-Duke, & Slade, 2019). One nationwide 
survey of people with psychiatric disorders showed that 67.5% of respondents viewed 
themselves as religious and 85.1% as spiritual (Corrigan, McCorkle, Schell, & Kidder, 
2003). Findings from this study also showed that both religiousness and spirituality were 
associated with psychological well-being and diminished psychiatric symptoms. Hence, 
an important goal of rehabilitation providers is to help people with psychiatric rehabilita￾tion explore their religious and spiritual goals, and to access services and people who will 
assist the persons in achieving these goals.
SOCIAL DISADVANTAGE
People with serious mental illness and psychiatric disabilities often experience social dis￾advantage. They may have low incomes, may have less education, may be homeless, and 
frequently come from culturally disenfranchised groups. Longitudinal research finds that 
individuals with lower socioeconomic status are more likely to develop mental illnesses, 
which can initiate a cascade into physical illness and greater poverty (Kivimäki et al., 
2020). Research also suggests that serious mental illness leads to a downward drift into 
social disadvantage (Sylvestre, Notten, Kerman, Polillo, & Czechowki, 2018). Direction, 
however, is beside the point; many of the problems with which people with psychiatric 
disabilities struggle may be a function of their social disadvantage as much as, or more 
than, the symptoms and dysfunctions of their illness.
People with psychiatric disorders are often detained and subsequently involved in 
the justice system. This can occur in both criminal and civil courts, and can range from 
minor misdemeanors to charges involving severe violence. In fact, the jail and prison 
system is now believed to be the biggest provider of mental health services to people 
with serious psychiatric illnesses. The nature of these problems is more fully discussed 
in Chapter 14. There are three points to consider here. First, criminal and/or civil court 
involvement can significantly derail the pursuit of goals in the other five domains. Second, 
court participation and the coercion it frequently entails can in its own right be unsettling 
to most people. Third, these problems are likely to be caused by disabilities and by social 
disadvantage. Hence, rehabilitation programs help people navigate the various levels and 
intricacies of the justice system, so they can meet the courts’ demands, cut their ties with 
the police, and return to their principal goals of independent living, work, relationships, 
and health.
People with serious mental illness get sick and die at much younger ages than peers. 
This is the primary topic of Chapter 15. In part, this situation reflects the lifestyles of 
people with psychiatric disabilities and the lower-quality physical health services that are 1. People with Psychiatric Disabilities 25
often provided for this group. The research reviewed in Chapter 15 poignantly shows 
that health and health care are even worse for people with disabilities when they are from 
ethnic-minority groups or have low incomes.
The message here reinforces the bidirectional mandate of rehabilitation services. 
Providers need to help people learn skills to accomplish goals in the face of their disabili￾ties. However, providers also need to address community barriers that undermine goals. 
An effective rehabilitation program thus has its team members wear multiple hats. This 
point is made repeatedly in subsequent chapters.
STRENGTHS FOCUS
As stated earlier in the chapter, although discussion of diagnosis, symptoms, dysfunc￾tions, course, and disabilities helps rehabilitation providers better understand the chal￾lenges faced by persons with serious mental illness, this kind of discussion tends to frame 
these persons as victims of their disabilities, without recognizing individuals’ positive 
assets. Each area of symptoms and dysfunctions specific to a disorder suggests not only 
problems blocking life goals but also possible strengths on which a person may draw 
to accomplish their goals. Examples of possible strengths are summarized in Table 1.2. 
Note that this is not meant to be an exhaustive table. Instead, the rehabilitation provider 
must actively engage the person to assess what their specific profile of strengths might be.
Although affect is frequently distressed by psychiatric illness, people with psychiatric 
disabilities may have several strengths in this domain. Among other possibilities, emo￾tions may motivate individuals to act against their symptoms and achieve their goals. 
People with psychosis often experience diminished perceptual and cognitive abilities. But 
despite these limitations, the majority of adults with psychiatric disability have the abil￾ity to make decisions regarding their health (Calcedo-Barba et al., 2020). Among the 
greatest strengths on which a person with disabilities may draw is motivation. Namely, 
despite the hurdles thrown up by symptoms and society, the person wants to achieve 
work, independent living, relationships, and other goals. Symptoms and dysfunctions 
TABLE 1.2. Possible Strengths That May Correspond to the Domains Defining 
Symptoms and Dysfunctions
Domains Possible strengths
Affect • Experiences the full range of emotions.
• Is concerned about emotions that are “out of control” or distressing.
Perception and cognition • Is able to orient to task at hand.
• Is able to problem-solve.
• Is able to understand the basics of human interaction.
Motivation • Is motivated to achieve specific goals.
• Is motivated to work with rehabilitation programs and other 
resources to accomplish goals.
Interpersonal functioning • Has some family members, friends, neighbors, and/or coworkers who 
provide support and companionship.
• Has rehabilitation providers and/or peers who provide support and 
companionship.26 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
often interfere with interpersonal relationships. Nevertheless, most people with serious 
mental illness have family members or friends on whom they might rely and who rely on 
them. Alternatively, rehabilitation providers or peers with psychiatric disabilities are also 
frequently available to step in for support and companionship.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The answer to the question “Who are people with psychiatric disabilities?” is simple, as well 
as multilevel and complex. The simple definition is straightforward: People with psychiatric 
disabilities are, first and foremost, people. They have the same types and breadth of life goals 
as others in their culture. Unfortunately, achieving these goals is undermined by the disabili￾ties that arise from serious mental illness. They are also impeded by community factors and 
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Joel Jenkins Revisited
This chapter has begun with the complex stories of four people with serious mental illness. 
What might we make of one of these persons given the information reviewed in this chapter? 
How might the concepts reviewed in this chapter expand our understanding of Joel Jenkins 
and his needs for psychiatric rehabilitation?
Joel is experiencing what is likely, because of his age, to be an early phase of schizo￾phrenia. His symptoms seem to be acute, tumultuous, and problematic for his parents. Fre￾quent hospitalization is likely to be interfering with the kind of goals that would dominate a 
22-year-old’s life: completing education, beginning his career, moving out of the family-of￾origin home, and building intimate relationships. Instead, his frequent, hostile exchanges 
with his parents have yielded significant problems with the police. He is becoming enmeshed 
in the court system and finding his life options diminished by the demands of the judge. His 
court troubles appear to be further exacerbated by marijuana use: Smoking pot is evidently 
both worsening his symptoms and increasing police involvement in his life.
Joel has identified several life goals. He would like to move out of his parents’ home 
and find a place of his own. He recognizes that to do this successfully, he will need to find a 
job that pays a reasonable salary. He also recognizes that his recurring psychotic symptoms 
and agitation are likely to interfere with these goals in the short term. So, in addition to work 
with job and housing coaches, the rehabilitation team is helping Joel and his psychiatrist to 
manage his antipsychotic medications more effectively. Joel is also working on harm reduc￾tion skills to diminish his use of marijuana.
Joel’s rehabilitation plan is influenced by his living in a small town. The breadth of ser￾vices may be limited, requiring some innovation on the part of the rehabilitation team. More￾over, job hunting may be a bit more difficult in a small community where Joel is well known. 
Again, the rehabilitation team needs to think innovatively about how potential employers’ 
attitudes can be enhanced to make sure that stigma does not undermine Joel’s options.
Joel has several strengths. He is also strongly motivated to get back to work. Joel has 
engaged closely with his rehabilitation job coach to develop a reasonable plan for achieving 
his vocational goals. He helps around the house, doing his own laundry, caring for the family 
pets, and enjoys cooking meals. Despite the angry and sometimes violent battles at home 
with his parents, Joel’s mother and father are an important support system for him.1. People with Psychiatric Disabilities 27
social disadvantage. Effective rehabilitation must therefore be bidirectional, addressing both 
individual and community factors.
The complexity of the answer to this chapter’s question lies in understanding the bar￾riers to achieving life goals. Diagnoses represent mental illness syndromes comprising dis￾tressing symptoms and disabling dysfunctions. As a result, people are unable to accomplish 
social roles and goals in such important life domains as work, independent living, income, 
relationships, and health. Course of illness is described by a complex mix of onset, trajec￾tory, and end state. Course of a disorder is exacerbated by several factors, including age of 
onset, gender, familial history, stress, and substance use. Co-occurring substance use, in 
particular, is a high-rate phenomenon in psychiatric disabilities that can have a serious effect 
on individuals’ life goals.
People with psychiatric disabilities are not well described solely in terms of their symp￾toms, dysfunctions, and disabilities. Their strengths constitute an equally important part 
of the picture. A focus on strengths reminds us that people with disabilities, like everyone 
else, are complex beings with many characteristics. A strengths focus also highlights the 
resources that may be drawn upon as a person engages in their rehabilitation plan. A com￾bination of the simple picture of the person as person, recognizing the individual’s strengths 
and limitations, provides the fullest answer to our opening question.28
CHAPTER 2
Stigma and Mental Illness
Rehabilitation has the combined agenda of helping people attain their 
goals by assisting them in dealing with disabilities that block these goals and addressing 
the community contexts in which these goals play out. Chapter 2 focuses on community 
variables, in an eff ort to understand the beliefs and behaviors that either undermine or 
promote the goals of people with psychiatric disabilities. Specifi cally, the chapter reviews 
the intended and unintended consequences of populations’ endorsing the stereotypes 
of mental illness, thereby setting up communities where the aspirations of people with 
mental illness are undermined by prejudice and discrimination. Public stigma convinces 
people in positions of power not to extend rightful opportunities to those labeled with 
mental illness (e.g., landlords decide not to rent to them, and employers decide not to hire 
them). Self- stigma occurs when the persons thus labeled internalize the stigma of men￾tal illness, which then undermines their self- esteem and self- effi cacy. People avoid these 
hurtful labels by not engaging in the mental health treatments from which many of these 
labels come. Contrary to stigma are ideas and behaviors that refl ect affi rming attitudes: 
People can recover from mental illness and hence should be hopeful; they can achieve 
goals, and hence should be empowered in that pursuit; and strategies meant to achieve 
recovery and goals can be self- determined. The community has the legal and moral duty 
to make these concepts a reality.
The purpose of this chapter is thus to review the impacts of stigma upon people with 
psychiatric disabilities, as well as families and others associated with these persons. It 
reviews both a cognitive- behavioral model of stigma as involving signals, stereotypes, 
prejudice, and discrimination, and a more complex model describing the interaction 
of stereotypes, prejudice, and discrimination with fi ve types of mental illness stigma. 
The chapter then elaborates on the impacts of these fi ve types of stigma in several life 
domains, including employment, education, housing, and health. It also includes a look 
at the role of the media in promoting the stigma of mental illness. Several texts provide 
excellent introductions to the eff ects of stigma, approaches to combating stigma, and 
lived experiences of people with serious mental illness, which might be consulted by the 
interested reader (Corrigan, 2018; Rüsch, 2023; Thornicroft et al., 2022).
Stigma can be a signifi cant barrier to rehabilitation goals. Hence, rehabilitation pro￾viders need to understand the breadth and depth of its eff ects, so that they can develop 
plans to challenge the barriers it produces. Chapter 6 reviews strategies for diminishing 
stigma.
CHAPTER 22. Stigma and Mental Illness 29
WHY INDIVIDUALS STIGMATIZE PEOPLE WITH MENTAL ILLNESS
Research on mental health stigma can be organized into a cognitive-behavioral model 
like the one in Figure 2.1 (Corrigan, 2000) that describes the relationship between dis￾criminative stimuli and consequent behavior by identifying the cognitions that mediate 
these constructs. In a simpler version of the model, persons with severe mental illness 
signal the public about their mental illness: “That person talking to himself on the park 
bench must be crazy.” These signals yield stereotypes and prejudice about persons with 
mental illness: “Crazy people are dangerous, and I am afraid of them.” Dangerousness 
is a common, globally endorsed stereotype associated with people with serious mental 
illness (Pescosolido et al., 2013; Seeman, Tang, Brown, & Ing, 2016), while fear is a typi￾cal prejudicial (emotional) reaction to this stereotype. Stereotypes and prejudice lead to 
behavioral reactions or discrimination: “I’m not going to allow dangerous people like 
that to move into my neighborhood.” Let’s take a closer look at each element of this 
model.
Signals That Lead to Stigma
Erving Goffman (1963) defined stigma as a discrediting mark of one group (typically a 
minority) that results in another group (the majority) stealing rights and privileges that 
correspond with the marked group’s humanity. In this framework, persons with mental 
illness join many other groups that have experienced stigma, prejudice, and discrimina￾tion: ethnic groups, such as people of color in North America; women; religious groups; 
people with lower education; LGBTQ people; people with physical disabilities; and peo￾ple who are overweight. As outlined in Figure 2.1, what Goffman calls stigma are the 
signals that evoke stereotypes, prejudice, and discrimination.
The general public infers mental illness from four sets of signals: psychiatric symp￾toms, social skills deficits, poor physical appearance, and labels (Corrigan, 2005; Pesco￾solido, Martin, Lang, & Olafsdottir, 2008). Many symptoms of severe mental illness—
inappropriate affect, unusual behavior, language irregularities, and talking to oneself 
aloud—are manifest indicators of psychiatric illness that frighten the public. Research 
has shown that symptoms like these tend to produce stigmatizing reactions (Cheung, 
Mak, Tsang, & Lau, 2018; Feldman & Crandall, 2007). Moreover, the poor social skills 
that are often a function of psychiatric illness also lead to stigmatizing reactions. Defi￾cits in eye contact, body language, and choice of discussion topics (Hooley, 2010; Penn, 
Descriptive 
stimuli 
Signals 
• Symptoms
• Skill deficits
• Appearance
• Labels
Cognitive 
mediators
Stereotypes
and prejudice
Behavior 
Discrimination 
FIGURE 2.1. How signals lead to stereotypes, prejudice, and discrimination. Note that this 
model is essentially a cognitive-behavioral model, with descriptive stimuli, cognitive media￾tors, and behavior.30 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
Kohlmaier, & Corrigan, 2000; Silton, Flannelly, Milstein, & Vaaler, 2011) potentially 
mark a person as “mentally ill” and lead to stigmatizing attitudes. Finally, research 
suggests that personal appearance may lead to stigmatizing attitudes (Eagly, Ashmore, 
Makhijani, & Longo, 1991; Penn, Mueser, & Doonan, 1997; Schumacher, Corrigan, & 
Dejong, 2003). In particular, diminished physical attractiveness and personal hygiene 
may be manifest indicators of mental illness, leading to stereotypical responses from one’s 
community (e.g., “That unkempt person on the park bench must be a mental patient”).
Note, however, the potential for mislabeling someone as “mentally ill” on the basis 
of these first three sets of signals. What might be eccentric behavior that is not charac￾teristic of a psychiatric disorder (e.g., a musician singing aloud a piece from an upcoming 
concert) could be misunderstood as mental illness. Fewer social skills may represent shy￾ness rather than mental illness. Physical appearance may also lead to false positives about 
judging someone as “mentally ill” (regarding someone as living with a mental illness 
when they in fact do not). Many street people with slovenly appearance are believed to be 
“mentally ill” when, in actuality, they are poor and homeless (Greenberg & Rosenheck, 
2010; Koegel, 1992). Just as these three signs may yield false positives, so the absence of 
these signs often leads to false negatives. Many people can conceal their experiences with 
mental illness without making those around them aware that they are doing so. Goffman 
(1963) more fully developed this point when he distinguished between discredited and 
discreditable stigma, or what might be called obvious and hidden stigma. The former 
occurs when people have a mark that is readily perceivable. Examples of groups with 
obvious stigma include persons from a cultural minority with an apparent physical trait 
(e.g., the dark skin of most persons of African descent), leading them to believe that their 
differences are obvious to the public. Persons with hidden stigma, on the other hand, 
can conceal their condition; they have no readily observable mark that identifies them as 
part of a stigmatized group. For example, sexual orientation cannot be discerned from 
an obvious cue. Similarly, members of the general public frequently cannot determine 
whether a person is “mentally ill” by merely looking at them. Only in those cases in 
which a person is acutely ill and displaying outward signs of psychosis (e.g., talking to 
oneself) might they be accurately identified as “mentally ill.”
Juxtaposing concerns about false positives with the idea that the stigma of mental 
illness may be hidden raises this question: What, then, is the definitive mark that leads to 
stigmatizing responses? Several carefully constructed studies suggest labels as key signals 
leading to stereotypes, prejudice, and discrimination (Abdullah & Brown, 2020; Jones et 
al., 1984; Link, 1987; Martinez, Piff, Mendoza-Denton, & Hinshaw, 2011; O’Connor, 
Brassil, O’Sullivan, Seery, & Nearchou, 2022; Seery, Bramham, & O’Connor, 2021), 
though O’Connor et al.’s (2022) meta-analysis of the literature on the impact of labeling 
on stigma points out that this is a complex process worthy of further study. People who 
are known as “mentally ill” are likely to become the victims of mental illness stigma. 
Labels can be obtained in various ways: Others can tag people with a label (e.g., a psy￾chiatrist can inform someone that Ms. X is mentally ill); individuals can label themselves 
(e.g., Mr. Y can decide to introduce himself as a psychiatric survivor); or labels can be 
obtained by association (a person observed coming out of a psychologist’s office may be 
assumed to be living with a mental illness).
Is It Disease or Label?
During the 1960s, questions arose regarding whether disabilities associated with men￾tal illness originate entirely from medical conditions, or whether the labels attached to 2. Stigma and Mental Illness 31
mental illness create disabilities in their own right. Although this is a rather dated debate, 
it is still important in the 21st century, and hence is reviewed here. This divided mental 
health providers and researchers into factions supporting the medical model versus label￾ing theory.
The key principle of labeling theory is that the label deviant (i.e., mentally ill) leads 
society to treat the labeled individual as different and flawed (Scheff, 1966, 1972). Com￾mon responses to the label mental illness include fear and disgust, leading people to mini￾mize contact with, and socially distance themselves from, anyone marked in this way. As 
a result, a person with mental illness is exposed to adverse reactions (e.g., prejudice and 
discrimination) from others that facilitate the process of their socialization into the role 
of the mental patient (Braginsky, Braginsky, & Ring, 1969; Goffman, 1961). This process 
causes the individual with mental illness to exhibit continued deviant behavior, fitting the 
label and stabilizing the mental illness (Scheff, 1966). Alternatively, the label of mental 
illness can become a self-fulfilling prophecy, in which the person acts “crazy” in order 
to meet the expectations of the public mark (Scheff, 1972). This kind of self-fulfilling 
prophecy leads to continued stigma.
Critics have countered labeling theory by arguing that aberrant behavior, and not 
the label mental illness per se, is the source of negative responses from the public (Gove, 
1982; Huffine & Clausen, 1979; Lehman, Joy, Kreisman, & Simmens, 1976). Others 
have argued that the impact of stereotypes on persons with mental illness is temporary, 
posing only a minor and brief problem for these persons (Gove, 1980; Gove & Fain, 
1973; Karmel, 1969). Gove and Fain (1973) countered labeling theory’s concept of sec￾ondary deviance by arguing that psychiatric relapse is due solely to the recurrence of the 
mental disorder; it is not affected by the label. According to Gove (1975), the label does 
not elicit negative societal reactions; rather, negative reactions are due to the bizarre 
behavior often displayed by persons with mental illness. Other researchers concluded 
that there generally is no negative reaction toward people labeled mentally ill (Crocetti, 
Spiro, & Siassi, 1971).
In an effort to resolve differences between labeling theory and Gove’s medical model, 
Link, Cullen, Frank, and Wozniak (1987) conducted a study in which label and aberrant 
behavior were manipulated in a series of vignettes. Results indicated that members of 
the general public were likely to stigmatize a person labeled “mentally ill,” even in the 
absence of any aberrant behavior, if they held the belief that people with mental illness 
are dangerous. Link and colleagues (1987) posed a modified labeling theory to make 
sense of the diverse literature, concluding that psychiatric labels are associated with nega￾tive societal reactions that exacerbate the course of persons’ disorders. This represents a 
middle ground between Scheff’s original labeling theory and Gove’s medical explanation. 
Aberrant behavior causes negative reactions from society that lead the public (and the 
individuals exhibiting this behavior) to label mental illness negatively; this can exacer￾bate individuals’ existing disorders. Although the debate over the mechanics of labeling 
remains unresolved, it seems clear that stigma worsens the lives of people suffering from 
mental illness (Corrigan, 2018; Rüsch, 2023).
Stereotypes
Social psychologists view stereotypes as knowledge structures that are learned by most 
members of a social group. Stereotypes are efficient means of categorizing information 
about social groups. They are considered “social” because they represent commonly 
agreed-upon notions of groups of persons (Pescosolido et al., 2013). They are “efficient” 32 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
because people can quickly generate impressions and expectations of individuals who 
belong to a stereotyped group. Stereotypes about mental illness include dangerousness, 
unpredictability, incompetence, and character weakness. Of these, dangerousness (and 
the resulting fear) is probably most troubling for people with mental illness, so it is dis￾cussed here in some detail.
Dangerousness
Research consistently shows that the general public views people labeled with mental ill￾ness as dangerous (Schomerus et al., 2012; Pescosolido, 2011; Pescosolido et al., 2013); in 
fact, these perceptions have increased over the past 20 years by about 10% (Pescosolido, 
Manago, & Monahan, 2019). Perceptions of dangerousness lead to fear, to calls for dis￾tancing from those with the mental illness label, and arguments that people with mental 
illness should be forced into treatment. Similar to the controversy around labeling theory 
described earlier, people have argued on the one hand that the stigma of dangerousness 
reflects the empirical fact that, as a group, persons with mental illness are indeed more 
violent, and on the other hand that dangerousness is a false and egregious stereotype 
(Corrigan & Cooper, 2005).
A meta-analysis of the literature examining risk of violence toward others among 
people with schizophrenia spectrum disorders found that there was on average a statis￾tically elevated risk for violence among men and women (Whiting, Gulati, Geddes, & 
Fazel, 2022). The vast majority of women and men living with schizophrenia are not vio￾lent. Applying the dangerousness stereotype to people living with serious mental illness 
broadly would, again, lead to many false positives (“Because they have schizophrenia, 
they must be violent!”) and associated experiences with prejudice and discrimination.
The relationship between mental illness and violence is quite complex and can be 
partially explained by other relationships. Consider, for example, that the mental illness 
label is associated with demographic characteristics that have a stronger demonstrated tie 
to violence; that people committing violent crimes are viewed more frequently as living 
with a mental illness because of the psychiatrization of criminal behavior (Abram & Tep￾lin, 1991; Bonfine, Wilson, & Munetz, 2020; Monahan, 1973); that people with mental 
illness are overrepresented in the criminal justice system, perhaps because of their label 
(D. Hall et al., 2019), and hotspots for crime are also places where many individuals with 
serious mental illness find themselves living (Weisburd & White, 2019).
Finally, the high rate of news stories depicting people with mental illness as danger￾ous does not accurately reflect the level of violence among people with psychiatric disor￾ders, although it does demonstrate how the media (re)produce society’s fascination with 
crime in any group (Wahl, 1995). Consider, for example, research findings that people 
of color are overrepresented as dangerous in the news, advertising, and entertainment 
media (Brooks & Hébert, 2006; Goodwill et al., 2019; Robinson, 2015). The role of the 
media is discussed in more detail later in this chapter. It is of critical importance that the 
public and psychiatric rehabilitation practitioners are aware of the overrepresentation of 
violence among marginalized groups (i.e., people living with mental health conditions 
and people of color) to prevent discrimination.
Difference
There is also a content-less stereotype: difference (Link & Phelan, 2001). This is the 
belief that “People with mental illness are different from me”—not necessarily because 2. Stigma and Mental Illness 33
of a specific characteristic, but just different. Difference is usually a harmful attribution, 
because with difference comes low status: “You belong to a different group (the mentally 
ill), which is beneath mine.” Social desirability—the desire not to endorse stereotypes 
publicly, to avoid being viewed disapprovingly as a bigot—often seems to suppress most 
stereotypes. People do not seem to agree readily in public, for instance, that those with 
mental illness are dangerous or unpredictable. The perception of difference, however, 
is relatively unaffected by social desirability and much more sensitive to opinions about 
people with mental illness (Corrigan, Bink, Fokuo, & Schmidt, 2015).
Prejudice and Discrimination
As outlined in Figure 2.1, stereotypes may lead to prejudice and discrimination. Just 
because people have knowledge of a set of stereotypes does not imply that they agree 
with them (Jussim, Nelson, Manis, & Soffin, 1995). For example, many persons can 
recall stereotypes about different racial groups but do not agree that the stereotypes are 
valid. People who are prejudiced, on the other hand, endorse these negative stereotypes 
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Shania Robinson Couldn’t Get a Job
Shania Robinson had been struggling with the challenges of schizophrenia since it had dis￾rupted her college education some 12 years earlier. Despite being hospitalized eight times, 
she finally was able to graduate from the state university with a bachelor’s degree in busi￾ness administration. She had completed an internship at an accounting firm, with support 
from a local job coach. She also had much better control over her psychotic symptoms 
after starting an atypical antipsychotic medication and gaining the support of a few family 
members and close friends. She thought that through regular meetings with a job coach, she 
might be able to handle a full-time job at an entry-level position.
Shania lined up four interviews with local businesses through the university’s place￾ment office. During the first interview, the prospective employer noticed that she had several 
gaps in her resume. When asked about these, Shania reported that those were periods when 
she had taken time off from school to treat her illness.
“You were in the psychiatric hospital,” asked the interviewer.
“Only two of those times. Mostly, I just needed some time away from the pressures of 
school while I learned to adjust to my medication.”
“Well, at least you’re through that stage in your life,” the interviewer said.
Shania responded, “Oh, yes, sir. With Dr. Halpiniak’s assistance, and careful monitoring 
of both my warning signs and my meds, I have total control over the illness.”
“My goodness, you still have this thing?”
“Well, yes, in some ways. Some of the problems with schizophrenia continue.”
The employer was noticeably shocked by this information. “Schizophrenia! I didn’t 
know you had schizophrenia. I didn’t think people could live outside of a hospital with that 
kind of disease.” The interviewer then looked at his watch and said, “Well, our time is up. You 
are one of several applicants we are talking to. We will get back to you next week.”
Unfortunately, the firm never did get back to her. Shania learned quickly that if she did 
not produce alternative explanations for blanks in her resume, other employers were simi￾larly likely to bar her from job opportunities.34 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
(“That’s right; all persons with mental illness are violent!”) and generate negative emo￾tional reactions as a result (“They all scare me!”). Prejudice is also viewed as a general 
attitude toward a group. In contrast to stereotypes, which are beliefs, prejudicial attitudes 
involve an evaluative (generally negative) component.
Prejudice, which is fundamentally a cognitive and affective response, leads to dis￾crimination, the behavioral reaction (Crocker, Major, & Steele, 1998). Prejudice that 
produces anger can lead to hostile behavior (e.g., physically harming a member of a 
minority group) (Weiner, 1995). Regarding persons with mental illness, angry prejudice 
may lead to withholding help or replacing health care with services provided by the crimi￾nal justice system (Corrigan, 2000). Fear may lead to avoidance; for instance, employers 
do not want persons with mental illness nearby, so they do not hire them (Corrigan, 
Markowitz, Watson, Rowan, & Kubiak, 2003; Van Beukering et al., 2021). Beliefs that 
people with mental illness are incompetent, another common stereotype about people 
with psychiatric disabilities, may lead to emotional reactions of pity and result in employ￾ment discrimination (Hipes, Lucas, Phelan, & White, 2016).
THE INTERACTIONS OF STIGMA STRUCTURES 
WITH TYPES OF STIGMA
Figure 2.1 has grounded the foundations of stigma in three basic structures: stereotypes, 
prejudice, and discrimination. These structures explain not only the stigmatizing experi￾ence of mental illness but also the processes involved in racism, sexism, ageism, homopho￾bia, and other types of egregious biases. A more complete picture of the mental illness 
experience crosses the three structures with five types of mental illness stigma: public 
stigma, self-stigma, label avoidance, structural stigma, and courtesy stigma. Figure 2.2
illustrates these interactions.
As shown in Figure 2.2, stereotypes, prejudice, and discrimination are manifested 
differently, depending on the type of stigma. Public stigma, self-stigma, and label avoid￾ance have their effects at the level of the individual person with psychiatric disabilities. 
Structural stigma has its impact on people through societal institutions. Courtesy stigma 
or stigma by association harms those associated with people with mental illness—families, 
friends, and care providers. The specific impact of each type of stigma is reviewed next.
FIGURE 2.2. A matrix for understanding mental illness stigma: the interaction of stereo￾types, prejudice, and discrimination with five types of stigma.
Public stigma Self-stigma
Label 
avoidance
Structural 
stigma
Courtesy 
stigma
Stereotypes 
and prejudice 
(cognitive)
“He is 
dangerous.”
“I am 
unreliable.”
Diagnosis 
of mental 
illness means 
“crazy.”
Positive 
personnel 
actions are 
suspended.
Parents are 
to blame for a 
child’s mental 
illness.
Discrimination 
(behavioral)
Employer 
refuses to hire 
person with 
mental illness.
Person with 
mental illness 
does not take 
on new tasks.
Individual 
refrains from 
going to the 
clinic to seek 
help.
Person 
with mental 
illness is not 
promoted.
Friends avoid 
parents.2. Stigma and Mental Illness 35
THE IMPACT OF PUBLIC STIGMA
Most researchers and advocates agree: People with mental illness suffer significant impact 
from stigma. As a result, stigma greatly hinders these persons’ rehabilitation goals. This 
section focuses on two such examples of negative impact. First, stigma robs people of 
rightful life opportunities in various domains. Two domains that are especially relevant 
to the lives of people with mental illness are employment and housing. Second, the gen￾eral health care system seems to withhold appropriate medical treatments because of 
mental illness stigma. We consider each of these areas in turn.
The Loss of Rightful Life Opportunities
Stereotypes, prejudice, and discrimination can rob people labeled mentally ill of impor￾tant life opportunities that are essential for achieving life goals. Two goals in particular 
are central to the concerns of people with serious mental illness: obtaining personally 
meaningful employment and living independently in safe and comfortable housing.
Stigma’s role as a barrier to obtaining good jobs and housing may be understood in 
terms of Link’s modified labeling theory (Link, Cullen, Struening, Shrout, & Dohren￾wend, 1989). Namely, these problems may partially occur because of the disabilities that 
result from serious mental illness (Corrigan, 2005). Many people with serious mental 
illness lack the social and coping skills to meet the demands of the competitive workforce 
and independent housing. Nevertheless, the problems that many people with psychiatric 
disabilities have in these domains are further exacerbated by labels and stigma. People 
with mental illness are frequently unable to obtain good jobs or find suitable housing 
because of the prejudice of key members in their communities: employers and landlords. 
Several studies have documented the public’s widespread endorsement of stigmatizing 
attitudes (Angermeyer, Matschinger, & Schomerus, 2013; Parcesepe & Cabassa, 2013; 
Pescosolido et al., 2013; Thornicroft et al., 2022). These attitudes have a deleterious 
impact on the chances of stigmatized persons’ obtaining and keeping good jobs (Brouw￾ers et al., 2016; Hipes et al., 2016; Van Beukering et al., 2021) and leasing safe housing 
(Reilly, Ho, & Williamson, 2022; Rüsch, 2023).
Classic research by Farina and Felner (1973) poignantly illustrates the nature of the 
problem. A male confederate, posing as an unemployed worker, sought jobs at 32 busi￾nesses. The same work history was reported at each of the job interviews, except that 
50% of the interviews also included information about a past psychiatric hospitalization. 
Subsequent analyses found that interviewers were less friendly and less supportive of hir￾ing the confederate when they added the information about their psychiatric hospitaliza￾tion.
The Reaction of the Primary Care System
People with serious mental illness experience health challenges yielding alarming morbid￾ity rates (Correll et al., 2017; Lawrence, Kisely, & Pais, 2010; Mai, Holman, Sanfilippo, 
Emery, & Preen, 2011; WHO, 2005), and they die, on average, 10–30 years earlier than 
their cohorts (Walker, McGee, & Druss, 2015; Saha, Chant, & McGrath, 2007). In 
part, these phenomena occur because of health system failures—for example, absence of 
integrated care services (Liu et al., 2017; Lutterman, Hogan, Phelan, & Mazade, 2010) or 
insufficient insurance coverage (Druss & Goldman, 2018; Druss & Mauer, 2010).
However, research also suggests that some provider decisions may worsen health 36 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
outcomes. Compared to patients not identified with mental illness, research has shown 
that health providers are less likely to refer patients with mental illness for mammogra￾phy (Koroukian, Bakaki, Golchin, Tyler, & Loue, 2012; Thomas et al., 2018), inpatient 
hospitalization after diabetic crisis (Sullivan, Han, Moore, & Kotrla, 2006), or cardiac 
catheterization (Druss, Rosenheck, & Sledge, 2000). Despite research demonstrating the 
high prevalence of diabetes among people with severe mental illness and recommenda￾tions for screening among this population, 70% of people taking antipsychotic medica￾tions (a risk factor for metabolic syndromes) remain unscreened for such health condi￾tions (Mangurian, Newcomer, Modlin, & Schillinger, 2016). Provider endorsement of 
stigma may be one influence on these health care decisions (Jones, Howard, & Thor￾nicroft, 2008; Thornicroft, Rose, & Kassam, 2007; Vistorte et al., 2018). One study 
examined the relationship between stigma and treatment decisions in primary care and 
psychiatric physicians and nurses (Corrigan, Mittal, et al., 2014). Results showed that 
providers who endorsed stigmatizing ideas about a patient with mental illness present￾ing for arthritic pain were less likely to refer the person for a consultation and less likely 
to refill the person’s analgesic prescription. This relationship was demonstrated equally 
across primary care and mental health care providers. People with mental illness cannot 
obtain services when providers fail to offer them or do so contrary to practice standards.
THE IMPACT OF SELF-STIGMA
Living in a culture steeped in stigmatizing images, persons with mental illness may accept 
these notions and suffer diminished self-esteem, self-efficacy, and confidence in their own 
future as a result (Corrigan & Rao, 2012). Persons with mental illness like Kathleen 
Gallo (1994) have written eloquently about this kind of self-stigma:
I perceived myself, quite accurately unfortunately, as having a serious mental illness and 
therefore as having been relegated to what I called “the social garbage heap.” . . . I tortured 
myself with the persistent and repetitive thought that people I would encounter, even total 
strangers, did not like me and wished that mentally ill people like me did not exist. Thus, I 
would do things such as standing away from others at bus stops and hiding and cringing in 
the far corners of subway cars. Thinking of myself as garbage, I would even leave the side￾walk in what I thought of as exhibiting the proper deference to those above me in social class. 
The latter group, of course, included all other human beings. (pp. 407–408)
First-person narratives such as this, as well as other subjective data, provide a compelling 
illustration of the impact of mental illness stigma on a person’s self-esteem (Davidson, 
1992; Estroff, 1989; Russinova, Mizock, & Bloch, 2018; Strauss, 1989). Qualitative data 
of this sort have been augmented by quantitative surveys of persons with mental illness. 
For example, studies of persons with mental illness and their families have demonstrated 
that diminished self-esteem and Quality of Life is a significant problem for people living 
with serious mental illnesses who internalize stigma (Dubreucq, Plasse, & Franck, 2021).
Self-stigma has been described in a regressive model (illustrated in Figure 2.3) 
reflecting what may be called “three A’s”: awareness of stereotypes (“I know most people 
believe people with mental illness are dangerous”), agreement with them (“I agree; most 
people with mental illness are dangerous”), and application of the stereotypes to oneself 
(“I am mentally ill, so I must be dangerous”). This process leads to diminished self-esteem 
(“I must be a bad person because I am mentally ill and dangerous”) and diminished 2. Stigma and Mental Illness 37
self-efficacy (“I am not able to do most normal things because I am mentally ill”), result￾ing in the “Why try?” effect (Corrigan, Michaels, & Morris, 2015; Corrigan, Larson, & 
Rüsch, 2009): “Why try to get a job? Someone like me isn’t worth it.” “Why try to live 
alone? Someone like me is not able.”
Awareness of stigma is not synonymous with internalizing it (Crocker & Major, 
1989). Although persons with mental illness report being aware of the negative stereo￾types about them (Crabtree, Haslam, Postmes, & Haslam, 2010), they do not necessarily 
agree with these stereotypes (Hayward & Bright, 1997). Hence, not every person with a 
mental disorder reacts to the stigma of mental illness with loss of self-esteem as outlined 
in Figure 2.3. On the contrary, some people with lived experience employ strategies to 
resist stigma (Firmin et al., 2017; O’Connor, Yanos, & Firmin, 2018). Stigma resistance 
through coping strategies such as deflecting and challenging stigma is associated with 
positive psychosocial outcomes (Firmin, Luther, Lysaker, Minor, & Salyers, 2016; Thoits 
& Link, 2016).
Some individuals living with mental illnesses are energized by prejudice and express 
righteous anger in response to stigma (Corrigan, Faber, Rashid, & Leary, 1999; Rog￾ers, Chamberlin, Ellison, & Crean, 1997). Righteous anger is evident in many of the 
narratives of persons with serious mental illness: “I was angry that I’d been crazy, but I 
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Shanté Johnson Thought, “I’m Mentally Ill, So I Must Be Bad”
Shanté Johnson had heard her fair share of jokes and stories about “the mentally ill.” TV 
shows had taught her that “those patients” were either people to be feared or silly folks to 
be laughed at. She even recalled, with some shame, a time in high school where she had 
tormented a fellow classmate because he had been sent away to the “psycho ward” for a 
month.
When Shanté turned 22, she began experiencing severe, unexplained depression. She 
was unable to sleep much, had almost no appetite, wondered whether being dead was bet￾ter, and had little energy. Her family physician referred her to a psychiatrist who, concerned 
about her increasingly suicidal statements, talked Shanté into admitting herself into a hospi￾tal. Her first reaction to the other patients on the ward was denial: “Not me. I’m not like them. 
I’m not crazy. This is all a mistake. Just a temporary thing.”
Unfortunately, Shanté was not able to control her symptoms easily. She experienced 
some reprieves from the loss of energy and inability to sleep. But every year or so thereaf￾ter, the symptoms seemed to come back, and the need for another hospitalization (or some 
other kind of break from regular life) became apparent. With the waxing and waning course, 
stigma began to set in.
“Maybe everything they say about the mentally ill is true. People like them can’t really 
take care of themselves. They are unpredictable. They are suited for nothing but living in 
transient hotels on welfare. And now I am one of them.”
Slowly, Shanté internalized the stigma and made more self-defeating statements: “I 
must be weak because I am mentally ill!” Her self-esteem suffered as well as her public face: 
“People can surely tell I am one of those ‘mentals.’ No wonder nobody wants to hang out 
with me.” In addition, her self-efficacy diminished: “Someone who is mentally ill and weak 
like me is not capable of getting a career. I just need to accept my lot in life—that I should go 
to day programs where I play bingo all day.”38 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
was even more angry at the inhumane, hurtful, degrading, and judgmental ‘treatment’ 
I’d been subjected to” (Unzicker, 1989, p. 71; see also Davidson, Stayner, & Haglund, 
1998; Estroff, 1995). Others neither experience lowered self-esteem nor become righ￾teously angry; instead, these individuals seem to ignore the effects of public prejudice 
altogether. Persons with intact self-esteem respond to stigma with indifference or indig￾nation, depending on their identification with the generic group of people with mental 
illness. Those with high group identification show heightened indignation in the form 
of righteous anger. Those who do not identify with the group are indifferent to stigma 
(Corrigan, 2002).
LABEL AVOIDANCE: THE IMPACT ON ENGAGING IN SERVICES
People may try to escape the harmful effects of a stigmatizing label—“Hey, there’s Joe. 
He’s a mental patient!”—by avoiding one place where they might get tagged with stereo￾types: the mental health provider’s office. Stigma is a significant barrier to care seeking 
and participation (Clement et al., 2015; Corrigan, 2004; Corrigan, Druss, & Perlick, 
2014; Kosyluk et al., 2021; Schnyder, Panczak, Groth, & Schultze-Lutter, 2017). Despite 
the availability of evidence-based treatments, epidemiological research suggests that peo￾ple who might benefit from care do not receive it. Stigma is one reason why (Corrigan, 
Druss, et al., 2014). In 1990, only 24.3% of individuals with a serious mental illness in 
the United States sought care. By 2003, 40.5% of individuals with a serious mental illness 
received treatment—a significant improvement over 1990 but still only a minority of the 
population with a potential need for care (Kessler et al., 2005). The proportion was up 
by 2011 to 59.6% of people with serious mental illnesses (SAMHSA, 2012), but still over 
40% had not received mental health services in the past year (SAMHSA, 2012). Over the 
next 8 years, a small increase was seen, with 64.5% of people with serious mental illness 
FIGURE 2.3. A regressive model of self-stigma and of factors that protect people from vul￾nerability to self-stigma.
Yes
No
Agreement with stereotypes? No
Awareness of stereotypes?
“3 A’s”
“Why try?”
“I’m not worth it.”
“I’m not able.”
Yes
No
Yes
Righteous anger
Indifference
Indifference
This process reduces:
Self-esteem
Self-efficacy
Application of stereotypes 
to the self?
Self-stigma process2. Stigma and Mental Illness 39
receiving treatment in 2020 (SAMHSA, 2020). Moreover, once people with mental ill￾ness get into mental health care, they may drop out prematurely. Approximately one-fifth 
of people who seek treatment quit treatment prematurely, with over 70% of all dropout 
occurring after the first or second visit (Olfson et al., 2009). Additionally, a recent sys￾tematic review and meta-analysis found that 49% of people with serious mental illnesses 
do not take their psychotropic medications as prescribed (Semahegn et al., 2020).
More than 100 peer-reviewed, empirical papers have showed relationships between 
label avoidance and care seeking for mental health problems (Clement et al., 2015). 
Research has demonstrated the phenomenon in older adults (Graham et al., 2003; Stew￾art, Jameson, & Curtin, 2015), adults (Kosyluk et al., 2021; Vogel, Wade, & Hack￾ler, 2007), adolescents (Bowers, Manion, Papadopoulos, & Gauvreau, 2013; Chandra 
& Minkovitz, 2007; Radez et al., 2021; Radez, Reardon, Creswell, Orchard, & Waite, 
2022), and children (Adler & Wahl, 1998; Radez et al., 2021). It has been examined in 
not only the overall population (Evans-Lacko, Brohan, Mojtabai, & Thornicroft, 2012) 
but also important subgroups, including veterans (Campbell et al., 2016; Hoge et al., 
2004; Possemato et al., 2018), active military personnel (Greene-Shortridge, Britt, & 
Castro, 2007; Sharp et al., 2015), police officers and other first responders (Haugen, 
McCrillis, Smid, & Nijdam, 2017; Royle, Keenan, & Farrell, 2009), health care provid￾ers (Gold, Andrew, Goldman, & Schwenk, 2016; Wrigley, Jackson, Judd, & Komiti, 
2005), and parents making decisions about their children’s health care (Hinshaw, 2005; 
Kosyluk et al., 2022; Struening et al., 2001). It seems to be strongly moderated by gender 
(Levant et al., 2013; Pederson & Vogel, 2007) and ethnicity (Cheng, Kwan, & Sevig, 
2013; Conner et al., 2010). The connection among stigma, care seeking, and participa￾tion is complex; it is influenced by several variables, including a person’s knowledge about 
mental illness and corresponding care, attitudes and actions of their support network, 
and cultural heritage.
STRUCTURAL STIGMA: 
UNDERSTANDING STIGMA AT THE SOCIETAL LEVEL
Thus far, this chapter has provided an overview of two models of stigma, together with 
descriptions of cognitive-behavioral processes in which individuals engage that harm 
people with mental illness (public stigma) or themselves (self-stigma and label avoidance). 
The individual level of analysis only provides a partial picture of the egregious impact of 
stigma, however. Sociologists have also discussed how political, economic, and historical 
forces create societal-level phenomena that diminish the life opportunities of people with 
mental illness, and hence become stigma (Link & Phelan, 2001; Pincus, 1999). As shown 
in Figure 2.4, two levels of structural stigma in society have been identified: institutional 
policies and social structures. The key distinction between stigma at these levels and 
stigma at an individual level of analysis is the emergence of societal forms and structures 
that restrict the life opportunities of people with mental illness (Hatzenbuehler, 2016, 
2017; Pugh, Hatzenbuehler, & Link, 2015).
Institutional Policies and Stigma
Pincus (1999) argues that stereotypes and prejudice can have a major impact on people of 
color when they are enacted into rules that impede their opportunities. These rules can 
be formal legislation at various levels of government, such as the Jim Crow laws of the 40 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
late 19th to the mid-20th century that robbed Black people of their rights to vote, attend 
integrated schools, or use various public facilities. They can be company policies, such 
as banks’ not providing mortgages to members of minority groups in order to “red-line” 
neighborhoods. They can be less formal policies, such as restaurant chains’ instructions 
to employees to provide a lesser grade of service to people of color. In each case, one 
person (e.g., the CEO of a company) or a group of people (e.g., a legislative bloc) in a 
position of power has a prejudicial agenda and promotes this agenda by enacting policies 
that discriminate against a group.
Similar examples are evident for people with mental illness, especially in government 
institutions (Conley, 2021). Research has discovered state laws that restrict the rights of 
people with mental illness in terms of fundamental opportunities and privileges such 
as employment, education, housing, health care coverage, jury service, voting, holding 
public office, marriage, and parenting (Hemmens, Miller, Burton, & Milner, 2002; Liv￾ingston, 2013; Walker et al., 2015). In fact, findings from Walker et al.’s survey suggest 
that restriction of political rights, such as the right to vote or hold public office, may be 
worsening for people with mental illness. Another study showed that, as of 2016, mental 
illness continued to be used as a rationale for restricting medical licensure (Dyrbye et al., 
2017). Results suggested that it was the label of mental illness, rather than evidence of 
current psychiatric disability, that led to the restriction of medical practice. A third study 
comprehensively reviewed legislation from all 50 states in 2002 (Corrigan et al., 2005). 
Results showed that about one-fourth of this legislation dealt with discrimination. Inter￾estingly, half of this legislation seemed to extend protections against discrimination (e.g., 
establishing parity in health services’ funding for mental health services), while the other 
half seemed to promulgate discrimination (e.g., reduced parental rights for persons with 
mental illness).
Social Structures and Stigma
Typically, institutional stigma arises from the prejudices of individuals in power who 
enact legislation and administrative rules that discriminate against people with mental 
illness (Pincus, 1996, 1999; Wilson, 1987). Sociologists have also identified stigma in 
social structures that develops historically as the result of the economic and political 
injustices wrought by prejudice and discrimination. Once again, this concept has mostly 
been used to explain racism and sexism. Pincus (1999), for example, describes the dispar￾ity of insurance rates for property across White and Black communities. Although agents 
FIGURE 2.4. Two levels of structural stigma: institutional policies and social structure.
INSTITUTIONAL POLICIES SOCIAL STRUCTURES
Prejudice of people in leadership positions
↓
Translated into laws and regulations that
discriminate against people with mental
illness
The effects of prejudice and discrimination:
• historically
• politically
• economically
Structures:
• Lack of parity in health benefits
appropriations2. Stigma and Mental Illness 41
might explain this as the result of higher rates of street crime in lower-income Black com￾munities, it nevertheless results in higher premiums for people of color. The key element 
of stigma at the level of social structures is not the intent but rather the effect of keeping 
certain groups in a subordinate position. Hence, there is not clearly a prejudicial group 
in power maintaining stigma at this level; rather, it is the product of historical trends in 
discrimination.
Inability to achieve parity in mental health insurance coverage with general medi￾cal coverage may have been an example of structural stigma related to mental illness 
(Feldman, Bachman, & Bayer, 2002). Although failure of legislatures to endorse parity 
may have been affected by the individual prejudices of some representatives and senators 
(Corrigan & Watson, 2003), it also represented the insidious effects of structural stigma. 
Namely, several decades of history in which insurance benefits for physical illness sur￾passed those for mental illness led to assumptions that greater benefits for mental health 
would produce diminished benefits for physical health—an assumption, by the way, that 
may not be borne out by actuarial evidence. The federal government moved to resolve 
this disparity by passing the Paul Wellstone and Pete Domenici Mental Health Parity and 
Addiction Equity Act of 2008, which requires parity of mental health with medical and 
surgical benefits. Beginning in 2014, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 
2010 (less formally known as the ACA or “Obamacare”) has further strengthened assur￾ance of parity in mental health insurance coverage. The ACA reduced financial barriers 
to care for millions of Americans, including lowest-income Americans, such as people 
living with serious mental illness (Glied, Collins, & Lin, 2020). Despite improvements in 
access to care brought about by the ACA, Texas and 19 other states challenged the ACA 
as unconstitutional in 2019. In June of 2021, the Supreme Court rejected this challenge 
to the ACA, and the ACA remains intact (Keith, 2021). Should the court have decided 
in favor of Texas and the 19 other Republican states, access to care would have been 
significantly impacted for millions of Americans. Such actions highlight the importance 
of political activism to support the rights of all Americans, including those with serious 
mental illness, to access affordable care.
Significantly lower rates of federal monies for mental health research, compared to 
other areas of health research, remain another example of stigma at the level of social 
structures (Link & Phelan, 2001; Pugh et al., 2015). This demonstrates the circular 
nature of this type of stigma. Knowledge about mental illness that will diminish stigma, 
and hence lead to more enlightened policies about funding research, cannot be increased, 
because funding agencies are not supporting studies in the psychiatric arena at the same 
rate as they support studies of general medical conditions.
THE FAMILY’S EXPERIENCE OF STIGMA: 
COURTESY STIGMA, VICARIOUS STIGMA, 
AND SELF-STIGMA/AFFILIATE STIGMA
Family members and friends are also affected by public stigma and other types of stigma 
against persons with mental illness (Corrigan, Watson, & Miller, 2006; Moses, 2014; 
Phelan, Bromet, & Link, 1998; Wahl & Harman, 1989). Three specific types of stigma 
impact family members: courtesy stigma, self-stigma (also referred to as felt stigma and 
affiliate stigma), and vicarious stigma. Goffman (1963) defined courtesy stigma as preju￾dice and discrimination extended to members of a group by virtue of their relationship 
with a stigmatized other. Studies have found that parents and siblings, spouses or other 42 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
partners, and other family caregivers of persons with mental illness report feeling stigma￾tized to some degree, and work to manage their self- and public identity in various ways 
(Moses, 2014). According to Moses, courtesy stigma encompasses stigma enacted in both 
interpersonal and structural domains (Chou, Pu, Lee, Lin, & Kröger, 2009; Stengler￾Wenzke, Trosbach, Dietrich, & Angermeyer, 2004; Yang et al., 2007).
In addition, many studies refer to internalized stigma experienced by family mem￾bers (also referred to as self-stigma, affiliate stigma, and felt stigma). They may experi￾ence shame, blame, or contamination because of their relationship with relatives identi￾fied with mental illness (Kosyluk et al., 2022; Serchuk, Corrigan, Reed, & Ohan, 2021). 
A family member’s role vis-à-vis a “marked” family member (parent, child, sibling, or 
spouse/partner) relates to the nature and extent of stigma the “marked” member experi￾ences (Moses, 2014). A parent is typically blamed for causing the stigmatized condition 
(Eaton, Ohan, Stritzke, & Corrigan, 2016, 2019); a sibling is viewed as genetically con￾taminated and may be blamed for failing to help manage the condition (Friedrich, Lively, 
& Rubenstein, 2008; Nechmad et al., 2000); a spouse/partner may also be blamed for 
poor illness management, as well as possibly degraded because of their voluntary asso￾ciation with the marked individuals (Buchanan, Kemppainen, Smith, MacKain, & Cox, 
2011); and a child is often assumed to be genetically and/or psychologically contaminated 
by the parent’s condition, which renders the child “damaged goods” (Corrigan & Miller, 
2004; Phelan, 2005). As mentioned earlier, self-stigma experienced by parents can lead 
to label avoidance and impact parent’s willingness to seek help for their minor children 
who may be showing signs of challenges with mental illness (Corrigan, Druss, & Perlick, 
2014; Kosyluk et al., 2022). This is troubling considering research that suggests early 
intervention is key for improving outcomes among people living with serious mental ill￾nesses.
Vicarious stigma consists of emotions experienced by parents when they witness 
their child being the object of prejudice and discrimination because of their mental ill￾ness; for example, when their child is not invited to a peer’s birthday party or is excluded 
from a school group or family function due to their challenges (Moses, 2014; Wahl & 
Harman, 1989). Parents often feel sad, guilty, frustrated, and angry when vicariously 
experiencing their child’s stigma (Corrigan, 2018; Eaton et al., 2016; Moses, 2014; Ser￾chuk et al., 2021). Parents reporting greater levels of self-stigma and greater levels of sad￾ness due to vicarious stigma are also more likely to report greater depression and poorer 
quality of life (Serchuk et al., 2021).
INTERSECTIONALITY
People living with mental illness are often members of other marginalized groups that 
carry with them their own stigma. The term intersectionality and the corresponding the￾ory evolved from theories of feminism and critical race theory to help describe the experi￾ences of oppression faced by Black women based on their intersecting, oppressed identi￾ties as women and people of color (Cole, 2009; Crenshaw, 1989). Intersectionality theory 
helps us to consider how categories of identity, difference, and disadvantage are jointly 
associated with outcomes. For example, the oppression and discrimination experienced 
by Black women is sometimes like that experienced by Black men, by White women, by a 
combination of these two identities, and sometimes a unique experience altogether.
Intersectionality theory is relevant to understanding the stigma surrounding seri￾ous mental illnesses. People living with serious mental illness are complex, occupying 2. Stigma and Mental Illness 43
various identities related to, among social categories, race and ethnicity, socioeconomic 
status, co-occurring disability identities, justice involvement, and homelessness. One or 
any combination of these identities can influence public perception and treatment of an 
individual living with a mental illness (Oexle & Corrigan, 2018). The experiences of a 
Black man with serious mental illness who is homeless may be very different from the 
experiences of a White man living with a serious mental illness who works a full-time 
job and lives in his own apartment. This also suggests the need for different approaches 
to challenging the stigma surrounding mental illness as it exists at multiple marginalized 
and intersecting identities.
THE MASS MEDIA AND STIGMA
Entertainment and news media are often implicated in the widespread propagation of 
stigmatizing images. Wahl (1995) has summarized mass media’s negative effects in terms 
of three categories of the media: entertainment, news, and advertising.
Entertainment
The entertainment industry frequently uses two stigmatizing images of people with men￾tal illness. First is the violent and out-of-control “psycho killer.” Media watch studies in 
the 1980s showed that more than two-thirds of television shows and films including a 
character with mental illness portrayed that person as violent (Gerbner, 1985; Signorelli, 
1989; Wahl & Roth, 1982). Films like Nightmare on Elm Street and Friday the 13th
define an entire industry that abuses this image. Alternatively, the entertainment indus￾try presents people with mental illness as comical buffoons. This image is seen in films 
like The Dream Team, where the characters portrayed by Michael Keaton, Christopher 
Lloyd, and Peter Boyle are alternately described as “nutty psychiatric patients,” “a mot￾ley crew of lunatics,” or “crazoids who hit the streets.” The 2000 film Me, Myself, and 
Irene combines violent and buffoonish images of mental illness. In the film, Jim Carrey 
portrays a police officer with a split personality who bounces between comic figure 
and possessed demon. “From gentle to mental” was the tag line used to market the 
film. More recently, the 2017 M. Night Shayamalan film, Split, created righteous anger 
among many people living with dissociative identity disorder (DID), their care providers, 
and advocates based on the portrayal of a person living with DID as a murderous villain 
(Nedelman, 2017).
News
The news media can also be guilty of perpetuating stigmatizing images. Surveys of 
newspaper stories repeatedly represent people with mental illness in a violent light. It 
is a recurring and sobering fact that stories perpetuating notions of dangerousness have 
harmful effects on readers’ views of persons with mental illness (Ma, 2017; Ross, Mor￾gan, Jorm, & Reavley, 2019). McGinty, Kennedy-Hendricks, Choksy, and Barry (2016) 
conducted a longitudinal study of a random sample of 400 news stories on mental illness 
between 1995 and 2014. They found that, compared with the first decade of news cov￾erage, stories published between 2005 and 2014 were more likely to talk about people 
with mental illness as perpetrators of mass shootings. Overall, 55% of the articles across 
the two decades talked about violence. Only 14% of the stories talked about successful 44 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
treatment for or recovery from mental illness. This study highlights the fact that little 
changed about the perpetuation of the dangerous stereotype surrounding mental illness 
across two decades and calls for more work to educate the media about their role in per￾petuating stigma.
Advertising
Advertising frequently uses stigmatizing images of mental illness to sell products. There 
was a time in U.S. history when merchants used disrespectful images of people of color to 
hawk wares. Consider restaurants that were called Little Black Sambo’s or Aunt Jemima’s 
Pancake House. Today, most Americans would be horrified if advertisers used any ver￾sion of racial stereotypes to promote their products. Yet it is still common to hear radio 
spots talk about “crazy deals that could get you put away” or television commercials pre￾senting “maniac salesmen out of control.” Direct-to-consumer advertising (i.e., television 
and radio commercials, print advertisements, and social media posts) of psychiatric medi￾cations or telehealth services for common mental health conditions such as depression 
is increasingly common. Though such advertisements can serve to improve perceptions 
of the prevalence, treatability, and controllability of mental health conditions (Brown, 
2017), it is important to pay attention to the messages delivered through such advertis￾ing, as they may inadvertently perpetuate stereotypes such as the idea that women are 
impacted more significantly by depression (Ma, 2017) or beliefs that people with mental 
health conditions are unworthy of help and incapable of recovery or self-determination 
(Corrigan, Kosyluk, Konadu Fokuo, & Park, 2014).
Social Media
With the growing trend toward consuming and sharing news through social media, it is 
important to acknowledge this as a source of public information about mental illness. 
Like print and television media, some limited literature suggests that inaccurate portray￾als of mental illness on social media worsen public stigma (Ma, 2017; Ross et al., 2019). 
As with other forms of media, there is also growing evidence that accurate and affirming 
portrayals of mental illnesses through social media can have a positive impact on stigma.
THE OPPOSITE OF STIGMA: 
AFFIRMING ATTITUDES AND BEHAVIOR
Focusing on stigma alone causes a problem: It fosters descriptions of what is wrong with 
the lives of people with psychiatric disabilities. Just as a strengths focus is essential for a 
full picture of such a person, so too is the obverse of stigma necessary for a full apprecia￾tion of psychiatric rehabilitation’s goals. Stereotypes, prejudice, and discrimination rob 
people of life opportunities in their communities. Affirming attitudes related to recovery 
and self-determination replace notions of brokenness with ideas of hope and achieve￾ment. Self-stigma fills persons with doubt, harms their self-esteem, and undermines their 
confidence. Personal empowerment asserts that ultimate control over the life of any per￾son with psychiatric disabilities belongs solely to that person. Affirming attitudes are not 
enough, however. Behavior change is also needed. These kinds of behaviors promote the 
affirmative vision that the public is responsible for helping people with mental illness 
achieve their life goals.2. Stigma and Mental Illness 45
Affirming Attitudes
Social attitudes and structures reflect affirming perspectives about an outgroup when they 
specify efforts to assist the outgroup in gaining opportunities available to the majority. 
Social inclusion, broadly speaking, has been defined as a societal zeitgeist that promotes 
the social determinants of health and perceived and real access to the economic, interper￾sonal, spiritual, and political resources available to all adults for obtaining their personal 
goals (Leff & Warner, 2006; Lloyd, Waghorn, Best, & Gemmell, 2008; Salzer, 2021). 
Three important conceptual evolutions in the mental health system—recovery, empower￾ment, and self-determination—have influenced ideas of social inclusion, or what we more 
broadly construe as affirming attitudes (Corrigan, Powell, & Michaels, 2014).
Recovery reintroduces the ideas of “future” and “aspiration” into descriptions of 
persons with serious mental illness. As noted in Chapter 1, classic notions of schizophre￾nia (e.g., Kraepelin’s [1919/1971] dementia praecox) described it as marked by a progres￾sive downhill course, with prognostic expectations of patients’ never being able to live 
independently, work, marry, or have children. Long-term follow-up studies, however, 
contradict such pessimism, finding that most people with mental illness can live good￾quality lives outside of institutions (Harrison et al., 2001). These findings have led to psy￾chiatric services that now foster hope for such persons in terms of attaining their goals.
Out of recovery comes empowerment—the idea that people with mental illness must 
have final authority over not only their treatment but also the life goals that direct it. This 
means that these people need to be of equal status with family members, service provid￾ers, and others involved in their life trajectories. Research has found that empowerment 
includes five recurring themes: self-efficacy and self-esteem; resistance to powerlessness; 
optimism/control over future; righteous anger; and group/community action (Rogers et 
al., 1997; Rogers, Ralph, & Salzer, 2010).
Some people believe that personal empowerment and self-determination are differ￾ent sides of the same coin. Self-determination is promoted by helping persons grasp per￾sonal empowerment for themselves, as well as by directing the community not to erect 
barriers to the process. It is more transparently anchored in the belief that people with 
serious mental illness do have goals (e.g., going back to work, living independently, and/
or enjoying intimate relationships), and in the notion that these goals should be pursued 
and are achievable.
Affirming Behaviors
Correcting the community biases and structures that prevent full integration will require 
affirmative actions. Affirmative action was originally thrust on the U.S. political scene as 
an executive order signed by President Lyndon Johnson directing federal contractors to 
develop a hiring plan that would increase the number of women and minorities in all job 
categories. This plan was seeking to resolve the historical disparities in hiring practices 
that kept people of color and women out of the better-paying, higher-status categories of 
work. More broadly put, affirmative action might be construed as any official effort that 
seeks to decrease structural and other forms of stigma by purposively and strategically 
increasing the opportunities of a stigmatized group.
Two examples come to mind in terms of mental illness. Reasonable accommodations 
for people with psychiatric disabilities promote community integration. An important 
clause of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), reasonable accommoda￾tions are those provisions that employers must supply to employees with disabilities so 46 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
that the employees can competently do their jobs. (See Chapter 3 for more discussion 
of the ADA.) The provision of these accommodations may not cause undue burden on 
employers and their business. Common examples of these kinds of accommodations 
include wheelchair-friendly work environments, so that people with ambulatory disabili￾ties can easily navigate these environments. More difficult to define have been accom￾modations for people with psychiatric disabilities (MacDonald-Wilson, Rogers, Mas￾saro, Lyass, & Crean, 2002; Mechanic, 2001). Workplace accommodations provided 
for people with mental illness can include flexible schedules and job coaching, so that 
people with mental illness can cope with the stress of job demands (Zafar, Rotenberg, 
& Rudnick, 2019). Such accommodations are fundamental to rehabilitation practices 
and are outlined throughout this book. On-the-job accommodations have been shown 
to be effective for limiting the impact of disability for people with serious mental illness, 
promoting improved job tenure, and have been shown to be cost-effective for employers 
(Zafar et al., 2019).
The U.S. Supreme Court’s ruling in Olmstead v. L. C. in 1999 is a second example 
in which court decisions have led to affirmative actions for people with mental illness that 
promote community integration. In this case, the state of Georgia was found to be in vio￾lation of the ADA because it did not provide community services to psychiatric inpatients 
(Cohen, 2001; Herbert & Young, 1999). In particular, the Court found that states could 
not avoid their duties under the ADA because they did not appropriate sufficient funds 
to support community programs for all people with psychiatric disabilities in need of 
these services. To comply with the ruling, states must develop comprehensive plans to end 
unnecessary institutionalization (Bazelon Center, 1999). Hence, the U.S. Supreme Court 
began requiring affirmative actions that challenge these kinds of structural stigmas, and 
these actions have been evolving over time (Sloan & Gulrajani, 2019). It is recognized 
that individuals with serious mental illness can live in community-based homes and still 
not experience full and rightful community integration. The Department of Justice has 
recently expanded Olmstead enforcement to the criminal justice system. Chapters 6, 10, 
and 11 more fully explore specific strategies that will undermine stigma and promote 
community inclusion.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The loss of life opportunities experienced by people with psychiatric disabilities does not 
stem solely from the symptoms and dysfunctions of their illnesses. Public reaction in the 
form of stigma may also produce significant hurdles for these persons. Moreover, internal￾izing this stigma may fill a person with doubt, further undermining their efforts to success￾fully achieve life goals. Public stigma can undermine rehabilitation goals related to work, 
education, health, and housing. It can also exacerbate the interactions between people with 
psychiatric disabilities and the police. Self-stigma and label avoidance can block people from 
seeking psychiatric and rehabilitative services that might assist them with their goals. They 
can harm a person’s sense of self-esteem and self-efficacy. Stigma is also a societal-level 
phenomenon: Institutional policies and social structures may either intentionally or uninten￾tionally prevent people with mental illness from fully enjoying their rights as citizens, including 
access to the public mental health system.
Service providers need to be aware of rehabilitation goals that decrease stigma. These 
include community integration, which seeks to replace public stigma with the commitment 
to helping people achieve their goals in their community, and personal empowerment, which 2. Stigma and Mental Illness 47
represents an essential process of rehabilitation—namely, ensuring that a person with mental 
illness has complete control of their life. Community integration and personal empowerment 
underpin all rehabilitation practices. As a result, the reader will see frequent mention of these 
principles throughout the remainder of the book. In addition, rehabilitation providers need to 
join with advocates and people with psychiatric disabilities to directly challenge the stigma 
of mental illness.48
CHAPTER 3
What Is Psychiatric Rehabilitation?
Psychiatric rehabilitation is the systematic eff ort to help adults with psy￾chiatric disabilities to attain their personal goals. It is bidirectional in focus, seeking to 
infl uence both individuals’ strengths and challenges related to these goals, and the com￾munity contexts in which the persons will live them out. The remainder of this book 
articulates specifi c psychiatric rehabilitation practices that have been proven eff ective—
or, when the evidence is lacking, practices that represent our best understanding of how 
to help in the rehabilitation process. Common to these practices is a set of fundamental 
concepts discussed in this chapter.
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN PSYCHIATRIC REHABILITATION
Many diff erent classifi cations of the core principles of psychiatric rehabilitation have been 
proposed over the years (Anthony, Cohen, Farkas, & Gagne, 2002; Bond & Res nick, 
2000; Cnaan, Blankertz, Messinger, & Gardner, 1988; Cook & Hoff schmidt, 1993; 
Dincin, 1995a; Hughes & Weinstein, 1997b; Pratt, Gill, Barrett, & Roberts, 1999). It 
sometimes seems that the development of psychiatric rehabilitation is the opposite of a 
theory-based fi eld (Cnaan, Blankertz, Messinger, & Gardner, 1989). Hence Anthony et 
al. (2002) list eclecticism as one of the core principles, and Dincin (1995a) refers to the 
pragmatism of psychiatric rehabilitation, refl ecting the fact that many of its most widely 
practiced approaches have been developed through a trial-and-error process. As a result, 
psychiatric rehabilitation often seems to be a hodgepodge of principles and practices lack￾ing a meaningful framework. Some years ago, Corrigan (2003) proposed an integrated 
model resting on the key structures of rehabilitation: principles (the moral imperatives 
that guide people and society in dealing with disabilities), strategies (the tools that reha￾bilitation providers might employ to help persons with disabilities), settings (places where 
rehabilitation occurs), and roles (the diff erent types of people who do rehabilitation). The 
framework is summarized in Figure 3.1 and reviewed here. Some of these principles are 
especially noteworthy because they challenge “old- school” notions of rehabilitation—
namely, custodial approaches in which things are done for people, because it is believed 
that they are unable to do these things for themselves. Old- school notions are highlighted 
where notable.
CHAPTER 33. What Is Psychiatric Rehabilitation? 49
Principles
As noted earlier, psychiatric rehabilitation is bidirectional: On the one hand, it is meant 
to have an impact on individuals and their challenges and strengths relative to personal 
goals; on the other, it is meant to have an impact on their community (the venue in which 
goals are pursued and achieved). Psychiatric rehabilitation has evolved several important 
principles that guide providers in their engagement of people with disabilities and in the 
community in which they live.
Principles for Approaching the Person
Recovery was hailed as the first principle of mental health services for people with psychi￾atric disabilities in both U.S. Surgeon General David Satcher’s report to the nation (U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services [DHHS], 1999) and in the report of a com￾mission appointed by President George W. Bush (New Freedom Commission on Mental 
Health, 2003). Recovery is recognized globally by organizations such as the WHO and 
FIGURE 3.1. The principles, strategies, settings, and roles that define psychiatric rehabilitation.
PRINCIPLES
Approaching the Person Approaching the Community*
Recovery Self-determination
Hope Community inclusion
Goals focus Place first, then train
Resilience Supports and modifications
Early intervention Real-world focus
Quality of life Inclusion
Strengths focus Continuity of services
Dignity to fail Integration of services
*This includes the rehabilitation service system
STRATEGIES
Basic listening skills
Problem solving
Instrumental and social support
Shared decision making
Goal setting
Skills training
Transfer training
Cognitive rehab/therapy
Mindfulness
Family education/support
Relapse prevention
Harm reduction
Trauma-informed care
Utilizing technology
SETTINGS
Residential
Psychiatric hospitals
Halfway houses
Person’s home
Vocational
Work settings
Education settings
Activity/Recreation
Day treatment
Partial hospitalization
Psychosocial clubhouse
The community
Faith-based communities
Mutual support programs
Self-help programs
ROLES
The person
Their support system
Professional providers
Paraprofessional providers
Peers50 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
the World Psychiatric Association as a human right (Amering, 2017). Recovery-based 
health systems echo the research summarized in Chapter 1; namely, most people learn 
to live with psychiatric disabilities, even if they do not erase the challenges altogether. 
In part, this reflects notions of recovery as an outcome, meaning that the symptoms of 
illness and barriers of disabilities diminish or disappear. But recovery is also a process—
one in which, regardless of a person’s current symptoms and disabilities, hope is the rule 
rather than the exception. Rehabilitation providers foster settings and interactions in 
which future opportunity and success are framed as not just possibilities but probabili￾ties. This does not mean that rehabilitation providers ignore people’s worries about the 
future or their questions of doubt and self-worth. To do so would be to ignore essential 
experiences. Instead, these experiences are framed in terms of hope.
The spirit of recovery is contrary to older notions of mental illnesses—namely, that 
people with these illnesses do not improve and should therefore expect to live with no 
goals and no accomplishments (Corrigan, 2013). That is why a third principle of psy￾chiatric rehabilitation is a focus on goals. In fact, goals are the defining center of reha￾bilitation. Regardless of a person’s symptoms or disabilities, what the person wants to 
accomplish is the essential question. Goals here reflect the key life domains of adults: 
education, work, housing, relationships, health, faith, and recreation. Strategies to help 
people identify and act on goals are reviewed in Chapter 5. Briefly, it is never a rehabilita￾tion provider’s job to challenge a person’s specific goals: “Charlie, I just don’t think you 
have what it takes to become an attorney.” Sometimes the rehabilitation provider may 
need to share information about a goal: “Charlie, you will need to get an undergraduate 
degree and then go through law school if you want to be an attorney.” But the reha￾bilitation team is then charged with helping Charlie take the steps toward achieving this 
vocational goal.
Rehabilitation providers realize that mental health is not just the removal of symp￾toms and disabilities. Instead, quality of life is central. As defined in Chapter 5, quality of 
life is the degree to which people are satisfied with the various domains of living: work, 
income, health, independent living, and relationships. A quality of life with a sense of 
well-being is accomplished through a focus on strengths. A strengths-focused rehabilita￾tion program helps people avail themselves of their strengths in the pursuit of goals. It 
also helps people learn ways to add to their list of strengths.
In line with a strengths-based focus is the concept of resilience, which is defined in 
the mental illness literature in two ways (Ayed, Toner, & Priebe, 2019). One definition 
frames resilience as a process of adjustment and adaptation to the experience of psychiat￾ric disability through which individuals withstand, bounce back from, or grow from their 
experience with serious mental illness. This definition is consistent with the common 
description by people with psychiatric disabilities of recovery from the disabling effects of 
serious mental illness as a “journey” (Deegan, 1996; Drake & Whitley, 2014). Psychiatric 
rehabilitation practitioners are charged with supporting individuals with serious mental 
illnesses in this process. Another conceptualization of resilience is as a reservoir of indi￾vidual and personal resources that they can tap to move forward in their recovery. This 
definition infers that resilience can be enhanced in psychiatric rehabilitation settings by 
leveraging existing personal and social resources, which can be identified through vari￾ous assessment strategies (see Chapter 5).
Resilience might be addressed following disasters that impact coping among people 
living with serious mental illness, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, using strategies such 
as short-term cognitive-behavioral therapy and the provision of resources (Richards & 
Dixon, 2020). Another important population to be targeted using resilience interventions 3. What Is Psychiatric Rehabilitation? 51
are those who are early on in their experience with symptoms of a serious mental illness. 
Services provided to this population are often referred to as early intervention or first￾episode programs. Research suggests that the earlier psychiatric rehabilitation is received 
following the onset of symptoms, the more promising the recovery outcomes. A meta￾analysis of the literature examining the effects of early intervention services compared 
with treatment as usual found superior effects of early intervention on treatment discon￾tinuation, hospitalization, involvement in school or work, and symptom severity (Correll 
et al., 2018). Delivering interventions meant to foster resilience soon after the onset of 
symptoms may delay or prevent the transition to psychosis (Stafford, Jackson, Mayo￾Wilson, Morrison, & Kendall, 2013).
With the focus on hope, goals, and strengths, one might think that failures do not 
occur in rehabilitation. Failure, however, is a part of human life. Everyone better under￾stands the bounds of existence through the experience of falling short. Unfortunately, 
out of concern about relapse—recurring symptoms that might bring a person back into 
the psychiatric hospital—a rehabilitation provider might rob the person of the dignity to 
INSTITUTIONAL EXAMPLE
Thresholds
Located alongside high-rise apartments and other residences in an affluent neighborhood 
of Chicago, the home base for Thresholds does not “look” like a psychiatric rehabilitation 
center. It appears to be a large residence, which it once was. When you walk inside, you 
may be struck by the apparent chaos of simultaneous diverse activities on every floor of the 
building. In the lobby, you step aside as a group of members (i.e., people with psychiatric 
disabilities) assemble for a mobile work crew to clean government buildings. In the base￾ment, a coffee shop is open for business. On the first floor, a peer-led medication education 
group is meeting. Nurses from the local university are conducting routine physical examina￾tions in another room. Adding to the swirl of activity on the first floor, the Mothers’ Group 
offers training and support to mothers with schizophrenia in caring for their preschoolers. 
On the second floor, some members are preparing the noonday meal, while the members’ 
council is planning the summer camping program. On the upper floors, workers hold indi￾vidual counseling sessions. The Education program meets on the fourth floor, providing 
tutorial help for members preparing for their GED examinations. Elsewhere, the Community 
Scholars program helps members enroll in local community colleges. That evening, Thresh￾olds is transformed into a drop-in center, with board games, food, and music. As you learn 
more about Thresholds, you discover that these impressions provide only a glimpse of the 
tip of the iceberg: They do not include the Thresholds Bridge assertive community treatment 
programs, the large network of housing interventions, or many other programs.
Thresholds embodies the core principles of psychiatric rehabilitation, discussed 
below. For example, all of its programs have a focus on real-world issues (work, housing, 
income support), with attention to members’ personal goals and preferences. Interventions 
aim at both skills training (sometimes through formal classes, but more often through expe￾riential learning) and environmental modification. Thresholds staff members work together 
on teams that provide the entire spectrum of psychiatric rehabilitation services, including 
mental health case management, vocational services, and residential services. All of the 
Thresholds programs aim at community integration, and their intention (especially that of 
the Thresholds Bridge programs) is to provide time-unlimited services, in recognition of the 
importance of continuity of services.52 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
fail (Corrigan, 2011a; Mukherjee, 2015). People with psychiatric disabilities need to be 
granted the same opportunities, with the same potential for missing the mark, as every￾one else.
Principles for Approaching the Community and Service System
Success in the community rests on self-determination (Corrigan, Angell, et al., 2012; 
Davidson, 2016; Piltch, 2016). People with disabilities have the final say about the goals 
they wish to seek, as well as the supports they might use to obtain them—supports that 
include the array of rehabilitation services in their community. People often rely on the 
advice of family members and other important people in their lives. The prominence of 
family influence may change by culture; in Asian cultures, for example, the role of par￾ents’ opinion is generally elevated over its role in mainstream U.S. culture (Lam, 2003). 
Family-centered decision making, in which family members take on a greater role in 
treatment and rehabilitation decisions, may be appropriate for individuals whose culture 
places high value on family involvement (Corrigan & Lee, 2021). Still, persons with dis￾abilities should make the final decisions on all aspects of their rehabilitation plans.
Rehabilitation programs also rely on community integration. This means avoiding 
the use of stepwise approaches in which individuals first adjust to protected settings, such 
as sheltered workshops, segregated housing arrangements, and day treatment programs, 
as preparation for eventual full integration (Carling, 1995). As a result, rehabilitation 
programs follow the principle of “place first and then train.” This perspective is contrary 
to old-school notions of training before placement (Corrigan, 2001). In the traditional 
philosophy, it was believed people should be trained on illness management skills in 
“safe” settings, before being placed in real-world settings with their potentially over￾whelming demands. As a result, people might be sent to a sheltered workshop to learn 
work adjustment skills before being placed in part-time jobs. Research showed, however, 
that this kind of overly cautious approach to rehabilitation did not protect the persons 
from relapse. Instead, it frustrated people by placing them in therapeutic limbo instead 
of helping them dive into the work (or school or housing) setting where their goals would 
really be met. The principle of “place first and then train” means that people with dis￾abilities are put into the work setting and then obtain the training and support to help 
them stay there.
Success in following these principles relies on community support and modifica￾tions. Most everyone needs the support of family members, friends, and community 
in achieving their goals. People with psychiatric disabilities rightfully have the same 
expectations. Rehabilitation providers might be needed to help organize these supports. 
In addition, people with psychiatric disabilities are entitled to accommodations in their 
community to fully avail themselves of supports and opportunities, as outlined in the 
ADA (see Chapter 2 and the discussion later in this chapter). Hence the school system, 
for example, should modify admissions and other policies so that persons with these 
disabilities can make it successfully through community college. Reasonable accommo￾dations are highlighted through the book, but especially in Chapter 11 on employment 
and education.
Slightly different from the concept of community integration, and one more often 
used outside of the United States, is that of community inclusion (Salzer, 2021). Commu￾nity inclusion goes a bit further than integration, as it emphasizes the value of recruiting, 
welcoming, and embracing individuals of diverse abilities into all spaces (work, school, 3. What Is Psychiatric Rehabilitation? 53
living, social, and spiritual). The principle of community inclusion, if applied in the con￾text of psychiatric rehabilitation services, should result in policies, programs, and prac￾tices that benefit people with mental illness and the community broadly.
Furthermore, rehabilitation occurs in the real world, not in sheltered settings. This 
means that people with psychiatric disabilities are due the rightful opportunities of same￾age peers—including work, housing, health, and relationships—with similar accredita￾tion where applicable (e.g., educational diplomas). This also means that these goals occur 
in real places (e.g., an actual legal office) in real ways (e.g., doing actual legal work). Reha￾bilitation is also inclusive. Old-school notions of rehabilitation sought to protect people 
with disabilities from those who might harm them. Families, in particular, were often 
distanced from persons with mental illness because of beliefs that hostile or overinvolved 
parents caused or worsened mental illness. Today, everyone a person wants included in 
services is included: parents, spouse or partner, children, extended family members, and 
friends. People in authority roles may also be included: professors, employers, landlords, 
religious leaders, health care providers, or members of the criminal justice system. This 
is often a changing list, depending on the specific goals that guide the rehabilitation plan.
In addition, rehabilitation programs offer continuity of services. Because psychiatric 
disabilities often involve chronic conditions, time-limited interventions are generally inef￾fective. Maintaining continuity in relationships by providing timely and predictable sup￾port is a key element in successful psychiatric rehabilitation programs. The principle of 
continuity of services may seem to be contrary to self-determination, especially for psy￾chiatric rehabilitation programs such as drop-in centers and clubhouse programs, which 
stress the voluntary nature of membership. In such programs, one way this principle is 
expressed is through systematically reaching out to those who have stopped participating 
(Beard, Malamud, & Rossman, 1978).
Information like that summarized in Figure 3.1 might suggest that a service plan 
occurs in separate boxes—that addressing vocational goals, for example, is a sepa￾rate task, done at a separate time, by a separate provider or team of providers from 
the provider(s) addressing independent living goals. This assumption might suggest that 
there is an order to goals (e.g., that people should resolve substance use goals before going 
back to work). Good rehabilitation services are integrated. The rehabilitation team, led 
by the person, tackles all goals together in the order that makes the best sense for that 
person. Often, several goals are considered at once. Traditional mental health systems, by 
contrast, often undermine integrated programs. This is sometimes called siloed services: 
Vocational services are provided by one team, mental health services by a second, and 
substance abuse interventions by a third. People in these systems often feel like ping-pong 
balls, bouncing from office to office to get services. Three types of integration are espe￾cially important and are discussed more fully in subsequent chapters:
•	 Integrated vocational and mental health services (Chapter 11). One team addresses 
all the employment (and educational) goals of people with psychiatric disabilities, 
while also helping them deal with these disabilities.
•	 Integrated substance abuse and mental health services (Chapter 16). Once again, 
a single team helps people with mental illness deal with substance abuse concerns, 
while also managing the mental illness.
•	 Integrated mental health and primary care services (Chapter 15). A third team 
helps people with psychiatric disabilities address physical health needs by assisting 
them in primary care clinics.54 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
Strategies
Strategies are the tools that rehabilitation providers use to help people accomplish their 
goals. They are discrete behavioral activities by means of which providers engage people 
to help them move forward. Most important of these are basic listening skills, those sets 
of activities fundamental to any counseling or helping relationship. Contrary to what one 
might expect, some listening and communication techniques may actually undermine 
counseling. Thomas Gordon (1970) summarized many of these “roadblocks” in a list 
commonly taught to counseling students; a list based on Gordon’s recommendations is 
provided in Table 3.1. Often added to this list are actions like advice giving or problem 
solving. A counselor who gives advice is not listening to a person, and often jumping way 
ahead of them. Table 3.2 lists the fundamental listening skills. These are often divided 
into attending, following, and reflecting skills (Egan, 2013). Space limitations preclude a 
satisfactory review of roadblocks and listening skills here. Students of psychiatric reha￾bilitation should be involved in skills-based coursework where these principles and prac￾tices are mastered.
Interpersonal problem-solving skills constitute another form of basic listening, in 
which the rehabilitation provider helps the person understand problems that block goals, 
brainstorm solutions to problems, consider the costs and benefits of solutions, pick one 
solution and plan its implementation, and evaluate that solution after a brief time to 
determine its effectiveness (Dobson & Dozois, 2019). The provider may work with the 
person to adapt a solution further if evaluation suggests that it falls short. Interpersonal 
problem solving is discussed more fully in Chapter 7.
Equally important are instrumental support and social support. Instrumental sup￾port helps the person solve problems that recur when they are living independently in the 
TABLE 3.1. Gordon’s Roadblocks to Communication 
Ordering, directing, commanding: Telling the person to do something; giving the person an order 
or command.
“I don’t care what other people are doing; you have to go to the sheltered workshop!”
“Stop complaining!”
Moralizing, preaching—“shoulds” and “oughts”: Invoking vague outside authority as accepted truth.
“You shouldn’t act like that.”
“You ought to do . . . ”
Teaching, lecturing, giving logical arguments: Trying to influence the person with facts, 
counterarguments, logic, information, or the provider’s own opinion.
“Going to community college can be the most wonderful experience you’ll ever have.”
“Let’s look at the facts about living independently on a fixed income.”
Judging, criticizing, disagreeing, blaming: Making a negative judgment or evaluation of the person.
“You’re not thinking clearly.”
“That’s an immature point of view.”
Withdrawing, distracting, sarcasm, humoring, diverting: Trying to get the person away from the 
problem, withdrawing from the problem, distracting the person, kidding the person out of it, or 
pushing the problem aside.
“Come on—let’s talk about something more pleasant.”
“We’ve all been through this before.”
Note. Based on Gordon (1970).3. What Is Psychiatric Rehabilitation? 55
community. Social support helps the person meet basic needs for affection and affiliation. 
Providing instrumental support may include discharge planning from the inpatient set￾ting, establishing linkages with community programs, networking with these programs 
to confirm that linkages have occurred, ensuring that high-quality community care is 
provided, and advocating when such care is not provided (Bachrach, 1989; Kanter, 1989). 
Social support includes being there when the person needs emotional assistance and pro￾viding this support unconditionally.
TABLE 3.2. Fundamental Listening Skills
Attending skills
A posture of involvement: The listener’s posture can let the speaker know that their message is being 
heard.
Appropriate body motion: A listener who is too still may appear distant to the speaker. Simple 
motions of nodding or leaning forward can let the speaker know that the listener is paying attention.
Eye contact: The listener should continue to make eye contact with the speaker while they talk, unless 
the eye contact is making the speaker uncomfortable.
Nondistracting environment: A noisy or distracting environment can create a barrier between speaker 
and listener. The listener should try to limit the interruptions and talk in a space where the speaker 
can speak freely.
Following skills
Door openers: The listener should make sure not to start the conversation with a roadblock. Good 
door openers provide an invitation to talk followed by silence, giving the speaker a chance to talk.
Minimal encouragers: Simple statements (e.g., “Right” or “Go on”), or a nod of the head, can let the 
speaker know that the listener is engaging with them.
Infrequent questions: Questions can help direct the speaker, but not all questions are helpful. Asking a 
closed-ended question that can be answered with one or two words does not encourage conversation, 
whereas an open-ended question does. This type of question begins with a word like what, why, or 
how, encouraging the speaker to continue.
Attentive silence: Being quiet, while showing the speaker that the listener is engaged, is one of the best 
ways to help. Eye contact and minimal encouragers can let the speaker know that the listener is paying 
attention, while letting the speaker do most of the talking.
Reflecting skills
This type of listening skill involves reflecting or returning the speaker’s messages, including both 
the obvious and potentially hidden messages. The obvious message is the exact meaning of what the 
person says, while the hidden message takes into account the mood and emotions of the speaker.
Paraphrasing: Restating the core of the speaker’s message in the listener’s words. It is concise—
concentrating on the content of what was said, and balancing the speaker’s and listener’s speaking 
styles. This focuses on the obvious message.
Reflecting feelings: This centers on the hidden message of what the speaker is saying. By listening for 
feeling words and observing body language, the listener can hear the speaker’s feelings and echo them 
back to the speaker.
Reflecting meanings: This involves tying the obvious and hidden messages together. By tying the 
speaker’s feelings to the content of their message, the listener can think about the overall meaning of 
what the speaker is saying.
Summary reflections: By summarizing the flow of the conversation, the listener can reflect themes or 
common statements the speaker is repeating.
Note. Based on Egan (2013).56 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
Good examples of ongoing support have been described as longitudinal, cross￾sectional, and accessible (Baker & Intagliata, 1992; Caragonne, 1981; Intagliata, 1982; 
Rapp, 1998; Rapp & Goscha, 2004; Test & Stein, 1978; Uijen, Schers, Schellevis, & van 
den Bosch, 2012). Longitudinal services begin at hospital discharge and continue as a 
person moves through various community programs. Longitudinal support does not end 
if the person experiences a relapse and is rehospitalized. Cross-sectional support implies 
that providers will address the needs of persons with mental illness across all domains 
of need. Hence, providers must have a broad network of contacts available to meet the 
changing nature of these persons’ concerns. By being accessible, providers reach out to 
people and serve them at their homes, workplaces, or rehabilitation programs, rather 
than waiting for people to come to staff offices.
Providers help people set their rehabilitation plans through shared decision making
(SDM), which is a fairly well-developed and evaluated approach to health care and other 
service options that combines three basic principles and strategies—education, cost–
benefit analyses, and support (Drake, Deegan, & Rapp, 2010). It has three correspond￾ing components:
1. Assist decision making by helping the person examine costs and benefits of vari￾ous options. Namely, the person is encouraged to identify and make sense of the advan￾tages and disadvantages of a specific service for specific problems (symptoms, disabilities, 
low quality of life) caused by the illness.
2. This kind of assessment is facilitated by information, so that the person bet￾ter understands their illness, corresponding treatment, and other relevant parameters. 
The education process requires development of meaningful and user-friendly informa￾tion channels. These might include face-to-face classroom kinds of endeavors. Online 
technologies and social media have also moved into this arena; education may now be 
provided via interactive websites, YouTube, Facebook, Twitter, and various mobile health 
(mHealth) apps (Borzekowski et al., 2009; Naslund, Marsch, McHugo, & Bartels, 2015).
3. SDM is fundamentally a social exchange between person and provider. Skills that 
enhance the qualities of this exchange may positively affect treatment decisions. This con￾sideration has been prominently incorporated in the field of motivational interviewing, 
which suggests that SDM exchanges need to surpass some kind of actuarial process to 
include empathy, genuineness, and the promotion of self-efficacy (Miller & Rose, 2010). 
SDM and motivational interviewing are reviewed more completely in Chapter 5.
Goal setting is the set of practical activities providers use to help people identify 
and act on their personal aspirations (Anthony & Liberman, 1992; Bachrach, 1992; 
Mosher & Burti, 1992). Goal assessment ensures that the focus of treatment is driven 
by personal perceptions of important needs. Various methods have evolved to assess 
goals (Brewin & Wing, 1993; Marshall, Hogg, Gath, & Lockwood, 1995; Phelan, Link, 
Stueve, & Moore, 1995); typically, they combine open-ended questions about a person’s 
needs with Likert scale ratings about the importance of these needs. These methods 
may seem to frame goal identification as a series of yes–no determinations (e.g., “Yes, 
obtaining supported housing is important to me, and I’d like some assistance in this 
area,” or “No, I don’t want to change my work experiences now”). Rather than viewing 
a specific goal as a categorical decision, a provider may obtain a more comprehensive 
picture by considering the profile of factors that motivate and discourage a specific deci￾sion (Corrigan, McCracken, & Holmes, 2001). For example, what are the advantages 3. What Is Psychiatric Rehabilitation? 57
and disadvantages of changing the current work setting? This kind of assessment helps 
the person identify specific barriers to achieving goals and personal benefits related to 
that pursuit.
Skills training helps adults who lack social and coping skills to learn adaptive 
behaviors so they can bolster their support networks and deal more effectively with life’s 
demands. Skills training is a rehabilitation strategy based on social learning theory that 
comprises four steps (Liberman, DeRisi, & Mueser, 1989; Morrison & Bellack, 1984):
1. Skills are briefly introduced to participants, so that they can gain a conceptual 
understanding of what they are about to learn.
2. Actors model the skills so that participants can learn them vicariously.
3. Participants are encouraged to behaviorally rehearse the newly learned skills dur￾ing role plays; for example, participants learning basic conversation skills may be 
instructed to role-play a conversation about local sports teams with an acquain￾tance on a bus.
4. Social and material reinforcers are distributed for successful participation in the 
role play.
These four activities have been used to help participants learn a wide range of social, self￾care, and coping skills.
Many of the social and coping skills learned in training programs frequently do 
not generalize outside the treatment center where skills training occurred (Corrigan & 
Basit, 1997). For example, participants who show marked improvement in social skills 
at a work program may seem relatively unchanged at home. Critics believe that this 
is a fundamental flaw in skills training programs, because the positive effects of these 
programs are not carried into other settings. Proponents counter that this critique actu￾ally represents a misunderstanding of the process of generalization. Rather than being a 
naturally occurring event, generalization is a goal that needs to be actively targeted in the 
treatment program.
Accordingly, clinical investigators have developed several transfer training strate￾gies that foster generalization. One of the best ways to generalize newly learned behav￾iors to situations outside the training milieu is to assign homework (Falloon, Lindley, 
McDonald, & Marks, 1977; McFall, 1982). Trainers inform individuals that they are to 
practice newly learned skills at important venues outside the treatment setting: at home, 
at their part-time jobs, at their places of worship, or when visiting friends. Homework 
directs a skills training participant to rehearse the new skills in a setting with different 
social demands. Family members, friends, coworkers, residential staff members, and oth￾ers with whom the participant regularly interacts are essential resources for generalizing 
skills. These persons need to be actively included in the skills training plan; family educa￾tion and support strategies are discussed more fully later in the section “Eye Movement 
Desensitization and Reprocessing.”
Persons with severe mental illnesses are often hampered by cognitive deficits, includ￾ing problems with attention, memory, decision making, and expression (Corrigan & 
Yudofsky, 1996). Social and coping skills may not be learned or generalized, because 
participants have difficulty recognizing similarities and differences between the training 
setting and other important situations. Cognitive rehabilitation and therapy strategies 
try to help participants resolve the various information-processing deficits that interfere 
with the acquisition and performance of important skills (Liberman & Green, 1992; 
Hogarty & Flesher, 1992).58 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
Researchers have attempted to improve participants’ deficits in attention, memory, 
and conceptual flexibility. Various reinforcement and punishment contingencies have 
been shown to significantly improve participants’ attention to test stimuli (Karras, 1968; 
Meiselman, 1973; Rosenbaum, Mackavey, & Grisell, 1957). Semantic encoding, in 
which subjects are instructed to remember word lists in terms of important dimensions, 
has significantly improved the subsequent recall of these words. Monetary reinforcers 
and rule learning have improved participants’ ability to manipulate concepts flexibly 
(Bellack, Mueser, Morrison, Tierney, & Podell, 1990; Green, Ganzell, Satz, & Vaclav, 
1990). For example, participants in a card-sorting task were able to sort these cards more 
accurately when they were paid for correct sorts and provided with a rule to guide the 
sort (e.g., sorting by color). Unfortunately, most of these studies on cognitive rehabilita￾tion have been conducted in laboratory settings, so the validity of their findings is ques￾tionable (Corrigan & Storzbach, 1993). What does paying attention to numbers flashing 
on a computer screen have to do with an individual’s ability to attend to a supervisor’s 
instructions about loading a truck?
More recently, researchers have enhanced the validity of cognitive rehabilitation by 
trying to diminish the impact of cognitive deficits on learning psychosocial skills. An 
attention-focusing procedure has been shown to augment the acquisition and generaliza￾tion of basic conversation skills (Liberman, Mueser, & Wallace, 1986; Massel, Corrigan, 
Liberman, & Milan, 1991; Wong & Woolsey, 1989). This protocol involves repetition 
of attentional prompts over the course of learning a new skill. Researchers have also 
applied many of the principles and techniques of cognitive-behavioral therapy to ideas 
that trouble people with serious mental illness (Beck & Rector, 2000; Gould, Mueser, 
Bolton, Mays, & Goff, 2001; Turkington & Kingdon, 2000). These kinds of approaches 
use collaborative empiricism; that is, a person and counselor jointly determine how a 
specific thought hurts the person and develop counters to these thoughts that are person￾ally effective.
Mindfulness has been incorporated into cognitive therapy to enhance its effects. 
Although largely emerging from Buddhism, mindfulness has recently been adapted for 
Western therapies. Mindfulness is intentional, accepting, and nonjudgmental focus of 
a person’s attention on the emotions, thoughts, and sensations occurring in the present 
moment (Kabat-Zinn, 2007). It has been included in recently developed psychothera￾pies such as dialectical behavior therapy (DBT; Linehan, 2013), acceptance and commit￾ment therapy (Hayes & Lillis, 2014), and eye movement desensitization and reprocessing 
(EMDR; Oren & Solomon, 2012).
DBT (https://dialecticalbehaviortherapy.com) focuses on teaching people with 
depression, anxiety, BPDs, addictions, eating disorders, and PTSD problem-solving strat￾egies. Strategies fall under four core skills sets, including mindfulness, distress tolerance, 
emotion regulation, and interpersonal/communication skills. Acceptance and commit￾ment therapy targets six core processes of change supporting psychological flexibility 
to decrease suffering and improve well-being, and has been found to be efficacious for a 
range of conditions, including anxiety, depression, substance use, pain, and transdiag￾nostic groups (Gloster, Walder, Levin, Twohig, & Karekla, 2020). The six core processes 
targeted by acceptance and commitment therapy include (1) acceptance (acknowledging 
and accepting the full range of emotions), (2) cognitive diffusion (changing the way you 
react to distressing emotions [suspending judgment]), (3) being present (being mindful of 
thoughts and feelings in the present moment without judgment), (4) self-as-context (view￾ing one’s identity as more than one’s thoughts and feelings), (5) values (choosing values 
in different domains and striving to live according to these values, as opposed to acting 3. What Is Psychiatric Rehabilitation? 59
in order to avoid distress), and (6) committed action (taking concrete steps to incorporate 
changes that align with values).
EMDR (www.emdr.com) is a psychotherapy treatment that targets emotional dis￾tress and traumatic memories (Shapiro, 1989a, 1989b). During EMDR, the clinician 
follows a protocol that requires the client to attend to emotionally distressing memo￾ries in sequential doses, while focusing on an external stimulus (i.e., directed lateral eye 
movements, hand tapping, audio stimulation) (Shapiro, 1991). Cuijpers, Veen, Sijbrandij, 
Yoder, and Cristea (2020) conducted a meta-analysis of studies examining the effective￾ness of EMDR for PTSD and other mental health conditions and found that EMDR may 
be effective for PTSD in the short term, but problems with the quality of existing studies 
do not allow for drawing definite conclusions about EMDR’s effectiveness. Sepehry, Lam, 
Sheppard, Guirguis-Younger, and Maglio (2021), who conducted another meta-analysis 
examining the effectiveness of EMDR for depression, concluded that it is an effective 
intervention for depression but similarly pointed out problems with the quality of existing 
research. More and higher-quality research is needed to determine whether EMDR may 
be an effective component of psychiatric rehabilitation interventions.
Schizophrenia and other serious mental illnesses have an adverse impact on not only 
an individual diagnosed with such a disorder but also their family. Parents, siblings, 
and other family members are typically distressed by the person’s sometimes bizarre 
and asocial behavior; anxious about increased financial burdens due to prolonged treat￾ment; uncertain about the person’s and their own future plans; and isolated from their 
own social supports due to caregiving responsibilities, stigma, and social embarrassment 
(Creer & Wing, 1974). Moreover, increased family stress may be a factor contributing 
to further exacerbations of the person’s symptoms (Imber-Mintz, Liberman, Miklowitz, 
& Mintz, 1987). People who return to families that display criticism or hostility seem 
to relapse three to four times more often than those whose families are low in expressed 
emotion (Brown, Birley, & Wing, 1972; Leff & Vaughn, 1985; Vaughn & Leff, 1976; 
Vaughn et al., 1982; Vaughn, Snyder, Jones, Freeman, & Falloon, 1984).
Family education and support are aimed at helping a family manage the burden of 
a member’s severe mental illness (Mueser & Glynn, 1999). Educational approaches to 
family therapy combine three interventions: information giving, communication skills 
training, and problem-solving training. During the first sessions, the family is provided 
information about the nature, course, and treatment of the person’s mental illness. Fam￾ily members learn about symptoms and their impact. This lesson can be made especially 
poignant by asking people to join in the educational process and to discuss personal 
experiences with symptoms. Effective treatments for the illness are also reviewed.
Support shared among family members is also beneficial to those involved. A 
multiple-family group (MFG) helps participating family members to extend their social 
network; the MFG is believed to absorb anxiety and stress generated by psychotic symp￾toms (Anderson, Hogarty, Bayer, & Needleman, 1984; Pattison, Llamas, & Hurd, 1979). 
Controlled research suggests that persons with severe mental illnesses who participate 
with family members in MFGs show significant reductions in symptoms and fewer rehos￾pitalization days (McFarlane et al., 1996). Family approaches are more thoroughly dis￾cussed in Chapter 12.
Pursuing goals and overcoming symptoms and disabilities are difficult; people often 
relapse. Relapse prevention is a cognitive-behavioral intervention in which rehabilita￾tion providers help people plan for and control relapses during periods when they are 
relatively strong. This intervention was originally developed to help people with the fre￾quent slips common during attempts to control alcohol and other drug use (Larimer, 60 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
Palmer, & Marlatt, 1999). Relapse is defined here as using alcohol or drugs beyond a 
stated goal (e.g., “I slipped and got drunk over the weekend”). Relapse prevention has 
also been applied to mental health issues (Segal, Pearson, & Thase, 2003). In this case, 
relapse might be experienced as being overwhelmed again by anxiety, depression, or 
voices. Relapse prevention helps people define slips, identify high-risk situations where 
slips might occur, plan ways to avoid these high-risk situations, and practice coping skills 
when relapses occur. It is more fully described in Chapters 7 and 16, since it has largely 
been studied as a strategy for drug and alcohol abuse.
The goal of relapse prevention may seem to be total abstinence, especially in terms of 
drug and alcohol abuse. People who abuse substances should stop. People do not always 
choose abstinence as a goal, however; for these persons, the pros of giving up a substance 
do not outweigh the cons. Harm reduction is a strategy for helping people learn to use 
drugs and alcohol safely (Marlatt, Larimer, & Witkiewitz, 2012). Among the greatest 
risks of heroin and other intravenous drug use are the infectious diseases (e.g., HIV/AIDS 
and hepatitis) that occur when a person is using a needle that someone else used. Safe 
needle exchange programs provide such a person with clean needles, which they should 
discard after single use. Programs that widely disseminate condoms have also been used 
to reduce the harm of HIV/AIDS (Hilton, Thompson, Moore-Dempsey, & Janzen, 2001). 
Rehabilitation providers doing harm reduction suspend moral judgment about the behav￾ior, instead using listening and problem-solving skills in an atmosphere of acceptance.
A trauma history is very common among people with psychiatric disabilities (Cope￾land et al., 2018; Sara & Lappin, 2017), and ongoing experiences with trauma can thwart 
recovery efforts. The trauma-informed care (TIC) framework put forth by SAMHSA 
(Huang et al., 2014) highlights the need to listen carefully to individuals receiving psy￾chiatric rehabilitation services to identify and address sources of trauma in order to pro￾mote recovery. SAMHSA’s definition of trauma states, “Individual trauma results from 
an event, series of events, or set of circumstances that are experienced by an individual as 
physically or emotionally harmful or life threatening and that has lasting adverse effects 
on the individual’s functioning and mental, physical, social, emotional, or spiritual well￾being.” It is important to recognize that, as discussed in Chapter 2, sources of trauma 
might include stigma, including discrimination within the psychiatric services system 
itself, and systems-level work is necessary to ensure that psychiatric rehabilitation ser￾vices are addressing rather than inflicting trauma. SAMHSA outlines six key principles 
of a trauma-informed approach to behavioral health care: (1) Safety; (2) Trustworthiness 
and Transparency; (3) Peer Support; (4) Collaboration and Mutuality; (5) Empowerment, 
Voice, and Choice; and (6) Cultural, Historical, and Gender Issues. Any psychiatric reha￾bilitation intervention can, and should, be approached in a trauma-informed manner, 
considering these six key principles. Sweeney and colleagues (Sweeney, Filson, Kennedy, 
Collinson, & Gillard, 2018) provide an excellent overview of the definitions of trauma 
and TIC, the origins of TIC, and an overview of trauma-informed approaches to care.
Isobel and colleagues (2021) interviewed individuals using mental health services 
and providers to obtain their perspectives on what a trauma-informed mental health ser￾vice might look like. Service users and caregivers identified that TIC requires increased 
awareness of trauma among mental health staff (indicating a need for staff trainings in 
identifying signs of trauma and how to explore trauma histories), opportunities to col￾laborate in care, active efforts by services to create environments of trust and safety, 
cultural competence, consistency, and continuity of care. Regarding staff training in TIC, 
Nation and colleagues (2022) conducted a mixed-methods evaluation of implementing 
introductory training on TIC into mental health rehabilitation services. At baseline, staff 3. What Is Psychiatric Rehabilitation? 61
members were surveyed regarding their attitudes toward TIC, participation in training 
was monitored, and interviews were conducted with team leaders to assess their views on 
the implementation of TIC. Training completion varied widely across the teams included 
in this implementation study, ranging from 4.8 to 78%. The team leader interviews 
revealed four themes around implementation, including the need to respect an individ￾ual’s life journey and avoid retraumatization; the importance of considering the context 
of implementing TIC training; TIC being an essential component of mental health care; 
and acknowledging the fact that to support the workforce best, an organization should 
be cognizant that staff may also have trauma histories.
An additional intervention strategy to consider when providing psychiatric reha￾bilitation services is utilizing technology. Naslund, Aschbrenner, and Bartels (2016) con￾ducted a study examining how people with serious mental illnesses use smartphones, 
mobile apps, and social media. They found that 93% of the 70 individuals living with 
psychiatric disabilities who participated in their study owned a cell phone (50% owned 
a smartphone at the time of the study), 78% used text messaging, and 71% used social 
media such as Facebook. A plethora of mobile health applications have emerged in the 
last couple of decades. Naslund et al. (2015) conducted a systematic review of the lit￾erature on mobile and e-health interventions for serious mental illness, identifying 46 
studies of such interventions across four countries. They classified interventions into four 
categories: (1) illness self-management and relapse prevention; (2) promoting adherence 
to medications and/or treatment; (3) psychoeducation, supporting recovery, and promot￾ing health and wellness; and (4) symptom monitoring. They found in their review of the 
literature that these interventions were consistently highly feasible and acceptable. They 
also found that although clinical outcomes varied, these studies offered insight into the 
potential effectiveness of utilizing technology to support people with serious mental ill￾nesses in their recovery.
Settings
Service providers operating rehabilitation programs select interventions that help persons 
attain their rehabilitation goals within specific milieus. In other words, the particular 
forms of these goals and interventions are influenced by the settings in which they are 
provided. For example, goals of inclusion, empowerment, and quality of life in residen￾tial venues appear as concerns about setting up an independent and personally satisfying 
household. The goals of opportunity and recovery in vocational settings are manifested 
as obtaining and maintaining a competitive and meaningful job. The large number of 
settings in which rehabilitation is provided can be divided into three groups: residential, 
vocational, and day activity/recreational programs. The ways in which the practice of 
rehabilitation is affected by these settings are reviewed in the next few pages.
Residential Venues
Persons with serious mental illnesses may address their residential needs in a variety of 
settings. Psychiatric hospitals continue to provide services for many persons with severe 
mental illnesses (Corrigan, McCracken, Kommana, Edwards, & Simpatico, 1996; Fisher, 
Geller, & Pandiani, 2009; Wik, Hollen, & Fisher, 2020; Perera, 2020). Hospitals pri￾marily serve to treat acute exacerbations of psychiatric symptoms. Inpatients are typi￾cally released to their community as soon as symptoms related to dangerousness have 
sufficiently remitted. Rehabilitation may seem to have little part in a symptom-oriented 62 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
inpatient program; however, rehabilitation goals are still important, even in a fairly 
restrictive environment such as a psychiatric hospital. Several rehabilitation interventions 
serve these goals. Inpatients benefit from the social support that helps them challenge 
any sense of shame they might feel about being hospitalized. Inpatients also need instru￾mental support to set up aftercare services required after discharge. An inpatient stay 
provides an excellent opportunity to learn and practice coping strategies to help a person 
avoid future symptom flare-ups.
Residential programs in the community vary in the amount of supervision and 
staff intrusiveness they involve. Inpatients may be discharged to halfway houses, where 
24-hour services are provided by nursing staff. These kinds of programs can be fairly 
intrusive, with service providers prompting residents to take their medications, complete 
their morning routines, and catch public transportation for the vocational program. The 
least intrusive residential programs have service providers who make regular visits to per￾sons’ apartments. Stein and Test’s (1980; Stein, 1992) research on assertive community 
treatment showed that many persons with severe mental illnesses could live successfully 
in their own homes when they received the regular support of case managers. Therefore, 
rehabilitation providers who work in assertive community treatment may provide social 
and instrumental support, teach social and coping skills, or target appropriate cognitive 
and emotional deficits. Research on assertive community treatment suggests that more 
restrictive residential settings are not needed when a person has access to support and 
other rehabilitation services (Bond et al., 1990; Mueser, Bond, Drake, & Resnick, 1998). 
The optimal place for meeting residential goals is in the person’s own home.
Vocational Programs
Many rehabilitation goals are best served by addressing a person’s vocational ambitions. 
Persons who work at jobs that meet their vocational needs are likely to feel included in 
their communities and to report a high quality of life (Anthony & Jansen, 1984; Baron & 
Salzer, 2000). Although sheltered workshops have been providing work-related services 
for several decades, most providers, advocates, and researchers recommend transitional 
or supported employment as the best way to help people reach vocational goals. Transi￾tional employment is a work-hardening program that provides people with temporary 
jobs (Macias, Kinney, & Rodican, 1995). Rehabilitation counselors oversee multiple 
employment sites, provide job coaching, and locate competitive employment. The short￾term community positions are under the direct supervision of a rehabilitation agency. 
This setup allows people to adjust to the demands of working in a safe and low-stress 
environment. People work at a job site for a few months and then transfer to another 
position. It is generally expected that people will rotate through two or three jobs before 
they are ready for competitive employment.
Supported employment is defined by six empirically validated principles (Bond, 
1998):
1. Competitive employment is the goal. People with psychiatric disabilities have 
a better quality of life in real jobs in integrated settings with at least minimum wage 
than people with such disabilities who participate in sheltered work programs (Gervey & 
Bedell, 1994; Drake, Bond, & Becker, 2012; Modini et al., 2016).
2. Rapid job search is essential. Contrary to the conservative notion that placing a 
person in a job must be a slow and stepwise process, research suggests that competitive 3. What Is Psychiatric Rehabilitation? 63
employment is best achieved through prompt and direct assistance in identifying appro￾priate jobs and placing persons in these positions (Bond, 1992; Bond & Dincin, 1986; 
Modini et al., 2016).
3. Rehabilitation and mental health support services must be integrated. Unfortu￾nately, mental health and vocational rehabilitation services are typically provided by sep￾arate teams. Research suggests that the integration of these two service paradigms within 
a single team yields the best outcomes (Chandler, Hu, Meisel, McGowen, & Madison, 
1997; Drake et al., 2012; Drake, McHugo, Becker, Anthony, & Clark, 1996; McFarlane 
et al., 1996; Test, Allness, & Knoedler, 1995).
4. Job placement must be guided by people’s preferences. Research suggests that 
most people with psychiatric disabilities participating in supported employment have job 
preferences (Becker, Drake, Farabaugh, & Bond, 1996) and are more satisfied with work 
when placement matches their preferences (Becker et al., 1996; Gervey & Kowal, 1994). 
Key to facilitating job preference is a job developer, a service provider who solicits the 
private sector for a wide range of employment positions. Public and structural stigma 
about mental illness may undermine an employer’s willingness to hire a person with 
a psychiatric disability, however (see Chapter 2), so efforts to overcome these types of 
stigma must be made.
5. Assessment must be continual and comprehensive. Rather than focusing on 
assessment solely at admission, information must continually be obtained to determine 
the impact of supported employment and ways it should be adjusted to meet the ever￾changing needs of individual participants (Bond, 1998).
6. Support must be time-unlimited. Health care systems often define intervention 
as a time-limited enterprise. However, evidence suggests that employment rates may be 
maintained or even increased over time if intensive support continues over the long term 
(Chandler et al., 1997; Cook & Razzano, 1992; McHugo, Drake, & Becker, 1998).
Some persons aspire to educational goals before pursuing vocational ambitions 
(Unger, 1993; Cook & Solomon, 1993). People with disabilities may strive to achieve 
their educational goals in local high schools, community colleges, 4-year universities, 
or graduate schools. Supported education offers the same combination of assistance and 
real-world experiences as provided in supported employment. Completing a degree pro￾gram not only provides a person with better opportunities to get hired into the competi￾tive job market, but it also boosts the individual’s sense of self-esteem and accomplish￾ment. Supported employment and education are discussed more fully in Chapter 11.
Activity and Recreation
Some persons are either not ready for, or prefer not to pursue, work. They may be over￾whelmed by psychotic or other symptoms, or may lack the social and coping skills they 
need to meet the demands of competitive work. These people need alternative sources of 
support and rehabilitation during the day. Rehabilitation settings that are not directly 
concerned with work and residence, and that are meant to be temporary for those who 
are especially overwhelmed by symptoms, are defined in this book as day treatment or 
partial hospitalization. These programs typically mix skills training (as described ear￾lier) with social support. Some programs may address special populations, such as per￾sons with severe mental illnesses who abuse alcohol and other drugs, or persons with 64 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
BPD. Drake and colleagues (1994; Drake, Becker, Biesanz, Wyzik, & Torrey, 1996) have 
argued that most of the interventions offered for persons in day treatment programs can 
be provided effectively for the same persons in supported employment programs. Day 
treatment strategies that address symptoms and social deficits can be combined with 
strategies common to supported employment programs. According to this view, day 
treatment is not needed in the continuum of care. Instead, persons can be linked directly 
to employment programs upon discharge from hospitals.
Psychosocial clubhouses provide an alternative milieu for day rehabilitation. Club￾houses, like Fountain House in New York City and Thresholds in Chicago, were devel￾oped out of people’s dissatisfaction with professionally led treatment programs (Beard, 
Propst, & Malamud, 1982; Dincin, 1995b). Under this approach, people and providers 
have equal status as members of the clubhouse, to further serve goals of empowerment 
and recovery. Clubhouses are primarily group-oriented; members decide to participate in 
various work units that determine short-term goals for the day (e.g., to clean the meeting 
room, to plan a holiday party, or to determine the agenda for a substance abuse group). 
A systematic review of the research on the clubhouse model of psychosocial rehabilitation 
for people with mental illness found that the clubhouse model is efficacious for promoting 
employment, reducing hospitalizations, and improving quality of life among people with 
psychiatric disabilities (McKay, Nugent, Johnsen, Eaton, & Lidz, 2018).
Still another alternative to day programs is self-help programs, developed and oper￾ated solely by and for persons with severe mental illnesses. One example of a self-help pro￾gram is the National Alliance on Mental Illness’s (NAMI’s) Peer-to-Peer Program (Kosy￾luk et al., 2023). This group program comprises eight meeting sessions, co-facilitated by 
people living with mental health conditions, during which participants offer one another 
mutual support. Knight (2006) summarized the existing literature on self-help groups 
for people with serious mental illnesses, reporting that self-help groups consistently show 
reduced symptoms and substance abuse over time; concomitant reductions in crises, hos￾pitalizations, and use of services; improved social competence and social networks; and 
increased healthy behaviors and perceptions of well-being.
Roles
The final element in our model is roles—the formal and informal positions assumed by 
different groups of stakeholders in the realization of psychiatric rehabilitation. As is true 
for other structures in this chapter’s model, the viewpoints of various stakeholders can 
cause psychiatric rehabilitation to change shape significantly. The central role or position 
in the individualized rehabilitation program is that of the person themself. The person 
has the most responsibility for deciding on the goals of service, as well as the venues 
in which services occur. Also important in terms of rehabilitation programming is the 
person’s own support system. Family members (parents, siblings, spouse/partner, and/
or children) should all be active participants in the rehabilitation plan when the person 
requests such assistance, as should other supportive individuals the person may identify. 
The third important group in this equation is the team of rehabilitation providers.
The various roles that describe providers of psychiatric rehabilitation are both 
multidisciplinary and adisciplinary (Corrigan & McCracken, 1997). Multidisciplinary
means that members of the rehabilitation team come from a variety of professional back￾grounds: rehabilitation counseling, psychiatry, social work, clinical psychology, and 
nursing. Added to this group are paraprofessionals—people without bachelor’s degree 
training who occupy many of the frontline positions central to psychiatric rehabilitation. 3. What Is Psychiatric Rehabilitation? 65
The wide variety of skills and expertise captured by a diversity of disciplines furnishes 
the rehabilitation team with many talents on which to draw. At the same time, however, 
rehabilitation providers are adisciplinary; that is, they do not permit the specialization of 
their individual disciplines to suggest that some tasks are uniquely within their purview 
while the rest of the interventions are somebody else’s work. For the most part, all of the 
rehabilitation tasks outlined in this chapter are the responsibility of all providers. The 
only exception is the prescription of antipsychotic medication. Although licensed physi￾cians have the statutory responsibility for prescribing medications, all providers have a 
central role in symptom monitoring and medication administration.
People who are or were clients of rehabilitation services are excellent resources for 
other people and therefore may make good rehabilitation providers. Researchers have 
examined the success of peer providers who have been hired to provide social and instru￾mental support to peers. Peers, in this context, are individuals who have consumed men￾tal health services for a severe mental illness and now provide them to other such indi￾viduals. One type of peer support that has been professionalized is the Certified Peer 
Specialist. Organizations now exist that train and certify individuals with lived experi￾ence as Certified Peer Specialists, and these specialists work in a variety of settings and in 
a variety of roles to support recovery. Evidence of the effectiveness of peers in psychiatric 
rehabilitation is mixed (Chinman et al., 2014; Lloyd-Evans et al., 2014; Pitt et al., 2013), 
with some studies finding positive effects on recovery and hospitalizations, and quality 
of life, and others finding no effect of peer support. A review by Bellamy, Schmutte, and 
Davidson (2017) found that peer support services are generally equally effective as ser￾vices provided by non-peer paraprofessional providers for improving clinical outcomes, 
and perhaps more effective for other recovery-oriented outcomes (e.g., hope, empower￾ment, and quality of life). Additional and more rigorous research is needed to determine 
whether peer support services improve psychiatric rehabilitation outcomes.
EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE
As we have emphasized in this chapter, the psychiatric rehabilitation field includes a 
panoply of approaches, many of them adapted from existing program models or invented 
de novo by program leaders. Sadly, probably more often than not, programs have been 
shaped by the funding streams that dictate how long services are offered, with whom, and 
when (Riggs, 1996; Clark, 1998). A great many of the influences on psychiatric rehabili￾tation practice have nothing to do with knowledge about what works.
Fortunately, over the past four decades, we have witnessed amazing strides in the 
development of effective service models for people with psychiatric disabilities. Yet even 
with this accumulation of research evidence, the psychiatric rehabilitation field has 
espoused a pluralistic philosophy, with a multiplicity of approaches considered “best 
practices” (Hughes & Weinstein, 1997a). In the 1990s, a consensus started to emerge 
that some practices had achieved a sufficient critical mass of evidence to warrant their 
designation as evidence-based practices (EBPs), defined as “interventions for which 
there is consistent scientific evidence that they improve client outcome” (Drake et al., 
2001, p.  180). But what exactly qualifies as “sufficient scientific evidence”? The best 
evidence comes from carefully controlled studies in which the rehabilitation intervention 
of interest is compared to another strategy (e.g., intensive care coordination is compared 
to office-based interventions). The concepts and measures that represent evidence must 
be well specified (e.g., how does intensive care coordination affect the amount of time a 66 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
person stays in the psychiatric hospital?). Finally, these studies are especially compelling 
when participants are randomly assigned to the intervention group or the comparison 
group. Interventions described in this test are supported by evidence from multiple, sepa￾rate studies; the body of work is often summarized in single narrative reviews of several 
studies (a systematic review). A meta-analysis is a statistical review of several studies.
Mueser, Drake, and Bond (1997) identified five practices with the most compelling 
evidence at that time. In 1998, based on systematic literature reviews and expert surveys, 
the Schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT) issued an influential report 
with 35 recommendations for psychopharmacological and psychosocial interventions for 
individuals with schizophrenia (Lehman, Steinwachs, & PORT Co-Investigators, 1998a). 
Paired with this report was a study of usual practice showing abysmally low rates of con￾gruence with these recommendations (Lehman, Steinwachs, & PORT Co-Investigators, 
1998b). An update of the PORT recommendations was issued in 2004 (Lehman et al., 
2004). Other surveys have similarly and repeatedly shown little consistency between 
PORT recommendations and services that consumers actually receive (West et al., 2005).
Also in 1998, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation sponsored a national consensus 
panel of mental health services researchers, consumers, family advocates, clinicians, and 
administrators, who identified six evidence-based practices for individuals with serious 
mental illness (Drake et al., 2001): (1) supported employment, (2) assertive community 
treatment, (3) illness management and recovery, (4) family psychoeducation, (5) inte￾grated dual-disorders treatment, and (6) medication management according to protocol. 
Supported employment and assertive community treatment were briefly described earlier; 
all six EBPs are described in detail in later chapters.
EBPs are well-defined according to a set of operationally defined principles and there￾fore can be, and have been, replicated faithfully in diverse settings. Accordingly, fidelity 
scales, which are measures that assess the degree to which a particular program meets 
the standards of a program model (Bond, Evans, Salyers, Williams, & Kim, 2000), have 
been developed for each of the six practices listed. In 1999, the National Evidence-Based 
Practices Project was launched to address the fact that dissemination of such practices 
was hampered by the lack of comprehensive, easily accessible information on their imple￾mentation (Drake et al., 2000; Mueser, Torrey, Lynde, Singer, & Drake, 2003). In the first 
phase of this project, teams of researchers, practitioners, and consumers created imple￾mentation resource kits for each of the six EBPs (Torrey et al., 2001). These kits comprise 
materials to facilitate practice implementation, such as workbooks, key research articles, 
fidelity scales, and introductory and instructional videos. Accompanying these resource 
kits was a training–consultation model that included the following elements: (1) an imple￾mentation steering committee composed of key stakeholders (e.g., agency administrators, 
program leaders, family members, and consumers) who would guide the process; (2) intro￾ductory presentations intended to build enthusiasm; (3) skills training for practitioners; 
(4) systematic assessment of model fidelity; (5) ongoing consultation; and (6) measurement 
of key consumer outcomes (Torrey, Finnerty, Evans, & Wyzik, 2003).
Torrey, Bond, McHugo, and Swain (2012) conducted a study examining the imple￾mentation of EBPs across eight states at 53 different sites. The most important findings 
of this work correlated barriers and facilitators of implementation with implementation 
success (fidelity to the EBPs). All sites faced implementation barriers, which varied by 
EBP, yet there was no evidence that the number or type of implementation barriers cor￾related with implementation success. An important finding of this work was that active 
and visible leadership strongly influences successful implementation. Though correlated 
with implementation success, positive attitudes toward and knowledge of EBPs (believing 3. What Is Psychiatric Rehabilitation? 67
in the practice and wanting to offer it) are not enough. Active leadership is required 
to successfully implement EBPs in psychiatric rehabilitation. Active leadership strategies 
include redesigning workflows and structures to support EBP practice. This may mean 
reworking documentation, policies, meeting structures, and support staff to enhance EBP 
implementation. Another finding of this implementation study was that workforce devel￾opment investment (i.e., training of staff in EBPs) was negatively related to implementa￾tion success. Training in EBPs is not enough to ensure successful implementation; it must 
be supported by active leadership.
COMMUNITY-BASED PARTICIPATORY RESEARCH
Community-based participatory research (CBPR) is an approach to science whose prac￾titioners believe that research on any group can only be done validly when professional 
researchers partner with that group (in this case, people with psychiatric disabilities). 
As partners, coinvestigators with lived experience share leadership in all elements of 
research design and implementation: defining research questions and subsequent hypoth￾eses; developing interventions meant to reflect these hypotheses; describing measures and 
designs that will test interventions; conducting statistical analyses to make sense of data 
collected according to these designs; and interpreting findings in ways that will lead to 
recommendations with public health significance. Coinvestigators have especially notice￾able roles “going into” and “coming out” of discrete research projects (Hatton, Kleffel, 
Bennett, & Gaffrey, 2001). At startup (“going into” a project), people with lived experi￾ence contribute their special insights to forming the key research questions and corre￾sponding hypotheses. This groundwork is central to subsequent design and measurement 
decisions. The end of a project (“coming out”) is when information from the research 
is used to influence the public health arena. Typically, people with lived experience are 
the advocates on the team with the enduring interest and motivation to take what is 
found and change the community. Thus, CBPR is essential to understanding and resolv￾ing health care disparities due to homelessness, ethnicity, and mental illness (Wallerstein 
& Duran, 2008).
CBPR with people with serious mental illnesses might seem to pose significant bar￾riers. Might the deficits often accompanying such illnesses undermine the CBPR process? 
For example, do the cognitive dysfunctions or interpersonal difficulties experienced by 
some people with serious mental illnesses undermine participation in the partnership 
process? Recent work evaluating the CBPR process with people with psychiatric disabili￾ties demonstrates that CBPR is possible and beneficial for this group and highlights bar￾riers (e.g., overcoming power differentials and the risk of tokenism) and facilitators (e.g., 
providing reasonable accommodations for full and equitable participation) for engaging 
in CBPR to address health disparities for individuals with psychiatric disabilities (Shee￾han, Nieweglowski, & Sun, 2021). Research programs on rehabilitation need to include 
people with lived experience as active partners.
POLICY AND LAW
Rehabilitation providers can help people with disabilities achieve their life goals by work￾ing to change the community, too. Policy and law play a major role in this effort. Two 
pieces of legislation are highlighted here: the ADA and the ACA.68 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
The Americans with Disabilities Act
The ADA sought to eliminate discrimination in five areas: employment, transportation, 
telecommunication, public accommodation, and the business of local and state gov￾ernment. Its application in the workplace has important ramifications for people with 
mental illness. The ADA prohibits discrimination in all phases of employment, includ￾ing the hiring process. It provides protection to “qualified individuals with disabilities”; 
that is, individuals with disabilities are qualified to perform the “essential functions” of 
an employment position. If an individual with a disability requires “reasonable accom￾modation” to perform the work, then employers covered under the law are required to 
make this accommodation—provided that it does not cause “undue hardship,” defined 
as an “action requiring significant difficulty or expense for the business” determined on 
the basis of factors such as the cost of the accommodation and the employer’s financial 
resources. Examples of psychiatric impairments requiring accommodation include diffi￾culties in concentrating, dealing with stress, and interacting with other people. The ADA 
also makes it illegal during the preemployment process to ask questions about the nature 
or severity of a disability. For example, an employer cannot ask job applicants about their 
psychiatric histories (Mancuso, 1995).
The ADA had a central role in a court case that some mental health advocates believe 
has important implications for psychiatric rehabilitation. The case of Olmstead v. L. C.
(1999) was a lawsuit filed on behalf of two women with intellectual and psychiatric dis￾abilities who were inpatients in a state psychiatric hospital in Georgia. Although hospital 
staff members all agreed that the women were ready for discharge, the two remained 
hospitalized because no appropriate community placements were available. In 1999, 
the U.S. Supreme Court considered the case, which involved interpreting the following 
regulation concerning enforcement of the ADA: “A public entity shall administer ser￾vices, programs, and activities in the most integrated setting appropriate to the needs 
of qualified individuals with disabilities” (28 C.F.R. § 35.130(d)). The Court ruled that 
the unnecessary segregation of individuals with disabilities in institutions may constitute 
discrimination based on these disabilities. This decision has been interpreted as requiring 
the community placement of institutional residents when a state’s own treating profes￾sionals have recommended such placement.
In addition to laws prohibiting discrimination in the workplace based on disability, 
discrimination in housing is also prohibited by federal law. Discrimination in housing 
is covered by the Fair Housing Act (Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968), which 
prohibits discrimination in the sale, rental, and financing of dwellings, based on a range 
of characteristics including disability. Finally, the Protection and Advocacy for Mentally 
Ill Individuals (now Individuals with Mental Illness) Act of 1986 created an independent 
office in each state to investigate incidents of abuse and neglect of individuals with mental 
illness. Protection and Advocacy offices investigate violations of individual rights in com￾munity housing, such as board and care facilities, as well as violations in state psychiatric 
hospitals.
The Affordable Care Act
The ACA is often viewed as the most significant overhaul of federal health care regula￾tion since Medicaid and Medicare. The provisions of the ACA have been gradually rolled 
out since the law was enacted in 2010. Perhaps most germane to the needs of people with 
psychiatric disabilities is the broadening of Medicaid and Medicare definitions, so that 
more people receive health care under one or the other of these.3. What Is Psychiatric Rehabilitation? 69
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has defined psychiatric rehabilitation as systematic efforts to help adults with 
psychiatric disabilities move forward in their recovery process. Over the last four decades, 
many different models of psychiatric rehabilitation have been developed—some based on 
specific ideologies, others developed in response to funding initiatives, and still others devel￾oped on a trial-and-error basis. In its evolution, the field has moved away from some early 
assumptions related to the concepts of asylum (people with serious mental illness are best 
served in enclaves apart from mainstream community life), separation of rehabilitation and 
medical models (psychiatric rehabilitation programs should distance themselves from mental 
health treatment), and transitionalism (people are best helped through gradualistic, stepwise 
programs of preparation for community living). Many of these ideas have died hard, just as 
in an earlier era in which many providers stubbornly maintained their faith in psychodynamic 
interventions to help people, despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary. In fact, many 
practices continue to be offered despite the lack of evidence for their effectiveness—or, 
worse, evidence that they actually interfere with the recovery process. As much as possible, 
the aim of this book is identifying and elaborating evidence-based psychiatric rehabilitation 
practices. However, its focus is not limited to these practices for several reasons.
First, in addition to EBPs, we describe current psychiatric rehabilitation practices, while 
recognizing that these often fall far short of the ideal (Lehman et al., 1998b; Torrey et al., 
2012). Deficiencies in current practices are made clear when they exist. These include (1) lack 
of access to practices that should be available (Hall, Graf, Fitzpatrick, Lane, & Birkel, 2003); 
(2) promotion of practices that are demonstrably less effective than evidence-based alterna￾tives; and (3) inadequate implementation of EBPs (Bond, 1991; Moser, DeLuca, Bond, & Roll￾ins, 2004; Rosenheck, Neale, Leaf, Milstein, & Frisman, 1995; Torrey et al., 2012). Second, this 
book includes descriptions of promising approaches, which are interventions that have not 
been researched enough to warrant designation as EBPs. Third, peer-run alternatives repre￾sent a special category that warrants attention despite an inadequate empirical base. Due to 
their voluntary nature, peer-run approaches are difficult to evaluate by means of randomized 
controlled trials (RCTs). Nonetheless, these “value-based services” should be encouraged as 
complements to the formal mental health care system (Bellamy et al., 2017; Frese, Stanley, 
Kress, & Vogel-Scibilia, 2001; Tracy, 2003). The history of mental health reform also suggests 
that peer advocacy has had a tremendously positive effect on keeping priorities straight.
Fourth, we describe practices that address critical domains of functioning, even though 
at this point it is not possible to designate any specific model or models as the best. This cat￾egory includes psychiatric rehabilitation approaches addressing housing, social networks, 
education, physical health, involvement with the criminal justice system, and trauma (to name 
some examples). Program models have been developed in each of these areas, and in some 
cases these models have been studied in rigorous research designs. Yet their status as EBPs 
is in doubt. In the meantime, psychiatric rehabilitation programs must address these issues 
as best they can; the history of how community mental health care program models have 
been developed amply documents the disastrous consequences of ignoring such problems.70
CHAPTER 4
Psychiatric Disability and Equity
Many of the disabilities experienced by people with serious mental illness 
are actually caused or worsened by social determinants of health such as race, ethnicity, 
gender identity, and sexual orientation. It is by no means identity with diversity per se 
that leads to disparity but rather the racism, sexism, and other forms of oppression that 
come from the majority population and limit one’s health options. People from these 
groups often experience greater social disadvantages such as poverty and criminal justice 
system involvement, which further worsen disabilities and undermine recovery. Equity is 
a fi rst value of the health care system that refl ects fully accessible, available, and cultur￾ally relevant interventions that meet individuals’ dynamic defi nition of their health and 
wellness goals. This chapter begins with a comprehensive defi nition of social determi￾nants and disadvantages, followed by a summary of research on how these determinants 
undermine almost every domain that defi nes needs and goals. The recovery system needs 
to recognize disparities that result from these determinants and seek to replace the sta￾tus quo with services that represent the divergent and complex needs of the rainbow of 
diverse options. This means framing diversity in terms of pride and not victimhood. 
Equitable services are often grounded in peer-based systems. Community-based partici￾patory research is crucial to including the diverse voice in the actual development and 
evaluation of recovery-based programs. We end the chapter with an example of how 
social determinants undermine service engagement and ways to resolve this gap to yield 
culturally sensitive recovery programs.
SOCIAL DETERMINANTS AND DISPARITIES
Social determinants signifi cantly impact the life goals of people who have psychiatric dis￾abilities separate from disease processes (e.g., psychiatric symptoms and corresponding 
dysfunctions) that undermine recovery. According to the DHHS, social determinants of 
health are the conditions in the environments where people are born, live, learn, work, 
play, worship, and age that aff ect a wide range of health, functioning, and quality-of-life 
outcomes and risks (Blackburn, Osborn, Walters, Nazareth, & Petersen, 2018; Correll 
et al., 2017; Misiak et al., 2021; Walker et al., 2015). In trying to make sense of social 
CHAPTER 44. Psychiatric Disability and Equity 71
determinants, we distinguish diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) groups from resulting 
social disadvantage. DEI groups are often described as outgroups in social psychology 
(Brewer, 2007), or as suspect classes in the law (Strasser, 1991), reflecting their minority 
position. Instead of viewing them through the lens of disadvantage and negativity, how￾ever, DEI groups are better viewed in terms of the culturally rich experiences of a collec￾tion of people that differs from the majority and suggests unique paths toward recovery. 
Regrettably, people from DEI groups more often experience social disadvantage (e.g., 
poverty, criminal justice system involvement, or immigration challenges) that evolves 
from a pernicious social history reflecting structural discrimination; specific disadvan￾tages are summarized in this chapter.
DEI Groups
Figure 4.1 comprises eight DEI groups that are commonly included in research on social 
determinants and implicated in disparities among people with psychiatric disabilities.
1. Race and ethnicity. Although race and ethnicity are evolving social constructs, 
the U.S. Office of Personnel Management and the U.S. Census Bureau are widely cited 
arbiters of race and ethnicity in American health (U.S. Census Bureau, n.d.-a, n.d.-b). 
The census distinguishes five races—American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, Black 
or African American, Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander, and White—plus a 
single ethnic category, Hispanic or Latinx. The evidence is clear; compared to the White 
majority, for people with psychiatric disability, achieving life goals is significantly worse 
for people of color, including those who are Black, Native American, Latinx, and Asian 
American (DHHS, Office of Minority Health, 2022).
2. Religion. Like race and ethnicity, the United States is rich in religious diversity. 
A 2021 survey from Pew (Pew Research Center, 2021) described several groups, with 
Christians (i.e., Protestant, Catholic, Mormon) dominating (65%); Buddhism, Hinduism, 
Islam, and Judaism at 1% or less; 29% characterizing themselves as unaffiliated, agnos￾tic, or atheist; and 2% as other. Discrimination experienced by non-Christian communi￾ties is associated with increased stress (Lewis, Cogburn, & Williams, 2015; Williams, 
2018) leading to worse health (Mouzon, Taylor, Keith, Nicklett, & Chatters, 2017; Oh, 
Yang, Anglin, & DeVylder, 2014).
FIGURE 4.1. Social factors that impact disabilities of people with lived experience.
Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
Race and ethnicity
Religion
Nation of origin
Gender identity
Sexual orientation
Age
Rural community
Disabilities per se
Social Disadvantage
Poverty
Criminal justice involvement
Language, acculturation, and immigration
Unaccommodating institutions72 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
3. Nation of origin. This includes equity and disparity issues for people or their 
families who have immigrated to the United States or who strongly identify with their 
countries of origin. Although acculturation (learning and adapting to a new culture; 
Berry, 2006; Ward, 1996) and enculturation (continuing to identify with one’s culture of 
origin; Kim, 2007) are rich experiences, they may be negatively associated predictors of 
health, wellness, and disability (Kasirye et al., 2005). This, as well as reduced English flu￾ency, are discussed more in the section “The Worsening Effects of Social Disadvantage,” 
below.
4. Gender identity. Much research has examined the effect of binary models of 
gender (male or female) on health patterns among people with psychiatric disabilities. 
Research shows, for example, that the course of schizophrenia is worse in males (Ochoa, 
Usall, Cobo, Labad, & Kulkarni, 2012; Li, Ma, Wang, Yang, & Wang, 2016; Rietschel 
et al., 2015). Far fewer findings exist on the interaction of transgender or nonbinary/non￾conforming identity, but studies suggest that corresponding discrimination has harmful 
relationships with health in general (Downing & Przedworski, 2018; Fredriksen-Goldsen 
et al., 2014) and with health and recovery among people with serious mental illness 
(Scheer, Harney, Esposito, & Woulfe, 2020).
5. Sexual orientation. Research fairly consistently shows sexual orientation minori￾ties (gay, lesbian, bisexual, asexual, pansexual, and questioning) show worse patterns in 
health compared to the straight minority (Jackson, Agénor, Johnson, Austin, & Kawachi, 
2016; Mayer et al., 2008). Discrimination related to intersection of sexual orientation 
with mental illness also shows worse health and recovery (Terra et al., 2022; Han, Dun￾can, Arcila-Mesa, & Palamar, 2020).
6. Age. Defined as years from birth, age interacts with mental illness and recovery, 
especially at the extremes of the continuum. Children and youth with mental illness are 
more likely to be absent, suspended, or expelled from school (Blackorby & Cameto, 
2004). Parental involvement and decision making are especially important for children’s 
health (Hingle, O’Connor, Dave, & Baranowski, 2010; Van Lippevelde et al., 2012). 
Alternatively, older age (e.g., greater than 60 years old) is associated with health in gen￾eral (Boersma, 2020; Maresova et al., 2019) and worse health among people with serious 
mental illness (Bartels, 2004; Bartels & Pratt, 2009). Research here seeks to unpack the 
physiological impact of old age, with aging representing a social determinant of health 
(e.g., age discrimination; Baumgartner et al., 2021).
7. Rural community. Policies and innovations driving the health and mental health 
care system seem to be dominated by urban or suburban settings. People living in small 
towns or other rural areas may have worse outcomes (Li et al., 2011). Causes of this dis￾parity are diverse but may include diminished access and availability to services (Gamm, 
Hutchinson, Bellamy, & Dabney, 2010) and diminished cultural competence of the pro￾vider workforce (Gamm, Castillo, & Pittman, 2010).
8. Disability per se. Disability in itself defines a DEI group that is a social deter￾minant of health. As explanations of the psychiatric disabilities and one’s mental health 
career mature, models have developed that frame psychiatric experience and recovery as 
a culture: not solely a flawed experience, but a group with shared history and experience 
that defines a positive lore and legacy. Shared history also applies to people with physical, 
sensory, developmental, and other disabilities. Stigma and discrimination remain, with 4. Psychiatric Disability and Equity 73
research evidence showing that disabilities can be a major source of disadvantage in the 
health system.
The Worsening Effects of Social Disadvantage
In Chapter 2, we distinguished structural stigma, experienced at societal levels, from 
better known research on the individual’s impact: public and self-stigma (Hatzenbuehler, 
2016, 2017; Hatzenbuehler & Link, 2014). Like self-stigma, prejudicial processes evolve 
from political and economic forces that lead to discriminatory structures that undermine 
opportunity. Broadly, structural stigma has led to high rates of social disadvantage expe￾rienced by people in DEI groups (see Figure 4.1). Four forms of social disadvantage that 
are prominent in the research literature are summarized here.
1. Poverty. People with serious mental illnesses often have incomes below the pov￾erty line (Levinson et al., 2010; Sareen, Afifi, McMillan, & Asmundson, 2011). Absence 
of sufficient income is significantly associated with health challenges (Ribeiro et al., 2017). 
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Recovery on the Streets
Langston Jones, a 32-year-old Black man with serious mental illness, was born and raised 
on Chicago’s South Side. He was a homeless man staying at either the Pacific Gardens 
shelter or in a slapped together tent city at the entrance to the Dan Ryan Expressway at 
Roosevelt Road. His psychotic symptoms, including unclear thinking, occurred fairly regu￾larly, worsened by an alcohol-use disorder. He was recently released from Stateville prison 
after a 2-year sentence for aggravated assault. As a Black man, he was frequently stopped 
by the Chicago police for loitering or suspicion of robbery. Mr. Jones did not want to enter a 
residential program for people with mental illness, nor did he want to travel to a city clinic for 
medication and other case management. He found city clinics to be run by “unaware” White 
professionals, with police officers providing security at the front desk.
A local recovery-based agency hired peer community workers to go into the field and 
meet the needs of people who were homeless on the South Side. As peers, these work￾ers were African Americans in recovery from mental illness. Many also had prior experi￾ences with homelessness, corrections, and/or substance use disorder. LaToya Hampton 
was a Black woman who, until engaging successfully in her own recovery-based program, 
bounced back and forth between the state mental hospital and Cook County jail. Ms. Hamp￾ton was trained on effective support services to become a peer community worker. She had 
met Mr. Jones several times at the Dan Ryan camp, where she began to build a relationship 
with him. Among other things, she introduced Mr. Jones to the team nurse who provided 
primary care in the camp to interested parties. One time, Hampton accompanied Jones 
to a Walgreens drugstore for the COVID vaccine. Hampton also went with Jones to check 
out a local housing first program. Housing first providers, described more fully in Chapter 
10, eschew rules and regulations (suggest as curfew or daily report) which many people 
find onerous. Jones checked into his own apartment in the housing first program and, with 
Hampton’s support, was able to stop living on the streets.74 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
Poverty among DEI groups and for people with psychiatric disability lead to housing 
instability (Barile, Smith Pruitt, & Parker, 2018) and food insecurity (O’Reilly, Hager, 
Harrington, & Black, 2020).
2. Criminal justice involvement. People with mental illness from DEI groups have 
higher rates of disabilities at both ends of the crime continuum: victims and arrestees. 
They are more likely to be victims of violent crime, which worsens health and recov￾ery (Teplin, McClelland, Abram, & Weiner, 2005; Thomas, Nixon, Ogloff, & Daffern, 
2019). Trauma related to crime and assault often yields long and enduring effects (Elhai, 
North, & Frueh, 2005; Sharma, 2003). People with mental illness also are often arrestees 
(Brame, Bushway, Paternoster, & Turner, 2014; Piquero, 2015) with the correspond￾ing loss of freedom (jail, prison, probation, or parole) interfering with recovery goals 
(Wennerstrom et al., 2022).
3. Language and immigration. The health needs of people with psychiatric disabili￾ties from nations of origin other than the United States are often challenged by language, 
acculturation, and immigration. Non-English speakers are greatly hampered in navigat￾ing the American service system (Timmins, 2002). Difficulties acculturating to a Western 
approach to health care undermines individual goals (Suarez-Balcazar, Viquez, Miranda, 
& Early, 2020). Refugees may struggle with trauma from their community of origin as 
they immigrate to the United States from war-torn or other politically and economically 
challenged nations (Fino, Mema, & Russo, 2020; Ostergaard et al., 2020). Refugees with 
mental illness have an especially difficult time with health and wellness goals (Berthold 
et al., 2014).
4. Unaccommodating institutions. Although the ADA proscribes restrictive health 
practices and prescribes reasonable accommodations, people with psychiatric disabilities 
continue to lack these entitlements in terms of education and work (Hill, Maestas, & 
Mullen, 2016). Lack of accommodations also has direct effects on recovery goals (Drai￾noni et al., 2006; Mason et al., 2019). Specifically, employers and other groups covered 
by the ADA fail to provide reasonable accommodations when indicated (Sevak & Khan, 
2017; Syma, 2019). Similarly, education systems fail to provide necessary on-campus 
accommodations that help students with disabilities address their goals.
Identity Not Essentialism
There are differing ways of understanding DEI groups. Let’s consider essentialism ver￾sus constructivism. Essentialism defines DEI groups and their “membership” in pre￾sumptions of fundamental endowment or inheritance, often with roots in biology or 
birth. For example, an essentialist assumption would be that all Latinx share the same 
body features, religious beliefs, and cultural preferences. These presumptions oversim￾plify real-life experience by reducing complex groups to neat categories with seemingly 
well-defined and immutable boundaries: their essences. This is evident in past pseudo￾science discussions of race where ethnic phenotypes were linked to genotypes resulting 
in five supposedly definitive categories: Caucasoid, Capoid, Mongoloid, Australoid, and 
Negroid (Jackson, 2001). Essentialists presume that evolution and natural development 
create these DEI groups, which subsequently defines people with corresponding pheno￾types. Essentialism has met robust criticism when it mistakes variations of phenotype 
into categorical differences (“All women are alike”), leading to misattribution of indi￾vidual choice and behavior in terms of one’s group assignment (“Mary decided to become 
a nurse because she is a woman”), opening the door to stereotypes and discrimination 4. Psychiatric Disability and Equity 75
(“Women are not capable of being physicians, so Mary can’t do it”) (Phillips, 2010). 
These criticisms have led to a stern rebuke from the American Association of Biologi￾cal Anthropologists (2019), asserting that essential conceptions of race and ethnicity 
emerged from Western colonialism, oppression, and discrimination.
Concerns about essentialism have been replaced with insights from social construc￾tivism, the fundamental insight that perceptions and experiences of DEI groups (from 
both within and outside the group) are created in a social world (Berger & Luckman, 
1966). For example, a Black person’s understanding of being Black is partly built on ways 
in which Whites engage them. These broad social theories are meaningful to behavior 
when they explain group and individual identity relative to recovery. Tajfel (1974, 1981) 
argued that humans have intrinsic goals to view themselves in terms of one or more 
ingroups; they then craft their identity on the basis of membership of that group. Groups 
influence one’s sense of being an individual (Who I am!) (Suarez-Balcazar et al., 2020), 
self-concept (How I describe myself!), and self-worth (Why I matter!) (Ashmore, Deaux, 
& McLaughlin-Volpe, 2004). These personally meaningful constructs are fluid, multidi￾mensional, and reflect one’s lived world. Social psychologists have shown that individuals 
who identify with their stigmatized group report less stress arising from prejudice and 
better self-esteem. This has been demonstrated for Black people (Branscombe, Schmitt, 
& Harvey, 1999), older adults (Garstka, Schmitt, Branscombe, & Hummert, 2004), 
women (Schmitt, Branscombe, Kobrynowicz, & Owen, 2002) and the LGBTQ commu￾nity (Halpin & Allen, 2004).
Pride, Not Victimhood
Another problem with essentialism occurs when defining DEI groups in contrast to 
the majority (e.g., White, cisgender, straight males), thereby grounding the narrative in 
terms of downward comparisons. Compared to White men, for example, Black women 
have fewer opportunities and resources, which accounts for disparities across life goals; 
this is why their unemployment rate is so high. Although this may be an accurate repre￾sentation of the social injustices that plague a minority group’s history, the downward 
comparison becomes part of the group’s essence, leading to unintentional stories of loss 
and victimhood that imply inferiority. It frames a group as meek and wounded, suggest￾ing they are unable to thrive on their own. This kind of downward comparison leads to 
calls for pity. People wrongly think the goal of social justice is for the majority to bestow
to minorities opportunities they need to achieve their goals. The privileged class should 
share their privileges with underserved groups. While the overall intent is true, the sen￾timent is troubling: that the down group should be pitied. This needs to be replaced 
by parity. Social justice rests on power where people of all groups avail resources and 
opportunities.
Black civil rights leaders framed power by calling their movement “Black Pride” 
(Black Power, 2016; Sniderman & Piazza, 2002) with its emphasis on pride and economic 
power, leading to the creation of appropriate political and cultural institutions. Black 
Pride can be traced back to Frederick Douglass in the 1850s, and embraced by 1950–60s 
leaders including Martin Luther King, Jr., Malcolm X, and Roy Wilkins. Similarly, the 
LGBTQ community embraced Gay Pride to promote narratives of self-affirmation, dig￾nity, and equality (Britt & Heise, 2000; Corbett, 1994). Pride movements accomplish 
their goals by highlighting rich histories related to cultural and political accomplish￾ments, including the arts and increased visibility of LGBTQ people as a social group.
What about pride and psychiatric disabilities? Some might think that the defining 76 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
qualities of mental illness are fundamentally negative, based on symptoms and dysfunc￾tion. Hence, the primary goal of mental health treatment, of being in the mental health 
group, is to get out of it. Hence, one might think people with mental illness should not 
identify with their illness. Research is mixed here. Some findings support the benefits of 
avoiding a mental illness identity. Research, for example, has found correlations between 
assuming a sick patient role and subsequent pessimism (Lally, 1989). People who believe 
identifying with mental illness threatens their broader well-being are likely to suppress 
that identity (Rüsch, Corrigan, Wassel, Michaels, Larson, et al., 2009; Rüsch, Corrigan, 
Wassel, Michaels, Olschewski, et al. 2009). This would seem to imply that identity as a 
person with mental illness should be avoided.
However, relationships between identity and self-stigma are more complex. Research 
has shown that effects of illness identity are influenced by perceived legitimacy of men￾tal illness stigma (Lysaker, Davis, Warman, Strasburger, & Beattie, 2007). Those who 
identify with mental illness but also agree with the stigma of their disorder (“I guess 
that’s right; people with mental illness choose their illness because they are weak”) report 
less hope and self-esteem. Conversely, persons whose sense of self prominently includes 
their mental illness, and who reject the stigma of mental illness, showed not only more 
hope and better self-esteem but also enhanced social functioning. Hence, identifying with 
mental illness does not automatically lead to more stress; it is the perceived legitimacy 
of the stigma that threatens identity and harms emotional health. The evolution from 
patienthood to personhood is not necessarily a rejection of mental illness but rather an 
integration of its central experiences into a total self-image (Roe, 2001). People with 
lived experience of recovery have Mad Pride, which is a similar effort to change the dia￾logue about mental illness from harm and failure to identity and accomplishment (Farber, 
2012; Rowland, 2015).
Intersectionality
The effects of DEI, social disadvantage, and psychiatric disability on health and well￾ness are additionally complex when considering the multiple intersections of identities 
that occur within the individual. The idea of intersectionality emerged from feminist 
psychology to describe the oppression experienced by Black women; that is, DEI identity 
is sometimes similar to the experience of Black men or White women, sometimes the 
combination of both, and sometimes unique to the interaction (Cole, 2009). The life 
choices and opportunities of individuals with psychiatric disability are also influenced by 
multiple DEI identities and social disadvantages that combine in unique, integrated pat￾terns. Oexle and Corrigan (2018) unpacked the effects of intersectionality on psychiatric 
disability by differentiating two perspectives using an example from the life experiences 
of Terrell Washington, a Black man with serious mental illness. The first view is double 
disadvantage. The harmful effects of stereotypes accumulate as the person is identified 
with multiple DEI groups (Grollman, 2014). As Terrell is associated with multiple identi￾ties including disability, he is viewed as more different and less worthy of opportunities, 
including those related to health and wellness (Corrigan, Talluri, & Qin, 2021; Shah, 
Nieweglowski, & Corrigan, 2022). The other perspective is prominence. One percep￾tually salient DEI group in an intersection may inhibit another and dominate negative 
reaction (Kang & Bodenhausen, 2014). Prominence is not solely influenced by perception 
(i.e., Terrell’s black skin) but also context. A minority racial group, for example, becomes 
more prominent in primarily White settings. Hence, Terrell may experience worse oppor￾tunities in service systems dominated by Whites. Ideas of intersectionality are relatively 4. Psychiatric Disability and Equity 77
new, with calls for both research methods and practice applications as recovery-based 
interventions continue to evolve.
COMMUNITY-BASED PARTICIPATORY RESEARCH
Disability, recovery, and rehabilitation are ever-evolving constructs requiring effective 
research to identify what works for individual groups; one dominant agenda of the 
past decade is representing lived-priorities of the wonderful variety of DEI groups and 
corresponding social disadvantages. CBPR has emerged as one way to do this; it is all 
about partnership. Traditional sciences framed people with lived experience as objects of 
research. Both qualitative and quantitative methods were then used to obtain meaningful 
information from them so scientists can, through their methods, determine answers to 
what they hypothesize to be research questions. CBPR reworks the research enterprise 
so key stakeholders join a team with shared authority over all segments of development 
and evaluation. CBPR is defined by 10 principles: (1) recognize community as the unit 
of identity, (2) build on strengths of community, (3) facilitate collaborative and equitable 
partnerships in all research phases through power-sharing processes, (4) promote co￾learning and capacity building among partners, (5) achieve balance between research 
and action, (6) emphasize public health problems of local relevance, (7) involve systems 
development, (8) disseminate findings to all partners and constituencies, (9) require long￾term process and commitment, and (10) address issues of race, ethnicity, racism, and 
social class through the lens of cultural humility (Minkler & Wallerstein, 2011). CBPR 
has been described as a moral imperative for people with disabilities—to borrow a term 
from the disability rights movement, “nothing about us without us” (Collins et al., 2018; 
Hancock, Bundy, Tamsett, & McMahon, 2012)
CBPR in rehabilitation research is especially compelling at two times in the process:
1. Going into the project. At start-up, the CBPR team members come together 
around a central, loosely defined concern (e.g., how might we: address health and well￾ness needs in the existing health care system, or implement supported education in com￾munity colleges, or link with faith-based communities to address individual spiritual 
priorities?) This opening definition focuses the CBPR team; members with psychiatric 
disability from DEI groups already have years of experience reacting to the focus in the 
real world that leads to meaningful research questions and hypotheses. None of the team 
members with lived experience dictate hypotheses, because the goal of CBPR is research. 
Hence, the team as a whole uses start-up hypotheses to collect information that con￾firms or further revises questions and the methods meant to answer them. This typically 
includes qualitative research, where people from the focal community group are inter￾viewed about their perceptions of the problem and solutions, and quantitative research, 
where these perceptions are tested in rigorous study.
2. Coming out of the project. CBPR is action research; its first goal is to use findings 
to actually change policy and practice so people with psychiatric disabilities from DEI 
groups receive services that better meet their needs and goals. The demands of different 
types of stakeholders at project completion on the team yield different actions coming out 
of CBPR. Researchers are often driven by academic demands to write up the study, put it 
on the library shelf, and go on to the next grant-funded project often in different areas. It 
is the CBPR team member with lived experience who has historical interest in project foci 78 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
with the promise that it will lead to better services. They are the advocates on the team; 
they are most likely to turn research into action. This is where power and CBPR become 
most obvious; agendas from the grassroots have emerging and significant credibility in 
the current U.S. zeitgeist.
As alluded to earlier, CBPR is conducted by teams that vary in stakeholder represen￾tation defined by and built around people with lived experience of psychiatric rehabilita￾tion and DEI group. This lived experience group is defined by a community-of-interest 
(e.g., Black people with serious mental illness who are homeless). Hence, the team for this 
kind of CBPR would comprise Black people with serious mental illness who are homeless. 
They come together in a group of four to five and partner with other stakeholders, includ￾ing scientists who are in some way technicians of the group, posing methods or analyses 
for the study, and then guiding the discussion about interpretations of findings. The team 
also includes family members, friends, others from the community, service providers, 
administrators, and policymakers. The entire team consists of about 10 people. Team 
processes may require months to accomplish; team members hope they can commit to 
this kind of timeline over the course of a study.
BARRIERS TO ENGAGEMENT
One of the broadest effects of disparities due to DEI and social disadvantage occurs as 
a barrier to engagement in recovery-based interventions, reducing the degree to which 
individuals regularly interact with a recovery team to attain their goals. As discussed in 
Chapter 3, engagement does not mean compliance or adherence; opting to not engage 
does not mean failing to understand one’s problem or to join in services prescribed by 
health professionals. Engagement reflects the health system and the degree to which it is 
welcoming, whether health care providers and the services they provide reflect an indi￾vidual’s sense of personal goals and priorities. Engagement is broadly defined with con￾tributions from the provider team; these include mental health professionals, vocational 
and educational counselors, housing specialists, criminal justice transition teams, and 
support providers, both peers and nonpeers. People who engage well in services achieve 
more of their recovery goals. Figure 4.2 summarizes three sets of barriers to engagement 
that especially represent the effects of DEI and social disadvantage. They are framed in 
terms of three questions. Where: In what settings and with what services are evidence￾based recovery services available? Who: Who are the providers of these services? What: 
What are the specific services provided?
Where: Barriers to Services and Settings
Evidence-based services practices are often not available or not accessible in low-income 
communities where people from many DEI groups with psychiatric disabilities live 
(Buzza et al., 2011; Chan, Hart, & Goodman, 2006). In addition, services are often 
difficult to access because of long urban commutes with public transportation (Hall, 
Kurth, Gimm, & Smith, 2019; Syed, Gerber, & Sharp, 2013), and programs frequently 
located in relatively high crime areas (Tung, Boyd, Lindau, & Peek, 2018). Rural commu￾nities have additional hurdles to availability (Buzza et al., 2011; Chan et al., 2006) and 
accessibility (Dassah, Aldersey, McColl, & Davison, 2018; Iezzoni, Killeen, & O’Day, 
2006). Administrative steps central to guiding appointments and follow through also 4. Psychiatric Disability and Equity 79
interfere with service engagement (Hwang et al., 2008; Langheim, 2014). Facilities are 
often unfriendly to DEI groups, especially to people with physical disabilities (Drainoni 
et al., 2006; Pharr, James, & Yeung, 2019).
Access to third party payers that support these interventions is hampered by whether 
the individual is certified to receive different levels of government and entitlements (Artiga, 
Damico, & Garfield, 2015) and whether providers assist in accessing those entitlements 
(Bowers, Owen, & Heller, 2017). Insurance is more than a binary construct: “Yes or no, 
do people have benefits they might avail for health care costs?” Description of the role 
of third-party payment includes type and breadth of insurance, place in a larger service 
system (e.g., does an individual provider accept an insurance plan?), and administration 
and logistics to avail third-party payment.
Who: Barriers by Providers
The by whom of most health care services may be reduced to the individual provider–per￾son or provider team–person relationship. Providers are professionals or paraprofession￾als offering direct services across the range of recovery goals. They also include reception 
and administrative support and entitlement personnel. DEI match between provider and 
person has been shown to influence subsequent engagement with the care plan (Ziguras, 
Klimidis, Lewis, & Stuart, 2003). Research, for example, shows matching race and/or 
ethnicity of persons with psychiatric disabilities and providers enhance engagement and 
outcome (Hill, Jones, & Woodworth, 2020; Nguyen et al., 2020; Takeshita et al., 2020), 
as do matches that reflect gender identity (Sacks, 2013; Zhao, Dowzicky, Colbert, Rob￾erts, & Kelz, 2019) and sexual orientation (Bishop, Crisp, & Scholz, 2022; Lisy, Peters, 
Schofield, & Jefford, 2018). Corresponding policies have called for professional training 
and education of students from DEI groups, leading to increased hiring and support of 
paraprofessionals and professionals.
FIGURE 4.2. Barriers to engaging in recovery-oriented services. DEI, diversity, equity, and 
inclusion.
Services and Settings
• Unavailable
• Inaccessible
• Payor coverage
Interventions
Conceptualization of disability
and corresponding
intervention fail to reflect
varied DEI perspectives
Providers
• Insufficient providers from
minority DEI
• Lack of cultural competence
of many DEI providers
Engagement
Recovery and Wellness
Where Who What80 I. Understanding Psychiatric Disabilities
Lack of cultural competence and humility by the existing provider workforce staff is 
an additional barrier to service engagement. Several systematic literature reviews (Betan￾court, Green, Carrillo, & Park, 2005; Henderson, Horne, Hills, & Kendall, 2018; Lie, 
Lee-Rey, Gomez, Bereknyei, & Braddock, 2011) have defined cultural competence or 
the lack thereof, including antecedents such as cultural openness, awareness, desire, and 
knowledge; these reviews have also defined attributes such as respecting and tailoring 
care aligned with personal values, and provision of equitable and ethical care with sensi￾tivity. Documented consequences of culturally competent and humble providers include 
satisfaction with care, perception of quality, effective interaction, and improved health 
outcomes (Lie et al., 2011). Especially important here is replacing essentialist with con￾structivist views of DEI (Garneau & Pepin, 2015). As said earlier, essentialism was the 
status quo perspective (i.e., DEI groups are defined by common values, beliefs, and prac￾tices that are objectively observable and stable over time; Garran & Werkmeister Rozas, 
2013). This leads to providers working with someone from specific DEI groups with 
prior presumptions of their values and goals. Proponents of constructivist models frame 
cultural competence as dynamic processes within a DEI group, as well as the changing 
identities of individuals in that group (Carpenter-Song, Schwallie, & Longhofer, 2007).
What: Interventions
The “what” of services is defined by evidence-based interventions described by practice 
guidelines specifying provider behaviors meant to help people with disabilities achieve 
their health goals. These guidelines are typically grounded in conceptualizations of the 
disabling condition; for example, the phenomenology of the disability itself, the way it 
undermines life goals, its causes, and factors that mitigate its ongoing experience. The 
task becomes even more complex when considering the description of DEI and social 
disadvantage intersections. American approaches to psychiatric rehabilitation have been 
grounded in Western models (Suarez-Balcazar et al., 2020) that often ignore other per￾spectives to understanding health and wellness (Hogan, 2019; Dodge, Daly, Huyton, 
& Sanders, 2012). Corresponding guidelines then lead to a menu of interventions that 
may assist people in addressing their health concerns. These too have been dominated 
by the West in the United States, though emergence of alternative and complementary 
approaches to care have begun to open service options to broader DEI perspectives 
(Attena, 2016; Kisling & Stiegmann, 2022).
Consider a prominent example. SDM is a Western-centered approach to rehabili￾tation that dominates psychiatric rehabilitation (Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality, 2016; Edwards & Elwyn, 2016) and includes three components: (1) Providers 
share information regarding specific concerns (e.g., related to work, education, or hous￾ing goals) and corresponding interventions with costs and benefits of each; (2) people 
explore their preferences with the provider regarding costs and benefits of each interven￾tion; and (3) interactive discussion between person and provider yields mutual decisions 
about subsequent treatment and testing. Despite its promise, concern has been expressed 
about self-decision-making models, especially when considering people from DEI groups 
where the broader social network may be keenly involved in treatment decisions (Corri￾gan & Lee, 2021). SDM reflects self-determination theory, which identifies autonomy as 
essential for psychological growth and well-being (Attena, 2016; Kisling & Stiegmann, 
2022). Autonomy, however, seems to reflect Western, individualist perspectives that may 
be less valued in more Eastern or collectivist societies (Oishi & Diener, 2001). Miller 4. Psychiatric Disability and Equity 81
(1997) suggested that directive feedback from family members may yield more satisfac￾tion than autonomy in some DEI groups.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Discussion like these have changed from a focus on disparity to promotion of equity. While 
the goal is to erase disparities so people, regardless of DEI group and social disadvantage, 
can fully avail services to meet personal goals, equity is meant to celebrate the process. The 
discussion has evolved from “What should we stop doing?”—how have majority cultures 
failed underserved groups—to “What should we craft in an affirmative manner?” Equity is cel￾ebratory; acknowledging diversity across all groups recognizes the strengths and resources 
of each. This is not a rehash of color blindness, a 1960s idea that prejudice and discrimination 
can be erased by ignoring differences between groups. Pride shouts out difference, followed 
by strategies to honor it. While equity needs to broadly be the goal across the world, goals of 
equity become a bit more focused when looking within a community. We need to recognize 
that communities are often described by shared values related to culture, religion, gender 
identity, sexual orientation, and disability. Recovery-based programs that reflect the generic 
world—the cross-diversity approach—ignore the need to frame goals and actions specific 
to the community. Going forward in this book, readers should ask themselves how specific 
principles and practices would be experienced by different DEI groups.PART II
REHABILITATION STRATEGIES 85
CHAPTER 5
Assessment
Assessment is the cornerstone of intervention for persons with psychiat￾ric disabilities. Understanding people’s needs and aspirations in their community is the 
fi rst step toward crafting plans meant to help them achieve their aspirations. Assessment 
refl ects the bidirectional goals of psychiatric rehabilitation guiding this text: to help these 
persons, and to have an impact on their community. First, assessment includes activities 
meant to describe a person with a psychiatric disability, so that the team of providers (led 
by that person!) better understands goals and barriers to achieving these goals. An impor￾tant standard for the success of assessment is the eff ectiveness of the plans it generates 
for helping people in their recovery. Comprehensive assessment is multilevel, examining 
interlocking aspects of the individual. A summary of assessment domains is provided in 
Table 5.1. The assessment process may begin with a summary of needs, of corresponding 
perceptions of interventions in light of those needs, and of readiness for change. Assess￾ment may also include functioning and disabilities; diagnosis and symptoms that might 
cause these disabilities; and history of trauma. Although this kind of focus is necessary, 
it stresses the person’s negative aspects, ignoring important aspects of the full profi le of 
relevant factors. Assessment should also include a review of personal strengths, as well as 
the person’s perceptions of recovery, empowerment, and self- determination.
In traditional reviews of assessment areas, diagnosis and symptoms, which have 
tended to be the basis of understanding psychiatric disabilities, are often provided fi rst. 
However, there is concern about the value of diagnosis for rehabilitation planning; for 
example, diagnosing someone with schizophrenia may not be useful for rehabilitation 
planning (Corrigan, 2013; Craddock & Mynors- Wallis, 2014). In addition, there is some 
concern that providers may rely on symptoms excessively; for example, a rehabilitation 
provider may prejudge someone with thought disorder as unable to work in an offi ce 
and therefore dissuade the person from seeking jobs in these kinds of settings (Corrigan, 
2013). Nevertheless, there is value in assessing these domains, though they should be 
deemphasized for rehabilitation providers and hence are put toward the end of the list.
Second, assessment describes the community in which people with psychiatric dis￾abilities pursue their aspirations. Community might not be the best word here; more 
broadly, it is the idea of social system. However, social system is a sterile term, lack￾ing the nuances of interactions that need to be understood. Community includes both 
familial and sociocultural worlds in which people achieve goals. Family is a complex 
CHAPTER 586 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
construct with a definition that may vary considerably across cultures, depending on 
who exactly falls into an individual’s family network: parents, spouse/partner, siblings, 
children, grandparents, aunts/uncles, and cousins (see Chapter 12). Notions of family 
also seem to vary across cultures, with those of European heritage seeming to reflect 
more of a focus on a nuclear family (parents/siblings or spouse/children), while groups 
from Africa, Central/South America, and Asia have much broader definitions (see Chap￾ter 4; Qiu, Schvaneveldt, & Sahin, 2013; Yi, 2020). In addition, family roles in the life 
and treatment decisions of people with mental illness seem to vary by culture: Families 
of European descent seem to embrace the self-determination of a person with disabilities 
more than families in other cultural groups, especially those of Asian backgrounds (Hsu 
et al., 2008; Lam, Tsang, Chan, & Corrigan, 2006; Woo & Chung, 2013; Nguyen￾Truong et al., 2021).
Community assessment includes identification of opportunities and resources that 
people use to meet their goals. More formally, assessment may examine reasonable 
accommodations that specifically promote vocational placements and independent liv￾ing. Assessment here also considers the degree to which the public endorses the stigma of 
mental illness, and the extent to which this endorsement leads to structural barriers that 
undermine work opportunities (e.g., is a company less likely to provide accommodations 
for workers with psychiatric disabilities because “those people are weak”?). Comple￾menting the assessment of stigma is the assessment of affirming attitudes, the degree to 
which the public embraces notions such as recovery and self-determination.
Tangential to community assessment is assessment of the service system itself. In 
the past few decades, people with lived experience and their families were viewed as 
consumers of services; providers needed to be mindful of status in this light, crafting 
strategies and programs that reflected consumer priorities. A further status change has 
been promoted more recently: People with lived experience and their families should be 
more than just passive consumers of services. Since the services are often publicly funded 
and operated, people with lived experience, as citizens, should have leadership roles in 
using public funds to support specific kinds of interventions and programs (Davidson, 
Ridgway, O’Connell, & Kirk, 2014; Jones et al., 2021). This change in attitude leads to 
important questions (e.g., What is the breadth of services available to people with psychi￾atric disabilities in their area?). This might partially be assessed by cataloging agencies 
available in the community, as well as specific services provided within these agencies. 
The catalog should include information about accessibility factors (e.g., aspects of the 
process of getting into a program, time until admission, and funding issues; see Chapter 
TABLE 5.1. Domains of Assessment
Individual
Needs and goals
Strengths
Recovery, empowerment, and hope
Functioning and disabilities
Quality of life
Treatment decision making
Readiness for change
Diagnosis and symptoms
Substance abuse
Trauma
Community per se
Task analyses (e.g., job analyses)
Resources and supports
Prejudice and discrimination
Affirming attitudes and behaviors
Service system
Resources and priorities
Program satisfaction
Fidelity to evidence-based programs
Cultural competence and humility5. Assessment 87
4). Profiles of providers may also be valuable (e.g., Does an agency include people with 
lived experience in the provision of services? Are providers from diverse communities?). 
Equally important is describing the depth of intervention. This includes whether provid￾ers and administrators embrace notions of recovery and empowerment in their services.
Consistent with the bidirectional mandate, community and service system assess￾ment turns the focus of rehabilitation providers from individuals per se to the social 
worlds in which they live. Community and service system assessments generate plans 
that have a positive impact on people’s lives and facilitate the achievement of their goals. 
Hence, community and service system assessment is valuable to the extent that it pro￾motes rehabilitation plans that lead to meaningful change for people.
This chapter begins with a discussion of the goals of assessment in psychiatric reha￾bilitation. Next, values and assumptions underlying the assessment process (e.g., the col￾laborative nature of assessment) are described. The chapter then discusses varied meth￾ods for assessing rehabilitation needs (e.g., self-report and interview-based approaches) 
and the advantages and disadvantages of each method. Finally, the different domains of 
assessment for psychiatric rehabilitation are more fully described, and examples of spe￾cific measures and strategies are provided.
GOALS OF ASSESSMENT
Assessment serves different goals, depending on whether an individual or the community/
service system is the focus. This is a useful but somewhat artificial dichotomy, because 
efforts overlap and are ongoing. Assessments oriented toward an individual serve two 
functions: (1) identification of rehabilitation needs and goals, and (2) evaluation of the 
person’s strengths within the context of the broader social network. Community and ser￾vice system assessments document resources and supports in the person’s family, broader 
social support network, and community to help people achieve their goals, including a 
survey of available services in a community. Whereas existing strategies and instruments 
for individual assessments are broad, deep, and evidence-based, strategies for measuring 
the community and service system are lacking. Hence, the review in this chapter also 
suggests direction for development of measurement strategies in various aspects of the 
latter domains.
Individual and community/service system assessments merge in the ultimate goal 
of the enterprise: development and monitoring of dynamic rehabilitation plans that best 
serve the person. From the perspective of the bidirectional service mandate, these plans 
reflect strategies with two targets: people and their social network (the goals of the pro￾vider), and the community with its service system (the advocate’s agenda). Rehabilitation 
plans for the individual are meant to reflect strategies in which people might engage to 
achieve goals. This requires a profile of available community and service system resources 
that might be matched to individual goals and barriers to these goals. For example, peo￾ple might be referred to a supported education program to help them obtain the necessary 
certification to become a paralegal. Rehabilitation providers join the person in this effort. 
A sobering reality is that many communities lack interventions shown to be effective in 
addressing personal goals (e.g., supported education programs). Other communities may 
have education programs but lack cultural relevance to the person (e.g., to someone of 
African American heritage). This dictates the second target of planning: Rehabilitation 
advocates need to work with local systems and communities to find funds for start-up 
and support of innovative services.88 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
Domains of assessment are summarized in Table 5.1 and remain a focus in the rest 
of this chapter. First, however, the domains are summarized in terms of individuals or of 
their community.
Assessment of the Individual
Assessment of Needs and Goals
Identifying psychosocial priorities involves posing this question: What needs to be 
changed in order to reduce the impact of a psychiatric disability on people’s life? Perhaps 
it is better to state this question affirmatively: What needs to occur so that people can 
achieve their desires? Dimensions of personal life experience include mood (e.g., depres￾sion, anxiety, happiness); enjoyment of life; involvement in work or school; satisfaction 
with close relationships; self-care skills; managing substance use; health; and involve￾ment with the criminal justice system (either as an arrestee or as a victim of crime).
In addition to assessing these broad areas of functioning, more specialized mea￾surement may be conducted to evaluate the effect of specific symptoms or abilities on 
functioning. For example, examining the frequency and nature of specific psychotic 
symptoms may provide valuable information about an individual’s anxiety or depression, 
because psychotic symptoms are often associated with these negative moods (Fowler et 
al., 2012). Similarly, social skills assessment may pinpoint specific skills that need to be 
taught in order to improve aspects of social functioning (Bhola et al., 2016; Kurtz & 
Mueser, 2008; Nangle, Hansen, Erdley, & Norton, 2009). Specialized assessment may 
also be conducted to evaluate whether cognitive impairments contribute to functional, 
social, or vocational problems (Brissos, Molodynski, Dias, & Figueira, 2011).
Assessment of Strengths
Historically, psychiatric and psychosocial assessment has focused primarily on psychopa￾thology and deficits, neglecting the role of strengths and capabilities. Lack of attention to 
people’s strengths can make them feel discouraged and inadequate. In addition, rehabili￾tation providers who fail to attend to persons’ strengths cannot fully avail themselves of 
assets in working toward rehabilitation goals. To address these problems, the rehabilita￾tion field has shifted toward capturing a more comprehensive picture of an individual’s 
functioning, including personal assets and strengths (Rapp & Goscha, 2011).
Strengths are broadly conceived as attributes that can be used to help an individ￾ual achieve personally valued goals (Tse et al., 2016). These attributes may be personal, 
social (i.e., based on others with whom the individual has contact), or present in the 
nonsocial environment. Examples of personal strengths include learning and achieve￾ment, determination, punctuality, affability, or good sense of humor. Examples of social 
strengths include the support of a family member, or interest and enjoyment in the per￾son by a friend, a loving partner, or a concerned member of a faith-based community. 
Rehabilitation providers should not adopt black-and-white views of either personal or 
social strengths (e.g., “Yes or no? Harriet is smart”). Strengths are flexible constructs. For 
example, to what extent might Harriet draw on her learning skills and body of knowl￾edge to meet work goals? In addition, strengths assessments may reflect the community. 
Examples of environmental strengths include whether a local health club offers discounts 
for people of low incomes, a pharmacy provides pillboxes for daily medications, or a café 
has free Wi-Fi.5. Assessment 89
Assessment of the Community
As noted, researchers have been studying and developing rehabilitation measures for indi￾viduals to a much greater degree than measures for communities. In fact, the discussion 
of community assessment describes as much an ongoing research agenda as a menu of 
effective approaches currently available. Several questions need to be answered in assess￾ing the community. First, what are the boundaries of the community? Geographic mark￾ers make sense sometimes. Everyone in the homogeneous small town of fictional Clifton 
(population of 200) might be targeted for a community assessment, but how is commu￾nity assessed in a bigger city like Chicago? It has geographic neighborhoods that might 
be considered. But what if community is defined as members of a Korean Presbyterian 
church in a particular neighborhood? Accessing them would be a different task.
Is community methodologically assessed by the sum of responses from members of 
the community? Typically, information from a whole community is hard to obtain. Hence, 
most survey strategies seek some sample of the community. Efforts need to be made to 
make sure that this sample is representative. For example, a sample of people surveyed in 
the Edgewater–Uptown neighborhood of Chicago should try to represent the diversity of 
ethnic groups, gender identity and sexual orientations (as various residents define these), 
and socioeconomic statuses (including occupations, educational levels, etc.). This is a 
daunting task and is likely to be easier when community assessment is driven by specific 
questions. For example, community assessment might be used to understand available 
jobs for the supported employment team. What companies are currently, or may soon be, 
hiring in the Edgewater–Uptown area for people with a high school education? Do these 
companies provide on-the-job training? Are company managers prepared to offer reason￾able accommodations to employees with psychiatric disabilities? These are the kinds of 
questions that typically guide development activities of the supported employment team.
Community data may be used in two ways. The first is to directly inform rehabilita￾tion plans for individuals with disabilities living in particular communities. The second 
is to inform policy agenda for advocates in these communities. Strategies for the latter 
are largely beyond the strategic purview of rehabilitation service providers and hence are 
only briefly considered here. Chapter 3 provides a summary of important policy issues for 
rehabilitation team members. Two entities might be construed within the community, or 
the people, places, cultures, and institutions that make up the geographic locale in which 
a person with a psychiatric disability lives. These are the community per se and the ser￾vice system. We discuss each of these in turn.
Domains of Community Assessment
Several areas emerge as important measurement strategies for the community per se: task 
analyses; resources and support; prejudice and discrimination; and affirming attitudes 
and behaviors. Task analyses unpack the skills and requirements of specific goals, which 
might form the basis of skills training and education for the person, or reasonable accom￾modations for the community. Analyses might be also conducted for independent living 
and related goals, but research and development efforts have largely been lacking here. 
Related to this are community assessments that take stock of available resources. What 
supports, for example, might a company’s human resource department provide to help 
people avail reasonable accommodations?
Communities that endorse prejudice about people with mental illness may discrimi￾nate against them. Employers who believe the stereotype that people with mental illness 90 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
are incapable of real work are unlikely to hire them. Landlords who believe that people 
with mental illness are incapable of living independently are unlikely to rent to them. It 
is just as important to examine the opposites of prejudicial attitudes and discriminatory 
behaviors, which are affirming beliefs and affirmative actions (see Chapter 2). Affirm￾ing beliefs include public endorsement of the idea that people with serious mental ill￾ness should have personal empowerment, leading to self-determination of life goals and 
service approaches. These correspond with affirmative behaviors, including reasonable 
accommodations. Hiring persons with psychiatric disabilities is not sufficient; employers 
need to provide reasonable accommodations, so that such persons can successfully fulfill 
their job duties. Reasonable accommodations are discussed more fully in Chapter 11.
Job developers (as discussed more fully in Chapter 11) may use this kind of informa￾tion to inform people about hiring priorities in different fields. For example, informa￾tion from the U.S. Department of Labor might suggest that radiation technologists are 
in demand in certain metropolitan areas of the United States—information that may 
be useful to people deciding on vocational programs in local community colleges. For 
the most part, however, this kind of information is more often used by policymakers 
seeking to understand and inform peers about broad trends. Many state labor depart￾ments provide information like this for area employers. For example, the Illinois Depart￾ment of Employment Security provides summaries for up-to-date information on busi￾ness employment dynamics, commuting patterns, employment projections, labor market 
review, and local area unemployment statistics—information that area businesses might 
use in making decisions about new jobs and hiring people with disabilities for those jobs. 
An additional goal of this information is tracking jobs and employment services for U.S. 
military veterans.
Assessment of the Service System
The service system is the second target of community assessment. Two aspects of service 
system are important, loosely construed at the administrative and service provider levels. 
At the administrative level, assessment seeks to determine the profile of distinct programs 
provided by agencies, and to compare it to the evidence base about effective interventions. 
Does, for example, a particular rehabilitation agency provide supported housing, educa￾tion, or employment services for its participants? This can be assessed by administrative 
interviews, as well as an audit of actual provider activity. Related is agency adoption of 
the principles listed in Chapter 3 that characterize effective rehabilitation programs. For 
example, a body of instruments has emerged to determine whether agency leadership and 
service staff endorse recovery orientations that support person-centered care (Davidson, 
Tondora, & Ridgway, 2010; Davidson, O’Connell, & Tondora, 2011; Osborn & Stein, 
2016; Rosenberg, Svedberg, & Schön, 2015). Working against this kind of orientation 
is staff endorsement of the stigma of mental illness. Research shows that mental health 
providers can be among the most stigmatizing of professionals (Schulze & Angermeyer, 
2003; Corrigan, Gause, Michaels, Buchholz, & Larson, 2014). Measures have emerged 
to assess this phenomenon as well.
Two additional areas are assessed when staff providers are utilizing evidence-based 
programs:
1. Fidelity assessment examines whether individuals are conducting interventions 
the way research suggests they should be conducted (Bond & Drake, 2020; Chinman et 
al., 2016). For example, are providers who offer supported employment doing the tasks 5. Assessment 91
that constitute effective employment services as outlined in Chapter 11? An example of a 
fidelity scale for supported employment is provided later in this chapter.
2. Evidence-based services do not necessarily reflect the cultural priorities of indi￾viduals receiving services. Hence, a second important domain is cultural competence 
and humility: whether providers are sensitive and responsive to the diversity concerns of 
people receiving services from them.
Putting It All Together: Development of a Recovery Plan
Assessment of goals and strengths, as well as identification of barriers to them, is only 
worthwhile to the extent that the process yields strategies to help people achieve their 
aspirations. Development of rehabilitation plans requires integration of individual with 
community factors. Assessment informs the person and rehabilitation provider of avail￾able opportunities and resources in the community, as well as available services in local 
rehabilitation programs. Multiple service options are available for almost every conceiv￾able rehabilitation goal that emerges in the individual assessment. Research evidence is 
often useful for identifying effective rehabilitation interventions. For example, research 
has mostly shown that supported employment is more effective than other vocational 
rehabilitation models such as sheltered work for helping people with psychiatric disabili￾ties find and keep competitive jobs (see Chapter 11). Similarly, research indicates that 
social skills training is effective in helping people improve their interpersonal relation￾ships. However, not everyone who participates in supported employment is successful in 
getting work, nor does everyone who receives social skills training improve relationships. 
Therefore, treatment planning requires not only understanding which interventions have 
been found to be effective for improving specific areas of functioning but also flexible, 
creative thinking to identify other ways of helping people achieve their goals when promi￾nent EBPs are less than helpful, or to address areas of functioning for which EBPs do not 
yet exist.
Beware the Rigid Contract
Some provider teams formalize a rehabilitation plan in a contract that specifies what is 
expected from team members in helping people pursue goals. A written summary can be 
a useful means of jointly understanding the plan, and of regularly reviewing it as actions 
move forward. However, the team needs to avoid sounding like a contract per se. Con￾tracts suggest binding mechanisms meant to provide directions for moving forward once 
signed. Rehabilitation plans need to be constantly evolving documents. Locking people 
in at the point of signing the contract only constrains possibilities.
Monitoring Progress toward Goals
A further function of assessment is to monitor progress toward rehabilitation goals and 
to modify plans as needed to address stubborn problems or emergent needs. It is hard 
to know whether individuals are benefiting from specific plans without monitoring their 
progress. For practitioners, this lack of information can either be demoralizing (e.g., they 
may believe they are not helping the individual) or misleading (e.g., they believe they are 
helping the person when they’re not). For the people with lived experience, failure to 
monitor progress toward goals implies that the treatment team does not view these goals 92 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
as important. This can lead individuals to devalue the importance of their own goals, 
or can make them pessimistic about their ability to achieve specific priorities. Regular 
monitoring of goals, and modifying rehabilitation plans as needed, reinforces the impor￾tance of those goals as the basis for the therapeutic relationship (Bordin, 1979; Solomon, 
Draine, & Delaney, 1995; Wade, 2009).
Prioritizing Rehabilitation Planning
Another function of assessment is to determine how rehabilitation needs might be hier￾archically organized in terms of the immediacy to which needs must be attended: urgent 
matters, disability-related needs, and rehabilitation needs.
Urgent Matters
Urgent matters are issues that are so pressing they must be attended to quickly in order 
to protect the person or others. These are typically health, psychiatric, or housing issues. 
For example, it is essential to quickly respond to chronic medical conditions when they 
seem to flare up. Similarly, attending to impact is important when a person is seriously 
injured (e.g., in an accident or an attack). Urgent matters of a psychiatric nature typically 
involve threats to the self or others. Threats to the self may be deliberate (e.g., an actively 
suicidal person has either attempted suicide or is formulating concrete plans to do so) 
or unintentional (e.g., an individual is refusing to eat or engage in self-care because of 
delusions or gross disorganization). Psychiatric needs that are threats to others, such as 
paranoid delusions or command hallucinations instructing the person to hurt another, 
must be addressed. Urgent matters involving housing typically involve loss of shelter. 
Other housing issues may be less pressing but are nevertheless important for individuals 
who have experienced long bouts of homelessness and for whom housing is likely to have 
a destabilizing influence in their lives. Another urgent matter involving housing occurs 
when a person’s housing is threatened by strife with other people, such as family mem￾bers, roommates, or landlords.
Disability-Related Needs
Disability-related needs involve direct manifestations of the clinical syndrome(s) respon￾sible for barriers to attaining goals. The nature and severity of specific psychiatric symp￾toms, relapses, and medication side effects are all clinical needs for which pharmaco￾logical management may be important. Although some degree of persistence in clinical 
symptoms is common in people with psychiatric disabilities, insufficiently treated symp￾toms or persistent side effects can interfere with the effectiveness of the rehabilitation and 
the goal of improving functional outcomes. For example, getting quick treatment may be 
important when an individual experiences early signs of a relapse or has actually experi￾enced symptom exacerbation (Rush et al., 1999).
Rehabilitation Needs
The distinction between disability-related and rehabilitation needs is transparent, because 
rehabilitation services are often directed at helping people cope with or overcome the 
clinical effects of a psychiatric disorder on their functioning. For example, people may be 
troubled by recurring psychotic symptoms, which can interfere with daily functioning; 5. Assessment 93
rehabilitation efforts may be undertaken to minimize this interference and promote better 
coping. For practical purposes, the second level of the hierarchy of needs can be reserved 
for addressing symptoms or side effects due to suboptimal pharmacological treatment, 
while the third level (rehabilitation needs) involves addressing other clinical needs (e.g., 
coping with persistent symptoms) and working toward rehabilitation goals.
There are few established guidelines for prioritizing rehabilitation goals. People might 
identify a wide range of possible goals, such as improving family relationships, improving 
personal illness self-management skills, pursuing work or educational goals, overcoming 
substance use challenges, improving parenting skills, or acquiring more effective self-care 
and independent living skills. The best strategy is to focus first on those goals that people 
are most motivated to work toward, that they want to pursue, and that are closest to their 
personal recovery goals.
Making Sense of System Change
The final goal of assessment considered here is to make sure that the community and 
system in which people live reflect priorities of recovery and self-determination. Unfor￾tunately, almost every service system in the United States lacks sufficient resources to 
support the evidence-based services and programs reviewed in this book. Hence, priori￾ties need to be identified that are based on a clear picture of what is currently offered. 
Community assessment partly meets that goal at the macro level. In addition, community 
assessment has individual-level goals: What is needed and what is lacking in the commu￾nity for the specific goals of people with lived experience?
CORE VALUES IN ASSESSMENT
Several values are critical to the success of the assessment process. These include collabo￾ration, SDM, person-centered goal setting, and dynamism.
Collaboration
Collaboration is essential to avoid the “do-it-to-’em” mistake of rehabilitation planning. 
Measurement, and the methods needed to collect the data reliably and validly, might 
unintentionally suggest an expertise level that exceeds the capability of the person with 
a psychiatric disability. As a result, rehabilitation providers might be viewed as “the 
authorities” because of their skills. This kind of “expertise” might yield unilateral plans 
for people with disabilities to approve. Plans might be reduced to a list of things done to
people to help them achieve their goals. A rehabilitation plan in such a case might become 
an end in itself: The plan becomes a definitive “cookbook” for guiding a person toward 
recovery and goal achievement when these cookbooks do not exist.
In fact, transition from rehabilitation assessment to plan, and then to implementa￾tion of that plan, is complex and dynamic. Transition begins with the individuals and 
their provider team making sense of assessment information together. The “truth” in this 
information emerges from the sense that people with their team make of the data. Active 
collaboration between provider team and person improves the likelihood of the person’s 
achieving rehabilitation goals by garnering their (and their family’s) support for working 
toward those goals. Collaboration also helps person, family, and provider team avoid 
working at cross-purposes. The value of the corresponding rehabilitation planning is its 94 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
ability to reflect fundamental aspects of the data—typically issues such as goals, sense of 
hope, and personal achievement. This does not yield a one-stop, final solution, but rather 
an ever-evolving effort to help people achieve aspirations.
Shared Decision Making
SDM is a natural and prescriptive corollary to collaboration. Psychiatric treatment, like 
all medical care, has traditionally been delivered in hierarchical fashion in which provid￾ers instruct “patients” what to do. Over time, as options in general medical care increase 
and decision making has become more complex, there has been a movement toward shar￾ing decision making between provider and service recipient (Braddock, 2010). Similarly, 
in psychiatric treatment and rehabilitation, there has been a shift toward SDM between 
providers and the people they serve (Alguera-Lara, Dowsey, Ride, Kinder, & Castle, 
2017; Drake et al., 2010; Drake, Cimpean, & Torrey, 2022; Fukui et al., 2014). Accord￾ingly, SDM is a central value of rehabilitation assessment. Rehabilitation providers strive 
to nurture the decision-making capacity of the people with whom they work. SDM is a 
complex enterprise that is described practically and more fully in regard to illness self￾management in Chapter 7.
Person-Centered Goal Identification
Personal preferences about rehabilitation goals are paramount. People with disabilities, 
like everyone else, differ in preferences for what is important. One person may place 
a high priority on returning to school or getting a job, while another may emphasize 
social relationships. Focusing on goals that are most important to people is the best way 
to enlist their involvement in goal setting and rehabilitation planning (Rudnick & Roe, 
2011). Although establishing person-centered goals are important, providers may also 
address concerns that may have a bearing on an individual’s personal welfare, but that 
the person does not prioritize. For example, Jon may not believe that his use of drugs and 
alcohol is a problem, but a provider may suspect that it interferes with his functioning, 
including areas that Jon wants to improve. Lindsay may believe that medication is not 
helpful, but a provider may be aware that she is more cognitively disorganized and prone 
to symptom relapses when she is not taking medication. During the assessment process, 
providers work to instill motivation on problems related to substance or medication use 
by exploring with the persons whether those (or other) behaviors interfere with attaining 
their goals. When people perceive that certain behaviors interfere with their goals, they 
often become motivated to change those behaviors. Instilling motivation in this fashion 
is referred to as motivational interviewing (Miller & Rollnick, 2023; Page & Tcher￾nitskaia, 2014; Torres, Frain, & Tansey, 2019) and is discussed further in Chapter 16. 
Although SDM suggests a valued partnership between person and provider, the person’s 
preferences define the final plan. For example, if Lindsay and her team continue to dis￾agree about the value of medication, and if Lindsay feels overwhelmed by side effects and 
sees no benefits, then medication is removed from the rehabilitation agenda.
Key to person-centered goals is regular assessment of the individual’s satisfaction 
with the current rehabilitation process. Figure 5.1 provides the Measure of Service Satis￾faction (MSS) as an example of one assessment approach; it reflects perceptions as they 
are relevant to specific service providers. Figure 5.1 summarizes Isaiah Harper’s satisfac￾tion with his job placement and support services at Waltown West Department Store as a 5. Assessment 95
cashier. The Johnson Supported Employment Services (SES) Program is assisting Isaiah in 
that position. Isaiah has made ratings on eight items—supervision, work breaks, weekly 
salary, work accommodations, coworker relationships, environment, work hours, and 
travel to work—at two different dates. Isaiah has rated his satisfaction on each of these 
items on a 9-point satisfaction scale, where a rating of 9 means “very satisfied.” A total 
score for each date has been determined by adding up satisfaction ratings for the eight 
items. Actually, the summary score per se might not be more useful than review of indi￾vidual ratings. In this case, Isaiah expressed most dissatisfaction with work accommoda￾tions and coworker relationships. As can be seen in the MSS textbox, Isaiah elaborated 
on concerns saying Waltown management just did not know what or how to provide 
truly effective accommodations. As a result, the SES team member and Isaiah reviewed 
possible accommodations (e.g., extra breaks, quiet workplace, phone contacts with pro￾vider, morning visits with job coach) and thought morning visits might be good. The 
SES provider and Isaiah then included Isaiah’s direct supervisor in planning leading to 
an action plan. The 3-month reevaluation in August showed significant improvement in 
satisfaction with work accommodations.
FIGURE 5.1. Example of a rehabilitation assessment measure completed at two time points.
Very 
satisfied
Equally satisfied 
and dissatisfied
Very 
dissatisfied
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Name: Isaiah Harper Program: Johnson Supported Employment Services
Work site: Waltown West Department Store 
Date: May 1, 2022 Date: August 3, 2022 
7 Supervision 7 Supervision
6 Work breaks 7 Work breaks
6 Weekly salary 7 Weekly salary
2 Work accommodations 5 Work accommodations
3 Coworker relationships 6 Coworker relationships
7 Environment 9 Environment
8 Work hours 7 Work hours
6 Travel to work 6 Travel to work
45 Total 54 Total
Please add specific comments that will help us understand and address any of your ratings.
May 1, 2022: Although Waltown supervisors mean well in terms of reasonable accommodations, 
they really do not know what this means or how to do it. I wish to have more friendly relationships 
with my coworkers.
August 2, 2022: My supervisors and I have a much better sense of accommodations, including 
having my job coach meet me at the beginning of shift two days a week. I am practicing 
conversations skills during my weekly peer support group to build relationships with colleagues.96 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
Dynamism
At times, assessment can seem like a one-time, up-front process, in which goals and bar￾riers are defined by the complex technology of assessment. Such perceptions can “lock” 
a person and rehabilitation team into a plan, despite subsequent events suggesting that 
major amendments to the plan are necessary. Shirley, for example, wants to complete 
an undergraduate degree so she can pursue a career in health care. Unfortunately, the 
full-time load of the first semester is daunting, even with assistance of her supported 
education team (see Chapter 11). She decides to reduce her course load to part-time in 
the spring semester but still finds the university’s culture stressful. She perceives other 
students as much younger; instead of being goal-oriented and seeking careers, they seem 
more oriented to social life. Shirley drops out after a month. With feedback from family 
and the supported education program, Shirley decides to pursue a certificate program in 
radiation technology at the local community college.
Shirley’s story is not an example of poor assessment, nor does dropping out of the 
university suggest failure! Rather, Shirley and the rehabilitation team are learning more 
about her goals in the real world over time. Ongoing assessment is bidirectional; the 
rehabilitation team provides relatively objective information about Shirley’s educational 
pursuit; “objectivity” is one of the strengths of evidence-based interventions. But the sum 
of the assessment process is subjective: Shirley repeatedly “tries on” the goals and strate￾gies identified in the rehabilitation plan. This kind of trying out becomes more real over 
time in the person’s community. Effective rehabilitation is dynamic and evolving.
ASSESSMENT METHODS
Methods for Assessing the Individual
Several different methods are used to conduct rehabilitation assessment with an indi￾vidual, including interviews with the person, self-report questionnaires, obtaining infor￾mation from others (e.g., family members, inpatient staff, and residential workers), role 
plays, and real-world observations. Each of these has advantages and disadvantages. The 
place to begin is “just ask them.” Ask people from the beginning what they need, want, 
and aspire to, and how a rehabilitation team will help. This is not, however, a start-up 
task only. Rehabilitation providers may regularly return to this basic question to make 
sure their plan corresponds with the ever-evolving wishes of the person.
Interviews
Interviewing involves more formally obtaining information about an individual’s needs 
and strengths by asking questions and engaging the person in conversations around 
specific topics. Interview-based approaches vary in degree of structure, ranging from 
unstructured formats to fully outlined approaches. An unstructured format is one in 
which the interview is organized around particular themes but is not necessarily gov￾erned by specific questions and follow-up probes. Semistructured and structured inter￾views differ mainly by how specific probe and follow-up questions are included as part of 
the interview. Structured interviews usually contain specific questions to elicit informa￾tion about particular areas of functioning, and typically include follow-up questions as 
well. “Yes or no. Do you ever hear voices when no one else is around?” Semistructured 5. Assessment 97
interviews often provide guidance about initial and follow-up questions, without script￾ing the precise wording or constraining the interviewer to ask those questions: “Tell me 
about those times when you hear voices.”
Unstructured interviews also differ from more structured interviews in coding 
responses. Information concerning an individual’s functioning is summarized descrip￾tively in unstructured interviews, whereas semistructured and structured interviews 
usually provide quantitative methods for summarizing information. For example, in the 
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5—Clinician’s Version (SCID-5-CV; First, Wil￾liams, Karg, & Spitzer, 2016), an instrument for establishing psychiatric diagnoses, spe￾cific symptoms are rated on a 3-point scale (1 = not present, 2 = not clear, 3 = definitely 
present). A psychiatric diagnosis is established through identification of specific symptom 
benchmarks, as well as determination of other factors that may also explain symptoms 
(e.g., substance use). In other structured interviews, quality of specific aspects of social 
functioning or severity of psychiatric symptoms is often rated on a fixed scale, with low 
numbers representing better functioning or less severe symptoms.
Structured interviews have a number of advantages over unstructured ones. First, 
specific questions diminish differences among interviewers due to style or specific word￾ing. Eliminating such differences improves the precision of the assessment. Second, struc￾tured interviews tend to be more comprehensive than unstructured interviews, because 
they are designed to tap different areas of functioning related to rehabilitation. This spec￾ificity is difficult to achieve without providing clear guidelines to the interviewer. There 
are also disadvantages. More training is usually required to learn how to use structured 
or semistructured interviews. Structured interviews also constrain the interviewer with 
their focus on particular areas of functioning to the exclusion of others; these interview 
formats may limit ability to delve into other areas of functioning, some of which may be 
important to the person. In addition, structured interviews are not available for assessing 
every area of functioning; unstructured formats may be required to understand function￾ing in more “innovative” areas. In view of these advantages and disadvantages, effective 
rehabilitation assessment usually involves a combination of unstructured and structured 
interviewing.
Self-Report Questionnaires
Self-report questionnaires are usually a paper-and-pencil or computer-based series of 
questions about symptoms, functioning, or satisfaction in particular domains. Many 
such questionnaires have been developed to obtain information from people with dis￾abilities, family members, and/or service providers. Responses to these questions are 
provided in either yes–no or continuum formats, such as a 4-point scale ranging from 1 
(not a problem) to 4 (severe problem). Similar to the data obtained in structured inter￾views, the quantitative data gathered in self-report questionnaires can be summarized 
to provide an index of functioning in a particular area. Self-report questionnaires are 
used to evaluate personal functioning in a wide range of areas. For example, distress 
related to depression, anxiety, or health concerns can easily be rated with self-report 
questionnaires. These scales have also been used to assess family perspectives on needs 
and provider attitudes that might undermine services. Self-report questionnaires are effi￾cient because they only require providers to give respondents instructions and to score 
the questionnaires (although additional time may be needed to explain unclear questions 
to respondents). Self-report questionnaires can be used in group settings, since everyone 98 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
can complete the questionnaires at the same time. These kinds of questionnaires can be 
especially useful as an alternative to directly asking people about behaviors that may 
be perceived as undesirable. For example, research has shown that individuals are more 
likely to acknowledge use of drugs and certain sexual behaviors (e.g., LGBTQ) when 
completing a computer-based self-report assessment than when responding to a live inter￾viewer (Turner et al., 1998).
Despite these advantages, self-report questionnaires have disadvantages. Written 
self-report questionnaires require good reading skills, which some respondents lack. 
Computer-administered questionnaires can provide a solution to this by stating ques￾tions aloud, although these devices are not routinely available in many rehabilitation 
settings. Self-administered questionnaires provide limited opportunities to correct mis￾understandings that may arise when a person is completing a questionnaire, because 
there is little interaction with the provider. Some areas of functioning may also be more 
difficult than others for individuals to rate. For example, psychotic symptoms, especially 
delusions, are difficult to assess with self-report questionnaires, as are other forms of 
cognitive impairment. Finally, some persons may be reluctant to report socially undesir￾able behaviors even on self-report questionnaires. For example, respondents often under￾report use of drugs and alcohol (Barbee, Clark, Crapanzano, Heintz, & Kehoe, 1989), 
high-risk sexual behavior (Cournos & McKinnon, 1997), and medication use (Weiden, 
Mott, & Curcio, 1995).
Obtaining Information from Others
People are sometimes not accurate observers of their own behavior. Accuracy of self￾observation may be further compromised by cognitive impairments or altered percep￾tions of reality (e.g., psychotic symptoms). As an alternative, some information about 
people’s disabilities may be obtained from an “other” who knows them well, such as 
a family member, friend, or treatment provider. Information from others is generally 
obtained through interviews that may vary in their degree of structure. Once again, 
structured interviews with others have advantages over unstructured ones, including elic￾iting information in standardized ways and yielding quantitative data that can be used 
for treatment planning and outcome evaluation. However, because significant others and 
clinicians tend not to be privy to people’s internal “private” experiences, assessments 
from others are limited to areas of functioning that are directly observed. Measures with 
others can be used to judge an individual’s social appropriateness, degree of connection 
and association with peers, work performance, independent living skills, substance use, 
and leisure time. Assessments from others also provide an independent perspective on a 
person’s functioning, which can be useful in understanding how individuals fit into their 
social context. Still, an independent perspective is not necessarily more objective; others 
may have personal biases that may distort information in particular ways. For example, 
ratings from others may be influenced by their desire to portray the individual with psy￾chiatric disability in a positive or negative light, depending on the nature and quality of 
their relationship. Another advantage of assessments from others is the potentially greater 
awareness other informants may have of social norms within the community in which the 
person lives. Some individuals with psychiatric disabilities have significant difficulties in 
social cognition (Green, Horan, & Lee, 2015; Hasson-Ohayon et al., 2015) that include 
the inability to perceive and understand common social conventions. Not understanding 
social norms can prevent individuals from accurately rating their own social functioning 
with respect to community norms. Information from others may bypass this problem.5. Assessment 99
There are additional disadvantages to information from others. Some people with 
psychiatric disabilities are unable to identify others who can provide information about 
their functioning. Even when such others are identified, contacting them may be difficult 
or require multiple efforts. In addition, some people with disabilities may be unwilling 
to identify other persons who can be contacted. People might feel talked about or other￾wise find this intrusive in situations in which rehabilitation providers fail to handle this 
sensitively.
Information from providers’ observations may be somewhat easier to obtain, because 
their jobs involve working with people, and they are therefore easier to identify and con￾tact. It may be difficult to enlist their cooperation because of the limited provider time, 
however. In addition, rehabilitation providers vary greatly in their knowledge of persons’ 
functioning in the community and thus may be able to provide only limited amounts of 
information.
Role Plays
Role plays or situational assessments are evaluations conducted under simulated life 
interactions. For example, role-play tests are often used to evaluate social skills by seeing 
how an individual performs in a contrived social interaction (Bellack, Mueser, Gingerich, 
& Agresta, 2004; Liberman, 2008; Park, Ku, et al., 2011). In such a test, a person might 
be instructed to “pretend that you have just met an acquaintance on the bus to work. 
Strike up a friendly conversation based on things you read in this morning’s newspaper.” 
Several standardized measures of social skills and problem solving have been developed 
and validated for persons with psychiatric disabilities (Bellack, Brown, & Thomas￾Lohrman, 2006). Situation-based assessments of work performance involve evaluating 
an individual in either a simulated work situation or an actual work-related interaction 
(Bond & Friedmeyer, 1987). The person’s performance can then be evaluated, providing 
detailed information about specific skills and problems related to functioning in those 
areas. Rehabilitation efforts focus on those areas identified in the assessment.
Role-play and situational assessments have the advantage of providing much more 
detailed information about specific strengths and areas of impairment than other assess￾ment methods may produce. This can be helpful in rehabilitation planning, since greater 
specificity can result in more focused rehabilitation efforts. The primary disadvantage of 
these types of assessments is that they are time-consuming; many mental health practitio￾ners lack not only the time but also the resources and skills to perform such assessments. 
Thus, such assessments of functional abilities are often not conducted in routine rehabili￾tation practice but may be included in research on rehabilitation programs.
Real-World Observations
Following people into their actual environments and watching how they respond to dif￾ferent situations can provide additional valuable information. There are coding schemas 
that observers can use to describe behaviors precisely; for example, one set of measures 
tracks specific behaviors in specific settings at specific times (Paul, 1986, 1987). However, 
like role-play measures, these types of efforts can be labor-intensive. Alternatively, a job 
coach may shadow a person in the work setting to observe strengths and barriers to tar￾geted goals that the person sets up for themself. Carefully written and specific progress 
notes on such observations provide useful information for the whole rehabilitation team, 
as well as the person with disabilities.100 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
SPECIFIC MEASURES FOR THE DOMAINS OF ASSESSMENT
This section covers specific measures and strategies for assessing the domains of func￾tioning summarized in Table 5.1. For each domain, we first discuss its relevance to psy￾chiatric rehabilitation, then describe the nature of the domain, followed by examples of 
specific assessment strategies and instruments. These are divided according to individual 
and community assessment factors.
Assessing Individual Factors
Diagnosis and symptoms often come first in this kind of list, because they seem to reflect 
the nature of psychiatric in the idea of psychiatric rehabilitation. They have, however, 
been moved far down the list in our text, because such a focus is not consistent with 
the priorities of recovery and the people it serves. For instance, many people live with 
unchanging psychotic behaviors but still have individually meaningful needs and goals. 
Hence, both the list of domains in Table 5.1 and this section begin with consideration 
of measures that assess needs and goals. Success in achieving these goals is influenced 
by strengths, the second item in the list of domains; assessment of strengths is followed 
by assessment of the potential for recovery, empowerment, and hope. Strengths are jux￾taposed with functioning and disabilities, which frequently define barriers to personal 
goals. Achieving goals despite disabilities defines quality of life or general well-being—
the degree of personal life satisfaction given the person’s current state of needs and chal￾lenges. People seek out services with some sense of what they want. Next in the list is 
consideration of factors that influence treatment decision making. Readiness for change 
is one such factor. Many people with serious mental illness are challenged by traumas 
that also need to be included in assessment.
Needs and Goals
The fundamental question of rehabilitation assessment is “Why are people seeking assis￾tance for their psychiatric disabilities?” People seek services believing it will help them 
achieve their goals. Hence, the place to begin is with understanding each person’s goals, 
in the long term as well as the short term. Immediate goals (e.g., getting admitted to a 
college program and then completing its 4-year curriculum) often precede more long￾term ones (e.g., obtaining a vocation that is personally meaningful and generates a good 
income). Assessment is in some ways a process of helping the person understand the 
domains in which goals are possible. These may include intimate relationships and other 
friendships; education, vocation, and income; housing; mental and physical health and 
wellness; faith-based communities; recreation; citizenship; and interactions with law 
enforcement (Milyavskaya, Nadolny, & Koestner, 2014). Assessing needs and goals help 
people sort out various costs and benefits of aspirations. Together, these reflect the per￾son’s sense of satisfaction with varied domains. They also help the person establish some 
sense of priorities (e.g., “I will put off moving to a bigger apartment until I get through 
my college program”).
The Needs and Resources Assessment (NARA) is one measure that provides an 
opportunity for persons to pair needs with available resources (Corrigan, Buican, & 
McCracken, 1995, 1996). The NARA is administered as a face-to-face interview in which 
participants are asked open-ended questions to identify specific needs in 13 domains 
(e.g., “What housing needs do you have?”). The person is then asked follow-up resource 5. Assessment 101
questions for each identified need (e.g., for housing: “You said you needed a new apart￾ment. What resources do you have to help you obtain this apartment?”). The open-ended 
questions are followed by standardized questions, to which the person responds on a 
7-point scale: “How satisfied are you with each domain?” and “How important is each 
need?”
The Camberwell Assessments of Need constitute several measures of the needs of 
various groups of people seeking services: elderly persons (Reynolds et al., 2000), preg￾nant mothers with mental illness (Howard et al., 2007), persons involved with the courts 
(Thomas et al., 2003), and people with intellectual disabilities (Xenitidis, Slade, Thor￾nicroft, & Bouras, 2003). The basic instrument, the Camberwell Assessment of Need 
(CAN), is a comprehensive 22-page assessment of needs, supports, and satisfaction with 
22 domains of life experience, a profile that mostly parallels the dimensions of life expe￾rience listed at the beginning of this chapter in the section “Assessment of Needs and 
Goals” (M. Phelan et al., 1995; Slade, Phelan, Thornicroft, & Parkman, 1996). Typi￾cally, the CAN is completed in face-to-face interviews between rehabilitation provider 
and service recipient. There is a brief version of the test—the Camberwell Assessment of 
Need, Short Appraisal Schedule, Patient (CANSAS-P)—that is two pages long and can be 
self-administered as a pencil-and-paper task. It represents perceived need in each domain.
Needs assessments, as the term is used here, are typically more descriptive than 
outcome measures. They are used to provide a profile of priorities to which strengths, 
resources, and interventions are matched. Still, some measurements of needs include indi￾ces of whether needs have been met. The Medical Research Council (MRC) Needs for 
Care Assessment, for example, includes scales representing whether needs have been met 
at some subsequent period (Brewin & Wing, 1993). Values like these can be used to deter￾mine whether specific rehabilitation plans have helped people reach their goals. They can 
also be used as overall program evaluation instruments by looking at mean change of 
goals for a group’s participation in specific interventions.
Strengths
People with and without disabilities begin the pursuit of goals with a sense of their 
strengths. As stated in Chapter 1, although discussion of symptoms and dysfunctions 
helps a rehabilitation provider better understand the challenges a person is facing, this 
kind of discussion frames people as victims of their disabilities without recognizing their 
positive assets. Although affect is frequently distressed in psychiatric illness, people with 
psychiatric disabilities may have several strengths in this domain. Among others, emo￾tions provide the color to life that motivates individuals to act against their symptoms and 
achieve their goals. People with psychosis also often experience diminished perceptual 
and cognitive abilities. But despite these limitations, they frequently have the abilities to 
understand problems and brainstorm solutions, as well as to perceive interpersonal situ￾ations correctly. Among the greatest strengths a person with disabilities may draw upon 
is motivation. Despite hurdles thrown up by symptoms and dysfunctions, the person 
wants to achieve work, independent living, relationships, and other goals. Symptoms and 
dysfunctions often interfere with interpersonal relationships; nevertheless, most people 
with serious mental illness have family or friends on whom they might rely. Alternatively, 
rehabilitation providers or peers with psychiatric disabilities are also frequently available 
to step in for support and companionship.
Although strengths-based programs have become an emerging principle of contem￾porary rehabilitation, little has been done toward crafting measures meant to promote 102 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
assessment of personal strengths. One standardized instrument is the Adult Needs and 
Strengths Assessment (Christopher, 1998) and its Abbreviated Referral Version (Nelson 
& Johnston, 2008). The latter is a 16-item measure completed by a knowledgeable other, 
typically a service provider. The first 12 items are 5-point scales representing problems 
with, among other things, impulse control, depression/anxiety, substance abuse, dan￾ger to self, or sexually inappropriate behavior. The remaining items ask about strengths 
related to medication compliance, social skills, relationships, and problem solving. 
Unfortunately, the focus on symptoms does not seem to capture the sense of strengths as 
represented in the strengths model.
Charles Rapp is one of the most eloquent advocates of strengths-based approaches. 
Rapp and Goscha (2011) offer a Strengths Assessment, an open-ended measure in which 
participants juxtapose current strengths (e.g., talents, skills, other personal strengths, 
and environmental strengths) with individual desires/aspirations and past resources. This 
information can be completed on a pencil-and-paper measure or be used as the founda￾tion of a face-to-face interview. Strengths are meant to reflect home and daily living, assets 
and finances, education and employment, relationships, health and wellness, leisure and 
recreation, and spirituality. Participants are then asked to prioritize their strengths. No 
research has been published on the measure. Still, ample guidance is provided regarding 
how to use this information to promote discussions among persons and providers about 
personal abilities that might be used to promote goals.
Recovery, Empowerment, and Hope
Although recovery is not synonymous with strengths, recovery is hailed as the first 
principle of the modern mental health system. In Chapter 1, two definitions of recovery 
were reviewed. First, recovery is described as an end point; this definition reflects ample 
research suggesting that many people with even the most serious disabilities can live 
with, or even overcome, challenges to achieve personal goals. Alternatively, recovery is a 
process in which the self-determined pursuit of goals is evidence of recovery itself. Factor 
models of recovery describe it in terms of several constructs, including a sense of personal 
confidence and hope for the future, a willingness to ask for help, an orientation toward 
goals and success, a reliance on others, and a view of self that is not dominated by symp￾toms. As suggested by this factor structure, recovery reintroduces personal empowerment 
and hope as central constructs for individuals with psychiatric disabilities. Empower￾ment includes notions of personal control, action, sharing, dignity, and equity (Barnes & 
Bowl, 2017; Clark & Krupa, 2002; Rogers, Ralph, & Salzer, 2010). Hope is also key to 
promoting health and wellness, especially in people struggling with disabilities over time.
Measures of recovery, empowerment, and hope are often paper-and-pencil or inter￾view measures. Several instruments assess recovery; indeed, two large reviews of such 
measures have been published in the last few years (Shanks et al., 2013; Scheyett, DeLuca, 
& Morgan, 2013; Williams et al., 2012). The Recovery Assessment Scale (RAS; Corri￾gan, Salzer, Ralph, Sangster, & Keck, 2004) is most often cited, with a separate review 
summarizing the breadths and depths of this measure (Salzer & Brusilovskiy, 2014). 
Although several versions of the RAS have emerged, Salzer and Brusilovskiy focused on 
the 24-item scale. The measure has been self-administered in either paper-and-pencil or 
computerized formats. The RAS generates an overall score plus five subscale scores: Per￾sonal Confidence and Hope, Willingness to Ask for Help, Goal Orientation, Reliance on 
Others, and Not Dominated by Symptoms. The RAS seems to be a sensitive measure of 
individual recovery change; hence, it is often used in program evaluation.5. Assessment 103
Although several measures of empowerment also emerge in the literature, few 
reviews of these measures have been found. The Empowerment Scale is one oft-cited 
measure (Rogers, Ralph, & Salzer, 2010). Like the RAS, the Empowerment Scale can 
be self-administered or incorporated into an interview. The 28-item version yields four 
subscales: Self-Efficacy, Perceived Power, Optimism about and Control over the Future, 
and Community Activism. Although the scale has good reliability and validity, research 
is unclear about its sensitivity to change.
A broader research literature examines issues of empowerment from the perspective 
of self-determination, which represents the degree to which people have autonomy and 
control over their goals and strategies to pursue those goals. Self-determination theory
(SDT) is a broader social-psychological model that describes personal motivation across 
the areas of human behavior discussed more in Chapter 15 (Deci & Ryan, 2012; Van 
den Broeck, Ferris, Chang, & Rosen, 2016). Applications of SDT to health and wellness 
have been an especially important focus (Williams, Deci, & Ryan, 1998). The Treat￾ment Self-Regulation Questionnaire (Levesque et al., 2007; Ryan et al., 1995) is a set 
of measures examining why people engage in some healthy behaviors, enter treatment, 
change healthy behaviors, follow treatment regimens, or engage in some other health￾relevant behaviors. Within this questionnaire is the Treatment Motivation Questionnaire 
(Ryan, Plant, & O’Malley, 1995), specifically developed for people in an alcohol treat￾ment program. It assesses levels of psychological internalization for entering and staying 
in services. Although SDT and corresponding measures are potentially rich resources for 
rehabilitation providers, only one questionnaire specifically reflecting agendas of people 
with psychiatric disabilities has been found in the literature. The Intrinsic Motivation 
Inventory was adapted by Choi, Mogami, and Medalia (2010) to address issues pertinent 
to people with schizophrenia. The adapted version is a 21-item measure that addresses 
three domains relevant to motivation for treatment: interest/enjoyment, perceived choice, 
and value/usefulness.
Hope is central to recovery and empowerment, being one of the domains in the 
RAS. Psychologists have developed sophisticated models of hope, defining the construct 
as perceived capability to define pathways for obtaining goals and motivating oneself 
via agentic thinking (Corrigan, 2014; Duncan, Jaini, & Hellman, 2021; Snyder, 2002). 
Hence, hope is a relevant object of study. The Herth Hope Index emerged from nursing as 
a commonly used measure of hope (Benzein & Berg, 2003; Herth, 1992). It is a 50-item 
measure that yields a single overall score representing the person’s hope.
Functioning and Disabilities
Serious mental illness often causes disabilities in social and vocational functioning that 
undermine the pursuit of goals, recovery, and hope. Good social functioning and associ￾ated social support may be beneficial for several reasons. First, good relationships with 
others help give people meaning in life, reasons to live, and motivation to take care 
of themselves. Second, social support can buffer the negative effects of stress, making 
individuals less vulnerable to stress-induced relapses. Third, having close relationships 
with others provides opportunities for reality testing, which may be especially ben￾eficial for individuals with occasional psychotic symptoms. Evidence suggests people 
with better social functioning and greater levels of social support experience a more 
benign course of their mental illness (Bybee, Mowbray, Oyserman, & Lewandowski, 
2003; Harandi, Taghinasab, & Nayeri, 2017; Sono et al., 2012; Wells, Miranda, Bruce, 
Alegria, & Wallerstein, 2004). Thus, improving social support is an important goal for 104 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
rehabilitation, and the assessment of social functioning is critical to evaluating the suc￾cess of those efforts.
SOCIAL FUNCTIONING
Interview-based methods are often useful for assessing an individual’s social functioning, 
especially when individual interviews can be supplemented by information from signifi￾cant others. Many measures of social functioning provide specific subscale scores. For 
example, the Social Adjustment Scale II (Schooler, Hogarty, & Weissman, 1979) provides 
subscale scores for the following dimensions of social functioning: Family, Extended 
Family, Friends, Romance, and Leisure/Recreation.
Aside from interview-based instruments that delve specifically into different dimen￾sions of social functioning, other instruments provide a more general assessment of the 
adequacy of an individual’s functioning in the community or in some more specific context 
(e.g., residence). General functioning scales, such as the Multnomah Community Ability 
Scale (Barker, Barron, & McFarlane, 1994; Bassani et al., 2009; Gerber, 2011), are often 
completed by providers who are privy to information about the individual’s function￾ing; these scales are less time-consuming to complete, because they do not require direct 
interviews. General measures of functioning are also relatively easy to administer and 
can provide a useful summary of an individual’s functioning in the community. However, 
global summaries are often unsuitable for pinpointing specific areas in need of rehabilita￾tion. Although other detailed assessment instruments may be time-consuming, they may 
be useful in yielding more specific information that can serve as a basis for identifying 
and planning rehabilitation needs.
Role functioning refers to whether individuals are able to meet the expectations of 
socioculturally defined roles, such as worker, student, parent, or spouse/partner. Role 
functioning is often included as a dimension of social functioning, and is strongly related 
to the quality of social relationships. It is useful to distinguish role functioning from the 
quality of social relationships, as impairment in the former area of functioning is critical 
to the definition of disability. Despite prominent difficulties experienced in the areas of 
school, parenting, and spousal/partner relationships, there is a dearth of well-established 
instruments for evaluating functioning in these domains.
VOCATIONAL FUNCTIONING
Some aspects of vocational functioning are relatively easily assessed, while others are 
more challenging. The assessment of work is probably most direct. Work can be mea￾sured by obtaining information such as the type of job an individual holds, wages and 
benefits paid, number of hours worked, and satisfaction with the job. Work history may 
be similarly obtained, including prior jobs, longest duration of competitive employment, 
wages and hours worked at last competitive job, and reasons for job termination. These 
measures are readily obtained through direct interview with the individual. Some struc￾tured interviews of social functioning also contain questions concerning work perfor￾mance, such as the Work and Social Adjustment Scale (Pedersen, Kvarstein, & Wilberg, 
2017). Observational measures of the quality of vocational functioning have also been 
developed, such as the Work Behavior Inventory (Lysaker, Bell, Bryson, & Zito, 1993). 
Observational measures like these rely on another individual to complete them, such as 
the employer; therefore, the use of these measures is limited to vocational settings where 
people have disclosed disabilities to their employers.5. Assessment 105
SELF-CARE AND INDEPENDENT LIVING SKILLS
Difficulties in caring for oneself and living independently are major problems for many 
individuals with psychiatric disabilities who may require extensive supports from treat￾ment providers and family members. Indeed, impaired self-care skills are incorporated 
into the diagnostic criteria of some psychiatric disorders, such as schizophrenia. For 
these reasons, improving self-care and independent living skills is an important priority 
of many rehabilitation programs. One instrument for assessing these skills is the Inde￾pendent Living Skills Survey (Liberman, 2008; Wallace, Liberman, Tauber, & Wallace, 
2000). This measure includes both person and provider (or significant other) versions and 
assesses a wide range of specific behaviors related to self-care and independent living. 
Many other instruments for measuring community functioning also tap some indepen￾dent living skills, such as the Social and Adaptive Functions Evaluation (Harvey et al., 
1997) and the Multnomah Community Ability Scale (Barker et al., 1994).
Quality of Life
Absence of social dysfunctions does not make for a satisfactory life. The concept of qual￾ity of life includes enjoyment and appreciation of different aspects of living; it is less 
concerned with specific psychopathology and impairments that characterize psychiat￾ric disorders (Huxley, 1998). A wide range of instruments have been developed for the 
measurement of quality of life, with most including both objective and subjective per￾spectives. Objective measures of quality of life overlap considerably with measures of 
community functioning, such as quality of social relationships (Connell, O’Cathain, & 
Brazier, 2014). In some cases, quality-of-life measures overlap with symptom measures 
as well. For example, the Quality of Life Scale (Heinrichs, Hanlon, & Carpenter, 1984) 
is strongly related to negative symptoms (Bellack, Morrison, Wixted, & Mueser, 1990), 
and the overall scale may be better conceptualized as a measure of the deficit syndrome of 
enduring negative symptoms (Carpenter, Heinrichs, & Wagman, 1988; Mueser, Douglas, 
Bellack, & Morrison, 1991) than as a conventional quality-of-life measure.
Treatment Decision Making
In Chapter 7, we distinguish between adherence and self-determination when considering 
treatment decisions. A sizable literature has examined measures of treatment adherence, 
which are reviewed here. In addition to the measures of self-determination discussed ear￾lier, decision making related to intervention is often examined in terms of readiness for 
change. Instruments to assess this construct are reviewed in the next section.
As discussed in Chapter 9, medication is one powerful intervention for psychiatric 
disabilities, having a significant impact on reducing symptoms and preventing relapses in 
individuals with serious mental illness (Schatzberg & Nemeroff, 2009). Medication deci￾sions may be challenging however, with more than half of people not administering medi￾cation as prescribed at some point in their illness (Bible, Casper, Seifert, & Porter, 2017; 
Marrero, Fumero, de Miguel, & Peñate, 2020). Given that not taking medication may 
be an important contributor to relapse and rehospitalizations (Zygmunt, Olfson, Boyer, 
& Mechanic, 2002), addressing decision making about medication is a common goal for 
psychiatric rehabilitation. Several costs and benefits may have an impact on medication 
decisions. Many medications for serious mental illness have undesirable effects that go 
along with their beneficial effects (Chapter 9). The side effects of such medications can 106 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
be uncomfortable and in some cases dangerous. In addition, medication side effects may 
contribute to decisions not to use them. Although side effects are common, many options 
are available for their management. However, in order to address this problem effectively, 
side effects must first be detected. Therefore, medication side effects are often routinely 
assessed in individuals receiving pharmacological treatment for their psychiatric disabili￾ties. These assessments are usually conducted by the physicians or nurse practitioners 
who are prescribing the medication. Although different classes of psychiatric medications 
tend to have common side effects, each medication group has its own unique profile mea￾sures of side effects (Ashoorian, Davidson, Rock Gudka, & Clifford, 2014; Schnittker 
& Do, 2020). Two widely used scales for measuring antipsychotic side effects are the 
Extrapyramidal Side Effects Questionnaire (Simpson & Angus, 1970) and the Abnormal 
Involuntary Movements Scale (National Institute of Mental Health [NIMH], 1975).
Almost all approaches to measuring actual medication use have their limitations, 
with more accurate approaches being more time-consuming. The most accurate meth￾ods for assessing medication use involve either pill counts or electronic medication cap 
devices. For pill counts, people are requested to bring medications to clinical visits, where 
providers simply count the number of pills in each bottle of prescribed medication. The 
extent to which more pills are present than would be expected from the prescribed dos￾age and frequency is an indicator of not using medications. Although an individual can 
easily subvert this technique by taking out pills and throwing them away, such attempts 
to conceal medication use seem to be rare. However, obtaining an accurate measure of 
medication use from pill counts can be difficult for many reasons, including free samples; 
noncountable forms of medication, such as inhalers, eye drops, or insulin vials; and medi￾cations given at a regular dose but with instructions including a limited number of “take 
as needed” (p.r.n.) administrations.
An electronic cap records the number of times a cap is taken off a medication bottle, 
and hence might be an alternative, reliable measure of medication use. This approach is 
expensive, however, especially for most people with psychiatric disabilities who are pre￾scribed multiple types of medication. Many people use weekly pillboxes to organize their 
medications, for which electronic devices have not been developed.
Direct interviews with people about their medications can be helpful but accuracy 
may be questionable. It can be assumed that reports of not taking meds are relatively 
accurate if people indicate that they do not routinely take their medications. However, 
reports of consistent medication use are not necessarily accurate. An alternative to direct 
questioning about use is to inquire indirectly about personal attitudes toward the medica￾tion. Some research indicates that negative attitudes toward medication (e.g., the belief 
that they are not beneficial) may be more strongly related to medication decisions than 
direct self-reports of use are (Kukla, Salyers, & Lysaker, 2013; Pratt, Mueser, Driscoll, 
Wolfe, & Bartels, 2006; Richardson, McCabe, & Priebe, 2013).
Reports of significant others can also provide useful information about medication 
use, although veracity of these reports depends on the amount of contact with the person, 
as well as the significant others’ biases. For example, treatment providers may overesti￾mate use because they believe that people are doing as they are told and following instruc￾tions to take medication. Blood levels of some medications can be taken. For example, an 
important part of monitoring the lithium for a bipolar disorder is to check blood levels 
regularly to prevent high toxic levels from developing. A very low level of lithium could 
indicate the person is not using it. However, blood levels cannot be used to monitor 
most medications, either because guidelines for therapeutic levels do not exist or because 5. Assessment 107
tests are expensive. In practice, assessment of medication use is similar to assessment of 
social functioning and substance use: A combination of individual reports, significant 
others’ reports, and behavioral observations provides the most accurate determination. 
Still, rehabilitation providers should use measures of use with caution. As discussed in 
Chapter 7, adherence may be a limiting way of viewing treatment decisions. It suggests a 
“right” way to use medication, which implies that failure to adopt the “right” prescrip￾tion is a failure of the person. Self-determination is more consistent with a rehabilitation 
perspective. People with disabilities must be the ones who set their medication-related 
goals. Hence, the value of use measures resides in provoking conversation between a per￾son and provider, in order to set an ongoing plan to help the person achieve goals.
Readiness for Change
“One of the harshest pronouncements professionals make to people with severe psy￾chiatric disabilities and their family members is some variation of ‘You are not ready 
for rehabilitation’” (Cohen, Anthony, & Farkas, 1997, p. 644). This seems to call for 
definitive measures of rehabilitation readiness that can distinguish those who will benefit 
from rehabilitation versus those who will not (Ferdinandi, Yoottanasumpun, Pollack, & 
Bermanzohn, 1998). Most rehabilitation providers, however, agree that this approach is 
wrongheaded. A better question is “Ready for what?” Instead of across-the-board state￾ments about whether a person can or cannot benefit from rehabilitation, more effective 
approaches seek to understand readiness for specifics: What exactly does the person want 
to pursue now?
As mentioned briefly in Chapter 16, the transtheoretical model and its stages of 
change offer a useful framework (Hutchison, Breckon, & Johnston, 2009; Migneault, 
Adams, & Read, 2005; Norcross, Krebs, & Prochaska, 2011). When paired with moti￾vational interviewing, rehabilitation assessment seeks to identify costs and benefits of 
individual goals. Gervey (2010), for example, developed a Vocational Counseling version 
of the University of Rhode Island Change Assessment (URICA-VC), a 32-item measure 
that sorts respondents into four stages of change for vocational rehabilitation: precon￾templation, contemplation, action, and maintenance. Alternatively, a Stages of Change 
Interview has been developed and is reproduced in Figure 5.2. Readiness assessments and 
stages of change depend on specific goals. A person’s readiness to address housing priori￾ties might differ from readiness to address work goals. Hence the Stages of Change Inter￾view is grounded by goals. In the assessment in Figure 5.2, Henry is wondering about 
moving away from his parents’ home into an apartment of his own. The rehabilitation 
provider begins by simply asking whether he is ready to pursue the goal: “Henry, are you 
ready to find an apartment and move out?” People who say “yes” list activities in which 
they are engaged to accomplish their goal. For example, someone might respond, “I have 
met with a peer supporter, identified an area in town to move to, and found funds to 
pay for the move.” Henry, however, has said “no” to the readiness question. In this case, 
the rehabilitation provider asks for the pros and cons of moving out. Henry lists several 
benefits, which include being able to decorate the place as he likes, inviting friends over 
freely, and listening to music he likes, all in an atmosphere where he is not arguing with 
his father. However, Henry also notes problems with this decision: He worries that he 
might be lonely and anxious living alone; he needs to figure out how he will get money 
for rent; and he is concerned that he may only be able to afford to live in a high-crime 
neighborhood. Henry’s task here, with the provider’s assistance and support, is to weigh 108 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
costs and benefits to determine whether he is ready to take action to move into his own 
apartment. This kind of analysis is not easy. Henry does not just add up pros versus cons 
and determine which side is more heavily weighted. Instead, the rehabilitation provider 
might ask Henry, after he is done with his list, which of the pros and cons is most impor￾tant. Let’s suppose Henry says that while he would like the freedom of his own place, he 
is very concerned about being lonely. Thus, given the perceived weight of all the pros and 
cons—especially the most important ones—does he perceive that it is worthwhile to act 
on his goals?
Perceived pros and cons define stages of change. People who identify no pros to 
changing a goal are in the precontemplation stage; they are not even thinking about it. 
This would be Henry if he said, “There is no reason why I would want to move out. 
Everything is fine.” People who perceive more cons than pros are in the stage of contem￾plating change but are not yet ready. This might be Henry as a result of the information 
in Figure 5.2: He sees a few benefits to moving out but is a bit hesitant right now to act on 
it. If Henry, on the other hand, were to believe that the benefits of moving out outweigh 
the risks, then he might be ready for action; he would be in the determination stage. The 
next step would be for the rehabilitation provider and Henry to consider different actions 
for investigating apartment options. The benefits of the Stages of Change Interview thus 
FIGURE 5.2. Example of a completed response form for the Stages of Change Interview.
Name: Henry Lopez Date: September 21, 2022
Specific goal: Move into my own apartment
Do you want to pursue this goal right now?
Yes No
What are you What are its
doing about it? pros and cons?
List activities here: Pros Cons
Decorate as I like Afraid of being alone
Fight less with Dad Get money for rent
Unsafe neighborhood?
Number of months Do the pros outweigh the cons?
participating in activity
If less than 6 months
If no pros to change:
in activity: Action stage
Precontemplation stage
If more than 6 months
? If cons > pros:
in activity: Maintenance stage
Contemplation stage
Have you slipped in the past month? ? If pros > cons:
If yes: Relapse stage
Determination stage5. Assessment 109
extend beyond assigning Henry to a stage; it also helps Henry and his rehabilitation team 
understand barriers to moving ahead on a goal. In Henry’s case, he and his provider now 
know that if Henry wishes to act on moving into his own apartment, they need to con￾sider ways to address his possible loneliness and the other potential problems.
Diagnosis and Symptoms
DIAGNOSIS
A psychiatric diagnosis may have important treatment indications for individuals with 
psychiatric disabilities (see Chapter 1). It may be related to identifying medications that 
are likely to reduce symptoms and prevent relapses (Lally & MacCabe, 2015). Diagnostic 
information may also be helpful in identifying psychosocial approaches to services. Some 
types of psychotherapy have been developed to address symptoms and functioning in 
specific diagnostic groups. For example, cognitive-behavioral approaches have been sup￾ported in delusional disorders, such as schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder (King￾don & Turkington, 2005, 2022)
Both self-report questionnaires and standardized interviews may be used to diagnose 
psychiatric disorders. For example, self-report questionnaires, which are often useful for 
screening individuals for certain disorders, are followed up with interviews to confirm 
a suspected disorder. The Psychiatric Diagnostic Screening Questionnaire (Zimmerman 
& Mattia, 2001a, 2001b) was developed to screen across psychiatric disorders for a 
variety of clinical populations (e.g., persons presenting for treatment at medical settings, 
substance abuse treatment settings, and mental health centers), and has been shown to 
be strongly predictive of diagnoses based on structured interviews (Zimmerman & Mat￾tia, 2001c; Zimmerman, Sheeran, Chelminski, & Young, 2004). Consensus in the field, 
however, suggests that interviewing an individual is necessary in order to firmly establish 
a psychiatric diagnosis, and that this often needs to be supplemented with information 
provided by significant others, such as family members or other treatment providers.
In the United States, the clear “gold standard” for assessing diagnosis is the SCID￾5-CV, mentioned earlier in this chapter (First et al., 2016). Although the original SCID 
measure is still widely used in psychiatric research, briefer versions such as the SCID￾5-CV (First et al., 2016) have been developed to aid in the diagnosis of psychiatric disor￾ders in specific clinical settings. The measure provides clinicians comprehensive instruc￾tions on how to use the SCID-5-CV effectively and accurately.
As they have been for clinical disorders (e.g., disorders classified on Axis I in DSM￾IV), semistructured interviews have been developed to diagnose personality disorders 
(formerly classified on Axis II in DSM-IV and DSM-5). In addition to these interview 
instruments, numerous self-administered tests have been developed that measure differ￾ent dimensions of personality, both in general and clinical populations. These include 
the Revised NEO Personality Inventory (Costa & McCrae, 1992), the Millon Clinical 
Multiaxial Inventory–III (Millon, Millon, Davis, & Grossmann, 1994; Craig, 2008), 
and the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory–2 (Butcher, Dahlstrom, Graham, 
Tellegen, & Kaemmer, 1989; Drayton, 2009). These self-administered tests are not con￾sidered further here, because their relevance for rehabilitation of persons with psychiatric 
disabilities remains to be determined.110 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
SEVERITY OF PSYCHIATRIC SYMPTOMS
Diagnosis is not equivalent with severity of psychiatric symptoms. One person diagnosed 
with schizophrenia can have significant hallucinations, while another has no evidence of 
hearing voices. Severity can also change within the person; one person hears voices of her 
dead mother when psychosis is acute, but these voices remit altogether when psychosis 
wanes. Symptom assessments provide one important outcome by which to measure the 
success of psychiatric treatment and rehabilitation. Although treatment and rehabilita￾tion efforts may not eliminate psychiatric disabilities altogether, they may be successful at 
reducing severity and some of the personal suffering associated with them. Therefore, it 
is important to be able to assess symptom severity, in order to identify whether a person 
needs help managing symptoms and to evaluate whether interventions are successful in 
reducing their harm.
A wide range of instruments has been developed to evaluate the severity of psychi￾atric symptoms. In general, these instruments are divided into self-report and interview￾based strategies. Self-report measures often provide valid measures on the severity of 
mood problems in persons with psychiatric disabilities. The Beck Depression Inventory–
II (BDI-II; Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996; Beck, Steer, & Carbin, 1988; Wang & Goren￾stein, 2013) has been shown to be a very accurate measurement of depression. However, 
self-report instruments are less useful for measuring psychotic symptoms or negative 
symptoms. Self-report instruments that query people about frequency and distress associ￾ated with psychotic symptoms, such as the Symptom Checklist–90—Revised (Derogatis, 
1977; Müller, Postert, Beyer, Furniss, & Achtergarde, 2010), tend to produce general 
measures of distress but not independent measures of the severity of psychotic symptoms.
Psychiatric rating scales based on semistructured interviews have been developed in 
order to provide an objective measure of common symptoms. These scales vary from 20 
to 50 specifically defined items, each rated on a severity scale with 5 to 7 points. Some 
scales have been developed to measure the full range of psychiatric symptoms, such as 
the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (Lukoff, Nuechterlein, & Ventura, 1986; Leucht et al., 
2005) and the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (Kay, Fiszbein, & Opler, 1987); oth￾ers have been designed to tap specific dimensions, such as the Scale for the Assessment of 
Negative Symptoms (Andreasen, 1984; Rabany, Weiser, Werbeloff, & Levkovitz, 2011) 
and the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (Hamilton, 1960; Zimmerman, Martinez, 
Young, Chelminski, & Dalrymple, 2013).
Interview-based psychiatric rating scales typically include a combination of symp￾tom ratings elicited through direct questioning and symptoms observed in the course of 
the interview. For example, depression is rated on the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale by 
asking questions such as “What has your mood been lately?” and “Have you been feeling 
down?” Item responses can either be added up for an overall index of symptom severity 
or summarized in subscale scores corresponding to symptom dimensions such as nega￾tive, positive, and affective symptoms.
Substance Abuse
Substance use disorders are among the most common comorbid disorders for people 
with psychiatric disabilities (see Chapter 16). Substance use has a wide range of different 
effects, including relapses and rehospitalizations; legal, economic, and family problems; 
and increased vulnerability to infectious diseases (Drake & Brunette, 1998). Because 
people with psychiatric disabilities are more likely to experience adverse consequences of 5. Assessment 111
using small amounts of alcohol and drugs, instruments developed for detecting substance 
use in the general population tend to be of limited value (Carey & Correia, 1998; Corse, 
Hirschinger, & Zanis, 1995). In recent years, a number of instruments have been devel￾oped specifically to assess substance use disorders. These include screening instruments, 
diagnostic instruments, descriptive instruments, and measures of engagement and prog￾ress in substance use treatment (Bo, Hai, Chen, & Hammock, 2021; Ezard et al., 2011).
Trauma
Many people with psychiatric disabilities are more likely to experience traumatic events 
throughout their lives, both before and after onset of their mental illness (Goodman, 
Rosenberg, Mueser, & Drake, 1997). As discussed in Chapters 1 and 3, traumatic events 
such as physical and sexual assault can have a devastating effect on people’s lives, and 
include triggering relapses and hospitalizations in people with major mental illness 
(Goodman et al., 2001). In addition, exposure to traumatic events may lead to specific 
syndromes that are associated with high levels of suffering and distress, such as PTSD 
(Brady, Kileen, Brewerton, & Lucerini, 2000; Breslau, 2002). Many different instruments 
have been employed for assessing trauma exposure and PTSD in people with psychiatric 
disabilities. Most of these come from research conducted in the general population, with 
some adaptations (Goodman et al., 1999; Meyer, Muenzenmaier, Cancienne, & Struen￾ing, 1996; Lenz & Luo, 2019; Mueser et al., 2001). In many settings, a brief trauma 
screen and a self-report checklist of PTSD symptoms are sufficient to identify people 
likely to have a diagnosis of PTSD. A screening assessment should be followed up with a 
direct interview. Although self-report questionnaires alone cannot be used to establish a 
diagnosis of PTSD, they can be very useful for monitoring the effects of treatment.
Assessing the Community
Assessment strategies reflecting community-level factors—the community per se and the 
service system—are less developed than for individuals. In part, this situation reflects the 
lingering notion that psychiatric disability is an individual’s problem and so is addressed 
by understanding the individual. As providers realize that the bidirectional nature of ser￾vices best promotes recovery and goal attainment though rehabilitation, the profession 
will develop and test better measures of community. With that said, there are strategies 
for measuring the domains of assessment outlined in Table 5.1. Some are relatively new, 
while others have a better record of evaluation. These methods are reviewed here in 
regard to the community per se and the service system. Some are discrete assessments, 
like many of the paper-and-pencil measures reviewed in the discussion of individual 
assessment measures. Many, however, are strategies suggesting how key concepts of the 
community might be measured.
Assessing the Community Per Se
Most people seek goals embedded within their community; therefore, making sense of 
goals in terms of specific community contexts is one important step in assessment. The 
broad term for this process is task analysis, or job analysis, when specifically applied to 
the employment sphere. Moreover, just as a person has resources and supports that facili￾tate the pursuit and attainment of goals, so the community needs to furnish resources 
and supports. Strategic assessment may help to identify available resources and supports, 112 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
as well as directions for future development. Assessment of community prejudice and dis￾crimination that undermine the pursuit of goals has a fair-size research literature. More￾over, community endorsement of affirming attitudes has also generated measures, though 
assessment of affirming behaviors is less formalized. Truly macro-level assessments such 
as economic indicators and government activity have clear relevance for affecting per￾sonal goals, but this arena is new and not well developed.
TASK ANALYSES
Task analyses are a family of strategies that define specific roles in particular contexts, in 
order to inform people about benefits of these roles. Task analyses, for example, may be 
done so that a person better understands the demands of specific employment positions 
or housing options. Job analyses are task analyses specifically intended to help persons 
with vocational goals. Although rehabilitation providers have touted the advantages of 
job analyses (Brodwin et al., 1992; Rubin & Roessler, 2008), this assessment approach 
has largely emerged from industrial/organizational psychology (Brannick, Levine, & 
Morgeson, 2007).
A job analysis answers several questions: Why does a job exist? What physical and 
mental activities does the worker need? When and where is the job performed? What 
qualifications are needed for the job? These questions may be answered through question￾naires and interviews with people in these positions, as well as their supervisors. Obser￾vation of workers on the job also provides useful information (Aggarwal & Thakur, 
2013). At present, rehabilitation providers seem to accomplish this task informally. For 
example, why might people placed at the local discount store on Main Street be quitting 
their jobs after a short time? Job analyses might reveal some unexpected aspects of this 
work setting such as starting time or amount of interaction with customers.
RESOURCES AND SUPPORTS
Community assessment seeks to identify resources of which people with disabilities are 
unaware. For vocational goals, this means a list of businesses that have actively pro￾vided accommodations to people with disabilities. Job developers often have this kind of 
informal list: “I know the discount chain store on Main Street is receptive to hiring and 
working with people with mental illness.” Rehabilitation programs, especially in large 
urban areas, may have more formal databases that list businesses “friendly” to the goals 
of people with mental illness. Most area chambers of commerce are partnered with local 
versions of the U.S. Business Leadership Network (www.usbln.org); these networks are 
groups of employers coming together to meet the needs of people with disabilities who 
wish to return to work. Parallel to this effort is the need for current information regard￾ing job openings. This usually requires multiple informational sources, including various 
news outlets and local job agencies hosted by state or city governments.
Community assessment of two other types of resources may be helpful. Many cit￾ies and towns, especially their parks and recreation departments, provide recreational 
and other civic activities that are relevant to people with psychiatric disabilities. This 
may include rehabilitation providers who are on mailing lists where calendars of events 
are posted. In addition, rehabilitation teams should acquire some sense of the extent 
of the accommodations that cities and towns provide to people with disabilities. Faith￾based communities are an additional source of support and resources for many people 
with disabilities. Again, rehabilitation providers should obtain a list of nearby mosques, 5. Assessment 113
synagogues, temples, and churches, as well as specific contacts within those communities 
who seem friendly to the goals of people with disabilities.
PREJUDICE AND DISCRIMINATION
As discussed in Chapter 2, the public often endorses stereotypes about people with men￾tal illness that are related to prejudice about such people, resulting in discrimination 
(Corrigan, 2005). The short version of the Attribution Questionnaire is a nine-item scale 
that assesses the degree to which the public believes people with mental illness are dan￾gerous or responsible for their illness (Corrigan, Watson, Warpinski, & Garcia, 2004; 
Corrigan, Powell, et al., 2014). The scale provides indices of fear, anger, pity, and dis￾crimination. As also discussed in Chapter 2, relatives of people with mental illness are 
often victimized by stigma (Moses, 2014); however, measures of courtesy stigma are not 
well developed.
AFFIRMING ATTITUDES AND BEHAVIORS
Erasing stigma is not enough; the public needs to endorse affirming attitudes such as 
recovery, empowerment, and self-determination. We discussed assessment of these con￾cepts in regard to individuals earlier in this chapter, but there are brief scales of affirming 
attitudes for the public as well. Called the Recovery Scale (Corrigan, Salzer, et al., 2004), 
the Empowerment Scale (Rogers, Ralph, & Salzer, 2010), and the Self-Determination 
Scale (Michaels et al., 2014), these three- and four-item scales are brief assessments of the 
degree to which a specific group endorses these ideas. One might expect that an employer 
scoring high on the Recovery Scale is more likely to hire a job candidate with a psychiat￾ric disability, and that a psychiatrist scoring high on the Self-Determination Scale is more 
likely to partner with people in the development of their medication plans.
Assessing the Service System
The term service system refers to a complex and interlocking set of providers, programs, 
and entitlements meant to help people with psychiatric disabilities achieve their goals. 
These include psychiatric rehabilitation programs that are especially oriented to the voca￾tional, housing, and health needs of their service recipients. Sometimes a single agency 
has programs meant to address the array of goals; more commonly, a group of agencies 
works together to provide a cogent and effective rehabilitation plan.
Regular assessment of the service system is essential to accomplishing individual 
goals. This assessment includes regular summary of resources and priorities in the local 
community. As suggested earlier, at a minimum, this should be a regular audit of exist￾ing services and specification of their priorities, service areas, and cost structures. As 
reviewed, measuring satisfaction with these services is useful here. In addition, the 
evidence-based programs described in this book typically have well-specified manuals 
defining the steps needed to benefit people with disabilities; as described here, fidelity 
assessments are strategies to determine whether providers are implementing programs 
as intended. Moreover, because recovery is the unifying principle of rehabilitation and 
seems to be the energizing force behind development of contemporary programs, recov￾ery assessments have been developed for providers and administrators. These measures 
examine the extent to which recovery is embraced by specific agencies, as well as whether 
commensurate interventions are in place to help people achieve their recovery goals. 114 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
Many programs have limited impact because they fall short in terms of cultural rel￾evance; hence, yet another important assessment domain described here is cultural com￾petence (see Chapter 4). Finally, programs may fall short because mental health providers 
unintentionally endorse the stigma of mental illness, undermining rehabilitation goals as 
a result (e.g., “Harry shouldn’t try to live on his own. He just got out of the psychiatric 
hospital and will relapse in his own apartment”).
PROGRAM SATISFACTION
Although assessments of program satisfaction are completed by individuals with psychi￾atric disabilities, such assessments reflect the service system and provide valuable infor￾mation for system change (Sohn, Barrett, & Talbert, 2014). Typically, these instruments 
are pencil-and-paper measures on which people report their satisfaction with various 
domains of service: specific interventions, settings, providers, and relevance to personal 
goals (Corrigan, 1990). For example, a measure might ask, “How helpful are the provid￾ers in your supported education program?” Respondents might answer this and similar 
items on a 7-point scale (1 = not at all, 7 = very much). Two cautions about interpreting 
these data: The first has to do with who administers such a measure. Scores may differ 
when satisfaction scales are given by providers rather than peers. People provide less 
candid response when providers for that program administer a satisfaction survey (Gill, 
Pratt, & Librera, 1998). Hence, satisfaction ratings may be more effective when measures 
are administered by the people who are receiving services.
The second caution has to do with a “halo effect.” People who engage in services 
for prolonged periods of time, even services with challenges, are likely to report them 
positively. They do not want to disrespect peers and providers with whom they have inter￾acted for a long time. Unfortunately, viewing everything as positive prevents program 
evaluators from identifying aspects of service that are in need of adjustment. One way to 
avoid this problem is to ask a respondent to compare the program of interest to another 
program in which the person has been involved (Corrigan & Jakus, 1993). For example, 
Ms. Jones might be asked, “For this exercise, I want you to compare the 4th Street Hous￾ing Program to another place you have lived—let’s say the Mortenson Rehab Center. 
On a 7-point scale, how do staff members at Fourth Street compare to the Mortenson 
Rehab Center staff?” The goal here is not to identify a “bad” program to be eliminated 
or “unsatisfactory” staff members to terminate but rather specific directions for change, 
which may require additional training or reallocation of agency resources.
FIDELITY TO EVIDENCE-BASED PROGRAMS
Fidelity instruments are typically checklists on which an observer documents whether 
component aspects of an EBP are being implemented as specified in the manual (Bond, 
Drake, McHugo, Rapp, & Whitley, 2009). SAMHSA’s National Repository of Evidence￾Based Programs and Practices (NREPP) typically lists whether a specific EBP has a fidel￾ity measure; note that SAMHSA ceased the NREPP portal in 2019 during the Trump 
administration. Most of the interventions described in this volume have fidelity assess￾ments. Table 5.2, for example, provides two of the 25 items that assess fidelity in the 
implementation of individual placement and support (IPS; discussed fully in Chapter 11), 
an EBP for supported employment (Bond, Drake, & Becker, 2012, 2020). The fidelity 
scale groups criteria that correspond with key ingredients of IPS: staffing, organization, 
and services. The two items in Table 5.2 represent caseload size and staff specialization. 5. Assessment 115
Fidelity scales specify anchors representing the degree to which each item is achieved. 
Caseload size ranges from having more than 41 in a caseload (scored 1) to an ideal situ￾ation of having 20 or fewer clients (scored 5). Employment specialization anchors range 
from a low in which less than 60% of those doing IPS are employment specialists (scored 
1), to a high in which 96% or more of specialists are providing IPS (scored 5).
Fidelity scales also specify sources for obtaining the data. For example, caseload can 
be judged by reviewing treatment records, interviewing people who are being served, or 
observing team meetings. Although there are strategies for fidelity self-assessment (e.g., 
in which employment specialists evaluate the fidelity of their own IPS program), most 
experts believe that some independent source (an outside observer) needs to check for 
fidelity as well (Bond, 2013; Bond & Drake, 2020; McGrew, White, Stull, & Wright￾Berryman, 2013). Fidelity ratings provide useful information for adjusting programs: 
They indicate what specifically needs to be changed to achieve the positive outcomes 
found in earlier research. For example, let’s say that fidelity ratings of the Mortenson 
Supported Employment Service find caseloads exceeding 35, giving it a low fidelity score. 
In this case, Mortenson’s administrators will need to reconsider job responsibilities and 
program enrollments to yield better ratios.
CULTURAL COMPETENCE AND HUMILITY
As discussed in Chapter 4, research consistently shows that large segments of the popu￾lation are left out of rehabilitation services because programs, and the staff members 
providing them, are not sensitive to the cultures of people they serve. Several measures 
TABLE 5.2. Sample Items for the Individual Placement and Support (IPS) Model 
Fidelity Scale
Criterion Data source Anchors
1. Caseload size: 
Employment 
specialists have 
individual employment 
caseloads. The 
maximum caseload 
for any full-time 
employment specialist 
is 20 or fewer clients.
OBS, DOC, 
INT
1 = ratio of 41 or more clients per employment specialist.
2 = ratio of 31–40 clients per employment specialist.
3 = ratio of 26–30 clients per employment specialist.
4 = ratio of 21–25 clients per employment specialist.
5 = ratio of 20 or fewer clients per employment specialist.
2. Employment 
specialization: 
Employment 
specialists provide only 
employment services.
OBS, DOC, 
INT
1 = employment specialists provide employment services
less than 60% of the time.
2 = employment specialists provide employment services
60–74% of the time.
3 = employment specialists provide employment services
75–89% of the time.
4 = employment specialists provide employment services
90–95% of the time.
5 = employment specialists provide employment services
96% or more of the time.
Note. OBS, observations including team meetings or shadowing employment specialists; DOC, document review 
(including intervention records, as well as agency policies and procedures); INT, interviews with clients, providers, 
or employers.116 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
have been developed to assess cultural competence in three areas: understanding that 
values and beliefs of individual providers influence perception of culture; knowledge that 
cultures and world views differ; and skills that promote culturally sensitive communica￾tion and interventions (Stanhope, Solomon, Pernell-Arnold, Sands, & Bourjolly, 2005). 
Paper-and-pencil instruments are typically administered to providers to get a sense of 
individual cultural competence. The Cross-Cultural Adaptability Scale, for example, is 
a 50-item measure that focuses on components of intercultural effectiveness, such as 
openness to new ideas, cross-cultural empathy, and nonjudgmental attitudes (Kelley & 
Meyers, 1992). There is some concern about measuring cultural competence through self￾report measures, however (Stanhope et al., 2005); providers may be unwilling to offer 
honest responses that might portray them as less than culturally competent. Feedback 
from service recipients can provide useful additional information.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Assessment for rehabilitation planning is a complex process that involves delving into many 
areas. Effective assessment is crucial to identifying the most important rehabilitation goals 
and prioritizing those goals. Familiarity with each domain is needed, since major problems 
in any one can impede progress toward rehabilitation goals. At the same time, one provider 
is unlikely to have all the expertise needed to assess every domain. Teamwork, which is 
necessary for performing a comprehensive assessment, involves not only contributions of a 
multidisciplinary group of providers but also active collaboration with people and their sig￾nificant others. Sharing the responsibilities of assessment and planning, and incorporating 
ongoing assessment into monitoring progress, will ensure that goals and rehabilitation are 
jointly agreed upon and modified as needed over time. 117
CHAPTER 6
Erasing Stigma 
and Promoting Empowerment
Erasing the harmful eff ects of mental illness stigma has become a major 
public health agenda (Rüsch, 2023). Nationwide programs have been launched in Aus￾tralia, Canada, and several member states of the European Union (Thornicroft et al., 
2022). Antistigma programs from 14 countries in the Americas, Africa, Asia, and Europe 
founded the Global Anti- Stigma Alliance (GASA; http://antistigma.global) in 2012 as a 
platform for exchange. The U.S. government’s eff orts are largely led by SAMHSA. These 
programs have served as laboratories for identifying and developing interventions meant 
to replace the stigma of mental illness with affi rming attitudes. Three approaches are 
reviewed in this chapter: strategies (1) for persons with psychiatric disabilities to chal￾lenge self- stigma and promote empowerment; (2) for advocates to erase public stigma and 
enhance community integration; and (3) for the community to replace social structures 
that promote discrimination with ones that foster affi rmative action.
CHALLENGING SELF- STIGMA
Five approaches to addressing self- stigma have been developed and researched, along 
with evidence about their effi cacy and eff ectiveness (Alonso, Guillén, & Muñoz, 2019):
1. Self- stigma has been framed as a set of irrational cognitive schemas resulting 
from internalized prejudice. Cognitive therapy has been used to challenge the 
irrational self- statements that emerge from these schemas.
2. Self- stigma can be seen as factually wrong, since the conviction that “I must be 
incompetent, because I have a mental illness” is not based on facts. Therefore, 
psychoeducational approaches have been used to educate people with mental ill￾ness about their condition and thus reduce self- stigma.
3. Self- stigma can be associated with a negative, defi cit- focused biographical story 
people tell about themselves. Therefore, narrative strategies have been developed 
to help people develop more positive, recovery- centered stories about themselves. 
CHAPTER 6118 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
An intervention that combines narrative and cognitive elements is reviewed in 
this chapter.
4. Self-stigma may be influenced by a person’s decision about whether to disclose 
their mental health experience. Strategic approaches to making the decision and 
to disclosing are reviewed.
5. Fostering personal empowerment reduces self-stigma.
Each of these five strategies is reviewed more fully below.
Facilitating Change in Self-Stigmatizing Cognitive Schemas
Self-stigma may be understood as a group of maladaptive self-statements or cognitive 
schemas that have developed largely as a result of socialization: A person first learns men￾tal illness prejudice, and subsequently internalizes it when the person is labeled as having 
a mental illness. Interpersonal differences in cognitive schemas may help explain why, 
given the same social situation, one person feels significantly “stigmatized”; a second may 
not feel stigmatized; and a third is motivated to act against the stigma. The adverse effects 
of stigma are “located” not only in the social situation but also in the cognitive processes 
of the stigmatized individual—that is, an individual’s perceiving and understanding the 
social situation in such a way that disrespectful messages emerge (Rüsch, 2023).
As summarized in Chapter 13, cognitive therapy has been shown to be an effective 
strategy for helping people change cognitive schemas that lead to anxiety, depression, 
and other consequences of self-stigma. Although some readers may be concerned that 
people with serious psychiatric disorders might not benefit from cognitive therapy, British 
researchers have documented its benefits for psychotic disorders (Kingdon & Turkington, 
2019). This approach targets distressing psychotic symptoms and maladaptive under￾standings of mental illness within a collaborative empirical framework. A therapist helps 
a person explore their distressing and often delusional cognitions—attempting to reframe 
them as beliefs rather than facts, empathetically discussing how the person might have 
arrived at such beliefs (but also recognizing their emotional costs), reviewing evidence 
for and against the beliefs, and trying to find less distressing alternative interpretations 
(Agbor et al., 2022). The cognitive approach has been expanded beyond the content 
of psychotic symptoms by also targeting the person’s catastrophic interpretation of the 
(self-)stigma and shame associated with mental illness. In this view, a self-stigmatizing 
cognition (“Because I have a mental illness, I must be stupid!”) can be questioned, and 
evidence for and against this negative self-concept can be gathered. This approach sounds 
plausible but, unfortunately, two controlled trials failed to show any positive effects 
on self-stigma: Cognitive therapy was not superior to stigma-related psychoeducation 
(Wood, Byrne, Enache, & Morrison, 2018) or to standard treatment (Morrison et al., 
2016). Based on these findings, cognitive strategies alone are unlikely to effectively dimin￾ish self-stigma and its consequences.
Reducing Self-Stigma by Psychoeducation
Similar to education as a strategy against public stigma (discussed later in this chapter), 
education or psychoeducation has been used to reduce self-stigma. The underlying idea is 
that self-stigma is a negative, destructive myth and can be replaced with factual informa￾tion. For example, if a woman believes that she must be stupid because she has a mental 6. Erasing Stigma and Promoting Empowerment 119
illness, this could be corrected by pointing out the fact that many people with mental 
illness at all levels of society are very intelligent.
Lucksted et al. (2011) have organized these strategies into a group-based interven￾tion meant to diminish self-stigma. Called Ending Self-Stigma, the program comprises 
nine sessions and includes lectures, discussion, sharing, skills practice, problem solving, 
and group support. An RCT compared standard treatment to Ending Self-Stigma and 
showed positive intervention effects only in some measures of self-stigma, and none of 
these effects remained significant at follow-up (Lucksted et al., 2017). A more recent trial 
compared Ending Self-Stigma to a general health and wellness psychoeducation that was 
not related to stigma; there was no intervention effect on any self-stigma measures after 
the program or at follow-up (Drapalski, Lucksted, Brown, & Fang, 2021). A large Ger￾man trial compared stigma-related psychoeducation to non-stigma-related psychoeduca￾tion: Among 462 participants with psychosis or depression there was no positive effect 
of stigma-focused psychoeducation on self-stigma (Gaebel, Zäske, et al., 2020). Based on 
these findings, there is no evidence for psychoeducation as a promising strategy to reduce 
self-stigma.
Narrative Approaches
Our self-concept is influenced by the stories we tell ourselves about our lives, our per￾ceived achievements and failures, struggles with disability and recovery, experiences of 
(self-)stigma and shame, ways we find meaning in suffering and illness, and so forth. 
Therefore, narrative approaches support participants to develop a more empowering, 
less deficit-focused story of their lives and help them to find meaning in their history and 
their future. Narrative enhancement and cognitive therapy, developed by Phil Yanos, 
Paul Lysaker, and David Roe in the United States and Israel, integrates narrative, psy￾choeducational, and cognitive strategies to reduce self-stigma; it is a group program and 
comprises 20 sessions. A number of controlled trials found positive effects of the program 
on self-stigma (Roe et al., 2014; Yanos, Roe, West, Smith, & Lysaker, 2012; Yanos et 
al., 2019).
Deciding Whether to Disclose
The marks that specifically signal mental illness are frequently not apparent to the public. 
Unlike race and gender, for example, mental illness usually includes few externally mani￾fested cues signaling that an individual belongs to the stigmatized group. Put another 
way, people with mental illness may be able to escape some of the harm caused by both 
public stigma and self-stigma by not letting other people know that they belong to this 
stigmatized group. One way to avoid stigma is by not disclosing one’s experience with 
mental illness and mental health services. Concluding, however, that it is best to conceal 
one’s psychiatric history suggests that disclosure yields only harm with no benefits. In 
reality, neither the definition of disclosure nor its comparative costs and benefits are 
clear (Quinn, 2018). Moreover, there are few completed studies of disclosure in regard to 
either mental illness stigma or the self-prejudice experienced by other stigmatized groups. 
Despite this limitation, some conclusions can be drawn from the empirical literature 
about the nature of disclosure in other stigmatized groups. After a brief review of this 
literature, we discuss the variety of disclosure options from which a person might select, 
as well as the costs and benefits of these options.120 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
Understanding the Impact of Disclosure
Individuals with a concealable stigma may vary in the ways they choose to disclose. 
To whom people selectively disclose usually depends on the setting, but frequent candi￾dates for disclosure include family members, friends, professional helpers, and/or others 
with the same concealable stigma (Quinn, 2018). Disclosure and nondisclosure can have 
advantages and disadvantages that depend on the social context and on the person who 
decides (not) to disclose. Disclosure can lead not only to stigma and discrimination, but 
also to social support and increased authenticity, and can facilitate help-seeking (Pachan￾kis, 2007; Quinn, 2018). Nondisclosure or secrecy, on the other hand, can protect people 
from stigma, but it can be a burden if people fear that others will find out; it can lead to 
social isolation and makes seeking help more difficult. One study showed that people who 
recognized benefits of being “out” were less likely to experience self-stigma undermining 
their quality of life (Corrigan, Morris, et al., 2010). A study among unemployed people 
with mental health problems assessed their attitudes toward disclosure at baseline: Those 
who did want to disclose to potential employers were less likely to have found a new job 
6 months later, underlining the risks of disclosure (Rüsch et al., 2018). In the same study, 
on the other hand, those who were comfortable with disclosing to family and friends had 
better quality of life 6 months later (Rüsch et al., 2019). Thus, disclosure is neither good 
nor bad, but its consequences depend on the context.
Different Levels of Disclosure
Disclosure varies in several ways. Table 6.1 summarizes five levels of disclosure: social 
avoidance, secrecy, selective disclosure, indiscriminate disclosure, and broadcasting of 
one’s experience (Corrigan & Lundin, 2001). The costs and benefits of each of these types 
of disclosure decisions are also reviewed in Table 6.1.
One way to handle disclosure is social avoidance. Persons can accomplish this by 
avoiding situations where the public may find out about their mental illness; instead, they 
associate only with other persons who have mental illness. In this way, they can avoid 
members of the “normal” population who may disapprove of their disabilities. Unfortu￾nately, there are several disadvantages to social avoidance. Persons who choose to avoid 
the “normal” world lose out on all the benefits it brings: free access to a broader set of 
opportunities, and citizens who support their experience with mental illness (Corrigan & 
Lundin, 2001). Moreover, social avoidance in some ways promotes stigma and discrimi￾nation: It endorses the idea that persons with mental illness should be kept away from 
the rest of the world.
There is no need to avoid work or community situations to keep one’s experiences 
with mental illness secret; secrecy is the second way of handling disclosure. Many per￾sons choose to enter these situations but not to share their experiences with others. 
They keep all aspects of their psychiatric experiences—both the impact of their illness 
and the interactions with the mental health system—private. Such persons may need to 
fill in some gaps in their past and current experience. Employment résumés may have 
blank years when they were hospitalized or otherwise unable to work. Consider, for 
example, Tamiko’s experience: For 2 years, between discharge from the Navy (where 
she served in computer operations) and her 26th birthday, she had been in and out of 
hospitals for depression. Instead of leaving these years blank on her résumé, she wrote, 
“Advanced training in computers.” When asked during job interviews what this training 
meant, she truthfully discussed the adult education courses she had completed in systems 6. Erasing Stigma and Promoting Empowerment 121
management during these periods. She did not, however, talk about how these courses 
were interspersed with psychiatric hospitalizations.
Keeping experiences with mental illness secret prevents persons from availing them￾selves of the support and resources of possibly empathetic others if these friends and/or 
colleagues learn of the illness. Hence, many people decide to selectively disclose their 
experiences with mental illness stigma—that is, to disclose to a limited number of other 
people. However, choosing to disclose only to some people has its risks. Those who 
find out may shun the persons after disclosure; that is, the targets of disclosure may 
decide that they do not want to work with, live near, or otherwise associate with “mental 
patients.” With the risk comes opportunity, however. Persons who disclose may find that 
their targets are supportive. Moreover, individuals with mental illness will not have to 
worry about keeping their secret when near those to whom they have disclosed. Also, the 
decision to disclose to someone does not mean that one must tell everything; choosing 
to disclose does not have to result in giving up all privacy. This includes decisions about 
TABLE 6.1. Five Ways to Disclose or Not Disclose
1. Social avoidance
The individual altogether avoids persons and places that may stigmatize or otherwise disrespect the 
person because of their mental illness.
Benefit: The person does not encounter others who will unfairly harm them.
Cost: The person loses the opportunity to meet new people who possibly may be supportive.
2. Secrecy
The individual does not tell people at places where they work or live about their mental illness.
Benefit: As in social avoidance, the person withholds information from others they do not know or 
trust. But the person does not have to avoid important settings like work or the community in the 
process.
Cost: Some people feel guilty about keeping secrets.
3. Selective disclosure
The individual tells some people they believe will be supportive about their mental illness.
Benefit: The person finds a small group of people who will understand their experiences and provide 
support.
Cost: The person may disclose to some people who will hurt them with the information. The person 
may have difficulty keeping track of who does and does not know.
4. Indiscriminate disclosure
The individual is not concerned with who knows about their mental illness. The person tells anyone 
they encounter when the topic comes up.
Benefit: The person does not worry about who knows about their problems. And the person is likely 
to find people who will be supportive.
Cost: The person is likely to tell people who will hurt them with the information.
5. Broadcasting of experience
The individual purposefully communicates their experiences with mental illness to a large group.
Benefit: The person does not have to worry about who knows about their history of mental illness. 
They are promoting a personal sense of empowerment and are striking a blow against stigma.
Cost: The person can encounter people who may try to hurt them with this information. They are also 
going to meet people who disapprove of the political statement.122 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
one’s past experiences with mental illness, as well as current encounters with the mental 
health system. Still, selective disclosure means that there are some people with whom 
information is shared and others from whom information remains a secret (Corrigan & 
Lundin, 2001). More than likely, the group of those who are not privy to the secret is 
much larger than the group of those who are informed; in this case, there remain a large 
number of people of whom the individuals with mental illness need to be wary.
People who choose indiscriminate disclosure abandon the secrecy. They no longer 
worry about who finds out about their mental illness or treatment history. People choos￾ing this option are relieved of the burden posed by keeping part of their lives under￾ground. Although they are no longer trying to hide their mental illness, individuals opt￾ing for indiscriminate disclosure are not actively seeking ways to inform others about 
their psychiatric experiences.
Broadcasting one’s experience means educating people about mental illness. This 
method has the same benefits as indiscriminate disclosure. Moreover, people who choose 
to broadcast seem to derive an additional benefit: It fosters their sense of power over the 
experience of mental illness and stigma. This kind of consciousness raising may help 
both the person and others understand that problems with mental illness are not solely a 
function of biological limitations; society’s reactions are also to blame. Shouting this out 
diminishes community oppression. In fact, many people who choose to broadcast their 
experiences wish to surpass the limited goal of talking about their mental illness. They 
also want to express their dissatisfaction with the way they have been treated because 
they have a mental illness.
Broadcasting experiences will yield hostile responses, as will indiscriminate disclo￾sure. Members of the general public hearing someone’s story about mental illness fre￾quently battle both the message and the messenger. Civil rights leaders have experienced 
such reactions for decades; challenging messages from racial groups outside the main￾stream about economic inequality and political injustice upset the status quo. In a simi￾lar manner, talking about one’s mental illness and displeasure with society’s reaction is 
disquieting. Citizens without mental illness may rebel against the messenger with angry 
denials. Once again, individuals opting to broadcast their experiences need to evaluate 
whether they are able to cope with the angry responses. Some persons who choose to 
broadcast their experiences join advocacy groups for support and guidance. The influ￾ence of these kinds of groups is discussed more fully in the section “Fostering Personal 
Empowerment.”
Considering the Costs and Benefits of Disclosure
As suggested in the preceding discussion, there are both costs and benefits to disclosing 
one’s experiences with mental illness (Corrigan & Lundin, 2001; Quinn, 2018). Given 
this list of positive and negative outcomes, the choices of whether and, if so, how to dis￾close are not decisions that all people stigmatized with mental illness should pursue in a 
set manner. Some people first carefully consider all the benefits of choosing to disclose 
their mental illness, listing as many as they can think of. They then write down the costs. 
Others just start writing down costs and benefits as these come to mind until they are 
all listed. Frequently, cost and benefit columns are divided into short- and long-term sec￾tions. The impacts of costs and benefits are sometimes relatively immediate and at other 
times delayed. Generally, people tend to be more influenced by short-term costs and ben￾efits; however, long-term costs and benefits frequently have greater implications for the 
future. Costs and benefits also vary by situation: Disclosing is significantly different at 6. Erasing Stigma and Promoting Empowerment 123
work than it is with neighbors or softball teammates. A person could conceivably decide 
to tell persons at work but not in the neighborhood, or to tell close friends but not their 
pastor or other religious leader. Hence, the costs and benefits of disclosing need to be 
listed separately for each setting.
The Honest, Open, Proud program (formerly known as Coming Out Proud) is a 
standardized program meant to help people challenge the self-stigma of mental illness 
(Corrigan, Kosyluk, & Rüsch, 2013; Rüsch & Kösters, 2021; Scior, Rüsch, White, & 
Corrigan, 2020). Led by people with mental illness, this four-session program helps par￾ticipants consider the pros and cons of disclosing, levels of disclosure from social avoid￾ance and secrecy to broadcasting as outlined earlier, relatively safe ways of coming out, 
and formats for telling their stories, followed by a booster session. A meta-analysis of 
five RCTs showed significant benefits of Honest, Open, Proud in terms of reduced stigma 
stress and self-stigma (Rüsch & Kösters, 2021).
Disclosing a mental illness is a difficult decision to make alone. Since there are so 
many factors to take into consideration, it is hard for one person to weigh the pluses and 
minuses calmly and rationally. Hence, some individuals may want to consider the judg￾ment and advice of others before plunging into disclosure. Family members may be good 
sources of advice. They may understand the benefits of disclosure and provide emotional 
support through the process. Friends with mental illness, especially those who have dis￾closed their status themselves, may offer positive advice or possibly warnings, depending 
on their experience with disclosing a mental illness. Those who are advocates and have 
succeeded in organizations like NAMI will probably advise persons to tell. Those who 
have had failures on account of disclosure, such as loss of a job or failure of a marriage, 
might tell people to keep their lips sealed.
Fostering Personal Empowerment
Another approach to changing self-stigma builds on a point about self-stigma made ear￾lier in this chapter: Personal empowerment is the opposite of self-stigma. Being empow￾ered means having control over one’s treatment and one’s life (WHO Regional Office 
for Europe, 2010). Persons who have a strong sense of personal empowerment can be 
expected to have high self-efficacy and self-esteem. They are not overwhelmed by their 
symptoms and psychiatric labels, but have a positive outlook and take an active role in 
their recovery. Empowerment approaches may be considered among the best ways to deal 
with self-stigma. Communities and health service providers can foster personal empow￾erment among persons with psychiatric disabilities in a variety of ways that involve giving 
persons greater control over their own treatment and integration into the community. 
Research findings indicate that programs in which persons with disabilities are included 
in all facets of intervention are conducive to the attainment of vocational and indepen￾dent living goals (Corrigan, Angell, et al., 2012).
At the most general level, fostering empowerment involves adopting a collaborative 
approach to treatment planning in which a person ceases to be merely a passive recipi￾ent of services (Corrigan, Angell, et al., 2012). At the very least, programs and providers 
should form treatment partnerships with their patients, seeking feedback from the service 
users as to their satisfaction with the services offered and their suggestions for improve￾ment. The emphasis is based on the service users’ strengths and potential rather than 
their weaknesses. Beyond this, truly empowering services promote the self-determination 
of people with psychiatric disabilities in relation to employment opportunities, housing, 
and other areas of social life. Rather than promote stigmatizing and coercive removal 124 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
from the community, these new approaches provide community-based support for the 
people’s continuing efforts to adapt to community living. This approach often occurs in 
the assertive community treatment (ACT) of Test and Stein (1980). In ACT, services are 
brought directly to a person’s home, workplace, or other meaningful community setting 
(see Chapter 8). Supported employment and supported education are also methods used 
to facilitate the inclusion of persons with disabilities into the fabric of society (Modini et 
al., 2016). These approaches, which were given increased priority with the passage of the 
ADA in 1990, encourage the prompt placement of such persons into employment and/or 
educational settings and provide supportive services for their continuing success in these 
activities. This approach contrasts with traditional paradigms that focus on preparing
persons with psychiatric disabilities for independent social functioning before supporting
them in actual community involvement. People can also empower themselves by offering 
peer support. The role of peer services is discussed more fully in Chapter 17.
The Paradox of Trying to Fix Self-Stigma
There is a paradox in trying to change self-stigma, of which service providers and advo￾cates need to be wary. Namely, focusing on self-stigma may frame prejudice and discrimi￾nation as problems solely of people with mental illness (Corrigan, 2018; Rüsch, 2023). 
Like the disabilities that arise from their illness, stigma may be viewed as another unfor￾tunate result of having mental illness with which such people must learn to live. This kind 
of perspective may ignore the public’s responsibility in creating and maintaining stigma. 
Although there is value in helping users of mental health services and others victimized 
by stigma learn how to deal with its harm for themselves, such efforts should not release 
the public from its responsibility for eradicating stigma. Link, Mirotznik, and Cullen 
(1991) have argued that because stigma is powerfully reinforced by culture, its effects 
are not easily overcome by the coping actions of individuals. They conclude that label￾ing and stigma are “social problems” that need to be addressed by public approaches, 
not “individual troubles” to be addressed solely in personal/private therapies. Although 
Link et al.’s formulation risks being one-sided in limiting itself to interventions aimed 
only at society at large (research supports the conclusion that both individual-level and 
societal-level interventions can be useful), it is true that the self-stigma experienced by 
some people with mental illness is less likely to go away if the public as a whole refuses to 
nurture stereotypes, prejudice, and discrimination.
ERASING PUBLIC STIGMA
Corrigan and Penn (1999) have grouped the various approaches to changing the public 
stigma of mental illness into three processes: protest, education, and contact. We discuss 
these processes first.
Protest
Protest strategies highlight the injustice of specific stigmas and lead to a moral appeal for 
people to stop thinking that way: In effect, “Shame on you for holding such disrespectful 
ideas about people with mental illness!” Ironically, this kind of attitude suppression may 
yield a rebound effect, so that prejudices about a group remain unchanged or actually 
become worse (Penn & Corrigan, 2002). Although there are both cognitive and social 6. Erasing Stigma and Promoting Empowerment 125
explanations for this kind of rebound, perhaps the simplest is the construct of psycho￾logical reactance (Brehm, 1966): “Don’t tell me what to think!” Hence, protest may have 
only limited effectiveness in changing public attitudes about people with mental illness.
This does not mean that protest has no role in decreasing stigma. There is largely 
anecdotal evidence that protest can change some behaviors significantly. For example, 
NAMI StigmaBusters is an email alert system that notifies members about stigmatizing 
representations of persons with mental illness in the media, and provides instructions 
on how to contact offending organizations and their sponsors. Through StigmaBusters, 
NAMI has successfully convinced various media groups to curtail using disrespectful 
images of mental illness in promoting their products. This suggests that organized protest 
can be a useful tool for convincing television networks, movie producers, advertisers, and 
others to stop running stigmatizing programs, ads, and articles, rather than alienate an 
important sales demographic.
Future research might examine the extent to which protest is effective as a punishing 
consequence to discriminatory behavior—in other words, the extent to which it decreases 
the likelihood that people will repeat this behavior. Research might also consider other 
types of punishing consequences, such as legal penalties prescribed by the ADA and the 
Fair Housing Act. For example, what is the effect of judgments ordering punitive damages 
to be paid by employers who discriminate in hiring individuals with mental illness, or 
penalties to be assessed against communities that have designed zoning laws to keep group 
homes for persons with mental illness out? It is important to keep in mind that these are 
rare phenomena indeed (Stefan, 2001). Do such penalties prevent future discrimination? 
In like manner, research might examine reinforcing consequences to affirmative actions 
that undermine stigma and encourage more public opportunities for people with mental 
illness (e.g., government tax credits for employers who hire and provide reasonable accom￾modations to people with psychiatric disabilities). The importance of affirmative action is 
discussed more fully in the section of this chapter on addressing structural stigma.
Education
Educational approaches to decreasing stigma contrast myths with facts about mental ill￾ness. Educational strategies aimed at reducing mental illness stigma have used public ser￾vice announcements, books, flyers, movies, videos, and other audiovisual aids to dispel 
myths about mental illness and replace them with facts (Corrigan, 2018). The educational 
approach is optimistic: It assumes that as soon as people know non-stigmatizing facts, 
they will no longer endorse prejudicial attitudes or discriminate against people with men￾tal illness. However, there are a number of problems (Corrigan, 2018): First, educational 
approaches often have low penetration rates (i.e., they do not reach a large proportion of 
the audience unless they are implemented for everyone as part of a school curriculum or 
the like). Second, there is information overload, which means that most people receive so 
much information or pseudoinformation online or offline that an additional hour or two 
of antistigma education may not have an impact. Third, there is the aforementioned psy￾chological reactance, because similar to protest, education tends to tell people what they 
should think. Fourth, the message of educational campaigns is hard to determine: Should 
people feel pity for the poor mentally ill? Should people be taught that it is “normal” to 
have a mental illness? Or should the message be that we are all on a continuum between 
complete mental health and severe mental illness? While the latter is true, evidence so far 
is lacking that this message effectively reduces stigma (Helmus, Schaars, Wierenga, de 
Glint, & van Os, 2019). Fifth, if education were helpful, mental health care professionals 126 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
should be free of negative attitudes toward their patients. However, this is not the case 
(Henderson et al., 2014). Finally, there are a number of educational interventions that 
have no or only a negligible effect on public stigma: Examples are Mental Health First 
Aid (Morgan, Ross, & Reavley, 2018) or a broad educational media campaign in the Ger￾man city of Hamburg (Makowski et al., 2016).
Contact
Contact has long been considered an effective means for reducing intergroup prejudice. In 
formalizing the contact hypothesis, Allport (1954) contended—and more recent research 
supports his contention (Pettigrew & Tropp, 2008)—that “optimal” contact interven￾tions must contain four elements:
1. Equal status between groups. In the contact situation, neither the minority nor 
the majority group members should occupy a higher status; that is, neither group should 
be in charge. This differs from the type of contact that members of certain power groups 
typically have with persons with mental illness (e.g., doctor–patient, landlord–tenant, 
employer–employee).
2. Common goals. Both groups should be working toward the same ends. Some 
studies of “optimal” contact have used contrived tasks, such as completing a puzzle. In 
more natural settings, tasks might include working together on a community project or 
solving a neighborhood problem.
3. No competition. The tone of the contact should be a joint effort, not a competi￾tive one.
4. Authoritative sanction for the contact. This might mean that the contact inter￾vention is sponsored or endorsed by the management of an employment organization, or 
by particular community organizations (e.g., the community’s board of education or the 
Better Business Bureau).
Contact’s benefits are also enhanced when the contact is made with a person who 
moderately disconfirms the stereotypes about their group (Vezzali & Stathi, 2021). Indi￾viduals who strongly disconfirm prevailing stereotypes may not be believed as representa￾tives; instead, they may be viewed as “special exceptions.” Conversely, contact with per￾sons who behave in ways consistent with the stereotypes about their group may reinforce 
stigmatizing attitudes or make them worse.
Several studies specifically focusing on contact’s effect on mental illness stigma have 
produced promising findings. One study found that contact with a person with men￾tal illness produced greater improvements in attitudes than protest, education, and con￾trol conditions did (Corrigan, River, et al., 2001). In a subsequent study, contact again 
produced the greatest improvements in participants’ attitudes and willingness to donate 
money to NAMI (Corrigan et al., 2002).
The Evidence Base
Extensive research has been done on the education and contact approaches to public 
stigma change. One review of the literature summarized 79 studies, 13 of which were of 
the most rigorous form (i.e., RCTs). Results of the latter group of studies clearly showed 
that adults who participated in contact had significantly better changes in stigmatizing 6. Erasing Stigma and Promoting Empowerment 127
attitudes and behavioral intentions (Corrigan, Morris, et al., 2012). The summary also 
showed that in vivo contact (in which a person with mental illness met face to face 
with a targeted audience) had significantly better effects than video or online versions. A 
subsequent analysis suggested that benefits of contact were maintained better over time 
than were benefits of education (Corrigan, Michaels, & Morris, 2015). Interestingly, 
adolescents seemed to be affected by education and contact differently: For them, edu￾cation led to better attitude change than did contact, while education and contact had 
similar effects on behavior A more recent meta-analysis has summarized the evidence of 
contact based on approximately 100 studies from 24 countries and about 26,000 partici￾pants (Maunder & White, 2019). Contact had a moderately strong effect on attitudes, 
emotional reactions and behavioral intentions (actual behaviors were rarely assessed). 
Encouragingly, contact with a person with one diagnosis improved attitudes of the target 
group toward people with any mental illness. In this meta-analysis, the type of contact 
(face-to-face, video, online, lecture, etc.) did not affect its efficacy. The positive effects of 
contact remained stable over 4–12 months (Maunder & White, 2019). Another meta￾analysis found positive effects of video-based contact to reduce prejudice among school￾children (Janoušková et al., 2017).
While contact is discussed here as a strategy to reduce public stigma, it may affect 
other forms of stigma too. By definition, people with mental illness take a leading role 
in contact-based interventions, and therefore one could assume that their self-stigma 
diminishes through leading these programs. A Spanish study supports this assumption 
(Martínez-Hidalgo, Lorenzo-Sánchez, López García, & Regadera, 2018). It has been 
debated how contact interventions affect the willingness of those with and without men￾tal illness to fight for social change. But recent data support the optimistic notion that 
contact increases the motivation of both groups to form coalitions and to address struc￾tural discrimination (Reimer et al., 2017).
The Message Matters
Many antistigma campaigns have utilized an educational approach, either by itself or in 
conjunction with protest or contact. And many, hoping to reduce the blame associated 
with mental illness, have focused on a biological model of mental illness. One example 
was NAMI’s “Mental Illness Is a Brain Disease” campaign, which involved distributing 
posters, buttons, and literature that provided information about the biological bases of 
serious mental illnesses. There is evidence that this type of message does reduce blame 
for psychiatric illness. However, framing mental illness in purely biological terms may 
increase other negative attitudes about mental illness (Lebowitz & Appelbaum, 2019). 
The more members of the general public perceive mental illness as a biological or genetic 
disorder, the more they tend to see people with mental illness as different. Biomedical 
illness concepts also increase therapeutic pessimism (Phelan, 2002; Phelan, Cruz-Rojas, 
& Reiff, 2002).
Biological explanations of mental illness may also yield unintended consequences 
by supporting the benevolence stigma—namely, the belief that persons with mental ill￾ness are innocent and child-like, and as such must be taken care of by parental figures. 
Although this type of stigma is well intentioned, it can be disempowering, leading per￾sons with mental illness (and others) to view themselves as different from other people, 
less competent, and less acceptable as friends. Biological explanations may also imply 
that persons with mental illness have no control over their behavior and are therefore 
unpredictable and violent (Lebowitz & Appelbaum, 2019).128 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
In contrast to the biological message, several studies have found that psychosocial 
explanations of mental illness can be effective in both increasing positive images of per￾sons with mental illness and reducing fear. Instead of arguing that mental illness is like 
any other medical illness (Pescosolido et al., 2010), psychosocial explanations of mental 
illness focus on environmental stressors and trauma as causal factors. These may include 
childhood abuse, poverty, loneliness, immigrant or ethnic-minority status, and unem￾ployment or job stress. The idea is to reframe psychiatric symptoms as understandable 
reactions to life events. A study conducted in New Zealand suggested that information 
about psychosocial causes and treatments for mental illness was effective for improving 
attitudes, particularly those related to dangerousness and unpredictability (Read & Law, 
1999). Although this study of educational interventions focusing on a psychosocial model 
did not include a control or comparison group, it does suggest that this type of mes￾sage can be useful for challenging stigma. Combined with the evidence for mixed effects 
of interventions limited to biological explanations, this research supports an approach 
framing mental illness as a disorder with both biological and psychosocial components, 
and emphasizing that people can and do recover from mental illness (Rüsch, 2023).
Clearly, the content of the educational message is important and needs to be tai￾lored to the specific components of stigma and to the specific groups being targeted. For 
example, addressing the biological causes of mental illness with a group of neighborhood 
residents may improve some of their attitudes about persons with mental illness. How￾ever, unless dangerousness is addressed, their willingness to welcome a group home to 
the neighborhood may go unchanged. Conversely, addressing only dangerousness with 
police officers may make them less likely to use undue force but may not influence their 
willingness to assist a crime victim with a mental illness.
Legislators at various levels are other groups making important decisions that may 
limit or expand the opportunities and resources available to persons with mental illness. 
For example, they decide how tax money is distributed among various types of services. 
Research on attributions and helping behavior indicates that people are more willing to 
help and give resources to people whom they do not blame for their problems (Corrigan 
& Watson, 2003). Thus, it might prove most fruitful to focus on a biological message 
when addressing legislators regarding funding for mental health services or health insur￾ance parity. Including information that people with mental illness do recover and lead 
meaningful lives may enhance the positive effect of the message. Clearly, if time and 
resources allow, strategies should address multiple stereotypes. More realistically, the 
content of a message may need to be selectively targeted to the stereotypes most relevant 
to the goals of the intervention.
Efforts at Changing Public Stigma
In recent years, major advocacy groups in the United States, such as NAMI and the 
National Mental Health Association, have launched antistigma campaigns. Other groups, 
including the National Stigma Clearinghouse and the Resource Center to Address Dis￾crimination and Stigma Associated with Mental Illnesses, have made the stigma of men￾tal illness their sole focus. Both federal and state governments have also joined the fray. 
In the past two decades, SAMHSA and NIMH have supported nationwide conferences 
on stigma. SAMHSA produced and disseminated an antistigma kit that included post￾ers and brochures challenging common stereotypes (see Figure 6.1). It funded the Center 
Against Discrimination and Stigma as a national technical support center on mental 
health stigma. It also sponsored the “Erase the Barriers” initiative, an eight-state effort 6. Erasing Stigma and Promoting Empowerment 129
to decrease stigma using public service announcements and public education strategies. 
Several national leaders joined together to form the National Mental Health Awareness 
Campaign (NMHAC), which developed a multilevel effort to challenge stigma. For inter￾national efforts outside the United States, see the earlier comment about GASA.
Now numbering more than 4,000 members, the NAMI StigmaBusters system has 
been an important source of protest, as described earlier. Among its many efforts, the 
StigmaBusters system identifies disrespectful and inaccurate images of mental illness in 
the popular media and coordinates letter-writing campaigns to get producers of these 
images to stop.
In 2004, NAMI (then called the National Alliance for the Mentally Ill) developed 
a contact-based antistigma program called “In Our Own Voice: Living with Mental 
Illness.” Particularly remarkable about this program was its combination of carefully 
crafted exercises and information base, which helped people with mental illness to teach 
civic and other groups about the experience of mental illness. NAMI provided the pro￾gram to law enforcement agencies, schools, businesses, and other community groups. 
Research supports positive effects of In Our Own Voice (Corrigan, Rafacz, et al., 2010).
There are also several examples of state governments using contact to dimin￾ish stigma and enhance consumer empowerment. New York, Florida, and Illinois, for 
instance, arranged formal dialogues between persons with mental illness and mental 
health care professionals as a way to change insidious attitudes in the mental health 
system that undermine empowerment. These dialogues provided a forum for health care 
professionals and their patients to exchange perspectives about mental illness and chal￾lenge latent stigmatizing attitudes. Moreover, the U.S. Center for Mental Health Services 
has an intramural office on consumer empowerment and funds consumer-based, extra￾mural projects that attempt to discount stigma. Many state departments of mental health 
FIGURE 6.1. A frame from the “Change Your Mind” public service announcement produced 
by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA).130 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
hire consumer advocates whose jobs include (among other things) vigilance to misrepre￾sentations of mental health issues.
A Targeted Model of Stigma Change
The campaigns we have just described are just some examples of how education, protest, 
and contact can be used to reduce prejudice and discrimination. The reader should note 
the common feature of these examples that further augments program impact: Each 
program targets a specific group and corresponding attitudes and behaviors for change. 
The NMHAC attempted to increase service use among adolescents who might be expe￾riencing mental health-related problems. NAMI’s StigmaBusters system seeks to stop 
the popular media from perpetuating disrespectful images in its TV shows and movies. 
States have been trying to change entrenched and disempowering attitudes in their men￾tal health systems by pairing people with mental illness with providers. The logic of a 
target-specific approach is all the more compelling when compared to the alternative—a 
generic effort to change the attitudes of the population as a whole. Consider, for example, 
a video promoting the idea that mental illness affects 20% of the citizenry, and hence is 
neither rare nor bizarre. Although this effort would be well intentioned and accurate, 
such a mass appeal would suffer because it is not particularly relevant to specific ele￾ments of the populace. It is unclear who exactly is supposed to take note of this message. 
Moreover, the expected products of such efforts are fuzzy; it is unclear exactly how the 
population should change given the highlighted stereotypes and prejudice. People might 
think, “Okay, so 20% of people in the United States may be mentally ill in their lifetimes. 
Now what should I do about it?”
The goal of improving attitudes about mental illness in general is laudable, yet too 
amorphous to achieve. A targeted approach that focuses on changing specific discrim￾inatory behaviors of specific groups lends itself to the practical outcomes outlined in 
Table 6.2 (Corrigan, 2011b). First, antistigma programs target specific power groups that 
make important decisions about the resources and opportunities available to persons 
with mental illness. These include employers, landlords, police officers, legislators, and 
media executives. Individuals acting out these power roles are significantly influenced by 
institutional and organizational factors (Link & Phelan, 2001) and may be more likely 
to rely on stereotypes about a group than persons in less powerful roles may be. For each 
group, the discriminatory behaviors and corresponding attitudes to be changed should 
be identified. For example, the developers of a campaign may want to address employ￾ers’ unwillingness to hire persons with mental illness. The corresponding attitudes might 
relate to competence and danger to other employees.
Once the target group, behaviors, and attitudes are identified, the most appropri￾ate strategy and content can be selected. Although the effect of protest on attitudes is 
unclear, it seems to be useful for eliminating undesirable behaviors such as the continuing 
portrayal of negative images in the media, as well as discriminatory housing and labor 
practices. Education appears to improve attitudes on a short-term basis and can be imple￾mented relatively inexpensively. Contact appears to be the most promising strategy, espe￾cially when it is structured to include the “optimal” conditions we discussed. However, it 
may be difficult to achieve on a broad scale unless more people become willing to disclose 
their mental illness in work and other social situations. Note that antistigma campaigns 
may employ a combination of strategies to address the attitudes and behaviors of a par￾ticular group. In addition to targeting power groups, campaigns may target groups that 
are hesitant to access services because of stigma (e.g., the NMHAC’s program aimed at 6. Erasing Stigma and Promoting Empowerment 131
teens who might be struggling with mental health issues). The targeted model is useful 
for these programs as well.
CHANGING SOCIAL STRUCTURES
Social scientists who have developed ideas related to institutional and structural factors 
conclude that individual-level strategies for stigma change—education, protest, and con￾tact—are probably not sufficient for remediating prejudice and discrimination, which are 
largely caused by collective variables (Jost, 2019; Link & Phelan, 2001). Education of 
key power groups might have some limited impact on the kinds of intentional biases rep￾resented by institutional discrimination. For example, as suggested, one way to diminish 
legislative actions that unjustly restrict the opportunities of people with mental illness is 
to educate legislators about how their actions are impinging on an important part of their 
constituency. More difficult, however, is altering the course of structural discrimination 
(see Chapter 2 for a discussion of structural stigma). Because the impact is frequently 
unintentional, educational and other individual-level strategies should have no effect on 
structural factors. Instead, various social change strategies that fall under the rubric of 
affirmative action may be relevant for stopping the harm caused by structural discrimina￾tion.
Affirmative Actions
Affirmative actions are a collection of government-approved activities intended to redress 
the disparities that have arisen from historical trends in prejudice and discrimination. 
According to affirmative models, membership in a stigmatized group is added to consid￾erations of an individual’s skills and achievements for access to specific limited opportu￾nities. Perhaps best known and most controversial among affirmative actions are quotas
TABLE 6.2. Targeting in Antistigma Programs
Targets Discriminatory behavior Attitudes
Employers • Fail to hire
• No reasonable accommodation
• View individuals as dangerous
• View individuals as incompetent
Landlords • Fail to lease
• No reasonable accommodation
• View individuals as dangerous
• View individuals as irresponsible
Criminal justice 
professionals
• Unnecessarily coercive
• Fail to use mental health 
services
• View individuals as dangerous
• View individuals as responsible or to 
blame
Policy makers • Insufficient resource allocation
• Unfriendly interpretation of 
regulations
• View individuals as dangerous
• View individuals as responsible or to 
blame
The media • Perpetuation and dissemination 
of stigmatizing images
• View individuals as dangerous
• View individuals as responsible or to 
blame
• View individuals as incompetent
• View individuals as irresponsible132 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
(i.e., requirements that a certain percentage of people given access to a limited oppor￾tunity must be from targeted ethnic or gender groups). For example, some colleges and 
universities have used a prospective student’s minority-ethnic status as an advantage in 
deciding admission. To our knowledge, quotas have not been used in the United States as 
a mechanism to rectify structural discrimination of mental illness.
The ADA, however, seems to be a federal policy that mirrors affirmative goals. ADA 
clauses that prohibit discrimination by employers because of a person’s psychiatric dis￾ability are effective for barring both individual and institutional levels of discrimina￾tion. It is the ADA clause on reasonable accommodations, however, that is an affirma￾tive action at the structural level. Namely, reasonable accommodation gives people with 
psychiatric disabilities (a group that has been traditionally discriminated against in job 
settings) an edge toward keeping their jobs. Table 6.3 provides examples of reasonable 
accommodations for people with psychiatric disabilities. The 1988 amendments to the 
Fair Housing Act offer similar guarantees of reasonable accommodations for people with 
psychiatric disabilities in the housing sector.
Although accommodations reasonably emerge from these statutes, neither businesses 
nor landlords necessarily know how to provide them. Moreover, note that there are statu￾tory limits to reasonable accommodations. Accommodations that place an undue hard￾ship on a business may be excluded. Rehabilitation practitioners play an important role in 
helping people receive these accommodations and in assisting employers in making them 
available. Affirmative actions like these are needed to offset the injustices that continue 
because of structural discrimination against people with mental illness.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Stigma has been portrayed as a major barrier to community integration and personal empow￾erment. Personal empowerment is enhanced by challenging self-stigma. Ways to diminish 
self-stigma include cognitive reframing, which challenges the irrational thoughts on which 
self-stigma is based; education about (self-)stigma; narrative approaches; and strategic deci￾sions to disclose one’s mental health history may also facilitate personal empowerment. Lev￾els of disclosure (or lack of disclosure) include social avoidance, secrecy, selective disclosure, 
indiscriminate disclosure, and broadcasting. Psychosocial approaches that directly chal￾lenge self-stigma are also important for promoting personal empowerment. These include 
fostering a collaborative approach to treatment programming; community-based supported 
services for housing, employment, and education; people with mental illness as providers; 
and consumer-operated services.
Three approaches have been pursued to change the public stigma of mental illness; 
these are essential for promoting community integration. Protest involves appealing to a 
moral or economic authority to ask people to stop prejudice and discrimination; education 
involves contrasting the myths of mental illness with facts; and contact involves challenging 
stigma by facilitating interactions between people with mental illness and the public. Affirma￾tive actions are necessary antistigma programs to challenge both the intentional and uninten￾tional social structures that promote prejudice and discrimination. Given the various causes 
of stigma and the multiple approaches to diminishing it, a comprehensive program will need 
to combine a variety of antistigma approaches.6. Erasing Stigma and Promoting Empowerment 133
TABLE 6.3. Examples of Reasonable Accommodations That May Conceivably Apply 
to the Needs of People with Psychiatric Disabilities
Job restructuring
• Reallocate marginal job functions.
Example: As part of Sally’s secretarial job, she was supposed to shred confidential documents. 
This was not an essential function, and the machine scared her. Therefore, this duty was given to 
someone else.
Sick time
• Permit the use of accrued paid leave or unpaid leave for treatment.
Example: Sarah needs 3 weeks off to recover from a relapse. She has accrued 2 weeks of paid leave, 
so the employer will need to provide another week of unpaid leave.
Modified or part-time schedule
• Change the work schedule.
Example: Harold wants to change his start time from 8:00 A.M. to 9:00 A.M. His medicine makes it 
hard for him to wake on time. He will still work his full 8 hours.
Example: Shirl wants to change her full-time job as a stenographer to half-time, at least for the 
next 6 months. She is not able to handle the demands of a full-time job because of recurring panic 
attacks. Of course, she will be paid for only 4 hours of work each day.
Modified workplace
• Provide room dividers or other soundproofing and visual barriers to decrease distractions.
Example: Office partitions were put around Marty’s desk so that he will not be distracted by the 
sales room.
• Move a person away from noisy machinery or high-traffic areas that may be distracting.
Example: Delores’s office was moved to the back, away from the reception area, so that she will not 
be distracted by visitors.
• Permit an individual to wear headphones that block out distractions.
Example: Molly wears headphones so that she will not be bothered by phones ringing throughout 
the day.
• Allow a person to work at home.
Example: Emily completes much of the computer work for her job at home. In this way, she does 
not have to deal with the social anxiety of working with other employees.
Modified policies
• Change work policies that govern personnel.
Example: Bert is permitted to take detailed notes during sales meetings, even though other staff 
members are not.
Example: Daniel has a soft drink at his work station for the dry mouth that results from his 
medication.
Example: Stanley is permitted to have the radio on in his office. The soft music relaxes him.
Supervision
• Have supervisors adjust feedback style, including changes in communication and extra training 
materials.
Example: Helene receives a daily 10-minute feedback from her supervisor.
Example: Juanita was given illustrated instructions on how to run the packing machine.
• Provide a job coach to offer counseling and support on the job.
Example: Phil is visited on the job by a coach from the local rehabilitation center. The job coach 
provides support and counseling on work-related issues.
 (continued)134 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
TABLE 6.3. (continued)
Reassignment
• Provide a job reassignment to another position whose essential functions more closely parallel the 
skills of the employee with disabilities.
Example: Brunetta was moved from a clerk/typist job to a telephone/reception position because she 
found its required tasks easier.
Note. All these accommodations can be arranged if they do not cause undue hardship for the employer. Based on 
Corrigan and Lundin (2001). 135
CHAPTER 7
Wellness Self- Management 
and Recovery
Helping people learn how to manage their psychiatric disabilities— 
including understanding the nature and treatment of their mental illness, and developing 
strategies for minimizing its impact on their lives—is an important goal of psychiatric 
rehabilitation. A related goal is recovery: While the traditional clinical recovery model 
focused on symptom reduction, the current approach is diff erent. Recovery means that 
people with psychiatric disabilities learn to live a self- determined, hopeful life that is as 
good as possible given the challenges of their illness (Slade, 2009). There are two sides to 
these goals: illness self- management, so that people are better able to manage symptoms 
and disabilities that undermine their aims; and wellness self- management, so that they are 
better able to promote their health and well-being. Illness self- management includes mak￾ing informed treatment decisions, reducing the impact of distressing or otherwise prob￾lematic symptoms, and reducing relapses and rehospitalizations. Absence of illness is never 
enough, however. Wellness self- management focuses on lifestyle choices that promote 
the fullest experience of people’s physical and mental capabilities. Quality of life requires 
both illness management and wellness promotion. More broadly, these two forms of self￾management help people identify and pursue personal goals to develop a physically and 
psychologically healthy lifestyle characterized by hope, optimism, and a sense of purpose. 
Both approaches, illness and wellness self- management, are closely related in practice.
This chapter begins with a review of historical perspectives that have contributed 
to the broad acceptance of both illness and wellness self- management as important con￾cepts, including progress in disease management, health promotion, SDM, and peer 
support. Components of self- management (and the research evidence supporting those 
components) are then reviewed, and several widely used self- management programs are 
described. The chapter ends with brief discussions of mobile health technologies and 
early intervention strategies.
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES
Eff orts to foster the self- management of psychiatric illnesses in persons with psychiatric 
disabilities have their roots in similar eff orts to help people manage chronic medical 
CHAPTER 7136 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
diseases; the strategies that promote health; the SDM movement in medicine; and the rise 
of the mental health recovery movement involving peer support.
Illness Self-Management
Lifelong illnesses such as diabetes, heart disease, and asthma require ongoing care to 
minimize disruptive effects on daily living and prevent premature mortality. For example, 
understanding which foods can dramatically increase blood sugar levels will enable peo￾ple with diabetes to maintain a steady glucose blood level through dietary monitoring. In 
addition, advances in medical technology have improved outcomes of chronic diseases. 
Through regular monitoring of blood glucose levels and daily administration of insulin, 
individuals with diabetes can enjoy normal, long lives. Although an increased under￾standing of the causes of disease and determinants of outcomes has improved long-term 
prognosis, gains from these advances are realized only by teaching people the principles 
of managing their illness and helping them incorporate critical changes into their life￾style. This means teaching individuals about the nature of their diseases, informing them 
about lifestyle changes that may promote better disease management, and teaching them 
how to monitor their illness (and, when possible, self-administer treatments), and know 
when they need to contact treatment providers and others in order to address emergent 
concerns before they become more serious (Dunn & Conard, 2018).
Promoting illness self-management is a natural part of helping professions that strive 
to minimize the impact of a chronic disease on functioning and quality of life. Manage￾ment of psychiatric disabilities has evolved to incorporate teaching self-management as a 
core part of treatment (Whiteman, Naslund, DiNapoli, Bruce, & Bartels, 2016). Rehabil￾itation providers help persons with psychiatric disabilities learn about their mental illness 
and ways to deal with it more effectively. A systematic review of illness self-management 
programs for people with severe mental illness found 37 RCTs of mainly clinician-led, 
group-based interventions of various length: On average, these programs had significant 
positive effects on psychiatric symptoms and the length of hospital admissions, as well as 
on hope, recovery, empowerment and self-efficacy (Lean et al., 2019).
Wellness Self-Management
A focus on wellness emerged in the 19th century as a reaction to medicine’s focus on dis￾ease—a focus that represented humankind as broken and ill rather than whole and able. 
The idea of wellness is often credited to Halbert Dunn, who highlighted the importance 
of fitness, environment, and self-responsibility in fully understanding health (Miller, 
2005). Dunn may have been the first to assert that the absence of sickness does not make 
a fully lived life. Health promotion is a parallel vision that emerged out of public health. 
Scholars have recently begun to apply wellness to the experiences and goals of people 
with mental illness (Swarbrick, Gill, & Pratt, 2016; Zechner, Pratt, Barrett, Dreker, & 
Santos, 2019). Wellness in mental health seeks to integrate aspects of prevention, educa￾tion, and health. Wellness also focuses on modifying health risks such as smoking, poor 
diet, and little physical activity. Researchers are partnering with providers to develop 
programs meant to remedy these health risks (Zechner et al., 2019).
Wellness management parallels illness management in some ways (Mueser & Cook, 
2013; Salerno et al., 2011). They both use structured curricula that address recovery, 
relapse, coping, and social supports. These goals are furthered by the provision of facts 
about mental health problems, about medication and other treatments, and about the 
development of personal goals. Wellness management differs from illness management 7. Wellness Self-Management and Recovery 137
by including purposeful instruction and skills focused on practical issues related to 
diet, exercise, relationships, and recreation. Positive psychology, or the study of what is 
“right” about people, plays an important role here too. Researchers in this area seek to 
understand what helps people and their communities thrive (Ciarrochi, Hayes, Oades, 
& Hofmann, 2021). A key idea is that mental wellness is more than the absence of men￾tal illness. Investigators have identified principles and practices that promote positive 
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Jerome Hicks Developed a Psychiatric Disorder
Jerome was in his first year of college when he began to have difficulties concentrating and 
started to withdraw from others. According to his family, Jerome just “wasn’t his usual self.” 
Their concerns increased when he performed poorly during his first semester. When his 
parents tried to talk to Jerome about his problems, he seemed suspicious. These concerns 
were only amplified when Jerome stopped going to classes the following semester, confid￾ing to friends that his dormitory room had been bugged and his roommate could read his 
thoughts. School officials contacted Jerome’s parents and explained that he needed to see 
a doctor because he was experiencing psychological problems at school. Jerome refused 
to accept the referral, insisting that there was a conspiracy against him. Eventually Jerome 
stopped eating because he thought his food was poisoned, and he was involuntarily hospi￾talized.
In the hospital, Jerome was diagnosed with schizophreniform disorder and was 
informed that medication was an important part of his treatment. It took several weeks for 
his psychotic symptoms to improve; he was then discharged from the hospital and given 
an appointment at his local community mental health center. Jerome decided he would not 
return to school at this time because it was too late to get his second semester back on 
track, so he returned home to live with his parents.
Jerome missed his appointment at the community mental health center. When his 
behavior once again became disorganized and psychotic, his family escorted him to the 
center to meet with the doctor. Jerome was given a prescription for a new antipsychotic 
medication and was reminded that taking it was an important part of his treatment. He 
was also assigned a care coordinator who met with him to determine his needs and goals. 
Jerome told his care coordinator that he was interested in returning to school at some point, 
but felt he needed to get his “affairs in order” before that time. The care coordinator sug￾gested that he participate in a social rehabilitation group at the center before returning to 
school, which Jerome noncommittally agreed to do.
In subsequent months, Jerome continued to be inconsistent in taking medication, dis￾organized in his speech, and paranoid about his family’s intentions toward him. After numer￾ous arguments and significant tension in the family, it was agreed that Jerome should move 
out and into a local apartment where supported living services would be available. This was 
accomplished without incident—but as soon as he was on his own, Jerome stopped taking 
his medication, which made him more prone to relapses. His behavior was often disorga￾nized and psychotic, which eventually led the mental health center to assign him to an asser￾tive community treatment program to ensure that he got his daily living needs met, includ￾ing taking medication. Jerome had fewer relapses over the next few years. However, he 
continued to function marginally in terms of involvement in meaningful activities and social 
relationships, and he still had one or two relapses per year requiring brief hospitalization.
This story illustrates the role of community care coordination and medications in man￾aging serious mental illness. It misses self-management strategies, however—those that 
might help Jerome manage his illness as well as promote his health.138 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
psychology and have developed concepts how to integrate positive psychology into men￾tal health care (Bohlmeijer & Westerhof, 2021).
Shared Decision Making
As described in earlier chapters, SDM is the process by which important medical deci￾sions are made in active collaboration among the person, the treatment provider, and 
anyone else who may be closely involved with the person, such as family members. SDM 
is a movement that began in modern medicine (National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence [NICE], 2021) and was rapidly adopted by psychiatry (Beitinger, Kissling, & 
Hamann, 2014). The rationale for SDM is twofold. First, as medical technology for treat￾ing different diseases has expanded, so too has awareness that deciding which interven￾tions are best for a particular disease is not straightforward, but rather depends on the 
personal values and preferences of the individual with the disease. For example, surgery 
for prostate cancer may prolong life, but sometimes at the cost of compromised sexual 
function. In such cases, the decision to have surgery is better understood as a personal 
one that depends on what is important to the individual and not simply an objective 
decision that can be made by the treatment provider. Treatments and decisions not to 
pursue treatment have advantages and disadvantages. Informed decision making requires 
an individual to learn basic information about the nature of the disorder, the treatment 
options, and their likely effects (both positive and negative; NICE, 2021).
Second, a person’s choice not to follow prescriptions or recommended treatments 
is a problem common to modern medicine, including psychiatry (Coldham, Addington, 
& Addington, 2002). Psychological reactance is a concept that refers to an individu￾al’s sensitivity to others’ efforts to control their behavior (Brehm, 1966). Authoritarian￾sounding treatment recommendations may undermine some decisions because of psy￾chological reactance among people with mental illness (De las Cuevas, Peñate, & Sanz, 
2014). People may, however, be more open to some treatment recommendations when 
providers make these recommendations collaboratively, respecting their right to choose 
which treatments they want. SDM involves providing people with the information they 
need in order to make informed decisions about treatment, which may ultimately improve 
adherence to recommended and effective treatments. A systematic review of 15 RCTs of 
SDM interventions for people with severe mental illness showed some benefits of SDM, 
mostly that participants perceived greater involvement in treatment decisions and were 
more satisfied with their mental health care. However, there was no clear effect of SDM 
on recovery, psychiatric symptoms, or other clinical outcomes (Aoki et al., 2022). A sys￾tematic review of qualitative and quantitative SDM studies found similar results (Thomas 
et al., 2021).
Peer Support
According to Frese and Davis (1997), the historical roots of the mental health peer sup￾port movement can be traced back to the Alleged Lunatics’ Friend Society in England in 
the mid-19th century (Hervey, 1986), and the later publication of Clifford Beers’ (1908) 
book A Mind That Found Itself: An Autobiography, which chronicled abuses in the 
name of treatment for psychiatric disabilities that Beers had experienced or witnessed 
during his time as an inpatient. More recent influences contributed to the rise of peer ser￾vices beginning in the 1970s, including deinstitutionalization (Mechanic & Rochefort, 
1990), widespread dissatisfaction with traditional psychiatric care, and the growth of 7. Wellness Self-Management and Recovery 139
self-help approaches for personal problems (Novella, 2008). Peer services stress having 
people manage services for themselves in an environment where all aspects of interven￾tion are self-determined. Chapter 17 addresses the role of peer supports and services.
COMPONENTS OF ILLNESS SELF-MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS
Teaching individuals how to better manage their psychiatric disabilities is a complex 
enterprise for which a wide range of strategies has been developed. The most commonly 
employed approaches include motivational interviewing, education about illness and 
treatment, treatment decision making and self-determination, relapse prevention train￾ing, coping skills training, social skills training and interpersonal problem solving, and 
self-help and peer support. This section describes the rationale for and nature of each of 
these approaches to self-management, as well as the research supporting them.
Motivational Interviewing
Motivational interviewing helps people identify the advantages and disadvantages of 
treatment decisions (e.g., “Do I want to enter into supported employment to pursue a job 
as an accountant?”) and life choices (e.g., “Do I want to move across town to a newer 
apartment near the lake?”) (Miller & Rollnick, 2023). Providers use their listening skills 
to help people understand the costs and benefits of a decision. This is not meant to be 
a simple task—just adding up costs and benefits, and moving forward when there are 
more benefits. Dialogue is central to motivational interviewing; the task is an interactive 
process in which people can hear for themselves what underlies a specific decision. Moti￾vational interviewing rests on four principles:
1. Express empathy. Tough decisions are hard to make. Counselors need to under￾stand and reflect this difficulty through motivational interviews.
2. Develop discrepancy. People are likely to move on tough decisions when they see 
how their behaviors conflict with their personal goals. For example, a man with schizo￾phrenia may have the long-term goal to get a job. If he considers stopping his antipsy￾chotic medication, a counselor can highlight the potential conflict between the increased 
risk of relapse without antipsychotic medication and the man’s goal of employment.
3. Rolling with resistance. As people unpack the costs and benefits of a decision, 
they may become fearful and turn away from related goals. A person deciding whether to 
act on an alcohol abuse problem, for example, may suddenly oppose any consideration of 
the problem during the motivational interview. The counselor recognizes this as under￾standable resistance, and helps the person live with this rather than challenging it.
4. Support self-efficacy. At the heart of motivational interviewing is a decision. A 
counselor seeks to reinforce a person in all efforts to gain control of the decision process 
and to reach a solution that is right for them.
Motivational interviewing originally developed as a strategy to help people make 
decisions about their alcohol and other substance use, and has generated volumes of 
empirical support. Since then, it has been applied to a variety of mental and physical health 
problems; a significant review describes specific applications to vocational rehabilitation 
(Manthey, Jackson, & Evans-Brown, 2011). A systematic review of 14 randomized trials 140 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
showed benefits of motivational interviewing on service use and treatment attendance 
among people with mental illness (Lawrence, Fulbrook, Somerset, & Schulz, 2017).
Education
People need information about their psychiatric disabilities, as well as available treatments 
for them, in order to make informed decisions. Education (also called psychoeducation) 
is the most widely used approach for accomplishing this goal. Educational teaching is 
distinguished from other approaches, such as cognitive-behavioral approaches, by its reli￾ance on didactic rather than experiential (e.g., role playing, practicing) teaching methods. 
Examples of didactic teaching methods include providing basic information, asking ques￾tions to elicit a person’s experience, asking review questions to evaluate understanding 
of taught material, using written handouts that summarize pertinent material, and using 
films and videos to illustrate important points. A curriculum often includes information 
on the illness and its symptoms, its course, and its disabilities, as well as the range of 
services options. The entire educational package is framed in realities about hope and 
recovery.
Research suggests that education is frequently incorporated into comprehensive reha￾bilitation programs aimed at improving illness self-management for psychiatric disabili￾ties (Lu et al., 2022; Solmi, Croatto, et al., 2023). However, research on these programs 
is not totally clear about the specific benefits of education. Understanding effects of edu￾cational interventions is further complicated by the fact that some programs described 
as “educational” include other treatment components, such as systematic training in 
problem solving. Research shows that programs that combine psychoeducation with 
cognitive training and social skills training improve psychosocial functioning of people 
with schizophrenia (Lu et al., 2022). These findings suggest that educational approaches 
alone are insufficient for improving a person’s ability to manage psychiatric disabili￾ties. The evidence is more positive for family interventions: Psychoeducational family 
programs alone, without behavioral or skills training, reduced relapse rates among the 
family members with schizophrenia (Bighelli et al., 2021; Rodolico et al., 2022). Stud￾ies from China provide initial evidence that mindfulness-based psychoeducation may 
reduce symptoms among people with schizophrenia (McGlanaghy et al., 2021). A review 
of 47 studies found that psychoeducation for people with bipolar disorder, sometimes 
combined with psychoeducation for their families, reduces the frequency of new ill￾ness episodes and of psychiatric hospitalizations and improves adherence to psychiatric 
medication (Rabelo, Cruz, Ferreira, Viana, & Barbosa, 2021). Overall, psychoeducation 
is a promising approach for families and, if combined with other strategies, possibly 
for people with severe mental illness themselves (Maheshwari, Manohar, Chandran, & 
Rao, 2020).
Treatment Decision Making and Self-Determination
Treatment decisions are often framed in terms of adherence, or the lack thereof. In this 
light, problems with adherence to treatment recommendations are among the greatest 
challenges faced by mental health practitioners. These problems may be especially trou￾blesome with regard to psychotropic medications, which are among the most effective 
treatments available for psychiatric disabilities. Studies show that about half of all people 
with depression, bipolar disorder, or schizophrenia do not take their medication as pre￾scribed (Semahegn et al., 2020). There is often a negative valence to the idea of adherence; 7. Wellness Self-Management and Recovery 141
for example, a person may come to feel (or be made to feel) that in not taking prescribed 
medication, working with the job coach, or participating in family support, the person 
is somehow doing something wrong. Disapproval of a person’s treatment choices often 
generalizes to disrespect of the person. Unfortunately, adherence is a value that is the 
“gold standard” for assessing health decisions. In part, this myopia occurs because of 
the way the problem is often stated: “Why don’t people take their medications?” More 
helpful might be this phrasing: “Why do people choose [or not choose] intervention X at 
time Y?”
One way to expand the discussion is to recognize adherence as one example of the 
broader set of decisions and behaviors related to a person’s pursuit of health (Corrigan, 
Angell, et al., 2012). Related questions might include the following: Did the person choose 
to seek out treatment when they might benefit from it? Did the person act on agreed-upon 
aspects of the treatment plan? This changes the research hypothesis away from whether 
the “patient” is doing what they “should” be doing to what processes affect independent 
decision making and behaviors related to health. Such a change opens discussions beyond 
the public health perspective to the breadth and depth of psychological models related 
to decision making in general, as well as the specific challenges of demonstrating the 
link between decisions and actual behaviors. In this light, self-determination is the key 
principle guiding the task (Ng et al., 2012). Strategies that promote self-determination, 
such as basic listening skills and motivational interviewing, help the person make deci￾sions regarding treatment (Eassey, Reddel, Ryan, & Smith, 2020; Ryan, Patrick, Deci, & 
Williams, 2008).
Relapse Prevention Training
Symptom relapses often occur gradually over a period of days or weeks. These relapses may 
be experienced as significant distress and undermine a person’s pursuit of goals. For many 
individuals, relapses only affect functioning when they are severe and untreated; there￾fore, helping people prevent relapses is an important element of illness self-management. 
Symptom relapses are often preceded by subtle changes in cognition, mood, and social 
behavior, such as difficulties with concentration, feeling more anxious or depressed, and 
withdrawing from other people. The gradual onset of symptom relapses provides oppor￾tunities to teach individuals how to recognize early signs of relapse and take action to 
avert a full-blown relapse.
Relapse prevention training is a systematic approach to educating people about the 
nature of relapses, their early warning signs, and possible triggers of relapses (e.g., holi￾days); teaching them to monitor personal early warning signs; and helping them establish 
relapse prevention plans for responding to these warning signs (Marlatt & Donovan, 
2005). Because relapses may involve loss of insight into the illness, involving significant 
others in developing a relapse prevention plan is common practice (and is a common 
component of family psychoeducational programs). Plans for responding to early signs 
vary but may include contacting a member of the treatment team in order to obtain a 
temporary increase in medication, which is often a useful way of staving off a relapse 
(Taylor, Barnes, & Young, 2021). The steps of developing a relapse prevention plan are 
summarized in Table 7.1.
Cognitive-behavioral therapies with a focus on early warning signs and positive cop￾ing mechanisms are generally effective for relapse prevention of depression, with sig￾nificant long-term effects even years after the end of psychotherapy (different from anti￾depressant medication, which is effective for relapse prevention only as long as people 142 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
take it) (NICE, 2022). Adding psychotherapy to antidepressant medication significantly 
reduces relapse rates for depression (compared to antidepressants alone) (Breedvelt et al., 
2021). For schizophrenia, a review of 14 trials, 10 of them RCTs, found evidence that 
different approaches effectively reduced relapse rates (Abu Sabra & Hamdan-Mansour, 
2022), including cognitive-behavioral programs, social skills training, and family psycho￾education. Some of these interventions were combined in multi-component interventions, 
and all interventions could be added to maintenance antipsychotic pharmacotherapy. A 
review compared relapse preventions for people with schizophrenia or with bipolar dis￾order; successful interventions to prevent relapse of schizophrenia tended to include the 
family, but the family was rarely involved in programs for bipolar disorder (Johansen, 
Hounsgaard, Frandsen, Fluttert, & Hansen, 2021).
There is increasing interest in using mobile or internet-based technologies for relapse 
prevention programs. Many of these programs use cognitive-behavioral strategies and 
are transdiagnostic. Some programs use technologies such as wearable devices to detect, 
for example, sleep disturbances or smartphone prompts during the day to collect data 
on mood swings as warning signs of relapse (Buck et al., 2021; Fonseka & Woo, 2022). 
However, this is an emerging field, and studies on the effectiveness of these approaches 
for relapse prevention are still inconsistent (Hennemann, Farnsteiner, & Sander, 2018).
TABLE 7.1. Steps of Relapse Prevention Training
1. Whenever possible, strive to develop a relapse prevention plan in collaboration with both the 
person with mental illness and a significant other, such as a family member or another person who 
spends time with the person with mental illness.
2. Discuss what a relapse is (a return or significant worsening of symptoms that interferes with 
functioning), and how having relapses and hospitalizations has affected the life of the person 
with mental illness and his or her attainment of desired goals. Explain that relapses usually occur 
gradually over time, and that developing a relapse prevention plan can minimize the chances or 
severity of future relapses.
3. Describe how stressful experiences can sometimes trigger relapses. Based on discussing one or two 
previous relapses, help the person with mental illness identify some triggers of past relapses (such 
as increased school or work expectations, or conflict with others). Stopping taking medication or 
using alcohol or drugs can also be identified as triggers.
4. Explain that relapses are usually preceded by small changes called early warning signs of 
relapse. These signs include changes in feelings (such as anxiety or depression), thinking (such as 
concentration programs or disorganization), social connections (such as avoiding people), beliefs 
(such as paranoia or believing others are talking about the person), and sensory experiences (such 
as hearing voices). Based on past relapses, help the person with mental illness identify two or three 
personal early warning signs of relapse.
5. Talk over and agree on a plan for responding to the early warning signs of a relapse. The plan 
should include who should monitor early warning signs, what steps need to be taken if early 
warning signs are detected (e.g., talking over the concern, problem solving about possible stresses, 
calling the case manager, or arranging for a special appointment to see the medication prescriber).
6. Write the plan down, rehearse the plan (in a role play) with people who are important to 
implementing it, give copies of the plan to people who need to know it (e.g., family members and 
the case manager), and identify a place where the person with mental illness can post the plan.
7. If another relapse occurs, meet to review how the relapse prevention plan worked, reinforce the 
steps and strategies of the plan that worked well, and explore whether any changes are needed to 
make the plan even more effective.7. Wellness Self-Management and Recovery 143
Coping Skills Training
People with psychiatric disabilities often experience persistent aspects of illness, such as 
psychotic symptoms (e.g., hallucinations, delusions), mood problems (depression, anxi￾ety), negative symptoms (apathy, anhedonia), and cognitive difficulties (problems with 
concentration and memory). These symptoms can be psychologically distressing and con￾tribute to functional impairment. Helping people cope with or overcome persistent symp￾toms is an important goal of most rehabilitation programs. Coping skills training and 
cognitive restructuring are two commonly used approaches to helping people manage or 
overcome persistent symptoms. Each is briefly introduced here, and cognitive restructur￾ing is discussed more fully in Chapter 13.
Coping skills training helps people to manage persistent symptoms through the iden￾tification and practice of specific coping strategies. The approach evolved out of research 
on how people with persistent symptoms successfully manage their symptoms. These 
accounts, and research on the use of different coping strategies among people with psy￾chiatric disabilities, shows that the more coping strategies people report, the more effec￾tive their coping efficacy (Mueser, Drake, et al., 1997; Phillips, Francey, Edwards, & 
McMurray, 2009). Therefore, an important aim of enhancing coping skills is to increase 
the number and variety of coping strategies people are able to use for managing persistent 
symptoms. Table 7.2 provides a set of skills a person might use to manage hearing voices. 
People with severe mental illness who find meaning in their experiences and their coping 
with the illness tend to have better coping skills (Roe, Yanos, & Lysaker, 2006).
Social Skills Training and Interpersonal Problem Solving
Social skills training is a systematic approach to teaching interpersonal skills based on 
social learning theory. Whereas early applications of social skills training focused on 
assertiveness in nonclinical populations, success in this area soon led to using similar 
methods to address other areas of social functioning for people with disabilities (Liber￾man et al., 1989). Social skills training procedures are now among the most widely stud￾ied and implemented tools for changing social behavior across a wide range of individuals 
and situations, including persons with psychiatric disorders, substance use disorders, and 
developmental disabilities.
Although the applications of social skills training vary, depending on the specific 
techniques taught and on the population and setting in which the training is provided, the 
core ingredients of the training are the same. Complex social behaviors are broken down 
into component skills, which are then taught via a combination of modeling (demonstrat￾ing) each skill, engaging individuals in role plays to practice the steps of the skill, providing 
positive and corrective feedback about the persons’ role-play performance, additional role 
plays to improve performance, and making a plan for the individuals to practice the skill 
on their own. The steps of group-based social skills training are summarized in Table 7.3.
The three general findings of research on social skills training for persons with men￾tal illness can be summarized as follows:
1. People with psychiatric disabilities are capable of learning new social skills and 
maintaining them over time.
2. Social skills that are learned in one setting show some, but limited, generalization 
to other settings.
3. Skills training tends to improve the quality of social and leisure-time functioning 144 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
but does not have a consistent impact on symptom severity, relapses, or rehospi￾talizations.
Most reviews conclude that social skills training has some, but not a large, impact on 
symptoms, including negative symptoms of schizophrenia, and social functioning (Turner 
et al., 2018). Guidelines therefore recommend social skills training for adolescents as well 
as for adults with schizophrenia (Lecomte et al., 2017; Norman, Lecomte, Addington, 
& Anderson, 2017). Social skills training also improves social functioning among adults 
with autism (Dubreucq, Haesebaert, Plasse, Dubreucq, & Franck, 2022).
Research has also evaluated the effects of skills training on other areas of function￾ing. Reviews show that work-related social skills training improves rates of competitive 
employment among people with psychiatric disabilities (Smith, Atmatzidis, Capogreco, 
Lloyd-Randolfi, & Seman, 2017). Thus, social skills training is one of several psychoso￾cial interventions to improve the social network and functioning of people with mental 
illness (Barnett et al., 2022). Although one might think that the remediation of cogni￾tive deficits among people with psychiatric disabilities could improve the effectiveness of 
social skills training, this does not seem to be the case, because improved cognition does 
not transfer to “real-life” skills (Killaspy et al., 2022).
Self-Help and Peer Support
As described earlier in this chapter, peer and self-advocacy movements played a key role 
in the development of illness self-management approaches for people with psychiatric 
TABLE 7.2. Coping Strategies for Dealing with Auditory Hallucinations
Strategies Examples
Arousal level
Decreasing arousal Relaxing, deep breathing, blocking ears, closing eyes
Increasing arousal Getting physical exercise, listening to loud and stimulating 
music
Behavior
Increasing nonsocial activity Walking, doing puzzles, reading, pursuing a hobby
Increasing interpersonal contact Initiating conversation, playing a game with someone else
Reality testing Seeking opinions from others
Cognition
Shifting attention Thinking about something pleasant, listening to the radio
Fighting back Telling voices to stop
Positive self-talk Telling yourself, “Take it easy,” “You can handle it”
Problem solving Asking yourself, “What is the problem?”, “What else can I do 
about it?”, and so forth.
Ignoring the symptom Paying as little attention to the symptom as possible
Acceptance Accepting that the symptom is not going to go away, and 
deciding to get on with other goals
Prayer Asking for help in coping from a higher power
Note. Adapted from Mueser and Gingerich (2006). Copyright © 2006 The Guilford Press. Adapted by permission.7. Wellness Self-Management and Recovery 145
TABLE 7.3. Steps of Group-Based Social Skills Training
1. Establish a rationale for learning a skill.
• Elicit, from group participants, reasons for learning the skill.
• Acknowledge all contributions.
• Provide additional reasons not mentioned by group members.
2. Discuss the steps of the skill.
• Break down the skill into three or four steps.
• Write the steps on a board or poster.
• Discuss the reason for each step.
• Check for understanding of each step.
3. Model the skill in a role play.
• Plan the role play in advance.
• Explain that you will demonstrate the skill in a role play.
• Use two leaders to model the skill.
• Keep the role play simple.
4. Review the role play with the participants.
• Discuss whether each step of the skill was used in the role play.
• Ask group members to evaluate the effectiveness of the role model.
• Keep the review brief and to the point.
5. Engage a person with mental illness in a role play of the same situation.
• Start with someone who is more skilled or is likely to be compliant.
• Request he or she try the skill in a role play with one of the leaders.
• Ask the person questions to make sure he or she understands the goal.
• Instruct group members to observe the person with mental illness.
6. Provide positive feedback.
• Elicit positive feedback from group members about the skills of the person with mental illness.
• Encourage feedback that is specific.
• Cut off any negative feedback.
• Praise effort and provide hints to group members about good performance.
7. Provide corrective feedback.
• Elicit suggestions for how he or she could use the skill better next time.
• Limit the feedback to one or two suggestions.
• Strive to communicate the suggestions in a positive, upbeat manner.
8. Engage the person with mental illness in another role play of the same situation.
• Request that he or she change one behavior in the role play.
• Ask him or her questions to check on his or her understanding of the suggestion.
• Try to work on behaviors that are most critical and changeable.
9. Provide additional feedback.
• Be generous but specific when providing positive feedback.
• Focus first on the behavior that the person with mental illness was requested to change.
• Engage him or her in two to four role plays, giving feedback after each one.
• Use other behavior-shaping strategies to improve skills, such as coaching, prompting, and 
supplemental modeling.
10. Assign homework.
• When possible, tailor the assignment to the level of skill of each person with mental illness.
• Give an assignment to practice the skill.
• Ask group members to identify situations in which they could use the skill.
Note. Adapted from Bellack, Mueser, Gingerich, and Agresta (2004). Copyright © 2004 The Guilford Press. 
Adapted by permission.146 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
disabilities (also see Chapter 17). Resentment and mistrust of traditional hierarchical and 
coercive treatment approaches led people with such disabilities to advocate for themselves 
and to take back control over their own lives and treatments (Clay, with Schell, Corri￾gan, & Ralph, 2005). Rather than looking to professionals for help, people sought out 
one another for inspiration in coping with their problems and moving forward in their 
lives. This focus on self-reliance has been accompanied by the larger self-help movement, 
which has spawned numerous books, DVDs, websites, and classes aimed at helping peo￾ple improve all aspects of their lives, such as physical health, mental health, relationships, 
financial standing, sports, and sex. For example, within the mental health field, there are 
numerous self-help books to guide individuals with different psychiatric disorders. There 
is increasing evidence for the effectiveness of peer support for people with psychiatric dis￾abilities (Killaspy et al., 2022; Lyons, Cooper, & Lloyd-Evans, 2021; Peck, Thangavelu, 
Li, & Goh, 2023). See Chapter 17 for a more thorough discussion of this kind of support.
Illness Management and Recovery
The Illness Management and Recovery (IMR) program incorporates five components 
of illness self-management: psychoeducation; behavioral tailoring for medication adher￾ence; relapse prevention training; social skills training for social support; and teaching 
coping skills for persistent symptoms (Petros & Solomon, 2015). Emphasis on establish￾ing individual recovery goals and pursuing these goals throughout the program has been 
included in IMR in order to motivate consumers to learn how to manage their psychiatric 
disability in pursuit of those goals. IMR can be delivered in either an individual or group 
format; it generally requires 6–10 months to complete, depending on frequency of ses￾sions and level of participants’ impairment (Petros & Solomon, 2015). The curriculum 
for IMR is organized into nine modules, covering these topics:
1. Recovery strategies
2. Practical facts about mental illness
3. Stress–vulnerability model and treatment strategies
4. Building social support
5. Using medications effectively
6. Reducing relapses
7. Coping with stress
8. Coping with problems and persistent symptoms
9. Getting needs met in the mental health system
Each topic is taught via a combination of educational, motivational, and cognitive￾behavioral strategies. The IMR program includes educational handouts for participants, 
a manual for trainers, informational brochures, an introductory video, a training video, 
a fidelity scale, and outcome measures.
A review uncovered seven randomized controlled studies of IMR (Petros & Solo￾mon, 2015). The evidence is mixed because some studies used abbreviated versions of 
IMR, others had high dropout rates or participants did not attend many IMR sessions. 
Overall, there was some evidence of positive effects on symptoms, recovery, goal attain￾ment, and psychosocial functioning. One study used an active control group as a com￾parison (the persons in this group received interpersonal problem solving) and was unable 
to find any difference in outcomes (Salyers et al., 2014).7. Wellness Self-Management and Recovery 147
Wellness Recovery Action Plan
Wellness Recovery Action Plan (WRAP) is a peer-led program for helping individuals 
with recurring health and emotional problems develop healthier and more rewarding 
lives (Canacott, Moghaddam, & Tickle, 2019). It is a structured program in which an 
individual or group of persons is guided through developing a personal written plan for 
managing or reducing troubling symptoms, as well as making other desired changes. 
WRAP is oriented toward helping anyone with physical or mental health problems regain 
control and balance in life; therefore, it avoids providing information about specific dis￾orders or treatment principles. Rather, as the program’s title suggests, the emphasis is on 
wellness and health.
The WRAP program is divided into seven components, with each including written 
plans that a person maintains in a workbook:
1. Creating a daily maintenance plan
2. Identifying triggers, early warning signs, and signs of potential crisis
3. Developing a crisis plan
4. Establishing a nurturing lifestyle (e.g., more healthy living)
5. Setting up a support system and self-advocating
6. Increasing self-esteem
7. Relieving tension and stress
Teaching is typically done through a combination of lecture and discussion, with time 
taken to complete the plans and receive advice and support. WRAP is usually provided by 
trained peer providers, who often use their own experiences to inspire other people with 
mental illness to believe that they can recover their wellness.
A review found five controlled trials of WRAP. On average, WRAP led to improved 
self-reported recovery outcomes with a small but significant effect; there was no effect on 
clinical symptoms (Canacott et al., 2019). A recent trial in Hong Kong evaluated a brief 
self-help version of WRAP with positive effects on depression, anxiety, empowerment, 
and hope that were mostly sustained at 3-month follow-up (Mak, Tsoi, & Wong, 2022).
Dialectical Behavior Therapy
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) was developed in the 1980s by Marsha M. Line￾han, who disclosed her own history of borderline personality disorder (BPD) in 2011. 
DBT was originally developed to address self-injurious and suicidal behavior, and has 
subsequently been more broadly applied to persons with BPD and with other disorders 
(Stoffers-Winterling et al., 2022). Dialectical refers to resolving conflict between con￾tradictory forces through a synthesis of the two. In DBT, dialectics is employed by the 
practitioner’s combined use of validation and acceptance of people as they are, with strat￾egies aimed at changing behavior and achieving a better balance in personal function￾ing. Dialectics is also used to help people strike a balance between reasonable mind and 
emotion mind in striving to develop wise mind, which combines the two in an integrated 
fashion. Although primarily a psychotherapeutic intervention, DBT is discussed here, as 
it gives people with BPD a very active role in the therapeutic process and teaches skills 
that can be used for self-management later on (the same applies to acceptance and com￾mitment therapy; see next section). In practice, DBT involves several cognitive-behavioral 
techniques to improve interpersonal skills (e.g., social skills training), self-management 148 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
of negative emotions (e.g., cognitive restructuring), and practical problem solving; these 
techniques are combined with mindfulness-based strategies (e.g., focusing on the present, 
taking a nonjudgmental stance) aimed at promoting participants’ tolerance of themselves 
as they are, including unpleasant feelings and thoughts. DBT is typically offered in com￾binations of weekly individual psychotherapy and group skills training, with counselors 
providing DBT also participating in weekly case consultation meetings among them￾selves. Specific guidelines are provided for establishing clear treatment contracts between 
each person and their individual therapist before beginning the program, and for specify￾ing the nature of and rules concerning additional contacts (e.g., telephone calls regarding 
thoughts of self-injury). Although DBT was initially developed to focus on outpatients’ 
suicidal threats or behaviors, the program was then adapted for inpatients and for per￾sons with BPD and substance use disorders (Bohus et al., 2021).
In the decade following the development of DBT and the first controlled trial, it has 
become a widely implemented program for several different populations.
A recent meta-analysis of DBT was based on 31 RCTs of DBT for people with BPD 
(Stoffers-Winterling et al., 2022). Results showed that DBT had significant positive effects 
on self-harm and psychosocial functioning. DBT is also effective for adolescents with 
BPD (Wong, Bahji, & Khalid-Khan, 2020); the evidence for its effectiveness for people 
with BPD and comorbid substance use problems is less clear (Bohus et al., 2021).
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy
Acceptance and commitment therapy was developed by Steven C. Hayes in the 1980s 
and 1990s as another intervention steeped in mindfulness that helps people manage their 
illness by targeting ineffective control strategies and emotional avoidance (Zhang et al., 
2018). A focus on control can be life-inhibiting, because internal experiences cannot be 
controlled. Acceptance and commitment therapy seeks to increase psychological flexibil￾ity through several processes: diffusion, acceptance, contact with the moment, values and 
committed action, and self-as-contact. Acceptance and commitment therapy uses meta￾phor and paradox to help people understand the limitations of control and the benefits of 
acceptance and commitment (Zhang et al., 2018). Research on acceptance and commit￾ment therapy has exploded. Recent research reviews have found evidence that acceptance 
and commitment therapy has positive effects on anxiety, depression, substance use, and 
OCD (Osaji, Ojimba, & Ahmed, 2020; Soondrum et al., 2022). Acceptance and commit￾ment therapy has been used in both group settings and internet-based or online formats 
(Ferreira, Mariano, de Rezende, Caramelli, & Kishita, 2022; Han & Kim, 2022; Sun et 
al., 2022).
MOBILE HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES
Mobile or digital mental health interventions (often called mHealth) comprise a rapidly 
evolving field. To distinguish the many different kinds of programs available, four dimen￾sions are helpful (Gagnon, Sasseville, & Leblanc, 2022): (1) The system a program is 
based on, such as internet, mobile app, email or SMS, telehealth, virtual reality, chat 
robots, or social media; (2) its function; that is, decision support, communication (user 
and health care provider, or peer-to-peer), cognitive-behavioral or other psychotherapy 
including gamification, or monitoring by the provider, or as self-monitoring; (3) the time 7. Wellness Self-Management and Recovery 149
(i.e., asynchronous, for example, by email or chat when texts are written at different 
times, or synchronous when participants are present at the same time as in a video call); 
and finally (4) facilitation, which means programs that are entirely or partly facilitated 
or guided by health care providers or peers versus programs that are unguided and self￾administered.
Much of the work in this arena currently focuses on smartphones (i.e., phones that, 
among other things, provide easy access to the internet, as well as to global position￾ing system [GPS] technology in a person’s community). Application software (usually 
referred to as apps) has developed exponentially in the past decade, providing a huge 
number of computer options for a smartphone. The National Institutes of Health have 
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Jerome Hicks, Revisited:
Learning How to Manage His Illness and Get On with His Life
To address Jerome’s need for improved illness self-management skills, he was engaged 
in the IMR program at his community mental health center. The program began with an 
exploration of the concept of recovery. The counselor described to Jerome different defini￾tions of recovery given by peers, and encouraged him to talk about what recovery meant to 
him. Jerome didn’t relate very much to the word recovery, because he had his doubts about 
whether he had an illness in the first place; however, the conversation did lead to identifying 
some concrete goals that Jerome was interested in working toward, including returning to 
school and having some friends he could spend time with.
Jerome’s counselor then provided basic information about schizophrenia spectrum 
disorders, including the nature of these disorders and their common symptoms. During this 
discussion, Jerome made it clear that he didn’t think he had a disorder on the schizophrenia 
spectrum, though he did acknowledge having “nervous problems” that made him feel anx￾ious around people and sensitive to stimuli in his environment. The counselor said that she 
understood his concerns, explained that other people also had these kinds of difficulties, 
and shared that there were effective strategies for reducing their impact on Jerome’s life.
After discussing with Jerome some of the symptoms he experienced in relation to his 
“nervous problems,” the clinician engaged him in a discussion about medication. She and 
Jerome talked about the different medications that Jerome had taken over the years, and 
she got Jerome’s perspective about what taking the medications was like for him. Jerome 
acknowledged that when he took his medication more regularly, he felt less afraid and was 
less likely to be hospitalized. However, he didn’t like some of the medication’s side effects, 
including the “nervous feeling” that he felt inside him when he took them. The counselor 
discussed common medication side effects, and stressed the importance of talking over 
these side effects with Jerome’s doctor. The counselor then role-played with Jerome how 
he could express his concerns with the doctor so that changes could be considered in the 
medications he was prescribed.
Attention was also focused on helping Jerome to pursue his personal goals, including 
returning to school and making friends. The counselor explored with Jerome how learning to 
manage his “nervous problems” would help him achieve these goals. With respect to school, 
Jerome looked into taking some classes, and decided to return slowly by auditing a course 
at a local community college. Jerome also started going to a local consumer drop-in center, 
where he began to make some friends with people with more interests.150 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
created an office whose specific charge is development and careful evaluation of mHealth 
technologies and software.
mHealth may serve several rehabilitation goals (Ben-Zeev et al., 2012):
1. People can use mHealth technologies to obtain preliminary information about 
psychiatric conditions, the associated disabilities, and possible prognoses. They can also 
learn about services that have been shown to have an impact on these challenges, as well 
as interventions that have no evidence base.
2. This kind of information may then help a person gain a better understanding of 
and access to service systems. Apps could provide service guides, or information kiosks 
with GPS capabilities could help people find services in their neighborhoods that address 
specific concerns. These guides, or kiosks, might include funding information, so that 
potential service users would know whether they have suitable health coverage for the 
services provided at a particular agency.
3. mHealth may support treatment engagement. Providers might use mHealth plat￾forms to provide outreach to those who are difficult to engage. For example, a rehabili￾tation provider might use text messaging to review aspects of a motivational interview. 
A recent systematic review found that text messaging increased medication adherence 
among people with serious mental illness (Simon et al., 2022).
4. Beyond engagement, mHealth might provide a set of tools for implementing reha￾bilitation plans. These tools could offer in-the-world opportunities to practice coping 
skills. For example, they could remind a person struggling with drug abuse about warn￾ing signs of relapse, as well as the plan the person might institute should they consider 
using drugs. Consistent with this idea, a review of 20 RCTs on various mobile and tele￾medicine interventions for people with opioid use disorders showed some positive effect 
on opioid abstinence (Kiburi, Ngarachu, Tomita, Paruk, & Chiliza, 2023), and similar 
positive effects have been found for alcohol use (Caballeria, López-Pelayo, Matrai, & 
Gual, 2022).
5. There is evidence that mobile or digital technologies can be a useful add-on to pro￾fessionally delivered traditional mental health care. For adults with depression, internet￾delivered cognitive-behavioral therapy as an add-on to usual care improved symptoms 
and remission rates (Jonsson et al., 2022).
6. mHealth or digital interventions have been successfully applied to a wide range of 
mental health problems: suicidality (Sarubbi et al., 2022); autism, with benefits for par￾ents as well as for their children (Yosep et al., 2022); recovery in youth (Dallinger et al., 
2022); prevention of depression in youth (Noh & Kim, 2023); major depression among 
adults (Serrano-Ripoll et al., 2022) or postpartal depression among women (Liu, Huang, 
Hu, & Wang, 2022; Novick, Kwitowski, Dempsey, Cooke, & Dempsey, 2022), and daily 
functioning (Jameel, Valmaggia, Barnes, & Cella, 2021); as well as symptoms among 
people with severe mental illness (Kim, Lee, Jeong, & Jang, 2022).
This is a relatively new field of research. Much of the evidence is sketchy, because 
there is a huge variety of possible digital or mHealth interventions, and the quantity and 
quality of programs as well as comparison groups differ. mHealth technologies have a 
couple of strengths as well as weaknesses (Koh, Tng, & Hartanto, 2022). An advantage is 
that they can offer a safe mode of service delivery during a pandemic; can facilitate access 
to services for people in remote geographical areas; are a low-threshold source of support 7. Wellness Self-Management and Recovery 151
that avoids labeling issues and the fear of stigma associated with using traditional mental 
health services; and can speed up service use as many mHealth technologies are available 
without waiting times.
However, there are also a number of problems and challenges: Privacy and confiden￾tiality can be a concern, depending on the type of technology used and the kind of infor￾mation shared. Digital technologies are likely to increase the digital divide in the sense 
that people living in poverty or those who are homeless may not be able to use them. 
Safety is an issue in emergencies such as suicidal crises, especially in unguided programs. 
Many of the apps and programs are not evidence based: A study of mobile apps for mood 
disorders found that only a very small minority was backed by robust evidence (Eis et al., 
2022). A review of apps for schizophrenia reported that most apps could not be accessed, 
and among the accessible apps, many offered inaccurate, dated, or stigmatizing content 
(Kwon, Firth, Joshi, & Torous, 2022). Unfortunately, most apps are developed without 
an active role of people with lived experience of mental illness, although such coproduc￾tion would likely improve their acceptability and effectiveness.
Finally, there is the yet unresolved question whether humans should guide or at 
least be involved in the delivery of mobile or online interventions (Chivilgina, Elger, & 
Jotterand, 2021). Currently, guided web-based interventions have better adherence rates 
than unguided ones (Musiat, Johnson, Atkinson, Wilksch, & Wade, 2022) and appear 
to reduce symptoms more effectively (Koelen et al., 2022). Future research will show 
whether artificial intelligence and machine learning algorithms can improve those pro￾grams that are not guided by humans (Zhou, Zhao, & Zhang, 2022); even if this works 
on average, it remains a difficult ethical question whether we want information technol￾ogy (IT) algorithms to react to individual crises such as acute suicidality (Gooding & 
Kariotis, 2021).
EARLY INTERVENTIONS
Most mental illnesses (except dementias) begin early in life: anxiety disorders, autism, 
and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), on average, in early adolescence, 
followed by eating disorders, OCD, and cannabis use in late adolescence/early adult￾hood, and by schizophrenia and bipolar disorders at above 20 years of age on average 
(Solmi et al., 2022). This early onset and the common recurrent course explains the large 
personal and socioeconomic impact of mental disorders. Since treatment cannot allevi￾ate all symptoms, prevention is key. A specific form of secondary or indicated prevention 
is early intervention for children or youth who are at risk of developing a mental illness 
or show early attenuated symptoms or signs of psychological distress. Best known is the 
so-called “risk of psychosis syndrome” when youth have brief or subthreshold symptoms 
reminiscent of psychosis that do not (yet) fulfill diagnostic criteria of schizophrenia (Cat￾alan et al., 2021). There is good evidence of the success of early intervention for youth at 
risk of psychosis or with first-episode psychosis compared to treatment as usual: A large 
U.S. study evaluated a complex intervention that consisted of medication management, 
resilience-focused therapy, supported employment, and family psychoeducation. The 
intervention led to improvements in terms of quality of life, functioning, and reduced psy￾chiatric hospitalizations during intervention (Srihari et al., 2015). However, these effects 
diminish over time after the intervention has ended; thus, the long-term effectiveness of 
early intervention for risk of psychosis is not at all clear (Hyatt, Hasler, & Wilner, 2022).
Another challenge for early intervention is that many early symptoms are unspecific. 152 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
For example, youth at risk of psychosis often have anxiety or depressive symptoms that 
may or may not progress into psychosis. Therefore, experts call for a transdiagnostic 
approach that helps youth with mental health problems deal with a wide range of symp￾toms (Shah, Jones, van Os, McGorry, & Gülöksüz, 2022). Finally, early intervention 
services for any kind of mental health problems should avoid unnecessary labeling of 
those who seek help or advice in order to facilitate help seeking and to reduce the poten￾tial (self-)stigma and discrimination as a consequence of being labeled as “mentally ill” 
(Rüsch et al., 2014).
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
People with psychiatric disabilities should play the central role in the pursuit of their goals. 
Facilitating illness and wellness self-management skills is crucial to accomplishing this. There 
are psychological benefits when people become more self-reliant in dealing with their illness 
and capable of handling their own affairs. Improved illness self-management is particularly 
important to the goals of rehabilitation and recovery, because it can minimize the disruptive 
effects of relapses, rehospitalizations, and persistent symptoms on people’s lives.
Research on specific components of illness and wellness self-management indicates 
that various combinations of interventions are effective for producing different outcomes. 
Psychoeducation may be useful for improving personal understanding of psychiatric dis￾ability and its treatment, but it has limited impact on the course of illness. Indicated preven￾tion for young people at risk of mental disorders has shown at least short-term benefits. 
Relapse prevention enjoys strong empirical support, as does cognitive-behavioral therapy 
for reducing distress and severity of persistent symptoms, including depression, anxiety, and 
psychotic symptoms. The different components of illness and wellness self-management 
have been incorporated to varying degrees into comprehensive programs and approaches. 
Internet-based or mobile interventions become increasingly important. In addition, many of 
these components are incorporated into family psychoeducation programs aimed at teach￾ing people, and their natural supports, how to manage psychiatric disabilities. 153
CHAPTER 8
Care Coordination
Most people with psychiatric disabilities need far more than mental 
health treatment in a clinic or offi ce to achieve their goals. They need a range of commu￾nity services and supports, including housing, medical care, and fi nancial benefi ts. In the 
late 1970s, the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) established the Community 
Support Program as a model of comprehensive services to meet needs of those discharged 
from psychiatric hospitals (Turner & TenHoor, 1978). Care coordination was designed 
to be the “glue” of the system, serving the centralized functions that would ensure peo￾ple received the services and supports that they needed when they needed them (Stroul, 
1993). Congress then passed the State Comprehensive Mental Health Services Plan Act 
in 1986; this law required states to develop comprehensive service plans for adults with 
serious mental illness in order to receive federal mental health funds. State plans had to 
include provisions for the delivery of care coordination to all of those in this population 
who received substantial public funds; this was to be achieved by 1992.
Conversely, the private sector, under the guise of behavioral health managed care, 
employs care coordination to control increasing health care expenses. Care coordination 
in this context does not provide services; rather, it functions as a utilization review mecha￾nism to manage the allocation of scarce and costly resources by limiting access to ser￾vices and substituting lower-cost service options for higher-cost ones, such as outpatient 
therapy rather than hospitalization (Sledge, Astrachan, Thompson, Rakfeldt, & Leaf, 
1995). This use of care coordination is somewhat antithetical to service models whose 
primary focus is to ensure that those with psychiatric disabilities receive the interventions 
and resources that they need. This chapter focuses on care coordination as a service rather 
than as a cost containment strategy. The chapter defi nes care coordination and its goals, 
objectives, and functions; describes the various models of care coordination that have 
been employed for persons with psychiatric disabilities; reviews research on the eff ective￾ness of care coordination models; and discusses concerns about care coordination.
WHAT’S IN A WORD?
The topics discussed herein have traditionally been known as case management—words 
that some commentators have viewed negatively (Everett & Nelson, 1992). Case seems 
CHAPTER 8154 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
to reduce a person to a sterile manila folder. Management suggests that some outside 
strategies are needed to make certain that each case stays on some predetermined course; 
it also suggests that people are the ones who need to be managed, rather than the many 
services they need. Although case management continues to be a prominent term in the 
service system, it is viewed here in terms of its broader and more recovery-focused goals. 
Rehabilitation providers need to help a person with disabilities understand the breadth 
and depth of possible care, and then help that person to coordinate the diverse services 
that go into this process.
Defining Care Coordination
Care coordination is the process of assessing, organizing, and ensuring receipt of services 
that assist individuals with psychiatric disabilities to meet their multiple and complex 
needs in an effective and efficient manner (Dieterich et al., 2017; Lim et al., 2022). Ser￾vices are provided to ensure continuity of care over the long term (Gaebel, Kerst, et al., 
2020). Care coordination provides a single point of accountability for assisting people in 
receiving the services they need (Gaebel, Kerst, et al., 2020). Usually, care coordination is 
provided by an individual care coordinator, but it may also be accomplished by a team.
Care coordination is an integral competency of a good counselor, and this type of 
involvement is essential to comprehensive assessment of each person’s needs, as well as 
to subsequent plans for addressing these needs (Leahy et al., 2019). Care coordination 
is generally viewed as affecting the person’s external world, but, over time, it may influ￾ence the person’s internal abilities to cope in the community by teaching problem-solving 
and negotiating skills. However, many of the models of care coordination do not provide 
psychotherapy, but simply supportive counseling. Similarly, models differ in the extent to 
which they have a rehabilitation focus and employ rehabilitation technologies. Basic care 
coordination, exemplified by the brokerage model (discussed later in this chapter), merely 
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Lynn Smith Is Helped by Brokered Care Coordination
Lynn Smith is a 58-year-old single woman diagnosed with schizophrenia. She had been 
hospitalized off and on since she was in her mid-20s. Lynn lives at her family home. Lynn’s 
father died in 2015. Her mother continued to care for Lynn until a few months ago, when she 
fell ill and was hospitalized. Her mother died about a month later.
Lynn has been involved with mental health services for many years. She attends a pro￾gram at a local mental health center a few days a week. Lynn takes Clozaril to help with 
the symptoms of her schizophrenia. Every 2 weeks she goes for bloodwork. She also has 
a thyroid disorder and some digestive problems, for which she takes other medications 
prescribed by a family physician. She has a care coordinator at the mental health center, 
who checks in regularly with Lynn to see how she is doing. Until Lynn’s mother’s death, Mrs. 
Smith took Lynn to doctors’ appointments or arranged for paratransit services, cooked, and 
maintained the home. If Lynn needed assistance with referrals for care or resources, her 
mother would contact the care coordinator. Up to now, Lynn has been well maintained in the 
home and has been adherent to her medications. With her mother’s death, however, some 
changes will need to be made to Lynn’s services.8. Care Coordination 155
maintains the original intent of ensuring that the person’s critical needs are identified and 
services to address them are delivered.
The Importance of Community Services
Care coordination occurs in a person’s community, though it may begin while the per￾son is hospitalized for psychiatric illness. Although psychiatric rehabilitation is almost 
always understood as helping the person address their goals in the world, some people 
in great distress may need a hospital stay. Rehabilitation and case coordination continue 
to be paramount even during an inpatient stay, however. In this case, the inpatient team 
works closely with the person and their rehabilitation team to coordinate the collection 
of services when the person returns to the community. Community services do not “take 
a break” when a person is admitted for a hospital stay. The rehabilitation team makes 
regular visits to the person and has a central role in their inpatient treatment and return 
to the community.
CARE COORDINATION’S GOALS, OBJECTIVES, AND FUNCTIONS
Care coordination can be understood in terms of the fundamental goals, objectives, and 
functions summarized in Figure 8.1. Major goals of care coordination include (1) main￾taining contact with services; (2) reducing length of stay when hospitalization occurs; (3) 
providing rehabilitation to promote psychosocial functioning at the highest level at which 
the individual is capable; and (4) improving the quality of life for persons with psychiatric 
disabilities, as well as their family caregivers (Dieterich et al., 2017; Gaebel, Zäske, et 
al., 2020; Isaacs, 2022; Isaacs, Beauchamp, Sutton, & Maybery, 2019; Lim et al., 2022). 
These goals are achieved through four basic service objectives:
•	 Continuity of care, or receipt of comprehensive services over the long term.
•	 Accessibility, or receipt of services when and where the person needs them.
•	 Accountability, or ensuring the intended effect for the services provided.
•	 Efficiency, or delivery of services in the appropriate sequence, resulting in eco￾nomical service provision.
Better outcomes occur when care coordination assumes primary responsibility for reha￾bilitation, treatment, and support; utilizes natural supports in the community rather than 
FIGURE 8.1. Goals, objectives, and functions of care coordination.
Goals
• Maintaining contact
• Reducing length 
of hospital stays
• Providing
rehabilitation
• Improving quality
of life
Objectives
• Continuity of care
• Accessibility
• Accountability
• Efficiency
Functions
• Assessment
• Planning
• Linkage 
• Monitoring
• Advocacy156 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
mental health services; and delivers these services wherever the person with a psychiatric 
disability is.
There is a high degree of consensus about the five basic functions performed by care 
coordinators in serving those with psychiatric disabilities: assessment, planning, linkage, 
monitoring, and advocacy (Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, 2015; National Acad￾emy of Certified Care Managers, 2022):
•	 Assessment requires comprehensive evaluation of the strengths, deficits, problems, 
and needs of a person with psychiatric disabilities. It also requires gathering infor￾mation from different sources, including the individual, other treatment facilities, 
and significant support system members. (See Chapter 5.)
•	 Planning is the development of services to meet a person’s needs. In keeping with 
a recovery orientation, the individual is a major partner in the development of this 
plan, and the plan is centered on the person’s strengths. The plan identifies needs, 
specific services, resources, supports to address these needs, and behavioral steps 
to implement the plan.
•	 Linkage is connecting persons with the services, supports, and resources in the 
implementation of their plans. This means more than making referrals to services; 
it also includes assisting individuals in accessing these services by accompanying 
them or by arranging for others to help.
•	 Monitoring is ensuring that services, supports, and other resources are received. 
Corrective actions are undertaken when obstacles are encountered.
•	 Advocacy includes the use of formal channels whenever necessary to obtain 
resources and services to which people with psychiatric disabilities have legal and 
ethical rights. These people may be mistreated in the process of trying to obtain 
services. Formal and informal strategies are employed to make necessary system 
changes that ensure receipt of supports.
Furthermore, services that are individualized, including assertive outreach, address 
a broad diversity of life domains. In addition, they involve small caseloads, which are key 
for producing positive outcomes. These services may also need to be time-unlimited given 
the long and cyclical nature of psychiatric disabilities. Although short-term gains can be 
attained with care coordination of limited duration, research indicates that these gains 
do not seem to be sustainable on a long-term basis. Finally, given the cyclical nature of 
psychiatric illnesses, persons with psychiatric disabilities may need emergency services 
available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
MODELS OF CARE COORDINATION
There are seven models of care coordination: (1) brokered care coordination, (2) clinical 
care coordination, (3) strengths-based care coordination, (4) rehabilitation care coordi￾nation, (5) assertive community treatment (ACT), (6) intensive care coordination (ICC), 
and (7) peer-provided care coordination (see Table 8.1, later in the chapter). Each model 
is described, some in far more detail than others. ACT is discussed most extensively, 
as it is the most publicized model in terms of the scholarly literature, the most widely 
researched of all the models, and the model that is considered an evidence-based practice. 
The others have been researched on a more limited basis.8. Care Coordination 157
Brokered Care Coordination
Brokered care coordination is the most basic of models and among the first to be devel￾oped in response to the deinstitutionalization movement (Solomon, 1992). In this model, 
care coordinators limit their work to the basic tasks listed in Figure 8.1. Essentially, a 
brokered care coordinator assesses an individual’s needs, plans for how these needs are 
to be addressed, assists in linking the person with the range of required services, and 
coordinates the various service providers. This model also includes service monitoring to 
ensure receipt of referred services and, when necessary, to advocate on the person’s behalf 
to obtain available services. Much of this work is conducted in the office by means of 
referrals or phone calls. Brokered care coordinators do not engage in therapy but mostly 
act as enablers and facilitators (Rosenberg & Rosenberg, 2013). Given these functions, 
these coordinators tend to have large caseloads and to depend on the existing community 
service system. Brokered care coordinators need to be knowledgeable about existing ser￾vices. Due to large caseloads and consequent lower costs, this model is one that continues 
to be widely practiced.
Given the intensity of the efforts required to engage individuals with psychiatric dis￾abilities successfully in services, and to find and develop supports and resources for them, 
care coordinators who restrict their work to information sharing and referral are unlikely 
to be successful (Gaebel, Kerst, et al., 2020). Such coordinators often end up respond￾ing to crisis situations rather than being proactive and goal-focused. The brokered care 
model is often not provided in its purest form; elements from other models may be com￾bined with these basic functions (Rosenberg & Rosenberg, 2013).
Clinical Care Coordination
Clinical care coordinators act as counselors and therapists, as well as providers of basic 
coordination. The model integrates the administrative functions of care coordination 
with clinical services (Moore, 2009). Clinical care coordinators assist people in functional 
skills and psychological growth by means of skills training, problem-solving techniques, 
and psychoeducation. Clinical care coordinators provide services in four domains: (1) an 
initial phase of engagement, assessment, and planning; (2) environmental interventions, 
which include linkage to services and resources, as well as support and consultation to 
formal and informal members of the social network; (3) person-focused interventions, 
which may include intermittent individual therapy, training in daily living skills, and 
psychoeducation; and (4) a person–environment focus, crisis services, and monitoring. 
Sullivan and Rapp (2002) have noted that clinical care coordination does not work well 
in reality. Most therapists do not have the time or inclination to engage in brokering care 
activities.
Assertive Community Treatment
ACT was created in Madison, Wisconsin, in the 1970s as a community-based alternative 
to psychiatric hospitalization (Marx, Test, & Stein, 1973). The intention of ACT was to 
transfer all of the functions of a long-term psychiatric institution into the community; 
it was therefore often called a “hospital without walls” (Stein & Test, 1980). In its ini￾tial implementation, hospital staff members were actually transferred to the community 
(Test, 1998). Original tenets of the model included the following:158 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
•	 The community, not the hospital, should be the primary locus of care for persons 
with psychiatric disabilities, because the community is where these persons face 
daily, ongoing stressors.
•	 Treatments and supports in the community must be comprehensive, potentially 
addressing all areas of life.
•	 Treatment and care must be flexible and highly individualized to address the vast 
heterogeneity of people with psychiatric disabilities, as well as their changing 
needs over time.
•	 Comprehensive and flexible treatments and supports must be organized and deliv￾ered to reach persons with psychiatric disabilities efficiently.
Central to ACT is the continuous and multidisciplinary treatment team. The team 
usually includes a psychiatrist, a nurse, and at least two care coordinators; frequently, 
social workers, peer support specialists, and family specialists are team members as well 
(Thorning & Dixon, 2020; Dartmouth Assertive Community Treatment Scale [DACTS], 
2017). The ratio for these teams is about 1 staff member to 10 participants, but teams 
usually consist of 10–12 staff members serving a total of about 120 persons with psychi￾atric disabilities (DACTS, 2017; Rochefort, 2019). Additional staff positions are contin￾gent on the team’s goals and the nature of participants’ needs. For example, a vocational 
specialist may be a team member if employment is an important goal for many partici￾pants. Given the high prevalence of substance use disorders among those with psychiatric 
disabilities, the model also prescribes staff members with substance abuse treatment skills 
(DACTS, 2017).
In the ACT model, the team, and not some other provider, is the primary source of 
rehabilitation and social services required by the persons with psychiatric disabilities. 
ACT teams are self-contained, comprehensive programs that essentially provide all ser￾vices a person needs. Teams meet daily to exchange the most recent information about 
participants. ACT provides an integrated approach to service delivery that is individual￾ized to the needs of each person. ACT teams provide medication, supportive therapy, 
problem-solving skills training, and crisis intervention, as well as assistance with housing 
and finances, work rehabilitation, and anything else that is critical to living successfully 
in the community. The team uses assertive outreach to provide services wherever a person 
with a psychiatric disability is located (Thorning & Dixon, 2020). The team is available 
24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
ACT operates with a nontermination policy: People who fail to appear for appoint￾ments are not terminated from the program, as is sometimes the case in other models. 
In addition, ACT provides time-unlimited services. This principle may be modified for 
those who demonstrate substantial improvement. However, a step-down transfer process 
is used to ensure continuity of care, as well as possibility of the individual’s returning to 
ACT should this be deemed necessary (DACTS, 2017).
There are variants of ACT teams that serve specialized populations or add a spe￾cific service focus. ACT has been adapted for veterans, older adults, youth, and people 
with intellectual disabilities (Thorning & Dixon, 2020). Another variant is a forensic 
ACT team that has been developed for community reentry or diversion from the crimi￾nal justice system (Rochefort, 2019). This model is discussed in Chapter 14. A third, 
enhanced model is family-aided ACT, which adds multifamily group psychoeducation 
(Melton & Dykeman, 2016). The specifics of family-aided ACT and other forms of mul￾tifamily group treatment are discussed in Chapter 12. A final approach has used teams 
composed of peers to provide ACT (Wright-Berryman, McGuire, & Salyers, 2011; see 8. Care Coordination 159
Chapter 17). Cognitive adaptation training has also been combined with ACT. Cognitive 
adaptation training (see Chapter 13 for a fuller discussion) integrates neuropsychology, 
behavioral counseling, and occupational therapy principles to teach people how to com￾pensate for cognitive impairments in order to improve social functioning. This form of 
ACT includes the development of environmental supports to fit a person’s specific needs 
(Allott, Killackey, Sun, Brewer, & Velligan, 2016).
Intensive Care Coordination
ICC (more commonly known as, and still sometimes called, intensive case management) 
emerged to serve individuals with heavy use of mental health services (Lim et al., 2022). 
ICC is sometimes referred to as assertive outreach, because it employs some aspects of 
ACT, including delivering services in the community, having low caseloads, and assist￾ing in meeting the daily needs of program participants. ICC services are typically deliv￾ered by an individual care coordinator; there are no shared caseloads. Interestingly, there 
seems to be no consensus on the essential ingredients of the model (Dieterich et al., 2017). 
But ICC became more widely implemented as it became apparent that individuals with 
psychiatric disabilities needed more than mere brokering services. Therefore, the aspects 
of more assertive care coordination and community service provision were incorporated 
into a basic brokered care coordination service (Dieterich et al., 2017).
Critical Time Intervention
Critical time intervention (CTI) was developed for individuals at high risk of homeless￾ness during periods of transition between institutional and community care, such as dur￾ing release from inpatient hospitalization or incarceration (Ponka et al., 2020). Like ACT, 
services involve navigating care systems, assessment, planning, and use of community 
supports. However, CTI is limited to the time period (usually about 9 months) of the 
housing transition, and services are not usually team-based. Caseload ratios are some￾what higher (around 25) than in ACT, with a focus on engaging individuals before the 
transition to conduct a needs assessment and transition plan (Manuel et al., 2023; Ponka 
et al., 2020). Services focus most heavily on housing, mental health, substance use, and 
employment. CTI includes a fidelity scale and has been extensively evaluated for individu￾als with psychiatric disabilities in recent years (Manuel et al., 2023).
Peer-Provided Care Coordination
People with psychiatric disabilities have been recruited as peer providers of care coordi￾nation. Peer care coordinators are people further along in their recovery from psychiatric 
disabilities (Wright-Berryman et al., 2011). By virtue of their own lived experience, peer 
coordinators may have a better appreciation of hurdles to a person’s goals and the relative 
strengths of different approaches to those goals. Peers may provide care coordination in 
peer-operated services, which are freestanding and wholly operated by individuals with 
psychiatric disability; in peer partnerships, which are services provided by peers and non￾peers; and peer employee services, which are more traditional rehabilitation programs 
into which people with psychiatric disabilities are hired to provide care coordination 
(Fortuna, Solomon, & Rivera, 2022). Again, peer services are summarized more fully in 
Chapter 17. A consensus about the active ingredients of care coordination has emerged as 
a result of syntheses of these varied models (see Table 8.1).160 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
OUTCOME RESEARCH
Reviews focusing on models of care coordination other than ACT—usually brokered care 
coordination—have yielded seemingly sobering conclusions. Reviews and meta-analyses 
have categorized care coordination as either intensive or nonintensive, with models such 
as ACT and ICC typically labeled as intensive due to low caseload sizes and frequency of 
contact (Dieterich et al., 2017; Lim et al., 2022). Less intensive models such as brokered 
care show few benefits (Ponka et al., 2020). ACT, CTI, and ICC all have impacts on hous￾ing stability and emergency room usage (Ponka et al., 2020). ICC was associated with 
increased financial stability and reduced substance use. However, there was little change 
in psychological symptoms or quality of life for any of these models. A systematic review 
found 13 CTI studies, including 10 with randomized designs (Manuel et al., 2023), that 
demonstrated a reduction in homelessness and increased engagement in services for those 
involved with CTI.
Other reviews point to factors besides care coordination per se that may affect out￾comes. An environmental context in which care coordination is embedded, and resources 
are readily available, is extremely important to models of care coordination (Bond & 
Drake, 2015; Thorning & Dixon, 2020). Also, care coordination may not be equally 
effective for all persons with psychiatric disabilities; some benefit, while others may not 
(Dieterich et al., 2017). Research on ACT suggests a great deal of consistency with regard 
to its outcomes. ACT seems to help people with psychiatric disabilities engage in ser￾vices by increasing housing stability, reducing hospital admission and length of stay, and 
promoting high personal and family satisfaction (Ponka et al., 2020; Dieterich et al., 
2017). A few reviews have concluded that there is improvement in symptomatology and 
quality of life, but most reviews find little effect of ACT on social functioning. Review￾ers have noted that greater fidelity to the original intervention yields better outcomes 
(Dieterich et al., 2017). Some reviewers have questioned whether increased adherence to 
medication may act as a mediator to reduce hospitalizations, but surprisingly few studies 
have assessed medication adherence per se (Dieterich et al., 2017). Few studies report on 
employment, and those that did saw no relationship between intensity of services and 
employment outcomes. Another review examined the impact of peer providers as part of 
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Lynn Smith, Revisited: More Intensive Care Coordination Needed
Lynn is still in the family home; the care coordinator has arranged for a part-time home 
health aide to help with general day-to-day care. However, this is a short-term solution, 
because Lynn cannot remain in the home. At this point, Lynn needs ICC to assist in finding 
her another housing arrangement, helping her to cope with the move, and providing the 
ongoing daily management that was previously provided by her mother. Unfortunately, Lynn 
has not learned skills for living independently, so the type of care coordination services 
she will need will depend on the type of housing arrangement she finds. With supported 
independent housing, Lynn will need ICC to help her access resources and supports, and 
maintain her home. Should Lynn be placed in a community residential rehabilitation facility, 
she is likely only to need brokered care coordination service, as was the situation before her 
mother’s death.8. Care Coordination 161
the ACT team (Wright-Berryman et al., 2011). Findings were somewhat mixed: On the 
one hand, results suggested that participant engagement was better when services were 
provided by peers; on the other hand, peer ACT was not found to have effects beyond 
those of standard ACT on symptom reduction or quality of life.
Despite the accumulation of research reflecting positively on ACT, some research in 
the United Kingdom has obtained more negative results. A large-scale study with more 
than 700 participants in four sites for over 2 years found no difference between ACT 
participants and controls in hospitalization rates (Burns et al., 1999). Others wondered 
whether these poor findings emerged because ACT was not implemented according to 
a well-specified manual (Fiander, Burns, McHugo, & Drake, 2003). However, a more 
TABLE 8.1. Key Features of Seven Models of Care Coordination
Brokered care coordination
• Basic functions: Assessment, planning, linking, monitoring, and advocacy
• Mainly service referrals
• High client–staff ratios
• Primarily office-based services
Clinical care coordination
• Basic brokered functions plus clinical care
• Intermittent provision of psychotherapy
• Skills training and psychoeducation
• Provision of environmental supports and resource acquisition
Strengths-based care coordination
• Identification of each person’s strengths
• Use of natural community resources
• Resource acquisition skills taught to participants
• Group supervision of care coordinators
Rehabilitation care coordination
• Rehabilitation goals of participants’ choice
• Functional assessment
• Skills training
• Resource acquisition skills taught to participants
Assertive community treatment (ACT)
• Multidisciplinary team
• Shared caseloads
• Low client–staff ratios
• Assertive outreach
• Services delivered in the community
• Time-unlimited services
• Team provision of social services, rehabilitation, and psychiatric treatment to meet participants’ 
needs, including medication management
Intensive care coordination (ICC)
• Assertive outreach
• Services delivered in the community
• Low client–staff ratios
Peer-provided care coordination
• Peers (people with lived experiences with serious mental illness) as service providers
• Peers: People in recovery whose journeys can help those struggling with disabilities and goals162 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
recent U.K. review of studies in which providers closely followed ACT guidelines also 
failed to find any significant changes in hospital care over 18 months: Burns (2010) exam￾ined the relationship between careful provision of ACT and outcomes in a meta-analysis 
of 64 studies. His findings did suggest that quality of outcomes was related to model fidel￾ity (the degree to which providers adhered to the ACT manual). It is unclear whether the 
differences in U.S. and U.K. findings represent a cultural phenomenon; variations in dis￾abilities and practices between the two nations might explain the different results. If so, 
this would be an example of cultural factors’ influence on the practice of rehabilitation.
In response to issues with ACT efficacy in the United Kingdom and Europe, research￾ers in the Netherlands adapted ACT to respond to changing needs of service users (Van 
Veldhuizen, 2007). Called flexible ACT, this model uses a multidisciplinary team like 
ACT, but offers two care levels that change based on the person’s current needs. In a lower 
level of care, flexible ACT recipients are offered individual case management services. 
When recipients experience an increase in symptoms, life stressor, or transition time, they 
can be swiftly shifted to a more intensive approach in which more frequent, team-based 
supports are in place. This model has since replaced ACT as the prevailing care coordina￾tion method in several European countries (Munch Nielsen, Hjorthøj, Arnfred, & Nor￾dentoft, 2022). Nugter, Engelsbel, Bähler, Keet, and van Veldhuizen (2016) followed 372 
participants of flexible ACT for 2 years, showing good model fidelity. Flexible ACT par￾ticipants had decreased hospitalization, fewer unmet needs, and increased quality of life 
during the study. A quasi-experimental study in Denmark compared participants at sites 
that had transitioned to flexible ACT with those that continued to provide ACT (Munch 
Nielsen et al., 2022). While the groups differed at baseline, making it difficult to compare 
outcomes, there were no differences in working alliance or satisfaction between the two 
models. Ponka and colleagues (2020) evaluated the cost-effectiveness of approaches to 
care coordination for people with mental illness who were homeless or at high risk of 
homelessness; they found that standard care coordination services (the least intensive 
level) was not cost-effective in comparison to ACT; it was more costly, since there were 
more outpatient services and arrests in that group, while participants in standard care 
coordination had lower quality of life and less time in stable housing. ICC shows prom￾ise for cost-effectiveness, since costs are related to emergency housing and health care 
(Ponka et al., 2020). ACT interventions had reliably better outcomes than usual treat￾ment, along with lower costs. A cost-effectiveness study (Maeng et al., 2023) examined a 
forensic-focused version of ACT as compared with ICC. Participants in flexible ACT had 
fewer days hospitalized, such that for every $1 invested in the flexible ACT program, an 
estimated $1.50 was saved.
CONCERNS REGARDING CARE COORDINATION
There have been criticisms leveled at care coordination in general, with some being 
directed specifically at ACT. Some commentators believe that ACT is coercive and pater￾nalistic, creating dependence as opposed to independence (Rochefort, 2019). Practices 
such as daily home visits, medication checks, and “no dropout policies” might feel intru￾sive. In one study, individuals participating in an ACT program who were exposed to 
limit-setting interventions had poorer outcomes than those who were not exposed to 
the same strategies (Rosenheck & Neale, 2004). Employment of these strategies prob￾ably has to do with the nature of the population, the expertise of the providers, and the 
available treatment options, rather than the model of care coordination per se (Solomon 8. Care Coordination 163
& Draine, 1995). More recently, ACT has strayed from original ideals of time-unlimited 
services and has made efforts to incorporate recovery principles into programming (Bond 
& Drake, 2015).
Generally, people with psychiatric disabilities and their families seem satisfied with 
care coordination; however, a recent review found few studies that collected satisfaction 
data and comparisons between models (Dieterich et al., 2017). One study found indi￾viduals served by ACT teams to be reasonably satisfied, although they did express some 
concerns (Redko, Durbin, Wasylenki, & Krupa, 2004). Some individuals did not like 
relating to so many service providers, did not feel that all of the providers knew them, 
and found it cumbersome dealing with so many staffers. Also, people disliked what they 
viewed as the intrusive, controlling nature of ACT, believing that they need not be visited 
so frequently. Positive remarks were made about the availability of the team members 
and about home visits, however (Redko et al., 2004). McGrew, Wilson, and Bond (1996) 
found that people served by ACT teams valued staff members’ availability and the alli￾ance with their care coordinators. Consistent with these findings, Krupa et al. (2005) 
found that people valued one primary relationship with a team member; for some, it was 
the only positive helping relationship in their lives.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Care coordination is an essential service for helping many persons with psychiatric disabili￾ties to meet the complex goals in their community. ACT seems to yield better outcomes 
than other care coordination models do, although some commentators have raised concerns 
about it as well. The design of ACT makes good clinical sense for those with psychiatric dis￾abilities; consequently, it has been the building block for other interventions for this popu￾lation, such as supported housing, supported employment, and dual-diagnosis programs 
(Bond & Drake, 2015).
The appropriate care coordination model for a given individual may change as circum￾stances change. There is a need for agency support of coordinators, as research has found 
that a lack of perceived organizational support for care coordination leads to job stress 
(Hannigan, Simpson, Coffey, Barlow, & Jones, 2018). Care coordination is a highly stressful 
job that requires a supportive environment to retain well-qualified care coordinators. With 
high turnover rates of care coordinators, as is the situation in many places, the establish￾ment of positive working relationships between care coordinators and participants becomes 
attenuated.164
CHAPTER 9
Medications
Psychiatric medication is an important part of treatment for addressing 
the challenges of acute episodes of severe mental illness, as well as decreasing relapses. 
Rehabilitation providers help people with psychiatric disabilities make ongoing decisions 
about their medications. They may do this by connecting people with medical profession￾als who consult with them about managing their prescriptions. In addition, rehabilitation 
providers use strategies that assist people in making decisions about their treatment plans 
(Taylor et al., 2021). A basic understanding of the clinical and side eff ects of the major 
classes of psychiatric medication helps rehabilitation providers in these tasks. Many peo￾ple with psychiatric disabilities are also under medical care for physical illnesses. In fact, 
people with serious mental illness have a higher rate of sickness than same-age people 
without mental illness (see Chapter 15). Although this chapter does not review nonpsy￾chiatric medications, rehabilitation providers may assume similar roles in helping people 
make decisions about all medical treatments (Taylor, 2021).
Medications and psychosocial treatments are often combined. Providers should not 
conclude, for example, “There’s no point in providing supported employment to Harry, 
because he is on antipsychotics,” or “Don’t consider antidepressants, because Mary is 
receiving cognitive- behavioral therapy.” The best rehabilitation plans help persons inte￾grate approaches; many people need both medications and psychosocial treatments. Spe￾cifi c decisions about these approaches will change over time. Rehabilitation providers 
must be vigilant to the dynamic nature of treatment plans, helping the persons with dis￾abilities stand at the forefront of their own plans.
ROLES FOR PSYCHIATRIC REHABILITATION PRACTITIONERS
Several professions prescribe psychiatric medications. Psychiatrists are especially expert 
in this task. However, other physicians also prescribe psychiatric medications; indeed, 
primary care providers are the most common prescribers of these kinds of drugs. Typi￾cally, primary care providers will refer people with signifi cant mental health disabilities 
to psychiatrists for medication management, given the complexity of these individuals’ 
medical plans. Nurse practitioners with specializations in mental health can prescribe 
these kinds of medications in many states; clinical psychologists with special postdoctoral 
CHAPTER 99. Medications 165
training also have prescription privileges in a few states. It is important to remember that 
these professionals may also be rehabilitation providers. For example, ACT programs 
(see Chapter 7) often have psychiatrists or nurses on their teams. Rehabilitation pro￾viders, however, are typically drawn from nonmedical professions or paraprofessions. 
Hence they have restricted roles in medication management; for the most part, they help 
people with disabilities make informed decisions about their prescriptions. To do this, 
they should have a working knowledge of medications, their therapeutic actions, and 
their side effects.
MEDICATION EFFECTS
The modern era of psychotropic medications began after World War II, with the finding 
in France in 1950 that a compound called chlorpromazine quelled the frightening voices 
and paranoid ideas of many people with schizophrenia, and the observation in Australia 
in 1948 that lithium muted the wild mood and energy cycles of many people with what 
was then called manic–depressive illness. Since that time, there has been a prolifera￾tion of medications for the major psychiatric disorders: schizophrenia, bipolar disorders, 
major depression, and anxiety and related disorders (Taylor et al., 2021). However, there 
has not been a lot of progress since the 1990s (Hyman, 2013). Effective medications are 
now available to alleviate the symptoms of severe mental illnesses. To be marketed in the 
United States, medications must be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA). Pharmaceutical companies are required to demonstrate a new medication’s basic 
safety and efficacy in placebo-controlled trials before they receive a license to market 
the medication. FDA approval requires that a medication be more effective than placebo 
(a “sugar pill”) for a specific condition in at least two independent RCTs. Placebo con￾trols are used to ensure that medications, rather than expectations or natural course of 
the illness, account for the improvements. To give a rough idea of the magnitude of the 
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Antwan Johnson Uses Medicines Inconsistently
Antwan Johnson is a single, 24-year-old Black male with a diagnosis of schizophrenia. He 
has had two psychotic episodes and hospitalizations, but none for the past year. He is strug￾gling to find a job while keeping up with his apartment and girlfriend. He has been prescribed 
one of the relatively new antipsychotic medications, but he has concerns about weight gain 
and sexual problems, both of which he has experienced in the past. Antwan is also worried 
about diabetes and heart disease, which he has heard might be caused by medications. His 
social worker, employment specialist, nurse, and doctor have all emphasized repeatedly 
that he may need to stay on his medications to avoid another episode of illness and hospi￾talization. They frequently ask him whether he is still taking his medications. However, he has 
also been cautioned by family members and some friends at the mental health center about 
medication. He is worried about long-term side effects, as well as the current problems he 
is experiencing related to medications. He frequently skips doses and sometimes goes for 
days or weeks without taking medications; he says he feels better when he is not using them. 
Antwan has been advised by his friends, and has learned from experience, not to tell his 
providers when he skips medications.166 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
efficacy of current medications, consider that about 70% of people with symptoms of 
major depression respond to an efficacious antidepressant, compared to about 40% in 
a control group who respond to placebo (Furukawa et al., 2016). Similarly, in a 1-year 
follow-up, about twice as many people with schizophrenia will experience a psychotic 
relapse if they are taking a placebo (61%) as compared to those taking an antipsychotic 
medication (24%) (Ceraso et al., 2022). These figures vary from study to study and with 
regard to specific medications and situations, but findings are often in the range of a 2:1 
or 3:2 response ratio for medication versus placebo.
Finding current information on specific medications and guidelines for use is a criti￾cal, everyday task for rehabilitation providers. The staff of many rehabilitation programs 
includes psychiatrists or psychiatric nurse practitioners who can serve as resources for 
nonmedical counselors in the field. There are widely available references, too, but they 
need to be used with caution. Reliable online resources include the Physicians’ Desk 
Reference (www.pdr.net) and WebMD (www.webmd.com) websites. The information 
available online from the pharmaceutical industry may sometimes be more advertisement 
than education. Using the internet can also be misleading, because the rapidly proliferat￾ing health information sites are not regulated and screened for accuracy. Thus, although 
the internet has become a source of information, much of it is anecdotal and misleading. 
A person’s doctor and other medical team members are often vital resources regarding 
medications for that person; still, the person should not give up decisions to these team 
members, but instead should join with them in coming up with the best plan. Table 9.1 
summarizes the major classes of psychiatric medications, common subgroups, clinical 
benefits, and side effects.
Most classes of medications have varied subgroups; how does a person and a medi￾cal team decide among subgroups after considering clinical benefits and side effects such 
as those listed in Table 9.1? This process may take time and may involve some trial and 
error. A subgroup that works effectively for one person may have a different impact on 
another. And even within a subgroup, specific medications vary in their impact on differ￾ent people. The hope of so-called “personalized” medicine is that in the future biologi￾cal (e.g., genetic) tests will predict whether a specific medication is likely effective for a 
certain individual. But so far this goal has not been achieved; therefore some trial and 
error is unavoidable (van Westrhenen & Ingelman-Sundberg, 2021). Medication effects 
may also vary as the amount of medication taken daily is changed. This process can be 
difficult, because weeks or months are often needed to determine the effects of a specific 
amount of a particular medication. While some medications, such as anxiolytics, start 
being effective within an hour or two, others (e.g., antidepressants) take weeks to show 
whether they work (Taylor et al., 2021). Person, doctor, and rehabilitation provider are 
trying to balance clinical benefits with side effects; again, however, the person should 
have the final authority on prescriptions.
Antipsychotic Medications
Antipsychotic medications are often prescribed for disorders on the schizophrenia spec￾trum and for people showing psychotic symptoms as a result of major depression, bipolar 
disorders, or other illnesses. They seem to have the best effects on some of the positive 
symptoms of psychosis, such as delusions, hallucinations, and formal thought disorder; 
unfortunately, they are less effective for negative symptoms such as flat affect, limited 
speech, and lack of motivation (that said, amisulpride and cariprazine show some effi￾cacy on negative symptoms) (Leucht et al., 2022). There are two major subgroups of  167
TABLE 9.1. The Seven Major Classes of Medications, Grouped by Indications 
and Clinical Effects
Indications and clinical effects Subgroups Side effects
Antipsychotic medications
Antipsychotic medications 
may be prescribed for 
disorders in the schizophrenia 
spectrum (e.g., schizophrenia, 
schizoaffective disorder) or 
psychoses related to affective 
disorders (e.g., bipolar or major 
depression). They may relieve 
some of the positive symptoms 
of psychosis, including 
hallucinations, delusions, 
and formal thought disorder. 
Some second-generation 
antipsychotics may relieve 
negative symptoms. 
Conventional:
chlorpromazine (Thorazine), 
chlorprothixene (Taractan), 
droperidol (Inapsine), 
fluphenazine (Permitil, 
Prolixin), haloperidol 
(Haldol), mesoridazine 
(Serentil), molindone 
(Moban), perphenazine 
(Trilafon), pimozide 
(Orap), prochlorperazine 
(Compazine), thioridazine 
(Mellaril), thiothixene 
(Navane), trifluoperazine 
(Stelazine)
Wakefulness: Sedation, fatigue.
Cardiovascular: Low blood 
pressure.
Hormonal (endocrine): Breast 
enlargement and increased milk 
production.
Skin: Skin rashes, skin 
photosensitivity.
Neurological (sometimes called 
extrapyramidal side effects or 
EPSs): Dystonia (severe muscle 
spasms); pseudoparkinsonism 
(tremor, muscle stiffness, rigidity, 
stooped posture, masklike face); 
akinesia (reduction in spontaneous 
movements); akathisia (internal 
restlessness); tardive dyskinesia 
(involuntary movements, often in 
mouth, tongue, or fingers). 
Second-generation 
(“atypical”): aripiprazole 
(Abilify), clozapine (Clozaril), 
olanzapine (Zyprexa), 
risperidone (Risperdal), 
ziprasidone (Geodon)
Sedation, hypersalivation, 
constipation, dry mouth, obesity, 
metabolic changes (lipids and 
glucose), Type 2 diabetes mellitus, 
pseudoparkinsonism at higher 
doses, agranulocytosis (sudden 
drop in white blood cells). 
Medication for antipsychotic side effects
Medications for the side effects 
of antipsychotics may be 
prescribed for extrapyramidal 
side effects (EPSs), which 
often result from conventional 
antipsychotic medication use. 
In particular, they relieve the 
various movement disorders 
that are among the EPSs.
amantadine (Symmetrel), 
benztropine (Cogentin), 
diphenhydramine (Benadryl), 
propranolol (Inderal), 
trihexiphenidyl (Artane)
Dry mouth, blurred vision, memory 
problems, constipation, rapid 
heartbeat, loss of appetite.
Antidepressant medication
Antidepressant medications 
may be prescribed for 
depression, and also for some 
anxiety and related disorders. 
They may relieve biological 
(e.g., insomnia and low 
energy), psychological (e.g., 
low mood and hopelessness), 
and behavioral (e.g., suicide) 
symptoms of depression.
Tricyclics and tetracyclics:
amitriptyline (Elavil), 
clomipramine (Anafranil), 
desipramine (Norpramin, 
Pertofrane), doxepin (Adapin, 
Sinequan), imipramine 
(Tofranil, Janimine, 
Sk-Pramine), nortriptyline 
(Aventyl, Pamelor), 
protriptyline (Vivactil), 
trimipramine (Surmontil), 
amoxapine (Asendin), 
maprotiline (Ludiomil)
Cardiovascular: Orthostatic 
hypotension, palpitations, 
conduction slowing, hypertension.
Central nervous system: Tremor, 
sedation, stimulation, twitches, 
seizure, EPSs.
Other: Perspiration, weight gain, 
sexual dysfunction, impotence, 
dry mouth, constipation, urinary 
hesitance, esophageal reflux.
 (continued)168 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
TABLE 9.1. (continued)
Indications and clinical effects Subgroups Side effects
Antidepressant medication (continued)
Monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors: phenelzine 
(Nardil), selegiline (Eldepryl), 
tranylcypromine (Parnate), 
isocarboxazid (Marplan)
Low blood pressure, high blood 
pressure crises (interactions with 
foods or medications), sexual 
dysfunction, insomnia, sedation, 
stimulation, muscle cramps, 
urinary hesitancy, constipation, dry 
mouth, weight gain, twitches. 
Selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors: fluoxetine 
(Prozac), fluvoxamine 
(Luvox), paroxetine (Paxil), 
sertraline (Zoloft)
Gastrointestinal: Nausea, 
indigestion, diarrhea, vomiting, 
cramping.
Neurological: Insomnia, jitteriness, 
agitation, restlessness, headache, 
tremor.
Other: Excessive perspiration, 
decreased libido, delayed orgasm.
Mood stabilizers
Mood stabilizers may be 
prescribed for bipolar 
disorders or schizoaffective 
disorder. They may relieve 
expansive mood (e.g., 
euphoria) and behaviors 
(e.g., unusual trouble with 
overspending or sexual 
relations).
lithium carbonate (Eskalith, 
Lithane, Lithotabs, 
Eskalith CR, Lithobid), 
lithium citrate (Cibalith-S), 
carbamazepine (Tegretol), 
valproic acid (Depakene, 
Depakote), lamotrigine 
(Lamictal), gabapentin 
(Neurontin)
Neurological: Tremor, ataxia 
(balance problems), sedation.
Gastrointestinal: Indigestion, 
weight gain, diarrhea.
Skin: Rash, hair loss.
Cardiac: Arrhythmia.
Hematological: Low blood count. 
Antianxiety medication (anxiolytics)
Anxiolytics may be prescribed 
for anxiety and related 
disorders, as well as for 
major depression. They may 
relieve distress as well as 
related autonomic symptoms, 
such as shortness of breath, 
rapid heartbeat, and profuse 
sweating. They may also 
relieve insomnia.
Benzodiazepines:
alprazolam (Xanax), 
chlordiazepoxide (Librium), 
clonazepam (Klonopin), 
clorazepate (Tranxene), 
diazepam (Valium), 
lorazepam (Ativan), 
oxazepam (Serax)
Sedation.
Impaired cognitive function and 
judgment; amnesia.
Respiratory suppression.
May lead to withdrawal if 
terminated precipitously.
Nonbenzodiazepines:
buspirone (BuSpar)
Nausea, headache, nervousness, 
and insomnia.
Sedatives/hypnotics
Sedatives and hypnotics may 
relieve symptoms related to 
insomnia.
Benzodiazepines: estazolam 
(Prosom), flurazepam 
(Dalmane), quazepam 
(Doral), temazepam 
(Restoral), triazolam 
(Halcion)
Sedation.
Impaired cognitive function and 
judgment; amnesia.
Respiratory suppression.
May lead to withdrawal if 
terminated precipitously.9. Medications 169
antipsychotics: conventional and atypical. The latter are also called second-generation, 
because they emerged from a line of research that gained prominence in the late 1980s, 
well after the introduction of the conventional antipsychotics.
Conventional antipsychotic medications may negatively affect several organ systems 
in the body. They can make people feel tired and fatigued. They can lower blood pressure 
and lead to skin rashes. They also have a variety of neurological effects, including muscle 
spasms, tremors, and restlessness, which are often known together as extrapyramidal 
side effects (EPSs). Atypical antipsychotics can also lead to sedation, changes in appetite, 
constipation, and obesity (which can lead to Type 2 diabetes).
Antipsychotic medications can be taken orally and daily as tablets or as depot injec￾tions with intervals of several weeks or sometimes months. Studies show some benefit 
of depot compared to oral antipsychotics in terms of relapse and hospitalization rates 
(Kishimoto, Hagi, Kurokawa, Kane, & Correll, 2021); however, this remains a personal 
choice.
Medication for the Side Effects of Antipsychotics
There are medications often prescribed to diminish the EPSs caused by conventional 
antipsychotics. Benzatropine (Cogentin) and diphenhydramine (Benadryl) are common 
TABLE 9.1. (continued)
Indications and clinical effects Subgroups Side effects
Sedatives/hypnotics (continued)
Nonbenzodiazepines:
eszopiclone (Lunesta), 
zalepon (Sonata), zolpidem 
(Ambien), zopiclone 
(Imovane), ramelteon 
(Rozerem)
Similar to benzodiazepines.
Psychostimulants
Psychostimulants may be 
prescribed for attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
or narcolepsy. For ADHD, 
they may relieve impulsivity, 
promote attentiveness, and be 
calming. For narcolepsy, they 
may reduce sleepiness.
Stimulants:
dextroamphetamine–
amphetamine (Adderall), 
dextroamphetamine 
(Dexedrine), 
dexmethylphenidate 
(Focalin), methylphenidate 
(Concerta, Ritalin), 
lisdexamfetamine (Vyvanse)
Central nervous system: Insomnia, 
headaches, nervousness, and social 
withdrawal.
Gastrointestinal: Stomachache and 
appetite loss.
Cardiac: Elevated heart rate and 
blood pressure.
May exacerbate psychotic 
symptoms.
Nonstimulants: atomextrine 
(Strattera), clonidine 
(Kapvay), guanfacine 
(Intuniv), armodafinil 
(Nuvigil), modafinil (Alertec, 
Provigil)
Nausea, decreased appetite; 
fatigue; abdominal pain; increased 
heart rate and blood pressure; 
insomnia; irritability; urinary 
retention.
Note. Common examples of generic and trade names (in parentheses) are subgrouped. Significant side effects are 
summarized. Based on Ferrando, Owen, and Levenson (2014).170 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
examples. These medications may have their own side effects, however, including dry 
mouth, blurred vision, and heart problems.
Antidepressant Medications
There are three major subgroups of antidepressant medications. The oldest is monoamine 
oxide inhibitors (MAOIs); they have dangerous side effects, and hence are used sparingly, 
if at all, today. Tricyclic and tetracyclic medications have relatively similar chemistry and 
physiological effects, which differ from those of the third subgroup, selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Antidepressant medications are often indicated for people 
showing marked biological (e.g., sleep disturbance), psychological (e.g., sadness and 
hopelessness), and behavioral (e.g., thoughts of suicide) symptoms of depression. These 
may include people with major depression or anxiety disorders.
As just stated, MAOIs have significant side effects, including blood pressure crises 
that are made worse by some foods and medications. Tricyclics and tetracyclics also affect 
blood pressure, though at less risky levels. They may have neurological side effects includ￾ing tremor or sedation. Tricyclics and tetracyclics may also cause weight gain, esophageal 
reflux, and sexual dysfunctions. SSRIs have in some ways become more popular, because 
they seem to have fewer side effects than the other two subgroups. That said, they still 
may cause restlessness and can have negative effects on digestion, sleep, and sexual func￾tioning.
Brain Stimulation Therapies
Brain stimulation therapies (BSTs) include a variety of treatments that involve focal elec￾trical or electromagnetic brain stimulation (Rosson et al., 2022). Two BSTs have particu￾larly broad research support. Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is the strategic induction 
of seizures by electrical means. Pulses are delivered through electrodes on the scalp while 
the person is under general anesthesia to avoid bodily harm that might result from the sei￾zures. ECT is often provided in a series of 8–12 treatments, two to three times per week; 
sometimes ECT is provided, about once a month, as maintenance treatment over longer 
periods of time. Side effects may include disorientation and impairments in verbal or 
autobiographical memory (Landry, Moreno, Patry, Potvin, & Lemasson, 2021). Studies 
show benefits of ECT for people with depression (Meechan, Laws, Young, McLoughlin, 
& Jauhar, 2022) and for those with schizophrenia (Ali, Mathur, Malhotra, & Braga, 
2019), including positive effects on negative symptoms (Tseng et al., 2022). Transcranial 
magnetic stimulation (TMS) was developed to address a variety of neurological disor￾ders. During the procedure, a magnetic generator coil is placed near the person’s head; 
this coil provides low electrical current to the region of the brain. TMS has been shown to 
improve symptoms in people with depression, anxiety, or OCD without inducing seizures 
(Hyde et al., 2022). People with these conditions should consult a skilled psychiatrist to 
determine which of the two approaches might be better for them.
Mood Stabilizers
Lithium is the first line of medication prescribed for the manic symptoms of bipolar I dis￾order and related illnesses. It seems to diminish the expansive mood and troubling behav￾iors that characterize a manic state. Lithium has risky side effects that typically require 9. Medications 171
regular blood tests to keep it at a certain safe blood level. Other mood stabilizers with less 
harmful side effects have since emerged, such as carbamazepine (Tegretol) and valproate 
(Depakote) and lamotrigine (Lamictal). Both lithium and the other mood stabilizers may 
have other negative effects, including digestive, skin, and neurological symptoms.
Antianxiety Medications
The panic and distress of anxiety and related disorders can be disruptive for many peo￾ple. Medications treating these symptoms and the corresponding physiological effects, 
such as shortness of breath or rapid heartbeat, are called anxiolytics. One group of these 
is benzodiazepines, which were once commonly used to help people manage their anxiety 
but are used much less often now because they can be addictive (leading to significant 
withdrawal when terminated). They can also suppress respiration. There are nonbenzo￾diazepines like buspirone (BuSpar) that seem to be less addictive, but these have risks of 
their own—including, paradoxically, nervousness and insomnia.
Sedatives and Hypnotics
Sometimes both benzodiazepines and nonbenzodiazepines are prescribed to help people 
fall asleep or stay asleep. However, these medications may worsen sleep when taken for a 
long time and hence are usually discontinued after a month or so. They also have the side 
effects described earlier for anxiolytics.
Psychostimulants
Psychostimulants are medications that reduce fatigue, promote alertness, and enhance 
mood. They have been used narrowly to assist people with ADHD or narcolepsy. People 
taking psychostimulants for ADHD show less impulsivity and better attentiveness. Nar￾colepsy is a chronic sleep disorder marked by overwhelming daytime drowsiness and 
sudden sleep attacks; psychostimulants may decrease sleepiness in persons with this dis￾order. Psychostimulants should not be used for people with psychosis, because they can 
worsen symptoms such as hallucinations. Psychostimulants, in general, can also have 
heart, digestive, and neurological effects.
MAKING DECISIONS ABOUT MEDICATIONS
Although psychotropic medications have many benefits, research shows that some people 
decide not to seek such medications or not to take them as prescribed. Large epidemio￾logical studies such as the National Comorbidity Survey Replication (Kessler & Meri￾kangas, 2004) and the World Mental Health Surveys (Demyttenaere et al., 2004) have 
shown that 30–40% of people who might benefit from psychotropic medications fail to 
seek them out. Providers have described psychological processes that might explain this.
Some rather extreme older ideas included resistance (intrapsychic processes were 
hypothesized to block a person from fully engaging in treatment) and noncompliance
(a behavioral judgment was passed on whether a person was failing to take medica￾tion) (Corrigan, 2011a). The concepts of adherence and nonadherence came later, as 
providers came to understand that people had to have active participation in treatment 172 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
decisions (Velligan et al., 2010). The concept of collaboration more clearly acknowledged 
the respective expertise of care provider (in disease processes) and the person (in personal 
experiences). Collaboration was insightful for its time, elevating the “patient” to equal 
status with the provider. The idea of engagement subsequently emerged: Understanding 
processes that help the provider engage the consumer in a collaborative relationship is 
vital. Finally, self-determination governs the rehabilitation provider’s current perspective 
on medication decisions.
Self-determination is choice! This, in part, can be stated as an ethical manifesto—
that by the very essence of being human, people have the right to choose where they want 
to live, what they want to work, with whom they wish to affiliate, and what medications 
they wish to ingest (Varkey, 2021). But choice is not just an ethic; it is an observational 
and psychological reality. People choose all the time. They drop out of school if it does 
not meet their vocational or other developmental goals. They exercise daily if it is con￾sistent with their vision of wellness. They take medication when they perceive it to have 
positive impact, and do not take it if they see it as having no effect or a negative impact.
Self-determination, however, is not meant as carte blanche for the pursuit of per￾sonal goals, regardless of their impact on others. Self-determination needs to be under￾stood vis-à-vis the same kinds of limits experienced by most adults. Generally, people are 
expected to make decisions that reflect not only their own interests but also those of other 
important people (e.g., friends, family members, coworkers, and others in their com￾munity). The idea of responsibility may be viewed as a restraint to self-determination; 
for individuals with mental health problems, this may mean that these individuals have 
a responsibility to participate in treatment so as not to burden others. But taking respon￾sibility for one’s own health and well-being is also advocated by the recovery movement; 
it is part of becoming empowered and self-determined. Self-determination suggests that 
people with mental illness are just like others—capable of making valuable choices and 
therefore deserving of self-determination. Self-determination requires a thoughtful bal￾ance between exercising one’s personal agency and responsibly considering the concerns 
of others.
HOW MIGHT ENHANCING SELF-DETERMINATION 
IMPROVE HEALTH-RELATED DECISIONS?
This section considers approaches aimed at the self, so that a person is better able to 
comprehend and make decisions about medications and other aspects of health care, and 
at the community, so that it can provide adequate resources and services for satisfactory 
decisions and not just be a barrier to self-determination. Still, cautions need to be voiced 
here. In helping to facilitate treatment participation, providers may unintentionally rein￾vent the value of adherence; namely, the goal may become getting people with mental ill￾nesses to accept the treatment that is recommended for them by “expert” providers. This 
should not occur. Self-determination means that a person decides for themself the direc￾tion and nature of intervention, with service providers occupying consultation and sup￾portive roles. The strategies discussed here are only meant to facilitate treatment-related 
behavior once the decision to participate in treatment has been made. Incidentally, many 
of the strategies here are applicable to most rehabilitation decisions, not just medication 
(e.g., “Should I seek employment?”; “Do I want to change my address?”; “Should I give 
up smoking?”).9. Medications 173
Helping a Person Make Decisions
Decisions related to adherence or other aspects of health care are more difficult when a 
person does not fully appreciate the ramifications of those decisions. SDM (see Chapter 
7) is a fairly well-developed and evaluated approach to health options meant to facili￾tate this process (Gurtner, Schols, Lohrmann, Halfens, & Hahn, 2021; NICE, 2021). 
It combines three basic principles and strategies. First, it helps the person examine costs 
and benefits of specific goals. For example, the person is encouraged to identify and 
make sense of the clinical benefits and side effects of a medication. Second, this kind of 
assessment is facilitated by information, so that the person better understands their life 
goals, disabling disorder, available treatments, and other relevant parameters. The edu￾cation process requires development of meaningful and user-friendly information chan￾nels. These may include face-to-face classroom kinds of endeavors or online didactic 
efforts. Peer-to-peer mentoring can also be helpful here. Third, health-related decision 
making is fundamentally a series of social exchanges between person and provider. Skills 
that enhance the qualities of these exchanges positively affect treatment decisions. This 
last point has been incorporated into motivational interviewing. It suggests that SDM 
exchanges do not simply constitute an actuarial process weighing costs and benefits but 
must also include the factors that define good therapeutic relationships, such as empathy, 
genuineness, and promotion of self-efficacy (Slade, 2009).
Ample research has examined SDM in a variety of health care contexts, including 
treatment decisions related to substance abuse and mental illnesses. Findings showed that 
SDM leads to enhanced satisfaction with treatments and more consumer involvement in 
treatment decisions. However, findings on SDM effects on mental health, such as psychi￾atric symptoms, or functional outcomes were more mixed, with no clear benefits of SDM 
(Aoki et al., 2022; Thomas et al., 2021).
Perhaps cognitive deficits are one reason why SDM seems to have limited effec￾tiveness for people with serious mental illnesses. As a result of information-processing 
dysfunctions, some people are unable to understand the balance between advantages 
and disadvantages of specific medications. Accordingly, cognitive therapies have been 
developed and tested to enhance treatment decisions and behaviors. Cognitive adapta￾tion training is a good example with a growing body of supporting evidence (see Chapter 
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Carlos Ramirez Learns to Manage His Illness
Carlos Ramirez is a single, 27-year-old Hispanic American male with a diagnosis of schizo￾phrenia. He has had two psychotic episodes and hospitalizations, but none for the past year. 
The rehabilitation team has helped him to maintain his job, apartment, and relationship with 
his girlfriend. After trying several typical and atypical antipsychotic medications and experi￾encing a variety of distressing side effects, he and his medical team have found a medication 
combination with dosages that he is able to tolerate. Carlos and his girlfriend are both well 
informed about his illness and use a variety of coping strategies. She helps him attend to 
stress, sleep, diet, exercise, job performance, and medications. They both continue to ask 
questions as they acquire new information from friends and the media, but they know they 
can count on the team to help them find accurate answers.174 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
13) (Stiekema et al., 2020). Cognitive adaptation training is the provision of compensa￾tory strategies and environmental supports specifically built around individual EBPs. For 
example, a counselor might work with a person to clear out old medications from the 
bathroom cabinet; to place all currently prescribed medications in a daily pillbox; and to 
record a message linked to a computer alarm: “It’s time to take my medication.”
Removing Community Barriers to Self-Determination
The second set of approaches addresses community hurdles to self-determination. Three 
are considered here: educating providers about self-determination; advocating for legisla￾tion that promotes empowered decisions; and streamlining interventions so participation 
is not onerous.
Professional Education about Self-Determination
Although providers seem to be improving their awareness of ideas about recovery and 
self-determination, there still seems to be a tenacious hold on old notions that people do 
not overcome their serious mental illnesses. Many medical and residency programs have 
incorporated recovery principles and people in recovery into their training, in order to 
stimulate interest in and educate newer generations of psychiatrists and other profession￾als about the treatment paradigm shift (Ahmed et al., 2021).
Laws and Policies That Promote Recovery
Efforts have been made to codify principles of recovery and self-determination. In 
part, this has been debated in legislation related to diverse issues such as outpatient 
commitment and psychiatric advance directives (ADs). More immediate to the mental 
health system than activities of the legislature are policies of the executive. The New 
Freedom Commission on Mental Health rested its report to President George W. Bush 
on a recovery-oriented system (Hogan, 2003). Most states have followed suit. Specific 
examples related to self-determination have included meaningful person and family 
involvement in government decisions, especially ones related to new spending; support 
of person-developed and person-operated services; person-responsive crisis planning and 
advance directives; and statewide recovery education programs. Similar policies apply to 
medication decisions.
ADs are legal documents written by people with mental illness when they are think￾ing clearly (Zelle, Kemp, & Bonnie, 2015). They are often used as adjuncts to the kinds 
of relapse prevention plan discussed in Chapter 7. They describe treatment preferences 
or name agents to make treatment decisions should the persons become unable to make 
such decisions due to psychiatric illness. Two kinds of ADs are available: (1) instructive
ADs, in which instructions about mental health treatment and rehabilitation services are 
provided in case of psychiatric crisis; and (2) proxy ADs, in which an individual names 
a health care agent to make treatment decisions when the individual is unable to do so. 
Research on the effect of ADs is complex: ADs are highly valued by consumers (Braun, 
Gaillard, Vollmann, Gather, & Scholten, 2023). Although ADs were created to enhance 
a person’s sense of self-determination, their better effects seem to be on the quality of the 
relationship between provider and person as they make decisions about medication use 
(Zelle et al., 2015).9. Medications 175
Convenience and Immediacy
Service providers have sought to make evidence-based practices more convenient. The 
use of the word convenient might seem to minimize the importance of this effort, but 
humans, as a general rule, choose behaviors with the fewest demands. Accordingly, prac￾tical, grassroots approaches to services have emerged over the past decade or more. Some 
make obvious sense from contemporary perspectives, such as moving services out of the 
office and beyond the 9-to-5 workday to offer assistance when and where persons need 
them—the type of assistance at the heart of principles that define community support 
programs and ACT. Offering assistance when and where it is needed is an especially 
urgent and timely priority for services meant to address people with serious mental ill￾nesses who are homeless or court-involved (Diduck et al., 2022; Schreiter, Speerforck, 
Schomerus, & Gutwinski, 2021).
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Medications may have an important role in rehabilitation plans meant to help people achieve 
their life goals. Although most rehabilitation counselors cannot prescribe medications, they 
may still play an important role in the ongoing management of prescribed drugs. They can 
help to educate people as they consider prescriptions. Rehabilitation counselors may also 
facilitate the SDM process. The best approach to medication and rehabilitation occurs when 
a counselor reinforces notions of recovery and empowerment. Medication plans should be 
self-determined.176
CHAPTER 10
Housing and Citizenship
Housing may be among the most important of personal goals. People are 
unlikely to get much satisfaction out of life unless they reside in a safe and warm place. 
This may be an especially dire issue for people with psychiatric disabilities who are expe￾riencing homelessness. Housing for many may also be the fi rst step toward the pursuit 
of broader rehabilitation goals. A person will have diffi culty pursuing employment and 
vocation without a home. Both physical health and mental health are sorely challenged 
by lack of stable housing.
This chapter begins with a description of the types of settings in which housing for 
persons with psychiatric disabilities may occur. This is followed by a review of values 
guiding a person’s decisions about housing and a summary of factors that infl uence where 
people might live. Types of housing models, and research on housing interventions, are 
then discussed.
Most research on barriers to housing refl ects individual-level factors: symptoms and 
other personal determinants that undermine fi nding and keeping good housing. How￾ever, providers need to keep the bidirectional nature of rehabilitation in mind (individual 
and communal) as they help persons pursue housing goals; that is, providers also need to 
be mindful of structural and community barriers to achieving residential goals—issues 
such as racial and ethnic discrimination, experiences of mental illness stigma and areas 
that are unfriendly to neighbors with psychiatric illness, and overall lack of aff ordable 
housing (Mejia- Lancheros et al., 2021; Piat et al., 2015)
Housing is entwined with ideas of citizenship. Living in hospitals or nursing homes 
cements people in the patient role, further alienating them from community. Housing 
and citizenship goals stress residence that promotes belonging (Sylvestre, 2017; Sylvestre 
et al., 2018). Instead of standing out as “that patient,” a citizen with a psychiatric dis￾ability becomes another neighbor. As such, they are able to enjoy the ordinariness of 
everyday life; everything is not framed in terms of disabilities and weaknesses. Citizen￾ship includes the “fi ve R’s” of rights, responsibilities, roles, resources, and relationships 
(Clayton, Miller, Gambino, Rowe, & Ponce, 2020). Rehabilitation plans should focus 
both on both instrumental aspects of citizenship (skills related to availing community 
resources) and its aff ective components (a sense of membership and relationship).
CHAPTER 1010. Housing and Citizenship 177
WHERE MIGHT HOUSING OCCUR?
A variety of settings, opportunities, and programs define the continuum of housing for 
people with psychiatric disabilities. This continuum ranges from the most challenging 
settings (e.g., living on the streets) to those most likely to reflect personal rehabilitation 
goals (an independently owned or leased setting with roommates of choice in setting of 
choice). A typology of these settings, together with citations of research reflecting their 
characteristics, is provided in Table 10.1.
First, it is useful to gain an understanding of the size of the overall population experi￾encing homelessness. According to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Develop￾ment (HUD), in January 2022, in a single night there were 582,462 people experiencing 
homelessness (de Sousa et al., 2022). At this point-in-time estimate, 40% of the popula￾tion experiencing homelessness were unsheltered, 60% were sheltered. While, overall, 
this represents only a slight increase from 2020, the number of people with disabilities 
experiencing long-term homeless increased by 16%. Black and Indigenous individuals 
and people of color continued to be overrepresented.
Homelessness is troubling for many people with psychiatric disabilities. Estimates 
for the prevalence of severe mental illness among those who are homeless vary widely, 
depending on sampling method, criteria for mental illness, and criteria for homelessness 
(Ayano, Tesfaw, & Shumet, 2019; Gutwinski, Schreiter, Deutscher, & Fazel, 2021). A 
1996 national survey of homeless persons found that 56% met a broad definition of 
lifetime mental illness (i.e., meeting diagnostic criteria and having a history of psychi￾atric hospitalization) (Mojtabai, 2005). Recent meta-analyses estimate that at among 
those experiencing homelessness in developed countries, the 12-month prevalence of any 
mental disorder is 76.2% (Gutwinski et al., 2021) and psychosis, 18.8% (Ayano et al., 
2019). SAMHSA (2011) estimates that, overall, 30% of people who experience chronic 
homelessness have a severe mental illness. Absence of housing varies from being literally 
homeless (i.e., lacking a regular or nighttime domicile) to being functionally homeless
(i.e., receiving temporary assistance from a shelter or other program).
Institutions emerged as the first planned efforts to address the care and housing 
needs of people with mental illness. Originally, these were large, government-run settings 
where people might stay for months or years. Advocates realized that these settings were 
limiting at best, and often inhumane. As a result of public awareness of the inhumane 
conditions in institutions, optimism about new antipsychotic medications, court cases 
challenging commitment procedures, policies that incentivized states to move people out 
of state hospitals, and the development of community support programs, the overall cen￾sus and length of stays in state hospitals dropped substantially (Grob, 1992). Other kinds 
of inpatient settings arose, including private psychiatric hospitals that exclusively catered 
to mental illness or psychiatric wards in general hospitals. Private hospitals and wards 
were also developed for substance abuse problems. Inpatient facilities are now also fre￾quently found in correctional facilities; in fact, jails and prisons are currently among the 
greatest sources of institutional mental health care in the United States (see Chapter 14).
Hospital inpatient units are meant to provide short-term care, so the person can be 
returned to the community. However, institutions also emerged in the community, such 
as nursing homes, intermediate care facilities, or licensed board and care facilities. These 
are often criticized for focusing exclusively on custodial needs (hygiene, diet, and physical 
health), while ignoring other essential elements of recovery (employment, relationships, 
education, and independent living). Adult foster care may also be viewed as a form of 178 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
TABLE 10.1. A Typology of Residential Arrangements
Homelessness
Homelessness includes several gradations (Drake, McHugo, & Biesanz, 1995; McHugo et al., 2005; 
McKinney–Vento Homeless Assistance Act of 1987):
• Literally homeless. “An individual who lacks a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime 
residence” (McKinney–Vento Act of 1987).
• Marginally homeless. Individuals who are living in temporary settings such as emergency 
shelters, or who “double up” with members of other households because they have nowhere else 
to go.
• Functionally homeless. Individuals living in temporary and institutional settings that are 
preceded by literal homelessness (McHugo et al., 2005).
Institutions
• State psychiatric hospitals. State-operated facilities whose primary function is the treatment of 
mental disorders.
• Private psychiatric hospitals. Private hospitals whose primary function is the treatment of mental 
disorders. Inpatient units operated by community mental health centers are included here.
• General hospital psychiatric wards. Psychiatric wards located in general medical centers and 
providing short-term, acute crisis care.
• Substance abuse hospitalization. Hospital wards whose primary function is the treatment of 
substance use disorders.
• Nursing home or intermediate care facilities. Facilities responsible for medical and physical care of 
a person, and licensed as such by the state (Shadish & Bootzin, 1981).
• Correctional facilities. Jails, prisons, and other correctional facilities.
• Licensed board-and-care facilities. “Non-medical community-based facilities that provide at least 
two meals a day and/or routine protective oversight to one or more residents with limitations 
in two or more daily living activities. There is enormous variation among these facilities in size, 
resident mix, daily charges and services. Similarly, the amount, type and extent of board and care 
regulation varies greatly at the State level” (Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and 
Evaluation, 1993). California is one state with an extensive network of board-and-care facilities 
(Lindamer et al., 2003; Segal & Aviram, 1978). Licensed board-and-care facilities are distinguished 
from unlicensed boarding homes, described below.
• Living with others who provide substantial care
—Adult foster care. Housing provided by a family or funded by a government program (e.g., a 
state mental health authority or the Department of Veterans Affairs) in which a person is living 
in a single family dwelling with a nonrelative who provides “substantial care,” including a 
majority of the following functions: monitoring medication, transportation, cooking, cleaning, 
making restrictions on leaving the home, and/or money management.
—Living with relatives (heavily dependent for personal care and control). A key criterion for 
classifying a person in this category is the assumption that if the family were not involved, the 
person would be living in a more restrictive setting. The same caretaking criteria used for adult 
foster care are considered in making this classification.
Crisis housing as an alternative to hospitalization
• Structured, supervised group living arrangements provided as a short-term alternative to psychiatric 
hospitalization. Length of stay is typically limited to about 90 days (Stroul, 1988).
• Housing alternatives to hospitalization, addressed on an individualized basis by using community 
lodging (e.g., hotels) (Bond et al., 1989).
Semi-independent setting
• Group home. A residence supervised by staff members who assist residents in completing chores 
essential to independent living (e.g., shopping, meal preparation, laundry). Typically, group homes 
have live-in staffs. Group homes may be time-limited or permanent residences (Golomb & Kocsis, 
1988; Winerip, 1994).10. Housing and Citizenship 179
institutional services. In this case, housing is provided by a family but funded by the gov￾ernment; again, the services provided are largely custodial.
Crisis care may assume a dynamic place between institutions and various versions of 
semi-independent and independent housing. In some ways, short stays in inpatient units 
and crisis stabilization settings provide this function. The intention is for a person to stay 
no more than a week until they are stabilized and can be returned to the community. 
Community-based and peer support alternatives have also appeared. This includes the 
peer respite model that provides voluntary mental health support to people experiencing 
or at risk of crisis, in a short-term residential setting staffed by peer providers (Pelot & 
Ostrow, 2021). Another example that utilizes peer support is called the Living Room; 
this is a place for acute crises, with the ambience of a small and quiet residence (Shattell 
et al., 2014).
Semi-independent housing is meant to provide a “safe” place where people with 
psychiatric disabilities can try out new skills to manage disabilities before living indepen￾dently. Group homes are common examples; these are facilities much like houses or small 
apartment buildings, run by 24-hour staff. The Fairweather Lodge Program provides a 
self-governing version of group homes, where residents make most decisions by consen￾sus (Krepp, 2000; Semmelhack, Ende, & Hazell, 2013). Independent housing represents 
most people’s goals. These are the same kinds of residential settings sought by every 
adult: leased or owned property where the residents have total control over the home. 
Agencies are now sponsoring scattered-site programs that help people attain these goals.
TABLE 10.1. (continued)
• Fairweather Lodge. A self-governing communal living arrangement in which residents share 
household duties and often work together on mobile work crews (Krepp, 2000).
• Boarding home. A facility that provides meals and lodging; however, it is not seen as an extension 
of a mental health or psychiatric rehabilitation agency, nor is it staffed with mental health 
personnel, and residents generally have autonomy to come and go.
• Supervised housing program. Housing sponsored by a provider agency in which people are living 
mostly independently. Criteria for this category pertain to the degree of control that provider 
agency staff members have over key aspects of the living arrangements. Indicators include the 
following: (1) The provider agency signs the lease; (2) the provider agency has keys to the residence; 
(3) the provider agency provides on-site day or evening staff coverage; and/or (4) the provider 
agency mandates people to participate in mental health services, such as a medication clinic or day 
program, as a condition for tenancy. When assistance is limited to case management support and/or 
financial aid, it is not classified as supervised housing.
Independent living
• Independent living. This category includes housing in the open rental market, as well as subsidized 
housing. Independent living includes a wide range of housing arrangements, including single-room 
occupancy (SRO) hotels. Independent living includes shared housing for reasons not related to 
mental illness (e.g., personal choice related to culture and/or financial considerations). People living 
with others are considered to be living independently if they perform daily living functions without 
the supervision of a family member or case manager, even if they receive intensive case coordination 
or management.
• Agency-sponsored scattered-site housing program. Residents live in apartments secured by a 
social service agency, which provides ongoing case management support (but the supervisory role 
is limited, as defined above). “Scattered-site” refers to the proximity of housing; if all residences 
are clustered within a single apartment complex, this is not scattered-site and may fit more closely 
within the category of supervised housing.180 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
WHAT IS VALUED IN HOUSING?
Among the darkest aspects of mental health services in the past were housing programs 
that reflected the expedient interests of the system and not the persons in the system. 
These programs featured large institutions where people were housed on wards so staff 
members could conveniently provide custodial care. State-run “warehouses” of this sort 
were largely phased out as a result of the community mental health movement, although 
poorly formed ideas for asylums have recently reemerged (Sisti, Segal, & Emanuel, 2015). 
Unfortunately, the quality of housing for people with psychiatric disabilities remained 
poor in the community. Large-scale nursing homes dominated by custodial concerns 
rather than by the pursuit of personal goals emerged. These facilities were often relegated 
to “mental health ghettos”—low-income areas with high crime rates (Carling, 1995).
As recovery and empowerment became the guiding visions of rehabilitation, 
researchers worked to identify the values that might drive a person’s housing and citizen￾ship goals. Table 10.2 reviews those that have emerged from comprehensive summaries 
of more than 40 studies; they are divided into values that represent housing versus those 
that reflect priorities of citizenship, although there is considerable overlap between the 
two sets (Nelson, 2010; Sylvestre, Nelson, Sabloff, & Peddle, 2007).
Housing values are divided into three sets. First, people with psychiatric disabilities 
value choice. They prefer to live in independent settings, where they determine what it 
means to live there. This includes who a person’s roommates are—significant others, 
family, or friends. People with disabilities also prefer a democratic management style in 
TABLE 10.2. Housing and Citizenship Values
Housing values
Choice
• Independent and not institutionally run housing
• Roommates who are selected by persons themselves (significant others, family members, friends)
• Democratic management style: Residents influence decisions in housing upkeep
Quality
• Sound and attractive physical space
• Safety
• Privacy
• Easy access to neighborhood resources
Access and affordability
• Programs that accept Section 8 certificates and other rent-geared-to-income plans
• Settings that welcome people who were recently homeless
• Housing that is fully accessible and accommodated to the needs of all disabilities
Citizenship values
Community integration
• Places that are not marked for stigma (i.e., openly identified as housing for persons with psychiatric 
disabilities)
• Residents who are identified as neighbors and not disabled people
Accountability
• Housing stakeholders (including management) who are fully accountable to each other
Housing rights
• Legally secured rent and tenure
• Lease changes protected by statutes that govern all other residents in area
Note. Based on Nelson (2010) and Sylvestre, Nelson, Sabloff, and Peddle (2007).10. Housing and Citizenship 181
housing; that is, they want to have the same kind of interactions with a landlord or lender 
as everyone else does. Second, people with psychiatric disabilities value quality in their 
housing. Like everyone else, they want to live in attractive and safe physical spaces. They 
want privacy; they also want proximity to neighborhood shops, recreational activities, 
faith-based communities, and other resources. Third, people want housing that is acces￾sible and affordable. Many people in large cities have difficulty finding low-cost housing 
because of gentrification (e.g., upscaling apartments into condos for young executives 
moving in from the suburbs). People with psychiatric disabilities also usually want build￾ings that accept Section 8 certificates, which are given by HUD to offset the monthly rent 
of people with low incomes. Finally, people with psychiatric disabilities expect buildings 
that are fully welcoming to people who were recently homeless. They need to be fully 
accessible to people with psychiatric disabilities, even those who also have physical dis￾abilities.
People want citizenship along with housing. Three sets of values emerge here, too. 
First, people want their independent housing in a community to be fully integrated into 
the community; they do not want to live in buildings with prominent signs that lead to 
public stigma. They want to be identified as residents and neighbors, not as people living 
in “that halfway house.” Second, they want to live in fully accountable neighborhoods—
areas where they are expected to be full citizens, and where they receive the same rights 
and benefits as their peers. Finally, people with psychiatric disabilities value housing 
rights. They want their rent and tenure legally guaranteed. Changes to a lease need to be 
governed by the same statutes that guide similar agreements in their neighborhood.
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Where Should Agnes Stone Live?
Agnes Stone was a 56-year-old woman who had been hospitalized several times for symp￾toms and disabilities related to schizophrenia. Housing had always been an issue for her; 
she had been evicted several times from facilities throughout the city, sometimes for non￾payment of rent. Soon after joining the Thresholds Bridge program in Chicago, Agnes moved 
from a nursing home to an efficiency apartment in a large, run-down building on the Near 
North Side. Over a 1-year period after joining the Bridge, she broke her pattern of rehospital￾ization (except for a brief stay at a private hospital).
This is not to say that Agnes was symptom-free; quite the contrary. Even though she 
received twice-weekly Bridge visits and 15-minute sessions every other week with an empa￾thetic counselor, Agnes functioned at marginal levels and displayed a wide range of bizarre 
behaviors. Bridge workers helped her keep her apartment in some semblance of order. 
They helped her with routine activities, such as budgeting money and keeping psychiatrist 
appointments. They made friendly suggestions regarding diet.
Agnes’s dress was unusual. In the summer heat, Agnes sported duck-hunting boots, 
a miniskirt, and an old gray sweatshirt; her cheek was decorated with a half-inch mascara 
“beauty mark.” Her thought disorder intruded in other ways on everyday life as well. She 
conducted animated discussions with herself in public; she barricaded her closet door to 
prevent a snake from slithering into her apartment; and she insisted that her acquaintances 
call her Clark Gable, because she was actually a man. Fortunately, her building housed an 
assortment of “characters,” some as picturesque as Agnes. They included her landlady, 
whose tolerance of Agnes’s behavior was one key to Agnes’s residential stability (Based on 
Witheridge, Dincin, & Appleby, 1982).182 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
FACTORS INFLUENCING WHERE PEOPLE LIVE
Many people are not able to attain housing goals for a variety of factors. Some factors 
directly represent challenges created by serious mental illness and corresponding dis￾abilities. Others represent the social determinants that hamper housing goals of people 
who experience socioeconomic disadvantage. Helping people overcome these challenges 
reflects the bidirectional nature of rehabilitation: helping people address both the person￾level factors of disability that undermine their goals and the community-level barriers 
to these goals. As is emphasized throughout this book, rehabilitation providers need to 
work with their broader team to address both types of barriers.
Poverty
Many people with psychiatric disabilities live in poverty (Draine, 2013; Sylvestre et al., 
2018). Their main sources of income may be monthly checks from Supplemental Security 
Income (SSI) and/or Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI). The continuity of these 
payments can be disrupted for many reasons. Over two-thirds of people with severe psy￾chiatric disabilities are almost entirely dependent on Social Security programs for income 
support (U.S. General Accounting Office, 1996), making up almost one-third of SSI ben￾eficiaries and nearly one-fifth of SSDI beneficiaries in 2021 (Social Security Administra￾tion, 2021). Thus, housing options are severely limited for the majority of people with 
serious mental illness, except for a fortunate small minority with access to housing sub￾sidies, special programs, or other resources. A national study of housing affordability in 
2016 concluded that people whose sole source of income was SSI would be required to 
pay, on average, 99% of their income to rent an efficiency apartment (Schaak, Sloane, Ari￾enti, & Zovistoski, 2017). This level far exceeds HUD guidelines for allocating no more 
than 30% of income to housing expenses. It even exceeds the more liberal 50% guideline 
suggested by NAMI (Sperling, 2005). Disparities between SSI income and housing costs 
are exacerbated in large cities, forcing many persons with psychiatric disabilities in these 
cities to live in substandard housing (Levstek & Bond, 1993). Living close to or below the 
poverty line means that people are vulnerable to homelessness. Financial problems are 
especially evident in people addicted to substances, who may spend half or more of their 
disability income on drugs or alcohol (Shaner et al., 1995). Poverty and housing problems 
may be further exacerbated by ethnic disparities; for example, one study showed that 
people who were Black were more vulnerable to housing loss in independent housing 
programs (Schutt & Goldfinger, 2009).
Affordable Housing
Starting in 1937, the federal government began to subsidize housing, both with funds 
to construct public residences and with income subsidies to allow people to rent in the 
open housing market (Youmans, 1992). Over 1.4 million housing units were constructed 
in cities, and 450,000 in rural areas (Youmans, 1992). The surge in homelessness in 
the 1980s has been attributed to many factors—including policies initiated by the Rea￾gan Administration to make cuts in federal housing subsidies for low-income groups 
(Youmans, 1992), as well as the gentrification of inner cities mentioned earlier, in which 
inexpensive hotels and apartment buildings were torn down and replaced with upscale 
housing (Carling, 1990). As a result, affordable housing is often not available to meet the 
needs of people with psychiatric disabilities.10. Housing and Citizenship 183
Given this state of affairs, Carling (1994) describes three strategies to access housing 
through financing: offering access to existing housing, preserving existing housing, and 
developing new affordable housing. These approaches often involve the use of subsidies, 
which can be directed to individual people in the form of individual vouchers or to hous￾ing developments as a whole. Sources of subsidies include federal, state, local, and private 
entities (Dincin, 1988). Sometimes housing development has been specifically targeted 
for people with psychiatric disabilities; in other cases, it has been more broadly aimed at 
people with disabilities as a whole; and still other strategies have been aimed at the people 
who are homeless in general (Hopper & Barrow, 2003).
Development of housing programs requires persistence in overcoming community 
resistance, as well as acquiring knowledge of endless regulations (Dincin, 1988; Winerip, 
1994). One ongoing debate concerns where the locus of responsibility for developing and 
managing housing programs should reside: in public housing authorities or in the mental 
health system? Although housing development strategies for people with psychiatric dis￾abilities may involve greater management than conventional housing, a study of one multi￾city project concluded that these kinds of projects resembled development of market-rate 
housing for any low-income tenants (Harkness, Newman, Galster, & Reschovsky, 2004).
Community Acceptance
In their study of board-and-care homes, Segal and Aviram (1978) examined external 
social integration. They defined this concept by indicators such as whether the residents 
of these homes had access to goods, services, and social contacts, and whether they used 
community resources apart from facility sponsorship. They found that conservative, 
middle-class neighborhoods were extremely negative in their reactions to individuals 
with mental illness living in their midst, whereas liberal, nontraditional communities 
were the most accepting. They also found that many people preferred to live in commer￾cially zoned, relatively transient areas, because of the anonymity and de facto community 
tolerance of mental illness.
HOUSING MODELS
Three housing paradigms have evolved to address the residential goals of people with 
psychiatric disabilities: custodial care, residential treatment, and supported housing
(Nelson, 2010; Parkinson, Nelson, & Horgan, 1999). In practice, approaches to housing 
are typically more loosely implemented than theoretical descriptions would suggest, and 
hybrid approaches are fairly common (McHugo et al., 2005).
Custodial Care
Custodial care refers to residences in which in-house staff members provide care services 
(meals, cleaning, and medication) (Kyle & Dunn, 2008; Parkinson et al., 1999). Custo￾dial housing aims at maintenance, with very little intention to facilitate rehabilitation or 
help people reach their goals, especially those related to independence. Examples include 
nursing homes and licensed board-and-care homes. Many custodial care facilities oper￾ate as for-profit businesses. The prevalence of custodial care may reflect the kind of cau￾tion common in some perspectives of psychiatry—namely, that people with serious men￾tal illness often relapse. Custodial care mirrors the concerns of inpatient settings where 184 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
safety comes first, so that relapse does not end up in catastrophe (Corrigan, Angell, et 
al., 2012).
Custodial care is demoralizing and fosters dependency (Parkinson et al., 1999). 
Research shows that people living in custodial housing typically have poorer indepen￾dent living skills, more psychiatric symptoms, and longer histories of psychiatric hos￾pitalizations compared to people who are living more independently (Parkinson et al., 
1999). Quality of life is often poor in such facilities (Nelson, 2010). Living environments 
in custodial care have the oppressive and stultifying characteristics of institutional liv￾ing, which do not promote recovery. Although most rehabilitation providers would not 
endorse custodial care as a desirable housing option, historically, it has been the housing 
option for up to one-fourth of people with serious mental illness (Goldman, 1984).
Very little research has examined custodial care. In a Canadian review, Parkinson 
et al. (1999) concluded that the physical environment of custodial housing was often 
unpleasant (e.g., odor, poor lighting, worn-out furniture) and seemed to yield no positive 
outcomes. One 10-year follow-up of board-and-care residents suggested deterioration in 
health, symptoms, and independent social functioning, as well as decreased family con￾tact (Segal & Kotler, 1993).
Residential Treatment Models
One step beyond custodial care is the idea that housing serves as a treatment setting; that 
is, it can be used as a venue where people learn symptom management and interpersonal 
skills that will subsequently help them achieve independence goals when they are ready. 
Residential treatment has been described in terms of two models: a housing continuum
or a housing array.
Housing Continuum Model
The notion of a housing continuum has five elements (Ridgway & Zipple, 1990):
1. There is a progressive hierarchy of residential settings that vary in provision of 
service, staff supervision, and restrictiveness.
2. As people improve, they are expected to move sequentially through the contin￾uum, eventually graduating to independent living.
3. Residents in each setting are similar in level of functioning.
4. Attendance in day treatment or other provider agency programs is often a require￾ment of residency in supervised group homes.
5. Participants who decompensate and return to the hospital often start over and 
recycle through the continuum.
The continuum model originated in the early days of deinstitutionalization, when transi￾tion from hospital to community was viewed as best accomplished through gradual steps: 
Inpatients progressed from a residence on the grounds of the hospital (a quarterway 
house) to a structured, supervised home in the community (a halfway house), and eventu￾ally to independent living.
Although the concept of the halfway house continues to be popular in the fields 
of corrections and substance abuse treatment, this terminology has fallen out of favor 
in mental health services. The term transitional group home is now more common 
and remains a central element in the continuum model. Although psychiatric hospitals 10. Housing and Citizenship 185
originally operated transitional housing, most of these kinds of residential programs are 
now operated by community mental health centers or psychiatric rehabilitation agencies, 
although sometimes they are run by nonprofit organizations operating independently of 
the mental health system (Randolph, Ridgway, Sanford, Simoneau, & Carling, 1988).
The continuum model has been always more of a conceptual model than a practi￾cal guide to operating a residential treatment program (Ridgway & Zipple, 1990). Few 
mental health systems have invested sufficient resources in housing to implement this 
paradigm fully or to serve more than a tiny segment of the total person population. Even 
at the paradigm’s apex of influence, fewer than 5% of people actually received services 
approximating the continuum model (Randolph et al., 1988).
Group homes are also often incompatible with persons’ preferences; most people 
want to live independently (Carling, 1995; Corrigan & McCracken, 2005). Although 
individualization is a fundamental principle of evidence-based psychiatric rehabilitation 
(Rapp & Goscha, 2005), group settings have difficulty in providing individualized treat￾ment and rehabilitation. Relatedly, the interpersonal and coping skills needed to adjust to 
group living are different from those necessary for independence (Farkas & Coe, 2019; 
Liberman, 2008). Still another concern about the continuum view involves the implicit 
requirement that people need to prepare for the next environment. Yet transitions are 
often stressful, artificially timed, and contrary to personal preferences. They also may 
result in lost relationships and community connections. Designing a housing program 
based on multiple transitions does not reflect the fact that people usually find it difficult 
to adjust to new environments (Stein & Test, 1980).
Moreover, staff members in housing programs on a continuum can become preoc￾cupied with facility issues (rules, staffing, keeping placements filled, etc.), to the detriment 
of developing the skills and supports people need to live independently. These kinds of 
housing programs also often fail to provide the last step in the continuum—stable, afford￾able housing. Consequently, people can become “stuck” in group housing. Finally, transi￾tional housing programs may require fixed lengths of stay that are not suited to people’s 
needs. Because the trajectories of psychiatric illnesses are idiosyncratic and nonlinear, 
requirements for specific lengths of stay are often artificial.
Housing Array Model
Like proponents of housing continua, proponents of the housing array model assume that 
various levels of support and assistance should be tailored to the different needs, com￾petencies, and preferences of different individuals (Dincin, 1988; Fields, 1990). Housing 
arrays, however, are more flexible than housing continua. A housing array does not imply 
any set sequence, nor are residents required to make transitions through housing options 
in some prescribed way. Permanent residence in a group home is one option within this 
model. In addition, housing arrays assume that some people simply need a place to live 
without the requirements of a rehabilitation plan.
Group homes in a housing array are often viewed as a best fit for people lacking 
basic independent living skills (e.g., shopping, cooking, and cleaning). Group homes may 
offer a built-in community, which can serve as an antidote to the sparse social networks 
of some people (Pescosolido, Wright, & Lutfey, 1999). Special-needs groups, such as 
people who are deaf and struggle with mental illness, may particularly benefit from con￾gregate living given the isolating features of their compounded disabilities (Dincin, 1988). 
Supervised group homes also have been used for people with co-occurring substance use 
disorders (Brunette, Mueser, & Drake, 2004a).186 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
By analogy to dormitory living in colleges, group homes for young adults with men￾tal illness have been offered as a transitional step as these young adults leave their families 
of origin (Dincin, 1995a). Dincin (1995a) has suggested that “emancipation” or “con￾structive separation” from the family (while maintaining a strong alliance) is often the 
best course of action in the recovery process for young adults, especially those who are 
overly dependent on parents.
Some of the criticisms of housing continua also apply to housing arrays, however. 
Development of group homes has often been a reflexive response to deinstitutionalization. 
For example, the general response by community providers in Indiana was to develop 
group homes when the state closed a state hospital in 1994 (McGrew, Wright, Pescoso￾lido, & McDonel, 1999). Little planning was given to other aspects of the closing, such as 
provision of intensive care coordination. Many people prefer not to live in such facilities.
The challenges involved in running group homes are formidable (Dincin, 1988; Win￾erip, 1994). Securing financing for housing programs may be difficult. Zoning laws and 
community resistance can be major challenges in deciding on locations. Continued finan￾cial viability requires that group homes remain filled, which implies a recruiting dynamic 
(“We must keep this building full”) that may be at cross-purposes to individual needs. 
Group homes are frequently staffed by underpaid and untrained individuals who may not 
be well versed in rehabilitation principles. Staff positions in group homes are also notori￾ously high-burnout, high-turnover positions (Bond et al., 1989; Winerip, 1994), creating 
further challenges. Managing a group home involves setting policies regarding substance 
abuse, assaultive behavior, property damage, refusal to take medications as prescribed, 
suicidal behavior, and medical illnesses. Defining rules that foster autonomy, while pro￾tecting the rights of the group, is difficult.
Supported Housing
Supported housing means helping people achieve independent living in housing arrange￾ments of their choice while providing adequate care, management, and support. Per￾manent supported housing (PSH) is now the prevailing model in the United States (Far￾kas & Coe, 2019). Supported housing seems to have originated in the work of mental 
health advocates who championed normal housing in the community as an alternative 
to clinically managed treatment programs. These advocates saw supported housing as a 
“paradigm shift” from the linear continuum model (Hogan, 1999; Ridgway & Zipple, 
1990). Advocates included individuals from the person-centered movement who noted 
the dehumanizing and paternalistic attitudes common in residential treatment programs 
(Howie the Harp, 1990). The surge of homelessness in the 1980s gave further impetus 
to the supported housing movement. As described by Hopper and Barrow (2003), two 
distinct traditions within the supported housing movement are integrated housing (the 
perspective of mental health advocates) and housing as housing (the perspective of hous￾ing advocates). Advocates for those who are homeless have viewed housing issues through 
the broader perspective of the needs of all individuals living on the margins of society. 
They have generally seen their role as community building rather than as finding hous￾ing in normalized settings. The integrated housing development approach searches for 
affordable housing within existing stock, whereas the housing-as-housing approach is 
more likely to develop new housing (through purchasing housing, rehabilitating existing 
buildings, or constructing new residences).
Ridgway and Rapp (1997) sorted the critical ingredients of supported housing 
into two categories: housing assistance and intensive case management. These are 10. Housing and Citizenship 187
summarized in Table 10.3. With its emphasis on normalization, individualization, and 
intensive support, the philosophy of supported housing is highly compatible with the 
assertive community treatment (ACT) model of care coordination discussed in Chapter 
8. Thus, it is not surprising that ACT and supported housing are often offered together 
(Witheridge, 1990). The one key difference is that supported housing is intended for a 
broader spectrum of people with psychiatric disabilities than is ACT.
One example of supported housing is the Pathways to Housing program in New York 
City for individuals with mental illness who are homeless (Tsemberis, 2013; Tsemberis, 
Gulcur, & Nakae, 2004). This program values housing as a basic human right. Pathways 
to Housing is an excellent example of the housing-first philosophy (Watson, Wagner, & 
Rivers, 2013). Unlike traditional programs, Pathways to Housing does not make housing 
assistance contingent on people’s agreeing to sobriety, treatment compliance, or other 
such conditions. It also does not discharge residents for difficulties related to their dis￾abilities. People are provided with immediate assistance in locating and securing per￾manent housing in the open market. Most people hold the leases on their apartments, 
although Pathways may serve as representative payee on their money, ensuring that rent 
is paid. Most residents receive rent subsidies from government sources. Pathways has also 
adopted a harm reduction philosophy (described in Chapter 16); that is, drug abstinence 
is not a prerequisite for assistance. Residents are encouraged to pursue less harmful sub￾stance use behaviors, even if they refuse to abstain. The Pathways program provides care 
coordination services based on the ACT model, but allows residents to determine type 
and intensity of services, or even to refuse most services. Pathways to Housing is now 
incorporated into Canada’s national housing program (Polvere, MacNaughton, & Piat, 
2013), as well as that of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (Montgomery, Hill, 
Kane, & Culhane, 2013).
Several criticisms of supported housing have been offered (Delespaul & deVries, 
1987; Fakhoury, Murray, Shepherd, & Priebe, 2002; Krupa, McLean, Eastabrook, Bon￾ham, & Baksh, 2003; Parkinson et al., 1999):
1. Supported housing may not be applicable to those with the most severe psychi￾atric disabilities. Some people may benefit from a more structured approach during the 
initial stages of recovery.
TABLE 10.3. Critical Components of Supported Housing
Housing assistance
• Rental subsidies are provided.
• Consumers’ choices are honored (e.g., where they live and with whom).
• Assistance is provided in obtaining and establishing a home.
• Consumers control personal space and have typical tenant roles and responsibilities.
Intensive case management
• Staff-to-client ratios are about 1:10.
• Case management contact with clients is frequent (up to several times a week) and individualized to 
clients’ needs; clients have ready access to crisis services.
• Most services and support are provided directly by the case manager, not brokered.
• Case management is mostly provided in home and community settings, and services tailored to each 
individual.
• Programs have explicit goals to increase residential stability, reduce homelessness and 
hospitalization, improve quality of life, and increase access to affordable housing.
Note. Based on Ridgway and Rapp (1997).188 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
2. Supported housing may not help people with social isolation. Although propo￾nents value community integration, many people stay confined to their apartments and 
have little contact with neighbors.
3. Sometimes supported housing does not account for the economic realities of a 
community. Safe, affordable, attractive housing may not be available in the open rental 
market. It is, in fact, the absence of appropriate housing that has led some advocates to 
propose the development of agency-run housing programs (including scattered-site hous￾ing that can be operated as supported housing) (Dincin, 1988).
In addition to a lack of affordable housing and housing discrimination, the lack of 
adequate funding to attract and retain qualified staff and the ability of providers to shift 
paradigms from more the traditional control and risk reduction approach to support 
client choice and recovery goals make successful implementation challenging (Farkas & 
Coe, 2019).
RESEARCH ON HOUSING INTERVENTIONS
An extensive body of research has examined processes and outcomes related to hous￾ing interventions (Eichler, Gowdy, & Etzel-Wise, 2004; Rog, 2004). A comprehensive 
review yielded 50 studies of housing programs that examined the processes and outcomes 
of these programs (Tabol, Drebing, & Rosenheck, 2010); an earlier review discovered 
87 separate articles (Fakhoury et al., 2002). Despite this substantially growing litera￾ture, investigators remain concerned about the quality of the research. RCTs are rarely 
used, and outcomes are often assessed cross-sectionally rather than over time. Although 
important measures of outcome are often incorporated (e.g., tenure of community living), 
future research needs to examine factors relevant to recovery: hope, satisfaction, and 
quality of life. Adherence to models is often poor, with studies of housing continua and 
arrays virtually absent from the literature.
Tabol et al. (2010) neatly summarized the research in terms of supportive versus 
supported housing: They described supportive housing as based on “rehabilitation values 
and a resident identity, rather than empowerment, community integration, and a tenant/
citizen identity” (p. 447). Supported housing is a more choice-based approach, leading to 
independent and permanent variants of housing.
Supportive Housing
Transitional housing and halfway houses are commonly studied examples of supportive 
housing. Based on 26 evaluations, one review concluded that it was effective in reducing 
hospitalizations, and that approximately 80% of halfway house residents adjusted to 
community living (Rog & Raush, 1975). A subsequent review encompassing 109 studies 
of halfway houses was far less enthusiastic, noting that major methodological deficiencies 
in this literature precluded any rigorous conclusions (Cometa, Morrison, & Ziskoven, 
1979).
Another review examined the impact of group housing without distinguishing 
between transitional and permanent living arrangements. Drawing on studies conducted 
in Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States, Nelson and colleagues (Nelson, 
Hall, & Walsh-Bowers, 1998; Parkinson et al., 1999), reached optimistic conclusions 10. Housing and Citizenship 189
regarding the effects of group housing, which included “increased participation, self￾respect, independent functioning, social support, and involvement in leisure activities” 
(Parkinson et al., 1999, p. 156).
Supervised group living programs vary widely in their program philosophies. One 
area with sharp differences in program philosophy is the treatment of co-occurring men￾tal illnesses and substance use disorders. A review of 10 controlled studies revealed that 
programs integrating treatment for mental illness and substance abuse, and having had 
less rigid admission criteria or rules requiring abstinence, had better outcomes (Brunette 
et al., 2004a). People who remained in these residential programs longer had better out￾comes as well. The authors thus tentatively concluded that long-term programs might be 
more effective than short-term ones.
Some research has examined factors influencing outcomes within group homes. The 
number of residents in a facility was correlated with poorer outcomes in an early study 
(Linn, 1981); further studies supported this conclusion (Newman, 2001). Staff attitudes 
reflecting hostility and criticism have also been found to have adverse effects on person 
outcomes (Fakhoury et al., 2002).
Supported Housing
Several large demonstration projects have examined the impact of supported housing. 
The first was the Robert Wood Johnson Nine-Cities Project, meant to improve orga￾nization of mental health services in nine cities through better coordination of services 
among different federal, state, and local agencies (Newman & Ridgely, 1994). The sec￾ond multisite project was known as the Second Round McKinney Program (SAMHSA, 
1995; Shern et al., 1997). The project evaluated outcomes for 896 previously homeless 
adults with mental illness at five demonstration sites receiving housing and rehabilitation 
services. At follow-up (1–2 years after admission), 78% of people in the active treatment 
conditions were stably housed. The third project involved outreach to people who were 
homeless and living with mental illness—a study known as the Access to Community 
Care and Effective Services and Supports (ACCESS) program (Rosenheck et al., 2002); a 
total of 5,325 people were enrolled in the project. At a 1-year follow-up, 37% were inde￾pendently housed, whereas 11% were homeless, 10% were living in institutions, and the 
remaining 42% were unstably housed (Mares & Rosenheck, 2004).
These projects documented the feasibility of supported housing approaches for peo￾ple with psychiatric disabilities. Their longitudinal results demonstrated that housing 
outcomes were much better at follow-up than at baseline. However, findings varied dra￾matically both among the three projects and from site to site within each project, making 
generalizations difficult. Moreover, with only a couple of exceptions, none of the studies 
provided rigorous comparisons to specific alternative housing models (e.g., exemplars 
from the housing continuum and housing array models). Many sites also excluded “high￾risk” people, thereby limiting the generalizability of the findings.
Rog and colleagues (2014) reviewed eight literature reviews, seven RCTs, and four 
quasi-experimental studies of permanent supported housing published between 1995 and 
2012. Although housing models differed across studies, all shared several characteristics: 
community-based services, housing assistance provided independently of mental health 
services, and choice in services. The authors concluded that compared to usual services, 
supported housing had strong positive effects on housing stability, reduced homelessness 
and hospitalization, and increased consumer satisfaction. Most studies reviewed did not 
find effects for psychological symptoms or substance use. Overall, the authors concluded 190 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
the evidence for PSH to be moderate; however, they noted that research rarely compared 
supported housing to other alternatives.
The largest study to date of permanent supported housing for people with serious 
mental illnesses is the At Home-Chez Soi Pan-Canadian Demonstration Project, which 
was an RCT of the housing first model (Aubry, Nelson, & Tsemberis, 2015). The study, 
conducted in five Canadian cities between 2009 and 2013, randomized 2,198 partici￾pants to treatment as usual (TAU) or housing first with ACT or intensive case manage￾ment (ICM) services depending on level of need. Consistent with prior research, housing 
first proved more effective than TAU in helping people exit homelessness and achieve 
stable housing. Housing first participants also showed greater improvements in commu￾nity functioning and quality of life at 12 months, although some improvements attenu￾ated by 24 months. Latimer and colleagues (2019) conducted an economic analysis of the 
study data and concluded that there was an 80% chance that the housing first with ICM 
intervention was cost-effective compared to TAU.
Housing Assistance versus Care Coordination
Limited research has examined an important practice issue: What is the impact of hous￾ing assistance compared to care coordination and support? In one study, homeless people 
with mental illness were randomly assigned to four conditions (Hurlburt, Hough, & 
Wood, 1996). Half had ready access to Section 8 rent subsidy certificates, while the oth￾ers did not. Within each of these two experimental groups, half were randomly assigned 
to receive comprehensive care coordination, while half received more brokered manage￾ment. The study found a strong advantage for the people who had access to Section 8 
housing certificates in achieving independent housing, whereas intensity of care coordi￾nation did not show any experimental differences. Substance abuse also had a significant 
influence on outcome.
A quasi-experimental study addressing the issue of guaranteed access to housing 
compared two programs for persons who were homeless. One was a comprehensive 
approach offering guaranteed access to housing, as well as housing support services and 
case coordination; the other also provided intensive care coordination but no guaranteed 
housing (Clark & Rich, 2003). The comprehensive approach found housing for people 
either in individual apartments owned and managed by the provider agency or in the 
open market. The authors found no differences between programs for people with low- or 
moderate-intensity psychiatric symptoms and few substance abuse problems. The com￾prehensive housing approach had better housing outcomes for people with severe symp￾toms and frequent substance use.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Housing and citizenship are among the primary goals for recovery and quality of life. Places 
where housing occurs have evolved from institutions (whether these were hospitals far 
removed from people’s home areas or nursing homes closer to people’s roots) to the com￾munity, to communities with full inclusion. The identities of people in housing have evolved as 
well—from patients in hospitals to residents, to community members and citizens (although 
great strides are still needed to yield full citizenship). Disabilities can undermine housing 
goals, but poverty and ethnic disparity can be equally troubling. The first approaches at 
housing assumed that the notion of an asylum, where people might escape the overwhelming 10. Housing and Citizenship 191
stresses of community living, was benevolent. Asylums, however, became custodial set￾tings where “safe existence” outranked self-determination of goals. Supported housing, in 
which people are provided financial assistance and support to find and obtain housing that 
meets their goals, is now the “gold standard.” Housing first programs are an example of this 
approach. Some people’s disabilities and other challenges (e.g., substance abuse) may get 
them excluded or evicted from supported housing programs. Housing first means that man￾agement puts up very few barriers (e.g., felonious behavior) forbidding people to live in their 
programs.192
CHAPTER 11
Employment and Education
Work, like housing, is often among the most central goals for people with 
psychiatric disabilities. Education may be an important tool to help achieve vocational 
goals; alternatively, education in itself may be important to some people with psychi￾atric disabilities. This chapter begins with a review of the importance of employment 
and work in a person’s life. A typology of vocational rehabilitation approaches is then 
provided. Rehabilitation experts generally agree that supported employment is the most 
eff ective way to promote individual employment goals; hence, it is described most exten￾sively in this chapter. The chapter then moves on to a discussion of possible goals people 
may wish to pursue in terms of education. Last, supported education programs to address 
these goals are reviewed.
THE IMPORTANCE OF WORK
Research shows that the vast majority of persons with mental illness want to work (Ali, 
Schur, & Blanck, 2011; Bond & Drake, 2014; Brantschen, Kawohl, Rössler, Bärtsch, & 
Nordt, 2014). As it does for most people, work serves many goals for those with psychiat￾ric disabilities (Eklund, Hansson, & Ahlqvist, 2004; Dunn, Wewiorski, & Rogers, 2008; 
Saunders & Nedelec, 2014). It provides structure to the day, a place to be, and tasks to 
do, which can often help people manage psychiatric symptoms. Work may also augment 
a person’s social support system; coworkers may evolve into friends or intimate partners. 
Certainly, work is the foundation for a living wage and health benefi ts. And it is often 
an important part of one’s identity: Social exchanges often begin with “What do you do 
for a living?”
Moreover, employment programs need to focus on careers and not just work. Many 
people have specifi c interests in terms of engaging and interesting tasks. One person 
likes to work with their hands and might do well as an electrician. Another prefers the 
order of a 9-to-5 job and might appreciate a desk job. Vocational service providers do 
not try to place people in just any jobs, but ones that meet their career and vocational 
sensitivities.
CHAPTER 1111. Employment and Education 193
BARRIERS TO WORK GOALS
Although work and career are often at the top of lists of goals, research suggests that 
only 38.1% of people with serious mental illness are employed full-time, 35.1% are not a 
part of the labor market, and 38.5% have incomes of less than $10,000 (compared with 
23.1% of people with no mental illness) (Luciano & Meara, 2014). The disabilities of seri￾ous mental illness can pose significant challenges to finding and keeping work. Cognitive 
dysfunctions that arise from psychoses, or from significant anxiety and depression, can 
undermine job performance. Moreover, distress can impede a person’s job performance 
and may interfere with interpersonal interactions at work. People with serious mental 
illnesses may also have difficulty in school, failing to achieve a high school or college 
diploma or marketable career skills. This is where supported education may play a role. 
Finally, a lack of job availability and accessibility may also impede work goals. Commu￾nities with low employment rates are difficult settings for people with disabilities to find 
work. Unemployment rates are often associated with low income and ethnic disparity.
TYPES OF VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION
Rehabilitation providers have implemented vocational services for people with psychi￾atric disabilities since the inception of the rehabilitation field. Table 11.1 lists four com￾mon models, ordered from those that are most restrictive and removed from a person’s 
community to those that fully embrace work in the person’s real world. This continuum 
parallels the “place first and then train” discussion in Chapter 3. More restrictive pro￾grams take the “train–place” approach and are focused on making sure treatment does 
not result in the person becoming more disabled. People are trained to handle their dis￾abilities in relatively safe settings before being placed in real-world work sites with greater 
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Martha Simpson Got Unneeded Training
Martha Simpson was a 54-year-old divorced woman with a long and turbulent history of 
bipolar disorder. She had worked intermittently as a law clerk between episodes of illness 
over many years, and she desired to return to this work after leaving the hospital. Her men￾tal health team referred her to a local psychosocial rehabilitation program. After a 6-week 
assessment process that included interviews, paper-and-pencil tests of interests and per￾sonality, and lengthy evaluations of her work skills in different areas, she was placed in the 
kitchen unit of the rehabilitation center. Though kitchen work was not her goal, Martha was 
told that this experience would help to ensure that her work habits, grooming, and social 
skills were ready for returning to competitive employment. She went along with cooking for 
the day program, which seemed to her like “playing house” for a month. The final straw was 
struggling to learn to use a modern potato peeler. After several demonstrations by a young 
rehabilitation worker, Martha picked up a knife and showed the worker how she had been 
peeling potatoes for decades. After this incident, Martha left the day program and found a 
law clerk job on her own. She struggled to keep this job because she had no follow-along 
supports.194 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
demands. “Place–train” programs are at the opposite end of the restrictiveness contin￾uum: Participants are placed in work settings of their interest as soon as possible, and are 
then trained to address challenges as they arise.
Sheltered workshops were established for people with different disabilities—
developmental disorders, ambulatory difficulties, visual or hearing disabilities, and seri￾ous psychiatric illness—as safe places where people could be gently reintroduced to the 
demands of employment. Economically, such workshops have been supported through 
contracts with businesses for specific activities related to products. These typically 
include packaging (e.g., a worker puts five wood screws in a bag with a label) or simple 
assembly tasks (e.g., a worker puts together the pieces of a kitchen faucet). Participants 
are then paid by the piece (e.g., 10 cents for each bag). In the process, participants have 
the opportunity to adjust to work and its stresses, and may learn skills to handle job￾related challenges specific to them. In some ways, however, sheltered workshops have 
become the unsavory hidden institutions of the vocational world. They may be in large 
factories where people sit on assembly lines for years putting screws into bags. Sheltered 
workshops are among the worst examples of “train–place” models. They are rarely seen 
in contemporary services for people with most disabilities.
Transitional employment is a step toward competitive employment, in that people 
with psychiatric disabilities work in real jobs (albeit typically low-skill ones; e.g., clean￾ing services) with competitive wages. Rehabilitation programs contract with businesses 
to complete a service (e.g., cleaning an office building 3 nights a week) and assume all 
responsibility for getting the work done according to the contract. This may mean that 
agency staff members are actually doing the cleaning work in situations where program 
participants with psychiatric disabilities are not able to fulfill their responsibilities. Like 
TABLE 11.1. Types of Programs Meant to Facilitate Rehabilitation Goals
Sheltered workshops
These are safe settings where people with disabilities work solely with other people with disabilities, 
while supervised by rehabilitation counselors. Typically, work is obtained from local industries; 
participants are paid by piece completed (e.g., a person is paid 10 cents for every package of wood 
screws sorted into a plastic bag). Sheltered workshops provide places where people can try out 
adjustment skills before moving on to real-world competitive settings.
Transitional employment
These are settings involving real-world jobs that rehabilitation programs contract to complete for 
companies. The jobs are managed by program staff. A person with a psychiatric disability is hired 
for a particular position (e.g., cleaning crew member) for a limited period of time (e.g., 3–6 months). 
Participants use this time to develop a variety of skills that help them adjust to work. Participants may 
move through different jobs on the contract.
Job clubs
Rather than embedded in work settings, some vocational goals are addressed by participating in 
job clubs. These are places where participants can learn job-seeking skills (how to write a resume 
or do a job interview) and work adjustment skills. Club members provide support to others as peers 
pursue work. The club may also provide important resources for job searches, such as computer and 
telephone access.
Supported employment
These are settings consistent with a “place–train” philosophy: Providers of supported employment 
believe that people who pursue real-world jobs that meet their interests, and who receive sufficient 
support, will be successful in their vocational goals.11. Employment and Education 195
sheltered workshops, transitional employment is meant to provide relatively safe train￾ing, where people work alongside peers with managers who are rehabilitation counselors. 
This gives the people a chance to learn work adjustment skills on actual work sites. Typi￾cally, participants assume a transitional job for 3–9 months to fully experience aspects 
of the position. Although more closely linked to the community, transitional employment 
has the same kind of “train–place” problems as sheltered workshops, unnecessarily post￾poning the pursuit of vocational goals in the real world.
Rather than being situated in work settings, job clubs have more of an educational 
feeling: They are places where people with psychiatric disabilities learn about and seek 
jobs, with the support of peers and rehabilitation providers. Job clubs provide a curricu￾lum in which people learn how to prepare for a job search, write up résumés, master inter￾viewing skills, and negotiate job offers. These skills are often learned in role plays, where 
people can practice the skills. Job clubs also have resources such as computer services and 
phones to help implement the job search. Peer support is essential to a job club, because job 
hunting can be stressful. Although job clubs do not stress the risk of work for people with 
psychiatric disabilities, they still resemble “train–place” programs in requiring people to 
demonstrate certain skills and benchmarks before actually going out to get jobs.
Supported employment is the fourth model in Table 11.1 and the approach that 
currently dominates strategies for helping people attain work goals. Because of its impor￾tance, it is discussed separately and in detail below.
SUPPORTED EMPLOYMENT
The goal of supported employment is to help people find jobs they are interested in as 
quickly as possible, and to provide the training and supports that they need to succeed in 
these jobs. Stepwise approaches, such as extensive preemployment assessment, training, 
and practice, are eschewed in favor of real-world experience.
Although several approaches to supported employment for psychiatric rehabilita￾tion emerged in the late 1980s, standardization has evolved as research has clarified its 
evidence-based principles (Becker et al., 2007; Drake & Bond, 2014). These principles 
focus on empowering people to make decisions, to search for jobs of their choice directly 
(without delays for prolonged assessment and training), to count on service providers to 
support them by integrating mental health and vocational services, and to obtain services 
for as long as needed (see Table 11.2). These principles are incorporated into most current 
models of supported employment, and several studies show that fidelity to these prin￾ciples at the program level is associated with better competitive employment outcomes 
(Luciano et al., 2014; Marshall et al., 2014).
The basic model of supported employment has several elements (Becker & Drake, 
2003; Becker & Bond, 2002). Helping people achieve employment goals needs to be a 
fundamental feature of mental health, as well as vocational rehabilitation services. To 
accomplish this effectively, mental health and vocational rehabilitation systems need to 
be integrated and collaborative. Vocational specialists join mental health teams to draw 
on the expertise and resources of both agencies. Employment then becomes part of the 
initial assessment, the treatment plan, the service delivery package, and the outcomes 
review process for everyone with a vocational goal. Typically, vocational specialists work 
with about 18–20 people at one time; thus, the number of specialists on a team is deter￾mined by the number of people with employment goals. Teams may also include care 
coordinators, substance abuse specialists, nurses, and psychiatrists. Ideally, counselors 196 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
from the state vocational rehabilitation agency meet with the team regularly to provide 
benefits counseling, as well as links with funding and services.
Integrated vocational care means that a person’s overall goals, strengths, difficulties, 
and situation are considered throughout the process. For example, in setting vocational 
goals, the team and the person may consider details such as past work experiences, pref￾erences for job type and hours, amount of stimulation and support in the work environ￾ment, benefits and insurance, and supports off the job site. This involves the entire team. 
The psychiatrist may have to adjust medications; the benefits counselor may need to 
review insurance and Social Security payments; the care coordinator may need to reas￾sure the person’s family about work; and the vocational specialist may need to help the 
person identify potential job sites, develop a strong and appropriate résumé, submit appli￾cations, and prepare for an interview. The key word here is help; at no point should team 
members throw up barriers to an individual’s goal because they believe that the person is 
unable to achieve that goal. When to seek employment, what kind of job to seek, whether 
and how much information to disclose to employers, how to arrange interviews, and so 
forth, should be consistent with and driven by the person’s priorities. The same is true for 
mental health services.
TABLE 11.2. Principles of Evidence-Based Supported Employment
1. Zero exclusion. Rather than professionals making decisions about readiness, participants 
themselves should make this decision. The policy of zero exclusion reflects federal guidelines, 
ethical principles of autonomy, philosophical commitment to person-centeredness, and empirical 
findings.
2. Integration of vocational and mental health services. Complete collaboration between vocational 
rehabilitation and mental health at all levels would be ideal. At the state level, the departments of 
vocational rehabilitation and mental health should cooperate on all policies, funding decisions, and 
organizational issues. At the local level, mental health and vocational staff should work together on 
multidisciplinary teams. The services should appear seamless to participants.
3. Benefits counseling. In order to make good decisions about vocational goals and pursuits, people 
need to have accurate understanding of their benefits, including Social Security payments, health 
insurance, housing assistance, and food assistance. Benefits counseling services are often provided 
through the state department of vocational rehabilitation.
4. Personal preferences. Vocational goals, supports, and timing should be highly individualized 
according to participants’ preferences, not professionals’ judgments. Each person is likely to 
have preferences regarding type of work, work setting, hours, coworkers, disclosure of mental 
illness, and other job factors. This principle eliminates group placements, generic placements, and 
professional choices in favor of jobs that reflect the specific preferences of each individual.
5. Rapid job search. Assessment is minimized in favor of rapidly helping people pursue jobs of 
their choosing. For people who seemingly have no preferences, perhaps due to lack of prior work 
experience, the job search itself becomes a way to learn about different jobs.
6. Follow-along supports. Services to help ensure vocational success are individually tailored, again 
according to personal preferences, and provided as needed without time limits. Follow-along 
services include on-site and/or off-site supports to both workers and employers. These services are 
available as long as a person requests them, including help in ending a job or finding a new job.
7. Systematic job development. Employment specialists work with employers to determine their needs 
and hiring preferences in order to best promote candidates with psychiatric disabilities to employers 
and match the needs and preferences of the job seeker.
8. Competitive employment. The goal of supported employment is for participants to obtain jobs that 
anyone in the labor market can apply for, that pay at least minimum wage/equal wages to workers 
with similar job duties, and have no time limits imposed upon them by the social service agency 
(such as with transitional employment).11. Employment and Education 197
An important part of job choice is career or vocation. The goal is not just to get a 
person into any job, anywhere. Work is more satisfying when it mirrors the individual’s 
sense of what makes for a stimulating job. The stereotype is that people with mental ill￾ness are only able to fill janitorial or food service jobs. Although these are important and 
meaningful jobs for many, a person should not be automatically directed toward such 
jobs. The vocational team helps people survey the range of interests and possibilities to 
find a job. This may lead to identifying needs for additional education or certification in 
pursuit of a specific career path. Assessments (covered in Chapter 5) can be administered 
to help the individual to identify career goals most aligned with their interests and unique 
abilities. Job development specialists are individuals who work with community employ￾ers to develop relationships that might help individuals with psychiatric disabilities secure 
a job that interests them and fits their skills set.
Once a person has chosen a career direction, the plan changes to emphasize supports 
that enhance the likelihood of success. Support may mean, for example, that the voca￾tional specialist visits the job site weekly to check in with the worker and the employer; 
that the psychiatrist monitors and changes medications to accord with the person’s new 
sleep cycle; and that the person attends a substance use support group in the evening. Job 
coaches may spend time on the job, helping the individual to adjust to their job responsi￾bilities, slowly removing their support as the person becomes confident in fulfilling their 
job duties independently. Supports are diverse and change over time. Again, the person 
directs this process through discussion, information, and choices.
Support may include help with ending one job and moving on to another. The team 
may need to help the person to understand decisions related to ending jobs, practicing an 
interview with the employer, and searching for a new job. Learning to become a steady 
worker and developing a sense of career is a longitudinal process and, for most of us, 
involves trying a number of jobs.
Research Evidence on Supported Employment
Research on employment services is substantial; most of the important work has been 
done on supported employment, particularly the type of supported employment called 
individual placement and support (IPS). IPS supports people in their efforts to achieve 
steady employment in mainstream competitive jobs, either part-time or full-time. This 
stands in contrast to other vocational rehabilitation approaches that employ people in 
sheltered workshops and other set-aside jobs. To date, 10 meta-analyses of the literature 
have been conducted to estimate the overall effects of supported employment across stud￾ies, with the most recent including 30 individual studies, and 25 unique RCTs (Frederick 
& VanderWeele, 2019).
Effectiveness
Research clearly demonstrates the benefits of supported employment in general, and IPS 
in particular, for individuals with psychiatric disabilities. Although there are many out￾comes that might be assessed to examine impact, the frequency with which persons par￾ticipating in supported employment get jobs is perhaps most compelling. Frederick and 
VanderWeele (2019) report competitive employment outcomes in two ways: (1) whether, 
at any point during a study, a participant obtained employment, and (2) whether employ￾ment was maintained at follow-up. They found that relative to a comparison condi￾tion, individuals receiving supported employment were 1.6 times more likely to obtain 198 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
competitive employment at some point during the study period, and 1.8 times more likely 
to be employed at the end of the study period.
In addition to being much more successful in helping people to obtain competitive 
jobs, supported employment helps those who do obtain work to do so more quickly. 
Across seven studies included in the Frederick and VanderWeele (2019) meta-analysis, 
participants of IPS supported employment had a shorter duration to their first competi￾tive employment job relative to comparison group participants who received TAU. (One 
common misconception is that supported employment is a rapid job placement model. 
In fact, supported employment is better described as a rapid job search model. Although 
the search for work begins soon after program entry, not everyone obtains work imme￾diately.) Job satisfaction generally has not differed between those enrolled in supported 
employment and those enrolled in alternative programs, though one study did find dif￾ferences in initial job satisfaction favoring supported employment (Bond, 2004). Other 
employment-related outcomes of interest include job tenure, hours worked, and earn￾ings. People participating in supported employment have shown longer job tenure, greater 
numbers of hours worked, and higher wages relative to those not participating in sup￾ported employment across numerous studies (Frederick & VanderWeele, 2019).
Recently, some researchers have studied augmented models of supported employment 
that deviate slightly from these principles in an attempt to address issues of implementa￾tion (e.g., challenges with funding time-unlimited services) (Mueser, Drake, & Bond, 
2016). For example, one model of supported employment, IPS, has been augmented to 
provide supported employment services until either 9 months of unemployment has been 
reached following initiation of supported employment services, or an individual has been 
employed for 4 consecutive months. Preliminary research comparing this modified ver￾sion of IPS (called IPS-LITE) suggests no differences in employment or other outcomes 
relative to the IPS model (Burns et al., 2015). Additional research with stronger research 
designs is needed to determine whether such modifications consistently produce compa￾rable outcomes to the IPS model.
Supported Employment and Specific Populations
Studies show that people of color and Latinx individuals face disparities in mental health 
care in the United States (Mongelli, Georgakopoulos, & Pato, 2020), and attribute such 
disparities to factors such as patient distrust of mental health providers, poverty, treat￾ment expenses, and availability of services in communities where people of color and 
Latinx individuals reside. Unfortunately, little research has examined racial and ethnic 
disparities in IPS supported employment and few states systematically report statistics on 
racial and ethnic demographics of people participating in IPS supported employment pro￾grams (Bond, Drake, Becker, & Pogue, 2022). Bond, Mascayano, Metcalfe, Riley, and 
Drake (2023) conducted a narrative review of the literature examining racial and ethnic 
differences in access, retention, and effectiveness of IPS supported employment in the 
United States. Four studies have examined issues of access by race and ethnicity, with two 
studies finding no differences in access, one showing less access for Black Americans, and 
one showing greater access for Black Americans but less for Latinx individuals. Three out 
of three studies examining retention found greater retention rates for individuals enrolled 
in IPS compared with usual vocational services, regardless of race and ethnicity. Six stud￾ies examining employment outcomes showed better outcomes for individuals participat￾ing in IPS, regardless of race or ethnicity.
The ASPIRE (Advancing State Policy Integration for Recovery and Employment) 11. Employment and Education 199
initiative was established in 2021 by the U.S. Department of Labor’s Office of Disability 
Employment Policy. Seven states (Florida, New York, Iowa, Montana, Louisiana, Vir￾ginia, and Indiana) were selected to be a part of the ASPIRE initiative in December 2022. 
These states are receiving support (i.e., consultation, technical assistance, and resources) 
from ASPIRE to align with state policy and funding infrastructures to promote competi￾tive and integrated employment for people with disabilities. In response to the paucity of 
data and research on racial and ethnic disparities in IPS supported employment, Bond 
and colleagues (2022) published an issue brief for ASPIRE recommending systematic data 
collection of racial and ethnic demographic data in ASPIRE states in order to improve 
research on racial and ethnic disparities in employment services.
Campbell, Bond, and Drake (2011) conducted a meta-analysis to determine what 
subgroups benefit from supported employment and found that different diagnostic groups 
(including schizophrenia), all age groups, both men and women, different ethnic and 
racial groups, people with a diverse range of work history (including little or none), all 
levels of educational attainment, all levels of symptom severity, and those with an exten￾sive hospitalization history all benefit from supported employment. The IPS supported 
employment model has been found to be more effective than alternative vocational reha￾bilitation models at improving the competitive work outcomes of clients with dual disor￾ders (Mueser, Campbell, & Drake, 2011). Unfortunately, individuals with co-occurring 
substance use disorders are less likely to enroll in supported employment programs than 
those without, despite a similar interest in employment (Frounfelker, Wilkniss, Bond, 
Devitt, & Drake, 2011). Middle-aged and older adults with schizophrenia have also been 
shown to benefit more from IPS supported employment than alternative models (Twam￾ley, Narvaez, Becker, Bartels, & Jeste, 2008). Transition age youth and young adults 
have also been found to benefit from supported employment (Burke-Miller, Razzano, 
Grey, Blyler, & Cook, 2012; Bond, Al-Abdulmunem, et al., 2023), as have individuals 
participating in early intervention programs for first-episode psychosis (Bond, Drake, & 
Luciano, 2015; Bond, Al-Abdulmunem, et al., 2023). IPS may also be effective for justice￾involved individuals with serious mental illness with modifications (Bond et al., 2015).
Nonvocational Outcomes
What effect does supported employment have on illness management, psychological 
health, relationships, and quality of life? In some sense, this is an inappropriate question, 
because, in theory, it is employment itself (not supported employment services per se) 
that leads to nonvocational benefits. Since it is complicated and ethically problematic to 
assign interested volunteers randomly to competitive work versus no work, the question 
regarding nonvocational outcomes inevitably leads to correlational analyses, with all the 
inherent problems of nonequivalence. Nevertheless, several conclusions can be drawn 
from the existing literature:
1. There seem to be few adverse effects of exposing people to supported employ￾ment or to employment itself. The studies of conversions of day treatment to supported 
employment support this finding by showing an absence of negative outcomes, contrary 
to predictions (Torrey, Clark, Becker, Wyzik, & Drake, 1997). This finding is important, 
because many mental health professionals were trained in the stress–diathesis model of 
mental illness (Zubin & Spring, 1977), which was often the justification for providing 
low-expectation, paternalistic environments and slow, stepwise approaches to rehabilita￾tion (Bond, 1992). The stress–diathesis model undoubtedly has much validity, but many 200 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
people point out—and population studies have confirmed—that unemployment can be 
much more stressful than employment (Ralph, 2000; Rogers, 1995; Steele & Berman, 
2001; Warr, 1987).
2. Correlational studies consistently show that employment is associated with non￾vocational gains (Arns & Linney, 1993, 1995; Bond et al., 2001; Fabian, 1989, 1992; 
Mueser, Becker, et al., 1997; Siu, Tsang, & Bond, 2010; Van Dongen, 1996, 1998; Win￾sper, Crawford-Docherty, Weich, Fenton, & Singh, 2020). Improvements associated with 
employment are typically greater in the areas of psychological health (e.g., self-esteem) 
and quality of life (e.g., financial support) than in the area of illness management (e.g., 
symptom control). Perhaps the strongest study of this type is a case–control comparison 
by Bond et al. (2001). In this study, people who were equivalent on other characteristics 
were selected because of working substantially in competitive versus sheltered settings. 
Outcomes showed that the group in competitive employment fared better (in terms of 
higher rates of improvement in symptoms; greater satisfaction with vocational services, 
leisure, and finances; and higher self-esteem) than did those in a combined minimal￾work–no-work group.
Dissemination Issues
Because supported employment has now been used with research scrutiny in dozens 
of programs, guidelines for its implementation are clearer than those for implement￾ing many other interventions (Becker & Bond, 2002; Becker, Swanson, Reese, Bond, & 
McLeman, 2015; Bond et al., 2001; Drake, Becker, Goldman, & Martinez, 2006; Swan￾son & Becker, 2018; Torrey et al., 2003). These guidelines are summarized in Table 11.3 
and include several principles: starting with voluntary programs, so that early adopters 
can be models and training sites for other programs later; total collaboration between the 
departments of mental health and of vocational rehabilitation at the state and local levels; 
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Carolyn Jacobs Gets an Academic Job
Carolyn Jacobs was a 55-year-old woman with eccentric ideas, a flamboyant appearance, 
and a history of schizoaffective disorder. She had delusional ideas about a past job as an 
administrative assistant in a university and thought of herself as a professional academic, 
although she had no college degree and had not worked in many years. Her mental health 
team noted that Carolyn’s psychotic thinking had decreased with age but she remained 
socially isolated and lacked a meaningful work role in her life. When a supported employ￾ment specialist joined the team, she met with Carolyn to discuss employment. Because ini￾tial applications to the local university did not result in interviews, the employment specialist 
helped Carolyn to identify a nearby library as an appropriate work setting for an intellectual 
person. The mental health team agreed that library work without much contact with the 
public would be a good job match. Subsequently, the employment specialist helped Carolyn 
to secure a library job restacking books, initially on a trial basis and then as a permanent 
job. Carolyn took great pride in working with books and intellectuals, and the employment 
specialist helped Carolyn and her supervisors to resolve occasional interpersonal problems. 
Carolyn stayed in the job for over 10 years and was highly celebrated when she retired at 
age 67.11. Employment and Education 201
building consensus with all stakeholders (state authorities, local administrators, practi￾tioners, and persons with mental illnesses), so that support and sustainability become 
part of implementation; and attending to the relevant tasks (e.g., adopting a new philoso￾phy, training staff, changing medical records, and billing) during each of three phases: 
preparation, actual implementation, and maintenance. Table 11.3 describes these guide￾lines according to these three phases.
Studies show that supported employment can be implemented broadly in routine 
practice settings (Drake & Bond, 2014). Indeed, one of the strengths of supported 
TABLE 11.3. Guidelines for Implementing Supported Employment
Preparatory phase (6–12 months)
1. Address the collaboration between mental health and vocational rehabilitation at the state and 
local levels. This typically includes planning, funding, supervising, training, and other functions 
at the state level. Locally, integrated interventions require regular personal contact among team 
members. 
2. Start with interested providers and programs. Early adopters have a better chance of success and 
can provide models, training sites, supervisors, and peer pressure for other programs. 
3. Plan for implementation locally (financing, structure of teams, training, supervision, records). 
Local problems of implementation are often unique to sites; problem solving must be done at the 
local level. 
4. When a program participant agrees, involve all stakeholders, including family members, 
practitioners, and administrators. Problems will need to be solved, and definite plans made, by 
each of these groups if any changes are to be solid and sustainable.
Implementation phase (6–12 months)
5. Train team members (employment specialists and mental health practitioners) for at least 1 year 
via regular supervision. Practitioners change their behaviors by first seeing new approaches in 
action and then having opportunities to try new rehabilitation skills with participants under 
regular supervision. It takes 6–12 months for practitioners to develop new skills and feel 
comfortable applying them routinely. 
6. Use an external trainer/supervisor initially if there is not a local supported employment expert. 
Supervision is often provided by telephone conference calls with the team. The external supervisor 
slowly backs out of the process as the local supervisor develops proficiency and takes over. 
7. Allow local teams to solve local problems. Many of the problems that arise are idiosyncratic to the 
local program, economy, health care environment, population, and so on. Again, problem solving 
must rely on local experts. 
8. Assess fidelity and outcomes regularly and independently (outside the team). Fidelity assessment is 
best done (at least initially) by someone who is independent of the local team, to assess principles 
of supported employment accurately. This assessor is usually an outside trainer to begin with, 
but the process can be shifted to local quality assurance procedures over time. If outcomes are 
consistently meeting benchmarks, ongoing fidelity assessment is unnecessary. 
Sustaining phase (continual following high-fidelity implementation)
9. Value, measure, and track employment outcomes. The most important outcome is individual, 
satisfying, and lasting employment for people who want to work. Program personnel must 
monitor employment outcomes to ensure that they stay on course. 
10. Renew consultation and training if outcomes drop. If employment outcomes drop, a consultation, 
perhaps based on fidelity assessment, is indicated. 
11. Plan to incorporate new evidence-based components. Evidence-based practices, by definition, 
are based on current best evidence and therefore will change. Programs will therefore need to be 
updated by emerging research on a regular basis. This change should be part of staff expectations. 
12. Have local teams continue to solve local problems. Over time, idiosyncratic problems occur in 
each program, and local experts from multiple stakeholder groups need to be empowered to solve 
these problems. 202 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
employment is its transportability; with a minimum of training and supervision, rehabili￾tation practitioners can join with routine mental health teams and learn the specific skills 
necessary to implement supported employment with good fidelity. In both the National 
Evidence-Based Practices Project (Torrey et al., 2001) and the Johnson & Johnson–
Dartmouth Community Mental Health Program (Drake et al., 2006), evidence-based 
supported employment was implemented in a variety of routine settings, with results 
that were roughly comparable to those found in research studies. Barriers to dissemi￾nation and adoption include funding, the traditional separation of vocational rehabili￾tation and mental health services, and absence of a recovery-oriented ideology. All of 
these barriers have been overcome in the previously cited demonstration projects without 
enormous external resources, and the projects have generally led to an expansion of 
supported employment programs in the states or regions where they were implemented. 
Long-term supported employment learning collaboratives, such as the one established via 
the Johnson & Johnson-Dartmouth Community Mental Health Program, can result in 
high-quality services with positive outcomes, sustainability, and innovation in supportive 
employment (Becker, Drake, & Bond, 2014).
Concerns about Supported Employment
Some criticisms of supported employment have emerged. The most serious have to do 
with length of job tenure, long-term career trajectories, and costs.
Job Tenure
One common concern regarding supported employment is that job tenure is relatively 
brief. In several RCTs (Luciano et al., 2014; Marshall et al., 2014), people who obtained 
work after supported employment were employed for about the same length of time as 
those enrolled in alternative programs; the average job tenure on the longest job was 21.3 
weeks for supported employment participants, compared to 17.3 weeks for those in other 
programs. In some of these studies, participants were still employed at follow-up, result￾ing in an underestimate of actual job tenure. Nevertheless, evidence shows that tenure in 
initial jobs is relatively short.
A counterargument is that short first-job tenure is not necessarily a negative out￾come; new workers can be expected to try different jobs while they are learning what 
specific jobs are like, what kinds of work they enjoy, and/or what skills they possess. 
These are normal and appropriate steps in the process of becoming a steady worker 
and developing a career. Success ultimately entails developing long-term, satisfying jobs 
that people consider careers rather than simply the length of a first job. In other words, 
supported employment aims to help people attain a positive and satisfying longitudinal 
vocational trajectory.
Long-Term Employment Trajectories
Long-term evidence on supported employment is just emerging, but studies indicate that 
people who have access to supported employment services over several years do work 
more over time and do acquire long-term, satisfying jobs more often (Salyers, Becker, 
Drake, Torrey, & Wyzik, 2004). Salyers et al. (2004) followed a small group of par￾ticipants exposed to supported employment over 10 years following the closure of a day 
treatment program and found that 33% worked substantially over time. Moreover, their 11. Employment and Education 203
jobs at a 10-year follow-up tended to be long-term and competitive; participants attrib￾uted gains in several other areas, including hope, self-esteem, and decreased substance 
abuse, to their success in employment. Cook, Burke-Miller, and Roessel (2016) examined 
outcomes among supported employment participants, and found that they were more 
than three times more likely to be employed after 13 years compared with control par￾ticipants, had significantly higher earnings per month, and were more likely to be able to 
terminate disability cash payments.
Costs
Another set of concerns regarding supported employment pertains to its costs and cost￾effectiveness. Latimer (2001) reviewed research from eight sets of studies (some databases 
were used in multiple evaluations) and concluded that supported employment programs 
were no more expensive than alternative approaches such as day treatment or sheltered 
employment; however, they did not produce substantial cost offsets, at least over the 
short term. This suggests that providing supported employment programs may increase 
costs relative to providing no vocational services and may be cost-neutral relative to alter￾native vocational or rehabilitation approaches. One problem with Latimer’s review is that 
the constraints of controlled research often distort cost estimates that might occur under 
routine program conditions. Evidence on the costs of routine supported employment pro￾grams comes from a study of seven real-world programs operating with high fidelity 
to the IPS model (Latimer, Bush, Becker, Drake, & Bond, 2004). Costs per “full-year￾equivalent participant,” which means the average cost of 1 year of continuous supported 
employment services per slot, were approximately $2,500 per year. Since some people 
change their minds about pursuing employment, and others obtain jobs and require little 
or no follow-up support—in both cases, opening slots for new clients—the costs per 
actual client served were considerably more modest. Some work suggests that largely due 
to the impact of supported employment on hospitalization rates (lower rates of hospital￾ization for those who receive supported employment relative to traditional vocational 
rehabilitation), savings for IPS supported employment are 54 cents per dollar relative to 
18 cents per dollar for traditional vocational rehabilitation (Hoffman et al., 2014; Mue￾ser, Drake, & Bond, 2016).
Another problem with economic research is the short-term perspective. If people 
increase their time working and their independence from the mental health system over 
time, as suggested by the long-term follow-ups, the true economic impact of supported 
employment must be considered over decades, not years. In the long run, attachment 
to a job and immersion in a job-related employment culture may improve health out￾comes and reduce long-term public welfare dependency—by, for example, reducing use 
of illegal and legal substances, increasing activity levels, and increasing social contacts 
with family and friends. Even marginal improvements in health and functioning could 
have substantial cost impacts, due to the high costs of treating chronic conditions and of 
nursing home care. However, the longer-term economic effects of supported employment 
programs have not been addressed due to the limited availability of long-term data.
Current Challenges in Supported Employment
Current challenges in supported employment include increasing access to such employ￾ment nationally, improving outcomes among participants who do not become steady 
workers, and enhancing outcomes among those who do become steady workers but are 
limited in their career development trajectories.204 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
Access
Vocational rehabilitation of all kinds, and especially evidence-based supported employ￾ment, is grossly underfunded in the United States, and less than 2% of those receiv￾ing mental health services in the United States have access to IPS (Becker, Courtney, & 
Reese, 2022; Drake et al., 2016; Hogan, Drake, & Goldman, 2014; Mueser & Cook, 
2016). Only about 2% of eligible people with serious mental illness access IPS supported 
employment, even though 60% of individuals with serious mental illness indicate that 
they want to work, and this may be due inadequate funding and a lack of methodol￾ogy for large-scale expansion of IPS (Bond, Drake, & Becker, 2020). The underfund￾ing of rehabilitation services for persons with disabilities who want to work in one of 
the wealthiest countries in the world—a country whose government purports to value 
economic self-reliance—is a conundrum. Political leadership and advocacy in this area 
are obviously needed. The movement to adopt EBPs within state and local vocational 
rehabilitation and mental health agencies may help to overcome political inertia (Ganju, 
2004). There is also hope that private foundations and industries will add resources to 
enhance access to evidence-based services (Mueser & Cook, 2016).
Improving Outcomes for Those with Limited Success
Short-term studies (1–2 years) and long-term research (3–12 years) show that about 
60–70% of participants who receive supported employment obtain at least one competi￾tive job, but only about half of them become steady workers over years. In other words, 
perhaps one-third of participants do not attain competitive employment, while another 
one-third have limited success and do not become steady workers; the last one-third 
become steady workers. Barriers to full success for the middle one-third are multiple 
and complex. Factors such as socialization into disability, medication nonresponsive￾ness, inability to use medications effectively, co-occurring medical illnesses, and lack of 
psychosocial supports are probably involved. Current research, however, focuses on two 
substantial barriers: economic disincentives and cognitive deficits.
Disincentives within the benefits system are often seen by beneficiaries as consti￾tuting a barrier to employment (U.S. General Accounting Office, 1996). Many people 
who are exposed to supported employment decide that work is not their goal once they 
receive benefits counseling, grasp how little they will actually gain economically, and 
understand what they may risk by going to work (e.g., removal from the Social Secu￾rity rolls and loss of health insurance). Some decide to work as volunteers, even though 
they have good employment skills, while declaring themselves retired or working “under 
the table.” Ongoing efforts are underway at the Social Security Administration and the 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to reconsider benefit regulations in order to 
offer more encouragement to people who want to work. These efforts include the Med￾icaid Buy-In program, the Ticket-to-Work program, extended waivers of Social Security 
review, research programs, and so forth. Research on the success of these programs in 
helping people to achieve economic self-sufficiency through employment is mixed (Ferris, 
Hsu, Liem, Raymond, & Acri, 2022; Morris, 2020; Schimmel, Liu, & Croake, 2012; 
Shah, Mancuso, He, & Kozak, 2012; Stapleton, Mamun, & Page, 2014), but willing￾ness to experiment with changing regulations is encouraging and likely to be at least 
partially successful. Opportunities for self-employment or small business ownership may 
also improve long-term work outcomes for people with mental illness (Ostrow, Smith, 
Penney, & Shumway, 2019). The United States has historically invested in programs to 11. Employment and Education 205
support entrepreneurship among people with disabilities. Further research is needed to 
determine whether self-employment leads to longer-term employment for people with 
serious mental illnesses, justifying funding of such programs.
Another strategy to avoid disincentives due to losing benefits is to engage people in 
supported employment early in the course of their illnesses, before they acquire disability 
benefits, and before they are socialized within the mental health system. Nuechterlein 
et al. (2020) have been studying this strategy in a clinic for people experiencing a first 
episode of schizophrenia with remarkable results: 83% of the participants were working 
and/or attending school at 6- and 18-month follow-ups. These findings could fundamen￾tally alter basic assumptions regarding disability, treatment, and rehabilitation.
Another promising area focuses on cognitive deficits. Research shows that persistent 
cognitive deficits (e.g., difficulties with attention and problem solving), rather than lack 
of work skills, symptoms of illness, substance abuse, or other problems, constitute the 
most significant person-level barrier to employment success for people with psychiatric 
disabilities (Green, 1996; McGurk & Mueser, 2004). In theory, functioning on the job 
might be improved by interventions that address cognitive deficits: (1) better job matches 
to avoid specific cognitive limitations; (2) compensatory strategies, such as posted 
reminders, to help people overcome specific cognitive problems; (3) errorless learning 
training to address job-specific problems; (4) cognitive enhancement training to improve 
cognitive functioning through computerized practice sessions that aim to stimulate the 
development of neurological connections; and/or (5) medications to enhance cognitive 
performance, such as those under development for dementia. These issues are more fully 
discussed in Chapter 13.
Enhancing Success for Steady Workers
Long-term follow-up studies show that the majority of people who become steady workers 
decide to limit their work to part-time employment and do not get off benefits completely 
(Salyers et al., 2004; Drake & Bond, 2014). Anecdotally, many people indicate that they 
and their employers would prefer full-time employment, but participants are hesitant to 
give up benefits (especially health insurance), and employers are often unable to offer 
adequate health insurance. Whether the Medicaid Buy-In legislation, other changes in 
disability benefits, or other improvements in alleviating symptoms or cognitive deficits 
will enable people to work full-time is unclear at this point.
SUPPORTED EDUCATION
Education status is strongly linked with income and employment status (U.S. Depart￾ment of Labor, 2022), and identity as a postsecondary student is a common and devel￾opmentally appropriate goal for young adults. Many people are unable to pursue educa￾tional goals, in part because of the disabilities that evolve out of their psychiatric illness. 
Kessler and Merikangas (2004) estimated that about 4.9 million U.S. residents who 
would have participated in college failed because of the onset of psychiatric disorder. 
Major mental illness usually begins during the years when educational goals often peak 
(Sullivan-Soydan, 2004)—the age when people need to determine what educationally 
comes after high school. Unfortunately, some people with psychiatric disabilities never 
make it out of high school, while others’ education is derailed during their college years. 
Data from the U.S. Department of Education’s Longitudinal Transition Study showed 206 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
that the graduation rate of students with psychiatric disabilities is estimated at 35%—the 
lowest graduation rate of nearly every type of disability—and that students with serious 
mental illnesses are least likely of all disability groups to disclose their condition in order 
to acquire any accommodations to which they might be entitled (Newman et al., 2011).
Earning a high school diploma is essential for entering the current work market. The 
demands of the 21st-century economy seem to require postsecondary educational accom￾plishments as well. These kinds of achievement are directly related to size of income 
and attainment of benefits. In addition, higher education leads to more satisfaction with 
work. People completing postsecondary education are more likely to obtain vocations 
that parallel their values and interests. Moreover, such persons are more mobile in the job 
market: They can more easily seek other positions when they have certificates or degrees 
that specify their advanced abilities.
Participation in education settings also meet some of the interpersonal needs of people 
with psychiatric disabilities (Mowbray, Collins, et al., 2005; Unger, 1993; Weiner, 1999). 
Peers with similar life goals (e.g., getting started in the work world) provide opportuni￾ties to make friendships, including those that may lead to more intimate interactions and 
perhaps life partnerships. There are also other, more personal goals that drive education. 
Participation in academic programs stokes a sense of inquisitiveness (Mowbray, Collins, et 
al., 2005; Mowbray, Brown, Furlong-Norman, & Sullivan-Soydan, 2002; Weiner, 1999). 
Instead of being passive to what is happening around them, educated individuals may more 
actively consider the public issues of their times (Alverson, Carpenter, & Drake, 2006). 
In this case, education is not solely driven by work goals. Education also yields a sense of 
pride and industry—pride in hard work, and industry in doing something that matters. 
Accomplishing educational goals helps to frame a person’s sense of identity. Moreover, it 
facilitates attainment of a life stage achieved by many adults: the stage at which a person 
can launch themself from the family of origin and start an independent life.
Supported Education Models
Supported education models are a bit more diverse than supported employment models 
and lack a prototype like IPS. Instead, researchers have distinguished three overall per￾spectives that vary by participation in campus life and type of provider (Carlson, Eichler, 
Huff, & Rapp, 2003; Mowbray, Collins, et al., 2005; Mowbray, Moxley, & Brown, 1993):
•	 Self-contained classrooms. Students with psychiatric disabilities participate in a 
structured curriculum devised solely for them. This curriculum addresses career 
goals and basic academic skills. Self-contained classrooms are typically time￾limited and lead to courses that are more fully integrated into the college cur￾riculum.
•	 On-site support. Support is provided as persons enroll in and complete courses. 
The sources of support are in-house disabilities offices meant to help people with 
all sorts of disabilities in their pursuit of educational goals.
•	 Mobile support. Interpersonal support is provided as in the on-site support model, 
although in this case, the providers are education coaches from the local mental 
health center.
Note a commonality of these three approaches: Postsecondary education is the goal. 
Hence, these programs are mostly conducted in community colleges, certificate pro￾grams, or 4-year universities.11. Employment and Education 207
The eight principles of IPS provide a framework for programs meant to help people 
attain educational goals—a framework that corresponds to many of the principles of 
supported education (Ellison et al., 2015). Table 11.4 lists the IPS principles as these are 
adapted to education, then juxtaposes these with commonly identified principles of sup￾ported education. In addition to highlighting similarities, this comparison summarizes 
notable differences between supported education and IPS—disparities that need to be 
addressed when IPS is extrapolated to education.
1. Placement in integrated educational programs, not special education. The first 
supported education programs were notable for their focus on postsecondary education—
namely, on helping people with their educational goals in community colleges (Mowbray, 
Collins, et al., 2005; Sullivan-Soydan, 2004; Unger, 1993). Despite this real-world focus, 
it is interesting to note that specific practices to achieve postsecondary goals vary from 
special self-contained classrooms (Weiss, Maddox, Vanderwaerden, & Szilvagyi, 2004) 
to clubhouse models where basic educational skills are addressed and the provision of 
transportation services and financial aid is considered (Holter & Paul, 2004).
2. Rapid search and placement in schools. Supported education programs differ in 
rapid placement goals. Some programs seem to encourage quick placement when people 
are ready (Mowbray, Collins, et al., 2005). Others have identified hurdles that may need 
to be addressed before actual placement may begin (Mowbray, 2004; Unger, 1993). Hur￾dles include the need to learn basic reading, writing, and arithmetic skills; resolving past 
and current financial aid problems; and waiting for the first day of the semester to actu￾ally start schooling. These differences suggest ways in which IPS may need to be changed 
to meet the goals of education or in which supported education goals need to evolve.
3. Integration of three principal systems. As in supported employment, there are 
historically independent services that need to be brought together for a strategic and 
TABLE 11.4. Principles/Practices of IPS Adapted for Education, and Corresponding 
Principles of Supported Education
Adapted IPS principles/practices Principles of supported education
• Schooling in integrated settings • Focus on genuine goals (postsecondary education 
or high school)
• Rapid educational placement • Quick placement versus need to await/resolve 
educational first steps
• Integrated education and mental health 
services
• Integration of diverse goals (those of schools, 
disability services, and mental health services)
• Consumer choice about schooling • Consumer preference as the foundation of a 
“choose–get–keep” philosophy
• Continual assessment • Incorporation of course grades into rehab plans
• Time- and place-unlimited support • Central focus on support
• Benefits counseling • Entitlements that work for the person and are not 
barriers to change
• Educational opportunity development • Supported education specialists develop 
relationships with local training programs, 
colleges, and universities
Note: IPS, individual placement and support.208 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
organized approach to the person’s education (Sullivan-Soydan, 2004). These include 
the school itself and the set of regulations that effect matriculation; the disability office 
within the school, charged with setting up reasonable accommodations; and the mental 
health system, seeking to help people overcome their psychiatric disabilities.
4. Participant choice. Also as in supported employment, participant choice is funda￾mental to supported education. The “choose–get–keep” model has been adapted for edu￾cation goals (Danley, Sciarappa, & MacDonald-Wilson, 1992; Sullivan-Soydan, 2004). 
The choosing phase helps the person identify and decide on various options related to 
education: practical issues such as where and when, plus value-related issues, such as the 
kind of employment to be sought after education. Research has shown that people with 
psychiatric disabilities are able to generate job preferences that are stable and realistic 
(Becker et al., 1996).
5. Continuous assessment. School systems have built-in mechanisms for regularly 
collecting data about progress; these include test scores and course grades. Assessment is 
not limited to academic performance, however; other processes related to successful edu￾cation need to be assessed. These may include interpersonal goals (e.g., becoming friendly 
with fellow students) and problem-solving efforts (e.g., the steps people may need to take 
to obtain reasonable accommodations from instructors).
6. Time- and place-unlimited support. Support from service providers may be espe￾cially important as a person learns to obtain such resources from fellow students and 
friends. The “choose–get–keep” paradigm (Sullivan-Soydan, 2004) highlights the long￾term need of support for the person seeking further education.
7. Entitlements that work for each person. A different set of entitlements influences 
a person’s participation and success in education programs; these include benefits pro￾grams that pay for education. For this reason, students with psychiatric disabilities need 
counseling to stay abreast of public entitlements.
8. Educational opportunity development. Employment specialists must work with 
local training programs, colleges, and universities to develop educational opportunities 
that meet the needs of students with serious mental illnesses.
Research on Supported Education
Although supported education makes sense and parallels many of the principles and prac￾tices of supported employment, research on it is surprisingly lacking. Most studies to 
date have addressed both educational and vocational goals using supported education 
(Hillborg, Lövgren, Bejerholm, & Rosenberg, 2021). Two systematic reviews have been 
published on supported education (Leonard & Bruer, 2007; Rogers, Kash-MacDonald, 
et al., 2010). These, and several other studies published since, suggest that supported 
education helps individuals progress toward educational goals and increases positive self￾esteem and self-perceptions, and that individuals report satisfaction with supported edu￾cation services (Ringeisen et al., 2017). Most studies report on educational engagement, 
but not on educational attainment outcomes. Greater methodological rigor is needed to 
more thoroughly examine whether supported education programs lead to greater educa￾tional attainment and more meaningful employment. Clearly, more research is necessary 
to establish the impact of supported education, including efforts to examine IPS as a suit￾able framework.
.11. Employment and Education 209
Peer Coaching
A fairly recent augmentation to the IPS supported education model is the addition of 
peer coaches in educational settings. Corrigan and colleagues (2020) have conducted 
CBPR with postsecondary stakeholders, including students with psychiatric disabilities, 
faculty, and staff, to examine perspectives of using peer coaches in supported education. 
Interviews with these stakeholders generated a list of perceived strengths and challenges 
of utilizing peer coaches in educational settings. Identified potential strengths included 
assistance with service navigation, alleviation of feelings of loneliness, assistance with 
managing school demands, and support with relevant skills (i.e., academics, time man￾agement, self-care, career development, and maintaining appointments). Potential chal￾lenges included finding suited peers, addressing potential burnout among peers, providing 
training and supervision for peers, and matching coaches with the student. This model 
of educational coaching is currently going through feasibility, fidelity, and preliminary 
effectiveness testing.
Another emerging model of supported education on college campuses proposes a 
curriculum including peer coaching, delivered directly by the 4-year academic institu￾tion to their undergraduate students (Davis et al., 2022). Almost all the other studies 
of supported education have looked at programs delivered by the vocational rehabilita￾tion provider. This newer supported education model is called Peer Academic Supports 
for Success (PASS). In the PASS model, coaching is defined as a “goal-directed, results￾oriented, systematic process in which one person facilitates sustained change in another” 
(Cavanagh & Grant, 2006). Psychiatric rehabilitation providers (in the case of PASS 
peer coaches) utilize coaching strategies to assist students with psychiatric disabilities to 
learn and use skills and supports in relation to their educational goals. PASS coaches are 
trained with regard to the specifics of the coaching role, campus resources, skills such 
as listening, responding, empathy, crisis response, suicide prevention, and motivational 
interviewing. PASS coaches’ training also covers many potential coaching activities such 
as time management activities, and planning worksheets for preparation for exams. A 
preliminary feasibility study of PASS was conducted with 12 students with psychiatric 
disabilities, demonstrating that PASS can be delivered with fidelity by peer coaches, the 
program can attract and retain students, and is safe. Results of this preliminary work 
suggest that PASS has significant positive effects on time management, resilience, self￾efficacy, and self-determination among participants. Additional research will be neces￾sary to build an evidence base for this intervention.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The field of vocational and educational rehabilitation for people with psychiatric disabilities 
has moved rapidly over the last three decades, with supported employment now resting on 
a solid base of evidence. In fact, the success of supported employment has raised expecta￾tions for treatment and rehabilitation in general; changed the way most mental health prac￾titioners think about rehabilitation; and supported the ideologies of recovery, inclusion, and 
community integration with strong data. We now know that most people with mental illness 
want to work competitively and can do so. Moreover, employment seems to help them in 
other areas of their lives, and long-term benefits appear to be even better than short-term 
benefits. Ideally, an expanded drive to examine supported education will yield similar find￾ings.210 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
The success of supported employment has inspired and invigorated movements to 
reconsider financing of mental health and vocational services, to change benefit and insur￾ance plans, to develop innovations that would improve vocational outcomes further, and to 
develop supported education services. Despite some challenges, supported employment 
continues to expand both in the United States and internationally, because it addresses a 
basic need expressed by most people with mental illness: to work and contribute to society. 211
CHAPTER 12
Family
Public beliefs about psychiatric illnesses infl uence the ways in which fami￾lies of people with these disorders are engaged. These beliefs aff ect whether families are 
included in the treatment process and off ered assistance in coping with the disorders 
(Solomon, 1998). At the height of the asylum era, families were considered passive causes 
of these disorders through their failure to protect their relatives from societal stresses 
(Terkelsen, 1990). Separation from the families was therefore considered to protect the 
persons from the stress resulting from community pressures (Terkelsen, 1990). Subse￾quently, family members (specifi cally, parents) were viewed by mental health practitio￾ners as primary active causal agents of their relatives’ mental illness (Gelkopf & Roe, 
2014). According to psychodynamic and family interactional theories of etiology, sepa￾ration of the relatives with psychiatric disabilities from their families was essential to 
resolve the parental factors causing illness (Lefl ey, 1996). Consequently, families were 
not only ignored and kept uninformed but also blamed for having caused the disorders. 
Fortunately, psychodynamic explanations of mental illness eventually lost their credibil￾ity, and it is widely recognized that families can play a vital role in supporting their loved 
one’s recovery (Burgess, Pirkis, Coombs, & Rosen, 2011).
A combination of biological and environmental factors was subsequently invoked to 
explain the onset and course of mental illness (Miklowitz, 2008; Morey & Mueser, 2007; 
Mueser & Gingerich, 2006). In this light, family dysfunction may be seen as a possible 
consequence rather than a cause of the illness (Lefl ey, 1996). These new theories resulted 
in paradigmatic shifts away from blaming families to recognition that families are invalu￾able, and often essential, resources both to their relatives with psychiatric disabilities and 
to the rehabilitation team (Pope, Jordan, Venkataraman, Malla, & Iyer, 2019). This new 
attitude precipitated a need to understand a family’s experience of coping with a relative 
with a severe psychiatric disability. Research fi ndings led to development of interventions 
for assisting family members in helping relatives manage their illness and achieve their 
goals (e.g., returning to school or getting a job). In the process, family members may real￾ize that they have legitimate goals, separate from those of their relatives with psychiatric 
disabilities. For example, aging parents may be concerned about an adult child’s living 
independently outside their home, but may realize that their goals are incompatible with 
the child’s continuing to live with them. In this situation, family interventions help all 
parties negotiate changes in plans.
CHAPTER 12212 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
This chapter first presents information on a family’s experience of having a relative 
with a psychiatric disability, as well as on corresponding family needs. Various family 
interventions are then described, as well as research evidence related to their effective￾ness. The final section presents issues and interventions related to persons with psychiat￾ric disabilities as parents.
THE FAMILY EXPERIENCE OF MENTAL ILLNESS
Having a relative with a psychiatric disability affects all members of the person’s imme￾diate family, whether a family member is the primary caregiver or not. Although reac￾tions differ among individuals, as well as among those with different relationships to the 
relative, effects of the illness are felt by parents, spouse/partner, siblings, and children 
(Karnieli-Miller et al., 2013; Leith, Jewell, & Stein, 2018; Morey & Mueser, 2007). At 
least three-quarters of persons with psychiatric disabilities have some type of ongoing 
contact with their families (Harvey, 2018; Lehman & Steinwachs, 1998; Macias, Gold, 
& Jones, 2013). From 30 to 65% of persons with a psychiatric disability are estimated to 
live with their families (Beeler, Rosenthal, & Cohler, 1999; Kaufman, Scogin, MacNeil, 
Leeper, & Wimberly, 2010; Miklowitz, 2008). Family members (especially parents) often 
assume the role of caregivers, for which they are neither trained nor psychologically pre￾pared (Doornbos, 2001; Lefley, 1996; Hatfield, 1987). Families must learn to cope with 
symptoms and dysfunctions of the illness, as well as the vagaries of the various service 
delivery systems: mental health, social welfare, Social Security, vocational systems, sub￾stance abuse services, and in some instances the criminal justice system.
For the most part, parents and spouses/partners, rather than siblings, children, or 
other family members, care for relatives with psychiatric disabilities. Therefore, most of 
the research related to the experience of caregiving has focused on parents and spouses/
partners. Nevertheless, a few studies have assessed siblings in the provision of care (Jew￾ell, 2002; Johnson, 2000; Kinsella, Anderson, & Anderson, 1996; Leith & Stein, 2012; 
Stein, Gonzales, Walker, Benoit, & Russin, 2020). Since the provision of care may be 
based on a hierarchy of family obligation, siblings may assume care for relatives as par￾ents age, become frail, or die (Pillemer & Suitor, 2014)). Horowitz, Tessler, Fisher, and 
Gamache (1992) found that the quality of relationship between siblings was a predictor of 
whether a sibling without mental illness would assist one with illness. Three distinct pat￾terns of care by siblings have been determined: collaboration with the primary care pro￾viders; assistance in crisis situations; and detachment, constructive escape, or unhealthy 
escape from a brother or sister with a psychiatric disability in order to protect their own 
psychological stability (Gerace, Camilleri, & Ayers, 1993; Kinsella et al., 1996).
Family Burden
Objective and Subjective Burden
Psychiatric disability may place an enormous burden on families. Burden is frankly 
a troubling term, suggesting people with psychiatric disability are somehow bringing 
unnecessary challenges to their family. We prefer to frame burden as the joint challenges 
which people and family address in their joint path to recovery. Hoenig and Hamil￾ton (1966) framed burden as having two components: objective and subjective burden. 
(Both these aspects of this complex experience are summarized in Figure 12.1.) Objective 12. Family 213
burden consists of the directly observable costs that result when the family addresses 
the needs of the of the family member with a psychiatric disability, including financial 
costs of care, as well as daily challenges imposed on the family because of the psychiatric 
illness. Subjective burden is the family discomfort or emotional strain experienced as a 
direct consequence of the disability. Burden is distinguished from general distress; burden 
is associated with problems that directly result from psychiatric illness, whereas distress 
relates to poor mental health, psychological morbidity, or life strain not attributable to 
the relative’s illness. Research has found that having a high degree of burden leads to 
high stress and poor physical and mental health among all family members (Greenberg, 
Hilton, Li, Lu, & Mailick, 2021; Karambelas et al., 2022)
A recent systematic review examined findings from 28 studies on caregiver burden 
in schizophrenia spectrum and bipolar disorders (Karambelas et al., 2022). Across the 
studies examined, about one-third were parents (32.3%); about one-fourth (24.4%) were 
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
A Family Counselor Helped the Madison Family
Mary Jane Madison, a widowed mother in her late 60s, was very concerned about her son, 
Bill, who had paranoid schizophrenia and abused alcohol, but refused treatment. He had 
been hospitalized several times, and recently had been in jail because of an assault against 
his mother. Mrs. Madison was afraid to have Bill live with her. He was currently on SSI and 
living in an apartment where he worked for the landlord. The mother sought help from a fam￾ily counselor. She was worried that the landlord was taking advantage of her son, and that 
Bill’s abuse of alcohol and noncompliance with treatment would result in his getting into 
further trouble.
The counselor educated Mrs. Madison about schizophrenia and available treatment 
resources. Armed with this information, Mrs. Madison realized that Bill was entitled to a 
care coordinator. The care coordinator then arranged for a more structured living arrange￾ment, a change in medication, and the services of a representative payee so that Bill would 
not spend his money on alcohol. He successfully remained out of the hospital for the next 
4 years.
FIGURE 12.1. Family consequences of subjective and objective family burden.
Ill relative 
characteristics
• Symptomatology
• Living 
arrangement
• Treatment 
acceptance–
rejection
Objective burden
• Relative’s 
disruptive 
behavior
• Impact of 
relative on 
household
• Support needs 
of family
•
costs
Mediating factors
• Coping 
strategies
• Mastery
• Self-esteem
• Social support
• Socioeconomic 
status
• Quality of 
relationship
•
caregiving
Subjective 
burden
Mental and 
physical health 
of family members
• Distress
• Physical health
• Mental health
• Family functioning
Family financial Gratification of214 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
spouses; 12.4% were siblings, 4.3% were children, and 11.9% had other relationships. 
The relatives with the psychiatric disabilities had a schizophrenia spectrum disorder 
(47.9%) or a bipolar disorder (32.7%) and other mental health conditions (19.4%). Find￾ings overall indicated that family caregivers experience high levels of burden, and diag￾nosis did not differentiate level of burden. An earlier literature review by Baronet (1999) 
examined objective and subjective caregiver burden. Not surprisingly, objective burden 
was related to tasks of caregiving, while subjective burden was associated with disrup￾tive behavior due to the disability. Objectively burdensome activities included provision 
of transportation; assistance with money management, cooking, and other housework; 
continuous supervision; limitations of caregivers’ personal activities; and provision of 
financial assistance. Subjectively burdensome concerns included the relative’s safety and 
potential for violence toward family members; excessive demands on the caregivers; night 
disturbances disrupting caregivers’ sleep; embarrassing behaviors; worries about future 
goals; and conflicts causing significant family hardships (Baronet, 1999).
Of the 28 studies reviewed by Baronet (1999), 15 assessed predictors of burden. A 
caregiver’s youth, being White (Horowitz & Reinhard, 1995; Pickett, Vraniak, Cook, & 
Cohler, 1993; Stueve, Vine, & Struening, 1997), and living with the relatives with mental 
illness (Jones, Roth, & Jones, 1995; Pickett, Greenley, & Greenberg, 1995) were related 
to higher burden. Younger age of the caregiver was specifically associated with stigma, 
fears regarding safety, and higher levels of overall burden (Greenberg, Kim, & Greenley, 
1997; Pickett et al., 1995; Horowitz & Reinhard, 1995; Stueve et al., 1997). Burden was 
not associated with caregiver’s or relative’s gender or education, family income, or the 
caregiver’s relationship to the relative (Baronet, 1999). Presence of symptomatic behavior 
had the strongest and most consistent relationship with high level of burden, but diagno￾sis was not related to burden (Baronet, 1999). Negative symptoms seem to be more prob￾lematic for families than positive ones (Fadden, Bebbington, & Kuipers, 1987; Hooley, 
Richters, Weintraub, & Neal, 1987; Oldridge & Hughes, 1992), perhaps due to their 
stable, ongoing nature (Mueser & Glynn, 1999).
Jungbauer and Angermeyer (2002) found that burden varied by the phases of schizo￾phrenia. The onset of this disorder is a time of high stress due to the shock and feeling 
of helplessness. At this point, families frequently do not connect the persons’ experiences 
to mental illness. As new episodes recur, burden intensifies, but usually not as greatly as 
during the initial episode. At other times, families experience chronic, everyday burdens 
of coping with their relatives.
More recently, researchers have moved away from focusing primarily on the concept 
of burden to considering the impact of caregiving on quality of life and the physical and 
mental health of family caregivers. In a systematic review of factors associated with fam￾ily members’ quality of life, Lima-Rodriguez, de Medina-Moragas, Fernández-Fernández, 
and Lima-Serrano (2022) examined 15 studies and categorized factors into five catego￾ries: individual, family, patient, disease process, and context. Individual factors associ￾ated with lower caregiver quality of life included being female, single, unemployed, less 
educated, and having less knowledge about their loved one’s illness. Family-level factors 
associated with lower quality of life included the caregiver being the parent, having two 
or more dependents, lower income, and living with the person with serious mental illness. 
Patient-level factors associated with lower caregiver quality of life included younger age, 
being unemployed, having a worse clinical status, more hospitalizations, and having a 
diagnosis of depression compared to schizophrenia. Factors related to the disease process 
associated with lower caregiver quality of life included disease onset before age 45, lon￾ger duration of exposure to illness, perceptions that the disability is under the person’s 12. Family 215
control, higher subjective and objective burden, and greater family alienation. Contex￾tual factors related to lower quality of life included higher social stigma and lower social 
support. While some of the factors identified may be immutable, the review identified 
factors in several categories that could be addressed by rehabilitation counselors working 
with people and their families (e.g., knowledge about the illness, perceptions of control 
of the illness, social support).
Research has also considered the impact of caring for a loved one with a serious 
mental illness on the physical and mental health of family members. Barker, Greenberg, 
Seltzer, and Almeida (2012) found evidence of hypoactivated daily cortisol in response 
to stress among parents of adult children with serious mental illness, suggesting a physi￾ological impact. Greenberg and colleagues (2021) found negative impacts of caregiving 
on measures of caregiver physical and mental health that maintained when controlling 
for genetic vulnerability for poor mental health outcomes. The authors indicated that this 
confirms the negative impact of caring for a child with serious mental illness “above and 
beyond genetic vulnerability” (p. 420).
Given the nature of schizophrenia and other serious mental illnesses, family mem￾bers of a person with such an illness also experience a sense of loss or “chronic sorrow” 
for the person the relative was before the illness, and for the lost potential of what the 
relative could have been (Richardson, Cobham, Murray, & McDermott, 2011; Williams￾Wengerd & Solheim, 2021). Unlike the death of a relative, this sense of loss can be an 
ongoing process of grieving, as family members are continually confronted with the loss. 
The degree of burden has been found to be correlated with this grief (Møller, Gudde, 
Folden, & Linaker, 2009; Solomon & Draine, 1996).
Violence
Most people with serious mental illness are not violent. However, they are at a modestly 
increased risk of committing violence against others (Fazel, Gulati, Linsell, Geddes, & 
Grann, 2009; Fazel, Lichtenstein, Grann, Goodwin, & Långström, 2010), with approxi￾mately half of all violent acts committed by people with serious mental illness being 
against family members (Estroff, Swanson, Lachicotte, Swartz, & Bolduc, 1998; Mona￾han et al., 2001). In a national online survey of 573 adults with an adult family mem￾ber with serious mental illness, most of whom had frequent contact with their relative, 
Labrum and Solomon (2017) found that 47% had experienced violent victimization by 
their relative since the onset of the relative’s illness. Twenty percent had experienced seri￾ous violence, defined as resulting in physical injury or involving a weapon. Twenty-two 
percent reported any victimization by their relative with mental illness, and 8% reported 
experiencing serious violence in the past 6 months.
Research has identified factors associated with violence by people with serious 
mental illness toward their family members. Younger age, lower education and income, 
drug and alcohol use, and low treatment engagement have been found to increase risk 
of violence toward family members (Labrum & Solomon, 2016; Swan & Lavitt, 1988; 
Vaddadi, Soosai, Gilleard, & Adlard, 1997). Risk of family violence increases when the 
person with serious mental illness is financially dependent on the family member, par￾ticularly when family members act as representative payees (Elbogen, Swanson, Swartz, 
& Van Dorn, 2005; Estroff et al., 1998; Labrum & Solomon, 2016). In several studies, 
family members have reported that efforts at limit setting and or insisting their relative 
with serious mental illnesses take medications preceded at least half of all acts of family 
violence (Labrum & Solomon, 2016; Straznickas, McNiel, & Binder, 1993; Varghese, 216 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
Khakha, & Chadda, 2016). Higher level of contact and poor-quality premorbid relation￾ships between persons with serious mental illness and family members also increases risk 
of violence toward family members (Labrum & Solomon, 2016; Vaddadi et al., 1997; 
Vaddadi, Gilleard, & Fryer, 2002). Labrum, Zingman, Nossel, and Dixon (2021) sug￾gest that promising strategies to reduce violence toward family members may include 
strengthening support services for people with serious mental illness so they are less reli￾ant and financially dependent on family members, improving strategies to engage people 
in treatment, and enhancing family members’ abilities to prevent and manage conflict.
Family Stigma
Stigma can be another significant source of burden for family members (Gela & Corri￾gan, 2014). Family stigma, or courtesy stigma (see Chapter 2), may be subtyped accord￾ing to the three types of stigma experienced by people labeled with a mental illness: 
public stigma, self-stigma, and label avoidance.
Public stigma may be experienced by family members in various ways, including the 
use of derogatory language to refer to the family, gossip and slander, remarks or ques￾tions that connote blame or criticism of the family for the condition, pity, unwelcome and 
patronizing advice, stares in public, and social avoidance or exclusion (Larson & Cor￾rigan, 2008; Norvilitis, Scime, & Lee, 2002). Self-stigma occurs when a family member 
internalizes stigmatizing views held by the general public regarding the family member’s 
association with the individual diagnosed with mental illness. This type of stigma is asso￾ciated with shame and other various forms of psychological distress (Hasson-Ohayon, 
Levy, Kravetz, Vollanski-Narkis, & Roe, 2011; Tsang, Tam, Chan, & Cheung, 2003; 
Wahl & Harman, 1989). Label avoidance occurs with respect to family stigma when a 
relative fears being identified or labeled as a family member of a person diagnosed with 
mental illness. In order to avoid such labeling, the relative may discourage the family 
member with mental illness from pursuing activities that could result in that individual’s 
being labeled, or the relative may not seek out services for the ill person. For example, 
label avoidance in family stigma could manifest itself as a parent not seeking treatment 
for a child in order to avoid the child being labeled, or to avoid potential blame for their 
child’s problems.
Family members experience an additional type of stigma: vicarious impact. Research 
shows that family members suffer from witnessing the negative impact of prejudice and 
discrimination on a relative with mental illness. As many as two-thirds of family mem￾bers in several studies expressed concern about the stigma experienced by their relatives 
(Angermeyer, Schulze, & Dietrich, 2003; Struening et al., 2001; Wahl & Harman, 1989). 
Family members widely agree that stigma hurts their relatives’ self-esteem, ability to keep 
friends, success in finding and obtaining a job or place to live, and acceptance by mental 
health professionals, and that it represents a major hurdle to the recovery of their rela￾tives.
Positive Aspects of Caregiving
As stated earlier, some families and people with psychiatric disabilities find the term 
family burden offensive, because it frames caregiving as solely a negative experience. 
Szmukler (1996; Szmukler et al., 1996) suggest describing caregiving more globally, 
including both positive and negative experiences. There has been less research on the 
positive aspects of caregiving; however, this is changing. Chen and Greenburg (2004) 12. Family 217
assessed over 500 caregivers of people with schizophrenia spectrum disorders and found 
many reported gains such as becoming more sensitive to people with disabilities (~70%); 
clarifying priorities and a greater sense of inner strength (>50%). Shiraishi and Reilly 
(2019) assessed 23 studies of the positive and negative impacts of schizophrenia on family 
caregivers, finding evidence of positive impacts related to the following categories: affec￾tion, compassion, family solidarity, self-confidence, personal growth, deep understand￾ing affirmation, admiration, and appreciation.
Research also suggests that adults with serious mental illnesses not only receive but 
they also provide assistance to their family members. A study of electronic health records 
of veterans with serious mental illness found regular mentions of help being given to or 
from family members, with 41% of the veterans with serious mental illness providing 
assistance or support to family members, often in a reciprocal relationship (Haselden et 
al., 2018). Labrum (2020) analyzed data from a survey of 573 adults with a relative with 
a serious mental illness and found that 61% provided assistance to and 37% reported 
receiving assistance from the person with serious mental illness. Assistance provided by 
the relatives with mental illness included assistance with activities of daily living and 
finances.
Expressed Emotion
Although families are no longer considered causal agents of psychiatric illness, there are 
concerns that some family qualities may exacerbate psychiatric illness and hasten the 
return of the relatives with psychiatric disabilities to the hospital. Research in Britain, 
conducted more than 50 years ago, found that people who were discharged from psychi￾atric hospitals and returned to close family relationships high in negative family affect 
were more likely to deteriorate and return to the hospital (Brown, Monck, Carstairs, & 
Wing, 1962). This finding has been replicated in subsequent studies (Butzlaff & Hooley, 
1998; Hooley, 2007; Kreisman & Blumenthal, 1995). This negative affect was termed 
expressed emotion (EE), which was operationally defined as criticism (critical comments 
[CCs]), hostility, and emotional overinvolvement (EOI) directed by family members 
toward their relatives with serious mental illness (Brown & Rutter, 1966).
Buzlaff and Hooley (1998) conducted a meta-analysis of the relationship of EE to 
psychiatric relapse, confirming a robust relationship between the two. They further con￾cluded that EE was a stronger predictor of relapse for mood and eating disorders than for 
schizophrenia spectrum disorders. Separate reviews of studies have confirmed the robust￾ness of the empirical relationship between EE and relapse (Weintraub, Hall, Carbonella, 
Weisman de Mamani, & Hooley, 2017), and the course of depression, posttraumatic 
stress, personality disorders, and alcoholism (Wearden, Tarrier, Barrowclough, Zas￾towny, & Armstrong Rahill, 2000). Buzlaff and Hooley (1998) also found that the rela￾tionship was strongest for those with the most long-standing illnesses. There is evidence 
that EE (or aspects of it) is a state rather than a trait and can change over time (Boye et 
al., 1999; Schreiber, Breier, & Pickar, 1995) and may vary by the stage of a person’s ill￾ness (Gómez-de-Regil, Kwapil, & Barrantes-Vidal, 2014). Research also suggests that 
levels of EE and its impact vary across cultures and socioethnic backgrounds (Bhugra 
& McKenzie, 2003; Hashemi & Cochrane, 1999; López et al., 2009; Singh, Harley, & 
Suhai, 2013).
A growing body of recent literature has considered EE in families of individuals 
experiencing at-risk mental state (ARMS) for psychosis. In their systematic review, Izon 
and colleagues (2021) found evidence of high EE in approximately one-third of ARMS 218 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
relatives. Higher levels of criticism and hostility were associated with symptoms, poorer 
functioning, and increased depression, anxiety, and distress. Higher levels of warmth 
in conjunction with better family functioning was associated with improved symptoms 
and functioning. One of the studies included in the systematic review (Haidl et al., 2018) 
found that “perceived irritability” of a key relative, an element of the Level of Expressed 
Emotion Scale (Cole & Kazarian, 1988), was a predictor of conversion into first-episode 
psychosis for high-risk patients.
Studies have found a relationship between EE and a family’s beliefs about a mental 
illness—beliefs that may play a role in the relapse of the relative with the illness (Bar￾rowclough & Hooley, 2003; Domínguez-Martinez, Medina-Prada, Kwapil, & Barrantes￾Vidal, 2017; Wearden et al., 2000). Family members who are hostile and critical, or have 
high EE, are more likely to view symptoms of their relative’s illness as residing within the 
relative’s personal control than are family members with low EE (Domínguez-Martinez, 
Medina-Prada, Kwapil, & Barrantes-Vidal, 2014, 2017; Barrowclough, Johnston, & Tar￾rier, 1994; Vasconcelos e Sa, Wearden, & Barrowclough, 2013; Weisman, Nuechterlein, 
Goldstein, & Snyder, 1998).
Family members with high EE face many difficulties and experience higher levels of 
distress (Kageyama & Solomon, 2018; Domínguez-Martínez, Medina-Pradas, Kwapil, & 
Barrantes-Vidal, 2017). They report experiencing higher levels of family stigma (Cherry, 
Taylor, Brown, Rigby, & Sellwood, 2017; Phillips, Pearson, Li, Xu, & Yang, 2002); care 
burden (Möller-Leimkühler & Jandl, 2011; Wang, Chen, & Yang, 2017), and physical 
violence from their family member (Amaresha & Venkatasubramanian, 2012; Kageyama 
& Solomon, 2018). Cherry et al. (2017) assessed eight studies that measured EE dimen￾sions of EOI and CCs, along with guilt and shame, and concluded that, overall, there was 
evidence that EOI was associated with both guilt and shame, while CCs were associated 
with shame. Noting that they could not confirm directionality of these relationships, the 
authors suggest that interventions targeting guilt and shame may be useful.
Like the concept of family burden, the concept of EE has been criticized by families 
and providers alike (Solomon, 1996). Low and high EE seem to suggest “good” and “bad” 
families, respectively, and these suggestions may be directly or indirectly communicated 
to families by practitioners. This may lead once again to blaming families and causing 
them guilt—this time for affecting the course of the illness rather than causing the onset 
of the disorder (Bernheim & Lehman, 1985; Platman, 1983). EE has also been criticized 
for blinding practitioners to the potential support and assistance that families provide to 
their relatives with psychiatric disabilities. In addition, family members who believe that 
the negative attributes of EE apply to them may become more alienated from the mental 
health treatment system, which can have negative consequences for the relatives with psy￾chiatric disabilities (Hatfield, Spaniol, & Zipple, 1987). However, understanding EE and 
the experiences of families is critical to the development of family interventions and sup￾porting families that are struggling to care for a loved one with a psychiatric disability.
FAMILY NEEDS
Family members of persons with psychiatric disabilities desire information about their 
relatives’ disorders in terms of diagnosis, prognosis, and treatments. Noncaregiving rela￾tives, including siblings and children, also want information about these illnesses in order 
to enhance their coping (Biegel, Mulligan, Putnam, & Song, 1994; Doornbos, 2001; 
Greenberg, Greenley, & Kim, 1995; Hatfield et al., 1987; Kinsella et al., 1996). Needs 12. Family 219
of families differ by diagnosis and whether families participate in self-help groups (Mue￾ser, Bellack, Wade, Sayers, & Rosenthal, 1992). A family’s needs may include knowing 
appropriate expectations, learning how to motivate a relative, understanding the relative’s 
disorder, planning for their relative’s future, advocating for better services for their rela￾tive, and navigating housing and rehabilitation services (Drapalski et al., 2008; Hatfield, 
1983). Family members also wish to learn skills to cope with the illness and its effects on 
the whole family, and to receive support for themselves in dealing with the stresses and 
strains (Lefley, 1996; Marsh, 1998; Hatfield, 1994b).
Despite these needs, early researchers found a good deal of discrepancy between 
what families wanted and what they received from rehabilitation counselors (Hatfield, 
1983), and similar findings have since been obtained. Families report a lack of under￾standing from some mental health practitioners (Doornbos, 2001; Solomon, Beck, & 
Gordon, 1988a, 1988b)—practitioners who seemingly have little comprehension of the 
burdens faced by families (Kaas, Lee, & Peitzman, 2003). Mueser, Webb, Pfeiffer, Gla￾dis, and Levinson (1996) found that professionals, in comparison to family members 
themselves, underestimated the degree of burden associated with negative and positive 
symptoms in people with bipolar disorders compared to those with schizophrenia. Fur￾thermore, families often feel rejected, ignored, and blamed for their relatives’ disabilities 
by mental health practitioners (Fisher, Benson, & Tessler, 1990; Kaas et al., 2003). Lefley 
(1996) described the stress that families feel from the system’s indifference to them as 
iatrogenic burden. Families are often dissatisfied with the services they receive from men￾tal health practitioners (Dockery et al., 2015; Grella & Grusky, 1989; Hanson & Rapp, 
1992; Solomon, 1994; Spaniol & Zipple, 1988), although some of these researchers did 
find that families had a relatively good amount of contact with care coordination ser￾vices. Families seemed more satisfied with care coordination services (Grella & Grusky, 
1989; Solomon, 1994; Solomon & Draine, 1994).
Family members want to be involved in the treatment planning process for their 
relative and report higher satisfaction with services when they perceive greater collabo￾ration between themselves and their relative’s treatment provider (Perreault, Rousseau, 
Provencher, Roberts, & Milton, 2012). They feel that they have much to offer practitio￾ners by being included in the treatment process (Doornbos, 2001). For example, family 
caregivers are in a position to monitor medication and side effects. They are frequently 
the first to notice a subtle return of symptoms or signs of substance abuse in their relative 
(Herz, 1985). Family members are therefore able to provide information to providers that 
would not otherwise be available to them (Doornbos, 2001). Without ongoing contact 
with providers, families often give up trying to communicate information to practitioners 
who can intercede to prevent a crisis from occurring (Leazenby, 1997). Although there 
have been efforts to promote collaborative relationships between providers and families, 
a survey of families found that they received little information regarding their relatives’ 
treatment plans (Marshall & Solomon, 2000).
Providers need to keep in mind that although family members may be excellent part￾ners in deciding goals and establishing rehabilitation plans, people with disabilities still 
have the right of self-determination. Sometimes family members and relatives with dis￾abilities may disagree about specific plans. Rehabilitation counselors may try to reach a 
consensus, but the final decisions in such a situation are those of the person with disabili￾ties. There is typically no black-and-white moment when a rehabilitation counselor can 
say, “Time to stop. We are going to focus on Mary Beth’s going back to college, according 
to her request.” Such a discussion is often a dynamic and ongoing process. Still, the reha￾bilitation counselor is the agent of the person with disabilities, not the family members, 220 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
and is therefore ultimately bound to honor their preferences. This does not mean that the 
family members must passively accept goals that do not correspond with theirs. Instead, 
family members and the person with the disability should seek a third-party counselor 
who strives to mediate between them.
FAMILY INTERVENTIONS
Researchers partnering with providers have developed a variety of interventions meant to 
enhance families’ capability to improve outcomes for relatives with psychiatric disabili￾ties. These are reviewed in Table 12.1 and include a variety of approaches to psychoedu￾cation; family consultation, and support; planned lifetime assistance; and respite care.
Psychoeducation
As the name implies, psychoeducation has both educational and psychotherapeutic com￾ponents. Originally, these interventions were created by mental health professionals in 
response to EE research, with the intention of enhancing family members’ ability to cope 
with their relatives’ disabilities, and thereby to lower their EE behavior (Mueser & Gin￾gerich, 2006). This change in behavior was expected to reduce relapse. Psychoeducation 
has two primary objectives: to provide information regarding a relative’s disorder and 
its treatment, and to teach family members strategies to cope with the relative’s illness, 
including problem-solving skills, coping and communication skills, and crisis manage￾ment. These services are often provided in structured programs that last at least 9 months 
but may go as long as 5 years; that are often diagnosis-specific; and that focus primarily 
on outcomes for the relatives with psychiatric disabilities, and less so on the well-being of 
family members (Solomon, 1996, 2000; Dixon et al., 2001).
Psychoeducational interventions may be delivered to an individual family member, 
to a family unit, or to multiple families. A family’s relative with psychiatric disability is 
often included in all, or part, of the intervention. Services may be provided in a family’s 
own home, in a clinic setting, or some other location. For the most part, these interven￾tions have focused on families of relatives with schizophrenia (Mueser & Gingerich, 
2006), but they have also been designed for families of relatives with bipolar disorders, 
major depression, and PTSD (McFarlane, Dixon, Lukens, & Lucksted, 2003; Miklow￾itz, 2008). Current versions of psychoeducational interventions assume a strengths-based 
TABLE 12.1. Types of Services for Families
Psychoeducation: Review of facts and skills to help family members and relatives with mental illness 
manage disabilities.
Family consultation and support: Provision of advice, information, and support to family members to 
help weather the challenges of serious mental illness. Consultation may be provided on an individual 
or group basis; support is often provided in multiple-family groups.
Planned lifetime assistance: Practical assistance, often focused on independent living goals of a person 
with disabilities as parents move toward retirement.
Respite: Temporary relief for family caregivers of relatives with serious mental illness.12. Family 221
perspective, viewing family members as competent therapeutic agents. They promote col￾laborative relationships between family members and practitioners (Lam, 1991).
Three prominent examples of these interventions are behavioral family management
(Falloon, Boyd, & McGill, 1984), family psychoeducation (Anderson, Reiss, & Hogarty, 
1986), and multifamily groups (McFarlane, 2002). These interventions have been deter￾mined to be effective in at least two randomized studies.
• Falloon et al.’s (1984) behavioral family management takes a sequential approach: 
It starts with assessment; then moves to intervention strategies, including communication 
and problem-solving training; and ends with ongoing review. As its name indicates, the 
intervention encompasses illness management strategies that employ behavior modifica￾tion techniques. Behavioral analyses of the strengths and needs of the family and of each 
family member are conducted. The goal is to help all family members to function at their 
best given the constraints of the relative with psychiatric disabilities.
• Anderson et al.’s (1986) intervention is based on a family systems orientation and 
starts by establishing an alliance with the family at the point of the person’s admission to 
the hospital. Once a relationship is formed, the provider serves as a representative with 
the hospital system. The second phase is a daylong survival skills workshop, which pro￾vides information about the disorder to a group of families. This format helps to reduce 
isolation and stigma. Upon the relative’s discharge from the hospital, individual family 
sessions begin, and contacts are made with the family and the relative during regularly 
scheduled sessions, phone consultations, and crisis contacts. The intervention is open￾ended and contingent on needs and negotiations among family members and the relative 
with the psychiatric disability. Subsequent sessions apply information from the survival 
skills workshop to deal with the ongoing process of social adjustment and employment 
for the relative.
• McFarlane’s (2002) intervention can be considered a second-generation treatment, 
because it combines aspects of two family psychoeducation interventions: behavioral 
family management and multiple-family approaches. The first stage is for practitioners to 
meet individually with a family to build an alliance. Second is a multifamily workshop, 
as in Anderson et al.’s (1986) model. Unlike Anderson et al.’s intervention, however, this 
model employs problem-solving groups attended by both family members and relatives 
with psychiatric disabilities. McFarlane (2002) proposes a long-term intervention with a 
closed-format membership. Thus, families receive support and problem-solving sugges￾tions from other families; consequently, this intervention has the advantage of a social 
support group as well. For the first year, the multifamily group focuses on social stabiliza￾tion of the relatives with psychiatric disabilities; in the second year, the group moves to 
emphasize social and vocational rehabilitation for the relatives.
Peer-Provided/Family-Based Education
Some types of family-based education differ from psychoeducation per se, in that they 
have been developed by families themselves to respond to their needs for practical advice 
and information. Families may feel that they do not need treatment, but hands-on assis￾tance in meeting the myriad problems that emerge from their loved ones’ psychiatric 
disabilities (Hatfield, 1994a). Many of these programs began as “grassroot” efforts by 
members of what was then called the National Alliance for the Mentally Ill (now the 
National Alliance on Mental Illness, or NAMI) (Lefley, 1996). Goals were to reduce 222 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
families’ stress and burden, to increase their coping skills, and to improve their quality 
of life. These educational interventions continue to emphasize competencies of families 
rather than deficits (Solomon, 1996; Toohey, Muralidharan, Medoff, Lucksted, & Dixon, 
2016). Families are taught skills to cope with the existential problems resulting from their 
relatives’ illness, to manage relapse should it occur (Lefley, 1996).
The underlying conceptual basis for family education emerged from findings regard￾ing stress, coping, and adaptation (Hatfield, 1987, 1990; Marsh, 1992). The coping 
and adaptation framework focuses on the strengths, resources, and adaptive capacities 
that all families have. Family members learn to cope with their relatives’ behaviors by 
modifying their own behaviors, cognitively neutralizing the meaning of the experiences, 
and managing the emotional consequences of the problems that arise from the rela￾tives’ disorders (Pearlin & Schooler, 1978). Adaptive coping is a family member’s use of 
behavioral and cognitive strategies to reduce stress and burden resulting from a relative’s 
illness.
In addition, these interventions employ social support groups, which help to buffer 
stress through emotional support, practical advice, and information sharing. Particular 
programs may have different conceptualizations. For example, NAMI’s Family-to-Family 
(FTF) education program employs a trauma model of recovery—viewing mental illness 
in a family as a traumatic event from which all family members need to recover, and 
stressing the need for all members to learn to take care of themselves (Burland, 1998). 
Programs like FTF are typically delivered in community settings, including churches, 
schools, or other locations that are convenient and accessible to family members (Solo￾mon, 2000). By being independent of the mental health system, participants avoid the 
stigma of attending a mental health agency. Family members who have had negative 
experiences with mental health practitioners are more likely to attend these interventions 
when they are independent of the mental health system. These programs are frequently 
led by family members, although they sometimes have professionals speak on a specific 
topic, such as new medications (Battaglino, 1987). These kinds of programs may also be 
facilitated by an individual who has the dual role of a professional and a family member, 
or cofacilitated by a professional and a trained family member. Most educational groups 
have an open admission policy to anyone who has a relative with a psychiatric disorder, 
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
What Happens When Goals Differ?
Often family members do not agree about goals. Jeremy Washington is a 28-year-old Black 
man living with disabilities resulting from a 10-year struggle with schizophrenia. He currently 
lives in a three-bedroom apartment with his father, Luther. Jeremy has a new part-time job at 
a local insurance company, working between 3 and 9 p.m. each day. When he gets home, he 
likes to relax by listening to the radio and having a couple of beers. Luther gets up early each 
morning to get to his job as a bus driver. He is bothered by Jeremy’s loud music at night. He 
also worries that Jeremy’s drinking will make his illness worse. Finally, Luther is planning on 
retiring in a couple of years and wants Jeremy to think about moving into his own place. Jer￾emy feels that work is still a major stressor and does not want to move out. The rehabilitation 
goal is helping Jeremy adjust to his new job. But this is not enough for Luther; he wants to 
also focus on Jeremy moving out.12. Family 223
regardless of whether the relative is receiving treatment. This is in contrast to psycho￾education interventions, which require the relative with a psychiatric disability to be in 
treatment. Additionally, the relative with the psychiatric disorder does not attend along 
with family members.
Being sponsored by NAMI, FTF is widely offered throughout the United States, 
Puerto Rico, and Canada. This is a “train-the-trainer” model, so the program becomes 
self-sustaining (Dixon, 1999). There is no cost to participants (Dixon et al., 2004). Since 
many of these programs were designed with parents in mind, other family members do 
not always feel that these interventions are relevant to their needs. There has been devel￾opment of programs specifically for spouses/partners, children, and siblings, as well as 
for families of relatives with disorders other than schizophrenia (e.g., bipolar disorders 
and BPD). For example, groups for spouses/partners focus on their concerns rather than 
those of parents, such as dealing with intimacy issues and partner role responsibilities 
(e.g., Mannion, Mueser, & Solomon, 1994).
Research on Psychoeducational Interventions
Since 1995, there have been at least 18 reviews of psychoeducational interventions, at 
least eight of which have been systematic reviews or meta-analyses (Cuijpers, 1999; 
Bevan Jones et al., 2018; Brady, Kangas, & McGill, 2017; Pharoah, Rathbone, Mari, 
& Streiner, 2004; Pilling et al., 2002; Pitschel-Walz, Leucht, Bauml, Kissling, & Engel, 
2001; Sin, Gillard, Spain, Cornelius, Chen, & Henderson, 2017; Wittenborn et al., 2022). 
The reviews have consistently concluded that these interventions produce lower rates of 
relapse, with some indication that gains are maintained for at least 2 years. Furthermore, 
reviews indicate that family psychoeducation has positive impacts on family caregivers, 
improving caregiving experiences and reducing caregiving burden and EE. Most of the 
early reviews were of studies that focused on relatives of persons with schizophrenia 
or schizophrenia spectrum disorders; however, several of the more recent reviews have 
examined studies focused on relatives of persons with depression or bipolar disorder 
(Bevan Jones et al., 2018; Brady et al., 2017; Wittenborn et al., 2022). In the majority of 
the studies included in the reviews, the family psychoeducation intervention was com￾bined with psychopharmacological treatment, and frequently with case management. 
This factor has resulted in some reviewers’ concluding that family interventions increase 
medication use, which subsequently reduces relapse.
Earlier studies suggested that beneficial effects seem to depend on the duration of 
an intervention’s being at least 9 months (Chien, Thompson, & Norman, 2008; Dixon 
& Lehman, 1995; Lam, 1991; Penn & Mueser, 1996). A review by McFarlane (2016) 
suggested that programs lasting longer than 3 months had more robust effects, and those 
lasting at least 6 months show the most consistent efficacy. Some reviewers have noted 
that employing an insight-oriented perspective in family interventions may actually result 
in negative outcomes (McFarlane, 2016; Penn & Mueser, 1996; Mueser & Glynn, 1999). 
Most reviews have found no particular advantage for one approach to psychoeducation 
over another (Baucom, Meuser, Shoham, Dauito, & Stickle, 1998). There is some evi￾dence that, at a minimum, an intervention needs to include education, family support, 
psychopharmacology, and case management for the relatives with psychiatric disabilities. 
A few studies assessed whether a multifamily or single-family format was more effective, 
but there was no clear conclusion on this issue (McFarlane, 2016) Also, cautions were 
raised about paying attention to cultural issues (Dixon, Adams, & Lucksted, 2000; Penn 
& Mueser, 1996).224 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
Several systematic reviews have evaluated psychoeducation outcomes related to fam￾ily functioning and burden. Findings vary but suggest improvement in psychosocial out￾comes both for families and for the relatives with psychiatric disabilities, such as family 
burden, family functioning, family stress, and relatives’ social role functioning associated 
with psychoeducation programs (Brady et al., 2017; Sin et al., 2017). Cuijpers (1999) con￾ducted a review of only burden and its component parts as outcomes of family interven￾tions, and concluded that family interventions had an effect on these outcomes; stronger 
effects on burden required at least 12 sessions.
While most of the research on family psycho-education has focused on in person 
interventions, there have been several studies of web-based programs. Sin and colleagues 
(2022) conducted a randomized controlled trial of an entirely web-based intervention 
called Carers for People with Psychosis e-support (COPe-support). Prior to the RCT, the 
intervention was codeveloped via a participatory research process and tested for usabil￾ity. The 20-week multimedia interactive intervention provided psychoeducation and net￾work support with peers and professionals; 407 study participants were randomized to 
COPe-support or a passive online information resource. Results did not find differences 
in family member well-being between the two groups at 20- or 40-week follow-up, per￾haps due to low engagement with the intervention (only 106 of the 204 participants in 
the COPe-support intervention logged in two or more times a week). Rotondi et al (2010) 
conducted a RCT study of SOAR (schizophrenia online access to resources), a web-based 
psychoeducation program for people with schizophrenia and their caregivers. The inter￾vention comprised an in-person, 4-hour psychoeducation skills workshop, professionally 
facilitated online therapy forums (one for people with schizophrenia, one for caregivers, 
and one combined), capability to ask the project team questions, frequently asked ques￾tions, and a library of resources and community activities. Among those assigned to the 
SOAR intervention, persons with schizophrenia spent an average of 46 hours on the 
website; caregivers averaged 14 hours. Positive effects were noted for a limited set of out￾comes. Compared to a usual care group, people with schizophrenia in the SOAR group 
had greater reductions in positive symptoms and increased knowledge about diagnosis. 
Caregivers in the SOAR condition showed improvements in knowledge about prognosis 
relative to the control condition.
Research on Family-Based Education
There have been at least eight randomized trials and multiple quasi-experimental stud￾ies of family-based education, with many of the studies examining family-led educa￾tion (Abramowitz & Coursey, 1989; Dixon et al., 2004, 2011; Haselden et al., 2019; 
Pickett-Schenk, Steigman, Bennett, & Lippincott, 2005; Posner, Wilson, Kral, Lander, 
& Mcllwraith, 1992; Reilly, Rohrbaugh, & Lackner, 1988; Smith & Birchwood, 1987; 
Solomon, Draine, Mannion, & Meisel, 1996a, 1996b, 1997; Toohey et al., 2016). In 
contrast to the findings for psychoeducation, there is little evidence that these interven￾tions affect relapse or rehospitalization rates. All of the studies found positive outcomes 
for family members, but most of them employed different outcome measures, resulting 
in little consistency of findings. Family members who participated in these trials were 
found to gain knowledge about their relatives’ disorders, greater understanding of and 
satisfaction with mental health services, and more satisfaction with the mental health 
treatment system. These studies also reported reductions in burden; improved self-care; 
less distress, fewer depression symptoms, and less anxiety; improved relationships with 
the relatives with psychiatric disabilities; improved coping behaviors; and an increased 12. Family 225
sense of self-efficacy in dealing with the relatives’ illness. Solomon and colleagues (1996a, 
1996b) did find a secondary benefit for the relatives with psychiatric disabilities: Their 
attitudes toward medication use improved.
Several of the previously mentioned studies examined NAMI’s FTF program, which 
is the most widely disseminated and studied family led education intervention (Dixon et 
al., 2004, 2011; Mercado et al., 2016; Schiffman et al., 2015; Smith et al., 2014; Toohey 
et al., 2016). Dixon and colleagues (2011) randomized 318 participants recruited from 
five Maryland NAMI affiliates to FTF or a wait-list control. At 3-month follow-up, FTF 
participants had significant improvements in problem-focused coping, increased accep￾tance of their family member’s disability, reduced distressed, and improved problem solv￾ing. Furthermore, FTF participants showed increases in positive appraisals but no signifi￾cant decreases in negative appraisals (Toohey et al., 2016). Family members of younger 
persons (ages 8–18) with psychiatric disabilities seemed to benefit the most in several 
domains, reporting more pronounced improvements in depressive symptoms, and nega￾tive perceptions and experiences than participants with adult (19 or older) family mem￾bers with psychiatric disabilities (Schiffman et al., 2015). Subsequent quasi-experimental 
research in the New York City metro area provides support for the positive impacts of 
FTF on family empowerment, family functioning, engagement in self-care, and emo￾tional acceptance (Mercado et al., 2016). A six-session modified version of FTF, NAMI 
Homefront, has also shown positive impacts for families of military service members and 
veterans (Haselden et al., 2019).
Family Consultation and Support
Family Consultation
Family consultation, sometimes called supportive family counseling or family systems 
consultation, is an individual approach in which a consultant collaboratively provides 
advice, support, and information that may be needed by a family (Mannion, 2000; Bern￾heim & Lehman, 1985; Bernheim, 1982). This approach is often adapted for a group, in 
which several family members are counseled by a professional and a family member; fam￾ilies share their problems and strategies for solving them (Mannion, Draine, Solomon, 
& Meisel, 1997). Frequently, a relative with a psychiatric disability is not included in the 
consultation meetings. The exclusion of the relative from some parts of this intervention 
enables the family members to be free to express negative emotions and concerns that 
might upset their relative if they were present. This intervention is especially attractive to 
families whose relatives with psychiatric disabilities refuse or resist mental health services 
(Solomon, Marshall, Mannion, & Farmer, 2002; Solomon, 2000).
Besides helping a family to learn new skills to cope with a relative’s disorder, the 
consultant evaluates use of the skills by each family member, provides information about 
available resources in the community, and, in a few cases, accompanies the family to 
mental health services. The consultant generally provides educational materials that 
are relevant to the family’s needs. Aspects of the intervention may be provided over the 
phone, especially once a relationship has been established. This makes it easy for family 
members to contact the consultant as questions arise. Having the consultant available 
over the long term, so that family members can obtain advice as situations with the rela￾tive change, is especially appealing (Ascher-Svanum, Lafuze, Barrickman, Van Dusen, & 
Fompa-Loy, 1997; Budd & Hughes, 1997).
Research on this intervention is limited. One arm of a randomized study of family 226 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
education assessed family consultation/support (Solomon et al., 1996a, 1996b, 1997). 
This study determined that participants in this intervention improved their sense of self￾efficacy in coping with a relative’s disorder, and that these gains were maintained for a 
period of 6 months.
Family Support and Advocacy Groups
Family support and advocacy groups provide emotional support, empathy, information, 
and opportunities to share feelings with others who have the experience of a relative with 
a psychiatric disability. These groups are usually peer-led, open-ended (in terms of both 
duration and new entrants) and offered in an environment that is nonjudgmental and free 
of stigma. Support is provided through group meetings in which participants network 
with members of other families who have common concerns (Solomon, 1998). Partici￾pants may learn from peers about practical means of coping with their relatives’ illness. 
They may also gain self-esteem through the process of assisting others (Marsh, 1998). 
Members share solutions to common problems, engage in role modeling, and positively 
reinforce each other (Lefley, 2003). These support groups have some of the elements of 
family-based education, but they are not quite as structured or formalized.
Like family-based education, these groups generally meet in accessible community 
locations. These groups are facilitated by family members and usually meet for an hour 
or two, every couple of weeks. Often these groups sponsor guest speakers on topics of 
concern to the membership (Battaglino, 1987). Many of these support groups are spon￾sored by NAMI, although support groups for families have been active since the 1960s. 
In some cases, these groups have developed service programs for persons with psychiatric 
disabilities to fill the gaps in the community service system (Lefley, 2003). Engagement 
in these advocacy activities can be therapeutic for family members. However, families’ 
needs for support, assistance, and information must be met before they are interested in 
engaging in advocacy work. Support groups that have been meeting for a long period of 
time often focus more on advocacy than on providing support and information. This is 
problematic for new members wishing to join established groups. As a consequence, some 
groups address the needs of new entrants by having them meet individually with members 
who serve as mentors.
Research on Family Support Groups
There has been one meta-analysis of family support groups. Wang, Chen, and Deng 
(2021) examined five RCTs of family-led peer support groups. Results were mixed. 
There were no significant differences between family-led peer support families and con￾trol group families in family functioning (Chien, Bressington, & Chan, 2018; Chien & 
Thompson, 2013; Chien et al., 2008; Dixon et al., 2011) or family burden (Chien et al., 
2008, 2018; Dixon et al., 2011). However, compared to control families, family-led peer 
support group families used more formal community services (Chien & Chan, 2004; 
Chien et al., 2008, 2018; Chien & Thompson, 2013), and their family members with psy￾chotic disorder had higher levels of psychosocial functioning, fewer psychotic symptoms, 
and few psychiatric hospitalizations (Chien & Chan, 2004; Chien et al., 2018; Chien & 
Thompson, 2013).
Less rigorous research has indicated that support group participation results in a 
number of positive outcomes. These include improved coping skills, increased knowledge, 12. Family 227
increased perceptions of social supports, less subjective burden, and lower psychological 
distress (Biegel & Yamatani, 1986; Citron, Solomon, & Draine, 1999; Heller, Rocco￾forte, Hsieh, Cook, & Pickett, 1997; Norton, Wandersman, & Goldman, 1993; Man￾nion, Meisel, Solomon, & Draine, 1996). Heller and colleagues (1997) found that longer 
participation results in greater benefits. Those who typically participate in these groups 
tend to be middle-class, White, highly educated females (Mannion et al., 1996). There￾fore, the results are biased by the characteristics of those who join and those who stay in 
these groups.
Planned Lifetime Assistance Programs
Many families have concerns about what will eventually happen to their relatives with 
psychiatric disabilities. These concerns are particularly acute for older parents acting as 
caregivers, who worry about what will become of their children when the parents die 
or become disabled (Sivakumar, Jain, Philip, Glynn, & Chandra, 2022). Small nonprofit 
agencies have been developed by families to handle special-needs trusts. These programs 
offer estate plans or living trusts for persons with disabilities, which provide funds for 
goods and services that are not otherwise covered under programs like Medicaid or 
SSI (e.g., dental care and education). They also prevent persons with psychiatric dis￾abilities from putting their benefits in jeopardy, because some of these benefits, such 
as SSI, are needs-based programs that do not allow individuals to have more than a 
specified amount of money (Tarutis & Boyd, 2001). These trusts can be established even 
with relatively limited funds. For example, the Planned Lifetime Assistance Network 
of Pennsylvania requires $5,000 to establish a trust. The Pennsylvania network also 
serves as a representative payee for persons with psychiatric disabilities (regardless of 
whether they have trusts) as well as other disabilities, and provides care coordination 
services. The network will assist in paying bills for persons with disabilities, should this 
be desired.
There has been no evaluation of the effectiveness of such interventions. But there 
has been research on when and why families engage in future planning, including plan￾ning for residential placement (Hatfield & Lefley, 2000; Kaufman, 1998; Smith, 2004). 
Hatfield and Lefley (2000) found that caregivers’ personal issues, such as knowledge 
regarding planning, as well as characteristics of their relatives with disabilities and of the 
service system, affected planning. Subjective burden and perceptions of aging often insti￾gate planning for placement, whereas being overwhelmed with daily hassles may prevent 
families from taking steps toward residential placement (Rimmerman & Keren, 1995; 
Smith, 2004). Psychiatric rehabilitation providers can play a key role in assisting families 
in addressing future care planning needs, and as Sivakumar and colleagues (2022) sug￾gest, this should be a integral and routine part of treatment planning.
Respite Care
Respite offers concrete temporary relief to family caregivers (SAMHSA, 2003). This ser￾vice may be provided by an individual who comes into the home to assist temporarily 
with the relative with a psychiatric disability while the family caregiver goes shopping or 
visiting. Other programs will take the relative on an outing to relieve the family members 
for a short period of time while the family goes on vacation. These types of services offer 
benefits to both the family members and the relative with a psychiatric disability.228 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
PEOPLE WITH PSYCHIATRIC DISABILITIES AS PARENTS
More than two-thirds of people with psychiatric disabilities become parents (Kaplan, 
Brusilovskiy, O’Shea, & Salzer, 2019). While, on average, women with psychiatric dis￾abilities have the same number of pregnancies as other women, there is evidence that 
more of those pregnancies are unplanned (Hall, Steinberg, Cwiak, Allen, & Marcus, 
2015). Despite this, there has been only limited attention to family planning needs of 
women with psychiatric disabilities. Existing research indicates that women with psychi￾atric disabilities face multiple barriers in access to reproductive health care, are vulner￾able to coercion and contraception interference from partners, and are rarely asked about 
reproductive health issues by their psychiatric providers (Lawley et al., 2022).
Early research on persons with psychiatric disabilities as parents focused primar￾ily on risk and the impact of their disabilities on the children. This research suggested 
that psychiatric disabilities are often associated with impaired parenting skills and dis￾rupted caregiving (Goodman & Brumley, 1990; Wan, Moulton, & Abel, 2008; Mow￾bray, Oyserman, & Bybee, 2000). A recent prospective study conducted in Denmark 
(Ranning, Munk Laursen, Thorup, Hjorthøj, & Nordentoft, 2015) found that parental 
diagnosis of serious mental illness was a strong risk factor for out-of-home placement 
during childhood, with maternal diagnosis of schizophrenia carrying the most risk at 
40% (paternal diagnosis of schizophrenia was associated with a 20% risk). In the United 
States, parents with serious mental illness are eight times more likely to have contact with 
child protective services and 26 times more likely to have children removed from their 
home than parents without mental illness (Kaplan et al., 2019). Risk factors for child 
protective services contact among people with psychiatric disabilities include being non￾White, having less education, lower social support, trauma history, and substance use 
(Ostrow et al., 2021).
Parenthood is a central source of meaning to mothers and fathers with psychiat￾ric disabilities (Boursnell, 2007; Ende et al., 2016), and critical to recovery for many 
(Reupert, Price-Robertson, & Maybery, 2017). In recent decades, research has moved 
beyond a singular focus on risks and deficits with increasing attention to parenting expe￾riences and interventions to support families where a parent has a mental illness (van der 
Ende, Busschbach, Nicholson, Koreevar, & van Weeghel, 2016; Mattejat & Remschmidt, 
2008; Reupert et al., 2017). A few studies have examined the role of fathers with psy￾chiatric disabilities (Nicholson & Henry, 2003; Price-Robertson, 2015; Reupert & May￾bery, 2009), and suggest that while many may not live full-time with their children, they 
value their parental role. Research assessing the experience of mothers with psychiatric 
disabilities has found that many of the issues are common to all parents, particularly 
low-income single mothers. However, some issues are specific to mothers with psychiatric 
disabilities. Some mothers struggle with the combined stressors of raising their children 
and coping with their psychiatric illness, frequently with minimal supports (Harries et 
al., 2023; Nicholson, Sweeney, & Geller, 1998; Oyserman et al., 1994; Mowbray et al., 
2000). A particular stressor for mothers with psychiatric disabilities is the possible loss 
of custody of their children (Harries, Smith, Gregg, & Wittkowski, 2023; Nicholson, 
Sweeney, & Geller, 1998; Park, Solomon, & Mandel, 2006; Sands, Koppelman, & Solo￾mon, 2004); which can lead to avoiding services or seeking support in attempt to protect 
custody of their children (Harries et al., 2023).
In a meta-synthesis of qualitative research on parenting with serious mental illness, 
Harries and colleagues (2023) noted themes related to stigma and shame; parents want￾ing to shield their children from their mental health difficulties in ways that sometimes 12. Family 229
created distance in the relationship; fear of loss and separation; struggles to balance the 
need to take care of self and the needs of children; management of boundaries and rene￾gotiation of roles following periods of absence or acute illness; and the need for compas￾sionate, wraparound support. The authors’ recommendations include providing parent 
psychoeducation that addresses guilt and stigma, and promotes integration with support 
systems and peer networks to address parental isolation. They also recommended that 
health care providers recognize the centrality of parenting in the lives of people with psy￾chiatric disabilities and be sensitive to parental concerns about social service involvement.
There are limited services for assisting parents with psychiatric disabilities. There 
are, however, some specialized programs for parents in this population, including ones 
for pregnant women. For example, Thresholds, a psychiatric rehabilitation agency in Chi￾cago (see the box at the start of Chapter 3), has long-operated a comprehensive program 
that mothers attend 3–5 days a week, followed by monthly home visits. In addition to 
clinical and rehabilitation services, this program includes parenthood-specific education 
and support (e.g., training in stress and household management), as well as education in 
child development. Nursery and child care settings are also part of this program, with 
child care workers modeling caregiving activities and conducting periodic assessments of 
each child’s development (Oyserman, Mowbray, & Zemencuk, 1994).
Nicholson and Blanch (1994) have noted that effective rehabilitation for parental roles 
requires a comprehensive approach, beginning with assessing a mother’s needs, strengths, 
and capabilities, then making arrangements for appropriate services. This rehabilitation 
approach will certainly enhance the capabilities of mothers with psychiatric disabilities 
and contribute to positive outcomes for them and their children. A pilot study of an 
integrated treatment approach to parent training showed promise: This integrated fam￾ily treatment offered home-based services including parent skills training, modeling, and 
coaching, as well as linkages to various environmental supports (Brunette, Richardson, 
White, Bemis, & Eelkema, 2004b).
A recent systematic review of recovery-oriented parenting interventions identified 
three interventions: Family Options, Let’s Talk about Children, and Parenting with Suc￾cess and Satisfaction (PARSS) (Reupert, Price-Robertson, & Maybery, 2017). Family 
Options is a strengths-based program focused on recovery and resilience (Nicholson, 
Albert, Gershenson, Williams, & Biebel, 2009). Over a period of 12–18 months, families 
meet with a Family Coach, develop a care plan, and work together in the home with at 
least weekly contact. Coaches provide emotional support, skills practice, education, feed￾back, and connections to resources. Let’s Talk about Children, a brief intervention devel￾oped in Finland, focuses on engaging parents with psychiatric disabilities in the support 
of their children. It involves two to three structured conversations with parents about 
their children’s strengths, vulnerabilities, and need for support (Allchin & Solantaus, 
2022). PARSS, a recovery-based, guided self-help intervention focused on enhancing self￾regulation, includes structured strategies to reach out and support parents (van der Ende, 
van Busschbach, Nicholson, Korevaar & ven Weeghel, 2014). The intervention includes 
parenting workbooks completed with the assistance of a mental health practitioner in 
weekly sessions over the course of a year. In their assessment of these programs, Reupert 
and colleagues (2017) concluded that evidence for the effectiveness of PARSS, while lim￾ited, suggests positive impacts on parent quality of life. The evidence for Family Options 
was stronger, suggesting improvements in parent well-being and socioeconomic factors. 
The evidence for the Let’s Talk intervention was the strongest, indicating improvements 
in parent well-being, parenting beliefs and practices, family relationships, and child well￾being.230 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
Online parenting interventions have also been developed and studied. Kaplan, Solo￾mon, Salzer, and Brusilovskiy (2014) conducted an RCT of an intervention that com￾bined an online parenting course and a moderated peer support listserv. The cognitive￾behavioral therapy–based curriculum was designed to support mothers with psychiatric 
disabilities and comprised twelve 30-minute online sessions covering a range of parenting 
topics, such as child development, parenting techniques, stress reduction, positive parent￾ing, and so forth. Mothers were asked to complete one session per week, which included 
a quiz and homework assignment to practice skills and discuss on the listserv. Com￾pared to the control condition, at the end of the intervention, mothers participating in 
the online intervention experienced enhanced parenting and coping skills, and decreased 
stress. Improvements in parenting satisfaction and reductions in parenting stress were 
maintained at 18-month follow-up (O’Shea, Kaplan, Solomon, & Salzer, 2019).
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Beliefs regarding families of persons with psychiatric disabilities have clearly changed over 
the last 50 years. Family members are no longer viewed as toxic agents, but rather as integral 
members of the rehabilitation team and as ongoing support systems for their relatives with 
psychiatric disabilities. Their welfare is increasingly seen as essential to their relatives’ recov￾ery process. When a family’s needs for information, education, support, and coping skills are 
met, benefits accrue to the entire family, including the relative with mental illness. Families 
whose needs are met through one or more family interventions have a better quality of life 
for themselves and their relatives with psychiatric disabilities. Over the years, there has been 
increasing recognition of the need to develop more specialized interventions for particular 
family members, for families of persons with designated diagnoses, and for families and 
relatives with other specific characteristics. There is also increasing recognition that many 
persons with psychiatric disabilities are not only children and siblings but also parents. The 
parental role requires new interventions to support people with psychiatric disabilities and 
their children.
Although some of the interventions described in this chapter clearly incur additional 
costs for the mental health system, they also have the potential for financial savings through 
cost offsets resulting from possible reductions in costly mental health service utilization—
particularly reductions in hospitalization and emergency room visits. With the range of fam￾ily interventions now available, rehabilitation practitioners do not necessarily have to pro￾vide these interventions themselves, but they do need to be competent and comfortable in 
working with families, and knowledgeable about community resources to facilitate families’ 
access to these interventions. They also need to have an understanding and an appreciation 
of the family experience, and to realize that caregiving can be a 24-hour, 7-day, 52-week job. 231
CHAPTER 13
Psychosis and Cognitive Challenges
Since researchers and clinicians fi rst described schizophrenia, defi cits in 
cognitive processes have been considered central to the illness. Kraepelin (1919/1971) 
believed that cognitive defi cits led to “annihilation of intrapsychic coordination.” Bleuler 
(1911/1950) described the nature of defi cient processes, attributing poor cognitive func￾tioning to the loss of associations among thoughts. Research on and development of 
cognitive interventions for people with schizophrenia, and other disabling psychiatric 
disorders, have largely represented two independent traditions. First, an extensive lit￾erature on cognitive rehabilitation has developed over the past fi ve decades, seeking to 
improve information processing, so that people with psychiatric disabilities are better 
able to perceive and comprehend their world (Ayşegül, Özdel, & Türkçapar; 2021; Cella, 
Preti, Edwards, Dow, & Wykes, 2017; Cella, Price, Corboy, Onwumere, Shergill, & 
Preti, 2020; Kambeitz- Ilankovic et al., 2019; Lejeune, Northrop, & Kurtz, 2021; Van 
Duin et al., 2019; Vita et al., 2021; Zheng et al., 2022). This body of work has refl ected 
laboratory-based approaches to cognition, focusing on the improvement of discrete pro￾cesses such as attention, memory, and decision making. The fi rst portion of this chapter 
reviews processing defi cits and intervention strategies that remediate these defi cits.
Second, researchers have extrapolated the principles and practices of cognitive ther￾apy to some of the symptoms and dysfunctions of schizophrenia and other disabling psy￾chiatric disorders. Consistent with the zeitgeist in cognitive therapy, researchers in this 
arena have crafted interventions that help people think about, and act upon, their belief 
systems. The second portion of this chapter explains these kinds of defi cits, together with 
approaches that help people with psychiatric disabilities address them.
Cognitive rehabilitation and cognitive therapy are fundamentally adjunctive services. 
Rather than being used as stand-alone rehabilitation strategies, they are best appended 
to other rehabilitation programs. Hence, job coaches might use these approaches for 
employees with cognitive defi cits that are interfering with work. Care coordinators might 
adopt cognitive therapy for persons whose delusions interfere with successful living at 
home. Practitioners working with individuals who are experiencing prodromal symptoms 
of schizophrenia or providing services within fi rst- episode psychosis programs might 
off er cognitive rehabilitation as a strategy for early intervention and prevention.
CHAPTER 13232 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
UNDERSTANDING COGNITIVE PROCESSING DEFICITS
Cognitive processing refers to the interconnectedness of the components of thought (e.g., 
attention, memory, and executive functioning) that are necessary for people to perceive, 
understand, and act upon their world. There was a time when the cognitive processing 
deficits manifested by people with psychotic disorders were thought to be derivative (i.e., 
it was believed that they emerged from the more apparent symptoms of the disorder or 
medication effects); however, researchers have since convincingly shown that many of 
the processing deficits are present before the onset of the disorder and remain after most 
other symptoms have remitted (Tripathi, Kar, & Shukla, 2018). Hence these deficits are 
important treatment targets in their own right.
Given this assertion, questions focus on the relevance of cognitive processing defi￾cits for psychiatric disabilities and rehabilitation. Several issues are addressed here to 
answer this question. First, a profile of deficit areas relevant to cognition is provided. 
This includes describing the Measurement and Treatment Research to Improve Cogni￾tion in Schizophrenia (MATRICS). Next comes a review of evidence that impairments in 
specific cognitive processes interfere with social functions, and that impaired social func￾tions in turn undermine achievement of goals in the major life domains. Social cognition 
is reviewed as a special circumstance bridging social and cognitive dysfunctions. This 
section then provides a summary of research on the impact of treatment strategies on 
cognitive impairments and psychiatric disabilities. This summary includes a brief review 
of medication effects (Chapter 9 reviews medication issues more thoroughly) and a more 
comprehensive discussion of rehabilitation approaches.
Much of the research reviewed in this chapter was completed on people with schizo￾phrenia; hence, research on schizophrenia is used as the prototype for understanding 
general principles and practices related to cognitive rehabilitation. The nature of cogni￾tive deficits and corresponding rehabilitation strategies should parallel these principles in 
other diagnoses.
What Are Relevant Processing Deficits?
Literature reviews suggest that about 80% of people with schizophrenia show abnor￾mal functioning on processing measures (McCleery & Nuechterlein, 2019). Findings 
from a meta-analysis of more than 200 studies looking at cognitive processes in people 
with schizophrenia versus controls without mental illness found moderate to large effect 
sizes, with the largest deficits being in memory and attention (Heinrichs & Zakzanis, 
1998). A more recent meta-analysis of 100 nonoverlapping studies demonstrates that 
these findings have remained consistent over time and across cultural and geographical 
variations (Schaefer, Giangrande, Weinberger, & Dickinson, 2013). Although research 
clearly shows that people with serious mental illness have significant deficits in cognitive 
processes, the ways in which these processes are defined and measured differ significantly 
across studies. An information processing paradigm is frequently used for understanding 
these diverse deficits (Corrigan, 1996).
Deficits as Information Processing Impairments
The fundamental assumption behind information processing paradigms is that the 
macro-level aspects of sensory input can be divided into discrete information bytes (e.g., 
visual stimuli can be described in terms of color, contrast, depth, location, and relative 13. Psychosis and Cognitive Challenges 233
size), and that the macro-level experience of human cognition can be divided into com￾posite functions (e.g., attention, memory, and executive functions) that interact in some 
meaningful order (e.g., serially, in parallel distribution) (Corrigan & Stephenson, 1994). 
Hence, the process of knowing can be understood by studying the various components 
of information processing individually and together. From a methodological standpoint, 
breaking down information and cognition into theoretical elements greatly enhances the 
study of these phenomena. The range of research questions increases geometrically with 
the number of defined elements. Similarly, methodological precision is enhanced as the 
questions of cognitive research narrow from “How does a person know?” to “How does 
a person attend, recall, recognize, or react?”
An information processing paradigm has advantages for understanding cognitive 
functioning (Ingram & Kendall, 1986). Findings about specific cognitive functions seem 
to coincide with biological research from neuroscience, which suggests putative asso￾ciations between information processing and neurological structures. Moreover, mea￾surement strategies used in defining the components of information processing have 
been adapted for assessment of cognitive deficits. In turn, variations of these assessment 
instruments have been used as rehabilitative tools.
Stage Theories/Bottom-Up Models
The first information processing theories were bottom-up, serial-search models of cogni￾tion (Sternberg, 1966, 1967), like the one illustrated in Figure 13.1. According to this 
perspective, information processing is serial; it manipulates information in a stepwise 
fashion, one byte at a time. Functions include information intake and encoding; storage 
and retrieval; transformation and conceptualization; and response selection and action. 
These models are bottom-up because processing is initiated by attention to incoming 
information. Let’s take a closer look at these functions, beginning with attention.
As represented in Figure 13.1, the relative infinity of information in a person’s envi￾ronment is significantly reduced by an attentional filter. Broadbent (1958, 1977) con￾sidered this filter a selective process, such that individuals focus attention on only a few 
of several channels of incoming information. For example, participants in a study may 
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Keiko Fukuoka Couldn’t Remember What Was Said
Keiko Fukuoka was severely distressed by “voices from the devil” when she was first admit￾ted for a medication evaluation. Her speech was marked by loose associations so that 
people had difficulty understanding her. These symptoms remitted almost entirely after 6 
weeks of atypical antipsychotic medication. Even though she continued on medication, her 
attention was poor. This did not seem to result from being sedated by her medication. When 
other people were talking with Keiko, she seemed wide awake. However, she had great dif￾ficulty following the content of a medication management skills class. Even when the peer 
instructor repeated the information, she could not remember it. As a result, she was having 
difficulty taking her medication as prescribed in her new apartment. Keiko was also having 
trouble with her supervisor at work, because she was forgetting phone messages and mis￾placing files.234 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
attend to a complex auditory message while ignoring the written message on a computer 
screen. Information from the visual channel often dominates attentional processing (Pos￾ner, Nissen, & Klein, 1976). Attended information then becomes a figural “snapshot,” 
which is available in iconic memory for a very short time (Averbach & Coriell, 1961; 
Sperling, 1960). Most of this information is lost as the icon decays or is replaced by 
subsequent incoming information, such that only a few bytes of original information 
remain. This information is encoded vis-à-vis extant memory traces, so that information 
has meaning beyond its stimulus qualities (e.g., a particular conglomeration of lines and 
curves, shades and hues, is perceived to be the image of a human being).
The amount of information that can be held in short-term memory is relatively lim￾ited and decays quickly (Miller, 1956). Short-term memory, often called working mem￾ory, refers to an individual’s ability to report what is currently on their mind. Depend￾ing on the individual’s previous experience with incoming information, their mental set, 
and environmental conditions, some information in short-term memory will be consoli￾dated into long-term memory (Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1968). Investigators believe that 
FIGURE 13.1. Bottom-up model of information processing.13. Psychosis and Cognitive Challenges 235
information in long-term memory is sorted into categories—memory structures that 
are defined by unique, descriptive attributes. Information in long-term memory may be 
retrieved in the future. Two forms of retrieval have been described: recognition and recall
(Mandler, 1972; Rabinowitz, Mandler, & Patterson, 1977). In recognition, individuals 
may compare incoming information to categories in the memory store, thereby recogniz￾ing the data: “Oh, I know you; you’re Mr. Jones.” Alternatively, the executive mechanism 
of an individual may initiate a more active and cognitively demanding memory search to 
recall a perceptual instance: “Let’s see. In the past, I’ve seen Mr. Jones and Ms. Smith at 
the street corner.”
The recall process also suggests the manner in which motoric responses are gener￾ated. A response may be elicited in reaction to an external stimulus (comparison func￾tion) or to an internal decision (executive function). The generated response may come 
from several motoric actions arranged hierarchically in the long-term store (Broen & 
Storms, 1966; Hull, 1952). Positions in the response hierarchy vary in arousal level and 
are determined on the basis of past learning history and present situational demands. In 
highly familiar situations, arousal of certain reactions exceeds most others, and individu￾als tend to respond automatically—that is, with little conscious consideration of response 
alternatives and with little cognitive effort (Hasher & Zacks, 1979, 1984; Schneider & 
Shiffrin, 1977). In less familiar situations, arousal of a range of responses that exceed a 
ceiling of response strength becomes conscious. Individuals will select a response from 
these alternatives, or, if unsatisfied with the options, will search their memories again for 
alternatives.
The cognitive processes in bottom-up models, and their juxtaposition to neighbor￾ing processes, readily suggest clinical problems. For example, according to the model 
illustrated in Figure 13.1, cognitive deficits may result from (1) an overly restrictive atten￾tional filter, which results in a person’s missing key information; (2) sensory icons that 
are quickly disrupted by subsequent information; (3) inaccurate encoding of incoming 
information; (4) rapid decay of information from short-term memory; (5) diminished 
consolidation to long-term memory; (6) inability to retrieve information in the long-term 
store; (7) an impoverished set of responses available for selection; and/or (8) random 
selection of responses from the response hierarchy. Similarly, these problem foci suggest 
specific rehabilitation strategies. As an example, remediation of attentional deficits may 
include self-instructional strategies in which people tell themselves to focus their atten￾tion on narrow stimulus bands; repeated practice on attentional tasks; and differential 
reinforcement for attention to targeted stimuli.
Assessing Cognitive Processing Deficits
A necessary part of clinical interaction is making sense of cognitive deficits to inform 
a rehabilitation plan. To meet this challenge, a group of neuroscientists developed the 
MATRICS Consensus Cognitive Battery (MCCB) assessment battery (Green, Harris, 
& Nuechterlein, 2014; Green et al., 2008; Kern, Green, Nuechterlein, & Deng, 2004; 
Nuechterlein, Green, & Kern, 2023; Nuechterlein et al., 2008), mentioned at the start 
of this chapter and described briefly in Chapter 5. The MCCB was developed to meet 
two goals. First, it was meant to be a battery for assessing different elements of cognitive 
processes like those summarized in Figure 13.1. The MCCB includes tests assessing seven 
cognitive domains that emerged from factor analyses of existing measures: attention/vigi￾lance, working memory, speed of processing, verbal learning, visual learning, reasoning, 
and social cognition (Nuechterlein et al., 2004). Second, the MATRICS battery needed 236 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
to meet the standards of good assessment in the context of rehabilitation services: test–
retest reliability, utility as a repeated measure, relationship to functioning, and sensitivity 
to change. After significant work on psychometrics, including establishing norms for the 
measures, the battery emerged as a collection of 10 subtests measuring the breadth of 
cognitive deficits. The MCCB has been used to inform medication regimens for people 
with schizophrenia (Nuechterlein et al., 2023). Experts are attempting to meet similar 
goals for rehabilitation practitioners.
The Link between Processing Deficits and Social Disabilities
Although some rehabilitation providers might argue that improving a person’s memory 
or attentional abilities is an important goal in its own right, most agree that cognitive 
remediation is best understood as an important step in helping people better understand 
social situations, which in turn is an essential step in achieving life goals. Hence, the 
development of cognitive rehabilitation strategies rests on identifying specific cognitive 
impairments that interfere with social functioning and/or the pursuit of life goals (Bel￾lack, Gold, & Buchanan, 1999). Research suggests that 20–60% of variance in social 
functioning is due to cognitive processes (Fett et al., 2011; Green, Kern, Braff, & Mintz, 
2000). In research summaries, Green (1996, 1998) found three sets of correlations, which 
are illustrated in Figure 13.2; he divided the social functioning sphere into three progres￾sively complex domains for these summaries. Psychosocial skill acquisition represents the 
discrete behaviors that provide the necessary foundation for interpersonal interaction. 
Social problem solving represents more dynamic and reactive strategies for resolving 
barriers to situational goals. The most macro-level construct is community outcomes,
representing the attainment of social roles commensurate with most life goals (e.g., work￾ing, living independently, and developing/maintaining relationships).
Psychosocial skill acquisition was shown to be significantly associated with mem￾ory, especially with verbal recall, and with attention and vigilance (for a comprehensive 
review of the relationship between measures of social cognition and social functioning, 
see Fett et al., 2011). Correlations between executive functioning and skill acquisition 
were found in some studies, but these results need to be further replicated. Social prob￾lem solving was also associated with verbal recall and vigilance, but not with executive 
functioning. Community outcome was associated with verbal recall and executive func￾tioning. An interesting pattern emerges when the sum of these findings in Figure 13.2 is 
examined: The more complex social functioning constructs seem to be associated with 
the more complex cognitive processes. It is important to note that most of these findings 
represent cross-sectional correlations, so the direction of the associations is generally not 
clear. Future research needs to discern whether cognitive processes in fact are causes of 
social functioning or whether these correlations represent some other kind of association. 
For further reading about the relationship between social cognition and functioning in 
schizophrenia, readers might consult Green, Horan, and Lee (2019) for a comprehensive 
review.
Researchers have developed a battery of social-cognitive measures in the same man￾ner as the MCCB was developed for measuring cognitive deficits. The Social Cognition 
Psychometric Evaluation (SCOPE) group developed a battery of measures that assess 
deficits in social cognition (Pinkham, Harvey, & Penn, 2018; Pinkham et al., 2013). 
As the MATRICS group did with the MCCB for cognitive processes, the SCOPE group 
sought to identify the key domains that make up social cognition and to develop a psy￾chometrically sound battery for assessing these domains. The resulting battery includes 
eight subtests that assess emotion, social perception, and social reasoning. The most 13. Psychosis and Cognitive Challenges 237
recent psychometric validation work with this battery resulted in SCOPE recommending 
the use of only three of the measures within this battery, all of which measure emotional 
processing and mental state attribution (Pinkham et al., 2018). The social perception 
and attribution style measures included in the battery are not recommended for use by 
SCOPE given the findings of their psychometric trials. Therefore, SCOPE concludes that 
additional work is needed to develop measures of these domains of social cognition, and 
the SCOPE battery cannot yet be considered a comprehensive battery of social cognition.
The Impact of Interventions for Cognitive Processing Deficits
Green and Nuechterlein (1999) have framed the connection between cognitive and social 
functioning impairment as the delta question: Namely, what changes in cognitive pro￾cesses correspond with changes in functional outcome? Three principles that address the 
delta question guide the development of strategies for improving cognitive processes rele￾vant to social goals: restoration, compensation, and reorganization (Bellack et al., 1999; 
Spaulding et al., 1999). Restoration represents the impact of “mental exercising,” which 
leads to regaining part or all of an original cognitive process. Compensation provides an 
external cognitive prosthetic or crutch that improves cognitive functioning. Reorganiza￾tion is a more elaborate form of compensation, in which people’s social environments 
are set up so that they are better able to understand task demands given their limited 
cognitive abilities. Both pharmacological and rehabilitation interventions may achieve 
the goals implied by these principles.
Psychopharmacological Interventions
Psychotropic medications yield complex effects on the cognitive deficits relevant to psy￾chiatric disabilities. Conventional antipsychotic medications, for example, have shown a 
mixed pattern of impact (Blanchard & Neale, 1992; Medalia, Gold, & Merriam, 1988; 
/
acquisition
FIGURE 13.2. The associations between cognitive processing and social functioning. Cogni￾tive processes represent the three core concerns: attention, memory, and executive function￾ing. Social functioning includes psychosocial skills acquisition, social problem solving, and 
community outcome.238 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
Mishara & Goldberg, 2004; Spohn & Strauss, 1989). Low to moderate doses of conven￾tional antipsychotic medications seem to improve impairments in attention and vigilance 
but have no measurable effects on memory. High doses of these medications may actually 
decrease vigilance and memory from their symptomatic baseline levels. Given the role 
of learning in the skills training component of rehabilitation, deficits in vigilance and 
memory could undermine a person’s participation in their rehabilitation program (Cor￾rigan & Penn, 1995).
The atypical (second-generation) antipsychotic medications, which are now more 
widely used, seem to have a better profile in terms of ameliorating cognitive impair￾ments than first generation antipsychotics, though there are mixed findings regarding 
the cognitive impact of specific second-generation antipsychotics (Nielsen et al., 2015). A 
meta-analysis of RCTs conducted by Baldez and colleagues (2021) revealed that atypical 
antipsychotics are effective for targeting cognition, but different drugs are more effective 
for different cognitive domains. They found that olanzapine is the drug with superior 
results in the greatest number of cognitive domains, while haloperidol (a typical first￾generation antipsychotic) shows the poorest performance in all cognitive domains. Anti￾depressant medications largely yield positive effects on cognitive processes (Perini et al., 
2019; Rosenblat, Kakar, & McIntyre, 2016). Mood-stabilizing drugs like lithium may, 
however, have negative consequences by slowing cognitive speed (Wingo, Wingo, Har￾vey, & Baldessarini, 2009; Rybakowski, 2016).
All benefits that occur because of psychotropic medications seem to be restorative in 
character (i.e., direct improvement in basic functions rather than compensation or reor￾ganization by some external prosthetic mechanism). Despite this positive profile, research 
has failed to show that the cognitive abilities of people with serious mental illness return 
to “normal” levels after medication use alone (Keefe, Silva, Perkins, & Lieberman, 1999; 
Rund & Borg, 1999). Plenty of room remains for improvement in cognitive functioning, 
which may be facilitated by rehabilitation approaches. Chapter 9 more completely sum￾marizes the role of medications in psychiatric rehabilitation.
Rehabilitation Interventions
Researchers have begun to identify and organize sets of cognitive rehabilitation strategies 
(Rakitzi, Georgila, & Becker-Woitag, 2021; Volker & Medalia, 2010). Two types are 
often identified: targeted programs, which seek to remediate individual processing defi￾cits, with social impairments improving as a secondary result; and integrated programs,
which combine cognitive and social interventions to directly address the interpersonal 
deficits that arise from interpersonal dysfunctions.
TARGETED PROGRAMS
Three types of targeted rehabilitation programs that correspond with the three principles 
of cognitive rehabilitation have emerged in the literature: restoration, compensation, and 
reorganization (Kurtz, Moberg, Gur, & Gur, 2001; Twamley, Jeste, & Bellack, 2003); 
they are summarized in Figure 13.3. Interventions promoting restoration are largely 
repetitive exercises that seek to improve specific attention, memory, or executive func￾tioning activities. Repeated practice is assumed to remediate the corresponding deficit. 
Compensatory approaches teach the person some sort of cognitive skill that is meant to 
augment the impaired cognitive function. Reorganizational approaches help people to off￾set cognitive limitations with environmental cues. Each of these approaches is discussed 13. Psychosis and Cognitive Challenges 239
more fully in later sections. These three types of targeted approaches may conceivably 
be used to remediate deficits in the three core impairment areas: attention, memory, and 
executive functioning. The interaction of approaches with deficit areas yields a matrix 
of possible interventions, as outlined in Figure 13.3, in which a number of rehabilitation 
interventions might fall within each cell.
Restoring Cognition through Repeated Practice. Repeated practice has more 
than a 50-year history of development and evaluation (Bell, Bryson, Greig, Corcoran, & 
Wexler, 2001; Bell, Bryson, & Wexler, 2003; Green et al., 1990; Karras, 1962, 1968; 
Medalia, Aluma, Tryon, & Merriam, 1998; Meiselman, 1973; van der Does & Van 
den Bosch, 1992; Wagner, 1968). Briefly, this intervention instructs participants through 
multiple trials of attentional, memory, or executive functioning tasks; the assumption is 
that not will repeated practice strengthen performance on these specific skills but also 
the improvement will generalize to related cognitive functions. An example from Bell et 
al. (2001, 2003) illustrates this approach. In a visual tracking task meant to improve sus￾tained attention, participants see a black line moving across a red background on a com￾puter screen. Yellow cubes appear along the line as it moves. Participants are instructed to 
focus at the end of the line and click the mouse whenever a yellow cube appears. A “TA 
DA” sound is heard when a response is correct, and a discordant sound when it is wrong. 
The speed and duration of the black line and yellow cubes are changed to increase task 
difficulty.
Errorless learning approaches have been used to augment repeated practice (Cella et 
al., 2019; Kern, Liberman, Kopelowicz, Mintz, & Green, 2002; Kern & Reddy, 2014). In 
such an approach, tasks begin with simple components and only progress to more complex 
ones after a person has met a 100% criterion. It is assumed that learning is more durable 
if mistakes are minimized or totally eliminated during training. Performance on repeated 
practice has been enhanced with reinforcers. Errorless learning can also include voca￾tional rehabilitation interventions in which work functions that are causing challenges 
are broken into smaller tasks and addressed hierarchically using cues, tasks, modeling, 
and self-instruction, until high levels of performance are achieved (Killaspy et al., 2022).
Compensating for Deficits via Cognitive Prosthetics. Compensatory strategies 
have often been used to improve memory (Koh, 1978; Koh, Grinker, Marusarz, & For￾man, 1981; Larsen & Fromholt, 1976; van der Gaag, Kern, van den Bosch, & Liberman, 
Attention Memory
Executive 
functioning
Restorative: Through repeated practice
Compensatory: Through learning 
strategic cognitive shortcuts
Reorganizational: Through 
environmental cues and other 
manipulations
FIGURE 13.3. Examples of the three types of targeted cognitive rehabilitation for the three 
core cognitive concerns.240 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
2002; Volker & Medalia, 2010). Four such strategies have been shown to be particularly 
powerful; the first three are helpful for enhancing the recall of verbal information.
1. Encoding. People are instructed to put a new concept into their own words. One 
way to do this is to associate a personally meaningful word or phrase with the concept to 
be learned. For example, Harry was to learn that his friend Mark lived on Monroe Street, 
so he encoded it as “one of the M presidents, like the streets in downtown Chicago.”
2. Chunking is organizing information into meaningful bits. Perhaps the best exam￾ple is 17086144770, which can be more easily recalled as the phone number 1 (708) 
614-4770.
3. Categorization is organizing information into meaningful groups. Consider this 
list:
Red Rose Duck Horse Black
Dog Apple Blue Lily Orchid
Tulip Pear Crow Brown Mouse
Lime Cat Lemon Grape Yellow
A person might be better able to recall them when reorganizing the list into colors 
(red, blue, brown, black, yellow), animals (dog, cat, duck, crow, horse, mouse), flowers 
(tulip, rose, lily, orchid), and fruit (lime, apple, pear, lemon, grape).
4. Self-instruction (Meichenbaum & Cameron, 1973; van der Gaag et al., 2002). 
This strategy is especially useful for helping a person to recall steps in a personally rel￾evant behavior, such as brushing teeth, taking medicine, or lighting a charcoal grill. 
Self-instruction begins with having a model demonstrate the steps of a multicomponent 
behavior and say these steps aloud. Consider the following steps in paying a phone bill:
First, I get out my phone bill.
Then I get out my checkbook.
I separate the stub that needs to be returned to the phone company from the state￾ment.
I then write down the amount on the stub in the ledger of my checkbook and sub￾tract it from my balance.
Then I turn to the corresponding blank check and fill out the date, amount, and 
payee. I then sign the check.
I put the check and stub in the return envelope. I put my return address on the enve￾lope, and then a postage stamp.
I then put the envelope in the mailbox in my apartment building.
After reviewing these steps aloud, the participant is asked to repeat the steps while 
also demonstrating them. Sometimes the steps are written on a piece of paper to remind 
the person.
Reorganizing the Environment to Offset Deficits. Two major reorganizing 
approaches have been developed and evaluated: shaping and environmental adapta￾tion. Shaping, a strategy from behavior therapy, involves differential reinforcement of 13. Psychosis and Cognitive Challenges 241
successive approximations to a goal behavior. In this sense, it reorganizes complex behav￾iors into steps, with the first being relatively easy and the rest becoming increasingly dif￾ficult. For example, the complex task of introducing oneself (with the goal of smiling and 
saying, “Hello, my name is X. Nice day, isn’t it?”) includes six steps:
Step 1: Walk up to another person.
Step 2: Look the person in the eye.
Step 3: Smile.
Step 4: Say, “Hello.”
Step 5: Say, “My name is X.”
Step 6: Say, “Nice day, isn’t it?”
In shaping, the person is first reinforced for doing Step 1 alone. Once this step is mas￾tered, the next goal for which reinforcement is given is doing Step 2 and Step 1. Steps 
continue to be added until the person is able to do all six steps at once, which is the goal 
behavior. What is a complex and cognitively overwhelming task for the person has been 
broken down and reorganized into doable steps.
Shaping has been applied to the cognitive deficits that result from psychiatric dis￾abilities (Silverstein, Menditto, & Stuve, 2001). Time is often used as the unit to guide 
shaping. Participants are started on a cognitive task (e.g., office work such as folding, 
cutting, and stapling) for a short period of time (e.g., 5 minutes), and shaping continues 
until they can do the task for 30 minutes or more (Bellus, Kost, Vergo, Gramse, & Weiss, 
1999; Menditto, Baldwin, O’Neal, & Beck, 1991; Silverstein, Hitzel, & Schenkel, 1998; 
Spaulding, Storms, Goodrich, & Sullivan, 1986). Reinforcements used in these programs 
are typically points or tokens that are part of a token economy.
The use of incentives and reinforcement for shaping and errorless learning echoes the 
recommendations of expert panels, which have argued that interventions targeting moti￾vation may be important adjuncts to cognitive rehabilitation (Velligan, Kern, & Gold, 
2006). People with psychiatric disabilities often have difficulty with what has been called 
conation in psychology (i.e., personal drive and volition). People with schizophrenia, 
especially those with pronounced negative symptoms, may need external motivators, 
along with cognitive rehabilitation interventions. This may include the judicious use of 
approaches such as token economies (Corrigan, 1995).
Environmental adaptation is the second reorganizational approach to cognitive 
rehabilitation. In this approach, an otherwise complex environment is simplified, so that 
people with cognitive impairments can accurately perceive and understand the reorga￾nized setting (Heinssen, 1996). Studies by Velligan and colleagues (Velligan et al., 2000; 
Velligan, Lam, Ereshefsky, & Miller, 2003; Maples & Velligan, 2008; Velligan et al., 
2015) have identified two types of cognitive deficits that govern environmental altera￾tions: apathy and distraction. Individuals with apathetic patterns tend to miss relevant 
environmental cues or are unable to organize multitask processes into meaningful steps. 
Relevant alterations might include using checklists for complex tasks, placing signs and 
equipment for daily activities in obvious places, and using labels or electronic devices 
(e.g., computer-driven medication dispensers and alarms) to cue behavior. These are all 
types of assistive technologies that might be employed in the workplace and in educa￾tional settings to enable the success of people with serious mental illnesses impacting 
cognition.
Individuals with distracted patterns tend to be overwhelmed by attending to too 
much information in a situation, including cues that are irrelevant to the goals of the 242 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
situation (Velligan et al., 2003). For example, such a person may not be able to under￾stand a message from an employer because they are also listening to a radio talk show in 
the background instead of tuning it out. Environmental alterations for these individuals 
may include organizing supplies to minimize incorrect use (e.g., placing complete out￾fits—shirt, pants, and underwear—in separate boxes in a closet) or minimizing back￾ground noise by turning off radios and televisions.
The Use of Computers in Targeted Cognitive Rehabilitation. Cognitive reha￾bilitation frequently includes computers. In fact, numerous software packages and web￾based tools have been developed to advance the cognitive rehabilitation agenda, though 
not necessarily for psychiatric disabilities. Packages specific to cognitive rehabilitation 
have been used alongside other programs that, although developed for general education 
or entertainment purposes, may have properties relevant to rehabilitation goals. The 
important issue for the rehabilitation provider is to discern which of these computer 
programs, if any, will benefit program participants. The interested reader should see 
Herlands and Medalia (2016) and Medalia, Herlands, Saperstein, and Revheim (2017) 
for a discussion of available software packages and practical worksheets and tools to 
assist with evaluating the utility of these packages for specific cognitive rehabilitation 
goals.
Computers and the sophisticated graphics that computers make possible have a natu￾ral allure for both rehabilitation providers and consumers. They offer the promise of 
cutting-edge technology that conceivably may remediate fundamental deficits. However, 
the promise of computer technology may not always coincide with evidence that actually 
supports it. Two meta-analyses support the efficacy of computerized cognitive remedia￾tion with individuals with schizophrenia (Grynszpan et al., 2011; Prikken, Konings, Lei, 
Begemann, & Sommer, 2019). These meta-analyses revealed significant small-to-medium 
treatment effects for attention, working memory, positive symptoms, and depressive 
symptoms, but not for social cognition or functional outcomes.
Criteria have been developed to help providers discern whether any particular com￾puter package will be useful for the cognitive needs of participants:
•	 There is evidence that the computer package improves functioning in people with 
cognitive processing deficits.
•	 There is evidence that the computer package improves cognitive deficits related 
specifically to the psychiatric disabilities of program participants.
•	 Improvement in cognitive deficits yields some meaningful change in participants’ 
lives; it does not just teach the participants to press the computer keys faster.
•	 The amount of time it takes to gain benefits from participating in the program 
is not excessive. For example, daily, hour-long participation in a cognitive reha￾bilitation program to improve attentional participation from the 50th to the 60th 
percentile is not likely to be cost-effective.
•	 The requirement for associated computer hardware does not require additional 
excessive costs.
INTEGRATED PROGRAMS: 
ADDRESSING MEANINGFUL SOCIAL-COGNITIVE REHABILITATION
Given the distinction between cognitive and social-cognitive deficits in the assess￾ment arena (Penn, Corrigan, Bentall, Racenstein, & Newman, 1997), social-cognitive 13. Psychosis and Cognitive Challenges 243
rehabilitation has evolved into its own set of approaches to helping people attain per￾sonal goals (Kurtz & Richardson, 2012). The largest group of these approaches inte￾grates cognitive and social rehabilitation strategies. Three integrated programs have been 
well developed and studied: integrated psychological therapy (IPT), cognitive adaptation 
training (CAT), and what is called vocational cognitive rehabilitation in this chapter.
Integrated Psychological Therapy. IPT combines cognitive retraining with 
social skills training to help people overcome processing deficits, so that they can better 
understand and interact with the social world (Aloi et al., 2020; Spaulding et al., 1999; 
Volker, Mueller, & Schmidt, 2011). IPT is a highly structured approach conducted in 
hour-long group meetings, three to five times a week, for several months to a year or 
more. Participants progress through five subprograms that begin by targeting basic cog￾nitive processes and move to social-cognitive processes and social skills:
1. Cognitive differentiation. Participants in this subprogram use repeated practice 
to improve stimulus discrimination during card-sorting tasks. When they show mastery 
of this task, they move to concept formation, which includes word problems involving 
antonym and synonym recognition. Finally, systematic search strategies are learned 
through a variation of the Twenty Questions game.
2. Social perception. One goal of this subprogram is to help participants discrimi￾nate between important social information and environmental noise. To accomplish this, 
participants view slides in which actors interact in different social situations and display 
emotions of varying intensity. As the subprogram progresses, emotions and interactions 
increase in complexity and distress. Participants are instructed to report the observable 
characteristics of actors. They are then asked to interpret the intent of actions and the 
emotion displayed by actors.
3. Verbal communication. This subprogram extrapolates skills learned in the first 
two subprograms to improve participants’ abilities to pay attention to the statements of 
others and to understand accurately what is being said. During initial exercises, partici￾pants are rewarded for repeating the verbatim comments of partners. Literal repetition is 
quickly replaced with paraphrasing the partners’ statements. Reciprocal communication 
is improved with questions that foster mutuality of listening and talking. Participants are 
taught the utility of basic question words (who, what, when, where) and are prompted to 
use them in conversation. Participants are then instructed to continue free communica￾tion without immediate prompts.
4–5. Social skills and interpersonal problem solving. The last two subprograms 
closely parallel more traditional behavioral skills training (Liberman, 1988). Briefly, indi￾vidual social skills are modeled by group leaders, participants rehearse the skills in role 
plays, and feedback is provided by peers. The IPT social skills subprogram is facilitated 
by focusing on cognitive components of the task. Similarly, acquisition of traditional 
problem-solving steps is enhanced by accentuating cognitive aspects. For example, select￾ing a solution to a problem involves cognitive analysis of the success and failure of similar 
solutions in other situations.
Cognitive Adaptation Training. CAT is a manualized treatment implemented in 
participants’ homes; it is designed to bypass impairments and improve functional engage￾ment in the daily lives of people with serious mental illness (Draper, Stutes, Maples, 
& Velligan, 2009; Velligan et al., 2008). In this treatment, rehabilitation counselors 244 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
regularly support functional independence for people with mental illness after a treat￾ment plan has been developed and implemented.
To develop a CAT treatment plan, assessments of a person’s executive functioning 
(i.e., apathy and disinhibition) are considered in conjunction with the person’s overt inde￾pendent living behaviors. An apathy assessment focuses on ascertaining a person’s ability 
to initiate tasks and follow them through to completion. For example, if a person starts to 
clean a bathroom, can the individual complete the task? If not, what part of the process 
is problematic? If the counselor discovers that finding cleaning supplies incites frustration 
and leads to discontinuation of the task, then the remedy may be to consolidate supplies 
for placement in the bathroom closet to aid in task completion. In an example related to 
medication use, perhaps a person can begin placing medications into a pillbox organizer 
but has difficulty systematically completing the task. Here, a therapist may help the per￾son devise a system for independently placing each medication into a weekly or monthly 
pillbox organizer. A disinhibition assessment focuses on how distracting stimuli interfere 
with task completion. For example, such an assessment in regard to medication use may 
ascertain whether outdated prescriptions contained in the bathroom divert the person 
from taking currently prescribed medications.
CAT addresses executive functioning issues through problem solving and organizing 
a person’s environment by integrating reminders (e.g., signs, lists, alarm clocks). It also 
organizes a person’s possessions to improve engagement in cooking, cleaning, self-care, 
and leisure pursuits. Generally, individuals with more significant executive function￾ing impairments require more structured environments with more prominent, obvious 
reminders. People with greater apathy levels (e.g., inability to wake to take medications) 
generally require environmental supports integrated to trigger initiation of behavior and 
completion of an entire task (e.g., an alarm clock with a recorded personal voice reminder 
to take medications). If disinhibition appears to be of significant concern (e.g., taking 
an outdated medication or too much of a current medication), then treatment involves 
removal of distracting stimuli (e.g., taking old medications out of the medicine cabinet 
and adding signage to avoid excess ingestion).
CAT is focused on solutions to problems (e.g., making sure a person takes the correct 
medication dosage at the correct time). It can also address difficulties related to self-care 
behaviors with appropriate solutions that cue and trigger particular responses (e.g., after 
washing and drying dishes, putting them into the appropriate kitchen cabinet). As a com￾pensatory strategy for serious mental illness, CAT has been shown to increase medication 
decisions, decrease symptoms, and improve functional outcomes on both individual and 
social levels (Stiekema et al., 2020; Velligan et al., 2000, 2002, 2015).
Vocational Cognitive Rehabilitation. Vocational cognitive rehabilitation helps 
people achieve work goals by integrating cognitive deficits that might undermine these 
goals directly into the persons’ intervention plans (McGurk, Mueser, DeRosa, & Wolfe, 
2009). Specifically, participants are engaged in 24 hours of computer-based cognitive 
exercises (McGurk, Mueser, Feldman, Wolfe, & Pascaris, 2007; McGurk, Twamley, 
Sitzer, McHugo, & Mueser, 2007) while participating in vocational rehabilitation. The 
computer tasks provide practice in attention and concentration, psychomotor speed, 
learning and memory, and executive functions. In addition, participants engage in weekly 
groups, where they examine the role of cognition in work activities, as well as learn com￾pensatory strategies that may be useful on the job (e.g., remaining focused and improv￾ing cognitive speed). The results of one study suggested that participants who received 
vocational cognitive rehabilitation demonstrated better vocational outcomes 2 years later 13. Psychosis and Cognitive Challenges 245
than those who did not (McGurk et al., 2009). Another study compared the receipt of 
cognitive remediation along with cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) to receipt of CBT 
alone, finding better vocational outcomes among those who received cognitive remedia￾tion (Kukla, Bell, & Lysaker, 2018).
THE EVIDENCE REVISITED
Research on cognitive rehabilitation has grown exponentially (Bowie et al., 2020; 
McGurk et al., 2013). Results of a meta-analysis examining the impact of 26 RCTs on 
1,151 participants are encouraging (McGurk, Twamley, et al., 2007). Cognitive reha￾bilitation yielded medium effects on cognitive deficits, slightly lower effects on social 
functioning, and small effects on symptoms. Another meta-analysis including 2,104 par￾ticipants found durable effects on global cognition and functioning, and these effects 
were enhanced when cognitive rehabilitation was provided in conjunction with other 
psychiatric rehabilitation interventions (Wykes, Huddy, Cellard, McGurk, & Czobor, 
2011). Recent research suggests that the effects of cognitive remediation endure over time 
(Buonocore et al., 2018, 2022). Future research needs to continue to examine whether 
improvements in cognitive deficits translate into meaningful changes in personal goals. 
For instance, does improvement on an attentional task help people to get jobs of interest 
to them?
UNDERSTANDING DEFICITS IN THOUGHT CONTENT
Delusions constitute the major form of content deficits found in people with psychiat￾ric disabilities. Delusions are false beliefs that may impede people from achieving life 
goals, because they undermine complete understanding of social situations. This section 
reviews the form and impact of delusions, as well as cognitive therapy principles that help 
people overcome the disabilities resulting from delusions.
Specific Models of Delusions and Other Content Deficits
Delusions have traditionally been regarded as fixed, false beliefs, held with absolute con￾viction and not amenable to reason (see, e.g., DSM-III-R; APA, 1987). Widely acknowl￾edged problems with the traditional psychiatric definitions, however, have led to phenom￾enological studies in which experiences of delusions are better described and understood; 
the more recent editions of DSM (APA, 1994, 2000, 2013, 2022) reflect this work. The 
idea that delusions are held with absolute conviction has been replaced by the concept 
that there are fluctuating rates of conviction, preoccupation, and distress caused by the 
false beliefs, as well as of action taken in accordance with the beliefs (Garety & Freeman, 
1999; Garety & Hemsley, 1994; Strauss, 1969). Examples of these four dimensions—
conviction, preoccupation, distress, and action—are summarized in Figure 13.4. The 
four dimensions are relatively independent of one another (Garety & Hemsley, 1994; 
Strauss, 1969) and have helped shift the conceptualization of delusions as categorical 
entities to a view of them as multidimensional (Appelbaum, Grisso, Frank, O’Donnell, & 
Kupfer, 1999; Blackwood et al., 2001; Garety & Freeman, 1999).
Accounts of delusional experiences have noted certain themes particular to people 
with schizophrenia (APA, 2022). Persecutory or paranoid delusions (beliefs that oth￾ers have malevolent intentions toward a person) are most commonly observed (Bentall, 246 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
2001), grandiose delusions (an exaggerated sense of one’s importance, power, knowledge 
or identity), ideas of reference (in which apparently innocuous events are believed to 
have some special significance for the person), and delusions of control (a so-called “pas￾sivity” symptom—beliefs that one’s actions are controlled by external forces) are also 
common (Frith, 1999). Delusions are evident not only in the schizophrenia spectrum 
but also in association with other serious psychiatric conditions, including what was 
formerly known as affective psychosis (Goodwin, Alderson, & Rosenthal, 1971), as well 
as mania (Taylor & Abrams, 1975), depression (Maher & Spitzer, 1993), and paranoia 
Dimensions Definition and scale Examples
Conviction The degree to which the person 
believes the delusion is true. 
On a 7-point scale, how certain are 
you that this belief is true?
Jack is absolutely sure that the CIA 
is following him because he joined a 
radical student group in college. (7)
Shirley is not at all certain that the 
voices she hears in her head are from 
the devil. (1)
Not at all
certain Waffling
Absolutely 
convinced
1 4 7
Preoccupation The amount of time the person 
spends thinking about the delusion.
On a 7-point scale, how much time 
do you spend thinking about the 
belief?
Jack rarely thinks about the CIA 
following him; “after 8 years, I have 
learned how to live with it.” (1)
Shirley can’t get the thoughts about 
devil voices out of her head, no matter 
how she tries to block them. (7) No time
at all
Some
time
Almost all
the time
1 4 7
Distress The degree to which thinking about 
the belief upsets the person.
On a 7-point scale, how upset does 
thinking about this belief make you?
Jack isn’t at all distressed about the 
thought of being followed by the CIA. (1)
Shirley is highly anxious when she thinks 
about the devil voices. (7)
Not at all
upset
Somewhat
stressed
Highly
upset
1 4 7
Action The motivation to act to control the 
delusion.
On a 7-point scale, how much do you 
want to change or otherwise control 
these beliefs?
Jack has learned how to live with “the 
CIA following me.” He is not motivated 
to act further on these beliefs. (1)
Because Shirley is so tormented by the 
thought that the devil is speaking to 
her, she is actively trying to control her 
thoughts. (7) Not at all Uncertain Urgently
1 4 7
FIGURE 13.4. The four dimensions of delusions. Each might be assessed using multipoint 
scales. Shirley’s examples show how delusions (in her case, her belief that the devil is talking 
to her) often arise from hallucinations (in her case, hearing voices).13. Psychosis and Cognitive Challenges 247
(Kendler, Gruenberg, & Tsuang, 1985). Experts believe that it may be more accurate to 
conceptualize a continuum of delusional beliefs in the adult population as a whole rather 
than a categorical diagnosis of delusions (i.e., a person is or is not delusional). Failures 
in reality discrimination (i.e., in the ability to distinguish between real and imaginary 
events) can be experimentally demonstrated in individuals without apparent disorders 
(Perky, 1910; Bentall & Slade, 1985; McKellar, 1968; Posey & Losch, 1983; West, 1948; 
Young, Scheftner, Klerman, & Andreasen, 1986). Verdoux et al. (1998) found that indi￾viduals with no psychiatric history demonstrated some evidence of delusional ideation, 
which might include attenuated versions of beliefs regarding persecution, mysticism, and 
guilt. Such findings suggest that delusions represent a dimensional phenomenon lying on 
a continuum with normality. Three models have been developed to explain the creation 
and maintenance of delusions as clinical phenomena: attributional bias, metarepresenta￾tion, and cognitive biases.
Attributional Bias
People without psychiatric disabilities often demonstrate a self-serving attributional bias 
when they are explaining the causes of events; that is, they attribute positive outcomes 
in social situations to their own individual characteristics, such as a proactive action or 
an intrinsic quality; by contrast, they attribute negative outcomes to something outside
themselves. Such biases are exaggerated among people with persecutory delusions. Specif￾ically, as compared to nonclinical and depressed controls, people with paranoid ideation 
take too much credit for success (i.e., they display an exaggerated internal attribution of 
positive events), while their responsibility for failure is excessively denied (i.e., negative 
events are externally attributed) (Candido & Romney, 1990; Bentall, Kinderman, & 
Kaney, 1994; Kinderman & Bentall, 1997; Lyon, Kaney, & Bentall, 1994). People with 
paranoid ideation tend to personalize their attributions; in order to protect their self￾esteem, those with persecutory delusions are likely to blame other people rather than situ￾ational factors when things go wrong (Bentall et al., 1994; Kinderman & Bentall, 1997). 
Blaming others leads to the kinds of false beliefs that are observed in paranoid delusions.
Deficits in Metarepresentation
Metarepresentation, which is also often studied as theory of mind (Frith, 1994), is the 
normal psychological ability to understand the intentions and behaviors of other people. 
Theory of mind influences the way one explains the causes of events in the social world to 
oneself and to others. The generation of causal attributions that are external and personal, 
as compared to those that are external and situational (i.e., delusional beliefs that are 
explained by other persons’ behavior rather than by circumstances), may be influenced by 
poor theory-of-mind abilities, because these are constituents of a social-cognitive domain 
that involves anticipating and interpreting the behaviors of others (Bentall, 1994; Kinder￾man & Bentall, 1997; Kinderman, Dunbar, & Bentall, 1998). Conversely put, in order to 
generate external situational attributions appropriately, one must have an appreciation of 
the mental states and intentions of others, rather than blaming other people (i.e., having 
a personalizing bias) for negative events. One must be able to imagine the world from the 
perspectives of others, as well as the ways in which one’s own experiences affect reactions 
toward others. Deficits in metarepresentation (disordered theory-of-mind abilities) cause 
one to misinterpret the intentions of others, which in turn may contribute to delusional 
ideation (Frith, 1994; Frith & Corcoran, 1996; Corcoran, 2001).248 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
Cognitive Biases
A range of cognitive biases has been associated with the development and maintenance 
of delusions, but the most extensively studied is the “jumping to conclusions” (JTC) bias 
(Dudley, Taylor, Wickham, & Hutton, 2016; McLean, Mattiske, & Balzan, 2017; Gawę, 
Staszkiewicz, & Balzan, 2017). The JTC bias occurs when an individual makes inter￾pretations and judgments early and based on inadequate evidence (McLean et al., 2017). 
Another form of cognitive bias that has been reliably associated with delusions in schizo￾phrenia is the “Bias against disconfirmatory evidence” (BADE), which occurs when an 
individual is presented with accumulating evidence in contrast with their initial judg￾ment and fails to reevaluate (Sanford, Veckenstedt, Moritz, Balzan, & Woodward, 2014; 
Woodward, Moritz, Cuttler, & Whitman, 2006).
Interventions to Remediate Deficits in Thought Content
Aaron Beck (1976), Albert Ellis (1977), and others (Freeman & Davis, 1990; Kendall, 
1982) developed cognitive therapy as a means for addressing the depression and anxiety 
that results from the content of certain thoughts. As illustrated in Figure 13.5, Ellis (1977) 
described the problems caused by thoughts in terms of antecedents (A), beliefs (B), and 
consequences (C). The presumed relationship between an antecedent and a consequence 
is illustrated at the top: A student worries about having failed a class test. This minor 
worry can become significant depression or anxiety when mediated by a belief such as “I 
must be a stupid student. I am worthless because I have no discipline to study for tests” 
(abbreviated as “I am stupid and worthless” in the Figure 13.5). The central goal of 
cognitive therapy is to teach people to identify hurtful, usually irrational thoughts, such 
as this belief, and to obtain evidence that counters or reframes them. For example, this 
student might learn to say, “Everyone fails a test once in a while. It does not mean I am a 
bad person.” In this way, people can control the psychological distress that results from 
hurtful thoughts. Specific methods to facilitate the process of identifying and countering 
irrational thoughts are summarized later in this section.
In the past two decades or so, researchers have applied this model to delusional 
thoughts. Figure 13.6 provides several examples of delusional beliefs under B. Not only 
might such delusional beliefs cause extreme psychological distress, but their consequences 
might undermine life goals. Hence, cognitive therapy may help people cope with delu￾sions, so that they do not undermine the person’s goals for work and independent living. 
Sitko, Bewick, Owens, and Masterson (2020) conducted a meta-analysis demonstrating 
the effectiveness of CBT for psychosis (CBTp) for addressing positive symptoms, delu￾sions, hallucinations, and negative symptoms across time across 28 studies.
Applying Cognitive Therapy to Delusions
Four steps are important for applying cognitive therapy to the needs of a person with 
delusions:
1. Engage with the person to develop a collaborative therapeutic relationship.
2. Identify, assess, define, and otherwise make sense of delusional beliefs that are 
causing problems for the person.
3. Strategically challenge these beliefs.
4. Once the person has become somewhat uncertain about the beliefs, help the per￾son develop counters.13. Psychosis and Cognitive Challenges 249
ENGAGEMENT
Engagement is central to successful cognitive therapy of delusions. People with schizo￾phrenia or other psychiatric disabilities have repeatedly been told that they should “stop 
having these crazy thoughts.” As a result, people with delusions may be unwilling to talk 
with rehabilitation providers about their “odd” beliefs. In addition to the range of funda￾mental skills that foster any kind of therapeutic relationships, two tasks help counselors 
to break down this wall.
First, providers will find it helpful to challenge the stigmatizing idea that delusions 
are qualitative marks distinguishing psychotic persons from the rest of the (“sane”) popu￾lation. Instead, as outlined earlier in this chapter, participants are educated that delusions 
are just one of many examples of “problematic beliefs.” All people, whether challenged 
by psychiatric disabilities or not, have extreme beliefs that guide their lives—beliefs that 
cannot be shown to be true. For example, some of our private thoughts regarding religion 
FIGURE 13.5. A diagram illustrating how irrational thoughts cause symptomatic reactions. 
A is the antecedent, the situation that leads up to a possible symptom. C is the consequence, 
the result of the antecedent. B is the intervening belief that can evolve an otherwise mild or 
benign consequence into depression or anxiety.
FIGURE 13.6. A diagram using the ABCs to illustrate how delusions may cause psychological 
distress or undermine life goals.250 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
fall into this category; empirical proof for private phenomena such as divine beings and 
miracles is impossible.
Framing delusions as being on the same continuum as normal experience leads to the 
second task of engagement: identifying the person’s goals for cognitive therapy. Rather 
than having the rehabilitation provider set the goal (“get rid of those delusions”), the 
person decides the direction. The purpose of cognitive therapy is to determine how cer￾tain beliefs hurt the person, and how these beliefs can be reframed or in some other way 
controlled so that the negative impact is diminished. This process is called collaborative 
empiricism by Beck and colleagues (Beck, 1976; Beck, Rector, Stolar, & Grant, 2009).
Harry Summerfield believed that he was George Washington, the first President of 
the United States, and that he did not work because “the President does not need a 
salary!” Hence, a therapeutic goal was to determine how to help Harry reconsider 
being George Washington, so that Harry would not have to give up on work and a 
social life. In this instance, neither the provider nor Harry needed to argue about 
whether Harry’s being Washington was true; they only needed to discuss what to do 
about this belief, so that the delusion would not narrow his vocational goals.
ASSESSING DELUSIONS
As stated earlier, delusions have been described as having three dimensions that are use￾ful in defining the experience for individuals and in evaluating the impact of cognitive 
therapy (Chadwick, Birchwood, & Trower, 1996):
1. Conviction. How certain is a person about a delusional belief? Likert scale items 
can reliably represent this dimension, from high (“I am consistently certain the belief is 
true”) to low (“I am frequently uncertain about the truth of the belief”) conviction.
2. Preoccupation. How much time does the person spend thinking about delusions? 
This can be directly assessed by asking the person, “How often do you think about the 
belief?” Note that both conviction and preoccupation can change significantly over the 
normal course of a delusion, even without cognitive therapy. Hence, repeated measures 
are needed to obtain a relatively reliable picture of the current status of a delusion.
3. Accommodation. Can the person conceive of beliefs or experiences that might 
disconfirm the delusions? Individuals who can generate more examples of accommoda￾tion are likely to receive greater benefit from cognitive therapy (Brett-Jones, Garety, & 
Hemsley, 1987). Hence, accommodation in some ways represents readiness to change. 
Brett-Jones et al. developed a method for assessing readiness to change delusions called 
reaction to hypothetical contradiction. A plausible hypothetical event that challenges the 
delusion is offered, and the individual is asked how such an event might alter the belief, if 
at all. People who are more open to hypothetical contradictions are more likely to benefit 
from cognitive therapy.
Let us contrast Harry’s delusion about being George Washington to Joan Arnowicz’s 
belief that she was getting communications from outer space. Prior to cognitive ther￾apy, Harry was highly convinced that he was George Washington: “No doubt about 
it; I’m the first President!” Joan was less certain about outer space communications: 
“Sometimes it seems like aliens are sending me messages through my teeth; other 
times, I’m not so sure. I wonder if my mind is playing tricks on me again.” Harry’s 
and Joan’s degree of preoccupation also differed. Harry didn’t spend a lot of time 13. Psychosis and Cognitive Challenges 251
thinking about being George Washington: “It’s just who I am. Why should I need to 
think about it?” Joan, on the other hand, was significantly stressed by her delusions. 
She rarely had it out of her mind.
Both Harry and Joan seemed willing to accommodate alternative explanations. 
When Harry read a statement in a history book that Washington died more than 
200 years ago, he wondered how this fit with his delusion. After Joan met a physicist 
from the local university, who said that direct communication with aliens was not 
physically possible, she felt a brief period of relief.
CHALLENGING BELIEFS
Rehabilitation providers who have engaged with participants, and have helped them 
to conceive of delusions from a cognitive perspective, can use the same menu of belief￾challenging strategies as those used by cognitive therapists with other psychiatric disor￾ders. The place to begin is to obtain evidence that challenges a belief. A provider and a per￾son jointly look for evidence that diminishes the person’s conviction about a belief. As this 
evidence amasses, the individual is more easily able to generate counters to the delusion.
A second way to challenge delusions is through empirical testing. Consistent with the 
typical approach to cognitive therapy, the rehabilitation provider and the person jointly 
set up a test to see whether reality corresponds with assumptions outlined by the delu￾sion. Steps in this kind of test include defining evidence that would challenge a delusion, 
identifying ways to search for this evidence, actually engaging in a study to look for this 
evidence, and examining the impact of the search on the ongoing beliefs (Chadwick et 
al., 1996; Fennell, 1989). Rehabilitation providers need to make sure that all phases of 
evidence gathering are collaborative. A frustrated provider may be tempted to assume the 
role of a debater and try to disprove a delusion unilaterally. In this case, the provider has 
abandoned the basic principle of collaborative empiricism and has probably diminished 
their engagement with the person. This pitfall can be avoided by remembering the pri￾mary assumptions of the collaborative approach: Namely, all aspects of cognitive therapy 
are controlled jointly by the provider and the person. In fact, the provider may want to 
highlight the individual’s control and power in the therapy situation when the person 
seems to be responding poorly to a specific component of the intervention.
When trying to find evidence that would challenge Harry’s belief about being George 
Washington, the counselor asked Harry to check out with respected others whether 
he could possibly be Washington. They first developed a survey about Washington, 
which Harry then administered to his rabbi and to the instructor in his composition 
class at night school. The results from both people added to Harry’s uncertainty 
about being Washington. An equally important task was to challenge Harry’s belief 
that work was not necessary because he had the president’s salary. In particular, 
Harry asked these respected others whether they thought that pursuit of a regular 
job was possible, even if he was, in fact, George Washington. Affirmative responses 
from both the rabbi and the instructor endorsed his burgeoning desire to seek work.
DEVELOPING COUNTERS
Once the person seems less certain about a problematic delusional belief, the rehabili￾tation counselor helps them develop counters to the belief, which may be used in the 
future when the person is hampered by the belief. For example, a counter to Harry’s 
belief that he was George Washington might be “No, that’s impossible. I can’t be the first 252 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
President, because he’s been dead for over 200 years!” As in most other elements of cog￾nitive therapy, the central aspect of developing counters is to ensure that the participant 
has an active role in generating the counters and in trying them out to make sure they are 
relevant and potent. Once again, a frustrated provider may err by constructing counters 
on their own and imposing them on the person.
Role reversal is an excellent way to identify meaningful counters. In this approach, 
the counselor assumes the voice of the delusion, stating different versions of it. The par￾ticipant, in turn, argues against the delusions, providing counters that challenge them. 
Role reversal is particularly powerful, because the provider can invoke statements that 
the participant has actually used to defend their belief.
Counselor: So to remind you, Harry, for this exercise, I’m going to argue that I am 
George Washington. And you are going to come up with reasons why that can’t 
be so. Ready?
Harry: Yep, let’s do it.
Counselor: You know Harry, it might seem strange, but sometimes I think I am 
George Washington.
Harry: You mean, like, the first President of the United States, the Father of our 
Country?
Counselor: That’s me.
Harry: But that’s impossible. He died more than 200 years ago.
Counselor: Yeah, but I am from Virginia, and Washington was from Virginia.
Harry: Sure, but, you know, not everyone from Virginia could be George Wash￾ington.
Counselor: Maybe . . . but when I walk down the street, it seems that everyone is 
staring at me. It must be because I am famous and the first President.
Harry: You know, sometimes I walk down the street, and people stare at me, too. 
I’m wondering if people are just being friendly and making eye contact. Or 
perhaps they are nosy. It doesn’t have to mean they think you are the president.
Counselor: But sometimes I just feel special.
Harry: Me too. I think we are all special.
From this kind of interaction, Harry could identify counters that were meaningful for 
him: “I am still special even if I am not George Washington, which is, of course, impos￾sible because he died over 200 years ago.”
Role reversal is essentially a controlled argument in which the person struggles with 
and overcomes the problematic belief. A rehabilitation provider must keep two caveats in 
mind while engaging the person in this exercise. First, the provider should not give up on 
the role reversal too easily.
Counselor: You know, Harry, it might seem strange, but sometimes I think I am 
George Washington.
Harry: But that’s impossible. He died more than 200 years ago.
Counselor: Wow, you are right. I never thought of it that way. I will stop thinking 
I am Washington.13. Psychosis and Cognitive Challenges 253
In this case, the rehabilitation counselor would be failing to mirror the true tension that 
Harry felt when holding his problematic belief. The interaction between a counselor and 
a person needs to progress through several exchanges to make sure that multiple facets 
of the delusion are challenged. Alternatively, the provider should not try to win the role 
reversal. In this case, all the provider has done is prove to the person that they are right 
for having a delusional belief. The provider should be attentive to how the participant is 
responding to the exercise, and back off a bit when the person is unable to counter any 
part of the role reversal.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Many people with psychiatric disabilities are not able to achieve life goals because of cogni￾tive deficits. Typically, these deficits are discussed in terms of process (how they think) and 
content (what they think). Process approaches frequently rely on stages that represent the 
combination of individual cognitive processes (e.g., attention, memory, and executive func￾tioning) to yield an integrated thinking person. Cognitive rehabilitation may facilitate improve￾ment in these deficits in three ways: restoration (“mental exercising” to help persons return 
to normal functioning), compensation (“prostheses” to assist people with cognitive tasks), 
or reorganization (environmental manipulation to help the persons with cognitive tasks). Two 
types of interventions incorporate these principles: (1) targeted approaches seek to improve 
individual processes through repeated practice, mnemonic strategies, or lists and prompts; 
and (2) integrated programs attempt to ensure that improvements in cognitive functioning 
lead to better social functioning and achievement of life goals.
Delusions are common disabilities related to thought content. According to cognitive 
theory, delusions can be represented as extremes on a continuum. Steps to challenge delu￾sional thoughts include engagement, assessing delusional beliefs, challenging the beliefs, 
and developing counters. Preliminary research on both cognitive rehabilitation and cognitive 
therapy for people with psychiatric disabilities has been encouraging. Outcome studies have 
shown that discrete cognitive processes and content areas improve after individuals partici￾pate in these services. Future research in this area, however, must show how improvement 
in specific cognitive deficits leads to meaningful change for these persons. Namely, how 
does being better able to attend to an information processing task translate into achieving 
work goals? Anchoring cognitive interventions in real-world goals will significantly benefit the 
ongoing development of treatment approaches in this area.254
CHAPTER 14
Criminal Justice
The United States’ incarceration rate is unsurpassed internationally. 
Between the mid-1970s and 2008, the rate of incarceration increased dramatically, after 
a period of almost 50 years of stability (Travis, Western, & Redburn, 2014). While rates 
have been declining slowly over the past decade and dropped 14% during the COVID￾19 pandemic, in the Spring of 2021, there were roughly 1.8 million people incarcerated 
in the United States, or 537 per 100,000 residents (Jang-Brown, Montagnet, & Heiss, 
2021). Many, many of these people have psychiatric disabilities. As a result, criminal jus￾tice and mental health offi cials, along with researchers, policymakers, advocates, family 
members, and people with mental illness, have collaborated to develop innovative pro￾grams and policies to reduce the involvement of people with serious mental illness in the 
criminal justice system (Kennedy- Hendricks, Huskamp, Rutkow, & Barry, 2016).
This chapter seeks to unpack complex questions about psychiatric disabilities and 
criminal justice system involvement. It begins by exploring the relationship between men￾tal illness and violent and nonviolent criminal off ending. It then considers the extent of 
criminal justice involvement by persons with mental illness. Causal factors and theoreti￾cal explanations for high rates of involvement in the legal system are considered next. 
The chapter then reviews legal–mental health intervention strategies meant to help people 
with psychiatric disabilities address goals related to the criminal justice system. It ends 
with a brief look at the few methods developed to date for helping people with mental 
illness when they are victims of crime.
DOES MENTAL ILLNESS LEAD TO CRIMINAL BEHAVIOR?
There have been multiple studies that suggest there is an association between mental 
illness and criminal behavior; however, the relationship is complex. Some studies have 
used birth cohort designs to address this question. These studies are prospective in nature 
and largely conducted in Scandinavian countries, where populationwide information is 
routinely collected by government agencies. In birth cohort designs, data are collected 
at birth, before anyone is identifi ed or labeled with mental illness, and before anyone 
becomes involved in the criminal justice system. Results of following people into adult￾hood suggest that people with severe psychiatric disorders, particularly schizophrenia, 
CHAPTER 1414. Criminal Justice 255
are at increased risk for both nonviolent and violent offenses (Arseneault, Moffitt, Caspi, 
Taylor, & Silva, 2000; Brennan, Mednick, & Hodgins, 2000; Sariaslan et al., 2020).
The findings are echoed by analyses of population data in the United States. Swartz 
and Lurigio (2007) analyzed data from the National Survey on Drug Use and Health and 
found a relationship between psychiatric disorders and past year arrest; however, it was 
largely mediated by substance use. For nonviolent offenses, the effect of psychiatric disor￾der was entirely mediated by substance use (psychiatric disorder increased the likelihood 
of substance use, which increased likelihood of arrest); for violent offenses, the effect 
was partially mediated, suggesting that serious mental illness had both an indirect (via 
substance use) and an independent effect on likelihood of arrest for violent crimes. Thus, 
people with co-occurring psychiatric and substance use disorders are at heightened risk 
for violent and nonviolent criminal offending.
Considering violence specifically, the rate of violence among people with serious 
mental illness may be two to five times higher than that of their peers from the general 
population (Corrigan & Watson, 2005; Swanson et al., 1997), with substance use driving 
much of this elevated risk (Swartz & Lurigio, 2007; Fazel, Långström, Hjern, Grann, & 
Litchtenstein, 2009). Furthermore, studies have demonstrated the influence of nonpsy￾chiatric individual and social–environmental factors that influence violence risk among 
people with serious mental illness that also influence violence risk among the general 
population (Swanson et al., 2002; Swanson, 2008).
Although there is a clear link in some cases between violence and serious mental ill￾ness, only 1–5% of violence in the community can be attributed to people with mental 
illness (Ahonen et al., 2019). Public health experts have long cautioned that the general 
population overestimates the degree of violence among people with serious mental illness 
(Monahan & Arnold, 1996). For example, population studies have shown that about 
40% of members of the general public views people with mental illness as violent. Percep￾tions of dangerousness of people with schizophrenia are even higher, and have increased 
over the past few decades to over 60% of the public viewing people with schizophrenia as 
likely to harm others (Pescosolido, Halpern-Manners, Luo, & Perry, 2021). Dangerous￾ness continues to be among the most problematic stigmas for people with mental illness. 
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Ken Monroe’s Pathway into the Criminal Justice System
Ken Monroe, a 35-year-old Black man with a diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia, had never 
engaged in long-term treatment and had had no contact with a mental health professional in 
over 2 years. Just prior to his entanglement with the criminal justice system, he had an exac￾erbation of his symptoms of paranoia. His paranoia was focused on his family and neigh￾bors, who he thought were “out to get him.” He checked into a motel to protect himself. 
While there, he soon became concerned that motel guests were planning to do him harm. He 
started throwing objects, including books and bedding, out the windows of his second-story 
motel room onto the cars in the parking lot.
Ken was extremely pleased when the police responded to his actions, having been 
called by the motel manager. His elation quickly diminished when he found that he was the 
one being arrested, not the other guests. He was initially charged with an obscure section of 
the criminal code related to projecting missiles, which he pleaded down to simple assault. 
However, Ken subsequently spent almost a year in jail awaiting trial.256 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
The question for rehabilitation providers is not whether such persons are violent or how 
to stop them. Rather, the task is how to help these persons meet their goals related to the 
criminal justice system.
Violent behavior in people with serious mental illness may be exacerbated by several 
factors, including substance use, history of victimization, community disorganization, 
and lower socioeconomic status (Fazel et al., 2009; Hiday, 2006; Swanson et al., 2002; 
Swanson, 2008). With regard to substance use, the risk of violence is higher among per￾sons with substance use disorders than among those with schizophrenia and other psy￾chotic disorders (Eronen, Angermeyer, & Schulze, 1998). A history of child abuse has 
also been found to be associated with violent reactive behavior and criminal offending 
in general population studies, but this linkage has not been addressed directly in studies 
among persons with mental illness—even though, as a group, persons with severe mental 
illness have extremely high rates of abuse during childhood, as well as other types of vic￾timization. While not differentiating violent and nonviolent criminal behavior, in a recent 
study Edalati and colleagues (2017) did find that among homeless adults with mental 
illness, exposure to adverse childhood events (ACEs) was associated with higher rates of 
both criminal justice system involvement and victimization.
Another often-neglected variable is that of the social conditions of the communities 
where persons with mental illness live. There is evidence that over time, people with seri￾ous mental illness tend to move to poorer and poorer communities, characterized by high 
unemployment, resource deprivation, crime, violence, drug use and police monitoring—
all factors that increase risk of involvement in criminal behavior and arrest (Epperson 
et al., 2014; Silver, Mulvey, & Swanson, 2002). To consider these associations another 
way, social adversity and related risk factors may drive violence and crime for people 
with mental illness just as they do for people without mental illness (Skeem, Manchak, 
& Peterson, 2011).
PEOPLE WITH MENTAL ILLNESS 
IN THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
Prisons and jails have become the primary service providers for persons with mental illness 
and psychiatric disabilities. This is an important social justice issue. Overrepresentation 
of people with serious mental illness occurs at every level of the criminal justice system 
(i.e., arrest, incarceration, and probation) in the United States, as well as other countries.
Rates of incarceration in prison or jail are often used to assess the extent of involve￾ment in the criminal justice system. Research in U.S. jails and prisons suggest approxi￾mately 14% of the incarcerated population has a serious mental illness, although for 
females, rates as high as 31% have been reported (Parsons & Sandwick, 2012; Prins, 
2014; Steadman, Osher, Robbins, Case, & Samuels, 2009). Many people with serious 
mental illness are under community correctional supervision as well. An analysis of the 
2009 National Survey on Drug Use and Health indicates that people with mental illness 
are also overrepresented among probationers and parolees (Vaughn, DeLisi, Beaver, Per￾ron, & Abdon, 2012).
When people with serious mental illness become involved in the criminal justice 
system, there is evidence that they spend more time in jail pretrial, are more likely to 
be sentenced to jail or prison, serve more of their sentences, and may be more likely to 
be rearrested than people without serious mental illness (Comartin, Nelson, Smith, & 
Kubiak, 2021; Hall et al., 2019; Eno Louden, O’Manchak, Connor, & Skeem, 2015). 14. Criminal Justice 257
Thus, people with serious mental illness are at higher risk of entry into the criminal 
justice system, and once they enter, they have more difficulty exiting. Co-occurring sub￾stance abuse increases the risk for all these negative outcomes.
Several states are implementing bail reforms that eliminate money bail requirements 
for all or certain types of charges. Under such reforms, people cannot be held in jail pre￾trial simply because they cannot afford to post bail. For example, New York State’s bail 
reform mandates pretrial release for most cases but allows judges discretion to impose 
cash bail or detention without bail in more serious cases (Vera, 2019). Bail reforms in 
other jurisdictions allow judges discretion to use preventive detention (detained without 
option of cash bail) for a broader range of cases. These reforms generally allow judges to 
impose pretrial conditions such as electronic monitoring. Bail reform has the potential 
to reduce the number of people with serious mental illnesses in jails, as they are often 
charged with minor crimes that may be ineligible for pretrial detention under some bail 
reform laws. However, there is substantial risk of bias that negatively impacts Black and 
Indigenous individuals, people of color, and people with mental illnesses in jurisdictions 
that afford broader discretion to judges to detain people based on risk to the public or 
risk of flight assessments.
Police are the first point of contact with the criminal justice system, and there is 
evidence that police encounters with people with serious mental illness are common. It is 
estimated that 6–10% of all police contacts with the public involve a person with serious 
mental illness (Livingston, 2016; Koziarski, Ferguson, & Huey, 2022), and in the United 
States, almost one-third of people with mental illness have police involved in their path￾ways to care. Furthermore, population data suggest that over 30% of people with serious 
mental illness have lifetime histories of arrest (Kennedy-Hendricks et al., 2016).
It can be useful to consider the types of charges that are most common. People 
with serious mental illness are overrepresented on misdemeanor charges such as criminal 
trespass and petty larceny, which are often survival crimes associated with homelessness 
and poverty (Compton et al., 2023). Additionally, there is some evidence that patterns 
of criminal offending among people with serious mental illness may change over the life 
course. Compton and colleagues (2022) examined the arrest records of 240 people with 
serious mental illness recruited from public inpatient psychiatric facilities in Georgia. 
Participants’ earliest charges included marijuana possession, driving under the influence 
of alcohol, burglary, and shoplifting. In contrast, their most recent charges included pro￾bation violations, failure to appear in court, officer obstruction, and disorderly conduct. 
This suggests an important role for psychiatric rehabilitation professionals in addressing 
social risk factors and assisting clients in navigating their criminal justice goals.
The large number of individuals with mental illness in the criminal justice system 
presents significant challenges for both law enforcement and correctional staff, who are 
generally not well trained or equipped to respond and support this population. Tragically, 
this puts people with serious mental illness in harm’s way. Research indicates they are 
at elevated risk of having force used on them, being injured, and being killed in police 
encounters (Laniyonu & Goff, 2021; Rossler & Terrill, 2017; Saleh, Appelbaum, Liu, 
Scott Stroup, & Wall, 2018). The intersection of serious mental illness and race is par￾ticularly deadly in police encounters (Shadravan, Edwards, & Vinson, 2021). In prison 
settings, serious mental illness increases both the risk of victimization and the odds of 
being sent to extended solitary confinement (Daquin & Daigle, 2018; Siennick, Picon, 
Brown, & Mears, 2022).
In addition to the human costs, public expenditures for people with mental illness 
enmeshed in the criminal justice system are large (Petrila, Andel, Constantine, & Robst, 258 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
2010). Aggregate costs of mental health and criminal justice services over 4 years in a 
large Florida county were $94,957,465, with a median cost per person of $15,134. Hence, 
it is not surprising that criminal justice officials, whose institutions are overcrowded and 
underresourced, feel that they are burdened with being the primary institutional provid￾ers of mental health care. Jails and prisons in the United States house more individuals 
with mental illness than do all of the state hospitals (Aufderheide, 2014).
THEORETICAL EXPLANATIONS OF CRIMINAL INVOLVEMENT
Social scientists have posed several theories in order to make sense of the degree to which 
people with serious mental illness are involved in the criminal justice system. Two early 
theories are (1) the criminalization hypothesis and (2) the hydraulic theory of social con￾trol.
1. The criminalization hypothesis rests on the observation that persons with mental 
illness, who once may have been served in mental hospitals, are now entering the criminal 
justice system because of deinstitutionalization. People with serious mental illness that 
would have, in prior eras, been institutionalized in state hospitals, now live in the com￾munity, often without adequate mental health treatment. Their symptomatic behavior 
brings them in contact with law enforcement and the criminal justice system that define 
their symptomatic behaviors as criminal rather than mental health issues. Relatedly, the 
theory of transinstitutionalization, emphasizes the idea that services have simply moved 
from one institution (mental health) to another (criminal justice) (Prins, 2011).
2. The hydraulic theory of social control proposes that change in the population of 
one institution that serves the societal function of social control will lead to an inverse 
change of equal magnitude in another social control institution. In this case, the closing 
of state psychiatric hospitals has led to an increase in jails and prisons.
Based on these early theories, one might surmise that providing mental health treat￾ment and perhaps reopening state psychiatric hospitals would reduce the criminal justice 
involvement of people with serious mental illness. However, those steps may not be suf￾ficient, or in the case of reopening state hospitals, desirable. Skeem and colleagues (2011) 
suggest that a plausible alternative to the criminalization hypothesis is that risk factors 
for criminal justice system involvement are generally the same for people with and with￾out serious mental illness. However, serious mental illness may increase peoples’ expo￾sure to these risk factors. Both criminological and social/personality psychology theories 
(items 3 and 4, below) of criminal offending may be useful to consider.
3. Criminologically informed perspectives on offending focus on factors influenc￾ing impulsivity, self-control, and social circumstances that influence access to economic 
opportunity and normative systems and institutions that promote prosocial behavior. 
Basically, poverty increases the likelihood of exposure to criminal activity, opportunities 
to engage in substance use and criminal behavior, others engaged in criminal activity, 
and unstructured time. The onset of serious mental illness in emerging adulthood may 
interrupt educational, vocational, social and economic trajectories, resulting in poverty, 
social marginalization, and increased risk of criminal offending (Fisher, Silver, & Wolff, 
2006; Ringhoff, Rapp, & Robst, 2012).14. Criminal Justice 259
4. Social/personality psychology models focus on antisocial cognition (criminal 
thinking) and criminal associates. For example, Bonta, Law, and Hanson (1998) sug￾gested that criminal behavior is learned by early modeling and reinforcement patterns, 
and maintained by a history of benefiting from criminal activity, social circumstances 
that encourage criminal activity, personal attitudes supportive of criminal behavior, and 
a personality style that finds impulsivity rewarding. People with serious mental illness 
may be at higher risk of being in adverse environments that expose them to the modeling 
and reinforcement of criminal behavior (Skeem et al., 2011).
While there is indirect evidence for the criminological and social/personality per￾spectives as alternatives to the earlier theories, Skeem and colleagues (2011) caution 
against discarding the criminalization hypothesis entirely. They point to evidence of a 
small group (5–8%) of offenders with serious mental illness whose crimes are directly 
attributable to mental illness. Ultimately, the worth of these theories can be judged to the 
degree that they inform ways to help people achieve their criminal justice-related goals.
Epperson et al. (2014) offer a “person–place” framework (see Table 14.1) for 
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Doris Cummings’s Journey through Prison
Doris Cummings, a White female in her early 40s, was released from prison after serving over 
a year and a half for two separate charges of arson. One offense related to a dispute with a 
neighbor: Doris set off firecrackers over her neighbor’s patio, which resulted in a fire. The 
other charge stemmed from an incident while she was incarcerated, in which she set her 
mattress on fire in her jail cell.
Doris had a diagnosis of schizophrenia, with only intermittent treatment over 15 years. 
She was frequently requested to leave treatment programs because of her disruptive behav￾ior. While incarcerated, Doris refused all medication, regardless of the presence of active 
symptoms. She received minimal treatment in prison, because the facility had no provision 
for specialized housing for female inmates with mental illness.
Upon discharge, Doris returned to her previous living arrangement with her mother and 
father. Her mother had a 30-year history of untreated schizophrenia. Because of his reli￾gious beliefs, her father was opposed to Doris’s taking prescribed medication; he believed 
that prayer was the answer to her and her mother’s mental health problems. At release, 
the parole department was unaware of her psychiatric history, so no provision for intensive 
supervision was made. Doris was requested to go to a local mental health agency, but she 
was only given a card with the name and phone number of the agency, and was told to call 
for an appointment. With no supervision and her father’s opposition, Doris did not go for 
treatment.
Subsequently, Doris was rearrested on violations of her parole, including failure to 
comply with mental health treatment. She was later arrested on new charges that stemmed 
from a traffic violation; due to her erratic and bizarre behavior at her preliminary arraign￾ment, an assault charge was added to the others. During the subsequent hearing, Doris 
was found sitting in the judge’s office, which she had trashed, and from which she had to be 
forcibly removed. Doris was sent back to prison, where she stayed until she had served her 
maximum sentence. She was then again released to the community, with no provision for 
criminal justice supervision or treatment, because she had served her full sentence.260 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
considering strategies to support people with psychiatric disabilities in meeting goals 
related to criminal justice that incorporates elements of the alternative theories. The 
framework maintains that while effective and accessible mental health treatment is a 
necessary component of successful interventions for this population, traditional men￾tal health treatment alone is not sufficient. Successful interventions must target multiple 
factors that put people at risk for criminal justice system involvement. These include 
person-level factors such as criminal thinking, antisocial attitudes, antisocial associ￾ates, employment problems, family/relationship circumstances, mental illness, addiction 
and trauma exposure. Additionally, interventions must consider place-level factors such 
as social and environmental disadvantage that may reduce opportunities for prosocial 
behavior and increase exposure to crime, violence, and police supervision. According to 
the framework, the impact of person and place factors on offending risk is mediated by 
stress and the person’s ability to cope with stress. When a person’s support system and 
coping strategies are overwhelmed, unhealthy coping behaviors, such as substance use 
and acting out, may put them at increased risk of justice system contact. Thus, although 
mental illness is an important variable in intervention strategies, comprehensive reha￾bilitation requires plans that seek to understand the individual and their lived social and 
geographic environment, coping skills, and support system. This opens the service pro￾vider to the broad range of strategies related to criminal justice in the light of diversity, 
poverty, and political alienation.
INTERVENTIONS FOR MANAGING GOALS 
RELATED TO CRIMINAL JUSTICE
Addressing the criminal justice goals of people with psychiatric disabilities requires a 
collaborative effort between representatives of the criminal justice and mental health sys￾tems on the one hand, and people with lived experience and their families on the other. 
Interagency task forces might include representatives from mental health agencies, local 
jails and prisons, police and sheriffs’ departments, probation and parole departments, 
district attorneys’ offices, pretrial services, and district courts (Schnapp & Cannedy, 
1998). Ideally, such task forces also include people representing the perspectives of peo￾ple with mental illness and their families. Often task forces like these are established in 
response to tragic incidents between law enforcement and persons with mental illness. 
TABLE 14.1. “Person–Place” Factors Contributing to Criminal 
Justice Involvement
Person-level factors Place-level factors
Mental illness Social disadvantage
Substance use disorder Environment disadvantage
Trauma
Antisocial attitudes/criminal thinking
Antisocial associates
School/employment difficulties
Family/relationship difficulties
Note. Data from Epperson et al. (2014).14. Criminal Justice 261
For example, a task force was created in Memphis, Tennessee, after a Black man with 
mental illness who was threatening himself with a knife was shot and killed by respond￾ing police officers (Perez, Leifman, & Estrada, 2003). This led to the development of 
the Crisis Intervention Team Model (discussed later in this section). Various interven￾tions have emerged from such planning groups—approaches meant to intersect at various 
points in the criminal justice system, from before initial police contact, court hearings, 
and incarceration in prisons and jails, to community reentry after incarceration.
The sequential intercept model (SIM) has nicely outlined points of interception, or 
opportunities for interventions to keep people with mental illness from becoming more 
deeply involved in the criminal justice system (Munetz & Griffin, 2006). According to 
the original SIM, a person’s first interactions occur with law enforcement and other 
emergency services (Intercept 1). Interactions between police and people with mental ill￾ness can devolve into cases of serious legal infractions and arrests, initial hearings, and 
detention (Intercept 2). Courts may find people guilty, leading to penalties including jail, 
prison, or mental health forensic commitment (Intercept 3). Those who are detained in 
corrections or forensic commitment eventually face the challenge of community reentry 
(Intercept 4), where they may be supervised by community correctional staff (Intercept 
5). The SIM developers emphasized that the entire process can be avoided in communi￾ties with best clinical practices: “an accessible, comprehensive, effective mental health 
treatment system focused on the needs of individuals with serious and persistent mental 
disorders” (Munetz & Griffin, 2006, p. 545). Recently, the SIM was revised to add Inter￾cept 0, which represents an adequately funded mental health system that could prevent 
crises and criminal justice system contact (Abreu, Parker, Noether, Steadman, & Case, 
2017). While the original model was rooted in the criminalization hypothesis, there is 
growing recognition of the need to develop interventions at each intercept that address 
both mental health and person–place needs.
The justice enterprise is vast; by necessity, some parts relevant to rehabilitation prac￾tice are not discussed in depth in this chapter. These include state and federal regula￾tions about fitness to stand trial, guilt and insanity, and civil commitment (Fitch, 2014). 
Although specific regulations vary by state, some generalities in each category are briefly 
reviewed here. Fitness to stand trial reflects the degree to which people can work with 
their attorneys in presenting their defense at trial and other court proceedings. Fitness is 
decided by competency evaluations conducted by a skilled officer of the court (typically 
a forensic psychiatrist or psychologist), who determines the answers to three questions: 
(1) Is the accused able to understand that they are in a courtroom, and to comprehend the 
roles of others in the courtroom (judge, bailiff, defense attorney, and prosecutors)? (2) Is 
the accused able to understand the charge, possible pleas (guilty or not guilty), repercus￾sions of guilty pleas, and implications of perjury? (3) Is the accused fully able to com￾municate with their lawyer about all facets of the trial and related proceedings? Judges 
may postpone court proceedings for people deemed unfit to stand trial and remand these 
persons into mental health custody, so that providers can help the persons become com￾petent for trial.
Mental illness can mitigate court decisions about guilt or penalty. The Model Penal 
Code Test of the American Law Institute sets the criteria for a person to be judged not 
guilty by reason of insanity (NGRI): Because of mental disease or defect (typically a 
DSM-diagnosed illness), people (1) are unable to appreciate the criminality of their con￾duct, and (2) are unable to conform their conduct to the requirements of law. Typically, 
forensic psychiatrists or psychologists are hired by both the defense and the prosecu￾tion in such a case; these professionals, after reviewing the case and interviewing the 262 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
defendant, provide their opinions about guilt and insanity. The subsequent decision about 
NGRI remains with the jury and judge. Contrary to popular ideas, NGRI decisions are 
rarely achieved in U.S. courts. People who are found NGRI may be civilly committed to 
the mental health system and may remain in psychiatric hospitals until their mental ill￾ness resolves and the persons are deemed safe. Several states have modified NGRI with 
alternatives, such as guilty but mentally ill, which more clearly establish the link between 
court decision and subsequent civil commitment.
Fitness and NGRI are decisions of the criminal courts, which may conceivably 
impose penalties including prison or jail sentences. Involuntary commitment or civil 
commitment is a decision of the civil courts, typically leading to detention in a psychi￾atric hospital. Criteria for civil commitment usually include danger to self or to others 
because of mental illness. Civil commitment may be an option for cases that have resulted 
in NGRI determinations. Alternatively, civil commitment may result from decisions of 
community providers who are concerned that persons may harm themselves or others 
because of mental illness. Use of civil commitment is reduced significantly as a commu￾nity mental health care option when solid rehabilitation programs, including assertive 
community treatment (ACT; see Chapter 8), are available to meet a person’s independent 
living needs. Outpatient civil commitment, often called assisted outpatient treatment
(AOT) is a court-involved strategy for managing the behavior of a person with serious 
mental illness and a history of violence or repeated hospitalizations and arrests. In con￾sultation with the person and their mental health team, the judge may order the person to 
accomplish several goals to stay in the community rather than being involuntarily com￾mitted to an inpatient setting. Goals may include regularly taking prescribed medication 
and meeting with a mental health provider. Outpatient commitment is a contentious 
policy issue; some advocates are concerned that it may lead to unnecessary coercion.
Interventions at Police Contact
Interactions with the criminal justice system typically begin with police officers. Two 
common-law principles govern their actions. First, the police have government-granted 
power and authority to protect the safety and welfare of the community. Second, the 
police are granted paternalistic or parens patriae authority, which is meant to protect citi￾zens with disabilities who cannot care for themselves, including those with serious mental 
illness. Acting under these principles, police officers have significant discretion in how a 
disruptive incident or minor crime is handled. In the absence of robust crisis services in 
the community, police are generally the first to respond to a mental health crisis situation. 
They then must identify the individual as being in need of psychiatric treatment; perhaps 
this results in their transporting the individual to a treatment facility, or in their making 
the determination that the illegal activity takes precedence and arresting the individual. 
As such, police officers assume the role of primary gatekeepers in determining whether 
the mental health or criminal justice system is the more appropriate means to meet the 
needs of the individual and to ensure community safety (Lamb, Weinberger, & DeCuir, 
2002).
Officers may also deal with such a situation informally (e.g., by attempting to calm 
the person), rather than moving on to court involvement. Research examining informal 
police responses has produced mixed findings. One study found that officers resolved 
over 40% of calls involving persons they identified as having mental illness informally 
(Watson & Wood, 2017). In the same study, officers resolved another 45% of the calls 
by transporting the person to a hospital, and 6% were resolved with an arrest. There is 14. Criminal Justice 263
some evidence that mental illness may be protective, in that when officers recognize that a 
person has a mental illness, they may be less likely to arrest them (Engel & Silver, 2001).
Police officers indicate that encounters with people with mental illness are operation￾ally problematic, and they feel ill-equipped to handle them (Borum, Deane, Steadman, & 
Morrissey, 1998; Hails & Borum, 2003). This is not surprising given limited training and 
resources for responding effectively. State standards for the minimum number of hours of 
mental health and deescalation-related training for officers vary from 2 to 40 hours (Plot￾kin & Peckerman, 2017). It is important to note that training for mental health personnel 
about the criminal justice system is also critical, so they are able to assist their clients who 
have system involvement.
Over the past 30 years, specialized responses have been developed to divert peo￾ple to mental health services at the point of police contact. Such programs, which have 
been referred to as prebooking or prearrest diversion programs, are largely collaborative 
between mental health and law enforcement personnel (Hails & Borum, 2003). Arrests 
are avoided by having the police make direct referrals to mental health treatment, thereby 
keeping persons with severe mental illness from entering the criminal justice system 
(Hails & Borum, 2003).
Deane, Steadman, Borum, Veysey, and Morrissey (1999) categorized specialized pre￾booking programs into three groups: (1) police-based specialized response that involves 
officers with special mental health training, who provide crisis intervention services and 
act as liaisons to the formal mental health system; (2) police-based specialized men￾tal health response that occurs when departments hire mental health consultants who 
provide on-location and telephone consultation to officers in the field; and (3) mental￾health-based specialized response that occurs when mobile crisis teams from the commu￾nity mental health service delivery system, through established arrangements with police 
departments, respond to special needs at the times of incidents. These basic program 
models are still in use, although, more recently, there has been increased attention to the 
development of robust mental health crisis systems and reducing the reliance on police as 
crisis responders. Many communities are implementing a continuum of response models 
that include crisis intervention team, co-responder, and community responder models.
Crisis Intervention Teams
One of the most widely implemented prebooking interventions is the crisis intervention 
team (CIT) model, a police-based specialized response model that has been adopted by 
more than 3,000 police forces worldwide (Cross et al., 2014; Watson & Fulambarker, 
2012). The foundation of the model is partnerships between law enforcement, mental 
health providers, and advocates that work together to deliver CIT training and support 
an effective crisis response system. While all officers should have basic mental health cri￾sis response skills, the CIT model selects officers to train and deploy who have the great￾est interest, the most amenable attitudes, and the most appropriate interpersonal skills to 
function as the first-line responders to mental health calls (Hails & Borum, 2003). These 
officers complete a 40-hour course that provides information on signs and symptoms of 
mental illness, corresponding interventions, deescalation techniques, co-occurring disor￾ders, legal issues, and local resources. Another component of the model is a designated, 
no-refusal drop-off, where officers can transport a person in need of care (Usher et al., 
2019). As the model has gained popularity, it has been adapted to local contexts. Strong 
CIT programs work to maintain partnerships across law enforcement, mental health, and 
advocacy to support the program and enhance the crisis services.264 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
There is a growing body of research that suggests that the CIT model has positive 
impacts (Watson, Compton, & Draine, 2017). There is strong evidence that CIT training 
improves officer knowledge, attitudes, and endorsement of deescalation skills. Multiple 
studies have also found that CIT implementation and training increases transports to 
crisis triage centers and other linkages to care. The impact of CIT on arrests and use of 
force is less clear, with some researchers finding reductions and others finding no effect. 
Finally, the program seems to reduce criminal justice costs, although treatment costs may 
be higher for diverted individuals.
Co-Responder Teams
The co-responder model pairs a clinician with a police officer to provide response to 
mental health crisis calls. The most widely implemented version is a police-based spe￾cialized mental health response, with the clinician riding with the officer. However, in 
some communities, the clinician is based at a mental health agency and responds at the 
request of law enforcement. While this model is rapidly gaining popularity in the United 
States, there is significant variation in its implementation. Some co-response teams are 
directly dispatched to 911 calls, others are secondary response at the request of the first 
responding patrol officer, and still others to follow-up visits in the community. More 
recently, some co-response teams are including paramedics and peer providers. Research 
to date suggests that stakeholders find the co-responder model acceptable and preferable 
to police-alone response (Shapiro et al., 2015). The model may reduce unnecessary emer￾gency department transports and increase service use following the initial contact (Puntis 
et al., 2018; Shapiro et al., 2015); reduce the risk of arrest (Bailey, Lowder, Grommon, 
Rising, & Ray, 2022) and reduce use of force in situations involving suicidal persons 
(Blais & Brisebois, 2021).
Community Responder Teams
Demands to reduce the involvement of police, particularly in communities of color, 
have led many communities to develop community response models that do not include 
police officers. Most programs are loosely based on the Crisis Assistance Helping Out 
on the Streets (CAHOOTS) model that has been operating in Eugene, Oregon, since the 
late 1980s. Operating out of the Whitebird Clinic, CAHOOTS teams comprise a crisis 
worker and a medic (EMT or nurse). The teams respond to behavioral health and social￾service-related calls for service. Their program data suggest that 5–8% of calls for ser￾vice that otherwise would have been handled by police are diverted to the CAHOOTS 
team.
A newer community response program, Denver Support Team Assisted Response 
(STAR), pairs a master’s-level clinician with a paramedic or EMT to respond to low-risk 
calls when individuals are not in imminent risk (trespass, welfare checks, mental health 
crisis). In the first year of the program, STAR responded to 1,396 calls with no arrests, 
injuries, or calls for police backup. Examining arrest data for the 6 months before and 6 
months after implementation of the STAR program, Dee and Pyne (2022) found a 34% 
reduction in reports of low-level crimes such as trespassing, public disorder, and resist￾ing arrest, charges that are more frequent among people with serious mental illness. 
Thus, sending a social service response rather than a criminal justice response may better 
address people’s needs and decrease criminal justice system involvement. Community 
response team variations are being piloted and across the country. Some are including 14. Criminal Justice 265
certified peer providers as part of the initial response team or to provide follow-up link￾age and support.
Postbooking Diversion Programs
Postbooking diversion programs divert people with mental illness to mental health care 
after they have been arrested. Diversion typically takes place at a court hearing and may 
be pretrial in the form of waived or deferred prosecution with linkage to treatment and 
social services, transfer to mental health court, or postadjudication in the form of spe￾cialty mental health probation (Epperson et al., 2014; Kennedy-Hendricks et al., 2016). 
Postbooking diversion programs seek to connect people with services in the community 
and reduce criminal justice system involvement and incarceration. Accordingly, these 
programs have three objectives: (1) screening and identifying individuals with severe 
mental illness; (2) negotiating treatment plans between the mental health and criminal 
justice personnel; and (3) appointing staff within the criminal justice system to act as 
liaisons between detainees and community mental health services. Negotiated disposi￾tions may be viewed as alternatives to prosecution, as conditions of reduced charges, or 
as conditions of probation (Desai, 2003). Steadman, Morris, and Dennis (1995) have 
listed six key features of effective diversion programs, which are indicated in Table 14.2.
Some postbooking programs are court-based, such as specialty mental health courts 
(described in the next section), and others are jail-based. Jail-based diversion has three 
forms: release from jail with conditions of participating in psychiatric treatment; post￾poning legal proceedings for a period of time, during which the individual participates 
in treatment; or summary probation, in which the individual is placed on probation for a 
period of time instead of being incarcerated. Each of these models requires the agreement 
of the prosecutor, defense attorney, and judge (Gill & Murphy, 2017; Shafer, Arthur, & 
Franczak, 2004; Steadman et al., 1999).
Several comprehensive reviews have summarized research on the impact of postbook￾ing programs (Desai, 2003; Lange, Rehm, & Popova, 2011; Sirotich, 2009). The findings 
are mixed. Desai (2003) and Sirotich (2009) concluded that studies on jail-based diver￾sion and court-based diversion showed no overall effects on subsequent rearrest records, 
though decreases were found for those committing low-level misdemeanors. While not￾ing substantial methodological limitations, Lange and colleagues (2011) reviewed the 
literature and concluded that the evidence supports jail-based and court-based diversion, 
TABLE 14.2. Key Features of Effective Postbooking Diversion Programs
• Integration of community-level services—mental health, judiciary, and social services
• Regular meetings among key players
• A designated liaison or boundary spanner who manages interactions among correctional, mental 
health, and judicial staff
• A strong leader who has good communication skills and understands all components of all systems 
as well as informal networks
• Early identification of individuals who have mental health treatment needs and meet the diversion 
criteria
• Diversion case managers who have experience in both the mental health and criminal justice 
systems
Note. Data from Steadman, Morris, and Dennis (1995).266 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
specialty probation, and forensic assertive community treatment (FACT) as being effec￾tive for reducing recidivism and improving other outcomes.
Mental Health Courts
Mental health courts are a specific form of court-based postbooking diversion (Wolff, 
2002, 2003). Evolving from the perceived success of drug courts, the first mental health 
court was established in 1997 in Broward County, Florida. As of 2020, there were 421 
adult and 56 juvenile mental health courts in the United States (Fox, Miley, Kortright, 
& Wetsman, 2021). Therapeutic jurisprudence has been philosophically influential in the 
development of these courts (Boothroyd, Poythress, McGaha, & Petrila, 2003).
While there is significant variation in eligibility criteria and operation, mental health 
courts share several characteristics (Fox et al., 2021; Epperson, Sarantakos, Suslovic, 
Thompson, & Self, 2022; Loong, Bonato, Barnsley, & Dewa, 2019; Thompson, Osher, 
& Tomasini-Joshi, 2008): (1) a specialized mental health court docket supervised by a 
sitting judge; (2) judicially supervised community treatment plans supported by a team 
of court staff and mental health professionals; (3) regular status hearings where adher￾ence is reviewed and incentives and sanctions imposed; and(4) defined criteria for pro￾gram completion. Additionally, entry into mental health court programs is voluntary and 
requires participants to give up some procedural rights (e.g., a speedy trial) in exchange 
for the opportunity to have charges reduced, avoid a conviction altogether, and or avoid 
jail or prison time.
Mental health courts vary in terms of eligibility criteria. While most mental health 
courts focus on misdemeanor and nonviolent felony cases, some mental health courts 
accept a broader range of cases and others only felonies. There is also variation in specific 
diagnoses, with some courts accepting individuals with intellectual and developmental 
disabilities and/or those who have experienced traumatic brain injuries (Thompson et al., 
2008; Watson, Hanrahan, Luchins, & Lurigio, 2001; Wolff, 2003). Initially, these courts 
focused on defendants shortly after their arrest, but some courts have expanded to accept 
referrals from other courts, as well as from attorneys, police officers, friends, relatives, 
or others aware of individuals with mental illness (Goldkamp & Irons-Guynn, 2000).
Some critics have raised concerns that mental health courts may be coercive or 
may serve as vehicles for coerced treatment (Goldkamp & Irons-Guynn, 2000; Redlich, 
Hoover, Summers, & Steadman, 2010). Issues of voluntariness in mental health courts 
are complicated by questions of an individual’s competency to comprehend and make 
decisions to participate, which must be determined before the individual can be a men￾tal health court candidate (Goldkamp & Irons-Guynn, 2000). Similarly, questions have 
been raised about these courts’ use of sanctions for noncompliance with treatment, such 
as more restrictive treatment alternatives or even incarceration, and whether these mech￾anisms are appropriate for producing desired outcomes. One of the biggest concerns is 
whether mental health court procedures differ greatly from those of conventional courts 
(e.g., by not providing protections of due process).
Several recent systematic reviews have examined the effectiveness of mental health 
courts. Loong and colleagues (2019) reviewed 20 studies of adult mental health courts 
and concluded that there is some evidence that mental health courts can reduce recidi￾vism. They further indicate that the inclusion of case managers and access to vocational 
and housing services may be important elements of effective mental health courts. Fox 
and colleagues (2021) conducted a meta-analysis of 30 studies of adult and juvenile 
mental health courts. They found a 74% reduction in recidivism associated with mental 14. Criminal Justice 267
health court participation overall, with similar effects for adult and juvenile participants. 
An earlier meta-analysis of 18 studies also reported mental health court involvement was 
also associated with fewer inpatient days and better overall interpersonal functioning 
(Sarteschi, Vaughn, & Kim, 2011).
Services after Initial Hearings: Jail and Prison
Jails and prisons are ill-equipped to provide appropriate treatment for inmates with men￾tal illness, yet are required by law to protect and to provide at least minimal care for 
them. But it is estimated that one-half to three-fourths of prison inmates with a current 
mental illness receive treatment in prison (Martin et al., 2018). Prison-based services may 
include screening, suicide prevention, medication management, group and individual 
psychotherapy, crisis intervention, case management, modified therapeutic community 
programs, gender-specific services and transitional services (Hills, Siegfried, & Ickowitz, 
2004).
Despite jails being some of the largest psychiatric treatment facilities in the United 
States, they struggle to adequately serve people with serious mental illness. Small jails 
provide very little in terms of services other than screening for mental illness and sui￾cide prevention; larger jails and prisons (those with over 1,000 inmates) tend to provide 
a greater array of services (Steadman & Veysey, 1997). Jail-based mental health ser￾vices vary considerably and may include in-jail mental health services, advocacy for early 
release, discharge planning and referral, and discharge planning with follow-up (Comar￾tin, Burgess-Proctor, Hicks, Putans, & Kubiak, 2022). In-jail mental health services may 
be limited to medications, or, as in the case of the New York City Jail system, include 
specialized treatment units that include medication, crisis services, incentive programs, 
and art therapy (Ford et al., 2020). Jail-based services may also include competency res￾toration services (Ash et al., 2020). Discharge planning services may include inreach from 
community providers to facilitate linkage upon release. Overall, there is evidence that 
jail-based mental health services may reduce in-jail victimization and injury (Ford et al., 
2020) and improve mental health treatment outcomes following release (Comartin et al., 
2022).
Emerging jail reform initiatives may reduce the need for jail-based mental health 
services, as fewer people are detained pretrial. However, some in the field have expressed 
concerns that this could reduce opportunities to identify and provide care to people with 
serious mental illness who lack access in the community or are be unhoused. Addition￾ally, such reforms may increase demand for pretrial monitoring and services in the com￾munity.
Reentry and Community Corrections
Plans that organize transitions from prison to community are essential to successful 
community reentry for persons with mental illness. Such services may include transition 
planning prior to re-entry, and support during the transition period. Several models that 
provide planning and support have been developed. FACT (Angell, Matthews, Barrenger, 
Watson, & Draine, 2014) is a version of the ACT model modified for use with people 
leaving correctional facilities. A recent meta-analysis suggests that FACT programs may 
both increase outpatient service use and reduce in-jail days (Goulet et al., (2022). A more 
time limited model of support is the critical time intervention (CTI), which is focused 
on establishing or reestablishing connections to community supports related to housing, 268 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
education, and employment. A randomized trial of CTI for people reentering the com￾munity found that it increased connections to community mental health services (Jarrett 
et al., 2012). Comparing the strategies of FACT and CTI, Angell and colleagues (2014) 
concluded that in communities with scarce resources, CTI may be less effective. Another 
promising reentry strategy is aimed at ensuring that prisoners with mental illness are 
enrolled in Medicaid at reentry to facilitate immediate access to care (Morrissey, Dom￾ino, & Cuddeback, 2016; Wenzlow, Ireys, Mann, Irvin, & Teich, 2011).
A systematic review of reentry interventions for this population concluded that while 
there is good evidence that interventions aimed at the prison to community transition can 
improve health insurance coverage and connections to mental health services in the com￾munity, however, there is less evidence that these interventions are effective for reducing 
recidivism (Hopkin, Evans-Lacko, Forrester, Shaw, & Thornicroft, 2018). More recent 
reentry interventions are being been developed to focus on addressing both mental health 
needs and risks for criminal behavior (Morgan, Scanlon, & Van Horn, 2020; Barrenger, 
Kriegal, Canada, & Blank Wilson, 2021).
VICTIMIZATION OF PERSONS WITH PSYCHIATRIC DISABILITIES
People with psychiatric disabilities are involved in the criminal justice system as victims, 
too. Indeed, an important epidemiological study showed that people with serious mental 
illness were from 6 to 23 times more likely than members of the general population to 
be victims, depending on the crimes (Teplin et al., 2005). Since then, two comprehensive 
reviews have yielded similarly sobering statistics. Maniglio (2009) reviewed nine studies, 
with a total of more than 5,000 participants, and showed that people with serious mental 
illness were up to 140 times more likely to be victims of crime than a comparison sample 
representing the general population. A second review of 15 studies showed that between 
73 and 87% of people with serious mental illness who were homeless reported being 
victimized by crime (Roy, Crocker, Nicholls, Latimer, & Ayllon, 2014). Victimization 
was worse among females with serious mental illness, and among people with a history 
of child abuse, alcohol abuse, or other drug abuse. These data clearly show that resolving 
the challenges of victimization is a major need for people with mental illness. Ironically, 
although victimization is a greater issue than perpetration, programs for the latter are 
much more common than programs for victimization.
HELPING VICTIMS OF CRIME
Given the high rates at which people with psychiatric disabilities are victimized by crime, 
it is a bit surprising to see no rehabilitation programs that tackle the needs of this group. 
Still, there is significant research on ways to help victims of crime generally, and some of 
these strategies may have value in developing and testing programs for victims with seri￾ous mental illness. One review of the literature has distinguished informal from formal 
approaches to seeking help after being victimized by crime (McCart, Smith, & Saw￾yer, 2010). Its results suggest that people are more likely to seek informal than formal 
approaches to help. Formal help includes interventions that help people navigate law 
enforcement and the courts after a crime. Mental health services may also be important 
formal services; these may include exposure therapy, cognitive therapy, stress inoculation 
training, and pharmacological treatment (Hembree & Foa, 2003). Medical care may be 14. Criminal Justice 269
a third important source of formal help. A trained support person is often an excellent 
ally to help the crime victim navigate these different services. Informal help seeking may 
include seeking the support and protection of family and friends; faith-based communi￾ties are beneficial for many victims as well.
These programs may incorporate a framework of restorative justice, which seeks to 
address the needs of both victims and offenders (Sherman & Strang, 2007). Restorative 
justice often involves a dialogue in which victims share the harm done by the crime, and 
offenders are encouraged to take responsibility and make amends. Interesting examples 
of restorative justice include victim–offender mediation and restorative conferencing
(which involves a circle of family, friends, and community leaders gathered to consider 
the interests of all stakeholders). Just as in rehabilitation planning, choices about help 
seeking after victimization need to be driven by a person’s goals and resources.
Crime victims often experience trauma related to victimization. People with psy￾chiatric disabilities are at increased risk of victimization, and trauma histories are ubiq￾uitous among those that are justice system involved (Thordarson & Rector, 2020). The 
principles of trauma-informed care (TIC) discussed in Chapter 3 are highly relevant to 
working with people with psychiatric disabilities, who may exhibit trauma-related behav￾iors that bring them in contact with police, community correctional services, and incar￾ceration, creating a cycle of ongoing retraumatization. Psychiatric rehabilitation services 
that attend to SAMHSA’s (2014) six key principles of TIC (safety; trust and transparency; 
peer support; collaboration and mutuality; empowerment, voice and choice; and cultural, 
historical, and gender issues) may interrupt this cycle and support a person’s pursuit of 
their goals while reducing ongoing exposure to trauma.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Currently, far too many people with severe mental illness become entangled in the criminal 
justice system and have difficulty exiting it. As the mass media have focused more attention 
on this population, public policymakers have put more resources into the development of 
new interventions to address the needs of the population, but much work remains to be done. 
Research indicates that interventions need to address both mental health needs and factors 
that increase risk of criminal behavior. Mental health providers need to have an understand￾ing and knowledge of this system so that they can assist their clients in navigating it. People 
with mental illness in the criminal justice system need more than additional pairs of eyes 
monitoring them with minimal treatment. They also need more than traditional mental health 
services. They need meaningful rehabilitation, including cognitive rehabilitation, social skills 
training, and supported employment, so that they have the tools to be reintegrated into the 
community and engage in prosocial behaviors.270
CHAPTER 15
Physical Health and Wellness
Individuals with serious mental illnesses have high rates of medical illness 
leading to early death (Corrigan & Ballentine, 2021). We begin by reviewing research on 
the depth and breadth of health and wellness challenges experienced by this group. We 
then summarize two sets of factors that explain this problem: (1) those that represent 
direct and indirect eff ects of the disease per se, of its symptoms, and its dysfunctions, or 
(2) those refl ecting social determinants and disparities of health. Each of these sets sug￾gests strategies that people and their health care teams might avail to meet individually 
defi ned health and wellness goals.
INCREASED MEDICAL ILLNESS AND EARLY DEATH
People with psychiatric disabilities have been found to have inordinate rates of co￾occurring physical illnesses that worsen disabilities or lead to death (Corrigan & Ballen￾tine, 2021). They have higher incidence and prevalence of cardiovascular and respiratory 
illnesses (Correll et al., 2017; Das- Munshi et al., 2017), gastrointestinal disorders (Eaton 
et al., 2006; Garakani et al., 2003), neurological disorders (Cremaschi et al., 2017; Kri￾din, Hundt, Ludwig, Schonmann, & Cohen, 2022), endocrine and immunity- related dis￾orders (Kridin et al., 2022; Misaki, Bodurka, & Paulus, 2022), urinary/reproductive dis￾orders (Bargiota, Pelekanou, Tsitouras, & Koukoulis, 2013; Kessing, Vradi, & Andersen, 
2015), and muscular/skeletal conditions (Fratto & Manzon, 2014). As a result, people 
with serious mental illnesses are hospitalized for physical health problems at much higher 
rates than persons in the general population (Mai, Holman, Sanfi lippo, & Emery, 2011). 
They overutilize emergency rooms both in response to exacerbated chronic conditions 
(Hackman et al., 2006; Nossel et al., 2010) and for relatively benign primary care evalu￾ations (Kêdoté, Brousselle, & Champagne, 2008). Individuals with serious mental illness 
are also vulnerable to early institutionalization (Bartels, 2004); that is, they enter nursing 
homes several years earlier than counterparts without mental illness. Medical problems 
(especially those that are undetected) exacerbate mental health conditions (Dixon, Post￾rado, Delahanty, Fischer, & Lehman, 1999; Felker, Yazel, & Short, 1996). Finally, people 
with serious mental illness experience high levels of early death. On average, people with 
serious mental illness have a 20% shorter lifespan than those in the general population 
CHAPTER 1515. Physical Health and Wellness 271
(Baxter et al., 2016; Chesney, Goodwin, & Fazel, 2014; Laursen, Musliner, Benros, 
Vestergaard, & Munk-Olsen, 2016; Oakley et al., 2018; Walker et al., 2015).
REASONS FOR MEDICAL ILLNESS 
AND IMPLICATIONS FOR HEALTH CARE
In Table 15.1, we divide causes of high rates of medical illness and death into those repre￾senting secondary disease effects of mental illness and the effects of disparities; note that 
these latter variables were more thoroughly unpacked in Chapter 4. In the remainder of 
this chapter, we review each set of causes, followed by strategies that rehabilitation pro￾viders, and the entire service team, might implement with people to address their health 
and wellness needs.
MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY THAT RESULTS 
FROM THE MENTAL ILLNESS PER SE
We divide many of these causes of health and wellness concerns of people with psychi￾atric disabilities into three groups: (1) those representing biological impact: genetic and 
other factors due to chronic physiological impact; (2) specific health-related problems 
stemming from the cognitive and/or social disabilities of serious mental illness; and (3) 
results from unintended or other negative effects of treatment.
TABLE 15.1. Causes of Medical Illness and Early Death
Disease, symptoms, and disabilities
Direct biological impact
• Co-occurring genetic vulnerabilities
• Allostatic load
The result of social and cognitive disabilities
• Diminished health literacy and self-management skills
• Diminished social support
• Modifiable health behaviors
Unintended treatment and system effects
• Medication and other treatment side effects
• Loss of decisional autonomy
• Physical versus mental health care silos
Social determinants that interfere with service engagement
Services and settings
• Unavailable or inaccessible services.
• Missing entitlements
Providers
• Lack of diverse service provider workforce
• Lack of cultural competence and humility
Interventions
• Health care models dominated by Western majority culture272 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
CONCERNS REPRESENTING DIRECT BIOLOGICAL IMPACT
Many of the physical health conditions comorbid with mental illness are directly due to 
physiological mechanisms of the disorder and/or to its chronic course.
Co-Occurring Genetic Vulnerabilities
The genetic sequelae of serious mental illness may be associated with health and func￾tioning challenges related to other organ systems. This is demonstrated through genome￾wide association (GWA) studies that identify common genes shared by two or more con￾ditions (Tam et al., 2019). For example, a meta-analysis of GWAs showed shared gene 
candidates that define disease pathways of major depression and cardiovascular disease 
(Amare, Schubert, Klingler-Hoffmann, Cohen-Woods, & Baune, 2017). In other words, 
some people who are genetically vulnerable for certain psychiatric disabilities might be 
similarly vulnerable for specific medical illnesses.
Implications for Health Care
Knowledge of genetic links between mental and physical illnesses might inform preven￾tion protocols that guide people and their care providers to be vigilant to early signs of 
illness (Khoury, 2018). Early intervention improves outcome. As always, specific goals 
and related actions for genetic counseling and monitoring are driven by the person with 
psychiatric disability. However, people and providers need to be aware of the risks of 
health geneticization; namely, public perspectives about the hereditary basis of illness 
leads to worse perceptions of seriousness and prognosis for both the mental and the 
physical disorder (Lebowitz & Appelbaum, 2019).
Allostatic Load
Allostatic load represents the cumulative burden of chronic stress and life events 
(McEwen & Stellar, 1993) that lead to worse health in general, as well as specific prob￾lems in varied organ systems, including cardiovascular disease (Offidani, Rafanelli, Gos￾toli, Marchetti, & Roncuzzi, 2013; Porcelli, Laera, Mastrangelo, & Masi, 2012), diabe￾tes (Steptoe et al., 2014), and cancer (Ruini, Offidani, & Vescovelli, 2015). Depression, 
anxiety, and other distressing symptoms significantly add to allostatic load and hence 
worsen health in people with recurring psychiatric symptoms; the negative impact of 
these symptoms worsens when prolonged over the course of a person’s life or are rela￾tively prominent.
Implications for Health Care
Strategies that help people accomplish personal goals reduce life burden and hence allo￾static stress. Specific stress management programs will likely diminish allostatic load; 
many of these are reviewed in Chapter 7. Research has revealed that specifically wellness￾oriented approaches seem to lessen allostatic stress, including exercise (Forrester, Leout￾sakos, Gallo, Thorpe, & Seeman, 2019; Sylvia, Ametrano, & Nierenberg, 2010) and 
social support (Seeman, Singer, Ryff, Dienberg Love, & Levy-Storms, 2002).15. Physical Health and Wellness 273
THE RESULT OF SOCIAL AND COGNITIVE DISABILITIES
The cognitive dysfunctions and social challenges of serious mental illness may lead to 
health problems by diminishing (1) health literacy and (2) the social support system 
needed to navigate the care system, which (3) leads to modifiable health risks (e.g., smok￾ing, poor diet, and unsafe sex).
Diminished Health Literacy and Self-Management Skills
Health literacy reflects comprehension of health and wellness conditions and the inter￾ventions meant to enhance corresponding goals (Andrus & Roth, 2002; Berkman, Davis, 
& McCormack, 2010). For example, people are better able to engage with health care 
providers when they understand how a variety of tangible symptoms suggest a health 
condition worth acting on (e.g., prolonged pain, stiffness, swelling, and redness in the 
knee that does not follow a discrete injury may imply an arthritic condition). Literacy 
also means knowledge of intervention options; the goal here is not so much for people 
to decide for themselves how to address arthritis per se but to have some appreciation of 
possibilities, so they can engage providers in treatment planning (Amalraj, Starkweather, 
Nguyen, & Naeim, 2009; Davis, Williams, Marin, Parker, & Glass, 2002). People with 
health literacy are better able to self-manage health concerns (Mackey, Doody, Werner, 
& Fullen, 2016).
Research suggests people with serious mental illness have less mastery of health knowl￾edge and skills compared to the rest of the population (Clausen, Watanabe-Galloway, 
Baerentzen, & Britigan, 2016; Kelly et al., 2021). They have especially low health literacy 
scores in appraising health information, navigating the health care system, and discerning 
good health information (Degan et al., 2019). Many people with serious mental illness 
are also less able to recognize experiences that suggest a remediable health condition 
(Hahm & Segal, 2005) or have little confidence that “health” conditions can be effectively 
impacted (Brunero, Lamont, & Coates, 2010). Social and cognitive disabilities seem to 
directly undermine understanding health conditions and corresponding treatments, as 
well as skills needed to self-manage health and health care (Friedman et al., 2019).
Implications for Health Care
Kelly and Brekke (2021) organized knowledge and self-management skills into five sets 
that psychiatric rehabilitation providers might use to facilitate health goals:
1. Self-monitoring and prioritizing health: Self-monitoring is commonly used in 
counseling to help people manage health behaviors by building awareness of focal behav￾iors through systematic observation and recording (Abraham & Michie, 2008; McAl￾ister, Perry, & Parcel, 2008; Porter et al., 2016). Self-monitoring has been shown to 
enhance benefits of healthy eating and physical activity programs (Michie, Abraham, 
Whittington, McAteer, & Gupta, 2009). Accuracy in self-monitoring combines under￾standing target behaviors (e.g., what the behavior entails) with skills to record and make 
sense of information (National Research Council, 2004; Porter et al., 2016).
2. Self-efficacy and self-management skills: People with a sense of self-efficacy 
regarding their health goals are more likely to approach these goals (Cramm & Nieboer, 
2012; O’Leary, 1985). Chapter 7 reviews self-management skills that might be easily 274 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
adapted for health goals. Many management skills programs reflect a specific focus on 
modifiable health behaviors; these are reviewed in the next section.
3. Coping skills: These include the stress management skills discussed earlier in 
terms of allostatic load.
4. Medication and treatment engagement skills: These are outlined in the next sec￾tion in terms of ways to address unintended negative effects of treatments.
5. Communication and interpersonal relationships skills: Limitations in social sup￾port are discussed in the next section as a major barrier to health goals.
Prevention Skills
Prevention begins when people monitor health concerns that might suggest subsequent, 
serious health problems on which they may wish to focus with their health care team. 
Figure 15.1 provides one example of a self-checklist. Consistent with national guidelines, 
prevention varies by age groups and is presented here roughly as 25-year cohorts (Com￾plete Guide to Annual Health Screenings by Age | Columbia NPG, 2020; U.S. Preventive 
Services Taskforce, n.d.; Blue Cross Blue Shield Minnesota, n.d.). The checklist varies 
from traditional measures of weight, blood pressure and cholesterol, and immunization 
history to modifiable health risks related to sexually transmitted disease, alcohol/other 
substance use, and domestic violence. The prevention checklist is additive; questions for 
those between 40 and 64 years old includes the first batch in the checklist plus additional 
concerns related to vaccinations and colorectal screening. Questions for each cohort also 
focus on prevention concerns specific to gender (e.g., cervical cancer screens or testicular 
exams).
Checklists like these end with next-step considerations. These include explicit delib￾eration on whether specific concerns should be voiced to health care providers, who on 
the team, and when? Clinic visits with one’s healthcare provider might lead to referrals for 
tests, specialized treatment providers (e.g., gynecology or neurology), or medication pre￾scriptions After-appointment follow-ups should be regularly reviewed including working 
with the provider team to interpret tests and evaluate impact of treatments and therapies.
Diminished Social Support
Diminished social support is a noticeable barrier to many of the goals of people with 
psychiatric disability (Dalgard, Bjørk, & Tambs, 1995). Social support is complex and 
has evolved beyond simple ideas of size of support network (“How many people can you 
count on when you need assistance?”) to making sense of perceptions and experiences of 
social exchange between people (Shumaker & Brownell, 1984) and grounding individual 
support exchanges within the broader social network and climate (Langford, Bowsher, 
Maloney, & Lillis, 1997). Social support has been viewed as a buffer to life adversity 
including allostatic load (Alloway & Bebbington, 1987). Disability’s impact on social 
support seems to lessen both the interpersonal and instrumental systems needed to man￾age health and engage in health care.
Implications for Health Care
Kelly and Brekke (2021) sought to unpack the support network relevant to individual 
health goals by including health care provider teams, family members and caretakers, 15. Physical Health and Wellness 275
FIGURE 15.1. Checklist for prevention and annual checkups. Based on Chicago Health Dis￾parities Center (2020).
Please check each one that is a concern for you or that you might want to discuss with your health 
care team.
18–39 years old
 Weight and height
 Blood pressure
 Cholesterol check (every 5 years)
 Skin check (suspicious lesions or moles)
 Tuberculosis testing
 Diabetes screening (and foot care)
 Chronic pain (e.g., dental, joint/arthritis)
 Immunizations and vaccines (e.g., tetanus, flu, and covid vaccines)
 Sexually transmitted disease (STD; depending on lifestyle or personal request)
 Contraceptive methods counseling (including for protections from STDs)
 Healthy eating counseling
 Interpersonal and domestic violence counseling
 Tobacco use
 Alcohol use
 Other drug use
 Depression screening
Gender-specific screenings
 Cervical cancer screening (Pap smear every 3 years)
 Human papillovirus (HPV) vaccine (if not received earlier)
 Breast exam (self-exam monthly, by primary care provider annually)
 Testicular exam
40–64 years old (in addition to concerns of 18- to 39-year-olds):
 Shingles vaccine
 Flu shot
 Colorectal screening and maybe colonoscopy
 Osteoporosis screening (bone density)
 Lung cancer screening
 Noticeable chest pain
Gender-specific screenings
 Mammogram
 Pelvic exam
 Prostate exam
65 years and older (in addition to concerns of 18- to 64-year-olds):
 Pneumonia vaccine
 High-dose flu vaccine
 Accidental fall prevention screening276 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
and others in one’s community (e.g., faith-based support). Interpersonal skills training 
may help individuals to better interact with their support network, but the provider team 
must also master communication skills so they can more effectively engage with the per￾son. In addition, strategies that enhance the person’s support system more broadly (e.g., 
family and friends) add to the ability for people to meet their needs. Chapter 17 reviews 
the additional benefits of peer services and support related to health.
Modifiable Health Behaviors
Problems with allostatic load, diminished health skills, and weakened social support may 
result in modifiable health behaviors among people with psychiatric disabilities. These 
include smoking, substance abuse, low physical activity, and poor diet (Corrigan & Bal￾lentine, 2021; Deakin et al., 2010), which are significant risk factors for obesity, high 
cholesterol, Type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular disease (Cimpean, Torrey, & Green, 
2005; Corrigan & Ballentine, 2021). Research has especially examined impact of weight 
gain and diet on people with serious mental illness (Hoerster & Young, 2021). Epide￾miological research suggests, for example, that 25–60% of people with bipolar disorders 
meet criteria for obesity), as do 30–70% of people with schizophrenia (Catapano & 
Castle, 2004; Dickerson et al., 2006). Type 2 diabetes is approximately twice as prevalent 
(15%) among people with schizophrenia as in the general population in the United States 
(Dixon, McDaid, Knapp, & Curran, 2006).
Another modifiable health risk is elevated rates of addictions, including high rates of 
nicotine dependence. About half of people with serious mental illnesses have a substance 
use disorder (Regier et al., 1990) with rates of nicotine dependence even higher (Dalack, 
Healy, & Meador-Woodruff, 1998; Ziedonis, Kosten, Glazer, & Frances, 1994). These 
addictive behaviors predispose individuals to several medical problems, including cancer, 
chronic respiratory diseases, and serious infections. People with serious mental illness 
and addictions may also be more likely to engage in behaviors such as sharing needles 
with other drug users and having unprotected sex with multiple partners, both of which 
increase the risk of HIV and other blood-borne viral infections (Corrigan & Ballentine, 
2021; Rosenberg et al., 2001).
Implications for Health Care
Changing behaviors of any kind generally involves altering attitudes, skills, and sup￾ports. These targets may be used in relation to helping people reduce substance abuse, 
cease smoking, improve diets, increase exercise, enhance medical self-care, and eliminate 
dangerous behaviors. We next discuss efforts to address inactivity, poor diet, and obesity 
among persons with psychiatric disabilities, and to help them reduce or eliminate smok￾ing.
INACTIVITY, POOR DIET, AND OBESITY
Many experts recommend exercise and dietary counseling for people with serious mental 
illness (Green, Patel, Goisman, Allison, & Blackburn, 2000; Hoerster & Young, 2021). 
A report by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality led to three specific recom￾mendations:
1. Dietary therapy: An individually tailored diet that attempts to create a deficit 
of 500–1,000 kcal/day for at least 6 months is recommended, though goals may change 15. Physical Health and Wellness 277
by gender, with men seeking higher targets. Total fats should account for less than 30% 
of daily calories. The impact of dietary therapy is directly related to the amount of time 
people spend with dietary professionals during the 6 months.
2. Physical activity: This, when paired with diet changes, can lead to weight loss 
that is maintained over time. Physical activity regimens must be implemented with care 
for people who live sedentary lives; they might unintentionally cause physical injury and 
so should be supervised by trained facilitators. Guidelines suggest that people should 
begin with short-duration, relatively low-intensity activities (e.g., gardening or walking), 
then transition to longer-duration, moderate-intensity activities such as walking distances 
or cycling.
3. Lifestyle adaptations: Diet and activity change can be difficult given the seden￾tary lifestyles and diet habits of many people with obesity. Activity needs to be strategi￾cally woven into daily life, so that costs of engaging in exercise are not excessive. Dietary 
therapy needs to consider available foods. Lifestyle adaptations are especially relevant 
to weight interventions for people with minority ethnic backgrounds (Seo & Sa, 2008).
One especially notable intervention combines the strengths of many of these 
approaches (Casagrande, Fradkin, Saydah, Rust, & Cowie, 2010; Daumit et al., 2013). 
The behavioral weight loss intervention (BWLI) is based on a strategic integration of 
CBT and principles of psychiatric rehabilitation, and rests on six core components: (1) 
self-monitoring via weigh-ins and food/exercise tracker logs; (2) goal setting, feedback, 
and problem solving with motivational interviewing; (3) social support through group 
diet and exercise sessions; (4) skills training, including discrete in-home strategies to meet 
diet and exercise goals; (5) environmental supports, with hands-on exercise and nutrition 
experiences; and (6) environmental reinforcements, such as incentives for participation 
and homework completion. BWLI consists of a 6-month initial intervention phase fol￾lowed by 6-months of maintenance.
BWLI adapts basic weight loss therapies to several of the previously mentioned spe￾cial issues for people with serious mental illness (Cabassa, Ezell, & Lewis-Fernández, 
2010; Faulkner, Larkin, Claflin, & Brooks, 2007): (1) Cognitive and interpersonal dis￾abilities: Ways to address these disabilities include skills training strategies developed for 
psychiatric rehabilitation (Corrigan & Liberman, 1994), self-monitoring, environmen￾tal prompts, and contingency management; (2) Self-determination: BWLI incorporates 
the two key strategies of SDM and motivational interviewing, described in Chapter 7; 
(3) Relapse management: Many people with serious mental illness experience symptom 
exacerbations that may challenge participation in weight loss programs. BWLI facilita￾tors adjust participation expectations as individuals report recurring symptoms. More￾over, they are trained to deal with distress that might recur, including interacting with a 
person’s broader mental health team as necessary. Participants may also take “vacations” 
from the program when needed.
SMOKING
Helping people with mental illness to overcome alcohol and drug abuse is discussed in 
Chapter 16. In this section, we target smoking cessation. This is a seriously neglected 
area given that 60–80% of people with serious mental illness are addicted to nicotine. 
Research generally shows that people with serious mental illness are less likely than oth￾ers to try to quit smoking, and that those who do try are only half as successful as 278 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
other smokers (Corrigan & Ballentine, 2021; Ziedonis & George, 1997). Nevertheless, 
many do quit (Peckham, Brabyn, Cook, Tew, & Gilbody, 2017; White, Stone, Murphy, 
Daumit, & McGinty, 2023). Controlled trials of smoking cessation interventions support 
the use of bupropion (Evins et al., 2005) and nicotine replacement therapies (Chou, Chen, 
Lee, Ku, & Lu, 2004). Less well-controlled studies support clozapine (George, Sernyak, 
Ziedonis, & Woods, 1995) or nicotine nasal spray (Williams, Ziedonis, & Foulds, 2004). 
Psychosocial interventions have also been used to address smoking habits among people 
with serious mental illness, although most of these have not been as successful as phar￾macological approaches.
UNINTENDED TREATMENT AND SERVICES EFFECTS
Treatments provided to people with psychiatric disabilities often have unplanned results 
that worsen health. We discuss three of these here.
Medication and Other Treatment Effects
The side effects of psychiatric medications have significant negative impact on physical 
health (De Hert, Detraux, & Vancampfort, 2018). Prominent here are weight gain and 
obesity (Correll, Detraux, De Lepeleire, & De Hert, 2015; De Hert et al., 2011), which 
can have secondary effects related to diabetes (Correll et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2017), 
and cardiovascular disease (Hagen et al., 2017). In addition, psychiatric medications may 
have adverse effects on triglycerides and cholesterol, which can also cause heart condi￾tions (Buhagiar & Jabbar, 2019). Medications have also been associated with pneumonia 
risk (Kuo et al., 2013; Yang et al., 2013). Side effects are noted for antipsychotic medica￾tion, antidepressants, and mood stabilizers (De Hert et al., 2011).
Implications for Health Care
People with psychiatric disabilities and their health care providers may avail themselves of 
several strategies that diminish negative medication effects (De Hert et al., 2011; Maj et 
al., 2020). Primary care and psychiatric visits should include discussion of signs of health 
problem due to medications. This can be augmented by regular measurement of weight 
and blood pressure, being vigilant to significant changes that may suggest corresponding 
intervention. These minimally invasive assessments may be enhanced with finger pricks 
that yield glucose levels or blood tests assessing lipids. Lithium levels may be especially 
advantageous given the frequent health effects of the drug. The health care provider needs 
to then fully explain findings and options that might resolve these concerns, including 
stopping medication, decreasing dose, or moving to alternative drugs.
Health risks may be alleviated by changing medications when warning signs appear; 
for example, when weight gain exceeds 5% during the first few months of starting a medi￾cation (American Diabetes Association, APA, American Association of Clinical Endocri￾nologists, & North American Association for the Study of Obesity, 2004). Other helpful 
steps include avoiding multiple medications. Even with optimal medication management, 
however, all medications have risks of side effects; therefore, attention to lifestyle changes 
(e.g., addressing diet and exercise) is critical.15. Physical Health and Wellness 279
Once again, providers need to make sure consideration of medication decisions do 
not echo erroneous assumptions reviewed in Chapter 9, namely, “not adhering” repre￾sents personal failure related to psychogenic resistance. Medication decisions are best 
understood as a psychological process described by the theory of planned behavior 
(Ajzen, 1991). Behavioral intentions related to specific targets (e.g., medications) result 
from the interaction of attitudes about the targeted behavior, subjective norms about the 
behavior, and perceived control. While subjective norms might favor psychiatric medica￾tions, the final decision depends on the individual’s analyses of combined inputs. There 
is no a priori assumption that medication is or is not the correct decision for individuals 
with psychiatric disability more specifically.
Loss of Decisional Autonomy
In Chapter 3, we reviewed the insidious concepts of compliance and adherence as they 
undermine recovery and self-determination. This often led clinicians wrongly to believe 
that people with serious mental illness are incapable of making correct treatment deci￾sions. Such a perspective undermines partnerships between person and provider, thereby 
worsening benefits individuals might receive from treatment.
Implications for Health Care
SDM, more fully reviewed in Chapter 7, is an essential skill for promoting decisional 
autonomy.
Stigma Held by Health Care Providers
Attitudes such as noncompliance and incompetence lead to an additional negative con￾sequence caused by the health care system (reviewed in Chapter 2); that is, primary care 
providers fail to believe health concerns voiced by people with lived experience (Jones et 
al., 2008; Thornicroft et al., 2007; Rojas Vistorte et al., 2018). As a result, these provid￾ers fail to offer the breadth of services appropriate for individual concerns, including not 
referring clients to specialty services that are better able to address these concerns.
Implications for Health Care
The stereotypes and prejudice endorsed by health providers that decrease health options 
is a form of public stigma. In Chapter 6, we contrast the impact of education versus con￾tact approaches to public stigma change, with research suggesting contact has longer and 
more enduring effects. Mittal and colleagues (2020) tested the impact of contact versus 
education on changing primary care provider attitudes about people with mental illness 
leading to improved quality of care. In the contact condition, a “physician peer” in recov￾ery shared their lived experience with serious mental illness, followed by an interactive 
discussion with the audience. Participants in the comparison group attended a Power￾Point presentation about serious mental illness, stigma, and its effects on health care. 
Although results failed to find significant difference in impact of contact versus educa￾tion, qualitative feedback was encouraging. Still, this study suggests directions the health 
care field might pursue to diminish stigma and improve service.280 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
Siloed Mental Health and Physical Health Services
Studies also show that people with serious mental illnesses do not receive high-quality 
medical care, because medical and mental health services are not integrated (Felker, 
Yazel, & Short, 1996). For example, one study found that only 50% of people served by 
community mental health centers had a regular non-psychiatrist doctor (Crews, Batal, 
Elasy, Casper, & Mehler, 1998). Approximately 50% of psychiatric service recipients 
have known medical problems that need further evaluation or treatment, and another 
35% suffer from previously unidentified medical problems that need further evaluation 
or treatment (Felker et al., 1996). Even among homeless people, those with serious men￾tal illness tend to receive less medical care than others (Folsom et al., 2002). People with 
serious mental illness are also less likely to receive needed specialized medical procedures, 
such as cardiac interventions following heart attacks (Druss et al., 2000).
One reason is that physical health care providers often view mental health versus 
the rest of physical health as unrelated and segregated. This difference, by the way, is not 
observed anywhere else in medicine (e.g., cardiology, neurology, and obstetrics) able to 
integrate services, and primary care providers coordinating the intervention team as a 
whole. This is additionally problematic given that mental health versus the rest of physi￾cal health services is provided by separate clinics and providers, separate silos (Kathol, 
Butler, McAlpine, & Kane, 2010; Rollins et al., 2017). Researchers and innovators have 
generated a variety of approaches for integrating mental and physical health teams and 
clinics (Druss & von Esenwein, 2006; Rodgers et al., 2018; Wells, Valverde, Ustjanaus￾kas, Calhoun, & Risendal, 2018).
Implications for Health Care
We review four ideas for bringing mental and physical health providers together in a 
fairly seamless fashion:
1. Expanded medical care by mental health practitioners. In this model, psychia￾trists and nurses within mental health clinics routinely monitor and manage medication 
with physical health side effects. Their role might be expanded to encompass more pri￾mary medical care and particularly prevention services, such as immunizations, blood 
pressure checks, and interventions for obesity and smoking (Carney, Yates, Goerdt, & 
Doebbeling, 1998; Dobscha & Ganzini, 2001). Pilot programs have attempted to involve 
psychiatrists as primary care physicians in this way (Silberman, Lu, & O’Neill, 1994; 
Wulsin, 1996).
2. Specialized primary care clinics. Specialized primary care clinics for people with 
serious mental illnesses have been set up in several large metropolitan areas. For example, 
outpatient primary care clinics staffed by internal medicine specialists in Denver exclu￾sively served people with serious mental illness (Crews et al., 1998). Case managers initi￾ate referrals and are then followed by internists who send complete medical plans to the 
mental health staff after each visit. Evidence suggests that coordination, transportation, 
and follow-up continue to be problematic in this arrangement, but that medical care was 
somewhat improved (Crews et al., 1998).
3. Medical care teams within mental health clinics. Another approach is to co-locate
the mental health team with general medical care (i.e., to locate them in the same setting). 
Felker, Workman, Stanley-Tilt, Albanese, and Short (1998) describe a multidisciplinary, 15. Physical Health and Wellness 281
primary care team located within a Department of Veterans Affairs psychiatric clinic. In 
this model, the treating psychiatrist became a member of the larger medical care team. 
Results included better communication among medical staff, mental health staff, and 
service recipients; higher service satisfaction; and identification of at least one new medi￾cal problem that warranted further evaluation or treatment in 56% of participants. In 
a separate RCT of co-located/integrated treatment, the group in integrated care was 
more likely to receive primary care and preventive interventions, to report improvements 
in physical health, and to avoid medical emergencies (Druss, Rohrbaugh, Levinson, & 
Rosenheck, 2001).
4. Patient-centered medical homes (PCMHs). PCMHs are perhaps the best devel￾oped approach to bridging silos built around the fundamental principles in Table 15.2,
summarized by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ; 2022). Spe￾cifically, PCMHs provide a one-stop, person-centered clinic offering services across the 
range of mental and physical health needs (Corrigan & Ballentine, 2021). Services are 
accessible when needed, based on the same standard of quality and safety that permeates 
the status quo of modern health care. Research has shown that PCMHs lead to improve￾ments in treatment experience, decreases in hospital stays and emergency department 
use, and enhanced preventive care (Corrigan & Ballentine, 2021). PCMHs also have 
systemic effects leading to diminished provider burnout and cost savings.
SOCIAL FACTORS THAT INTERFERE 
WITH SERVICE ENGAGEMENT
In Figure 15.2, we distinguished health concerns that arise directly from the illness with 
social determinants of health. We believe the impact of social determinants on physical 
health may be as great as or greater than those that occur from the disease and treatment 
system per se. Specifically, we argue that engagement, or lack thereof, in the health care 
service system related to social determinants is a significant cause of health concerns; 
this is a variation on the model of disabilities, services, and equity in Figure 4.1 of Chap￾ter 4. Briefly, in this section we recap barriers to service engagement related to diversity 
and social disadvantage, then develop some evidence-based ways to address them. An 
TABLE 15.2. Key Features to Patient-Centered Medical Homes as Based 
on Definitions of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
Patient-centered: A partnership among stakeholders (e.g., people with lived experience, healthcare 
providers, and family members) that centers all treatment decisions around the person’s priorities. 
This includes providing education and support to all stakeholders so they are readily able to join in 
this partnership.
Comprehensive: A coordinated team of health care providers who addresses the breadth and depth of 
individual health concerns.
Accessible: Patients are able to access services when needed which may include state-of-the art 
communications, 24/7 services, and short wait times.
Committed to quality and safety: Monitoring quality improvement is essential to yield safe and 
competent care.
Note. Adapted from Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (2021). Copyright © 2021 Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality. Adapted by permission.282 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
abridged version of barriers is summarized in Figure 15.2 for this purpose. These are 
framed in terms of where health care services are provided, by whom, and with what 
service guidelines.
Where Are the Health Services?
Services and settings in many communities are lacking despite research on evidence-based 
interventions that address the health needs of diverse groups with disabilities. In part, 
lack of available and accessible services represents policy failure; government and other 
responsible entities need to identify health care deserts in order to develop both brick￾and-mortar and service systems that meet local needs. Of equal importance is navigating 
the status quo, the existing fragmented system. Community health workers (CHWs), 
have significant potential for advancing the health needs of diverse groups with psychi￾atric disabilities (Kim et al., 2016; Logan & Castañeda, 2020). CHWs are indigenous 
members of diverse communities trained to provide support, education, and care coordi￾nation to improve health and wellness among people with disabilities in their community. 
Although CHWs vary in terms of paraprofessional and professional backgrounds, their 
work is guided by cultural relevance and in-the-community services (Wells, Valverde, et 
al., 2018).
Peer Health Navigators
Peer health navigators (PHNs) evolved from a narrower class of CHWs called patient 
navigators, who were trained CHWs that specifically escorted and supported patients 
through multiple levels of clinics, services, and entitlements. Successful patient naviga￾tors essentially interfaced between patients and the overwhelming number of other “ser￾vice” providers, including the physician or nurse practitioner leading the treatment team, 
ancillary diagnosticians and treatment specialists, behavioral health care providers, hos￾pice and palliative care workers, community support services, and faith-based minis￾try. Patient navigators evolved into peer navigators in cancer care when navigators were 
recruited from previous cancer patients who were also ethnically diverse. Patients of color 
reported emotional support, “being there,” and “feeling heard” as essential elements of 
successful peer navigators, those with whom they shared ethnicity (Sheehan, Ballentine, 
FIGURE 15.2. Barriers to engaged services for health and wellness goals.
Services and Settings Providers Interventions
Engagement
Health, Prevention, and Wellness
Where Who What15. Physical Health and Wellness 283
et al., 2021). This enhanced perceptions of trust that there are provider “insiders” who 
understand their perspectives and look out for their concerns.
In parallel development, peers with lived experience of disability have been shown 
to have value in services for others with disabilities (see Chapter 17). “Peerness” is the 
essential ingredient in peer support services grounded in recovery, a process steeped in 
hope and self-determination. While this value describes recovery-based approaches to 
care in general, disclosure and shared lived experience are the unique ingredients to peer￾ness (Corrigan, 2021). Disclosure involves three steps. First, people need to identify them￾selves as individuals with disability and recovery. Second, they need to generally share 
experiences that describe this identity with others. Third, as providers, they need to stra￾tegically share experiences that help service recipients realize their goals.
PHNs for psychiatric disability adhere to three concepts:
•	 Peers. They are people with shared experience of disability and are from the same 
ethnic background. They may also share experiences in terms of “other” health 
concerns—managing HIV/AIDS or dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic—and 
shared histories of social disadvantage, such as homelessness or incarceration.
•	 Health. The primary focus is on a person’s physical health and wellness goals.
•	 Navigation. PHNs do this by helping people engage in the existing health care 
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Walking Mr. Lam around the System
Fong Lam had major challenges getting health care needs met while living in Chicago. He 
saw his primary care doctor at a City Clinic at 3500 South State, who then sent him to the 
West Side and the County Hospital for his monthly appointment at the diabetes clinic. He 
was having a hard time managing his blood sugar. Lam had to walk the long halls of the 
massive hospital to find the lab for his blood test. He then had to get to the North Side for his 
podiatry checkup and then to the Loop to see the psychiatrist. The psychiatrist wanted Lam 
to see his counselor at the Chicago Mental Health Clinic in Chinatown later in the day. Unfor￾tunately, he was turned away from the City Clinic because he did not have a prior appoint￾ment. He then had to travel to the local Walgreens to fill his prescriptions. Lam did this using 
CTA elevated trains and buses, which were often running late because it was midsummer 
and vehicles were breaking down. Many of his needs, especially in terms of managing his 
chronic diabetes, went unmet solely because of these overwhelming demands.
Mr. Lam registered with Thresholds, a local recovery service provider, where he was 
matched with a peer health navigator, Kevin Jones. Jones mapped out all the different clinics, 
labs, and pharmacies Lam must travel to and accompanied him to each appointment. At the 
appointment, Jones went into individual meetings when Lam asked and helped Lam manage 
his questions and doctor recommendations, writing these down in a notebook. These instru￾mental services were augmented by interpersonal support, an empathic ear that is “in the 
clinic” and “in the moment” to share all these challenges. Jones also addressed third-party 
payor concerns when they arose. He made apportionments for Lams as needed. Finally, 
Jones recurrently reviewed Lam’s health goals. Jones discovered, for example, that Lam did 
not have his COVID vaccinations. Lam reported he was worried that the vaccination might 
cause long-term harm. Jones and Lam compared the pros and cons of vaccination and Lam 
decided to do it, but only if Jones went with him.284 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
system by coordinating health services and helping access care through, among 
other things, traveling with people to their primary care appointments and helping 
them with follow-up recommendations.
Who Provides the Health Services?
We describe barriers here in terms of a provider–person dyad, specifically from the per￾spective of the person receiving services and the provider of these services. The first is 
enhanced by diversifying the workforce, and the second by promoting cultural compe￾tence and humility of providers.
Diversifying the Workforce
The quality of services for people with psychiatric disabilities from diverse groups is 
enhanced when the provider workforce diversifies, specifically, when providers are “simi￾lar” to service recipients. Hence, policy and other administrative entities need to support 
workforce diversification. The U.S. Government leads this effort in this country. The 
2021–2025 strategic plan of the National Institute of Minority Health and Health Dis￾parity (NIMHD) clearly outlines the U.S. government’s commitment to diversification 
when it explicitly calls for support of training to enhance the diversity of the biomedi￾cal workforce and to promote training and advancement of minority health and health 
disparities researchers. NIMHD outlines four strategies necessary to achieve this goal.
1. Support individual-level programs to train students from health disparity popu￾lations in the biomedical sciences.
2. Enhance current and novel institution-level programs at institutions that have 
a historical commitment to educating underrepresented students and to enhance 
the ability of these programs to recruit, train, and retain a diverse biomedical 
research workforce.
3. Support training and mentorship programs for minority health and health dis￾parities researchers at all stages of career and leadership development.
4. Incorporate development of specialized research skills into health disparities 
training programs, including core and emerging skills that are important for 
measuring, understanding, and addressing minority health and health disparities 
complexities.
Promoting Cultural Competence and Humility
In Chapter 4, we compared a relatively discredited notion of culture—essentialism—that 
groups are defined by biologically rooted categories; competence occurs when a provider 
memorizes these categories; and constructivism, cultural identity emerges for individu￾als as a result of their cultural and historical journey. Constructivism calls for flexible 
skills to promote cultural competence (Garneau & Pepin, 2015). Research has examined 
benefits of cultural competence training in the health workforce and has found a vast 
array of training approaches that include factors such as cultural awareness, defining 
cultural and linguistic competency, utilizing the ask, share, compare, negotiate model, 
communication skills, and health care specific teachings (Henderson et al., 2018; Jongen, 
McCalman, & Bainbridge, 2018; Kruse et al., 2017). Outcome studies showed positive 
improvements in practitioner knowledge skills, attitudes, and beliefs (Jongen et al., 2018) 15. Physical Health and Wellness 285
that extend to better health outcomes among service recipients (Lie et al., 2011). Research 
has especially noted the importance of cultural competence training in services for people 
with disabilities (Taylor-Ritzler, Balcazar, Suarez-Balcazar, & Iriarte, 2008).
Humility has been viewed as a better concept than competence. Humility is the prod￾uct of conceptual evolution from essentialism to social constructivism models that frame 
culture as dynamic processes and changing identities of individuals in that group. This 
leads to programs rooted in humility, namely, teaching providers to approach patients 
with open mind, empathy, and unconditional positive regard.
What Services Are Provided?
Services, intervention, and policy are often dominated by perspectives of the majority cul￾ture. This is apparent, for example, in ways in which health conditions and correspond￾ing evidence-based interventions are described by Western medicine. The emergence 
of alternative and complementary medicines in the evidence-based research enterprise 
suggests American health services have evolved to include other non-Western frames of 
conditions and interventions. Our own research has been especially interested in examin￾ing adaptations of basic ways to engage people in their health decisions, specifically in 
terms of decision making (Corrigan & Lee, 2020; Gao, Corrigan, Qin, & Nieweglowski, 
2019; Lee, Lam, & Ditchman, 2015). Decision making is important at the intersection 
of understanding and acting on health concerns, with SDM dominating person-centered 
approaches to care (Edwards & Elwyn, 2016; Galla, 2000; Légaré et al., 2013; Zolnierek 
& DiMatteo, 2009). The dominance of SDM may suggest an important area for cultural 
adaptation.
As outlined in Chapter 4, concern has been expressed about self-decision-making 
models per se, especially when considering people from diverse groups in which the 
broader social network may be keenly involved in treatment decisions (Corrigan & Lee, 
2020). SDM reflects insights of self-determination theory (SDT), which has been defined 
as essential for psychological growth and well-being (Deci & Ryan, 2008). SDT assumes 
that people value health plans that reflect personally defined priorities and operate in 
a system that promotes self-determination. (Ryan & Deci, 2000) Autonomy, however, 
seems to reflect Western, individualist perspectives that may be less valued in more East￾ern or collectivist societies (Markus, Kitayama, & Heiman, 1996; Oishi & Diener, 2001). 
Miller (1997) suggested that directive feedback from family may yield more satisfaction 
than autonomy in some diverse groups. Western approaches to decision making may be 
lacking.
Hence, people from some cultural groups may wish to involve members of their 
extended family in decision making efforts (Lee, Lam, & Ditchman, 2015). Research 
shows, for example, that family dynamics impact self-care concerns among many Korean 
Americans (Nam, Song, Park, & Song, 2013; Park, Chesla, Rehm, & Chun, 2011). 
Family-centered decision making (FCDM) may be a viable alternative to SDM (Corrigan 
& Lee, 2020). The central question here is whether and how much family members, 
especially parents, should be actively involved in health care decision making. One study 
showed that a group of Korean Americans with cancer significantly preferred active fam￾ily involvement in care seeking compared to European Americans (Blackhall, Murphy, 
Frank, Michel, & Azen, 1995). The discussion here seems to recapitulate an essentialist 
view of FCDM that providers, for example, should incorporate FCDM in their services 
for East Asians with disabilities. Research, however, calls for heterogeneity, a construc￾tivist view. For example, one study on Chinese living in the United States versus in Asia 286 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
showed acculturation to America led to preference for SDM (Gao et al., 2019). Similar 
findings emerged for Korean decisioning about type 2 diabetes (Lee, Qin, Baig, Lee, & 
Corrigan, in press). Note that there are groups from cultures beyond East Asia that may 
prefer FCDM. For example, research among Latinx has described familism and respeto
as values that are likely to influence family roles in health decision making (Corrigan 
& Lee, 2020). Deference shown by adult children to their parents may affect choices 
about health services. For that matter, service providers should not assume that European 
Americans, by virtue of their culture, will prefer SDM. Family centeredness is likely to 
vary among people of Western European heritage.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
People with serious mental illness have significant health problems that are major barriers 
to wellness and recovery. These problems are described in terms of direct indicators of the 
illness per se (e.g., physiological covariates or the harmful effect of cognitive and social dis￾abilities on health management) and social factors that lead to service disparities. Rehabilita￾tion providers need to master interventions relevant to all these causes. Prominent here are 
approaches that promote cultural competence and humility, as well as reflect interventions 
that occur beyond Western medicine and rehabilitation. 287
CHAPTER 16
Co- Occurring Mental Illness 
and Substance Use Disorder
Many people struggle with co- occurring or coexisting mental illness and 
substance use disorders. Until the publication of DSM-5 (APA, 2013), the substance use 
disorders included abuse of other drugs or dependence on alcohol. DSM-5-TR now simply 
defi nes them as mild, moderate, or severe substance use disorders (the abuse– dependence 
distinction has been dropped) (APA, 2022). Although people with co- occurring mental 
and substance use disorders are a heterogeneous group, two important fi ndings describe 
them:
1. Substance use disorders (SUDs) are common among people with serious mental 
illness (SMI). Along with many clinical studies, population surveys such as the 2018 
National Survey on Drug Use and Health (SAMHSA, 2019) suggest that nearly 30% of 
adults with psychiatric disabilities report suffi cient symptoms for an additional diagno￾sis of substance use disorder. Each year, over 3 million Americans, about 1.3% of U.S. 
adults, experience co- occurring SMI and SUDs (SAMHSA, 2019). The actual number 
is likely to be higher, because people with and without psychiatric disabilities tend to 
underreport substance use (Johnson, 2014). Individuals with SUD are also at increased 
risk of developing a psychiatric disability over time, according to data from the National 
Comorbidity Study Replication (Kenneson, Funderburk, & Maisto, 2013).
2. People with co- occurring disorders have a much greater rate of adverse outcomes 
than individuals who have mental illness alone (Alsuhaibani, Smith, Lowrie, Aljhani, 
& Paudyal, 2021). Typical adverse outcomes include higher rates of treatment discon￾tinuation (Krawczyk et al., 2017), hospitalization (Heslin, Elixhauser, & Steiner, 2015), 
victimization (de Waal, Dekker & Goudriaan, 2017), criminal justice involvement (Al￾Rousan, Rubenstein, Sieleni, Deol, & Wallace, 2017), homelessness (Henry, Watt, Rosen￾thal, & Shivji, 2016), suicide risk (Stone, Chen, Daumit, Linden, & McGinty, 2019), and 
serious physical illnesses (Onyeka, Collier Høegh, Nåheim Eien, Nwaru, & Melle, 2019).
This chapter fi rst reviews early approaches to helping people manage their co￾occurring disorders. This period was marked by the failure of two uncoordinated 
CHAPTER 16288 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
systems—mental health and substance use disorder services—to provide effective inter￾ventions. Integrated care evolved as the standard of effective programs for people with 
co-occurring disorders; the principles that define integrated care are reviewed next in 
this chapter. Interventions that are often incorporated into an integrated master plan, 
and their supporting evidence, are then summarized. A research literature examining the 
impact of interventions for people with co-occurring disorders is growing (e.g., Schouten 
et al., 2022; Wuthrich et al., 2021; Johnstone et al., 2023; Wang, Chau, Kong, Sun, & 
So, 2021), and research findings have led to the development of public health guidelines 
(SAMHSA, 2020). These findings and guidelines are reviewed where appropriate in the 
chapter.
EARLY CLINICAL AND RESEARCH APPROACHES
Since the early 1980s, when the high rate and adverse consequences of co-occurring dis￾orders became apparent, numerous clinical interventions have been developed and tested. 
Initial studies documented that poor treatment was the norm. The traditional system of 
treatment in the United States, comprising parallel or sequential interventions in a vari￾ety of mental health treatment settings and separate substance use treatment settings, 
was ineffective. Substance use programs focused on abstinence while ignoring psychiat￾ric symptoms. Mental health programs helped persons with symptoms (e.g., symptoms 
of depression, anxiety, or psychosis), but did not address substance use that might be 
exacerbating these symptoms. Both types of programs failed to put together a meaning￾ful plan to help these persons pursue personal goals related to employment, independent 
living, and health. The programs were not set up for people with co-occurring disorders; 
coordination between programs was absent or inadequate; and those with dual disorders 
rarely received simultaneous treatments for both disorders (Ridgely, Osher, Goldman, 
& Talbott, 1987). Since that time, there has emerged a national consensus regarding the 
goal of integrating mental health and substance use interventions, at least for people with 
co-occurring severe mental illnesses and substance use disorders (DHHS, Office of the 
Surgeon General, 2016).
Clinical innovations for people with co-occurring disorders, public policies related 
to integrated treatments, and treatment effectiveness studies developed rapidly. Early 
studies of integrated treatment in the 1980s demonstrated that adding substance use 
counseling to community mental health treatment for people with dual disorders was 
helpful for those who were motivated and stayed with treatments (Mercer-McFadden, 
Drake, Brown, & Fox, 1997). However, many people with dual disorders were not eas￾ily engaged in treatment and not motivated to pursue abstinence, and these individu￾als fared poorly (Hellerstein, Rosenthal, & Miner, 1995). Outreach and motivational 
interventions were needed to engage people with dual diagnoses in abstinence-oriented 
treatments (Mercer-McFadden et al., 1997). Early studies also showed that people with 
dual disorders did not readily fit into residential substance use programs, and that inpa￾tient dual-diagnosis treatments did not confer benefits after hospital discharge (Drake, 
Mercer-McFadden, Mueser, McHugo, & Bond, 1998). Pharmacological approaches were 
largely unstudied during this era.
During the 1990s, programs for people with co-occurring disorders began to inte￾grate mental health and substance use interventions, and to tailor the interventions to 
each person’s stage of motivation. For example, individuals who were engaged in men￾tal health treatment but did not wish to pursue abstinence were helped by a series of 16. Co-Occurring Mental Illness and Substance Use Disorder 289
motivational approaches (see Mueser, Noordsy, Drake, & Fox Smith, 2003). Several 
open clinical trials demonstrated that integrated interventions were effective in engag￾ing people in treatment, helping them to reduce and eliminate their substance use, and 
helping to stabilize their mental illnesses (Detrick & Stiepock, 1992; Drake, McHugo, 
& Noordsy, 1993; Durell, Lechtenberg, Corse, & Frances, 1993; Meisler, Blankertz, 
Santos, & McKay, 1997). Similarly, modifications of traditional residential treatment 
programs seemed to be more effective (Sacks, 1997). By the mid-1990s, however, the field 
was still limited by a lack of controlled research (Drake et al., 1998).
CONSENSUS PRINCIPLES OF SERVICES 
FOR CO-OCCURRING DISORDERS
Before interventions addressing the discrete elements of problems related to co-occurring 
disorders (also called dual diagnosis) are reviewed, overarching principles reflecting con￾sensus on state-of-the-art programs are summarized (see Table 16.1). Programs like these 
rest on a platform of integrated mental health and substance use services. The principles 
are provided to outline a general framework for services; the next major section of this 
chapter describes specific tools to accomplish the interventions.
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Louisa Ramirez Got Ineffective Treatment
Louisa Ramirez was a young Hispanic woman who developed difficulties with depression 
and suicidal behavior in adolescence. While her diagnosis evolved from major depression to 
bipolar I disorder over the next 10 years, Louisa dropped out of college, was divorced twice, 
made several suicide attempts, was hospitalized nearly 20 times, and was seen by numerous 
psychiatrists and mental health practitioners. Yet her substance use went undetected and 
untreated, despite countless mental health contacts. She had a remarkably parallel experi￾ence in the substance use treatment system: Over 5 years, she entered multiple substance 
use treatment facilities and attended numerous Alcoholics Anonymous meetings without 
anyone recognizing that she needed to manage her bipolar illness. She never received 
coordinated mental health and substance use treatment by the same practitioner(s), and 
remained unstable and miserable as a result.
TABLE 16.1. Principles of Dual-Diagnosis Care
1. Integrated treatment. Combine and individually tailor the mental health and substance use 
interventions.
2. Stagewise treatments. Match treatments to the person’s level of motivation and stage of recovery.
3. Long-term retention. Keep treatment, rehabilitation, and support available and easily accessible for 
as long as needed.
4. Comprehensive services. Address all areas of the individual’s personal recovery.
5. Interventions for people who do not respond to services. Provide different approaches to 
intervention for persons who are not making progress toward recovery.290 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
Integrated Treatment
Interventions must integrate (i.e., combine and individually tailor) mental health and sub￾stance use interventions at the clinical interface (Spivak et al., 2020). Although this defi￾nition of integration differs slightly from administrative, financial, organizational, and 
physical integration, it often includes these other concepts. Clinical integration means 
that the same provider (or provider team) offers comprehensive mental health and sub￾stance use interventions in a coordinated fashion, and helps an individual learn to man￾age intertwined illnesses (Fantuzzi & Mezzina, 2020). The provider, or provider team, 
assumes responsibility for blending interventions into a coherent package. Interventions 
should seem holistic and unitary for the individual with dual disorders, with a consistent 
approach, philosophy, and set of recommendations. Integrated dual diagnosis treatment 
is a standardized and multidisciplinary approach that uses motivational interviewing in 
conjunction with mental health and addiction counseling to provide tailored services 
(Kikkert, Goudriaan, de Waal, Peen, & Dekker, 2018). In a controlled trial with 154 
dually diagnosed individuals, researchers found a reduction in days of alcohol or drug use 
but no changes in symptoms or functioning at 12-month follow-up (Kikkert et al., 2018).
Clinical integration implies that interventions are modified, as well as combined. 
Treatment components help people to manage both types of disorders by recognizing 
their inseparability. For example, social skills training addresses not only developing rela￾tionships but also finding friends who do not misuse substances, and learning to avoid 
and resist social situations associated with substance use. Relapse prevention addresses 
risk situations and coping strategies related to preventing episodes of substance use and/
or mental illness, while vocational rehabilitation focuses on employment that helps peo￾ple to manage both disorders (Spencer et al., 2021). For example, integrated treatment 
within a vocational rehabilitation context might include identifying job opportunities 
that avoid substance exposure (e.g., bartending) and planning for managing work-related 
stressors that might trigger relapse. Similarly, family psychoeducation emphasizes the 
need to understand and cope with two (or more) intertwined disorders (Drake, Xie, & 
McHugo, 2020).
Stagewise Treatments
Effective programs tailor interventions to each person’s stage of treatment or recovery. 
Stagewise treatment is based on the concept of stages of change, discussed in Chapter 4 
(Kortrijk et al., 2013). Although there are different ways of conceptualizing progress 
toward recovery, commonly recognized stages of treatment for a person with co-occurring 
disorders include (1) engaging the person in a collaborative, trusting relationship (engage￾ment stage); (2) helping the engaged person to develop motivation for recovery-oriented 
interventions (persuasion or motivation stage); (3) helping the motivated person to acquire 
skills and supports for managing both illnesses and pursuing personal goals (active treat￾ment stage); and (4) helping the person who is in stable remission to develop and use 
strategies for preventing relapses (relapse prevention stage).
Engagement
Because many people with dual disorders have difficulty accessing and making use of 
treatment (Priester et al., 2016), effective programs emphasize engagement by providing 16. Co-­Occurring Mental Illness and Substance Use Disorder 291
outreach, practical assistance, and culturally competent services, as well as by using a 
motivational counseling style (Spencer et al., 2021). For example, people with dual dis￾orders who are homeless are often engaged in integrated treatment programs through 
outreach to shelters and the streets by workers who have the same language capacity 
and cultural sensitivity, who help with housing and other practical matters, and who 
take the time to develop trusting relationships with these persons. The workers are often 
peers, or people in recovery who may have been homeless themselves. Services for co￾occurring disorders are increasingly provided by peer professionals, who are individuals 
with lived experience of co-occurring disorders (Videka et al., 2019). Peer professionals 
work alongside mental health clinicians to engage people in services, provide mentorship, 
and offer them hope for recovery (see Chapter 17). Approaches like these enable people 
to access services and establish relationships with providers. Without outreach and a 
trusting relationship, the rates of failure to engage and of dropout are high. Studies of 
residential programs also indicate that engagement strategies are critical, with more flex￾ible programs not requiring abstinence at first, but encouraging people who are not yet 
abstinent to enter gradually.
Persuasion or Motivation
Even after people are engaged in services, they may still struggle to manage their own 
illnesses. Effective programs provide motivational counseling interventions that are 
designed to increase readiness for more definitive interventions (see Chapter 7). Moti￾vational interviewing helps people to identify their own goals and then recognize how, 
through a systematic examination of the advantages and disadvantages of current pat￾terns, substance use and mental illness interfere with attaining those goals (Miller & 
Rollnick, 2023). Research demonstrates that people who lack motivation can be reliably 
identified and effectively helped by motivational interventions (Lawrence et al., 2017; 
Moore, Flamez, & Szirony, 2018). There are ways other than motivational interviewing 
to help people increase their motivation to manage their dual disorders. Contingency 
management, described in a subsequent section, is a good adjunct.
Active Treatment
Motivated people are now ready to participate in active treatment; various treatment 
approaches are reviewed later in this chapter. Active approaches, ranging from behavioral 
tailoring and promoting medication adherence to improving recognition of early warning 
signs to prevent relapse, can be effectively used to help people to manage their mental ill￾nesses and substance use disorders (Lo Coco et al., 2019; Magwood et al., 2020; Minkoff 
& Covell, 2022).
Relapse Prevention
Despite achieving stability, remission, and symptom control, people remain vulnerable 
to relapse. Relapse prevention plans are therefore recommended in most programs, espe￾cially those with a residential focus (Davis et al., 2019). Relapse prevention essentially 
consists of identifying triggers that are likely to lead to substance use and planning how 
to handle situations in which those slips occur. Relapse prevention is described in Chap￾ter 7 as a means of promoting illness self-management.292 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
Long-Term Retention
Co-occurring disorders yield significant disabilities requiring interventions for months or 
years, with appropriate supports in the community, rather than rapid interventions such 
as an intensive treatment program (Drake et al., 2020; Pettersen et al., 2019). Learning to 
lead a satisfying and sustainable life, apart from substances, typically requires changing 
many aspects of one’s life—activities, habits, stress management, friends, and housing. 
One 16-year prospective study indicates that this process takes time and often involves 
relapses en route to recovery (Drake et al., 2020). Most research suggests that longer 
treatment intervals are associated with better outcomes. This finding could, of course, 
be explained by self-selection, since people who are more motivated may elect to stay in 
treatment longer; or it could be explained by circularity, because people who relapse are 
dismissed from conventional treatment programs and therefore have shorter treatment 
intervals. No studies have systematically varied the length of participation.
Comprehensive Services
Effective programs for co-occurring disorders offer a variety of services, which (as empha￾sized throughout this chapter) are individualized according to a person’s needs. Services 
may include individual and group counseling, medication management, peer group sup￾ports, family interventions, vocational services, liaison with the criminal justice system, 
money management, trauma interventions, and housing supports (Fantuzzi & Mezzina, 
2020; Spencer et al., 2021; Spivak et al., 2020). These programs address substance use 
disorders and mental illnesses broadly in all services rather than narrowly as a discrete 
treatment intervention. For example, hospitalization during acute episodes of mental ill￾ness provides important opportunities for accurate diagnosis, stabilization, and link￾age with outpatient interventions focusing on co-occurring disorders. Similarly, housing, 
social, and vocational programs can support persons with dual diagnoses in acquiring 
skills and supports needed for recovery. These comprehensive programs are difficult to 
evaluate, because the interventions are not discrete.
Extensive research on homelessness and incarceration indicates that people with co￾occurring disorders are prone to lose housing and require extensive supports to main￾tain a residence (Henry et al., 2016). They may lose their housing because of financial, 
behavioral, and/or social network problems. During the initial stages of recovery, people 
need safe, stable, and secure housing. Mature programs around the United States inevita￾bly have an integrated housing component that offers long-term residence or permanent 
housing (Urbanoski et al., 2018). People with co-occurring disorders need not only treat￾ment but also housing, social supports, and meaningful activities to attain and sustain 
recovery (Polcin, 2016).
The psychological process of recovery involves not only managing one’s illnesses, 
but also pursuing personally meaningful and satisfying life goals (Corrigan et al., 2019). 
A person recovering from co-occurring disorders often participates in employment, new 
friendships, self-help programs, renewed family relationships, exercise, hobbies, and 
other recovery-oriented activities. The personal change process is complex and involves 
developing new attitudes, habits, behaviors, friendships, and coping strategies. As noted, 
recovery thus typically takes months or years rather than days or weeks, as the individual 
modifies many aspects of daily behavior and consolidates them incrementally. A continu￾ous relationship with one counselor, who serves as a guide and support in pursuing a 
variety of goals, can promote a transformation to recovery.16. Co-­Occurring Mental Illness and Substance Use Disorder 293
Interventions for People Who Do Not Respond to Services
Several ancillary interventions may be helpful to individuals who do not respond well to 
basic approaches; these may include money management (Tsai, Ablondi, Payne, Rosen, & 
Rosenheck, 2019), intensive family interventions (Hogue, Schumm, MacLean, & Bobek, 
2022), trauma interventions (López-Goñi, Haro, Fernández-Montalvo, & Arteaga, 2021), 
and contingency management (Desrosiers, Tchiloemba, Boyadjieva, & Jutras-Aswad, 
2019). Some of these may be instituted at the beginning of treatment. For example, early 
inclusion of family psychoeducation that addresses mental illness and substance use, for 
those individuals who live with their families, seems warranted. Long-term residential 
treatment is expensive but may be an effective approach for people who have cognitive 
problems or impulsive behavior and who have failed to respond to outpatient treatment.
RECENT CLINICAL APPROACHES
More than 40 controlled studies of psychosocial interventions have been completed in 
the past 10 years, and new studies are published almost every month. Furthermore, 
pharmacological treatment approaches with considerable promise have begun to appear. 
The recent clinical research emphasizes the five principles of care outlined in Table 16.1 
(Drake, Mueser, Brunette, & McHugo, 2004), as well as specific psychosocial interven￾tions (Kirk et al., 2018), residential interventions (Woodhall-Melnik & Dunn, 2016), and 
psychopharmacological interventions (Arms, Johl, & DeMartini, 2022; Xavier, Behera, 
& Selvarajan, 2020). Specific approaches to intervention are summarized in Table 16.2 
and briefly defined here. Many of these are variations of interventions described more 
fully earlier in this book. Readers are referred to the chapters where they can learn more 
about the particular interventions; ways in which they are adapted for co-occurring sub￾stance use disorder are described here.
Motivational Interviewing
Many people who misuse alcohol and other drugs do not believe that the benefits of giv￾ing up the substance misuse outweigh the costs. Motivational interviewing is reviewed in 
Chapter 7 as a way to promote SDM; however, it was originally developed to help people 
make decisions about substance use (Barnett, Sussman, Smith, Rohrbach, & Spruijt￾Metz, 2012). Motivational interviewing helps people identify advantages and disadvan￾tages of using drugs and alcohol (Miller & Rollnick, 2023). For example, someone might 
list advantages of alcohol use as “managing stress better” and “becoming the life of the 
party.” Costs might include “dealing with my angry wife” and “angering a boss who 
TABLE 16.2. Interventions for People with Co-Occurring Disorders
• Motivational interviewing • Care coordination
• Cognitive and cognitive-behavioral 
therapies
• Pharmacological 
interventions
• Contingency management • Legal interventions
• Twelve-Step programs • Harm reduction
• Family interventions294 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
thinks that partying at night gets in the way of my job performance.” Note that the costs 
and benefits for using alcohol are likely to be different for use of another substance (e.g., 
cocaine) by the same person. Providers use listening skills to help people understand the 
costs and benefits of a decision. As indicated in Chapter 7, this is not a simple task—just 
adding up costs and benefits, and moving forward when there are more benefits. Dialogue 
is central to motivational interviewing, which is an interactive process enabling people to 
hear for themselves what underlies specific decisions. In addition, the costs and benefits 
of giving up substances are not the same as the costs and benefits of actively participating 
in a treatment program. For instance, a person might say, “Just because I want to stop 
using cocaine does not mean I want to spend 2 hours every day traveling across town on 
public transportation to get to the treatment program.”
Cognitive and Cognitive-Behavioral Therapies
Motivational interviewing is often followed by cognitive or cognitive-behavioral counsel￾ing, which entails helping people to recognize their motives and risk factors for substance 
use; to develop alternative strategies for dealing with motives and risk factors; and to 
practice, and then use, these new strategies (Vujanovic et al., 2017). As discussed in 
Chapter 13, cognitive therapy is a series of interactive strategies in which people learn 
to identify and challenge beliefs that cause problems for them. For example, Judy might 
believe that she can only deal with job stress by drinking seven glasses of wine at night. 
Cognitive therapy would help her challenge this belief and develop a counter to it, so that 
she is less likely to feel an urge for overdrinking in the future.
Several studies have examined the impact of cognitive and cognitive-behavioral ther￾apies. Research reviews suggested the effectiveness of CBT for symptom improvement 
and substance use reduction (Vujanovic et al., 2017), particularly for CBT combined with 
motivational interviewing and for adults with depression (Riper et al., 2014).
Contingency Management
Contingency management involves the systematic provision of incentives and disincen￾tives for substance use in order to decrease future misuse (Forster, DePhilippis, & For￾man, 2019). Contingency management can include extra privileges (e.g., home visits), 
prizes, money, token systems, or activity vouchers (Desrosiers et al., 2019). Contingent 
incentives have been shown to be effective in abstinence for a variety of substances 
(Petry, Alessi, Olmstead, Rash, & Zajac, 2017) and for individuals with co-occurring 
serious mental illness (McPherson et al., 2018). For example, in an RCT in adults with 
co-occurring alcohol use disorder and serious mental illness, McDonell and colleagues 
(2017) showed that prizes for negative urine samples can be effective in increasing absti￾nence and reducing drinking behavior.
Twelve-Step Programs
Programs with 12 steps are commonly used to help people address goals undermined by 
substance use. These programs are peer-led, with participants benefiting from peer sup￾port in the light of 12 principles. These include admitting that one cannot control one’s 
addiction to alcohol or other drugs; recognizing the need for the help of a higher power 
to become abstinent; examining past errors and making amends for these errors; learning 16. Co-­Occurring Mental Illness and Substance Use Disorder 295
to live a new life separate from addiction; and helping others who suffer from similar 
substance use problems. A new member is encouraged to obtain a sponsor, a more expe￾rienced person in recovery, who guides the new member through the program. The 12 
steps were originally embodied in Alcoholics Anonymous, but versions of them are now 
included in Narcotics Anonymous and Cocaine Anonymous. Programs with 12 steps for 
people with co-occurring disorders include Dual Diagnosis Anonymous (Milani et al., 
2020) and Double Trouble in Recovery (Eddie et al., 2019).
A significant research literature documents the effects of 12-step programs on people 
with co-occurring disorders (Eddie et al., 2019; Milani et al., 2020; Tonigan, Pearson, 
Magill, & Hagler, 2018). Many of these studies seem to have been one-group longitudi￾nal designs showing positive benefits for people who participated in 12-step programs. 
Although research is somewhat lacking on 12-step services for people with dual dis￾orders, the research literature suggests that such programs have significant effects for 
people with illicit drug use (Bøg, Filges, Brännström, Jørgensen, & Fredrikksson, 2017) 
and alcohol use disorder (Kelly, Humphreys, & Ferri, 2020).
Family Interventions
Interventions for families, delivered by professionals or peers, are widely advocated and 
effective; however, they are rarely used in either the adult mental health field or the sub￾stance use disorder field (Hogue et al., 2022). Family interventions are more extensively 
implemented and researched in regards to adolescent substance use (Hogue et al., 2017). 
As indicated in Chapter 12, effective family interventions address education, support, 
and skills; that is, they help family members to understand the illnesses and treatments 
that their relatives are experiencing; they acknowledge the pain of the family members 
themselves and provide opportunities for them to support one another; and they enable 
family members to improve their skills for helping their relatives. For example, family 
members can learn and practice how to respond when their relatives are intoxicated, sui￾cidal, or psychotic, all of which are difficult situations that require some knowledge and 
training. Families can also learn skills for solving new problems as they arise, as well as 
ways to access effective human service resources in their local areas. Effective interven￾tions involve a substantial amount of time for meetings, usually over the course of several 
months.
Care Coordination
Care coordination is essential to increasing the intensity and integration of community￾based services; assertive community treatment (ACT) is one well-studied example in the 
literature (see Chapter 8). Briefly, ACT for people with co-occurring disorders would 
include a multidisciplinary team with a relatively small caseload providing comprehensive 
and time-unlimited services covering the gamut of challenges including those reflecting 
psychiatric disabilities and substance use problems. The majority of ACT recipients expe￾rience co-occurring substance use issues (Abufarsakh, Kappi, Pemberton, Williams, & 
Okoli, 2023). Review findings suggest that more intensive and integrated services reflected 
in ACT had superior outcomes in some, but not all, areas (Penzenstadler, Soares, Anci, 
Molodynski, & Khazaal, 2019). In a systematic review of 29 studies, authors found less 
use of substances, increase in readiness for change, and reductions in hospitalizations and 
days intoxicated (Abufarsakh et al., 2023).296 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
Pharmacological Interventions
Chapter 9 examines psychopharmacological issues and rehabilitation. Pharmacological 
treatment of the comorbid mental health diagnosis may assist the person in recovery from 
substance use disorder (Iqbal, Levin, & Levin, 2019). Several studies have examined the 
effects of antipsychotic medications on co-occurring disorders, suggesting that atypical 
antipsychotic medications may have beneficial effects on the psychotic symptoms of peo￾ple with dual disorders, decrease cravings, and reduce substance use (Krause et al., 2019). 
Valproic acid is an anticonvulsant often prescribed for people with seizure disorders; it 
also has mood-stabilizing capacities. Several studies show that valproic acid aids with 
alcohol and cocaine use disorders (Romão et al., 2022). Hallucinogens (e.g., ketamine, 
psilocybin) have been increasingly evaluated as a treatment for a variety of substance use 
disorders; although promising, studies have lacked quality and rigor, and it is unclear 
how they impact psychiatric conditions (Begola & Schillerstrom, 2019).
For alcohol use disorder, there are three FDA-approved medications: disulfiram, 
naltrexone, and acamprosate. Disulfiram (more commonly known by its primary trade 
name, Antabuse) is sometimes prescribed to people who misuse alcohol as a way to dis￾suade them from using it in the future. Disulfiram intensifies the “hangover effects” of 
alcohol consumption; as a result, people may want to avoid disulfiram in order to avoid 
these symptoms. Disulfiram is only prescribed when a person is fully informed about its 
effects and consents to take it. The drug has been safely used in open clinical trials to 
decrease alcohol use in people with dual disorders (Akbar, Egli, Cho, Song, & Noronha, 
2018). Naltrexone impedes the intoxicating effects of alcohol, whereas acamprosate treats 
symptoms of withdrawal (Akbar et al., 2018).
Medication-assisted treatments are an evidence-based, first-line approach for treat￾ing opioid use disorder: Here we review methadone, naltrexone, and buprenorphine. 
Methadone is a less risky version of opium, which can be obtained legally, and which 
reduces cravings related to heroin and other opioid addictions (Ghanem, Dromgoole, 
Hussein, & Jermyn, 2022). Methadone also suppressed symptoms of opioid withdrawal 
and does not produce the intoxicating experience of other opioids. Naltrexone reduces 
intoxication, cravings, and withdrawal. Buprenorphine, safest of the three, reduces crav￾ings (Ghanem et al., 2022). Finally, naloxone, when injected or administered via nasal 
spray, can rapidly reverse an otherwise fatal opioid overdose.
People with SMI have higher smoking rates and greater burden of disease than those 
without a mental illness (Pearsall, Smith, & Geddes, 2019). Several pharmacological 
treatments have shown efficacy in assisting people with SMI stop or reduce smoking. A 
systematic review and meta-analysis of 28 controlled studies in people with SMI found 
that varenicline, bupropion, and nicotine replacement therapy (e.g., patches, gum) all 
have strong evidence in this population (Pearsall et al., 2019). Medication-assisted treat￾ment is often combined with behavioral interventions such as motivational interviewing, 
CBT, lifestyle interventions, or digital apps (Spanakis et al., 2022).
Legal Interventions
Interventions involving the criminal justice system are commonly used with people with 
co-occurring disorders; many are involved with the courts and under some sort of legal 
control or supervision. These interventions are more completely discussed in Chapter 14. 
Legal directives may include incarceration, conditions of probation and parole, involun￾tary hospitalization, outpatient commitment (i.e., assisted outpatient treatment), coercive 16. Co-­Occurring Mental Illness and Substance Use Disorder 297
medications, and guardianships for finances. More subtle but coercive techniques are 
also used to shunt people into hospitals, group homes, and other supervised situations. 
With limited evidence for its effectiveness, some U.S. states allow family members or 
health care providers to obtain court-ordered treatment for individuals who are at high 
risk of harming self or others through their substance use (Jain, Christopher, & Apple￾baum, 2018). Given the frequency with which mandatory interventions are used for this 
population, remarkably few studies have addressed them. A small study examining the 
implementation of an open-door policy for inpatient treatment of dual diagnosis found 
that it created a less coercive environment and did not increase substance use or violence 
on the ward. Forensic assertive community treatment (FACT; discussed in Chapter 14) 
is a community-delivered care coordination intervention for justice-involved individuals 
with psychiatric disabilities or dual diagnosis (Lamberti et al., 2017). FACT recipients 
typically are receiving court-ordered community supervision and are recently released 
from incarceration or anticipating release; services focus on holistic health needs and 
reducing recidivism.
Harm Reduction
In some ways, most of the interventions reviewed in this section involve personal goals 
that are facilitated by eliminating substance use. Recent views offered by advocates and 
public health specialists suggest that abstinence is not the preferred or viable option for 
some individuals who use substances (Bahji, Yanagawa, & Lamba, 2020). The life cir￾cumstances of some persons make it unlikely that they will engage in treatments that 
challenge these preferences. Accordingly, for these individuals, the goal changes to reduc￾ing the harm that results from use of certain substances by strategizing ways to reduce 
substance use in ways that reduce the associated risks. Harm reduction has been shown 
to reduce accidental injury, overdose, hospitalizations, progression of substance-related 
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Bill Harrison Learned to Manage a Dual Diagnosis
Bill Harrison began to have mood swings as an adolescent. Although a bright and ambi￾tious young man, Bill drank heavily both when he was in a high-energy state and when he 
was feeling depressed. The combination of unstable moods and alcohol use resulted in his 
flunking out of college and having trouble maintaining a job. He rejected counseling in both 
high school and college. At age 24, he attempted suicide, was hospitalized, and was referred 
to the local community mental health center. The treatment team recognized immediately 
that Bill had problems resulting from co-occurring disorders. After 6 months of outreach, 
building an alliance, and providing education, they engaged Bill in a process of selecting 
interventions of his preference. An effective treatment plan was soon in place. The team 
psychiatrist prescribed lithium for his bipolar disorder and disulfiram for his alcoholism; Bill 
attended a dual-diagnosis group and then Alcoholics Anonymous meetings regularly with a 
team counselor who was also in recovery; and the team employment specialist helped him 
to attend community college part-time and work part-time. Bill was confident that he was 
learning to manage his illnesses, and that he was making progress toward his goals of finish￾ing college and working in a bank.298 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
physical illness, and to alleviate symptoms of depression and anxiety (Charlet & Heinz, 
2017).
Several programs have emerged to promote harm reduction. Needle exchange pro￾grams provide opportunities for people who use drugs intravenously to replace used 
needles with sterile ones with no charge or recrimination (Bahji et al., 2020). Supervised 
injection sites provide safer spaces for people to use illicit drugs (Levengood et al., 2021). 
Methadone replacement therapy (discussed earlier as a pharmacological intervention) 
provides people who use heroin or other opioids with a legal alternative (Moore et al., 
2019), and access to nalaxone prevents opioid overdose (Macias-Konstantopoulos et al., 
2021). Safe sex programs may also be helpful for some people with psychiatric disabili￾ties. Ready provision of free condoms has decreased the spread of HIV/AIDS, especially 
among people with low incomes (Macias-Konstantopoulos et al., 2021; Murdock, Brizzi, 
Perez, & Badowski, 2019).
Rehabilitation providers involved in harm reduction programs need to be fully aware 
of the different statutes that may be relevant to these kinds of programs (Elliott, 2012). 
Providers are not at liberty to violate laws in promoting harm reduction; they cannot, for 
example, purchase heroin for program participants in order to keep them from being vic￾timized by crime. The legality of needle exchange programs and safe injection sites varies 
by jurisdiction (federal, state, and municipal regulations may differ) and time period. 
Providers of harm reduction need to remain up-to-date on the various statutes that may 
apply to their services.
There is evidence that harm reduction is being incorporated into services for people 
with co-occurring disorders. For example, harm reduction is being increasingly integrated 
in the housing first model, a residential program for people with co-occurring disorders 
(Kerman et al., 2021). However, the quality of the research thus far is limited, and many 
of the studies found in a comprehensive review suggested that harm reduction interven￾tions were being combined with motivational interviewing. Moreover, research has yet to 
address how harm reduction should be adapted for people with co-occurring disorders.
CURRENT RESEARCH QUESTIONS
Current research questions encompass both clinical interventions and service system 
issues. Individual, group, family, self-help, and pharmacological interventions will 
undoubtedly become more effective as they are standardized, tested, and improved. Refin￾ing and testing specific interventions with the full range of participants rather than with 
highly compliant or otherwise nonrepresentative individuals is clearly a priority. In addi￾tion, we need to study how to sequence and combine interventions in relation to stages 
of treatment and recovery. For example, one set of interventions, such as individual and 
family psychoeducation combined with outreach and motivational counseling, might be 
optimal for people who are not yet engaged in treatment and not yet motivated to pursue 
abstinence; an entirely different set of interventions, such as group behavioral substance 
use counseling and medications, might prove best for those who are engaged in treatment 
and actively trying to achieve long-term abstinence.
The studies conducted to date have typically examined persons with dual diagnoses 
as a group, although they are clearly heterogeneous. Another priority might be to develop 
and test typologies for the sake of developing more specific clinical recommendations and 
research. Both short- and long-term studies indicate a diversity of responses to standard 
dual-diagnosis treatment (Hides, Quinn, Stoyanov, Kavanagh, & Baker, 2019; Iqbal et al., 16. Co-­Occurring Mental Illness and Substance Use Disorder 299
2019; Murthy, Mahadevan, & Chand, 2019). Xie, Drake, and McHugo (2006) identified 
four distinct courses in a prospective 10-year study: The first group responded quickly to 
treatment and developed relatively stable abstinence; the second group responded quickly 
but continued to have a fluctuating course over many years; the third group (the largest) 
improved slowly and steadily over time; and the fourth group appeared to be completely 
unresponsive to standard treatments over the 10 years of the study. Characterizing these 
groups carefully might result in more effective matching of individuals to services, and 
might facilitate the development of new interventions for subgroups.
Developing treatment pathways is also critical. Applying the concept of pathways to 
the treatment of co-occurring disorders suggests that simple and inexpensive interven￾tions should be tried first, and that interventions of increasing intensity should be added 
if people demonstrate no response to the simpler interventions. Some data are already 
available for a number of secondary interventions, such as disulfiram, clozapine, inten￾sive family treatments, trauma interventions, and long-term residential interventions, but 
there have been no comprehensive attempts to develop algorithms.
Beyond developing and testing interventions for participants in routine treatment 
systems, transforming systems of care is a challenge for administrators and services 
researchers. Thus, for example, the field needs studies of financing and contracting mech￾anisms, of dissemination and implementation, of training procedures for all clinicians, of 
computerized decision support systems, and of SDM. Service system interventions, rather 
than small programs utilizing highly trained, specialized clinicians, will be required to 
have any significant impact on a problem that affects at least half of persons with serious 
mental illness.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has addressed rehabilitation services for people with co-occurring severe 
mental illness such as schizophrenia or bipolar disorders and substance use disorders. 
Recent controlled research studies indicate that individual and group counseling, contin￾gency management, care coordination, and residential interventions are effective; promising 
approaches to family intervention and psychopharmacology are currently being tested. Prin￾ciples of care include integration of mental health and substance use disorder interventions, 
stagewise interventions that correspond to an individual’s level of motivation, long-term care, 
comprehensive care, and treatment pathways based on treatment response. Future research 
is expected to refine existing interventions, clarify a typology of individuals with dual diagno￾ses, and improve attempts to match people to individualized treatments.300
CHAPTER 17
Peer Supports and Services
Peer supports and services are provided by individuals who have experi￾enced mental illness and are in the process of recovery or who have achieved recovery. 
The premise is that individuals who have shared common experiences can provide better 
support and safer environments than can individuals who have no history of psychiatric 
treatment. Peer supports and services are recovery- oriented by their very nature, because 
they engender empowerment and are based on the principle of self- determination (Strat￾ford et al., 2019). Peer services and supports typically occur within one of three systems 
or models: (1) organically emerging peer support such as mutual support or self-help 
groups, (2) peer-led service organizations, and (3) peer services provided within exist￾ing clinical and rehabilitation settings. This chapter provides a historical overview of 
peer services, then focuses primarily on reviewing the research on peer services provided 
through the third model: clinical and rehabilitation settings.
HISTORICAL CONTEXT
Persons with mental illness and their families have assembled for support and advocacy 
for over 170 years. In 1845, the Alleged Lunatics’ Friend Society was established in Eng￾land (Van Tosh, Ralph, & Campbell, 2000). In the United States after the Civil War, 
Elizabeth Packard wrote of her forced commitment by her husband and founded the 
Anti- Insane Asylum Society in Illinois. Elizabeth Stone, who was institutionalized by 
her family for her decision to switch from her family’s religion, undertook comparable 
activities in Massachusetts (Van Tosh et al., 2000). Cliff ord Beers described the abuses he 
experienced when hospitalized for psychiatric problems in his 1908 book A Mind That 
Found Itself: An Autobiography; he was also instrumental in founding the National 
Committee for Mental Hygiene, which later became Mental Health America (Grob, 
1994). This association has been instrumental in the promotion of peer participation in 
mental health advocacy, planning, and service delivery, and remains so today.
In the 1940s, two members of the staff of Rockland State Hospital brought together a 
group of patients who were about to be discharged, hoping that these persons’ friendships 
might endure after their release from the hospital (Anderson, 1998). The people formed 
a group with fi nancial support from one of these staff members, and continued meeting 
CHAPTER 1717. Peer Supports and Services 301
weekly for several years to provide support to each other. This self-help group, originally 
called the We Are Not Alone Society, later formed what became Fountain House (Beard, 
1978). Other self-help groups, such as Recovery, Inc. (now Recovery International) and 
GROW, have also been in existence since the mid-20th century (Lefley, 2003).
The development of the modern American mental health consumer movement/sur￾vivor civil rights movement occurred in the early 1970s, independently of these roots 
(Chamberlin, 1990; Frese & Davis, 1997). The mental health consumer movement coin￾cided with the self-help revolution (Gartner & Riessman, 1984); it was fueled by the 
civil rights movement generally, and by the deinstitutionalization movement specifically. 
The President’s Commission on Mental Health (1978) noted the formation of numerous 
self-help groups of persons with mental and emotional problems throughout the United 
States. Like other marginalized groups in the 1970s, people with SMI began to realize 
that they were being denied basic rights, were discriminated against, and were devalued 
by society. Consequently, these former patients began to organize to correct some of these 
wrongs by regaining their rights and demonstrating that they were not powerless victims. 
These initial groups had names like the Insane Liberation Front in Oregon, the Mental 
Patients’ Liberation Project in New York, and the Mental Patients’ Liberation Front in 
Boston. In 1972, the voices of consumers began to be heard with the publication of 
Madness Network News, which ceased publication in 1986. The annual Conference on 
Human Rights and Against Psychiatric Oppression started in 1973. The publication of 
On Our Own: Patient-Controlled Alternatives to the Mental Health System (Chamber￾lin, 1978) was an important milestone for the movement, as consumers and others were 
able to read about the self-help movement and the development of peer-operated services 
in the mainstream press (Van Tosh, Ralph, & Campbell, 2000).
Some of these early activists had an antipsychiatry bias, because they were angry at 
a system that they felt had abused and dehumanized them (Lefley, 2003). Hence, some 
called themselves psychiatric survivors and formed the National Association of Psychi￾atric Survivors (Lefley, 2003). These activists maintained that they did not survive the 
illness; they survived the treatment. More radical survivors formed the Support Coalition 
International, currently called MindFreedom International. Others joined the National 
Depressive and Manic Depressive Association (now the Depression and Bipolar Support 
Alliance). Other individuals seem to have more moderate views regarding forced treat￾ment and the use of psychiatric medications; they may believe that they would not cur￾rently be alive without their medications (Lefley, 2003). The National Mental Health 
Consumers’ Association formerly represented those with more moderate views and took 
no formal position on forced treatment. This organization is no longer functioning, but 
some of its members have joined the NAMI Consumer Council (Lefley, 2003).
The Community Support Program (CSP), initially at NIMH, and later within SAM￾HSA, was a significant catalyst in the development and expansion of the consumer move￾ment and of peer services and supports (Lefley, 2003). Although peer support programs 
were conceived and developed by people with serious mental illness, CSP had the federal 
financing and resources to publicize and promote them. CSP implemented a number of 
initiatives, including funding peer-run programs, contracting for and offering consulta￾tion, and offering informational materials to stimulate the growth of self-help programs 
(Brown & Parrish, 1995). In 1985, CSP provided funds for the first national Alternatives 
conference. Alternatives, offered annually, is organized and planned by consumers and 
serves to build skills and share knowledge (Lefley, 2003; Van Tosh et al., 2000).
In 1988, CSP undertook a unique grant program to demonstrate and evaluate men￾tal health self-help programs (Brown & Parrish, 1995). Thirteen projects were funded, 302 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
including employment programs, housing initiatives, and linkage services between hos￾pitals and communities to assist in transitions. The National Association of State Men￾tal Health Program Directors (NASMHPD) approved a position statement in 1989 that 
recognized the significant contributions of peers to improving service delivery. Conse￾quently, by the 1990s, 30 states had an Office of Consumer Affairs staffed by peers (Van 
Tosh & DelVecchio, 1998). A national survey conducted by the Berkeley Self-Help Center 
in conjunction with NASMHPD found that almost all states funded self-help groups 
(Segal, Silverman, & Temkin, 1995). The Center for Mental Health Services funded a 
multisite research study, titled the Consumer Operated Services Program, to investigate 
the effects of consumer-operated services as an adjunct to traditional mental health care 
when compared to traditional services without consumer-operated services; many sites 
participating in this study employed a randomized design (Clay et al., 2005). In 2010, 
the ACA expanded Medicaid service, including mechanisms for peer service billing to 
Medicaid (Daniels et al., 2013). As of 2019, 39 states allowed Medicaid reimbursement 
for peer mental health or substance use services (Videka et al., 2019).
Peer services and supports now permeate much of the formal mental health system—
not as substitutes for, but as adjuncts to—clinical mental health services. Peer workers 
are practicing in all 50 U.S. states, in a wide variety of settings (Videka et al., 2019). In 
a national survey, 37% of facilities serving individuals with SMI have peer support avail￾able, while 56% of substance use facilities include peer services (Videka et al., 2019). 
Accordingly, there have been initiatives to train and certify peers to be providers. In 
the United States, 49 states now have a peer support credential (Voss et al., 2022). State 
credentials typically require a minimum high school diploma, personal experience with 
mental health challenge, and completion of a training program. Required training totals 
an average of 50 hours, and there is often a supervised experiential component (Videka et 
al., 2019). In light of mental health needs that unfolded during the COVID-19 pandemic, 
President Biden’s national strategy for mental health care contained plans for a nation￾wide peer certification (Canady, 2022).
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
The Benefits of Peer Support
Frank Carrazza was doing well, despite struggling with psychiatric disabilities related to 
schizophrenia for 20 years. As a result of working with his supported employment team, 
Frank had a part-time job as a clerk in a nearby shipping company. His symptoms were 
currently managed well, in part because of the strong relationship he had built with Dr. 
Peterson. Frank had been living in his own apartment for the past 4 years. Despite all these 
accomplishments, Frank felt something was missing. He had a nice support network among 
members of a local church. But sometimes he still felt inexplicably distant from them.
Frank heard about a local organization called Together We Can (TWC), a group of 
people with psychiatric disabilities. TWC had twice-weekly mutual support meetings where 
people might drop in to address current challenges in their lives or provide assistance to 
peers. Frank liked being able to help others with challenges similar to his. But TWC was not 
all problem-focused; it also offered regular social opportunities. Frank particularly liked to 
attend the group on Friday evenings, when TWC alternated movie nights with music mixers. 
TWC became a place with which he identified. “These are my people,” he would say.17. Peer Supports and Services 303
The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) has identified peer support as central 
to its psychiatric services (Office of Mental Health, 2008). The VA employs more than 
1,000 paid peer support staff and additional peer support volunteers throughout the 
United States (U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, n.d.). Termed “peer specialists” in 
the VA, these employees must be veterans, have at least 1 year in recovery, and complete 
an approved program of study (Klee, Chinman, & Kearney, 2019).
DEFINING PEER SUPPORTS AND SERVICES
Who is a peer? In the context of mental illness, peers are people with lived experience. 
They are usually people with a history of significant mental illness that caused psychiatric 
disability. There are no litmus tests for being a peer: hospitalization, medication, length 
of illness, SSDI status, or work disruption. Usually, people who identify themselves as 
individuals with lived experience with serious mental illness are considered peers. They 
assume all roles in peer-operated services such as mutual support groups. Peers who are 
hired into service positions are usually also in recovery. Recovery means that people are 
able to achieve important life goals, including those related to employment, despite their 
disabilities.
Varying definitions of peer support have emerged (Solomon, 2004; Stratford et al., 
2019). Fortuna, Solomon, and Rivera (2022) recently provided an updated definition of 
peer support as mutually agreed-upon emotional and/or social support that is provided 
by individuals with lived expertise to other persons who share similar mental health and 
social challenges. Peer supporters effect personal change in those they support through 
self-determination. Stratford and colleagues (2019) also highlight the civil rights under￾pinnings and social justice framework of peer support, in that peer support challenges 
traditional hierarchies of care and structural stigma, emphasizing the rights of individu￾als with mental illness to effect change in mental health service systems. Peer support is 
often mutually beneficial through a reciprocal process of giving and receiving, based on 
principles of respect and shared responsibility (Mead, Hilton, & Curtis, 2001). Through 
this system of sharing, supporting, and assisting others, feelings of rejection, discrimina￾tion, frustration, and loneliness are combated (Stratford et al., 2019). Peer support in the 
traditional sense of self-help groups is voluntary. However, peers who deliver support 
services are typically financially compensated.
Copeland and Mead (2004) have distinguished peer support from clinical support. 
Peers understand each other because they’ve “been there,” shared similar experiences, 
and model a willingness to learn and grow. Peers assemble in order to change unhelpful 
patterns, get out of “stuck” places, and build relationships that are respectful, mutually 
responsible, and, potentially, mutually transforming. Furthermore, peer support requires 
disclosure of these shared experiences (Stratford et al., 2019). Peer support may be under￾stood in terms of several theoretical explanations, which are summarized in Table 17.1.
THEORETICAL BASES FOR PEER SERVICES
Several psychosocial processes are considered the theoretical bases for peer services: 
social and emotional support, experiential knowledge, social learning theory, social com￾parison theory, and the helper therapy principle (Fortuna et al., 2022; Magura et al., 
2003; Scannell, 2022; Solomon, 2004).304 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
Emotional support involves communicating acceptance and approval of peers 
(Magura et al., 2003; Davidson, Chinman, Sells, & Rowe, 2006) and letting others know 
that they are cared about, valued, and loved. Two of Yalom’s (1985) therapeutic fac￾tors in group psychotherapy are included in the emotional support provided by self-help 
groups: universality, or learning that others have similar problems and/or circumstances; 
and group cohesiveness, or perceiving that group members understand and accept each 
other (Lyons et al., 2021). Social support is having people available who can assist peers 
in meeting resource and psychosocial needs (Addo, Ginder, & Nedegaard, 2022). Social 
support encompasses attachment and reassurance; instrumental support, which includes 
provision of material goods and services, and informational support, which involves 
advice, guidance, and feedback. Thus, social and emotional support includes peer advice, 
acceptance, a sense of belonging, and positive feedback as to persons’ own self-worth 
(Fortuna et al., 2022). Because of the empathic, open, and receptive nature of the peer 
relationship, peers are comfortable with exploring problems and concerns in the presence 
of other peers (Magura et al., 2003). Research has found that supportive relationships 
contribute to positive adjustment, and that they buffer stressors and assist individuals in 
encountering adversities, including those emanating from psychiatric problems (Beckers, 
Maasen, Koekkoek, Tiemens, & Hutschemaekers, 2022).
Experiential knowledge consists of the specialized information and perspectives that 
peers have obtained through living with severe psychiatric disabilities and can provide 
to one another (Fortuna et al., 2022). Peers who participate in self-help groups or receive 
services provided by peers have opportunities to learn skills and behaviors through gen￾eral information sharing and through observing the behaviors of others (Magura et al., 
2003, p.  402). Experiential knowledge is practical and applicable to similar circum￾stances. Peers are able to learn from other peers what has worked for them in similar 
situations and with similar problems. Within a self-help group context, common elements 
TABLE 17.1. Social Process Theories of Peer Services and Supports
Social and emotional support
• Communication and demonstration of acceptance and approval
• Provision of tangible materials, information, advice, feedback, resources, and companionship
Experiential knowledge
• Specialized information and perspectives acquired through experience of coping with mental illness
• Practical and applicable information and strategies for problem solving
Social learning theory
• Role models through active examples and verbal instruction
• Means to cope and enhanced sense of self-efficacy in managing illness
• Reciprocal learning
Social comparison theory
• Sense of normality through interacting with others who share commonalities
• Upward comparison: Optimism, hope, and incentive to achieve
• Downward comparison: A sense that things can be worse
Helper therapy principle
• Help for oneself through helping others
• Sense of increased self-efficacy
• Enhanced self-esteem through social approval from those helped17. Peer Supports and Services 305
regarding both problems and strategies for solutions emerge from information shared by 
those who have experienced similar problems (Lyons et al., 2021). These processes may 
validate peer approaches, as well as provide individuals with increased confidence in their 
ability to cope with disabilities.
Social learning theory within the context of peer services and supports is similar to 
experiential learning. Peers function as competent role models who offer means of learn￾ing through example and instruction (Barton & Henderson, 2016). Those who are receiv￾ing or have received mental health services are credible role models for others with psy￾chiatric disabilities; interactions with peers are likely to effect positive behavioral change. 
They may acquire a sense of self-efficacy in dealing with the sequelae of mental illness 
and with the mental health system. Reciprocal learning is an important component of 
social learning. Peers who have confidence in managing their illness are also more opti￾mistic about their future (Thomas, Muralidharan, Medoff, & Drapalski, 2016).
Social comparison theory enables peers to establish a sense of normality through 
interactions with others who share a common experience of psychiatric disabilities (Bar￾ton & Henderson, 2016). Social comparison involves both upward and downward com￾parisons. In upward comparisons, peers who interact with those whom they perceive to 
be doing better gain a sense of optimism and hope, as well as an incentive to strive toward 
improvement. In downward comparisons, peers perceive other peers as not coping with 
their psychiatric disabilities well, which offers the perspective that circumstances can be 
far worse than their own situations (Barton & Henderson, 2016).
In helping others, one helps oneself; this is the helper therapy principle (Riessman, 
1965). Advising, assisting, and emotionally supporting others reinforce one’s own learn￾ing of valued attitudes, skills, and behaviors (Magura et al., 2003). Helpers enhance their 
self-esteem through the social approval and appreciation they receive from those whom 
they help. In a qualitative study of peer supporters in substance use, supporters reported 
benefiting from their helper role (Scannell, 2022).
TYPES OF PEER SERVICES
Types of peer services, summarized in Table 17.2, are often divided into peer-delivered 
self-help and peer-provided services.
TABLE 17.2. Types of Peer Services
Mutual support or self-help groups
These organizations typically are formal groups where participants benefit from the exchange of 
personal ideas with people who share lived experience. Often the focus is on current problems that are 
challenges to the achievement of personal goals. People also benefit from helping others in this kind of 
exchange.
Peer-provided services
• Peer-operated services are developed and administered by and for people with lived experience.
• Peer partnerships provide programs similar to peer-operated services, but peer providers partner 
with others to help them administer these programs. Nonpeer partners may, for example, be 
experts in finance or personnel.
• Peer employees are individuals with lived experience hired by traditional service programs to 
provide treatment for people with serious mental illness through using their lived experience.306 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
Peer Delivered Self-Help
Mutual support or self-help groups constitute the oldest and the most common type of 
peer services and supports. They have been developed for a wide diversity of problems 
and issues, often because the formal system of care failed to meet people’s total needs 
(Lieberman, 1990). Self-help groups are voluntary opportunities for mutual aid, usually 
formed by peers who come together for assistance in satisfying a common need, overcom￾ing life-disrupting problems, and bringing about personal change (Katz & Bender, 1976). 
Self-help groups are typically free of charge and not organized or led by professionals, 
unless the professionals are participating in the groups as peers (Lyons et al., 2021). These 
groups offer hope, information, and opportunities to help members themselves, as well 
as others. Self-help groups are growing rapidly in low- and middle-income countries and 
may be more easily accessible than other types of mental health support (Fortuna et al., 
2022).
Self-help groups are typically initiated by peers, but in some cases nonpeer providers 
may facilitate the development of a group and help to maintain the group until a leader 
or leaders emerge. Well-known examples of self-help groups for persons with severe men￾tal illness include Recovery International (formerly Recovery, Inc.), GROW, Schizophre￾nia Alliance, Depression and Bipolar Support Alliance, Double Trouble in Recovery (for 
persons with mental illness and substance use problems; see Chapter 16) and Emotions 
Anonymous.
Many mutual support or self-help groups are formalized, with principles and books 
of readings. Schubert and Borkman (1991) developed a typology of self-help groups 
based on internal–external dependence, locus of power, sources of leadership, and role 
of professionals. This typology includes unaffiliated, federated (associated with a larger 
organization), affiliated (subordinate to regional or national groups), managed (under 
professional control), and hybrid (combination of affiliated and managed) groups. For 
our present purposes, groups that are managed or controlled by professionals are not 
considered here. There are, however, other groups that are less structured but still have 
guiding values and a group format.
Online support groups emerged when access to personal computers became wide￾spread (Townsend, Gearing, & Polyanskaya, 2012). These groups began via email or 
shared bulletin boards to exchange ideas. In many instances, groups make use of inter￾net platforms that enable live interface among group members. These groups seem to 
offer a high degree of anonymity, resulting in little likelihood of social repercussions 
(Krentzman, 2021). This anonymity makes some individuals more comfortable sharing 
embarrassing or sensitive information. Online groups are also valuable for people who 
have no groups in their area, no transportation, illness, or a physical disability, or who 
are institution-bound (Krentzman, 2021). In recent years, platforms such as Facebook, 
Twitter, YouTube, and other digital technology (e.g., Zoom) have facilitated connections 
for people who want to give and receive mutual support (Fortuna et al., 2022). These 
technologies have expanded the availability and accessibility of self-help, especially in 
light of the COVID-19 pandemic. Some support groups are generally public and open to 
anyone who would like to join; others are closed, requiring a person to make an applica￾tion to the leaders of the group in order to join.
One-on-one self-help or mutual support typically occurs more informally than 
groups and may result from connections made through attendance at self-help groups. 
For example, the sponsorship process that occurs in conjunction with some 12-step self￾help models can provide additional mutual support. For example, Tonigan and Rice 17. Peer Supports and Services 307
(2010) found that individuals with alcohol use disorder who connected with a spon￾sor early in their 12-step self-help group had less use of alcohol and other substances 
than those that did not begin immediately working with a sponsor. Research suggests 
that individual supports such as sponsorship can also help the sponsor increase their 
self-awareness, social skills, well-being, purpose, and meaning (McGovern, Addison, & 
McGovern, 2021). Overall, while there is limited research on one-to-one mutual (unpaid) 
peer support for SMI, the WHO (2019) has created comprehensive guidebook on provid￾ing individual peer support.
Effectiveness of Mutual Support
Most of the research on mutual support/self-help groups has been descriptive, summariz￾ing characteristics of participants and their experienced benefits. There has been limited 
research on the effectiveness of these groups generally, and even less when it comes to 
self-help groups for persons with severe psychiatric disorders (Lloyd-Evans et al., 2014; 
Pistrang, Barker, & Humphreys, 2008). The most recent review on self-help groups for 
mental health problems yielded 12 studies, of which only four had a randomized design 
(Pistrang et al., 2008). Seven of 12 studies showed changes, including reduced symptoms 
and social adjustment, with no negative effects. None of the randomized designs exam￾ined people with SMI. Markowitz (2015) conducted an 18-month longitudinal study (n
= 533), surveying self-help group attendees in the United States. Participants tended to 
be White, middle-aged females with a variety of mental health problems. They reported 
small reductions in symptoms and increases in quality of life and self-esteem (Markowitz, 
2015).
Central to self-help is choosing to join a program; participation cannot be dictated 
by the requirements of science. In addition, research has found that people continue 
attending support groups over time for help with coping, to be around others, and to 
derive hope (Markowitz, 2015). Research has also shown that longer-term participants in 
these groups, or those with more frequent attendance, have better outcomes (Markowitz, 
2015). Participants in Markowitz’s longitudinal study who stopped attending during the 
study did so because they did not feel it was helping (12%), they were hospitalized (25%) 
or they perceived negativity in the group (14%). Selective attrition can lead to overesti￾mation and underestimation of effects of mutual support groups when those with either 
extremely severe or extremely mild symptoms exit the group (Pistrang et al., 2008).
Peer-Provided Services
Peer-provided services are delivered by people who self-identify as individuals with men￾tal illness and have received mental health services in the past (Fortuna et al., 2022). 
Unlike that in self-help groups, the peer relationship in these services is unidirectional 
and not mutual. A peer service provider’s function is to help others with mental illness. 
Three categories of services fall within this domain: peer-operated services, peer partner￾ships, and peer employees. These three categories differ mainly in the amount of control 
that persons with mental illness have over administrative functions and decision making 
(Clay et al., 2005). In peer-operated services, peers have total control over administration 
and decision making; in peer partnerships, peers share these responsibilities with non￾peers. Peer partnerships are considered peer-provided services by the Center for Mental 
Health, where at least 51% of the board members were consumers as of 2005 (Clay et al., 
2005). Peer employees have no more or less control over the services their organization 308 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
provides than does any nonpeer employee; their responsibilities are contingent on the 
positions they hold within the organization.
Peer-Operated Services
Peer-operated services are planned, operated, administered, and evaluated by individuals 
with mental illness (Fortuna et al., 2022; Ostrow & Hayes, 2015). These services occur 
within a formal organization that is a freestanding legal entity directed by peers and con￾forming to values of freedom of choice and peer control. Individuals without involvement 
in these programs are fully supervised by people with a history of mental illness. One 
example of these services are drop-in centers, where peers can come to engage in social, 
educational, and recreational activities (Fortuna et al., 2022). Peer-run respite services 
provide voluntary, overnight services as an alternative to hospitalization during acute 
mental health crisis (Ostrow & Croft, 2015). Peer-operated services may also offer com￾prehensive services such as employment, housing, benefits acquisition, care coordination, 
advocacy groups, crisis services, and psychoeducational services (Cook et al., 2023; del 
Vecchio, 2022; Ostrow & Hayes, 2015). In addition, peers provide warm lines, which 
are telephone support systems specifically staffed by peers; these systems have been found 
to offer a benefit to the traditional mental health system by preventing crisis hotlines 
from being burdened by habitual callers who are not in crisis (Fortuna et al., 2022). Peer 
service programs also engage in advocacy, research, education, and technical assistance 
(Ostrow & Hayes, 2015). These organizations receive financial operating support from 
a variety of sources, including government grants, private foundations, and/or fee for 
service (Ostrow & Hayes, 2015).
EFFECTIVENESS OF PEER-­OPERATED SERVICES
Evaluations of peer-operated services are mostly descriptive and focus mostly on who uses 
services, characteristics of the services’ programs, and implementation issues (Mowbray, 
Woodward, Holter, MacFarlane, & Bybee, 2009; Thieling, Swarbrick, Brice, & Nemec, 
2022). Some studies have reported positive outcomes, including improved quality of life, 
fewer hospitalizations, increased employment, physical health, and greater satisfaction 
with programs (Swarbrick, 2011; Swarbrick, Gill, & Pratt, 2016). Wellness Recovery 
Action Planning (WRAP), a peer-based wellness management program, was summarized 
in Chapter 7 of this book. A systematic review and meta-analysis of studies on WRAP 
has shown that WRAP participants, compared to control groups, report higher levels of 
recovery but have no significant changes in symptoms (Canacott et al., 2019).
Peer Partnership Services
Peer partnerships are interventions in which peers share the responsibilities for operation 
of the services with nonpeers. For example, fiduciary responsibility for a service program 
may reside with a nonpeer entity. Consequently, administration and governance of the 
program are shared by peers and nonpeers, though primary agency of the service itself 
is with peers (Fortuna et al., 2022). Peer partnerships are comparable to hybrid self-help 
groups in which professionals have significant leadership roles. The nature of the ser￾vices provided through partnership is no different than those in peer-operated services. 
Peer-run programs are nonhierarchical, whereas peer partnerships are structurally less 
egalitarian.17. Peer Supports and Services 309
EFFECTIVENESS OF PEER PARTNERSHIPS
There are few studies on peer partnership services. One example of partnership between 
peers and nonpeers is the Clubhouse model, which originated over 70 years ago and was 
developed by ex-patients of a state hospital (Raeburn, Halcomb, Walter, & Cleary, 2013). 
The Clubhouse model is a nonclinical community in which Clubhouse members with 
mental illness and nonpeer staff share the responsibility of programming around holistic 
needs of members, with a focus on community integration through employment. The 
model is standardized with a fidelity measure and accreditation process (McKay et al., 
2018). A systematic review of the Clubhouse model found 52 articles that include findings 
that this model can enhance employment outcomes, reduce hospitalization, and increase 
members’ quality of life (McKay et al., 2018).
Peer Employees
Peer employees are individuals who self-identify as persons with mental illness and are 
hired either in designated peer positions or into traditional mental health services. Des￾ignated peer positions are in some cases extensions of provider positions, such as care 
coordinator aides or peer specialists, or they may be peer counselors, peer advocates, peer 
care coordinators, recovery support specialists, or peer companions. Peers as employees 
offer several benefits. They have users’ perspectives on human service and health systems, 
can describe and demonstrate successful coping strategies, and can engage readily with 
other consumers (Fortuna et al., 2022). Peer employees may also offer positive role mod￾els, which can instill hope in others that recovery is possible. However, there are also 
concerns about consumers as providers, such as boundary issues and dual relationships. 
Peer employees need to be careful about treating service recipients as friends or violating 
confidentiality. In addition, professional and paraprofessional providers may have dif￾ficulty accepting peers as equals, in part because of the stigma of mental illness (Bellamy 
et al., 2017; Firmin, Mao, Bellamy, & Davidson, 2019; Voss et al., 2022). Peer employees 
may also require special accommodations, such as job sharing and additional supports 
(Jones et al., 2019).
Peers have developed methods to cope with dual roles; these include obtaining sup￾port from other peers, participating in self-help groups, continuing their own mental 
health treatment, accessing supervisors for support, and attending training (Abraham, 
Erickson, Sata, & Lewis, 2022; Forbes, Pratt, & Cronise, 2022; Jenkins, Shafer, & 
Janich, 2020). Some people, however, do not want to receive services from peers, because 
they do not see peer employees as experts who are able to help them. They also may not 
trust peers who have made the transition to staff positions (Mowbray, 1997). Moreover, 
consumers may be concerned that professionals intentionally or unintentionally may have 
influenced peer employees to adopt professional beliefs that diminish the insights they 
have obtained from lived experience (Gillard, 2019).
Growth in digital peer services has also been profound; a systematic review of 30 
studies, including 11 RCTs on 24 distinct digital peer support interventions found that 
services addressed myriad areas, including self-management, cognitive training, weight 
management, psychoeducation and parenting skills (Fortuna et al., 2020). Most of the 
interventions demonstrated feasibility, acceptability, and preliminary effectiveness, 
though study quality varied and most were pilot or early-stage investigations. Interest￾ingly, more than half of the interventions reported community involvement (e.g., through 
focus groups or codesign) of interventions (Fortuna et al., 2020).310 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
Paid Peer Support Roles and Settings
Peer support workers are in variety of roles and settings, with funding provided through 
sources such as Medicaid, VA, SAMHSA, temporary assistance to needy families (TANF), 
state governments, Department of Justice, drug courts, and other grants (Gagne, Finch, 
Myrick, & Davis, 2018). Some of these services may be facilitated through peer-operated 
services or partnerships; however, many are being implemented by peer employees.
Case Management. Peers are increasingly involved in team-based case manage￾ment services for people with psychiatric disabilities at various levels of care (White et 
al., 2020). For example, ACT teams who serve the highest-need individuals in commu￾nity settings have incorporated peer members onto their teams (Wright-Berryman et al., 
2011). Several recent programs aim to support individuals during their transition from 
hospitalization back into the community (Corrigan, Talluri, & Shah, 2022).
Physical Health and Wellness. Given high rates of comorbidity and early mor￾tality, physical health interventions for individuals with SMI have proliferated. These 
include self-management programs for chronic illnesses such as diabetes, smoking cessa￾tion interventions, diet and exercise programs, and health navigation services (Cabassa, 
Camacho, Vélez-Grau, & Stefancic, 2017). These programs include group or individual 
services around health literacy, health engagement, or in the case of health navigators, 
accompaniment to health appointments and health activities. A systematic review of 
peer-based health interventions for serious mental illness, including 18 articles and three 
randomized studies, found the strongest evidence for self-management and navigation 
interventions (Cabassa et al., 2017).
Mental Illness Self-Management. Peer-led illness self-management programs are 
implemented to help individuals manage symptoms, communicate with health providers, 
develop recovery plans, and work toward personal recovery goals. These include both 
unstructured programs and manualized approaches such as Pathways to Recovery or 
BRIDGES (see Corrigan et al., 2022).
Crisis Services. Peers are employed on mobile crisis response teams, warmlines 
and hotlines, crisis stabilization, and suicide prevention (Brasier et al., 2022; Klee et al., 
2019). This may include work in emergency departments or community alternatives to 
hospitalization such as the Living Room models (Heyland, Emery, & Shattell, 2013). The 
rollout of the nationwide 988 mental health crisis phone line and the accompanying fund￾ing creates additional opportunities for peers in crisis work (Canady, 2022).
Employment and Education. Peers may deliver supported employment mod￾els,  such as individual placements and support (IPS); serve as peer representative on 
IPS teams; support volunteer work; or provide supported education programming to 
individuals pursuing postsecondary education (Becker & Drake, 2019; Corrigan et al., 
2020)
Forensic Settings. Peers work in jails, prisons, or with court systems to support 
justice-involved individuals. This work may include jail-based mentoring, transition plan￾ning, connections to housing, employment, health care, and probation/parole compliance. 17. Peer Supports and Services 311
Recent initiatives have provided training specifically for forensic peer specialists (Bellamy 
et al., 2019).
Substance Use. Peer support for people with substance use disorder is wide￾spread (Videka et al., 2019). Peers in addiction settings lead recovery groups, support 
medication-assisted treatment for opioids use disorder, and provide individual support, 
family support, and crisis services.
Housing/Residential Services. Peers work as staff in transitional housing, shel￾ters, group homes, and conduct outreach to homeless individuals (Gagne et al., 2018). 
Established housing models such as housing first have incorporated peer support pro￾gramming as adjunctive services (Stefancic et al., 2019).
Primary Care. Peers in primary care lead groups and provide psychoeducation, 
outreach, case management, and engagement services, along with primary care teams 
(Chapman, Blash, Mayer, & Spetz, 2018; Klee et al., 2019). In a newly developed veter￾an’s program, peer support specialists in primary care provide health coaching, facilitate 
connection to services, and lead health-focused groups (Peeples et al., 2023).
Antistigma and Advocacy. Peers have an important role in addressing stigma 
and discrimination through training and advocacy (Cronise, Teixeira, Rogers, & Har￾rington, 2016). Peers lead antistigma programming and mental health advocacy events, 
and have leadership roles on consumer councils or advisory councils in mental health.
Hospital Settings. Some peers are employed within hospitals to provide recovery 
services for inpatient or intensive outpatient programming (Chapman et al., 2018; Klee 
et al., 2019; Videka et al., 2019). These services are similar to services provided in the 
community, with an emphasis on discharge/transition planning.
Children and Family Services. Peer are increasingly taking on roles to provide 
prevention and recovery services to children, adolescents and their families (Ojeda, Jones, 
Munson, Berliant, & Gilmer, 2021). This can include early intervention in high schools, 
therapeutic day schools, or through recreational programming in the community. Peers 
may also provide support to family members of persons experiencing mental illness, 
including parenting skills training (Gagne et al., 2018).
Peer Workforce Concerns
A national survey of peer specialist (n = 597) found that most are providing direct ser￾vices, but some are also working in administrative, teaching, or systems-level advocacy 
(Cronise et al., 2016). Peer specialists are paid on average $15/ hour (Cronise et al., 2016; 
Daniels, Ashenden, Goodale, & Stevens, 2016) and often experienced discrimination 
from nonpeer colleagues (64%), leadership (30%) or service users (22%). Understand￾ably, peer workers are more satisfied in jobs when they are respected by supervisors, 
colleagues, and peer service recipients, and when they have adequate training, supports, 
and access to career advancement (Cronise et al., 2016). The field faces scrutiny over low 
wages, limited advancement opportunities, and role ambiguity, suggesting a continued 
need for allied health professions to receive training about the value of peer support in 
mental health and to advocate for peer worker equity (Voss et al., 2022).312 II. Rehabilitation Strategies
EFFECTIVENESS OF PEER EMPLOYEES
There is an extensive literature on the impact of peer employee services (Burke, Pyle, 
Machin, Varese, & Morrison, 2019; Chien, Clifton, Zhao, & Lui, 2019; Lyons et al., 
2021; Smit et al., 2022; White et al., 2020). The most recent meta-analysis of 30 RCTs 
with over 4,000 participants found small effect sizes in terms of symptoms, self-reported 
recovery, and functioning (Smit et al., 2022). People with SMI benefited more than 
those with less severe mental health problems; however, quality of studies was a limi￾tation. Lyons and colleagues (2021) examined RCTs of group interventions for mental 
health conditions (not exclusively SMI), finding small increases in recovery lasting up 
to 6 months but not clinical symptoms; most on self-management and self-stigma. A 
meta-analysis that was limited to peer-provided individual services similarly found small 
effects on self-reported recovery, but no effect on symptoms (White et al., 2020). A review 
of 13 RCTs for people with SMI (n = 2,500 participants) could not make conclusions 
about whether peer support increased service use and decreased relapse rates (Chien et 
al., 2019). Given the nature of peer services, researchers might expect greater impact on 
hope, recovery, empowerment, and quality of life over symptoms (Bellamy et al., 2017), 
as has been shown in many studies. While research evidence is promising but method￾ologically limited, it is clear that peer services are not harmful and often are at least 
equally effective as those provided by nonpeers with similar education and training (Bel￾lamy et al., 2017). Structured interventions with peers in well-defined roles have shown 
more positive impact of peer support (Bellamy et al., 2017).
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Consistent with the helper therapy principle, peer services and supports offer benefits to 
not only service recipients but also to peer providers themselves and to mental health ser￾vice delivery systems (Fortuna et al., 2022). In many instances, peer recipients derive the 
same level of positive outcomes from peer services and supports as from traditional mental 
health services, and sometimes even more positive outcomes. In addition, peer providers 
have enhanced their own recovery, self-discovery, and social support systems as a result of 
their helper roles. Peers as providers acquire meaningful and productive ways to fill their time, 
achieve professional growth toward careers, and benefit from improved clinical outcomes 
and quality of life (Solomon, 2004). Mental health service delivery systems are better able to 
serve individuals in need who would otherwise not use these systems; to improve the negative 
attitudes of nonpeer providers who have previously endorsed the traditional belief in a poor 
prognosis for serious mental illness; and to obtain new perspectives on the planning, evalua￾tion, and development of services (Barrenger, Stanhope, & Miller, 2019; Solomon, 2004).
Despite these benefits, there are challenges to implementation, including role conflict 
and confusion, potential dual relationships, and risks of confidentiality violations. These chal￾lenges are not insurmountable, however. Suggested means of addressing these challenges 
include proper training and high-quality supervision of peers; an accepting and friendly par￾ticipant atmosphere; structures and opportunities for discussions among peer and nonpeer 
providers; use of conflict resolution methodologies; and clear organizational policies regard￾ing these issues (Bellamy et al., 2017; Fortuna et al., 2022; Ibrahim et al., 2020; Mutschler, 
Bellamy, Davidson, Lichtenstein, & Kidd, 2022). In particular, training is needed for nonpeer 
supervisors and administrators to better understand and advocate for the role of peer sup￾port in rehabilitation settings (Foglesong et al., 2022).17. Peer Supports and Services 313
PERSONAL EXAMPLE
Lindy Fox Smith Describes Her Work as a Peer Support Provider
I was diagnosed with bipolar disorder in 1982, and 2 years later with alcoholism. After many 
hospitalizations, and participation in an alcohol rehabilitation program, my illnesses stabi￾lized. I decided I wanted to go back to school and work in the field of mental health. In 1989, I 
received a master’s degree in counseling psychology. Providing services to peers has been 
a very positive experience for me. It has allowed me to share my story of recovery with oth￾ers who were struggling with issues that I had struggled with. Sharing coping and recovery 
strategies with peers turned a negative experience into a positive one. It was very empower￾ing for me to be able to work with my peers in this capacity, increasing my self-esteem and 
self-confidence. Because of this, I experienced greater stability in my own mental illness.
In working with peers, I always respected them and saw each of them as unique indi￾viduals. They made choices and decisions for themselves because, even though we shared 
similar experiences, they needed to make choices specific to them. Many of the people 
whom I worked with found hope from my experience. I shared my recovery with them, and 
they felt as though they could move ahead too.
Although working as a professional with peers has often been a positive experience for 
both the consumers and me, sometimes it has had its drawbacks. For example, one person 
felt some discouragement in working with me. He felt that even though we had the same ill￾ness, he could never accomplish what I had. Instead of feeling optimistic about the future, 
quite the opposite occurred for him. Still, I felt he could make positive changes in his life, 
and I continually conveyed a message of hope in the work that I did with him. This person 
also wanted to change our relationship into a friendship. He had a hard time viewing me as 
a professional. It seems inevitable that this happens from time to time.
Despite the few difficulties I have had, my work as a peer provider has been very 
rewarding. I feel that it has been a reciprocal relationship, with benefits to both me and the 
persons receiving the services.
Lindy Fox Smith, MA, LADC
Research Associate
New Hampshire–Dartmouth Psychiatric Research Center 315
REFERENCES
Abdullah, T., & Brown, T. L. (2020). Diagnostic 
labeling and mental illness stigma among Black 
Americans: An experimental vignette study. 
Stigma and Health, 5(1), 11–21.
Abraham, C., & Michie, S. (2008). A taxonomy 
of behavior change techniques used in interven￾tions. Health Psychology: Offi cial Journal of 
the Division of Health Psychology, American 
Psychological Association, 27(3), 379–387.
Abraham, K. M., Erickson, P. S., Sata, M. J., & 
Lewis, S. B. (2022). Job satisfaction and burn￾out among peer support specialists: The con￾tributions of supervisory mentorship, recovery￾oriented workplaces, and role clarity. Advances 
in Mental Health, 20(1), 38–50.
Abram, K.  M., & Teplin, L.  A. (1991). Co￾occurring disorders among mentally ill jail 
detainees: Implications for public policy. Amer￾ican Psychologist, 46, 1036–1045.
Abramowitz, I., & Coursey, R. (1989). Impact of 
an educational support group on family par￾ticipants who take care of their schizophrenic 
relatives. Journal of Counseling and Clinical 
Psychology, 57, 632–636.
Abreu, D., Parker, T., Noether, C., Steadman, H., 
& Case, B. (2017). Revising the paradigm for 
jail diversion for people with mental and sub￾stance use disorders: Intercept 0. Behavioral 
Sciences and the Law, 35(5–6), 380–395.
Abufarsakh, B., Kappi, A., Pemberton, K.  M., 
Williams, L.  B., & Okoli, C.  T. (2023). Sub￾stance use outcomes among individuals with 
severe mental illnesses receiving assertive com￾munity treatment: A systematic review. Inter￾national Journal of Mental Health Nursing, 
32, 704–726.
Abu Sabra, M. A., & Hamdan- Mansour, A. M. 
(2022). Using relapse prevention interventions 
to maintain remission and minimize relapse 
rates for individuals with schizophrenia: A 
scoping review. Journal of Psychosocial Nurs￾ing and Mental Health Services, 60(7), 47–54.
Addo, R., Ginder, V., & Nedegaard, R. (2022). 
The role of peer support in recovery from psy￾chiatric symptoms: A moderation analysis. 
Community Mental Health Journal, 58, 1141–
1145.
Adler, A.  K., & Wahl, O.  F. (1998). Children’s 
beliefs about people labeled mentally ill. Amer￾ican Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 68, 321–326.
Agbor, C., Kaur, G., Soomro, F. M., Eche, V. C., 
Urhi, A., Ayisire, O. E., . . . Anugwom, G. O. 
(2022). The role of cognitive behavioral ther￾apy in the management of psychosis. Cureus, 
14(9), Article e28884.
Agency for Healthcare Research and Qual￾ity (AHRQ). (2016). 2015 Annual Progress 
Report to Congress: National Strategy for 
Quality Improvement in Health Care. https:// 
ahrq.gov/workingforquality/reports/2015-
annual- report.html
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 
(AHRQ). (2021). 5 key functions of the medi￾cal home. https://ahrq.gov/ncepcr/tools/pcmh/
implement/key- functions.html
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 
(AHRQ). (2022). The SHARE Approach. 
https://ahrq.gov/health- literacy/professional￾training/shared- decision/index.html
Aggarwal, A., & Thakur, G. S. M. (2013). Tech￾niques of performance appraisal: A review. 
International Journal of Engineering and 
Advanced Technology, 2, 617–621.
Ahmed, N., Barlow, S., Reynolds, L., Drey, N., 
Begum, F., Tuudah, E., & Simpson, A. (2021). 
Mental health professionals’ perceived barriers 
and enablers to shared decision- making in risk 
assessment and risk management: A qualita￾tive systematic review. BMC Psychiatry, 21(1), 
Article 594.
Ahonen, L., Loeber, R., & Brent, D.  A. (2019). 
The association between serious mental health 
problems and violence: Some common assump￾tions and misconceptions. Trauma, Violence, 
and Abuse, 20(5), 613–625.
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes, 50(2), 179–211.
Akbar, M., Egli, M., Cho, Y., Song, B., & 
Noronha, A. (2018). Medications for alcohol 
REFERENCES316 References
use disorders: An overview. Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics, 185, 64–85.
Albert, N., & Weibell, M. A. (2019). The outcome 
of early intervention in first episode psychosis. 
International Review of Psychiatry, 31(5–6), 
413–424.
Alguera-Lara, V., Dowsey, M.  M., Ride, J., 
Kinder, S., & Castle, D. (2017). Shared deci￾sion making in mental health: The importance 
for current clinical practice. Australasian Psy￾chiatry, 25(6), 578–582.
Al-Haddad, B. J., Oler, E., Armistead, B., Elsayed, 
N. A., Weinberger, D. R., Bernier, R. . . . Wal￾dorf, K. M. A. (2019). The fetal origins of men￾tal illness. American Journal of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, 221(6), 549–562.
Ali, M., Schur, L., & Blanck, P. (2011). What 
types of jobs do people with disabilities want? 
Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation, 21(2), 
199–210.
Ali, S. A., Mathur, N., Malhotra, A. K., & Braga, 
R.  J. (2019). Electroconvulsive therapy and 
schizophrenia: A systematic review. Molecular 
Neuropsychiatry, 5(2), 75–83.
Allchin, B., & Solantaus, T. (2022). An evidence￾based practice developed in-situ: Let’s talk 
about children and a consolidation of its evi￾dence base. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 13, Article 
824241.
Allott, K. A., Killackey, E., Sun, P., Brewer, W. J., 
& Velligan, D. I. (2016). Feasibility and accept￾ability of cognitive adaptation training for 
first-episode psychosis. Early Intervention in 
Psychiatry, 10(6), 476–484.
Alloway, R., & Bebbington, P. (1987). The buffer 
theory of social support: A review of the litera￾ture. Psychological Medicine, 17(1), 91–108.
Allport, G.  W. (1954). The nature of prejudice. 
Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Aloi, M., de Filippis, R., Lavalle, F.  G., Chiap￾petta, E., Vigano, C., Segura-Garcia, C., & 
De Fazio, P. (2020). Effectiveness of integrated 
psychological therapy on clinical, neuropsycho￾logical, emotional and functional outcome in 
schizophrenia: A RCT study. Journal of Mental 
Health, 29, 524–531.
Alonso, M., Guillén, A. I., & Muñoz, M. (2019). 
Interventions to reduce internalized stigma in 
individuals with mental illness: A systematic 
review. Spanish Journal of Psychology, 22,
Article e27.
Al-Rousan, T., Rubenstein, L., Sieleni, B., Deol, 
H., & Wallace, R. B. (2017). Inside the nation’s 
largest mental health institution: A prevalence 
study in a state prison system. BMC Public 
Health, 17(1), Article 342.
Alsuhaibani, R., Smith, D. C., Lowrie, R., Aljhani, 
S., & Paudyal, V. (2021). Scope, quality and 
inclusivity of international clinical guidelines 
on mental health and substance abuse in rela￾tion to dual diagnosis, social and community 
outcomes: A systematic review. BMC Psychia￾try, 21(1), 1–23.
Alverson, H., Carpenter, E., & Drake, R.  E. 
(2006). An ethnographic study of job seeking 
among people with severe mental illness. Psy￾chiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 30, 15–22.
Amalraj, S., Starkweather, C., Nguyen, C., & 
Naeim, A. (2009). Health literacy, communica￾tion, and treatment decision-making in older 
cancer patients. Oncology, 23(4), 369–375.
Amare, A.  T., Schubert, K.  O., Klingler￾Hoffmann, M., Cohen-Woods, S., & Baune, 
B. T. (2017). The genetic overlap between mood 
disorders and cardiometabolic diseases: A sys￾tematic review of genome wide and candidate 
gene studies. Translational Psychiatry, 7(1), 
Article e1007.
Amaresha, A.  C., & Venkatasubramanian, G. 
(2012). Expressed emotion in schizophrenia: 
An overview. Indian Journal of Psychological 
Medicine, 34, 12–20.
American Association of Biological Anthropolo￾gists. (2019). AAPA Sstatement on race and 
racism. American Association of Biological 
Anthropologists. https://physanth.org/docu￾ments/199/aapa_race_statement_march_2019.
pdf.
American Diabetes Association, American Psy￾chiatric Association (APA), American Asso￾ciation of Clinical Endocrinologists, & North 
American Association for the Study of Obesity. 
(2004). Consensus development conference on 
antipsychotic drugs and obesity and diabetes. 
Diabetes Care, 27(2), 596–601.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (1987). 
Diagnostic and statistical manual of men￾tal disorders (3rd ed., rev.). Washington, DC: 
Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (1994). 
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 
disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2000). 
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 
disorders (4th ed., text rev.). Washington, DC: 
Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2013). 
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 
disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2022). 
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 
disorders (5th ed., text rev.). Arlington, VA: 
Author.
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. Public 
Law No. 101–336, 104 Stat. 327 (1990).
Amering, M. (2017). Promotion of mental health: References 317
Recovery. In Sabine Bährer-Kohler, Francisco 
Javier Carod-Artal (Eds.), Global mental health
(pp. 103–111). Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Anderson, C.  M., Hogarty, G., Bayer, T., & 
Needleman, R. (1984). Expressed emotion and 
social networks of parents of schizophrenic 
patients. British Journal of Psychiatry, 144,
247–255.
Anderson, C. M., Reiss, D. J., & Hogarty, G. E. 
(1986). Schizophrenia and the family. New 
York: Guilford Press.
Anderson, S. B. (1998). We are not alone: Foun￾tain House and the development of the club￾house culture. New York: Fountain House.
Andreasen, N. C. (1984). Modified Scale for the 
Assessment of Negative Symptoms. Wash￾ington, DC: U.S.  Department of Health and 
Human Services.
Andrus, M.  R., & Roth, M.  T. (2002). Health 
literacy: A review. Pharmacotherapy, 22(3), 
282–302.
Angell, B., Matthews, E., Barrenger, S., Watson, 
A.  C., & Draine, J. (2014). Engagement pro￾cesses in model programs for community reen￾try from prison for people with serious mental 
illness. International Journal of Law Psychia￾try, 37(4), 490–500.
Angermeyer, M.  C., Matschinger, H., & 
Schomerus, G. (2013). Attitudes towards psy￾chiatric treatment and people with mental ill￾ness: Changes over two decades. British Jour￾nal of Psychiatry, 203(2), 146–151.
Angermeyer, M.  C., Schulze, B., & Dietrich, S. 
(2003). Courtesy stigma: A focus group study 
of relatives of schizophrenia patients. Social 
Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 38,
593–602.
Anthony, W.  A., Cohen, M., Farkas, M.  D., & 
Gagne, C. (2002). Psychiatric rehabilitation
(2nd ed.). Boston: Center for Psychiatric Reha￾bilitation.
Anthony, W. A., & Jansen, M. A. (1984). Predict￾ing the vocational capacity of the chronically 
mentally ill: Research and policy implications. 
American Psychologist, 39, 537–544.
Anthony, W. A., & Liberman, R. P. (1992). Prin￾ciples and practice of psychiatric rehabilitation. 
In R.  P.  Liberman (Ed.), Handbook of psy￾chiatric rehabilitation (pp.  1–29). New York: 
Macmillan.
Aoki, Y., Yaju, Y., Utsumi, T., Sanyaolu, L., 
Storm, M., Takaesu, Y., .  .  . Edwards, A.  G. 
(2022). Shared decision-making interventions 
for people with mental health conditions. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 
11(11), CD007297.
Appelbaum, P. S., Grisso, T., Frank, E., O’Donnell, 
S., & Kupfer, D.  J. (1999). Competence of 
depressed patients for consent to research. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 1380–
1384.
Arms, L., Johl, H., & DeMartini, J. (2022). 
Improving the utilisation of medication-assisted 
treatment for alcohol use disorder at discharge. 
BMJ Open Quality, 11(4), Article 001899.
Arns, P. G., & Linney, J. A. (1993). Work, self, 
and life satisfaction for persons with severe and 
persistent mental disorders. Psychosocial Reha￾bilitation Journal, 17, 63–79.
Arns, P.  G., & Linney, J.  A. (1995). Relating 
functional skills of severely mentally ill clients 
to subjective and societal benefits. Psychiatric 
Services, 46, 260–265.
Arseneault, L., Moffitt, T. E., Caspi, A., Taylor, 
P.  J., & Silva, P.  A. (2000). Mental disorders 
and violence in a total birth cohort: Results 
from the Dunedin Study. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 57, 979–986.
Artiga, S., Damico, A., & Garfield, R. (2015). 
The impact of the coverage gap in states not 
expanding Medicaid by race and ethnicity. San 
Francisco, CA: Kaiser Family Foundation.
Ascher-Svanum, H., Lafuze, J., Barrickman, P., 
Van Dusen, C., & Fompa-Loy, J. (1997). Edu￾cation needs of families of mentally ill adults. 
Psychiatric Services, 48, 1072–1074.
Ash, P., Roberts, V.  C., Egan, G.  J., Coffman, 
K.  L., Schwenke, T.  J., & Bailey, K. (2020). 
A jail-based competency restoration unit as a 
component of a continuum of restoration ser￾vices. Journal of the American Academy of 
Psychiatry and the Law, 48(1), 43–51.
Ashmore, R. D., Deaux, K., & McLaughlin-Volpe, 
T. (2004). An organizing framework for collec￾tive identity: Articulation and significance of 
multidimensionality. Psychological Bulletin, 
130, 80–114.
Ashoorian, D., Davidson, R., Rock, D., Gudka, 
S., & Clifford, R. (2014). A review of self￾report medication side effect questionnaires for 
mental health patients. Psychiatry Research,
219(3), 664–673.
Atkinson, R. C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1968). Human 
memory: A proposed system and its control 
processes. In K.  W.  Spence & J.  T.  Spence 
(Eds.), The psychology of learning and motiva￾tion (Vol. 2, pp. 89–195). New York: Academic 
Press.
Attena, F. (2016). Limitations of Western medi￾cine and models of integration between medical 
systems. Journal of Alternative and Comple￾mentary Medicine, 22(5), 343–348.
Aubry, T., Nelson, G., & Tsemberis, S. (2015). 
Housing first for people with severe men￾tal illness who are homeless: A review of the 
research and findings from the At Home–Chez 318 References
Soi Demonstration Project. Canadian Journal 
of Psychiatry, 60(11), 467–474.
Aufderheide, D.  H. (2014). Moving toward a 
public safety/public health model. Corrections 
Today, 76(3), 17.
Averbach, E., & Coriell, A. S. (1961). Short-term 
memory in vision. Bell Systems Technical Jour￾nal, 40, 309–328.
Ayano, G., Tesfaw, G., & Shumet, S. (2019). The 
prevalence of schizophrenia and other psychotic 
disorders among homeless people: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. BMC Psychiatry, 19,
Article 370.
Ayed, N., Toner, S., & Priebe, S. (2019). Concep￾tualizing resilience in adult mental health lit￾erature: A systematic review and narrative syn￾thesis. Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, 
Research and Practice, 92(3), 299–341.
Ayşegül, K.  A.  R.  T., Özdel, K., & Türkçapar, 
M. H. (2021). Cognitive behavioral therapy in 
treatment of schizophrenia. Archives of Neuro￾psychiatry, 58(Suppl. 1), S61–S65.
Bachrach, L.  L. (1989). Case management: 
Toward a shared definition. Hospital and Com￾munity Psychiatry, 40, 883–884.
Bachrach, L.  L. (1992). Psychosocial rehabilita￾tion and psychiatry in the care of long-term 
patients. American Journal of Psychiatry, 149,
1455–1463.
Bahji, A., Yanagawa, B., & Lamba, W. (2020). 
Harm reduction for injection drug users with 
infective endocarditis: A systematic review. 
Canadian Journal of Addiction, 11(2), 13–23.
Bailey, K., Lowder, E.  M., Grommon, E., Ris￾ing, S., & Ray, B.  R. (2022). Evaluation of a 
police–mental health co-response team relative 
to traditional police response in Indianapolis. 
Psychiatric Services, 73(4), 366–373.
Baker, F., & Intagliata, J. (1992). Case manage￾ment. In R.  P.  Liberman (Ed.), Handbook of 
psychiatric rehabilitation (pp. 213–244). Bos￾ton: Allyn & Bacon.
Baldez, D.  P., Biazus, T.  B., Rabelo-da-Ponte, 
F.  D., Nogaro, G.  P., Martins, D.  S., Kunz, 
M., & Czepielewski, L. S. (2021). The effect of 
antipsychotics on the cognitive performance of 
individuals with psychotic disorders: network 
meta-analyses of randomized controlled tri￾als. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 
126, 265–275.
Barbee, J.  G., Clark, P.  D., Crapanzano, M.  S., 
Heintz, G.  C., & Kehoe, C.  E. (1989). Alco￾hol and substance abuse among schizophrenic 
patients presenting to an emergency psychiatric 
service. Journal of Nervous and Mental Dis￾ease, 177(7), 400–407.
Bargiota, A., Pelekanou, M., Tsitouras, A., & 
Koukoulis, G.  N. (2013). Eating habits and 
factors affecting food choice of adolescents liv￾ing in rural areas. Hormones, 12(2), 246–253.
Barile, J.  P., Smith Pruitt, A., & Parker, J.  L. 
(2018). A latent class analysis of self-identified 
reasons for experiencing homelessness: Oppor￾tunities for prevention. Journal of Community 
and Applied Social Psychology, 28(2), 94–107.
Barker, E. T., Greenberg, J. S., Seltzer, M. M., & 
Almeida, D. M. (2012). Daily stress and corti￾sol patterns in parents of adult children with a 
serious mental illness. Health Psychology, 31,
130–134.
Barker, S., Barron, N., & McFarlane, B. (1994). 
Multnomah Community Ability Scale: Users 
manual. Western Mental Health Research Cen￾ter, Oregon Health Sciences University.
Barlow, J. (2014). Psychiatry and intervention in 
infancy and early childhood. In P.  Byrne & 
A. Rosen (Eds.), Early intervention in psychia￾try: EI of nearly everything for better mental 
health (pp. 57–67). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Barnes, M., & Bowl, R. (2017). Taking over the 
asylum: Empowerment and mental health. 
New York: Bloomsbury.
Barnett, E., Sussman, S., Smith, C., Rohrbach, 
L. A., & Spruijt-Metz, D. (2012). Motivational 
interviewing for adolescent substance use: A 
review of the literature. Addictive Behaviors, 
37, 1325–1334.
Barnett, P., Steare, T., Dedat, Z., Pilling, S., 
McCrone, P., Knapp, M., Cooke, E., . . . Lloyd￾Evans, B. (2022). Interventions to improve 
social circumstances of people with mental 
health conditions: A rapid evidence synthesis. 
BMC Psychiatry, 22(1), Article 302.
Baron, R. C., & Salzer, M. S. (2000). The career 
patterns of persons with serious mental illness: 
Generating a new vision of lifetime careers for 
those in recovery. Psychiatric Rehabilitation 
Skills, 4, 136–156.
Baronet, A.  M. (1999). Factors associated with 
caregiver burden in mental illness: A critical 
review of the research literature. Clinical Psy￾chology Review, 19, 819–841.
Barrenger, S.  L., Kriegel, L., Canada, K.  E., & 
Blank Wilson, A. (2021). What gets measured 
in reentry research? A scoping review on com￾munity reentry from jail and prison for persons 
with mental illnesses. Criminal Justice and 
Behavior, 48(3), 259–273.
Barrenger, S.  L., Stanhope, V., & Miller, E. 
(2019). Capturing the value of peer support: 
Measuring recovery-oriented services. Journal 
of Public Mental Health, 18(3), 180–187.
Barrowclough, C., & Hooley, J. (2003). Attribu￾tions and expressed emotion: A review. Clinical 
Psychology Review, 23, 849–880.
Barrowclough, C., Johnston, M., & Tarrier, N. References 319
(1994). Attributions, expressed emotion, and 
patient relapse: An attributional model of rela￾tives’ response to schizophrenic illness. Behav￾ior Therapy, 25, 67–88.
Bartels, S. J. (2004). Caring for the whole person: 
Integrated health care for older adults with 
severe mental illness and medical comorbidity. 
Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 
52, 249–257.
Bartels, S.  J., & Pratt, S. (2009). Psychosocial 
rehabilitation and quality of life for older adults 
with serious mental illness: Recent findings and 
future research directions. Current Opinion in 
Psychiatry, 22(4), 381–385.
Barton, J., & Henderson, J. (2016). Peer support 
and youth recovery: A brief review of the theo￾retical underpinnings and evidence. Canadian 
Journal of Family and Youth/Le Journal Cana￾dien de Famille et de la Jeunesse, 8(1), 1–17.
Bassani, D. G., Dewa, C. S., Krupa, T., Aubry, T., 
Gehrs, M., Goering, P.  N., & Streiner, D.  L. 
(2009). Factor structure of the Multnomah 
Community Ability Scale—longitudinal analy￾sis. Psychiatry Research, 167(1–2), 178–189.
Battaglino, L. (1987). Family empowerment 
through self-help groups. In A. Hatfield (Ed.), 
Families of the mentally ill meeting the chal￾lenge (pp. 43–51). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Baucom, D., Meuser, K., Shoham, U., Dauito, A., 
& Stickle, T. (1998). Empirically supported 
couple and family interventions for marital dis￾tress and adult mental health problems. Jour￾nal of Counseling and Clinical Psychology, 66,
53–88.
Baumgartner, S. E., Corrigan, P. W., Wan, H. T., 
Werner, P., Himes, C. L., & Qin, S. (2021). The 
difference in stigmatizing attributions toward 
older adults with or without Alzheimer’s dis￾ease. Stigma and Health. [Epub ahead of print] 
https://doi.org/10.1037/sah0000315
Baxter, A.  J., Patton, G., Scott, K.  M., Degen￾hardt, L., & Whiteford, H. A. (2013). Global 
epidemiology of mental disorders: What are we 
missing? PLoS ONE, 8(6), Article e65514.
Baxter, S., Johnson, M., Blank, L., Cantrell, A., 
Brumfitt, S., Enderby, P., . . . Goyder, E. (2016). 
Non-pharmacological treatments for stutter￾ing in children and adults: A systematic review 
and evaluation of clinical effectiveness, and 
exploration of barriers to successful outcomes. 
Southhampton, UK: NIHR Journals Library.
Bazelon Center. (1999). Under court order. Wash￾ington DC: Author.
Beard, J. H. (1978). The rehabilitation services of 
Fountain House. In L. Stein & M. Test (Eds.), 
Alternatives to mental hospital treatment
(pp. 201–208). New York: Plenum.
Beard, J.  H., Malamud, T.  J., & Rossman, E. 
(1978). Psychiatric rehabilitation and long￾term rehospitalization rates: The findings of 
two research studies. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 
4, 622–635.
Beard, J.  H., Propst, R.  N., & Malamud, T.  J. 
(1982). The Fountain House model of rehabili￾tation. Psychosocial Rehabilitation Journal, 
5(1), 47–53.
Beck, A.  T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the 
emotional disorders. New York: New Ameri￾can Library.
Beck, A.  T., & Rector, N.  A. (2000). Cognitive 
therapy of schizophrenia: A new therapy for the 
new millennium. American Journal of Psycho￾therapy, 54, 291–300.
Beck, A. T., Rector, N. A., Stolar, N., & Grant, 
P. (2009). Schizophrenia: Cognitive theory, 
research, and therapy. New York: Guilford 
Press.
Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). 
Beck Depression Inventory–II (BDI-II). San 
Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Carbin, M. G. (1988). 
Psychometric properties of the Beck Depres￾sion Inventory: Twenty-five years of evaluation. 
Clinical Psychology Review, 8(1), 77–100.
Becker, D.  R., Baker, S.  R., Carlson, L., Flint, 
L., Howell, R., Lindsay, S., . . . Drake, R. E. 
(2007). Critical strategies for implementing 
supported employment. Journal of Vocational 
Rehabilitation, 27, 13–20.
Becker, D. R., & Bond, G. R. (Eds.). (2002). Sup￾ported employment implementation resource 
kit. Rockville, MD: Center for Mental Health 
Services, Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
Services Administration.
Becker, D. R., Courtney, C., & Reese, S. L. (2022). 
Update on funding IPS supported employment 
services in the IPS learning community. Psychi￾atric Rehabilitation Journal, 45, 299–301.
Becker, D. R., & Drake, R. E. (2003). A working 
life for people with severe mental illness. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Becker, D.  R., & Drake, R. (2019). Supported 
employment and education for people in early 
psychosis. Intervening early in psychosis: A 
team approach first. Arlington, VA: American 
Psychiatric Publishing.
Becker, D. R., Drake, R. E., & Bond, G. R. (2014). 
The IPS supported employment learning col￾laborative. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal,
37(2), 79–85.
Becker, D.  R., Drake, R.  E., Farabaugh, A., & 
Bond, G. R. (1996). Job preferences of clients 
with severe psychiatric disorders participating 
in supported employment programs. Psychiat￾ric Services, 47, 1223–1226.
Becker, D.  R., Swanson, S., Reese, S., Bond, 320 References
G. R., & McLeman, B. M. (2015). Supported 
Employment Fidelity Review Manual: A com￾panion guide to the evidence-based IPS sup￾ported Employment Fidelity Scale. Lebanon, 
NH: Dartmouth Psychiatric Research Center.
Beckers, T., Maassen, N., Koekkoek, B., Tiemens, 
B., & Hutschemaekers, G. (2022). Can social 
support be improved in people with a severe 
mental illness?: A systematic review and meta￾analysis. Current Psychology. [Epub ahead of 
print] doi: 10.1007/s12144-02102694-4
Beeler, J., Rosenthal, A., & Cohler, B. (1999). Pat￾terns of family caregiving and support provided 
to older psychiatric patients in long-term care. 
Psychiatric Services, 50, 1222–1224.
Beers, C.  W. (1908). A mind that found itself: 
An autobiography. Retrieved from https://
ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/gbv/detail.
action?docid=4878649
Begola, M. J., & Schillerstrom, J. E. (2019). Hal￾lucinogens and their therapeutic use: A litera￾ture review. Journal of Psychiatric Practice,
25(5), 334–346.
Beitinger, R., Kissling, W., & Hamann, J. (2014). 
Trends and perspectives of shared decision￾making in schizophrenia and related disor￾ders. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 27(3), 
222–229.
Bell, M., Bryson, G., & Wexler, B.  E. (2003). 
Cognitive remediation of working memory def￾icits: Durability of training effects in severely 
impaired and less severely impaired schizo￾phrenia. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 108,
101–109.
Bell, M. D., Bryson, G., Greig, T., Corcoran, C., & 
Wexler, B. E. (2001). Neurocognitive enhance￾ment therapy with work therapy: Effects on 
neurocognitive test performance. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 58(8), 763–768.
Bellack, A.  S., Brown, C.  H., & Thomas￾Lohrman, S. (2006). Psychometric character￾istics of role-play assessments of social skill 
in schizophrenia. Behavior Therapy, 37(4), 
339–352.
Bellack, A. S., Gold, J. M., & Buchanan, R. W. 
(1999). Cognitive rehabilitation for schizo￾phrenia: Problems, prospects, and strategies. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 25(2), 257–274.
Bellack, A.  S., Morrison, R.  L., Wixted, J.  T., 
& Mueser, K. T. (1990). An analysis of social 
competence in schizophrenia. British Journal 
of Psychiatry: Journal of Mental Science, 156,
809–818.
Bellack, A.  S., Mueser, K.  T., Gingerich, S., & 
Agresta, J. (2004). Social skills training for 
schizophrenia: A step-by-step guide (2nd ed.). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Bellack, A.  S., Mueser, K.  T., Morrison, R.  L., 
Tierney, A., & Podell, K. (1990). Remediation 
of cognitive deficits of schizophrenia. Ameri￾can Journal of Psychiatry, 147, 1650–1655.
Bellamy, C., Kimmel, J., Costa, M. N., Tsai, J., 
Nulton, L., Nulton, E., .  .  . O’Connell, M. 
(2019). Peer support on the “inside and out￾side”: Building lives and reducing recidivism 
for people with mental illness returning from 
jail. Journal of Public Mental Health, 18(3), 
188–198.
Bellamy, C., Schmutte, T., & Davidson, L. (2017). 
An update on the growing evidence base for 
peer support. Mental Health and Social Inclu￾sion, 21, 161–167.
Bellus, S., Kost, P., Vergo, J., Gramse, R., & Weiss, 
K. (1999). The effects of shaping classes on aca￾demic skills, self care skills and on-ward behav￾ior with persons who are cognitively impaired 
and chronic psychiatric inpatients. Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation Skills, 3(1), 23–40.
Bentall, R. P. (1994). Cognitive biases and abnor￾mal beliefs: Towards a model of persecutory 
delusions. In A.  S.  David & J.  C.  Cutting 
(Eds.), The neuropsychology of schizophrenia
(pp. 337–360). Hove, UK: Erlbaum.
Bentall, R. P. (2001). Social cognition and delu￾sional beliefs. In P. W. Corrigan & D. L. Penn 
(Eds.), Social cognition and schizophrenia
(pp.  123–148). Washington, DC: American 
Psychiatric Association.
Bentall, R. P., Kinderman, P., & Kaney, S. (1994). 
The self, attributional processses and abnormal 
beliefs: Towards a model of persecutory delu￾sions. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 32,
331–341.
Bentall, R., & Slade, P. (1985). Reality testing 
and auditory hallucinations: A signal detection 
analysis. British Journal of Clinical Psychol￾ogy, 24, 159–169.
Ben-Zeev, D., Drake, R.  E., Corrigan, P.  W., 
Rotondi, A. J., Nilsen, W., & Depp, C. (2012). 
Using contemporary technologies in the assess￾ment and treatment of serious mental illness. 
American Journal of Psychiatric Rehabilita￾tion, 15(4), 357–376.
Benzein, E., & Berg, A. (2003). The Swedish ver￾sion of Herth Hope Index—An instrument for 
palliative care. Scandinavian Journal of Caring 
Sciences, 17(4), 409–415.
Berger, P. L., & Luckman, T. (1966). The social 
construction of reality: A treatise in the sociol￾ogy of knowledge. New York: Anchor.
Berkman, N. D., Davis, T. C., & McCormack, L. 
(2010). Health literacy: What is it? Journal of 
Health Communication, 15(Suppl. 2), 9–19.
Bernheim, K. (1982). Supportive family counsel￾ing. Schizophrenic Bulletin, 8, 634–648.
Bernheim, K., & Lehman, A. (1985). Working References 321
with families of the mentally ill. New York: 
Norton.
Berry, J. W. (2006). Acculturation: A conceptual 
overview. In Acculturation and parent–child 
relationships: Measurement and development
(pp. 13–30). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Berthold, S. M., Kong, S., Mollica, R. F., Kuoch, 
T., Scully, M., & Franke, T. (2014). Comorbid 
mental and physical health and health access 
in Cambodian Refugees in the US. Journal of 
Community Health, 39(6), 1045–1052.
Betancourt, J. R., Green, A. R., Carrillo, J. E., & 
Park, E. R. (2005). Cultural Competence and 
health care disparities: Key perspectives and 
trends. Health Affairs, 24(2), 499–505.
Bevan Jones, R., Thapar, A., Stone, Z., Thapar, 
A., Jones, I., Smith, D., & Simpson, S. (2018). 
Psychoeducational interventions in adolescent 
depression: A systematic review. Patient Edu￾cation and Counseling, 101(5), 804–816.
Bhola, P., Basavarajappa, C., Guruprasad, D., 
Hegde, G., Khanam, F., Thirthalli, J., & 
Chaturvedi, S.  K. (2016). Development of a 
social skills assessment screening scale for psy￾chiatric rehabilitation settings: A pilot study. 
Indian Journal of Psychological Medicine, 
38(5), 395–403.
Bhugra, D., & McKenzie, K. (2003). Expressed 
emotion across cultures. Advances in Psychiat￾ric Treatment, 9(5), 342–348.
Bible, L. J., Casper, K. A., Seifert, J. L., & Por￾ter, K. A. (2017). Assessment of self-care and 
medication adherence in individuals with men￾tal health conditions. Journal of the American 
Pharmacists Association, 57(3, Suppl.), S203–
S210.
Biegel, D., Mulligan, S., Putnam, P., & Song, 
L. (1994). Predictors of burden among lower 
socio-economic status caregivers of persons 
with chronic mental illness. Community Men￾tal Health Journal, 30, 473–494.
Biegel, D., & Yamatani, H. (1986). Self-help 
groups for families of the mentally ill: Research 
perspectives. In M. Z. Goldstein (Ed.), Family 
involvement in the treatment of schizophrenia
(pp.  57–80). Washington, DC: American Psy￾chiatric Press.
Bighelli, I., Rodolico, A., García-Mieres, H., 
Pitschel-Walz, G., Hansen, W.-P., Schneider￾Thoma, J., . . . Leucht, S. (2021). Psychosocial 
and psychological interventions for relapse pre￾vention in schizophrenia: A systematic review 
and network meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry, 
8(11), 969–980.
Bishop, J., Crisp, D. A., & Scholz, B. (2022). A 
systematic review to determine how service 
provider practises impact effective service pro￾vision to lesbian, gay and bisexual consumers 
in a mental health setting. Clinical Psychology 
and Psychotherapy, 29, 874–894.
Blackburn, R., Osborn, D., Walters, K., Nazareth, 
I., & Petersen, I. (2018). Statin prescribing for 
prevention of cardiovascular disease amongst 
people with severe mental illness: Cohort study 
in UK primary care. Schizophrenia Research, 
192, 219–225.
Blackhall, L. J., Murphy, S. T., Frank, G., Michel, 
V., & Azen, S. (1995). Ethnicity and attitudes 
toward patient autonomy. Journal of the Amer￾ican Medical Association, 274, 820–825.
Blackorby, J., & Cameto, R. (2004). Changes in 
the school engagement and academic perfor￾mance of students with disabilities. In Wave 
1 Wave 2 Overview (SEELS) (pp.  8-1–8-23). 
Menlo Park, CA: SRI International.
Black Power. (2016, August 25). Retrieved from 
https://www.archives.gov/research/african￾americans/black-power
Blackwood, D.  H.  R., Fordyce, A., Walker, 
M.  T., St. Clair, D.  M., Porteous, D.  J., & 
Muir, W.  J. (2001). Schizophrenia and affec￾tive disorders—cosegregation with a transloca￾tion at chromosome 1q42 that directly disrupts 
brain-expressed genes: Clinical and P300 find￾ings in a family. American Journal of Human 
Genetics, 69, 428–433.
Blais, E., & Brisebois, D. (2021). Improving police 
responses to suicide-related emergencies: New 
evidence on the effectiveness of co-response 
police-mental health programs. Suicide and 
Life-Threatening Behavior, 51(6), 1095–1105.
Blanchard, J. J., & Neale, J. M. (1992). Medica￾tion status of participants in psychopathology 
research: Selective review of current reporting 
practices. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
101(4), 732–734.
Bleuler, E. (1950). Dementia praecox or the group 
of schizophrenias (J.  Zinken, Trans.). New 
York: International Universities Press. (Origi￾nal work published 1911)
Bleuler, M. (1978). The schizophrenic disor￾ders: Long-term patient and family studies
(S. M. Clemens, Trans.). New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.
Blixen, C.  E., Kanuch, S., Perzynski, A.  T., 
Thomas, C., Dawson, N. V., & Sajatovic, M. 
(2016). Barriers to self-management of serious 
mental illness and diabetes. American Journal 
of Health Behavior, 40(2), 194–204.
Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Minnesota. (n.d.). 
Preventive care for women. Retrieved Septem￾ber 15, 2022, from https://bluecrossmn.com/
wellbeing/preventive-care/preventive-care￾women
Bo, A., Hai, A. H., Chen, D.-G., & Hammock, K. 
(2021). Risk of bias assessments in systematic 322 References
reviews and meta-analyses of behavioral inter￾ventions for substance use outcomes. Journal of 
Clinical Epidemiology, 139, 20–27.
Boersma, P. (2020). Prevalence of Multiple 
Chronic Conditions Among US Adults, 2018. 
Preventing Chronic Disease, 17, Article e106.
Bøg, M., Filges, T., Brännström, L., Jørgensen, 
A.  M.  K., & Fredrikksson, M.  K. (2017). 
12-step programs for reducing illicit drug use. 
Campbell Systematic Reviews, 13(1), 1–149.
Bohlmeijer, E., & Westerhof, G. (2021). The 
model for sustainable mental health: Future 
directions for integrating positive psychology 
into mental health care. Frontiers in Psychol￾ogy, 12, Article 747999.
Bohus, M., Stoffers-Winterling, J., Sharp, C., 
Krause-Utz, A., Schmahl, C., & Lieb, K. 
(2021). Borderline personality disorder. Lan￾cet, 398(10310), 1528–1540.
Bond, G.  R. (1991). Variations in an assertive 
outreach model. New Directions for Mental 
Health Services, 52, 65–80.
Bond, G. R. (1992). Vocational rehabilitation. In 
R. P. Liberman (Ed.), Handbook of psychiatric 
rehabilitation (pp. 244–275). Boston: Allyn & 
Bacon.
Bond, G.  R. (1998). Principles of the individual 
placement and support model: Empirical sup￾port. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 22,
11–23.
Bond, G. R. (2004, December 14). Critical ingre￾dients of supported employment: Research 
evidence. Paper presented at the UNC/Duke 
Mental Health Seminar, Durham, NC.
Bond, G.  R. (2013). Self-assessed fidelity: Pro￾ceed with caution. Psychiatric Services, 64(4), 
393–394.
Bond, G.  R., Al-Abdulmunem, M., Marbacher, 
J., Christensen, T.  N., Sveinsdottir, V., & 
Drake, R. E. (2023). A systematic review and 
meta-analysis of IPS supported employment for 
young adults with mental health conditions. 
Administration and Policy in Mental Health 
and Mental Health Services Research, 50(1), 
160–172.
Bond, G.  R., & Dincin, J. (1986). Accelerating 
entry into transitional employment in a psy￾chosocial rehabilitation agency. Rehabilitation 
Psychology, 31, 143–155.
Bond, G. R., & Drake, R. E. (2014). Making the 
case for IPS supported employment. Admin￾istration and Policy in Mental Health, 41(1), 
69–73.
Bond, G. R., & Drake, R. E. (2015). The critical 
ingredients of assertive community treatment. 
World Psychiatry, 14(2), 240–242.
Bond, G.  R., & Drake, R.  E. (2020). Assessing 
the fidelity of evidence-based practices: History 
and current status of a standardized measure￾ment methodology. Administration and Policy 
in Mental Health, 47(6), 874–884.
Bond, G. R., Drake, R. E., & Becker, D. R. (2012). 
Generalizability of the Individual Placement and 
Support (IPS) model of supported employment 
outside the US. World Psychiatry, 11(1), 32–39.
Bond, G.  R., Drake, R.  E., & Becker, D.  R. 
(2020). An update on individual placement and 
support. World Psychiatry, 19(3), 390–391.
Bond, G. R., Drake, R., Becker, D., & Pogue, J. 
(2022, January). Measuring access to Indi￾vidual Placement Support (IPS) and Employ￾ment Outcomes for historically underserved 
groups (Issue Brief). Retrieved from www.dol.
gov/sites/dolgov/files/odep/topics/pdf/aspire￾issuebriefmeasuringrace.pdf
Bond, G. R., Drake, R. E., & Luciano, A. (2015). 
Employment and educational outcomes in early 
intervention programmes for early psychosis: A 
systematic review. Epidemiology and Psychiat￾ric Sciences, 24(5), 446–457.
Bond, G. R., Drake, R. E., McHugo, G. J., Rapp, 
C.  A., & Whitley, R. (2009). Strategies for 
improving fidelity in the National Evidence￾Based Practices Project. Research on Social 
Work Practice, 19, 569–581.
Bond, G. R., Evans, L., Salyers, M. P., Williams, 
J., & Kim, H. K. (2000). Measurement of fidel￾ity in psychiatric rehabilitation. Mental Health 
Services Research, 2, 75–87.
Bond, G. R., & Friedmeyer, M. H. (1987). Predic￾tive validity of situational assessment at a psy￾chiatric rehabilitation center. Rehabilitation 
Psychology, 32, 99–112.
Bond, G. R., Kim, S. J., Becker, D. R., Swanson, 
S.  J., Drake, R.  E., Krzos, I.  M., .  .  . Froun￾felker, R. L. (2015). A controlled trial of sup￾ported employment for people with severe men￾tal illness and justice involvement. Psychiatric 
Services, 66(10), 1027–1034.
Bond, G. R., Mascayano, F., Metcalfe, J. D., Riley, 
J., & Drake, R.  E. (2023). Access, retention, 
and effectiveness of individual placement and 
support in the US: Are there racial or ethnic dif￾ferences? Journal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 
58, 175–185.
Bond, G. R., & Resnick, S. G. (2000). Psychiat￾ric rehabilitation. In R. G. Frank & T. Elliott 
(Eds.), Handbook of rehabilitation psychology
(pp.  235–258). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association.
Bond, G.  R., Resnick, S.  G., Drake, R.  E., Xie, 
H., McHugo, G.  J., & Bebout, R.  R. (2001). 
Does competitive employment improve nonvo￾cational outcomes for people with severe men￾tal illness? Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 69, 489–501.References 323
Bond, G. R., Witheridge, T. F., Dincin, J., Was￾mer, D., Webb, J., & Graaf-Kaser, R. (1990). 
Assertive community treatment for frequent 
users of psychiatric hospitals in a large city: A 
controlled study. American Journal of Com￾munity Psychology, 18, 865–891.
Bond, G.  R., Witheridge, T.  F., Wasmer, D., 
Dincin, J., McRae, S. A., Mayes, J., & Ward, 
R. S. (1989). A comparison of two crisis hous￾ing alternatives to psychiatric hospitalization. 
Hospital and Community Psychiatry, 40,
177–183.
Bonfine, N., Wilson, A.  B., & Munetz, M.  R. 
(2020). Meeting the needs of justice-involved 
people with serious mental illness within com￾munity behavioral health systems. Psychiatric 
Services, 71(4), 355–363.
Bonta, J., Law, M., & Hanson, K. (1998). The 
prediction of criminal and violent recidivism 
among mentally disordered offenders: A meta￾analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 123(2), 123–
142.
Boothroyd, R., Poythress, N., McGaha, A., & 
Petrila, J. (2003). The Broward Mental Health 
Court: Process, outcomes, and service utiliza￾tion. International Journal of Law and Psy￾chiatry, 26, 55–71.
Bordin, E.  S. (1979). The generalizability of the 
psychoanalytic concept of the working alliance. 
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and Practice, 
16, 252–260.
Borum, R., Deane, M. W., Steadman, H., & Mor￾rissey, J. (1998). Police perspectives to respond￾ing to mentally ill people in crisis: Perceptions 
of program effectiveness. Behavioral Sciences 
and the Law, 16, 393–405.
Borzekowski, D.  G., Leith, J., Medoff, D.  R., 
Potts, W., Dixon, L. B., Balis, T., . . . Himel￾hoch, S. (2009). Use of the internet and other 
media for health information among clinic out￾patients with serious mental illness. Psychiatric 
Services, 60, 1265–1268.
Bowers, A., Owen, R., & Heller, T. (2017). Care 
coordination experiences of people with dis￾abilities enrolled in medicaid managed care. 
Disability and Rehabilitation, 39(21), 2207–
2214.
Bowers, H., Manion, I., Papadopoulos, D., & 
Gauvreau, E. (2013). Stigma in school-based 
mental health: Perceptions of young people and 
service providers. Child and Adolescent Men￾tal Health, 18(3), 165–170.
Bowie, C. R., Bell, M. D., Fiszdon, J. M., Johan￾nesen, J. K., Lindenmayer, J. P., McGurk, S. R., 
.  .  . Wykes, T. (2020). Cognitive remediation 
for schizophrenia: an expert working group 
white paper on core techniques. Schizophrenia 
Research, 215, 49–53.
Boye, B., Bentsen, H., Notland, T., Manivold, O., 
Lersbryggen, A., Oskarson, K., . . . Malt, U. F. 
(1999). What predicts the course of expressed 
emotion in relatives of patients with schizo￾phrenia or related psychosis? Social Psychiatry 
and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 34, 35–43.
Braddock, C.  H. (2010). The emerging impor￾tance and relevance of shared decision making 
to clinical practice. Medical Decision Making, 
30(5), 5–7.
Brady, K., Kileen, T. K., Brewerton, T., & Lucer￾ini, S. (2000). Comorbidity of psychiatric dis￾orders and posttraumatic stress disorder. Jour￾nal of Clinical Psychiatry, 61(Suppl. 7), 27–32.
Brady, P., Kangas, M., & McGill, K. (2017). 
“Family Matters”: A systematic review of the 
evidence for family psychoeducation for major 
depressive disorder. Journal of Marital and 
Family Therapy, 43(2), 245–263.
Braginsky, B. M., Braginsky, D. D., & Ring, K. 
(1969). The mental hospital as a last resort.
New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Brame, R., Bushway, S., Paternoster, R., & Turner, 
R. (2014). Demographic patterns of cumulative 
arrest prevalence by ages 18 and 23. Crime and 
Delinquency, 60(3), 471–486.
Brannick, M., Levine, E., & Morgeson, F. (2007). 
Job and work analysis: Methods, research, and 
applications for human resource management
(2nd ed.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Branscombe, N.  R., Schmitt, M.  T., & Harvey, 
R. D. (1999). Perceiving pervasive discrimina￾tion among African Americans: Implications 
for group identification and well-being. Jour￾nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77,
135–149.
Brantschen, E., Kawohl, W., Rössler, W., 
Bärtsch, B., & Nordt, C. (2014). Supported 
employment–improving competitive employ￾ment for people with mental illness: The role 
of motivation and social network. Journal of 
Vocational Rehabilitation, 40(1), 41–47.
Brasier, C., Roennfeldt, H., Hamilton, B., Mar￾tel, A., Hill, N., Stratford, A., . . . Brophy, L. 
(2022). Peer support work for people experi￾encing mental distress attending the emergency 
department: exploring the potential. Emer￾gency Medicine Australasia, 34(1), 78–84.
Braun, E., Gaillard, A.-S., Vollmann, J., Gather, 
J., & Scholten, M. (2023). Mental health ser￾vice users’ perspectives on psychiatric advance 
directives: A systematic review. Psychiatric Ser￾vices, 74, 381–392.
Breedvelt, J.  J.  F., Brouwer, M.  E., Harrer, M., 
Semkovska, M., Ebert, D. D., Cuijpers, P., & 
Bockting, C. L. H. (2021). Psychological inter￾ventions as an alternative and add-on to anti￾depressant medication to prevent depressive 324 References
relapse: Systematic review and meta-analysis. 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 219(4), 538–545.
Brehm, J.  W. (1966). A theory of psychological 
reactance. Cambridge, MA: Academic Press.
Brennan, P.  A., Mednick, S.  A., & Hodgins, S. 
(2000). Major mental disorders and criminal 
violence in a Danish birth cohort. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 57, 494–500.
Breslau, N. (2002). Epidemiologic studies of 
trauma, posttraumatic stress disorder, and 
other psychiatric disorders. Canadian Journal 
of Psychiatry/ Revue Canadienne de Psychiat￾rie, 47(10), 923–929.
Brett-Jones, J. R., Garety, P. A., & Hemsley, D. R. 
(1987). Measuring delusional experiences: A 
method and its application. British Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 26, 257–265.
Brewer, M.  B. (2007). The social psychology of 
intergroup relations: Social categorization, 
ingroup bias, and outgroup prejudice. In A 
W.  Kruglanski & E.  T.  Higgins (Eds), Social 
psychology: Handbook of basic principles (2nd 
ed., pp. 695–715). New York: Guilford Press.
Brewin, C. R., & Wing, J. K. (1993). The MRC 
Needs for Care Assessment: Progress and 
controversies. Psychological Medicine, 23(4), 
837–841.
Brissos, S., Molodynski, A., Dias, V. V., & Figueira, 
M. L. (2011). The importance of measuring psy￾chosocial functioning in schizophrenia. Annals 
of General Psychiatry, 10(1), Article 18.
Britt, L., & Heise, D. (2000). From shame to pride 
in identity politics. In Self, identity, and social 
movements (pp. 252–264). Minneapolis: Uni￾versity of Minnesota Press.
Broadbent, D. E. (1958). Perception and commu￾nication. Oxford, UK: Pergamon Press.
Broadbent, D. E. (1977). The hidden pre-attentive 
process. American Psychologist, 32, 109–118.
Brodwin, M.  G., Brodwin, S.  K., Liebman, R., 
Vandecreek, S., Knapp, S., & Jackson, T.  L. 
(1992). Job analyses procedures in rehabili￾tation counseling. In Innovations in clinical 
practice: A source book (Vol. 11, pp. 363–386). 
Professional Resource Press.
Broen, W.  E.  J., & Storms, L.  H. (1966). Law￾ful disorganization: The process underly￾ing a schizophrenic syndrome. Psychological 
Review, 73(4), 265–279.
Brooks, D.  E., & Hébert, L.  P. (2006). Gender, 
race, and media representation. In B. J. Dow & 
J. T. Wood (Eds.), The Sage handbook of gen￾der and communication (pp. 297–317). Thou￾sand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Brouwers, E. P. M., Mathijssen, J., Van Bortel, T., 
Knifton, L., Wahlbeck, K., Van Audenhove, C., 
. . . Van Weeghel, J. (2016). Discrimination in 
the workplace, reported by people with major 
depressive disorder: A cross-sectional study in 
35 countries. BMJ Open, 6(2), Article e009961.
Brown, G. W., Birley, J. L., & Wing, J. K. (1972). 
Influence of family life on the course of schizo￾phrenic disorders: A replication. British Jour￾nal of Psychiatry, 121, 241–258.
Brown, G. W., Monck, E., Carstairs, G., & Wing, 
J. (1962). The influence of family life on the 
course of schizophrenic illness. British Journal 
of Preventive and Social Medicine, 16, 55–68.
Brown, G.  W., & Rutter, M. (1966). The mea￾surement of family activities and relationships. 
Human Relations, 19, 241–263.
Brown, N. P., & Parrish, J. (1995). CSP champion 
of self-help. Journal of the California Alliance 
for the Mentally Ill, 6(3), 6–7.
Brown, S.  A. (2017). The effects of direct-to￾consumer-advertising on mental illness beliefs 
and stigma. Community Mental Health Jour￾nal, 53(5), 534–541.
Bruce, M.  J., & Weaver, T.  L. (2021). Test￾ing cognitive models to characterize trauma 
anniversary reactions marked by stress and 
growth. OMEGA. [Epub ahead of print] doi: 
10.1177/00302228211066687
Brunero, S., Lamont, S., & Coates, M. (2010). A 
review of empathy education in nursing. Nurs￾ing Inquiry, 17(1), 65–74.
Brunette, M. F., Mueser, K. T., & Drake, R. E. 
(2004a). A review of research on residential 
problems for people with severe mental ill￾ness and co-occurring substance use disorders. 
Drug and Alcohol Review, 23, 471–481.
Brunette, M., Richardson, F., White, L., Bemis, 
G., & Eelkema, R. (2004b). Integrated family 
treatment for parents with severe psychiatric 
disabilities. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 
28, 177–179.
Buchanan, C., Kemppainen, J., Smith, S., MacK￾ain, S., & Cox, C. (2011). Awareness of post￾traumatic stress disorder in veterans: A female 
spouse/intimate partner perspective. Military 
Medicine, 176, 743–751.
Buck, B., Hallgren, K.  A., Campbell, A.  T., 
Choudhury, T., Kane, J.  M., & Ben-Zeev, D. 
(2021). mHealth-assisted detection of precur￾sors to relapse in schizophrenia. Frontiers in 
Psychiatry, 12, Article 642200.
Budd, R., & Hughes, I. (1997). What do relatives 
of people with schizophrenia find helpful about 
family interventions? Schizophrenia Bulletin. 
23, 341–347.
Buhagiar, K., & Jabbar, F. (2019). Association of 
first- vs. second-generation antipsychotics with 
lipid abnormalities in individuals with severe 
mental illness: A systematic review and meta￾analysis. Clinical Drug Investigation, 39(3), 
253–273.References 325
Buonocore, M., Spangaro, M., Bechi, M., Baraldi, 
M. A., Cocchi, F., Guglielmino, C., . . . Caval￾laro, R. (2018). Integrated cognitive reme￾diation and standard rehabilitation therapy in 
patients of schizophrenia: Persistence after 5 
years. Schizophrenia Research, 192, 335–339.
Buonocore, M., Spangaro, M., Bechi, M., Trez￾zani, S., Terragni, R., Martini, F., . . . Caval￾laro, R. (2022). Cognitive remediation in 
schizophrenia: What happens after 10 years? 
Schizophrenia Research: Cognition, 29, Article 
100251.
Burgess, P., Pirkis, J., Coombs, T., & Rosen, A. 
(2011). Assessing the value of existing recovery 
measures for routine use in Australian mental 
health services. Australasian Psychiatry, 45(4), 
267–280.
Burke, E., Pyle, M., Machin, K., Varese, F., & 
Morrison, A. P. (2019). The effects of peer sup￾port on empowerment, self-efficacy, and inter￾nalized stigma: A narrative synthesis and meta￾analysis. Stigma and Health, 4(3), 337–356.
Burke-Miller, J., Razzano, L.  A., Grey, D.  D., 
Blyler, C. R., & Cook, J. A. (2012). Supported 
employment outcomes for transition age youth 
and young adults. Psychiatric Rehabilitation 
Journal, 35(3), 171–179.
Burland, J. (1998). Family-to-family: A trauma￾and-recovery model of family education. In 
H.  Lefley (Ed.), Family coping with mental 
illness: The cultural context (pp.  33–41). San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Burns, T. (2010). The rise and fall of assertive 
community treatment? International Review 
of Psychiatry, 22, 130–137.
Burns, T., Creed, F., Fahy, T., Thompson, S., 
Tyrer, P., & White, I. (1999). Intensive versus 
standard case management for severe psychotic 
illness: A randomized trial. UK 700 Group. 
Lancet, 353, 2185–2189.
Burns, T., Yeeles, K., Langford, O., Montes, 
M. V., Burgess, J., & Anderson, C. (2015). A 
randomised controlled trial of time-limited 
individual placement and support: IPS-LITE 
trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 207(4), 
351–356.
Butcher, J.  N., Dahlstrom, W.  G., Graham, J., 
Tellegen, A., & Kaemmer, B. (1989). Manual 
for the restandardized Minnesota Multiphasic 
Personality Inventory: MMPI-2: An admin￾istrative and interpretive guide. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Butzlaff, R. L., & Hooley, J. M. (1998). Expressed 
emotion and psychiatric relapse. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 55, 547–552.
Buzza, C., Ono, S.  S., Turvey, C., Wittrock, S., 
Noble, M., Reddy, G., Kaboli, P. J., & Reisinger, 
H. S. (2011). Distance is relative: Unpacking a 
principal barrier in rural healthcare. Journal of 
General Internal Medicine, 26(2), 648–654.
Bybee, D., Mowbray, C.  T., Oyserman, D., & 
Lewandowski, L. (2003). Variability in com￾munity functioning of mothers with serious 
mental illness. Journal of Behavioral Health 
Services and Research, 30(3), 269–289.
Caballeria, E., López-Pelayo, H., Matrai, S., & 
Gual, A. (2022). Telemedicine in the treatment 
of addictions. Current Opinion in Psychiatry,
35(4), 227–236.
Cabassa, L. J., Camacho, D., Vélez-Grau, C. M., 
& Stefancic, A. (2017). Peer-based health inter￾ventions for people with serious mental illness: 
A systematic literature review. Journal of Psy￾chiatric Research, 84, 80–89.
Cabassa, L. J., Ezell, J. M., & Lewis-Fernández, 
R. (2010). Lifestyle interventions for adults 
with serious mental illness: A systematic lit￾erature review. Psychiatric Services, 61(8), 
774–782.
Calcedo-Barba, A., Fructuoso, A., Martinez￾Raga, J., Paz, S., de Carmona, M. S., & Vicens, 
E. (2020). A meta-review of literature reviews 
assessing the capacity of patients with severe 
mental disorders to make decisions about their 
healthcare. BMC Psychiatry, 20(1), 1–14.
Callaly, T. (2014). Early intervention for young 
people with mental illness. In P.  Byrne & 
A. Rosen (Eds.), Early intervention in psychia￾try: EI of nearly everything for better mental 
health (pp. 68–78). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Campbell, D. G., Bonner, L. M., Bolkan, C. R., 
Lanto, A.  B., Zivin, K., Waltz, T.  J., .  .  . 
Chaney, E. F. (2016). Stigma predicts treatment 
preferences and care engagement among Veter￾ans Affairs primary care patients with depres￾sion. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 50(4), 
533–544.
Campbell, K., Bond, G. R., & Drake, R. E. (2011). 
Who benefits from supported employment: A 
meta-analytic study. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 
37(2), 370–380.
Canacott, L., Moghaddam, N., & Tickle, A. 
(2019). Is the Wellness Recovery Action Plan 
(WRAP) efficacious for improving personal 
and clinical recovery outcomes?: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Psychiatric Rehabili￾tation Journal, 42(4), 372–381.
Canady, V. A. (2022). President Biden’s national 
strategy to support MH workforce, address cri￾sis. Mental Health Weekly, 32(10), 1–3.
Candido, C. L., & Romney, D. M. (1990). Attribu￾tional style in paranoid vs. depressed patients. 
British Journal of Medical Psychology, 63(4), 
355–363.
Caragonne, P. (1981). An analysis of the function 
of the case manager in four mental health social 326 References
service settings (Doctoral dissertation, Univer￾sity of Michigan, 1981). Dissertation Abstracts 
International, 41, 3262A.
Carey, K. B., & Correia, C. J. (1998). Severe men￾tal illness and addictions: Assessment consider￾ations. Addictive Behaviors, 23, 735–748.
Carling, P. J. (1990). Major mental illness, hous￾ing, and supports. American Psychologist, 45,
969–975.
Carling, P. J. (1994). Supports and rehabilitation 
for housing and community living. In L. Spaniol 
& Publications Committee (Eds.), An introduc￾tion to psychiatric rehabilitation (pp. 89–110). 
Columbia, MD: International Association of 
Psychosocial Rehabilitation Services.
Carling, P. J. (1995). Return to community: Build￾ing support systems for people with psychiatric 
disabilities. New York: Guilford Press.
Carlson, L., Eichler, M.  S., Huff, S., & Rapp, 
C. A. (2003). A tale of two cities: Best practices 
in supported education. Lawrence: University 
of Kansas, School of Social Welfare.
Carney, C. P., Yates, W. R., Goerdt, C. J., & Doe￾bbeling, B. N. (1998). Psychiatrists’ and inter￾nists’ knowledge and attitudes about delivery of 
clinical preventive medical services. Psychiatric 
Services, 49(12), 1594–1600.
Carpenter, W. T., Heinrichs, D. W., & Wagman, 
A.  M. (1988). Deficit and nondeficit forms of 
schizophrenia: The concept. American Journal 
of Psychiatry, 145(5), 578–583.
Carpenter-Song, E. A., Schwallie, M. N., & Long￾hofer, J. (2007). Cultural competence reexam￾ined: Critique and directions for the future. 
Psychiatric Services, 58(10), 1362–1365.
Carrà, G., Crocamo, C., Angermeyer, M., Brugha, 
T., Toumi, M., & Bebbington, P. (2019). Posi￾tive and negative symptoms in schizophrenia: 
A longitudinal analysis using latent variable 
structural equation modelling. Schizophrenia 
Research, 204, 58–64.
Casagrande, S., Fradkin, J.  E., Saydah, S.  H., 
Rust, K. F., & Cowie, C. C. (2010). The preva￾lence of meeting A1C, blood pressure, and LDL 
goals among people with diabetes, 1988–2010. 
Diabetes Care, 36(8), 2271–2279.
Catalan, A., Salazar de Pablo, G., Vaquerizo Ser￾rano, J., Mosillo, P., Baldwin, H., Fernández￾Rivas, A., .  .  . Fusar-Poli, P. (2021). Annual 
Research Review: Prevention of psychosis in 
adolescents—systematic review and meta￾analysis of advances in detection, prognosis 
and intervention. Journal of Child Psychology 
and Psychiatry, 62(5), 657–673.
Catapano, L., & Castle, D. (2004). Obesity in 
schizophrenia: What can be done about it? 
Australasian Psychiatry, 12(1), 23–25.
Cavanagh, M., & Grant, A. M. (2006). Coaching 
psychology and the scientist-practitioner 
model. In D. A. Lane & S. Corrie (Eds.), The 
modern scientist-practitioner: A guide to prac￾tice in psychology (pp.  146–157). New York: 
Routledge.
Cella, M., Edwards, C., Swan, S., Elliot, K., 
Reeder, C., & Wykes, T. (2019). Exploring the 
effects of cognitive remediation on metacogni￾tion in people with schizophrenia. Journal of 
Experimental Psychopathology, 10(2), Article 
2043808719826846.
Cella, M., Preti, A., Edwards, C., Dow, T., & 
Wykes, T. (2017). Cognitive remediation for 
negative symptoms of schizophrenia: A net￾work meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology 
Review, 52, 43–51.
Cella, M., Price, T., Corboy, H., Onwumere, J., 
Shergill, S., & Preti, A. (2020). Cognitive reme￾diation for inpatients with psychosis: A system￾atic review and meta-analysis. Psychological 
Medicine, 50(7), 1062–1076.
Center for Substance Abuse Treatment. (2015). 
Comprehensive Case Management for Sub￾stance Abuse Treatment. Treatment Improve￾ment Protocol (TIP) Series, No. 27 (HHS Pub￾lication No. (SMA) 15–4215). Rockville, MD: 
Center for Substance Abuse Treatment.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
(2020). CDC WONDER: Underlying cause 
of death, 1999–2019. https://wonder.cdc.gov/
deaths-by-underlying-cause.html
Ceraso, A., Lin, J. J., Schneider-Thoma, J., Siafis, 
S., Heres, S., Kissling, W., . . . Leucht, S. (2022). 
Maintenance treatment with antipsychotic 
drugs in schizophrenia: A Cochrane Systematic 
Review and meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Bul￾letin, 48(4), 738–740.
Chadwick, P., Birchwood, M.  J., & Trower, P. 
(1996). Cognitive therapy for delusions, voices, 
and paranoia. New York: Wiley.
Chamberlin, J. (1978). On our own: Patient￾controlled alternatives to the mental health 
system. New York: Hawthorn.
Chamberlin, J. (1990). The ex-patients’ move￾ment: Where we’ve been and where we’re going. 
Journal of Mind and Behavior, 11, 323–336.
Chan, L., Hart, L.  G., & Goodman, D.  C. 
(2006). Geographic access to health care for 
rural medicare beneficiaries. Journal of Rural 
Health, 22(2), 140–146.
Chandler, D., Hu, T., Meisel, J., McGowen, M., 
& Madison, K. (1997). Mental health costs, 
other public costs, and family burden among 
mental health clients in capitated integrated 
service agencies. Journal of Mental Health 
Administration, 24, 178–188.
Chandra, A., & Minkovitz, C. S. (2007). Factors 
that influence mental health stigma among 8th References 327
grade adolescents. Journal of Youth and Ado￾lescence, 36, 763–774.
Chapman, S. A., Blash, L. K., Mayer, K., & Spetz, 
J. (2018). Emerging roles for peer providers 
in mental health and substance use disorders. 
American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 
54(6), S267–S274.
Charlet, K., & Heinz, A. (2017). Harm reduc￾tion—A systematic review on effects of alcohol 
reduction on physical and mental symptoms. 
Addiction Biology, 22(5), 1119–1159.
Chen, F., & Greenberg, J. (2004). A positive aspect 
of caregiving: The influence of social support 
on caregiving gains for family members of rela￾tives with schizophrenia. Community Mental 
Health Journal, 40, 423–435.
Cheng, H., Kwan, K.  K., & Sevig, T. (2013). 
Racial and ethnic minority college students’ 
stigma associated with seeking psychological 
help: Examining psychocultural correlates. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 60, 98–111.
Cherry, M. G., Taylor, P. J., Brown, S. L., Rigby, 
J.  W., & Sellwood, W. (2017). Guilt, shame 
and expressed emotion in carers of people 
with long-term mental health difficulties: A 
systematic review. Psychiatry Research, 249,
139–151.
Chesney, E., Goodwin, G. M., & Fazel, S. (2014). 
Risks of all-cause and suicide mortality in men￾tal disorders: A meta-review. World Psychiatry,
13(2), 153–160.
Cheung, R. Y., Mak, W. W., Tsang, P. S., & Lau, 
J. T. (2018). Stigma of psychosis: Do diagnos￾tic label, symptom manifestation, and gender 
matter? American Journal of Orthopsychiatry,
88(5), 529–537.
Chicago Health Disparities Center. (2020). Peer 
navigators for people with mental illness: 
Workbook. https://chicagohealthdisparities.
org/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/workbook￾for-african-american-peer-navigators-1.pdf
Chien, W. T., Bressington, D., & Chan, S. W. C. 
(2018). A randomized controlled trial on 
mutual support group intervention for fami￾lies of people with recent-onset psychosis: A 
four-year follow-up. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 9,
710–710.
Chien, W. T., & Chan, S. W. C. (2004). One-year 
follow-up of a multiple-family-group inter￾vention for Chinese families of patients with 
schizophrenia. Psychiatric Services, 55(11), 
1276–1284.
Chien, W. T., Clifton, A. V., Zhao, S., & Lui, S. 
(2019). Peer support for people with schizo￾phrenia or other serious mental illness. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,
(4), CD010880.
Chien, W.  T., & Thompson, D.  R. (2013). An 
RCT with three-year follow-up of peer support 
groups for Chinese families of persons with 
schizophrenia. Psychiatric Services, 64(10), 
997–1005.
Chien, W. T., Thompson, D. R., Leung, S. F., & 
Bressington, D. (2022). Quality of life, symp￾tom severity and level of functioning in people 
with severe mental illness ready for hospital 
discharge. Journal of Psychiatric and Mental 
Health Nursing, 29(1), 14–24.
Chien, W.-T., Thompson, D.  R., & Norman, I. 
(2008). Evaluation of a peer-led mutual sup￾port group for Chinese families of people with 
schizophrenia. American Journal of Commu￾nity Psychology, 42(1–2), 122–134.
Chinman, M., George, P., Dougherty, R. H., Dan￾iels, A. S., Ghose, S. S., Swift, A., & Delphin￾Rittmon, M.  E. (2014). Peer support services 
for individuals with serious mental illnesses: 
Assessing the evidence. Psychiatric Services,
65(4), 429–441.
Chinman, M., McCarthy, S., Mitchell-Miland, 
C., Daniels, K., Youk, A., & Edelen, M. (2016). 
Early stages of development of a peer special￾ist fidelity measure. Psychiatric Rehabilitation 
Journal, 39(3), 256–265.
Chivilgina, O., Elger, B.  S., & Jotterand, F. 
(2021). Digital technologies for schizophrenia 
management: A descriptive review. Science and 
Engineering Ethics, 27(2), 25.
Choi, J., Mogami, T., & Medalia, A. (2010). 
Intrinsic motivation inventory: An adapted 
measure for schizophrenia research. Schizo￾phrenia Bulletin, 36(5), 966–976.
Chou, K.-R., Chen, R., Lee, J.-F., Ku, C.-H., & 
Lu, R.-B. (2004). The effectiveness of nicotine￾patch therapy for smoking cessation in patients 
with schizophrenia. International Journal of 
Nursing Studies, 41(3), 321–330.
Chou, Y., Pu, C.  Y., Lee, Y.  C., Lin, L.  C., & 
Kröger, T. (2009). Effect of perceived stigma￾tization on the quality of life among ageing 
female family carers: A comparison of carers of 
adults with intellectual disability and carers of 
adults with mental illness. Journal of Intellec￾tual Disability Research, 53(7), 654–664.
Christopher, N. (1998). Modeling level and dura￾tion of care decisions for acute psychiatric ser￾vices in a managed care environment. Unpub￾lished Dissertation, Northwestern University, 
Evanston, IL.
Ciarrochi, J., Hayes, S. C., Oades, L. G., & Hof￾mann, S.  G. (2021). Toward a unified frame￾work for positive psychology interventions: 
Evidence-based processes of change in coach￾ing, prevention, and training. Frontiers in Psy￾chology, 12, Article 809362.
Cimpean, D., Torrey, W.  C., & Green, A.  I. 328 References
(2005). Schizophrenia and co-occurring gen￾eral medical illness. Psychiatric Annals, 35(1), 
71–72, 74–76, 78–81.
Ciompi, L. (1980). Catamnestic long-term study 
on the course of life and aging of schizophre￾nia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 6, 606–618.
Citron, M., Solomon, P., & Draine, J. (1999). Self￾help groups for families of persons with mental 
illness: Perceived benefits of helpfulness. Com￾munity Mental Health Journal, 35, 15–30.
Clark, C. C., & Krupa, T. (2002). Reflections on 
empowerment in community mental health: 
Giving shape to an elusive idea. Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation Journal, 25(4), 341–349.
Clark, C., & Rich, A.  R. (2003). Outcomes of 
homeless adults with mental illness in a housing 
program and in case management only. Psychi￾atric Services, 54, 78–83.
Clark, R. E. (1998). Supported employment and 
managed care: Can they coexist? Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation Journal, 22(1), 62–68.
Clausen, W., Watanabe-Galloway, S., Baerentzen, 
M. B., & Britigan, D. H. (2016). Health literacy 
among people with serious mental illness. Com￾munity Mental Health Journal, 52(4), 399–405.
Clay, S., with Schell, B., Corrigan, P. W., & Ralph, 
R. (Eds.). (2005). On our own, together: Peer 
programs for people with mental illness. Nash￾ville, TN: Vanderbilt University Press.
Clayton, A., Miller, R., Gambino, M., Rowe, M., 
& Ponce, A. N. (2020). Structural barriers to 
citizenship: A mental health provider perspec￾tive. Community Mental Health Journal, 
56(1), 32–41.
Clement, S., Schauman, O., Graham, T., Mag￾gioni, F., Evans-Lacko, S., Bezborodovs, N., . . . 
Thornicroft, G. (2015). What is the impact of 
mental health-related stigma on help-seeking?: 
A systematic review of quantitative and quali￾tative studies. Psychological Medicine, 45(1), 
11–27.
Cnaan, R. A., Blankertz, L., Messinger, K. W., & 
Gardner, J. R. (1988). Psychosocial rehabilita￾tion: Toward a definition. Psychosocial Reha￾bilitation Journal, 11(4), 61–77.
Cnaan, R. A., Blankertz, L., Messinger, K. W., & 
Gardner, J. R. (1989). Psychosocial rehabilita￾tion: Toward a theoretical base. Psychosocial 
Rehabilitation Journal, 13(1), 33–55.
Coffey, M., Hannigan, B., Barlow, S., Cartwright, 
M., Cohen, R., Faulkner, A., & Simpson, A. 
(2019). Recovery-focused mental health care 
planning and co-ordination in acute inpatient 
mental health settings: a cross national com￾parative mixed methods study. BMC Psychia￾try, 19(1), 1–18.
Cohen, M. R., Anthony, W. A., & Farkas, M. D. 
(1997). Assessing and developing readiness for 
psychiatric rehabilitation. Psychiatric Services,
48(5), 644–646.
Cohen, P. S. (2001). Being “reasonable”: Defining 
and implementing a right to community-based 
care for older adults with mental disabilities 
under the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
International Journal of Law and Psychiatry, 
24, 233–252.
Coldham, E. L., Addington, J., & Addington, D. 
(2002). Medication adherence of individuals 
with a first episode of psychosis. Acta Psychi￾atrica Scandinavica, 106, 286–290.
Cole, E. (2009). Intersectionality and research in 
psychology. American Psychologist, 64, 170–
180.
Cole, J. D., & Kazarian, S. S. (1988). The Level 
of Expressed Emotion Scale: A new measure 
of expressed emotion. Journal of Clinical Psy￾chology, 44(3), 392–397.
Collins, S.  E., Clifasefi, S.  L., Stanton, J., the 
Leap Advisory Board, Straits, K.  J.  E., Gil￾Kashiwabara, E., .  .  . Wallerstein, N. (2018). 
Community-based participatory research 
(CBPR): Towards equitable involvement of 
community in psychology research. American 
Psychologist, 73(7), 884–898.
Comartin, E.  B., Burgess-Proctor, A., Hicks, 
M. R., Putans, L., & Kubiak, S. P. (2022). A 
statewide evaluation of jail-based mental health 
interventions. Psychology, Public Policy, and 
Law, 28(3), 433–445.
Comartin, E. B., Nelson, V., Smith, S., & Kubiak, 
S. (2021). The criminal/legal experiences 
of individuals with mental illness along the 
Sequential Intercept Model: An eight-site study. 
Criminal Justice and Behavior, 48(1), 76–95.
Cometa, M.  S., Morrison, J.  K., & Ziskoven, 
M. (1979). Halfway to where?: A critique of 
research on psychiatric halfway houses. Jour￾nal of Community Psychology, 7, 23–27.
Complete Guide to Annual Health Screenings 
by Age | Columbia NPG. (2020, January 7). 
Retrieved from www.columbianps.org/healthy￾life-blog/guide-to-annual-health-screenings￾by-age
Compton, M.  T., Graves, J., Zern, A., Pauselli, 
L., Anderson, S., Ashekun, O., .  .  . Wood, J. 
(2022). Characterizing arrests and charges 
among individuals with serious mental illnesses 
in public-sector treatment settings. Psychiatric 
Services, 73(10), 1102–1108.
Compton, M. T., Zern, A., Pope, L. G., Gesser, 
N., Stagoff-Belfort, A., Tan de Bibiana, J., . . . 
Smith, T.  E. (2023). Misdemeanor charges 
among individuals with serious mental ill￾nesses: A statewide analysis of more than two 
million arrests. Psychiatric Services, 74(1), 
31–37.References 329
Conley, D.  L. (2021). The impact of structural 
stigma and other factors on state mental health 
legislative outcomes during the Trump admin￾istration. Stigma and Health, 6, 476–486.
Connell, J., O’Cathain, A., & Brazier, J. (2014). 
Measuring quality of life in mental health: Are 
we asking the right questions? Social Science 
and Medicine, 120, 12–20.
Conner, K.  O., Copeland, V.  C., Grote, N.  K., 
Koeske, G., Rosen, D., Reynolds, C.  F., .  .  . 
Brown, C. (2010). Mental health treatment 
seeking among older adults with depression: 
The impact of stigma and race. American Jour￾nal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 18, 531–543.
Cook, J.  A., Burke-Miller, J.  K., & Roessel, E. 
(2016). Long-term effects of evidence-based 
supported employment on earnings and on SSI 
and SSDI participation among individuals with 
psychiatric disabilities. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 173(10), 1007–1014.
Cook, J. A., & Hoffschmidt, S. J. (1993). Compre￾hensive models of psychosocial rehabilitation. 
In R. W. Flexer & P. L. Solomon (Eds.), Psy￾chiatric rehabilitation in practice (pp. 81–97). 
Boston: Andover.
Cook, J.  A., & Razzano, L. (1992). Natural 
vocational supports for persons with severe 
mental illness: Thresholds Supported Competi￾tive Employment Program. In L. I. Stein (Ed.), 
Innovative community mental health pro￾grams (pp. 23–41). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Cook, J. A., & Solomon, M. L. (1993). The Com￾munity Scholar Program: An outcome study of 
supported education for students with severe 
mental illness. Psychosocial Rehabilitation 
Journal, 17, 83–97.
Cook, J.  A., Steigman, P.  J., Swarbrick, M., 
Burke-Miller, J. K., Laing, T. B., Vite, L., . . . 
Brown, I. (2023). Outcomes of peer-provided 
individual placement and support services in 
a mental health peer-run vocational program. 
Psychiatric Services, 74, 480–487.
Copeland, M.  E., & Mead, S. (2004). Wellness 
Recovery Action Plan and Peer Support: Per￾sonal, group and program development. Dum￾merston, VT: Peach Press.
Copeland, W.  E., Shanahan, L., Hinesley, J., 
Chan, R. F., Aberg, K. A., Fairbank, J. A., . . . 
Costello, E. J. (2018). Association of childhood 
trauma exposure with adult psychiatric disor￾ders and functional outcomes. JAMA Network 
Open, 1(7), e184493–e184493.
Corbett, J. (1994). A Proud Label: Exploring the 
relationship between disability politics and gay 
pride. Disability and Society, 9(3), 343–357.
Corcoran, R. (2001). Theory of mind and schizo￾phrenia. In P.  W.  Corrigan & D.  L.  Penn 
(Eds.), Social cognition and schizophrenia
(pp. 149–174). Washington, DC: American Psy￾chological Association.
Correll, C. U., Detraux, J., De Lepeleire, J., & De 
Hert, M. (2015). Effects of antipsychotics, anti￾depressants and mood stabilizers on risk for 
physical diseases in people with schizophrenia, 
depression and bipolar disorder. World Psychi￾atry, 14(2), 119–136.
Correll, C. U., Galling, B., Pawar, A., Krivko, A., 
Bonetto, C., Ruggeri, M., . . . Kane, J. M. (2018). 
Comparison of early intervention services vs 
treatment as usual for early-phase psychosis: 
A systematic review, meta-analysis, and meta￾regression. JAMA Psychiatry, 75(6), 555–565.
Correll, C. U., Solmi, M., Veronese, N., Bortolato, 
B., Rosson, S., Santonastaso, P., . . . Stubbs, B. 
(2017). Prevalence, incidence and mortality 
from cardiovascular disease in patients with 
pooled and specific severe mental illness: A 
large-scale meta-analysis of 3,211,768 patients 
and 113,383,368 controls. World Psychiatry, 
16(2), 163–180.
Corrigan, P.  W. (1990). Consumer satisfaction 
with institutional and community care. Com￾munity Mental Health Journal, 26(2), 151–165.
Corrigan, P. W. (1995). Use of a token economy 
with seriously mentally ill patients: Criticisms 
and misconceptions. Psychiatric Services, 46,
1258–1263.
Corrigan, P.  W. (1996). Models of “normal” 
cognitive functioning. In P.  W.  Corrigan & 
S.  C.  Yudofsky (Eds.), Cognitive rehabilita￾tion for neuropsychiatric disorders (pp. 3–51). 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Corrigan, P. W. (2000). Mental health stigma as 
social attribution: Implications for research 
methods and attitude change. Clinical Psychol￾ogy: Science and Practice, 7, 48–67.
Corrigan, P. W. (2001). Place-then-train: An alter￾native paradigm for psychiatric disabilities. 
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 8,
334–349.
Corrigan, P.  W. (2002). The paradox of self￾stigma and mental illness. Clinical Psychology: 
Science and Practice, 9, 35–53.
Corrigan, P.  W. (2003). Towards an integrated, 
structural model of psychiatric rehabilitation. 
Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 26, 346–
358.
Corrigan, P.  W. (2004). How stigma interferes 
with mental health care. American Psycholo￾gist, 59, 614–625.
Corrigan, P. W. (Ed.). (2005). On the stigma of 
mental illness: Practical strategies for research 
and social change. Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association.
Corrigan, P. W. (2011a). Dignity to fail. Psychiat￾ric Services, 62, Article 241.330 References
Corrigan, P. W. (2011b). Strategic Stigma Change 
(SSC): Five principles for social marketing cam￾paigns meant to erase the prejudice and dis￾crimination of mental illness. Psychiatric Ser￾vices, 62(8), 824–826.
Corrigan, P. W. (2013). The risk of prognostica￾tion. Psychiatric Services, 64(8), Article 719.
Corrigan, P. W. (Ed.). (2014). The stigma of dis￾ease and disability: Understanding causes and 
overcoming injustices (pp. xi, 319). Washing￾ton, DC: American Psychological Association.
Corrigan, P. W. (2018). The stigma effect: Unin￾tended consequences of mental health cam￾paigns. New York: Columbia University Press.
Corrigan, P. W. (2021). The Power of Peer Provid￾ers in Mental Health Services—Nova Science 
Publishers. https://novapublishers.com/shop/
the-power-of-peer-providers-in-mental-health￾services
Corrigan, P.  W., Angell, B., Davidson, L., Mar￾cus, S.  C., Salzer, M.  S., Kottsieper, P., .  .  . 
Stanhope, V. (2012). From adherence to self￾determination: Evolution of a treatment para￾digm for people with serious mental illnesses. 
Psychiatric Services, 63(2), 169–173.
Corrigan, P. W., & Ballentine, S. L. (Eds.). (2021). 
Health and wellness in people living with seri￾ous mental illness. Washington, DC: American 
Psychiatric Association.
Corrigan, P. W., & Basit, A. (1997). Generaliza￾tion of social skills training for persons with 
severe mental illness. Cognitive and Behavioral 
Practice, 4, 197–206.
Corrigan, P.  W., Bink, A.  B., Fokuo, J.  K., & 
Schmidt, A. (2015). The public stigma of men￾tal illness means a difference between you and 
me. Psychiatry Research, 226, 186–191.
Corrigan, P.  W., Buican, B., & McCracken, S. 
(1995). The Needs and Resources Assessment 
Interview for severely mentally ill adults. Psy￾chiatric Services, 46(5), 504–505.
Corrigan, P.  W., Buican, B., & McCracken, S. 
(1996). Can severely mentally ill adults reliably 
report their needs? Journal of Nervous and 
Mental Disease, 184(9), 523–529.
Corrigan, P. W., & Cooper, A. (2005). Mental ill￾ness and dangerousness: Fact or misperception, 
and implications for stigma. In P. W. Corrigan 
(Ed.), On the stigma of mental illness: Practi￾cal strategies for research and social change
(pp.  165–179). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association.
Corrigan, P.  W., Druss, B.  G., & Perlick, D.  A. 
(2014). The impact of mental illness stigma on 
seeking and participating in mental health care. 
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 
15, 37–70.
Corrigan, P. W., Faber, D., Rashid, F., & Leary, 
M. (1999). The construct validity of empower￾ment among consumers of mental health ser￾vices. Schizophrenia Research, 38, 77–84.
Corrigan, P. W., Gause, M., Michaels, P., Buch￾holz, B., & Larson, J. (2014). The California 
Assessment of Stigma Change: A short battery 
to measure improvements in the public stigma 
of mental illness. Community Mental Health 
Journal, 51, 635–640.
Corrigan, P.  W., & Jakus, M.  R. (1993). The 
Patient Satisfaction Interview for partial hos￾pitalization programs. Psychological Reports,
72(2), 387–390.
Corrigan, P. W., Kosyluk, K. A., Konadu Fokuo, 
J., & Park, J.  H. (2014). How does direct to 
consumer advertising affect the stigma of men￾tal illness? Community Mental Health Journal,
50(7), 792–799.
Corrigan, P.  W., Kosyluk, K.  A., & Rüsch, N. 
(2013). Reducing self-stigma by Coming Out 
Proud. American Journal of Public Health,
103(5), 794–800.
Corrigan, P.  W., Larson, J.  E., & Rüsch, N. 
(2009). Self-stigma and the “why try” effect: 
Impact on life goals and evidence-based prac￾tices. World Psychiatry, 8, 75–81.
Corrigan, P.  W., & Lee, E.-J. (2020). Family￾centered decision making for East Asian adults 
with mental illness. Psychiatric Services, 72(1), 
114–116.
Corrigan, P.  W., & Lee, E.-J. (2021). Family￾centered decision making for east Asian adults 
with mental illness. Psychiatric Services, 72(1), 
114–116.
Corrigan, P. W., & Liberman, R. P. (Eds.). (1994). 
Behavior therapy in psychiatric hospitals. New 
York: Springer.
Corrigan, P. W., Liberman, R. P., & Engel, J. D. 
(1990). From noncompliance to collaboration 
in the treatment of schizophrenia. Hospital and 
Community Psychiatry, 41(11), 1203–1211.
Corrigan, P. W., & Lundin, R. (2001). Don’t call 
me nuts!: Coping with the stigma of mental ill￾ness. Tinley Park, IL: Recovery Press.
Corrigan, P.  W., Markowitz, F., Watson, A., 
Rowan, D., & Kubiak, M. A. (2003). An attri￾bution model of public discrimination towards 
persons with mental illness. Journal of Health 
and Social Behavior, 44, 162–179.
Corrigan, P. W., McCorkle, B., Schell, B., & Kid￾der, K. (2003). Religion and spirituality in the 
lives of people with serious mental illness. Com￾munity Mental Health Journal, 39, 487–500.
Corrigan, P.  W., & McCracken, S.  G. (1997). 
Intervention research: Integrating practice 
guidelines with dissemination strategies. 
Applied and Preventive Psychology, 6, 205–
209.References 331
Corrigan, P.  W., & McCracken, S.  G. (2005). 
Place first, then train: A substitute for a medi￾cal model of psychiatric rehabilitation. Social 
Work, 50, 31–42.
Corrigan, P.  W., McCracken, S.  G., & Holmes, 
E.  P. (2001). Motivational interviews as goal 
assessment for persons with psychiatric disabil￾ity. Community Mental Health Journal, 37,
113–122.
Corrigan, P.  W., McCracken, S.  G., Kommana, 
S., Edwards, M., & Simpatico, T. (1996). Staff 
perceptions about barriers to innovative behav￾ioral rehabilitation programs. Cognitive Ther￾apy and Research, 20, 541–551.
Corrigan, P.  W., Michaels, P.  J., & Morris, S. 
(2015). Do the effects of antistigma programs 
persist over time? Findings from a meta￾analysis. Psychiatric Services, 66(5), 543–546.
Corrigan, P. W., & Miller, F. E. (2004). Shame, 
blame, and contamination: A review of the 
impact of mental illness stigma on family mem￾bers. Journal of Mental Health, 13, 537–548.
Corrigan, P.  W., Mittal, D., Reaves, C.  M., 
Haynes, T. F., Han, X., Morris, S., . . . Sullivan, 
G. (2014). Mental health stigma and primary 
health care decisions. Psychiatry Research, 
218, 35–38.
Corrigan, P. W., Morris, S., Larson, J. E., Rafacz, 
J., Wassel, A., Michaels, P., .  .  . Rüsch, N. 
(2010). Self-stigma and coming out about one’s 
mental illness. Journal of Community Psychol￾ogy, 38(3), 1–17.
Corrigan, P.  W., Morris, S.  B., Michaels, P.  J., 
Rafacz, J.  E., & Rüsch, N. (2012). Challeng￾ing the public stigma of mental illness: A meta￾analysis of outcome studies. Psychiatric Ser￾vices, 63(10), 963–973.
Corrigan, P. W., & Penn, D. L. (1995). The effects 
of antipsychotic and antiparkinsonian medi￾cation on psychosocial skill learning. Clinical 
Psychology: Science and Practice, 2, 251–262.
Corrigan, P.  W., & Penn, D.  L. (1999). Lessons 
from social psychology on discrediting psychi￾atric stigma. American Psychologist, 54(9), 
765–776.
Corrigan, P. W., Powell, K. J., & Michaels, P. J. 
(2014). Brief battery for measurement of stig￾matizing versus affirming attitudes about men￾tal illness. Psychiatry Research, 215, 466–470.
Corrigan, P. W., Qin, S., Davidson, L., Schomerus, 
G., Shuman, V., & Smelson, D. (2019). How 
does the public understand recovery from 
severe mental illness versus substance use disor￾der? Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 42(4), 
341–349.
Corrigan, P. W., Rafacz, J., Hautamaki, J., Wal￾ton, J., Rüsch, N., Rao, D., .  .  . Reeder, G. 
(2010). Changing stigmatizing perceptions and 
recollections about mental illness: The effects 
of NAMI’s in Our Own Voice. Community 
Mental Health Journal, 46(5), 517–522.
Corrigan, P. W., & Rao, D. (2012). On the self￾stigma of mental illness: Stages, disclosure, and 
strategies for change. Canadian Journal of Psy￾chiatry, 57, 464–469.
Corrigan, P. W., River, L. P., Lundin, R. K., Penn, 
D. L., Uphoff-Wasowski, K., Campion, J., . . . 
Kubiak, M.  A. (2001). Three strategies for 
changing attributions about severe mental ill￾ness. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 27(2), 187–195.
Corrigan, P. W., Rowan, D., Green, A., Lundin, 
R., River, P., Uphoff-Wasowski, K., . . . Kubiak, 
M. A. (2002). Challenging two mental illness 
stigmas: Personal responsibility and dangerous￾ness. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 28(2), 293–309.
Corrigan, P. W., Salzer, M., Ralph, R. O., Sang￾ster, Y., & Keck, L. (2004). Examining the fac￾tor structure of the Recovery Assessment Scale. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 30(4), 1035–1041.
Corrigan, P.  W., Sheehan, L., Walley, G., Qin, 
S., Nieweglowski, K., & Maurer, K. (2020). 
Strengths and challenges of peer coaches for 
supported education in colleges and universi￾ties. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 43(3), 
175–178.
Corrigan, P.  W., & Stephenson, J.  A. (1994). 
Information processing and clinical psychol￾ogy. In V. S. Ramachandran (Ed.), Encyclope￾dia of human behavior (Vol. 2, pp. 645–654). 
Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Corrigan, P. W., & Storzbach, D. (1993). The eco￾logical validity of cognitive rehabilitation for 
schizophrenia. Journal of Cognitive Rehabili￾tation, 11(3), 14–21.
Corrigan, P. W., Talluri, S. S., & Qin, S. (2021). 
Difference and disdain as indicators of the pub￾lic stigma of mental illness. Journal of Nervous 
and Mental Disease, 209(9), 645–649.
Corrigan, P. W., Talluri, S. S., & Shah, B. (2022). 
Formal peer-support services that address pri￾orities of people with psychiatric disabilities: 
A systematic review. American Psychologist,
77(9), 1104–1116.
Corrigan, P.  W., & Watson, A.  C. (2003). Fac￾tors that explain how policy makers distribute 
resources to mental health services. Psychiatric 
Services, 54(4), 501–507.
Corrigan, P. W., & Watson, A. C. (2005). Find￾ings from the National Comorbidity Survey on 
the frequency of dangerous behavior in indi￾viduals with psychiatric disorders. Psychiatry 
Research, 136, 153–162.
Corrigan, P. W., Watson, A. C., Gracia, G., Slo￾pen, N., Rasinski, K., & Hall, L.  L. (2005). 
Newspaper stories as measures of structural 
stigma. Psychiatric Services, 56, 551–556.332 References
Corrigan, P. W., Watson, A. C., & Miller, F. E. 
(2006). Blame, shame, and contamination: The 
impact of mental illness and drug dependence 
stigma of family members. Journal of Family 
Psychology, 20, 239–246.
Corrigan, P. W., Watson, A. C., Warpinski, A. C., 
& Garcia, C. (2004). Implications of educat￾ing the public on mental illness, violence, and 
stigma. Psychiatric Services, 55(5), 577–580.
Corrigan, P. W., & Yudofsky, S. C. (Eds.). (1996). 
Cognitive rehabilitation of neuropsychiatric 
disorders. Washington, DC: American Psychi￾atric Press.
Corse, S.  J., Hirschinger, N.  B., & Zanis, D. 
(1995). The use of the Addiction Severity Index 
with people with severe mental illness. Psychi￾atric Rehabilitation Journal, 19, 9–18.
Costa, P.  T., & McCrae, R.  R. (1992). Revised 
NEO Personality Inventory (NEO PI-R) and 
NEO Five-Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI). Lutz, 
FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Cournos, F., & McKinnon, K. (1997). HIV sero￾prevalence among people with severe mental 
illness in the United States: A critical review. 
Clinical Psychology Review, 17(3), 259–269.
Crabtree, J.  W., Haslam, A.  S., Postmes, T., & 
Haslam, C. (2010). Mental health support 
groups, stigma, and self-esteem: Postive and 
negative implications of group identification. 
Journal of Social Issues, 66, 553–569.
Craddock, N., & Mynors-Wallis, L. (2014). 
Psychiatric diagnosis: Impersonal, imperfect 
and important. British Journal of Psychiatry,
204(2), 93–95.
Craig, R.  T. (2008). Millon Clinical Multiaxial 
Inventory–III. In Personality Assessment. New 
York: Routledge.
Cramm, J.  M., & Nieboer, A.  P. (2012). Self￾management abilities, physical health and 
depressive symptoms among patients with car￾diovascular diseases, chronic obstructive pul￾monary disease, and diabetes. Patient Educa￾tion and Counseling, 87(3), 411–415.
Creer, C., & Wing, J. K. (1974). Schizophrenia at 
home. Surbiton, UK: National Schizophrenia 
Fellowship.
Cremaschi, L., Kardell, M., Johansson, V., Isgren, 
A., Sellgren, C. M., Altamura, A. C., . . . Lan￾dén, M. (2017). Prevalences of autoimmune 
diseases in schizophrenia, bipolar I and II dis￾order, and controls. Psychiatry Research, 258,
9–14.
Crenshaw, K. (1989). Demarginalizing the inter￾section of race and sex: A Black Feminist cri￾tique of antidiscrimination doctrine. Univer￾sity of Chicago Legal Forum, 1989, 139–168.
Crews, C., Batal, H., Elasy, T., Casper, E., & 
Mehler, P.  S. (1998). Primary care for those 
with severe and persistent mental illness. West￾ern Journal of Medicine, 169(4), 245–250.
Crocetti, G., Spiro, H. R., & Siassi, I. (1971). Are 
the ranks closed?: Attitudinal social distance 
and mental illness. American Journal of Psy￾chiatry, 127, 1121–1127.
Crocker, J., & Major, B. (1989). Social stigma 
and self-esteem: The self-protective properties 
of stigma. Psychological Review, 96, 608–630.
Crocker, J., Major, B., & Steele, C. (1998). Social 
stigma. In D.  T.  Gilbert, S.  Fiske, & G.  Lin￾dzey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychol￾ogy (Vol. 2, 4th ed., pp. 504–553). New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Cronise, R., Teixeira, C., Rogers, E. S., & Har￾rington, S. (2016). The peer support workforce: 
Results of a national survey. Psychiatric Reha￾bilitation Journal, 39(3), 211–221.
Cross, A. B., Mulvey, E. P., Schubert, C. A., Grif￾fin, P. A., Filone, S., Winckworth-Prejsnar, K., 
. . . Heilbrun, K. (2014). An agenda for advanc￾ing research on crisis intervention teams for 
mental health emergencies. Psychiatric Ser￾vices, 65, 530–536.
Crow, T. (1982). Two syndromes in schizophre￾nia? Trends in Neurosciences, 5(10), 351–354.
Cuijpers, P. (1999). The effects of family inter￾ventions on relatives’ burden: A meta-analysis. 
Journal of Mental Health, 8, 275–285.
Cuijpers, P., Veen, S. C. V., Sijbrandij, M., Yoder, 
W., & Cristea, I.  A. (2020). Eye movement 
desensitization and reprocessing for men￾tal health problems: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy,
49(3), 165–180.
Dalack, G. W., Healy, D. J., & Meador-Woodruff, 
J.  H. (1998). Nicotine dependence in schizo￾phrenia: Clinical phenomena and laboratory 
findings. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
155(11), 1490–1501.
Dalgard, O.  S., Bjørk, S., & Tambs, K. (1995). 
Social support, negative life events and mental 
health. British Journal of Psychiatry, 166(1), 
29–34.
Dallinger, V.  C., Krishnamoorthy, G., Burton, 
L.  J., Du Plessis, C., Pillai-Sasidharan, A., & 
Ayres, A. (2022). Internet-based interventions to 
support recovery in youth: A systematic review. 
Digital Health, 8, Article 20552076221129094.
Daniels, A. S., Ashenden, P., Goodale, L., & Ste￾vens, T. (2016). National survey of compen￾sation among peer support specialists. Mesa, 
AZ: College for Behavioral Health Leadership.
Daniels, A. S., Cate, R., Bergeson, S., Forquer, S., 
Niewenhous, G., & Epps, B. (2013). Best prac￾tices: Level-of-care criteria for peer support 
services—A best-practice guide. Psychiatric 
Services, 64(12), 1190–1192.References 333
Danley, K.  S., Sciarappa, K., & MacDonald￾Wilson, K. (1992). Choose–get–keep: A psy￾chiatric rehabilitation approach to supported 
employment. New Directions for Mental 
Health Services, 53, 87–96.
Daquin, J. C., & Daigle, L. E. (2018). Mental dis￾order and victimisation in prison: Examining 
the role of mental health treatment. Criminal 
Behaviour and Mental Health, 28(2), 141–151.
Dartmouth Assertive Community Treatment 
Scale (DACTS). (2017). Retrieved from https://
case.edu/socialwork/centerforebp/resources/
dartmouth-assertive-community-treatment￾scale-dacts-protocol
Das-Munshi, J., Chang, C.-K., Dutta, R., Mor￾gan, C., Nazroo, J., Stewart, R., & Prince, 
M. J. (2017). Ethnicity and excess mortality in 
severe mental illness: A cohort study. Lancet 
Psychiatry, 4(5), 389–399.
Dassah, E., Aldersey, H., McColl, M. A., & Davi￾son, C. (2018). Factors affecting access to pri￾mary health care services for persons with dis￾abilities in rural areas: A “best-fit” framework 
synthesis. Global Health Research and Policy,
3(1), Article 36.
Daumit, G.  L., Dickerson, F.  B., Wang, N.-Y., 
Dalcin, A., Jerome, G. J., Anderson, C. A. M., 
. . . Appel, L. J. (2013). A behavioral weight￾loss intervention in persons with serious men￾tal illness. New England Journal of Medicine,
368(17), 1594–1602.
Davidson, L. (1992). Sense of self in recovery from 
severe mental illness. British Journal of Medi￾cal Psychology, 65, 131–145.
Davidson, L. (2016). The recovery movement: 
Implications for mental health care and 
enabling people to participate fully in life. 
Health Affairs, 35(6), 1091–1097.
Davidson, L., Chinman, M., Sells, D., & Rowe, 
M. (2006). Peer support among adults with 
serious mental illness: A report from the field. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 32, 443–450.
Davidson, L., O’Connell, M., & Tondora, J. 
(2011). Making sure the person is involved in 
person-centered care. In A. Rudnick & D. Roe 
(Eds.), Serious mental illness: Person-centered 
approaches (pp.  342–363). Boca Raton, FL: 
CRC Press.
Davidson, L., Ridgway, P., O’Connell, M., & 
Kirk, T.  A., Jr. (2014). Transforming mental 
health care through the participation of the 
recovery community. In G.  Nelson, B.  Kloos, 
& J.  Ornelas (Eds.), Community psychology 
and community mental health: Towards trans￾formative change (pp.  89–107). New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Davidson, L., Stayner, D., & Haglund, K. (1998). 
Phenomenological perspectives on the social 
functioning of people with schizophrenia. 
In K.  Mueser & N.  Tarrier (Eds.), Hand￾book of social functioning in schizophrenia
(pp. 97–120). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Davidson, L., Tondora, J., & Ridgway, P. (2010). 
Life is not an “outcome”: Reflections on recov￾ery as an outcome and as a process. American 
Journal of Psychiatric Rehabilitation, 13, 1–8.
Davis, J.  P., Barr, N., Dworkin, E.  R., Dumas, 
T.  M., Berey, B., DiGuiseppi, G., & Cahn, 
B.  R. (2019). Effect of mindfulness-based 
relapse prevention on impulsivity trajectories 
among young adults in residential substance 
use disorder treatment. Mindfulness, 10(10), 
1997–2009.
Davis, L., & Brekke, J. (2014). Social support and 
functional outcome in severe mental illness: 
The mediating role of proactive coping. Psy￾chiatry Research, 215(1), 39–45.
Davis, M., Hutchinson, D.  S., Cherchia, P., 
Golden, L., Morrison, E., & Baczko, A. (2022). 
Peer Academic Supports for Success (PASS) for 
college students with mental illness: Open trial. 
Healthcare, 10(9), Article 1711.
Davis, T. C., Williams, M. V., Marin, E., Parker, 
R. M., & Glass, J. (2002). Health literacy and 
cancer communication. CA: A Cancer Journal 
for Clinicians, 52(3), 134–149.
Deakin, B., Ferrier, N., Holt, R.  I., Millar, H., 
Nutt, D. J., Reynolds, G., . . . Taylor, D. (2010). 
The physical health challenges in patients with 
severe mental illness: Cardiovascular and met￾abolic risks. Journal of Psychopharmacology,
24(Suppl. 1), 1–8.
Deane, M., Steadman, H., Borum, R., Veysey, B., 
& Morrissey, J. (1999). Emerging partnerships 
between mental health and law enforcement. 
Psychiatric Services, 50, 99–101.
Deci, E.  L., & Ryan, R.  M. (2008). Self￾determination theory: A macrotheory of 
human motivation, development, and health. 
Canadian Psychology, 49(3), 182–185.
Deci, E.  L., & Ryan, R.  M. (2012). Motiva￾tion, personality, and development within 
embedded social contexts: An overview of 
self-determination theory. In R.  Ryan (Ed.), 
The Oxford handbook of human motivation
(pp. 85–107). Oxford University Press.
Dee, T.  S., & Pyne, J. (2022). A community￾response approach to mental-health and 
substance-abuse crises reduced crime. Sci￾ence Framework Advances, 8(23), Article 
eabm2106.
Deegan, P. (1996). Recovery as a journey of the 
heart. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal,
19(3), 91–97.
Degan, T. J., Kelly, P. J., Robinson, L. D., Deane, 
F. P., Wolstencroft, K., Turut, S., & Meldrum, 334 References
R. (2019). Health literacy in people living with 
mental illness: A latent profile analysis. Psychi￾atry Research, 280, Article 112499.
De Hert, M., Correll, C. U., Bobes, J., Cetkovich￾Bakmas, M., Cohen, D., Asai, I., . . . Leucht, S. 
(2011). Physical illness in patients with severe 
mental disorders: I. Prevalence, impact of med￾ications and disparities in health care. World 
Psychiatry, 10(1), 52–77.
De Hert, M., Detraux, J., & Vancampfort, D. 
(2018). The intriguing relationship between 
coronary heart disease and mental disorders. 
Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 20(1), 
31–40.
De las Cuevas, C., Peñate, W., & Sanz, E. J. (2014). 
The relationship of psychological reactance, 
health locus of control and sense of self-efficacy 
with adherence to treatment in psychiatric out￾patients with depression. BMC Psychiatry, 14,
Article 324.
Delespaul, P.  A., & deVries, M.  W. (1987). 
The daily life of ambulatory chronic mental 
patients. Journal of Nervous and Mental Dis￾ease, 175, 537–544.
del Vecchio, P. (2022). Peer service providers as 
colleagues. In W. E. Sowers, H. L. McQuiston, 
J.  M.  Ranz, J.  M.  Feldman, & P.  S.  Runnels 
(Eds.), Textbook of community psychiatry: 
American Association for Community Psy￾chiatry (pp.  525–534). Cham, Switzerland: 
Springer.
Demyttenaere, K., Bruffaerts, R., Posada-Villa, J., 
Gasquet, I., Kovess, V., Lepine, J. P., . . . Chat￾terji, S. (2004). Prevalence, severity, and unmet 
need for treatment of mental disorders in the 
World Health Organization World Mental 
Health Surveys. Journal of the American Medi￾cal Association, 291(21), 2581–2590.
Derogatis, L. R. (1977). Symptom Checklist–90—
Revised (SCL-90–R). Baltimore, MD: Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine.
Desai, R. (2003). Jail diversion services for people 
with mental illness: What do we really know? 
In W. H. Fisher (Ed.), Research in community 
and mental health: Vol. 12. Community-based 
interventions for criminal offenders with 
severe mental illness (pp.  99–121). Bingley, 
UK: Emerald.
DeSisto, M.  J., Harding, C.  M., McCormick, 
R. V., Ashikaga, T., & Brooks, G. W. (1995). 
The Maine and Vermont three-decade studies 
of serious mental illness. British Journal of Psy￾chiatry, 167, 331–342.
De Sousa, T., Andrichik, A. Cuellar, M., Marson, 
J., Prestera, E., & Rush, K. (2022, December). 
The 2022 Annual Homelessness Assessment 
Report (AHAR) to Congress: Part 1. Retrieved 
from www.huduser.gov/portal/sites/default/
files/pdf/2022-ahar-part-1.pdf
Desrosiers, J. J., Tchiloemba, B., Boyadjieva, R., 
& Jutras-Aswad, D. (2019). Implementation 
of a contingency approach for people with co￾occurring substance use and psychiatric disor￾ders: Acceptability and feasibility pilot study. 
Addictive Behaviors Reports, 10, Article 
100223.
Detrick, A., & Stiepock, V. (1992). Treating per￾sons with mental illness, substance abuse, and 
legal problems: The Rhode Island experience. 
New Directions for Mental Health Services, 
56, 65–77.
de Waal, M. M., Dekker, J. J. M., & Goudriaan, 
A.  E. (2017). Prevalence of victimization in 
patients with dual diagnosis. Journal of Dual 
Diagnosis, 13(2), 119–123.
Dickerson, F. B., Brown, C. H., Kreyenbuhl, J. A., 
Fang, L., Goldberg, R. W., Wohlheiter, K., & 
Dixon, L. B. (2006). Obesity among individu￾als with serious mental illness. Acta Psychiat￾rica Scandinavica, 113(4), 306–313.
Diduck, B., Rawleigh, M., Pilapil, A., Geeraert, 
E., Mah, A., & Chen, S.-P. (2022). Mental 
health needs of homeless and recently housed 
individuals in Canada: A meta-ethnography. 
Health and Social Care in the Community, 
30(6), e3579–e3592.
Dieterich, M., Irving, C.  B., Bergman, H., 
Khokhar, M.  A., Park, B., & Marshall, M. 
(2017). Intensive case management for severe 
mental illness. Cochrane Database of System￾atic Reviews, 2017(1), CD007906.
Dincin, J. (1988). A crucial dimension. In Swit￾zer Monograph (pp. 25–47). Alexandria, VA: 
National Rehabilitation Association.
Dincin, J. (1995a). Core programs in the Thresh￾olds approach. New Directions for Mental 
Health Services, 68, 33–54.
Dincin, J. (Ed.). (1995b). A pragmatic approach 
to psychiatric rehabilitation: Lessons from Chi￾cago’s Thresholds program. New Directions 
for Mental Health Services [Special issue]. San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Dixon, A., McDaid, D., Knapp, M., & Curran, 
C. (2006). Financing mental health services 
in low- and middle-income countries. Health 
Policy and Planning, 21(3), 171–182.
Dixon, L. (1999). Providing services to families of 
persons with schizophrenia: Present and future. 
Journal of Mental Health Policy and Econom￾ics, 2, 3–8.
Dixon, L., Adams, C., & Lucksted, A. (2000). 
Update on family psychoeducation for schizo￾phrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 26, 5–20.
Dixon, L., & Lehman, A. (1995). Family interven￾tions for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulle￾tin, 21, 631–643.
Dixon, L., Lucksted, A., Stewart, B., Burland, 
J., Brown, C., Postrado, L., . . . Hoffman, M. References 335
(2004). Outcomes of the peer-taught 12-week 
family-to-family education program for severe 
mental illness. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 
109, 207–215.
Dixon, L., McFarlane, W., Lefley, H., Lucksted, 
A., Cohen, M., Falloon, I., . . . Sondheimer, D. 
(2001). Evidence based practices for services to 
families of people with psychiatric disabilities. 
Psychiatric Services, 52, 903–910.
Dixon, L., Postrado, L., Delahanty, J., Fischer, 
P.  J., & Lehman, A. (1999). The Association 
of Medical Comorbidity in Schizophrenia with 
Poor Physical and Mental Health. Journal of 
Nervous and Mental Disease, 187(8), 496–
502.
Dixon, L. B., Lucksted, A., Medoff, D. R., Bur￾land, J., Stewart, B., Lehman, A. F., . . . Mur￾ray-Swank, A. (2011). Outcomes of a random￾ized study of a peer-taught family-to-family 
education program for mental illness. Psychiat￾ric Services, 62(6), 591–597.
Dobscha, S. K., & Ganzini, L. (2001). A program 
for teaching psychiatric residents to provide 
integrated psychiatric and primary medical 
care. Psychiatric Services, 52, 1651–1653.
Dobson, K.  S., & Dozois, D.  J. (Eds.). (2019). 
Handbook of cognitive-behavioral therapies
(4th ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Dockery, L., Jeffery, D., Schauman, O., Williams, 
P., Farrelly, S., Bonnington, O., . . . Clement, S. 
(2015). Stigma- and non-stigma-related treat￾ment barriers to mental healthcare reported 
by service users and caregivers. Psychiatry 
Research, 228(3), 612–619.
Dodge, R., Daly, A.  P., Huyton, J., & Sanders, 
L. D. (2012). The challenge of defining wellbe￾ing. International Journal of Wellbeing, 2(3), 
Article 3.
Domínguez-Martínez, T., Medina-Pradas, C., 
Kwapil, T.  R., & Barrantes-Vidal, N. (2014). 
Relatives’ illness attributions mediate the asso￾ciation of expressed emotion with early psy￾chosis symptoms and functioning. Psychiatry 
Research, 218(1), 48–53.
Domínguez-Martínez, T., Medina-Pradas, C., 
Kwapil, T.  R., & Barrantes-Vidal, N. (2017) 
Relatives’ expressed emotion, distress and attri￾butions in clinical high-risk and recent onset of 
psychosis. Psychiatry Research, 247, 323–329.
Doornbos, M. (2001), The 24–7–52 job: Family 
caregiving for young adults with serious and 
persistent mental illness. Journal of Family 
Nursing, 7, 328–344.
Downing, J.  M., & Przedworski, J.  M. (2018). 
Health of Transgender Adults in the U.S., 
2014–2016. American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine, 55(3), 336–344.
Draine, J. (2013). Mental health, mental illnesses, 
poverty, justice, and social justice. American 
Journal of Psychiatric Rehabilitation, 16,
87–90.
Drainoni, M.-L., Lee-Hood, E., Tobias, C., Bach￾man, S. S., Andrew, J., & Maisels, L. (2006). 
Cross-disability experiences of barriers to 
health-care access: Consumer perspectives. 
Journal of Disability Policy Studies, 17(2), 
101–115.
Drake, R. E., Becker, D. R., Biesanz, J. C., Torrey, 
W. C., McHugo, G. J., & Wyzik, P. F. (1994). 
Rehabilitative day treatment vs. supported 
employment: I. Vocational outcomes. Commu￾nity Mental Health Journal, 30, 519–532.
Drake, R. E., Becker, D. R., Biesanz, J. C., Wyzik, 
P. F., & Torrey, W. C. (1996). Day treatment 
versus supported employment for persons with 
severe mental illness: A replication study. Psy￾chiatric Services, 47, 1125–1127.
Drake, R.  E., Becker, D.  R., Goldman, H.  H., 
& Martinez, R.  A. (2006). The Johnson & 
Johnson–Dartmouth Community Mental 
Health Program: Best practices in disseminat￾ing an evidence-based practice. Psychiatric Ser￾vices, 57, 302–304.
Drake, R. E., & Bond, G. R. (2014). Introduction 
to the special issue on individual placement and 
support. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 
37, 76–78.
Drake, R. E., Bond, G., & Becker, D. (2012). Indi￾vidual placement and support: An evidence￾based approach to supported employment. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Drake, R.  E., Bond, G.  R., Goldman, H.  H., 
Hogan, M.  F., & Karakus, M. (2016). Indi￾vidual placement and support services boost 
employment for people with serious mental ill￾nesses, but funding is lacking. Health Affairs, 
35(6), 1098–1105.
Drake, R.  E., & Brunette, M.  F. (1998). Com￾plications of severe mental illness related to 
alcohol and drug use disorders. In R.  Balon 
(Ed.), Recent developments in alcoholism, Vol. 
14: The consequences of alcoholism: Medi￾cal neuropsychiatric economic cross-cultural
(pp. 285–299). New York: Plenum.
Drake, R.  E., Cimpean, D., & Torrey, W.  C. 
(2022). Shared decision making in mental 
health: Prospects for personalized medicine. 
Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 11(4), 
455–463.
Drake, R. E., Deegan, P. E., & Rapp, C. (2010). 
The promise of shared decision making in men￾tal health. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 
34(1), 7–13.
Drake, R.  E., Goldman, H.  H., Leff, H.  S., 
Lehman, A.  F., Dixon, L., Mueser, K.  T., & 
Torrey, W. C. (2001). Implementing evidence￾based practices in routine mental health service 
settings. Psychiatric Services, 52, 179–182.336 References
Drake, R.  E., McHugo, G.  J., Becker, D.  R., 
Anthony, W.  A., & Clark, R.  E. (1996). The 
New Hampshire study of supported employ￾ment for people with severe mental illness. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychol￾ogy, 64, 391–399.
Drake, R.  E., McHugo, G.  J., & Biesanz, J.  C. 
(1995). The test-retest reliability of standard￾ized instruments among homeless persons with 
substance use disorder. Journal of Alcohol 
Studies, 56, 161–167.
Drake, R.  E., McHugo, G., & Noordsy, D.  L. 
(1993). Treatment of alcoholism among schizo￾phrenic outpatients: Four-year outcomes. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 150, 328–329.
Drake, R.  E., Mercer-McFadden, C., Mueser, 
K. T., McHugo, G. J., & Bond, G. R. (1998). 
Review of integrated mental health and sub￾stance abuse treatment for patients with dual 
disorders. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 24, 589–
608.
Drake, R.  E., Mueser, K.  T., Brunette, M., & 
McHugo, G. J. (2004). A review of treatments 
for people with severe mental illness and co￾occurring substance use disorder. Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation Journal, 27, 360–374.
Drake, R. E., Mueser, K. T., Torrey, W. C., Miller, 
A.  F., Lehman, A.  F., Bond, G.  R., .  .  . Leff, 
H.  S. (2000). Evidence-based treatment of 
schizophrenia. Current Psychiatry Reports, 2,
393–397.
Drake, R. E., & Whitley, R. (2014). Recovery and 
severe mental illness: description and analysis. 
Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 59(5), 236–
242.
Drake, R. E., Xie, H., & McHugo, G. J. (2020). 
A 16-year follow-up of patients with serious 
mental illness and co-occurring substance use 
disorder. World Psychiatry, 19(3), 397–398.
Drapalski, A. L., Lucksted, A., Brown, C. H., & 
Fang, L.  J. (2021). Outcomes of Ending Self￾Stigma, a group intervention to reduce inter￾nalized stigma, among individuals with seri￾ous mental illness. Psychiatric Services, 72(2), 
136–142.
Drapalski, A.  L., Marshall, T., Seybolt, D., 
Medoff, D., Peer, J., Leith, J., & Dixon, L. B. 
(2008). Unmet needs of families of adults with 
mental illness and preferences regarding family 
services. Psychiatric Services, 59(6), 655–662.
Draper, M. L., Stutes, D. S., Maples, N. J., & Vel￾ligan, D. I. (2009). Cognitive adaptation train￾ing for outpatients with schizophrenia. Journal 
of Clinical Psychology, 65(8), 842–853.
Drayton, M. (2009). The Minnesota Multiphasic 
Personality Inventory–2 (MMPI-2). Occupa￾tional Medicine, 59(2), 135–136.
Druss, B.  G., & Goldman, H.  H. (2018). 
Integrating health and mental health services: 
A past and future history. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 175(12), 1199–1204.
Druss, B. G., & Mauer, B. J. (2010). Health care 
reform and care at the behavioral health–
primary care interface. Psychiatric Services, 
61, 1087–1092.
Druss, B. G., Rohrbaugh, R. M., Levinson, C. M., 
& Rosenheck, R. A. (2001). Integrated medi￾cal care for patients with serious psychiatric ill￾ness: A randomized trial. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 58(9), 861–868.
Druss, B. G., Rosenheck, R. A., & Sledge, W. H. 
(2000). Health and disability costs of depres￾sive illness in a major U.S. corporation. Ameri￾can Journal of Psychiatry, 157(8), 1274–1278.
Druss, B.  G., & von Esenwein, S.  A. (2006). 
Improving general medical care for persons 
with mental and addictive disorders: Systematic 
review. General Hospital Psychiatry, 28(2), 
145–153.
Dubreucq, J., Haesebaert, F., Plasse, J., Dubreucq, 
M., & Franck, N. (2022). A systematic review 
and meta-analysis of social skills training for 
adults with autism spectrum disorder. Jour￾nal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
52(4), 1598–1609.
Dubreucq, J., Plasse, J., & Franck, N. (2021). 
Self-stigma in serious mental illness: A sys￾tematic review of frequency, correlates, and 
consequences. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 47(5), 
1261–1287.
Dudley, R., Taylor, P., Wickham, S., & Hutton, P. 
(2016). Psychosis, delusions and the “jumping 
to conclusions” reasoning bias: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Bul￾letin, 42(3), 652–665.
Duncan, A.  R., Jaini, P.  A., & Hellman, C.  M. 
(2021). Positive psychology and hope as life￾style medicine modalities in the therapeutic 
encounter: A narrative review. American Jour￾nal of Lifestyle Medicine, 15(1), 6–13.
Dunn, E. C., Wewiorski, N. J., & Rogers, E. S. 
(2008). The meaning and importance of 
employment to people in recovery from serious 
mental illness: Results of a qualitative study. 
Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 32(1), 
59–62.
Dunn, P., & Conard, S. (2018). Improving health 
literacy in patients with chronic conditions: A 
call to action. International Journal of Cardi￾ology, 273, 249–251.
Durell, J., Lechtenberg, B., Corse, S., & Frances, 
R. (1993). Intensive case management of per￾sons with chronic mental illness who abuse 
substances. Hospital and Community Psychia￾try, 44, 415–416.
Dyrbye, L. N., West, C. P., Sinsky, C. A., Goeders, References 337
L. E., Satele, D. V., & Shanafelt, T. D. (2017, 
October). Medical licensure questions and phy￾sician reluctance to seek care for mental health 
conditions. Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 92(10), 
1486–1493.
Eagly, A. H., Ashmore, R. D., Makhijani, M. G., 
& Longo, L.  C. (1991). What is beautiful 
is good, but .  .  . : A meta-analytic review of 
research on the physical attractiveness stereo￾type. Psychological Bulletin, 110, 109–128.
Eassey, D., Reddel, H. K., Ryan, K., & Smith, L. 
(2020). “It is like learning how to live all over 
again”: A systematic review of people’s expe￾riences of living with a chronic illness from a 
self-determination theory perspective. Health 
Psychology and Behavioral Medicine, 8(1), 
270–291.
Eaton, K., Ohan, J. L., Stritzke, W. G., & Cor￾rigan, P.  W. (2016). Failing to meet the good 
parent ideal: Self-stigma in parents of children 
with mental health disorders. Journal of Child 
and Family Studies, 25(10), 3109–3123.
Eaton, K., Ohan, J. L., Stritzke, W. G., & Cor￾rigan, P.  W. (2019). The Parents’ Self-Stigma 
Scale: Development, factor analysis, reliabil￾ity, and validity. Child Psychiatry and Human 
Development, 50(1), 83–94.
Eaton, W. W., Byrne, M., Ewald, H., Mors, O., 
Chen, C.-Y., Agerbo, E., & Mortensen, P.  B. 
(2006). Association of schizophrenia and auto￾immune diseases: Linkage of Danish national 
registers. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
163(3), 521–528.
Edalati, H., Nicholls, T. L., Crocker, A. G., Roy, 
L., Somers, J. M., & Patterson, M. L. (2017). 
Adverse childhood experiences and the risk of 
criminal justice involvement and victimization 
among homeless adults with mental illness. 
Psychiatric Services, 68(12), 1288–1295.
Eddie, D., Hoffman, L., Vilsaint, C., Abry, A., 
Bergman, B., Hoeppner, B., .  .  . Kelly, J.  F. 
(2019). Lived experience in new models of care 
for substance use disorder: A systematic review 
of peer recovery support services and recovery 
coaching. Frontiers in Psychology, 10, Article 
1052.
Edwards, A., & Elwyn, G. (2016). Shared 
decision-making in health care: Achieving 
evidence-based patient choice (3rd ed.). New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Egan, G. (2013). The skilled helper: A problem￾management and opportunity-development 
approach to helping (10th ed.). Belmont, CA: 
Cengage Learning.
Eichler, M., Gowdy, E.  A., & Etzel-Wise, D. 
(2004). I’m in my home and I’m happy: Effec￾tive housing practices in Kansas. Lawrence: 
University of Kansas, School of Social Welfare.
Eis, S., Solà-Morales, O., Duarte-Díaz, A., Vidal￾Alaball, J., Perestelo-Pérez, L., Robles, N., & 
Carrion, C. (2022). Mobile applications in 
mood disorders and mental health: Systematic 
search in Apple App Store and Google Play 
Store and review of the literature. International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public 
Health, 19(4), Article 2186.
Eklund, M., Hansson, L., & Ahlqvist, C. (2004). 
The importance of work as compared to other 
forms of daily occupations for wellbeing and 
functioning among persons with long-term 
mental illness. Community Mental Health 
Journal, 40, 465–477.
Elbogen, E.  B., Swanson, J.  W., Swartz, M.  S., 
& Van Dorn, R. (2005). Family representative 
payeeship and violence risk in severe mental ill￾ness. Law and Human Behavior, 29, 563–574.
Elhai, J. D., North, T. C., & Frueh, B. C. (2005). 
Health service use predictors among trauma 
survivors: A critical review. Psychological Ser￾vices, 2, 3–19.
Elliott, R. (2012). Harm reduction and interna￾tional law: Drug control vs. human rights. In 
R. Pates & D. Riley (Eds.), Harm reduction in 
substance use and high-risk behaviour: Inter￾national policy and practice. Chichester, UK: 
Wiley-Blackwell.
Ellis, A. (1977). Rational-emotive therapy: 
Research data that supports the clinical and 
personality hypotheses of RET and other 
modes of cognitive-behavior therapy. Counsel￾ing Psychologist, 7(1), 2–42.
Ellison, M.  L., Klodnick, V.  V., Bond, G.  R., 
Krzos, I. M., Kaiser, S. M., Fagan, M. A., & 
Davis, M. (2015). Adapting supported employ￾ment for emerging adults with serious men￾tal health conditions. Journal of Behavioral 
Health Services and Research, 42, 206–222.
Engel, R. S., & Silver, E. (2001). Policing mentally 
disordered suspects: A re-examination of the 
criminalization hypothesis. Criminology, 39,
225–252.
Eno Louden, J., O’Manchak, S., Connor, M., & 
Skeem, J. (2015). Applying the Sequential Inter￾cept Model to reduce recidivism among pro￾bationers and parolees with mental illness. In 
P. Griffin, K. Heilbrun, E. Mulvey, D. DeMat￾teo, & C. Schubert (Eds.), The Sequential Inter￾cept Model: Promoting community alterna￾tives for individuals with serious mental illness
(pp.  118–136). New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Epperson, M. W., Sarantakos, S. P., Suslovic, B. J., 
Thompson, J. G., & Self, J. J. (2022). “You feed 
and water a rose bush and eventually it blos￾soms”: Constructions of self-transformation 
among mental health court defendants. 338 References
International Journal of Law and Psychiatry, 
85, 101839–101839.
Epperson, M.  W., Wolff, N., Morgan, R.  D., 
Fisher, W.  H., Frueh, B.  C., & Huening, J. 
(2014). Envisioning the next generation of 
behavioral health and criminal justice interven￾tions. International Journal of Law and Psy￾chiatry, 37, 427–438.
Eronen, M., Angermeyer, M., & Schulze, B. 
(1998). The psychiatric epidemiology of violent 
behavior. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric 
Epidemiology, 33, S13–S23.
Estroff, S. E. (1989). Self, identity, and subjective 
experiences of schizophrenia: In search of the 
subject. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 15, 189–196.
Estroff, S. E. (1995). Whose story is it anyway?: 
Authority, voice, and responsibility in nar￾ratives of chronic illness. In S.  K.  Toombs, 
D. Barnard, & R. A. Carson (Eds.), Chronic ill￾ness: From experience to policy (pp. 77–102). 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Estroff, S. E., Swanson, J. W., Lachicotte, W. S., 
Swartz, M., & Bolduc, M. (1998). Risk recon￾sidered: Targets of violence in the social net￾works of people with serious psychiatric 
disorders. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric 
Epidemiology, 33, S95–S101.
Evans-Lacko, S., Brohan, E., Mojtabai, R., & 
Thornicroft, G. (2012). Association between 
public views of mental illness and self-stigma 
among individuals with mental illness in 14 
European countries. Psychological Medicine, 
42(8), 1741–1752.
Everett, B., & Nelson, A. (1992). We’re not cases 
and you’re not managers: An account of a cli￾ent/professional partnership developed in 
response to the “borderline” diagnosis. Psycho￾social Rehabilitation Journal, 15, 49–60.
Evins, A. E., Cather, C., Deckersbach, T., Freud￾enreich, O., Culhane, M.  A., Olm-Shipman, 
C.  M., .  .  . Rigotti, N.  A. (2005). A double￾blind placebo-controlled trial of bupropion 
sustained-release for smoking cessation in 
schizophrenia. Journal of Clinical Psychophar￾macology, 25(3), 218–225.
Ezard, N., Oppenheimer, E., Burton, A., Schil￾peroord, M., Macdonald, D., Adelekan, M., 
. . . van Ommeren, M. (2011). Six rapid assess￾ments of alcohol and other substance use in 
populations displaced by conflict. Conflict and 
Health, 5, Article 1.
Fabian, E.  S. (1989). Work and the quality of 
life. Psychosocial Rehabilitation Journal, 12,
39–49.
Fabian, E. S. (1992). Supported employment and 
the quality of life: Does a job make a difference? 
Rehabilitation Counseling Bulletin, 36, 84–97.
Fadden, G., Bebbington, P., & Kuipers, L. (1987). 
Caring and its burdens: A study of the spouses 
of depressed patients. British Journal of Psy￾chiatry, 151, 660–667.
Fair Housing Act (Title VIII of Civil Rights Act 
of 1968, Pub. L. No. 90–284, 82 Stat. 73), 42 
U.S.C. 3601 (1968).
Fakhoury, W.  K., Murray, A., Shepherd, G., & 
Priebe, S. (2002). Research in supported hous￾ing. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epide￾miology, 37, 301–315.
Falloon, I. R. H., Boyd, J., & McGill, C. (1984). 
Family care of schizophrenia. New York: Guil￾ford Press.
Falloon, I.  R.  H., Lindley, P., McDonald, R., 
& Marks, I.  M. (1977). Social skills training 
of out-patient groups: A controlled study of 
rehearsal and homework. British Journal of 
Psychiatry, 131, 599–609.
Fantuzzi, C., & Mezzina, R. (2020). Dual diagno￾sis: A systematic review of the organization of 
community health services. International Jour￾nal of Social Psychiatry, 66(3), 300–310.
Farber, S. (2012). The spiritual gift of madness: 
The failure of psychiatry and the rise of the 
Mad Pride movement. Rochester, VT: Inner 
Traditions.
Farina, A., & Felner, R.  D. (1973). Employ￾ment interviewer reactions to former mental 
patients. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 82,
268–272.
Farkas, M., & Coe, S. (2019). From residential 
care to supportive housing for people with psy￾chiatric disabilities: Past, present, and future. 
Frontiers in Psychiatry, 10, 862–862.
Faulkner, J. A., Larkin, L. M., Claflin, D. R., & 
Brooks, S.  V. (2007). Age-related changes in 
the structure and function of skeletal muscles. 
Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and 
Physiology, 34(11), 1091–1096.
Fazel, S., Gulati, G., Linsell, L., Geddes, J. R., & 
Grann, M. (2009). Schizophrenia and violence: 
systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS 
Medicine, 6, Article e1000120.
Fazel, S., Långström, N., Hjern, A., Grann, M., 
& Litchtenstein, P. (2009). Schizophrenia, 
substance abuse, and violent crime. Journal of 
the American Medical Association, 301(19), 
2016–2023.
Fazel, S., Lichtenstein, P., Grann, M., Goodwin, 
G. M., & Långström, N. (2010). Bipolar dis￾order and violent crime: new evidence from 
population-based longitudinal studies and sys￾tematic review. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
67, 931–938.
Feldman, D. B., & Crandall, C. S. (2007). Dimen￾sions of mental illness stigma: What about men￾tal illness causes social rejection? Journal of 
Social and Clinical Psychology, 26, 137–154.References 339
Feldman, S., Bachman, J., & Bayer, J. (2002). 
Mental health parity: A review of research and 
a bibliography. Administration and Policy in 
Mental Health, 29, 215–228.
Felker, B., Workman, E., Stanley-Tilt, C., Alba￾nese, R., & Short, D. (1998). The psychiatric 
primary care team: A new program to provide 
medical care to the chronically mentally ill. 
Medicine and Psychiatry, 1, 36–41.
Felker, B., Yazel, J. J., & Short, D. (1996). Mortal￾ity and medical comorbidity among psychiatric 
patients: A review. Psychiatric Services, 47(12), 
1356–1363.
Fennell, M. J. (1989). Depression. In K. Hawton, 
P.  Salkovskis, J.  Kirk, & D.  M.  Clark (Eds.), 
Cognitive behavioural therapy for psychiatric 
problems (pp. 169–234). Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press.
Ferdinandi, A.  D., Yoottanasumpun, V., Pol￾lack, S., & Bermanzohn, P. C. (1998). Rehab 
Rounds: Predicting rehabilitation outcome 
among patients with schizophrenia. Psychiatric 
Services, 49(7), 907–909.
Ferrando, S.  J., Owen, J.  A., & Levenson, J.  L. 
(2014). Psychopharmacology. In R.  E.  Hales, 
S.  C.  Yudofsky, & L.  W.  Roberts (Eds.), The 
American Psychiatric Publishing textbook 
of psychiatry (pp. 929–1004). Arlington, VA: 
American Psychiatric Publishing.
Ferreira, M. G., Mariano, L. I., de Rezende, J. V., 
Caramelli, P., & Kishita, N. (2022). Effects of 
group Acceptance and Commitment Therapy 
(ACT) on anxiety and depressive symptoms in 
adults: A meta-analysis. Journal of Affective 
Disorders, 309, 297–308.
Ferris, D., Hsu, Y. Y., Liem, W., Raymond, M., & 
Acri, M. (2022). All over the map: A systematic 
literature review and state policy scan of Med￾icaid buy-in programs for working individu￾als with disabilities. Journal of Insurance and 
Financial Management, 6, Article 3.
Fett, A. K., Viechtbauer, W., Dominguez, M. D., 
Penn, D.  L., van Os, J., & Krabbendam, L. 
(2011). The relationship between neurocog￾nition and social cognition with functional 
outcomes in schizophrenia: A meta-analysis. 
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 35,
573–588.
Fiander, M., Burns, T., McHugo, G. J., & Drake, 
R.  E. (2003). Assertive community treatment 
across the Atlantic: Comparison of model fidel￾ity in the UK and USA. British Journal of Psy￾chiatry, 182, 248–254.
Fields, S. (1990). The relationship between resi￾dential treatment and supported housing in a 
community system of services. Psychosocial 
Rehabilitation Journal, 13(4), 105–113.
Fino, E., Mema, D., & Russo, P. M. (2020). War 
trauma exposed refugees and posttraumatic 
stress disorder: The moderating role of trait 
resilience. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 
129, Article 109905.
Firmin, R. L., Luther, L., Lysaker, P. H., Minor, 
K. S., McGrew, J. H., Cornwell, M. N., & Saly￾ers, M. P. (2017). Stigma resistance at the per￾sonal, peer, and public levels: A new conceptual 
model. Stigma and Health, 2(3), 182–194.
Firmin, R. L., Luther, L., Lysaker, P. H., Minor, 
K.  S., & Salyers, M.  P. (2016). Stigma resis￾tance is positively associated with psychiatric 
and psychosocial outcomes: A meta-analysis. 
Schizophrenia Research, 175(1–3), 118–128.
Firmin, R. L., Mao, S., Bellamy, C. D., & David￾son, L. (2019). Peer support specialists’ experi￾ences of microaggressions. Psychological Ser￾vices, 16(3), 456–462.
First, M. B., Williams, J. B. W., Karg, R. S., & 
Spitzer, R. L. (2016). Structured Clinical Inter￾view for DSM-5® Disorders—Clinician Ver￾sion. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric 
Publishing.
Fisher, G., Benson, P., & Tessler, R. (1990). Fam￾ily response to mental illness: Developments 
since deinstitutionalization. Research in Com￾munity and Mental Health, 8, 203–236.
Fisher, W.  H., Geller, J.  L., & Pandiani, J.  A. 
(2009). The changing role of the state psychi￾atric hospital. Health Affairs, 28(3), 676–684.
Fisher, W.  H., Silver, E., & Wolff, N. (2006). 
Beyond criminalization: Toward a criminologi￾cally informed framework for mental health 
policy and services research. Administra￾tion and Policy in Mental Health and Mental 
Health Services Research, 33(5), 544–557.
Fitch, W.  L. (2014). Forensic mental health ser￾vices in the United States: 2014. Alexandria, 
VA: National Association of State Mental 
Health Program Directors.
Foglesong, D., Spagnolo, A.  B., Cronise, R., 
Forbes, J., Swarbrick, P., Edwards, J.  P., & 
Pratt, C. (2022). Perceptions of supervisors 
of peer support workers (PSW) in behavioral 
health: Results from a national survey. Com￾munity Mental Health Journal, 58(3), 437–
443.
Folsom, D.  P., McCahill, M., Bartels, S.  J., 
Lindamer, L. A., Ganiats, T. G., & Jeste, D. V. 
(2002). Medical comorbidity and receipt of 
medical care by older homeless people with 
schizophrenia or depression. Psychiatric Ser￾vices, 53(11), 1456–1460.
Fonseka, L. N., & Woo, B. K. P. (2022). Wear￾ables in Schizophrenia: Update on current and 
future clinical applications. JMIR mHealth 
and uHealth, 10(4), Article e35600.
Forbes, J., Pratt, C., & Cronise, R. (2022). 340 References
Experiences of peer support specialists super￾vised by nonpeer supervisors. Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation Journal, 45(1), 54–60.
Ford, E. B., Silverman, K. D., Solimo, A., Leung, 
Y. J., Smith, A. M., Bell, C. J., & Katyal, M. 
(2020). Clinical outcomes of specialized treat￾ment units for patients with serious mental ill￾ness in the New York City jail system. Psychi￾atric Services, 71(6), 547–554.
Forrester, S.  N., Leoutsakos, J.-M., Gallo, J.  J., 
Thorpe, R. J., & Seeman, T. E. (2019). Asso￾ciation between allostatic load and health 
behaviours: A latent class approach. Journal of 
Epidemiology and Community Health, 73(4), 
340–345.
Forster, S. E., DePhilippis, D., & Forman, S. D. 
(2019). “I’s” on the prize: A systematic review 
of individual differences in contingency man￾agement treatment response. Journal of Sub￾stance Abuse Treatment, 100, 64–83.
Fortuna, K.  L., Naslund, J.  A., LaCroix, J.  M., 
Bianco, C.  L., Brooks, J.  M., Zisman-Ilani, 
Y., . . . Deegan, P. (2020). Digital peer support 
mental health interventions for people with 
a lived experience of a serious mental illness: 
systematic review. JMIR Mental Health, 7(4), 
Article e16460.
Fortuna, K. L., Solomon, P., & Rivera, J. (2022). 
An update of peer support/peer provided ser￾vices underlying processes, benefits, and criti￾cal ingredients. Psychiatric Quarterly, 93(2), 
571–586.
Fowler, D., Hodgekins, J., Garety, P., Freeman, 
D., Kuipers, E., Dunn, G., . . . Bebbington, P. E. 
(2012). Negative cognition, depressed mood, 
and paranoia: A longitudinal pathway analysis 
using structural equation modeling. Schizo￾phrenia Bulletin, 38(5), 1063–1073.
Fox, B., Miley, L. N., Kortright, K. E., & Wets￾man, R. J. (2021). Assessing the effect of mental 
health courts on adult and juvenile recidivism: 
A meta-analysis. American Journal of Crimi￾nal Justice, 46(4), 644–664.
Fratto, G., & Manzon, L. (2014). Use of psycho￾tropic drugs and associated dental diseases. 
International Journal of Psychiatry in Medi￾cine, 48(3), 185–197.
Frederick, D.  E., & VanderWeele, T.  J. (2019). 
Supported employment: Meta-analysis and 
review of randomized controlled trials of indi￾vidual placement and support. PLoS ONE,
14(2), Article e0212208.
Fredriksen-Goldsen, K.  I., Cook-Daniels, L., 
Kim, H.-J., Erosheva, E. A., Emlet, C. A., Hoy￾Ellis, C. P., . . . Muraco, A. (2014). Physical and 
mental health of transgender older adults: An 
at-risk and underserved population. Gerontol￾ogist, 54(3), 488–500.
Freeman, A., & Davis, D.  D. (1990). Cogni￾tive therapy of depression. In A. S. Bellack & 
M.  Hersen (Eds.), International handbook of 
behavior modification and therapy (2nd ed., 
pp. 333–352). New York: Plenum.
Frese, F.  J., & Davis, W.  W. (1997). The 
consumer-survivor movement, recovery, and 
consumer professionals. Professional Psychol￾ogy, Research and Practice, 28(3), 243–245.
Frese, F. J., Stanley, J., Kress, K., & Vogel-Scibilia, 
S. (2001). Integrating evidence-based practices 
and the recovery model. Psychiatric Services, 
52, 1462–1468.
Friedman, D., Linnemann, R. W., Altstein, L. L., 
Georgiopoulos, A. M., Islam, S., Bach, K.-T., 
. . . Yonker, L. M. (2019). Effects of a primary 
palliative care intervention on quality of life 
and mental health in cystic fibrosis. Pediatric 
Pulmonology, 54(7), 984–992.
Friedrich, R. M., Lively, S., & Rubenstein, L. M. 
(2008). Siblings’ coping strategies with mental 
health services: A national study of siblings of 
persons with schizophrenia. Psychiatric Ser￾vices, 59, 261–267.
Frith, C. D. (1994). Theory of mind in schizophre￾nia. In A. S. David & J. C. Cutting (Eds.), The 
neuropsychology of schizophrenia (pp.  147–
161). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Frith, C.  D. (1999). Commentary on Garety & 
Freeman: II. Cognitive approaches to delusions: 
A critical review of theories and evidence. Brit￾ish Journal of Clinical Psychology, 38(3), 319–
321.
Frith, C.  D., & Corcoran, R. (1996). Exploring 
“theory of mind” in people with schizophrenia. 
Psychological Medicine, 26, 521–530.
Frounfelker, R. L., Wilkniss, S. M., Bond, G. R., 
Devitt, T.  S., & Drake, R.  E. (2011). Enroll￾ment in supported employment services for cli￾ents with a co-occurring disorder. Psychiatric 
Services, 62(5), 545–547.
Fukui, S., Salyers, M.  P., Matthias, M.  S., Col￾lins, L., Thompson, J., Coffman, M., & Tor￾rey, W.  C. (2014). Predictors of shared deci￾sion making and level of agreement between 
consumers and providers in psychiatric care. 
Community Mental Health Journal, 50(4), 
375–382.
Furukawa, T.  A., Cipriani, A., Atkinson, L.  Z., 
Leucht, S., Ogawa, Y., Takeshima, N., .  .  . 
Salanti, G. (2016). Placebo response rates in 
antidepressant trials: A systematic review of 
published and unpublished double-blind ran￾domised controlled studies. Lancet Psychiatry, 
3(11), 1059–1066.
Gaebel, W., Kerst, A., Janssen, B., Becker, T., 
Musalek, M., Rössler, W., .  .  . Stricker, J. 
(2020). EPA guidance on the quality of mental References 341
health services: A systematic meta-review and 
update of recommendations focusing on care 
coordination. European Psychiatry, 63(1), 
Article e75.
Gaebel, W., Zäske, H., Hesse, K., Klingberg, 
S., Ohmann, C., Grebe, J., . . . Riesbeck, M. 
(2020). Promoting stigma coping and empow￾erment in patients with schizophrenia and 
depression: Results of a cluster-RCT. European 
Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosci￾ence, 270(5), 501–511.
Gagne, C.  A., Finch, W.  L., Myrick, K.  J., & 
Davis, L. M. (2018). Peer workers in the behav￾ioral and integrated health workforce: Oppor￾tunities and future directions. American Jour￾nal of Preventive Medicine, 54(6), S258–S266.
Gagnon, M.-P., Sasseville, M., & Leblanc, A. 
(2022). Classification of digital mental health 
interventions: A rapid review and framework 
proposal. Studies in Health Technology and 
Informatics, 294, 629–633.
Galderisi, S., Kaiser, S., Bitter, I., Nordentoft, M., 
Mucci, A., Sabé, M., .  .  . Gaebel, W. (2021). 
EPA guidance on treatment of negative symp￾toms in schizophrenia. European Psychiatry,
64(1), Article e21.
Galla, J. H. (2000). Clinical practice guideline on 
shared decision-making in the appropriate ini￾tiation of and withdrawal from dialysis. Jour￾nal of the American Society of Nephrology,
11(7), 1340–1342.
Gallo, K.  M. (1994). First person account: Self￾stigmatization. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 20,
407–410.
Gamm, L., Castillo, G., & Pittman, S. (2010). 
Access to quality health services in rural areas. 
Nation, 2(3), 45–51.
Gamm, L., Hutchinson, L., Bellamy, G., & Dab￾ney, B.  J. (2010). Rural healthy people 2010: 
Identifying rural health priorities. Journal of 
Rural Health, 18(1), 9–14.
Ganju, V. (2004). Evidence-based practice and 
mental health system transformation. Paper 
presented at the 2004 National Statistics Con￾ference, Washington, DC.
Gao, S., Corrigan, P. W., Qin, S., & Nieweglowski, 
K. (2019). Comparing Chinese and European 
American mental health decision making. Jour￾nal of Mental Health, 28(2), 141–147.
Garakani, A., Win, T., Virk, S., Gupta, S., 
Kaplan, D., & Masand, P. S. (2003). Comor￾bidity of irritable bowel syndrome in psychi￾atric patients: A review. American Journal of 
Therapeutics, 10(1), 61–67.
Gardner, A., Filia, K., Killackey, E., & Cotton, 
S. (2019). The social inclusion of young peo￾ple with serious mental illness: A narrative 
review of the literature and suggested future 
directions. Australian and New Zealand Jour￾nal of Psychiatry, 53(1), 15–26.
Garety, P.  A., & Freeman, D. (1999). Cognitive 
approaches to delusions: A critical review of 
theories and evidence. British Journal of Clini￾cal Psychology, 38, 113–154.
Garety, P.  A., & Hemsley, D.  R. (1994). Delu￾sions: Investigations into the psychology of 
delusional reasoning. Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press.
Garneau, A. B., & Pepin, J. (2015). Cultural com￾petence: A constructivist definition. Journal of 
Transcultural Nursing, 26(1), 9–15.
Garran, A. M., & Werkmeister Rozas, L. (2013). 
Cultural competence revisited. Journal of Eth￾nic and Cultural Diversity in Social Work,
22(2), 97–111.
Garstka, T.  A., Schmitt, M.  T., Branscombe, 
N. R., & Hummert, M. L. (2004). How young 
and older adults differ in their responses to 
perceived age discrimination. Psychology and 
Aging, 19, 326–335.
Gartner, A. J., & Riessman, F. (Eds.). (1984). The 
self-help revolution. New York: Human Sci￾ences Press.
Gawęda, Ł., Staszkiewicz, M., & Balzan, R.  P. 
(2017). The relationship between cognitive 
biases and psychological dimensions of delu￾sions: The importance of jumping to conclu￾sions. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Exper￾imental Psychiatry, 56, 51–56.
Gela, N., & Corrigan, P. W. (2014). The stigma 
of families with mental illness. In J. A. Arditti 
(Ed.), Family problems: Stress, risk, and resil￾ience (pp. 33–49). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Gelkopf, M., & Roe, D. (2014). Evaluating out￾come domains assessing caregivers of individu￾als with mental illness: A review. Family Pro￾cess, 53(1), 150–174.
George, T. P., Sernyak, M. J., Ziedonis, D. M., & 
Woods, S.  W. (1995). Effects of clozapine on 
smoking in chronic schizophrenic outpatients. 
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 56, 344–346.
Gerace, L., Camilleri, D., & Ayers, L. (1993). Sib￾ling perspectives on schizophrenia and the fam￾ily. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 19, 637–647.
Gerber, L. G. (2011). A comparison of the global 
assessment of functioning, the Multnomah 
Community Ability Scale, and the Brief Psychi￾atric Rating Scale: Clinician interrater reliabil￾ity in adult community mental health. Walden 
University ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 
No. 34337368.
Gerbner, G. (1985). Mass media discourse: Mes￾sage system analysis as a component of cul￾tural indicators. In T. A. Van Dijk (Ed.), Dis￾course and communication: New approaches 
to the analysis of mass media discourse 342 References
and communication (pp.  13–25). Berlin: de 
Gruyter.
Gervey, R. (2010). Rehabilitation readiness: A 
construct validity study of the University of 
Rhode Island Change Assessment for Voca￾tional Counseling (URICA-VC) scale for per￾sons with mental illness. Journal of Vocational 
Rehabilitation, 33(2), 133–142.
Gervey, R., & Bedell, J.  R. (1994). Supported 
employment in vocational rehabilitation. In 
J.  R.  Bedell (Ed.), Psychological assessment 
and treatment of persons with severe mental 
disorders (pp. 151–175). Washington, DC: Tay￾lor & Francis.
Gervey, R., & Kowal, H. (1994). A description 
of a model for placing youth and young adults 
with psychiatric disabilities in competitive 
employment. Paper presented at the Interna￾tional Association of Psychosocial Rehabilita￾tion Services Conference, Albuquerque, NM.
Ghanem, N., Dromgoole, D., Hussein, A., & 
Jermyn, R.  T. (2022). Review of medication￾assisted treatment for opioid use disorder. Jour￾nal of Osteopathic Medicine, 122, 367–374.
Gill, K. J., Murphy, A. A. (2017). Jail diversion for 
persons with serious mental illness coordinated 
by a prosecutor’s office. Biomed Research 
International, 2017, Article 7917616.
Gill, K. J., Pratt, C. W., & Librera, L. A. (1998). 
The effects of consumer vs. staff administra￾tion on the measurement of consumer satisfac￾tion with psychiatric rehabilitation. Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation Journal, 21, 365–370.
Gillard, S. (2019). Peer support in mental health 
services: Where is the research taking us, and 
do we want to go there? Journal of Mental 
Health, 28(4), 341–344.
Glied, S. A., Collins, S. R., & Lin, S. (2020). Did 
the ACA lower americans’ financial barriers to 
health care?: A review of evidence to determine 
whether the Affordable Care Act was effective 
in lowering cost barriers to health insurance 
coverage and health care. Health Affairs, 39(3), 
379–386.
Gloster, A. T., Walder, N., Levin, M. E., Twohig, 
M.  P., & Karekla, M. (2020). The empirical 
status of acceptance and commitment therapy: 
A review of meta-analyses. Journal of Contex￾tual Behavioral Science, 18, 181–192.
Goffman, E. (1961). Asylums: Essays on the 
social situations of mental patients and other 
inmates. Garden City, NY: Doubleday/Anchor.
Goffman, E. (1963). Stigma: Notes on the man￾agement of spoiled identity. Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Goldkamp, J., & Irons-Guynn, C. (2000, April). 
Emerging judicial strategies for the mentally ill 
in criminal caseload: Mental health courts in 
Fort Lauderdale, Seattle, San Bernadino, and 
Anchorage (U.S. Department of Justice, Office 
of Justice Programs, No. NCJ-NCJ 182504). 
Washington, DC: U.S.  Government Printing 
Office.
Gold, K.  J., Andrew, L.  B., Goldman, E.  B., & 
Schwenk, T. L. (2016). “I would never want to 
have a mental health diagnosis on my record”: 
A survey of female physicians on mental health 
diagnosis, treatment, and reporting. General 
Hospital Psychiatry, 43, 51–57.
Goldman, H.  H. (1984). Epidemiology. In 
J. A. Talbott (Ed.), The chronic mental patient: 
Five years later (pp.  15–31). Orlando, FL: 
Grune & Stratton.
Golomb, S. L., & Kocsis, A. (1988). The halfway 
house: On the road to independence. New 
York: Brunner/Mazel.
Gómez-de-Regil, L., Kwapil, T. R., & Barrantes￾Vidal, N. (2014). Predictors of expressed emo￾tion, burden and quality of life in relatives of 
Mexican patients with psychosis. Journal of 
Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing, 21(2), 
170–179.
Gooding, P., & Kariotis, T. (2021). Ethics and 
law in research on algorithmic and data-driven 
technology in mental health care: Scoping 
review. JMIR Mental Health, 8(6), Article 
e24668.
Goodman, S.  H., & Brumley, H.  E. (1990). 
Schizophrenic and depressed mothers: Rela￾tional deficits in parenting. Developmental 
Psychology, 26(1), 31–39.
Goodman, L. A., Rosenberg, S. D., Mueser, K. T., 
& Drake, R.  E. (1997). Physical and sexual 
assault history in women with serious mental 
illness: Prevalence, correlates, treatment, and 
future research directions. Schizophrenia Bul￾letin, 23, 685–696.
Goodman, L.  A., Salyers, M.  P., Mueser, K.  T., 
Rosenberg, S.  D., Swartz, M., Essock, S.  M., 
Osher, F.  C., .  .  . Swanson, J. (2001). Recent 
victimization in women and men with severe 
mental illness: Prevalence and correlates. Jour￾nal of Traumatic Stress, 14(4), 615–632.
Goodman, L. A., Thompson, K. M., Weinfurt, K., 
Corl, S., Acker, P., Mueser, K. T., & Rosenberg, 
S.  D. (1999). Reliability of reports of violent 
victimization and posttraumatic stress disorder 
among men and women with serious mental ill￾ness. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 12, 587–599.
Goodman, S.  H., & Brumley, H.  E. (1990). 
Schizophrenic and depressed mothers: Rela￾tional deficits in parenting. Developmental 
Psychology, 26(1), 31–39.
Goodwill, J. R., Anyiwo, N., Williams, E. D. G., 
Johnson, N.  C., Mattis, J.  S., & Watkins, 
D. C. (2019). Media representations of popular References 343
culture figures and the construction of Black 
masculinities. Psychology of Men and Mascu￾linities, 20(3), 288–298.
Goodwin, D. W., Alderson, P., & Rosenthal, R. 
(1971). Clinical significance of hallucinations 
in psychiatric disorders: A study of 116 hallu￾cinatory patients. Archives of General Psychia￾try, 24, 76–80.
Gordon, T. (1970). Parent effectiveness training: 
The tested new way to raise responsible chil￾dren. New York: Wyden.
Gottesman, I.  I., & Erlenmeyer-Kimling, L. 
(2001). Family and twin strategies as a head 
start in defining prodomes and endopheno￾types for hypothetical early-interventions in 
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 51(1), 
93–102.
Gould, R. A., Mueser, K. T., Bolton, E., Mays, V., 
& Goff, D. (2001). Cognitive therapy for psy￾chosis in schizophrenia: An effect size analysis. 
Schizophrenia Research, 48, 335–342.
Goulet, M.-H., Dellazizzo, L., Lessard￾Deschênes, C., Lesage, A., Crocker, A. G., & 
Dumais, A. (2022). Effectiveness of forensic 
assertive community treatment on forensic 
and health outcomes: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Criminal Justice and Behavior, 
49(6), 838–852.
Gove, W. (1975). The labeling theory and mental 
illness: A reply to Scheff. American Sociologi￾cal Review, 40, 242–248.
Gove, W. R. (Ed.). (1980). The labeling of devi￾ance: Evaluating a perspective (2nd ed.). Bev￾erly Hills, CA: Sage.
Gove, W. R. (1982). Labeling theory’s explanation 
of mental illness: An update of recent evidence. 
Deviant Behavior: An Interdisciplinary Jour￾nal, 3, 307–327.
Gove, W.  R., & Fain, T. (1973). The stigma of 
mental hospitalization: An attempt to evaluate 
its consequences. Archives of General Psychia￾try, 28, 494–500.
Graham, N., Lindesay, J., Katona, C., Bertolote, 
J. M., Camus, V., Copeland, J. R., . . . Wancata, 
J. (2003). Reducing stigma and discrimination 
against older people with mental disorders: A 
technical consensus statement (WHO-WPA 
2002 report). International Journal of Geriat￾ric Psychiatry, 18, 670–678.
Grattan, R. E., Lara, N., Botello, R. M., Tryon, 
V. L., Maguire, A. M., Carter, C. S., & Nien￾dam, T. A. (2019). A history of trauma is asso￾ciated with aggression, depression, non-suicidal 
self-injury behavior, and suicide ideation in 
first-episode psychosis. Journal of Clinical 
Medicine, 8(7), Article 1082.
Green, A. I., Patel, J. K., Goisman, R. M., Alli￾son, D.  B., & Blackburn, G. (2000). Weight 
gain from novel antipsychotic drugs: Need for 
action. General Hospital Psychiatry, 22, 224–
235.
Green, M. F. (1996). What are the functional con￾sequences of neurocognitive deficits in schizo￾phrenia? American Journal of Psychiatry, 153,
321–330.
Green, M. F. (1998). Schizophrenia from a neuro￾cognitive perspective. Needham Heights, MA: 
Allyn & Bacon.
Green, M. F., Ganzell, S., Satz, P., & Vaclav, J. F. 
(1990). Teaching the Wisconsin Card Sorting 
Test to schizophrenic patients. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 47, 91–92.
Green, M. F., Harris, J. G., & Nuechterlein, K. H. 
(2014). The MATRICS consensus cognitive 
battery: What we know 6 years later. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 171(11), 1151–1154.
Green, M.  F., Horan, W.  P., & Lee, J. (2015). 
Social cognition in schizophrenia. Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience, 16(10), 620–631.
Green, M.  F., Horan, W.  P., & Lee, J. (2019). 
Nonsocial and social cognition in schizophre￾nia: Current evidence and future directions. 
World Psychiatry, 18(2), 146–161.
Green, M. F., Kern, R. S., Braff, D. L., & Mintz, J. 
(2000). Neurocognitive deficits and functional 
outcome in schizophrenia: Are we measuring 
the “right stuff”? Schizophrenia Bulletin, 26,
119–136.
Green, M.  F., & Nuechterlein, K.  H. (1999). 
Should schizophrenia be treated as a neuro￾cognitive disorder? Schizophrenia Bulletin, 25,
309–318.
Green, M.  F., Nuechterlein, K.  H., Kern, R.  S., 
Baade, L. E., Fenton, W. S., Gold, J. M., . . . 
Marder, S.  R. (2008). Functional co-primary 
measures for clinical trials in schizophrenia: 
Results from the MATRICS Psychometric and 
Standardization Study. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 165(2), 221–228.
Green, S. A., & Graham, B. M. (2022). Symptom 
fluctuation over the menstrual cycle in anxi￾ety disorders, PTSD, and OCD: A systematic 
review. Archives of Women’s Mental Health, 
25, 71–85.
Greenberg, G.  A., & Rosenheck, R.  A. (2010). 
Mental health correlates of past homelessness 
in the National Comorbidity Study Replica￾tion. Journal of Health Care for the Poor and 
Undeserved, 21, 1234–1249.
Greenberg, J., Hilton, E. C., Li, J. J., Lu, Q., & 
Mailick, M. R. (2021). The impact of parenting 
a child with serious mental illness: Accounting 
for the parent’s genetic vulnerability to mental 
illness. Journal of Family Psychology, 35(3), 
417–422.
Greenberg, J., Greenley, J., & Kim, H. W. (1995). 344 References
The provision of mental health services to 
families of persons with severe mental illness. 
Research in Community and Mental Health, 8,
181–204.
Greenberg, J., Kim, H., & Greenley, J. (1997). 
Factors associated with subjective burden in 
siblings of adults with severe mental illness. 
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 67,
231–241.
Greene-Shortridge, T.  M., Britt, T.  W., & Cas￾tro, C. A. (2007). The stigma of mental health 
problems in the military. Military Medicine, 
172, 157–161.
Grella, C., & Grusky, O. (1989). Families of the 
seriously mentally ill and their satisfaction with 
services. Hospital and Community Psychiatry, 
40, 831–835.
Grob, G. (1994). Mad, homeless, and unwanted: 
A history of the care of the chronically mentally 
ill in America. Psychiatric Clinics of North 
America, 17, 541–558.
Grob, G.  N. (1992). Mental health policy in 
America: Myths and realities. Health Affairs, 
11, 7–22.
Grollman, E.  A. (2014). Multiple disadvantaged 
statuses and health: The role of multiple forms 
of discrimination. Journal of Health and Social 
Behavior, 55(1), 3–19.
Grynszpan, O., Perbal, S., Pelissolo, A., Fossati, 
P., Jouvent, R., Dubal, S., & Perez-Diaz, F. 
(2011). Efficacy and specificity of computer￾assisted cognitive remediation in schizophre￾nia: A meta-analytical study. Psychological 
Medicine, 41(1), 163–173.
Gurtner, C., Schols, J. M. G. A., Lohrmann, C., 
Halfens, R. J. G., & Hahn, S. (2021). Concep￾tual understanding and applicability of shared 
decision-making in psychiatric care: An inte￾grative review. Journal of Psychiatric and Men￾tal Health Nursing, 28(4), 531–548.
Gutwinski, S., Schreiter, S., Deutscher, K., & 
Fazel, S. (2021) The prevalence of mental dis￾orders among homeless people in high-income 
countries: An updated systematic review and 
meta-regression analysis. PLoS Medicine, 
18(8), Article e1003750.
Habtewold, T. D., Rodijk, L. H., Liemburg, E. J., 
Sidorenkov, G., Boezen, H. M., Bruggeman, R., 
& Alizadeh, B. Z. (2020). A systematic review 
and narrative synthesis of data-driven studies 
in schizophrenia symptoms and cognitive defi￾cits. Translational Psychiatry, 10(1), 1–24.
Hackman, A. L., Goldberg, R. W., Brown, C. H., 
Fang, L.  J., Dickerson, F.  B., Wohlheiter, K., 
Medoff, D.  R., .  .  . Dixon, L. (2006). Use of 
emergency department services for somatic 
reasons by people with serious mental illness. 
Psychiatric Services, 57(4), 563–566.
Hagen, J. M., Sutterland, A. L., Koeter, M. W., 
Lutter, R., Cohen, D., & de Haan, L. (2017). 
Advanced glycation end products in recent￾onset psychosis indicate early onset of cardio￾vascular risk. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
78(9), 1395–1401.
Hahm, H.  C., & Segal, S.  P. (2005). Failure to 
seek health care among the mentally ill. Ameri￾can Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 75, 54–62.
Haidl, T., Rosen, M., Schultze-Lutter, F., Nieman, 
D., Eggers, S., Heinimaa, M., . . . Ruhrmann, S. 
(2018). Expressed emotion as a predictor of the 
first psychotic episode—Results of the Euro￾pean prediction of psychosis study. Schizophre￾nia Research, 199, 346–352.
Hails, J., & Borum, R. (2003). Police training and 
specialized approaches to people with mental 
illness. Crime and Delinquency, 49, 52–61.
Hall, D., Lee, L. W., Manseau, M. W., Pope, L., 
Watson, A.  C., & Compton, M.  T. (2019). 
Major mental illness as a risk factor for incar￾ceration. Psychiatric Services, 70(12), 1088–
1093.
Hall, J. P., Kurth, N. K., Gimm, G., & Smith, S. 
(2019). Perspectives of adults with disabilities 
on access to health care after the ACA: Quali￾tative findings. Disability and Health Journal,
12(3), 350–358.
Hall, K. S., Steinberg, J. R., Cwiak, C. A., Allen, 
R.  H., & Marcus, S.  M. (2015). Contracep￾tion and mental health: A commentary on the 
evidence and principles for practice. American 
Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 212(6), 
740–746.
Hall, L. L., Graf, A. C., Fitzpatrick, M. J., Lane, T., 
& Birkel, R. C. (2003). Shattered lives: Results 
of a national survey of NAMI members living 
with mental illness and their families. Arling￾ton, VA: National Alliance for the Mentally Ill 
(NAMI) /Treatment Recovery Information and 
Advocacy Data Base (TRIAD).
Halpin, S. A., & Allen, M. W. (2004). Changes 
in psychosocial well-being during stages of gay 
identity development. Journal of Homosexual￾ity, 47, 109–126.
Hamilton, M. (1960). A rating scale for depres￾sion. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and 
Psychiatry, 23(1), 56–62.
Han, A., & Kim, T.  H. (2022). The effects of 
internet-based Acceptance and Commitment 
Therapy on process measures: Systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Journal of Medical 
Internet Research, 24(8), Article e39182.
Han, B. H., Duncan, D. T., Arcila-Mesa, M., & 
Palamar, J.  J. (2020). Co-occurring mental 
illness, drug use, and medical multimorbid￾ity among lesbian, gay, and bisexual middle￾aged and older adults in the United States: A References 345
nationally representative study. BMC Public 
Health, 20(1), 1–9.
Hancock, N., Bundy, A., Tamsett, S., & McMa￾hon, M. (2012). Participation of mental health 
consumers in research: Training addressed and 
reliability assessed. Australian Occupational 
Therapy Journal, 59(3), 218–224.
Hannigan, B., Simpson, A., Coffey, M., Barlow, 
S., & Jones, A. (2018). Care coordination as 
imagined, care coordination as done: Findings 
from a cross-national mental health systems 
study. International Journal of Integrated 
Care, 18(3), Article 12.
Hanson, J. G., & Rapp, C. A. (1992). Families’ 
perceptions of community mental health pro￾grams for their relatives with a severe mental 
illness. Community Mental Health Journal, 
28, 181–197.
Harandi, T.  F., Taghinasab, M.  M., & Nayeri, 
T. D. (2017). The correlation of social support 
with mental health: A meta-analysis. Electronic 
Physician, 9(9), 5212–5222.
Harding, C.  M., Brooks, G.  W., Ashikaga, T., 
Strauss, J.  S., & Breier, A. (1987a). The Ver￾mont longitudinal study of persons with severe 
mental illness: II. Long-term outcome of sub￾jects who retrospectively met DSM-III criteria 
for schizophrenia. American Journal of Psy￾chiatry, 144(6), 727–735.
Harding, C. M., Strauss, J. S., Hafez, H, & Liber￾man. P. (1987b). Work and mental illness: 1. 
Toward an intergration of the rehabilitation 
process. Journal of Nervous and Mental Dis￾ease, 175, 317–326.
Harkness, J., Newman, S., Galster, G., & Rescho￾vsky, J. (2004). The financial viability of hous￾ing for the mentally ill. Housing Policy Debate, 
15(11).
Harries, C. I., Smith, D. M., Gregg, L., & Witt￾kowski, A. (2023). Parenting and serious 
mental illness (SMI): A systematic review and 
metasynthesis. Clinical Child and Family Psy￾chology Review, 26, 303–342.
Harrison, G., Hopper, K., Craig, T., Laska, E., 
Siegel, C., Wanderling, J., .  .  . Wiersma, D. 
(2001). Recovery from psychotic illness: A 
15- and 25-year international follow-up study. 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 178, 506–517.
Harvey, C. (2018). Family psychoeducation for 
people living with schizophrenia and their fam￾ilies. BJPsych Advances, 24(1), 9–19.
Harvey, P. D., Davidson, M., Mueser, K. T., Par￾rella, M., White, L., & Powchik, P. (1997). 
Social-Adaptive Functioning Evaluation 
(SAFE): A rating scale for geriatric psychiatric 
patients. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 23(1), 131–
145.
Haselden, M., Brister, T., Robinson, S., Covell, 
N., Pauselli, L., & Dixon, L. (2019). Effec￾tiveness of the NAMI Homefront Program for 
Military and Veteran Families: In-person and 
online benefits. Psychiatric Services, 70(10), 
935–939.
Haselden, M., Dixon, L. B., Overley, A., Cohen, 
A. N., Glynn, S. M., Drapalski, A., . . . Thorn￾ing, H. (2018). Giving back to families: Evi￾dence and predictors of persons with serious 
mental illness contributing help and support to 
families. Community Mental Health Journal, 
54(4), 383–394.
Hashemi, A.  H., & Cochrane, R. (1999). 
Expressed emotion and schizophrenia: A 
review of studies across cultures. International 
Review of Psychiatry, 11(2–3), 219–224.
Hasher, L., & Zacks, R.  T. (1979). Automatic 
and effortful processes in memory. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General, 108, 356–
388.
Hasher, L., & Zacks, R. T. (1984). Automatic pro￾cessing of fundamental information: The case 
of frequency of occurrence. American Psychol￾ogist, 39, 1372–1388.
Hasson-Ohayon, I., Avidan-Msika, M., 
Mashiach-Eizenberg, M., Kravetz, S., Rozenc￾waig, S., Shalev, H., & Lysaker, P. H. (2015). 
Metacognitive and social cognition approaches 
to understanding the impact of schizophre￾nia on social quality of life. Schizophrenia 
Research, 161(2–3), 386–391.
Hasson-Ohayon, I., Levy, I., Kravetz, S., 
Vollanski-Narkis, A., & Roe, D. (2011). Insight 
into mental illness, self-stigma, and the fam￾ily burden of parents of persons with a severe 
mental illness. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 52,
75–80.
Hatfield, A. B. (1983). What families want of fam￾ily therapy. In W. McFarlane (Ed.), Family ther￾apy in schizophrenia (pp. 41–65). New York: 
Guilford Press.
Hatfield, A.  B. (1987). Coping and adaptation: 
A conceptual framework for understanding 
families. In A. B. Hatfield & H. Lefley (Eds.), 
Families of the mentally ill. New York: Guil￾ford Press.
Hatfield, A. B. (1990). Family education in men￾tal illness. New York: Guilford Press.
Hatfield, A. B. (1994a). Developing collaborative 
relationships with families. New Directions for 
Mental Health Services, 62, 51–59.
Hatfield, A.  B. (1994b). Family education the￾ory and practice. New Directions for Mental 
Health Services, 62, 3–11.
Hatfield, A., & Lefley, H. (2000). Helping elderly 
caregivers plan for the future care of a relative 
with mental illness. Psychiatric Rehabilitation 
Journal, 24, 103–107.346 References
Hatfield, A., Spaniol, L., & Zipple, A. (1987). 
Expressed emotion: A family perspective. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 13, 221–226.
Hatton, D. C., Kleffel, D., Bennett, S., & Gaffrey, 
E. A. (2001). Homeless women and children’s 
access to health care: A paradox. Journal of 
Community Health Nursing, 18, 25–34.
Hatzenbuehler, M.  L. (2016). Structural stigma: 
Research evidence and implications for psycho￾logical science. American Psychologist, 71(8), 
742–751.
Hatzenbuehler, M.  L. (2017). Structural stigma 
and health. In B.  Major, J.  F.  Dovidio, & 
B.  G.  Link (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of 
stigma, discrimination, and health (pp.  105–
123). New York: Oxford University Press.
Hatzenbuehler, M.  L., & Link, B.  G. (2014). 
Introduction to the special issue on structural 
stigma and health. Social Science and Medi￾cine, 103, 1–6.
Haugen, P. T., McCrillis, A. M., Smid, G. E., & 
Nijdam, M. J. (2017). Mental health stigma and 
barriers to mental health care for first respond￾ers: A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Journal of Psychiatric Research, 94, 218–229.
Hayes, S. C., & Lillis, J. (2014). Acceptance and 
commitment therapy process. In G. R. Vanden￾bos, E. Medenbauer, & J. Frank-McNeil (Eds.), 
Psychotherapy therapies and techniques: A 
reader. Washington, DC: American Psychologi￾cal Association.
Hayward, P., & Bright, J. A. (1997). Stigma and 
mental illness: A review and critique. Journal 
of Mental Health, 6, 345–354.
Heinrichs, D.  W., Hanlon, T.  E., & Carpenter, 
W.  T. (1984). The Quality of Life Scale: An 
instrument for rating the schizophrenic defi￾cit syndrome. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 10(3), 
388–398.
Heinrichs, R. W., & Zakzanis, K. K. (1998). Neu￾rocognitive deficit in schizophrenia: A quanti￾tative review of the evidence. Neuropsychol￾ogy, 12, 426–445.
Heinssen, R. K. (1996). The cognitive exoskeleton: 
Environmental interventions in cognitive reha￾bilitation. In P. W. Corrigan & S. C. Yudofsky 
(Eds.), Cognitive rehabilitation for neuropsy￾chiatric disorders (pp. 395–425). Washington, 
DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Heller, T., Roccoforte, J., Hsieh, K. Cook, J., & 
Pickett, S. (1997). Benefits of support groups 
for families of adults with severe mental ill￾ness. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 
62, 187–198.
Hellerstein, D.  J., Rosenthal, R.  N., & Miner, 
C. R. (1995). A prospective study of integrated 
outpatient treatment for substance-abusing 
schizophrenic patients. American Journal on 
Addictions, 42, 33–42.
Helmus, K., Schaars, I. K., Wierenga, H., de Glint, 
E., & van Os, J. (2019). Decreasing stigmatiza￾tion: Reducing the discrepancy between “us” 
and “them”: An intervention for mental health 
care professionals. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 10,
Article 243.
Hembree, E.  A., & Foa, E.  B. (2003). Interven￾tions for trauma-related emotional distur￾bances in adult victims of crime. Journal of 
Traumatic Stress, 16, 187–199.
Hemmens, C., Miller, M., Burton, V. S., & Mil￾ner, S. (2002). The consequences of official 
labels: An examination of the rights lost by the 
mentally ill and the mentally incompetent ten 
years later. Community Mental Health Jour￾nal, 38, 129–140.
Henderson, C., Noblett, J., Parke, H., Clement, 
S., Caffrey, A., Gale-Grant, O., .  .  . Thorni￾croft, G. (2014). Mental health-related stigma 
in health care and mental health-care settings. 
Lancet Psychiatry, 1(6), 467–482.
Henderson, S., Horne, M., Hills, R., & Kendall, 
E. (2018). Cultural competence in healthcare 
in the community: A concept analysis. Health 
and Social Care in the Community, 26(4), 
590–603.
Hennemann, S., Farnsteiner, S., & Sander, L. 
(2018). Internet- and mobile-based aftercare 
and relapse prevention in mental disorders: A 
systematic review and recommendations for 
future research. Internet Interventions, 14,
1–17.
Henry, M., Watt, R., Rosenthal, L., & Shivji, A. 
(2016). The 2016 Annual Homeless Assess￾ment Report (AHAR) to Congress. Part 1: 
Point-in-time estimates of homelessness.
www.nhipdata.org/local/upload/file/2016-
ahar-part-%20reduced(1).pdf
Herbert, P. B., & Young, K. A. (1999). The Ameri￾cans with Disabilities Act and deinstitutional￾ization of the chronically mentally ill. Journal 
of the American Academy of Psychiatry and 
Law, 27, 603–613.
Herlands, T., & Medalia, A. (2016). How to 
assess and choose computerized cognitive exer￾cises. In A.  Medalia & C.  R.  Bowie (Eds.), 
Cognitive remediation to improve functional 
outcomes (pp.  155–175). New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Herth, K. (1992). Abbreviated instrument to mea￾sure hope: Development and psychometric eval￾uation. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 17(10), 
1251–1259.
Hervey, N. (1986). Advocacy or folly: The Alleged 
Lunatics’ Friend Society, 1845–63. Medical 
History, 30(3), 245–275.
Herz, M. I. (1985). Prodromal symptoms and pre￾vention of relapse in schizophrenia. Journal of 
Clinical Psychiatry, 46, 22–25.References 347
Heslin, K.  C., Elixhauser, A., & Steiner, C.  A. 
(2015). Hospitalizations involving mental and 
substance use disorders among adults, 2012
(HCUP Statistical Brief #191). Retrieved from 
www.hcup-us.ahrq. gov/reports/statbriefs/
sb191-hospitalization-mentalsubstance-use￾disorders-2012.pdf
Heyland, M., Emery, C., & Shattell, M. (2013). 
The Living Room, a community crisis respite 
program: Offering people in crisis an alterna￾tive to emergency departments. Global Journal 
of Community Psychology Practice, 4(3), 1–8.
Hiday, V. (2006). Putting community risk in per￾spective: A look at correlations, causes and con￾trols. International Journal of Psychiatry and 
Law, 29, 316–331.
Hides, L., Quinn, C., Stoyanov, S., Kavanagh, D., 
& Baker, A. (2019). Psychological interventions 
for co-occurring depression and substance use 
disorders. Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews, 2019(11), CD009501.
Hill, A., Jones, D., & Woodworth, L. (2020). Phy￾sician–Patient Race-Match Reduces Patient 
Mortality (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3211276). 
Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.3211276
Hill, M. J., Maestas, N., & Mullen, K. J. (2016). 
Employer accommodation and labor supply 
of disabled workers. Labour Economics, 41,
291–303.
Hillborg, H., Lövgren, V., Bejerholm, U., & 
Rosenberg, D. (2021). Integrating interventions 
that can support a career-oriented recovery for 
young adults: building on the supported educa￾tion knowledge base. Journal of Psychosocial 
Rehabilitation and Mental Health, 8, 35–60.
Hills, H., Siegfried, C., & Ickowitz, A. (2004). 
Effective prison mental health services: 
guidelines to expand and improve treatment.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, 
National Institute of Corrections.
Hilton, B. A., Thompson, R., Moore-Dempsey, L., 
& Janzen, R. G. (2001). Harm reduction theo￾ries and strategies for control of human immu￾nodeficiency virus: A review of the literature. 
Journal of Advanced Nursing, 33, 357–370.
Hingle, M. D., O’Connor, T. M., Dave, J. M., & 
Baranowski, T. (2010). Parental involvement in 
interventions to improve child dietary intake: A 
systematic review. Preventive Medicine, 51(2), 
103–111.
Hinshaw, S. P. (2005). The stigmatization of men￾tal illness in children and parents: Developmen￾tal issues, family concerns, and research needs. 
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 
46, 714–734.
Hipes, C., Lucas, J., Phelan, J. C., & White, R. C. 
(2016). The stigma of mental illness in the labor 
market. Social Science Research, 56, 16–25.
Hoenig, J., & Hamilton, M. (1966). The schizo￾phrenic patient in the community and his effect 
on the household. International Journal of 
Social Psychiatry, 12, 165–176.
Hoerster, K. D., & Young, A. S. (2021). Improv￾ing diet, activity, and weight. In P. W. Corrigan 
& S. L. Ballentine (Eds.), Health and wellness 
in people living with serious mental illness. 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Asso￾ciation Publishing.
Hoffmann, H., Jäckel, D., Glauser, S., Mueser, 
K. T., & Kupper, Z. (2014). Long-term effec￾tiveness of supported employment: 5-year fol￾low-up of a randomized controlled trial. Ameri￾can Journal of Psychiatry, 171(11), 1183–1190. 
Hogan, A.  J. (2019). Moving away from the 
“medical model”: The development and revi￾sion of the World Health Organization’s clas￾sification of disability. Bulletin of the History 
of Medicine, 93(2), 241–269.
Hogan, M. F. (2003). The President’s New Free￾dom Commission: Recommendations to trans￾form mental health care in America. Psychiat￾ric Services, 54, 1467–1474.
Hogan, M. F., Drake, R. E., & Goldman, H. H. 
(2014). A national campaign to finance sup￾ported employment. Psychiatric Rehabilitation 
Journal, 37, 73–75.
Hogarty, G.  E., & Flesher, S. (1992). Cognitive 
remediation in schizophrenia: Proceed . . . with 
caution. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 18, 51–57.
Hoge, C.  W., Castro, C.  A., Messer, S.  C., 
McGurk, D., Cotting, D. I., & Koffman, R. L. 
(2004). Combat duty in Iraq and Afghani￾stan, mental health problems, and barriers to 
care. New England Journal of Medicine, 351,
13–22.
Hogue, A., Bobek, M., Dauber, S., Henderson, 
C.  E., McLeod, B.  D., & Southam-Gerow, 
M.  A. (2017). Distilling the core elements of 
family therapy for adolescent substance use: 
Conceptual and empirical solutions. Journal of 
Child and Adolescent Substance Abuse, 26(6), 
437–453.
Hogue, A., Schumm, J.  A., MacLean, A., & 
Bobek, M. (2022). Couple and family therapy 
for substance use disorders: Evidence-based 
update 2010–2019. Journal of Marital and 
Family Therapy, 48(1), 178–203.
Holder, S.  M., Peterson, E.  R., Stephens, R., & 
Crandall, L. A. (2019). Stigma in mental health 
at the macro and micro levels: Implications 
for mental health consumers and profession￾als. Community Mental Health Journal, 55(3), 
369–374.
Holter, M.  C., & Paul, T. (2004). Education as 
a signature program at Breakthrough Club of 
Sedgwick County. American Journal of Psychi￾atric Rehabilitation, 7, 301–313.348 References
Hooley, J.  M. (2007). Expressed emotion and 
relapse of psychopathology. Annual Review of 
Clinical Psychology, 3(1), 329–352.
Hooley, J. M. (2010). Social factors in schizophre￾nia. Current Directions in Psychological Sci￾ence, 19(4), 238–242.
Hooley, J., Richters, J., Weintraub, S., & Neal, J. 
(1987). Psychopathology and marital distress: 
The positive side of positive symptoms. Journal 
of Abnormal Psychology, 96, 27–33.
Hopkin, G., Evans-Lacko, S., Forrester, A., Shaw, 
J., & Thornicroft, G. (2018). Interventions at 
the transition from prison to the community 
for prisoners with mental illness: A systematic 
review. Administration and Policy in Mental 
Health and Mental Health Services Research, 
45(4), 623–634.
Hopper, K., & Barrow, S. M. (2003). Two gene￾alogies of supported housing and their implica￾tions for outcome assessment. Psychiatric Ser￾vices, 54, 50–54.
Horan, W. P., & Green, M. F. (2019). Treatment 
of social cognition in schizophrenia: Current 
status and future directions. Schizophrenia 
Research, 203, 3–11.
Horowitz, A., & Reinhard, S. (1995). Ethnic dif￾ferences in caregiving duties and burden among 
parents and siblings of persons with severe 
mental illness. Journal of Health and Social 
Behavior, 36, 138–150.
Horowitz, A., Tessler, R., Fisher, G., & Gamache, 
G. (1992). The role of adult siblings in provid￾ing social support to the seriously mentally ill. 
Journal of Marriage and the Family, 54, 233–
241.
Howard, L., Hunt, K., Slade, M., O’Keane, V., 
Senevirante, T., Leese, M., & Thornicroft, G. 
(2007). Assessing the needs of pregnant women 
and mothers with severe mental illness: The 
psychometric properties of the Camberwell 
Assessment of Need–Mothers (CAN-M). Inter￾national Journal of Methods in Psychiatric 
Research, 16(4), 177–185.
Howie the Harp. (1990). Independent living with 
support services: The goals and future for men￾tal health consumers. Psychosocial Rehabilita￾tion Journal, 13(4), 85–89.
Hsu, G. L. K., Wan, Y. M., Chang, H., Summer￾grad, P., Tsang, B. Y. P., & Chen, H. (2008). 
Stigma of depression is more severe in Chinese 
Americans than Caucasian Americans. Psychi￾atry, 71(3), 210–218.
Huang, L.  N., Flatow, R., Biggs, T., Afayee, S., 
Smith, K., Clark, T., & Blake, M. (2014). SAM￾HSA’s Concept of Truama and Guidance for 
a Trauma-Informed Approach. Retrieved from 
https://ncsacw.acf.hhs.gov/userfiles/files/sam￾hsa_trauma.pdf
Huber, G., Gross, G., Schuttler, R., & Linz, M. 
(1980). Longitudinal studies of schizophrenic 
patients. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 6, 592–605.
Huffine, C.  L., & Clausen, J.  A. (1979). Mad￾ness and work: Short- and long-term effects of 
mental illness on occupational careers. Social 
Forces, 57, 1049–1062.
Hughes, K., Bellis, M.  A., Hardcastle, K.  A., 
Sethi, D., Butchart, A., Mikton, C., . . . Dunne, 
M.  P. (2017). The effect of multiple adverse 
childhood experiences on health: A system￾atic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Public 
Health, 2(8), e356–e366.
Hughes, R., & Weinstein, D. (Eds.). (1997a). 
Best practices in psychosocial rehabilitation.
Columbia, MD: International Association of 
Psychosocial Rehabilitation.
Hughes, R., & Weinstein, D. (1997b). Introduc￾tion. In R. Hughes & D. Weinstein (Eds.), Best 
practices in psychosocial rehabilitation (pp. vi–
xvi). Columbia, MD: International Association 
of Psychosocial Rehabilitation.
Hull, C.  L. (1952). A behavior system. New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Hurlburt, M.  S., Hough, R.  L., & Wood, P.  A. 
(1996). Effects of substance abuse and hous￾ing stability of homeless mentally ill persons 
in supported housing. Psychiatric Services, 47,
731–736.
Hutchison, A.  J., Breckon, J.  D., & Johnston, 
L. H. (2009). Physical activity behavior change 
interventions based on the transtheoretical 
model: A systematic review. Health Education 
and Behavior, 36(5), 829–845.
Huxley, P. (1998). Quality of life. In K. T. Meuser 
& N. Tarrier (Eds.), Handbook of social func￾tioning in schizophrenia (pp. 52–65). Boston: 
Allyn & Bacon.
Hwang, S. W., Colantonio, A., Chiu, S., Tolomic￾zenko, G., Kiss, A., Cowan, L., Redelmeier, 
D.  A., & Levinson, W. (2008). The effect of 
traumatic brain injury on the health of home￾less people. Canadian Medical Association 
Journal/Journal de l’Association Medicale 
Canadienne, 179(8), 779–784.
Hyatt, A. S., Hasler, V., & Wilner, E. K. (2022). 
What happens after early intervention in first￾episode psychosis?: Limitations of existing ser￾vice models and an agenda for the future. Cur￾rent Opinion in Psychiatry, 35(3), 165–170.
Hyde, J., Carr, H., Kelley, N., Seneviratne, R., 
Reed, C., Parlatini, V., . . . Brandt, V. (2022). 
Efficacy of neurostimulation across mental dis￾orders: Systematic review and meta-analysis of 
208 randomized controlled trials. Molecular 
Psychiatry, 27(6), 2709–2719.
Hyman, S.  E. (2013). Psychiatric drug develop￾ment: Diagnosing a crisis. Cerebrum, 2013,
Article 5.
Ibrahim, N., Thompson, D., Nixdorf, R., Kalha, References 349
J., Mpango, R., Moran, G., .  .  . Slade, M. 
(2020). A systematic review of influences on 
implementation of peer support work for adults 
with mental health problems. Social Psychiatry 
and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 55, 285–293.
Iezzoni, L.  I., Killeen, M.  B., & O’Day, B.  L. 
(2006). Rural residents with disabilities con￾front substantial barriers to obtaining primary 
care. Health Services Research, 41(4p1), 1258–
1275.
Imber-Mintz, L., Liberman, R.  P., Miklowitz, 
D. J., & Mintz, J. (1987). Expressed emotion: 
A clarion call for partnership among relatives, 
patients and professionals. Schizophrenia Bul￾letin, 13, 227–235.
Ingram, R. E., & Kendall, P. C. (1986). Cognitive 
clinical psychology: Implications of an infor￾mation processing perspective. In R. E. Ingram 
(Ed.), Information processing approaches to 
clinical psychology (pp. 3–21). San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press.
Intagliata, J. (1982). Improving the quality of 
community care for chronically mentally dis￾abled the role of case management. Schizophre￾nia Bulletin, 8, 655–673.
Iqbal, M. N., Levin, C. J., & Levin, F. R. (2019). 
Treatment for substance use disorder with co￾occurring mental illness. FOCUS, A Journal of 
the American Psychiatric Association, 17(2), 
88–97.
Isaacs, A. N. (2022). Care coordination as a col￾laborative element of recovery oriented services 
for persons with severe mental illness. Austral￾asian Psychiatry, 30(1), 110–112.
Isaacs, A. N., Beauchamp, A., Sutton, K., & May￾bery, D. (2019). Unmet needs of persons with 
a severe and persistent mental illness and their 
relationship to unmet accommodation needs. 
Health and Social Care in the Community,
27(4), e246–e256.
Isaacs, A. N., Brooks, H., Lawn, S., Mohammadi, 
L., Vicary, E., & Sutton, K. (2022). Effective￾ness of personal recovery facilitators in adults 
with schizophrenia and other psychoses: A sys￾tematic review of reviews and narrative synthe￾sis. Schizophrenia Research, 246, 132–147.
Isobel, S., Wilson, A., Gill, K., & Howe, D. (2021). 
“What would a trauma-informed mental health 
service look like?”: Perspectives of people who 
access services. International Journal of Men￾tal Health Nursing, 30(2), 495–505.
Izon, E., Berry, K., Wearden, A., Carter, L., Law, 
H., & French, P. (2021). Investigating expressed 
emotion in individuals at-risk of developing 
psychosis and their families over 12 months. 
Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 28(5), 
1285–1296.
Jackson, C.  L., Agénor, M., Johnson, D.  A., 
Austin, S.  B., & Kawachi, I. (2016). Sexual 
orientation identity disparities in health behav￾iors, outcomes, and services use among men 
and women in the United States: A cross￾sectional study. BMC Public Health, 16(1), 
Article 807.
Jackson, J.  P. (2001). “In ways unacademical”: 
The reception of Carleton S. Coon’s The Ori￾gin of Races. Journal of the History of Biology, 
34(2), 247–285.
Jain, A., Christopher, P., & Appelbaum, P.  S. 
(2018). Civil commitment for opioid and other 
substance use disorders: does it work? Psychi￾atric Services, 69(4), 374–376.
Jameel, L., Valmaggia, L., Barnes, G., & Cella, 
M. (2021). mHealth technology to assess, mon￾itor and treat daily functioning difficulties in 
people with severe mental illness: A systematic 
review. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 145,
35–49.
Jang-Brown, J., Montagnet, C., & Heiss, J. 
(2021). People in jail and prison in spring 
2021. Retrieved from www.vera.org/down￾loads/publications/people-in-jail-and-prison￾in-spring-2021.pdf
Janoušková, M., Tušková, E., Weissová, A., 
Trančík, P., Pasz, J., Evans-Lacko, S., & Win￾kler, P. (2017). Can video interventions be used 
to effectively destigmatize mental illness among 
young people? A systematic review. European 
Psychiatry, 41(1), 1–9.
Jarrett, M., Thornicroft, G., Forrester, A., Harty, 
M., Senior, J., King, C., . . . Shaw, J. (2012). 
Continuity of care for recently released prison￾ers with mental illness. Epidemiology and Psy￾chiatric Sciences, 21(2), 187–193.
Jenkins, G. T., Shafer, M. S., & Janich, N. (2020). 
Critical issues in leadership development for 
peer support specialists. Community Mental 
Health Journal, 56, 1085–1094.
Jewell, T. (2002). Parental influence on sibling 
caregiving for people with severe mental ill￾ness. Community Mental Health Journal, 
38(1), 17–33.
Johansen, K.  K., Hounsgaard, L., Frandsen, 
T. F., Fluttert, F. A. J., & Hansen, J. P. (2021). 
Relapse prevention in ambulant mental health 
care tailored to patients with schizophrenia or 
bipolar disorder. Journal of Psychiatric and 
Mental Health Nursing, 28(4), 549–577.
Johnson, E. (2000). Differences among families 
with serious mental illness: A qualitative analy￾sis. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 70,
126–134.
Johnson, T. P. (2014). Sources of error in substance 
use prevalence surveys. International Scholarly 
Research Notices, 2014, Article 923290.
Johnstone, S., Dela Cruz, G.  A., Kalb, N., 
Tyagi, S.  V., Potenza, M.  N., George, T.  P., 
& Castle, D. J. (2023). A systematic review of 350 References
gender-responsive and integrated substance use 
disorder treatment programs for women with 
co-occurring disorders. American Journal of 
Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 49, 21–42.
Jones, E. E., Farina, A., Hastorf, A. H., Markus, 
H., Miller, D. T., & Scott, R. A. (1984). Social 
stigma: The psychology of marked relation￾ships. New York: Freeman.
Jones, N., Atterbury, K., Byrne, L., Carras, M., 
Brown, M., & Phalen, P. (2021). Lived expe￾rience, research leadership, and the transfor￾mation of mental health services: Building a 
researcher pipeline. Psychiatric Services, 72(5), 
591–593.
Jones, N., Niu, G., Thomas, M., Riano, N.  S., 
Hinshaw, S. P., & Mangurian, C. (2019). Peer 
specialists in community mental health: Ongo￾ing challenges of inclusion. Psychiatric Ser￾vices, 70(12), 1172–1175.
Jones, S., Howard, L., & Thornicroft, G. (2008). 
“Diagnostic overshadowing”: Worse physical 
health care for people with mental illness. Acta 
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 118, 169–171.
Jones, S., Roth, D., & Jones, P. (1995). Effect of 
demographic and behavioral variables on bur￾den of caregivers of chronic mentally ill per￾sons. Psychiatric Services, 46, 141–145.
Jongen, C., McCalman, J., & Bainbridge, R. 
(2018). Health workforce cultural competency 
interventions: A systematic scoping review. 
BMC Health Services Research, 18(1), Article 
232.
Jonsson, U., Linton, S. J., Ybrandt, H., Ringborg, 
A., Leander, L., Moberg, K., . . . Arnberg, F. K. 
(2022). Internet-delivered psychological treat￾ment as an add-on to treatment as usual for 
common mental disorders: A systematic review 
with meta-analysis of randomized trials. Jour￾nal of Affective Disorders, 322, 221–234.
Jost, J. T. (2019, April). A quarter century of sys￾tem justification theory: Questions, answers, 
criticisms, and societal applications. British 
Journal of Social Psychology, 58(2), 263–314.
Jungbauer, J., & Angermeyer, M. (2002). Living 
with a schizophrenic patient: A comprehen￾sive study of burden as it affects parents and 
spouses. Psychiatry, 65, 110–123.
Jussim, L., Nelson, T.  E., Manis, M., & Soffin, 
S. (1995). Prejudice, stereotypes, and labeling 
effects: Sources of bias in person perception. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
68, 228–246.
Kaas, M., Lee, S., & Peitzman, C. (2003). Barriers 
to collaboration between mental health profes￾sionals and families in the care of persons with 
severe mental illness. Issues in Mental Health 
Nursing, 24, 741–756.
Kabat-Zinn, J. (2007), Arriving at your own 
door: 108 lessons in mindfulness. New York: 
Hyperion.
Kageyama, M., & Solomon, P. (2018). Character￾istics of parents with high expressed emotion 
and related factors. Journal of Nervous and 
Mental Disease, 206(12), 955–961.
Kambeitz-Ilankovic, L., Betz, L.  T., Dominke, 
C., Haas, S.  S., Subramaniam, K., Fisher, 
M., .  .  . Kambeitz, J. (2019). Multi-outcome 
meta-analysis (MOMA) of cognitive remedia￾tion in schizophrenia: Revisiting the relevance 
of human coaching and elucidating interplay 
between multiple outcomes. Neuroscience and 
Biobehavioral Reviews, 107, 828–845.
Kang, S., & Bodenhausen, G. (2014). Multiple 
identities in social perception and interaction: 
Challenges and opportunities. Annual Review 
of Psychology, 66, 547–574.
Kanter, J. (1989). Clinical case management: Defi￾nition, principles, components. Hospital and 
Community Psychiatry, 40, 361–368.
Kaplan, K., Brusilovskiy, E., O’Shea, A.  M., & 
Salzer, M.  S. (2019). Child protective service 
disparities and serious mental illnesses: Results 
from a national survey. Psychiatric Services, 
70, 202–208.
Kaplan, K., Solomon, P., Salzer, M. S., & Brusi￾lovskiy, E. (2014). Assessing an internet-based 
parenting intervention for mothers with a seri￾ous mental illness: A randomized controlled 
trial. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 37(3), 
222–231.
Karambelas, G. J., Filia, K., Byrne, L. K., Allott, 
K. A., Jayasinghe, A., & Cotton, S. M. (2022). 
A systematic review comparing caregiver bur￾den and psychological functioning in caregivers 
of individuals with schizophrenia spectrum dis￾orders and bipolar disorders. BMC Psychiatry, 
22(1), Article 422.
Karmel, M. (1969). Total institution and self￾mortification. Journal of Health and Social 
Behavior, 10, 134–141.
Karnieli-Miller, O., Perlick, D.  A., Nelson, A., 
Mattias, K., Corrigan, P., & Roe, D. (2013). 
Family members’ of persons living with a seri￾ous mental illness: Experiences and efforts to 
cope with stigma. Journal of Mental Health, 
22(3), 254–262.
Karras, A. (1962). The effects of reinforcement 
and arousal on the psychomotor performance 
of chronic schizophrenics. Journal of Abnor￾mal and Social Psychology, 65, 104–111.
Karras, A. (1968). Choice reaction time of chronic 
and acute psychiatric patients under primary or 
secondary aversive stimulation. British Journal 
of Social and Clinical Psychology, 7, 270–279.
Kasirye, O. C., Walsh, J. A., Romano, P. S., Beck￾ett, L. A., Garcia, J. A., Elvine-Kreis, B., . . . References 351
Schenker, M.  B. (2005). Acculturation and 
its association with health-risk behaviors in a 
rural Latina population. Ethnicity and Dis￾ease, 15(4), 733–739.
Kathol, R.  G., Butler, M., McAlpine, D.  D., & 
Kane, R.  L. (2010). Barriers to physical and 
mental condition integrated service delivery. 
Psychosomatic Medicine, 72(6), 511–518.
Katz, A.  H., & Bender, E.  I. (1976). Self-help 
groups in Western society: History and pros￾pects. Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 
12, 265–282.
Kaufman, A. (1998). Older patients who care for 
adult children with serious mental illness. Jour￾nal of Gerontological Social Work, 29, 35–55.
Kaufman, A. V., Scogin, F., MacNeil, G., Leeper, 
J., & Wimberly, J. (2010). Helping aging par￾ents of adult children with serious mental ill￾ness. Journal of Social Service Research, 36(5), 
445–459.
Kay, S. R., Fiszbein, A., & Opler, L. A. (1987). 
The positive and negative syndrome scale 
(PANSS) for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bul￾letin, 13(2). 261–276.
Kêdoté, M. N., Brousselle, A., & Champagne, F. 
(2008). Use of health care services by patients 
with co-occurring severe mental illness and 
substance use disorders. Mental Health and 
Substance Use: Dual Diagnosis, 1(3), 216–227.
Keefe, R. S., Silva, S. G., Perkins, D. O., & Lieber￾man, J. A. (1999). The effects of atypical anti￾psychotic drugs on neurocognitive impairment 
in schizophrenia: A review and meta-analysis. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 25, 201–222.
Keith, K. (2021). Supreme Court rejects ACA 
challenge; law remains fully intact. Retrieved 
from www.healthaffairs.org/content/forefront/
supreme-court-rejects-aca-challenge-law￾remains-fully-intact#:~:text=On%20June%20
17%2C%202021%2C%20the,now%20
penalty%2Dless%20individual%20mandate
Kelley, C., & Meyers, J.  E. (1992). The Cross￾Cultural Adaptability Inventory manual. Min￾neapolis: National Computer Systems.
Kelly, E., Brekke, J. S. (2021). Healthy living skills. 
In P. Corrigan & S. Ballentine (Eds.), Physical 
illness and wellness among people with psy￾chiatric disability (pp. 163–229). Washington, 
DC: American Psychiatric Association Press. 
Kelly, E.  L., Hong, B., Duan, L., Pancake, L., 
Cohen, H., & Brekke, J. S. (2021). Service use 
by Medicaid recipients with serious mental ill￾ness during an RCT of the Bridge Peer Health 
Navigator Intervention. Psychiatric Services,
72(10), 1145–1150.
Kelly, J.  F., Humphreys, K., & Ferri, M. 
(2020). Alcoholics Anonymous and other 
12-step programs for alcohol use disorder. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 3,
CD012880.
Kendall, P.  C. (1982). Cognitive processes and 
procedures in behavior therapy. Annual Review 
of Behavior Therapy: Theory and Practice, 8,
120–155.
Kendler, K. S., & Diehl, S. R. (1993). The genet￾ics of schizophrenia: A current, genetic￾epidemiologic perspective. Schizophrenia Bul￾letin, 19(2), 261–285.
Kendler, K.  S., Gruenberg, A.  M., & Tsuang, 
M. T. (1985). Psychiatric illness in first-degree 
relatives of schizophrenic and surgical control 
patients: A family study using DSM-III criteria. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 42, 770–779.
Kennedy-Hendricks, A., Huskamp, H.  A., Rut￾kow, L., & Barry, C.  L. (2016). Improving 
access to care and reducing involvement in the 
criminal justice system for people with mental 
illness. Health Affairs, 35(6), 1076–1083.
Kenneson, A., Funderburk, J. S., & Maisto, S. A. 
(2013). Substance use disorders increase the 
odds of subsequent mood disorders. Drug and 
Alcohol Dependence, 133, 338–343.
Kerman, N., Polillo, A., Bardwell, G., Gran-Ruaz, 
S., Savage, C., Felteau, C., & Tsemberis, S. 
(2021). Harm reduction outcomes and practices 
in Housing First: A mixed-methods systematic 
review. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 228,
Article 109052.
Kern, R. S., Green, M. F., Nuechterlein, K. H., & 
Deng, B. H. (2004). NIMH-MATRICS survey 
on assessment of neurocognition in schizophre￾nia. Schizophrenia Research, 72, 11–19.
Kern, R.  S., Liberman, R.  P., Kopelowicz, A., 
Mintz, J., & Green, M. F. (2002). Applications 
of errorless learning for improving work perfor￾mance in persons with schizophrenia. Ameri￾can Journal of Psychiatry, 159, 1921–1926.
Kern, R. S., & Reddy, F. L. (2014). Evolution of 
errorless learning in psychiatric rehabilitation. 
American Journal of Psychiatric Rehabilita￾tion, 17, 254–271.
Kessing, L.  V., Vradi, E., & Andersen, P.  K. 
(2015). Life expectancy in bipolar disorder. 
Bipolar Disorders, 17(5), 543–548.
Kessler, R. C., Demler, O., Frank, R. G., Olfson, 
M., Pincus, H. A., Walters, E. E., . . . Zaslaf￾sky, A. M. (2005). Prevalence and treatment of 
mental disorders, 1990 to 2003. New England 
Journal of Medicine, 352, 2515–2523.
Kessler, R. C., & Merikangas, K. R. (2004). The 
National Comorbidity Survey Replication 
(NCS-R): Background and aims. International 
Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research, 
13, 60–68.
Khare, C., Mueser, K. T., & McGurk, S. R. (2016). 
Vocational rehabilitation for individuals with 352 References
schizophrenia. Current Treatment Options in 
Psychiatry, 3(2), 99–110.
Khoury, M. J. (2018). From genes to public health: 
The applications of genetic technology in dis￾ease prevention. In M. Freeman (Ed.), The eth￾ics of public health: Volumes I and II (pp. 371–
376). Surrey, UK: Routledge.
Kiburi, S.  K., Ngarachu, E., Tomita, A., Paruk, 
S., & Chiliza, B. (2023). Digital interventions 
for opioid use disorder treatment: A systematic 
review of randomized controlled trials. Journal 
of Substance Abuse Treatment, 144, Article 
108926.
Kikkert, M., Goudriaan, A., de Waal, M., Peen, 
J., & Dekker, J. (2018). Effectiveness of inte￾grated dual diagnosis treatment (IDDT) in 
severe mental illness outpatients with a co￾occurring substance use disorder. Journal of 
Substance Abuse Treatment, 95, 35–42.
Killaspy, H., Harvey, C., Brasier, C., Brophy, L., 
Ennals, P., Fletcher, J., & Hamilton, B. (2022). 
Community-based social interventions for 
people with severe mental illness: A systematic 
review and narrative synthesis of recent evi￾dence. World Psychiatry, 21(1), 96–123.
Kim, B. S. (2007). Acculturation and encultura￾tion. In F. T. L. Leong, A. G. Inman, A. Ebreo, 
L. H. Yang, L. M. Kinoshita, & M. Fu (Eds.), 
Handbook of Asian American psychology (2nd 
ed., pp. 141–158). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Kim, K., Choi, J. S., Choi, E., Nieman, C. L., Joo, 
J. H., Lin, F. R., . . . Han, H.-R. (2016). Effects 
of community-based health worker interven￾tions to improve chronic disease management 
and care among vulnerable populations: A 
systematic review. American Journal of Public 
Health, 106(4), e3–e28.
Kim, S.  K., Lee, M., Jeong, H., & Jang, Y.  M. 
(2022). Effectiveness of mobile applications 
for patients with severe mental illness: A meta￾analysis of randomized controlled trials. Japan 
Journal of Nursing Science, 19(3), Article 
e12476.
Kinderman, P., & Bentall, R.  P. (1997). Causal 
attributions in depression and paranoia: Inter￾nal, personal and situational attributions for 
negative events. Journal of Abnormal Psychol￾ogy, 106, 341–345.
Kinderman, P., Dunbar, R., & Bentall, R.  P. 
(1998). Theory-of-mind deficits and causal 
attributions. British Journal of Psychology, 89,
191–204.
Kingdon, D. G., & Turkington, D. (2005). Cogni￾tive therapy of schizophrenia. New York: Guil￾ford Press.
Kingdon, D.  G., & Turkington, D. (2022). 
Cognitive-behavioral therapy of schizophre￾nia. Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis.
Kingdon, D., & Turkington, D. (2019). Cognitive 
therapy of psychosis: Research and implemen￾tation. Schizophrenia Research, 203, 62–65.
Kinsella, K., Anderson, R., & Anderson, W. 
(1996). Coping skills, strengths, and needs as 
perceived by adult offspring and siblings of peo￾ple with mental illness: A retrospective study. 
Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 20, 24–32.
Kirk, I., Leiknes, K. A., Laru, L., Hammerstrøm, 
K. T., Bramness, J. G., Gråwe, R. W., . . . Waal, 
H. (2018). Dual diagnoses—severe mental ill￾ness and substance use disorder: Part 2. Effect 
of psychosocial interventions. Oslo, Norway: 
Knowledge Centre for the Health Services at 
the Norwegian Institute of Public Health.
Kishimoto, T., Hagi, K., Kurokawa, S., Kane, 
J.  M., & Correll, C.  U. (2021). Long-acting 
injectable versus oral antipsychotics for the 
maintenance treatment of schizophrenia: A sys￾tematic review and comparative meta-analysis 
of randomised, cohort, and pre–post studies. 
Lancet Psychiatry, 8(5), 387–404.
Kisling, L. A., & Stiegmann, R. A. (2022). Alter￾native medicine. Retrieved from www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/books/nbk538520
Kivimäki, M., Batty, G.  D., Pentti, J., Shipley, 
M. J., Sipilä, P. N., Nyberg, S. T., . . . Vahtera, 
J. (2020). Association between socioeconomic 
status and the development of mental and 
physical health conditions in adulthood: A 
multi-cohort study. Lancet Public Health, 5(3), 
e140–e149.
Klee, A., Chinman, M., & Kearney, L. (2019). 
Peer specialist services: New frontiers and new 
roles. Psychological Services, 16(3), 353–359.
Knight, E. L. (2006). Self-help and serious men￾tal illness. Medscape General Medicine, 8(1), 
Article 68.
Koegel, L. (1992). Assessment of assertiveness and 
social skills of adolescents. In I. G. Fodor (Ed.), 
Adolescent assertiveness and social skills train￾ing: A clinical handbook (pp.  43–61). New 
York: Springer.
Koelen, J. A., Vonk, A., Klein, A., Koning, L. de, 
Vonk, P., de Vet, S., & Wiers, R. (2022). Man 
vs. machine: A meta-analysis on the added 
value of human support in text-based inter￾net treatments (“e-therapy”) for mental disor￾ders. Clinical Psychology Review, 96, Article 
102179.
Koh, J., Tng, G.  Y.  Q., & Hartanto, A. (2022). 
Potential and pitfalls of mobile mental health 
apps in traditional treatment: An umbrella 
review. Journal of Personalized Medicine,
12(9), Article 1376.
Koh, S.  D. (1978). Remembering of verbal 
materials by schizophrenic young adults. In 
S. Schwartz (Ed.), Language and cognition in References 353
schizophrenia (pp. 59–69). Hillsdale, NJ: Erl￾baum.
Koh, S. D., Grinker, R. R., Marusarz, T. Z., & 
Forman, P.  L. (1981). Affective memory and 
schizophrenia anhedonia. Schizophrenia Bul￾letin, 7, 292–307.
Koroukian, S.  M., Bakaki, P.  M., Golchin, N., 
Tyler, C., & Loue, S. (2012). Mental illness and 
use of screening mammography among Medic￾aid beneficiaries. American Journal of Preven￾tive Medicine, 42, 606–609.
Kortrijk, H., Mulder, C., van Vliet, D., van Leeu￾wen, C., Jochems, E., & Staring, A. (2013). 
Changes in motivation for treatment in precon￾templating dually diagnosed patients receiving 
assertive community treatment. Community 
Mental Health Journal, 49(6), 733–741.
Kosyluk, K., Kenneally, R. G., Tran, J. T., Cheong, 
Y. F., Bolton, C., & Conner, K. (2022). Over￾coming stigma as a barrier to children’s men￾tal health care: The role of empowerment and 
mental health literacy. Stigma and Health.
Kosyluk, K.  A., Conner, K.  O., Al-Khouja, M., 
Bink, A., Buchholz, B., Ellefson, S., . . . Corri￾gan, P. W. (2021). Factors predicting help seek￾ing for mental illness among college students. 
Journal of Mental Health, 30(3), 300–307.
Kosyluk, K.  A., Conner, K.  O., Lo, C., Ji, M., 
Beekman, B. M., Tran, J., . . . Kipp, K. (2023). 
Examining the efficacy of the National Alli￾ance on Mental Illness Peer-to-Peer Program 
with a predominantly Latinx population: A 
pilot randomized controlled trial. American 
Journal of Psychiatric Rehabilitation, 23(3–4), 
227–248.
Koziarski, J., Ferguson, L., & Huey, L. (2022). 
Shedding light on the dark figure of police men￾tal health calls for service. Retrieved Febru￾ary 11, 2022, from https://academic.oup.com/
policing/advance-article/doi/10.1093/police/
paac006/6527037
Kraepelin, E. (1971). Dementia praecox and para￾phrenia (R.  M.  Barclay, Trans.). New York: 
Krieger. (Original work published 1919)
Krause, M., Huhn, M., Schneider-Thoma, J., Big￾helli, I., Gutsmiedl, K., & Leucht, S. (2019). 
Efficacy, acceptability and tolerability of anti￾psychotics in patients with schizophrenia and 
comorbid substance use: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis. European Neuropsycho￾pharmacology, 29(1), 32–45.
Krawczyk, N., Feder, K.  A., Saloner, B., Crum, 
R. M., Kealhofer, M., & Mojtabai, R. (2017). 
The association of psychiatric comorbid￾ity with treatment completion among clients 
admitted to substance use treatment programs 
in a U.S.  national sample. Drug and Alcohol 
Dependence, 175, 157–163.
Kreisman, D., & Blumenthal, R. (1995). Emo￾tional overinvolvement: A review and explana￾tion of its role in expressed emotion. Research 
in Community and Mental Health, 8, 3–39.
Krentzman, A. R. (2021). Helping clients engage 
with remote mutual aid for addiction recovery 
during COVID-19 and beyond. Alcoholism 
Treatment Quarterly, 39(3), 348–365.
Krepp, J. K. (2000). Lodge magic: Real life adven￾tures in mental health recovery. Minneapolis, 
MN: Tasks Unlimited.
Kridin, K., Hundt, J.  E., Ludwig, R.  J., Schon￾mann, Y., & Cohen, A. D. (2022). Anxiety and 
depression predispose individuals to an autoim￾mune bullous diseases—bullous pemphigoid: 
A large-scale population-based cohort study. 
Current Psychology, 41, 8945–8955.
Kriesche, D., Woll, C. F., Tschentscher, N., Engel, 
R. R., & Karch, S. (2022). Neurocognitive defi￾cits in depression: A systematic review of cogni￾tive impairment in the acute and remitted state. 
European Archives of Psychiatry and Clini￾cal Neuroscience. [Epub ahead of print] doi: 
10.1007/s00406-022-01479-5.
Krupa, T., Eastbrook, S., Hern, L., Lee, D., 
North, R., Percy, K., . . . Wing, G. (2005). How 
do people who receive assertive community 
treatment experience the service? Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation Journal, 29, 18–24.
Krupa, T., McLean, H., Eastabrook, S., Bonham, 
A., & Baksh, L. (2003). Daily time use as a 
measure of community adjustment for clients 
of assertive community treatment. American 
Journal of Occupational Therapy, 57, 558–
565.
Kruse, C. S., Krowski, N., Rodriguez, B., Tran, 
L., Vela, J., & Brooks, M. (2017). Telehealth 
and patient satisfaction: A systematic review 
and narrative analysis. BMJ Open, 7(8), Article 
e016242.
Kukla, M., Bell, M. D., & Lysaker, P. H. (2018). A 
randomized controlled trial examining a cogni￾tive behavioral therapy intervention enhanced 
with cognitive remediation to improve work 
and neurocognition outcomes among persons 
with schizophrenia spectrum disorders. Schizo￾phrenia Research, 197, 400–406.
Kukla, M., Salyers, M. P., & Lysaker, P. H. (2013). 
Levels of patient activation among adults with 
schizophrenia: Associations with hope, symp￾toms, medication adherence, and recovery atti￾tudes. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 
201(4), 339–344.
Kuo, C.-J., Yang, S.-Y., Liao, Y.-T., Chen, W. J., 
Lee, W.-C., Shau, W.-Y., .  .  . Chen, C.-C. 
(2013). Second-generation antipsychotic medi￾cations and risk of pneumonia in schizophre￾nia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 39(3), 648–657.354 References
Kurtz, M. M., Moberg, P. J., Gur, R. C., & Gur, 
R.  E. (2001). Approaches to cognitive reme￾diation of neuropsychological deficit in schizo￾phrenia: A review and meta-analysis. Neuro￾psychological Review, 11, 197–210.
Kurtz, M. M., & Mueser, K. T. (2008). A meta￾analysis of controlled research on social skills 
training for schizophrenia. Journal of Consult￾ing and Clinical Psychology, 76(3), 491–504.
Kurtz, M. M., & Richardson, C. L. (2012). Social 
cognitive training for schizophrenia: A meta￾analytic investigation of controlled research. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 38(5), 1092–1104.
Kwon, S., Firth, J., Joshi, D., & Torous, J. (2022). 
Accessibility and availability of smartphone 
apps for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia, 8(1), 
Article 98.
Kyle, T., & Dunn, J. R. (2008). Effects of hous￾ing circumstances on health, quality of life and 
healthcare use for people with severe mental 
illness: A review. Health & Social Care in the 
Community, 16(1), 1–15.
Labrum, T. (2020). Persons with serious mental 
illness help relatives: Rates and correlates of 
assistance. Journal of Mental Health, 29(3), 
328–335.
Labrum, T., & Solomon, P.  L. (2016). Factors 
associated with family violence by persons with 
psychiatric disorders. Psychiatry Research, 
244, 171–178.
Labrum, T., & Solomon, P.  L. (2017). Rates of 
victimization of violence committed by rela￾tives with psychiatric disorders. Journal of 
Interpersonal Violence, 32, 955–974.
Labrum, T., Zingman, M.  A., Nossel, I., & 
Dixon, L. (2021). Violence by persons with 
serious mental illness toward family caregivers 
and other relatives: A review. Harvard Review 
of Psychiatry, 29(1), 10–19.
Lally, J., & MacCabe, J. H. (2015). Antipsychotic 
medication in schizophrenia: A review. British 
Medical Bulletin, 114(1), 169–179.
Lally, S. J. (1989). Does being in here mean there 
is something wrong with me? Schizophrenia 
Bulletin, 15(2), 253–265.
Lam, C. (2003). Covert parental control: Parent–
adolescent interaction and adolescent develop￾ment in a Chinese context. International Jour￾nal of Adolescent Medicine and Health, 15,
63–77.
Lam, C.  S., Tsang, H., Chan, F., & Corrigan, 
P. W. (2006). Chinese and American perspec￾tives on stigma. Rehabilitation Education, 20,
269–279.
Lam, D. (1991). Psychosocial family intervention 
in schizophrenia: A review of empirical studies. 
Psychological Medicine, 21, 423–441.
Lamb, H. R., Weinberger, L. E., & DeCuir, W. J. 
(2002). The police and mental health. Psychiat￾ric Services, 53, 1266–1271.
Lamberti, J. S., Weisman, R. L., Cerulli, C., Wil￾liams, G. C., Jacobowitz, D. B., Mueser, K. T., 
.  .  . Caine, E.  D. (2017). A randomized con￾trolled trial of the Rochester Forensic Assertive 
Community Treatment model. Psychiatric Ser￾vices, 68(10), 1016–1024.
Landry, M., Moreno, A., Patry, S., Potvin, S., 
& Lemasson, M. (2021). Current practices of 
electroconvulsive therapy in mental disorders: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis of short 
and long-term cognitive effects. Journal of 
ECT, 37(2), 119–127.
Lange, S., Rehm, J., & Popova, S. (2011). The 
effectiveness of criminal justice diversion initia￾tives in North America: A systematic literature 
review. International Journal of Forensic Men￾tal Health, 10(3), 200–214.
Langford, C.  P., Bowsher, J., Maloney, J.  P., & 
Lillis, P. P. (1997). Social support: A conceptual 
analysis. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 25(1), 
95–100.
Langheim, F.  J.  P. (2014). Poor access to health 
care as a social determinant of mental health. 
Psychiatric Annals, 44(1), 52–57.
Laniyonu, A., & Goff, P.  A. (2021). Measuring 
disparities in police use of force and injury 
among persons with serious mental illness. 
BMC Psychiatry, 21(1), Article 500.
Larimer, M. E., Palmer, R. S., & Marlatt, G. A. 
(1999). Relapse prevention: An overview of 
Marlatt’s cognitive-behavioral model. Alcohol 
Research and Health, 23, 151–160.
Larsen, S. F., & Fromholt, P. (1976). Mnemonic 
organization and free recall in schizophrenia. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 85, 61–65.
Larson, J.  E., & Corrigan, P.  W. (2008). The 
stigma of families with mental illness. Aca￾demic Psychiatry, 32, 87–91.
Latimer, E. A. (2001). Economic impacts of sup￾ported employment for persons with severe 
mental illness. Canadian Journal of Psychia￾try, 46, 496–505.
Latimer, E. A., Bush, P. W., Becker, D. R., Drake, 
R. E., & Bond, G. R. (2004). The cost of high￾fidelity supported employment programs for 
people with severe mental illness. Psychiatric 
Services, 55, 401–406.
Latimer, E.  A., Rabouin, D., Cao, Z., Ly, A., 
Powell, G., Adair, C. E., . . . Veldhuizen, S. R. 
(2019). Cost-effectiveness of Housing First 
intervention with intensive case management 
compared with treatment as usual for homeless 
adults with mental illness: Secondary analysis 
of a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Network 
Open, 2(8), e199782–e199782.
Laursen, T. M., Musliner, K. L., Benros, M. E., References 355
Vestergaard, M., & Munk-Olsen, T. (2016). 
Mortality and life expectancy in persons with 
severe unipolar depression. Journal of Affective 
Disorders, 193, 203–207.
Lawley, M. E., Cwiak, C., Cordes, S., Ward, M., 
& Hall, K. S. (2022). Barriers to family plan￾ning among women with severe mental illness. 
Women’s Reproductive Health, 9(2), 100–118.
Lawrence, D., Kisely, S., & Pais, J. (2010). The 
epidemiology of excess mortality in people with 
mental illness. Canadian Journal of Psychia￾try, 55(12), 752–760.
Lawrence, P., Fulbrook, P., Somerset, S., & 
Schulz, P. (2017). Motivational interviewing 
to enhance treatment attendance in mental 
health settings: A systematic review and meta￾analysis. Journal of Psychiatric and Mental 
Health Nursing, 24(9–10), 699–718.
Leahy, M. J., Chan, F., Iwanaga, K., Umucu, E., 
Sung, C., Bishop, M., & Strauser, D. (2019). 
Empirically derived test specifications for the 
certified rehabilitation counselor examination: 
Revisiting the essential competencies of reha￾bilitation counselors. Rehabilitation Counsel￾ing Bulletin, 63, 35–49.
Lean, M., Fornells-Ambrojo, M., Milton, A., 
Lloyd-Evans, B., Harrison-Stewart, B., Yesufu￾Udechuku, A., .  .  . Johnson, S. (2019). Self￾management interventions for people with 
severe mental illness: Systematic review and 
meta-analysis. British Journal of Psychiatry,
214(5), 260–268.
Leazenby, L. (1997). Confidentiality as a barrier 
to treatment. Psychiatric Services, 48, 1467–
1468.
Lebowitz, M.  S., & Appelbaum, P.  S. (2019). 
Biomedical explanations of psychopathology 
and their implications for attitudes and beliefs 
about mental disorders. Annual Review of 
Clinical Psychology, 15, 555–577.
Lecomte, T., Abidi, S., Garcia-Ortega, I., Mian, 
I., Jackson, K., Jackson, K., & Norman, R. 
(2017). Canadian Treatment Guidelines on 
psychosocial treatment of schizophrenia in 
children and youth. Canadian Journal of Psy￾chiatry, 62(9), 648–655.
Lee, E.-J., Lam, C., & Ditchman, N. (2015). Self￾determination and cultural considerations: An 
Asian perspective. In P.  W.  Corrigan (Ed.), 
Person-centered care for mental illness: The 
evolution of adherence and self-determination.
(pp.  211–234). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association.
Lee, E. J., Qin, S., Baig, A. A., Lee, J. D., & Cor￾rigan, P. W. (in press). Decision making about 
type 2 diabetes mellitus among Koreans. 
Research in Social Science and Disability.
Leff, J., & Vaughn, C. (1985). Expressed emotion 
in families: Its significance for mental illness.
New York: Guilford Press.
Leff, J., & Warner, R. (2006). Social inclusion of 
people with mental illness. New York: Cam￾bridge University Press.
Lefley, H. (1996). Family caregiving in mental ill￾ness. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Lefley, H. (2003). Advocacy, self-help, and 
consumer-operated services. In A.  Tasman, 
J. Kay, & J. Lieberman (Eds.), Psychiatry (2nd 
ed., pp. 2274–2288). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Légaré, F., Moumjid-Ferdjaoui, N., Drolet, R., 
Stacey, D., Härter, M., Bastian, H., . . . Thom￾son, R. (2013). Core competencies for shared 
decision making training programs: Insights 
from an international, interdisciplinary work￾ing group. Journal of Continuing Education in 
the Health Professions, 33(4), 267–273.
Lehman, A. F., Kreyenbuhl, J., Buchanan, R. W., 
Dickerson, F.  B., Dixon, L.  B., Goldberg, R., 
. . . Steinwachs, D. M. (2004). The Schizophre￾nia Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT): 
Updated treatment recommendations 2003. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 30, 193–217.
Lehman, A. F., & Steinwachs, D. M. (1998). Pat￾terns of usual care for schizophrenia: Initial 
results from the Schizophrenia Patient Out￾comes Research Team (PORT) client survey. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 24, 11–20.
Lehman, A.  F., Steinwachs, D.  M., & PORT 
Co-Investigators. (1998a). At issue: Translat￾ing research into practice: The Schizophrenia 
Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT) 
treatment recommendations. Schizophrenia 
Bulletin, 24, 1–10.
Lehman, A.  F., Steinwachs, D.  M., & PORT 
Co-Investigators. (1998b). Patterns of usual 
care for schizophrenia: Initial results from 
the Schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research 
Team (PORT) client survey. Schizophrenia Bul￾letin, 24, 11–23.
Lehman, S., Joy, V., Kreisman, D., & Simmens, 
S. (1976). Responses to viewing symptomatic 
behaviors and labeling of prior mental illness. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 4, 327–334.
Leith, J. E., Jewell, T. C., & Stein, C. H. (2018). 
Caregiving attitudes, personal loss, and stress￾related growth among siblings of adults with 
mental illness. Journal of Child and Family 
Studies, 27(4), 1193–1206.
Leith, J.  E., & Stein, C.  H. (2012). The role of 
personal loss in the caregiving experiences of 
well siblings of adults with serious mental ill￾ness. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 68(10), 
1075–1088.
Lejeune, J.  A., Northrop, A., & Kurtz, M.  M. 
(2021). A meta-analysis of cognitive remedia￾tion for schizophrenia: Efficacy and the role of 356 References
participant and treatment factors. Schizophre￾nia Bulletin, 47(4), 997–1006.
Lenz, A.  S., & Luo, Y. (2019). Differential esti￾mation of treatment effect between clinician￾administered and self-reported PTSD 
assessments. Journal of Counseling and Devel￾opment, 97, 3–14.
Leonard, E. J., & Bruer, R. A. (2007). Supported 
education strategies for people with severe 
mental illness: A review of evidence based 
practice. International Journal of Psychosocial 
Rehabilitation, 11(1), 92–103.
Leucht, S., Chaimani, A., Krause, M., Schneider￾Thoma, J., Wang, D., Dong, S., . . . Davis, J. M. 
(2022). The response of subgroups of patients 
with schizophrenia to different antipsychotic 
drugs: A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Lancet Psychiatry, 9(11), 884–893.
Leucht, S., Kane, J. M., Kissling, W., Hamann, J., 
Etschel, E., & Engel, R. (2005). Clinical impli￾cations of Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale scores. 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 187(4), 366–371.
Levant, R. F., Stefanov, D. G., Rankin, T. J., Hal￾ter, M.  J., Mellinger, C., & Williams, C.  M. 
(2013). Moderated path analysis of the relation￾ships between masculinity and men’s attitudes 
toward seeking psychological help. Journal of 
Counseling Psychology, 60, 392–406.
Levengood, T. W., Yoon, G. H., Davoust, M. J., 
Ogden, S. N., Marshall, B. D., Cahill, S. R., & 
Bazzi, A. R. (2021). Supervised injection facili￾ties as harm reduction: A systematic review. 
American Journal of Preventive Medicine,
61(5), 738–749.
Levesque, C. S., Williams, G. C., Elliot, D., Pick￾ering, M. A., Bodenhamer, B., & Finley, P. J. 
(2007). Validating the theoretical structure of 
the Treatment Self-Regulation Questionnaire 
(TSRQ) across three different health behaviors. 
Health Education Research, 22(5), 691–702.
Levinson, D., Lakoma, M.  D., Petukhova, M., 
Schoenbaum, M., Zaslavsky, A.  M., Anger￾meyer, M., . . . Kessler, R. C. (2010). Associa￾tions of serious mental illness with earnings: 
Results from the WHO World Mental Health 
surveys. British Journal of Psychiatry, 197(2), 
114–121.
Levstek, D.  A., & Bond, G.  R. (1993). Housing 
cost, quality, and satisfaction among formerly 
homeless persons with serious mental illness 
in two cities. Innovations and Research, 2(3), 
1–8.
Lewis, T. T., Cogburn, C. D., & Williams, D. R. 
(2015). Self-reported experiences of discrimi￾nation and health: scientific advances, ongo￾ing controversies, and emerging issues. Annual 
Review of Clinical Psychology, 11, 407–440.
Li, R., Ma, X., Wang, G., Yang, J., & Wang, C. 
(2016). Why sex differences in schizophrenia? 
Journal of Translational Neuroscience, 1(1), 
37–42.
Li, Z., Sun, D., Liu, P., Zhang, L., Bai, J., & Cui, 
H. (2011). Visual impairment and mortality in 
a rural adult population (the Southern Harbin 
Eye Study). Ophthalmic Epidemiology, 18(2), 
54–60.
Liberman, R.  P. (1988). Behavioral family man￾agement. In R.  P.  Liberman (Ed.), Psychiat￾ric rehabilitation of chronic mental patients
(pp.  199–244). Washington, DC: American 
Psychiatric Press.
Liberman, R. P. (2008). Recovery from disability: 
Manual of psychiatric rehabilitation. Washing￾ton, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Liberman, R. P., DeRisi, W. J., & Mueser, K. T. 
(1989). Social skills training for psychiatric 
patients. Elmsford, NY: Pergamon Press.
Liberman, R. P., & Green, M. F. (1992). Whither 
cognitive-behavior therapy for schizophrenia? 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 18, 27–35.
Liberman, R. P., Kopelowicz, A., Ventura, J., & 
Gutkind, D. (2002). Operational criteria and 
factors related to recovery from schizophre￾nia. International Review of Psychiatry, 14(4), 
256–272.
Liberman, R. P., Mueser, K. T., & Wallace, C. J. 
(1986). Social skills training for schizophrenic 
individuals at risk for relapse. American Jour￾nal of Psychiatry, 143, 523–526.
Lie, D.  A., Lee-Rey, E., Gomez, A., Bereknyei, 
S., & Braddock, C.  H. (2011). Does cultural 
competency training of health professionals 
improve patient outcomes?: A systematic review 
and proposed algorithm for future research. 
Journal of General Internal Medicine, 26(3), 
317–325.
Lieberman, M. A. (1990). A group therapist per￾spective on self-help groups. International 
Journal of Group Psychotherapy, 40, 251–279.
Lim, C. T., Caan, M. P., Kim, C. H., Chow, C. M., 
Leff, H. S., & Tepper, M. C. (2022). Care man￾agement for serious mental illness: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Psychiatric Services, 
73(2), 180–187.
Lima-Rodríguez, J. S., de Medina-Moragas, A. J., 
Fernández-Fernández, M. J., & Lima-Serrano, 
M. (2022). Factors associated with quality of 
life in relatives of adults with serious mental ill￾ness: A systematic review. Community Mental 
Health Journal, 58(7), 1361–1380.
Lindamer, L. A., Bailey, A., Hawthorne, W., Fol￾som, D. P., Gilmer, T. P., Garcia, P., . . . Jeste, 
D. V. (2003). Gender differences in character￾istics and service use of public mental health 
patients with schizophrenia. Psychiatric Ser￾vices, 54, 1407–1409.References 357
Linehan, M. M. (2013). What psychiatrists should 
know about dialectical behavior therapy. Psy￾chiatric Annals, 43, Article 148.
Link, B. G. (1987). Understanding labeling effects 
in the area of mental disorders: An assess￾ment of the effects of expectations of rejection. 
American Sociological Review, 52, 96–112.
Link, B. G., Cullen, F. T., Struening, E., Shrout, 
P. E., & Dohrenwend, B. P. (1989). A modified 
labeling theory approach to mental disorders: 
An empirical assessment. American Sociologi￾cal Review, 54(3), 400–423.
Link, B. G., Cullen, F. T., Frank, J., & Wozniak, 
J. F. (1987). The social rejection of former men￾tal patients: Understanding why labels matter. 
American Journal of Sociology, 92, 1461–
1500.
Link, B. G., Mirotznik, J., & Cullen, F. T. (1991). 
The effectiveness of stigma coping orientations: 
Can negative consequences of mental illness 
labeling be avoided? Journal of Health and 
Social Behavior, 32(3), 302–320.
Link, B. G., & Phelan, J. C. (2001). Conceptual￾izing stigma. Annual Review of Sociology, 27,
363–385.
Linn, M. W. (1981). Can foster care survive? New 
Directions for Mental Health Services, 11,
35–47.
Lippard, E.  T., & Nemeroff, C.  B. (2020). The 
devastating clinical consequences of child 
abuse and neglect: Increased disease vulner￾ability and poor treatment response in mood 
disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry,
177(1), 20–36.
Lisy, K., Peters, M. D. J., Schofield, P., & Jefford, 
M. (2018). Experiences and unmet needs of 
lesbian, gay, and bisexual people with cancer 
care: A systematic review and meta-synthesis. 
Psycho-Oncology, 27(6), 1480–1489.
Liu, N. H., Daumit, G. L., Dua, T., Aquila, R., 
Charlson, F., Cuijpers, P., . . . Saxena, S. (2017). 
Excess mortality in persons with severe mental 
disorders: A multilevel intervention framework 
and priorities for clinical practice, policy and 
research agendas. World Psychiatry, 16(1), 
30–40.
Liu, X., Huang, S., Hu, Y., & Wang, G. (2022). 
The effectiveness of telemedicine interventions 
on women with postpartum depression: A sys￾tematic review and meta-analysis. Worldviews 
on Evidence-Based Nursing, 19(3), 175–190.
Livingston, J.  D. (2013). Mental illness-related 
and structural stigma: The downward spiral 
of systemic exclusion final report. Retrieved 
from https://mentalhealthcommission.ca/wp￾content/uploads/2021/09/mental-illness￾related-structural-stigma-the-downward￾spiral-of-systemic-exclusion-final￾Livingston, J. D. (2016). Contact between police 
and people with mental disorders: A review of 
rates. Psychiatric Services, 67(8), 850–857.
Lloyd, C., Waghorn, G., Best, M., & Gemmell, 
S. (2008). Reliability of a composite measure 
of social inclusion for people with psychiatric 
disabilities. Australian Occupational Therapy 
Journal, 55, 47–56.
Lloyd-Evans, B., Mayo-Wilson, E., Harrison, B., 
Istead, H., Brown, E., Pilling, S., .  .  . Kend￾all, T. (2014). A systematic review and meta￾analysis of randomised controlled trials of peer 
support for people with severe mental illness. 
BMC Psychiatry, 14, 1–12.
Lo Coco, G., Melchiori, F., Oieni, V., Infurna, 
M. R., Strauss, B., Schwartze, D., . . . Gullo, 
S. (2019). Group treatment for substance use 
disorder in adults: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis of randomized-controlled trials. 
Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 99,
104–116.
Logan, R. I., & Castañeda, H. (2020). Address￾ing health disparities in the rural United States: 
Advocacy as caregiving among community 
health workers and promotores de salud. Inter￾national Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health, 17(24), Article E9223.
Loong, D., Bonato, S., Barnsley, J., & Dewa, 
C. S. (2019). The effectiveness of mental health 
courts in reducing recidivism and police con￾tact: A systematic review. Community Mental 
Health Journal, 55(7), 1073–1098.
López, S.  R., Ramírez García, J.  I., Ullman, 
J.  B., Kopelowicz, A., Jenkins, J., Breitborde, 
N. J. K., & Placencia, P. (2009). Cultural vari￾ability in the manifestation of expressed emo￾tion. Family Process, 48(2), 179–194.
López-Goñi, J. J., Haro, B., Fernández-Montalvo, 
J., & Arteaga, A. (2021). Impact of a trauma 
intervention on reducing dropout from sub￾stance use disorder treatment. Psychological 
Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Pol￾icy, 13, 847–855.
Lu, E.  Y., Cheng, A.  S.  K., Tsang, H.  W.  H., 
Chen, J., Leung, S., Yip, A., . . . Ma, N. (2022). 
Psychoeducation, motivational interviewing, 
cognitive remediation training, and/or social 
skills training in combination for psychoso￾cial functioning of patients with schizophrenia 
spectrum disorders: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. 
Frontiers in Psychiatry, 13, Article 899840.
Luciano, A., Drake, R. E., Bond, G. R., Becker, 
D. R., Carpenter-Song, E., Lord, S., . . . Swan￾son, S.  J. (2014). Evidence-based supported 
employment for people with severe mental ill￾ness: Past, current, and future research. Journal 
of Vocational Rehabilitation, 40, 1–13.358 References
Luciano, A., & Meara, E. (2014). Employment 
status of people with mental illness: National 
survey data from 2009 and 2010. Psychiatric 
Services, 65(10), 1201–1209.
Lucksted, A., Drapalski, A.  L., Brown, C.  H., 
Wilson, C., Charlotte, M., Mullane, A., & 
Fang, L. J. (2017). Outcomes of a psychoedu￾cational intervention to reduce internalized 
stigma among psychosocial rehabilitation cli￾ents. Psychiatric Services, 68(4), 360–367.
Lucksted, A., Drapalski, A., Calmes, C., Forbes, 
C., DeForge, B., & Boyd, J. (2011). Ending self￾stigma: Pilot evaluation of a new intervention 
to reduce internalized stigma among people 
with mental illnesses. Psychiatric Rehabilita￾tion Journal, 35, 51–54.
Lukoff, D., Nuechterlein, K., & Ventura, J. (1986). 
Manual for the expanded Brief Psychiatric Rat￾ing Scale (BPRS). Schizophrenia Bulletin, 12, 
578–593.
Lutterman, T., Hogan, M., Phelan, B., & Mazade, 
N. (2010). State mental health agencies. In. B, 
Lubotsky Levin, K. D. Hennessy, & J, Petrila 
(Eds.), Mental health services: A public health 
perspective (pp. 321–348). New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Lyon, H. M., Kaney, S., & Bentall, R. P. (1994). 
The defensive function of persecutory delu￾sions: Evidence from attribution tasks. British 
Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 637–646.
Lyons, N., Cooper, C., & Lloyd-Evans, B. (2021). 
A systematic review and meta-analysis of group 
peer support interventions for people experi￾encing mental health conditions. BMC Psychia￾try, 21(1), 1–17.
Lysaker, P. H., Bell, M. D., Bryson, G. J., & Zito, 
W. (1993). Raters’ guide for the Work Behavior 
Inventory. Washington, DC: Rehabilitation, 
Research, and Development Service, Depart￾ment of Veteran Affairs.
Lysaker, P.  H., Davis, L.  W., Warman, D.  M., 
Strasburger, A., & Beattie, N. (2007). Stigma, 
social function and symptoms in schizophre￾nia and schizoaffective disorder: Associations 
across 6 months. Psychiatry Research, 149(1–
3), 89–95.
Lysaker, P. H., Pattison, M. L., Leonhardt, B. L., 
Phelps, S., & Vohs, J.  L. (2018). Insight in 
schizophrenia spectrum disorders: Relation￾ship with behavior, mood and perceived quality 
of life, underlying causes and emerging treat￾ments. World Psychiatry, 17(1), 12–23.
Ma, Z. (2017). How the media cover mental ill￾nesses: A review. Health Education, 117(1), 
90–109.
MacDonald-Wilson, K. L., Rogers, E. S., Massaro, 
J. M., Lyass, A., & Crean, T. (2002). An investi￾gation of reasonable workplace accommodations 
for people with psychiatric disabilities: Quanti￾tative findings from a multi-site study. Commu￾nity Mental Health Journal, 38, 35–50.
Macias, C., Kinney, R., & Rodican, C. (1995). 
Transitional employment: An evaluative 
description of Fountain House practice. Jour￾nal of Vocational Rehabilitation, 5, 151–157.
Macias, R. L., Gold, P. B., & Jones, D. R. (2013). 
Age and physical health as predictors of family 
contact among adults with severe psychiatric 
illness. Psychiatric Quarterly, 84(2), 183–195.
Macias-Konstantopoulos, W., Heins, A., Sachs, 
C.  J., Whiteman, P.  J., Wingkun, N.  J.  G., 
& Riviello, R.  J. (2021). Between emergency 
department visits: The role of harm reduction 
programs in mitigating the harms associated 
with injection drug use. Annals of Emergency 
Medicine, 77(5), 479–492.
Mackey, L.  M., Doody, C., Werner, E.  L., & 
Fullen, B. (2016). Self-management skills in 
chronic disease management: What role does 
health literacy have? Medical Decision Mak￾ing, 36(6), 741–759.
Maeng, D., Tsun, Z.  Y., Lesch, E., Jacobowitz, 
D. B., Strawderman, R. L., Harrington, D. K., 
.  .  . Lamberti, J.  S. (2023). Affordability of 
forensic assertive community treatment pro￾grams: A return-on-investment analysis. Psy￾chiatric Services, 74, 358–364.
Magura, S., Laudet, A., Mahmood, D., Rosen￾blum, A., Vogel, H., & Knight, E. (2003). Role 
of self-help processes in achieving abstinence 
among dually diagnosed persons. Addictive 
Behaviors, 28, 399–413.
Magwood, O., Salvalaggio, G., Beder, M., Ken￾dall, C., Kpade, V., Daghmach, W., .  .  . Pot￾tie, K. (2020). The effectiveness of substance 
use interventions for homeless and vulnerably 
housed persons: A systematic review of system￾atic reviews on supervised consumption facili￾ties, managed alcohol programs, and pharma￾cological agents for opioid use disorder. PLoS 
ONE, 15(1), Article e0227298.
Maher, B. A., & Spitzer, M. (1993). Delusions. In 
P. Sutker & H. Adams (Eds.), Comprehensive 
handbook of psychology (pp. 309–339). New 
York: Plenum.
Maheshwari, S., Manohar, S., Chandran, S., & 
Rao, T. (2020). Psychoeducation in schizophre￾nia. In A.  Shrivastava & A.  de Sousa (Eds.), 
Schizophrenia treatment outcomes: An evi￾dence-based approach to recovery (pp.  275–
284). New York: Springer.
Mai, Q., Holman, C.  D.  J., Sanfilippo, F.  M., 
& Emery, J. D. (2011). The impact of mental 
illness on potentially preventable hospitalisa￾tions: A population-based cohort study. BMC 
Psychiatry, 11, 1–11.References 359
Mai, Q., Holman, C.  D.  J., Sanfilippo, F.  M., 
Emery, J. D., & Preen, D. B. (2011). Mental ill￾ness related disparities in diabetes prevalence, 
quality of care and outcomes: A population￾based longitudinal study. BMC Medicine, 9,
Article 118.
Maj, M., Stein, D.  J., Parker, G., Zimmerman, 
M., Fava, G. A., De Hert, M., . . . Wittchen, 
H. (2020). The clinical characterization of the 
adult patient with depression aimed at person￾alization of management. World Psychiatry,
19(3), 269–293.
Mak, W. W. S., Tsoi, E. W. S., & Wong, H. C. Y. 
(2022). Brief Wellness Recovery Action 
Planning (WRAP®) as a mental health self￾management tool for community adults in 
Hong Kong: A randomized controlled trial. 
Journal of Mental Health. [Epub ahead of 
print] doi: 10.1080/09638237.2022.2069723.
Makowski, A. C., Mnich, E. E., Ludwig, J., Daub￾mann, A., Bock, T., Lambert, M., Härter, M., 
.  .  . von dem Knesebeck, O. (2016). Changes 
in beliefs and attitudes toward people with 
depression and schizophrenia: Results of a pub￾lic campaign in Germany. Psychiatry Research, 
237, 271–278.
Mancuso, L.  L. (1995). Achieving reasonable 
accommodation for workers with psychiatric 
disabilities: Understanding the employer’s per￾spective. American Rehabilitation, 21, 2–8.
Mandler, G. (1972). Organization and recogni￾tion. In E.  Tulving & W.  Donaldson (Eds.), 
Organization of memory (pp. 139–166). New 
York: Academic Press.
Mangurian, C., Newcomer, J.  W., Modlin, C., 
& Schillinger, D. (2016). Diabetes and cardio￾vascular care among people with severe mental 
illness: A literature review. Journal of General 
Internal Medicine, 31(9), 1083–1091.
Maniglio, R. (2009). Severe mental illness and 
criminal victimization: A systematic review. 
Acta Pychiatrica Scandinavica, 119, 180–191.
Mannion, E. (2000). Training manual for the 
implementation of family education in the 
adult mental health system of Berks County, 
Pennsylvania. Philadelphia: University of Penn￾sylvania, Center for Mental Health Policy and 
Services Research.
Mannion, E., Draine, J., Solomon, P., & Meisel, 
M. (1997). Applying research on family educa￾tion about mental illness to development of a 
relatives’ group consultation model. Commu￾nity Mental Health Journal, 33, 555–574.
Mannion, E., Meisel, M., Solomon, P., & Draine, 
J. (1996). A comparative analysis of families 
with mentally ill adult relatives: Support group 
members versus non-members. Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation Journal, 20, 43–50.
Mannion, E., Mueser, K., & Solomon, P. (1994). 
Designing psychoeducational services for 
spouses of persons with serious mental illness. 
Community Mental Health Journal, 30, 117–
190.
Manthey, T., Jackson, C., & Evans-Brown, P. 
(2011). Motivational interviewing and voca￾tional rehabilitation: A review with recom￾mendations for administrators and counselors. 
Journal of Applied Rehabilitation Counseling, 
42(1), 3–14.
Manuel, J. I., Nizza, M., Herman, D. B., Conover, 
S., Esquivel, L., Yuan, Y., & Susser, E. (2023). 
Supporting vulnerable people during challeng￾ing transitions: A systematic review of critical 
time intervention. Administration and Policy 
in Mental Health and Mental Health Services 
Research, 50(1), 100–113.
Maples, N., & Velligan, D. (2008). Cognitive 
adaptation training: Establishing environmen￾tal supports to bypass cognitive deficits and 
improve functional outcomes. American Jour￾nal of Psychiatric Rehabilitation, 11, 164–180.
Mares, A. S., & Rosenheck, R. A. (2004). One￾year housing arrangements among home￾less adults with serious mental illness in the 
ACCESS Program. Psychiatric Services, 55,
566–574.
Maresova, P., Javanmardi, E., Barakovic, S., 
Barakovic Husic, J., Tomsone, S., Krejcar, O., 
& Kuca, K. (2019). Consequences of chronic 
diseases and other limitations associated with 
old age—a scoping review. BMC Public Health, 
19(1), Article 1431.
Markowitz, F.  E. (2015). Involvement in mental 
health self-help groups and recovery. Health 
Sociology Review, 24(2), 199–212.
Markus, H.  R., Kitayama, S., & Heiman, R.  J. 
(1996). Culture and basic psychological pro￾cesses. In E.  T.  Higgins & A.  W.  Kruglanski 
(Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic 
principles (pp. 857–913). New York: Guilford 
Press.
Marlatt, G.  A., Larimer, M.  E., & Witkiewitz, 
K. (Eds.). (2012). Harm reduction: Pragmatic 
strategies for managing high-risk behaviors
(2nd ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Marlatt, G. A., & Donovan, D. M. (Eds.). (2005). 
Relapse prevention: Maintenance strategies in 
the treatment of addictive behaviors (2nd ed.). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Marrero, R.  J., Fumero, A., de Miguel, A., & 
Peñate, W. (2020). Psychological factors 
involved in psychopharmacological medication 
adherence in mental health patients: A system￾atic review. Patient Education and Counseling, 
103(10), 2116–2131.
Marsh, D. (1992). Families and mental illness. 360 References
New directions in professional practice. New 
York: Praeger.
Marsh, D. (1998). Serious mental illness and the 
family: the practitioner’s guide. New York: 
Wiley.
Marshall, M., Hogg, L. I., Gath, G. H., & Lock￾wood, A. (1995). The Cardinal Needs Schedule: 
A modified version of the MRC Needs for Care 
Assessment Schedule. Psychological Medicine, 
25, 603–617.
Marshall, T., Goldberg, R. W., Braude, L., Dough￾erty, R.  H., Daniels, A.  S., Shoma Ghose, S., 
. . . Delphin-Rittmon, M. E. (2014). Supported 
employment: Assessing the evidence. Psychiat￾ric Services, 65, 16–23.
Marshall, T., & Solomon, P. (2000). Releasing 
information to families of persons with severe 
mental illness: A survey of NIMH members. 
Psychiatric Services, 51, 1006–1011.
Martin, M.  S., Potter, B.  K., Crocker, A.  G., 
Wells, G.  A., Grace, R.  M., & Colman, I. 
(2018). Mental health treatment patterns fol￾lowing screening at intake to prison. Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 86(1), 
15–23.
Martinez, A. G., Piff, P. K., Mendoza-Denton, R., 
& Hinshaw, S. P. (2011). The power of a label: 
Mental illness diagnosis, ascribed human￾ity, and social rejection. Journal of Social and 
Clinical Psychology, 30(1), 1–23.
Martínez-Hidalgo, M.  N., Lorenzo-Sánchez, E., 
López García, J. J., & Regadera, J. J. (2018). 
Social contact as a strategy for self-stigma 
reduction in young adults and adolescents with 
mental health problems. Psychiatry Research, 
260, 443–450.
Marx, A., Test, M., & Stein, L. (1973). Extra￾hospital management of severe mental illness. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 29, 505–511.
Mason, D., Ingham, B., Urbanowicz, A., Michael, 
C., Birtles, H., Woodbury-Smith, M., . . . Parr, 
J. R. (2019). A systematic review of what bar￾riers and facilitators prevent and enable physi￾cal healthcare services access for autistic adults. 
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disor￾ders, 49(8), 3387–3400.
Massel, H. K., Corrigan, P. W., Liberman, R. P., 
& Milan, M. (1991). Conversation skills 
training in thought-disordered schizophrenic 
patients through attention focusing. Psychiatry 
Research, 38, 51–61.
Mattejat, F., & Remschmidt, H. (2008). The chil￾dren of mentally ill parents. Deutsches Ärzteb￾latt International, 105(23), 413–418.
Maunder, R.  D., & White, F.  A. (2019). Inter￾group contact and mental health stigma: A 
comparative effectiveness meta-analysis. Clini￾cal Psychology Review, 72, Article 101749.
Mayer, K.  H., Bradford, J.  B., Makadon, H.  J., 
Stall, R., Goldhammer, H., & Landers, S. 
(2008). Sexual and gender minority health: 
What we know and what needs to be done. 
American Journal of Public Health, 98(6), 
989–995.
McAlister, A., L., Perry, C., L., & Parcel, G., S. 
(2008). How individuals, environments, and 
health behaviors interact: Social cognitive the￾ory. In K. Glanz, B. K. Rimer, & K. Viswanath 
(Eds.), Health behavior and health education: 
Theory, research, and practice  (pp.  169–188). 
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
McCart, M. R., Smith, D. W., & Sawyer, G. K. 
(2010). Help seeking among victims of crime: 
A review of the empirical literature. Journal of 
Traumatic Stress, 23, 198–206.
McCleery, A., & Nuechterlein, K.  H. (2019). 
Cognitive impairment in psychotic illness: 
Prevalence, profile of impairment, develop￾mental course, and treatment considerations. 
Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 21, 239–
248.
McDonell, M.  G., Leickly, E., McPherson, S., 
Skalisky, J., Srebnik, D., Angelo, F., . . . Ries, 
R. K. (2017). A randomized controlled trial of 
ethyl glucuronide-based contingency manage￾ment for outpatients with co-occurring alcohol 
use disorders and serious mental illness. Ameri￾can Journal of Psychiatry, 174(4), 370–377.
McEwen, B.  S., & Stellar, E. (1993). Stress and 
the individual. Mechanisms leading to disease. 
Archives of Internal Medicine, 153(18), 2093–
2101.
McFall, R.  M. (1982). A review and reformula￾tion of the concept of social skills. Behavioral 
Assessment, 4, 1–33.
McFarlane, W.  R. (2016). Family interventions 
for schizophrenia and the psychoses: A review. 
Family Process, 55(3), 460–482.
McFarlane, W. (2002). Multifamily groups in the 
treatment of severe psychiatric disorders. New 
York: Guilford Press.
McFarlane, W., Dixon, L., Lukens, E., & Luck￾sted, A. (2003). Family psychoeducation and 
schizophrenia: A review of the literature. 
Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 29, 
223–245.
McFarlane, W., Dushay, R., Stastny, P., Deakins, 
S., & Link, B. (1996). A comparison of two 
levels of family-aided assertive community 
treatment. Psychiatric Services, 47, 744–750.
McGinty, E. E., Kennedy-Hendricks, A., Choksy, 
S., & Barry, C. L. (2016). Trends in news media 
coverage of mental illness in the United States: 
1995–2014. Health Affairs, 35(6), 1121–1129.
McGlanaghy, E., Turner, D., Davis, G. A., Sharpe, 
H., Dougall, N., Morris, P., .  .  . Hutton, P. References 361
(2021). A network meta-analysis of psycho￾logical interventions for schizophrenia and 
psychosis: Impact on symptoms. Schizophrenia 
Research, 228, 447–459.
McGlashan, T.  H. (1984). The Chestnut Lodge 
follow-up study: II.  Long-term outcome of 
schizophrenia and the affective disorders. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 41, 586–601.
McGovern, W., Addison, M., & McGovern, R. 
(2021). An exploration of the psycho-social 
benefits of providing sponsorship and sup￾porting others in traditional 12 step, self-help 
groups. International Journal of Environmen￾tal Research and Public Health, 18(5), Article 
2208.
McGrew, J.  H., White, L.  M., Stull, L.  G., & 
Wright-Berryman, J. (2013). A comparison of 
self-reported and phone-administered methods 
of ACT fidelity assessment: A Pilot Study in 
Indiana. Psychiatric Services, 64(3), 272–276.
McGrew, J. H., Wilson, R., & Bond, G. (1996). 
Client perspectives on helpful ingredients of 
assertive community treatment. Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation Journal, 19, 13–21.
McGrew, J. H., Wright, E. R., Pescosolido, B. A., 
& McDonel, E. C. (1999). The closing of Cen￾tral State Hospital: Long-term outcomes for 
persons with severe mental illness. Journal of 
Behavioral Health Services and Research, 26, 
246–261.
McGurk, S. R., & Mueser, K. T. (2004). Cogni￾tive functioning, symptoms, and work in sup￾ported employment: A review and heuristic 
model. Schizophrenia Research, 70, 147–173.
McGurk, S.  R., Mueser, K.  T., Covell, N.  H., 
Cicerone, K.  D., Drake, R.  E., Silverstein, 
S. M., . . . Essock, S. M. (2013). Mental health 
system funding of cognitive enhancement 
interventions for schizophrenia: Summary 
and update of the New York Office of Men￾tal Health expert panel and stakeholder meet￾ing. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 36,
133–145.
McGurk, S. R., Mueser, K. T., DeRosa, T. J., & 
Wolfe, R. (2009). Work, recovery, and comor￾bidity in schizophrenia: A randomized con￾trolled trial of cognitive remediation. Schizo￾phrenia Bulletin, 35, 319–335.
McGurk, S. R., Mueser, K. T., Feldman, K., Wolfe, 
R., & Pascaris, A. (2007). Cognitive training 
for supported employment: 2–3 year outcomes 
of a randomized controlled trial. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 437–441.
McGurk, S.  R., Twamley, E.  W., Sitzer, D.  I., 
McHugo, G.  J., & Mueser, K.  T. (2007). A 
meta-analysis of cognitive remediation in 
schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychia￾try, 164, 1791–1802.
McHugo, G. J., Bebout, R. R., Harris, M., Cleg￾horn, S., Herring, G., Xie, H., .  .  . Drake, 
R.  E. (2005). A randomized controlled trial 
of integrated versus parallel housing services 
for homeless adults with severe mental illness. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 30, 969–982.
McHugo, G.  J., Drake, R.  E., & Becker, D.  R. 
(1998). The durability of supported employ￾ment effects. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Jour￾nal, 22(1), 55–61.
McKay, C., Nugent, K.  L., Johnsen, M., Eaton, 
W.  W., & Lidz, C.  W. (2018). A systematic 
review of evidence for the clubhouse model 
of psychosocial rehabilitation. Administra￾tion and Policy in Mental Health and Mental 
Health Services Research, 45, 28–47.
McKellar, P. (1968). Experience and behaviour.
Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin Books.
McKinney–Vento Homeless Assistance Act of 
1987 (originally the Stuart B.  McKinney 
Homeless Assistance Act of 1987), Pub. L. No. 
100-77, 101 Stat. 482 (1987).
McLean, B. F., Mattiske, J. K., & Balzan, R. P. 
(2017). Association of the jumping to conclu￾sions and evidence integration biases with delu￾sions in psychosis: A detailed meta-analysis. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 43(2), 344–354.
McPherson, S. M., Burduli, E., Smith, C. L., Her￾ron, J., Oluwoye, O., Hirchak, K., .  .  . Roll, 
J. M. (2018). A review of contingency manage￾ment for the treatment of substance-use disor￾ders: Adaptation for underserved populations, 
use of experimental technologies, and per￾sonalized optimization strategies. Substance 
Abuse and Rehabilitation, 9, 43–57.
Mead, S., Hilton, D., & Curtis, L. (2001). Peer 
support: A theoretical perspective. Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation Journal, 25, 134–141.
Mechanic, D. (2001). Cultural and organizational 
aspects of the application of the Americans 
with Disabilities Act to persons with psychiat￾ric disabilities. Milbank Quarterly, 76, 5–23.
Mechanic, D., & Rochefort, D. A. (1990). Dein￾stitutionalization: An appraisal of reform. 
Annual Review of Sociology, 16(1), 301–327.
Medalia, A., Aluma, M., Tryon, W., & Merriam, 
A. E. (1998). Effectiveness of attention training 
in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 24,
147–152.
Medalia, A., Gold, J., & Merriam, A. (1988). The 
effects of neuroleptics on neuropsychological 
test results of schizophrenics. Archives of Clini￾cal Neuropsychology, 3, 249–271.
Medalia, A., Herlands, T., Saperstein, A., & 
Revheim, N. (2017). Cognitive remediation for 
psychological disorders: Therapist guide. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Meechan, C.  F., Laws, K.  R., Young, A.  H., 362 References
McLoughlin, D. M., & Jauhar, S. (2022). A cri￾tique of narrative reviews of the evidence-base 
for ECT in depression. Epidemiology and Psy￾chiatric Sciences, 31, Article e10.
Meichenbaum, D., & Cameron, R. (1973). Train￾ing schizophrenics to talk to themselves: A 
means of developing attentional controls. 
Behavior Therapy, 4, 515–534.
Meiselman, K. C. (1973). Broadening dual modal￾ity cue utilization in chronic nonparanoid 
schizophrenics. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 41, 447–453.
Meisler, N., Blankertz, L., Santos, A.  B., & 
McKay, C. (1997). Impact of assertive com￾munity treatment on homeless persons with co￾occurring severe psychiatric and substance use 
disorders. Community Mental Health Journal, 
33, 113–122.
Mejia-Lancheros, C., Lachaud, J., Woodhall￾Melnik, J., O’Campo, P., Hwang, S.  W., & 
Stergiopoulos, V. (2021). Longitudinal interre￾lationships of mental health discrimination and 
stigma with housing and well-being outcomes 
in adults with mental illness and recent experi￾ence of homelessness. Social Science and Medi￾cine, 268, Article 113463.
Melton, R.  P., & Dykeman, C. (2016). Family 
aided community treatment for the treatment 
of early psychosis: A proof of concept study. 
Community Mental Health Journal, 52, 623–
630.
Menditto, A.  A., Baldwin, L.  J., O’Neal, L.  G., 
& Beck, N.  C. (1991). Social-learning proce￾dures for increasing attention and improving 
basic skills in severely regressed institutional￾ized patients. Journal of Behavior Therapy and 
Experimental Psychiatry, 22, 265–269.
Mercado, M., Fuss, A. A., Sawano, N., Gensemer, 
A., Brennan, W., McManus, K., . . . Cleek, A. F. 
(2016). Generalizability of the NAMI Family￾to-Family Education Program: Evidence from 
an efficacy study. Psychiatric Services, 67(6), 
591–593.
Mercer-McFadden, C., Drake, R.  E., Brown, 
N.  B., & Fox, T.  S. (1997). The Community 
Support Program demonstrations of services 
for young adults with severe mental illness and 
substance use disorders 1987–1991. Psychiat￾ric Rehabilitation Journal, 20, 13–24.
Meyer, I. H., Muenzenmaier, K., Cancienne, J., & 
Struening, E. (1996). Reliability and validity of 
a measure of sexual and physical abuse histo￾ries among women with serious mental illness. 
Child Abuse and Neglect, 20, 213–219.
Michaels, P.  J., Corrigan, P.  W., Buchholz, B., 
Brown, J., Arthur, T., Netter, C., & MacDonald￾Wilson, K. L. (2014). Changing stigma through 
a consumer-based stigma reduction program. 
Community Mental Health Journal, 50(4), 
395–401.
Michie, S., Abraham, C., Whittington, C., McA￾teer, J., & Gupta, S. (2009). Effective tech￾niques in healthy eating and physical activity 
interventions: a meta-regression. Health Psy￾chology, 28(6), 690–701.
Migneault, J.  P., Adams, T.  B., & Read, J.  P. 
(2005). Application of the transtheoretical 
model to substance abuse: Historical develop￾ment and future directions. Drug and Alcohol 
Review, 24(5), 437–448.
Miklowitz, D.  J. (2008). Bipolar disorder: A 
family-focused treatment approach (2nd ed.). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Milani, R. M., Nahar, K., Ware, D., Butler, A., 
Roush, S., Smith, D., . . . O’Donnell, J. (2020). 
A qualitative longitudinal study of the first UK 
Dual Diagnosis Anonymous (DDA), an inte￾grated peer-support programme for concurrent 
disorders. Advances in Dual Diagnosis, 13(4), 
151–167.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, 
plus or minus two: Some limits on our capac￾ity for processing information. Psychological 
Review, 63(2), 81–97.
Miller, J.  G. (1997). Culture and self: Uncover￾ing the cultural grounding of psychological 
theory. In J. G. Snodgrass & R. L. Thompson 
(Eds.), Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences: Vol. 818. The self across psychology: 
Self-recognition, self-awareness, and the self 
concept (pp. 217–231). New York Academy of 
Sciences.
Miller, J.  W. (2005). Wellness: The history and 
development of a concept. Spektrum Freizeit,
27(1), 84–106.
Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2023). Motivational 
interviewing: Helping people change and grow
(4th ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Miller, W. R., & Rose, G. S. (2010). Motivational 
interviewing in relational context. American 
Psychologist, 65, 298–299.
Millon, T., Millon, C., Davis, R., & Grossmann, 
S. (1994). Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inven￾tory–III. Piscataway, NJ: National Computer 
Systems.
Milner, K., Crawford, P., Edgley, A., Hare-Duke, 
L., & Slade, M. (2019). The experiences of 
spirituality among adults with mental health 
difficulties: A qualitative systematic review. 
Epidemiology and Psychiatric Sciences, 29,
Article e34.
Milyavskaya, M., Nadolny, D., & Koestner, R. 
(2014). Where do self-concordant goals come 
from?: The role of domain-specific psychologi￾cal need satisfaction. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 40(6), 700–711.References 363
Minkler, M., & Wallerstein, N. (2011). Commu￾nity-based participatory research for health: 
From process to outcomes. Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley.
Minkoff, K., & Covell, N. H. (2022). Recommen￾dations for integrated systems and services for 
people with co-occurring mental health and 
substance use conditions. Psychiatric Services,
73(6), 686–689.
Misaki, M., Bodurka, J., & Paulus, M. P. (2022). 
A library for fMRI real-time processing sys￾tems in python (RTPSpy) with comprehensive 
online noise reduction, fast and accurate ana￾tomical image processing, and online process￾ing simulation. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 16,
Article 834827.
Mishara, A.  L., & Goldberg, T.  E. (2004). A 
meta-analysis and critical review of the effects 
of conventional neuroleptic treatment on cogni￾tion in schizophrenia: Opening a closed book. 
Biological Psychiatry, 55, 1013–1022.
Misiak, B., Stańczykiewicz, B., Wiśniewski, 
M., Bartoli, F., Carra, G., Cavaleri, D., .  .  . 
Frydecka, D. (2021). Thyroid hormones in 
persons with schizophrenia: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Progress in Neuro￾Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychia￾try, 111, Article 110402.
Mittal, D., Owen, R. R., Ounpraseuth, S., Chek￾uri, L., Drummond, K. L., Jennings, M. B., . . . 
Corrigan, P.  W. (2020). Targeting stigma of 
mental illness among primary care providers: 
Findings from a pilot feasibility study. Psychia￾try Research, 284, Article 112641.
Modestin, J., Huber, A., Satirli, E., Malti, T., & 
Hell, D. (2003). Long-term course of schizo￾phrenic illness: Bleuler’s study reconsidered. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 160(12), 
2202–2208.
Modini, M., Tan, L., Brinchmann, B., Wang, 
M. J., Killackey, E., Glozier, N., . . . Harvey, 
S. B. (2016). Supported employment for people 
with severe mental illness: Systematic review 
and meta-analysis of the international evidence. 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 209(1), 14–22.
Mojtabai, R. (2005). Perceived reasons for loss 
of housing and continued homelessness among 
homeless persons with mental illness. Psychiat￾ric Services, 56, 172–178.
Möller-Leimkühler, A.  M., & Jandl, M. (2011). 
Expressed and perceived emotion over time: 
does the patients’ view matter for the caregiv￾ers’ burden? European Archives of Psychiatry 
and Clinical Neuroscience, 261(5), 349–355.
Møller, T., Gudde, C. B., Folden, G. E., & Lin￾aker, O. M. (2009). The experience of caring in 
relatives to patients with serious mental illness: 
Gender differences, health and functioning. 
Scandinavian Journal of Caring Sciences, 
23(1), 153–160.
Monahan, J. (1973). The psychiatricization of 
criminal behavior: A reply. Hospital and Com￾munity Psychiatry, 24, 105–107.
Monahan, J., & Arnold, J. (1996). Violence by 
people with mental illness: A consensus state￾ment by advocates and researchers. Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation Journal, 19, 67–70.
Monahan, J., Steadman, H. J., Silver, E., Apple￾baum, P. S., Robbins, P. C., Mulvey, E. P., . . . 
Banks, S. (2001). Rethinking risk assessment: 
The MacArthur Study of Mental Disorder and 
Violence. New York: Oxford University Press.
Mongelli, F., Georgakopoulos, P., & Pato, M. T. 
(2020). Challenges and opportunities to meet 
the mental health needs of underserved and dis￾enfranchised populations in the United States. 
Focus, 18(1), 16–24.
Montgomery, A. E., Hill, L. L., Kane, V., & Cul￾hane, D. P. (2013). Housing chronically home￾less veterans: Evaluating the efficacy of a hous￾ing first approach to HUD-VASH. Journal of 
Community Psychology, 41, 505–514.
Moore, E. (Ed.). (2009). Case management for 
community practice. New York: Oxford Uni￾versity Press.
Moore, K. E., Roberts, W., Reid, H. H., Smith, 
K.  M., Oberleitner, L.  M., & McKee, S.  A. 
(2019). Effectiveness of medication assisted 
treatment for opioid use in prison and jail set￾tings: A meta-analysis and systematic review. 
Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 99,
32–43.
Moore, M., Flamez, B., & Szirony, G. M. (2018). 
Motivational interviewing and dual diagnosis 
clients: Enhancing self-efficacy and treatment 
completion. Journal of Substance Use, 23(3), 
247–253.
Moreno-Küstner, B., Martin, C., & Pastor, L. 
(2018). Prevalence of psychotic disorders and 
its association with methodological issues. A 
systematic review and meta-analyses. PLoS 
ONE, 13(4), Article e0195687.
Morey, B., & Mueser, K.  T. (2007). The family 
intervention guide to mental illness: Recogniz￾ing symptoms and getting treatment. Oakland, 
CA: New Harbinger.
Morgan, A. J., Ross, A., & Reavley, N. J. (2018). 
Systematic review and meta-analysis of Mental 
Health First Aid training: Effects on knowl￾edge, stigma, and helping behaviour. PLoS 
ONE, 13(5), Article e0197102.
Morgan, R. D., Scanlon, F., & Van Horn, S. A. 
(2020). Criminogenic risk and mental health: 
a complicated relationship. CNS Spectrums, 
25(2), 237–244.
Morris, Z. A. (2020). Examining the relevance of 364 References
employment integration policies on disability 
benefit receipt: A multilevel analysis of older 
working age adults in 16 countries. Disability 
and Rehabilitation, 42(23), 3339–3347.
Morrison, A. P., Burke, E., Murphy, E., Pyle, M., 
Bowe, S., Varese, F., . . . Wood, L. J. (2016). 
Cognitive therapy for internalised stigma in 
people experiencing psychosis: A pilot ran￾domised controlled trial. Psychiatry Research, 
240, 96–102.
Morrison, R. L., & Bellack, A. S. (1984). Social 
skills training. In A.  S.  Bellack (Ed.), Schizo￾phrenia: Treatment, management, and reha￾bilitation (pp.  247–279). Orlando, FL: Grune 
& Stratton.
Morrissey, J. P., Domino, M. E., & Cuddeback, 
G.  S. (2016). Expedited Medicaid, mental 
health service use, and criminal recidivism 
among released prisoners with severe mental 
illness. Psychiatric Services, 67(8), 842–849.
Moser, L. L., DeLuca, N. L., Bond, G. R., & Rol￾lins, A. L. (2004). Implementing evidence based 
psychosocial practices: Lessons learned from 
statewide implementation of two practices. 
CNS Spectrums, 9, 926–936.
Moses, T. (2014). Stigma and family. In P. W. Cor￾rigan (Ed.), The stigma of disease and disabil￾ity: Understanding causes and overcoming 
injustices (pp.  247–268). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
Mosher, L. R., & Burti, L. (1992). Relationships 
in rehabilitation: When technology fails. Psy￾chosocial Rehabilitation Journal, 15, 11–17.
Mouzon, D. M., Taylor, R. J., Keith, V. M., Nick￾lett, E. J., & Chatters, L. M. (2017). Discrimi￾nation and psychiatric disorders among older 
African Americans. International Journal of 
Geriatric Psychiatry, 32(2), 175–182.
Mowbray, C. T. (1997). Benefits and issues created 
by consumer role innovation in psychiatric reha￾bilitation. In C. T. Mowbray, D. Moxley, C. Jas￾per, & L. Howell (Eds.), Consumers as provid￾ers in psychiatric rehabilitation  (pp.  45–63). 
Columbia, MD: International Association for 
Psychosocial Rehabilitation Services.
Mowbray, C.  T. (2004). Supported education: 
Diversity, essential ingredients, and future 
directions. American Journal of Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation, 7, 347–362.
Mowbray, C. T., Brown, K. S., Furlong-Norman, 
K., & Sullivan-Soydan, A.  S. (Eds.). (2002). 
Supported education and psychiatric reha￾bilitation: Models and methods. Linthicum, 
MD: International Association of Psychosocial 
Rehabilitation Services.
Mowbray, C.  T., Bybee, D., & Collins, M.  E. 
(2000). Integrating vocational services on case 
management teams: Outcomes from a research 
demonstration project. Mental Health Services 
Research, 2, 51–66.
Mowbray, C. T., Collins, M. E., Bellamy, C. D., 
Megivern, D.  A., Bybee, D., & Szilvagyi, S. 
(2005). Supported education for adults with 
psychiatric disabilities: An innovation for 
social work and psychosocial rehabilitation 
practice. Social Work, 50(1), 7–21.
Mowbray, C. T., Moxley, D. P., & Brown, K. S. 
(1993). A framework for initiating supported 
education programs. Psychosocial Rehabilita￾tion Journal, 17, 129–149.
Mowbray, C.  T., Oyserman, D., & Bybee, D. 
(2000). Mothers with serious mental illness. In 
F. J. Frese III (Ed.), The role of organized psy￾chology in treatment of the seriously mentally 
ill (pp. 73–91). Jossey-Bass/Wiley.
Mowbray, C. T., Woodward, A. T., Holter, M. C., 
MacFarlane, P., & Bybee, D. (2009). Charac￾teristics of users of consumer-run drop-in cen￾ters versus clubhouses. Journal of Behavioral 
Health Services and Research, 36, 361–371.
Mueser, K. T., Becker, D. R., Torrey, W. C., Xie, 
H., Bond, G. R., Drake, R. E., & Dain, B. J. 
(1997). Work and nonvocational domains of 
functioning in persons with severe mental ill￾ness: A longitudinal analysis. Journal of Ner￾vous and Mental Disease, 185, 419–426.
Mueser, K.  T., Bellack, A., Wade, J., Sayers, S., 
& Rosenthal, C. (1992). An assessment of 
the educational needs of chronic psychiatric 
patients and their relatives. British Journal of 
Psychiatry, 160, 674–680.
Mueser, K. T., Bond, G. R., Drake, R. E., & Resn￾ick, S.  G. (1998). Models of community care 
for severe mental illness: A review of research 
on case management. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 
24, 37–74.
Mueser, K.  T., Campbell, K., & Drake, R.  E. 
(2011). The effectiveness of supported employ￾ment in people with dual disorders. Journal of 
Dual Diagnosis, 7(1–2), 90–102.
Mueser, K. T., & Cook, J. A. (2013). Introduction 
to the special issue on illness self-management. 
Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 36(4), 229–
230.
Mueser, K. T., & Cook, J. A. (2016). Why can’t 
we fund supported employment? Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation Journal, 39(2), 85–89.
Mueser, K. T., Douglas, M. S., Bellack, A. S., & 
Morrison, R. L. (1991). Assessment of endur￾ing deficit and negative symptom subtypes in 
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 17(4), 
565–582.
Mueser, K. T., Drake, R. E., & Bond, G. R. (1997). 
Recent advances in psychiatric rehabilitation 
for patients with severe mental illness. Harvard 
Review of Psychiatry, 5, 123–137.References 365
Mueser, K.  T., Drake, R.  E., & Bond, G.  R. 
(2016). Recent advances in supported employ￾ment for people with serious mental illness. 
Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 29(3), 196–
201.
Mueser, K. T., & Gingerich, S. (2006). The com￾plete family guide to schizophrenia: Helping 
your loved one get the most out of life. New 
York: Guilford Press.
Mueser, K.  T., & Glynn, S. (1999). Behavioral 
family therapy for psychiatric disorders. Oak￾land, CA: New Harbinger.
Mueser, K. T., Noordsy, D. L., Drake, R. E., & 
Fox Smith, L. (2003). Integrated treatment for 
dual disorders: A guide to effective practice.
New York: Guilford Press.
Mueser, K. T., Rosenberg, S. D., Fox, L., Salyers, 
M. P., Ford, J. D., & Carty, P. (2001). Psycho￾metric evaluation of trauma and posttraumatic 
stress disorder assessments in persons with 
severe mental illness. Psychological Assess￾ment, 13, 110–117.
Mueser, K. T., Torrey, W. C., Lynde, D., Singer, P., 
& Drake, R. E. (2003). Implementing evidence￾based practices for people with severe mental 
illness. Behavior Modification, 27(3), 387–411.
Mueser, K., Webb, C., Pfeiffer, M., Gladis, M., & 
Levinson, D. (1996). Family burden of schizo￾phrenia and bipolar disorder: Perceptions of 
relatives and professionals. Psychiatric Ser￾vices, 47, 507–511.
Mukherjee, D. (2015). Discharge decisions and 
the dignity of risk. Hastings Center Report, 
45(3), 7–8.
Müller, J. M., Postert, C., Beyer, T., Furniss, T., & 
Achtergarde, S. (2010). Comparison of eleven 
short versions of the Symptom Checklist 90—
Revised (SCL-90-R) for use in the assessment 
of general psychopathology. Journal of Psycho￾pathology and Behavioral Assessment, 32(2), 
246–254.
Munch Nielsen, C., Hjorthøj, C., Arnfred, B. T., 
& Nordentoft, M. (2022). Patient outcomes of 
flexible assertive community treatment com￾pared with assertive community treatment. 
Psychiatric Services. [Epub ahead of print] 
doi: 10.1176/appi.ps.20220235
Munetz, M. R., & Griffin, P. A. (2006). Use of the 
sequential intercept model as an approach to 
decriminalization of people with serious men￾tal illness. Psychiatric Services, 57, 544–549.
Murdock, R.  M., Brizzi, M.  B., Perez, O., & 
Badowski, M. E. (2019). Public health consid￾erations among people who inject drugs with 
HIV/HCV co-infection: A review. Infectious 
Diseases and Therapy, 8(1), 23–32.
Murthy, P., Mahadevan, J., & Chand, P.  K. 
(2019). Treatment of substance use disorders 
with co-occurring severe mental health disor￾ders. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 32(4), 
293–299.
Musiat, P., Johnson, C., Atkinson, M., Wilksch, 
S., & Wade, T. (2022). Impact of guidance 
on intervention adherence in computerised 
interventions for mental health problems: A 
meta-analysis. Psychological Medicine, 52(2), 
229–240.
Mutschler, C., Bellamy, C., Davidson, L., Lichten￾stein, S., & Kidd, S. (2022). Implementation of 
peer support in mental health services: A sys￾tematic review of the literature. Psychological 
Services, 19(2), 360–374.
Nam, S., Song, H.-J., Park, S.-Y., & Song, Y. 
(2013). Challenges of diabetes management in 
immigrant Korean Americans. Diabetes Edu￾cator, 39(2), 213–221.
Nangle, D.  W., Hansen, D.  J., Erdley, C.  A., & 
Norton, P.  J. (Eds.). (2009). Practitioner’s 
guide to empirically based measures of social 
skills. New York: Springer.
Naslund, J.  A., Aschbrenner, K.  A., & Bartels, 
S.  J. (2016). How people with serious men￾tal illness use smartphones, mobile apps, and 
social media. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Jour￾nal, 39(4), 364–367.
Naslund, J. A., Marsch, L. A., McHugo, G. J., & 
Bartels, S.  J. (2015). Emerging mHealth and 
eHealth interventions for serious mental illness: 
A review of the literature. Journal of Mental 
Health, 24(5), 321–332.
Nation, L., Spence, N., Parker, S., Wheeler, M. P., 
Powe, K., Siew, M., .  .  . Dark, F.  L. (2022). 
implementing introductory training in trauma￾informed care into mental health rehabilitation 
services: A mixed methods evaluation. Fron￾tiers in Psychiatry, 12, Article 2602.
National Academy of Certified Care Managers. 
(2022). Content domains and care manager 
tasks. Tucson, AZ: Author.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE). (2021). Shared decision making. NICE 
guideline: No. 197. London: Author.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE). (2022). Depression in adults: Treat￾ment and management. NICE Guideline: No. 
222. London: Author.
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). 
(1975). Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale 
(AIMS). Psychoparmacology, 4, 3–6.
National Research Council. (2004). Eliminat￾ing health disparities: Measurement and data 
needs. National Academies Press.
Nazareth, I., & Kendrick, T. (2014). Prevention 
and early intervention in depression and anxi￾ety disorders. In P. Byrne & A. Rosen (Eds.), 
Early intervention in psychiatry: EI of nearly 366 References
everything for better mental health (pp. 185–
200). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Nechmad, A., Fennig, S., Ternochiano, P. Treves, 
I., Fennig-Naisberg, S., & Levkovich, Y. (2000). 
Siblings of schizophrenic patients: A review. 
Israel Journal of Psychiatry and Related Sci￾ences, 37, 3–11.
Nedelman, M. (2017). What Shyamalan’s “Split” 
gets wrong about dissociative identity disorder.
Retrieved from www.cnn.com/2017/01/23/
health/shyamalan-split-movie-dissociative￾identity-disorder/index.html
Nelson, C., & Johnston, M. (2008). Adult Needs 
and Strengths Assessment–Abbreviated Refer￾ral Version to specify psychiatric care needed 
for incoming patients: Exploratory analysis. 
Psychological Reports, 102(1), 131–143.
Nelson, G. (2010). Housing for people with seri￾ous mental illness: Approaches, evidence, and 
transformative change. Journal of Sociology 
and Social Welfare, 37(4), 123–146.
Nelson, G., Hall, G.  B., & Walsh-Bowers, R. 
(1998). The relationship between housing char￾acteristics, emotional well-being, and the per￾sonal empowerment of psychiatric consumer/
survivors. Community Mental Health Journal, 
34, 57–69.
New Freedom Commission on Mental Health. 
(2003). Achieving the promise: Transforming 
mental health care in America. Final report
(DHHS Pub. No. SMA-03-3832). Rockville, 
MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Ser￾vices Administration.
Newman, L., Wagner, M., Knokey, A.-M., 
Marder, C., Nagle, K., Shaver, D., Wei, X., 
with Cameto, R., Contreras, E., Ferguson, K., 
Greene, S., and Schwarting, M. (2011). The 
post-high school outcomes of young adults 
with disabilities up to 8 years after high school: 
A report from the National Longitudinal Tran￾sition Study–2 (NLTS2) (NCSER 2011–3005). 
Menlo Park, CA: SRI International.
Newman, S.  J. (2001). Housing and mental ill￾ness: A critical review of the literature. Wash￾ington, DC: Urban Institute.
Newman, S. J., & Ridgely, M. S. (1994). Organi￾zation and delivery of independent housing for 
persons with chronic mental illness. Adminis￾tration and Policy in Mental Health, 21, 199–
216.
Newton, N. C., Deady, M., & Teesson, M. (2014). 
Alcohol and substance abuse prevention and 
early intervention. In P.  Byrne & A.  Rosen 
(Eds.), Early intervention in psychiatry: EI 
of nearly everything for better mental health
(pp. 201–217). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Ng, J.  Y.  Y., Ntoumanis, N., Thøgersen￾Ntoumani, C., Deci, E.  L., Ryan, R.  M., 
Duda, J.  L., & Williams, G.  C. (2012). Self￾determination theory applied to health con￾texts: A meta-analysis. Perspectives on Psycho￾logical Science, 7(4), 325–340.
Nguyen, A.  M., Siman, N., Barry, M., Cleland, 
C., Pham-Singer, H., Ogedegbe, O., . . . Shelley, 
D. (2020). Patient–physician race/ethnicity con￾cordance improves adherence to cardiovascular 
disease guidelines. Health Services Research, 
55(Suppl. 1), Article 51.
Nguyen-Truong, C.  K.  Y., Davis, A., Vuong, 
V. M. N., Nguyen, K. Q. V., Truong, A. M., & 
Leung, J. (2021). Perceptions, beliefs, and expe￾riences of Asians and Micronesian Islanders on 
Family Health History Genetic Cancer Screen￾ing Community Outreach. Journal of Cancer 
Education, 36(6), 1341–1353.
Nicholson, J., Albert, K., Gershenson, B., Wil￾liams, V., & Biebel, K. (2009). Family options 
for parents with mental illnesses: A develop￾mental, mixed methods pilot study. Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation Journal, 33(2), 106–114.
Nicholson, J., & Blanch, A. (1994). Rehabilita￾tion for parenting roles for people with serious 
mental illness. Psychosocial Rehabilitation, 18,
109–119.
Nicholson, J., & Henry, A. (2003). Achieving the 
goal of evidence based psychiatric rehabilita￾tion practices for mothers with mental illness. 
Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 27, 122–
130.
Nicholson, J., Sweeney, E., & Geller, J. (1998). 
Mothers with mental illness: II.  Family rela￾tionships and the context of parenting. Psychi￾atric Services, 49, 643–649.
Nielsen, R.  E., Levander, S., Kjaersdam Telleus, 
G., Jensen, S. O. W., Östergaard Christensen, 
T., & Leucht, S. (2015). Second-generation 
antipsychotic effect on cognition in patients 
with schizophrenia—a meta-analysis of ran￾domized clinical trials. Acta Psychiatrica Scan￾dinavica, 131(3), 185–196.
Noh, D., & Kim, H. (2023). Effectiveness of 
online interventions for the universal and 
selective prevention of mental health problems 
among adolescents: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Prevention Science, 24, 353–
364.
Norcross, J. C., Krebs, P. M., & Prochaska, J. O. 
(2011). Stages of change. Journal of Clinical 
Psychology, 67(2), 143–154.
Norman, R., Lecomte, T., Addington, D., & 
Anderson, E. (2017). Canadian Treatment 
Guidelines on psychosocial treatment of 
schizophrenia in adults. Canadian Journal of 
Psychiatry, 62(9), 617–623.
Norton, S., Wandersman, A., & Goldman, 
C. (1993). Perceived costs and benefits of References 367
membership in self-help groups: Comparison of 
members and non-members of the Alliance for 
the Mentally Ill. Community Mental Health 
Journal, 29, 143–160.
Norvilitis, J. M., Scime, M., & Lee, J. S. (2002). 
Courtesy stigma in mothers of children with 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: A pre￾liminary investigation. Journal of Attention 
Disorders, 6, 61–68.
Nossel, I., Calmes, C., Brown, C., Kreyenbuhl, 
J., Goldberg, R., Fang, L., & Dixon, L. (2010). 
Patterns of emergency department use for 
medical conditions among persons with seri￾ous mental illness. Psychiatric Services, 61,
1251–1254.
Novella, E.  J. (2008). Theoretical accounts on 
deinstitutionalization and the reform of men￾tal health services: A critical review. Medicine, 
Health Care and Philosophy, 11(3), 303–314.
Novick, A.  M., Kwitowski, M., Dempsey, J., 
Cooke, D.  L., & Dempsey, A.  G. (2022). 
Technology-based approaches for supporting 
perinatal mental health. Current Psychiatry 
Reports, 24(9), 419–429.
Nuechterlein, K. H., Barch, D. M., Gold, J. M., 
Goldberg, T.  E., Green, M.  F., & Heaton, 
R.  K. (2004). Identification of separable cog￾nitive factors in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia 
Research, 72, 29–39.
Nuechterlein, K. H., Green, M. F., & Kern, R. S. 
(2023). The MATRICS Consensus Cognitive 
Battery: An update. Current Topics in Behav￾ioral Neurosciences, 63, 1–18.
Nuechterlein, K.  H., Green, M.  F., Kern, R.  S., 
Baade, L. E., Barch, D. M., Cohen, J. D., . . . 
Marder, S. R. (2008). The MATRICS Consen￾sus Cognitive Battery, part 1: Test selection, 
reliability, and validity. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 165(2), 203–213.
Nuechterlein, K. H., Subotnik, K. L., Ventura, J., 
Turner, L. R., Gitlin, M. J., Gretchen-Doorly, 
D., .  .  . Liberman, R.  P. (2020). Enhancing 
return to work or school after a first episode of 
schizophrenia: The UCLA RCT of Individual 
Placement and Support and Workplace Funda￾mentals Module training. Psychological Medi￾cine, 50(1), 20–28.
Nugter, M.  A., Engelsbel, F., Bähler, M., Keet, 
R., & van Veldhuizen, R. (2016). Outcomes 
of FLEXIBLE assertive community treatment 
(FACT) implementation: A prospective real life 
study. Community Mental Health Journal, 52,
898–907.
Oakley, P., Kisely, S., Baxter, A., Harris, M., 
Desoe, J., Dziouba, A., & Siskind, D. (2018). 
Increased mortality among people with schizo￾phrenia and other non-affective psychotic dis￾orders in the community: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Journal of Psychiatric 
Research, 102, 245–253.
Ochoa, S., Usall, J., Cobo, J., Labad, X., & 
Kulkarni, J. (2012). Gender differences in 
schizophrenia and first-episode psychosis: A 
comprehensive literature review. Schizophre￾nia Research and Treatment, 2012, Article 
916198.
O’Connell, N., O’Connor, K., McGrath, D., 
Vagge, L., Mockler, D., Jennings, R., & 
Darker, C. D. (2022). Early intervention in psy￾chosis services: A systematic review and narra￾tive synthesis of the barriers and facilitators to 
implementation. European Psychiatry, 65(1), 
Article e2.
O’Connor, C., Brassil, M., O’Sullivan, S., Seery, 
C., & Nearchou, F. (2022). How does diag￾nostic labelling affect social responses to peo￾ple with mental illness?: A systematic review 
of experimental studies using vignette-based 
designs. Journal of Mental Health, 31(1), 115–
130.
O’Connor, L. K., Yanos, P. T., & Firmin, R. L. 
(2018). Correlates and moderators of stigma 
resistance among people with severe mental ill￾ness. Psychiatry Research, 270, 198–204.
Oexle, N., & Corrigan, P. W. (2018). Understand￾ing mental illness stigma toward persons with 
multiple stigmatized conditions: Implications 
of intersectionality theory. Psychiatric Ser￾vices, 69(5), 587–589.
Office of Mental Health. (2008). Handbook on 
uniform mental health services in VA medi￾cal centers and clinics. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, Veterans 
Health Administration.
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and 
Evaluation (ASPE). (1993). Licensed board 
and care homes: Preliminary findings from 
the 1991 National Health Provider Inventory. 
ASPE Research Notes. Retrieved from http://
aspe.hhs.gov/daltcp/reports/1993/rn06.pdf.
Offidani, E., Rafanelli, C., Gostoli, S., Marchetti, 
G., & Roncuzzi, R. (2013). Allostatic overload 
in patients with atrial fibrillation. International 
Journal of Cardiology, 165(2), 375–376.
Ogawa, K., Miya, M., Watarai, A., Nakazawa, 
M., Yuasa, S., & Utena, H. (1987). A long￾term follow-up study of schizophrenia in Japan 
with special reference to the course of social 
adjustment. British Journal of Psychiatry, 151,
758–765.
Oh, H., Yang, L. H., Anglin, D. M., & DeVylder, 
J.  E. (2014). Perceived discrimination and 
psychotic experiences across multiple ethnic 
groups in the United States. Schizophrenia 
Research, 157(1–3), 259–265.
Oishi, S., & Diener, E. (2001). Goals, culture, and 368 References
subjective well-being. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 27(12), 1674–1682.
Ojeda, V. D., Jones, N., Munson, M. R., Berliant, 
E., & Gilmer, T. P. (2021). Roles of peer spe￾cialists and use of mental health services among 
youth with serious mental illness. Early Inter￾vention in Psychiatry, 15(4), 914–921.
Oldridge, M., & Hughes, I. (1992). Psychological 
well-being in families with a member suffering 
from schizophrenia. British Journal of Psychia￾try, 147, 183–186.
O’Leary, A. (1985). Self-efficacy and health. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 23(4), 437–
451.
Olfson, M., Mojtabai, R., Sampson, N.  A., 
Hwang, I., Druss, B., Wang, P. S., . . . Kessler, 
R. C. (2009). Dropout from outpatient mental 
health care in the United States. Psychiatric 
Services, 60, 898–907.
Olmstead v. L. C., 527 U.S. 581, 119 S.Ct. 2176 
(1999).
Onyeka, I. N., Collier Høegh, M., Nåheim Eien, 
E. M., Nwaru, B. I., & Melle, I. (2019). Comor￾bidity of physical disorders among patients 
with severe mental illness with and without 
substance use disorders: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Journal of Dual Diagnosis,
15(3), 192–206.
O’Reilly, N. L., Hager, E. R., Harrington, D., & 
Black, M.  M. (2020). Assessment of risk for 
food insecurity among African American urban 
households: Utilizing cumulative risk indices 
and latent class analysis to examine accumula￾tion of risk factors. Translational Behavioral 
Medicine, 10(6), 1322–1329.
Oren, E., & Solomon, R. (2012). EMDR therapy: 
An overview of its development and mecha￾nisms of action. European Review of Applied 
Psychology, 62(4), 197–203.
Osaji, J., Ojimba, C., & Ahmed, S. (2020). The 
use of acceptance and commitment therapy in 
substance use disorders: A review of literature. 
Journal of Clinical Medicine Research, 12(10), 
629–633.
Osborn, L.  A., & Stein, C.  H. (2016). Men￾tal health care providers’ views of their work 
with consumers and their reports of recovery￾orientation, job satisfaction, and personal 
growth. Community Mental Health Journal, 
52(7), 757–766.
O’Shea, A., Kaplan, K., Solomon, P., & Salzer, 
M.  S. (2019). Randomized controlled trial of 
an internet-based educational intervention for 
mothers with mental illnesses: An 18-month 
follow-up. Psychiatric Services, 70(8), 732–
735.
Ostergaard, L.  S., Wallach-Kildemoes, H., 
Thøgersen, M.  H., Dragsted, U.  B., Oxholm, 
A., Hartling, O., & Norredam, M. (2020). 
Prevalence of torture and trauma history 
among immigrants in primary care in Den￾mark: Do general practitioners ask? European 
Journal of Public Health, 30(6), 1163–1168.
Ostrow, L., & Croft, B. (2015). Peer respites: A 
research and practice agenda. Psychiatric Ser￾vices, 66(6), 638–640.
Ostrow, L., & Hayes, S.  L. (2015). Leadership 
and characteristics of nonprofit mental health 
peer-run organizations nationwide. Psychiatric 
Services, 66(4), 421–425.
Ostrow, L., Kaplan, K., Zisman-Ilani, Y., Brusi￾lovskiy, E., Smith, C., & Salzer, M. S. (2021). 
Risk factors associated with child protective 
services involvement among parents with a seri￾ous mental illness. Psychiatric Services, 72(4), 
370–377.
Ostrow, L., Smith, C., Penney, D., & Shumway, 
M. (2019). “It suits my needs”: Self-employed 
individuals with psychiatric disabilities and 
small businesses. Psychiatric Rehabilitation 
Journal, 42(2), 121–131.
Oxhandler, H. K., Narendorf, S. C., & Moffatt, 
K. M. (2018). Religion and spirituality among 
young adults with severe mental illness. Spiri￾tuality in Clinical Practice, 5(3), 188–200.
Oyserman, D., Mowbray, C.  T., & Zemencuk, 
J. K. (1994). Resources and supports for moth￾ers with severe mental illness. Health and 
Social Work, 19, 132–142.
Pachankis, J. E. (2007). The psychological impli￾cations of concealing a stigma: A cognitive￾affective-behavioral model. Psychological Bul￾letin, 133(2), 328–345.
Page, K.  M., & Tchernitskaia, I. (2014). Use of 
motivational interviewing to improve return￾to-work and work-related outcomes: A review. 
Australian Journal of Rehabilitation Counsel￾ling, 20, 38–49.
Parcesepe, A. M., & Cabassa, L. J. (2013). Public 
stigma of mental illness in the United States: 
A systematic literature review. Administra￾tion and Policy in Mental Health and Mental 
Health Services Research, 40(5), 384–399.
Park, K.-M., Ku, J., Choi, S.-H., Jang, H.-J., Park, 
J.-Y., Kim, S. I., & Kim, J.-J. (2011). A virtual 
reality application in role-plays of social skills 
training for schizophrenia: A randomized, 
controlled trial. Psychiatry Research, 189(2), 
166–172.
Park, M., Chesla, C. A., Rehm, R. S., & Chun, 
K. M. (2011). Working with culture: Culturally 
appropriate mental health care for Asian Amer￾icans. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 67(11), 
2373–2382.
Park, M., Solomon, P., & Mandel, D. (2006). 
Involvement in the child welfare system among References 369
mothers with serious mental illness. Psychiatric 
Services, 57, 493–497.
Parkinson, S., Nelson, G., & Horgan, S. (1999). 
From housing to homes: A review of the litera￾ture on housing approaches for psychiatric con￾sumer/survivors. Canadian Journal of Com￾munity Mental Health, 18, 145–164.
Parsons, J., & Sandwick, T. (2012). Closing the 
gap: Using criminal justice and public health 
data to improve the identification of mental ill￾ness. New York: Vera Institute of Justice.
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 
2010 (Affordable Care Act [ACA] or “Obam￾acare”), Public Law No. 111–148, 124 Stat. 119 
(2010).
Pattison, E. M., Llamas, R., & Hurd, G. (1979). 
Social network mediation of anxiety. Psychiat￾ric Annals, 9, 56–67.
Paul Wellstone and Pete Domenici Mental Health 
Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008, Pub￾lic Law No. 110–343 (2008).
Paul, G.  L. (1986). Assessment in residential 
treatment settings: Principles and methods 
to support cost-effective quality operations. 
Champaign, IL: Research Press.
Paul, G.  L. (1987). Observational assessment 
instrumentation for service and research—The 
TSBC/SRIC System implementation package: 
Assessment in residential treatment settings, 
Part 5. Champaign, IL: Research Press.
Pearlin, L., & Schooler, C. (1978). The structure 
of coping. Journal of Health and Social Behav￾ior, 19, 2–21.
Pearsall, R., Smith, D. J., & Geddes, J. R. (2019). 
Pharmacological and behavioural interventions 
to promote smoking cessation in adults with 
schizophrenia and bipolar disorders: A system￾atic review and meta-analysis of randomised 
trials. BMJ Open, 9(11), Article e027389.
Peck, C. K. H., Thangavelu, D. P., Li, Z., & Goh, 
Y.  S. (2023). Effects of peer-delivered self￾management, recovery education interventions 
for individuals with severe and enduring men￾tal health challenges: A meta-analysis. Journal 
of Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing, 30,
54–73.
Peckham, E., Brabyn, S., Cook, L.  Tew, G., & 
Gilbody, S. (2017). Smoking cessation in severe 
mental health: What works? An updated sys￾tematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Psy￾chiatry, 17, Article 252.
Pedersen, G., Kvarstein, E.  H., & Wilberg, T. 
(2017). The Work and Social Adjustment Scale: 
Psychometric properties and validity among 
males and females, and outpatients with and 
without personality disorders. Personality and 
Mental Health, 11(4), 215–228.
Pederson, E.  L., & Vogel, D.  L. (2007). Male 
gender role conflict and willingness to seek 
counseling: Testing a mediation model on col￾lege-aged men. Journal of Counseling Psychol￾ogy, 54, 373–384.
Peeples, A. D., Muralidharan, A., McCarthy, S., 
Goldberg, R., Kuykendall, L., Vineyard, N., 
& Chinman, M. (2023). Barriers and enablers 
to implementing peer specialists in Veterans 
Health Administration Primary Care: A quali￾tative study. Journal of General Internal Medi￾cine, 38, 707–714.
Pelot, M., & Ostrow, L. (2021). Characteristics 
of peer respites in the United States: Expand￾ing the continuum of care for psychiatric cri￾sis. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 44(4), 
305–309.
Penn, D. L., & Corrigan, P. W. (2002). The effects 
of stereotype suppression on psychiatric stigma. 
Schizophrenia Research, 55(3), 269–276.
Penn, D. L., Corrigan, P. W., Bentall, R. P., Racen￾stein, J. M., & Newman, L. (1997). Social cog￾nition in schizophrenia. Psychological Bulletin, 
121, 114–132.
Penn, D. L., Kohlmaier, J. R., & Corrigan, P. W. 
(2000). Interpersonal factors contributing to 
the stigma of schizophrenia: Social skills, per￾ceived attractiveness, and symptoms. Schizo￾phrenia Research, 45(1–2), 37–45.
Penn, D.  L., & Mueser, K.  T. (1996). Research 
update on the psychosocial treatment of schizo￾phrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 153,
607–617.
Penn, D. L., Mueser, K. T., & Doonan, R. (1997). 
Physical attractiveness in schizophrenia: The 
mediating role of social skill. Behavior Modi￾fication, 21, 78–85.
Penzenstadler, L., Soares, C., Anci, E., Molodyn￾ski, A., & Khazaal, Y. (2019). Effect of asser￾tive community treatment for patients with 
substance use disorder: a systematic review. 
European Addiction Research, 25(2), 56–67.
Perera, I.  M. (2020). The relationship between 
hospital and community psychiatry: Comple￾ments, not substitutes? Psychiatric Services,
71(9), 964–966.
Perez, A., Leifman, S., & Estrada, A. (2003). 
Reversing the criminalization of mental illness. 
Crime and Delinquency, 49, 62–78.
Perini, G., Cotta Ramusino, M., Sinforiani, E., 
Bernini, S., Petrachi, R., & Costa, A. (2019). 
Cognitive impairment in depression: Recent 
advances and novel treatments. Neuropsychi￾atric Disease and Treatment, 15, 1249–1258.
Perky, C.  W. (1910). An experimental study of 
imagination. American Journal of Psychology, 
21, 422–452.
Perreault, M., Rousseau, M., Provencher, H., 
Roberts, S., & Milton, D. (2012). Predictors 370 References
of caregiver satisfaction with mental health 
services. Community Mental Health Journal, 
48(2), 232–237.
Pescosolido, B.  A. (2011). The public stigma of 
mental illness: What do we think; what do we 
know; what can we prove? Journal of Health 
and Social Behavior, 54, 1–21.
Pescosolido, B.  A., Halpern-Manners, A., Luo, 
L., & Perry, B. (2021). Trends in public stigma 
of mental illness in the US, 1996–2018. JAMA 
Network Open, 4(12), e2140202–e2140202.
Pescosolido, B. A., Manago, B., & Monahan, J. 
(2019). Evolving public views on the likelihood 
of violence from people with mental illness: 
Stigma and its consequences. Health Affairs, 
38(10), 1735–1743.
Pescosolido, B.  A., Martin, J.  K., Lang, A., & 
Olafsdottir, S. (2008). Rethinking theoretical 
approaches to stigma: A framework integrating 
normative influences on stigma (FINIS). Social 
Science and Medicine, 67(3), 431–440.
Pescosolido, B.  A., Martin, J.  K., Long, J.  S., 
Medina, T.  R., Phelan, J.  C., & Link, B.  G. 
(2010). “A disease like any other”?: A decade 
of change in public reactions to schizophrenia, 
depression, and alcohol dependence. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 167(11), 1321–1330.
Pescosolido, B. A., Medina, T. R., Martin, J. K., & 
Long, J. S. (2013). The “backbone” of stigma: 
Identifying the global core of public prejudice 
associated with mental illness. American Jour￾nal of Public Health, 103(5), 853–860.
Pescosolido, B.  A., Wright, E.  R., & Lutfey, K. 
(1999). The changing hopes, worries, and com￾munity supports of individuals moving from 
a closing long-term care facility. Journal of 
Behavioral Health Services and Research, 26,
276–288.
Petersen, I., Bhana, A., Lund, C., & Herrman, H. 
(2014). Primary prevention of mental disorders. 
In P. Byrne & A. Rosen (Eds.), Early interven￾tion in psychiatry: EI of nearly everything for 
better mental health (pp. 117–133). Chichester, 
UK: Wiley.
Petrila, J., Andel, R., Constantine, R., & Robst, J. 
(2010). Public expenditures related to the crim￾inal justice system and to services for arrestees 
with a serious mental illness. Psychiatric Ser￾vices, 61, 516–519.
Petros, R., & Solomon, P. (2015). Reviewing ill￾ness self-management programs: A selection 
guide for consumers, practitioners, and admin￾istrators. Psychiatric Services, 66(11), 1180–
1193.
Petry, N. M., Alessi, S. M., Olmstead, T. A., Rash, 
C.  J., & Zajac, K. (2017). Contingency man￾agement treatment for substance use disorders: 
How far has it come, and where does it need to 
go? Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 31(8), 
897–906.
Pettersen, H., Landheim, A., Skeie, I., Biong, 
S., Brodahl, M., Benson, V., & Davidson, 
L. (2019). Helpful ingredients in the treat￾ment of long-term substance use disorders: 
A collaborative narrative study. Substance 
Abuse: Research and Treatment, 13, Article 
1178221819844996.
Pettersson, E., Lichtenstein, P., Larsson, H., Song, 
J., Deficit, A., Agrawal, A., .  .  . Polderman, 
T.  J.  C. (2019). Genetic influences on eight 
psychiatric disorders based on family data of 4 
408 646 full and half-siblings, and genetic data 
of 333 748 cases and controls. Psychological 
Medicine, 49(7), 1166–1173.
Pettigrew, T. F., & Tropp, L. R. (2008). How does 
intergroup contact reduce prejudice?: Meta￾analytic tests of three mediators. European 
Journal of Social Psychology, 38(6), 922–934.
Pew Research Center. (2021). Measuring religion 
in Pew Research Center’s American trends 
panel. Retrieved from www.pewresearch.org/
religion/2021/01/14/measuring-religion-in￾pew-research-centers-american-trends-panel
Pharoah, F., Rathbone, J., Mari, J., & Streiner, D. 
(2004). Family intervention for schizophrenia. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2,
CD000088.
Pharr, J.  R., James, T., & Yeung, Y.-L. (2019). 
Accessibility and accommodations for patients 
with mobility disabilities in a large healthcare 
system: How are we doing? Disability and 
Health Journal, 12(4), 679–684.
Phelan, J., Link, B. G., Stueve, A., & Moore, R. E. 
(1995). Education, social liberalism, and eco￾nomic conservatism: Attitudes toward home￾less people. American Sociological Review, 60,
126–140.
Phelan, J. C. (2002). Genetic bases of mental ill￾ness—A cure for stigma? Trends in Neurosci￾ences, 25(8), 430–431.
Phelan, J.  C. (2005). Geneticization of deviant 
behavior and consequences for stigma: The 
case of mental illness. Journal of Health and 
Social Behavior, 46, 307–322.
Phelan, J. C., Bromet, E. J., & Link, B. G. (1998). 
Psychiatric illness and family stigma. Schizo￾phrenia Bulletin, 24, 115–126.
Phelan, J. C., Cruz-Rojas, R., & Reiff, M. (2002). 
Genes and stigma: The connection between 
perceived genetic etiology and attitudes and 
beliefs about mental illness. Psychiatric Reha￾bilitation Skills, 6(2), 159–185.
Phelan, M., Slade, M., Thornicroft, G., Dunn, 
G., Holloway, F., Wykes, T., Strathdee, G., . . . 
Hayward, P. (1995). The Camberwell Assess￾ment of Need: The validity and reliability of an References 371
instrument to assess the needs of people with 
severe mental illness. British Journal of Psy￾chiatry, 167(5), 589–595.
Phillips, A. (2010). What’s wrong with essential￾ism? Distinktion: Journal of Social Theory, 
11(1), 47–60.
Phillips, L.  J., Francey, S.  M., Edwards, J., & 
McMurray, N. (2009). Strategies used by psy￾chotic individuals to cope with life stress and 
symptoms of illness: A systematic review. Anxi￾ety, Stress, and Coping, 22(4), 371–410.
Phillips, M.  R., Pearson, V., Li, F., Xu, M., & 
Yang, L. (2002). Stigma and expressed emo￾tion: A study of people with schizophrenia and 
their family members in China. British Journal 
of Psychiatry, 181(6), 488–493.
Piat, M., Polvere, L., Kirst, M., Voronka, J., 
Zabkiewicz, D., Plante, M.-C., .  .  . Goering, 
P. (2015). Pathways into homelessness: Under￾standing how both individual and structural 
factors contribute to and sustain homelessness 
in Canada. Urban Studies, 52(13), 2366–2382.
Pickett, S., Greenley, J., & Greenberg, J. (1995). 
Off-timedness as a contributor to subjective 
burden for parents of offspring with severe 
mental illness. Family Relations, 44, 185–201.
Pickett, S., Vraniak, D., Cook, J., & Cohler, B. 
(1993). Strength in adversity: Blacks bear bur￾den better than whites. Professional Psychol￾ogy: Research and Practice, 24, 460–467.
Pickett-Schenk, S., Steigman, P., Bennett, C., & 
Lippincott, R. (2005). Journey of Hope educa￾tion course outcomes project. Chicago: Univer￾sity of Illinois at Chicago, Center on Mental 
Health Services Research and Policy.
Pillemer, K., & Suitor, J. J. (2014). Who provides 
care?: A prospective study of caregiving among 
adult siblings. Gerontologist, 54, 589–598.
Pilling, S., Bebbington, P., Kuipers, E., Garety, 
P., Geddes, J., Orbach, G., .  .  . Morgan, C. 
(2002). Psychological treatments in schizo￾phrenia: I. Meta-analysis of family intervention 
and cognitive behavior therapy. Psychological 
Medicine, 32, 763–782.
Piltch, C. A. (2016). The role of self-determination 
in mental health recovery. Psychiatric Rehabili￾tation Journal, 39(1), 77–80.
Pincus, F.  L. (1996). Discrimination comes in 
many forms: Individual, institutional, and 
structural. American Behavioral Scientist, 40,
186–194.
Pincus, F. L. (1999). From individual to structural 
discrimination. In F. L. Pincus & H. J. Ehrlich 
(Eds.), Race and ethnic conflict: Contending 
views on prejudice, discrimination, and ethn￾oviolence (pp.  120–124). Boulder, CO: West￾view Press.
Pinhas, L., Wong, J., & Woodside, D. B. (2014). 
Early intervention in eating disorders. In 
P. Byrne & A. Rosen (Eds.), Early intervention 
in psychiatry: EI of nearly everything for bet￾ter mental health (pp.  288–304). Chichester, 
UK: Wiley.
Pinkham, A.  E., Harvey, P.  D., & Penn, D.  L. 
(2018). Social cognition psychometric evalu￾ation: Results of the final validation study. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 44(4), 737–748.
Pinkham, A. E., Penn, D. L., Green, M. F., Buck, 
B., Healey, K., & Harvey, P.  D. (2013). The 
Social Cognition Psychometric Evaluation 
study: Results of the expert survey and RAND 
panel. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 40, 813–823.
Piquero, A.  R. (2015). Understanding race/eth￾nicity differences in offending across the life 
course: Gaps and opportunities. Journal of 
Developmental and Life-Course Criminology, 
1(1), 21–32.
Pistrang, N., Barker, C., & Humphreys, K. 
(2008). Mutual help groups for mental health 
problems: A review of effectiveness studies. 
American Journal of Community Psychology,
42(1–2), 110–121.
Pitschel-Walz, G., Leucht, S., Bauml, J., Kissling, 
W., & Engel, R. (2001). The effect of family 
interventions on relapse and rehospitalization 
in schizophrenia: A meta-analysis. Schizophre￾nia Bulletin, 27, 73–92.
Pitt, V., Lowe, D., Hill, S., Prictor, M., Het￾rick, S.  E., Ryan, R., & Berends, L. (2013). 
Consumer-providers of care for adult cli￾ents of statutory mental health services. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 3,
CD004807.
Platman, S.  R. (1983). Family caretaking and 
expressed emotion: An evaluation. Hospital 
and Community Psychiatry, 34, 921–925.
Plotkin, M., & Peckerman, T. (2017, January). 
The variability in law enforcement state stan￾dards: A 42-state survey on mental health and 
crisis deescalation training. New York: CSG 
Justice Center.
Polcin, D.  L. (2016). Co-occurring substance 
abuse and mental health problems among 
homeless persons: Suggestions for research and 
practice. Journal of Social Distress and Home￾lessness, 25(1), 1–10.
Polvere, L., MacNaughton, E., & Piat, M. (2013). 
Participant perspectives on housing first and 
recovery: Early findings from the At Home/
Chez Soi project. Psychiatric Rehabilitation 
Journal, 36, 110–112.
Ponka, D., Agbata, E., Kendall, C., Stergiopoulos, 
V., Mendonca, O., Magwood, O., . . . Pottie, 
K. (2020). The effectiveness of case manage￾ment interventions for the homeless, vulnerably 
housed and persons with lived experience: A 372 References
systematic review. PLoS ONE, 15(4), Article 
e0230896.
Pope, M.  A., Jordan, G., Venkataraman, S., 
Malla, A. K., & Iyer, S. N. (2019). “Everyone 
has a role”: Perspectives of service users with 
first-episode psychosis, family caregivers, treat￾ment providers, and policymakers on respon￾sibility for supporting individuals with mental 
health problems. Qualitative Health Research, 
29(9), 1299–1312.
Porcelli, P., Laera, D., Mastrangelo, D., & Masi, 
A. D. (2012). Prevalence of allostatic overload 
syndrome in patients with chronic cardiovascu￾lar disease. Psychotherapy and Psychosomat￾ics, 81(6), 375–377.
Porter, K., Chen, Y., Estabrooks, P., Noel, L., 
Bailey, A., & Zoellner, J. (2016). Using teach￾back to understand participant behavioral self￾monitoring skills across health literacy level 
and behavioral condition. Journal of Nutrition 
Education and Behavior, 48(1), 20–26.
Posey, T.  B., & Losch, M.  E. (1983). Auditory 
hallucinations of hearing voices in 375 normal 
subjects. Imagination, Cognition and Person￾ality, 3, 99–113.
Posner, C., Wilson, K., Kral, M., Lander, S., & 
Mcllwraith, R. (1992). Family psychoeduca￾tion support groups in schizophrenia. Ameri￾can Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 62, 206–218.
Posner, M.  I., Nissen, M.  J., & Klein, R.  M. 
(1976). Visual dominance: An information￾processing account of its origins and signifi￾cance. Psychological Review, 83(2), 157–171.
Possemato, K., Wray, L. O., Johnson, E., Webster, 
B., & Beehler, G.  P. (2018). Facilitators and 
barriers to seeking mental health care among 
primary care veterans with posttraumatic 
stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic Stress,
31(5), 742–752.
Pratt, C. W., Gill, K. J., Barrett, N. M., & Rob￾erts, M. M. (1999). Psychiatric rehabilitation.
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Pratt, S. I., Mueser, K. T., Driscoll, M., Wolfe, R., 
& Bartels, S. J. (2006). Medication nonadher￾ence in older people with serious mental illness: 
Prevalence and correlates. Psychiatric Rehabili￾tation Journal, 29(4), 299–310.
President’s Commission on Mental Health. 
(1978). Report to the President. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Price-Robertson, R. (2015). Fatherhood and 
mental illness. Retrieved from https://aifs.
gov.au/resources/policy-and-practice-papers/
fatherhood-and-mental-illness
Priester, M. A., Browne, T., Iachini, A., Clone, S., 
DeHart, D., & Seay, K. D. (2016). Treatment 
access barriers and disparities among indi￾viduals with co-occurring mental health and 
substance use disorders: An integrative litera￾ture review. Journal of Substance Abuse Treat￾ment, 61, 47–59.
Prikken, M., Konings, M. J., Lei, W. U., Begemann, 
M. J., & Sommer, I. E. (2019). The efficacy of 
computerized cognitive drill and practice train￾ing for patients with a schizophrenia-spectrum 
disorder: A meta-analysis. Schizophrenia 
Research, 204, 368–374.
Prins, S. J. (2011). Does transinstitutionalization 
explain the overrepresentation of people with 
serious mental illness in the criminal justice 
system? Community Mental Health Journal, 
47, 716–722.
Prins, S. J. (2014). Prevalence of mental illnesses 
in U.S. state prisons: A systematic review. Psy￾chiatric Services, 65(7), 862–872.
Pruessner, M., Iyer, S. N., Faridi, K., Joober, R., 
& Malla, A.  K. (2011). Stress and protective 
factors in individuals at ultra-high risk for psy￾chosis, first episode psychosis and healthy con￾trols. Schizophrenia Research, 129(1), 29–35.
Pugh, T., Hatzenbuehler, M., & Link, B. (2015, 
August). Structural stigma and mental illness.
Commissioned Paper for Committee on the 
Science of Changing Behavioral Health Social 
Norms, Mailman School of Public, Columbia 
University, New York.
Puntis, S., Perfect, D., Kirubarajan, A., Bolton, 
S., Davies, F., Hayes, A., . . . Molodynski, A. 
(2018). A systematic review of co-responder 
models of police mental health “street” triage. 
BMC Psychiatry, 18, Article 256.
Qiu, W., Schvaneveldt, P. L., & Sahin, V. (2013). 
Children’s perceptions and definitions of fam￾ily in China, Ecuador, Turkey, and the United 
States. Journal of Comparative Family Studies,
44(5), 641–662.
Quinn, D. M. (2018). When stigma is concealable: 
The costs and benefits for health. In B. Major, 
J. F. Dovidio, & B. G. Link (Eds.), The Oxford 
handbook of stigma, discrimination, and 
health (pp. 287–299). New York: Oxford Uni￾versity Press.
Rabany, L., Weiser, M., Werbeloff, N., & Levko￾vitz, Y. (2011). Assessment of negative symp￾toms and depression in schizophrenia: Revision 
of the SANS and how it relates to the PANSS 
and CDSS. Schizophrenia Research, 126(1–3), 
226–230.
Rabelo, J. L., Cruz, B. F., Ferreira, J. D. R., Viana, 
B. D. M., & Barbosa, I. G. (2021). Psychoedu￾cation in bipolar disorder: A systematic review. 
World Journal of Psychiatry, 11(12), 1407–
1424.
Rabinowitz, J.  C., Mandler, G., & Patterson, 
K. E. (1977). Determinants of recognition and 
recall: Accessibility and generation. Journal References 373
of Experimental Psychology: General, 106,
302–329.
Radez, J., Reardon, T., Creswell, C., Lawrence, 
P. J., Evdoka-Burton, G., & Waite, P. (2021). 
Why do children and adolescents (not) seek and 
access professional help for their mental health 
problems?: A systematic review of quantitative 
and qualitative studies. European Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, 30(2), 183–211.
Radez, J., Reardon, T., Creswell, C., Orchard, 
F., & Waite, P. (2022). Adolescents’ perceived 
barriers and facilitators to seeking and access￾ing professional help for anxiety and depressive 
disorders: A qualitative interview study. Euro￾pean Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 31(6), 
891–907.
Raeburn, T., Halcomb, E., Walter, G., & Cleary, 
M. (2013). An overview of the clubhouse model 
of psychiatric rehabilitation. Australasian Psy￾chiatry, 21(4), 376–378.
Rakitzi, S., Georgila, P., & Becker-Woitag, A. P. 
(2021). The recovery process for individuals 
with schizophrenia in the context of evidence￾based psychotherapy and rehabilitation. Euro￾pean Psychologist, 26, 96–111.
Ralph, R. O. (2000). Review of recovery litera￾ture: A synthesis of a sample of recovery lit￾erature 2000. Portland: University of Southern 
Maine, Edmund S. Muskie Institute of Public 
Affairs.
Randolph, F. L., Ridgway, P., Sanford, C., Simo￾neau, D., & Carling, P.  J. (1988). A national 
survey of community residential programs 
for persons with prolonged mental illness.
Burlington: University of Vermont, Center for 
Community Change Through Housing and 
Support.
Ranning, A., Munk Laursen, T., Thorup, A., 
Hjorthøj, C., & Nordentoft, M. (2015). Seri￾ous mental illness and disrupted caregiving for 
children: A nationwide, register-based cohort 
study. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 76(8), 
e1006–e1014.
Rapp, C.  A. (1998). The active ingredients of 
effective case management: A research synthe￾sis. Community Mental Health Journal, 34(4), 
363–380.
Rapp, C. A., & Goscha, R. J. (2004). The prin￾ciples of effective case management of mental 
health services. Psychiatric Rehabilitation 
Journal, 27(4), 319–333.
Rapp, C. A., & Goscha, R. J. (2005). What are the 
common features of evidence-based practices? 
In R. E. Drake, M. R. Merrens, & D. W. Lynde 
(Eds.), Evidence-based mental health practice: 
A textbook (pp. 189–215). New York: Norton.
Rapp, C. A., & Goscha, R. J. (2011). The strengths 
model: A recovery-oriented approach to 
mental health services (3rd ed.). New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Read, J., & Law, A. (1999). The relationship of 
causal beliefs and contact with users of men￾tal health services to attitudes to the “mentally 
ill.” International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 
45(3), 216–229.
Redko, C., Durbin, J., Wasylenki, D., & Krupa, T. 
(2004). Participant perspectives of satisfaction 
with assertive community treatment. Psychiat￾ric Rehabilitation Journal, 27, 283–286.
Redlich, A. D., Hoover, S., Summers, A., & Stead￾man, H. J. (2010). Enrollment in mental health 
courts: Voluntariness, knowingness, and adju￾dicative competence. Law and Human Behav￾ior, 34(2), 91–104.
Regier, D. A., Farmer, M. E., Rae, D. S., Locke, 
B. Z., Keith, S. J., Judd, L. L., . . . Goodwin, 
F. K. (1990). Comorbidity of mental disorders 
with alcohol and other drug abuse: Results 
from the Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) 
study. Journal of the American Medical Asso￾ciation, 264, 2511–2518.
Reilly, J., Ho, I., & Williamson, A. (2022). A sys￾tematic review of the effect of stigma on the 
health of people experiencing homelessness. 
Health and Social Care in the Community, 30,
2128–2141.
Reilly, J., Rohrbaugh, M., & Lackner, J. (1988). 
A controlled evaluation of psychoeduca￾tion workshops for relatives of state hospital 
patients. Journal of Marital and Family Ther￾apy, 14, 429–432.
Reimer, N.  K., Becker, J.  C., Benz, A., Christ, 
O., Dhont, K., Klocke, U., . . . Hewstone, M. 
(2017). Intergroup contact and social change: 
Implications of negative and positive contact 
for collective action in advantaged and disad￾vantaged groups. Personality and Social Psy￾chology Bulletin, 43(1), 121–136.
Reupert, A., & Maybery, D. (2009). Fathers’ 
experience of parenting with a mental illness. 
Families in Society, 90(1), 61–68.
Reupert, A., Price-Robertson, R., & Maybery, D. 
(2017). Parenting as a focus of recovery: A sys￾tematic review of current practice. Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation Journal, 40, 361–370.
Reynolds, T., Thornicroft, G., Abas, M., Woods, 
B., Hoe, J., Leese, M., & Orrell, M. (2000). 
Camberwell Assessment of Need for the Elderly 
(CANE). Development, validity and reliability. 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 176, 444–452.
Ribeiro, W.  S., Bauer, A., Andrade, M.  C.  R., 
York-Smith, M., Pan, P.  M., Pingani, L., .  .  . 
Evans-Lacko, S. (2017). Income inequality and 
mental illness-related morbidity and resilience: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 
Psychiatry, 4(7), 554–562.374 References
Richards, M., & Dixon, L. B. (2020). Resilience. 
Psychiatric Services, 71(8), 878–879.
Richardson, M., Cobham, V., Murray, J., & 
McDermott, B. (2011). Parents’ grief in the 
context of adult child mental illness: A qualita￾tive review. Clinical Child and Family Psychol￾ogy Review, 14, 28–43.
Richardson, M., McCabe, R., & Priebe, S. (2013). 
Are attitudes towards medication adherence 
associated with medication adherence behav￾iours among patients with psychosis?: A sys￾tematic review and meta analysis. Social Psy￾chiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 48(4), 
649–657.
Ridgely, M.  S., Osher, F.  C., Goldman, H.  H., 
& Talbott, J.  A. (1987). Chronic mentally ill 
young adults with substance abuse problems: 
A review of research, treatment, and train￾ing issues. Baltimore: University of Maryland, 
Task Force on Chronic Mentally Ill Young 
Adults with Substance Problems.
Ridgway, P., & Rapp, C.  A. (1997). The active 
ingredients of effective supported housing: A 
research synthesis. Lawrence: University of 
Kansas, School of Social Welfare.
Ridgway, P., & Zipple, A.  M. (1990). The 
paradigm shift in residential services: From 
the linear continuum to supported housing 
approaches. Psychosocial Rehabilitation Jour￾nal, 13(4), 11–31.
Riessman, F. (1965). The “helper therapy” prin￾ciple. Social Work, 10, 27–32.
Rietschel, L., Lambert, M., Karow, A., Zink, M., 
Müller, H., Heinz, A., . . . Bechdolf, A. (2015). 
Clinical high risk for psychosis: Gender dif￾ferences in symptoms and social functioning. 
Early Intervention in Psychiatry, 11, 306–313.
Riggs, R. T. (1996). HMOs and the seriously men￾tally ill: A view from the trenches. Community 
Mental Health Journal, 32, 213–218.
Rimmerman, A., & Keren, N. (1995). Letting go: 
Patient attitudes toward out-of-home place￾ment of their children with psychiatric dis￾ability. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 19,
3–8.
Ringeisen, H., Langer Ellison, M., Ryder-Burge, 
A., Biebel, K., Alikhan, S., & Jones, E. (2017). 
Supported education for individuals with psy￾chiatric disabilities: State of the practice and 
policy implications. Psychiatric Rehabilitation 
Journal, 40(2), 197–206.
Ringhoff, D., Rapp, L., & Robst, J. (2012). The 
criminalization hypothesis: Practice and policy 
implications for persons with serious mental 
illness in the criminal justice system. Best Prac￾tices in Mental Health, 8, 1–19.
Riper, H., Andersson, G., Hunter, S. B., de Wit, J., 
Berking, M., & Cuijpers, P. (2014). Treatment 
of comorbid alcohol use disorders and depres￾sion with cognitive-behavioural therapy and 
motivational interviewing: A meta-analysis. 
Addiction, 109(3), 394–406.
Robinson, R. (2015). Not to be trusted: Danger￾ous levels of inaccuracy in TV crime reporting 
in NYC. Retrieved December 20, 2022, from 
https://colorofchange.org/newsaccuracyrat￾ings/
Rochefort, D. A. (2019). Innovation and its dis￾contents: Pathways and barriers in the diffusion 
of assertive community treatment. Milbank 
Quarterly, 97(4), 1151–1199.
Rodgers, M., Dalton, J., Marden, M., Street, A., 
Parker, G., & Eastwood, A. (2018). Integrated 
care to address the physical health needs of 
people with server mental illness: A mapping 
review of the recent evidence on barriers, facili￾tators, and evaluation. International Journal of 
Integrated Care, 18, Article 9.
Rodolico, A., Bighelli, I., Avanzato, C., Concerto, 
C., Cutrufelli, P., Mineo, L., .  .  . Leucht, S. 
(2022). Family interventions for relapse pre￾vention in schizophrenia: A systematic review 
and network meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry, 
9(3), 211–221.
Roe, D. (2001). Progressing from patienthood to 
personhood across the multidimensional out￾comes in schizophrenia and related disorders. 
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 189,
691–699.
Roe, D., Hasson-Ohayon, I., Mashiach￾Eizenberg, M., Derhy, O., Lysaker, P.  H., & 
Yanos, P.  T. (2014). Narrative enhancement 
and cognitive therapy (NECT) effectiveness: A 
quasi-experimental study. Journal of Clinical 
Psychology, 70(4), 303–312.
Rog, D.  J. (2004). The evidence on supported 
housing. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 
27, 334–344.
Rog, D.  J., Marshall, T., Dougherty, R.  H., 
George, P., Daniels, A.  S., Ghose, S.  S., & 
Delphin-Rittmon, M.  E. (2014). Permanent 
supportive housing: Assessing the evidence. 
Psychiatric Services, 65(3), 287–294.
Rog, D. J., & Raush, H. L. (1975). The psychiatric 
halfway house: How is it measuring up? Com￾munity Mental Health Journal, 11, 155–162.
Roe, D., Yanos, P.  T., & Lysaker, P.  H. (2006). 
Coping with psychosis: An integrative devel￾opmental framework. Journal of Nervous and 
Mental Disease, 194(12), 917–924.
Rogers, E.  S., Chamberlin, J., Ellison, M., & 
Crean, T. (1997). A consumer-constructed 
scale to measure empowerment. Psychiatric 
Services, 48, 1042–1047.
Rogers, E.  S., Kash-Macdonald, M.  B.  D., 
& Maru, M. (2010). Systematic review of References 375
supported education literature, 1989–2009 
(Report). Boston, MA: Boston University, Sar￾gent College, Center for Psychiatric Rehabilita￾tion.
Rogers, E. S., Ralph, R. O., & Salzer, M. S. (2010). 
Validating the Empowerment Scale with a mul￾tisite sample of consumers of mental health ser￾vices. Psychiatric Services, 61, 933–936.
Rogers, J. A. (1995). Work is key to recovery. Psy￾chosocial Rehabilitation Journal, 18, 5–10.
Rojas Vistorte, A.  O., Silva Ribiero, W., Jaen, 
D., Jorge, M.  R., Evans-Lacko, S., & Mari, 
J. J. (2018). Stigmatizing attitudes of primary 
care professionals towards people with mental 
disorders: A systematic review. International 
Journal of Psychiatry in Medicine, 53, 317–
338.
Rollins, A. L., Wright-Berryman, J., Henry, N. H., 
Quash, A. M., Benbow, K., Bonfils, K. A., . . . 
Salyers, M. P. (2017). Managing physical and 
mental health conditions: Consumer perspec￾tives on integrated care. Social Work in Mental 
Health, 15(1), 66–79.
Romão, J., Gonçalves, M., Ribeiro, M., André, 
R., Saraiva, R., & Abreu, M. (2022). Growing 
use of valproic acid in substance use disorders. 
European Psychiatry, 65(Suppl. 1), S243–S244.
Rosenbaum, G., Mackavey, W. R., & Grisell, J. L. 
(1957). Effect of biological and social motiva￾tion on schizophrenic reaction time. Journal 
of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 54, 364–
368.
Rosenberg, D., Svedberg, P., & Schön, U.-K. 
(2015). Establishing a recovery orientation in 
mental health services: Evaluating the Recov￾ery Self-Assessment (RSA) in a Swedish con￾text. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 38(4), 
328–335.
Rosenberg, S., Mueser, K., Friedman, M., Gor￾man, P., Drake, R., Vidaver, R., . . . Jankowski, 
M. (2001). Developing effective treatments for 
posttraumatic disorders among people with 
severe mental illness. Psychiatric Services, 52,
1453–1461.
Rosenberg, S.  J., & Rosenberg, J. (2013). Com￾munity mental health: Challenges for the 21st 
century (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge.
Rosenblat, J.  D., Kakar, R., & McIntyre, R.  S. 
(2016). The cognitive effects of antidepressants 
in major depressive disorder: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis of randomized clini￾cal trials. International Journal of Neuropsy￾chopharmacology, 19(2), Article pyv082.
Rosenheck, R. A., Lam, J., Morrissey, J. P., Callo￾way, M. O., Stolar, M., & Randolph, F. (2002). 
Service systems integration and outcomes for 
mentally ill homeless persons in the ACCESS 
program. Psychiatric Services, 53, 958–966.
Rosenheck, R., & Neale, M. (2004). Therapeutic 
limit setting and six month outcomes in a Vet￾erans Affairs assertive community treatment 
program. Psychiatric Services, 55, 139–144.
Rosenheck, R., Neale, M., Leaf, P., Milstein, R., 
& Frisman, L. (1995). Multisite experimental 
cost study of intensive psychiatric community 
care. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 21, 129–140.
Ross, A. M., Morgan, A. J., Jorm, A. F., & Reavley, 
N. J. (2019). A systematic review of the impact of 
media reports of severe mental illness on stigma 
and discrimination, and interventions that aim 
to mitigate any adverse impact. Social Psychia￾try and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 54(1), 11–31.
Rossler, M. T., & Terrill, W. (2017). Mental ill￾ness, police use of force, and citizen injury. 
Police Quarterly, 20(2), 189–212.
Rosson, S., Filippis, R.  de, Croatto, G., Collan￾toni, E., Pallottino, S., Guinart, D., Brunoni, 
A.  R., .  .  . Solmi, M. (2022). Brain stimula￾tion and other biological non-pharmacological 
interventions in mental disorders: An umbrella 
review. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral 
Reviews, 139, 104743.
Rotondi, A.  J., Anderson, C.  M., Haas, G.  L., 
Eack, S. M., Spring, M. B., Ganguli, R., . . . 
Rosenstock, J. (2010). Web-based psycho￾educational intervention for persons with 
schizophrenia and their supporters: One-year 
outcomes. Psychiatric Services, 61(11), 1099–
1105.
Rowland, M. (2015). Angry and mad: A critical 
examination of identity politics, neurodiver￾sity, and the Mad Pride movement. Journal of 
Ethics in Mental Health, 9, 1–3.
Roy, L., Crocker, A. G., Nicholls, T. L., Latimer, 
E. A., & Ayllon, A. R. (2014). Criminal behav￾ior and victimization among homeless indi￾viduals with severe mental illness: A systematic 
review. Psychiatric Services, 65, 739–750.
Royle, L., Keenan, P., & Farrell, D. (2009). Issues 
of stigma for first responders accessing support 
for posttraumatic stress. International Journal 
of Emergency Mental Health, 11, 79–85.
Rozalski, V., & McKeegan, G. M. (2019). Insight 
and symptom severity in an inpatient psychi￾atric sample. Psychiatric Quarterly, 90(2), 
339–350.
Rubin, S. E., & Roessler, R. (2008). Foundations 
of the vocational rehabilitation process. Aus￾tin, TX: PRO-ED.
Rudnick, A., & Roe, D. (Eds.). (2011). Serious 
mental illness: Person-centered approaches
(pp. xxxi, 375). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Ruini, C., Offidani, E., & Vescovelli, F. (2015). 
Life stressors, allostatic overload, and their 
impact on posttraumatic growth. Journal of 
Loss and Trauma, 20(2), 109–122.376 References
Rund, B.  R., & Borg, N.  E. (1999). Cognitive 
deficits and cognitive training in schizophrenic 
patients: A review. Acta Psychiatrica Scandi￾navica, 100, 85–95.
Rüsch, N. (2023). The stigma of mental illness: 
Strategies against social exclusion and discrim￾ination. Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Rüsch, N., Corrigan, P.  W., Waldmann, T., 
Staiger, T., Bahemann, A., Oexle, N., .  .  . 
Becker, T. (2018). Attitudes toward disclosing 
a mental health problem and reemployment: 
A longitudinal study. Journal of Nervous and 
Mental Disease, 206(5), 383–385.
Rüsch, N., Corrigan, P. W., Wassel, A., Michaels, 
P., Larson, J. E., Olschewski, M., . . . Batia, K. 
(2009). Self-stigma, group identification, per￾ceived legitimacy of discrimination and mental 
health service use. British Journal of Psychia￾try, 195(6), 551–552.
Rüsch, N., Corrigan, P. W., Wassel, A., Michaels, 
P., Olschewski, M., Wilkniss, S., & Batia, K. 
(2009). A stress-coping model of mental ill￾ness stigma: I.  Predictors of cognitive stress 
appraisal. Schizophrenia Research, 110(1–3), 
59–64.
Rüsch, N., & Kösters, M. (2021). Honest, Open, 
Proud to support disclosure decisions and to 
decrease stigma’s impact among people with 
mental illness: Conceptual review and meta￾analysis of program efficacy. Social Psychiatry 
and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 56(9), 1513–
1526.
Rüsch, N., Malzer, A., Oexle, N., Waldmann, 
T., Staiger, T., Bahemann, A., .  .  . Corrigan, 
P.  W. (2019). Disclosure and quality of life 
among unemployed individuals with mental 
health problems: A longitudinal study. Jour￾nal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 207(3), 
137–139.
Rüsch, N., Müller, M., Heekeren, K., Theodor￾idou, A., Metzler, S., Dvorsky, D., . . . Rössler, 
W. (2014). Longitudinal course of self-labeling, 
stigma stress and well-being among young 
people at risk of psychosis. Schizophrenia 
Research, 158(1–3), 82–84.
Rush, A. J., Rago, W. V., Crismon, M. L., Toprac, 
M. G., Shon, S. P., Suppes, T., . . . Altshuler, 
K.  Z. (1999). Medication treatment for the 
severely and persistently mentally ill: The Texas 
Medication Algorithm Project. Journal of Clin￾ical Psychiatry, 60(5), 284–291.
Russinova, Z., Mizock, L., & Bloch, P. (2018). 
Photovoice as a tool to understand the expe￾rience of stigma among individuals with seri￾ous mental illnesses. Stigma and Health, 3(3), 
171–185.
Ryan, R.  M., & Deci, E.  L. (2000). Self￾determination theory and the facilitation of 
intrinsic motivation, social development, and 
well-being self-determination theory. Ameri￾can Psychologist, 55(1), 68–78.
Ryan, R.  M., Patrick, H., Deci, E.  L., & Wil￾liams, G. C. (2008). Facilitating health behav￾iour change and its maintenance: Interventions 
based on self-determination theory. European 
Health Psychologist, 10, 2–5.
Ryan, R. M., Plant, R. W., & O’Malley, S. (1995). 
Initial motivations for alcohol treatment: Rela￾tions with patient characteristics, treatment 
involvement, and dropout. Addictive Behav￾iors, 20(3), 279–297.
Rybakowski, J. (2016). Effect of lithium on neu￾rocognitive functioning. Current Alzheimer 
Research, 13(8), 887–893.
Sacks, S. (1997). Final report: Therapeutic 
community-oriented supported housing for 
MICAs. New York: Center for Therapeutic 
Community Research.
Sacks, T.  K. (2013). Race and gender concor￾dance: Strategy to reduce healthcare dispari￾ties or red herring? Evidence from a qualitative 
study. Race and Social Problems, 5(2), 88–99.
Saha, S., Chant, D., & McGrath, J. (2007). A 
systematic review of mortality in schizophre￾nia: Is the differential mortality gap worsening 
over time? Archives of General Psychiatry, 64,
1123–1131.
Saleh, A.  Z., Appelbaum, P.  S., Liu, X., Scott 
Stroup, T., & Wall, M. (2018). Deaths of peo￾ple with mental illness during interactions with 
law enforcement. International Journal of Law 
and Psychiatry, 58, 110–116.
Salerno, A., Margolies, P., Cleek, A., Pollock, M., 
Gopalan, G., & Jackson, C. (2011). Wellness 
self-management: An adaptation of the illness 
management and recovery program in New 
York State. Psychiatric Services, 62(5), 456–
458.
Salyers, M. P., Becker, D. R., Drake, R. E., Torrey, 
W. C., & Wyzik, P. F. (2004). Ten-year follow￾up of a supported employment program. Psy￾chiatric Services, 55, 302–308.
Salyers, M. P., McGuire, A. B., Kukla, M., Fukui, 
S., Lysaker, P. H., & Mueser, K. T. (2014). A 
randomized controlled trial of illness man￾agement and recovery with an active control 
group. Psychiatric Services, 65(8), 1005–1011.
Salzer, M.  S. (2021). Community inclusion and 
social determinants: From opportunity to 
health. Psychiatric Services, 72(7), 836–839.
Salzer, M. S., & Brusilovskiy, E. (2014). Advanc￾ing recovery science: Reliability and validity 
properties of the Recovery Assessment Scale. 
Psychiatric Services, 65(4), 442–453.
Sands, R., Koppelman, N., & Solomon, P. 
(2004). Maternal custody status and living References 377
arrangements of children of women with severe 
mental illness. Health and Social Work, 29,
317–325.
Sanford, N., Veckenstedt, R., Moritz, S., Balzan, 
R.  P., & Woodward, T.  S. (2014). Impaired 
integration of disambiguating evidence in delu￾sional schizophrenia patients. Psychological 
Medicine, 44(13), 2729–2738.
Sara, G., & Lappin, J. (2017). Childhood trauma: 
psychiatry’s greatest public health challenge? 
Lancet Public Health, 2(7), e300–e301.
Sareen, J., Afifi, T.  O., McMillan, K.  A., & 
Asmundson, G.  J.  G. (2011). Relationship 
Between household income and mental disor￾ders: Findings from a population-based longi￾tudinal study. Archives of General Psychiatry,
68(4), 419–427.
Sariaslan, A., Arseneault, L., Larsson, H., Lich￾tenstein, P., & Fazel, S. (2020). Risk of subjec￾tion to violence and perpetration of violence in 
persons with psychiatric disorders in Sweden. 
JAMA Psychiatry, 77(4), 359–367.
Sarteschi, C.  M., Vaughn, M.  G., & Kim, K. 
(2011). Assessing the effectiveness of mental 
health courts: A quantitative review. Journal of 
Criminal Justice, 39, 12–20.
Sarubbi, S., Rogante, E., Erbuto, D., Cifrodelli, 
M., Sarli, G., Polidori, L., .  .  . Pompili, M. 
(2022). The effectiveness of mobile apps for 
monitoring and management of suicide crisis: 
A systematic review of the literature. Journal of 
Clinical Medicine, 11(19), Article 5616.
Saunders, S. L., & Nedelec, B. (2014). What work 
means to people with work disability: A scop￾ing review. Journal of Occupational Rehabili￾tation, 24, 100–110.
Scannell, C. (2022). By helping others we help 
ourselves: Insights from peer support workers 
in substance use recovery. Advances in Mental 
Health, 20, 232–241.
Schaak, G., Sloane, L., Arienti, F., & Zovistoski, 
A. (2017). Priced out: The housing crisis for 
people with disabilities. Retrieved January 
14, 2023, from www.tacinc.org/wp-content/
uploads/2020/04/priced-out-in-2016.pdf
Schaefer, J., Giangrande, E., Weinberger, D.  R., 
& Dickinson, D. (2013). The global cognitive 
impairment in schizophrenia: Consistent over 
decades and around the world. Schizophrenia 
Research, 150(1), 42–50.
Schatzberg, A. F., & Nemeroff, C. B. (2009). The 
American Psychiatric Publishing Textbook 
of Psychopharmacology. Washington, DC: 
Author.
Scheer, J. R., Harney, P., Esposito, J., & Woulfe, 
J.  M. (2020). Self-reported mental and physi￾cal health symptoms and potentially trau￾matic events among lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender, and queer individuals: The role 
of shame. Psychology of Violence, 10(2), 131–
142.
Scheff, T. J. (1966). Users and non-users of a stu￾dent psychiatric clinic. Journal of Health and 
Human Behavior, 7, 114–121.
Scheff, T. J. (1972). On reason and sanity: Politi￾cal dimensions of psychiatric thought. In 
W.  P.  Lebra (Ed.), Transcultural research in 
mental health (pp. 400–406). Honolulu: Uni￾versity Press of Hawaii.
Scheyett, A., DeLuca, J., & Morgan, C. (2013). 
Recovery in severe mental illnesses: A litera￾ture review of recovery measures. Social Work 
Research, 37(3), 286–303.
Schiffman, J., Reeves, G. M., Kline, E., Medoff, 
D. R., Lucksted, A., Hoagwood, K., . . . Dixon, 
L. B. (2015). Outcomes of a family peer educa￾tion program for families of youth and adults 
with mental illness. International Journal of 
Mental Health, 44(4), 303–315.
Schimmel, J., Liu, S., & Croake, S. (2012). 
Employment experiences of young Medicaid 
Buy-In participants with psychiatric disabili￾ties. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 35(3), 
259–264.
Schmitt, M.  T., Branscombe, N.  R., Kobrynow￾icz, D., & Owen, S. (2002). Perceiving discrim￾ination against one’s gender group has different 
implications for well-being in women and men. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
28, 197–210.
Schnapp, W., & Cannedy, R. (1998). Offenders 
with mental illness: Mental health and crimi￾nal justice best practices. Administration and 
Policy in Mental Health, 25, 463–466.
Schneider, W., & Shiffrin, R.  M. (1977). Con￾trolled and automatic human information pro￾cessing: 1. Detection, search, and attention. 
Psychological Review, 84, 1–66.
Schnittker, J., & Do, D. (2020). Pharmaceutical 
side effects and mental health paradoxes among 
racial-ethnic minorities. Journal of Health and 
Social Behavior, 61(1), 4–23.
Schnyder, N., Panczak, R., Groth, N., & Schultze￾Lutter, F. (2017). Association between mental 
health-related stigma and active help-seeking: 
Systematic review and meta-analysis. British 
Journal of Psychiatry, 210(4), 261–268.
Schomerus, G., Schwahn, C., Holzinger, A., Cor￾rigan, P.  W., Grabe, H.  J., Carta, M.  G., & 
Angermeyer, M. C. (2012). Evolution of pub￾lic attitudes about mental illness: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Acta Psychiatrica 
Scandinavica, 125, 440–452.
Schooler, N., Hogarty, G., & Weissman, M. 
(1979). Social Adjustment Scale II (SAS￾II). In W.  A.  Hargreaves, C.  C.  Atkinson, & 378 References
J.  E.  Sorenson (Eds.), Resource materials for 
community mental health program evaluations
(pp.  290–303). Washington, DC: National 
Institute of Mental Health.
Schouten, M. J., Christ, C., Dekker, J. J., Riper, 
H., Goudriaan, A. E., & Blankers, M. (2022). 
Digital interventions for people with co￾occurring depression and problematic alcohol 
use: A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Alcohol and Alcoholism, 57(1), 113–124.
Schreiber, J. L., Breier, A., & Pickar, D. (1995). 
Expressed emotion: Trait or state? British Jour￾nal of Psychiatry, 166(5), 647–649.
Schreiter, S., Speerforck, S., Schomerus, G., & 
Gutwinski, S. (2021). Homelessness: Care for 
the most vulnerable—a narrative review of risk 
factors, health needs, stigma, and interven￾tion strategies. Current Opinion in Psychiatry,
34(4), 400–404.
Schubert, M., & Borkman, T. (1991). An organi￾zational typology for self-help groups. Ameri￾can Journal of Community Psychology, 19,
769–787.
Schulze, B., & Angermeyer, M. C. (2003). Subjec￾tive experiences of stigma: A focus group study 
of schizophrenic patients, their relatives and 
mental health professionals. Social Science and 
Medicine, 56(2), 299–312.
Schumacher, M., Corrigan, P. W., & Dejong, T. 
(2003). Examining cues that signal mental ill￾ness stigma. Journal of Social and Clinical Psy￾chology, 22(5), 467–476.
Schutt, R. K., & Goldfinger, S. M. (2009). Fun￾damental causes of housing loss among persons 
diagnosed with serious and persistent mental 
illness: A theoretically guided test. Asian Jour￾nal of Psychiatry, 2, 132–138.
Scior, K., Rüsch, N., White, C., & Corrigan, 
P. W. (2020). Supporting mental health disclo￾sure decisions: The Honest, Open, Proud pro￾gramme. British Journal of Psychiatry, 216(5), 
243–245.
Seeman, N., Tang, S., Brown, A.  D., & Ing, A. 
(2016). World survey of mental illness stigma. 
Journal of Affective Disorders, 190, 115–121.
Seeman, T. E., Singer, B. H., Ryff, C. D., Dienberg 
Love, G., & Levy-Storms, L. (2002). Social 
relationships, gender, and allostatic load across 
two age cohorts. Psychosomatic Medicine, 
64(3), 395–406.
Seery, C., Bramham, J., & O’Connor, C. (2021). 
Effects of a psychiatric diagnosis vs a clinical 
formulation on lay attitudes to people with psy￾chosis. Psychosis, 13(4), 361–372.
Segal, S. P., & Aviram, U. (1978). The mentally 
ill in community-based sheltered-care. New 
York: Wiley.
Segal, S. P., & Kotler, P. L. (1993). Sheltered care 
residence: Ten-year personal outcomes. Ameri￾can Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 63, 80–91.
Segal, S. P., Silverman, C., & Temkin, T. (1995). 
Characteristics and service use of long-term 
members of self-help agencies for mental health 
clients. Psychiatric Services, 46, 269–274.
Segal, Z. V., Pearson, J. L., & Thase, M. E. (2003). 
Challenges in preventing relapse in major 
depression: Report of a National Institute of 
Mental Health Workshop on state of the sci￾ence of relapse prevention in major depression. 
Journal of Affective Disorders, 77, 97–108.
Semahegn, A., Torpey, K., Manu, A., Assefa, 
N., Tesfaye, G., & Ankomah, A. (2020). Psy￾chotropic medication non-adherence and its 
associated factors among patients with major 
psychiatric disorders: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Systematic Reviews, 9(1), 1–18.
Semmelhack, D., Ende, L., & Hazell, C. (2013). 
Innovation in the group home design. In group 
therapy for adults with severe mental illness
(pp. 78–88). London: Routledge.
Seo, D.  C., & Sa, J. (2008). A meta-analysis 
of psycho-behavioral obesity interventions 
among US multiethnic and minority adults. In 
Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects 
(DARE): Quality-assessed Reviews [Inter￾net]. Centre for Reviews and Dissemination 
(UK). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
nbk75205
Sepehry, A. A., Lam, K., Sheppard, M., Guirguis￾Younger, M., & Maglio, A. S. (2021). EMDR 
for depression: A meta-analysis and system￾atic review. Journal of EMDR Practice and 
Research, 15(1), 2–17.
Serchuk, M.  D., Corrigan, P.  W., Reed, S., & 
Ohan, J. L. (2021). Vicarious stigma and self￾stigma experienced by parents of children with 
mental health and/or neurodevelopmental dis￾orders. Community Mental Health Journal,
57(8), 1537–1546.
Serrano-Ripoll, M.  J., Zamanillo-Campos, R., 
Fiol-DeRoque, M.  A., Castro, A., & Ricci￾Cabello, I. (2022). Impact of smartphone app￾based psychological interventions for reducing 
depressive symptoms in people with depression: 
Systematic literature review and meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. JMIR mHealth 
and uHealth, 10(1), Article e29621.
Sevak, P., & Khan, S. (2017). Psychiatric versus 
physical disabilities: A comparison of barri￾ers and facilitators to employment. Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation Journal, 40(2), 163–171.
Shadish, W. R., & Bootzin, R. R. (1981). Nurs￾ing homes and chronic mental patients. Schizo￾phrenia Bulletin, 7, 488–498.
Shadravan, S.  M., Edwards, M.  L., & Vin￾son, S.  Y. (2021). Dying at the intersections: References 379
Police-involved killings of black people with 
mental illness. Psychiatric Services, 72(6), 
623–625.
Shafer, M., Arthur, B., & Franczak, M. (2004). An 
analysis of post-booking jail diversion program￾ming for persons with co-occurring disorders. 
Behavioral Sciences and the Law, 22, 771–785.
Shah, B. B., Nieweglowski, K., & Corrigan, P. W. 
(2022). Perceptions of difference and disdain 
on the self-stigma of mental illness. Journal of 
Mental Health, 31(1), 22–28.
Shah, J. L., Jones, N., van Os, J., McGorry, P. D., 
& Gülöksüz, S. (2022). Early intervention 
service systems for youth mental health: Inte￾grating pluripotentiality, clinical staging, and 
transdiagnostic lessons from early psychosis. 
Lancet Psychiatry, 9(5), 413–422.
Shah, M. F., Mancuso, D. C., He, L., & Kozak, S. 
(2012). Evaluation of the Medicaid buy-in pro￾gram in Washington state: Outcomes for work￾ers with disabilities who purchase Medicaid 
coverage. Journal of Disability Policy Studies,
22(4), 220–229.
Shaner, A., Eckman, T. A., Roberts, L. J., Wilkins, 
J. N., Tucker, D. E., Tsuang, J. W., . . . Mintz, 
J. (1995). Disability income, cocaine use, and 
repeated hospitalization among schizophrenic 
cocaine abusers: A government-sponsored 
revolving door? New England Journal of Medi￾cine, 333, 777–783.
Shanks, V., Williams, J., Leamy, M., Bird, V. J., 
Le Boutillier, C., & Slade, M. (2013). Measures 
of personal recovery: A systematic review. Psy￾chiatric Services, 64(10), 974–980.
Shapiro, F. (1989a). Eye movement desensitiza￾tion: A new treatment for post-traumatic stress 
disorder. Journal of Behavior Therapy and 
Experimental Psychiatry, 20(3), 211–217.
Shapiro, F. (1989b). Efficacy of the eye movement 
desensitization procedure in the treatment of 
traumatic memories. Journal of Traumatic 
Stress, 2(2), 199–223.
Shapiro, F. (1991). Eye movement desensitiza￾tion and reprocessing procedure: From EMD 
to EMDR: A new treatment model for anxi￾ety and related traumata. Behavior Therapist, 
14(5), 133–135.
Shapiro, G. K., Cusi, A., Kirst, M., O’Campo, P., 
Nakhost, A., & Stergiopoulos, V. (2015). Co￾responding police-mental health programs: A 
review. Administration and Policy in Mental 
Health and Mental Health Services Research, 
42(5), 606–620.
Sharma, B. R. (2003). Clinical forensic medicine—
management of crime victims from trauma to 
trial. Journal of Clinical Forensic Medicine,
10(4), 267–273.
Sharp, M. L., Fear, N. T., Rona, R. J., Wessely, 
S., Greenberg, N., Jones, N., & Goodwin, L. 
(2015). Stigma as a barrier to seeking health 
care among military personnel with mental 
health problems. Epidemiologic Reviews,
37(1), 144–162.
Shattell, M. M., Harris, B., Beavers, J., Tomlinson, 
S. K., Prasek, L., Geevarghese, S., . . . Heyland, 
M. (2014). A recovery-oriented alternative to 
hospital emergency departments for persons in 
emotional distress: “The Living Room.” Issues 
in Mental Health Nursing, 35, 4–12.
Sheehan, L., Ballentine, S., Washington, L., Can￾ser, M., Connor, J., Jones, R., .  .  . Corrigan, 
P. (2021). Implementing community-based 
participatory research among African Ameri￾cans with serious and persistent mental illness: 
A qualitative study. Gateways: International 
Journal of Community Research and Engage￾ment, 14(1), 1–19.
Sheehan, L., Nieweglowski, K., & Sun, Y. (2021). 
Research considerations and community-based 
participatory research. In P.  W.  Corrigan & 
S.  L.  Ballentine (Eds.), Health and wellness 
in people living with serious mental illness
(pp. 23–46). Washington, DC: American Psy￾chiatric Association Publishing.
Sherman, L. W., & Strang, H. (2007). Restorative 
justice: The evidence. London: Smith Institute.
Shern, D. L., Felton, C. J., Hough, R. L., Lehman, 
A. F., Goldfinger, S., Valencia, E., . . . Wood, 
P.  A. (1997). Housing outcomes for homeless 
adults with mental illness: Results from the 
second-round McKinney program. Psychiatric 
Services, 48, 239–241.
Shields, G. S., & Slavich, G. M. (2017). Lifetime 
stress exposure and health: A review of con￾temporary assessment methods and biological 
mechanisms. Social and Personality Psychol￾ogy Compass, 11(8), Article e12335.
Shiraishi, N., & Reilly, J. (2019). Positive and 
negative impacts of schizophrenia on family 
caregivers: A systematic review and qualitative 
meta-summary. Social Psychiatry and Psychi￾atric Epidemiology, 54(3), 277–290.
Shumaker, S. A., & Brownell, A. (1984). Toward 
a theory of social support: Closing conceptual 
gaps. Journal of Social Issues, 40, 11–36.
Siennick, S. E., Picon, M., Brown, J. M., & Mears, 
D.  P. (2022). Revisiting and unpacking the 
mental illness and solitary confinement rela￾tionship. Justice Quarterly, 39(4), 772–801.
Signorelli, N. (1989). Television and conceptions 
about sex roles: Maintaining conventionality 
and the status quo. Sex Roles, 21, 341–360.
Silberman, E.  K., Lu, F., & O’Neill, P. (1994). 
Developing a primary care role for psychia￾trists. Bulletin of the Association for Academic 
Psychiatry, 22, Article 4A.380 References
Silton, N.  R., Flannelly, K.  J., Milstein, G., & 
Vaaler, M. L. (2011). Stigma in America: Has 
anything changed? Impact of perceptions of 
mental illness and dangerousness on the desire 
for social distance: 1996 and 2006. Journal of 
Nervous and Mental Disease, 199, 361–366.
Silver, E., Mulvey, E. P., & Swanson, J. W. (2002). 
Neighborhood structural characteristics and 
mental disorder: Faris and Dunham revisited. 
Social Science and Medicine, 55, 1457–1470.
Silverstein, S.  M., Hitzel, H., & Schenkel, L. 
(1998). Identifying and addressing cognitive 
barriers to rehabilitation readiness. Psychiatric 
Services, 49, 34–36.
Silverstein, S.  M., Menditto, A.  A., & Stuve, P. 
(2001). Shaping attention span: An operant 
conditioning procedure to improve neurocogni￾tion and functioning in schizophrenia. Schizo￾phrenia Bulletin, 27, 247–257.
Simon, E., Edwards, A. M., Sajatovic, M., Jain, 
N., Montoya, J.  L., & Levin, J.  B. (2022). 
Systematic literature review of text messaging 
interventions to promote medication adherence 
among people with serious mental illness. Psy￾chiatric Services, 73(10), 1153–1164.
Simpson, G. M., & Angus, J. W. S. (1970). A rat￾ing scale for extrapyramidal side effects. Acta 
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 212, 11–19.
Sin, J., Gillard, S., Spain, D., Cornelius, V., Chen, 
T., & Henderson, C. (2017). Effectiveness of 
psychoeducational interventions for family 
carers of people with psychosis: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology 
Review, 56, 13–24.
Sin, J., Henderson, C., Elkes, J., Cornelius, V., 
Woodham, L.  A., Batchelor, R., .  .  . Gillard, 
S. (2022). Effect of digital psychoeducation and 
peer support on the mental health of family 
carers supporting individuals with psychosis in 
England (COPe-support): A randomised clini￾cal trial. Lancet Digital Health, 4(5), e320–
e329.
Singh, S. W., Harley, K., & Suhai, K. (2013). Cul￾tural specificity of emotional overinvolvement: 
A systematic review. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 
39(2), 449–463.
Sirotich, F. (2009). The criminal justice outcomes 
of diversion programs for persons with mental 
illness: A review of the evidence. Journal of 
the American Academy of Psychiatry and the 
Law, 37, 461–472.
Sisti, D. A., Segal, A. G., & Emanuel, E. J. (2015). 
Improving long-term psychiatric care: Bring 
back the asylum. Journal of the American Med￾ical Association, 313, 243–244.
Sitko, K., Bewick, B.  M., Owens, D., & Mas￾terson, C. (2020). Meta-analysis and meta￾regression of cognitive behavioral therapy for 
psychosis (CBTp) across time: The effectiveness 
of CBTp has improved for delusions. Schizo￾phrenia Bulletin Open, 1(1), Article sgaa023.
Siu, P. S., Tsang, H. W., & Bond, G. R. (2010). 
Nonvocational outcomes for clients with severe 
mental illness. Journal of Vocational Rehabili￾tation, 32(1), 15–24.
Sivakumar, T., Jain, J., Philip, S., Glynn, S. M., & 
Chandra, P. (2022). Future care planning: Con￾cerns of elderly parents caring for a person with 
serious mental illness. Psychiatric Services, 
73(1), 96–99.
Skeem, J.  L., Manchak, S., & Peterson, J.  K. 
(2011). Correctional policy for offenders with 
mental illness: Creating a new paradigm for 
recidivism reduction. Law and Human Behav￾ior, 35(2), 110–126.
Slade, M. (2009). Personal recovery and mental 
illness: A guide for mental health professionals. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Slade, M., Phelan, M., Thornicroft, G., & Park￾man, S. (1996). The Camberwell Assessment 
of Need (CAN): Comparison of assessments by 
staff and patients of the needs of the severely 
mentally ill. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric 
Epidemiology, 31(3–4), 109–113.
Sledge, W. H., Astrachan, B., Thompson, K., Rak￾feldt, J., & Leaf, P. (1995). Case management 
in psychiatry: An analysis of tasks. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 1259–1265.
Sloan, L., & Gulrajani, C. (2019). Where we are 
on the twentieth anniversary of Olmstead v. 
LC. Journal of the American Academy of Psy￾chiatry Law, 47, 408–413.
Smart, E.  L., Brown, L., Palmier-Claus, J., 
Raphael, J., & Berry, K. (2020). A systematic 
review of the effects of psychosocial interven￾tions on social functioning for middle-aged and 
older-aged adults with severe mental illness. 
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 
35(5), 449–462.
Smit, D., Miguel, C., Vrijsen, J. N., Groeneweg, 
B., Spijker, J., & Cuijpers, P. (2022). The effec￾tiveness of peer support for individuals with 
mental illness: Systematic review and meta￾analysis. Psychological Medicine. [Epub ahead 
of print] doi:10.1017/S0033291722002422
Smith, D.  L., Atmatzidis, K., Capogreco, M., 
Lloyd-Randolfi, D., & Seman, V. (2017). Evi￾dence-based interventions for increasing work 
participation for persons with various disabili￾ties: A systematic review. Occupation, Partici￾pation and Health, 37(2 Suppl.), 3S–13S.
Smith, G.  C. (2004). Predictors of the stage of 
residential planning among aging families of 
adults with severe mental illness. Psychiatric 
Services, 55, 804–810.
Smith, J., & Birchwood, M. (1987). Specific and References 381
non-specific educational intervention with fam￾ilies living with a schizophrenic relative. British 
Journal of Psychiatry, 150, 645–652.
Smith, M.  E., Lindsey, M.  A., Williams, C.  D., 
Medoff, D. R., Lucksted, A., Fang, L. J., . . . 
Dixon, L.  B. (2014). Race-related differences 
in the experiences of family members of per￾sons with mental illness participating in the 
NAMI Family to Family Education Program. 
American Journal of Community Psychology, 
54(3–4), 316–327.
Sniderman, P.  M., & Piazza, T. (2002). Black 
pride and Black prejudice. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Snyder, C. R. (2002). Hope theory: Rainbows in 
the mind. Psychological Inquiry, 13, 249–275.
Social Security Administration. (2021). Annual 
Statistical Report on the Social Security Dis￾ability Insurance Program. Retrieved from 
www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/di_
asr/2021/di_asr21.pdf
Sohn, M., Barrett, H., & Talbert, J. (2014). Pre￾dictors of consumer satisfaction in community 
mental health center services. Community 
Mental Health Journal, 50(8), 922–925.
Solmi, M., Croatto, G., Piva, G., Rosson, S., 
Fusar-Poli, P., Rubio, J. M., . . . Correll, C. U. 
(2023). Efficacy and acceptability of psychoso￾cial interventions in schizophrenia: Systematic 
overview and quality appraisal of the meta￾analytic evidence. Molecular Psychiatry, 28,
354–368.
Solmi, M., Radua, J., Olivola, M., Croce, E., 
Soardo, L., Salazar de Pablo, G., .  .  . Fusar￾Poli, P. (2022). Age at onset of mental disorders 
worldwide: Large-scale meta-analysis of 192 
epidemiological studies. Molecular Psychiatry,
27(1), 281–295.
Solomon, P. (1992). The efficacy of case manage￾ment services for severely mentally disabled cli￾ents. Community Mental Health Journal, 28,
163–180.
Solomon, P. (1994). Family views of service deliv￾ery: An empirical assessment. In H. Lefley & 
M. Wasow (Eds.), Helping families cope with 
mental illness (pp.  259–274). Chur, Switzer￾land: Harwood.
Solomon, P. (1996). Moving from psychoeduca￾tion to family education for families of adults 
with severe mental illness. Psychiatric Services, 
47, 1364–1370.
Solomon, P. (1998). The cultural context of inter￾ventions for family members with a seriously 
mentally ill relative. New Directions for Men￾tal Health Services, 77, 5–16.
Solomon, P. (2000). Interventions for families 
of individuals with schizophrenia: Maxi￾mizing outcomes for their relatives. Disease 
Management and Health Outcomes, 8, 211–
221.
Solomon, P. (2004). Peer support/peer provided 
services underlying processes, benefits, and 
critical ingredients. Psychiatric Rehabilitation 
Journal, 27, 392–401.
Solomon, P., Beck, S., & Gordon, B. (1988a). A 
comparison of perspectives on discharge of 
extended care facility clients: Views of fami￾lies, hospital staff, community mental health 
workers, and clients. Administration in Mental 
Health, 15, 166–174.
Solomon, P., Beck, S., & Gordon, B. (1988b). 
Family members’ perspectives on psychiatric 
hospitalization and discharge. Community 
Mental Health Journal, 24, 108–117.
Solomon, P., & Draine, J. (1994). Family perspec￾tives on consumers as case managers. Commu￾nity Mental Health Journal, 30, 165–176.
Solomon, P., & Draine, J. (1995). The efficacy of 
a consumer case management team: 2 year out￾comes of a randomized trial. Journal of Mental 
Health Administration, 22, 135–146.
Solomon, P., & Draine, J. (1996). Examination 
of grief among family members of individuals 
with serious and persistent mental illness. Psy￾chiatric Quarterly, 67, 221–234.
Solomon, P., Draine, J., & Delaney, M. A. (1995). 
The working alliance and consumer case man￾agement. Journal of Mental Health Adminis￾tration, 22(2), 126–134.
Solomon, P., Draine, J., Mannion, E., & Meisel, 
M. (1996a). The impact of individualized con￾sultation and group workshop family educa￾tion and interventions on ill relative outcomes. 
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 184,
252–254.
Solomon, P., Draine, J., Mannion, E., & Meisel, 
M. (1996b). Impact of brief family psychoedu￾cation on self efficacy. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 
22, 41–50.
Solomon, P., Draine, J., Mannion, E., & Meisel, 
M. (1997). Effectiveness of two models of brief 
family education: Retaining gains of family 
members of adults with serious mental illness. 
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 67,
177–186.
Solomon, P., Marshall, T., Mannion, E., & 
Farmer, J. (2002). Social workers as consumer 
and family consultants. In K.  Bentley (Ed.), 
Social work practice in mental health: Con￾temporary roles, tasks, and techniques (pp. 
230–253). Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Song, Z., Corcoran, R., & Gillespie, S. M. (2022). 
Schizophrenia spectrum, other psychotic dis￾orders and violence. In Clinical Forensic Psy￾chology (pp.  269–286). Cham, Switzerland: 
Palgrave Macmillan.382 References
Sono, T., Oshima, I., Ito, J., Nishio, M., Suzuki, 
Y., Horiuchi, K., . . . Tsukada, K. (2012). Fam￾ily support in assertive community treatment: 
An analysis of client outcomes. Community 
Mental Health Journal, 48(4), 463–470.
Soondrum, T., Wang, X., Gao, F., Liu, Q., Fan, J., 
& Zhu, X. (2022). The applicability of accep￾tance and commitment therapy for obsessive–
compulsive disorder: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Brain Sciences, 12(5), Article 
656.
Spanakis, P., Peckham, E., Young, B., Heron, P., 
Bailey, D., & Gilbody, S. (2022). A system￾atic review of behavioural smoking cessation 
interventions for people with severe mental ill 
health—what works? Addiction, 117(6), 1526–
1542.
Spaniol, L., & Zipple, A. (1988). Family and pro￾fessional perceptions of family needs and cop￾ing strengths. Rehabilitation Psychology, 33,
37–45.
Spaulding, W. D., Fleming, S. K., Reed, D., Sul￾livan, M., Storzbach, D., & Lam, M. (1999). 
Cognitive functioning in schizophrenia: Impli￾cations for psychiatric rehabilitation. Schizo￾phrenia Bulletin, 25, 275–289.
Spaulding, W.  D., Storms, L., Goodrich, V., & 
Sullivan, M. (1986). Applications of experi￾mental psychopathology in psychiatric rehabili￾tation. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 12(4), 560–577.
Spencer, A.  E., Valentine, S.  E., Sikov, J., Yule, 
A.  M., Hsu, H., Hallett, E., .  .  . Fortuna, L. 
(2021). Principles of care for young adults with 
co-occurring psychiatric and substance use dis￾orders. Pediatrics, 147(Suppl. 2), 229–239.
Sperling, A. (2005). Housing update: Consum￾ers need a broad range of options to meet their 
needs. NAMI Advocate, 3(2), 16.
Sperling, G. (1960). The information available 
in brief visual presentations. Psychological 
Monographs, 74, 1–29.
Spivak, S., Strain, E.  C., Spivak, A., Cullen, B., 
Ruble, A.  E., Parekh, V., .  .  . Mojtabai, R. 
(2020). Integrated dual diagnosis treatment 
among United States mental health treatment 
facilities: 2010 to 2018. Drug and Alcohol 
Dependence, 213, Article 108074.
Spohn, H. E., & Strauss, M. E. (1989). Relation of 
neuroleptic and anticholinergic medication to 
cognitive functions in schizophrenia. Journal 
of Abnormal Psychology, 98, 367–380.
Srihari, V. H., Tek, C., Kucukgoncu, S., Phutane, 
V. H., Breitborde, N. J. K., Pollard, J., Ozkan, 
B., . . . Woods, S. W. (2015). First-episode ser￾vices for psychotic disorders in the U.S. Public 
sector: A pragmatic randomized controlled 
trial. Psychiatric Services, 66(7), 705–712.
Stafford, M.  R., Jackson, H., Mayo-Wilson, E., 
Morrison, A.  P., & Kendall, T. (2013). Early 
interventions to prevent psychosis: systematic 
review and meta-analysis. British Medical 
Journal, 346, f185.
St-Andre, M., Schwartz, H., & Yoshida, K. 
(2014). Perinatal interventions in psychiatry: 
A clinical perspective. In P. Byrne & A. Rosen 
(Eds.), Early intervention in psychiatry: EI 
of nearly everything for better mental health
(pp. 43–56). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Stanhope, V., Solomon, P., Pernell-Arnold, A., 
Sands, R., & Bourjolly, J. (2005). Evaluating 
cultural competence among health profession￾als. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 28,
225–233.
Stapleton, D., Mamun, A., & Page, J. (2014). Ini￾tial impacts of the Ticket to Work program: 
Estimates based on exogenous variation in 
Ticket mail months. IZA Journal of Labor 
Policy, 3(1), 1–24.
Steadman, H., Deane, M. W., Morrissey, J., West￾cott, M., Salasen, S., & Shapiro, S. (1999). 
A SAMHSA research initiative assessing the 
effectiveness of jail diversion programs for 
mentally ill persons. Psychiatric Services, 50,
1620–1623.
Steadman, H., Morris, S., & Dennis, D. (1995). 
The diversion of mentally ill persons from jails 
to community based services: A profile of pro￾grams. American Journal of Public Health, 85,
1630–1635.
Steadman, H.  J., Osher, F.  C., Robbins, P.  C., 
Case, B., & Samuels, S. (2009). Prevalence of 
serious mental illness among jail inmates. Psy￾chiatric Services, 60, 761–765.
Steadman, H., & Veysey, B. (1997, January). Pro￾viding services for jail inmates with mental dis￾orders (National Institute of Justice: Research 
in Brief). Washington, DC: U.S.  Department 
of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, National 
Institute of Justice.
Steele, K., & Berman, C. (2001). The day the 
voices stopped: Memoir of madness and hope.
New York: Basic Books.
Stefan, S. (2001). Unequal rights: Discrimina￾tion against people with mental disabilities 
and the Americans with Disabilities Act (1st 
ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association.
Stefancic, A., House, S., Bochicchio, L., Harney￾Delehanty, B., Osterweil, S., & Cabassa, L. 
(2019). “What we have in common”: A quali￾tative analysis of shared experience in peer￾delivered services. Community Mental Health 
Journal, 55, 907–915.
Stein, C. H., Gonzales, S. M., Walker, K., Benoit, 
M. F., & Russin, S. E. (2020). Self and sibling 
care attitudes, personal loss, and stress-related References 383
growth among siblings of adults with mental 
illness. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 
90(6), 799–809.
Stein, D. J., Shoptaw, S. J., Vigo, D. V., Lund, C., 
Cuijpers, P., Bantjes, J., .  .  . Maj, M. (2022). 
Psychiatric diagnosis and treatment in the 21st 
century: Paradigm shifts versus incremental 
integration. World Psychiatry, 21(3), 393–414.
Stein, L.  I. (1992). Perspective: On the abolish￾ment of the case manager. Health Affairs, 11,
172–177.
Stein, L.  I., & Test, M.  A. (1980). An alterna￾tive to mental health treatment: I. Conceptual 
model, treatment program, and clinical evalu￾ation. Archives of General Psychiatry, 37(4), 
392–397.
Steinmeyer, E.  M., Marneros, A., Deister, A., 
Rohde, A., & Junemann, H. (1989). Long-term 
outcome of schizoaffective and schizophrenic 
disorders, a comparative study: II.  Causal￾analytical investigations. European Archives 
of Psychiatry and Neurological Sciences, 238,
126–134.
Stengler-Wenzke, K., Trosbach, J., Dietrich, S., & 
Angermeyer, M. C. (2004). Experience of stig￾matization by relatives of patients with obses￾sive compulsive disorder. Archives of Psychiat￾ric Nursing, 18, 88–96.
Steptoe, A., Hackett, R.  A., Lazzarino, A.  I., 
Bostock, S., La Marca, R., Carvalho, L. A., & 
Hamer, M. (2014). Disruption of multisystem 
responses to stress in type 2 diabetes: Investi￾gating the dynamics of allostatic load. Proceed￾ings of the National Academy of Sciences USA,
111(44), 15693–15698.
Sternberg, S. (1966). High-speed scanning in 
human memory. Science, 153, 652–654.
Sternberg, S. (1967). Two operations in character 
recognition: Some evidence from reaction-time 
measurements. Perception and Psychophysics, 
2, 45–53.
Stewart, H., Jameson, J. P., & Curtin, L. (2015). 
The relationship between stigma and self￾reported willingness to use mental health ser￾vices among rural and urban older adults. Psy￾chological Services, 12(2), 141–148.
Stiekema, A. P. M., van Dam, M. T., Bruggeman, 
R., Redmeijer, J. E., Swart, M., Dethmers, M., 
. . . van der Meer, L. (2020). Facilitating recov￾ery of daily functioning in people with a severe 
mental illness who need longer-term intensive 
psychiatric services: Results from a cluster ran￾domized controlled trial on cognitive adapta￾tion training delivered by nurses. Schizophre￾nia Bulletin, 46(5), 1259–1268.
Stoffers-Winterling, J. M., Storebø, O. J., Konger￾slev, M.  T., Faltinsen, E., Todorovac, A., 
Sedoc Jørgensen, M., . . . Simonsen, E. (2022). 
Psychotherapies for borderline personality dis￾order: A focused systematic review and meta￾analysis. British Journal of Psychiatry, 221(3), 
538–552.
Stone, E. M., Chen, L. N., Daumit, G. L., Linden, 
S., & McGinty, E. E. (2019). General medical 
clinicians’ attitudes toward people with serious 
mental illness: A scoping review. Journal of 
Behavioral Health Services and Research, 46,
656–679.
Strasser, M. (1991). Suspect classes and suspect 
classifications: On discriminating, unwittingly 
or otherwise. Temple Law Review, 64, 937–
975.
Stratford, A.  C., Halpin, M., Phillips, K., Sker￾ritt, F., Beales, A., Cheng, V., . . . Davidson, L. 
(2019). The growth of peer support: An inter￾national charter. Journal of Mental Health,
28(6), 627–632.
Strauss, J. S. (1969). Hallucinations and delusions 
as points on continua function. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 21, 581–586.
Strauss, J.  S. (1989). Subjective experiences of 
schizophrenia: Toward a new dynamic psychia￾try: II. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 15, 179–187.
Straznickas, K. A., McNiel, D. E., & Binder, R. L. 
(1993). Violence toward family caregivers by 
mentally ill relatives. Psychiatric Services, 44,
385–387.
Stroul, B. A. (1988). Residential crisis services: A 
review. Hospital and Community Psychiatry, 
39, 1095–1099.
Stroul, B. A. (1993). Rehabilitation in community 
support systems. In R.  Flexer & P.  Solomon 
(Eds.), Psychiatric rehabilitation in practice
(pp. 45–61). Boston: Andover.
Struening, E. L., Perlick, D. A., Link, B. G., Hell￾man, F., Herman, D., & Sirey, J.  A. (2001). 
Stigma as a barrier to recovery: The extent to 
which caregivers believe most people devalue 
consumers and their families. Psychiatric Ser￾vices, 52, 1633–1638.
Stueve, A., Vine, P., & Struening, E. (1997). Per￾ceived burden among caregivers of adults with 
serious mental illness: Comparison of black, 
Hispanic, and white families. American Jour￾nal of Orthopsychiatry, 67, 199–209.
Suarez-Balcazar, Y., Viquez, F., Miranda, D., & 
Early, A.  R. (2020). Barriers to and facilita￾tors of community participation among latinx 
migrants with disabilities in the United States 
and latinx migrant workers in Canada: An eco￾logical analysis. Journal of Community Psy￾chology, 48, 2773–2788.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration (SAMHSA). (1995). Making a 
difference: Interim status report of the McK￾inney Demonstration Program for Homeless 384 References
Adults with Serious Mental Illness. Rockville, 
MD: Author.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration (SAMHSA). (2003). Family 
psychoeducation implementation resource kit.
Rockville, MD: Author.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration (SAMHSA). (2011). Current 
statistics on the prevalence and characteristics of 
people experiencing homelessness in the United 
States. Retrieved from www.samhsa.gov/sites/
default/files/programs_campaigns/home￾lessness_programs_resources/hrc-factsheet￾current-statistics-prevalencecharacteristics￾homelessness.pdf
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration (SAMHSA). (2012). Results 
from the 2011 National Survey on Drug Use 
and Health: Summary of national findings
(NSDUH Series H-44, DHHS Publication No. 
SMA 12–4713). Rockville, MD: Author.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration (SAMHSA). (2014). SAM￾HSA’s concept of trauma and guidance for a 
trauma-informed approach (HHS Publica￾tion No. (SMA) 14–4884). Rockville, MD: 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration (SAMHSA). (2019). Key sub￾stance use and mental health indicators in the 
United States: Results from the 2018 National 
Survey on Drug Use and Health (HHS Publica￾tion No. PEP19–5068, NSDUH Series H-54). 
Rockville, MD: Center for Behavioral Health 
Statistics and Quality, Substance Abuse and 
Mental Health Services Administration.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration (SAMHSA). (2020). Substance 
use disorder treatment for people with co￾occurring disorders: Treatment Improvement 
Protocol (TIP) Series, No. 42 (SAMHSA Pub￾lication No. PEP20–02–01–004). Rockville, 
MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Ser￾vices Administration.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration (SAMHSA). (2021). Key sub￾stance use and mental health indicators in the 
United States: Results from the 2020 National 
Survey on Drug Use and Health (HHS Publi￾cation No. PEP21-07-01-003, NSDUH Series 
H-56). Rockville, MD: Center for Behavioral 
Health Statistics and Quality, Substance Abuse 
and Mental Health Services Administration.
Sullivan, G., Han, X., Moore, S., & Kotrla, K. 
(2006). Disparities in hospitalization for dia￾betes among persons with and without co￾occurring mental disorders. Psychiatric Ser￾vices, 57, 1126–1131.
Sullivan, P. F., & Geschwind, D. H. (2019). Defin￾ing the genetic, genomic, cellular, and diagnos￾tic architectures of psychiatric disorders. Cell,
177(1), 162–183.
Sullivan, W.  P., & Rapp, C.  A. (2002). Social 
workers as case managers. In K.  J.  Bentley 
(Ed.), Social work practice in mental health
(pp. 182–210). Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Sullivan-Soydan, A. P. (2004). Supported educa￾tion: A portrait of a psychiatric rehabilitation 
intervention. American Journal of Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation, 7, 227–248.
Sun, Y., Ji, M., Zhang, X., Chen, J., Wang, Y., 
& Wang, Z. (2022). Comparative effectiveness 
and acceptability of different ACT delivery for￾mats to treat depression: A systematic review 
and network meta-analysis of randomized con￾trolled trials. Journal of Affective Disorders, 
313, 196–203.
Swan, R.  W., & Lavitt, M. (1988). Patterns of 
adjustment to violence in families of the men￾tally ill. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 3,
42–54.
Swanson, J.  W. (2008). Preventing the unpre￾dicted: Managing violence risk in mental health 
care [Special issue]. Psychiatric Services, 59(2), 
191–193.
Swanson, J. W., Estroff, S., Swartz, M., Borum, 
R., Lachicotte, W., Zimmer, C., & Wagner, R. 
(1997). Violence and severe mental disorder 
in clinical and community populations: The 
effects of psychotic symptoms, comorbidity, 
and lack of treatment. Psychiatry, 60, 1–22.
Swanson, J.  W., Swartz, M.  S., Essock, S.  M., 
Osher, F.  C., Wagner, H.  R., Goodman, 
L. A., . . . Meador, K. G. (2002). The social–
environmental context of violent behavior 
in persons treated for severe mental illness. 
American Journal of Public Health, 92(9), 
1523–1531.
Swanson, S. J., & Becker, D. R. (2018). IPS Sup￾ported Employment Program Implementation 
Guide. Rockville, MD: IPS Employment Cen￾ter.
Swarbrick, M. (2011). Self-help and peer￾operated services. In A.  Rudnick & D.  Roe 
(Eds.), Serious mental illness: Person-centered 
approaches (pp.  301–312). Boca Raton, FL: 
CRC Press.
Swarbrick, M., Gill, K. J., & Pratt, C. W. (2016). 
Impact of peer delivered wellness coaching. 
Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 39(3), 
234–238.
Swartz, J.  A., & Lurigio, A.  J. (2007). Serious 
mental illness and arrest: The generalized 
mediating effect of substance use. Crime and 
Delinquency, 53(4), 581–604.
Sweeney, A., Filson, B., Kennedy, A., Collinson, 
L., & Gillard, S. (2018). A paradigm shift: References 385
relationships in trauma-informed mental health 
services. BJPsych Advances, 24(5), 319–333.
Syed, S. T., Gerber, B. S., & Sharp, L. K. (2013). 
Traveling towards disease: Transportation bar￾riers to health care access. Journal of Commu￾nity Health, 38(5), 976–993.
Sylvestre, J. (2017). The contributions of the con￾cept of citizenship to housing practice, policy, 
and research. In J.  Sylvestre, G.  Nelson & 
T. Aubry (Eds.), Housing for people with seri￾ous mental illness: Theory, research, practice, 
and policy perspectives (pp.  212–231). New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Sylvestre, J., Nelson, G., Sabloff, A., & Peddle, S. 
(2007). Housing for people with serious mental 
illness: A comparison of values and research. 
American Journal of Community Psychology, 
40, 125–137.
Sylvestre, J., Notten, G., Kerman, N., Polillo, A., 
& Czechowki, K. (2018). Poverty and serious 
mental illness: Toward action on a seemingly 
intractable problem. American Journal of 
Community Psychology, 61(1–2), 153–165.
Sylvia, L.  G., Ametrano, R.  M., & Nierenberg, 
A. A. (2010). Exercise treatment for bipolar dis￾order: Potential mechanisms of action mediated 
through increased neurogenesis and decreased 
allostatic load. Psychotherapy and Psychoso￾matics, 79(2), 87–96.
Syma, C. (2019). Invisible disabilities: Perceptions 
and barriers to reasonable accommodations in 
the workplace. Library Management, 40(1/2), 
113–120.
Szmukler, G. (1996). From family “burden” to 
caregiving. Psychiatric Bulletin, 20, 449–451.
Szmukler, G., Burgess, P., Herrman, H., Benson, 
A., Colusa, S., & Bloch, S. (1996). Caring for 
relatives with serious mental illness: The devel￾opment of the Experience of Caregiving Inven￾tory. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epide￾miology, 31, 137–148.
Tabol, C., Drebing, C., & Rosenheck, R. (2010). 
Studies of “supported” and “supportive” hous￾ing: A comprehensive review of model descrip￾tions and measurement. Evaluation and Pro￾gram Planning, 33, 446–456.
Tajfel, H. (1974). Social identity and intergroup 
behaviour. Social Science Information, 13(2), 
65–93.
Tajfel, H. (1981). Human groups and social cate￾gories. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Takeshita, J., Wang, S., Loren, A.  W., Mitra, 
N., Shults, J., Shin, D. B., & Sawinski, D. L. 
(2020). Association of racial/ethnic and gender 
concordance between patients and physicians 
with patient experience ratings. JAMA Net￾work Open, 3(11), Article e2024583.
Tam, V., Patel, N., Turcotte, M., Bossé, Y., 
Paré, G., & Meyre, D. (2019). Benefits and 
limitations of genome-wide association studies. 
Nature Reviews Genetics, 20(8), 467–484.
Tarutis, G., & Boyd, M. (2001, Summer). The 
Supplemental Special Needs Trust. NAMI 
Advocate, pp. 22–25.
Taylor, D., Barnes, T. R. E., & Young, A. (2021). 
The Maudsley Prescribing Guidelines in 
psychiatry (14th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley￾Blackwell.
Taylor, D.  M. (2021). The Maudsley Practice 
Guidelines for physical health conditions in 
psychiatry. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Taylor, M.  A., & Abrams, R. (1975). Acute 
mania: Clinical and genetic study of responders 
and nonresponders to treatments. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 32, 863–865.
Taylor, S. F., Grove, T. B., Ellingrod, V. L., & Tso, 
I.  F. (2019). The fragile brain: Stress vulner￾ability, negative affect and GABAergic neuro￾circuits in psychosis. Schizophrenia Bulletin,
45(6), 1170–1183.
Taylor-Ritzler, T., Balcazar, F., Suarez-Balcazar, 
Y., & Iriarte, E. (2008). Conducting disabil￾ity research with people from diverse ethnic 
groups: Challenges and opportunities. Journal 
of Rehabilitation, 74, 4–11.
Teplin, L. A., McClelland, G., Abram, K. M., & 
Weiner, D.  A. (2005). Crime victimization in 
adults with severe mental illness: Comparison 
with the National Crime Victimization Survey. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 911–921.
Terkelsen, K. (1990). A historical perspective on 
family–provider relationships. In H. P. Lefley & 
D. Johnson (Eds.), Families as allies in the treat￾ment of the mentally ill (pp. 3–21). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association.
Terra, T., Schafer, J. L., Pan, P. M., Costa, A. B., 
Caye, A., Gadelha, A., . . . Salum, G. A. (2022). 
Mental health conditions in lesbian, gay, bisex￾ual, transgender, queer and asexual youth in 
Brazil: A call for action. Journal of Affective 
Disorders, 298, 190–193.
Test, M. A. (1998). Community-based treatment 
models for adults with severe and persistent 
mental illness. In J. Williams & K. Ell (Eds.), 
Mental health research: Implications for prac￾tice (pp.  420–436). Washington, DC: NASW 
Press.
Test, M.  A., Allness, D.  J., & Knoedler, W.  H. 
(1995). Impact of seven years of assertive 
community treatment. Paper presented at the 
American Psychiatric Association Institute on 
Psychiatric Services, Boston, MA.
Test, M.  A., & Stein, B.  S. (1978). Community 
treatment of the chronic patient: Research 
overview. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 4, 350–364.
Test, M.  A., & Stein, L.  I. (1980). Alternative 
to mental hospital treatment: III.  Social cost. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 37, 409–412.386 References
Thieling, A.  M.  S., Swarbrick, M., Brice Jr, G., 
& Nemec, P. (2022). A welcoming space to 
manage crisis: The Wellness Respite Program. 
Journal of Psychosocial Nursing and Mental 
Health Services, 60(11), 26–32.
Thoits, P. A., & Link, B. G. (2016). Stigma resis￾tance and well-being among people in treat￾ment for psychosis. Society and Mental Health, 
6(1), 1–20.
Thomas, E. C., Ben-David, S., Treichler, E., Roth, 
S., Dixon, L. B., Salzer, M., & Zisman-Ilani, Y. 
(2021). A systematic review of shared decision￾making interventions for service users with 
serious mental illnesses: State of the science and 
future directions. Psychiatric Services, 72(11), 
1288–1300.
Thomas, E. C., Muralidharan, A., Medoff, D., & 
Drapalski, A. L. (2016). Self-efficacy as a medi￾ator of the relationship between social support 
and recovery in serious mental illness. Psychi￾atric Rehabilitation Journal, 39(4), 352–360.
Thomas, M., James, M., Vittinghoff, E., Creas￾man, J. M., Schillinger, D., & Mangurian, C. 
(2018). Mammography among women with 
severe mental illness: Exploring disparities 
through a large retrospective cohort study. Psy￾chiatric Services, 69(1), 48–54.
Thomas, S., Harty, M.-A., Parrott, J., McCrone, 
P., Slade, M., & Thornicroft, G. (2003). CAN￾FOR: Camberwell Assessment of Need Foren￾sic Version. London: RCPsych.
Thomas, S. D. M., Nixon, M., Ogloff, J. R. P., & 
Daffern, M. (2019). Crime and victimization 
among people with intellectual disability with 
and without comorbid mental illness. Journal 
of Applied Research in Intellectual Disabili￾ties, 32(5), 1088–1095.
Thompson, M., Osher, F., & Tomasini-Joshi, D. 
(2008). Improving responses to people with 
mental illnesses: The essential elements of a 
mental health court. New York: The Council 
of State Governments Justice Center.
Thordarson, H., & Rector, T. (2020). From 
trauma-blind to trauma-informed: re-thinking 
criminalization and the role of trauma in per￾sons with serious mental illness. CNS Spec￾trums, 25(5), 577–583.
Thornicroft, G., Rose, D., & Kassam, A. (2007). 
Discrimination in health care against people 
with mental illness. International Review of 
Psychiatry, 19, 113–122.
Thornicroft, G., Sunkel, C., Aliev, A. A., Baker, 
S., Brohan, E., El Chammay, R., . . . Winkler, 
P. (2022). The Lancet Commission on ending 
stigma and discrimination in mental health. 
Lancet, 400(10361), 1438–1480.
Thorning, H., & Dixon, L. (2020). Forty-five 
years later: The challenge of optimizing 
assertive community treatment. Current Opin￾ion in Psychiatry, 33(4), 397–406.
Timmins, C. L. (2002). The impact of language 
barriers on the health care of Latinos in the 
United States: A review of the literature and 
guidelines for practice. Journal of Midwifery 
and Women’s Health, 47(2), 80–96.
Tonigan, J.  S., Pearson, M.  R., Magill, M., & 
Hagler, K. J. (2018). AA attendance and absti￾nence for dually diagnosed patients: A meta￾analytic review. Addiction, 113(11), 1970–1981.
Tonigan, J. S., & Rice, S. L. (2010). Is it benefi￾cial to have an alcoholics anonymous spon￾sor? Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 24(3), 
397–403.
Toohey, M.  J., Muralidharan, A., Medoff, D., 
Lucksted, A., & Dixon, L. (2016). Caregiver 
positive and negative appraisals. Journal of 
Nervous and Mental Disease, 204(2), 156–159.
Torres, A., Frain, M., & Tansey, T. N. (2019). The 
impact of motivational interviewing training 
on rehabilitation counselors: Assessing work￾ing alliance and client engagement: A random￾ized controlled trial. Rehabilitation Psychol￾ogy, 64(3), 328–338.
Torrey, W.  C., Bond, G.  R., McHugo, G.  J., & 
Swain, K. (2012). Evidence-based practice 
implementation in community mental health 
settings: The relative importance of key 
domains of implementation activity. Adminis￾tration and Policy in Mental Health and Men￾tal Health Services Research, 39, 353–364.
Torrey, W. C., Clark, R. E., Becker, D. R., Wyzik, 
P. F., & Drake, R. E. (1997). Switching from 
rehabilitative day treatment to supported 
employment. Continuum: Developments in 
Ambulatory Mental Health Care, 4, 27–38.
Torrey, W.  C., Drake, R.  E., Dixon, L., Burns, 
B. J., Rush, A. J., Clark, R. E., . . . Klatzker, D. 
(2001). Implementing evidence-based practices 
for persons with severe mental illness. Psychi￾atric Services, 52, 45–50.
Torrey, W. C., Finnerty, M., Evans, A., & Wyzik, 
P.  F. (2003). Strategies for leading the imple￾mentation of evidence-based practices. Psychi￾atric Clinics of North America, 26, 883–897.
Townsend, L., Gearing, R. E., & Polyanskaya, O. 
(2012). Influence of health beliefs and stigma 
on choosing Internet support groups over for￾mal mental health services. Psychiatric Ser￾vices, 63, 370–376.
Tracy, B. (2003). Evidence-based practices or 
value-based services. Psychiatric Services, 54,
Article 1437.
Travis, J., Western, B., & Redburn, S. (2014). The 
growth of incarceration in the United States: 
Exploring causes and consequences. Washing￾ton, DC: National Academies Press.References 387
Tripathi, A., Kar, S. K., & Shukla, R. (2018). Cog￾nitive deficits in schizophrenia: understanding 
the biological correlates and remediation strat￾egies. Clinical Psychopharmacology and Neu￾roscience, 16(1), 7–17.
Tsai, J., Ablondi, K., Payne, K., Rosen, M. I., & 
Rosenheck, R.  A. (2019). Recovery-oriented 
money management for homeless veterans: A 
feasibility study. American Journal of Psychi￾atric Rehabilitation, 22(3), 147–167.
Tsang, H. W., Tam, P. K., Chan, F., & Cheung, 
W. M. (2003). Sources of burdens on families 
of individuals with mental illness. Interna￾tional Journal of Rehabilitation Research, 26,
123–130.
Tse, S., Tsoi, E.  W.  S., Hamilton, B., O’Hagan, 
M., Shepherd, G., Slade, M., . . . Petrakis, M. 
(2016). Uses of strength-based interventions 
for people with serious mental illness: A criti￾cal review. International Journal of Social Psy￾chiatry, 62(3), 281–291.
Tsemberis, S. (2013). Housing First: Implemen￾tation, dissemination, and program fidelity. 
American Journal of Psychiatric Rehabilita￾tion, 16, 235–239.
Tsemberis, S., Gulcur, L., & Nakae, M. (2004). 
Housing First, consumer choice, and harm 
reduction for homeless individuals with a dual 
diagnosis. American Journal of Public Health, 
94, 651–656.
Tseng, P.-T., Zeng, B.-S., Hung, C.-M., Liang, 
C.-S., Stubbs, B., Carvalho, A. F., . . . Li, C.-T. 
(2022). Assessment of noninvasive brain stimu￾lation interventions for negative symptoms of 
schizophrenia: A systematic review and net￾work meta-analysis. JAMA Psychiatry, 79(8), 
770–779.
Tsuang, M. T., & Winokur, G. (1975). The Iowa 
500: Field work in a 35-year follow-up of 
depression, mania, and schizophrenia. Cana￾dian Psychiatric Association Journal, 20,
359–365.
Tung, E.  L., Boyd, K., Lindau, S.  T., & Peek, 
M. E. (2018). Neighborhood crime and access 
to health-enabling resources in Chicago. Pre￾ventive Medicine Reports, 9, 153–156.
Turkington, D., & Kingdon, D.  G. (2000). 
Cognitive-behavior techniques for general psy￾chiatrists in the management of patients with 
psychoses. British Journal of Psychiatry, 180,
523–527.
Turner, C.  F., Ku, L., Rogers, S.  M., Lindberg, 
L. D., Pleck, J. H., & Sonenstein, F. L. (1998). 
Adolescent sexual behavior, drug use, and vio￾lence: Increased reporting with computer sur￾vey technology. Science, 280(5365), 867–873.
Turner, D. T., McGlanaghy, E., Cuijpers, P., van 
der Gaag, M., Karyotaki, E., & MacBeth, A. 
(2018). A meta-analysis of social skills training 
and related interventions for psychosis. Schizo￾phrenia Bulletin, 44(3), 475–491.
Turner, J.  C., & TenHoor, W.  J. (1978). The 
NIMH community support program: Pilot 
approach to a needed social reform. Schizo￾phrenia Bulletin, 4, 319–348.
Twamley, E.  W., Jeste, D.  V., & Bellack, A.  S. 
(2003). A review of cognitive training in schizo￾phrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 29, 359–382.
Twamley, E.  W., Narvaez, J.  M., Becker, D.  R., 
Bartels, S. J., & Jeste, D. V. (2008). Supported 
employment for middle-aged and older people 
with schizophrenia. American Journal of Psy￾chiatric Rehabilitation, 11(1), 76–89.
U.S. Census Bureau. (n.d.-a). About the topic of 
race. Retrieved June 8, 2022, from www.cen￾sus.gov/topics/population/race/about.html
U.S. Census Bureau. (n.d.-b). QuickFacts: United 
States. Retrieved September 12, 2022, from 
www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table/US/
PST045221
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
Office of Minority Health. (2022, June 7). 
TCH. Think Cultural Health. https://thinkcul￾turalhealth.hhs.gov
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
(DHHS). (1999). Mental health: A report of the 
Surgeon General. Washington, DC: Author.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
Office of the Surgeon General. (2016). Facing 
addiction in America: The Surgeon General’s 
report on alcohol, drugs, and health. Washing￾ton, DC: Author.
U.S. Department of Labor. (September 8, 2022). 
Employment projections: Education pays in 
higher earnings and lower unemployment rates
(Report). Retrieved from www.bls.gov/emp/
chart-unemployment-earnings-education.htm
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. (n.d.). Peer 
support services in VA. Retrieved from www.
veteranshealthlibrary.va.gov
U.S. General Accounting Office. (1996). SSA dis￾ability: Program redesign necessary to encour￾age return to work (Report to the Chairman, 
Special Committee on Aging and the U.S. Sen￾ate, No. GAO/HEHS 96–62). Washington, 
DC: Author.
U.S.  Preventive Services Taskforce. (n.d.). Home 
page. Retrieved September 15, 2022, from 
https://uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/usp￾stf
Uijen, A. A., Schers, H. J., Schellevis, F. G., & van 
den Bosch, W. J. (2012). How unique is continu￾ity of care?: A review of continuity and related 
concepts. Family Practice, 29(3), 264–271.
Unger, K.  V. (1993). Creating supported educa￾tion programs utilizing existing community 388 References
resources. Psychosocial Rehabilitation Jour￾nal, 17, 11–23.
Unzicker, R. (1989). On my own: A personal jour￾ney through madness and re-emergence. Psy￾chosocial Rehabilitation Journal, 13, 71–77.
Urbanoski, K., Veldhuizen, S., Krausz, M., 
Schutz, C., Somers, J. M., Kirst, M., & Goer￾ing, P. (2018). Effects of comorbid substance 
use disorders on outcomes in a Housing First 
intervention for homeless people with mental 
illness. Addiction, 113(1), 137–145.
Usher, L., Watson, A. C., Bruno, R., Andriukaitis, 
S., Kamin, D., Speed, C., & Taylor S. (2019). 
Crisis Intervention Team (CIT) Programs: A 
Best Practice Guide for Transforming Com￾munity Responses to Mental Health Crises. 
Memphis: CIT International.
Vaddadi, K. S., Gilleard, C., & Fryer, H. (2002). 
Abuse of carers by relatives with severe mental 
illness. International Journal of Social Psychia￾try, 48, 149–155.
Vaddadi, K.  S., Soosai, E., Gilleard, C.  J., & 
Adlard, S. (1997). Mental illness, physical 
abuse and burden of care on relatives: A study 
of acute psychiatric admission patients. Acta 
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 95, 313–317.
Van Beukering, I.  E., Smits, S.  J.  C., Janssens, 
K.  M.  E., Bogaers, R.  I., Joosen, M.  C.  W., 
Bakker, M., . . . Brouwers, E. P. M. (2021). In 
what ways does health related stigma affect sus￾tainable employment and well-being at work?: 
A systematic review. Journal of Occupational 
Rehabilitation, 32(3), 365–379.
Van den Broeck, A., Ferris, D. L., Chang, C.-H., 
& Rosen, C.  C. (2016). A review of self￾determination theory’s basic psychological 
needs at work. Journal of Management, 42(5), 
1195–1229.
van der Does, A.  W., & Van den Bosch, R.  J. 
(1992). What determines Wisconsin Card Sort￾ing performance in schizophrenia? Clinical 
Psychology Review, 12(6), 567–583.
van der Ende, P. C., van Busschbach, J. T., Nich￾olson, J., Korevaar, E.  L., & van Weeghel, J. 
(2014). Parenting and psychiatric rehabilita￾tion: Can parents with severe mental illness 
benefit from a new approach? Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation Journal, 37(3), 201–208.
van der Ende, P., Busschbach, J.  T., Nicholson, 
J., Koreevar, A. L., & van Weeghel, J. (2016). 
Strategies for parenting by mothers and fathers 
with mental illness. Journal of Psychiatric and 
Mental Health Nursing, 23, 86–97.
van der Gaag, M., Kern, R.  S., van den Bosch, 
R. J., & Liberman, R. P. (2002). A controlled 
trial of cognitive remediation in schizophrenia. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 28, 167–176.
Van Dongen, C.  J. (1996). Quality of life and 
self-esteem in working and nonworking per￾sons with mental illness. Community Mental 
Health Journal, 32, 535–548.
Van Dongen, C. J. (1998). Self-esteem among per￾sons with severe mental illness. Issues in Men￾tal Health Nursing, 19, 29–40.
Van Duin, D., de Winter, L., Oud, M., Kroon, 
H., Veling, W., & van Weeghel, J. (2019). The 
effect of rehabilitation combined with cognitive 
remediation on functioning in persons with 
severe mental illness: Systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Psychological Medicine, 49(9), 
1414–1425.
Van Lippevelde, W., Verloigne, M., De Bourdeaud￾huij, I., Brug, J., Bjelland, M., Lien, N., & Maes, 
L. (2012). Does parental involvement make a 
difference in school-based nutrition and physi￾cal activity interventions?: A systematic review 
of randomized controlled trials. International 
Journal of Public Health, 57(4), 673–678.
Van Tosh, L., & DelVecchio, P. (1998). Consumer￾operated self-help programs: A technical 
report. Rockville, MD: Center for Mental 
Health Services.
Van Tosh, L., Ralph, R., & Campbell, J. (2000). 
The rise of consumerism. Psychiatric Rehabili￾tation Skills, 4, 383–409.
van Veldhuizen, J. R. (2007). FACT: A Dutch ver￾sion of ACT. Community Mental Health Jour￾nal, 43, 421–433.
Van Weeghel, J., van Zelst, C., Boertien, D., & 
Hasson-Ohayon, I. (2019). Conceptualiza￾tions, assessments, and implications of personal 
recovery in mental illness: A scoping review of 
systematic reviews and meta-analyses. Psychi￾atric Rehabilitation Journal, 42(2), 169–181.
van Westrhenen, R., & Ingelman-Sundberg, M. 
(2021). Editorial: From trial and error to indi￾vidualised pharmacogenomics-based pharma￾cotherapy in psychiatry. Frontiers in Pharma￾cology, 12, Article 725565.
Varghese, A., Khakha, D. C., & Chadda, R. K. 
(2016). Pattern and type of aggressive behavior 
in patients with severe mental illness as per￾ceived by the caregivers and the coping strate￾gies used by them in a tertiary care hospital. 
Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 30, 62–69.
Varkey, B. (2021). Principles of clinical ethics and 
their application to practice. Medical Principles 
and Practice, 30(1), 17–28.
Vasconcelos e Sa, D., Wearden, A., & Barrow￾clough, C. (2013). Expressed emotion, types of 
behavioural control and controllability attribu￾tions in relatives of people with recent-onset 
psychosis. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric 
Epidemiology, 48(9), 1377–1388.
Vaughn, C.  E., & Leff, J. (1976). The measure￾ment of expressed emotion in the families of References 389
psychiatric patients. British Journal of Social 
and Clinical Psychology, 15, 157–165.
Vaughn, C. E., Snyder, K. S., Freeman, W., Jones, 
S., Falloon, I. R. H., & Liberman, R. P. (1982). 
Family factors in schizophrenic relapse: A rep￾lication. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 8, 425–426.
Vaughn, C. E., Snyder, K. S., Jones, S., Freeman, 
W. B., & Falloon, I. R. H. (1984). Family fac￾tors in schizophrenic relapse: Replication in 
California of British research on expressed 
emotion. Archives of General Psychiatry, 41,
1169–1177.
Vaughn, M. G., DeLisi, M., Beaver, K. M., Per￾ron, B.  E., & Abdon, A. (2012). Toward a 
criminal justice epidemiology: Behavioral and 
physical health of probationers and parolees in 
the United States. Journal of Criminal Justice, 
40, 165–173.
Velligan, D., Bow-Thomas, C., Huntzinger, C., 
Ritch, J., Ledbetter, N., Priloda, T., . . . Miller, 
A.  L. (2000). Randomized controlled trial of 
the used of compensatory strategies to enhance 
adaptive functioning in outpatients with 
schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychia￾try, 157, 1317–1323.
Velligan, D. I., Diamond, P. M., Mintz, J., Maples, 
N., Li, X., Zeber, J., . . . Miller, A. L. (2008). 
The use of individually tailored environmental 
supports to improve medication adherence and 
outcomes in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bul￾letin, 34, 483–493.
Velligan, D. I., Kern, R. S., & Gold, J. M. (2006). 
Cognitive rehabilitation for schizophrenia and 
the putative role of motivation and expectan￾cies. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 32, 474–485.
Velligan, D. I., Lam, F., Ereshefsky, L., & Miller, 
A. L. (2003). Perspectives on medication adher￾ence and atypical antipsychotic medications. 
Psychiatric Services, 54, 665–667.
Velligan, D. I., Prihoda, T. J., Ritch, J. L., Maples, 
N., Bow-Thomas, C. C., & Dassori, A. (2002). 
A randomized single-blind pilot study of com￾pensatory strategies in schizophrenia outpa￾tients. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 28, 283–292.
Velligan, D.  I., Tai, S., Roberts, D.  L., Maples￾Aguilar, N., Brown, M., Mintz, J., & Turking￾ton, D. (2015). A randomized controlled trial 
comparing cognitive behavior therapy, cogni￾tive adaptation training, their combination and 
treatment as usual in chronic schizophrenia. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 41(3), 597–603.
Velligan, D. I., Weiden, P. J., Sajatovic, M., Scott, 
J., Carpenter, D., Ross, R., . . . Docherty, J. P. 
(2010). Assessment of adherence problems in 
patients with serious and persistent mental ill￾ness: recommendations from the Expert Con￾sensus Guidelines. Journal of Psychiatric Prac￾tice, 16, 34–45.
Vera. (2019). The State of Justice Reform 2019: 
The next wave of bail reform goes beyond 
ending money bail. Retrieved February 10, 
2023, from www.vera.org/state-of-justice￾reform/2019/bail-reform
Verdoux, H., Maurice-Tison, S., Gay, B., van Os, 
J., Salamon, R., & Bourgeois, M. (1998). A 
survey of delusional ideation in primary care 
patients. Psychological Medicine, 28, 127–134.
Vezzali, L., & Stathi, S. (2021). Using intergroup 
contact to fight prejudice and negative atti￾tudes: Psychological perspectives. New York: 
Routledge.
Videka, L., Neale, J., Page, C., Buche, J., Beck, 
A.  J., Wayment, C., & Gaiser, M. (2019). 
National analysis of peer support providers: 
Practice settings, requirements, roles, and 
reimbursement. Ann Arbor: Behavioral Health 
Workforce, University of Michigan.
Vistorte, A. O. R., Ribeiro, W. S., Jaen, D., Jorge, 
M. R., Evans-Lacko, S., & Mari, J. D. J. (2018). 
Stigmatizing attitudes of primary care profes￾sionals towards people with mental disorders: 
A systematic review. International Journal of 
Psychiatry in Medicine, 53(4), 317–338.
Vita, A., Barlati, S., Ceraso, A., Nibbio, G., Ariu, 
C., Deste, G., & Wykes, T. (2021). Effective￾ness, core elements, and moderators of response 
of cognitive remediation for schizophrenia: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis of ran￾domized clinical trials. JAMA Psychiatry, 
78(8), 848–858.
Vogel, D.  L., Wade, N.  G., & Hackler, A.  H. 
(2007). Perceived public stigma and the will￾ingness to seek counseling: The mediating roles 
of self-stigma and attitudes toward counseling. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 54, 40–50.
Volker, R., & Medalia, A. (2010). Neurocogni￾tion and social cognition in schizophrenia 
patients: Basic concepts and treatment. New 
York: Karger.
Volker, R., Mueller, D.  R., & Schmidt, S.  J. 
(2011). Effectiveness of integrated psychologi￾cal therapy (IPT) for schizophrenia patients: 
A research update. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 37,
S71–S79.
Voss, M., Barrett, T. S., Lapidos, A., Werner, P., 
Bennett, P., Campbell, A., & Van Komen, A. 
(2022). Peer support workforce survey: Profes￾sional activities, skills, job satisfaction, and 
financial well-being. Retrieved from https://
ssrn.com/abstract=4273593
Vovou, F., Hull, L., & Petrides, K. V. (2021). Men￾tal health literacy of ADHD, autism, schizo￾phrenia, and bipolar disorder: A cross-cultural 
investigation. Journal of Mental Health, 30(4), 
470–480.
Vujanovic, A.  A., Meyer, T.  D., Heads, A.  M., 390 References
Stotts, A.  L., Villarreal, Y.  R., & Schmitz, 
J.  M. (2017). Cognitive-behavioral therapies 
for depression and substance use disorders: An 
overview of traditional, third-wave, and trans￾diagnostic approaches. American Journal of 
Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 43(4), 402–415.
Wade, D. T. (2009). Goal setting in rehabilitation: 
An overview of what, why and how. Clinical 
Rehabilitation, 23(4), 291–295.
Wagner, B. R. (1968). The training of attending 
and abstracting responses in chronic schizo￾phrenia. Journal of Experimental Research in 
Personality, 3, 77–88.
Wahl, O. F. (1995). Media madness: Public images 
of mental illness. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers 
University Press.
Wahl, O.  F., & Harman, C.  R. (1989). Family 
views of stigma. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 15,
131–139.
Wahl, O. F., & Roth, R. (1982). Television images 
of mental illness: Results of a metropolitan 
Washington media watch. Journal of Broad￾casting and Media, 26, 599–605.
Walker, E.  R., McGee, R.  E., & Druss, B.  G. 
(2015). Mortality in mental disorders and 
global disease burden implications: A system￾atic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Psychia￾try, 72(4), 334–341.
Wallace, C.  J., Liberman, R.  P., Tauber, R., & 
Wallace, J. (2000). The independent living 
skills survey: A comprehensive measure of the 
community functioning of severely and persis￾tently mentally ill individuals. Schizophrenia 
Bulletin, 26(3), 631–658.
Wallerstein, N., & Duran, B. (2008). The theo￾retical, historical, and practice roots of 
CBPR. In M. Minkler & N. Wallerstein (Eds.), 
Community-based participatory research for 
health: From processes to outcomes (2nd ed., 
pp. 25–46). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Wan, M. W., Moulton, S., & Abel, K. M. (2008). 
The service needs of mothers with schizophre￾nia: A qualitative study of perinatal psychiatric 
and antenatal workers. General Hospital Psy￾chiatry, 30(2), 177–184.
Wang, W., Chau, A. K. C., Kong, P., Sun, X., & 
So, S.  H.  W. (2021). Efficacy of motivational 
interviewing in treating co-occurring psycho￾sis and substance use disorder: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Journal of Clinical 
Psychiatry, 83(1), Article 38865.
Wang, X., Chen, Q., & Yang, M. (2017). Effect of 
caregivers’ expressed emotion on the care bur￾den and rehospitalization rate of schizophre￾nia. Patient Prefer Adherence, 11, 1505–1511.
Wang, Y., Chen, Y., & Deng, H. (2021). Effec￾tiveness of family- and individual-led peer sup￾port for people with serious mental illness: A 
meta-analysis. Journal of Psychosocial Nursing 
and Mental Health Services, 60(2), 20–26.
Wang, Y.-P., & Gorenstein, C. (2013). Assessment 
of depression in medical patients: A systematic 
review of the utility of the Beck Depression 
Inventory–II. Clinics, 68(9), 1274–1287.
Ward, C. (1996). Acculturation. In D. Landis & 
R. S. Bhagat (Eds.), Handbook of intercultural 
training (2nd ed., pp.  124–147). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Warr, P. (1987). Work, unemployment, and mental 
health. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Watson, A., Hanrahan, P., Luchins, D., & Luri￾gio, A. (2001). Mental health courts and the 
complex issue of mentally ill offenders. Psychi￾atric Services, 52, 477–481.
Watson, A. C., Compton, M. T., & Draine, J. N. 
(2017). The Crisis Intervention Team (CIT) 
model: An evidence-based policing practice? 
Behavioral Sciences and the Law. 35 (5–6) 
431–441.
Watson, A.  C., & Fulambarker, A.  J. (2012). 
The crisis intervention team model of police 
response to mental health crises: A primer for 
mental health practitioners. Best Practices in 
Mental Health, 8, 71–81.
Watson, A. C., & Wood, J. D. (2017). Everyday 
police work during mental health encounters: 
A study of call resolutions in Chicago and their 
implications for diversion. Behavioral Sciences 
and the Law, 35(5–6), 442–455.
Watson, D. P., Wagner, D. E., & Rivers, M. (2013). 
Understanding the critical ingredients for facili￾tating consumer change in Housing First pro￾gramming: A case study approach. Journal of 
Behavioral Health Services and Research, 40,
169–179.
Wearden, A.  J., Tarrier, N., Barrowclough, C., 
Zastowny, T.  R., & Armstrong Rahill, A. 
(2000). A review of expressed emotion research 
in health care. Clinical Psychology Review, 20,
633–666.
Weiden, P.  J., Mott, T., & Curcio, N. (1995). 
Recognition and management of neuroleptic 
noncompliance. In C. L. Shriqui & H. A. Nas￾rallah (Eds.). Contemporary issues in the treat￾ment of schizophrenia (pp.  411–434). Wash￾ington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Weiner, B. (1995). Judgments of responsibility: A 
foundation for a theory of social conduct. New 
York: Guilford Press.
Weiner, E. (1999). The meaning of education for 
university students with a psychiatric disabil￾ity: A grounded theory analysis. Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation Journal, 22, 403–409.
Weintraub, M. J., Hall, D. L., Carbonella, J. Y., 
Weisman de Mamani, A., & Hooley, J.  M. 
(2017). Integrity of literature on expressed References 391
emotion and relapse in patients with schizo￾phrenia verified by a p-curve analysis. Family 
Process, 56(2), 436–444.
Weisburd, D., & White, C. (2019). Hot spots of 
crime are not just hot spots of crime: Examin￾ing health outcomes at street segments. Jour￾nal of Contemporary Criminal Justice, 35(2), 
142–160.
Weisman, A., Nuechterlein, K., Goldstein, M., & 
Snyder, K. (1998). Expressed emotion, attri￾butions and schizophrenia symptom dimen￾sions. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 107,
355–359.
Weiss, J., Maddox, D., Vanderwaerden, M., & 
Szilvagyi, S. (2004). The Tri-County Scholars 
Program: Bridging the clubhouse and commu￾nity college. American Journal of Psychiatric 
Rehabilitation, 7, 281–300.
Wells, K., Miranda, J., Bruce, M.  L., Alegria, 
M., & Wallerstein, N. (2004). Bridging com￾munity intervention and mental health services 
research. American Journal of Psychiatry,
161(6), 955–963.
Wells, K.  J., Valverde, P., Ustjanauskas, A.  E., 
Calhoun, E.  A., & Risendal, B.  C. (2018). 
What are patient navigators doing, for whom, 
and where?: A national survey evaluating the 
types of services provided by patient navi￾gators. Patient Education and Counseling,
101(2), 285–294.
Wennerstrom, A., Sugarman, M., Martin, D., 
Lobre, C. B., Haywood, C. G., & Niyogi, A. 
(2022). “You have to be almost dead before 
they ever really work on you in prison”: A qual￾itative study of formerly incarcerated women’s 
health care experiences during incarceration in 
Louisiana, U.S. Health and Social Care in the 
Community, 30, 1763–1774.
Wenzlow, A. T., Ireys, H. T., Mann, B., Irvin, C., 
& Teich, J.  L. (2011). Effects of a discharge 
planning program on Medicaid coverage of 
state prisoners with serious mental illness. Psy￾chiatric Services, 62(1), 73–78.
West, D. J. (1948). A mass observation question￾naire on hallucinations. Journal of the Society 
for Psychical Research, 34, 187–196.
West, J. C., Wilk, J. E., Olfson, M., Rae, D. S., 
Marcus, S., Narrow, W. E., . . . Regier, D. A. 
(2005). Patterns and quality of treatment for 
patients with schizophrenia in routine psychiat￾ric practice. Psychiatric Services, 56, 283–291.
Weye, N., Santomauro, D. F., Agerbo, E., Chris￾tensen, M. K., Iburg, K. M., Momen, N. C., . . . 
Plana-Ripoll, O. (2021). Register-based metrics 
of years lived with disability associated with 
mental and substance use disorders: A register￾based cohort study in Denmark. Lancet Psy￾chiatry, 8(4), 310–319.
White, S., Foster, R., Marks, J., Morshead, R., 
Goldsmith, L., Barlow, S., .  .  . Gillard, S. 
(2020). The effectiveness of one-to-one peer 
support in mental health services: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. BMC Psychiatry, 
20(1), 1–20.
White, S. A., Stone, E., Murphy, K. A., Daumit, 
G., & McGinty, E. A. (2023). Smoking cessa￾tion medication prescribing for smokers with 
and without mental illness. Psychiatry Ser￾vices, 74, 332–340.
Whiteman, K. L., Naslund, J. A., DiNapoli, E. A., 
Bruce, M. L., & Bartels, S. J. (2016). System￾atic review of integrated general medical and 
psychiatric self-management interventions for 
adults with serious mental illness. Psychiatric 
Services, 67(11), 1213–1225.
Whiting, D., Gulati, G., Geddes, J. R., & Fazel, S. 
(2022). Association of schizophrenia spectrum 
disorders and violence perpetration in adults 
and adolescents from 15 countries: A system￾atic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Psychia￾try, 79, 120–132.
WHO Regional Office for Europe. (2010). 
User empowerment in mental health—A 
statement by the WHO regional office for 
Europe. Retrieved from www.euro.who.int/
en/health-topics/noncommunicable-diseases/
mental-health/publications/2010/user￾empowerment-in-mental-health-a-statement￾by-the-who-regional-office-for-europe
Wik, A., Hollen, V., & Fisher, W.  H. (2020). 
Forensic patients in state psychiatric hospitals: 
1999–2016. CNS Spectrums, 25(2), 196–206.
Williams, D.  R. (2018). Stress and the mental 
health of populations of color: Advancing our 
understanding of race-related stressors. Journal 
of Health and Social Behavior, 59(4), 466–485.
Williams, G., Deci, E., & Ryan, R. (1998). Building 
healthcare partnerships by supporting auton￾omy: Promoting maintained behaviour change 
and positive health outcomes. In P.  Hinton￾Wailer, A.  L.  Suchman, & R.  Botelho (Eds.), 
Partnerships, power and process: Transform￾ing health-care delivery (Vol. 10, pp. 76–88). 
Rochester, NY: Univerity of Rochester Press.
Williams, J., Leamy, M., Bird, V., Harding, C., 
Larsen, J., Le Boutillier, C., .  .  . Slade, M. 
(2012). Measures of the recovery orientation 
of mental health services: Systematic review. 
Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiol￾ogy, 47(11), 1827–1835.
Williams, J.  M., Ziedonis, D.  M., & Foulds, J. 
(2004). A case series of nicotine nasal spray in 
the treatment of tobacco dependence among 
patients with schizophrenia. Psychiatric Ser￾vices, 55(9), 1064–1066.
Williams-Wengerd, A. M., & Solheim, C. (2021). 392 References
Grief experiences in parents of adult children 
with serious mental illness. Journal of Family 
Theory and Review, 13(4), 528–549.
Wilson, W.  J. (1987). The truly disadvantaged: 
The inner city, the underclass and public pol￾icy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Winerip, M. (1994). 9 Highland Road. New York: 
Pantheon Books.
Wingo, A.  P., Wingo, T.  S., Harvey, P.  D., & 
Baldessarini, R. J. (2009). Effects of lithium on 
cognitive performance: A meta-analysis. Jour￾nal of Clinical Psychiatry, 70(11), 1588–1597.
Winsper, C., Crawford-Docherty, A., Weich, S., 
Fenton, S.  J., & Singh, S.  P. (2020). How do 
recovery-oriented interventions contribute to 
personal mental health recovery?: A systematic 
review and logic model. Clinical Psychology 
Review, 76, Article 101815.
Witheridge, T.  F. (1990). Assertive community 
treatment as a supported housing approach. 
Psychosocial Rehabilitation Journal, 13(4), 
69–75.
Witheridge, T.  F., Dincin, J., & Appleby, L. 
(1982). The Bridge: An assertive home-visiting 
program for the most frequent psychiatric 
recidivists (Final Report to the NIMH Hospital 
Improvement Program). Chicago: Thresholds.
Wittenborn, A. K., Woods, S. B., Priest, J. B., Mor￾gan, P. C., Tseng, C., Huerta, P., & Edwards, 
C. (2022). Couple and family interventions for 
depressive and bipolar disorders: Evidence base 
update (2010–2019). Journal of Marital and 
Family Therapy, 48(1), 129–153.
Wolff, N. (2002). Courts on therapeutic agents: 
Thinking past the novelty of mental health 
courts. Journal of the American Academy of 
Psychiatry and the Law, 30, 431–437.
Wolff, N. (2003). Courting the court: Courts as 
agents for treatment and justice. Community￾Based Interventions for Criminal Offenders 
with Severe Mental Illness, 12, 143–197.
Wong, J., Bahji, A., & Khalid-Khan, S. (2020). 
Psychotherapies for adolescents with subclini￾cal and borderline personality disorder: A sys￾tematic review and meta-analysis. Canadian 
Journal of Psychiatry, 65(1), 5–15.
Wong, S.  E., & Woolsey, J.  E. (1989). Re￾establishing conversational skills in overtly psy￾chotic, chronic schizophrenic patients: Discrete 
trials training on the psychiatric ward. Behav￾ior Modification, 13, 415–430.
Woo, B. K. P., & Chung, J. O. P. (2013). Public 
stigma associated with dementia in a Chinese￾American immigrant population. Journal of 
the American Geriatrics Society, 61(10), 1832–
1833.
Wood, L., Byrne, R., Enache, G., & Morri￾son, A.  P. (2018). A brief cognitive therapy 
intervention for internalised stigma in acute 
inpatients who experience psychosis: A feasi￾bility randomised controlled trial. Psychiatry 
Research, 262, 303–310.
Woodhall-Melnik, J. R., & Dunn, J. R. (2016). A 
systematic review of outcomes associated with 
participation in Housing First programs. Hous￾ing Studies, 31(3), 287–304.
Woodward, T. S., Moritz, S., Cuttler, C., & Whit￾man, J. C. (2006). The contribution of a cog￾nitive bias against disconfirmatory evidence 
(BADE) to delusions in schizophrenia. Journal 
of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychol￾ogy, 28(4), 605–617.
World Health Organization. (2005). World health 
report: Make every mother and child count. 
Geneva: Author.
World Health Organization. (2019). ICD-11:
International classification of diseases (11th 
revision). Geneva: Author.
World Health Organization. (2019). One-to-one 
peer support by and for people with lived expe￾rience: WHO QualityRights guidance module. 
Geneva: Author.
Wright-Berryman, J.  L., McGuire, A.  B., & 
Salyers, M.  P. (2011). A review of consumer￾provided services on assertive community treat￾ment and intensive case management teams: 
implications for future research and practice. 
Journal of the American Psychiatric Nurses 
Association, 17(1), 37–44.
Wrigley, S., Jackson, H., Judd, F., & Komiti, A. 
(2005). Role of stigma and attitudes toward 
help-seeking from a general practitioner for 
mental health problems in a rural town. Aus￾tralian and New Zealand Journal of Psychia￾try, 39, 514–521.
Wulsin, L. R. (1996). An agenda for primary care 
psychiatry. Psychosomatics, 37(2), 93–99.
Wuthrich, V.  M., Meuldijk, D., Jagiello, T., 
Robles, A.  G., Jones, M.  P., & Cuijpers, P. 
(2021). Efficacy and effectiveness of psycholog￾ical interventions on co-occurring mood and 
anxiety disorders in older adults: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. International Jour￾nal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 36(6), 858–872.
Wykes, T., Huddy, V., Cellard, C., McGurk, S. R., 
& Czobor, P. (2011). A meta-analysis of cogni￾tive remediation for schizophrenia: Methodol￾ogy and effect sizes. American Journal of Psy￾chiatry, 168(5), 472–485.
Xavier, A.  S., Behera, S.  K., & Selvarajan, S. 
(2020). An overview on medication-assisted 
treatment (MAT) for opioid dependence. Jour￾nal of Opioid Management, 16(2), 141–149.
Xenitidis, K., Slade, M., Thornicroft, G., & Bou￾ras, N. (2003). CANDID: Camberwell Assess￾ment of Need for Adults with Developmental References 393
and Intellectual Disabilities (1st edition). Lon￾don: RCPsych.
Xie, H., Drake, R., & McHugo, J. (2006). Are there 
distinctive trajectory groups in substance abuse 
remission over 10 years?: An application of the 
group-based modeling approach. Administra￾tion and Policy in Mental Health and Mental 
Health Services Research, 33(4), 423–432.
Yalom, I. (1985). The theory and practices of 
group psychotherapy (3rd ed.). New York: 
Basic Books.
Yang, L. H., Kleinman, A., Link, B. G., Phelan, 
J. C., Lee, S., & Good, B. (2007). Culture and 
stigma: Adding oral experience to stigma the￾ory. Social Science and Medicine, 64, 1524–
1535.
Yang, M., Yan, Y., Yin, X., Wang, B.  Y., Wu, 
T., Liu, G.  J., & Dong, B.  R., Rev. 2013 
(2013). Chest physiotherapy for pneumonia in 
adults. The Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews, (2), CD006338.
Yanos, P.  T., Lysaker, P.  H., Silverstein, S.  M., 
Vayshenker, B., Gonzales, L., West, M. L., & 
Roe, D. (2019). A randomized-controlled trial 
of treatment for self-stigma among persons 
diagnosed with schizophrenia-spectrum disor￾ders. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epide￾miology, 54(11), 1363–1378.
Yanos, P. T., Roe, D., West, M. L., Smith, S. M., 
& Lysaker, P.  H. (2012). Group-based treat￾ment for internalized stigma among persons 
with severe mental illness: Findings from a 
randomized controlled trial. Psychological Ser￾vices, 9(3), 248–258.
Yi, S. S. (2020). Taking action to improve Asian 
American health. American Journal of Public 
Health, 110(4), 435–437.
Yosep, I., Prayogo, S. A., Kohar, K., Andrew, H., 
Mardhiyah, A., Amirah, S., & Maulana, S. 
(2022). Managing autism spectrum disorder 
in the face of pandemic using internet-based 
parent-mediated interventions: A systematic 
review of randomized controlled trials. Chil￾dren, 9(10), Article 1483.
Youmans, R. (1992). The shortage of low-income 
housing: The role of the federal government. In 
R.  I.  Jahiel (Ed.), Homelessness: A preventa￾tive approach (pp. 255–268). Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press.
Young, M. A., Scheftner, W. A., Klerman, G. K., 
& Andreasen, N.  C. (1986). The endogenous 
sub-type of depression: A study of its internal 
construct validity. British Journal of Psychia￾try, 148, 257–267.
Zafar, N., Rotenberg, M., & Rudnick, A. (2019). 
A systematic review of work accommodations 
for people with mental disorders. Work, 64(3), 
461–475.
Zechner, M.  R., Pratt, C.  W., Barrett, N.  M., 
Dreker, M.  R., & Santos, S. (2019). Multi￾dimensional wellness interventions for older 
adults with serious mental illness: A systematic 
literature review. Psychiatric Rehabilitation 
Journal, 42(4), 382–393.
Zelle, H., Kemp, K., & Bonnie, R.  J. (2015). 
Advance directives in mental health care: Evi￾dence, challenges and promise. World Psychia￾try, 14(3), 278–280.
Zhang, C.-Q., Leeming, E., Smith, P., Chung, 
P.-K., Hagger, M.  S., & Hayes, S.  C. (2018). 
Acceptance and commitment therapy for 
health behavior change: A contextually-driven 
approach. Frontiers in Psychology, 8, Article 
2350.
Zhang, J., Chen, C., Hua, S., Liao, H., Wang, M., 
Xiong, Y., & Cao, F. (2017). An updated meta￾analysis of cohort studies: Diabetes and risk of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Diabetes Research and 
Clinical Practice, 124, 41–47.
Zhao, C., Dowzicky, P., Colbert, L., Roberts, 
S., & Kelz, R.  R. (2019). Race, gender, and 
language concordance in the care of surgical 
patients: A systematic review. Surgery, 166(5), 
785–792.
Zheng, Y., Xu, T., Zhu, Y., Li, C., Wang, J., 
Livingstone, S., & Zhang, T. (2022). Cogni￾tive behavioral therapy for prodromal stage of 
psychosis—outcomes for transition, function￾ing, distress, and quality of life: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Bul￾letin, 48(1), 8–19.
Zhou, S., Zhao, J., & Zhang, L. (2022). Appli￾cation of artificial intelligence on psychologi￾cal interventions and diagnosis: An overview. 
Frontiers in Psychiatry, 13, Article 811665.
Ziedonis, D. M., & George, T. P. (1997). Schizo￾phrenia and nicotine use: Report of a pilot 
smoking cessation program and review of neu￾robiological and clinical issues. Schizophrenia 
Bulletin, 23(2), 247–254.
Ziedonis, D. M., Kosten, T. R., Glazer, W. M., & 
Frances, R. J. (1994). Nicotine dependence and 
schizophrenia. Hospital and Community Psy￾chiatry, 45(3), 204–206.
Ziguras, S., Klimidis, S., Lewis, J., & Stuart, 
G. (2003). Ethnic matching of clients and cli￾nicians and use of mental health services by 
ethnic minority clients. Psychiatric Services,
54(4), 535–541.
Zimmerman, M., Martinez, J.  H., Young, D., 
Chelminski, I., & Dalrymple, K. (2013). Sever￾ity classification on the Hamilton Depression 
Rating Scale. Journal of Affective Disorders,
150(2), 384–388.
Zimmerman, M., & Mattia, J. I. (2001a). The Psy￾chiatric Diagnostic Screening Questionnaire: 394 References
Development, reliability and validity. Compre￾hensive Psychiatry, 42(3), 175–189.
Zimmerman, M., & Mattia, J.  I. (2001b). Psy￾chiatric Diagnostic Screening Questionnaire 
(PDSQ) [Database record]. Washington, DC: 
APA PsycTests.
Zimmerman, M., & Mattia, J. I. (2001c). A self￾report scale to help make psychiatric diagnoses: 
The Psychiatric Diagnostic Screening Ques￾tionnaire. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
58(8), 787–794.
Zimmerman, M., Sheeran, T., Chelminski, I., & 
Young, D. (2004). Screening for psychiatric dis￾orders in outpatients with DSM-IV substance 
use disorders. Journal of Substance Abuse 
Treatment, 26(3), 181–188.
Zolnierek, K. B. H., & DiMatteo, M. R. (2009). 
Physician communication and patient adher￾ence to treatment: A meta-analysis. Medical 
Care, 47(8), 826–834.
Zubin, J., & Spring, B. (1977). Vulnerability: A 
new view of schizophrenia. Journal of Abnor￾mal Psychology, 86(2), 103–126.
Zygmunt, A., Olfson, M., Boyer, C.  A., & 
Mechanic, D. (2002). Interventions to improve 
medication adherence in schizophrenia. Amer￾ican Journal of Psychiatry, 159(10), 1653–
1664. 395
Note. f or t following a page number indicates a figure or table.
Acceptance, 58, 60
Acceptance and commitment therapy, 58–59, 148
Accessible services
barriers to engagement and, 78–81, 79f
care coordination and, 155, 155f
housing values and, 180t, 181
mHealth technologies and, 151
overview, 56
vocational services and, 204
Accommodations, 45–46, 132, 133t–134t, 250
Accountability, 155, 155f, 180t, 181
Activity, 276–277
Addiction, 276. See also Substance use disorders 
(SUDs)
Adherence
assessment and, 105
components of illness-management programs and, 
140–141
Illness Management and Recovery (IMR) program, 
146
medications and, 171–172
self-determination and, 172–175
technology and, 61
Adult foster care, 177, 178t, 179
Adverse childhood experiences (ACEs), 11–12, 256
Advertising, 44
Advocacy
care coordination and, 156
erasing public stigma and, 124–131, 129f, 131t
family consultation and support and, 226
peer supports and services and, 311
Affect, 6–7, 25t. See also Symptoms
Affiliate stigma, 41–42. See also Stigma
Affirmative actions, 131–132, 133t–134t
Affirming attitudes and behaviors, 44–46, 113, 
117–124, 121t. See also Behavior
Affordable Care Act of 2010, 41, 68
Affordable housing, 182–183. See also Housing
Age, 71f, 72
Agency-sponsored scattered-site housing program, 179, 
179t, 188
Alcohol use. See Substance use
Allostatic load, 272
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ACT), 45–46, 
68, 132, 133t–134t
Anger, 7, 37–38
Anhedonia, 6–7, 13–14
Antecedents, 248, 249f
Antianxiety medications, 168t, 171. See also
Medication
Antidepressant medications, 167t–168t, 170, 238. See 
also Medication
Antipsychotic medications, 166, 167t, 169–170, 
237–238. See also Medication
Antistigma campaigns, 128–131, 129f, 131t, 311
Anxiety/anxiety disorders. See also Diagnoses; 
Obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD); 
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
expressed emotion (EE) in families and, 218
health and, 272
medications and, 168t, 171
overview, 3–4, 6–7, 14–15
Apathy, 241–242, 244
Assertive community treatment (ACT). See also Care 
coordination; Community
concerns regarding, 162–163
co-occurring disorders and, 295
criminal justice system and, 266, 267–268
fostering empowerment and, 124
housing and, 187
medications and, 165
outcome research, 160, 162
overview, 62, 156, 157–159, 161t, 163
self-determination and, 175
Assertive outreach. See Intensive care coordination 
(ICC)
Assessment
care coordination and, 156, 157
cognitive adaptation training (CAT) and, 244
cognitive processing deficits and, 235–237
of the community, 89–91, 111–116, 115t
core values in, 93–96, 95f
delusions and, 250–251
goals and, 56–57, 87–93
Index396 Index
Assessment (cont.)
of the individual, 88, 100–111, 108f
methods, 96–99
overview, 85–87, 86t, 116
progress monitoring and, 91–92
rehabilitation planning and, 92–93
of the service system, 90–91
specific measures and strategies, 100–116, 108f, 115t
strategies of psychiatric rehabilitation and, 56–57
supported education and, 207t, 208
supported employment and, 196t, 197
treatment planning and, 91
vocational services and, 63
Assisted outpatient treatment (AOT), 262. See also
Criminal justice system
At-risk mental states (ARMS), 217–218
Attentional functioning, 7, 54, 55t, 58, 237f, 242
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), 169t, 
171
Attitudes, 44–45, 113. See also Affirming attitudes and 
behaviors
Atypical antipsychotics. See Antipsychotic medications; 
Medication
Autonomy, 279, 285
Avoidance, 15, 38–39, 46, 120, 121t
Behavior. See also Affirming attitudes and behaviors; 
Symptoms
assessment and, 113
coping skills training and, 144t
health and, 276–278
overview, 7–8
role of mental illness in criminal behavior and, 
254–256
stigma and, 29, 29f, 34, 34f
Behavioral counseling, 159
Behavioral family management, 221
Behavioral weight loss intervention (BWLI), 277
Beliefs, 248, 249f, 251
Benefits counseling, 196t, 205, 207t, 208
Bias, 247, 248, 257
Biological factors
course of the disorder and, 20
erasing public stigma and, 127–128
medical illness and, 271t, 272
overview, 11, 211
stress–vulnerability model and, 11–12, 12f
Bipolar disorder, 3, 14, 168t, 170–171. See also
Diagnoses; Mood disorders
Borderline personality disorder (BPD), 15
Bottom-up models, 233–235, 234f
Brain stimulation therapies (BSTs), 170
Broadcasting of experience, 121t, 122. See also
Disclosure
Brokered care coordination, 154–155, 156, 157, 160, 
161t. See also Care coordination
Burden, 212–217, 213f
Cardiovascular health. See Health
Care coordination
concerns regarding, 162–163
co-occurring disorders and, 295
goals, objectives and functions of, 155–156, 155f
housing and, 190
models of, 156–160, 161t
outcome research, 160–162, 161t
overview, 153–155, 163
peer supports and services and, 310
vocational services and, 196
Caregiver burden. See Burden
Carers for People with Psychosis e-support (COPe￾support) intervention, 224
Case management. See Care coordination
Change, 107–109, 108f, 290–291
Characteristic diagnoses, 6–12, 12f. See also Diagnoses
Child protective services, 228
Children and family services, 311
Choice. See also Self-determination
housing values and, 180t
medications and, 172
supported education and, 207t, 208
supported employment and, 196t, 197
trauma-informed care (TIC) framework and, 60
Choose–get–keep model, 208
Citizenship, 176, 180–181, 180t, 190–191. See also
Community; Housing
Civil commitment, 262. See also Criminal justice 
system
Clinical care coordination, 156, 157, 161t. See also
Care coordination
Cognition, 7, 25, 25t, 144t. See also Symptoms
Cognitive adaptation training (CAT), 159, 173–174, 
243–244
Cognitive approaches, 205, 231. See also Cognitive 
therapy; Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT)
Cognitive factors, 29, 29f, 34, 34f, 58, 243, 248. See 
also Cognitive functioning; Cognitive processing 
deficits
Cognitive functioning. See also Cognitive factors; 
Cognitive processing deficits
cognitive processing deficits and, 232–245, 234f, 
237f, 239f
health and, 273–278, 275f
medical illness and, 271t
self-determination and, 173–174
skills training and, 57–58
supported employment and, 205
Cognitive processing deficits. See also Cognitive 
factors; Cognitive functioning; Psychosis
assessment and, 235–237
delusions and, 245–253, 246f, 249f
interventions for, 237–245, 239f
overview, 231, 232–245, 234f, 237f, 239f, 253
social disabilities and, 236–237, 237f
Cognitive prosthetics, 239–240
Cognitive schemas, 117, 118
Cognitive therapy, 118, 231, 248–253, 249f, 294
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), 141–142, 245, 
294
Collaboration
assessment and, 93–94, 116
challenging self-stigma and, 132
fostering empowerment and, 123
medications and, 172
trauma-informed care (TIC) framework and, 60
Collateral information, 98–99
Commitment, 262. See also Criminal justice system
Committed action, 59
Communication skills, 54, 54f, 55t, 274. See also
Listening skillsIndex 397
Community. See also Assertive community treatment 
(ACT); Citizenship; Community integration; 
Housing
assessment of, 89–91
care coordination and, 155
cognitive processing deficits and, 236, 237f
housing and, 183, 186
overview, 85–86
principles of psychiatric rehabilitation and, 
52–53
self-determination and, 174–175
system change and, 93
Community assessment, 86, 111–116, 115t. See also
Assessment
Community health workers (CHWs), 282
Community integration. See also Community
citizenship values and, 180t, 181
housing and, 180t, 181, 183
overview, 52
stigma and, 132
Community responder teams, 264–265. See also
Criminal justice system
Community-based participatory research (CBPR), 67, 
70, 77–78
Compensatory strategies, 205, 237, 239f
Competition, 126, 196t
Comprehensive services, 289t, 292
Consequences, 248, 249f
Contingencies, 58, 294
Continuity of services, 53, 155, 155f, 158. See also
Care coordination
Continuum model of housing, 184–185. See also
Housing
Conventional antipsychotic medications. See
Antipsychotic medications
Conviction, 245, 246f, 250
Co-occurring disorders. See also Psychiatric 
disabilities; Substance use disorders (SUDs)
current research questions, 298–299
early clinical and research approaches, 288–289
overview, 4, 287–288, 299
recent clinical approaches, 293–298, 293t
service systems and, 289–293, 289t
Coordination of care. See Care coordination
Coping, 20, 50–51, 221–223, 274. See also Coping 
skills training; Resilience
Coping skills training, 57, 143, 144t, 146. See also
Coping; Skills training
Co-responder model, 264. See also Criminal justice 
system
Counters to the belief, 251–253
Course, 4, 16–21, 16f, 19t, 27. See also Psychiatric 
disabilities
Court-based diversion, 265–267, 265t. See also
Criminal justice system
Courtesy stigma, 34, 34f, 41–42, 216. See also
Stigma
Criminal justice system. See also Jails and prisons
co-occurring disorders and, 296–297
helping victims of crime, 268–269
interventions for managing goals related to, 
260–268, 265t
overview, 24, 70, 74, 254, 269
peer supports and services and, 310–311
people with mental illness in, 256–258
role of mental illness in criminal behavior and, 
254–256
theories to explain criminal involvement and, 
258–260, 260t
Crisis intervention team (CIT) model, 263–264. See 
also Criminal justice system
Crisis services, 157, 178t, 179, 263–264, 310
Critical time intervention (CTI), 159, 160, 267–268
Cross-sectional support, 56
Cultural competence, 80, 91, 115–116, 284–285
Cultural factors
community-based participatory research and, 77
diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) and, 71–72, 71f
healthcare and, 285–286
label avoidance and, 39
trauma-informed care (TIC) framework and, 60
Custodial care, 183–184. See also Housing
Dangerousness, 9, 32, 254–256. See also Symptoms; 
Violence
Decision making. See also Shared decision making 
(SDM)
assessment and, 105–107
barriers to engagement and, 80–81
components of illness-management programs and, 
140–141
health and healthcare and, 279, 285–286
medications and, 171–172
self-determination and, 172–175
Delusions, 7, 245–253, 246f, 249f
Depression
delusions and, 246–247
expressed emotion (EE) in families and, 218
eye movement desensitization and reprocessing and, 
59
health and, 272
interpersonal functioning, 8
medications and, 167t–168t
overview, 3, 6–7, 8, 13–14
Depressive disorders. See Depression; Mood disorders
Descriptive stimuli, 29, 29f
Determinants, 70–77, 71f
Diagnoses. See also Psychiatric disabilities; Symptoms; 
individual diagnoses
assessment and, 97, 100, 109
characteristic diagnoses, 6–12, 12f
common diagnoses, 12–16
making a diagnosis, 15–16
overview, 3–4, 5–6
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
(DSM-5-TR), 3–4, 5, 6, 12, 14, 287–288
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), 58, 147–148
Diet, 276–277
Digital interventions. See Internet-based interventions; 
Mobile interventions; Technology
Disabilities. See also Psychiatric disabilities
assessment and, 103–105
community-based participatory research and, 77–78
overview, 4, 21–24, 26–27, 70, 81
Disability per se, 71f, 72–73
Disclosure
challenging self-stigma and, 118, 119–123, 121t
costs and benefits of, 122–123
impact of, 120
levels of, 120–122, 121t398 Index
Discrimination. See also Stigma
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ACT) and, 
68
assessment and, 113
erasing public stigma and, 132
housing and, 188
interactions of stigma structures with types of 
stigma, 34, 34f
overview, 29f, 33–34
Disease, mental illness as, 30–31
Disinhibition, 8, 244
Distractibility, 7, 241–242
Distress, 218, 245, 246f
Diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI)
barriers to engagement, 78–81, 79f
community-based participatory research and, 77–78
comparison with the majority and, 75–76
effects of social disadvantage and, 73–74
essentialism and, 74–76
identity and, 75–76
intersectionality and, 76–77
overview, 71–73, 71f, 81
Drug use. See Substance use
Dual disorders. See Co-occurring disorders
Dysfunctions, 6, 16–18, 16f, 19t
Early intervention, 17, 18, 51, 151–152. See also
Interventions
Education. See also Psychoeducation
challenging self-stigma and, 132
components of illness-management programs and, 
140
erasing public stigma with, 125–126, 127–128, 132
overview, 22–23
peer supports and services and, 310
supported education, 205–209
Efficiency, 155, 155f
Emotional support. See Social and emotional support
Empathy, 139
Empirical testing, 251
Employment. See also Supported employment; 
Vocational services; Work
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ACT) and, 
68
community assessment and, 89, 90
examples of accommodations and, 133t–134t
overview, 22–23
peer supports and services and, 310
treatment planning and, 91
Empowerment
affirming attitudes and behaviors and, 45
assessment and, 102–103
challenging self-stigma and, 118, 123–124
changing social structures and, 131–132, 133t–134t
medications and, 175
overview, vii–viii, 132
stigma and, 46–47
trauma-informed care (TIC) framework and, 60
End state of the disorder, 16, 16f, 18, 19t, 27. See also
Course
Endocrine disorders. See Health
Engagement
barriers to, 78–81, 79f
care coordination and, 157
cognitive therapy of delusions and, 249–250
co-occurring disorders and, 290–291
health and healthcare and, 274, 281–286, 282f
medications and, 172
mHealth technologies and, 150
Environmental factors, 11–12, 12f, 20–21, 88, 128, 
211, 259–260, 260t
Environmental modification, 133t–134t, 157, 
240–242
Equity
barriers to engagement, 78–81, 79f
community-based participatory research and, 77
comparison with the majority and, 75–76
effects of social disadvantage and, 73–74
intersectionality and, 76–77
mHealth technologies and, 151
overview, 70, 81
social determinants and, 70–77, 71f
supported employment and, 198–199
Errorless learning, 205, 239
Essentialism, 74–76
Ethnicity, 71, 71f, 77, 182, 198–199
Etiology, 6, 11–12, 12f
Evidence-based practices (EBPs)
assessment and, 114–115, 115t
assessment of the service system and, 91
overview, viii–ix, 65–67, 69
self-determination and, 175
supported employment and, 204
Executive function, 235, 237f, 244
Experiential knowledge, 303, 304–305, 304t
Expressed emotion (EE), 217–218, 220
Extrapyramidal side effects, 106, 167t, 169–170
Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing 
(EMDR), 58, 59
Fair Housing Act, 68
Family. See also Parents
burden and, 212–216, 213f
caregiver burden and, 212–216, 213f
experience of mental illness by, 211–218, 213f
family interventions, 220–227, 220t
history, 20
housing and, 178t
needs of, 218–220, 228–230
overview, 85–86, 211–212, 230
positive aspects of caregiving and, 216–217
roles in psychiatric rehabilitation and, 64
stigma and, 41–42
Family consultation and support, 220t, 225–227
Family interventions, 211, 229, 295. See also Family 
psychoeducation; Multifamily groups
Family psychoeducation. See also Psychoeducation
assertive community treatment (ACT) and, 158
early interventions and, 151
overview, 59, 220–225, 220t, 230
wellness self-management and, 152
Family systems consultation. See Family consultation 
and support
Family-centered decision making (FCDM), 285–286
Family-to-Family (FTF) education program, 222–223, 
225
Fidelity, 66, 90–91, 114–115, 115t
Financial factors, 180t, 181, 182–183, 203, 257–258. 
See also Poverty
Fitness to stand trial, 261. See also Criminal justice 
system
Following skills, 54, 55t. See also Listening skillsIndex 399
Forensic assertive community treatment (FACT), 266, 
267–268, 297. See also Assertive community 
treatment (ACT)
Functional homelessness, 177, 178t. See also Housing
Functioning, 69, 103–105
Gastrointestinal disorders. See Health
Gender, 60, 71f, 72
Generalization of skills, 57. See also Skills training
Genetic factors, 11, 20, 271t, 272
Genomewide association (GWA) studies, 272
Goals
assessment and, 87–93, 94–95, 95f, 100–101, 116
care coordination and, 155–156, 155f
criminal justice system and, 260–268, 265t
erasing public stigma and, 126
family disagreement regarding, 222
focus on in rehabilitation, 50
goal setting, 56–57
strengths-based perspective and, 25
supported education and, 206
Grandiose delusions, 246. See also Delusions
Group home, 178t, 179, 184–186, 188–189. See also
Housing
Group-based interventions, 119, 143–144, 145t, 158. 
See also Multifamily groups; Skills training; Social 
skills training
Halfway house, 184–185, 188–189. See also Housing
Hallucinations, 7, 144t
Harm reduction approaches, 60, 187, 297–298
Health. See also Healthcare
biological impact and, 272
overview, 23, 270–271, 271t, 286
peer supports and services and, 310
social and cognitive disabilities and, 273–278, 275f
technology and, 61
treatment and services effects on, 278–281, 281t
Health literacy, 273–274
Healthcare. See also Health
barriers to engagement and, 78–81, 79f
biological impact and, 272
modifiable health behaviors and, 276–278
overview, 286
social and cognitive disabilities and, 273–278, 
275f
social factors and, 274, 276, 281–286, 282f
stigma and, 35–36, 40–41, 46–47, 279
treatment and services effects and, 278–281, 281t
Helper therapy principle, 303, 304t, 305
Homelessness, 177. See also Housing
Hope, 102–103
Hospitalization, 177, 178t, 179, 311
Housing. See also Citizenship; Community
care coordination and, 190
factors influencing, 182–183
housing assistance, 186–187, 187t, 190
models of, 183–188, 187t
overview, 176, 190–191
peer supports and services and, 311
research on housing interventions, 188–190
settings and arrangements for, 177–179, 178t–179t
values and, 180–181, 180t
Humility, 91, 115–116, 284–285
Hydraulic theory of social control, 258
Hypomania, 8, 14
Identity, 75–77
Illness self-management. See also Wellness self￾management
components of illness-management programs and, 
139–148, 142t, 144t, 145t
overview, 135, 136, 152
peer supports and services and, 310
relapse prevention and, 291
supported employment and, 199–202, 201t
Immunity-related disorders. See Health
Inactivity, 276–277
Independent living, 22, 105, 179t
Indiscriminate disclosure, 121t, 122. See also
Disclosure
Individual placement and support (IPS) model, 
114–115, 115t, 197–198, 204, 207–209, 207t
Information from others, 98–99
Information processing, 173–174, 232–233
Inpatient treatment, 61–62, 177, 178t, 179, 270
Insomnia, 168t–169t, 171
Institutional policies, 39–40, 40f
Instrumental support, 54–56
Integrated psychological therapy (IPT), 243
Integrated services. See also Service system
cognitive processing deficits and, 238, 242–245
co-occurring disorders and, 289t, 290
healthcare and, 280–281, 281t
overview, 53
supported education and, 207–208, 207t
vocational and mental health services, 63, 196, 196t
Intensive care coordination (ICC), 156, 159, 160, 161t. 
See also Care coordination
Intensive case management, 186–187, 187t
Internet-based interventions, 142–143, 224, 230, 306. 
See also Mobile interventions; Technology
Interpersonal functioning. See also Social functioning; 
Symptoms
health and, 274
life goals and, 23
overview, 8–9
problem solving and, 143–144, 145t, 243
social disadvantage and, 24–25
strengths-based perspective and, 25–26, 25t
treatment planning and, 91
Intersectionality, 42–43, 76–77
Interventions. See also Early intervention
barriers to engagement and, 79f, 80–81
for cognitive processing deficits, 237–245, 239f
criminal justice system and, 260–268, 265t
helping victims of crime, 268–269
medical illness and, 271t
parenthood-specific education and support, 228–230
Interviews. See also Assessment
diagnosis and, 109
information from others and, 98
medication and, 106
overview, 96–97, 104
symptoms and, 110
Involuntary commitment, 262. See also Criminal 
justice system
Jail-based diversion, 265–266, 265t. See also Criminal 
justice system
Jails and prisons. See also Criminal justice system
peer supports and services and, 310–311
postbooking diversion programs and, 265–267, 265t400 Index
Jails and prisons (cont.)
role of mental illness in criminal behavior and, 
254–258
services within, 267
social disadvantage and, 24
Job clubs, 194t, 195. See also Vocational services
Justice system involvement. See Criminal justice system
Label avoidance, 38–39, 46, 216
Labels, 30–31, 34, 34f
Language, ix–x, 74
Law, 67–68, 174. See also Criminal justice system
Legal interventions, 296–297. See also Criminal justice 
system
Life events, 11–12, 12f
Life goals, 21–24, 27, 44. See also Goals
Lifespan, 270
Lifestyle factors, 276–278
Listening skills, 54, 54t, 55t, 60. See also
Communication skills
Literal homelessness, 177, 178t. See also Housing
Lithium. See Mood stabilizers
Longitudinal services, 56
Long-term retention, 289t, 292
Major depression, 3, 13–14. See also Depression; 
Diagnoses
Management, wellness. See Wellness self-management
Management of care. See Care coordination
Mania, 8, 14, 246–247
Marginal homelessness, 178t
Mass media, 43–44
Measurement and Treatment Research to Improve 
Cognition in Schizophrenia (MATRICS), 232, 
235–237
Medical illness, 270–271, 271t. See also Health
Medical model, 30–31
Medication
adherence and, 61
antianxiety medications, 168t, 171
antidepressant medications, 167t–168t, 170
antipsychotic medications, 166, 167t, 169–170
assessment and, 105–106
cognitive processing deficits and, 232, 237–238
components of illness-management programs and, 
140–142
co-occurring disorders and, 296
decisions regarding, 171–172
early interventions and, 151
effects of, 165–171, 167t–169t
health and, 274, 278–279
historical perspectives, 165–166
housing and, 177
Illness Management and Recovery (IMR) program, 146
mood stabilizers, 168t, 170–171
overview, 164, 175
psychostimulants, 169t, 171
relapse prevention and, 141–142
roles for practitioners, 164–165
sedatives and hypnotics, 168t–169t, 171
self-determination and, 172–175
supported employment and, 205
Memory, 58, 237f, 242
Mental health courts, 266–267. See also Criminal 
justice system
Mental health services, 53, 78–81, 79f. See also
Integrated services; Service system
Mental illness stigma, 30–31. See also Stigma
Mental-health-based specialized response, 263. See also
Criminal justice system
mHealth technologies. See Mobile interventions; 
Technology
Mindfulness, 58, 140
Mobile interventions. See also Internet-based 
interventions; Technology
family-based education and, 224
overview, 61, 148–151
parenthood-specific education and support, 230
relapse prevention and, 142–143
supported education and, 206
Modifiable health behaviors, 276–278
Monitoring, 156, 157. See also Progress monitoring
Monoamine oxide inhibitors (MAOIs). See
Antidepressant medications
Mood disorders, 3, 13–14. See also Bipolar disorder; 
Depression; Diagnoses
Mood stabilizers, 168t, 170–171, 238. See also
Medication
Motivation, 7–8, 25, 25t, 291. See also Symptoms
Motivational interviewing, 94, 139–140, 293–294
Multidisciplinary teams. See Team approach
Multifamily groups, 59, 158, 221, 226–227. See also
Group-based interventions
Muscular/skeletal conditions. See Health
Mutual support groups, 305t, 306–307
Narcolepsy, 169t, 171
Narrative strategies, 117–118, 119, 132
Nation of origin, 71, 71f
National Alliance for the Mentally Ill (NAMI), 128, 
129, 130, 182, 221–222
National Mental Health Awareness Campaign 
(NMHAC), 129, 130
Needs assessment, 100–101, 218–220. See also
Assessment
Neurological disorders. See Health
Neuropsychology, 159
News media, 43–44
Nonadherence, 171–172
Not guilty by reason of insanity (NGRI), 261–262. See 
also Criminal justice system
Nutrition, 276–277
Obesity, 276–277
Objective burden, 212–215, 213f. See also Burden
Observations, 99, 104. See also Assessment
Obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD), 3–4, 14–15. See 
also Anxiety/anxiety disorders; Diagnoses
Occupational therapy, 159
Olmstead v. L. C. (1999), 46, 68
Online interventions. See Internet-based interventions; 
Mobile interventions
Onset of the disorder, 16–17, 16f, 151–152. See also
Course
Outpatient civil commitment, 262. See also Criminal 
justice system
Paranoia, 245–247. See also Delusions
Parenting skills, 228–230
Parents, 41–42, 212–216, 213f. See also FamilyIndex 401
Parents with psychiatric disabilities, 228–230
Partial hospitalization, 63–64. See also Settings for 
psychiatric rehabilitation
Pathways to Housing, 187
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010, 
41, 68
Patient-centered medical homes (PCMHs), 281, 281t
Peer coaching, 209
Peer health navigators (PHNs), 282–284
Peer supports and services
assertive community treatment (ACT) and, 158–159
components of illness-management programs and, 
144, 146
family-based education and, 221–223
historical perspectives, 300–303
overview, 300, 303, 304t, 305t, 307–313
roles in psychiatric rehabilitation and, 65
theoretical bases for, 303–305
trauma-informed care (TIC) framework and, 60
types of peer services, 305–312, 305t
wellness self-management and, 138–139
Peer-provided care coordination, 156, 159, 161t. See 
also Care coordination
Perception, 7, 25, 25t. See also Symptoms
Permanent supported housing (PSH), 186. See also
Supported housing
Persecutory delusions, 245–246. See also Delusions
Personality disorders, 15
Personality models, 259
Person-centered goals, 94–95, 95f. See also Goals
Person–environment focus, 157
Person-focused interventions, 157
Person–place framework, 259–260, 260t
Pharmacological interventions. See Medication
Physical health. See Health
Planned lifetime assistance, 220t, 227
Planning. See Treatment planning
Police contact, 262–265. See also Criminal justice 
system; Jails and prisons
Police-based specialized mental health response, 263, 
264. See also Criminal justice system
Police-based specialized response, 263. See also
Criminal justice system
Policy, 67–68, 77–78, 174, 288. See also Affordable 
Care Act of 2010; Americans with Disabilities Act 
of 1990 (ACT)
Positive psychology, 137–138
Postbooking diversion programs, 265–267, 265t. See 
also Criminal justice system
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 3, 14–15, 59, 
111. See also Anxiety/anxiety disorders; Diagnoses
Poverty, 70, 73–74, 151, 182–183, 258. See also
Financial factors
Prearrest diversion programs, 263. See also Criminal 
justice system
Prebooking programs, 263. See also Criminal justice 
system
Preferences, 196t, 197
Prejudice. See also Stigma
assessment and, 113
erasing public stigma and, 132
essentialism and identity and, 74–75
overview, 29f, 33–34
types of stigma and, 34, 34f
Preoccupation, 245, 246f, 250
Prevention skills, 274, 275f
Primary care services, 35–36, 53, 280–281, 281t, 311. 
See also Healthcare
Principles of psychiatric rehabilitation, 49–53, 49f. See 
also Psychiatric rehabilitation
Prisons. See Jails and prisons
Problem-solving skills, 54, 60, 236, 243
Prodrome, 16–17, 16f
Professional education, 174–175. See also Training for 
practitioners
Progress monitoring, 91–92, 156. See also Assessment
Protest, 124–125
Providers, 79–80, 79f, 271t
Psychiatric diagnoses. See Diagnoses
Psychiatric disabilities. See also Co-occurring 
disorders; Course; Diagnoses; Disabilities; 
individual diagnoses
assessment and, 103–105
cognitive processing deficits and, 232–245, 234f, 
237f, 239f
family experience of, 211–218, 213f
housing and, 177
overview, ix–x, 3–5, 21–24, 26–27, 70, 81
Psychiatric medications. See Medication
Psychiatric rehabilitation
community-based participatory research and, 77–78
disabilities and, 21–24
overview, vii, ix–x, 26–27, 48, 49f, 69
principles, 49–53, 49f
roles, 49f, 64–65
settings, 49f, 61–64
strategies, 49f, 54–61, 54t, 55t
Psychoeducation. See also Education; Family 
psychoeducation
challenging self-stigma and, 117, 118–119
components of illness-management programs and, 
140
early interventions and, 151
family interventions, 220–225, 220t, 226
Illness Management and Recovery (IMR) program, 
146
parenthood-specific education and support, 228–230
technology and, 61
Psychological reactance, 125, 138
Psychopharmacology. See Medication
Psychosis. See also Cognitive processing deficits; 
Schizophrenia
dangerousness and, 9
delusions and, 245–253, 246f, 249f
early interventions and, 151–152
expressed emotion (EE) in families and, 217–218
medications and, 166, 167t, 169–170
overview, 7, 231, 253
schizophrenia and, 12–13
Psychosocial factors, 20, 88, 128, 132
Psychosocial functioning, 19–20, 236, 237f
Psychostimulants, 169t, 171. See also Medication
Psychotropic medication. See Medication
Public stigma. See also Stigma
erasing, 124–131, 129f, 131t
family experience of, 216
impact of, 35–36
interactions of stigma structures with types of 
stigma, 34, 34f
overview, 28, 46, 132402 Index
Quality of life. See also Wellness self-management
assessment and, 105
family experience of, 214
focus on in rehabilitation, 50
housing and, 180t, 184
overview, 22, 135
supported employment and, 199–202, 201t
Questionnaires, 97–98, 109. See also Assessment
Race, 71, 71f, 75, 77, 198–199
Real-world observations, 99. See also Assessment
Recovery. See also Wellness self-management
affirming attitudes and behaviors and, 44, 45
assessment and, 102–103
community-based participatory research and, 77–78
criteria for, 18–20
medications and, 175
overview, vii–viii, 49–50, 135, 152
recovery plan, 91
technology and, 61
Recreation, 23–24, 63–64
Reflecting skills, 54, 55t. See also Listening skills
Rehabilitation, vocational. See Vocational services
Rehabilitation care coordination, 156, 161t. See also
Care coordination
Rehabilitation interventions, 238–245, 239f
Rehabilitation needs, 92–93
Rehabilitation plans
assessment and, 92–93, 116
collaboration and, 93–94
housing and, 176
overview, 91
person-centered goals and, 94–95, 95f
Relapse prevention, 59–60, 61, 141–142, 142t, 146, 291
Relationship factors, 20, 23, 24–25, 91, 274
Relatives. See Family
Religion, 23–24, 71, 71f. See also Spiritual life
Reorganization, 237, 239f, 240–242
Repeated practice, 239, 239f
Residential services. See also Housing
criminal justice system and, 262
overview, 61–62, 177, 178t, 179, 183, 184–186
peer supports and services and, 311
planned lifetime assistance programs and, 227
Resilience, 50–51, 151. See also Coping
Resistance, 139, 171–172
Respiratory illness. See Health
Respite care, 220t, 227
Restoration, 237, 239f
Restorative justice, 269
Rights, 180t, 181
Role functioning, 104, 252–253. See also Social 
functioning
Role plays, 57, 99. See also Skills training
Roles in psychiatric rehabilitation, 49f, 64–65. See also
Psychiatric rehabilitation
Scattered-site programs, 179, 179t, 188
Schizoaffective disorder, 13. See also Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia. See also Diagnoses; Psychosis
affirming attitudes and behaviors and, 45
biological factors, 11
caregiver burden and, 214
cognitive processing deficits and, 232–245, 234f, 
237f, 239f
criteria for recovery and, 19–20
family’s experience of, 59
medications and, 166, 167t, 169–170
overview, 3, 12–13, 231
role of mental illness in criminal behavior and, 
254–256
symptoms and, 8
Schizophreniform disorder, 13. See also Schizophrenia
Second-generation antipsychotic medications. See
Antipsychotic medications; Medication
Secrecy, 120–121, 121t. See also Disclosure
Sedatives and hypnotics, 168t–169t, 171. See also
Medication
Selective disclosure, 121–122, 121t. See also Disclosure
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). See
Antidepressant medications; Medication
Self-determination
affirming attitudes and behaviors and, 44, 45
assessment and, 103, 105
community and service system and, 52–53
components of illness-management programs and, 
140–141
enhancing, 172–175
medications and, 172
overview, vii
Self-determination theory (SDT), 285
Self-efficacy, 36–37, 139, 273–274
Self-esteem, 200
Self-help
components of illness-management programs and, 
144, 146
historical perspectives, 300–301
overview, 64
peer supports and services and, 304–305, 305t, 
306–307
Self-management. See also Wellness self-management
components of illness-management programs and, 
139–148, 142t, 144t, 145t
early interventions and, 151–152
health and, 273–274
historical perspectives, 135–139
mHealth technologies and, 148–151
overview, 135, 152
peer supports and services and, 310
relapse prevention and, 291
self-determination and, 172–175
theories to explain criminal involvement and, 258
Self-report questionnaires, 97–98, 109. See also
Assessment
Self-stigma. See also Stigma
challenging, 117–124, 121t
family experience of, 41–42, 216
identity and, 76
impact of, 36–38, 38f
interactions of stigma structures with types of 
stigma, 34, 34f
overview, 28, 46, 132
paradox of trying to fix, 124
Service system. See also Integrated services
assessment of, 90–91, 113–116, 115t
barriers to engagement and, 78–81, 79f
co-occurring disorders and, 289–293, 289t, 298–299
in jails and prisons, 267
medical illness and, 271t
principles of psychiatric rehabilitation and, 52–53Index 403
social factors that interfere with healthcare service 
engagement and, 281–286, 282f
system change and, 93
Settings for psychiatric rehabilitation, 49f, 61–64, 
78–79, 79f. See also Hospitalization; Inpatient 
treatment
Sexual orientation, 71f, 72
Shared decision making (SDM). See also Decision 
making
assessment and, 94
barriers to engagement and, 80–81
co-occurring disorders and, 293–294, 299
healthcare and, 285–286
overview, 56
person-centered goals and, 94
self-determination and, 173–174, 175
wellness self-management and, 138
Side effects of medications, 105–106, 167t, 169–170, 
278–279. See also Medication
Skills training. See also Coping skills training; Social 
skills training
care coordination and, 157
components of illness-management programs and, 
143–144, 144t, 145t
overview, 57
self-determination and, 173
Sleep problems, 168t–169t, 171
Smartphones, 149–150. See also Mobile interventions; 
Technology
Smoking, 277–278
SOAR (schizophrenia online access to resources), 224
Social and emotional support, 303, 304, 304t
Social avoidance, 120, 121t. See also Avoidance; 
Disclosure
Social comparison theory, 303, 304t, 305
Social determinants, 70–77, 71f
Social disadvantage, 24–25, 73–74, 78–81, 79f
Social factors, 31–33, 243, 258, 271t, 281–286, 282f
Social functioning. See also Interpersonal functioning
affirming attitudes and behaviors and, 45
assessment and, 88, 104
cognitive adaptation training and, 159
cognitive processing deficits and, 236–237, 237f
health and, 273–278, 275f
medical illness and, 271t
problem solving and, 236, 237f
social skills, 88, 243
stigma and, 29–30
Social justice, 70, 75–76
Social learning theory, 303, 304t, 305
Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI), 182
Social skills training, 57, 91, 143–144, 145t, 146. See 
also Skills training
Social structures, 40–41, 131–132, 133t–134t
Social support, 55–56, 274, 276
Social-cognitive rehabilitation, 242–245
Social/personality psychology models, 259
Special education, 207. See also Education
Spiritual life, 23–24, 71, 71f
Stage theories, 233–235, 234f
Stages of change, 107–109, 108f, 290–291
Stagewise treatments, 289t, 290–291
Stereotypes. See also Stigma
assessment and, 113
essentialism and identity and, 74–75
intersectionality and, 76
overview, 29f, 31–33
types of stigma and, 34, 34f
Stigma
affirming attitudes and behaviors instead of, 44–46
caregiver burden and, 214
challenging self-stigma and, 117–124, 121t
changing social structures and, 131–132, 133t–134t
effects of social disadvantage and, 73
erasing public stigma, 124–131, 129f, 131t
family experience of, 41–42, 216, 218
healthcare and, 279
identity and, 76
impact of public stigma, 35–36
impact of self-stigma, 36–38, 38f
interactions of stigma structures with types of 
stigma, 34, 34f
intersectionality and, 42–43
label avoidance, 38–39
mass media and, 43–44
mHealth technologies and, 151
opposite of, 44–46
overview, 28, 29–34, 29f, 46–47, 132
peer supports and services and, 311
role of mental illness in criminal behavior and, 
254–256
structural stigma and, 39–41, 40f
Strategies of psychiatric rehabilitation, 49f, 54–61, 54t, 
55t. See also Psychiatric rehabilitation
Strengths-based care coordination, 156, 161t. See also
Care coordination
Strengths-based perspective
affirming attitudes and behaviors and, 44–46
assessment and, 88, 101–102
community-based participatory research and, 77
overview, 5, 25–26, 25t, 27, 50
Stress, 11–12, 12f, 20, 199–200
Structural stigma, 34, 34f, 39–41, 40f. See also Stigma
Subjective burden, 212–215, 213f. See also Burden
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration (SAMHSA), 128–129, 129f
Substance use. See also Substance use disorders (SUDs)
assessment and, 103, 110–111
course of the disorder and, 21
dangerousness and, 9
housing and, 187
motivational interviewing and, 139
overview, 27, 277–278
peer supports and services and, 311
relapse prevention and, 59–60
role of mental illness in criminal behavior and, 255
Substance use disorders (SUDs). See also Co-occurring 
disorders; Substance use
current research questions, 298–299
early clinical and research approaches, 288–289
overview, 287–288
recent clinical approaches, 293–298, 293t
service systems and, 289–293, 289t
Supervised housing programs, 179t, 188–189
Supported education, 205–209, 207t. See also
Education
Supported employment. See also Employment; 
Vocational services
challenges in, 203–205
concerns regarding, 202–203404 Index
Supported employment (cont.)
early interventions and, 151
fidelity assessment and, 114–115, 115t
implementing, 200–202, 201t
outcome research, 208
overview, 62–63, 194t, 195–205, 196t, 201t, 
209–210
treatment planning and, 91
Supported housing, 183, 186–190, 187t. See also
Housing
Symptoms. See also Affect; Behavior; Cognition; 
Dangerousness; Diagnoses; Interpersonal 
functioning; Motivation; Perception
assessment and, 100, 110
caregiver burden and, 214
cognitive rehabilitation and, 242
course of the disorder and, 16–18, 16f, 19t
criteria for recovery and, 19–20
early interventions and, 151–152
expressed emotion (EE) in families and, 218
health and, 272
housing and, 176
insight into, 10
making a diagnosis, 15–16
management of, 20
monitoring, 61
overview, 6–10
Targeted programs, 238–242, 239f
Task analysis, 111–112
Team approach, 64–65, 78, 116, 158
Technology. See also Internet-based interventions; 
Mobile interventions
online support groups, 306
overview, 61
relapse prevention and, 142–143
research on, viii–ix
in targeted cognitive rehabilitation, 242
Tetracyclic medications. See Antidepressant 
medications
Thresholds rehabilitation center, 51, 64, 228–230
Training for practitioners, 66, 79–80, 284, 302
Trajectory of the disorder, 16, 16f, 17, 27. See also
Course
Transition planning, 267–268
Transitional employment, 62, 194–195, 194t. See also
Employment; Vocational services
Transitional group home, 184–185, 188–189. See also
Housing
Trauma, 60–61, 111, 128, 269
Trauma-informed care (TIC) framework, 60–61, 269
Treatment, 38–39, 46. See also Interventions; 
Treatment planning
Treatment adherence. See Adherence
Treatment planning
assessment and, 105–107, 116
care coordination and, 156, 157
cognitive adaptation training (CAT) and, 244
collaboration and, 93–94
components of illness-management programs and, 
140–141
health and, 279
overview, 91
rehabilitation planning and, 92–93
Tricyclic medications. See Antidepressant medications; 
Medication
Twelve-step programs, 294–295
Urinary/reproductive disorders. See Health
Values
acceptance and commitment therapy and, 58–59
assessment and, 93–96, 95f
barriers to engagement and, 80
housing and, 180–181, 180t
overview, 69
Vicarious stigma, 41–42, 216. See also Stigma
Victimhood, 75–76
Victimization, 268–269
Violence, 9, 215–216, 254–256
Vocational functioning, 104
Vocational services. See also Employment; Settings for 
psychiatric rehabilitation; Supported employment; 
Work
cognitive processing deficits and, 244–245
early interventions and, 151
examples of accommodations and, 133t–134t
integrated services and, 53
overview, 62–63, 209–210
types of vocational rehabilitation, 193–195, 194t
Weight management, 276–277, 278
Wellness self-management. See also Quality of life; 
Recovery; Self-management
historical perspectives, 136–138
overview, 135, 152
peer supports and services and, 310
self-determination and, 172–175
technology and, 61
Work, 192, 193–195, 194t. See also Employment; 
Supported employment; Vocational services
