Private DebtFounded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publishing 
company in the United States. With offices in North America, Europe, 
Australia, and Asia, Wiley is globally committed to developing and marketing 
print and electronic products and services for our customers’ professional 
and personal knowledge and understanding.
The Wiley Finance series contains books written specifically for finance 
and investment professionals as well as sophisticated individual investors 
and their financial advisors. Book topics range from portfolio manage￾ment to e-commerce, risk management, financial engineering, valuation and 
financial instrument analysis, as well as much more.
For a list of available titles, visit our website at www.wileyfinance.com.Yield, Safety and the Emergence 
of Alternative Lending
Second Edition
STEPHEN L. NESBITT
Private DebtCopyright © 2023 by Cliffwater LLC.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or 
otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright 
Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through 
payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the Web 
at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the 
Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, 
(201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Trademarks: Wiley and the Wiley logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of John Wiley 
& Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the United States and other countries and may not be used 
without written permission. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their 
best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect 
to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any 
implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may 
be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and 
strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a 
professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss 
of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, 
consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please 
contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside 
the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some 
material included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or 
in print-on-demand. If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in 
the version you purchased, you may download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. 
For more information about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Names: Nesbitt, Stephen L., 1953- author.
Title: Private debt : yield, safety, and the emergence of alternative 
 lending / Stephen L. Nesbitt.
Description: Second Edition. | Hoboken,  New Jersey. : Wiley, [2023] | 
 Series: Wiley finance | Revised edition of the author’s Private debt, [2019]
Identifiers: LCCN 2022051297 (print) | LCCN 2022051298 (ebook) | ISBN 
 9781119944393 (cloth) | ISBN 9781119944416 (adobe pdf) | ISBN 
 9781119944409 (epub)
Subjects: LCSH: Investments. | Small business—Finance. | Bank loans.
Classification: LCC HG4521 .N427 2023  (print) | LCC HG4521  (ebook) | DDC 
 658.15/2—dc23/eng/20221024
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022051297
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022051298
Cover Design: Wiley
Cover Image: © s_maria/Shutterstockv
Contents
Introduction ix
List of Exhibits xv
Acknowledgments xxi
CHAPTER 1
Overview of US Middle Market Corporate Direct Lending 1
CHAPTER 2
The Historical Performance of US Middle Market Direct Loans 9
CHAPTER 3
Performance Comparisons to Other Asset Classes 23
CHAPTER 4
Current Yield or Yield to Maturity? 37
CHAPTER 5
Comparative Credit Loss Rates 43
CHAPTER 6
How Liquid Are Direct Loans? 49
CHAPTER 7
Middle Market Loans as a Hedge Against Rising Interest Rates 53
CHAPTER 8
Credit as a Separate Asset Class 57
CHAPTER 9
Senior and Unitranche Direct Lending 65CHAPTER 10
Loans and the Theory of Credit 69
CHAPTER 11
Risk Premiums in US Middle Market Lending 87
CHAPTER 12
Covenants and the Loan Agreement 95
CHAPTER 13
Should Direct Loan Portfolios Be Leveraged? 99
CHAPTER 14
The Democratization of Alternatives 107
CHAPTER 15
Business Development Companies (BDCs) 111
CHAPTER 16
Interval and Tender Funds 127
CHAPTER 17
Selecting Direct Lending Managers 131
CHAPTER 18
Loan Valuation 153
CHAPTER 19
Investment Fees 161
CHAPTER 20
Portfolio Construction 167
CHAPTER 21
Expected Returns and Risks from Direct Lending 181
CHAPTER 22
Asset Allocation 191
CHAPTER 23
Direct Lending Performance Under a Volcker-like Fed Policy Regime 195
vi ContentsContents vii
CHAPTER 24
Enter SOFR 201
CHAPTER 25
European Middle Market Direct Lending 207
CHAPTER 26
The Borrower’s Perspective 215
CHAPTER 27
Enhanced Lending 223
Conclusion 271
Glossary 275
About the Author 283
Index Citations 285
Index 287ix
Introduction
T
he timing of this second edition is not accidental. The global economic 
and financial markets are experiencing tremendous volatility, perhaps 
even a paradigm shift, and investors are beginning to question the tradi￾tional 60–40 asset mix and buy-on-the-dip strategies that have served them 
well in the past. For the first six months of 2022 the 60–40 asset mix is 
down almost 20%, a drawdown only matched by periods of depression 
(1932), financial crisis (2008), or stagflation (1974). At the same time, infla￾tion is on a tear, exceeding 9% annualized for the same six months.
Making matters worse, government bonds, which have served as the 
asset “anchor to windward” for decades, have seemingly lost that position 
in the currently inflationary environment as interest rates rise. Even Treas￾ury Inflation Protection Securities (TIPS) have struggled despite their infla￾tion hedging characteristics as the increase in real yields have caused TIPS 
returns to fall 9% for the first six months of 2022, almost equal to the 
−13% loss for ten-year Treasuries.
An early reversal in the current inflationary environment appears 
unlikely. The cure for inflation is unfortunately stagflation, with the Federal 
Reserve’s new aggressive interest rate hikes likely to push the US economy 
into recession.
This economic reordering puts investors in a tough spot. Even after the 
recent 20% price decline, stocks remain expensive with price-earnings ratios 
equal to 19 times earnings. By comparison, stock price-earnings ratios aver￾aged nine times earnings during the 1970s stagflation period. Unfortunately, 
stocks may still be expensive even after their recent bear market decline.
Treasury bond yields now exceed 3%, but these higher levels may still 
be unacceptable to investors when inflation rates are closer to 10% than 
zero, and inflation expectations equal 4% over the next two years and 3% 
over the next 10 years. Historically, Treasury bonds yield 1.5% in excess 
of inflation, a yield that had offered investors a reasonable 1.5% inflation￾adjusted or real return. A return to this historical bond pricing regime would 
make Treasury bonds vulnerable to further price declines of 10–15% to 
restore investor demand.x Introduction
With an outlook for both stocks and bonds in question, it is not surpris￾ing that investors are looking for alternatives to the 60–40 mix.
One obvious 60–40 replacement is cash. Holding cash short term may 
make a lot of sense for some investors, particularly those who have short￾term time horizons or potentially large financial obligations. But holding 
cash is a lose-a-little strategy. Over time, holding cash earns a return that 
matches inflation but no more. There is no wealth creation, just wealth 
preservation. Of course, if investors can successfully market time by hold￾ing cash until stocks and bonds reach their lows and then buy the 60–40 
portfolio, then they could achieve both preservation and wealth creation. 
Unfortunately, market timing has proven to be almost impossible to succeed 
at with investors more often losing money at it rather than making money. 
While holding cash may appear the safe thing to do, investors more often 
than not sell low, buy high in their cash decisions, suffering losses over time.
The first edition of Private Debt, published in 2019, was intended to 
introduce investors to a relatively brand-new asset class, one that offered 
high yield in an otherwise low interest rate world. Since that time, private 
debt has become perhaps the fastest growing investment class globally. This 
second edition documents that growth and success, but more importantly it 
presents an investment case why private debt may be an ideal investment in 
the newly uncertain inflationary world ahead. This investment case rests pri￾marily on the floating-rate nature of middle market corporate loans, which 
protects investor wealth against inflation and, second, the additional yield 
spread that allows for wealth creation. These “all-weather” wealth preserva￾tion and wealth creation characteristics will likely continue to make private 
debt one of the fastest growing alternative asset classes.
The focus of this book, like the first edition, is on lending to middle 
market companies, primarily in the US. Corporate lending had traditionally 
been the business of commercial banks, but the global financial crisis and 
ensuing regulatory backlash created an opportunity for nonbank private 
asset managers to replace bankers as primary lenders to a large swath of 
middle market businesses. The economic recovery, albeit slow, found many 
middle market companies looking for debt capital for growth or refinanc￾ing. With banks in retrenchment, these companies found asset managers 
to be willing lenders. Lacking the deposit capital available to banks, the 
new direct lenders in turn have sought capital from institutional investors 
hungry for yields closer to 10% than the 1 to 3% available from tradi￾tional sources.
Though estimates vary, the size of the corporate direct loan market in 
the US today is estimated to be $1 trillion, up from $400 billion in 2019, 
a 2.5-fold increase. The increase is a product of both supply and demand. 
Corporate borrowing continues its trend toward private lenders, primarily Introduction xi
specialized asset managers, preferring the speed, flexibility, and size of 
capital that asset managers bring relative to banks. Demand from capital 
providers has also grown as investors, primarily institutional but also retail, 
have become increasingly comfortable with the risks associated with direct 
lending that go along with the higher yields.
Chapters 1–6 collectively describe US middle market corporate direct 
lending, addressing the three characteristics that broadly define any asset 
class: return, risk, and liquidity. Private debt, including middle market cor￾porate loans, has long been a mystery to investors for lack of credible histor￾ical data. The findings in this book would not be possible without a research 
effort launched in 2015 to construct a database and index for direct mid￾dle market corporate loans and published in a major investment journal.1
That research covering return and risk is updated through March 31, 2022, 
in this second edition along with a new chapter addressing liquidity. The 
recent economic downturn associated with the COVID crisis has been a use￾ful stress test for the resilience of direct lending to go along with the 2008 
Financial Crisis covered in the first edition.
Chapter 7 is new, focusing in on the relationship between movements in 
interest rates and middle market loan returns. Unlike traditional investment￾grade bonds, whose price goes down as rates rise, middle market loans pro￾vide a hedge against rising rates.
As with the first edition, Chapter 8 argues that fixed income as an asset 
class is more appropriately divided into two separate asset classes: an inter￾est rate (Treasuries) asset class and a credit asset class. Instead of stock 
and fixed income allocations, investors should think in terms of three asset 
classes: stock, credit, and interest rate allocations. Our recommendation for 
separation five years ago has now gained broad acceptance among institu￾tional investors.
Chapter 9 is also new. The demand for direct loans among investors 
has increasingly focused on senior only loans and less on second lien loans 
and mezzanine bonds. Since the first edition an index inclusive only of first 
lien and unitranche direct loans has been developed with results covered in 
Chapter 9. Later in Chapter 27 another index focused on just venture lend￾ing is introduced.
Chapter 10 provides a foundation for the three-asset view by theoreti￾cally splitting fixed income into separate credit and interest rate components 
using option pricing models developed 50 years ago by Robert Merton, 
1
Stephen L. Nesbitt, “The Investment Opportunity in U.S. Middle Market Direct 
Lending,” The Journal of Alternative Investments (Summer 2017).xii Introduction
Fisher Black, and Stephen Cox. Their concept that any credit instrument 
can be modeled as a risk-free rate plus a put option forms the basis for sen￾sitivity analysis and simulation to better understand the behavior of yield, 
return, and risk for various types of direct corporate loans and the value of 
covenants.
Chapter 10 is particularly useful in setting up Chapter 11. Investors first 
looking at direct lending are surprised by, and suspicious of, their higher 
yields. Chapter 11 provides an explanation for the high yields in direct loans 
by dissecting them into six components, each associated with a distinct 
risk factor potentially found in loans, and each offering an extra yield, or 
risk premium, as compensation for the specific risk factor. This yield archi￾tecture provides investors with a method for understanding and comparing 
absolute yields.
Chapter 12 takes a closer look at covenants, a real concern in 2021 and 
early 2022 when covenants were stripped from new loans in “covenant-lite” 
deals. The theoretical presentation in Chapter 10 includes an application of 
the Black-Cox model that gives a formulation for measuring the opportu￾nity cost of covenant-lite in yield-equivalent units. Under one set of assump￾tions, for example, the Black-Cox model values a covenant package as being 
worth 1% in yield. Chapter 12 provides an inventory of what comprises a 
typical loan agreement, including the elements of a full covenant package. 
Its purpose is to provide the reader a practical knowledge of the types of 
covenants in a loan agreement that are covered from a theoretical perspec￾tive in Chapter 10.
Investments that go terribly wrong generally have too much leverage or 
involve fraud. Many investors in direct corporate loans apply some leverage 
to enhance return. Chapter 13 examines the impact of leverage on portfolio 
return and risk and provides guidance to investors on what leverage level 
might be appropriate. Unlike traditional stock or bond portfolios, where 
return and risk characteristics are similar among managers, direct lending 
offers investors many knobs that can materially differentiate one portfolio 
from another.
Chapters 14–17 discuss alternative forms for investing in direct corpo￾rate loans and some of the practicalities. Chapter 14 is new and highlights 
the current trend to offer alternative investments to retail investors. BDCs 
in Chapter 15 and a new Chapter 16 covering interval funds and tender 
funds together present popular investment vehicles, whereby individuals can 
access direct loans for personal investment.
Chapters 17–20 address a range of practical questions about direct loan 
investing, including manager selection, loan valuation, fees, and portfolio 
construction.Introduction xiii
Having covered what direct lending portfolios might look like and 
how they work, Chapters 21 and 22 together show how institutional inves￾tors can use the data and findings covered in previous chapters to validate 
long-term allocations to direct corporate loans within existing diversified 
portfolios using standard asset allocation technology. Chapter 22 provides 
examples of optimized portfolios showing that allocations to direct lending, 
both unlevered and levered, enhance risk-adjusted return.
Chapter  23 is also new and addresses how direct lending and other 
asset classes might perform during a stagflation scenario. Having man￾aged investments during the last stagflationary period, this author is keenly 
aware of the potential destruction of capital that might result if a similar 
scenario unfolds.
Chapters 24–26 each have a narrow focus. Chapter 24 is more technical 
in nature but important to direct lending as it is to all floating rate financial 
contracts. It discusses the shift from Libor to SOFR that is underway.
The research focus contained in this book is on direct corporate lend￾ing in the US middle market. But the same financial events that created the 
direct lending market in the US also occurred in Europe, though to different 
degrees. Chapter 25 provides an overview of the direct lending market in 
Europe with comparisons to the US market. Unlike Europe, direct lending in 
Asia is in its early development stages. Chapter 26 reverses the perspective 
from lender to borrower and identifies what characteristics a middle market 
corporate borrower looks for in a lender.
The book concludes with a view of direct corporate lending as part 
of a larger private debt market. Direct lending should be viewed as a core 
component with breadth of opportunity and characteristics that should 
make investors comfortable with it as a long-term investment. Other private 
debt investments tend to be smaller in market size and might be viewed as 
enhanced lending with higher return potential but higher risk. Chapter 27 
provides short descriptions of 10 types of private debt outside direct lend￾ing that might be considered as complementary investments to a dedicated 
private debt allocation.
Together these chapters are intended to provide readers with a strong 
foundation for understanding private debt. But a real risk is that the reader 
gets lost or frustrated among all the data and analysis found within these 
chapters. That would be a shame because private debt is perhaps the easiest 
of alternative asset classes to understand, captured by a simple equation:
Private Debt Return Income Realized Gains Losses
Unrealiz
 
ed Gains Losses Feesxiv Introduction
The components of this equation are fairly simple to understand and 
the content of the chapters ahead will be tied back to it to help the reader 
with a lifeline should it be necessary.
The first edition successfully introduced direct lending and private debt 
to an audience that mostly was unfamiliar with the subject. Perhaps the 
tremendous growth and acceptance of private debt over the subsequent five 
years was modestly influenced by that first edition. This second edition is 
intended not only to refresh many of the numbers that have become stale 
but also to demonstrate that, as predicted, direct lending continues to per￾form as expected and should perform well in the face of the many chal￾lenges ahead.xv
List of Exhibits
Exhibit 1.1 Breakdown of the $12.6 trillion US corporate debt market.
Exhibit 1.2 Capital structure of $40 million EBITDA company.
Exhibit 2.1 Cliffwater Direct Lending Index performance.
Exhibit 2.2 Components of direct lending returns, September 2004 to 
March 2022.
Exhibit 2.3 Direct loan income as percentage of loan asset value, rolling 
four quarters.
Exhibit 2.4 PIK as a percentage of total income in middle market 
direct loans.
Exhibit 2.5 Net realized gains (losses) as percentage of loan assets, rolling 
four quarters and cumulative returns.
Exhibit 2.6 Net unrealized gains (losses) as percentage of loan assets, roll￾ing four quarters and cumulative returns.
Exhibit 2.7 Direct loan total return as percentage of loan asset value, roll￾ing four-quarter returns.
Exhibit 3.1 Asset class return and risk, September 2004 to December 2021.
Exhibit 3.2 Asset class cumulative returns (growth of $1.00), September 
2004 to December 2021.
Exhibit 3.3 Asset class return versus risk, September 2004 to December 
2021.
Exhibit 3.4 Asset class cumulative total returns through the GFC, 
September 2007 to March 2011.
Exhibit 3.5 Asset class max drawdown and recovery period during 
the GFC.
Exhibit 3.6 Direct lending performance attribution during/after the GFC, 
June 2008 to December 2010.xvi List of Exhibits
Exhibit 3.7 Asset class cumulative total returns through the COVID 
crisis, December 2019 to December 2020.
Exhibit 3.8 Asset class max drawdown and recovery period during the 
COVID crisis.
Exhibit 3.9 Direct lending performance attribution during/after the 
COVID crisis, December 2019 to December 2020.
Exhibit 4.1 Direct loan fair value versus par (principal) value.
Exhibit 4.2 Current yield and yield-to-three-year takeout for the Cliffwa￾ter Direct Lending Index.
Exhibit 4.3 Yields for direct loans (CDLI), high-yield bonds, and lever￾aged loans.
Exhibit 5.1 Credit loss comparison, 2005 to 2021.
Exhibit 5.2 CDLI nonaccruals and recovery rates, September 2007 to 
March 2022.
Exhibit 6.1 Liquidity measurement for US middle market direct loan 
assets.
Exhibit 7.1 US short-term interest rates versus inflation, August 1954 to 
June 2022.
Exhibit 7.2 Impact of interest rate changes on Bloomberg Aggregate 
Bond Index and CDLI, Q4 2004 to Q1 2022.
Exhibit 7.3 Impact of interest rate changes on Bloomberg Aggregate 
Bond Index and CDLI, Q4 2004 to Q1 2022.
Exhibit 8.1 Return and risk for interest rates, equity, and credit, 
December 31, 1999, to June 30, 2022.
Exhibit 8.2 The broader private debt landscape.
Exhibit 8.3 Descriptions of enhanced private debt strategies.
Exhibit 9.1 Growth in senior secured direct lending (as percentage 
of CDLI).
Exhibit 9.2 CDLI, CDLI-S comparison, March 31, 2022.
Exhibit 9.3 Historical CDLI, CDLI-S, T-Bill yields, September 2010 to 
March 2022.
Exhibit 9.4 Comparison of CDLI-S and CDLI performance.List of Exhibits xvii
Exhibit 10.1 Merton model representation of debt costs and loan-to-value 
ratios for private debt.
Exhibit 10.2 Credit risk premium and firm risk.
Exhibit 10.3 Unlevered firm volatility (standard deviation) by industry 
group.
Exhibit 10.4 Credit risk premium and the risk-free rate.
Exhibit 10.5 Credit risk premium and time to maturity.
Exhibit 10.6 Simulation results for a hypothetical first lien, unitranche, 
and second lien loan.
Exhibit 10.7 Simulation results for hypothetical first lien and second 
lien loans.
Exhibit 10.8 Simulation results for hypothetical first lien, unitranche, and 
second lien 100 loan portfolios.
Exhibit 10.9 Simulation results for hypothetical first lien and second lien 
loan portfolios.
Exhibit 10.10 Simulated versus actual risk calculations.
Exhibit 10.11 Illustration of down-and-in option.
Exhibit 10.12 Debt costs with/without covenants (a theoretical representa￾tion using the Black-Cox model).
Exhibit 10.13 Simulation results for hypothetical unitranche 100  loan 
portfolio with and without covenants.
Exhibit 11.1 Available risk premiums in direct US middle market corpo￾rate loans, March 31, 2022.
Exhibit 11.2 Time-varying middle market loan risk premiums, June 2016 
to March 2022.
Exhibit 13.1 Indicative fee and leverage specifications for a direct lending 
portfolio.
Exhibit 13.2 Indicative direct lending portfolio after fees, expenses, 
and leverage.
Exhibit 13.3 Performance simulation for direct lending portfolios with 
leverage, September 2004 to March 2022.
Exhibit 13.4 Simulated return and risk for levered direct lending portfo￾lios, September 2004 to March 2022.xviii List of Exhibits
Exhibit 13.5 Factors explaining the cost of financing leverage.
Exhibit 15.1 BDC industry statistics, March 31, 2022.
Exhibit 15.2 Private, non-listed business development companies, March 31, 
2022.
Exhibit 15.3 Publicly traded business development companies, June 30, 
2022.
Exhibit 15.4 Comparison of Cliffwater BDC Index and five-year 
Treasury yields.
Exhibit 15.5 Cliffwater BDC Index price premium or discount to NAV.
Exhibit 15.6 Comparison of market return and net operating return for 
Cliffwater BDC Index.
Exhibit 15.7 Comparison of price return and NAV return for Cliffwater 
BDC Index.
Exhibit 16.1 Private, non-listed credit interval funds, June 30, 2022.
Exhibit 17.1 Performance comparison of two direct lending managers.
Exhibit 17.2 Yield (interest income) by direct loan manager, 2005 to 2021.
Exhibit 17.3 Manager exposure to direct loan risk factors, March 31, 2022.
Exhibit 17.4 Net realized gains (losses) for direct lending managers and 
the Cliffwater Direct Lending Index, by year.
Exhibit 17.5 Cumulative net realized gains (losses) for direct lending asset 
managers and the Cliffwater Direct Lending Index (heavy 
dark line), September 2004 to March 2022.
Exhibit 17.6 Total return for direct lending managers and the Cliffwater 
Direct Lending Index, by year.
Exhibit 17.7 Due diligence checklist for middle market direct lender.
Exhibit 17.8 Portfolio characteristics for direct lending private partnerships.
Exhibit 18.1 Price comparison for direct loans, high-yield bonds, and 
bank loans, March 2004 to March 2022.
Exhibit 18.2 Comparison of fair value versus cost (principal) value for 
senior and subordinated loans within the CDLI, September 
2004 to March 2022.
Exhibit 18.3 Price relationship between middle market loans and liquid 
leveraged loans.List of Exhibits xix
Exhibit 19.1 Direct lender fees.
Exhibit 20.1 Ten-year state pension fund returns ending June 30, 2021, 
total fund and by asset class.
Exhibit 20.2 Distribution of state pension asset class returns, total fund 
and by asset class.
Exhibit 20.3 CDLI industry weightings, March 31, 2022.
Exhibit 20.4 Russell 2000 industry weightings, March 31, 2022.
Exhibit 21.1 Calculation of expected return for corporate direct lending.
Exhibit 21.2 Expected return, risk, and correlations across asset classes.
Exhibit 22.1 Optimized portfolios with direct lending, unlevered and 
levered.
Exhibit 23.1 Direct lending return forecasts.
Exhibit 23.2 Direct lending compared to other asset classes.
Exhibit 23.3 60-year history of interest rates and price-earnings ratios.
Exhibit 24.1 SOFR adoption rates in 2022.
Exhibit 25.1 Comparison of European and US direct lending markets.
Exhibit 26.1 US sponsor survey on choosing bank versus nonbank financing.
Exhibit 26.2 European sponsor survey on choosing bank versus nonbank 
financing.
Exhibit 27.1 Model pricing of CLO notes and CLO equity.
Exhibit 27.2 Venture direct loan performance (CDLI-Venture).xxi
Acknowledgments
T
here are many individuals at Cliffwater to thank, but especially Josh Bel￾vedere, Steven Harvey, Philip Hasbrouck, Stanley Liu, Joaquin Lujan, Eli 
Sokolov, Jeff Topor, and Mark Williams whose collective expertise contrib￾uted significantly to Chapter 27.
Special thanks goes to the team at John Wiley & Sons: Bill Fallon, 
executive editor; Samantha Enders, assistant editor; Purvi Patel, production 
managing editor; Samantha Wu, cover specialist. Thanks also to Susan Ger￾aghty at 1000 Books and Julie Kerr.CHAPTER 1
1
T
his book focuses on the investment opportunity in US middle market 
corporate direct lending (or direct loans), a large and rapidly growing 
segment of the global private debt market. Direct loans are illiquid (non￾traded) loans made to US middle market companies, generally with annual 
EBITDA ranging from $10 million to $100 million. These middle market 
corporate borrowers are of an equivalent size to those companies found in 
the Russell 2000 Index of medium and small stocks but, in aggregate, they 
represent a much larger part of the US economy compared to the Index. The 
US corporate middle market includes nearly 200,000 individual businesses 
representing one-third of private sector GDP and employing approximately 
50 million people.1
Exhibit  1.1 illustrates where direct corporate lending fits within the 
multiple sources of long-term debt financing provided to US companies 
as of March 31, 2022. Long-term debt financing to US companies totaled 
approximately $12.6 trillion. By comparison, equity financing to US compa￾nies totaled approximately $24 trillion.
Traded, investment-grade bonds represent almost one-half of corporate 
debt financing, but this debt is issued by the largest US companies. High-yield 
(non-investment grade) bonds and bank loans represent almost one-half 
of investment-grade bond issuance. These companies are also larger, with 
EBITDA over $100 million where scale allows them to access the traded 
broker markets. Bank commercial lending, the market with which direct 
lenders compete, is $2.6 trillion in size.
The size of the direct lending US middle market loans is estimated to 
equal $1.0 trillion as of March 31, 2022. While small compared to tradi￾tional sources of corporate financing, the direct loan market has significant 
Overview of US Middle Market 
Corporate Direct Lending
1
National Center for the Middle Market.2 PRIVATE DEBT
potential for growth if it can continue to claim market share from the bank 
commercial and industrial (C&I) loan business. In fact, direct lending has 
grown 250% from its $400 billion size in 2019. That is well in excess of 
the roughly 40% growth across the other debt categories.
THE RISE OF NONBANK LENDING
Commercial banks have been the traditional lenders to US middle mar￾ket companies. The Federal Reserve reports that US banks hold roughly 
$2.6 trillion in C&I loans on their balance sheets, which is likely mostly 
composed of middle market business loans. Banks also make loans to larger 
companies that are not held on their balance sheets. Instead, these loans are 
sold and syndicated across many investors, which are subsequently traded 
as private transactions in the secondary market. These traded loans are also 
referred to as broadly syndicated loans (BSLs), also known as “leveraged 
EXHIBIT 1.1 Breakdown of the $12.6 trillion US corporate debt market. 
Source: Bloomberg, Federal Reserve Bank, Cliffwater.Overview of US Middle Market Corporate Direct Lending 3
loans.” The size of the leveraged loan market is roughly $1.4 trillion, or just 
over one-half the size of bank C&I loans. These larger traded bank loans 
have become very popular among institutional and retail investors through 
pooled accounts, mutual funds, and ETFs, providing a yield advantage to 
investment-grade bonds while maintaining daily liquidity.
Loans to middle market companies are too small for general syndica￾tion and therefore are held by the originating bank, sometimes with a few 
co-investors. The investment opportunity in middle market loans princi￾pally came about as an outcome of the 2008–2009 global financial crisis 
(GFC), and the years following, when increased capital requirements and 
tighter regulation on corporate lending made holding middle market corpo￾rate loans more expensive and restrictive. As banks decreased their lending 
activity, nonbank lenders took their place to address the continued demand 
for debt financing from corporate borrowers.
Direct loans are typically originated and held by asset managers, which 
get their capital from private investors rather than bank deposits. Asset 
managers are regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission and are 
not subject to the same investment restrictions placed on banks. Investors 
are primarily institutional rather than retail, representing insurance com￾panies, pension funds, endowments, and foundations. Retail investors have 
had access to direct loans mainly through publicly traded business develop￾ment companies (BDCs), which are discussed in Chapter 15.
There are approximately 250 asset managers in the US that invest in 
direct middle market corporate loans, up from 180 in 2019. Many of them 
began direct lending during and soon after the GFC and recruited experi￾enced credit professionals from banks that either went into bankruptcy (Bear 
Sterns, Lehman Brothers) or had their activities sharply curtailed. Impor￾tant also were the financial problems faced by GE Capital, the financing 
arm of General Electric, during the GFC. GE Capital, through its subsidiary 
Antares, was at one point the largest US nonbank lender. The subsequent 
exodus of credit and deal professionals provided significant intellectual 
capital to the nascent nonbank lending industry.
While banks continue to hold a key advantage over asset managers by 
having a low cost of funds (i.e., bank deposits), this is offset by higher capi￾tal requirements, which ties up shareholder equity, and restrictions on the 
type of business loans that can be made by banks and the amount of lever￾age they can offer to borrowers. While these regulations may ease over time, 
a less likely prospect with a Democratic administration, the loss of talent 
during and after the GFC, and subsequent weakening of banks’ relation￾ships with borrowers, makes this a daunting prospect.
Finally, the growth of nonbank lending has also been helped by a new 
type of corporate borrower, the private equity sponsor. Private equity has 4 PRIVATE DEBT
seen steady growth since it began in the early 1980s but its role in the US 
economy has picked up significantly since the GFC, particularly in the mid￾dle market. These private equity–sponsored companies are professionally 
managed, use debt strategically in financing, and require timeliness, con￾sistency, and flexibility from lenders, as well as attractive pricing. The advent 
of direct lending by professional asset managers has given private equity 
sponsors a preferred source of financing. Currently roughly 75% of direct 
loans are backed by private equity sponsors.
DIRECT LENDING INVESTORS
Investor interest in middle market direct lending has been driven by several 
factors. First and foremost are their attractive yields, ranging from 6% for 
the least risky senior loans to 12% for riskier subordinated loans. These 
yields compare with 2–3% for liquid investment grade bonds, as repre￾sented by the Bloomberg Aggregate Bond Index, a widely used investment 
grade bond index, and 4–5% for broadly syndicated loans, as represented 
by the Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 Index, an index used to 
track the broadly syndicated loan market.
Investors are also attracted to direct loans because coupon payments to 
lenders (investors) are tied to changes in interest rates and have relatively 
short maturities (typically five- to seven-year terms, which are typically 
refinanced well before the end of the loan term). The floating rate feature 
is particularly important in periods of rising interest rates. Interest rates 
for direct loans are set by a short-term “base rate” or “reference rate” like 
three-month Libor, US Treasury bills, or now SOFR, plus a fixed spread to 
compensate for longer-term default risk and illiquidity. Direct loan investors 
will see their yields increase as interest rates rise through quarterly adjust￾ments to their base rate. In many respects, rising interest rates are beneficial 
for direct loan investors.
Conversely, most traditional bond funds primarily hold fixed rate secu￾rities, whose yields do not adjust to rising interest rates. Instead, rising rates 
cause bond prices to fall, in line with the duration of the bonds. A typical 
bond mutual fund has a five-year duration, a measure of average bond life. 
In this example, if interest rates for bonds with a five-year weighted aver￾age duration rise one percentage point, the bond fund will experience a 5% 
decline in value (five-year duration multiplied by 1% interest rate increase), 
offsetting any benefit from increased yield. Direct loans have only a three￾month duration, and a one percentage point increase in rates will have only 
a temporary 0.25% (25 basis point) price decline. The direct loan yield will 
reset at the next calendar quarter and its value will return to par.Overview of US Middle Market Corporate Direct Lending 5
Direct loans generally have a shorter life than their five- to seven-year 
maturities suggest, which can be both good and bad. The average life of a 
direct loan has averaged approximately three years, much shorter than their 
stated maturity due to their being refinanced due to corporate actions, such 
as acquisition of the borrower by another company or prepayment by the 
borrower to get a lower interest rate. The good news is that direct loans 
are not as illiquid as their maturity suggests. At a three-year effective life, 
one-third of the loans pay off every year, which makes their liquidity profile 
attractive compared to private equity funds, whose effective life is seven to 
nine years on average.
However, if prepayments result from the borrower refinancing at a 
lower interest spread, then the lender is potentially worse off in terms of 
future yield, which causes the price of the loan to decline. Most loan docu￾ments include prepayment penalties, which go to the lender (investor) to 
make them whole for giving up the higher coupon, but these do not always 
provide sufficient compensation for the foregone income.
Most US middle market direct corporate loans are backed by the opera￾tional cash flow and assets of the borrower. Companies generally borrow 
from one lender whose security in case of default is all borrower assets but 
for trade payables and employee claims. The lender is said to have a senior, 
first lien claim in default. Some companies have additional lenders whose 
claims in default come after the senior lenders have been paid off. These are 
subordinated, second lien lenders who receive additional interest income for 
the greater risk of loss they take.
DIRECT LENDING ILLUSTRATION
Exhibit 1.2 illustrates a balance sheet of a middle market company with 
$40  million in EBITDA. The company is worth $360  million, or nine 
times (9×) EBITDA. Companies generally have a small amount of revolv￾ing credit for working capital purposes. “Revolvers” enable the borrowing 
company the right to draw capital as needed, paying an interest rate on 
amounts drawn as well as a fee on undrawn capital. These can be direct 
loans provided by an asset manager but, since they entail a high degree 
of servicing relative to the interest rates charged, are sometimes provided 
by a bank.
Most debt capital in our example is provided by a senior, first lien direct 
loan equal to $160 million, which equals 4× EBITDA. This direct loan has 
first claim on assets in bankruptcy excepting trade receivables, which would 
satisfy any revolver amount outstanding.6 PRIVATE DEBT
The company also has a $40 million second lien loan in place equal to 
1× EBITDA but subordinated to the first lien and revolver debt. Histori￾cally, banks provided the senior first lien loan and nonregulated, nonbank 
institutional investors provided the subordinated second lien loan. Direct 
lending has increasingly left the nonbank asset manager to provide all debt 
financing, perhaps with the sole exception of the revolver, for middle market 
companies.
Companies can also have “unitranche” loans in place that combine first 
and second lien loans into one. Unitranche loans have become very popular 
in recent years as borrowers seek a single source of debt financing.
Finally, equity financing equal to $160 million provides the remaining 
capital that completes this company’s balance sheet. Equity has historically 
been provided by the owner operator but increasingly it is the private equity 
sponsor who provides equity capital and who also puts in place professional 
managers to run the business.
The type of lending illustrated in Exhibit 1.2 is often referred to as lev￾eraged finance because the amount of debt represents a higher multiple (lev￾erage) of EBITDA than might be typical of investment-grade debt of a large 
multinational company. Rating agencies typically assign a non-investment 
EXHIBIT 1.2 Capital structure of $40 million EBITDA company.Overview of US Middle Market Corporate Direct Lending 7
grade rating to direct loans. This is due to the higher debt leverage multi￾ple, the relatively small size of the borrower, and the private ownership of 
the company, as opposed to public listing. Consequently, direct loan per￾formance is more closely correlated to non-investment grade “junk” bonds, 
or broadly syndicated bank loans, rather than investment-grade corporate 
bonds found in indexes like the Bloomberg Aggregate Bond Index.
With this overview as an introduction, Chapter 2 provides a detailed 
description of the historical investment characteristics of US middle market 
direct loans.CHAPTER 2
9
A prerequisite for institutional asset class standing is the presence of an 
index. No index for middle market loans existed until the Cliffwater 
Direct Lending Index was developed in 2015. It now has become the indus￾try standard measure for middle market performance.
THE CLIFFWATER DIRECT LENDING INDEX (CDLI)
Most asset classes become institutionalized only after a long maturation 
period that permits discovery of both return and risk. That discovery process 
also involves the establishment of a database of unbiased information on the 
asset. For example, the CRSP database served that early role in the study of 
stock performance, as did the Capital International database for interna￾tional stocks and the Salomon Brothers database for corporate bonds.
A major challenge for investors considering US middle market direct 
lending has been the lack of data on which to understand long-term return 
and risk. Bank C&I loans or direct loans held by insurance companies might 
be valuable sources of information, but these records are proprietary and 
not kept in a form that is conducive to the rigorous performance analysis 
available for other asset classes. As a result, investors who have engaged 
in direct lending have relied primarily on the attractive yields available 
on current private corporate loans and the performance records of a few 
asset managers who have engaged in middle market direct lending over an 
extended period of time. Currently investors might collect and compare per￾formance records of direct lending managers, but these records suffer from 
being self-reported with inconsistencies in loan valuation, asset quality, use 
of leverage, and time period.
Fortunately, a significant and rapidly growing segment of the direct lend￾ing market consists of loans originated and held by BDCs where quarterly 
The Historical Performance of US 
Middle Market Direct Loans10 PRIVATE DEBT
SEC disclosures provide a vast amount of loan (asset) information, includ￾ing listings of individual loans and quarterly valuations conducted by 
independent valuation firms. The information provided is comprehensive 
enough to calculate quarterly performance measures for direct loans that 
include income return, price return, and total return. It is from these SEC 
disclosures going back to 2004 that a corporate direct loan database has 
been constructed by Cliffwater LLC, together with a performance index 
called the Cliffwater Direct Lending Index (CDLI). As of March 31, 2022, 
the CDLI represented over $224 billion in direct loan assets covering 8,000+ 
loans from 111 individual public and private BDCs managed by the largest 
direct lending asset managers.
The loans captured by the direct loan database and the Cliffwater Direct 
Lending Index are a significant subset of the direct lending universe (~25%) 
and, importantly, represent loans that are originated and held to maximize 
risk-adjusted return to shareholders/investors.
The following describes the construction of the Cliffwater Direct 
Lending Index:
1. Index Base Date: September 30, 2004
2. Index Launch Date: September 30, 2015
3. Data Universe: All underlying assets held by private and public BDCs 
that satisfy certain eligibility requirements
4. Index Reporting Cycle: All index returns and characteristics are reported 
with a 2.5 month lag to allow sufficient time for release of SEC filings
5. BDC Eligibility:
a. SEC regulated as a BDC under the Investment Company Act of 1940
b. At least 75% of total assets represented by direct loans as of the cal￾endar quarter-end
c. Release SEC 10-K and 10-Q filings within 75 calendar days follow￾ing the calendar quarter-end
d. Eligibility reviewed at quarterly eligibility dates (75 calendar days 
following the calendar quarter-end)
6. Weighting: Asset-weighted by reported “fair value”
7. Rebalancing: As of calendar quarter-end
8. Reported Quarterly Index Characteristics: total asset return, income 
return, realized gains(losses), unrealized gains(losses), and total assets
9. Location: www.CliffwaterDirectLendingIndex.com
The CDLI is consistent with other private asset indexes in its quarterly 
reporting cycle, fair value asset valuation, and asset weighting. The loans are 
valued quarterly following SFAS 157 guidance. Returns are unlevered and 
gross of both management and administrative fees.The Historical Performance of US Middle Market Direct Loans 11
Theoretically, the CDLI is investable indirectly through public or private 
BDC share purchases. However, the primary CDLI return series excludes 
the application of leverage and imposition of fees, both management and 
administrative, which for some institutional investors can be negotiated 
based on objectives and size of investment. The CDLI return series should 
be useful to potential investors as a building block on which to customize 
returns series for expected fees and desired leverage. Later in this chapter 
are pro forma net-of-fee returns using the CDLI return series and leverage.
Importantly, SEC filing and transparency requirements eliminate com￾mon biases of survivorship and self-selection found in other industry universe 
and index benchmarks. And finally, loan assets in the CDLI are managed 
for total return largely by independent asset managers, unlike similar assets 
within insurance companies where statutory and other regulatory require￾ments can result in non-performance objectives.
US MIDDLE MARKET DIRECT LOAN PERFORMANCE
Exhibit 2.1 provides Cliffwater Direct Lending Index (CDLI) returns from 
its September 30, 2004, inception through March 31, 2022. All returns are 
based on quarterly data and are gross of fees and expenses.
Total returns are divided into the three major components investors use 
to assess performance for credit driven securities: income, unrealized gains 
(losses), and realized gains (losses). Income return is composed of contrac￾tual interest payments and, to a lesser degree, price discounts direct lenders 
might receive when they originate loans. Unrealized gains (losses) represent 
Trailing Periods ending March 31, 2022
Q1 2022
Last 4 
Qtrs
Last 5 
Years*
Last 10 
Years*
Sep 2004 
Inception*
Income 1.93% 8.67% 9.75% 10.46% 10.79%
plus Net Realized 
Gains (Losses)
0.03% 0.49% −1.23% −0.97% −1.08%
plus Net Unrealized 
Gains (Losses)
−0.19% 1.85% 0.18% 0.01% −0.19%
equals Total Return** 1.76% 11.17% 8.63% 9.43% 9.46%
EXHIBIT 2.1 Cliffwater Direct Lending Index performance.
*Annualized return.
**Return subcomponents may not add exactly to total return due to compounding effects.12 PRIVATE DEBT
change in loan values as determined by valuation agents and are generally a 
reflection of movement in overall market spreads or change in assessment of 
specific loan credit risk, akin to a loan loss reserve. Finally, realized (gains) 
losses are predominately losses and are the product of loan specific defaults 
and recoveries, which result in a write-down of loan principal.
Exhibit  2.2 plots the performance of the Cliffwater Direct Lending 
Index and its components. Visualizing performance in this way helps our 
understanding of what generates returns and what detracts from perfor￾mance over time.
The heavy line in Exhibit 2.2 plots the cumulative (growth of $1.00) 
CDLI return, consisting of gross yield (top diagonal line) plus net realized 
gains/losses and plus net unrealized gains/losses (dashed line). The vertical 
axis uses a log scale. A log scale is useful for plotting cumulative returns over 
long periods of time because a constant rate of return produces a straight line. 
For example, the CDLI income return over the 17.50-year period appears as 
a straight line. This suggests that direct lending income (yield) has remained 
relatively constant over the period. Casual inspection also shows that direct 
lending income return drives total return over time, reduced periodically by 
net realized and unrealized losses. For the entire CDLI history, the direct 
loans in the Index returned 9.46%, annualized, with current income equal 
to 10.79%; unrealized losses equal to −0.19%, and realized losses equal 
EXHIBIT 2.2 Components of direct lending returns, September 2004 to 
March 2022.The Historical Performance of US Middle Market Direct Loans 13
to −1.08%. These returns are consistent with the investment thesis underly￾ing most fixed income strategies that investors should try to maximize yield 
but subject to preventing losses (realized and unrealized) in loan principal.
YIELD ON DIRECT LOANS
Exhibit 2.3 shows rolling four-quarter income return (yield) on direct CDLI 
loan assets. Beginning 2004, income has been fairly stable within the US 
middle market with income ranging roughly between 8% and 12% and 
averaging 10.79%. Higher income is associated with periods of recession 
while lower income is associated with periods of economic expansion.
A useful yield comparison is between middle market direct loans 
(CDLI) and three-month Treasury bills, plotted at the bottom of Exhibit 2.3. 
Because middle market loans are floating rate, equal to a fixed yield spread 
on top of a variable or floating short-term “reference rate,” and because 
often-used reference rates like Libor and SOFR are closely linked to T-bill 
yields, the difference between middle market yields and T-bill yields is a 
good measure of the yield premium from middle market loans associated 
with their unique risks. That historical yield premium equals 9.67%, the 
EXHIBIT 2.3 Direct loan income as percentage of loan asset value, rolling 
four quarters.
Source: Cliffwater, Bloomberg.14 PRIVATE DEBT
difference between the 10.79% historical average yield for middle market 
loans and the 1.12% historical average yield for three-month T-bills. On 
March 31, 2022, the premium equaled 8.52%, the difference between an 
8.67% middle market loan yield and a 0.15% T-bill yield, down from the 
9.67% long-term average. This yield spread decline is likely attributable to 
the growth of senior secured loans within the middle market at the expense 
of subordinated loans, a trend taken up later.
Not all income from middle market loans is traditional interest (coupon) 
income. Asset managers who originate corporate direct loans also receive 
fees for arranging and servicing the loans. These fees come in the form of 
discounts at origination of the loan. A typical example might be a loan that 
pays the lender $100 in principal value at maturity in five years, but the 
lender advances the borrower only $98  in financing. The lender receives 
a 2% discount ($100 minus $98) for arranging the loan. Principal value 
remains at $100 while net asset value at origination is set at $98. Account￾ing treatment for the $2 discount, called the original issue discount or OID, 
can vary with some reporting OID as income at origination but most amor￾tizing the discount over the life of the loan. Understanding the accounting 
treatment of OID can be important because income can appear to spike 
during time periods of high origination or prepayments.
OID income generation for direct loans can be identified in the statement 
of cash flows in BDC quarterly SEC filings, which reports the dollar value 
associated with amortization of discounts. Over the five years ending March 
2022 during which current CDLI total income return averaged 9.75% per 
year, origination income or OID contributed 0.40% (40 basis points) per 
year. Expressed differently, OID has represented 4% of the income associ￾ated with middle market direct loans. With direct loans averaging a five-year 
maturity at origination, the 0.40% annual amortized OID yield would be 
equivalent to a 2.0% average discount to principal value at origination.
Another less well understood source of income for some middle market 
loans is payment-in-kind, or PIK income. Instead of quarterly cash interest 
payments, PIK income represents a quarterly noncash increase in principal. 
PIK income is generally associated with subordinated debt or lower qual￾ity borrowers that may have limited free cash flow in the short term or, 
more recently, loans to high-quality growth companies with strong earnings 
potential but limited near-term cash flow generation. Like OID, PIK income 
is also found in the statement of cash flows in quarterly SEC filings. Over 
the last five years during which current CDLI total income return averaged 
9.75%, PIK income contributed 0.62% (62 basis points) per year.
The proportions of income attributable to OID and PIK are potentially 
important statistics in measuring the risk of underlying loans. The presence The Historical Performance of US Middle Market Direct Loans 15
of OID lowers risk because cash income is paid faster than the interest 
accrual. However, the presence of PIK increases risk because cash income 
is postponed, increasing both the potential for credit losses and the interest 
rate risk inherent in the loan by increasing loan’s duration.
Exhibit 2.4 reports quarterly PIK income as a percentage of total CDLI 
income. Note that PIK is a higher percentage of total income during and 
around stress periods, including the GFC (2008), the oil crisis (2016), and the 
COVID crisis (2020).
NET GAINS (LOSSES)
While the CDLI income return component largely drives long-term total 
return, net gains (losses) can significantly affect returns over shorter time 
periods and can be very important in differentiating individual manager 
(lender) performance.
Net gains (losses) are defined as the periodic change in loan valuation. It 
is the equivalent of price change for traded securities. Net gains (losses) are 
frequently divided into two components, realized and unrealized.
14%
12%
10%
8%
8%
6%
4%
PIK Income as Percentage of Total CDLI Income
2%
0%
Sep-05
Sep-06
Sep-07
Sep-08
Sep-09
Sep-10
Sep-11
Sep-12
Sep-13
Sep-14
Sep-15
Sep-16
Sep-17
Sep-18
Sep-19
Sep-20
Sep-21
EXHIBIT 2.4 PIK as a percentage of total income in middle market direct loans.16 PRIVATE DEBT
Realized gains (losses) represent the component of valuation change 
that reflects completed transactions. In the case of a portfolio of loans, such 
as the CDLI, realized gains (losses) mostly come in the form of realized 
losses generated by write-downs of loan principal that result from borrower 
default. The amount of the write-down depends on the value of the post￾default collateral or new principal amount.
Unrealized gains (losses) represent the component of valuation change 
that is sourced by a change in market price or, in the case of a portfolio 
of loans, such as the CDLI, a change in fair value not attributable to a 
transaction.1
It is instructive to review the mechanisms by which gains and losses for 
direct loans typically are generated, as well as the linkage between realized 
and unrealized gains and losses.
■ Loan values are established quarterly based on a fair value assessment 
as to what the loan is worth. Fair value takes account of the prob￾ability and size of future loan impairments based on individual loan 
circumstances.
■ Price changes in the broader traded credit markets, including high-yield 
bonds and bank loans, help guide expectations for future loan impair￾ments and fair values.
■ Quarterly changes in fair value create unrealized net gains (losses), 
which cause fair value to differ from cost (par) value. Most likely, 
fair value will be below cost value to reflect some probability of 
impairment.2
■ Unrealized losses from reductions in fair value usually occur in advance 
of actual loan impairments as the certainty of loss increases as default 
approaches.
■ A subsequent default event triggers a realized loss that is a permanent 
reduction in the cost (par) value of the loan.
1
ASC 820 (previously FAS 157) defines fair value as “the price that would be re￾ceived to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between 
market participants at the measurement date.” Assets with a value that cannot be 
determined by observable measures, which would include the direct loans in the 
CDLI, are considered Level 3 assets (illiquid) and where valuation models are used 
to determine fair value. Best practice is to use an outside valuation firm to indepen￾dently set or recommend fair value.
2
An exception might be venture debt, when equity and warrants are offered by bor￾rowers as enhancements.The Historical Performance of US Middle Market Direct Loans 17
■ The realized loss (from a default or restructuring) replaces the existing 
unrealized loss through an offsetting unrealized gain. The new unreal￾ized gain equals the prior unrealized loan loss if the default event and 
realized loss was correctly anticipated.
■ Over time, investors observe a buildup in net realized losses, as defaults 
accumulate. These realized losses are comparable to loss rates3
 reported 
by rating agencies and banks for high-yield bonds and bank loans.
■ Unrealized losses will generally build in the early stages of a credit 
downturn and reverse in the later stages as realized losses from defaults 
replace them.
This background should help put the realized losses and unrealized gains 
reported for the CDLI over the quarter and trailing year in better context.
NET REALIZED GAINS (LOSSES)
Exhibit 2.5 shows rolling four-quarter and cumulative realized gains (losses) 
for all direct CDLI loans. Unlike current income, realized gains (losses) for 
direct loans are not consistent and positive but episodic and mostly neg￾ative, corresponding (with some lag) to the general US business cycle or 
industry-specific events. For the entire 17.5-year period, cumulative realized 
losses equaled −17.28%, or −1.08% annualized.
Direct loans in the CDLI experienced modest realized gains over the 
brief period prior to the 2008 GFC. These gains were largely associated with 
equity and warrants that sometimes come with direct loans, particularly 
pre-2008 when most direct loans were subordinated, had lower yields, but 
came with more equity participation. This was also a period following the 
2000–2002 recession when the equity markets were experiencing a sharp 
rebound. In the current direct lending environment, where lending is senior 
in orientation with little equity participation, the occurrence of net realized 
gains for direct lending generally will be less likely.
The second period covering the GFC is of great interest because it is 
a period that investors now use to stress test different asset classes. Also, 
because direct lending is a newer asset class, it is the first time period that 
can be used to study likely maximum loss scenarios.
3
Default and recovery rates are more frequently reported for high-yield bonds and 
loans. The credit loss rate is equal to the default rate multiplied by one minus the 
recovery rate.18 PRIVATE DEBT
Cumulative realized losses for direct loans caused by the GFC totaled 
−10.20%, covering the years 2008, 2009, and 2010. Realized losses are 
not confined to 2008 because defaults in 2009 and 2010 likely result from 
financial impairments that occurred in 2008.
The third period extends from 2011 to 2015, when realized losses con￾tinued to ebb with the final three years, 2013 to 2015, reflecting an unusual 
period of almost no realized losses. But for the euro crisis early during this 
period, it was a time period marked by slow but steady US business expan￾sion and a climbing stock market.
The fourth period begins in 2016 with the oil crisis and a continuing 
period of retail disruption. Realized losses were slightly above the historical 
average and began to slow again with the pickup in the economy in the three 
years 2017 through 2019.
The 2020–2021 COVID crisis represents the fifth period and a second 
major stress test for the markets generally and direct loans post-GFC. Real￾ized losses totaled −3.53% over the five-quarter period starting January 1, 
2020, and running through March 31, 2021, and equaled a little more than 
one-third of the realized losses experienced during the GFC. Of course, the 
COVID crisis was very short and unusual in many ways, just as the GFC 
was perhaps unique in its severity.
EXHIBIT 2.5 Net realized gains (losses) as percentage of loan assets, rolling four 
quarters and cumulative returns.The Historical Performance of US Middle Market Direct Loans 19
A look at the CDLI data shows that realized losses from defaults come 
in waves. Unlike the steady source of income that comes from direct loans, 
credit losses are episodic and appear highly correlated with the business 
cycle. The unfortunate news is that turns in the business cycle are almost 
impossible to predict, though investors seem to spend an inordinate amount 
of energy trying to predict them. There are two more reliable ways to reduce 
realized losses. The first is to invest in senior loans, but the cost of that strat￾egy is lower yield, which may be greater than the higher realized losses the 
investor would otherwise incur. The second method is to select a skilled 
lender (asset manager) who has strong underwriting capabilities and can 
sense when market risk may be higher or lower and adjust strategy appro￾priately. There is evidence that credit underwriting skill persists, which is 
covered in Chapter 17.
NET UNREALIZED GAINS (LOSSES)
Unrealized gains (losses) measure changes in loan asset value that come 
about not by actual transactions or write-downs but by changes in the value 
of loans given by a market or third-party valuation agent. Since middle 
market direct loans are seldom traded and instead held to maturity, periodic 
changes in loan value that create unrealized gains (losses) are determined 
by the lender itself or third-party valuation agents. This type of valuation 
is referred to in accounting as fair value, and guidance for determining fair 
value is given by accounting standard AFAS 157.
AFAS 157 places assets for valuation purposes into Levels 1, 2, and 3. 
Level 1 assets are exchange traded where a market price is available at the 
end of each day. Public stocks are an example. Level 2 assets are traded 
through broker/dealer markets with prices determined when a transaction 
occurs or when a price (broker quote) is requested. Level 3 assets are val￾ued based on the lender’s valuation policy, which incorporates quantitative 
models and qualitative insight in determining fair value for each loan. These 
lender valuations incorporate overall market credit spreads and loan specific 
credit outlooks. In fact, in their quarterly reporting, most BDCs provide an 
assessment of creditworthiness by categorizing loans into varying default 
risk categories. Most direct loans are Level 3 assets.
Valuation involving Level 3 assets, such as direct loans, is most often 
performed quarterly. Changes in valuation give rise to quarterly unrealized 
gains (losses) that theoretically harbinger expected but uncertain future 
credit losses. Unrealized losses for direct loans can be viewed in the same 
way that banks create and periodically change reserves against future real￾ized losses from loan defaults.20 PRIVATE DEBT
The practice of pricing through lender valuations versus independent 
third-party valuations varies and often depends on the needs of investors. 
Best practice is to have all loans valued quarterly by third-party valuation 
firms. But this can be expensive and unnecessary if the information gener￾ated has little use, as it would in a private fund or partnership that does not 
trade or its investors are captive. More likely, fair value is determined only 
once a year by a third-party valuation firm, either by valuation of all loans 
once a year or valuing one-quarter of the portfolio at every quarter-end. At 
those times when loans are not being independently valued, the lender itself 
is valuing the loans based on methodologies similar to what the third-party 
valuation firm would otherwise use.
Exhibit 2.6 shows rolling four-quarter and cumulative unrealized gains 
(losses) for all direct loans in the Cliffwater Direct Lending Index.
Long-term cumulative returns for unrealized gains (losses) should aver￾age close to 0% because, as discussed previously, unrealized losses will either 
convert to net realized losses on a credit default and recovery, or they will be 
reversed when principal is fully repaid. The cumulative net unrealized gain 
(loss) line in Exhibit 2.6 is consistent with this expectation.
For example, unrealized losses expanded in the 2007–2008, 2013–2014, 
and 2019–2020 periods, anticipating rising realized losses ahead. When 
EXHIBIT 2.6 Net unrealized gains (losses) as percentage of loan assets, rolling four 
quarters and cumulative returns.The Historical Performance of US Middle Market Direct Loans 21
loans are subsequently written down it creates a realized loss but also poten￾tially an unrealized gain if the realized loss was previously anticipated in a 
prior period by recognizing an unrealized loss. Two accounting entries equal 
in dollar value, a realized loss plus an unrealized gain, convert an unrealized 
loss into a realized loss.
TOTAL RETURN
Exhibit 2.7 combines income, realized gains (losses), and unrealized gains 
(losses) into a single total return. As with the components, total return 
reported in the exhibit represents rolling four-quarter periods.
Rolling four quarter CDLI total returns in Exhibit 2.7 have been high 
and fairly consistent, averaging 9.88% for the entire 17.5-year history of the 
Index. The exception occurred during the GFC when the worst four-quarter 
(one-year) period was calendar 2008 when the CDLI total return equaled 
−6.50%. Component returns for the same one-year period were 11.72% 
(income), −2.89% (realized losses), and −16.25% (unrealized losses).
EXHIBIT 2.7 Direct loan total return as percentage of loan asset value, rolling four￾quarter returns.22 PRIVATE DEBT
A first cut at filling out the private return equation using CDLI as the 
performance benchmark and its return components covering 17.5 years 
would be as follows:
Private Debt Return Income Realized Gains Losses
Unreali
 
zed Gains Losses Fees
Private D ebt Return Fees 4 9 4. %6 10. %79 1 0. %8 0. %19
4
Component returns do not add exactly to total return due to compounding effects.CHAPTER 3
23
L
ittle has changed with respect to basic asset allocation theory over the 
last 55 years since Harry Markovitz introduced portfolio optimization 
based on asset return, risk, and correlation. In practice, however, there are 
many more asset class choices available to investors today, and newer asset 
classes like direct lending are only successful to the extent that they have 
differentiating investment features compared to other asset classes. A high 
current yield is the most obvious differentiating feature, but for institutional 
investors this is not enough to warrant consideration. Direct loans must 
also demonstrate attractive return and risk characteristics that justify their 
inclusion into a diversified portfolio of assets. This chapter provides a com￾parative analysis of return and risk across the major asset classes that direct 
loans might compete with for inclusion into a diversified portfolio.
Exhibits 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 compare direct lending performance, measured 
by the Cliffwater Direct Lending Index, with the most commonly used public 
and private asset classes.
Full definitions for the individual indexes are provided in the Glossary 
but note here that all index returns are before fees except for private equity, 
represented by the Cambridge Associates US Buyout Benchmark whose 
returns only report net of all fees, including carried interest. Asset class 
return and risk measures cover the same 17.25-year period ending Decem￾ber 2021. The starting date is chosen because it reflects the start date for the 
Cliffwater Direct Lending Index (CDLI) and the end date corresponds to the 
last date all return data is available, with private equity returns being the 
most delayed. All calculations are based on quarterly returns to be consist￾ent across asset classes. Finally, only US asset classes are included because 
the comparison is meant to gauge return and risk within a single market, 
without currency and country-specific impacts.
Performance Comparisons to Other 
Asset ClassesPerformance Comparisons to Other Asset Classes 25
EXHIBIT 3.3 Asset class return versus risk, September 2004 to December 2021.
5.61
4.55
12.43
3.72
3.29
2.10
1.97
0.80
8.00 Growth of $1.00 (Log Scale)
Cambridge US Buyouts
Russell 3000
Cliffwater Direct Lending Index
NCREIF Property (Real Estate)
Bloomberg High Yield Bond
Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100
Bloomberg Aggregate Bond
Sep-04
Jun-05
Mar-06
Dec-06
Sep-07
Jun-08
Mar-09
Dec-09
Sep-10
Jun-11
Mar-12
Dec-12
Sep-13
Jun-14
Mar-15
Dec-15
Sep-16
Jun-17
Mar-18
Dec-18
Sep-19
Jun-20
Mar-21
Dec-21
EXHIBIT 3.2 Asset class cumulative returns (growth of $1.00), September 2004 to 
December 2021.26 PRIVATE DEBT
Asset classes are grouped by type in Exhibit  3.1. The Russell 3000 
Index, which includes large and middle market companies, represents 
the performance of the US public equity market. Next, two measures of 
investment-grade fixed income are provided. The Merrill Lynch 0–3 Month 
T-Bill Index represents short-term rates, and the Bloomberg Aggregate 
Bond Index represents the most popular benchmark for fixed income port￾folios and the index most commonly used for passive fixed income invest￾ing. Two measures of traded non-investment grade credit are provided. The 
Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100  Index measures the perfor￾mance of broadly syndicated bank loans and is the most common index 
currently used to benchmark direct loan and other private debt strategies. 
The Bloomberg High Yield Bond Index is the most common index used 
to benchmark high-yield bond portfolios. Like direct lending, high-yield 
bonds are non-investment grade, but they are actively traded and have fixed, 
not floating, rate coupons. Last, Exhibit 3.1 shows two other private asset 
classes in addition to the CDLI. NCREIF (National Council on Real Estate 
Investment Fiduciaries) measures the quarterly performance of institutional 
real estate equity. Its construction is very similar to that used for the CDLI. 
Finally, the Cambridge Associates US Buyout Benchmark measures perfor￾mance of private partnerships that invest in private US companies, not pri￾vate equity companies themselves. Again, Cambridge Associates US Buyout 
Benchmark is net of fees while the other indexes are reported gross of fees.
RETURN
The asset class returns shown in Exhibit 3.1 are consistent with expecta￾tions. Equities are expected to outperform other asset classes over long time 
periods, as private and public equities do in Exhibit 3.1. US buyouts, meas￾ured by the Cambridge Associates US Buyout Benchmark, was the best￾performing asset class with a 15.26% annualized return, which was 4.18% 
above the 11.08% annualized return for the Russell 3000 Index return of 
public US equities. The 4.18% difference between private and public equity 
compares favorably with the 3.00% per annum excess return for private 
equity over public equity targeted by most institutional investors.
Direct lending, measured by the CDLI, returned an annualized 9.50% 
and outperformed the other asset classes listed except for private and pub￾lic equity, which it trailed by 4.76% and 1.58%, respectively. The outper￾formance by the Cambridge Associates US Buyout Benchmark should be 
expected because it represents capital that has less seniority than direct 
loans in the corporate capital structure and therefore should have a higher 
return (see Exhibit 1.2). Given that the private equity returns are net of fees Performance Comparisons to Other Asset Classes 27
and the CDLI is gross of fees, the difference would be closer to 6–7% if the 
CDLI were adjusted for likely fees and expenses. This estimated net-of-fee 
difference in private equity and private debt returns is in line with under￾writing of sponsored equity and debt financing.
The 9.50% CDLI return outperformed the NCREIF Property Index 
(NPI) of institutional commercial real estate equity return of 8.62% for the 
measurement period, which is of note because both indexes have common 
construction methodologies and similar ASC 820 oversight in asset valua￾tion. Also, both asset classes share the common role of stable income, lower 
risk, and inflation protection within diversified institutional portfolios.
Another important comparison is between the annualized 9.50% CDLI 
return and the 4.47% Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 Index 
return. This 5.03% annualized difference is approximately equal to the 
historical yield spread between the two indexes and represents a reason￾able expectation for an illiquidity premium for private floating rate non￾investment grade loans over equivalent publicly traded loans. Adjusted for 
fees, the estimated difference is closer to 3.53%, because direct lending 
investors pay roughly 1.5% more for a direct loan portfolio compared to a 
portfolio of bank leveraged loans. Many direct lending investors are bench￾marking their direct lending portfolio returns to a 1–2% spread over the 
Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 Index. The historical returns 
in Exhibit 3.1 suggest this might be a somewhat conservative benchmark.
At first glance, the 7.25% annualized return for the Bloomberg High 
Yield Bond Index looks attractive both because its return is closer to the 
9.50% CDLI return and it far exceeds the 4.70% return on the Morning￾star LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 Index. However, both comparisons are 
misleading because (1) high-yield bonds are fixed rate, not floating rate, and 
(2) high-yield bonds generally have lower seniority, sitting in a company’s 
capital structure below senior secured debt.
The high-yield bond return can be adjusted for the fixed/floating differ￾ence by subtracting the spread between the Bloomberg 3–5 Year US Treasury 
return of 3.19%, whose duration is similar to that of high-yield bonds, and 
the Merrill Lynch 0–3 Month T-Bill return of 1.31%. The 1.88% difference 
is what needs to be subtracted from the 7.25% Bloomberg High Yield Bond 
Index return to get an equivalent floating rate return for high-yield bonds 
equal to 5.37%, annualized, and a return that would be equivalent to buying 
high-yield bonds but adding a fixed/floating interest rate swap.
Before fees and using the equivalent duration high-yield bond return, 
the three floating rate credit indexes returned 9.50%, 5.37%, and 4.70% 
for direct loans, high-yield bonds, and leveraged loans, respectively, over the 
17.25-year measurement period. Adjusting for estimated fees equal to 1.90%, 
0.65%, and 0.65% for direct loans, high-yield bonds, and leveraged loans, 28 PRIVATE DEBT
respectively, after-fee and floating-rate equivalent returns for these three asset 
classes would equal 7.60%, 4.72%, and 4.05%, respectively.1
 The 0.67% 
spread between public high-yield bonds and leveraged bank loans is attrib￾utable to the subordinated credit position of most high-yield bonds, which 
should entail a higher credit spread compared to leveraged bank loans.
Finally, the 9.50% CDLI return compares very favorably to the 4.00% 
return for the popular Bloomberg Aggregate Bond Index, composed of all 
investment-grade public US debt. A similar 1.88% downward adjustment to 
the 4.00% return is warranted to make it a floating-rate equivalent return. 
Assuming the same 1.90% fee for direct lending and a 0.04% fee for an 
index tracking investment grade bond index, there is a net 5.52% difference 
(= 9.50% − 1.90% − 4.00% + 1.88% + 0.04%) between direct-lending and 
investment-grade fixed income returns. Future chapters will show that cal￾culated net 5.52% return premium would seem to be an attractive investor 
reward for allocating assets to direct lending.
Exhibit 3.2 provides a graphical representation of asset class returns. As 
in Exhibit 2.2, cumulative returns in Exhibit 3.2 are plotted on a log scale so 
that a constant return appears as a straight line and drawdowns are scaled 
by return, not dollar loss.
The strong performance for private equity (Cambridge US Buyout 
Index) is striking from Exhibit 3.2 with a hypothetical $1.00 invested on 
September 30, 2004, growing to $11.86 by December 31, 2021. In com￾parison to public equity (Russell 3000 Index), the performance difference 
is shown to be quite wide, with a dollar of public equity growing to $5.61 
after 17.25 years, less than one-half profits produced by private equity.
The performance shown for the CDLI is not as strong as it is for private 
equity, nor should it be, but in a comparison with equivalent public securi￾ties, measured by the Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 Index, the 
CDLI displays consistent and widening separation, with a dollar growing 
to $4.55 after 17.25 years compared to $2.10 for the Morningstar LSTA 
US Leveraged Loan 100 Index. Like private equity, private debt more than 
doubled the profits over the time period examined compared to public debt.
RISK
Historical standard deviation of return in the second column and maximum 
drawdown in the fourth column of Exhibit 3.1 give investors a comparison 
of the volatility found in direct lending compared to the other asset classes.
1
Direct lending fees based on survey research presented in Chapter 19. High-yield 
bond and leveraged loan fees are based on reported ETF expense ratios.Performance Comparisons to Other Asset Classes 29
Risk values for the public asset classes show little surprise with public 
equity measuring the highest 16.58% standard deviation; non-investment 
grade credit through bank loans and high-yield bonds incurring slightly less 
risk at 9.95% and 10.56%, respectively; and investment grade intermediate 
maturity bonds represented by the Bloomberg Aggregate Bond Index at a 
3.31% risk level.
Standard deviations for private equity, private real estate, and private 
direct loans equal 10.05%, 5.09%, and 3.63%, respectively. Relative vola￾tility among these three private asset classes is likely consistent with the 
perceived risk being taken, with private equity the highest risk and private 
debt the lowest risk. However, the absolute levels of risk from private assets 
are likely understated due to the use of fair value accounting, which results 
in a smoothing of asset values. This undoubtedly occurs, but it is difficult to 
precisely measure its impact on risk and correlation. We address this in more 
detail in Chapter 18.
Exhibit 3.3 provides a useful depiction that combines return and risk 
by asset class with return shown by the vertical axis and risk shown in the 
horizontal axis. The return/risk ratio, reported in Exhibit 3.1, is depicted in 
Exhibit 3.3 by the dashed line extending from the origin through the asset 
class plot point. The radius of the dashed line equals the return/risk ratio. 
The dashed line depicted is for the Cliffwater Direct Lending Index, which 
has the highest radius value of 2.61. This is an important finding because 
investors have been searching over the past decade for strong return in com￾bination with safety. Direct lending is increasingly getting recognition for 
potentially filling that void.
DRAWDOWN
Investors increasingly look at maximum drawdown as another important 
measure of risk. This return measures the cumulative, unannualized percent￾age decline in value from peak value to lowest value. Maximum drawdown 
became an important complement to the more familiar standard deviation 
risk measure after the 2008–2009 GFC. The standard deviation measure of 
risk works only if the periodic returns on which the calculation is based are 
uncorrelated with each other. (They are not serially correlated and follow 
a random walk.) But that is not how markets behaved in 2008 and 2009. 
Down months followed down months in a pattern that led a standard devia￾tion risk measure to understate the true risk of loss. As a result, most invest￾ment professionals added the maximum drawdown calculation to their risk 
metrics. The maximum drawdown calculation also avoids the understate￾ment of standard deviation risk caused by serial correlation.30 PRIVATE DEBT
Though it occurred 15 years ago, the near halving of stock values 
during the GFC hasn’t been forgotten. The maximum drawdown for the 
Russell 3000  Index equaled −46%, transpiring over a six-quarter period 
from September 30, 2007, through March 31, 2009, and gave rise to a 
renewed emphasis on risk management strategies. In hindsight, Treas￾ury securities proved to be the best risk mitigator. Treasury indexes, and 
broader investment-grade bond indexes like the Bloomberg Aggregate Bond 
Index, which is predominately composed of Treasury and agency bonds 
and notes, lost little or no value during the GFC, earning risk-off status 
among chief risk officers. However, as investment professionals discovered, 
the opportunity cost of holding these securities has been significant, with 
Treasury yields averaging less than 3%, and sometimes below 2%. Since the 
GFC, asset allocators have been looking for strategies or asset classes that 
might better balance return and risk and sit somewhere between stocks and 
Treasuries in the risk spectrum. The performance of direct loans strongly 
suggests it might be a good choice to fill that between role.
Make no mistake, direct loans are a risk-on asset class, as the correla￾tions in Exhibit 3.1 demonstrate. The correlation between the CDLI and the 
Russell 3000 index measures 0.70. R-Squared, the square of the correlation, 
equals 0.49, meaning that 49% of the volatility of the CDLI is explained by 
the volatility of the Russell 3000 index. In other words, direct loan returns 
are heavily influenced by the ups and downs of stocks. Why direct loans 
have a strong correlation to stocks is answered from a theoretical perspec￾tive in Chapter 10.
However, direct loan fair values do not display the same high volatil￾ity as stocks. While directionally influenced by stocks, direct loan values 
have a Treasury-like 3.5% standard deviation. The CDLI beta to the Russell 
3000 Index, which is the product of relative standard deviation and correla￾tion, measures 0.15 and would be considered a strong portfolio diversifier 
by most risk management standards.
DIRECT LENDING AND THE GFC STRESS TEST
Exhibit 3.4 provides comparative asset class performance beginning Sep￾tember 31, 2007, marking the beginning of Q4 2007 when an economic 
recession began, through the GFC, and ending March 31, 2011, when asset 
classes had mostly recovered to precrisis values.
Investment grade bonds, measured by the Bloomberg Aggregate Bond 
Index, was the only risk-off asset class that escaped the GFC, as Exhibit 3.4 
shows. All other asset classes suffered losses of varying amounts. Direct lend￾ing, measured by CDLI, was down a modest 5% from September 2007 while Performance Comparisons to Other Asset Classes 31
losses in all other asset classes were severe, ranging from an 18% loss for 
hedge funds (HFRI Fund Weighted Index) to a 46% loss for public equities. 
Also noteworthy is the low 5% loss for direct lending compared to public 
debt losses of 27% for leveraged loans and 29% for high-yield bonds.
Equity real estate, measured by the NPI, is an interesting case. It too 
suffered a significant 19% loss ($0.81) during the GFC, but its lowest point 
came two to three quarters after the other asset classes. The lagged experi￾ence for real estate is discussed further in Chapter 18 covering valuation, 
but note here that real estate values are notoriously sticky, which causes 
returns to be smoothed through serial correlation.
Exhibit 3.5 contains a similar analysis but defines the drawdown period 
separately for each asset class with the starting date defined as the quarter￾end when the asset class experienced its highest value (rather than the singu￾lar September 2007 date used in Exhibit 3.4) through the quarter-end date 
when the asset class reaches its lowest value.
The severity of the GFC market decline hit traditional risk-oriented 
asset classes the hardest with stocks, leveraged loans, and high-yield bonds 
suffering the largest losses. Private equity and private real estate lost about 
one-quarter of their value. Even hedge funds incurred significant −19% 
0.95
0.82 0.81
0.71 0.74
0.73
0.54
$0.40
$0.50
$0.60
$0.70
$0.80
$0.90
$1.00
$1.10
$1.20
$1.30
$1.40
Growth of $1.00
Cliffwater Direct Lending Index
NCREIF Property (Real Estate)
Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100
Russell 3000
Bloomberg Aggregate Bond
HFRI Fund Weighted
Cambridge Private Equity
Bloomberg High Yield Bond
Sep-07
Mar-08
Sep-08
Mar-09
Sep-09
Mar-10
Sep-10
Mar-11
EXHIBIT 3.4 Asset class cumulative total returns through the GFC, September 2007 
to March 2011.32 PRIVATE DEBT
losses despite being regarded at the time as protection against market down￾turns. Direct lending experienced a modest −8% drawdown compared to 
the other asset classes, largely attributable to its high cash yield that signifi￾cantly mitigated losses. Also noteworthy is the short four-quarter recovery 
for direct lending compared to the other asset classes. Private equity and 
private real estate required 9 and 12 quarters, respectively, to recover com￾pletely from the GFC. The relatively long 12-quarter recovery period for 
real estate is also consistent with the notion of sticky valuations mentioned 
previously.
Exhibit 3.6 examines the drawdown experience of direct lending in more 
detail by examining the income, realized gain (loss), and unrealized gain 
(loss) components of the CDLI. The time period chosen differs slightly from 
previous exhibits, starting at June 2008, the beginning of the CDLI draw￾down, and ending on December 2010 when CDLI realized losses reached 
their highest level.
For the CDLI, high current interest income provided a strong buffer 
against losses. At the June 2008 start of its drawdown, the yield on the 
CDLI equaled 9.90% and subsequently increased during the drawdown 
period, reaching a 11.27% December 2008 high. Loan valuations were 
adjusted downward in the third and fourth quarters of 2008, creating unre￾alized losses peaking at −14% ($0.86) in March 2009. The −8% drawdown 
through December 2008, cited in Exhibit 3.5, came six months after the 
Asset Class Index Beginning Date Max Drawdown
Quarters to 
Recovery
Bloomberg US Aggregate 3/31/2008 −1% 1
Cliffwater Direct Lending 
Index
6/30/2008 −8% 4
HFRI Fund Weighted 
(hedge funds)
12/31/2007 −19% 7
NCREIF Property (real 
estate)
6/30/2008 −24% 12
Cambridge US Buyout 12/31/2007 −25% 9
Bloomberg High Yield 9/30/2007 −27% 8
Morningstar LSTA US 
Leveraged Loan 100
9/30/2007 −30% 8
Russell 3000 9/30/2007 −46% 18
EXHIBIT 3.5 Asset class max drawdown and recovery period during the GFC.Performance Comparisons to Other Asset Classes 33
drawdown began and was a combination of positive current income being 
more than offset by downward adjustments to loan fair values (unrealized 
losses). Note that realized losses did not contribute to the −8% CDLI maxi￾mum drawdown. Realized losses came gradually in subsequent quarters and 
totaled −10% ($0.90) when they bottomed in December 2010. Unrealized 
losses were gradually replaced by realized losses until December 2010 when 
cumulative unrealized losses were again zero ($1.00).
An important observation about the behavior of direct loans during 
the GFC is that the fair value accounting process worked. In fact, one could 
argue that the process worked too well (i.e., was too conservative). In the 
end, the −14% in unrealized losses imposed on direct loans in the second 
half of 2008 exceeded the −10% in total realized losses or actual principal 
impairments that ended two years later in December 2010. If one can think 
of unrealized losses as loan loss reserves, those doing independent valua￾tions on loans overestimated future impairments by −4%. In the end, the 
2008 GFC was not only a stress test on direct loan performance but also a 
stress test on the process used to determine loan values.
Cliffwater Direct Lending Index (Total)
Income
$1.40
$1.30
$1.20
$1.10
Growth of $1.00
$1.00
$0.90 $0.92
$0.88
$0.90 $0.90
$1.00
$1.21
$1.34
$0.80
Jun-08
Sep-08
Dec-08
Mar-09
Jun-09
Sep-09
Dec-09
Mar-10
Jun-10
Sep-10
Dec-10
Net Realized Gains (Losses)
Net Unrealized Gains (Losses)
EXHIBIT 3.6 Direct lending performance attribution during/after the GFC, June 
2008 to December 2010.34 PRIVATE DEBT
A study by Cambridge Associates indirectly supports the drawdown 
analysis reflected in the CDLI performance.2
 Using a limited, but institutional￾quality sample set, the author estimates realized losses for a portfolio of 
senior loans through the GFC with outcomes very similar to those reported 
by the CDLI. Unfortunately, the study does not provide yield and unrealized 
losses, but its reporting of loss experience provides the confirming evidence 
of the loss research presented.
Examination of the GFC shows that direct lending can perform well in 
the context of risky assets. But every crisis is different and the next one will 
likely find direct lending potentially vulnerable to lower yield, covenant￾lite, and higher EBITDA leverage conditions. However, the direct lending 
market today is more senior-driven, populated with better-skilled lenders, 
with a more diversified set of borrowers than existed before the last crisis. It 
will be different the next time but not by much.
DIRECT LENDING AND THE COVID STRESS TEST
Every recession is different and the COVID crisis clearly demonstrated that. 
But in many respects, asset class behavior was like the GFC except it was 
less severe and of shorter duration, lasting one year. In statistical parlance, 
the GFC was a 3-sigma event while COVID was a 1.5-sigma event.
Exhibits 3.7 and 3.8 display COVID-related losses across asset classes.
Not surprising, the investment-grade Bloomberg Aggregate Index return 
was never impaired, just as during the GFC. Neither was real estate, but this 
is likely due to the valuation lag found in real estate and the quick recov￾ery that vacated the need for the subsequent write-downs found during the 
GFC. Direct lending, measured by the Cliffwater Direct Lending Index, suf￾fered only a modest −5% ($0.952) drawdown while private equity, hedge 
funds, high-yield bonds, and leveraged loans experienced low teen losses. 
As during the GFC, public equities had the largest drawdown.
Exhibit  3.9 shows that the components of the CDLI return during 
COVID followed the same pattern found during the GFC. A strong income 
return moderated losses, which during the drawdown were driven almost 
entirely by 7% ($0.93) in unrealized losses. Only in subsequent quarters 
were 3% ($0.97) in losses realized, and far less than the 7% anticipated by 
early unrealized valuation markdowns. And again, as described previously, 
as losses are realized, unrealized losses are reversed.
2
“Stress and Losses Among Middle-Market Senior and Unitranche Loans,” Tod 
Trabocco, Cambridge Associates.Performance Comparisons to Other Asset Classes 35
$1.30
$1.20
$1.10
1.031
1.007
0.952
0.902
0.870
0.885
0.791
Bloomberg Aggregate Bond
Bloomberg High Yield Bond
NCREIF Property (Real Estate)
Cambridge Private Equity
HFRI Fund Weighted
Russell 3000
Cliffwater Direct Lending Index
Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100
Dec-19
Mar-20
Jun-20
Sep-20
Dec-20
$1.00
$0.90
Growth of $1.00
$0.80
$0.70
EXHIBIT 3.7 Asset class cumulative total returns through the COVID crisis, Decem￾ber 2019 to December 2020.
Asset Class Index Beginning Date Max Drawdown
Quarters 
to Recovery
Bloomberg US Aggregate 12/31/2019 NA NA
NCREIF Property (real estate) 12/31/2019 NA NA
Cliffwater Direct Lending Index 12/31/2019 −5% 2
Cambridge US Buyout 12/31/2019 −10% 2
HFRI Fund Weighted (hedge 
funds)
12/31/2019 −11% 2
Bloomberg High Yield 12/31/2019 −13% 2
Morningstar LSTA US Lever￾aged Loan 100
12/31/2019 −13% 3
Russell 3000 12/31/2019 −21% 2
EXHIBIT 3.8 Asset class max drawdown and recovery period during the COVID 
crisis.36 PRIVATE DEBT
EXHIBIT 3.9 Direct lending performance attribution during/after the COVID crisis, 
December 2019 to December 2020.
Summarizing, direct lending is driven by income and realized losses, 
which can take time to unfold. Unrealized losses represent the primary 
source of direct lending volatility but are muted because income is the pri￾mary source of return. Historically, direct lending as measured by CDLI has 
demonstrated not only a very competitive return against all asset classes 
but also low volatility that produces the highest return-to-risk ratio across 
asset classes.CHAPTER 4
37
Yield is one of the most basic of financial measures and one that strongly 
influences investor behavior. This is especially true for fixed income 
where return is driven almost entirely by coupon income. Direct corporate 
loans also fall into this description. Other asset classes that distribute most 
or all their earnings, from whatever source, also rely on yield to inform 
investors about investment attractiveness. These include REITs and MLPs. 
While yield at first seems the most intuitive of concepts, investors find that 
it can take on unexpected complexity when applied in practice. Since direct 
lending returns depend almost entirely on their yield, understanding how 
yields are calculated is especially important.
There are two basic yield calculation methods: current yield and yield-to￾maturity.
CURRENT YIELD
In previous chapters references to direct lending yield have used the current 
yield method. Current yield is calculated as the most recent quarter’s interest 
income divided by average assets over the quarter. Assets are defined by their 
fair value in the current yield calculation, not their cost or principal value. 
For example, CDLI interest income during the 2022 first quarter totaled 
$4.2 billion on a fair value of assets that averaged $214.8 billion. Dividing 
income by assets gives a quarterly yield equal to 1.96%. We multiply the 
1.96% quarterly yield by 4 to get a 7.82% annualized current yield.
YIELD-TO-THREE-YEAR TAKEOUT
Total return fixed income investors often think of yield through the lens of 
yield to maturity or yield to worst, reflecting current income plus amortiza￾tion of the difference between principal amount at maturity (or call date) 
Current Yield or Yield to Maturity?38 PRIVATE DEBT
and the fair value of the security. In other words, the yield-to-maturity 
(worst) calculation includes the amortization of unrealized gains and losses 
into its definition of yield.
The yield-to-maturity calculation is the more common method for 
expressing fixed income yield, but an underlying assumption is that princi￾pal value will be paid at maturity. This may not be true if the amortization 
of unrealized loss that is factored into the yield-to-maturity calculation is 
based on expected future credit losses. If it is, the yield-to-maturity calcula￾tion is assuming no credit impairment and represents the maximum return 
the loan could achieve. Current yield, however, assumes that current asset 
fair value is what will be realized on maturity.
Both current yield and yield to maturity are used throughout this book. 
Current yield is the preferred calculation because of the view that current 
unrealized losses, equal to the difference between fair value and principal 
value, are expected future credit losses and should not enhance yield as 
it does in the yield-to-maturity calculation. Loan yield-to-maturity is also 
shown in many examples because it may be more appropriate when making 
yield comparisons to other asset classes or where a measure of yield that 
is gross of credit losses is called for.
Unlike current yield, the calculation for yield-to-maturity explicitly 
incorporates a maturity date, or date when loan proceeds are repaid. While 
most direct loans have a five-year stated maturity, refinancings, prepay￾ments, and corporate actions have historically reduced their average or 
effective life  to approximately three years. As such, a yield-to-three-year 
takeout calculation is used for direct loans. When fair value is less than 
principal value, the difference, unrealized losses, is effectively amortized 
over a three-year horizon and added to current yield. In the less frequent 
case when fair value exceeds principal value, unrealized gains are amortized 
over a three-year horizon and subtracted from current yield.
A yield-to-three-year takeout calculation for the CDLI requires both 
principal and fair value. We calculate these values by aggregating indi￾vidual loan principal and fair values reported quarterly in financial state￾ments. Exhibits 4.1 and 4.2 illustrate how differences between fair value 
and principal value create differences between current yield and yield-to￾three-year takeout for the CDLI.
Loan fair value generally remains below principal or par value due to 
expectations for future defaults. The few instances where fair value climbs 
above principal value are when credit conditions for loans have improved 
to an extent that default expectations are below what was expected at loan 
origination. The pattern of fair versus principal value shown in Exhibit 4.1 
shows that when it comes to the fair value of non-investment grade loans, 
potential downside exceeds potential upside.Current Yield or Yield to Maturity? 39
EXHIBIT 4.1 Direct loan fair value versus par (principal) value.
EXHIBIT 4.2 Current yield and yield-to-three-year takeout for the Cliffwater Direct 
Lending Index.40 PRIVATE DEBT
Exhibit 4.2 compares current yield and yield-to-three-year takeout for 
the CDLI. Whenever loan fair value dips below principal value, as shown 
in Exhibit 4.1, the yield-to-three-year takeout (yield to maturity) for direct 
loans exceeds the current yield. The difference is the amortization of the fair 
value discount over a three-year assumed effective loan maturity. This differ￾ence was very significant in 2008 when the CDLI yield-to-three-year takeout 
exceeded 20% while CDLI current yield climbed to just 12%. A more recent 
yield divergence occurred during the 2016 oil crisis when the energy sector 
entered recession and fair values for oil and gas loans were reduced. Current 
yields were modestly affected, but yield-to-three-year takeout jumped again 
under the calculation assumption that the fair value discount would be elim￾inated in three years.
High-yield bonds and broadly syndicated loans (also called leveraged 
loans) are the closest to US middle market corporate direct loans from an 
investment perspective. All three expose investors to significant credit risk 
but compensate investors by offering higher yield. Consequently, yield com￾parisons among the three are relevant.
The most quoted yield for high-yield bonds is yield to worst, a measure 
akin to yield-to-three-year takeout because it also amortizes differences 
between current price and par value over the expected life of the bond. 
Exhibit 4.3 provides a yield comparison of direct loans (represented by the 
EXHIBIT 4.3 Yields for direct loans (CDLI), high-yield bonds, and leveraged loans.Current Yield or Yield to Maturity? 41
CDLI yield-to-three-year takeout), high-yield bonds (represented by the 
Bloomberg High Yield Bond Index yield to worst) and leveraged loans (rep￾resented by the Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 Index yield to 
maturity). These yield definitions provide the best apples-to-apples compari￾son across the three credit driven asset classes.
The top line in Exhibit 4.3 plots the yield-to-three-year takeout for the 
CDLI. The middle, dashed line plots the yield to worst for the Bloomberg 
High Yield Bond Index. The lowest yield line plots the yield to maturity 
for the Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 Index, composed of the 
100 most liquid syndicated bank loans. These apples-to-apples yields for 
direct loans, high-yield bonds, and leveraged loans follow a very similar 
pattern, suggesting that underlying corporate credit conditions over time 
are affecting all three markets in a similar way. It also shows that investors 
in the private direct loan market have earned yields significantly higher than 
investors in publicly traded high-yield bonds and leveraged loans.
The average yields for the entire 17.5-year period reported in 
Exhibit  4.3 were 11.63%, 7.74%, and 6.15% for the CDLI, Bloomb￾erg High Yield Bond Index, and Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 
100  Index, respectively. These spreads have varied somewhat over time 
but there is a consistent and large spread in favor of middle market direct 
loans, represented by the CDLI. Note also that yields for high-yield bonds 
generally are above those for leveraged loans, but to a much lesser degree. 
The higher bond yields are due to their lower (subordinated) quality gen￾erally and their fixed rate character, which will give them a higher yield 
compared to leveraged loans as long as the yield curve is positive.
This historical yield record gives middle market direct loans a 3.89% 
average yield spread over high-yield bonds and a 5.48% average yield 
spread over leveraged loans.
In Chapter 5 we compare credit losses across the three credit asset classes.CHAPTER 5
43
Credit-oriented fixed income instruments like US middle market direct 
loans achieve their long-term returns by capturing high yields without 
offsetting principal impairments by way of realized losses. Chapter 1 stated 
a 10.79% income return (yield) for US middle market direct loans and a 
−1.08% annual realized loss since the start of the CDLI in September 2004. 
Chapter  4 showed that levels of direct lending income (yield) were con￾sistently and significantly above yields on more familiar and more liquid 
high-yield bonds and leveraged loans, even when differences in fees are 
accounted for. An important question in this comparison is whether there 
is a difference in credit losses between the −1.08% found for US middle 
market loans and credit losses for high-yield bonds and leveraged loans. In 
other words, is the roughly 3.5–4.5% after-fee yield spread partially com￾pensating direct loan investors for higher credit losses in middle market 
loans? The answer is no.
Exhibit 5.1 reports calendar year default, recovery, and loss statistics for 
high-yield bonds, leveraged loans, the CDLI, and US bank C&I loans from 
2005 through 2021.
Credit loss equals the product of default ratio and one minus the recov￾ery rate. Data on default and recovery rates are readily available on pub￾licly traded securities from bankers and rating agencies. But because direct 
middle market corporate loans are privately negotiated and held to matu￾rity, there is no database that tracks these statistics in the same way as for 
high-yield bonds and leveraged loans. However, realized credit loss rates 
are available through public filings, and those statistics are used to calculate 
CDLI realized losses, which largely represent credit losses. US bank credit 
losses on their business commercial loans are also provided as a compari￾son. Default and recovery rate information on bank business loans are also 
not available. Banks report charge-off rates for their loan portfolio that are 
similar to realized credit losses for nonbank middle market direct loans.
Comparative Credit Loss Rates44 PRIVATE DEBT
High-Yield Bondsa Leveraged Loansa
CDU 
Middle 
Market 
Debtb
US Bank 
Commercial 
& Industrial 
Business 
Loansc
Default 
Ratio
Recovery 
Rate
Credit 
Loss
Default 
Ratio
Recovery 
Rate
Credit 
Loss
Credit 
Loss**
Charge-Off 
Rate
2005 2.8% 56% 1.23% 3.0% 84% 0.48% −0.89% 1.01%
2006 0.9% 55% 0.41% 0.5% 84% 0.08% −0.63% 1.27%
2007 0.4% 55% 0.18% 0.2% 69% 0.06% −1.74% 2.25%
2008 2.3% 27% 1.68% 3.7% 58% 1.55% 0.59% 5.03%
2009 10.3% 36% 6.59% 12.8% 61% 4.99% 6.91% 9.37%
2010 0.8% 41% 0.47% 1.8% 71% 0.52% 2.96% 6.01%
2011 1.7% 49% 0.87% 0.4% 67% 0.13% 1.78% 2.85%
2012 1.3% 53% 0.61% 1.4% 55% 0.63% 0.60% 1.73%
2013 0.7% 53% 0.33% 1.7% 69% 0.53% 0.19% 1.06%
2014 2.9% 48% 1.51% 4.3% 73% 1.16% −0.01% 0.81%
2015 1.8% 25% 1.35% 1.7% 48% 0.88% 0.70% 1.20%
2016 3.6% 31% 2.48% 1.5% 63% 0.56% 1.41% 1.65%
2017 1.3% 52% 0.61% 1.8% 62% 0.70% 1.75% 1.38%
2018 1.8% 40% 1.08% 1.7% 62% 0.66% 0.93% 1.11%
2019 2.6% 26% 1.95% 1.6% 48% 0.85% 0.87% 1.65%
2020 6.2% 22% 4.84% 4.0% 48% 2.08% 3.30% 1.82%
2021 0.3% 47% 0.16% 0.5% 52% 0.24% −0.27% 0.60%
Inception 2.4% 37% 1.54% 2.5% 62% 0.94% 1.07% 2.38%
Last 10 Yrs 2.2% 34% 1.48% 2.0% 59% 0.83% 0.94% 1.30%
EXHIBIT 5.1 Credit loss comparison, 2005 to 2021.
a
Source: JPMorgan Markets.
b
Source: Cliffwater Direct Lending Index (Realized Credit Losses).
c
Source: Federal Reserve (Fred: CORBLACBS).
Exhibit 5.1 shows that the 1.07% average credit loss rate from US mid￾dle market direct loans over the 2005 to 2021 period is very close to the 
0.94% loss rate for leveraged loans and below both the 1.54% loss rate 
for high-yield bonds and the 2.38% loss rate for bank C&I loans. Also, 
credit losses follow the same pattern over time with the highest loss rates 
occurring during the GFC and COVID crisis.
On their face, these comparative loss rates are not surprising. Direct 
loans have much more in common with leveraged bank loans than high-yield 
bonds. Direct loans and leveraged bank loans are primarily floating rate, 
intermediate-term, senior secured loans. High-yield bonds are fixed rate, Comparative Credit Loss Rates 45
longer-term subordinated debt so an investor would expect to experience 
higher credit losses, primarily through lower recovery rates. That character￾istic is also visible from the data in Exhibit 5.1.
The charge-offs on bank C&I loans are about 1% higher on average 
compared to the other credit loss rates. Most of the higher losses are attrib￾uted to the three-year GFC period 2008–2010  when C&I losses totaled 
20% compared to 10% for the other credit types. For the last ten years, 
C&I losses averaged 1.30% and have been more consistent with the other 
corporate credits, as Exhibit 5.1 shows. Bank reporting is not sufficient to 
explain fully their higher GFC losses, but it is likely that business loans 
at the time had greater real estate exposure, and lending standards were 
more relaxed leading up to the GFC.
NONACCRUALS AND IMPLIED RECOVERIES FOR MIDDLE 
MARKET CORPORATE LOANS
Reported default and recovery rates, the two components of loss rates, are 
flow statistics, meaning they express quantities per unit of time. In the case 
of defaults and recoveries, the typical time period reported for high-yield 
bonds and leveraged loans is monthly. Since loss rates are a product of 
defaults and recoveries, they too are available monthly. These same statistics 
are not available for middle market corporate direct loans. Loss rates are 
available, but only on a quarterly basis.
Fortunately, something similar to default and recovery rates are reported 
and available for the CDLI. These are loans on nonaccrual status, meaning 
loans that are no longer current in paying interest income and would be con￾sidered in default. This nonaccrual default statistic is different from what is 
reported for high-yield bonds and leveraged loans in that it is a stock sta￾tistic, not a flow statistic. Stock statistics represent quantities accumulated 
over time rather than for a subperiod (monthly or quarterly) of time. As a 
result, direct loan nonaccruals levels should exceed default rates as long as 
it takes over a quarter for recoveries to be realized.
Exhibit 5.2 reports CDLI nonaccrual loans (left axis) both at cost (par) 
value and at fair value, as a percentage of all CDLI loans at cost (par) value. 
The cost value of loans on nonaccrual have averaged 2.31% of total loan 
assets over the 14.75-year period shown. Like default rates, nonaccruals 
peak during periods of recession, most notably during the GFC and COVID 
subperiods, but also during the 2015–2016 oil crisis. Note that the 2.31% 
average nonaccrual stock level is not dissimilar from the 2.50% average 
default flow rate for leveraged loans. These stock and flow numbers would 46 PRIVATE DEBT
be similar if loans on nonaccrual took about one year to complete a work￾out of some sort, a plausible assumption.
Also shown in Exhibit 5.2 (right axis) is the implied recovery rate, equal 
to the fair value of loans on nonaccrual divided by the cost (par) value of 
those same loans. Implied recovery rates have been fairly consistent over 
the measurement period, averaging 48% as measured in Exhibit 5.2 (right 
axis). It is this implied recovery rate that should be compared to the actual 
historical recovery rates for high-yield bonds (37%) and leveraged loans 
(62%) reported in Exhibit 5.1. The 48% implied recovery rate for direct 
loans, falling between recovery rates for high-yield bonds and leveraged 
loans, seems reasonable given that CDLI direct loan composition over the 
measurement period has averaged 55% senior loans (the quality of lever￾aged loans) and 45% subordinated loans (the quality of high-yield bonds).
The loss rates examined in this chapter show that the higher yields for 
middle market loans when compared to more liquid high-yield bonds and 
leveraged loans, reported in Chapter 4, are not offset by a finding of higher 
loss rates. In fact, the 1.07% average annual loss rate for middle market 
direct loans is low, only 0.13% above the average loss rate for leveraged 
loans and 0.47% less than the average loss rate for high-yield bonds. This 
is an important finding because middle market borrowers are generally 
smaller than the larger corporate borrowers that finance in the public mar￾kets by issuing leveraged loans or high-yield bonds. Larger companies are 
often thought to be safer, which is inconsistent with our findings. Why this 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
0.0%
1.0%
2.0%
3.0%
4.0%
5.0%
6.0%
7.0%
Implied Recovery Rate
Percent of Total Loan Value
Nonaccruals at CV (%) (left axis)
Nonaccruals at FV (%) (left axis)
Implied Recovery Rate (right axis)
Sep-07
Mar-08 Sep-08
Mar-09 Sep-00
Mar-10
Sep-10
Mar-11 Sep-11
Mar-12
Sep-12
Mar-13
Sep-13
Mar-14 Sep-14
Mar-15
Sep-15
Mar-16 Sep-16
Mar-17 Sep-17
Mar-18 Sep-18
Mar-19 Sep-19
Mar-20
Sep-20
Mar-21
Sep-21
Mar-22
EXHIBIT 5.2 CDLI nonaccruals and recovery rates, September 2007 to 
March 2022.Comparative Credit Loss Rates 47
is so will be discussed in the chapters ahead but unlike the large borrowers 
accessing the public markets for financing, middle market loans are much 
more likely to have protective covenants and the borrowing companies are 
more likely owned by private equity firms (sponsor backed) with better 
alignment of interest with lenders should companies get in financial trouble.
Chapter  6 examines the cash flow characteristics of middle market 
direct loans. If loss rate differences don’t explain the higher yields for direct 
loans, perhaps a lack of liquidity is responsible. After all, these directly orig￾inated loans are generally held to maturity.CHAPTER 6
49
F
or some investors, an attractive feature of US middle market direct loans 
is an effective life that is shorter than their typical five- to seven-year 
maturity. Understanding effective life is useful for measuring overall port￾folio liquidity, which in turn can help investors in setting commitment levels 
to direct lending portfolios, and help managers who must balance cash 
flows from direct loan assets with potential investor withdrawals or man￾age financing when direct loan assets are leveraged at the portfolio level.
US middle market direct corporate loans have historically had an effec￾tive life that averages 3.09 years, based on data underlying the CDLI cover￾ing the period from September 2004 through March 2022. However, unlike 
many of the investment characteristics for direct lending that show stability, 
the measurement of effective life has varied considerably over time, from 
a low of 2.09 years (September 2013) to a high of 6.95 years (September 
2009). And, unfortunately but predictably, the effective life in direct lending 
varies inversely with general conditions of market liquidity. In other words, 
direct loan liquidity declines when credit conditions deteriorate.
A significant benefit of investing in US middle market direct loans is 
their comparatively high cash flow from principal repayment, which is a 
by-product of a short effective life and high current income. The CDLI data￾base shows principal-related cash flow averages approximately one-third of 
total assets annually. Interest income has averaged over one-tenth of total 
assets, bringing the combined average annual cash flow from direct loans to 
more than 40% of loan value, even when PIK (payment-in-kind) income is 
stripped out. At this high level of cash flow, direct loans become a very fun￾gible asset that provides asset allocators the flexibility they generally want 
to rebalance overall portfolios. The high cash flow from direct loans also 
serves to reduce the uncertainty in periodic loan valuation as a loan’s value 
will quickly converge to par if its current value is discounted.
Exhibit  6.1 reports principal cash flow from loan maturities, pre￾payments, and some asset sales in the CDLI as a percentage of total 
investments at cost for the period from September 2005 through March 
How Liquid Are Direct Loans?50 PRIVATE DEBT
2022. Measurements reflect trailing four-quarter (one-year) periods. Also 
included in Exhibit 6.1 is the effective life, which is calculated by taking 
the reciprocal of the principal-related cash flow percentage. For example, 
a portfolio with 33 1/3% of loans repaid or sold every year will turn over 
once every three years.
Principal-related cash flow from portfolios of direct loans average 
32.4% annually for the entire 16.75-year measurement period shown in 
Exhibit 6.1. Alternatively, direct loans can be thought of as having an aver￾age 3.09-year effective life. Combined with interest income that averaged 
10.8%, compounded annually, over the same period, direct loan portfolios 
generated 43.2% (32.4% plus 10.8%) on average in combined annual cash 
flow. On their face, these are impressive metrics for investors with short￾term cash flow requirements or investors wanting vintage (time) diversi￾fication without having to hold back allocations over several years as is 
common for private equity.
However, the CDLI data also shows that principal-related cash flow 
from direct loan assets is correlated to the credit cycle. As credit condi￾tions tighten, borrowers are less able to refinance or repay outstanding 
debt. Conversely, when credit conditions ease, borrowers are better able to 
refinance loans and can prepay outstanding debt, shortening the average 
life. Principal-related cash flow dropped more than one-half its long-term 
EXHIBIT 6.1 Liquidity measurement for US middle market direct loan assets.How Liquid Are Direct Loans? 51
average during the GFC, to 14.5% of loan assets for the four quarters end￾ing September 2009, raising the effective life to 6.9 years. Principal-related 
cash flow dipped again during the 2015–2016 energy downturn, to 27.5% 
of loan assets, raising effective life to 3.6 years, and more recently dipped 
to 27.2% during the 2020 COVID crisis, raising effective life to 3.7 years.
Interest income from direct loan portfolios, however, show modest 
gains during periods of market stress. For example, during the GFC when 
principal-related cash flow dropped to 13.9%, cash flow from loan income 
reached a 12.6% peak level for the same time period, compared to 10.79% 
for the entire measurement period. This is likely explained by lenders requir￾ing higher interest payments on newly originated loans or loan extensions to 
incentivize them to alter loan terms when credit risk increases. Together, the 
combined principal and income cash flow from direct loans fell to a 26.8% 
low, as a percentage of cost (par) during the GFC, compared to 46.2% com￾bined annualized cash flow over the entire measurement period.
Understanding the liquidity of direct loans is important for many rea￾sons. The first is time diversification, which is also referred to as vintage 
diversification in private fund investing. Ideally, and in the absence of any 
tactical market views, investors would prefer to invest, and reinvest, equal 
dollar or percentage amounts in each calendar year to effectively dollar 
average their entry price. While this discipline has been known and largely 
practiced for decades in private equity, investors have been known to allo￾cate excessive amounts of capital during peak valuations both because total 
assets are inflated (at least in hindsight) and distributions from private 
equity is high as general partners sell portfolio companies at high multiples 
and return capital to investors. The net result is that private equity invest￾ments become concentrated in higher priced vintage years rather than being 
equally distributed.
Vintage diversification is also important in direct lending but to a lesser 
extent because of the shorter duration of the assets. With the strong cash 
flow characteristics described in Exhibit 6.1 vintage diversification can be 
achieved by averaging investor capital over a two- to three-year period 
rather than the five-year period allocation period generally favored by pri￾vate equity investors. The importance of vintage diversification for direct 
lending is also mitigated by the lower periodic volatility in direct lending 
returns. Departures from the vintage discipline can produce worse out￾comes for private equity when compared to direct lending. Nonetheless, 
investors in direct lending should pay attention to the vintage weighting, 
particularly if they use leverage, which will increase return volatility in 
direct lending and hence the downside risk in departing from vintage diver￾sification.52 PRIVATE DEBT
These first chapters have hopefully provided a basic understanding of 
US middle market direct corporate loans and their investment characteris￾tics. The chapters that follow are meant to shift from details about direct 
loans and instead provide a top-down perspective on credit risk within an 
overall portfolio allocation. Unlike most other asset classes, credit opportu￾nities come in many shapes and sizes with varying expectations for return, 
risk, and liquidity. A framework for how much to allocate to credit and 
specific types of credit opportunities is useful at this juncture.CHAPTER 7
53
Chapter 3 reported the relative strong performance of middle market loans 
during recession-induced stock market declines. Middle market loan 
return drawdowns were shown to be mild by comparison to other asset 
classes and short-lived, as measured by the CDLI.
Today, investors are focused on unexpected increases in interest rates, 
a phenomenon not seen since the stagflation period of the 1970s when 
inflation and interest rates climbed to double-digit levels and stayed there 
for almost ten years. They should be concerned. As of this writing, CPI 
inflation is hovering at a 9.00% annualized rate, as shown in Exhibit 7.1, 
while short-term interest rates remain low at 1.21%. Real interest rates, 
equal to the difference between nominal interest rates and inflation, are at 
record −7.79% lows.
High inflation virtually requires interest rates to go higher to keep 
monetary policy neutral. If not, current negative real interest rates will spur 
additional inflation. Consequently, interest rate increases are on the way; 
how much and when remains uncertain.
In the current environment investors should reevaluate allocations to 
fixed rate securities, the most popular being represented by the Bloomberg 
Aggregate Bond Index, composed of all investment-grade US fixed income 
securities. This index, and the portfolios/ETFs that track it, have benefited 
from more than 20 years of declining interest rates. That tailwind appears 
over for the foreseeable future. One natural substitute is middle market 
direct loans both because their floating-rate yield increases with the general 
level of interest rates, and, as covered in Chapter 6, their short three-year 
effective maturity and high coupon income create generous liquidity to rein￾vest cash flow at the highest current rates.
Ideally, data on the performance of middle market loans during the 
inflationary 1970s would be useful to demonstrate their resilience dur￾ing rising interest rates. Unfortunately, that information does not exist. 
Middle Market Loans as a Hedge 
Against Rising Interest Rates54 PRIVATE DEBT
Even traded leveraged loan index data goes back only to 2000. Instead, 
Exhibits 7.2 and 7.3 examine return data for the CDLI and the Bloomberg 
Aggregate Bond Index against the backdrop of changes in ten-year Treasury 
rates going back to 2004, when CDLI data became first available.
Exhibit 7.2 plots 72 quarterly CDLI and Bloomberg Aggregate Bond 
Index returns (y-axis) against the quarterly change in ten-year Treasury 
yields (x-axis). As expected, Bloomberg Aggregate Bond Index returns are 
negatively related to increases in ten-year Treasury yields as suggested by 
the pattern of triangle symbols and regression line. The regression has a 
0.71 R-squared, which means 71% of the Bloomberg’s quarterly return is 
explained by changes in ten-year yields, a measurement consistent with the 
tight proximity of individual data points to the regression line. The regres￾sion equation shown means that for every 1% positive change in ten-year 
Treasury yield, the Bloomberg Aggregate Bond Index return falls −3.10%.
CDLI returns, by contrast, experience quite the opposite result when 
ten-year Treasury yields change. The dots representing quarterly CDLI 
returns are positively sloped, meaning that CDLI returns increase during 
periods of rising ten-year Treasury yields. The regression line has a much 
lower 0.32 R-squared, which means that only 32% of the CDLI quarterly 
return is explained by changes in ten-year yields. Visual inspection of the 
scatterplot for the CDLI shows a much looser connection of CDLI returns 
EXHIBIT 7.1 US short-term interest rates versus inflation, August 1954 to 
June 2022. 
Source: FRED.Middle Market Loans as a Hedge Against Rising Interest Rates 55
with interest rate changes. This is not surprising since credit risk and other 
factors play a more important role in generating CDLI returns unlike the 
Bloomberg Aggregate Bond Index, where interest rate risk is virtually 
the only driver of return. A preview of the impact of credit risk on CDLI 
EXHIBIT 7.2 Impact of interest rate changes on Bloomberg Aggregate Bond Index 
and CDLI, Q4 2004 to Q1 2022.
Quarterly 
Periods
Average 10-
Year Yield 
Change
Bloomberg 
Aggregate 
Bond Index 
Return
Cliffwater 
Direct Lending 
Index Return 
(CDLI)
CDLI Return 
minus Bloomberg 
Aggregate Return
Rising Interest 
Rates
0.33% −0.35% 2.78% 3.13%
Falling Interest 
Rates
−0.40% 2.26% 1.80% −0.46%
EXHIBIT 7.3 Impact of interest rate changes on Bloomberg Aggregate Bond Index 
and CDLI, Q4 2004 to Q1 2022.56 PRIVATE DEBT
returns can be seen in the two CDLI plot points labeled COVID Q1 2020 
and GFC Q4 2008. Both plot points depart significantly from the regres￾sion line. The two departures should be interpreted as another noninterest 
rate factor influencing those quarterly returns. That additional factor is a 
dramatic increase in perceived credit risk during those two unique quar￾ters, a subject discussed in Chapter 8.
The regression equation for the CDLI means that for every 1% positive 
change in ten-year Treasury yield, the CDLI return increases by 2.12%. The 
positive slope for CDLI is likely overstated, influenced by the two highly 
negative COVID and GFC data points. Conceptually, interest rate changes 
and middle market loan returns should impact one another positively, in 
a one-to-one manner given the floating rate nature of loans. If the two 
COVID and GFC data points are eliminated from the graph, the 2.12% 
slope changes to 0.89%, approximately equal to what would be expected.
The table in Exhibit  7.3 provides a second depiction of investment 
grade and middle market loan returns as interest rates change.
Time periods are divided into two subsets. The first subset consists of all 
quarters when ten-year Treasury yields rose quarter over quarter. The second 
subset consists of all quarters when ten-year Treasury yields fell quarter 
over quarter. Shown in the table for each subset are the average change 
in yield, the average Bloomberg Aggregate Bond Index return, the average 
CDLI return, and the difference in average returns between the CDLI and 
Bloomberg Aggregate Bond Index.
The rising rate environment, represented in the first row, clearly favors 
investing in floating rate middle market loans with a 3.13% average quar￾terly return difference, while the falling rate environment, represented in the 
second row, slightly favors investment grade bonds with a 0.46% return 
advantage over the CDLI. Assuming an environment of anything other than 
declining rates, middle market loans provide a significant return advantage 
over investment-grade bonds.
The relationship between investment-grade bonds and middle mar￾ket loan returns and interest rates is similar if changes in short-term Libor 
replaces ten-year Treasury bonds as the measure of interest rate changes. 
A rising Libor is associated with positive and higher CDLI returns and nega￾tive and lower Bloomberg Aggregate Bond Index returns.
In summary, inflation rates are well above historical norms as well as 
Fed targets, which will likely cause interest rates to rise significantly. Middle 
market loans, represented by the CDLI, are likely to produce positive and 
improving returns in such an environment as their floating rate yields 
increase. Fixed-rate investment-grade bonds, however, will suffer low and 
likely negative returns given their high interest rate sensitivity.CHAPTER 8
57
T
his chapter presents the case for credit and private debt more broadly as 
an asset class to be considered as part of any asset allocation study.
WHAT IS AN ASSET CLASS?
An asset class is defined as a group of securities that share similar charac￾teristics or common risk factors. Further, academics and practitioners limit 
asset class status to securities that by their nature produce a significant and 
persistent return above cash precisely because their associated risks can’t be 
diversified away.1
 Equities, fixed income, and cash2
 have traditionally been 
identified as the three primary investor asset classes. However, by this defini￾tion securities like physical commodities, currencies, and hedge funds would 
not achieve asset class status.
Credit meets the traditional asset class definition because its primary 
risk—the probability of borrower default—can’t be diversified away, and 
consequently the market provides investors significant returns above riskless 
cash as a reward. Exhibit 8.1 provides historical returns and risks for invest￾ing in equity, US Treasuries (i.e., interest rate risk), and three categories of 
liquid corporate credit.3
The analysis in Exhibit 8.1 includes only liquid asset classes and begins 
December 31, 1999. Prior to 2008, institutional credit portfolios consisted 
primarily of allocations to traded non-investment grade high-yield bonds 
and/or leveraged loans (a.k.a. bank loans, broadly syndicated loans) with 
perhaps modest and infrequent investments in private debt.
Credit as a Separate Asset Class
1
Non-diversifiable risks are also known as systematic or beta risks.
2
Cash is included as an asset class, representing the risk-free rate of return.
3
The January 1, 2000, start date was selected because it is the first date bank loan 
data is available.Credit
Interest Rates Equity
Investment Grade 
(IG) Corporates
Leveraged 
Loans
High Yield (HY) 
Bonds
1 Description Time value of 
money
Compensation 
for uncertain 
earnings and 
multiples
Compensation for 
the probability 
of principal loss
Compensation 
for the 
probability 
of principal 
loss
Compensation 
for the 
probability of 
principal loss
2 Measurement 10-Yr. Treasury Russell 
3000 Index
Bloomberg US 
Corporate Bond 
Index
Morningstar 
LSTA US 
Leveraged 
Loan Index
Bloomberg High 
Yield Bond 
Index
3 Total Return 4.21% 6.51% 5.03% 4.47% 6.17%
4 minus duration adjustment† 0.00% 0.00% –2.39% 0.00% –1.89%
5 minus 30-day T-bills†† –1.62% –1.62% –1.62% –1.62% –1.62%
6 Excess Return 2.60% 4.90% 1.03% 2.86% 2.66%
7 Excess Risk 7.20% 14.80% 5.44% 6.55% 10.88%
8 Excess Return/Risk 0.36 0.33 0.19 0.44 0.24
EXHIBIT 8.1 Return and risk for interest rates, equity, and credit, December 31, 1999, to June 30, 2022. 
58
Nesbitt944393_c08.indd 58 12/12/2022 12:53:37 PMCredit
Interest Rates Equity
Investment Grade 
(IG) Corporates
Leveraged 
Loans
High Yield (HY) 
Bonds
9 Correlations:
Term Structure 1.00 –0.29 –0.39 –0.34 –0.50
Equity 1.00 0.65 0.55 0.72
Credit (IG) 1.00 0.79 0.87
Credit (BL) 1.00 0.82
Credit (HY) 1.00
All return and risk data is annualized. Risk is calculated as annualized standard deviation of excess return.
†
Historical return attributable to Bloomberg Investment Grade and High Yield Bond Index durations, respectively, and cal￾culated by monthly adjustments of the Treasury bond excess returns to equal the same duration as the Investment Grade and 
High Yield Bond Index durations, respectively. 
(Source: Bloomberg Index Services Limited.)
††Source: ICE BofAML 3 Month T-Bill Index.
EXHIBIT 8.1 (continued)
59
Nesbitt944393_c08.indd 59 12/12/2022 12:53:37 PM60 PRIVATE DEBT
The first two columns in Exhibit 8.1 provide historical return and risk 
data for interest rate and equity risk. The last three columns show the same 
data for three different categories of liquid credit investments, with increas￾ing levels of credit risk: investment-grade bonds, leveraged loans, and high￾yield bonds. Investment grade bonds represent the lowest credit risk level. 
Leveraged loans are senior secured debt but considered non-investment 
grade in quality because interest coverage and debt ratios compare less 
favorably to investment-grade debt. Finally, high-yield bonds represent pri￾marily subordinated, higher risk debt.
Excess return is shown in row 6 and measures the portion of total return 
that is solely attributable to the type of beta risk identified by the column. 
Excess return is also commonly referred to as risk premium and is generally 
calculated by subtracting the risk-free rate (30-day T-bill return) from total 
return. However, in the case of investment-grade and high-yield bonds there 
is an interest rate risk factor as well as a credit risk factor embedded in their 
total returns. Interest rate risk is stripped out by subtracting Treasury bond 
returns—in excess of three-month T-bill returns—whose durations equal those 
of investment-grade and high-yield bonds. This duration adjustment results in 
lowering returns by −2.39% and −1.89% for investment grade and high-yield 
bonds, respectively. No duration adjustment is needed for leveraged loans 
because interest income is based on a short-term floating rate instrument, such 
as T-bills or Libor, which adjusts every 30 or 90 days, plus an agreed-to yield 
spread. Such instruments have little or no interest rate duration.
Excess returns for all three credit measures are positive over the measure￾ment period. For leveraged loans and high-yield bonds, their respective 2.86% 
and 2.66% credit-driven excess returns exceed the 2.60% excess return for the 
interest rate asset class, represented by ten-year Treasuries. As expected, the 
excess return is greatest for equities that experienced the highest level of risk.
Also relevant for asset  allocation purposes are risk-adjusted excess 
returns, measured by excess return divided by excess risk. Leveraged loans 
had the highest excess return/risk ratio, equal to 0.44, followed by interest 
rates and equity that had excess return/risk ratios equal to 0.36 and 0.31, 
respectively. The lowest ratios fell to investment grade credit and high-yield 
bonds, with values equal to 0.19 and 0.24, respectively.
Exhibit 8.1 also reports correlations of excess returns between inter￾est rates, equity, and the three credit categories. Not surprising, the three 
credit measures have high cross correlations, ranging from 0.79 to 0.82. 
From an asset allocation perspective, less attractive are the high correlations 
of the three credit categories with equities, ranging from 0.55 to 0.72, far 
less attractive as a diversifier when compared to ten-year Treasuries, which 
have a negative −0.29 correlation to equities. Nonetheless, the correlations 
between the credit categories and equities are sufficiently low for public Credit as a Separate Asset Class 61
credit instruments to deserve an allocation within a diversified portfolio. 
The allocation question is considered in further detail in Chapter 22.
The growing allocation to credit within portfolios from fractional 
amounts ten years ago to meaningful allocations today is almost solely the 
result of private, not public, debt opportunities, anchored by the growth of 
direct lending. The reason is that absolute and risk-adjusted returns for direct 
lending, as measured by the CDLI, are multiples of those achieved in public 
credit as presented in Exhibit 3.1. But direct lending is not the whole story.
PRIVATE DEBT: THE FULL PICTURE
Earlier and later chapters focus on corporate direct lending, which is only 
part of what most institutional investors define as the private debt asset class, 
though clearly the largest and arguably the most important. Exhibit 8.2 cat￾alogs multiple types of private debt assets grouped into two subclasses. The 
eastern hemisphere represents corporate direct lending, which is the largest 
subsector of private debt, estimated to represent $1 trillion in loan assets.
Direct lending is considered to be a core investment because it best rep￾resents the features of private debt: cash-paying, broad diversification across 
borrowers and industries, floating rate without interest rate risk, principal 
security with covenant protections, and a fairly short effective loan life that 
best provides for the opportunity for liquidity. Core private debt, when 
properly implemented, reflects primarily the beta4
 characteristics of private 
debt, just as core real estate, fully developed, leased, and diversified repre￾sent the beta characteristics of private real estate.
The enhanced private debt strategies represented by the western hemi￾sphere in Exhibit 8.2 are defined in Exhibit 8.3. The list is by no means 
exhaustive but does represent strategies with significant deployed capital.
The allocations reflected in Exhibit 8.2 are for illustrative purposes only. 
The chart is intended to identify the subsectors within the private credit 
opportunity set and not recommended allocations. From a practical per￾spective it would be difficult to push high allocations to the enhanced strate￾gies, leaving direct lending to represent the largest fraction of a composite 
credit portfolio allocation.
4
Asset return and risk are often broken down into beta and alpha components where 
beta represents broad drivers of return represented by an index, like the CDLI, and 
alpha represents outsized allocations to specific credits, sub-strategies, or industries. 
Beta-driven returns are a by-product of the asset class while alpha-driven returns are 
a by-product of decisions made by the manager to earn returns in excess of an index. 
As a result, alpha-driven returns depend much more on manager selection than beta￾driven returns, where returns depend on the collective positions of many managers.62 PRIVATE DEBT
Enhanced private debt strategies are expected to achieve higher levels 
of return, after fees, when compared to direct lending. Historical returns 
suggest that enhanced lending performance might be expected to produce 
a 3–5% higher return when compared to direct lending, but outcomes can 
vary depending on the enhanced debt strategies and managers selected. For 
example, infrastructure debt has emerged as a private debt opportunity 
only over the past five to seven years. Unlevered, the net yield on private 
infrastructure debt is approximately 6%, below that of direct lending. What 
makes infrastructure debt more interesting to investors is when financing 
(leverage) is applied or when structured to produce a higher yielding sub￾ordinated note. The same is true for commercial real estate debt in general. 
Unlevered, net yields are not so attractive, but when structured (levered) to 
EXHIBIT 8.2 The broader private debt landscape.Credit as a Separate Asset Class 63
Strategy General Description Characteristics
Mezzanine Directly originated corpo￾rate loans subordinate to 
senior debt. Can be secured 
by assets or unsecured, but 
have priority to equity
Focus on total return, 
combination of cash and 
PIK income, plus equity 
warrants
Structured (CLO 
equity)
Typically, highly levered 
investments in lower risk 
credit collateral
High, but risky cash flow
Venture Debt Loans to venture capital–
backed companies that are 
typically not yet profitable; 
investments can be a com￾bination of cash and PIK 
income plus equity/warrants
Private equity–type 
upside return profile 
with baseline contractual 
return from the debt 
component
Rescue Financing Senior debt provided to a 
company in or approaching 
bankruptcy
High returns but higher 
risk, short duration, 
super senior debt; typi￾cally not a standalone 
strategy
Asset-Backed Lending Lending against or leasing 
of assets; collateral may 
include hard assets, such as 
commoditized equipment 
or mission critical assets, or 
financial assets such as trade 
claims and receivables
Fixed or floating rate, 
amortization and 
duration varies by the 
underlying asset type, 
underwritten to asset 
value, not cash flow
Real Estate Debt Loans collateralized by real 
estate; typically takes the 
form of (1) a whole loan 
with the senior portion syn￾dicated to a bank partner or 
(2) a mezzanine unsecured 
loan
Hard asset collateral, 
higher LTVs (60–90% 
range versus 50–60% 
for corporate debt)
(continued)
EXHIBIT 8.3 Descriptions of enhanced private debt strategies.64 PRIVATE DEBT
produce a commercial mortgage-backed security, the yields climb to high 
single-digit levels. Again, most investors in enhanced lending strategies try 
to take measured risks to earn returns well above core direct lending returns.
It is also noteworthy that both direct lending and enhanced debt strate￾gies are available in the UK and Europe, but to a lesser degree in Asia, where 
legal protections for lenders are less certain. In addition, opportunistic credit 
strategies have surfaced since the GFC. Opportunistic credit strategies have 
become quite popular and enable managers/funds to allocate tactically 
across private and public credit strategies to take advantage of the most 
attractive investments over time.
Strategy General Description Characteristics
Infrastructure Debt Senior and mezzanine debt 
investments backed by infra￾structure assets
High-quality hard asset 
collateral, with long￾term contractual cash 
flows
Royalties Investments in intellectual 
property rights with credit￾like cash flow characteris￾tics or debt investments to 
companies collateralized by 
intellectual property rights
Uncorrelated to credit 
markets, typically health 
care, entertainment, or 
other IP rights
Reinsurance Investment in insurance￾linked notes or catastrophe 
bonds (CAT bonds) that pay 
cash income in exchange 
for payment of claims from 
earthquake, flooding, and 
hurricane events
Uncorrelated returns, 
high fees, and a limited 
market can cause incon￾sistent returns
Litigation Finance Financing, including loans, 
to law firms or claimants 
backed by legal fees or 
awards
Uncorrelated with a 
wide range of risks and 
returns (9–30% + gross) 
depending on strategy
Other Fund finance, life settlements, marketplace lending 
(fintech)
EXHIBIT 8.3 (continued)CHAPTER 9
65
T
he growth in private debt investing is distributed across most credit-driven 
strategies but the largest beneficiary has been senior and unitranche cor￾porate direct lending. One-stop unitranche loans, which combine traditional 
senior and second lien loans into a single loan, have seen the greatest growth 
for their convenience to borrowers and higher yields offered to investors. 
The market surge toward loan seniority is seen in Exhibit 9.1, where the 
weighting of the senior lending, as a percentage of the CDLI, has grown 
from 42% in 2012 to 76% on March 31, 2022.
Several factors explain the market shift to senior direct lending. The first 
is the transition in middle market lending from banks to asset managers. 
Bank lending is traditionally senior secured, and its transition to alternative 
direct lending through independent asset managers has expanded the senior 
composition of direct middle market loans. The innovation of the unitranche 
loan has also limited the need for borrowers to find second lien financing.
Equally important is investor demand for a replacement for traditional 
investment-grade fixed income. While middle market loans are seldom rated, 
and most likely would be considered non-investment grade if they were, a 
portfolio of senior or unitranche loans would be much closer in quality to 
traditional fixed income than second lien loans.
Finally, banks and insurance companies will lend against senior and uni￾tranche loans at attractive rates, but not second lien loans. This effectively 
gives investors seeking higher yields a choice between holding higher-yield 
second lien loans or holding senior loans partially financed by borrowing 
from a bank or insurance company. The use of leverage and financing in 
middle market lending is taken up in Chapter 13.
The Cliffwater Senior-Only Direct Lending Index (CDLI-S) was cre￾ated in 2017 to measure the comparative performance of only senior middle 
market loans. The CDLI-S is a subset of the broader CDLI and includes 
more than 3,000 senior and unitranche middle market loans held within 
BDCs. CDLI-S follows the same construction methodology as CDLI but 
only includes loans held by managers of BDCs that have an investment style 
Senior and Unitranche Direct Lending66 PRIVATE DEBT
that clearly focuses on senior secured loans. The CDLI-S beginning date is 
September 30, 2010, compared to September 30, 2004, for the CDLI. The 
shorter historical series for CDLI-S is attributable to the post-2008 intro￾duction of most senior-only direct lending BDC strategies. As with the 
CDLI, CDLI-S does not suffer from biases (backfill and survivorship) found 
in other databases because all source data come from required SEC filings. 
Exhibit 9.2 provides some key differences between the CDLI and CDLI-S.
Senior loans within the CDLI-S are generally represented by larger, 
sponsored (private equity–backed) borrowers with a track record of lower 
realized losses and a lower rate of nonaccrual status. Not surprising, the 
senior-oriented CDLI-S is composed of higher-quality loans, which is 
EXHIBIT 9.1 Growth in senior secured direct lending (as percentage of CDLI).
Descriptor CDLI-S CDLI
# loans 3,210 9,475
Total assets $84 b $223 b
EBITDA (median) $79 m $46 m
Nonaccrual (as % of cost) 0.4% 1.1%
Implied recovery rate 72% 58%
% sponsor 90% 79%
% senior 94% 76%
EXHIBIT 9.2 CDLI, CDLI-S comparison, March 31, 2022.Senior and Unitranche Direct Lending 67
reflected in its lower yield when compared to the broader CDLI, as shown 
in Exhibit 9.3.
The CDLI earned an average but declining yield equal to 10.70% 
over the 11.5-year period shown in Exhibit 9.3. The CDLI-S average yield 
equaled 8.14% and was relatively stable. The declining CDLI yield is attrib￾utable to the increasing composition of senior loans in the middle market, 
as shown in Exhibit 9.1. T-bill yields averaged 0.52%, producing a 7.62% 
yield spread for senior middle market loans. Unitranche loans represent 
roughly one-half of the senior loans within the CDLI-S.
Senior middle market loans alone earned a 2.54% lower yield com￾pared to the entire set of loans in the CDLI, but lower realized credit losses 
in the CDLI-S offset almost one-half of the yield difference, as shown in 
Exhibit 9.4.
While the gross yield difference between the CDLI and CDLI-S equaled 
2.54% (10.70% minus 8.14%) over the 11.5-year history of CDLI-S, CDLI 
suffers higher realized losses equal to −1.06% annualized, compared to just 
−0.12% for CDLI-S. The 0.94% realized loss difference reduces the net-of￾loss yield difference to 1.60%.
Other differences between the CDLI and CDLI-S might matter as 
well to investors. While long-term unrealized losses are about the same, 
near zero, for both indexes, the short-term volatility is greater for CDLI. 
0%
5%
10%
15%
CDLI, CDLI-S, T-Bill Income Return
CDLI
CDLI-S
T-bills (3 month)
Sep-11
Jun-12
Mar-13
Dec-13
Sep-14
Jun-15
Mar-16
Dec-16
Sep-17
Jun-18
Mar-19
Dec-19
Sep-20
Jun-21
Mar-22
EXHIBIT 9.3 Historical CDLI, CDLI-S, T-Bill yields, September 2010 to 
March 2022.68 PRIVATE DEBT
Over the entire measurement period the broader CDLI annualized return 
standard deviation measured 2.95% compared to 2.43% for CDLI-S. 
Both risk levels are low, but the difference is significant and produces an 
identical 3.32 return-to-risk ratio for both indexes.
A final factor that generates interest in CDLI-S is the greater capacity 
to finance senior and unitranche loans compared to second lien and mez￾zanine  private debt. The low level of volatility in senior secured middle 
market loans attracts financing for lenders that wish to enhance returns to 
their investors. The use of financing and leverage is discussed more fully in 
Chapter 13 but is generally limited to senior secured and unitranche loans.
Index Components Q1 2022
Last Four 
Quarters
Last Five 
Years*
From CDLI-S 
Inception 
September 
2010
CDLI-S Returns
CDLI-S total return** 1.52% 8.44% 7.92% 8.05%
= Income 1.66% 7.45% 8.12% 8.14%
+/− Net realized gains (losses) 0.02% 0.18% −0.30% −0.12%
+/− Net unrealized gains (losses) −0.15% 0.77% 0.11% −0.02%
CDLI Returns
CDLI total return** 1.76% 11.17% 8.63% 9.80%
= Income 1.93% 8.67% 9.75% 10.70%
+/− Net realized gains (losses) 0.03% 0.49% −1.23% −1.06%
+/− Net unrealized gains (losses) −0.19% 1.85% 0.18% −0.23%
EXHIBIT 9.4 Comparison of CDLI-S and CDLI performance.
*Annualized return.
**Return subcomponents may not add to total return due to compounding effects.CHAPTER 10
69
Much of the credit research presented thus far has been empirical, using 
historical data to drive an understanding of credit return and risk. How￾ever, credit can also be understood from a theoretical perspective, using 
option pricing theory to explain and measure credit return and risk. This 
chapter reviews some basic theoretical underpinnings of credit and ties its 
conclusions to market behavior.
The chapter begins with a review of the Merton model for pricing cor￾porate debt; shows how it can be applied to calculate credit risk premiums 
for middle market corporate loans, including sensitivity analysis; estimates 
credit risk using Monte Carlo simulation; and, finally, tests risk findings 
against historical risk measures.
This research approach can be helpful in several ways. For example, 
understanding the Merton model better informs investors of loan pricing 
and its determinants. Take the tightening of yield spreads for credit securi￾ties relative to comparable maturity Treasury securities (also called spread 
compression), for example, which is generally attributable to capital inflows 
but instead could be explained by a rise in the risk-free rate. Another appli￾cation is determining return and risk expectations for less familiar debt 
instruments such as second lien and mezzanine loan structures, which can 
be estimated through simulation techniques when empirical data are not 
available.
To better understand the implications of the current covenant-lite 
trend, an extension of the Merton model, called the Black-Cox model, is 
considered. The Black-Cox model provides a method for pricing covenants 
and, in so doing, gives us a way to price (in yield equivalent) the cost of 
covenant-lite loans. For example, using Black-Cox, we estimate that a trend 
toward covenant-lite structures reduces return by approximately 1% but 
that cost varies considerably and directly with the loan-level leverage.
Like CAPM and Black-Scholes, the Merton and Black-Cox models 
have withstood the test of time but remain imperfect approximations of 
Loans and the Theory of Credit70 PRIVATE DEBT
a complex credit world. Nonetheless, this chapter shows that theoretical 
guideposts exist to better understand and measure credit-driven investment 
opportunities and risks.
THE MERTON MODEL
Current corporate credit theory remains almost entirely based on Robert 
Merton’s 1974 adaptation of Black-Scholes option pricing formula to cor￾porate credit.1
 Merton showed that the same formula for pricing stock 
options could be used for pricing bonds by associating the level of corporate 
debt with the exercise price of a stock option.
In Merton’s world, the corporate lender can be thought of as (1) pro￾viding the corporate borrower a fixed amount of debt capital, expecting 
full repayment at maturity plus interest, plus (2) selling the corporate bor￾rower a put option and receiving a premium, giving the borrower the right 
to repurchase the debt at maturity for the then value of corporate assets. At 
maturity, the borrower’s put option only has value if the value of corporate 
assets is less than the value of the corporate debt, and the debt can be settled 
in full by remaining corporate assets.
In Merton’s world, the expected risk of default is fully absorbed by 
the corporate borrower through the premium cost of the put. Hence, the 
principal value of the debt becomes technically default-free and the interest 
rate in (1) is deserving only of the risk-free rate of return to compensate 
for the time value of money. Hence, the value of corporate debt can be 
written as:
Corporate Debt Xe Put rT
0 (10.1)
X value of debtatmaturity
T time to maturity
r riskless rate of interest
e rT discounted value of adollar
Put0 value of a put option at on corporate value
 
T
 at exercise price equal to X
1
Robert C. Merton, “On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest 
Rates,” The Journal of Finance (May 1974).Loans and the Theory of Credit 71
The annuitized value of Put0 in Equation (10.1) can be viewed as the 
annualized credit risk premium. However, Merton provides a more direct 
calculation of the credit risk premium in Equation (10.2).
Credit Premium R r
T
h
d
h 1 1 2 1 ln (10.2)
R yield
r risk-free rate
T time to maturity
standard deviation of firm assets
cumulative normal distribution function
d
e rT debt
total assets present value of debt to assets strike price
h2 T d T 1 2
2 ln /
h1 T d T 1 2
2 ln /
As expected, equation (2) has the same look as Black-Scholes but here 
the contents in the brackets represent a weighted average of the current 
asset coverage ratio ( 1
d
) and an asset coverage ratio equal to 1.0, the default 
point. The weights ( h h 2 1 , ) depend on time to maturity, firm risk, and debt 
levels. More weight is given to the debt coverage ratio as debt increases. The 
first term ( ) 1
T amortizes the credit premium over the life of the loan.
Exhibit 10.1 applies Merton’s formula to a hypothetical middle market 
corporate loan. We assume a five-year loan, a borrower whose assets (unlev￾ered firm) exhibit a 40% standard deviation, and a 1.75% riskless rate of 
interest over the life of the loan. Because we also are modeling a private 
loan, we assume a 2.00% liquidity premium and a 0.5% annualized origi￾nal issue discount (OID), values that are consistent with research on middle 
market loans presented in Chapter 11.
Line 3 in Exhibit 10.1 is the investor’s required interest rate at vary￾ing leverage levels to compensate for time, liquidity, and credit risk. For 
example, in an efficient market a lender would require a 7.10% yield for a 72 PRIVATE DEBT
private loan equal to 50% of total firm value. That 7.10% would be com￾posed of a riskless 1.75% for the time value of money, 2.00% for the loss 
of liquidity, 0.50% for the cost of creating the loan, and 2.85% to com￾pensate for default risk. As expected, yield increases as debt increases. At 
70% debt, a level reflective of some unitranche loans, the required yield 
increases to 9.11%.
The representation of yield in line 3 is an average yield because it repre￾sents the composite pricing of debt capital from the first dollar (1% of total 
assets) through the last dollar (i.e., the 1% of debt capital that brings total 
debt from 49–50%). Theoretically, each incremental dollar of debt brings 
greater risk and should have a greater yield. Marginal yield represents the 
pricing of incremental debt capital and is shown in line 4. For example, the 
yield required for the last 1% of debt capital before a cumulative 50% of 
total assets is reached equals 11.82%. For a unitranche loan seeking 70% 
debt capital, the last marginal 1% requires a yield equal to 16.16%.
Marginal yields are useful for at least three reasons. First, they inform 
investors that the high yields they see reported for second lien, subordinated, 
and mezzanine debt are necessary to compensate for credit risk. For example, 
the 70% loan-to-value (LTV) 9.11% unitranche loan in Exhibit 10.1 can be 
divided into a 50% LTV senior loan and a 20% LTV subordinated loan. The 
0% 10%
25.0%
Credit Risk Premium (Marginal Rate)
Credit Risk Premium (Average Rate)
T-bill + Liquidity Premium+ OID
T-bill 16.16%
4
3
2
1
11.82%
9.11%
7.10%
4.25%
1.75% 1.75%
4.25%
20.0%
15.0%
10.0%
Required Interest Rate
5.0%
0.0%
20% 30% 40% 50%
Debt as a Percent Total Firm Value
60% 70% 80% 90%
EXHIBIT 10.1 Merton model representation of debt costs and loan-to-value ratios 
for private debt.Loans and the Theory of Credit 73
senior loan has a 7.10% required yield from Exhibit 10.1. The subordinated 
loan has a required yield equal to 14.1%. The subordinated debt required yield 
can be calculated by solving the equation: 9 1. %1 0 x . . 29 7 10 0 % .71 , 
where x equals the subordinated debt required yield, 9.11% equals the 
required unitranche yield, 7.10% equals the required senior debt yield, and 
0.28 and 0.71 are the debt weightings to junior and senior tranches, respec￾tively. Alternatively, the subordinated debt required yield can be calculated 
by solving the integral to the equation for line 4 with limits from 50% LTV 
to 70% LTV.
Second, marginal yields help investors understand the yield differences 
for varying senior debt structures—that is, super senior, senior, stretch senior, 
and unitranche—each having differing attachment or detachment points. 
For example, a 70% unitranche loan that sells a 20% first-out loan partici￾pation raises the required yield on its remaining last-out loan by almost two 
percentage points, from 9.11% to 10.88%.
Third, marginal yields inform as to the importance and pricing of 
covenants that offer lenders protection against potential adverse marginal 
use of corporate assets by borrowers, something covered in detail later in 
this chapter.
It is useful to understand how credit risk premiums react to changes in 
the value of its three key inputs: firm volatility, the risk-free rate, and time.
FIRM VOLATILITY
Exhibit 10.2 plots the credit risk premium (excluding the Libor and OID 
premiums in Exhibit 10.1) component of return at firm risk levels of 30%, 
40%, and 50%, respectively. Firm volatility levels of 30% and 50% repre￾sent approximately one standard deviation from the mean firm volatility.2
As Exhibit 10.2 shows, credit risk premiums are quite sensitive to per￾ceived asset volatility. At a 50% debt to firm value level, credit risk premiums 
can double or halve with a major one standard deviation move in the VIX.
Firm risk is generated primarily from three sources: overall market 
conditions, firm-specific conditions, and industry conditions. Changes in 
market conditions would likely set and move credit risk premiums simi￾larly across all loans. Firm-specific conditions, by definition, are unique to 
2
The standard deviation of the VIX Index, a measure of equity market risk, equals 
8.06% when measured monthly over the 25 years ending March 2022. We estimate 
that the average beta for middle market companies equals 1.2, so that one standard 
deviation of market risk applied to middle market companies equals 9.67%. We 
assume company-specific risk does not change and add (subtract) 10–40% average 
firm risk.74 PRIVATE DEBT
individual companies and would move risk premiums singularly. Industry 
conditions affect the loan pricing of borrowers as a subgroup within the 
same industry.
Exhibit 10.3 shows firm asset volatility estimates across industry groups 
based on companies in the Russell 2000 Index covering the 14-year period 
from 2007 through 2021. Russell 2000 companies were selected as the proxy 
for middle market companies because they are the closest traded equivalent 
to middle market companies. Individual firm volatility (standard deviation) 
is calculated by adjusting firm stock volatility over the measurement period 
for firm leverage (debt to total assets) over the measurement period. The 
average volatility for all firms within the same industry is calculated and 
reported in Exhibit 10.3, ordered from highest volatility industry to low￾est volatility industry. Average volatility for all Russell 2000 companies is 
reported as well.
The disparity in firm volatility by industry coupled with the sensitivity 
of credit risk premiums to firm volatility suggest that industries should each 
carry substantially different yields, everything else being equal. For example, 
the same 49% debt ratio loan should carry a 4.16% risk premium for the 
average health care borrower but a much lower 2.17% for an information 
technology company. Not surprisingly, lenders that specialize tend to select 
the higher volatility industries where the reward from skilled underwriting 
is potentially greater.
14.0%
12.0%
10.0%
8.0%
6.0%
Required Interest Rate
4.0%
2.0%
0.0%
0% 10% 20% 30% 40%
Debt as a Percent Total Firm Value
50% 60%
1.13%
2.85% 2.59%
5.01% 4.86%
7.39%
70% 80% 90%
50% Volatility (+1σ)
30% Volatility (–1σ)
Baseline (40% Standard Deviation)
EXHIBIT 10.2 Credit risk premium and firm risk.Loans and the Theory of Credit 75
Higher yields for smaller borrowers, discussed Chapter 11, may also 
be partially attributable to differences in expected firm asset volatility. 
Unlevered asset standard deviations for the 1,000 largest and 1,000 small￾est companies in the Russell 2000 Index equal 27% and 38%, respectively. 
This difference in standard deviation would require smaller borrowers to 
pay an additional 1.50% yield relative to larger borrowers, a difference 
consistent with the empirical findings presented for middle market loans in 
Chapter 11.
RISK-FREE RATE
Exhibit 10.4 shows how the credit risk premium changes with the risk-free 
rate. Exhibit 10.4 focuses only on the credit risk premium itself and does 
not include how the risk-free rate directly affects the base rate on floating 
rate loans.
Credit risk premiums are inversely correlated to the risk-free rate. At 
a 50% debt to firm value level, the credit risk premium is 3.19% at a 0% 
T-bill rate and 2.15% at a 5% T-bill rate. A higher risk-free rate lowers the 
effective strike price of the put sold to borrowers by lenders. The lower 
EXHIBIT 10.3 Unlevered firm volatility (standard deviation) by industry group.76 PRIVATE DEBT
strike price makes the put less valuable, lowering the option premium and, 
therefore, the credit risk premium received by the lender.
As Exhibit  10.4 shows, the impact of rising interest rates on credit 
spreads is not inconsequential. At the 50% debt level, an increase in the 
risk-free rate from 0–5% lowers the credit risk premium by 1.04%. At a 
70% debt level, the credit risk premium falls by 1.61%. A 20% loan sub￾ordinated to a 50% senior loan would see its credit risk premium fall by 
3.03%, from 10.92% to 7.89%, from a 0% to 5% T-bill rate change.
The relationship described in Exhibit  10.4 may explain some of the 
yield spread compression that has been coincident with rising short rates.
TIME TO MATURITY
Exhibit 10.5 describes the relationship between credit spreads and time to 
maturity. Unlike volatility and the risk-free rate that change credit spreads in 
the same direction across debt to total firm assets, time to maturity changes 
direction.
Exhibit 10.5 mostly confirms conventional thought that longer matu￾rity loans are riskier for the lender and require higher spreads. However, 
at very high debt ratios (60% and above in our example), longer maturity 
loans are less risky.
Debt as a Percent Total Firm Value
14.0%
12.0%
10.0% 0% T-bill rate
5% T-bill rate
3.19%
5.40%
4.86%
3.79%
2.85%
2.15%
Baseline (1.75% T-bill rate)
8.0%
6.0%
Required Interest Rate
4.0%
2.0%
0.0%
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90%
EXHIBIT 10.4 Credit risk premium and the risk-free rate.Loans and the Theory of Credit 77
ESTIMATING LOAN RISK
The Merton model is also useful for estimating the risk characteristics of a 
corporate loan. To demonstrate this, stock returns are simulated, and the 
Merton formula is applied to show the impact on corporate loan pricing.
Simulation inputs:
(a) Middle market corporate loans with a five-year maturity.
(b) Floating interest rates so the five-year risk-free bond has zero risk 
(no duration).
(c) Annualized firm-level risk equal to 34%, derived in the following 
way. We calculate the stock risk of every company in the Russell 
2000 small stock index over the last 14 years ending December 
31, 2021, finding a 47% average. Since our Merton model requires 
firm-level volatility, not stock volatility, we convert the 47% stock 
risk to an estimate of firm level risk by deleveraging using the aver￾age 0.27× Russell 2000 debt-to-total assets ratio over the same 14-
year period. Deleveraging produces a 34% annualized unlevered 
risk estimate for the average Russell 2000 company. Russell 2000 
companies were selected as a proxy for US middle market compa￾nies because their average EBITDA of $77 million is at roughly the 
Debt as a Percent Total Firm Value
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90%
14.0%
12.0%
10.0% 7-year maturity
3-year maturity
2.90%
5.20%
4.46%
4.86%
2.85%
2.43%
Baseline (5-year maturity)
8.0%
6.0%
Required Interest Rate
4.0%
2.0%
0.0%
EXHIBIT 10.5 Credit risk premium and time to maturity.78 PRIVATE DEBT
midpoint of the $10 million to $125 million EBITDA range that 
generally defines the corporate middle market.3
 The difference is 
that Russell 2000 companies are exchange traded while most mid￾dle market borrowers are private companies.
(d) The 34% firm-level risk estimate is divided into two risk sources: 
market-related risk (beta) and nonmarket idiosyncratic risk. 
Market risk is assumed to be 20%, equal to the risk of the Rus￾sell 2000 Index over the same 14-year period. Knowing that, by 
definition, market and nonmarket risks are independent of each 
other, the calculation for the nonmarket risk for the average mid￾dle market company equals 39%.4
Exhibit 10.6 provides simulation results for three loans. The first rep￾resents a senior, first lien loan with a principal value equal to 50% of initial 
firm assets. The second represents a unitranche loan, intended to incorpo￾rate first and second lien loans into one, with a principal value equal to 
70% of firm assets. The third loan is second lien with a value equal to 20% 
of initial firm assets and with lien protection above the 50% asset value. 
Results are based on 1,000 trials.
Exhibit 10.7 displays the simulation outcomes for the first lien and sec￾ond lien graphically.
Exhibits 10.6 and 10.7 together provide useful guidance on what to 
expect in terms of risk from different loan structures. Not surprisingly, risk 
(standard deviation) increases from 8.54% for a senior loan to 12.04% for 
a unitranche loan and 24.88% for a second lien loan. However, correlation 
and R-square with the Russell 2000 Index remain largely unchanged across 
the three loan types as equity risk represents a roughly constant percentage 
of total risk. Finally, equity beta increases from 0.19 for a senior loan to 
0.27 for a unitranche loan and 0.57 for a second lien loan. Loans do act 
more like equity further down in the capital structure.
Loans also possess other less desirable risk features. The simulated 
loan returns feature negative convexity, consistent with the short volatil￾ity nature of the short-put feature in Equation (1). However, the negative 
convexity is not severe and is far less than what is found in hedge fund 
returns.5
 Loans also display a negative skew, or downside tail, in the distri￾bution of returns. But unlike risk and convexity, skew improves as credit 
quality declines.
3
Borrowers in the CDLI have a median and average EBITDA equal to $45 million 
and $62 million, respectively, at March 31, 2022.
4
0.392
 = 0.342
 + 0.202
, assuming zero correlation between market and nonmarket risk.Loans and the Theory of Credit 79
First Lien Unitranche Second Lien
Loan size 50% of firm assets 70% of firm assets 20% of firm assets
Recourse All firm assets All firm assets Firm assets above 
50% first lien
Risk (std. dev.) 8.54% 12.04% 24.88%
Corr. w/ Russell 2000 0.45 0.47 0.48
R-Square 20% 21% 22%
Beta 0.19 0.27 0.57
Convexity −0.26 −0.30 −0.42
Skew −1.01 −0.64 −0.23
EXHIBIT 10.6 Simulation results for a hypothetical first lien, unitranche, and second 
lien loan.
EXHIBIT 10.7 Simulation results for hypothetical first lien and second lien loans.80 PRIVATE DEBT
ESTIMATING LOAN PORTFOLIO RISK
Exhibits 10.8 and 10.9 contain risk characteristics for a portfolio of loans, 
which is likely of greater interest. We simulate returns for portfolios of sen￾ior loans, unitranche loans, and second lien loans, assuming 100 loans in 
each portfolio. As before, we simulate equity market risk and company￾specific risk separately.
Equity market risk affects all loans the same, at least directionally. Con￾ceptually, company-specific risk should be independent with zero correla￾tion across companies. However, we assume the same 0.25 cross correlation 
for all 100 loans instead of a zero correlation because, in our experience, 
there are common factors in addition to the market factor that tend to push 
returns in the same direction. These common factors could include industry, 
liquidity, and size factors. Our choice of 0.25 is consistent with values found 
for hedge fund returns after market returns are stripped from total returns. 
With these assumptions, the nonmarket firm-level risk for a portfolio of 
loans equals 16% compared to 32% for a single corporate borrower. The 
simulation results in Exhibits 10.8 and 10.9 are based on 1,000 trials.
Portfolio diversification reduces nonmarket risk, causing higher beta, 
correlation, and R-square values for loan portfolios in contrast to individual 
loans. Convexity worsens but skew improves slightly.
First Lien Unitranche Second Lien
Loan size 50% of firm assets 70% of firm assets 20% of firm assets
Recourse All firm assets All firm assets Firm assets above 
50% first lien
Risk (std. dev.) 5.67% 8.29% 17.78%
Corr. w/ Russell 
2000
0.73 0.74 0.75
R-Square 54% 55% 57%
Beta 0.22 0.32 0.70
Convexity −0.39 −0.48 −0.80
Skew −0.81 −0.55 −0.26
EXHIBIT 10.8 Simulation results for hypothetical first lien, unitranche, and second 
lien 100 loan portfolios.
5
For example, Cliffwater calculates an average convexity value equal to −0.75 for 
a diversified group of 500  larger hedge funds covering a five-year period ending 
December 31, 2021.Loans and the Theory of Credit 81
TESTING THE MERTON MODEL
The simulated loan portfolio risk estimates contained in Exhibit 10.9 are 
next compared to risk calculations for actual returns reported for two cor￾porate credit indexes: the Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 Index 
and the Bloomberg High Yield Bond Index. The first index is composed of 
traded floating rate bank loans, generally senior in credit standing, while the 
second index is composed of traded fixed rate corporate bonds, generally 
subordinated to bank loans. Our risk calculations are based on monthly 
returns from January 2000 through December 2021.
In addition, because the Bloomberg High Yield Bond Index returns are 
at a fixed rate, their monthly returns are affected by changes in longer matu￾rity interest rates. By contrast, our simulated returns assume floating rates. 
To convert the fixed rate Bloomberg High Yield Bond Index to a floating 
rate, the duration-equivalent monthly Treasury bond return is subtracted 
from the monthly Index return. The result should be what the Bloomberg 
EXHIBIT 10.9 Simulation results for hypothetical first lien and second lien loan 
portfolios.82 PRIVATE DEBT
High Yield Bond Index would have returned if the underlying bonds were a 
floating rate rather than a fixed rate.6
Exhibit 10.10 compares the simulated loan portfolio risk characteristics 
with calculations based on actual index returns.
A comparison of the simulated first lien risk calculations and the 
Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 Index reveals similarities and 
differences. Risk values (standard deviations) are very similar as are the 
betas. Convexity and skew are higher for the Morningstar LSTA US Lev￾eraged Loan 100 Index but that is likely because the Russell 2000 Index 
itself displayed some of those same characteristics during the measurement 
period, which probably magnified the Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged 
Loan 100 Index values.
A comparison of the simulated second lien risk calculations and the 
duration-adjusted Bloomberg Barclays High Yield Bond Index also includes 
similarities and differences. Importantly, higher risks and higher betas for 
subordinated debt are exhibited in both simulated and duration-adjusted 
actual returns. The biggest difference is the much higher 17.78% risk 
level for simulated second lien versus 10.88% for the duration-adjusted 
Bloomberg High Yield Bond Index. This difference is likely due to an inex￾act match in debt ratios between our hypothetical second lien loan and the 
actual debt ratio specifications for the Index.
(Exhibit 10.7) 
Simulated First 
Lien
(Exhibit 10.7) 
Simulated
Second Lien
Morningstar 
LSTA US Lev￾eraged Loan 
100 Index
Duration￾Adjusted 
Bloomberg 
Barclays High 
Yield Bond 
Index
Risk (std. dev.) 5.67% 17.78% 6.46% 10.88%
Corr. w/ Rus￾sell 2000
0.73 0.75 0.53 0.71
R-Square 54% 57% 28% 50%
Beta 0.22 0.70 0.10 0.38
Convexity −0.39 −0.80 −0.92 −0.55
Skew −0.81 −0.26 −2.45 −1.22
EXHIBIT 10.10 Simulated versus actual risk calculations.
6
A monthly Treasury bond return of equal duration to the Bloomberg Barclays High 
Yield Bond Index is calculated using durations and returns for the five-year maturity 
Treasury and three-month T-bill.Loans and the Theory of Credit 83
MERTON MODEL WITH COVENANTS
Easy credit conditions not only result in spread narrowing but also relax￾ation in loan covenants. An extension of the Merton model by Fisher 
Black and John Cox7
 (Black-Cox) addresses the value of covenants where 
the Merton model was covenant free. This is useful for lenders who 
want to understand the cost of foregoing customary covenants late in a 
credit cycle.
The Merton model has no provision for bankruptcy prior to loan matu￾rity. Loan covenants vary in type but all act to trigger a default or restruc￾ture prior to maturity. By doing so, covenants can protect possible further 
erosion in firm assets and enhance recoveries. They can also accelerate cash 
flow to the lender, thereby creating value.
Black-Cox extends the Merton model to include covenants, also using 
option pricing theory.8
 Covenants are intended to protect the value of firm 
assets and ultimately can terminate the loan through default before maturity 
if firm assets fall below loan face value. Ideally, the loan face value becomes 
a barrier for firm assets after which default is declared in a covenant-tight 
world. More likely, the look-back nature of covenants results in a barrier 
that falls below face value, but once the covenant barrier is broken the 
lender takes the keys and replaces the equity holder.9
 Black-Cox argue that 
this dynamic mirrors a down-and-in call option given to the lender and can 
be valued in the same way.
Exhibit 10.11 provides an example of a down-and-in option.
At loan underwriting (time = 0), firm assets are well above face value 
but take a declining path to equal just 25% of loan value at maturity. Under 
the Merton model, default would occur at maturity and the lender would 
recover just 25% of principal.
In the Black-Cox model, loan covenants produce a value barrier giving 
lenders the opportunity to force borrowers into default before maturity. In 
our example, covenants allow the lender to force default at time t where 
recovery equals 70% of principal, saving 45% of value (70% minus 25%). 
Our example is one of many scenarios that could play out, including some 
where asset recovery makes early default costly.
7
Fisher Black and John C. Cox, “Valuing Corporate Securities: Some Effects of Bond 
Indenture Provisions,” The Journal of Finance (May 1976).
8
Fisher Black is the same author of Black-Cox and Black-Scholes models.
9
At barrier breaches, lenders more often extract value from borrowers other than 
taking the keys, including special payments or yield adjustments, whose potential 
value can also be represented by Black-Cox.84 PRIVATE DEBT
Conceptually, covenants give the lender the right to buy the firm at 
an exercise price equal to the face value of the loan once covenant terms 
have been violated, which is represented by firm assets falling below the 
barrier value. The representation of loan principal as exercise price means 
that through default the lender pays for the firm assets by absolving the 
borrower of principal repayment. This description fits the standard options 
pricing model except that the option comes into existence and has value 
only on the condition that firm assets drop through a barrier created by the 
loan covenants. The Black-Cox model values the down-and-in option, and 
in so doing, the value of the covenant.
In Exhibit 10.12 we take the example in Exhibit 10.1 but add a cov￾enant package that creates a barrier equal to 60% of the face value of the 
loan. We select 60% because it approximates the historical average recov￾ery rate on broadly syndicated leveraged loans, which generally come with 
covenants.
Lines 1 and 2 are repeated from Exhibit 10.1 and show average and 
marginal loan rates using the Merton model without covenants. Lines 3 
and 4 are added and represent the average and marginal loan rates using 
the Black-Cox model with covenants. As expected, lender protections from 
covenants add value to a loan as measured by a down-and-in call option and 
convert to a lower interest rate required by the lender. For example, a senior 
loan representing 50% of firm assets would require a 6.56% rate without 
covenants and a 6.18% rate with covenants. Covenants could be said to be 
worth an extra 0.38% (6.56% − 6.18%).
Observe that covenants become much more important to the lender 
as a loan stretches to higher ratios of firm value. At a 70% loan to asset 
Value
face value (exercise price)
barrier
Time t
25% recovery
70% recovery
Maturity
firm assets
EXHIBIT 10.11 Illustration of down-and-in option.Loans and the Theory of Credit 85
value, the loss of covenant protection requires an additional 0.93% of yield 
(8.43% − 7.50%), compared to 0.38% for the 50% loan.
Finally, marginal rates without and with covenants are represented 
by lines 2 and 4, respectively, and point to their critical importance in 
pricing second lien loans. For example, a second lien loan representing 
20% of firm assets with a 50% attachment point would require a yield 
equal to 13.11% without covenants and 10.80% with covenants, a 2.31% 
difference.
Understanding the imprint of covenants on loan pricing would seem 
critical in an environment trending toward covenant-lite because it repre￾sents an erosion in expected return not reflected in headline credit spreads.
Covenants also reduce many risk measures for a portfolio of loans. 
Exhibit  10.13 compares risk statistics for a diversified portfolio of uni￾tranche loans without covenants (see Exhibit 10.8) and with covenants.
Covenants lower risk and beta and improve convexity and skew. What 
doesn’t really change is the correlation and R-Square with stocks. In sum￾mary, covenants play an important role in both the pricing (yield) and risk 
of loan portfolios and can be measured by the Black-Cox model.
0%
20.0%
Credit Risk Premium (Marginal Rate)
Credit Risk Premium (Average Rate)
Average Rate with Covenants
Marginal Rate with Covenants
18.0%
16.0%
14.0%
12.0%
10.0%
Required Interest Rate
8.0%
6.0%
4.0%
2.0%
0.0%
10% 20% 30% 40%
Debt as a Percent Total Firm Value
50% 60%
15.15%
4
1
3
2
11.74%
10.84%
9.41%
6.56%
6.18%
8.43%
7.50%
70% 80% 90%
EXHIBIT 10.12 Debt costs with/without covenants (a theoretical representation 
using the Black-Cox model).86 PRIVATE DEBT
The Merton model provides a useful framework for understanding the 
pricing of corporate loan yield spreads. Coupled with simulation meth￾ods, investors can develop useful estimates of return and risk for loans 
of differing credit seniority, including covariances useful for multi-asset 
optimization.
The Merton model reveals that credit risk premiums (yields) rise rap￾idly as loan leverage ratios increase and that expectations of underlying 
firm risk, whether market, industry, or firm specific, can produce significant 
differences in risk premiums. Simulation confirms that corporate loans of 
varying leverage levels all have high correlations with the stock market. 
However, senior loans display much lower levels of risk compared to sub￾ordinated loans.
The Black-Cox model shows how to value loan covenants and measure 
the impact of covenant-lite structures. A reasonable estimate for the value 
of covenants is approximately 1% per annum, but that value will increase 
(decrease) with loan seniority and leverage ratios.
Unitranche
Without Covenants
Unitranche With 
Covenants
Loan size 70% of firm assets 70% of firm assets
Recourse All firm assets All firm assets
Risk (std. dev.) 8.29% 6.20%
Corr. w/ Russell 2000 0.74 0.73
R-Square 55% 53%
Beta 0.32 0.24
Convexity −0.48 −0.11
Skew −0.55 −0.39
EXHIBIT 10.13 Simulation results for hypothetical unitranche 100 loan portfolio 
with and without covenants.CHAPTER 11
87
Risk premium is an often-used term in finance to identify factors common 
to a group of securities where because that group possesses unique risk￾generative characteristics that cannot be diversified away, there exists an 
expected or ex ante return attributable to that common factor. Oddly, while 
called a risk premium, it is a return premium for taking risk.
It is also worth emphasizing that risk premiums accrue to common 
factors that are non-diversifiable or can’t otherwise be eliminated through 
diversification. Consequently, risk premiums are considered beta and not 
alpha. When risk premiums are found in less traditional asset classes or 
investment strategies they are sometimes referred to as alternative beta.
Most familiar to investors and perhaps the largest risk premium is the 
equity risk premium. Stock risk can’t be diversified away in portfolio con￾struction so investors, being risk averse, demand a premium for holding 
stocks in a portfolio. A wealth of historical data has verified the existence 
of a stock risk premium, measuring somewhere between 4% and 6% over 
long time periods. Another familiar example is the term structure premium, 
reflecting the common factor among long-dated bonds that the risks relat￾ing to lending at fixed rates for long periods of time can’t be diversified 
away and deserves a premium return relative to short-term lending. Again, 
historical studies have attributed 1–2% in premium return to investing in 
long-dated bonds, unrelated to credit risk.
Modern finance is perhaps currently suffering from risk premium 
inflation, where investment analysts are mining for and discovering risk 
premiums in every data set. These efforts have produced, probably prema￾turely, investment products that “harvest alternative risk premia” that col￾lectively are expected to produce systematic excess return unrelated to the 
basic stock and bond risk premiums. These second-order risk premiums are 
undoubtedly much smaller, if they exist at all.
Risk Premiums in US Middle 
Market Lending88 PRIVATE DEBT
Potential investors in US middle market direct loans frequently question 
why middle market yield spreads are so high, particularly when the record 
shows historical credit losses have been about the same as losses found in 
more liquid broadly syndicated loans and high-yield bonds. Does the “free 
lunch” label apply to this newly forming institutional asset class or is there 
something else going on?
Analysis of the direct loan database underlying the CDLI shows that 
middle market direct lending is a collection of yield spreads, each associ￾ated with a different risk factor and each risk factor is non-diversifiable 
and deserving of a risk premium. This is very unlike investing in stocks, 
bonds, or liquid credit where there is one dominant factor receiving a 
risk premium. Instead, direct lending is a collage of risk premiums, each 
identifiable with consistent excess returns associated with each. Risk pre￾mium excess returns primarily take the form of excess income or yield in 
our analysis.
There are four identifiable risk premiums unique to middle market 
direct lending with quantifiable yield spreads associated with each one. 
Exhibit  11.1 reports yield spreads (premiums) available to the four risk 
factors found within middle market lending. The measurement date is 
March 31, 2022.
EXHIBIT 11.1 Available risk premiums in direct US middle market corporate loans, 
March 31, 2022.Risk Premiums in US Middle Market Lending 89
The left most bar in Exhibit  11.1 represents the 0.1% yield on the 
risk-free T-bill. The second bar to the right is the excess yield available in 
broadly syndicated loans (BSLs), measured by the Morningstar LSTA US 
Leveraged Loan 100 Index, which equaled 4.1% on March 31, 2022. The 
4.1% excess yield represents investor compensation for taking pure liquid 
credit risk in the public market. The four bars to the right identify four 
additional yield spreads, each associated with a unique risk premium. Yield 
for all six bars is defined as trailing four-quarter interest income. The four 
risk premiums and their values at March 31, 2022, are as follows:
1. Directly originated, upper middle market. There is a 2.8% yield pre￾mium for moving from liquid broadly syndicated bank loans to senior 
loans backed by upper middle market, sponsor-driven borrowers. This 
yield premium can be interpreted as a liquidity premium because under￾lying loan characteristics are most like bank loans except for being pri￾vately originated as opposed to bank originated and syndicated to the 
public market.
2. Nonsponsored borrowers. There is a 1.7% yield premium for holding 
debt of companies not controlled by private equity firms, something 
that could be interpreted as a governance premium or nonsponsor pre￾mium. Nonsponsored borrowers might be viewed as riskier because 
management behavior, particularly under corporate distress, could be 
less predictable and costlier to lenders compared to sponsor-backed 
borrowers.
3. Lower middle market. A 1.6% yield premium is found for lending to 
lower middle market borrowers, companies with annual EBITDA less 
than $10 million, compared to upper middle market borrowers with 
EBITDA over $100 million. This could be a size premium often found 
in other asset classes.
4. Second lien, subordinated debt. Not surprisingly, the largest yield pre￾mium is associated with the seniority premium. Subordinated loans 
have a 3.3% higher yield when compared to senior loans within the US 
middle market.
Exhibit 11.2 displays how the risk-free rate, the credit risk premium, 
and the four middle market direct loan risk premiums in Exhibit 11.1 have 
changed over the last 5.5 years.
The four middle market risk premiums have shown some variability 
over time, but not much. The risk premium with the most volatility is 
the seniority premium for subordinated loans, which has been as high as 
4.2% in June 2016 and as low as 1.8% in December 2018. The higher 
yield spread fluctuations in the seniority premium are consistent with 0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
Current Yield (LTM)
Risk-free Rate (T-bills)
Broadly Syndicated Loans
Directly Originated, Upper Middle Market
Non-sponsor Borrowers
Lower Middle Market
Second Lien, Subordinated Debt
EXHIBIT 11.2 Time-varying middle market loan risk premiums, June 2016 to March 2022.
90Risk Premiums in US Middle Market Lending 91
varying yield spreads for junior and mezzanine debt in the broadly syn￾dicated and structured credit markets and are correlated with the overall 
business and credit cycles.
Investors are often interested in discovering relative value within asset 
classes, including private debt. A common approach is to compare current 
yields or yield spreads against historical values. Historical average values for the 
premiums (excluding the risk-free rate) in Exhibit 11.2 are broadly syndicated 
loans (4.2%); directly originated, upper middle market (2.1%); nonsponsored 
borrowers (2.3%); lower middle market (2.1%); and second lien, subordi￾nated debt (2.9%). Current values can then be compared to these averages to 
identify opportunities. Applying this simple methodology on March 31, 2022, 
lending to upper middle market sponsor-backed borrowers, perhaps even in 
a second lien position, tilts the construction of a portfolio of loans toward a 
composition that takes advantage of risk premiums that are above historical 
averages and away from risk premiums that are below historical averages.
Understanding risk premiums is also useful in developing return expec￾tations for direct loans and understanding past performance. Equation 11.1 
illustrates how investors can use the risk premiums in combination with 
direct loan manager portfolio risk exposures.
Expected Direct Loan Yield Libor BSLSpread b P
b P b
1 1
2 2 3 3P b4 4 P (11.1)
Libor short-term generally three-mo. benchmark rate
BSLSpread broadly syndicated bank loan spread over Libor
i middle market risk factor 1 4 

b i i loan exposure to middle market risk factor
P i i risk premium for middle market risk factor
Take, as example, a conservative manager whose focus is senior, sponsor￾based loans across the middle market and the middle market loan risk fac￾tors and premiums are the four described in Exhibit 11.1. The manager’s 
beta ( bi ) exposure to the first factor, directly originated private corporate 
loans, equals 1.0, by definition, if the manager stays fully invested in direct 
loans. Our conservative manager wants the convenience of investing only 
with sponsor-backed borrowers so the beta exposure to the nonsponsored 
risk premium equals 0.0. The manager’s exposure to the third lower mid￾dle market risk premium equals 0.5, because roughly one-half the loans 
are upper middle market and the other one-half are lower middle market. 
Finally, our conservative manager by style wants to remain in the senior 
9192 PRIVATE DEBT
part of the borrower’s capital structure and therefore has a beta exposure 
to the subordinated risk premium equal to 0.0. Equation 11.2 calculates the 
expected yield for our conservative manager on March 31, 2022.
Manager Yield 0 1 4 1 1 00 2 8 0 00 1 7
0 50 1 6 0
. % . % . . % . . %
. . % . . 00 3 3% . 7 8% (11.2)
The 7.8% expected yield for this conservative manager, gross of fees, 
leverage, and credit losses, falls 0.9% below the 8.7% gross yield on the 
CDLI on March 31, 2022, as calculated in equation 11.3.
CDLI Yield 0 1 4 1 1 00 2 8 0 21 1 7
0 50 1 6 0 20
. % . % . . % . . %
. . % . 3 3. % 8 7. % (11.3)
The 0.9% yield deficit for the conservative direct loan manager com￾pared to the asset-weighted average manager, who mirrors the CDLI, could 
be overcome by several factors so that actual total return performance, and 
risk, is competitive or superior to the average manager. For example, expected 
credit losses could be lower. A reasonable expectation is for a senior-only 
manager to have realized credit losses that are 0.50% below the average 
manager represented by the CDLI based on differences in historical credit 
losses for senior and subordinated debt.1
 Second, expected fees for a senior￾only manager should be about 0.50% lower (including both asset-based 
and incentive fees) and the nonsponsor focus for our conservative manager 
should lower fees another 0.10%. The relationship between fees and indi￾vidual risk factor exposures is covered in Chapter 19. Suffice for now that 
investors could reasonably expect that a senior-only, nonsponsored lender 
might offer fees that are 0.60% (0.10% plus 0.50%) below the average 
direct lending fee. Third, the cost of borrowing to finance leverage should 
be lower for a senior-only direct lending portfolio. Comparing financing 
costs for BDCs that invest in only senior debt shows an approximate 0.55% 
lower cost of financing for senior loan portfolios compared to the overall 
CDLI. The financing cost comparison is based on a leverage ratio equal to 
approximately 1.05× net assets. Multiplying the 0.55% in lower borrowing 
costs with the 1.05× leverage level gives a net savings equal to 0.58%.
The likely net cost savings for our senior-focused direct lending manager 
equals 1.68%, equal to the 0.50% savings from credit losses, the 0.60% 
savings on fees, and the 0.58% savings on financing costs. Subtracting the 
1
 Exhibit 9.4 shows historical credit losses of −0.12% annualized for CDLI-Senior 
compared to a much higher −1.06% for CDLI.Risk Premiums in US Middle Market Lending 93
1.68% in cost savings from the 0.90% deficit in yield spread leaves a 0.78% 
yield advantage to our senior lender.
There is one other point worth noting. Senior loans have lower levels 
of PIK income, averaging 5% of total interest income compared to 8% for 
more diversified portfolios. To the extent that PIK income is not valued as 
highly as cash, the 0.21% in additional PIK income (out of 8.7%) earned by 
the average manager might be viewed as a soft difference.
The risk premium model for middle market direct corporate loans 
described in Exhibit 11.1 is a useful construct in understanding where yield 
comes from and the risk factors underlying them. This understanding is very 
important in yield-driven asset classes where investors are often mesmer￾ized by the manager or fund with the highest yield, on the presumption that 
yield translates into realized return. Differences in fees, realized losses, and 
financing opportunities are direct mitigating factors that need to be consid￾ered when comparing yields, but so also is general risk-taking, and each risk 
factor likely possesses incremental valuation risk (unrealized losses).
METHODOLOGY
The discovery of risk premiums in middle market loans is based on data 
collected from public information disclosed by public and private BDCs and 
from private data sources.
Risk premiums are calculated through a cross-sectional regression where 
the dependent variable is portfolio yield and the three independent varia￾bles are expected/actual share of sponsor/nonsponsor lending (measured by 
percentage allocations to sponsor or nonsponsor lending), expected/actual 
portfolio company size (measured by average EBITDA), and loan seniority 
(measured by percentage allocations to senior or subordinated debt). The inde￾pendent variables are scaled such that higher values represent higher expected 
risk (e.g., nonsponsor borrower, smaller borrower, and more junior debt). By 
design, the intercept term is the yield on larger-sized, sponsor-backed senior 
loans. The yield on a broadly syndicated loan, measured by the Morningstar 
LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 Index yield, is subtracted from the intercept 
yield to separately capture what is interpreted as the liquidity premium.
The results from the regression’s intercept and coefficients are the yield 
premiums reported in Exhibit 11.1. Each regression coefficient is statistically 
significant (T-stat >2.0) with an overall regression R-squared equal to 55%.
Ideally, the identified risk premiums would be measured net, not 
gross, of credit losses. Useful further study would be analysis on the 
relationship between risk premiums and credit losses, something that is 
currently challenging because it requires another downward credit cycle, 94 PRIVATE DEBT
such as the 2008–2010 period when significant realized credit losses last 
occurred in middle market direct lending.
However, credit losses for two of the risk premiums seem fairly settled. 
The 2.1% average historical illiquidity premium is not offset by incremental 
credit losses. Credit losses on the CDLI have not been statistically differ￾ent from credit losses on broadly syndicated bank loans so the 2.1% yield 
spread should be viewed as both gross and net of credit losses. By com￾parison, evidence shows that the 2.9% average yield spread for the senior￾ity premium comes with incremental credit losses. There is plenty of data 
showing that subordinated debt experiences higher credit losses, primarily 
through lower recovery rates, when compared to senior debt.
That leaves questions about credit losses for sponsored versus non￾sponsored debt and upper- versus lower-middle market debt. The author 
knows of no published study addressing the sponsor, nonsponsor question. 
On the matter of upper- versus lower-middle market debt, a 2012 Moody’s 
Analytics RiskCalc 4.0 study examining factors predictive of default found 
that seven financial variables were predictive of default frequency. The most 
important was the amount of debt as a percentage of corporate assets. The 
least important factor was company size, measured by assets. At this time, 
it seems the relationship between credit losses and nonsponsored borrowers 
and smaller borrowers remains largely unanswered.
The presence of unique risk premiums in US middle market direct lend￾ing will be very important in later chapters on asset managers. While all 
asset manager lenders have exposure to the illiquidity premium, exposures 
to a nonsponsor, lower-middle market and subordinated risk factors vary 
widely. This makes discriminating among asset manager lenders based only 
on yield very difficult, if not misleading, because of possible differences in 
risk-taking. Investors often make the mistake of investing with asset man￾agers or in funds with the highest yield. Know that risk-adjusted portfo￾lio yield is an important part of understanding manager performance and 
selection.CHAPTER 12
95
L
oan agreements generally include legal requirements, or covenants, governing 
borrower behavior through the life of the loan. The loan covenant package 
theoretically sets the barrier in the Black-Cox model and helps create value for 
the lender in addition to regular payments of interest. The value created likely 
takes the form of higher recovery rates should default occur or additional lender 
income through interest rate resets or fees charged by the lender to waive cov￾enant violations. This report provides an overview of a typical loan agreement 
and catalogs the more common loan covenants.
Direct loans are governed by lengthy agreements between the borrower 
and lender, generally structured as follows:
■ Definitions: Like most financial agreements, direct loan agreements 
begin with definitions and measures that are at the foundation of the 
loan agreement. Definitions for over 200 terms are generally found, 
including calculations for such variables as EBITDA, the base rate, 
interest spread, fees, and definitions of default.
■ Loan commitment: This section spells out the size of the loan or 
loans, drawdown and repayment schedules, payment procedures, and 
voluntary and involuntary prepayment. It also specifies the terms of 
payment, including interest calculations, timing, and what constitutes 
default. Loan fees and expenses, prepayment premiums, and make￾whole provisions are included here.
■ Conditions precedent: Here the lender specifies what final conditions are 
required before the loan is made. Generally, the items verify the borrower’s 
current financial condition and might include payoff letters evidencing 
payment in full of any prior loans, payment of fees and expenses, deliv￾ery of current financial statements, results of lien searches, authorizations, 
insurance, absence of litigation, and passage of financial tests. In the case 
of secured loans, the agreement would specify the pledged assets and prior￾ity of lender claims. For revolving loans, these or similar conditions are set 
forth for each time there is a draw from the revolver facility.
Covenants and the Loan Agreement96 PRIVATE DEBT
■ Representations and warranties: The borrower represents and warrants 
to the lender its business status with respect to several potential risk fac￾tors, including the existence of liens, subsidiaries, employee benefits and 
pensions, regulatory compliance, and places of business.
■ Affirmative covenants: These are actions the borrower must do over the 
term of the agreement. Included in this section is a further assurance 
covenant that, among other things, will, in the case of a secured loan, 
generally require the borrower to cause any newly formed subsidiary to 
join the credit facility as a guarantor, thus preventing leakage of value 
from the collateral pool, which secures the loan.
■ Negative covenants: These are actions the borrower must not do over 
the term of the agreement.
■ Events of default, remedies: This section identifies what actions trigger 
default, what cures are available to the borrower to get out of default, 
and what rights the lender has if default is not remedied, for exam￾ple, the lender’s ability to demand repayment and accelerate its loan in 
advance of the stated maturity date.
■ Agent: Some direct loans are shared among multiple lenders, each of 
which holds a pro-rata interest in the total loan package. The admin￾istrative agent is identified along with its duties and authorities. The 
administrative agent is generally the lead lender originating the loan. 
The agent is responsible for handling communications and cash move￾ments between the borrower and the lenders and typically takes the 
lead in negotiating any amendments to the loan agreements, including 
covenant waivers.
■ Miscellaneous: Loan agreements close with a list of assorted perfunc￾tory items not material to the economic substance.
While the level and structure of interest payments found in the loan 
commitment section of the agreement represents the clear majority of the 
return on direct loans, we showed that covenant protection itself has value 
that can be theoretically measured by the Black-Cox model.
Covenants, and financial covenants in particular, are designed to protect 
the financial condition of the borrower for purposes of repaying the lender 
in full through controls on the borrower’s income statement and balance 
sheet. These covenants are put forth in the loan indenture and monitored by 
the agent, who is usually the lead lender.
Covenants are generally divided into affirmative covenants and negative 
covenants.
A list of affirmative covenants would likely include the following:
■ Corporate books and records as well as regular monthly or quarterly 
management reports and projections that assist the lender in under￾standing the ongoing operating condition of the borrowerCovenants and the Loan Agreement 97
■ Evidence of compliance with payments on obligations, including rents, 
leases, insurance, pension payments, and taxes
■ Evidence of maintenance of corporate existence, assets, and businesses
■ Ongoing compliance with all applicable laws and regulations
■ Observer rights at board of directors meetings
A longer list of negative covenants would likely include the following:
■ Limitations on the ability of the borrower to take on additional debt, 
expressed either in dollars or as a percentage of total assets
■ Limitations on the ability of the borrower to lend to a subsidiary or 
limitations on subsidiary debt
■ Prohibition on speculation and permissions only for bona fide hedging
■ Prohibitions on new liens, whether for business reasons or taxes
■ Limitations on dividend payments or other distributions to equity 
investors
■ Prohibitions or restrictions on asset sales, mergers, or consolidations
■ Limitations on types of corporate investments
■ Limitations on annual capital expenditures
More important, financial covenants that are less likely to be under the 
borrower’s control may include the following:
■ Minimum fixed charge coverage ratio, often expressed as EBITDA, as a 
multiple of required interest, lease, and similar payments
■ Maximum (total and senior) debt to EBITDA ratio, often declining over 
the life of the loan and netting for cash on hand
■ Minimum available balance sheet cash
The financial covenants generally fall into two camps: maintenance 
and incurrence. Maintenance covenants are stricter compared to incurrence 
covenants, requiring the borrower to continually satisfy a financial test. 
Incurrence covenants instead require application of a financial test only 
when a corporate action, such as new debt, is incurred. For example, a 
requirement that the borrower’s debt not exceed a percentage of EBITDA 
is a common covenant. A maintenance covenant involving EBITDA might 
be very valuable to the lender and costly to the borrower given year-to-year 
potential volatility in EBITDA, particularly in cyclical industries. However, 
an incurrence covenant covering leverage would only be violated if the bor￾rower were to exceed the covenant level via the incurrence of additional 
indebtedness. If the covenant level was exceeded solely because the borrow￾er’s EBITDA declined, the borrower would not be in breach of the covenant. 98 PRIVATE DEBT
Consequently, differentiating the application of maintenance and incurrence 
tests becomes important in interpreting the strength of any covenant. Private 
direct loans typically make use of maintenance covenants, while publicly 
traded debt, such as high-yield bonds and some broadly syndicated loans, 
often only includes incurrence covenants. This difference makes theoretical 
sense given the relatively less liquid nature of direct loans.
Definitions are another important dimension in understanding cove￾nants. For example, EBITDA plays a central role in many covenants, but the 
definition of EBITDA can itself become an important part of lender protec￾tion. Late in a credit cycle when lenders are competing more aggressively 
for deals, credit terms generally favor borrowers, and it is not uncommon 
for the definition of EBITDA in the loan agreement to expand and include 
add-backs such as expected reduction in operating costs and capital expen￾ditures or expected improvements in sales that make the borrower look 
more creditworthy. Ideally, lenders should push for standard GAAP defini￾tions grounded in current operating performance. Otherwise, covenants no 
longer have any meaning. In addition, financial covenants are typically set 
at a cushion to the borrower’s actual financial condition. For example, if 
the borrower’s actual senior leverage (senior debt as a multiple of trailing 
12-month EBITDA) is 4.0 times at the initiation of the loan, the covenant 
level might be set at a modest cushion, such as 4.25 times. In the case of 
acquisition finance, a cushion is often set to a financial model. As the market 
for direct loans becomes more competitive, lenders will compete for deals 
by offering wider cushions. Similar to the use of add-backs, these covenant 
cushions make financial covenants less impactful.
Covenant lite is a term often used to describe loan agreements in which 
covenants are either watered down or eliminated and is a condition often 
seen later in a business cycle when credit is abundant, and borrowers have 
the upper hand in loan negotiations. The Black-Cox model helps measure the 
significant cost of covenant-lite loan agreements, particularly for unitranche 
and second lien loans. Lenders often note that covenants don’t enhance the 
return on an otherwise bad deal. However, well-constructed covenants are 
important in that they give the lender a seat at the table in the event the 
borrower’s financial condition declines and permit the lenders to restructure 
their loan packages to improve their position as creditor, including raising 
interest rates and fees, and accelerating their ability to force a company 
restructuring before the value of their collateral declines beyond recovery.CHAPTER 13
99
Many investors in US middle market direct lending use leverage (borrow), 
typically at the fund level, to enhance return. Whether and how much 
to leverage is an important decision in constructing a direct lending port￾folio. This chapter addresses how leverage affects direct lending return and 
risk and provides some guidance as to how the leverage question should be 
answered.
Exhibit 13.1 provides underlying fee and leverage assumptions that are 
representative of an institutional private fund vehicle. Those assumptions 
are then used in conjunction with the historical CDLI returns to project 
return and risk outcomes at varying leverage levels.
As an illustration, the net of fee return for this direct lending portfolio 
example is calculated in Exhibit  13.2, assuming leverage equal to 1.06 
(106%) of net assets. This is the weighted average leverage used by BDCs 
on their loan portfolios over the last year ending March 31, 2022. The fees 
selected for our example are representative of an institutional account, but 
less than fees typically charged by the average publicly traded BDC.
The representations in Exhibit  13.2 are intended to reflect what an 
investor would have received since 2004 from a direct lending portfolio 
with the characteristics of the CDLI and a leverage level that asset 
managers (lenders) use to support those loan assets. Instead of using actual 
historical fee levels, fees more reflective of current institutional managers 
were selected, acknowledging that fees have come down over time as a 
by-product of greater scale in direct lending platforms and the desire to 
examine prospective performance rather than historical performance.
The calculation progression in Exhibit  13.2 begins with the 9.50% 
unlevered, gross of fee CDLI return since September 30, 2004, through 
March 31, 2022. Our example assumes that direct loan assets will return 
a level similar to the average over the last 17.5 years. Next, an additional 
Should Direct Loan Portfolios 
Be Leveraged?100 PRIVATE DEBT
Direct lending asset returns Cliffwater Direct Lending Index (CDLI)
Leverage (borrowing/net assets) 0.0 unlevered
0.6 average leverage for BDCs
1.0 leverage
1.5 leverage
2.0 leverage
Cost of debt (financing) 3.87%, equal to the average 2004–2022 
historical financing cost of all BDCs in the 
CDLI, taken from 10-Qs/Ks. Financing 
spread equal to 2.28%, the difference 
between 3.87% total cost of financing and 
1.59%, the average 3-mo. Libor rate for the 
same 2004–2022 time period
Management fee 1.00% of gross assets
Administrative expenses 0.20% of gross assets
Carried interest/preferred return 10%/6%
EXHIBIT 13.1 Indicative fee and leverage specifications for a direct lending 
portfolio.
9.50% Asset return net of realized and unrealized losses
+ 10.07% Gross additional return from leverage at 1.06 times NAV
− 4.10% Cost of financing (@ 3.87% of borrowings)
= 15.47% Gross of fee return
− 0.41% Administrative expenses (@ 0.20% of gross assets)
− 2.06% Management fees (@ 1.00% of gross assets)
13.00% Return net of management and administrative fees
− 1.30% Incentive fees (@ 10% of return net of management fee and 
expenses)
11.70% Net return to investors
22% Manager fees as a % of gross of fee return
EXHIBIT 13.2 Indicative direct lending portfolio after fees, expenses, and leverage.Should Direct Loan Portfolios Be Leveraged? 101
10.07% is added to reflect the 106% leverage being used and equals 9.50% 
times 1.06.1
 The cost of leverage financing is assumed to equal 3.87%, 
the actual cost of debt financing loans in the CDLI over its history. The 
cost of leveraged financing in the example equals 4.10%, the 3.87% cost 
of financing multiplied by the 1.06× amount of financing. Together, the 
unlevered and 1.06× levered direct loan assets produce a 15.47% return 
net of borrowing costs but still gross of fees.
Fees are next deducted from the 15.47% return. Administrative fees 
equal to 0.20% of gross assets are subtracted. These fees, as a percentage of 
net assets, equal 0.41% (0.20% × 2.06). The term gross assets is generally 
used to refer to the combined value of both unlevered and levered direct 
loans. Since lenders and administrators must create and service all loans, 
administrative fees are often charged on all assets rather than net assets. 
In our example, both management and administrative fees are charged on 
gross assets. Consequently, the 1.00% management fee on gross assets is the 
equivalent to 2.06% (1.00% multiplied by 2.06) on net assets.
The last fee deduction in Exhibit 13.2 is the incentive fee, which is cal￾culated after management fees and administrative expenses. The 1.30% 
incentive fee equals 10% multiplied by the 13.00% net return excluding 
the incentive fee. The example includes a 6% preferred return, but it does 
not affect the outcome since it is well below the 13.00% net return before 
application of the incentive fee. The net, after-fee return for the direct lend￾ing portfolio with average performance (CDLI) and 1.06  leverage ratio 
equals 11.70%. In this example, total management fees paid equal 3.36% 
of net assets and represent 22% of the direct lending portfolio’s 15.47% 
gross return.
SIMULATED DIRECT LOAN PORTFOLIOS WITH LEVERAGE
The calculations for leverage and fees in Exhibit  13.2 are repeated, but 
instead of the 9.50% cumulative annualized CDLI return as a starting point, 
quarterly CDLI returns are used to create a simulated quarterly return series 
with leverage and after fees. Additionally, a quarterly return series is created 
for leverage levels 0.5×, 1.0×, 1.5×, and 2.0×. Exhibit 13.3 plots cumulative 
returns for the unlevered CDLI, which is gross of fees, the unlevered CDLI 
1
Average BDC leverage over the last year is used instead of the 0.66 (66%) 17.5-year 
historical average because BDC leverage was more restricted prior to 2019 and cur￾rent leverage values are more representative of unconstrained financing support that 
is available to most institutional direct lending managed accounts.102 PRIVATE DEBT
net of fees, and four levered CDLI return series, also net of fees. Annualized 
return and risk statistics are shown for the six simulated portfolio series in 
Exhibit 13.4.
As expected, return increases with leverage because direct lending returns, 
as measured by the CDLI, exceed the combined costs of financing, adminis￾trative fees, management fees, and incentive fees. Annualized returns range 
from 7.98% for an unlevered direct lending portfolio to 18.01% for a port￾folio levered 2.0×. Very rarely are portfolios of direct loans leveraged more 
than 2.0× unless they are within a structured vehicle like a collateralized loan 
obligation, also known as a CLO. When leverage is used, the most common 
level is 1.0×.
Noteworthy is the reduction in return-to-risk ratio in Exhibit 13.4 as 
more leverage is used. Leverage increases risk as it increases return but 
return increases at a lower marginal rate compared to risk. For example, 
risk roughly doubles from the 3.25% unlevered portfolio to 6.50% for the 
1.0× levered portfolio. Return does not double, but increases only by one￾half, from 7.98% to 12.98%. Leverage does not bring double the pleasure 
because leveraged assets have lower returns due to the cost of financing, 
and administrative and management fees are typically charged at the same 
1.0
2.0
4.0
8.0
16.0
32.0
Growth of $1 (Log Scale)
CDLI Total Return
No Leverage (net of fees)
0.5× Leverage (net of fees)
1.0× Leverage (net of fees)
1.5× Leverage (net of fees)
2.0× Leverage (net of fees)
Sep-04
Nov-05
Jan-07
Mar-08
May-09
Jul-10
Sep-11
Nov-12
Jan-14
Mar-15
May-16
Jul-17
Sep-18
Nov-19
Jan-21
Mar-22
EXHIBIT 13.3 Performance simulation for direct lending portfolios with leverage, 
September 2004 to March 2022.Should Direct Loan Portfolios Be Leveraged? 103
rate on levered assets as unlevered assets. Unlevered assets have a return￾to-risk ratio equal to 2.46 but as leverage is applied the return-to-risk ratio 
declines to 1.85 for a 2.0× leveraged direct lending portfolio.
Investors might think about the optimal amount of leverage by compar￾ing the 2008 and 2020 drawdown columns in Exhibit 13.4 with comparable 
data for private equity and real estate presented in Exhibit 3.1 in Chapter 3. 
Comparisons with publicly traded high-yield bonds and leveraged loans are 
interesting as well but risk statistics for those asset classes are based on 
market price and not determinations of SFAS 157 fair value.
Selection of leverage level likely depends on investor risk preference. 
Investors that are looking for a direct lending portfolio to have low risk and 
perhaps be a substitute for their traditional liquid fixed income portfolio 
are likely to select an unlevered or 0.5× levered direct lending portfolio. 
This might also be the choice of an investor that is new to direct lending 
and wants to build up some experience before adding the complexities of 
borrowing to the portfolio. For this investor, the 3.18% risk level for the 
unlevered, after-fee portfolio or the 4.87% risk level for the 0.5× levered 
Return
Risk 
(Std. Dev)
Return
/Risk
2008 Max 
Drawdown*
2020 Max 
Drawdown**
Cliffwater 
Direct 
Lending 
Index
9.50% 3.61% 2.62 −8% −5%
CDLI, no 
leverage, 
after fees
7.98% 3.25% 2.46 −7% −4%
0.5× Leverage, 
after fees
10.47% 4.87% 2.15 −13% −7%
1.0× Leverage, 
after fees
12.98% 6.50% 2.00 −16% −10%
1.5× Leverage, 
after fees
15.49% 8.12% 1.91 −21% −12%
2.0× Leverage, 
after fees
18.01% 9.75% 1.85 −25% −15%
EXHIBIT 13.4 Simulated return and risk for levered direct lending portfolios, 
September 2004 to March 2022.
*Max drawdown from June 30, 2008 to December 31, 2008.
**December 31, 2019 to March 31, 2020.104 PRIVATE DEBT
portfolio is comparable to the 3.31% risk level for traditional fixed income 
risk as measured by the Bloomberg US Aggregate Bond Index.
Investors looking for a direct lending portfolio to be a component of a 
higher-returning portfolio, perhaps including private equity, are more likely 
to apply leverage to direct loans to get expected returns at a level compara￾ble to private equity. To achieve the 12–15% level of return often targeted 
for private equity would require a leverage level between 1.0× and 2.0×. A 
2.0× direct lending portfolio is perhaps optimal for a direct lending portfo￾lio seeking private equity returns. Its 9.75% risk level shown in Exhibit 13.4 
is roughly equal to the 10.05% private equity risk reported in Exhibit 3.1.
Investors looking to direct lending as an asset class that sits between 
stocks and bonds might find a leverage level equal to 1.0× the most attractive.
 The 6.50% risk level in Exhibit 13.4 is similar to the 5.09% risk level for 
equity real estate reported in Exhibit 3.1. Real estate is often viewed as 
an asset that offers cash flow, moderate risk, and good returns over time. 
A 1.0× levered direct lending portfolio might serve a similar and com￾plementary role.
The analysis of leverage and risk is extended to drawdown in the last two 
columns of Exhibit 13.4. Both the GFC and COVID periods are included. 
Data analysts would generally consider the GFC as a 3-sigma economic and 
market event and COVID as a 1.5-sigma event. Drawdown has been a very 
useful alternative measure of risk since the GFC due to serial correlation 
of returns discussed in Chapter  3. Drawdown sharply magnifies the risk 
in leverage and is likely better understood by investors. By the drawdown 
measure, the unlevered direct lending portfolio looks clearly like a low-risk 
portfolio with a maximum drawdown equal to 7%, after fees, during a 
3-sigma event. Most institutional portfolios fell 20% during the GFC and 
a 7% drawdown would likely be viewed as an attractive risk mitigator by 
most asset allocators. In the more recent COVID drawdown, the unlevered 
direct lending portfolio fell just 4%, again a good risk-off outcome from an 
absolute perspective and relative to other asset classes.
Even with one-half turn of leverage (0.5×) the 13% and 7% simulated 
drawdowns during the GFC and COVID, respectively, would look accept￾able to most risk-averse investors, and both would have performed well 
above all asset classes except traditional fixed income.
A leverage level between 0.5× and 1.5× is what most institutional 
investors are engineering for their direct lending portfolios. This suggests 
direct lending is being viewed more as an asset class investors want to sit 
between stocks and bonds, providing high levels of cash flow (yield) at 
moderate risk.Should Direct Loan Portfolios Be Leveraged? 105
PORTFOLIO CHARACTERISTICS, LEVERAGE, AND THE COST 
OF FINANCING
Chapters 11 and 13 together show there are two methods for increasing return 
(and risk) in direct lending. Chapter 11 showed return could be increased by 
lending to nonsponsored borrowers, smaller borrowers, and in a subordi￾nated creditor position. This chapter showed that return could be increased 
by leveraging the direct lending portfolio through outside financing.
The leverage analysis presented in Exhibits 13.3 and 13.4 is based on a 
direct lending portfolio whose composition reflects the average character￾istics of the direct lending market, captured by the CDLI, and a constant 
average cost of financing equal to 3.87% reflecting the historical average 
cost. A more refined analysis would tailor both the direct lending portfolio 
and the financing to specific circumstances. For example, Chapter 11 identi￾fied direct loan premiums that might influence portfolio yield and return. It 
would also seem reasonable to assume that the same or other risk factors 
might affect the cost of financing levered direct lending portfolios.
Exhibit 13.5 presents results from an analysis to identify which factors 
might explain differences in portfolio financing costs in the presence of lev￾erage. A cross-sectional multiple regression was performed on 47 separate 
BDCs with data from the first quarter of 2022. The dependent variable was 
the cost of debt (Y) for the first quarter. Three independent variables were 
identified as potentially affecting financing costs: the amount of loan assets 
that are senior secured (X1
), the size of the direct loan portfolio (X2
), and the 
amount of leverage (X3
). Financing costs would be expected to be lower for 
senior debt and higher for subordinated debt. The size of the portfolio might 
Regression Results
Dependent Variable
Y = Cost of Debt (annualized)
Independent Variable Coefficient t-Stat
X0
 = Intercept 6.11% 8.56
X1
 = % Senior −2.63% −3.42
X2
 = Asset Size ($ b) −0.07% −2.66
X3
 = % Levered −0.16% −0.52
EXHIBIT 13.5 Factors explaining the cost of financing leverage.106 PRIVATE DEBT
lower financing costs if scale could extract better financing terms. And, finally, 
financing costs would be expected to rise as more overall leverage is used.
The regression results in Exhibit 13.5 show that both loan seniority (X1
) 
and asset size (X2
) are statistically significant with t-statistics equal to −3.42 
and −2.66, respectively. The −2.63% coefficient for loan seniority means 
that senior secured loans can be financed at a 2.63% lower rate when com￾pared to subordinated loans. It is interesting that the incremental yield on 
second lien loans when compared to senior loans in Chapter 11 is not sig￾nificantly greater than the incremental financing cost, likely explaining why 
subordinated loans are rarely financed. Asset size (X2
) also had a statistically 
negative impact on financing cost, reducing it by 7 basis points (−0.07%) for 
every additional $1 billion in loan assets. It is not surprising that very large 
lenders are able to secure cheaper financing from their bank and insurance 
company leverage providers.
Surprising is that leverage levels do not explain financing cost, with a 
statistically inconclusive t-statistic equal to −0.52 and directionally oppo￾site of what would be expected. Deviations of actual financing costs from 
predicted costs suggests that, either other systemic factors are involved that 
were not captured or, more likely, the discrepancies are attributable to nego￾tiating and structuring skills of CFOs at direct lending firms that put the 
financing in place. Traditional investor due diligence focuses mostly on the 
operational and risk management capabilities of the CFO, but with direct 
lending the position can also meaningfully enhance value (alpha) through 
negotiating lower financing costs with asset flexibility.
Fiduciaries approach leverage very cautiously, particularly when they 
have discretion over its use. This chapter showed that the low volatility found 
in direct loans makes leverage a likely acceptable addition to a portfolio. 
However, understanding the complexities of financing and its costs becomes 
ever more important as more leverage is used and should become an integral 
part of investor due diligence.CHAPTER 14
107
Private assets have been represented in institutional portfolios for over 
three decades. Until recently these private assets have been focused almost 
exclusively on private equity and commercial real estate. But private debt 
has been slowly joining the other two, quietly forming a private assets tril￾ogy. Currently, institutional investors maintain average private asset alloca￾tions equal to 23% of total assets, divided 13% to private equity, 7% to 
private commercial real estate, and 3% to private debt.1
 The 3% allocation 
to private debt is low, reflecting its recent creation as an asset class, but is 
now the most rapidly growing of the three within institutional portfolios.
The democratization of alternatives is a popular phrase used among 
asset management professionals and wealth managers to capture efforts to 
bring institutional-quality alternative offerings to high-net-worth and retail 
investors. Unlike institutional investors, individual investors have relied 
upon the 60–40 mix. In an effort to diversify investor portfolios further, 
asset managers have tried to introduce alternative investments into portfolio 
allocations. To date, these efforts have largely come in two waves.
The first began ten years ago, in the aftermath of the GFC, when asset 
managers launched many varieties of liquid alternatives in US-registered 
vehicles with a focus on safety and low correlation to stocks, which had just 
seen a 50% drawdown in 2008–2009. Much of this centered on alterna￾tive investment strategies that could be adapted to open-end mutual funds. 
Retail investors liked the liquidity and convenience associated with mutual 
funds, and SEC requirements limited fees, required liquidity, and restricted 
leverage levels. Popular at the time were hedge fund strategies (equity long/
short, macro, credit), real asset strategies (commodities, listed infrastruc￾ture, MLPs), liquid private equity, smart beta, and multi-asset strategies, 
including tactical asset allocation and risk parity.
The Democratization of Alternatives
1
Cliffwater LLC, “Long-Term State Pension Performance Study, 2000 to 2021” 
(September 2022).108 PRIVATE DEBT
Much of this early democratization effort failed, at least commercially. 
This was due partly to an impressive rebound in publicly traded stocks that 
produced ten-year annualized return ending December 31, 2021, equal to 
16.48% as measured by the S&P 500 Index. For the same ten-year period 
liquid hedge fund strategies struggled, producing a mediocre 2.57% annual￾ized return.2
 Commodities, the liquid alternative for real assets, lost −5.41% 
per year.3
 By the end of the decade, no one wanted to talk about liquid 
alternatives.
The failure of liquid alternative funds could have been foreseen 
because they mostly relied upon the fragile success of manager skill (alpha) 
through hedge fund strategies. Instead, managers that experienced success 
through private hedge funds ended up being severely compromised by 
mutual fund requirements and diminished returns within the hedge fund 
industry generally, brought about by asset growth and market efficiency. 
Other liquid alternative strategies that relied upon asset class return (beta), 
such as commodities, produced lots of volatility but little return.4
The new second wave of alternatives democratization is now in full 
swing, having begun in earnest just a few years ago. This second wave has 
a much better chance of success because, from an investment perspective, it 
relies on the long-standing return liquidity premium from the private mar￾kets rather than trading securities in the public markets.
The key to the success of this second wave will be combining three 
important features: (1) earning an attractive return (7–15% net of fees at 
moderate risk), (2) finding the right investment vehicle that balances the 
underlying liquidity of private assets with investors’ desire for liquidity, and 
(3) minimizing or eliminating investor inconveniences such as commitment 
paperwork, unexpected capital calls, late K-1s, and the layering of invest￾ment funds from recycling distributions. First wave funds solved (2) and 
(3) through open-end mutual fund structures but did not produce attrac￾tive returns. Early signs show that second-wave funds are having success 
producing desired investor returns using private assets and meeting inves￾tor demands for liquidity and convenience by deploying private assets into 
lesser known SEC registered vehicles meant to bridge the liquidity gap 
between daily open-end mutual funds and locked-up closed-end funds.
2
HFRX Global Hedge Fund Index. One of the largest hedge fund of funds, the 
$4 billion Ironwood Institutional Multi-Strategy Fund LLC, a tender fund, produced 
a fairly unimpressive 5.86% ten-year return ending April 2022.
3
Bloomberg Commodity Index.
4
Remnants of commodity investing remain, but they have shifted back to the very 
old (gold) or the very new (bitcoin).The Democratization of Alternatives 109
Chapters 15 and 16 cover the lesser-known investment vehicles that are 
leading the democratization of alternatives, particularly when it comes to 
investor access to private debt. These are BDCs, interval funds, and tender 
funds. But first the partnership model through which virtually all institu￾tional investors allocate to private debt and other private assets is covered, a 
model that quickly challenges the patience of smaller investors.
THE PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP MODEL FOR INVESTING 
IN PRIVATE ASSETS
There are several ways investors can invest in middle market loans. The 
most common method, particularly among large institutional investors but 
also some ultra-high-net-worth investors, is private partnerships offered by 
direct lending asset managers. These private partnerships have a finite term, 
averaging seven years, as opposed to perpetual or evergreen investment 
vehicles with indefinite life. With the finite private partnership, the direct 
lending asset manager will take six months to a year to fundraise assets for 
the direct lending partnership. At the end of a successful fundraising effort 
the asset manager will have attained, say, $1 billion in binding investor com￾mitments to the direct lending partnership. The $1 billion in commitments 
are not invested all at once but generally over a two- to three-year period 
as the asset manager originates loans to be placed in the partnership. Inves￾tor committed capital is called by the partnership intermittently as the asset 
manager needs cash to fund the loans that go into the partnership. Investors 
are generally given one to two weeks to wire cash to the partnership after 
it receives notice from the partnership that the funds are needed. New lend￾ing stops after the capital commitments have been invested in loans unless 
there is an additional reinvestment period that allows the asset manager to 
recycle cash from loan maturities or principal prepayments back into new 
loans. Reinvestment periods, if present, might extend another year or two. 
After the investment and reinvestment periods no additional loans are made 
and the completed partnership portfolio, consisting of 30 to 50 individual 
loans, moves into runoff with investors receiving cash proceeds from loan 
maturities and principal prepayments as they occur. In seven to ten years 
from when the commitment to the partnership is made, the investor can 
expect full recapture of committed capital and profits.
Investing in middle market direct loans through private partnerships is 
a cumbersome process, requiring a great deal of administrative and port￾folio management attention. It also requires constantly committing to new 
direct lending partnerships every two to three years to maintain a consistent 
loan allocation because a single partnership alone offers loan exposure that 110 PRIVATE DEBT
ascends quickly over a couple years and then almost immediately descends 
over the next couple years. This pattern of cash flow requires the investor to 
commit to additional direct lending partnerships to fill the time gaps when 
legacy partnerships are unwinding.
All this detail can be a headache for investors who do not have the 
administrative and legal support, or investment expertise, to assemble 
and maintain a portfolio of private partnerships that will deliver the con￾sistent outcomes reflected in the CDLI. Most large pension funds have 
those resources and prefer to invest in private partnerships, a legal format 
they know well from private equity investing. Others, including high net 
worth, family office, and smaller institutional investors, often do not have 
the required resources and have turned to other, more permanent vehicles 
to gain access to direct middle market loans.CHAPTER 15
111
Business development companies have been the primary alternative to 
private partnerships for investors who seek a more simplified access to 
direct loans. Two other alternatives, known as interval funds and tender 
funds, are covered in Chapter 16. All three vehicles—BDCs, interval funds, 
and tender funds—are SEC registered, like mutual funds, which enable them 
to raise assets from a broad range of investors but also require them to 
adhere to certain investor type, investment, and transparency requirements. 
These SEC features give investors protections they may not find with private 
partnerships.
WHAT IS A BDC?
While differences exist, BDCs are in many ways like REITs (for real estate) 
and MLPs (for energy assets) in their cash-generating, tax-preference invest￾ment characteristics that appeal to investors. BDCs were created by Con￾gress in 1980, under Section 54 of the Investment Company Act of 1940, 
to stimulate private investment in middle market US companies, which had 
suffered during the stagflation period following the steep 1973–1974 reces￾sion. Congress gave the BDC the advantage of electing to be private or 
exchange traded with a tax-free pass-through of investment income, but 
with some restrictions:
■ SEC registration and oversight
■ At least 70% of assets invested in nonpublic debt and equity in US 
corporations
■ Maximum leverage equal to 2.0× net asset value (NAV)
■ Annual distribution of at least 90% of income to shareholders
■ Certain portfolio diversification constraints
Business Development Companies 
(BDCs)112 PRIVATE DEBT
Noteworthy is that the BDC is an SEC-registered investment company, 
subject to most of the same requirements as US mutual funds. These require￾ments include direct SEC oversight that should give BDC investors greater 
comfort when compared to private funds. At the same time SEC oversight 
can potentially bring higher costs, less investment flexibility, and unwanted 
transparency.
It is the requirement that 70% of assets be invested in nonpublic (pri￾vate) debt and equity of US corporations that define the business of a BDC 
as making direct loans and providing equity financing. While equity is a 
permissible investment within the 70% requirement, virtually all BDCs 
concentrate their corporate financing activity on direct middle market cor￾porate loans.
Prior to 2018, BDCs had been limited in their use of leverage to 1.0× 
their NAV. Expressed another way, BDCs had to maintain assets equal to 
at least 200% of their borrowings. In 2018, the passage of the Small Busi￾ness Credit Availability Act allowed BDCs to increase leverage from 1.0× to 
2.0× debt-to-equity, for example, maintain assets equal to at least 150% of 
their borrowings. Noteworthy is that BDC leverage levels increased from 
an average level of 0.71× net assets in 2017, before the increase in leverage 
allowance to 1.06× net assets for the four quarters ending March 2022. 
Leverage levels continue to increase slowly with most BDC managers target￾ing a 1.20× level. These arguably unconstrained leverage levels are slightly 
above the 1.00× leverage level suggested in Chapter 14.
Many BDCs can apply for, create, and invest in small business investment 
companies (SBICs) where loans are made to smaller companies. BDCs find 
the SBIC desirable because the SBIC provides low-cost, long-term financ￾ing at attractive leverage levels with subordination. Further, SBIC financing 
does not count against BDC debt limitations. However, SBIC financing is 
limited to $150 million for one fund and $225 million for more than one 
fund, which ultimately makes this type of financing a small part of the BDCs 
overall capital structure.
Many BDCs also invest in special purpose vehicles (SPVs). These take 
the form of joint ventures between the BDC and an outside institutional 
investor such as an insurance company or pension plan. Loans made by the 
SPV must be approved by both JV partners. The attractiveness of SPVs is 
that they can use financing that, like the SBIC, does not count against the 
borrowing limitations of the BDC. The limitation of SPVs is that they do not 
qualify for the 70% investment requirement in US corporations.
There are several operational requirements for running a BDC as an 
SEC-registered investment company:
■ An independent board of directors
■ A CEO, CFO, and chief compliance officerBusiness Development Companies (BDCs) 113
■ Independent legal counsel, administration, audit, and Sarbanes Oxley 
compliance
■ Quarterly 10-K/Qs, board meetings, annual investment management 
agreement approvals, 8-Ks, and proxy statements
■ Quarterly fair-value loan and portfolio marks determined by inde￾pendent valuation firms and asset management and overseen by the 
BDC board.
BDCs elect to be treated as a regulated investment company (RIC) 
under Subchapter M of the 1986 Internal Revenue Code so that investment 
earnings pass through to investors without tax. However, to qualify as a 
RIC the BDC must also do the following:
■ At least 90% of gross income must be from interest, dividends, and real￾ized gains of securities.
■ Pass a quarterly asset diversification test.
■ Distribute greater than 90% of taxable income, equal to ordinary 
income plus short-term capital gains
The 90% requirement that BDC income come from interest, dividends, 
and realized gains of securities means BDCs do not generate unrelated business 
taxable income (UBTI). The absence of UBTI in BDCs is important and 
desirable to private institutional investors like endowments, foundations, and 
private pension plans that do not want to pay taxes on private investments 
and instead go to offshore vehicles that may limit the types of investments that 
can be held. The BDC cleanses UBTI for these investors.
BDCs also present tax advantages for non-US investors because they do 
not generate effectively connected income (ECI), which represents income 
generated in the US. The presence of ECI potentially creates a tax liability or 
tax withholding for the non-US investor operating in the United States. Nor 
is the non-US investor required to file a US tax return from a BDC invest￾ment. Consequently, an increased number of foreign institutional investors 
are looking at or have invested already in BDCs as a preferred structure to 
invest in direct lending.
The diversification test requires that at least 50% of the value of their 
assets consists of cash, cash items, US government securities, securities of 
other regulated investment companies, and other securities if such other 
securities of any one issuer do not represent more than 5% of their assets 
or more than 10% of the outstanding voting securities of the issuer. Also 
required is that no more than 25% of the value of their assets is invested 
in the securities (other than US government securities or securities of other 
regulated investment companies) of any one issuer or of two or more issu￾ers that are controlled (as determined under applicable Internal Revenue 114 PRIVATE DEBT
Code rules) by the BDC and are engaged in the same or similar or related 
trades or businesses (the diversification tests). These diversification tests are 
important, but generally BDC portfolios are well within the requirements.
BDCs can be internally or externally managed, though all but a few are 
externally managed by independent asset management firms. When exter￾nally managed, there is an investment management agreement between the 
BDC and the external asset manager that is approved by the BDC board 
annually. Annual contract approval is an SEC regulatory requirement that 
also applies to all registered mutual funds.
Most asset managers operating BDCs also offer private direct lending 
funds, in the form of private partnerships, to institutional investors. The 
SEC prohibits registered vehicles (like BDCs) and private funds from co￾investing in the same securities, under Rule 17d. This means a loan origi￾nated by the asset manager cannot be divided into participations across 
the manager’s client accounts, including the registered vehicle (BDC), with￾out SEC permission. Consequently, almost all managers who operate BDCs 
request and are granted 17d exemptive relief from the SEC. The purpose of 
17d is to prevent managers from cherry-picking securities, good or bad, to 
put in a registered vehicle.
The 17d exemptive relief also means BDC loan assets will look very 
much like the assets found in BDC managers’ private fund offerings. Addi￾tionally, this means investors can look to the performance of the BDC 
as indicative of private fund performance. This is important because it sug￾gests the CDLI, which is based on the performance of BDC direct loans, is 
also representative of the broader US direct lending marketplace represented 
by private partnerships.
Unlike REITs, registered vehicles such as mutual funds that invest in 
BDCs must disclose the fees and expenses of a BDC holding in their own 
disclosures. This flow-through is called acquired fund fees and expenses, or 
AFFE, and can materially affect the mutual fund’s reported expense ratio. 
The sensitivity of mutual fund and ETF investors to expense ratios caused 
index providers to expunge BDCs from their indexes in 2014 not for invest￾ment purposes, but for the sole reason to reduce their reported expense 
ratios. Currently, the BDC industry is urging the SEC to reverse or modify 
its position on AFFE, arguing that BDCs are being unfairly singled out for 
AFFE disclosure when other asset classes like REITs and MLPs, which have 
management fees and expenses within their structures, are not disclosed. 
Unfortunately, AFFE disclosure limits institutional participation, though 
there are serious efforts to get this SEC administrative rule changed.
Another SEC mutual fund and ETF rule that also applies to BDCs is the 
3% limit. Regulated investment companies cannot own more than 3% of the 
outstanding shares of a BDC without SEC permission (exemptive relief) or Business Development Companies (BDCs) 115
relinquishing voting rights. Unfortunately, the 3% limit, which is intended to 
limit fee pyramiding, also severely curtails corporate governance within the 
BDC industry. As discussed later, there are many poorly managed BDCs that 
might otherwise be corrected except that activist shareholders are limited from 
building a stock position in the target BDC beyond 3%. The limit severely 
curtails the influence an outside shareholder can exert on a poorly managed 
BDC and allows entrenched asset managers and directors to continue to disad￾vantage their shareholders. SEC changes to AFFE disclosures and the 3% limit 
would likely greatly expand and improve the BDC industry through parity in 
disclosure and a corporate governance solution to poor management. Begin￾ning with the Ares Capital Corporation purchase of American Capital in 2017, 
many of the poorly managed BDCs have been acquired or replaced by better 
asset management teams, improving the overall quality of the BDC market.1
One positive note on corporate governance is that BDCs are not per￾mitted to issue new stock if the price is trading below NAV without share￾holder approval. Poor performing BDCs almost always trade below NAV, 
so they are at least restrained from diluting shareholder value by new share 
issuances. Unfortunately, this is small consolation to investors who have 
endured weak returns.
A couple of final BDC characteristics are worth noting. First, BDCs 
must also offer their corporate borrowers significant managerial assistance. 
Though potentially burdensome, borrowers seldom request such assistance 
from their direct lenders. Second, BDCs are permitted to charge management 
fees on gross assets, as opposed to net assets that deduct financed assets, and 
can charge incentive fees separately on (1) income and (2) net realized capital 
gains plus unrealized losses. These fee permissions are particularly generous 
to the BDC asset manager and not something generally found in institutional 
offerings of private funds. The separation of incentive fees for income and 
realized gains, net unrealized losses, does not meet institutional standards. 
Managers could stretch for yield in their loan originations to maximize the 
income incentive fee while recognizing this may increase realized losses over 
time. Best practice is to combine, not separate, the two incentive fees so 
the asset manager is incentivized to optimize total return rather than one 
component. A more complete discussion of fees is found in a later chapter.
Finally, BDCs offer investors greater convenience when compared to 
private partnerships. First, tax reporting is done through Form 1099 instead 
of K-1, which investors complain are often late and delay tax filing. Second, 
BDCs can offer shareholders immediate access and liquidity. Shareholders 
1
Large, well-managed asset managers, such as Crescent Capital, KKR, Oaktree, 
Blackstone, Barings, Carlyle, and Owl Rock, have replaced weaker BDC managers.116 PRIVATE DEBT
can buy or sell exchange traded BDCs daily and private BDCs are set up 
to be perpetual direct-lending vehicles allowing investors regular windows 
(generally monthly) to purchase or redeem shares, with some limitations.2
BDC INDUSTRY STATISTICS
Exhibit 15.1 provides summary statistics on the BDC market.
85 # of BDCs with assets >$50 million
41 # of BDCs with assets >$1 billion
9 # of BDCs with assets >$5 billion
$223 billion assets held by all BDCs >$50 million
37 # of publicly traded BDCs
48 # of private BDCs
$52 billion market capitalization of publicly traded BDCs
$121 billion assets held by publicly traded BDCs
$102 billion assets held by private BDCs
93% % of gross BDC investments that are debt related
76% % of gross BDC investments that are senior secured
9.77% current gross yield on gross BDC assets
12.98% current leveraged gross yield on net BDC assets (net of interest 
costs)
9.27% dividend yield on Cliffwater BDC Index
1.21% average management fee on gross BDC assets
0.82% average incentive fee on gross BDC assets
0.38% average expenses on gross BDC assets
4.97% average fees and expenses on net BDC assets (NAV)
EXHIBIT 15.1 BDC industry statistics, March 31, 2022.
2
Most private BDCs have monthly or quarterly shareholder redemption windows, 
but are limited to a 5% quarterly maximum, imposed at the fund level. This means 
redeeming shareholders can get all their money out as long as the total of all redeem￾ing shares does not exceed 5% of shares outstanding. If total redemptions exceed 
5%, each redeeming shareholder receives their pro rate share. For example, if re￾quested redemptions total 10% of shares outstanding, each redeeming shareholder 
would be allowed to sell one-half of their requested amount. Investors would then 
have to wait until the next redemption window to sell remaining shares.Business Development Companies (BDCs) 117
PRIVATE BDCs
BDCs can remain private or choose to be publicly traded on one of the 
major exchanges. Of the 85 BDCs with assets above $50 million, 37 are 
publicly traded and 48 are private BDCs. While there are more private 
than public BDCs, public BDCs represent the majority (54%) of assets man￾aged within BDCs.
Private BDCs can be divided into two categories according to their 
long-term liquidity strategy for investors: (1) private-to-public BDCs and 
(2) stay-private or perpetual BDCs.
Until recently, asset managers preferred to raise assets as a private BDC 
and then become exchange traded through a public offering. Asset manag￾ers might prefer to sponsor a public BDC because it helps them build brand 
awareness, provides a source of permanent capital, and facilitates growth 
opportunity through new share offerings if the BDC stock trades above NAV. 
Investors also seem to prefer public BDCs because they provide ongoing 
liquidity and are generally larger, providing better direct loan diversification.
A popular strategy after the 2008 GFC has been for an asset manager 
to launch a private BDC, sell shares in a private offering, and then go public 
later. Sometimes the asset manager will offer lower fees to investors in the 
private BDC to encourage commitments by larger institutional investors. 
At IPO, those fees asset management charges increase but the institutional 
investor has the opportunity then to sell its shares, generally after some 
lock-up period. A private BDC would be necessary as a predecessor to the 
public BDC to acquire loans, funded by investor capital calls, so when the 
BDC goes public the funds raised in the public market would be immedi￾ately deployed into middle market loans rather than cash.
These institutional investors also have a reasonable expectation that 
they can sell their shares at a premium to NAV when the BDC goes public. 
For example, since the GFC, BDCs with strong asset management back￾ing have had their shares trade at a 10–20% premium to NAV. Investors 
can potentially earn an 8–10% dividend through interest income while the 
BDC is in the private phase and earn an additional premium of 10–20% 
at IPO. It generally takes the private BDC about three to four years to be 
fully ramped to scale before being ready to IPO. Current yield plus the 
IPO premium together might provide a total return expectation between 
10% and 15%.
Five examples of public BDCs that followed the path from private BDC 
to public BDC with a significant premium at IPO were Sixth Street (ticker: 
TSLX) in 2014, Goldman Sachs (ticker: GSBD) in 2015, Bain (ticker: BCSF) 
in 2018, Owl Rock (ticker: ORCC) in 2019, and Blackstone (ticker: BXSL) in 
2021. Sixth Street Specialty Lending, Inc. was organized as a private BDC 118 PRIVATE DEBT
in December 2010. It concurrently raised capital through a private offer￾ing of its shares to institutional investors and called committed capital as it 
made direct loans. Large institutional backing came from pension funds of 
the States of New Jersey, Oregon, Ohio, and Arizona, as well as the high￾net-worth arm of Morgan Stanley. Private BDCs that intend to go public 
generally want to build a retail investor base, like that brought by Morgan 
Stanley, that will provide greater liquidity on IPO and will be a more repre￾sentative shareholder base post-IPO.
In its private offering, Sixth Street Specialty Lending agreed to go pub￾lic within four years or gradually liquidate the BDC loan holdings as they 
matured. The BDC went public in an IPO after four years in March 2014, 
traded at an early 20–30% premium to NAV, and has since averaged an 
approximate 20% premium. During its private phase the BDC earned 
an 11.66% net annualized return for its shareholders. The IPO would have 
increased the annualized return to private shareholders from 11.66% to a 
range of 16–19% depending on when the shareholder sold shares in 2014.
Goldman Sachs BDC, Inc. followed a similar path as Sixth Street Spe￾cialty Lending but two years later. Their private BDC was launched in 2013 
and the BDC conducted an IPO in May 2015. It initially traded at a 10–20% 
premium to NAV and has since averaged an approximate 15% premium. 
Except for Bain Capital, whose IPO timing may have been unfortunate, the 
other private-to-public BDCs have had successful IPOs.
Another related private-to-public route, which will likely gain popular￾ity, is a private BDC being acquired at a premium by its sister public BDC. 
Golub Capital uses this technique to grow its public BDC (ticker: GBDC). In 
2015, Golub launched a private BDC (GCIC), offering advantageous terms to 
institutional investors. That private BDC grew to over $1 billion in net assets 
before it was acquired by GBDC in 2019 at a 7% premium to net assets.
The most popular type of BDC today is the stay-private, perpetual BDC. 
Perpetual BDCs allow investors to purchase shares, generally monthly, not on 
an exchange at market prices, but in a private transaction at NAV. The BDC 
repurchases shares at NAV but limited to monthly or quarterly with a limit, 
generally 5% of outstanding shares per quarter. These perpetual BDCs enjoy 
current favor because their share volatility is much less than publicly traded 
BDCs and it is easier to raise capital by selling shares without restriction. Most 
notably, Blackstone broke all records recently, raising $18 billion in investor 
capital for a private perpetual BDC known as BCRED. Success brings imita￾tors and several other perpetual BDCs have been formed to access this market.
Exhibit 15.2 provides a listing of all private BDCs.
It is not uncommon for asset managers to have multiple private BDCs. 
Owl Rock, Goldman Sachs, Golub, and Barings are examples. These mul￾tiple offerings generally have different investment objectives or different Business Development Companies (BDCs) 119
Name SEC Code
Net Assets in
$ Thousands
Blackstone Private Credit Fund 1803498 $17,902,407
Owl Rock Technology Finance 
Corp
1747777 $3,457,234
Owl Rock Core Income Corp. 1812554 $2,763,379
Franklin Square Energy 1501729 $1,783,915
Owl Rock Capital Corp III 1807427 $1,663,566
Franklin BSP Lending Corp 1490927 $1,498,382
Apollo Debt Solutions BDC 1837532 $1,356,706
Owl Rock Capital Corp II 1655887 $1,341,968
Morgan Stanley Direct Lending 
Fund
1782524 $1,190,918
TCG BDC II 1702510 $1,149,202
New Mountain Guardian III 1781870 $1,142,290
Golub Capital BDC 3 1715268 $1,115,718
Goldman Sachs Private Middle 
Market Credit II
1772704 $1,007,775
CION (Apollo) 1534254 $922,453
TCW Direct Lending VII 1715933 $918,854
HPS Corporate Lending Fund 1838126 $913,586
Barings Private Credit 1859919 $853,407
NMF SLF I 1766037 $750,228
Stone Point Credit Corp 1825384 $639,292
HMS Income Fund (Main 
Street Capital)
1535778 $616,627
Barings Capital Investment 
Corp
1811972 $609,599
Runway Growth Credit Fund 1653384 $597,466
Monroe Capital Income Plus 1742313 $497,611
Goldman Sachs Private Middle 
Market Credit
1674760 $497,435
SL Investment Corp 1825590 $427,902
Trinity Capital 1786108 $424,041
Audax 1633858 $406,993
Nuveen Churchill BDC 1737924 $402,677
Kayne Anderson BDC 1747172 $387,182
TCW Direct Lending 1603480 $382,568
EXHIBIT 15.2 Private, non-listed business development companies, March 31, 2022.
(continued)120 PRIVATE DEBT
Name SEC Code
Net Assets in
$ Thousands
AB Private Credit Investors 
Corp
1634452 $373,791
Oaktree Strategic Income II 1744179 $338,163
TriplePoint Global Venture 
Credit
1792509 $295,094
Venture Lending & Leasing IX 1717310 $240,069
Franklin BSP Capital 1825248 $237,668
AG Twin Brook BDC 1666384 $186,445
SCP Private Credit Income BDC 1743415 $180,928
Commonwealth Credit Partners 
BDC I
1841514 $142,570
Carey Credit Income Fund 
(Guggenheim)
1618697 $139,809
NC SLF 1844684 $134,436
BlackRock Direct Lending 
Corp.
1834543 $87,730
Venture Lending & Leasing 8 1642862 $68,661
WTI Fund X 1850938 $67,364
NexPoint Capital 1588272 $62,947
Golub Capital Direct Lending 
Corp
1868878 $58,952
BC Partners Lending 
Corporation
1726548 $46,327
Carlyle Secured Lending III 1851277 $15,422
Total Net Private BDC Assets $50,279
EXHIBIT 15.2 (continued)
shareholder objectives; for example, one may stay private and another pri￾vate to public.
PUBLICLY TRADED BDCs
There are 39 publicly traded BDCs with a combined market capitalization 
equal to $52 billion at June 30, 2022. A listing of those public BDCs is 
shown in Exhibit 15.3.
Some of the largest and highest-quality asset managers operate publicly 
traded BDCs, including BlackRock, Blackstone, Goldman, Carlyle, KKR Business Development Companies (BDCs) 121
Publicly Traded BDC Ticker Percentage of Market Cap
Ares Capital ARCC 19.49
FS Investment FSK 12.47
Owl Rock ORCC 10.30
Blackstone Secured 
Lending Fund
BXSL 7.90
Prospect Capital PSEC 6.12
Golub Capital GBDC 4.86
Hercules Technology HTGC 4.10
Goldman Sachs BDC GSBD 3.63
Sixth Street Specialty 
Lending
TSLX 2.97
New Mountain Finance NMFC 2.64
Oaktree Specialty 
Lending Co
OCSL 2.61
Barings BDC BBDC 2.21
Bain Capital Specialty 
Finance
BCSF 1.89
SLR Investment SLRC 1.59
TCP Capital TCPC 1.51
Apollo Investment AINV 1.48
Carlyle Secured Lending CGBD 1.44
Trinity Capital Inc. TRIN 1.14
Pennant Park 
Floating Rate
PFLT 1.08
Crescent Capital CCAP 1.04
Capital Southwest CSWC 1.04
Fidus Investment FDUS 0.94
Triplepoint Venture TPVG 0.88
Pennant Park PNNT 0.87
Gladstone Capital GLAD 0.75
Whitehorse Finance WHF 0.66
Horizon Tech. Finance HRZN 0.63
Saratoga Capital SAR 0.57
BlackRock Kelso BKCC 0.57
Stellus Capital Inv. SCM 0.53
Portman Ridge Finance 
Corporation
PTMN 0.47
EXHIBIT 15.3 Publicly traded business development companies, June 30, 2022. 
(continued)122 PRIVATE DEBT
and Oaktree. The largest publicly traded BDC is managed by Ares Capital 
(ARCC), a firm well known not only for its direct lending but also distressed 
private funds. It is the largest BDC because (1) it was a very early entrant, 
starting its BDC in 2004, (2) it has been one of the best performing BDCs 
since its beginning, and (3) the Ares BDC has made major acquisitions of 
troubled BDCs in the past and has had success turning them around. For 
example, Ares acquired American Capital BDC in 2016 and acquired Allied 
Capital BDC in 2010.
BDC MARKET INDEXES
There are three popular indexes tracking the public BDC market: S&P BDC 
Index (SPBDCUP), the Cliffwater BDC Index (CWBDC), and the MVIS US 
Business Development Index (MVBIZD), which is the successor index to the 
Wells Fargo BDC Index (WFBDCPX). All three indexes are capitalization￾weighted, but unlike the Cliffwater BDC Index, the S&P and MVIS indexes 
are float adjusted and cap any single BDC to no more than 10% and 20%, 
respectively.
The capped index weightings on any single BDC causes a major reweight￾ing from traditional capitalization weighting because ARCC, arguably one 
of the longest tenured and best-performing BDCs, has a 19.49% weighting 
by market capitalization but only a 10% weight in the S&P BDC Index.3
Such a limitation causes extra portfolio turnover and transaction costs as 
the Ares excess weighting must be rebalanced every quarter to the remaining 
Publicly Traded BDC Ticker Percentage of Market Cap
Monroe Capital MRCC 0.40
Oxford Square OXSQ 0.38
OFS Capital OFS 0.30
First Eagle Alternative 
Capital
FCRD 0.21
Great Elm Capital GECC 0.19
Investcorp Credit ICMB 0.13
100
3
The MVIS BDC Index appears to have changed its capped weighting to 20% from 
10% when it replaced the Wells Fargo BDC Index.
EXHIBIT 15.3 (continued)Business Development Companies (BDCs) 123
BDCs. The limitation is also contrary to the efficient market hypothesis that 
market capitalization weighting provides the highest risk-adjusted return 
for the average investor. While index providers sometimes argue that limit￾ing an outsized market weighting improves diversification, most (95%) of 
the benefit of diversification occurs with the first 13 BDC positions and 
the 19% Ares market weighting does not interfere with achieving a very 
diversified portfolio. For these reasons, the Cliffwater BDC Index is used 
to provide analysis of the public BDC market. Information on the Cliffwa￾ter BDC Index, including a return history back to 2004, can be found at 
www.BDCs.com.
BDCs: A TALE OF TWO MARKETS
The public BDC market is often described as two-tiered, with a group of 
strong performing BDCs backed by shareholder friendly management teams 
with large platforms, and another group of weak performing BDCs backed 
by smallish boutique firms whose BDCs are poor performing and who take 
advantage of their captive shareholders through unnecessarily high fees. 
While the entire BDC market trades near NAV, the first group consistently 
trades at a premium to NAV while the second group consistently trades at 
a discount, sometimes a severe one. As pointed out previously, the second 
group exists only because the 3% limit restricts the corporate governance 
tools available to shareholders and activists broadly to force changes to 
management.
BDC DIVIDEND YIELD
Most investors are attracted to public BDCs because of their dividend yields, 
which represent most of their quarterly earnings from interest income, net 
of losses and management fees. Exhibit 15.4 provides a history of dividend 
yield for the Cliffwater BDC Index dating back to its start date in Sep￾tember 2004.
Post-GFC dividend yields on the Cliffwater BDC Index have remained 
within an 8–11% yield range, with a significant spike occurring during 
COVID. Most of the fluctuations in dividend yield have not been the result 
of changing underlying loan yields but, instead, price fluctuations in BDC 
shares. Unlike the CDLI, which maintains loan values at NAV, the Cliffwater 
BDC Index is market price based and shares can trade above or below NAV.
Exhibit 15.5 provides the history of price premiums or discounts for the 
Cliffwater BDC Index price compared to the Cliffwater BDC Index NAV.124 PRIVATE DEBT
Investors often look at BDC premiums and discounts as an indica￾tor of relative value, choosing to buy at discounts and sell at premiums. 
Sometimes BDCs can sell at significant discounts to NAV as they did most 
recently during COVID. Some astute investors with knowledge of the BDC 
market purchased individual BDCs at discounts up 60% of NAV. When 
the market rebounded, some of these investors doubled their investment 
in less than one year. The three-year effective maturity of BDC underlying 
loan portfolios makes buying BDCs at discount a particularly successful 
trading strategy because, if the loan fundamentals are good, the discount 
will have to converge to NAV as principal matures or prepays over a three￾year window.
0.00
5.00
10.00
15.00
20.00
25.00
30.00
Sep ’04 Dec ’07 Apr ’11
CWBDC Index 5-Year Treasury
Jul ’14 Oct ’17 Dec ’20
EXHIBIT 15.4 Comparison of Cliffwater BDC Index and five-year Treasury yields.
Sep ’04 Dec ’07
40.00
30.00
20.00
10.00
0.00
–10.00
–20.00
–30.00
–40.00
–50.00
–60.00
–70.00
Apr ’11 Jul ’14
% Premium/Discount on NAV
Oct ’17 Dec ’20
EXHIBIT 15.5 Cliffwater BDC Index price premium or discount to NAV.Business Development Companies (BDCs) 125
BDC TOTAL RETURN
Exhibit 15.6 reports the cumulative return for the public BDC market using 
the Cliffwater BDC Index from its inception on September 30, 2004. The 
volatile lighter line shows the growth of $1,000 invested through August 17, 
2022. The $1,000 would have grown to $3,726 and an annualized return 
equal to 7.62%, including dividend income.
The smoother, darker line shows the return on NAV, equivalent to the 
BDCs’ return on equity capital. Over the same time, the net operating return 
for the Cliffwater BDC Index equaled 7.91%, annualized. The difference 
in operating and market return is because BDCs were trading at a 15% 
premium to NAV in 2004 and a 5% discount in 2022. The lesson is that 
shareholder returns do follow BDC fundamentals over time, but market 
premiums and discounts can negatively or positively affect performance, 
particularly over shorter time periods.
Exhibit  15.7 examines just the price component of total return and 
compares it to NAV. In both cases, interest or dividend income is stripped 
from the return calculation.
The dividend yield for the CWBDC Index has averaged about 10% 
over the entire Index history. However, as Exhibit 15.7 depicts, NAV have 
declined, losing value at an annualized rate equal to −2.19%. This rate of 
loss, when de-levered by the 0.69× historical average leverage ratio for BDCs, 
gives an equivalent unlevered realized loss equal to −1.29%, roughly equal 
to the −1.08% historical realized loss ratio for the CDLI (see Exhibit 2.1).
Sep ’04
4000.00
3500.00
3000.00
2500.00
2000.00
1500.00
1000.00
500.00
Dec ’07 Apr ’11
CWBDC NAV CWBDC Index
Jul ’14 Oct ’17 Dec ’20
EXHIBIT 15.6 Comparison of market return and net operating return for Cliffwater 
BDC Index.126 PRIVATE DEBT
Visual inspection of Exhibit 15.7 suggests BDC premiums and discounts 
do a pretty good job forecasting net realized and unrealized gains and losses, 
though they tend to overshoot their target. This might be interpreted as 
efficient market pricing, as future realized or unrealized losses are antici￾pated by market pricing well before they occur in the financial statements. 
This also suggests an existing BDC discount may not be a value opportunity 
but rather an expectation that NAV may decline to meet the discounted 
price rather than the other way around.
Sep ’04 Dec ’07
1400.00
1300.00
1200.00
1100.00
1000.00
900.00
800.00
700.00
600.00
500.00
400.00
300.00
200.00
Apr ’11
CWBDC Index CWBDC NAV
Jul ’14 Oct ’17 Dec ’20
EXHIBIT 15.7 Comparison of price return and NAV return for Cliffwater 
BDC Index.CHAPTER 16
127
T
ogether with BDCs, interval funds and tender funds are pooled inves￾tor vehicles intended to give investors access to investments that are not 
liquid enough to offer in daily open-end mutual funds or exchange traded 
funds. Interval funds are covered first because, next to BDCs, they have 
become the preferred vehicle for investors trying to access the benefits of 
private debt in a semiliquid and convenient way.
INTERVAL FUNDS
Interval funds are SEC-registered pooled investor vehicles operated under 
the Investment Company Act of 1940. They are intended to have an indefi￾nite life, unlike private partnerships. What is unique to interval funds is their 
requirement to allow investors/shareholders to redeem their shares for cash 
at defined periodic time intervals, typically quarterly. On setup, the asset 
manager sponsoring the interval fund can set redemption frequency and 
limits. For example, most interval funds set their redemption frequency to 
be quarterly, though monthly or semiannually is sometimes seen.
Redemption limits are applied at the fund level, not the individual 
shareholder level and can range between 5% and 25% of net assets at each 
redemption date. Like the redemption frequency, the redemption limit is set 
in advance, contained in the fund prospectus, and must be adhered to by the 
fund. Most interval funds set their quarterly redemption limit at 5% of net 
assets. This means shareholders who want to get all or some of their money 
out of the fund can do so quarterly unless the redeeming shareholders in 
aggregate are requesting to redeem more than the redemption limit, which 
equals 5% in this example. Should a quarter’s total redeeming assets equal 
7% of net assets, for example, each redeeming shareholder would receive 
5/7ths of their requested redemption amount and 2/7ths would remain in the 
interval fund. There is no automatic rollover of unfilled redemption requests 
to the next quarter and no queuing system. Each quarterly redemption cycle 
Interval and Tender Funds128 PRIVATE DEBT
is independent of the last. Shareholders are notified in advance of redemp￾tion dates, generally 30 days, and shareholders can submit their redemption 
requests up to the date of redemption. Redemption proceeds are received 
one or two days after the redemption date.
Investors contribute to an interval fund by being issued new shares val￾ued at NAV at the time of issuance. Most interval funds issue shares either 
daily, monthly, or quarterly. Shares are typically nontraded; all share trans￾actions are with the fund itself. The ability to invest immediately, without 
a strung-out series of capital calls, is an important convenience valued by 
non-institutional investors. This feature also allows investors to skip the 
cumbersome subscription agreements that private partnerships require.
Virtually all interval funds elect regulated investment company status, 
which allows them to pass through in dividends substantially all income and 
net realized gains (minus short-term losses) to investors. This pass-through 
status avoids any tax levy at the fund level. Instead, investors receive a famil￾iar 1099 at year-end, replacing the often-delayed K-1 sent to limited part￾ners often months after year-end.
Most interval funds pay quarterly dividends equal to their cash income 
but allow for a dividend reinvestment election for investors that want to 
grow their fund allocation.
Interval funds and BDCs are both SEC-registered funds with many 
similarities, but one very important difference is the regulatory limit on the 
amount of leverage (borrowing) that can be used. Fund borrowing is lim￾ited to 2× net asset value for BDCs but a much lower 0.5× NAV for interval 
funds.1
 The higher permissible leverage granted to BDCs is the result of 
Congressional legislation that exempts BDCs from SEC mutual fund lever￾age limits they otherwise would have to adhere to, as interval funds must.
The tighter leverage restrictions have apparently not hampered interval 
fund growth over the last several years, though they still remain a fraction 
of the size of the BDC market. On June 30, 2022, publicly traded and pri￾vate BDCs collectively held $110 billion in investor assets, almost doubling 
over the previous three years. Interval funds focused on private debt held 
$27 billion in investor assets, a fivefold increase since 2019.
Exhibit 16.1 provides a listing of credit-oriented interval funds.
1
For every $1 of investor capital, a BDC can borrow an additional maximum of 
$2, giving the BDC a total of $3 to invest in direct loans. An interval fund can bor￾row only 50 cents for every $1 of investor capital. Leverage limits for BDCs and 
interval funds can often be expressed as asset coverage ratios, that is, the minimum 
dollar amount of assets as a percentage of fund borrowing. The minimum asset 
coverage ratios for BDCs and interval funds equal 300% ($3.00/$1.00) and 150% 
($1.50/$1.00), respectively.Interval and Tender Funds 129
Interval funds are also a popular vehicle for equity real estate, holding 
$20 billion in investor capital.
TENDER FUNDS
Tender funds are very similar to interval funds. The major difference is that 
share repurchases are not fixed by timing, size, or price. Basically, tender funds 
can repurchase shares when they want, in any amount they want, and at a 
price that may differ from NAV. This flexibility is very unlike interval funds 
whose share repurchases come at fixed intervals, up to fixed amounts, and at 
NAV. Tender funds have gained traction among asset managers who provide 
investors access to private equity where the liquidity of underlying investments 
is long term and uncertain, which practically makes any promise of short-term 
liquidity a serious challenge. In the second wave of democratization of alterna￾tives, private equity managers are choosing tender funds. These managers are 
few but include firms such as Partners Group, Stepstone, and Hamilton Lane.
Name Ticker
Net Assets in
$ Millions
Cliffwater Corporate Lending Fund CCLFX $8,200
PIMCO Flexible Credit Income Fund PFLEX $3,024
Stone Ridge Alternative Lending Risk Premium Fund LENDX $2,372
CION Ares Diversified Credit Fund CADUX $2,342
Variant Alternative Income Fund NICHX $1,935
Carlyle Tactical Private Credit Fund TAKNX $1,303
PIMCO Flexible Municipal Income Fund PMFLX $1,189
Lord Abbett Credit Opportunities Fund LCRDX $945
Cliffwater Enhanced Lending Fund CELFX $686
Apollo Diversified Credit Fund CRDIX $537
KKR Credit Opportunities Portfolio KCOUX $515
BlackRock Credit Strategies Fund CREDX $435
First Eagle Credit Opportunities Fund FECRX $405
FS Credit Income Fund FCRIX $290
Blackstone Floating Rate Enhanced Income Fund BGFLX $297
Alternative Credit Income Fund RCIIX $260
Flat Rock Opportunity Fund FROPX $177
Oaktree Diversified Income Fund Inc ODIDX $147
Bluerock High Income Institutional Credit Fund IIMFX $82
AFA Multi-Manager Credit Fund AMCLX $40
EXHIBIT 16.1 Private, non-listed credit interval funds, June 30, 2022.CHAPTER 17
131
T
here is no passive option in direct lending; it is only accessible through 
active management. It is a dynamic market as lenders continuously origi￾nate and refinance middle market corporate loans every three to five years, 
mirroring the private equity market but with greater velocity. The CDLI 
captures the collective (asset-weighted) work product of the direct loan 
managers represented in the Index, but it is not investable. Manager/lender 
selection, therefore, is part of investing in direct loans.
Not surprisingly, some managers have produced better outcomes than 
others, and by wide margins. The purpose of this chapter is to explore the 
factors that differentiate direct loan managers and offer suggestions on what 
characteristics best typify managers who will be successful. But before pro￾ceeding, a brief case study is presented to illustrate the importance over time 
in selecting the right manager.
SELECTION MATTERS
Exhibits 17.1a and 17.1b provide actual direct loan performance from two 
of the earliest and largest direct lending managers for the September 31, 
2004, to March 31, 2022, time period. Both manager track records are 
audited and included in the CDLI. A comparison of the exhibits shows 
clearly that not all managers are alike when executing a direct lending 
investment program.
A dollar invested with Manager A at September 30, 2004, would have 
grown to $8.66 as shown in the top, heavy line in Exhibit 17.1a, repre￾senting a 13.13% annualized return, gross of fees, and unlevered. Manager 
A’s 13.13% asset performance is also 3.67% above the 9.46% return for 
the CDLI (see Exhibit 2.1), indicative of significant skill at direct lending. 
Also impressive is that the 3.67% excess return above the CDLI did not 
all come from yield. Manager A’s income return grew to $7.19, a 11.93% 
annualized income return compared to 10.79% for the CDLI, a yield differ￾ence of 1.14%.
Selecting Direct Lending Managers132 PRIVATE DEBT
8.66
7.19
1.26
0.96
0.5
1.0
2.0
4.0
8.0
Growth of $1 (Log Scale)
Direct Loan Manager A
Total Return
Income
Net Realized Gains (Losses)
Net Unrealized Gains (Losses)
EXHIBIT 17.1a Performance of successful Manager A.
3.23
5.89
0.54
0.97
0.5
1.0
2.0
4.0
8.0
Growth of $1 (Log Scale)
Direct Loan Manager B
Total Return
Income
Net Realized Gains (Losses)
Net Unrealized Gains (Losses)
EXHIBIT 17.1b Performance of unsuccessful Manager B.Selecting Direct Lending Managers 133
Manager A is unusual in their ability to generate realized gains over this 
period when direct loans almost always incur realized losses from defaults. 
Manager A produced these realized gains primarily through acquisition of 
secondary pools of direct loans at discount during periods of distress, like 
the 2008 GFC, and a strong record of low credit losses on directly originated 
loans. While the CDLI incurred realized losses equal to −1.08% over this 
period, Manager A produced realized gains equal to 1.33%, or an excess 
return from realized gains equal to 2.41% (1.33% + 1.08%). The 2.41% is 
the realized gross-of-fee alpha produced by Manager A.
Annualized unrealized losses for Manager A and the CDLI over the 
measurement period were similar, equal to −0.23% and −0.19%, respec￾tively. Therefore the 3.67% annualized difference in total return between 
Manager A and the CDLI can be divided into 1.14% from excess yield, 
2.41% from excess realized gains, −0.04% from excess unrealized losses, 
and a residual 0.16% that is attributable to reinvestment of excess returns 
from excess yield and gains. (The 0.16% is sometimes referred to as a cross￾product term.)
Manager B’s track record, shown in Exhibit 17.1b is a completely dif￾ferent story, underperforming the CDLI in both income generation and real￾ized losses.
A dollar invested with Manager B at September 30, 2004, would have 
grown to $3.23 as shown in the heavy line, less than one-half of Manager 
A, and representing a 6.93% annualized return, gross of fees, and unlev￾ered. Manager B’s 6.93% asset performance is 2.53% below the 9.46% 
return for the CDLI, reflecting poor past performance coming from large 
realized losses that were not offset by higher income. In fact, Manager B’s 
income return of 10.66% was about the same as the CDLI income return 
of 10.79%, but their realized losses equaled an annualized −3.46%, and 
well above the CDLI −1.08% realized loss return. A reasonable expectation 
is that yield and realized losses are inversely related, with investors getting 
rewarded in higher yields for higher credit risk. That was certainly not true 
for Manager B. Manager B’s performance record does show a small annual￾ized unrealized loss at period’s end equal to −0.17%, about the same as the 
CDLI. Therefore, the 2.53% total return shortfall for Manager B relative to 
the CDLI is virtually all attributable to poor underwriting that translated 
into large, realized credit losses.
This case study demonstrates that manager selection matters, and some￾times a lot. Accepting that, what should an investor look at when selecting 
a direct lender? For example, should investors just select direct lenders that 
offer the highest yields? After all, a higher yield would give the investor at 
least a better starting point, absent any other information.134 PRIVATE DEBT
MANAGER DIRECT LOAN YIELD
Direct lending returns are driven by three primary factors: yield, credit 
losses, and fees. Yields attract the most attention when evaluating direct 
lenders because they are an overwhelming source of return, easily calcu￾lated, and always available.
Exhibit 11.1 showed that investors hunting for yield can fall into a kind 
of yield trap because absolute direct loan yields vary by the types of risks 
taken. At any point in time investors shopping for yield will find a range of 
yields being generated by direct loan managers. Exhibit 17.2 reports yield 
variations across BDC managers for their underlying assets for years 2005 
through 2021. Yield is calculated by dividing interest income by average 
gross assets. Each dot represents a different direct lending manager.
Casual inspection of Exhibit 17.2 suggests that both the level and dis￾persion of manager loan yields remains relatively stable over time. The asset￾weighted average is shown as the heavy line and represents CDLI interest 
income. CDLI interest income plots below the median of manager yields 
due to asset weighting. The slight downward slope in interest income is 
largely attributable to declining Libor over the period shown, a trend that 
is reversing.
EXHIBIT 17.2 Yield (interest income) by direct loan manager, 2005 to 2021.Selecting Direct Lending Managers 135
The dispersion of yields is measured by standard deviation each year. It 
averages 1.80% over the entire time period, meaning approximately two￾thirds of managers build loan portfolios with yields within a 3.60% range.
The dispersion in manager yields is best understood by combining the 
risk premium architecture presented in Exhibit 11.1 with actual direct loan 
manager exposures to risk factors, as shown in Exhibit 17.3. The diagram 
illustrates the variation among managers in exposures to risk factors at a 
single point in time. These manager risk factor exposures remain roughly 
constant over time, reflecting each manager’s preferred style of loan origi￾nation. Each bubble represents a single manager, and the number is only 
for identification purposes. The size of each bubble is not a risk factor and 
measures direct loan assets under management.
The horizontal axis measures the average size of the borrower in the 
manager’s portfolio. This is the fourth risk factor identified in Exhibit 11.1. 
Size is measured by EBITDA and ranges up to $100 million, which is broadly 
considered the upper end of the US middle market. Beyond $100 million in 
EBITDA, borrowers generally have accessed the broadly syndicated bank 
loan markets for financing. Recently this has been changing, with borrow￾ers using private debt managers for financing that went to the syndicated 
market in the past.
Note the wide dispersion in borrower size averages across direct loan 
managers, with equal numbers of managers operating at different size strata. 
Also, there does not appear to be a relationship between the size of manager 
and average size of borrower. Often, investors are concerned that as manag￾ers grow in assets they are forced to do bigger deals. While this tendency is 
found in other asset classes, it has yet to materialize in direct lending.
The vertical axis in Exhibit 17.3 measures manager average exposure 
to sponsored or nonsponsored borrowers, the third risk factor identified in 
Exhibit 11.1. Unlike the symmetric distribution of borrower size, the dis￾tribution of sponsored and nonsponsored exposure favors sponsored bor￾rowers with an average overall exposure to sponsored borrowers equal to 
roughly 77%. There also appear to be more direct lenders lending to spon￾sored borrowers and for those lenders to be larger. Lenders to nonsponsored 
borrowers frequently point out the increased time and effort required to 
underwrite their loans. If true, then it would be logical to expect fewer assets 
and managers doing nonsponsored loans.
Perhaps most noticeable is the smaller number and size of direct lenders 
operating in the nonsponsored lower middle market. This would mean that 
many managers are purposefully foregoing the full yield premiums found in 
smaller nonsponsored loans. This likely is attributable to the ability of asset 
managers to scale their businesses more easily by lending to sponsor-backed 
borrowers.EXHIBIT 17.3 Manager exposure to direct loan risk factors, March 31, 2022.
136Selecting Direct Lending Managers 137
The last risk factor from Exhibit 11.1 is credit risk and is measured in 
Exhibit 17.3 by the darkest bubble. Lenders focused on senior loans are dis￾played in darkest shading. Lenders making primarily subordinated loans are 
shown in lightest shading. Lenders with a broad mix of senior and subor￾dinated loans are in medium shading. By number, managers making mostly 
senior loans and those that invest in both senior and subordinated debt are 
roughly equal, though senior-only managers are larger in size. Only one 
manager in the sample focuses exclusively on subordinated debt, probably 
because the availability of subordinated debt is less predictable, scalable, 
and lenders will also find themselves competing with hedge funds and other 
special situation managers for these borrowers.
The middle market yield potential measured by the risk premiums in 
Exhibit 11.1 measured 6.6% (1.7% nonsponsored premium, plus 1.6% 
lower middle market premium, plus 3.3% subordinated premium) on 
March 31, 2022. The actual range in middle market yields, from high 
to low, offered by direct lending managers equaled 6.2% for the same 
date shown in Exhibit  17.2. Excluding the highest and lowest yielding 
managers, the dispersion in return equaled 5.4%. This variation in yield 
among direct lenders is significant but largely explained by risk factor 
exposures for those managers. The regression of manager risk factors 
and yields produced an R-square equal to 0.52, meaning that 52% of the 
variability in manager yield is explained by the risk factors. Combining 
the 52% R-square between yields and risk factors with the 1.80% cross￾sectional standard deviation in yields implies that the standard deviation 
of yields across direct lenders that is not explained by risk factors equals 
a smallish 1.25%.
It appears that direct lenders have some ability to affect yield in a way 
other than by taking on factor exposures rewarded by high-yield premi￾ums. And it is likely the 1.25% dispersion not explained by risk factors 
are created by differences in the extent to which managers self-originate 
loans, earning full deal fees (OID) versus participating in smaller or larger 
club deals and receiving partial or no fees. Another explanation is that 
some direct lenders engage in an industry focus, such as venture or health 
care lending, which have higher asset volatility and therefore higher yields, 
as explained in Chapter 10. And, of course, the presence of covenants is 
another important factor, also explained in Chapter 10.
In the broader credit markets, and for the direct lending market as well, 
the level of interest income (yield) likely represents beta. In most cases dif￾ferences in yield can be explained by the major risk premiums identified in 
Chapter 11 or other factors unrelated to manager skill. In the market for 
financing, even in the middle market, there are sufficient competitive pres￾sures among lenders that yield anomalies would seem hard to come by.138 PRIVATE DEBT
CREDIT LOSSES ACROSS DIRECT LENDERS
Risk premiums provide a very useful explanation for the different yields 
found in US middle market direct lending but there is not sufficient evidence 
that they are useful in explaining credit losses, the second component in 
the calculation of direct lending returns. Instead, the variability in realized 
credit losses appears thus far to fall at the footsteps of the lender itself and 
their underwriting capability.
Exhibit 17.4 parallels Exhibit 17.2. In Exhibit 17.4, realized credit gains 
(losses), rather than interest income, are shown by calendar year for indi￾vidual direct lending managers together with the CDLI, which represents an 
asset-weighted average.
Dispersion among manager realized gains (losses) in Exhibit  17.4 is 
significant and exceeds differences found for interest income. The average 
annual cross-sectional standard deviation of realized gains (losses) equals 
3.36% for the entire period and rises to 4.94% during the 2008–2010 subpe￾riod when losses from the GFC were realized. By contrast, the cross-sectional 
standard deviation in interest income was 2.34% for the entire period and 
2.48% during the 2008–2010 GFC subperiod. Statistically speaking, an 
investor focus on a lender’s ability to manage credit losses is significantly 
EXHIBIT 17.4 Net realized gains (losses) for direct lending managers and the 
Cliffwater Direct Lending Index, by year.Selecting Direct Lending Managers 139
more important than their ability to generate interest income. Expressed 
differently, managing credit losses is 2.1× more important than income 
generation, calculated by the ratio of variances (the square of standard 
deviation).
The 3.36% cross-sectional standard deviation in realized gains (losses) 
across direct lending managers is very meaningful considering that the 
standard deviation of CDLI returns over time is 3.63% (Exhibit 3.1). This 
is not like traditional stocks and bonds where active manager risk (alpha 
risk) is a very small percentage of overall market risk (beta risk). In direct 
lending, individual manager risk can exceed the risk of the direct lending 
asset class itself.
Exhibit 17.5 presents realized gains (losses) in another way by showing 
cumulative net realized gains (losses) by direct loan manager. The length of 
track record varies across managers with many starting after the GFC. As 
a result, Exhibit 17.5 contains track records of net realized gains (losses) 
of differing lengths. The dark line represents aggregate CDLI net realized 
losses. However, the graphic is useful in showing the long-term dispersion of 
realized gains (losses) across managers and not just yearly dispersion.
A key question is whether the risk factors that explain so much of the 
differences in direct lending interest income among managers also explain 
differences in manager realized credit gains (losses). Finding an answer that 
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
1.00
1.10
1.20
1.30
Sep-04
Jun-05
Mar-06
Dec-06
Sep-07
Jun-08
Mar-09
Dec-09
Sep-10
Jun-11 Mar-12
Dec-12
Sep-13
Jun-14 Mar-15
Dec-15
Sep-16
Jun-17
Mar-18
Dec-18
Sep-19
Jun-20
Mar-21
Dec-21
0.85
Cumulative Erosion of $1.00 through Net Realized Losses
EXHIBIT 17.5 Cumulative net realized gains (losses) for direct lending asset manag￾ers and the Cliffwater Direct Lending Index (heavy dark line), September 2004 to 
March 2022.140 PRIVATE DEBT
is statistically meaningful is difficult because realized credit losses are con￾centrated over just a few years, 2008–2010, covering a small sample set of 
direct lenders. Most of the remaining years are largely credit benign with 
modest credit losses. In those years differences in portfolio yield may reflect 
perceived risk of default, but without actual defaults a statistical relation￾ship won’t be found.
The correlation between calendar year interest income and realized 
credit gains (losses) equals −0.39, suggesting that higher yield direct lend￾ing portfolios tend to experience lower realized credit gains (larger realized 
credit losses). Assuming higher yields reflect greater credit risk, the nega￾tive correlation is directionally correct. However, the R-squared equals just 
16%, meaning that yield explains a low percentage of the variation of credit 
losses across direct lenders.
These results likely mean that credit losses across individual direct lend￾ers are better explained by differences among lenders in their skills at sourc￾ing, underwriting, and work-out capabilities. This would be lender alpha.
TOTAL RETURN
Historical data on yield and credit gains (losses) suggest that direct lender 
performance can vary widely across managers. Yields vary widely across 
direct lenders given their exposure to risk factors and realized credit losses 
vary widely due to differences in underwriting skill. And the lack of cor￾relation between yield and credit loss increases the dispersion of manager 
returns, rather than reducing it. A wide dispersion among direct lenders in 
calendar year total return (incorporating yield, realized gains [losses], and 
unrealized gains [losses]) is indeed found in Exhibit 17.6.
The average cross-sectional standard deviation equals 6.56%, which is 
high for asset classes, but low compared to private equity, and has implica￾tions for portfolio construction discussed in Chapter 20. A major takeaway 
from this dispersion analysis is that the selection of direct lending managers 
is very important and that the risk found in manager selection likely exceeds 
the risk found in the asset class itself. This means that the common approach 
of hiring a single manager to gain exposure to direct lending and then add￾ing managers as allocations increase probably presents unnecessary risks. 
Better to hire several direct lenders at the outset to get a better chance of 
asset class characteristics.EXHIBIT 17.6 Total return for direct lending managers and the Cliffwater Direct Lending Index, by year.
141142 PRIVATE DEBT
DIRECT LENDING MANAGERS
Direct loans are bespoke agreements between lenders and borrowers. As 
such, successful investment outcomes are dependent on the quality of the 
direct lending manager(s) selected by the investor.
Unlike ten years ago, investors today have a variety of asset manage￾ment firms to select from. The population of direct lending managers has 
grown rapidly since the GFC and continues to expand in line with the growth 
in direct lending assets. Unlike many other traditional and alternative asset 
classes, there has yet to appear any significant concentration in assets among 
a few firms. As of December 31, 2022, there were roughly 300 global direct 
lending firms, 200 located in the United States. These firms combined managed 
$856 billion in direct lending assets globally, with $650 billion in the United 
States and $200 billion in Europe. Direct lending in Asia is in its infancy with 
perhaps a dozen managers investing $6 billion in direct loan assets.
An institutional approach to selecting a direct lender likely involves a 
multifaceted analysis, such as the one described in Exhibit 17.7. Like most 
other asset classes, a small minority, perhaps 20% of available managers, 
meet the highest qualifications and fiduciary standards. There is generally 
another group of 20–30% that are of institutional quality but lack a few 
Credit
Losses People
Platform
Origination
Underwriting
Workout
Portfolio
Construction
Portfolio
Construction
Financing
Fees and
Expenses
Track
Record
Organization
Investment
Process
Past
Performance
Loan
Construction
Investment
Strategy
EXHIBIT 17.7 Due diligence checklist for middle market direct lender.Selecting Direct Lending Managers 143
characteristics that put them in the highest grouping. Finally, roughly 50% 
or more available managers are unlikely to produce good outcomes due to 
multiple deficiencies.
ORGANIZATION
Successful money management firms have experienced investment and oper￾ational personnel with good resources at their disposal. Ideally, the invest￾ment people have been working together under one roof for a long period 
of time. But for a few managers, many direct lending organizations have 
been newly formed over the past ten years and thus don’t have long histo￾ries. In those cases, the professional team may have worked together at a 
bank or nonbank financial lender prior to the GFC and were recruited to 
an asset management firm or started a new firm during the GFC. This is in 
fact a common scenario in direct lending, at least in the United States. Many 
successful direct lending professionals today have pedigrees going back to 
pre-GFC nonbank commercial lenders such as GE Capital and CIT. Others 
came from commercial banks such as Continental, First Chicago, Fleet, and 
the New York investment bank proprietary trading desks. These profession￾als were well trained and experienced in middle market corporate lending 
well before direct lending became popular.
Operations has a critical role to play at any direct lending organization. 
Unlike stock and bond managers, for whom every security has a digital 
identifier with terminal access to all sorts of data and a great number of 
operational functions are outsourced, most direct lenders deal with loan 
documentation and terms that require identification, measurement, and 
compliance that is not available off the shelf. While some functions can be 
outsourced to capable vendors, this does not change the need for the direct 
lender to input data, feed it to the vendor, and verify accuracy. Several of the 
early direct lending firms built their own administrative systems for lack of 
good off-the-shelf products. That is one reason administrative expenses for 
operating a direct lending portfolio can be high, averaging around 0.40%.
INVESTMENT STRATEGY
Most direct lending managers have a similar investment strategy: maximize 
interest and other income and avoid losses from defaults. They can differ 
greatly in how they execute and that is where lenders are differentiated. Bor￾rower type and size are the most significant differentiators, as described in 
Chapter 11. Most direct lenders deal only with borrowers backed by private 144 PRIVATE DEBT
equity sponsors. Here, the number and depth of these relationships with 
private equity firms is very important and can be verified through reference 
checks. It is also useful to know the reputation of the private equity firms, 
particularly in dealing with their portfolio companies during downturns.
Only a few asset managers lend exclusively to nonsponsored borrowers. 
More often a direct lender will source both sponsored and nonsponsored 
borrowers. With nonsponsored lenders it is likely more challenging to do 
just about everything. Yields are higher but investors in lenders to nonspon￾sors need to also assess the rate at which loans can be made and exited. In 
both cases they are likely much slower. For example, nonsponsored compa￾nies are likely to have fewer corporate actions (liquidity events).
Direct lenders typically differentiate themselves into lower middle mar￾ket, middle market, and upper middle market. The lower middle market 
would be borrowers with EBITDA less than $25 million while the upper 
middle market are borrowers above $75 million in EBITDA. Lender focus is 
usually based on existing sponsor relationships or other sourcing avenues. 
Lenders in the upper middle market need to guard against excesses, like 
covenant-lite, that slip down from the broadly syndicated bank market to 
the upper middle market for direct loans. Lenders in the lower middle mar￾ket see more stable borrower metrics and terms but need to pay more atten￾tion or allocate more resources to problem loans and exit strategies.
Lenders will also differentiate by the level of credit risk taken. Some 
are senior secured only while others look at the totality of the business 
they are lending to and may lend at several levels, including subordinated. 
Unitranche lending, which combines senior and junior loans so that the 
lender becomes a single turnkey source of financing for the borrower is 
rapidly growing in popularity. To be successful, unitranche loans need to 
be priced lower than the typical senior/junior debt structure. The positive is 
that investors may get more money to work with unitranche lenders, but the 
negative is that the investor gives up yield for risk taken.
A smaller group of direct lenders focuses on certain industries. Health 
care and technology (venture) lending are two examples. These lenders take 
advantage of the higher yields (beta) offered by these higher risk industries and 
seek to mitigate risk of default (alpha) through specialized industry expertise.
ORIGINATION
Direct lenders originate loans, but not entirely. The classic direct lender 
sources loan deals, structures the loan documentation, holds the entire loan 
to maturity and likely after refinancing, monitors the borrower for cov￾enant compliance, and works out the loan in the case of borrower distress. Selecting Direct Lending Managers 145
For sourcing and structuring, together called origination, the direct lender 
receives compensation in the form of deal fees that are paid up front or 
original issue discount that, while accounting treatment can vary, is usually 
amortized as income over the life of the loan.
Roughly 20% of the direct lenders today are of this classic variety. Another 
70% may self-originate but could also participate in small club deals where 
a few direct lenders agree to participate jointly in a loan pari passu. In these 
cases, the club may be formed because the loan is too large for the direct lender 
who found the deal, or that lender might invite other lenders to diversify into 
more loans as other club members reciprocate. With smaller clubs, deal fees are 
shared but not always equally. Finally, fewer than 10% of direct lenders do not 
originate deals but lend only through participations from large lead arrangers 
like an Antares or Golub. These direct lenders effectively outsource the origina￾tion process. Their loan portfolios forgo the extra income, but they are typi￾cally much more diversified by number of loans and industry. While origination 
sounds great and produces extra income and perhaps an informational advan￾tage relative to borrowers, it also can present a bottleneck to the investment 
opportunity set that can frustrate portfolio construction and risk management.
Most direct lenders organize origination and underwriting functions 
together on industry verticals. There are exceptions where the origination 
team operates independent of the underwriting team, a model traditionally 
found in commercial bank lending. The move to combining these functions 
is likely due to the need for speed of execution and the ability to bring indus￾try expertise to the borrower early in the underwriting engagement.
UNDERWRITING
In theory, underwriting is the process of structuring financing to fit the 
needs of the borrower while at the same time assessing risk. Risk assess￾ment includes the concepts of expected default frequency and recovery given 
default. Expected default frequency addresses the size of the loans relative 
to firm assets and cash flow to minimize the future probability of a default 
happening. Recovery given default refers to having sufficient security so that 
if default occurs there is an opportunity for full recovery of loan proceeds.
In practice, borrower financials and proposed loan amounts are used by 
the loan manager to determine implied credit ratings, or shadow ratings, based 
on comparisons provided by major rating agencies. For example, loan lever￾age levels (loan to EBITDA) for the proposed loan at issuance is compared to 
equivalent measures determined by rating agencies for different quality grades, 
from single A to CCC. The proposed loan is given a shadow rating that best 
matches its leverage level at issuance. In turn, the shadow rating is used to set 
pricing (yield) based on what the loan market is currently offering for that risk.146 PRIVATE DEBT
Underwriting is generally performed by the industry specialist, which is 
then reviewed more broadly by an investment committee.
Of course, loan managers consider many financial variables, not just 
leverage levels, in their mapping of a specific loan to a rating agency’s letter 
rating. Hence, the loan manager is basically rating the loan, not the rating 
agency. But loan managers generally rely on rating agency letter grades to 
accurately reflect risk. Market yields for each rating then sets the price for 
accepting that level of risk.
LOAN CONSTRUCTION AND MONITORING
A general discussion on loan agreements and covenants was covered in 
Chapter 12. Direct lenders use the underwriting process to settle on loan 
terms and covenants that will be required to finance the borrower. In most 
cases direct lenders use the services of outside law firms that specialize in 
structured finance to assist in constructing and negotiating loan terms. Com￾pliance with the loan agreement requires ongoing monitoring of borrower 
financials. Most loans have maintenance covenants that require periodic 
(quarterly) collection of data from the borrower and covenant testing.
WORKOUT
The final step of the investment process is workout of the loan in case a default 
occurs. Oftentimes the default is technical and that requires the borrower to 
pay a fee or greater interest rate as a remedy. In situations where there is 
an actual default stemming from a fundamental problem with the borrower, 
the lender will need specialized expertise and resources to maximize recovery 
value. Not all direct lenders have these skills. Some direct lenders operate as 
part of larger alternative asset management firms that include private equity 
and distressed capabilities. These direct lenders are better positioned to handle 
the recovery process versus the alternative of a distressed sale.
PORTFOLIO CONSTRUCTION
The most common vehicle for investing in corporate direct loans is private 
partnerships with limited life. Asset managers who construct portfolios of 
direct loans for private partnerships seek to optimize return and risk, subject 
to the level of committed assets, the period of time designated for invest￾ment, and deal flow opportunity during the investment period. Like private Selecting Direct Lending Managers 147
equity, most investors in direct lending will have concurrent commitments 
to more than one direct lending manager because no single manager can 
optimize the entire direct lending opportunity set. Understanding this, the 
direct lender should optimize their own opportunity subset and let the inves￾tor optimize the full direct lending opportunity through multiple managers. 
This design has worked well for institutions investing in private equity and 
private real estate.
Understanding they will not be responsible for investors’ overall market 
diversification (beta), direct lenders instead maximize the yields they can 
manufacture while minimizing credit losses (alpha). Investors will commit 
to several direct lending funds of complementary strategies to optimize their 
overall allocation to direct lending. But direct lenders don’t always agree 
on this view of portfolio construction. Some design their portfolios to be 
more turnkey, believing their investors want to one-stop their direct lending 
exposure. These managers generally have been in business longer and have 
investors that may have relied principally on one manager. Other managers 
have very focused direct lending strategies with a greater emphasis on return 
maximization and who should represent one component of an overall direct 
lending allocation.
Exhibit 17.8 provides some general statistics on 50 of the largest direct 
lenders and their private partnerships, a group that collectively manages 
$649 billion in direct lending assets. These statistics should provide some 
guidance on how actual portfolios are managed.
2008 Average Year Firm Launched
$12 billion Average direct lending assets managed
62% Percent of firms managing BDCs
50 Average # of direct lending professionals
$455 million Median fund gross assets
78% Average % first lien (senior secured)
13% Average % of first lien that is unitranche
0.98× Average leverage used
1.97× Maximum leverage used
$50 billion Average borrower EBITDA
80% Average % sponsor-backed loans
75 Average # portfolio credits
9.3% Average net IRR (internal rate of return)
8.1% Average cash yield
0.25% Average annualized loss ratio
EXHIBIT 17.8 Portfolio characteristics for direct lending private partnerships.148 PRIVATE DEBT
The portfolio statistics for the sample of private partnerships are not 
dissimilar from BDCs. This should not be too surprising because many asset 
managers offer both private partnerships and BDCs. Noteworthy is the 0.98× 
average leverage for private partnerships, which is very similar to the value 
found in BDCs, whose leverage averages 1.09× and is constrained by regula￾tion to less than 2.0×. Looking back at the portfolio characteristics for BDCs 
in Chapter 15, it appears that asset managers operate their BDCs and private 
partnerships in very similar ways across portfolio composition and financing.
The average number of loans at 75 is adequately diversified for a single 
fund but probably not for an investor, particularly when leverage averages 
0.98×. That means the average position size, as a percentage of NAV, equals 
1.3%. One default, with an offsetting 50% recovery rate, would lower the 
IRR of the private fund by roughly 13 basis points over its five-year life. 
Given that loans have limited return upside, most investors would want to 
have broader representation of credits through multiple funds.
The 0.25% realized credit loss ratio for the average manager in Exhibit 
16.8 stands out compared to the 1.08% realized credit losses reported for 
the CDLI. The low loss ratio for the 50-firm sample set in Exhibit 16.8 is 
due to two reasons. First, the sample is biased toward larger managers who 
became large because they have achieved better performance, presumably 
from lower loss rates. If investors can select better managers, ex ante, then 
the 0.25% loss rate may be a better predictor of future loss rates compared 
to the 1.08% loss rate for an unbiased universe of direct lenders. Second, the 
lower 0.25% loss rate is not surprising because the sample set is also biased 
toward direct lenders that started businesses after the GFC. Their average 
loss rates will be lower than the 1.08% CDLI loss rate whose calculation 
gives equal weight to pre- and post-GFC loss outcomes.
It is important to understand the portfolio construction strategy for any 
individual loan manager and how it fits into an investor’s overall portfolio.
LEVERAGE FINANCING
Most middle market direct lenders enhance yields by using a modest amount 
of leverage, ranging from none to 2.0× net asset value. The higher levels 
of leverage are used for senior secured middle market credits while port￾folios of subordinated and mezzanine loans use little or no leverage. As 
reported, the average BDC and direct lending private partnership generally 
operate with leverage levels between 0.9× and 1.2×. Unlevered direct lend￾ing portfolios are available from some managers. Also, collateralized loan 
obligations (CLOs) holding middle market loans are growing in popularity 
with leverage levels between 4.0× and 5.0×. The higher leverage levels for Selecting Direct Lending Managers 149
middle market CLOs are made possible by strict rules for the allocation of 
loan cash flows that protect those providing senior financing. This presents 
income uncertainty and price volatility to those investors providing capital 
(NAV) that generally does not appeal to institutional investors wanting con￾sistent cash flow and low volatility.
There are several methods for financing assets purchases, each with 
pros and cons. The first is the subscription line. These credit facilities have 
recently become very popular and are banks, insurance companies, or spe￾cialty finance firms that will lend BDCs or private partnerships against their 
undrawn committed capital. Consequently, subscription lines are a tempo￾rary source of financing, existing only until committed capital is fully drawn 
by the general partner. The amount of financing under the subscription line 
depends on several factors, including the size of the fund and the credit￾worthiness of investors. Subscription lines are relatively cheap, priced at 
1.50–1.75% over Libor, but like revolving loans, the lender pays an unused 
commitment fee, typically 0.25%. Subscription lines are very useful early 
in a fund’s life when the portfolio is being ramped up and does not have 
the diversification necessary to satisfy asset-based lenders. Subscription lines 
have also become a popular way to boost the internal rate of return (IRR) 
calculation of performance since income is generated on little to no net asset 
value. However, some investors have gotten frustrated with a manager’s 
borrowing on uncommitted capital rather than just calling capital because 
the undrawn commitments may be held by the investor in reserves that are 
earning less than the financing costs of the subscription line.
The second and most common financing method is for the direct 
lender to enter into an agreement creating a revolving credit facility. The 
facility provides the direct lender financing as needed (revolving) subject 
to limits. The financing is provided by multiple parties, including banks 
and insurance companies, arranged by a syndication agent, and guar￾anteed by the underlying portfolio of loan assets. The revolving credit 
facility is generally costlier with a 2.25–2.50% spread over Libor and a 
0.375% charge on unused amounts. But unlike a subscription line, the 
revolver is a more permanent source of financing with a four- or five-year 
maturity.
A third financing method is the creation of a special purpose vehicle 
(SPV). SPVs are lending vehicles, also with four- or five-year maturities, 
secured by loans placed in the SPV. Costs tend to be somewhat higher than 
revolvers at a 2.50–3.00% spread over Libor. They also tend to be more 
manually intensive. There are many types of SPV facilities, including the 
availability of term financing, flexibility in asset-level approvals, and the 
ability to use them as warehouse financing for CLO takeouts, or for rated 
structures.150 PRIVATE DEBT
A fourth financing source, and one more commonly found in permanent 
capital structures like BDCs or interval funds, is longer maturity (five-plus 
years) unsecured and subordinated notes issued in private placements or 
through public offerings. These generally have fixed rates at higher costs. 
Managers issuing private placements have the option to enter into an interest 
rate swap matching floating rate to fixed rate payments. On a swap-adjusted 
basis the financing might cost a little more but it is very flexible and easy to 
support compared to SPV facilities, which can require significant resources.
A fifth source of financing is issuing public fixed rate debt with inter￾mediate term maturities. This financing option is generally available only to 
asset managers running large BDCs or interval funds that can rationalize the 
rating and syndication costs. These publicly traded bonds are sold primarily 
to retail investors.
A sixth source of financing can come from the small business adminis￾tration (SBA). The SBA was established in 1958 by Congress to stimulate 
small business growth and, today, is responsible for roughly $25 billion 
in loans to small businesses. Direct lenders can access SBA financing by 
getting licensed by the SBA to set up a small business investment corpo￾ration (SBIC). The SBIC is akin to a private partnership where the direct 
lending asset manager is the general partner and institutional investors are 
limited partners. SBICs are attractive to its investors—general and limited 
partners—because they can issue SBA-guaranteed debentures at ten-year 
maturities, with no principal amortization, at favorable interest rates com￾pared to other traditional sources of financing, and at levels up to 2.0× 
investor capital. However, SBA financing is limited to $150 million per SBIC 
and $350 million for multiple SBICs under a common manager. SBICs must 
also direct their loans or other investments to qualifying companies, which 
are generally smaller middle market companies with EBITDA less than 
$10 million or companies in industries or sectors designated by the SBA for 
favorable treatment.
Understanding how direct lending managers arrange their sources of 
financing, how cash flows from loan assets match the interest and princi￾pal repayment requirements of credit facilities, and how financing costs are 
optimized across the potential sources, is a critical component of investor 
due diligence.
FEES AND EXPENSES
Chapter 19 discusses manager fees in some detail. Fees have generally been 
coming down as they have in most other asset classes. Part of the reason 
in direct lending is asset growth has allowed managers to reduce costs as Selecting Direct Lending Managers 151
increased scale has widened operating margins. Also, the entry of institu￾tional investors has brought greater attention to both the level and structure 
of manager fees. But not all direct lenders have the same strategy, and more 
labor-intensive strategies will continue to charge higher fees.
TRACK RECORD
The lack of a track record history through the GFC has been a hindrance 
to evaluating many of the direct lending firms formed after 2008. A few 
direct lenders do have track records that extend well before the GFC and 
are generally able to provide sufficient granularity to decompose returns 
into income, realized losses, and unrealized losses. Direct lenders that oper￾ate BDCs are required to provide this detail to shareholders so the infor￾mation is readily available and verifiable. Detailed performance data from 
direct lenders that do not operate BDCs is often not available from the 
manager. This is because direct managers generally follow the performance 
practices of their private equity brethren and report only total net per￾formance by fund by vintage year. Unfortunately, it is impossible to glean 
information on a lender’s credit loss experience from a performance pres￾entation of this type. Without changing their reliance on IRR, more direct 
lenders are now supplementing performance disclosures with default and 
recovery histories.
In the case of direct lenders formed after 2008, an understanding of 
their abilities during downturns requires parsing performance histories at 
prior firms, which is more difficult, but generally the investor can come to 
some conclusion as to whether the current team or its individual members 
successful navigated the GFC. That said, there is nothing better than actual 
audited returns during a downturn to verify underwriting and workout 
capabilities.CHAPTER 18
153
How accurate are valuations in the absence of a tradable market for middle 
market loans? This is an important question for most investors in direct 
corporate loans for several reasons. First, many investors in public BDCs 
focus on the price-to-NAV ratio (the BDC market price divided by net asset 
value) as a potential measure of under- (over)-valuation, signaling a buy or 
sell opportunity. If NAV is incorrect, so is the valuation signal. Second, man￾ager fees are based on NAV so mistakes in valuation can potentially cause fee 
overpayments. Third, a growing group of direct lending pooled vehicles allow 
investors to purchase or sell units at NAV. Private BDCs, interval funds, and 
tender funds, as well as other registered and nonregistered, open-end pooled 
vehicles are examples. For instance, if NAV is overstated, excess value is 
passed from the new shareholders making investments to existing sharehold￾ers, and at the same time excess value is passed from existing shareholders 
to withdrawing shareholders. Excess value flows in the opposite direction 
when NAV is understated. This chapter addresses how direct loan values are 
determined and whether investors can rely on them.
As background, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) defines 
asset value as fair value,1
 prescribed by ASC 820 most recently in 2011. ASC 
820 defines fair value as “the price that would be received to sell an asset or 
paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market partici￾pants at the measurement date.” In outlining a discovery process that will find 
fair value, ASC 820 segregated assets into three categories (Level 1, Level 2, 
and Level 3), each with a different process for determining fair value.
Level 1 assets are liquid assets with valuations based on quoted prices 
readily available in active markets. Level 1 assets typically include listed equi￾ties, listed derivatives, mutual funds, and any other assets that have a reg￾ular mark-to-market pricing mechanism, generally via a central exchange. 
Investors should have a high confidence in Level 1 valuations except perhaps 
Loan Valuation
1
Private, nontraded assets were historically valued at historical cost, adjusted for 
write-ups or write-downs, prior to ASC 820 and fair value accounting.154 PRIVATE DEBT
during extreme events. Level 2 assets generally trade in inactive markets and 
rely on values (quotes) provided by market participants rather than real-time 
transactions on a central exchange. These assets are often priced through 
indicative quotations from multiple broker dealers and then averaged. Exam￾ples of Level 2 assets include credit default swaps and corporate debt. Most 
derivative securities are considered Level 2 assets even though the valuation 
for the underlying security may be readily available on a central exchange. 
Level 3 assets are generally those that are not traded or traded infrequently 
and, therefore, fair value cannot be determined by market-related activity or 
inputs. The fair value of Level 3 assets can only be estimated by using signifi￾cant assumptions as inputs to a valuation model.
Direct corporate loans are Level 3 assets.2
 There may be some excep￾tions when the direct loans are lightly traded, in which case they might be 
treated as Level 2. While ASC 820 gives broad discretion in setting fair value 
for Level 3 assets, there are several straightforward models available to price 
corporate loans. The key inputs are the most recent borrower financials, 
recent changes, and most likely a valuation model that maps the circum￾stances of the loan being valued to a pool of other loans with similar cir￾cumstances that have a credit rating. Pricing can then be discovered once a 
rating equivalent is agreed on. Importantly, asset managers develop written 
valuation policies that guide how it is valuing Level 3 assets and a compli￾ance function confirms that these policies are being consistently followed.
Common practice is for direct loans to be valued quarterly. Another, not 
dissimilar, valuation process is used for determining the value of liabilities 
if financing is used. NAV equals the fair value of assets minus the fair value 
of liabilities. It is also common for the asset manager to use an independent 
external valuation firm to value its Level 3 loans at least once a year with the 
loan manager setting values during the off quarters. Best practice is quar￾terly independent valuations, though these can be costly, and so managers 
generally weigh the net benefits of this practice to shareholders.
The quality of ASC 820 fair value protocols as they apply to Level 3 
assets and direct US middle market corporate loans in particular can be 
tested by comparing, in the aggregate, quarterly pricing for high-yield bonds 
and broadly syndicated bank loans, both of which are Level 2 assets, with 
the fair value determination of direct loans captured by the CDLI. More 
granular comparisons of individual loans or groups of loans with equiva￾lent Level 2 loans might reach different conclusions, but the comparison in 
Exhibit 18.1 between direct loan values and traded high-yield bonds and 
bank loans should provide guidance about the pricing behavior and accu￾racy of diversified loan portfolios over time.
2
Level 3 assets comprised 91% of total BDC assets on March 31, 2022.Loan Valuation 155
Quarter valuations for the three indexes are plotted in Exhibit 18.1. 
Casual inspection suggests that pricing for direct loans, as measured by the 
CDLI, tracks the short-term directions of high-yield bonds and bank loans, 
and for the most part direct loan values lie between their Level 2 counter￾parts. The exceptions are the 2008 financial crisis and, to a lesser extent, the 
2015–2016 oil crisis and 2020 COVID crisis. The valuation divergence for 
direct loans during the oil crisis was likely due to the difference in energy 
sector weights between the CDLI, where energy represented less than 5% of 
the Index, and high-yield bonds and bank loans, where energy represented 
well over 10% of those indexes. The valuation divergence for the GFC and 
COVID crisis has to do with the fact that high-yield bonds and leveraged 
loans are publicly traded, and providers of liquidity to sellers demand a 
premium yield (lower price) for supplying that liquidity. This public market 
feature, not present in the private markets, causes greater price volatility for 
high-yield bonds and leveraged loans.
The markedly greater divergence between direct loans and publicly 
traded high-yield bonds and loans during the GFC had another element not 
present during COVID. At December 31, 2018, there was a 25-point differ￾ence in valuation, which surely did not originate from changing fundamen￾tals of the underlying companies across the three indexes. At the time, liquid 
high-yield bonds and loans were popular collateral in structured vehicles 
100.30 100.47
97.12
97.35
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Loan or Bond Price, Direct Loan “Fair Value” (Cost = 100) 
CDLI “Fair Value”
Bloomberg High Yield Bond Price
S&P/LSTA U.S. Leveraged Loan 100 Price
Sep-04
Dec-05
Mar-07
Jun-08
Sep-09
Dec-10
Mar-12
Jun-13
Sep-14
Dec-15
Mar-17
Jun-18
Sep-19
Dec-20
Mar-22
EXHIBIT 18.1 Price comparison for direct loans, high-yield bonds, and bank loans, 
March 2004 to March 2022.156 PRIVATE DEBT
carrying high leverage. The unwinding of these vehicles caused selling pres￾sure and lower prices on Level 2 risky assets that did not affect direct loans, 
which were held in banks, insurance companies, and BDCs. Effectively, 
direct loan values were set to reflect ASC 820 orderly transaction pricing 
rather than the market dislocation pricing occurring at the time. It is inter￾esting that in a post-GFC update the FASB included in its Level 3 pricing 
guidance the concept of risk adjustment in pricing when there is significant 
measurement uncertainty. However, this guidance has apparently not come 
into play in subsequent downturns.
Direct loan valuations in Exhibit 18.1 also appear less volatile, apart 
from the 2008 financial crisis. This lower volatility is also reflected in the 
calculation of return volatility reported in Exhibit 3.1 where direct loans 
had a 3.63% standard deviation compared to 9.54% for the S&P/LSTA 
Leveraged Loan Index and 10.56% for the Bloomberg High Yield Bond 
Index. Direct middle market loans in fact may be less volatile than these 
publicly traded bank loans and bonds. But an alternative explanation could 
be that the Level 3 valuation process must somehow be flawed and that 
those setting fair value are not doing so conditioned only on information 
as of the valuation date but also implicitly take account of past prices and 
future expectations. If true, this creates a smoothing of prices over time, 
lowering the measured standard deviation of return.
A test for the presence of smoothing would be a positive finding of 
serial correlation in direct lending returns. Serial correlation measures the 
correlation of returns with returns’ prior periods. If there is no smoothing, 
serial correlation equals zero. This is the ideal random walk world, where 
past prices do not influence current or future prices. If serial correlation is 
positive and equal to 0.50, for example, it means that past prices do explain 
current pricing to a degree equal to 25% (equal to 0.502
).
Returns can also be found to have correlation not only with the immedi￾ate prior quarterly return but also quarterly returns extending back in time. 
A common manifestation of this effect used to occur in private real estate and 
private equity returns where serial correlation persisted up to a four-quarter 
lag. This produced significant smoothing in returns, causing risk calculations 
based on these returns to be understated. The cause of the serial correlation 
in these smoothed returns was intermittent independent valuations, mostly 
annually, without the rigorous guidelines of ASC 820. Since the GFC the integ￾rity of valuations has become a greater priority for all private asset classes.
The integrity of direct loan valuations can be tested by measuring 
serial correlations of various time lags for direct lending quarterly returns. Loan Valuation 157
Quarterly CDLI price returns, not total returns, are used because valuation 
impacts change in price but not income. The CDLI quarterly price return 
equals realized plus unrealized capital gains (losses) divided by NAV.
Serial correlations in CDLI price returns equal to 0.40, 0.21, 0.00, and 
−0.02 are found for one-quarter lag, two-quarter lag, three-quarter lag, 
and four-quarter lag, respectively. In a regression where the CDLI quarterly 
price return is the dependent variable and each of the four prior quarter 
price returns are independent variables, only the immediate prior quarter 
shows statistical significance with a t-statistic equal to 3.06. Keeping only 
the immediate prior quarter price return as the only independent variable 
increases the t-statistic to 3.55 with a beta coefficient equal to 0.40 and an 
R-squared equal to 0.16. It is interesting to compare the serial correlation 
for CDLI price returns with the Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 
100 Index price returns. For the same time period, positive serial correlation 
also exists for the Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 Index price 
returns with a beta coefficient equal to 0.15, but the correlation equals only 
0.15 and the t-statistic equals 1.26, which is not statistically significant. 
Therefore, while some short-term price smoothing exists within private 
direct lending, it is short-lived (one quarter), represents a minor percentage 
of the return (16%), and is mitigated by the existence of positive serial cor￾relation in traded leveraged loans as well.
These measurements suggest modest and short-lived smoothing in 
direct lending valuations. Modest is understood as a correlation equal to 
0.40, meaning that the prior quarter explains only 16% (equal to 0.402
) of 
the current quarter valuation. Short-lived is understood as a t-statistic that 
is only statistically significant for the immediate prior quarter. This observa￾tion applies to the CDLI, a proxy for direct lending overall. Individual direct 
lender returns may display higher, lower, or no serial correlation, depending 
on their specific valuation process.
The 3.63% measured risk for the CDLI in Exhibit 3.1 can be revised 
knowing the NAVs on which the returns are calculated display some 
smoothing. Using the 0.40 serial correlation as input, the CDLI risk level 
can be mathematically unsmoothed to a value equal to 4.62%, or 1.38× 
the measured standard deviation. This unsmoothing adjustment is relatively 
small but can become important in applications involving leverage or where 
investors trade on NAV. It can be shown mathematically as well that if loan 
returns have the appearance of smoothing in the manner described, then the 
valuation error, measured by standard deviation, in any one quarter, equals 
plus or minus 0.52% (52 basis points).158 PRIVATE DEBT
SENIOR VERSUS SUBORDINATED LOAN PRICING
CDLI pricing in Exhibit 18.1 is decomposed in Exhibit 18.2 into three com￾ponents by seniority: senior secured, subordinated, and other.
Exhibit 18.2 takes a closer look at middle market loan values by group￾ing loans into senior and subordinated subsets to better understand pricing 
and volatility associated with credit seniority. Loan values for each subset 
are plotted from the 2004 CDLI inception. The heavy line represents the 
asset-weighted average price for senior loans (including unitranche) and 
the lighter line represents the same for second lien and subordinated loans. 
The dashed line represents the asset-weighted price for an “Other” category, 
which includes equity-related holdings (equity, warrant, CLO equity, other) 
within CDLI that are sometimes attached to middle market loans.
Clear valuation differences exist between senior and subordinated mid￾dle market loans within the CDLI. Senior loans are less volatile and hold 
their value better in down markets compared to subordinated loans. These 
fair value changes also inform risk calculations. The standard deviation of 
return (excluding interest income) measures 2.94% for senior loans and 
5.20% for subordinated loans. The standard deviation of the equity-related 
“Other” category measures 9.51%, much closer to the 16.58% standard 
deviation of the Russell 3000 Index.
0.86 
0.99
0.77
0.97
1.11
 0.75
 0.80
 0.85
 0.90
 0.95
 1.00
 1.05
 1.10
 1.15
 1.20
Par Value = 1.00
Senior Fair Value/Cost Value
Subordinated Fair Value/Cost Value
Other Fair Value/Cost Value
Sep-04
Dec-05
Mar-07
Jun-08
Sep-09
Dec-10
Mar-12
Jun-13
Sep-14
Dec-15
Mar-17
Jun-18
Sep-19
Dec-20
Mar-22
EXHIBIT 18.2 Comparison of fair value versus cost (principal) value for senior and 
subordinated loans within the CDLI, September 2004 to March 2022.Loan Valuation 159
VALUING DIRECT MIDDLE MARKET LOANS USING 
STATISTICAL METHODS
Independent valuation firms and asset managers value direct loans quar￾terly by either comparing prices of loans with similar characteristics (loan￾to-value, industry, EBITDA growth, etc.) or modeling future cash flows 
adjusted for the probability of default and likely recovery. The uniqueness 
of each loan can make this an arduous and expensive task.
It can be shown that valuing middle market loans in the aggregate, or 
some large subgroup of loans, can be achieved through statistical techniques 
with reasonably high accuracy, using a broad index of liquid loans as the 
source of price discovery for illiquid middle market loans. Exhibit  18.3 
shows the statistical relationship between prices for senior-only and subor￾dinated middle market loans with prices for the Morningstar LSTA US Lev￾eraged Loan 100 Index using quarterly data for the 2005 to March 2022 
time period.
EXHIBIT 18.3 Price relationship between middle market loans and liquid leveraged 
loans.160 PRIVATE DEBT
The quarterly price for the Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 
100 Index is used as the independent variable in Exhibit 18.3 while the quar￾terly asset-weighted prices for senior loans and subordinated loans from the 
CDLI are used as separate dependent variables. Quarterly markers identify 
pairings of senior or subordinated middle market loan prices with the quar￾terly price for the Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 Index. The 
regression lines and regression results in Exhibit 18.3 define the historical 
price relationship between private and public loans. For both regression 
lines, the R-squared figures of 0.85 and 0.83 are very high for direct senior 
loans and subordinated loans, respectively.
Second, the slope coefficients, or betas, between senior and subordi￾nated loan prices and the Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 prices 
are different and in the expected direction. Senior middle market loans have 
0.40 beta to leveraged loans while subordinated loans have a 0.70 beta to 
leveraged loans. Again, the betas are well less than 1.00 because middle mar￾ket loans do not provide the liquidity to investors that leveraged loans do. 
The higher 0.70 beta for subordinated loans reflects their greater sensitivity 
to general economic risks, both equity and credit.
The statistical analysis presented in this chapter can be refined, of course, 
but the point is that valuations of diversified direct loan portfolios possess 
links to the broadly syndicated leveraged loan market that can be very use￾ful when intra-quarter price discovery is needed. Diversification matters for 
valuation because individual loan price estimation errors will cancel out in 
an unbiased way the greater the number of individual loans in the portfo￾lio. In fact, any error in the valuation of a portfolio of loans will fall by the 
reciprocal of square root of the number of loans in a portfolio, if valuations 
of individual loans are truly independent of each other. For example, say the 
average valuation error on an individual loan is a consequential plus or minus 
3% of its true value. For a portfolio of 30 loans, the valuation error for the 
overall portfolio drops to 0.5%. For a portfolio of 1,000 loans the valuation 
error drops to 0.1%, an error rate that is at the threshold for immaterial in 
fund accounting.CHAPTER 19
161
I
nvestors continue to inquire about fees and the value proposition offered 
by active management, particularly for the higher fees found in alternative 
investments. This chapter updates fee data on investment services for middle 
market corporate direct lending, identifies unique features found in direct 
lending fees, presents an apples-to-apples fee measurement protocol to bet￾ter compare managers who have different fee structures, and, finally, gives 
statistical results that attempt to explain why some managers might reason￾ably have higher or lower fees compared to the average.
Fee, expense, and portfolio information was collected from 49 direct 
lending managers who collectively manage $541 billion in direct lending 
assets as of September 31, 2021, and offer limited partnership interests in 
private partnerships on which our fee analysis is based. Portfolio informa￾tion includes use of portfolio leverage, loan seniority, borrower size, and 
allocations to nonsponsored borrowers, all characteristics found to explain 
differences in loan yields, and which may also explain fee differences as well. 
While the 49 funds examined are not identical, they are substantially similar 
in their focus on middle market lending as an investment strategy with the 
majority of capital provided by institutional investors.
Exhibit 19.1 provides results from our updated direct lending fee survey 
covering data collected during the fourth quarter of 2021. Fees are broken 
down into management (column 1) and incentive (columns 4 and 5). Manage￾ment and incentive fees are combined to report total fees (columns 6 and 8).
A single set of loan assumptions underlie the results. Unlevered mid￾dle market loan yields, including original issue discount (OID) and other 
prepayment fees,1
 are assumed to equal 7.75% with a 0.50% annual 
credit loss ratio. Our research suggests these gross yield and loss rates 
are consistent with the study group whose portfolio of middle market 
loans are 89% senior, 78% sponsor-backed, with a $50 million EBITDA 
Investment Fees
1
OID and fees paid to lenders from early prepayment of principal.162 PRIVATE DEBT
borrower size. Additionally, borrowing costs are assumed to equal 2.80% 
and administrative and other costs equal 0.42%, both consistent with the 
characteristics for the study group of direct lenders.
MANAGEMENT FEES
Column 1 in Exhibit 18.1 reports survey results for management fees. Direct 
lending management fees are most often charged on invested, not committed, 
assets, and all 49 direct lending managers in our survey charge on invested 
assets. Private equity managers almost universally charge fees on committed 
assets during a fund’s investment period. This difference is likely explained 
by legacy practices, more robust deal flow, shorter investment periods, and a 
shorter deal life compared to private equity. Fees on invested assets reduces 
both overall fees and mitigates or eliminates the J-curve phenomena.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)
Mgmt. 
Fee Rate 
(%) Leverage
Effective 
Mgmt. 
Fee on 
NAV (%)
Carried 
Interest 
(%)
Preferred 
Return 
(%)
Total 
Fees on 
NAV 
(%)
Gross 
Yield 
(%)
Total 
Fees as 
% of 
Gross 
Yield
Average 1.10 1.07× 1.89 13.1 6.1 3.14 12.01 26
Asset￾Weighted
1.07 1.25× 1.99 12.9 6.3 3.34 12.83 26
GAV Average 1.03 1.18× 2.15 12.1 5.8 3.35 12.51 27
NAV Average 1.25 0.79× 1.25 15.3 6.6 2.63 10.76 25
10th Percentile 1.50 1.50× 2.53 17.5 7.0 4.15 13.93 32
25th Percentile 1.25 1.25× 2.25 15.0 7.0 3.47 12.81 30
50th Percentile 1.00 1.00× 1.91 15.0 7.0 2.97 11.70 26
75th Percentile 1.00 1.00× 1.50 12.0 6.0 2.54 11.70 24
90th Percentile 0.79 0.46× 1.12 10.0 5.0 2.20 9.30 20
10th–90th 
Range
0.71 1.04× 1.41 7.50 2.0 1.95 4.63 12
EXHIBIT 19.1 Direct lender fees.
NAV = net asset value (investor capital only).
GAV = gross asset value (investor capital + assets financed through borrowings).Investment Fees 163
Of the direct lending managers, 35 of the 49 (71%) charge fees on 
gross assets (GAV)2
 while the remaining 14 managers base their manage￾ment fees on net assets (NAV). Outside direct lending, other forms of struc￾tured finance (such as CLOs), and some real estate structures, we seldom 
find management fees charged on gross assets. The argument for charging 
fees on gross assets is that the resources required of a manager to deploy 
assets is the same regardless of whether those assets are invested or lev￾ered, and, in fact, additional resources may be required to maintain the 
leverage. Weighted by assets, 75% charge management fees on GAV and 
25% on NAV.
Column 1 shows considerable variability in management fees, only a 
fraction of which is explained by whether fees are charged on net or gross 
assets. The 10th–90th percentile fee range equals 0.71%, which is a very 
meaningful difference for any asset class.
LEVERAGE
Column 2 reports leverage statistics for the survey group. Most manag￾ers use leverage in their private funds (only four do not) with an aver￾age equal to 1.07×.3
 Not surprisingly, managers who charge management 
fees on gross assets use more leverage than those that do not. However, 
those same managers have a lower average management fee (column 1, 
rows 3 and 4).
EFFECTIVE MANAGEMENT FEE
Column 3 adjusts the headline fee in column 1 and expresses fees as a 
percentage of net assets (NAV). Average management fees increase from 
1.10% to 1.89% of net assets due to some managers charging fees on lev￾ered assets (GAV). Of course, for them, the stated average 1.03% manage￾ment fee on GAV becomes 2.15% as a percentage of net assets.
2
Gross assets (GAV) include both investor capital (NAV) plus assets from leverage 
(borrowings).
3
Leverage is expressed as a multiple of net assets (NAV). A value equal to 1.07× 
means that the private fund uses borrowings equal to 1.07  multiplied by its net 
assets, for a gross asset value equal to 2.07 multiplied by net assets.164 PRIVATE DEBT
CARRIED INTEREST
Column 4 reports carried interest statistics for private debt funds. The vast 
majority of managers in the survey charge an incentive fee. The average 
incentive fee equals 13.1%, which is well below the ubiquitous 20% incen￾tive fee found in private equity, with 10% and 15% incentive fees being the 
two most commonly found. As might be expected, managers who charge 
management fees on gross assets tend to have lower incentive fees than those 
charging management fees on net assets, at 12.1% versus 15.3%, respectively.
PREFERRED RETURN
The average preferred return equals 6.1%. This is lower than the typical pre￾ferred return of 8% for private equity, likely reflecting lower return expec￾tations for direct lending. In almost all cases direct lending funds require a 
100% catch-up after the preferred return is achieved. Private equity funds 
generally apply a 50% catch-up, which is more investor friendly.
TOTAL FEES ON NAV
Direct comparisons of fees can be difficult with the variety in structures and 
use of leverage. Therefore, we create a single fee measure in column 6 that 
represents the sum of asset fees and incentive fees, as a percentage of net 
asset value. We calculate total fees on NAV by averaging combined manage￾ment and incentive fees as a percentage of NAV across managers. The aver￾age direct lending manager imposes a combined fee equal to 3.14% of net 
assets. The average gross of fee expected return equals 12.01%.
TOTAL FEES AS PERCENTAGE OF GROSS INCOME
Column 7 looks at the proportion of gross return that is paid to managers 
either through management or incentive fees. The 26% average is not mate￾rially different from what is found in private equity.
FACTORS EXPLAINING FEE VARIATION
A significant proportion of manager fee variation can be explained statisti￾cally by four factors. Leverage is the dominant factor explaining higher fees; 
explaining lower fees are size of borrower, allocation to senior loans, and 
allocation to sponsor-backed borrowers.Investment Fees 165
In addition to these management fees, the survey showed direct lending 
private partnerships charged an additional 0.42% of NAV in nonmanage￾ment expenses, including administrative costs, custody, professional fees, and 
other costs. Together with management fees, total fees and expenses for direct 
lending private partnerships are found to equal 3.56% of net asset value.
COMPARISONS TO BDC FEES
Fees are higher for BDCs when compared to private partnerships. The all-in 
fee of 3.56% of NAV found for private partnerships compares to 4.79% 
for BDCs, a significant 1.23% difference.4
 The higher fee for BDCs is not 
explained by greater leverage. The asset-weighted average leverage for pri￾vate partnerships equals 1.25×, as reported in Exhibit 18.1, which is greater 
than the 1.09× asset-weighted average leverage for BDCs. Corrected for the 
difference in leverage, the 1.23% fee difference would be higher.
Several reasons explain the higher fees for BDCs. BDC management fee 
rates are slightly higher compared to private partnerships, but importantly, 
those rates are applied to gross assets for virtually all BDCs but only 70% 
of private partnerships charge management fees on gross assets. The 1.99% 
effective management fee on net private partnership assets compares to 
2.35% for BDCs. Second, BDC incentive fees average 16.9% compared to 
12.9% for private partnerships. This difference in incentive fee rate causes 
BDCs to charge roughly 59 basis points more on net assets compared to 
private partnerships. Finally, BDC administrative costs are higher, averaging 
70 basis points on net assets compared to 42 basis points for private part￾nerships. Summing the higher BDC management fees (0.36%), the higher 
incentive fees (0.59%), and the higher administrative costs (0.28%) equals 
1.23%, the all-in difference between BDC and private partnership fees.
The recent success of stay-private BDCs is based in part on bringing 
down fees. Several BDC launches have significantly cut fees in hopes of 
rapid fundraising.
DIRECT LENDING FEES AND ALIGNMENT OF INTEREST
Investors in direct lending should be aware of three issues with the fee struc￾tures common to private partnerships and BDCs that may cause the finan￾cial interests of managers and investors to part.
4
Asset-weighted annualized fees paid over the previous three years ending March 31, 
2022, to all 87 publicly traded and private nontraded BDCs whose loan assets com￾prise the CDLI.166 PRIVATE DEBT
■ The first is charging incentive fees on interest income, the primary 
source of private debt return that reflects payment to the lender for 
taking credit risk. There is no reason for incentive fees to be earned on 
earnings that reflect the return to beta, in this case credit risk. Further, 
such a structure is only going to incentivize the lender to take more 
credit risk so as to get greater yield and, hence, incentive fees. Better 
that the lender receives incentive compensation for avoiding or mini￾mizing losses, though unfortunately such fee structures are rare. What 
is worse is BDCs typically have separate incentive fees for income and 
gains (losses). This means BDC lenders potentially can incur damaging 
credit losses and still collect an incentive fee on income.
■ Second is the majority of lenders charge fees on gross assets rather than 
net assets. This gives the lender an incentive to prioritize leverage to 
maximize management fees, doubling the amount for the average man￾ager. Similar to (1), the incentive is to take risk.
■ Third is lender incentive fees generally have a low hurdle rate, less than 
unlevered loan yields, with a 100% catch-up after meeting the hurdle. 
In private equity the catch-up generally equals 50%. This again encour￾ages the lender to maximize yield sufficient to earn the entire catch-up 
and nothing more. Such a severe fee step up and step down can lead 
lenders to make decisions that are not in the investor’s interest.
Fortunately, direct lending fee levels and structure are moving in the 
right direction and some individual lenders are offering attractive terms to 
their investors.
.CHAPTER 20
167
T
oday, virtually all institutional investors follow the same four-step pro￾cess when constructing a multi-asset portfolio. Step one is to identify 
asset classes that might be considered as part of a multi-asset portfolio. Gen￾erally, these asset classes have positive long-term real returns. Other asset 
class factors considered are short-term return volatility, correlation to other 
asset classes, liquidity, and market size. Step two is adopting a benchmark 
index for each asset class that will represent it both in the asset allocation 
and portfolio monitoring processes. The third step is selecting a target mix 
of asset classes that will comprise a portfolio that best meets client objec￾tives. And the final step is structuring/selecting securities or funds that will 
constitute each asset class with the objective of mirroring or exceeding the 
benchmark index in some beneficial way. Sounds straightforward, but inves￾tors often encounter frustrations in implementing this process. This chapter 
focuses on how private debt has worked its way into the institutional multi￾asset mainstream and what the challenges have been.
DIRECT LENDING BENCHMARKS
Investors, as fiduciaries, require a means to measure the performance of 
managers to whom investment discretion is being given and fees paid. With 
private assets portfolios there are three general approaches to benchmark 
selection, none of which is ideal.
The first option is to find the publicly traded index that is most repre￾sentative of the private asset portfolio in question. For private real estate 
this is a REIT index. For private equity it’s the Russell 3000 Index or simi￾lar index. The closest public equivalent index for corporate direct lending 
is either the Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 Index or Credit 
Suisse Leveraged Loan Index. Private assets can generally outperform these 
public equivalent indexes over longer periods of time but over the short 
Portfolio Construction168 PRIVATE DEBT
term there can be wide discrepancies between the private asset class and the 
public index. It becomes difficult to tell whether wide differences are attrib￾utable to the manager(s) selected or the failure of the public benchmark to 
adequately capture private asset characteristics that causes performance to 
diverge from the public benchmark.
The second option is to use performance data from vendors that pro￾duce return universes of similar funds and composites from data collected 
on individual funds. Useful and comprehensive fund universe data is avail￾able for most private equity and real estate portfolios, but not yet for pri￾vate debt until very recently. Cambridge Associates, Burgiss, and Prequin are 
three commercial vendors that now provide private debt return universes. 
But the problem with universes of comparable funds is that the data col￾lection process can be subject to selection biases that may overstate actual 
achievable returns. As well, composite returns based on the databases may 
not reflect the specific investment strategy being followed by the investor. 
Therefore, these universe databases often lack information on underlying 
company holdings that would help define an appropriate benchmark for 
portfolio construction purposes.
The third option is an index constructed of actual private securities. 
A good example is the NCREIF Property Index1
 (NPI), which consists of 
thousands of commercial real estate properties across the United States and 
whose data are collected quarterly and consolidated into industry-wide 
information and index returns. Unfortunately, there is no equivalent data￾base and index available for private equity. The CDLI is constructed in the 
same way as the NPI except the source of its data is public filings while 
NPI data are submitted to NCREIF by fund managers. The NPI and CDLI 
are good performance comparisons with actual portfolios, except both the 
NPI and CDLI are before all fees and expenses and private asset managers 
almost always report performance net of fees and expenses, making perfor￾mance comparisons accurate only if adjustments for fees are made.
THE IMPORTANCE OF A BENCHMARK
Exhibit 20.1 examines institutional asset class performance as compared to 
commonly used benchmarks. The distribution of asset class returns cover￾ing the ten-year period ending June 30, 2021, is shown across seven major 
asset classes used by 65 state pension systems. Pension assets for these 
1
National Counsel of Real Estate Investment Fiduciaries.7.7%
3.1%
4.9% 5.4%
6.7%
7.9%
12.1%
13.0%
10.1%
5.5%
7.4% 8.0%
9.7%
11.4%
14.8%
18.5%
9.1%
4.0%
6.0% 6.4%
7.4%
10.0%
14.1%
15.2%
8.1%
3.4%
4.8% 5.4%
9.5% 8.8%
14.7%
16.4%
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
Total Fund
(65)
US Bonds
(54)
Hedge Funds
(11)
Non-US
Stocks (37)
Credit/
Private Debt
(8)
Real Estate
(30)
US Stocks
(37)
Private Equity
(39)
10-Year Return ending June 30, 2021
High (10th Percentile)
Low (90th Percentile)
Median
Benchmark
EXHIBIT 20.1 Ten-year state pension fund returns ending June 30, 2021, total fund and by asset class.
16965 systems total over $3.5 trillion and are a good representation of how 
institutional capital is managed.2
 Not all 65 state pensions that reported 
ten-year total fund returns ended June 30, 2021, also reported all asset class 
returns. The number of state funds represented in each asset class distribu￾tion is located below the asset class labels along the horizontal axis.
The arrows in Exhibit 20.1 display the range of individual state pension 
returns from low (the 90th percentile return) to high (the 10th percentile 
return) along with their values. Median returns are shown on the right with 
a dash mark depicting where within the arrow the value falls. Finally, a black 
dot is shown for each asset class identifying the benchmark commonly used 
for each asset class. The benchmark return is identified by the circled value 
to the left of the arrow.
Exhibit 20.2 shows additional information, including the benchmarks 
used for each asset class and the 10th–90th mid-range return spread within 
each asset class. This spread is useful in understanding the extent to which 
investment professionals constructing asset class portfolios track bench￾mark returns.
Several observations that should be comforting to investors come from 
Exhibits 20.1 and 20.2. The first is that higher risk asset classes show higher 
return. Bonds have the lowest return and the lowest risk. Stocks have the 
highest return and highest risk among liquid asset classes. The performance 
of non-US stocks is probably a disappointment over the ten-year period, but 
when combined with US stocks, which many argue is more appropriate, the 
global performance of stocks (~10%) is about where it is expected to be.
The second observation is that private asset classes have performed 
better than public asset classes. Private equity achieved the highest return, 
with a 15.18% median return among state pensions, which was greater 
than the 14.10% and 6.45% median returns for public US and non-US 
stocks, respectively. Private equity is generally distributed about 70% to US 
partnerships and 30% to non-US partnerships, so an equivalent weighted 
public stock equivalent would be 11.81%.3
 Consequently, state pensions 
earned a return that was 3.36% (15.18% minus 11.81%) higher on their 
private equity than they would otherwise have earned on their public 
equity. It is not surprising these numbers are driving state pensions to allo￾cate more assets to private equity.
Private real estate returned 10.04% for the ten-year period and was 
the next highest returning private asset class, as most might expect. Most 
170 PRIVATE DEBT
2
Data is sourced from state pension Annual Comprehensive Financial Reports 
(ACFRs).
3
Equals 0.7 × 14.10% + 0.3 × 6.45%.172 PRIVATE DEBT
state pensions do not allocate much, if any, to public REITs because of their 
smaller size and very high volatility. For the same ten-year period, REITs, 
as measured by the FTSE NAREIT Equity REIT Index, returned 9.34%, 
which was less than what state pensions earned on the private real estate 
portfolios.
Our third observation relates to private debt, only now are there a 
sufficient number of public funds allocating directly to private debt with 
ten-year track records that some conclusions can be drawn. Institutional 
investors use terms such as credit, private credit, or private debt to describe 
a newly forming asset class. The composition of most of these allocations 
is a mix of direct lending and opportunistic credit, though some inves￾tors also include smaller allocations to public high-yield bonds, broadly 
syndicated loans, and distressed debt. There are now eight state pension 
systems with dedicated policy allocations to this asset class with ten-year 
track records.
Selecting a benchmark for a dedicated credit asset class has been a chal￾lenge for institutional investors. Thus far, the majority have chosen to use 
publicly traded benchmarks such as the Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged 
Loan 100 Index or the Bloomberg High Yield Corporate Bond Index plus 
a 1–2% return premium. This approach will generally produce low bench￾mark returns as compared to the likely performance of private debt. For 
example, the Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 Index returned 
just 4.06% annualized over the ten-year period shown in Exhibit 20.1. This 
proposed benchmark would have fallen below all actual state pension pri￾vate debt returns even with a 2% return premium tacked on. Although an 
easy benchmark to beat if invested in private debt, a public credit index fails 
to represent the types of credit in virtually all private debt allocations.
The CDLI is shown as a benchmark in Exhibit 20.1. Its 9.5% annual￾ized return, while ranking high among actual private debt returns, is a better 
benchmark because of its representation. Should investors want to include 
some allocation to public credit with their credit allocations, a better bench￾mark scheme would be percentage allocations to CDLI and the Morningstar 
LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 Index.
The third observation is perhaps more unsettling to investors in alterna￾tive investments. Exhibit 20.2 reports the dispersion of individual state pen￾sion asset class outcomes, measured by the 10th–90th mid-range statistic, 
is more pronounced in private asset classes than public asset classes. This 
may suggest institutional investors are having a much harder time deciding 
how to construct the private portfolios that they want to allocate to from a 
top-down asset allocation perspective. Private debt allocations are equally 
vulnerable to this phenomenon, with a 3.01% mid-range value.Portfolio Construction 173
The distribution of returns for public asset classes, measured by the 10th–
90th mid-range, is about the same: 2.68% for US stocks, 2.55% for non-US 
stocks, and 2.43% for US bonds. Portfolio construction for all three of these 
asset classes involve the wide use of indexing or active risk diversification 
brought by using multiple managers that individually are well diversified and 
focused on benchmark risk, the result of returns varying significantly from 
benchmark returns. The comparatively tight dispersion in returns across 
these three asset classes reflects a portfolio construction process among insti￾tutional investors that is, for the most part, very tightly controlled and driven 
by the portfolio construction of the targeted benchmark index.
The ten-year returns for hedge funds are also tightly dispersed with 
a 2.56% mid-range similar to public asset classes. The low dispersion for 
hedge funds may be attributable to a well-established and accepted bench￾mark, the HFRI Fund-of-Funds Index.
Exhibits 20.1 and 20.2 suggest that institutional investors need to rec￾ognize that portfolio construction within private asset classes can be as 
important as the amounts allocated to these asset classes. In short, portfolio 
construction may be more important than asset allocation when it comes to 
private assets.
And regarding the emerging private debt asset class, institutional inves￾tors will likely migrate benchmarks like the CDLI that capture returns of 
private debt investments rather than an often disconnected public index 
alternative.
THE CDLI AS A PRIVATE DEBT BENCHMARK
The challenges to finding a single benchmark that serve both objectives of 
performance measurement comparison and portfolio construction may be 
too great for private debt generally and corporate direct lending specifically. 
The CDLI has the best chance, given its similarity in construction to the 
NPI and the general, though not unanimous, acceptance of that index as a 
benchmark for equity real estate allocations.
There are six characteristics of good benchmarks:4
■ Unambiguous
■ Investable
■ Measurable
4
Jeffrey V. Bailey, Thomas M. Richards, and David E. Tierney, “Benchmark Port￾folios and the Manager/Plan Sponsor Relationship,” Current Topics in Investment 
Management (Harper & Row, 1990).174 PRIVATE DEBT
■ Appropriate
■ Reflective of current investment opinions
■ Specified in advance
Unambiguous means the securities and asset values in the index are 
known. The loan securities in the CDLI and their fair values are published 
quarterly in ten-Q/K SEC filings, thereby meeting this criterion. Other useful 
information included in the quarterly 10-Q/Ks includes specific borrower, 
industry classification, yields, and seniority.
Investable means the securities are available to be held as a passive 
investment if the investor wants to forgo active management. This criterion 
is not suited for private assets since it is the active manager who creates the 
security or loan in this case. However, the CDLI is composed of direct loans 
within BDCs, most of which are publicly traded and index funds of BDCs 
that exist for investors who choose that option. Conceptually, the CDLI is 
available as a passive investment option through a BDC index fund but the 
BDC index fund is much more volatile.
Measurable means a return on the benchmark can be calculated on a 
regular basis and within a reasonable time. The CDLI is published within 
three months after quarter-end. While not as timely as public indexes, which 
are updated at end of day, the timing of the CDLI is similar to the NPI and 
a full quarter ahead of the publication of most private fund universe data.
Appropriate means the index reflects the activity or investment style of 
the manager. The CDLI fits this criterion by the simple fact that it is com￾posed of the loans managers underwrite.
Reflective means the manager is knowledgeable of the securities in the 
index. Unlike public securities, where the assumption of perfect information 
creates market efficiency, the private markets are characterized by infor￾mation asymmetry where managers possess proprietary information on the 
securities they underwrite. However, the disclosure of the names of bor￾rowers in the CDLI provides all managers the opportunity to acquire infor￾mation about the borrower and participate in refinancings. Therefore, the 
CDLI meets the reflective requirement of a good benchmark to the closest 
extent available to a private benchmark.
Specified in advance means the benchmark is known to the manager in 
advance of the evaluation period. The CDLI meets this criterion with the 
only qualification being the three-month lag in reporting quarterly returns, 
but with the understanding that private asset reporting can’t be as continu￾ous as with publicly traded securities.
With the understanding that private asset benchmarks by their very 
nature can’t perfectly fit the criteria laid out for the ideal benchmark, the Portfolio Construction 175
CDLI meets five of the six criteria and falls short to a degree on invest￾ability because of its gross-of-fee calculation. The CDLI could be adjusted 
for fees, however, by deducting an appropriate fee rate. By contrast, an 
equivalent public benchmark, such as the Morningstar LSTA US Lever￾aged Loan 100  Index, falls short on the appropriate criterion, meaning 
the broadly syndicated loans within the Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged 
Loan 100 Index are not middle market loans that are appropriate securi￾ties for the direct loan manager’s portfolio. Fund universes and composite 
returns based on them fall short on the investability and reflective criteria. 
Some private funds in the universe are not available to investors and, there￾fore, not investable. Also, private fund holdings are considered intellectual 
property by the managers and not disclosed. Therefore, managers have no 
information about the underlying holdings against which they are being 
evaluated.
In summary, there is no ideal benchmark for direct lending, but this 
is also a problem that applies to all private asset classes. While the most 
common benchmark used currently is an equivalent public index, like the 
Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 Index or the Bloomberg High 
Yield Bond Index, more investors are shifting to the CDLI because it better 
represents what loan managers invest in.
DIVERSIFICATION
Some of the early investors in direct lending selected just one or a cou￾ple of direct lenders, perhaps to gain understanding of the asset class or as 
an opportunistic investment within private equity. Now that institutional 
investors are beginning to make larger and targeted allocations to private 
debt as an asset class, a more structured approach to portfolio construction 
is needed.
Leaving the benchmark choice aside, the presence of direct loan risk 
factors (Exhibit 11.1) and loan manager exposures to those risk factors 
(Exhibit 17.3) provide useful guidance for portfolio construction.
First is the recognition that no one loan manager can represent the US 
corporate middle market for direct loans. In fact, it is not even close. Not 
only does the average manager have too few loans but also each manager 
has different exposures to risk factors and premiums. Unless the fiduciary 
wants to provide long-term direction on what parts of the direct loan mar￾ket are most favorable—and they don’t—then a multiple-manager structure 
is an absolute requirement.176 PRIVATE DEBT
Regarding risk factor exposures, fiduciaries should target the aggregate 
exposures of the direct loan market, as represented by the CDLI, when they 
are selecting direct lenders as a group. Markets tend toward efficiency, even 
private ones, and aggregate characteristics are more likely to produce the 
best risk-adjusted returns. Given the more focused tendencies of individual 
loan managers as reported in Exhibit 17.3, it will likely take five or more 
direct lenders to achieve a portfolio that sufficiently captures the variety in 
middle market loans.
Second is the recognition that the lack of diversification among man￾agers will likely expose the overall portfolio to other factor risks that are 
diversifiable with likely no sacrifice in long-term return. These include 
sponsor risk and industry risk. Approximately 75% or more of borrow￾ers are sponsored-backed. In a typical direct lender profile, sponsor-backed 
loans are not broadly diversified across private equity firms but instead one 
or a few firms represent an outsized percentage of loans originated by the 
direct lender. By itself, this is not necessarily a bad thing as the lender may 
have a very good relationship with one or two private equity firms that 
result in regular deal flow with benefits that can be passed along to inves￾tors. However, a portfolio consisting of only one or two direct lenders has 
a good chance of having excessive exposure to a few private equity firms. 
In effect, the investor ends up with not only direct lender manager risk but 
also private equity manager risk. A portfolio with multiple direct lenders 
will diversify the private equity firm risk underlying the sponsor-backed 
loans made by the direct lenders.
The US corporate middle market is well diversified across industries. 
Investors will likely take on unnecessary and non-compensated risk by 
concentrating loans in one industry or subset of industries. That industry 
risk increases the probability of defaults. From a practical perspective, this 
was recently illustrated during the oil crisis in 2015 and 2016. A lender 
skilled at picking energy borrowers would still produce outsized real￾ized and unrealized losses because of the industry downturn, even though 
the lender’s borrower performed better when compared to the average 
energy borrower.
Exhibit  20.3 reports Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS) 
sector weights for direct corporate loans in the CDLI at March 31, 2022. 
One modification has been made to the sectors. An “Other” sector replaces 
the GICS Real Estate sector because the direct lending represents corpo￾rate, not real estate loans. The “Other” category captures mostly structured 
financial assets collateralized by corporate loans.
The pie chart in Exhibit 20.3 shows that the direct lending market is well 
diversified across GICS sectors. The largest sector is information technology Portfolio Construction 177
at 22% of total loan assets, with the next two largest sectors, industrials 
and health care, comprising 19% and 15%, respectively, of total loan assets.
Exhibit 20.4 provides GICS sector weights for the Russell 2000 Index 
of middle market and smaller company stocks, which should have industry 
weightings similar to direct middle market loans.
Russell 2000  Index sector weightings for stocks are very similar to 
the CDLI sector weightings for direct loans. Differences lie in two sectors. 
Financials represent 16% of the Russell 2000 Index and is one of its larg￾est sectors, while representing just 10% of the CDLI. This difference is 
likely explained by middle market banks not needing access to direct loans 
through the private markets when they have customer deposits to finance 
their investment activities. The second difference is the 8% weighting to real 
estate in the Russell 2000 Index and 2% weighting in CDLI. In the other 
direction, information technology represents 22% of the CDLI but a much 
lower 15% of the Russell 2000 Index.
Business Services
3%
Consumer Staples
3%
Energy
2%
Financials
10%
Health Care
15%
Industrials
19%
Other
4%
Information Technology
(i.e., business services)
22%
Consumer Discretionary
14%
Real Estate
2% Utilities
1%
Materials
2%
Telecomunication
Services
3%
EXHIBIT 20.3 CDLI industry weightings, March 31, 2022.178 PRIVATE DEBT
A well-constructed portfolio of direct loans should produce a diversified 
sector profile like that found in Exhibit 20.3. This is much more likely to be 
achieved when multiple managers are used because individual direct loan 
managers seldom have a portfolio of loans that is sector balanced. Unlike 
traditional stock and bond managers who can easily optimize portfolios 
to ensure sector diversification, direct lending managers have much greater 
difficulty creating sector weighting neutrality, even if they had a desire to 
do so. Consequently, investors need to consider the sector imbalances in the 
managers they select and actively pursue combinations of managers that 
achieve sector diversification.
Diversification is perhaps best measured non-statistically by the number 
of individual loans (credits) in the overall portfolio. The larger the num￾ber of credits, the more credit losses will approach and eventually equal 
market averages, in this case the realized credit losses for the CDLI and 
over 10,000 loan holdings. The investor reaches that extreme by hiring all 
80+ direct lenders represented in the CDLI. Obviously, executing on that 
strategy is administratively costly unless the investor builds a portfolio of 
Utilities
2%
Real Estate
8%
Consumer
Discretionary
10%
Consumer Staples
4%
Energy
6%
Financials
16%
Health Care
17%
Industrials
15%
Information Technology
(i.e., business services)
15%
Materials
4%
Telecomunication
Services
3%
EXHIBIT 20.4 Russell 2000 industry weightings, March 31, 2022.Portfolio Construction 179
publicly traded BDCs. A combined portfolio that held 250 to 500 individual 
credits would seem appropriate for an objective to achieve risk-adjusted 
returns at or above the CDLI. With leverage, the number of credits might 
be even greater.
The final factor is the level of confidence in the abilities of the direct 
lender, primarily to underwrite risk well and produce below-market credit 
losses. Qualitative factors and quantitative factors, such as those covered in 
Chapter 17, are important. Most institutional investors err on the side of 
more managers when constructing a portfolio and narrow the list over time 
as experience reveals a clearer picture of manager skill.
Top-performing institutional investors implement disciplined and diver￾sified portfolio construction techniques to asset classes. As allocations to 
direct lending and private debt increase, investors need to follow the same 
best practices for portfolio construction followed in other private asset 
classes. There is no single best answer, but having a good benchmark and 
guidelines to maintain diversification are necessary for favorable long￾term outcomes.CHAPTER 21
181
Previous chapters discussed the different dimensions of corporate direct 
lending. This chapter and Chapter 22 provide an institutional framework 
for assessing direct lending relative to other asset classes and determining 
the appropriate allocation to direct lending within an overall portfolio.
Somewhat surprisingly, the institutional approach to asset  allocation 
has not changed much since the 1980s. Prior to 1980, a centralized top￾down approach to asset allocation did not exist. Instead, institutional inves￾tors allocated assets to a few good balanced managers, who in turn made 
decisions as to how to allocate assets across different asset classes, which 
at that time were only a handful. Pensions, endowments, and foundations 
(collectively, fund sponsors) moved to a single allocator model in the 1980s 
because the balanced manager approach showed poor returns, charged high 
fees, and was not integrated with benefit obligations and spending rates. 
Consultants, who previously focused almost exclusively on manager selec￾tion, emerged to assist their institutional clients with asset allocation and 
asset-liability management.
With control of asset allocation, fund sponsors and their advisors fore￾cast long-term return and risk for individual asset classes, define an “effi￾cient frontier” of asset mixes that maximize return at different levels of 
risk, and select the asset mix from the efficient frontier that best fits the 
risk-taking desired by the fund sponsor. The efficient frontier portfolio that 
best matches the level of risk desired by the fund sponsor is called the opti￾mal portfolio, or more frequently, the policy asset mix, and becomes part of 
the fund sponsor’s investment policy statement. This process, known as an 
asset allocation study, is repeated every three to five years. Most asset alloca￾tion studies do not closely integrate liabilities into the selection of the policy 
asset mix except for corporate pension plans that have less tolerance for 
Expected Returns and Risks 
from Direct Lending182 PRIVATE DEBT
variability of required pension contributions. These plans have sought to 
eliminate changes in their unfunded liabilities by matching the interest rate 
risk (duration) of their assets with that of their liabilities, which typically is 
in the 9- to 12-year range.
The growth of corporate direct lending, or more broadly private debt, 
among institutional investors will partly depend on its defined role within 
the context of asset allocation studies. A critical step will be for investment 
consultants, who have great influence over asset  allocation decisions, to 
judge private debt as an investment that is sufficiently permanent, scalable, 
and unique in terms of possessing investment characteristics that are not 
otherwise incorporated in other mainstream asset classes already widely 
used in asset allocation studies. If this happens, private debt will become 
more widely used as a distinct asset class for asset allocation studies, and 
potentially a permanent fixture in policy asset mixes. That is now happen￾ing in earnest, as more and more of the largest US public pension systems 
are including private debt as a separate asset class within their policy asset 
mixes, at levels up to 20% of total assets and an average allocation equal 
to 6.39% for those pension funds that have a designated allocation to pri￾vate debt.1
In cases where private debt is not modeled by institutions as a sepa￾rate asset class, another factor that will affect the growth of its adoption 
is the choice of the broader asset class within which private debt is con￾sidered a subcategory. In some cases, private debt is included within a pri￾vate equity or private assets program. Since most institutions view private 
equity as a return-enhancing strategy, private debt, even though it may 
have superior risk-adjusted returns than private equity, might be viewed 
as having a drag on performance. This can have a particularly dampening 
effect on the demand for private debt in cases where investment staff receive 
performance-based compensation. This can work in the opposite way when 
private debt is included within a broader fixed income allocation. In these 
cases, private debt can significantly enhance the yield and return profile of 
a public fixed income portfolio, even alongside high-yield bonds and other 
non-investment grade debt exposure.
Chapter 8 presented the case for treating credit as a separate asset class. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide the inputs necessary to integrate 
private debt into an asset allocation study.
1
Cliffwater 2021 annual state pension study.Expected Returns and Risks from Direct Lending 183
EXPECTED RETURN
The following equation gives a simple and concise expression for determin￾ing expected return.
Expected Return = + Cash Yield Cash F low Growth C+ hange i n Valuation
 +Manager Alpha
The two variables in brackets represent the strategic component of 
return because they incorporate long-term asset class fundamentals, which 
returns will eventually mirror. The sum of current cash yield plus cash flow 
growth is generally referred to as the Gordon model. Change in valua￾tion measures asset price changes that would come about, for example, if 
price-earnings ratios changed, if the yield curve shifted up or down, or if 
overall credit spreads shifted. Valuation changes are viewed as sources of 
short-term volatility, with limited impact on long-term returns. Therefore, 
this component is generally not included in the expected return estimate 
used in asset allocation studies. Finally, manager alpha is the concept of 
managers creating idiosyncratic returns not attributable to the general 
market. Since manager alpha is highly variable and ephemeral, it gener￾ally has been industry practice not to include manager alpha in expected 
returns. The exception is for those asset classes that would otherwise not 
be considered for inclusion except for a significant, positive contribution 
from manager alpha.
There are two asset classes for which manager alpha is a significant 
contributor to expected returns, helping to drive allocations in a policy 
investment mix. The first is private equity. Allocators typically assume a 
return premium over public equity when developing their private equity 
expected returns, usually in the range of 3–5%. This premium might partly 
be attributable to a liquidity premium, in which case it is not alpha and 
would be reflected in an otherwise higher current cash yield compared to 
public stocks. The other source of the return premium is manager alpha, 
which could come from opportunistically buying companies below their 
intrinsic value or making improvements to the company’s revenue growth 
and/or profitability in ways unique to the manager. For most asset classes, 
the uncertainty in forecasting manager alpha is high because these markets 
are generally efficient, and manager alpha has not been found to be sig￾nificant and persistent over an extended period. Private equity has been an 
exception to this, where excess returns have been significant and persistent. 184 PRIVATE DEBT
For example, data from state pension systems covering the period from 
2000 to 2021 show private equity portfolio returns in aggregate earned net 
returns equal to 11.0%, annualized, which exceeded public equity returns 
by 4.1%, justifying an expected return premium in the 3–5% range.2
The second asset class where manager alpha is integral to its expected 
return is hedge funds. A 2–5% manager alpha is a typical range for mod￾eling hedge fund expected returns. Also, investors don’t generally think 
about cash yield and cash flow growth in the context of hedge funds. 
Instead, a forecast of equity beta gives a percentage level of participation 
in overall stock market cash yield and cash flow growth. For example, 
if hedge funds are expected to have an equity beta equal to 0.20, and if 
expected stock cash yield plus cash flow growth equals 7%, then hedge 
funds will be expected to derive a 1.4% return (0.20 × 7%) from its expo￾sure to stocks. The sum of 1.4% and the level of manager alpha the alloca￾tor selects equals the expected return for hedge funds.
This backdrop should be useful for developing an expected return for 
corporate direct lending that is consistent with how expected returns are 
developed for other asset classes in an asset allocation study.
Fortunately, developing expected returns for corporate direct lending is 
straightforward with a likely lower estimation error than most other asset 
classes. Despite this, there are several nuances to consider.
Using this expected return equation, a first try at forecasting cash yield 
might be either the current yield or yield-to-three-year takeout for the CDLI. 
The current yield on the CDLI is probably a better measure for calculating 
expected return because if NAV is at a premium or discount to principal value, 
it assumes no amortization, while yield-to-three-year takeout assumes a three￾year amortization window and, if used, would overstate long-term expected 
returns. The current yield on the CDLI was 7.77% on March 31, 2022.
An adjustment to cash yield might be for expected changes in short￾term rates over the ten-year forecasting period. Historically, short-term 
rates have tracked expected inflation, but on March 31, 2022, the three￾month Treasury bill was yielding just 0.48%, which was well below the 
2.47% expected inflation over subsequent ten years.3
 Depending on when 
T-bill yields rise,4
 an upward adjustment from the 7.77% March CDLI cur￾rent yield to an expected 9.76% ten-year CDLI current yield5
 is warranted 
because direct loan benchmark rates are effectively tied to T-bill yields.
2
“Long-Term Private Equity Performance: 2000 to 2021,” Stephen Nesbitt, 
Cliffwater LLC, June 13, 2022.
3
The ten-year break-even inflation rate on March 31 equaled 2.83%.
4
As of this writing (September 1, 2022), T-bill rates had already risen to 2.87%.
5
9.76% = 7.77% + (2.47% − 0.48%).Expected Returns and Risks from Direct Lending 185
Using the 9.76% adjusted CDLI current yield also assumes the risk pre￾miums within the corporate direct lending market will remain consistent 
with the premiums measured on March 31, 2022. While the current pre￾miums undoubtedly will move around over time, their current value will 
likely be an unbiased estimate of future premiums. Another approach could 
be to look at historical risk premiums or historical current yields for corpo￾rate direct lending and use those. The problem with this approach is that it 
ignores the starting point, to which expected returns can be very sensitive, 
even over ten-year periods.
The second component of expected return—cash flow growth—is likely 
a negative number for direct lending and should be set to equal expected 
realized credit losses over the ten-year forecasting period. The 1.08% annual 
rate in realized credit losses should be a good first approximation of future 
expected credit losses. Lower credit losses might be used if the forecast was 
based on the presumed selection of more-skilled managers.
Finally, change in valuation is generally ignored for asset  allocation 
studies. It is also less important for middle market direct lending where fun￾damentals and valuations are more stable and, unlike stock price-earnings 
ratios, valuations are not subject to wide swings. Manager alpha can also 
be ignored for expected return. CDLI returns and fundamentals reflect the 
weighted average efforts of the underlying managers, and if manager alpha 
exists, it is already embedded into cash yield and cash flow growth.
Exhibit 21.1 provides a calculation for ten-year return forecasts for cor￾porate direct lending that would be suitable inputs into present-day institu￾tional asset allocation studies. Two prospective portfolios are modeled. The 
first column represents an unlevered direct lending portfolio, and the second 
column represents a typical 1.00× levered portfolio.
The assumptions in lines 1 to 8 are intended to mirror the typical invest￾ment characteristics and terms for a diversified direct lending portfolio. 
However, actual direct lending portfolio specifications and portfolio size 
can alter terms. Consequently, the calculations in Exhibit 21.1 should be 
viewed as representative for corporate direct lending on March 31, 2022. 
That said, direct lending returns have been remarkably stable over time, evi￾denced by CDLI performance, which underlies the performance of private 
partnerships, BDCs, and other pooled private debt vehicles.
Expected gross yield equals 9.76% (line 1) and is above the 8.76% 
interest income reported in Exhibit 2.3 for the CDLI during the trailing 
four quarters ending March 31, 2022. The higher expected yield compared 
to actual yield comes from anticipated increases in short-term interest rates 
that will affect the base reference rate for direct loans. The 9.76% gross 
yield is assumed to be the same for both unlevered and levered strategies. 
Credit losses (line 2) equal the historical average realized losses for the 186 PRIVATE DEBT
CDLI. Leverage at 1.00× (line 3) is roughly equal to the 1.07× average used 
by levered private direct lending funds (Exhibit 19.1). Management fees at 
1.25% of net assets (line 4) is the most likely rate found for levered and 
unlevered funds charging on net assets rather than gross assets. The 10% 
incentive fee (line 5) is subject to a 7% preferred return (line 6). The 7% 
preferred return does not affect the incentive fee calculation because the full 
1.12% incentive fee still results in 10.01% return, well above the 7% pre￾ferred return. Administrative expenses (line 7) are assumed to equal 0.41% 
but they can vary in practice. Administrative expenses are generally lower 
Unlevered 
Portfolio
Levered 
Portfolio
Assumptions
1 Gross Yield on Direct Loans 9.76% 9.76%
2 Credit Loss Rate −1.08% −1.08%
3 Leverage NA 1.00×
4 Management Fee (on net assets) 1.25% 1.25%
5 Incentive Fee NA 10%
6 Preferred Return NA 7%
7 Admin Expenses (on net assets) 0.42% 0.42%
8 Cost of Financing NA 4.47%
Expected Return Calculation
9 Unlevered Portfolio Cash Yield 9.76% 9.76%
10 + Gross Yield from Leverage NA 9.76%
11 − Interest Cost of Leverage NA −4.47%
12 = Gross Levered Portfolio Cash Yield 9.76% 15.05%
13 − Expected Credit Loss −1.08% −2.16%
14 = Net Yield before Fees 8.68% 12.89%
15 − Management Fees −1.25% −1.25%
16 − Administrative Expenses −0.42% −0.42%
17 = Net Yield after Mgmt Fees and Admin Expenses 7.01% 11.22%
18 − Incentive Fees NA −1.12%
19 = Expected Return on Direct Lending 7.01% 10.01%
Notes
20 Total Mgmt and Incentive Fees 1.25% 2.37%
21 Fees as % of Net Yield Before Fees 14% 18%
EXHIBIT 21.1 Calculation of expected return for corporate direct lending.Expected Returns and Risks from Direct Lending 187
for private funds and higher for registered vehicles like BDCs. Like manage￾ment fees, administrative fees can sometimes be charged on gross assets. The 
4.47% cost of financing the 1.00× leverage (line 8) approximately equals 
the annualized weighted average interest cost for obtaining leverage among 
BDCs during the year ending March 31, 2022, adjusted upward for antici￾pated short-term T-bill interest rate hikes.
The expected return calculation starts in line 9 with a 9.76% current 
yield for both unlevered and levered portfolios. The expected return on the 
unlevered portfolio is straightforward. Deductions for credit losses (line 13), 
management fees (line 15), and administrative expenses (line 16) leave a net 
yield and expected return equal to 7.01%. Manager fees (line 20) as a per￾centage of net yield before fees (line 14) equals 14% (line 21).
The levered portfolio adds 9.76% (9.76% × 1.00) in leveraged yield 
(line 10) but deducts 4.47% (4.47% × 1.00) in financing costs, resulting in a 
15.05% gross levered cash yield (line 12). Subtracting expected credit losses of 
2.16% (1.08% × 2.00) gives a net yield before fees equal to 12.89%. Further 
subtracting management fees and administrative expenses produces a 11.22% 
return (line 17) on which incentive fees are based. The full incentive fee equal 
to 1.12% (10% × 11.22%) is deducted to arrive at an expected return equal 
to 10.01% for the levered direct lending portfolio (line 19). Total fees (line 20) 
as a percentage of net yield before fees (line 14) equals 18% (line 21).
Looked at in isolation, most institutional investors should find corporate 
direct lending with a 7% unlevered or 10% levered expected return compel￾ling when compared with recent total fund returns. A 21-year performance 
study by Cliffwater LLC covering all state pension plans with fiscal years 
ended June 30, 2021, representing over $3.5 trillion in assets, found that pen￾sion assets produced a 6.69% compound annual return, less than the 7–8% 
actuarial assumed returns. Since the 2001 to 2021 period covers two bear 
markets and two bull markets, the 6.69% return would seem very representa￾tive of what pensions might achieve looking ahead. In fact, none of the 65 
state pensions in the study achieved returns above their actuarial return over 
the 21-year period.
In the same Cliffwater study, the average annual risk for individual 
state pension portfolios, measured by standard deviation, equaled 10.93% 
for the 21 years ending June 30, 2021. By comparison, the return standard 
deviation for the CDLI equaled 3.69% over its 17.5-year history. In Chap￾ter 13, risk calculations for direct lending portfolios with various amounts 
of leverage were derived based on historical CDLI data and fee assumptions. 
Risk calculations ranged from a 3.25% standard deviation for an unlevered 
direct lending portfolio to 9.75% standard deviation for a direct lending 
portfolio at 2.0× leverage. Even at the high 2.0× leverage the direct lending 
portfolio risk is below the average total portfolio risk for state pensions. 188 PRIVATE DEBT
While the comparative time periods do not precisely overlap, it seems rea￾sonable to conclude the addition of corporate direct lending to large state 
pensions would be accretive, increasing pension returns and reducing risk. 
This outcome would be similar if applied to other institutional asset pools.
Asset  allocation studies begin with a review of return assumptions 
for all available asset classes. Exhibit 21.2 provides a detailed matrix with 
expected returns, risks, and correlations for 19 traditional and alterna￾tive asset classes, most of which are considered in asset allocation studies. 
Expected returns are represented by the compound return in the first col￾umn and were created using the previous equation and applying it to each 
asset class. Long-term expected returns for major asset classes are generally 
similar across consultants and other allocators.
EXPECTED RISKS
Expected risk is shown in the third column of Exhibit 21.2. The public asset 
classes rely on historical measures alone. The private asset classes use histori￾cal data in combination with unsmoothing techniques and links to public asset 
classes to arrive at risk forecasts that are more economically based, rather than 
accounting based. For example, the risk forecast shown for unlevered private 
debt, which is based on direct lending, equals 4.00%, which is slightly higher 
than the 3.63% historical standard deviation found in Exhibit 3.1. Unlike 
expected returns, risk estimates for private asset classes can vary widely across 
consultants, who often use different techniques for forecasting risk.
Correlations are shown in the remaining columns in Exhibit  21.2. 
As with expected risk, correlation forecasts rely on historical measures 
for the liquid asset classes and unsmoothed mechanisms for the private 
asset classes.
Values for the Consumer Price Index are added to the asset classes near 
the bottom of Exhibit 21.2, as many allocators want to gauge the sensitivity 
of their asset mix policies to changing inflation. This has received special 
interest recently with the concern over what will happen to asset values if 
inflation and interest rates rise. The correlations of asset classes with CPI 
inform investors whether asset classes will react positively to rising inflation 
(positive correlation) or negatively to rising inflation (negative correlation). 
The last row shows the inflation beta, a measure of asset class return sensi￾tivity to changes in CPI inflation. Note that unlevered direct lending has a 
forecast inflation beta equal to 0.55, meaning that if inflation unexpectedly 
increases 5.00% over some time period, the return on direct lending will 
increase an additional 2.75% over the same time period. This relationship 190 PRIVATE DEBT
is entirely consistent with the floating rate characteristic of direct loans. By 
contrast, conventional fixed income with fixed rates has a negative inflation 
beta. Core US bonds have an expected inflation beta equal to −0.36. This 
has also been consistent with rising rates over the past year when core bond 
portfolios with fixed interest rates have reported negative returns.
Also shown are equity betas for the asset classes in the second to last row. 
Direct lending is assumed to have a positive correlation with stocks and, 
unlevered, a 0.14 equity beta. This level of equity beta is also consistent 
with  events during the 2008 GFC. The CDLI fell 6.5% during calendar 
2008, only 15% of the 42.2% drop in global stocks, measured by the MSCI 
All Country World Index.
Not so favorable is the high 0.80 correlation between direct lending and 
private equity. This level of correlation means that 64% (R-square) of the 
variability in direct lending returns is explained by volatility in the underly￾ing equity of the companies lent to. This also sounds reasonable given the 
Chapter 10 discussion of loans as a short-put option on corporate assets. 
Volatility in the valuation of corporate assets is directly absorbed by corpo￾rate debt and equity with the split determined by the amount of leverage. In 
comparison to other asset classes, direct lending is attractive for being high 
cash yielding, low risk, and with positive interest rate and inflation sensitiv￾ity. Its negatives are lack of liquidity and diversification potential. The lack 
of diversification also extends to publicly traded high-yield bonds and bank 
loans, whose correlations with direct lending are also expected to be high 
because the underlying borrowers in all three asset classes are companies 
inextricably linked to the business cycle.CHAPTER 22
191
Asset allocation studies are intended to formulate diversified portfolios of 
asset classes that will maximize long-term return within acceptable levels 
of risk. With the expected returns, risks, and correlations in Exhibit 21.2 as 
inputs, portfolios of maximum return can be calculated for varying levels 
of risk using optimization software. Collectively these optimized portfolios 
form what is called an efficient frontier.
Ideally, investors who are fiduciaries select a portfolio risk level that is 
prudent, which means a risk level peers might select facing similar circum￾stances. This prescription for decision-making has turned circular in recent 
years and potentially concerning as returns for otherwise prudent portfolios 
are insufficient to meet enterprise required returns, such as actuarial inter￾est rates, moving fiduciaries to select higher risk, higher return asset mixes, 
which are now deemed prudent because others are doing the same. The 
concern is that return, not risk, is now driving asset allocation studies.
Along the way fiduciaries have looked to alternative investments as a 
potential solution for improving return without excessive risk. Commer￾cial equity real estate was the earliest alternative to stocks and bonds in 
the 1980s but lost its bloom during real estate busts of the early 1990s 
and again in 2008–2009. Allocators have systematically increased risk fore￾casts for real estate over time without commensurate increases in return. 
As a result, asset allocation studies have kept real estate at modest alloca￾tion levels.
Private equity, borne from the “conglomerate discount” phenomena 
of the 1970s, first made its way into institutional portfolios in the early 
1980s and successfully produced returns well above public equities over 
time. Despite its success, it is unusual for private equity allocations to exceed 
10% in asset allocation studies because the perceived risk is higher than 
public equity, and it incurs higher implementation costs. Despite these con￾cerns, fiduciaries have been increasing their allocations to private equity in 
recent years.
Asset Allocation192 PRIVATE DEBT
Hedge funds emerged as an alternative investment after the 2008 GFC 
to achieve equity-like returns with lower bond-like risk. The thinking was 
that private equity and hedge funds together could produce a return that 
was 3–5% more than a stock and bond combination at a similar risk level. 
So far only one-half of that formula has worked. Private equity has exceeded 
public equity by significant amounts but hedge funds have struggled to pro￾duce returns commensurate with their risk, complexity, and fees.
Nonbank finance, and corporate direct lending specifically, was reinvig￾orated by GFC-related bank failures and subsequent regulation that drasti￾cally restricted bank risk-taking. Unlike hedge funds, which had a legacy of 
earlier success for endowment and family office investors, nonbank finance 
had less institutional history and was not viewed as a mainstream asset 
class. The purpose of this book has been to educate fiduciaries and inves￾tors about direct lending and other areas of private credit so they can assess 
whether to include these assets into the asset allocation process.
Exhibit  22.1 uses the inputs provided in Exhibit 21.2 and standard 
optimization software to illustrate what recommended allocations to direct 
lending might look like from future asset allocation studies. For these pur￾poses, the list of asset classes has been narrowed down to eight, where direct 
lending is included twice, one unlevered and the other levered at 1.00×. 
Also, instead of showing the entire efficient frontier, only portfolios with 
risk levels of 10%, 12%, and 14% are displayed, with the values selected 
because they span risk levels taken by most institutional investors.
Section (a) in Exhibit 22.1 considers only unlevered direct lending along￾side stocks, bonds, real estate, and private equity. The allocations reported 
in section (a) are subject to a maximum of 40% to the illiquid assets and 
no more than 20% in any individual private asset class. The optimal port￾folio allocation to unlevered direct lending is significant, averaging 11%, 
and inversely related to the desired amount of risk. Also noteworthy is the 
distribution of allocations across private assets. For all three risk levels allo￾cations to private assets are at their maximum limit of 40% and the redis￾tribution from direct lending to private equity is predictable. Noteworthy is 
that real estate receives a smaller allocation compared to private equity and 
direct lending.
Section (b) expands the optimization to allow for leveraged direct lend￾ing, which alters the optimization outcomes. Levered direct lending is pre￾ferred to unlevered and receives a maximum 20% allocation because of its 
higher return. This is true across the three risk levels. The higher allocation 
to levered direct lending comes from private equity, which previously had 
been increased as the sole source of higher return. Real estate remains basi￾cally unchanged.194 PRIVATE DEBT
Section (c) adds high-yield bank loans and high-yield bonds as liquid 
credit-oriented asset classes to the optimization. The thought is to separate 
out the allocations to direct lending in sections (a) and (b) caused by liquid 
credit exposure from other return and risk characteristics unique to direct 
lending. In so doing, credit exposure (bank loans, high-yield bonds, unlev￾ered direct lending, and levered direct lending) is limited to no more than 
25% of the total portfolio. The optimized portfolios again leave an opti￾mized allocation to levered direct lending at 20% of total assets.
As a generalization, asset allocation studies that include corporate direct 
lending with return and risk assumptions like those identified in Exhibit 
22.2 should produce allocations to direct lending at 10–20% of total assets 
with a preference for modestly levered direct loans. In some ways, direct 
lending might be viewed as a lower risk complement to private equity. Both 
are desirable and their relative allocations dependent on the level of risk 
desired by fiduciaries making asset allocation decisions. Real estate is an 
important contributor to overall portfolio return and risk, but allocations 
are smaller compared to other private asset classes.
Hedge funds are one of the asset classes notably absent in the Exhibit 22.1 
analysis. Optimal portfolios at lower risk levels (standard deviation <10%) 
include allocations to hedge funds, allocations to lower risk alternatives such 
as infrastructure, and reallocations from levered to unlevered direct lending.CHAPTER 23
195
As of this writing inflation is unacceptably high and potentially systemic. 
The Federal Reserve, whose job is to control inflation, is reaching back 
40 years, opening the inflation-fighting playbook written by Paul Volcker, 
Fed chairman under Ronald Reagan. Volcker’s weapon of choice (or neces￾sity) was interest rates, raising them to 18–19% in 1980–1981, up from 
6–8% for most of the prior decade.1
 The Volcker playbook was successful, 
bringing inflation down from a high of 15.8% to 4.5% over the 1980–1984 
time period. But it was costly, causing a recession that produced a 2.6% 
decline in real GNP and a 6% jump in the unemployment rate to 10.8%.2
The capital markets were not spared. Stocks fell 17% and investment 
grade bonds fell 11%.3
 These declines might seem modest compared to con￾temporary drawdowns, but they followed a decade with no real return for 
stocks or bonds. The non-investment grade bond market, still in its infancy, 
saw a 20% cumulative default rate (12% in cumulative losses) for the 
1982–1985 time period.4
 Corporate earnings suffered as well, falling 18%.5
Direct Lending Performance Under 
a Volcker-like Fed Policy Regime
1
Federal Funds Effective Rate (source: FRED).
2
Normalized unemployment at the time was 5% or more, unlike today’s 3% levels.
3
S&P 500 Index and Long-Term Government Bonds (Ibbotson), respectively. Draw￾downs for both stocks and bonds were dampened by the high dividend and coupon 
yields at the time.
4
Standard and Poor’s Ratings Direct, January 2004. The broadly syndicated loan 
market was nonexistent at the time and bank commercial and industrial loan data 
are unavailable.
5
S&P  500 earnings per share. US corporate profits in the aggregate fell 16% 
(Source: FRED).196 PRIVATE DEBT
The Fed’s task today might appear less challenging. The starting point 
for inflation is lower, 8% versus 16%, as is the starting point for interest 
rates, 3% versus 7%. However, there is more leverage (debt) in the financial 
system today after decades of innovation and post-GFC Fed accommoda￾tion. In other words, the same change in interest rates will likely have a 
greater impact on consumer spending and business profits than 40 years ago.
This chapter underwrites direct lending in a Volcker-like policy regime, 
understanding that the direct lending did not exist 40 years ago and there￾fore has no historical comparison. The same is nearly true for traded non￾investment grade debt. In 1980 the high-yield bond market was in its 
infancy, awaiting Milken’s reign later in the decade, and the leveraged loan 
market did not exist. Fortunately, the economics of direct lending are fairly 
straightforward, and a few reasonable inputs can give investors some confi￾dence on the return and risk ahead for direct lending as the Fed pursues its 
Volcker-like policies.
DIRECT LENDING RETURN FORECAST UNDER A VOLCKER-LIKE 
POLICY REGIME
As described throughout these chapters, direct lending returns can be 
parceled into four variables, as follows:
Direct Lending Return Income Realized Gains Losses
Unrea
 
lized Gains Losses Fees
A five-year forecast shows total direct lending losses doubling compared 
to the previous five years, but higher credit spreads and increased base rates 
offset those losses completely. The five-year time frame matches in length the 
time period beginning December 1980 during which Volcker successfully 
completed his deflationary plan.
Exhibit 23.1 contains current run rates as well as return forecasts over 
one and five years, annualized, for a typical institutional senior secured 
direct lending private fund that is levered 1:1 under a Volcker-like regime 
that succeeds over a five-year period but suffers a significant recession in 
the interim.
Income
Interest income will almost certainly increase under a Volcker playbook, at 
least initially and for two reasons. First, direct loans are floating rate, receiv￾ing a short-term reference rate of interest generally tied to three-month Direct Lending Performance Under a Volcker-like Fed Policy Regime 197
Libor or SOFR plus a credit spread.6
 The Fed Funds interest rate is expected 
to climb from 4.5% to 5.5% based on the forward rates curve and Fed pro￾nouncements. Presumably, at this higher interest rate level the Fed expects 
to get inflation under control. Three-month Libor averages about 35 basis 
points above the Fed Funds rate.
For senior secured loans, the credit spread has averaged 6.90% over the 
previous five years ending June 30, 2022.7
 The higher credit spread expected 
over the next one and five years is a result of greater market uncertainty 
(higher VIX) that would most likely be associated with a Volcker scenario, 
as it was in 1981–1985.
However, the extra return associated with one turn of leverage remains 
constant, assuming that spread expansion on income also occurs with 
financing.
Realized Losses
Realized losses are generally delayed from the occurrence of a recession. The 
GFC is used to benchmark realized losses for a Volcker scenario, totaling 
19% (9.5% unlevered) over five years with most of the defaults occurring 
Current Run Rate (%)
Annualized Five-Year 
Return Forecast (%)
3-mo. Libor 3.60 4.50
+ Credit spread w/OID 7.00 7.50
+ Levered (1:1) spread 5.00 5.00
= Interest income 15.60 17.00
+/− Realized losses −2.00 −3.80
+/− Unrealized losses 0.00 −1.00
− Fees and expenses* −3.14 −2.97
= Direct lending return 10.46 9.23
*Assumes 1.25% management fee on net assets, 12.5% carry, and 0.40% 
expenses on net assets.
EXHIBIT 23.1 Direct lending return forecast.
6
Libor will be the reference rate for illustrative purposes, understanding that SOFR is 
its replacement. SOFR averages about 15–20 basis points below Libor.
7
Credit spread equals the average yield on CDLI-S over the last five years minus the 
average three-month Libor yield over the last five years.198 PRIVATE DEBT
in years three through five. The unlevered 9.5% is the cumulative realized 
credit loss rate on the CDLI8
 for the 2008–2010 period.
Unrealized Losses
Over the five-year period, annualized unrealized losses are expected to total 
1.0%. Initial unrealized losses will be higher (forecasting future realized 
losses) but assuming Fed policy is successful in taming inflation, any unreal￾ized markdowns are expected to ultimately reverse.
Fees and Expenses
Management fees and expenses are 1.25% and 0.40%, respectively, on net 
assets, with a 12.5% incentive, representative of a top-tier direct lending 
manager.
ASSET CLASS COMPARISONS UNDER A VOLKER-LIKE 
POLICY REGIME
In Exhibit  23.2 the direct lending return forecasts for direct lending are 
compared to forecasts for other major liquid asset classes. The forecasts 
are as of September 23, 2022, and therefore are in addition to year-to-date 
gains/losses for direct lending (+1%), stocks (−20%), and investment grade 
bonds (−14%).
The 1.3% return forecast for stocks is characterized by an additional 
22% drawdown from September 22, 2022, levels, followed by a slow 
recovery. The percentage decline in earnings per share is similar to that 
experienced during 1981–1982 and the decline in price-earnings ratio 
reflects the impact of projected higher interest rates. The historical 60-year 
relationship between interest rates and price-earnings ratio is described in 
Exhibit 23.3.
The equation in Exhibit 23.3 quantifies the inverse relationship between 
the ten-year Treasury bond yield and S&P 500 price-earnings ratio. A 1% 
increase in the ten-year Treasury bond is associated with a 1.23 point reduc￾tion in price-earnings ratio. At current price-earnings levels, a 1% increase 
in rates is associated with a 7% drop in stock prices.
8
Please see disclosures at the end of this report for further information on the CDLI 
and CDLI-S.Direct Lending Performance Under a Volcker-like Fed Policy Regime 199
Current 
Cliffwater 
Ten-Year Expected 
Return (%)
Annualized 
Five-Year 
Forecast (%) Notes
Direct Lending 10.46 9.23 Levered 1:1, see Exhibit 1
US Stocks 7.00 1.30 One-year: 18% short-term 
EPS decline and 1.6× 
drop in P/E ratio
Five-year: EPS recovers to 
2022 levels, P/E slightly 
below current levels to 
reflect higher 4.0% ter￾minal ten-year Treasury 
yield
Inv. Grade 
Bonds
4.55 4.10 One-year: rise in ten-year 
Treasury to 5.0%
Five-year: ten-year Treasury 
falls to 4.0%, 1% above 
3% inflation rate
Cash 2.35 4.50 Three-month Libor
EXHIBIT 23.2 Direct Lending compared to other asset classes.
y = –123.33x + 23.848
R2 = 0.624 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0.0% 2.0% 4.0% 6.0% 8.0% 10.0% 12.0% 14.0% 16.0%
10-Year Treasury Bond Yield (%)
Price-Earnings Ratio (S&P 500)
EXHIBIT 23.3 60-year history of interest rates and price-earnings ratios.200 PRIVATE DEBT
The forecast negative return on investment grade bonds (Bloomberg 
Aggregate Bond Index) combines the expected increase in interest rates 
over the forecast period with the 6.4-year duration for investment grade 
bonds. Cash returns are expected to exceed the expected inflation rate con￾sistent with the switch from quantitative easing to Volcker-like quantitative 
tightening.
Direct lending’s relatively short maturity (five years), absence of inter￾est rate risk, credit seniority, and covenant protection should help the asset 
class weather a Volcker-like scenario, both absolutely and relative to other 
asset classes.CHAPTER 24
201
Direct middle market loans are floating rate, meaning the lender gets paid 
a current short-term interest rate plus a yield spread, the size of which 
reflects the credit risk of the underlying borrower. The short-term interest 
rate or reference rate had historically been Libor or, less often, a T-bill rate. 
The typical Libor or T-bill maturity is three months, though a one-month 
maturity is sometimes used. Libor rates historically averaged 25 basis points 
over T-bills, but more during times of distress. Libor worked well until regu￾lators mandated its elimination in 2023 due to charges of fraud in its cal￾culation. The transition out of Libor and into SOFR1
 as the reference rate 
for fixed-income securities and derivatives is proceeding smoothly with vir￾tually all new agreements now tied to SOFR. Since they were launched in 
2021, SOFR rates have fallen between Libor and T-bill rates. An overview of 
SOFR is provided in this chapter because SOFR is not well understood even 
though it plays a critical role in private debt.
Two transition changes from Libor to SOFR are noteworthy. First, 
because SOFR is an overnight-only borrowing rate while most Libor-based 
agreements use 1-, 3-, 6-, and 12-month maturities, a fix was needed to 
secure equivalent SOFR maturities. A futures-based methodology published 
by CME Group2
 has been accepted by regulators as a solution. Therefore, 
expect to see references to CME Term SOFR Rates.
Second, Libor embedded a small incremental yield attributable to bank 
credit risk that is not present in SOFR where Treasuries are used as col￾lateral. The market is now addressing this potential lost spread by (1) add￾ing an explicit and separate credit spread adjustment (CSA) to SOFR or 
Enter SOFR
1
Secured overnight financing rate.
2
The CME Group is the world’s leading and most diverse derivatives marketplace 
and was born from the combination of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the 
Chicago Board of Trade. Today CME operates the following exchanges: CME, 
CBOT, NYMEX, and COMEX.202 PRIVATE DEBT
(2) implicitly including it in the credit spread charged to the borrower. Year￾to-date, approximately two-thirds of SOFR-based agreements have used 
option (1), but the trend is toward option (2).
While the Libor/SOFR transition has proven uneventful to date, there 
are certain conventions and practices that are still in flux.
■ In late 2020, global regulators formally announced that after December 
31, 2021, substantially all global Libor rates will either cease publi￾cation or lack representativeness, thus removing any uncertainty sur￾rounding the discontinuation of Libor.
■ While many competing Libor replacements were contemplated, the 
industry has settled on SOFR as the accepted successor rate for US 
dollar-based contracts. SOFR is the volume-weighted median rate for 
overnight cash borrowings collateralized by US Treasury securities, as 
transacted in the repurchase agreement (i.e., repo) market.
■ ARRC3
 and market participants coalesced around SOFR because 
(1) it is derived from an active and well-defined market with sufficient 
depth that makes it extraordinarily difficult to manipulate or influence 
($1 trillion-plus in daily volume); (2) it is produced in a transparent, 
direct manner and is based on observable transactions rather than being 
dependent on estimates, like Libor, or derived through models; and (3) it 
is derived from a market that is, and promises to remain, active enough 
to reliably produce a rate during a wide range of market conditions, 
including time of stress.
■ Treasury rates, which meet similar criteria, are not good reference rates 
because they are countercyclical. When the market experiences stress, 
risk-off demand bids Treasury security prices up and rates fall. SOFR 
is instead procyclical. When the market experiences stress, lenders 
demand a higher rate to give up cash, and borrowers pay a higher rate 
to access cash. This procyclicality comports with the proper intuition in 
the market between lenders and borrowers broadly.
■ The two main issues with SOFR as a Libor replacement are that it is 
a rate representative of overnight, secured lending between market 
3
The Alternative Reference Rate Committee is a group of private-market partici￾pants—banks, asset managers, and regulators bodies—convened by the Federal Reserve 
Board and the New York Federal Reserve to help ensure a successful transition from 
USD LIBOR to an alternative reference rate.Enter SOFR 203
participants while Libor is a rate representative of term, unsecured lend￾ing between banks.
■ Because SOFR is an overnight rate and lacks a term structure, ARRC 
recommends the use of CME Term SOFR Rates,4
 which are published 
daily and are a series of forward-looking SOFR term rates derived by 
compounding projected overnight SOFR rates implied from futures 
contracts.5
 A term structure is important because lenders and borrow￾ers prefer to have (1) a forward-looking rate that reflects the expecta￾tion of rates over the actual interest period and (2) a rate that is known 
and can be locked in at the beginning of the interest period, as opposed 
to in arrears calculations that are unknown until the end of the inter￾est period.6
■ Because SOFR lacks a counterparty credit risk spread (Libor was essen￾tially an AA bank-to-bank risk spread), some lenders and borrowers are 
negotiating a credit spread adjustment (CSA) over term SOFR. Some￾times the CSA is flat over the term SOFR curve and sometimes it steps 
up over the term SOFR curve (commonly referencing a 10/15/25 spread 
over one-month/three-month/six-month maturities).
■ It remains to be seen whether all-in lending rates include a CSA per￾manently (i.e., a two-part construct—term SOFR + spread + CSA) or if 
explicit CSAs are dropped in favor of building any compensating CSA 
into the overall spread (i.e., a one-part construct—term SOFR + spread).
■ Note that references to CSAs are made in two different contexts: either 
a prospective spread (a spread that is dynamic and determined by the 
market of borrowers and lenders for new debt issues), or a fallback 
spread, which is a fixed spread ARCC recommends as fallback language 
for those documents that had not prior contemplated a transition away 
from Libor. The fallback rate recommended by the ARRC is based on 
4
The most commonly used US dollar Libor settings (overnight, one-month, three￾month, six-month, and one-year) will cease publishing after June 30, 2023.
5
“Inferring Term Rates from SOFR Futures Prices,” Finance and Economics Dis￾cussion Series, Federal Reserve Board 2019, https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/
feds/files/2019014pap.pdf; https://www.cmegroup.com/market-data/files/cme-term￾sofr-reference-rates-benchmark-methodology.pdf
6
“Term SOFR is Here – The ARRC Recommends CME Group’s Term SOFR Rates 
for Use,” August 23, 2021, https://www.dechert.com/knowledge/onpoint/2021/8/
term-sofr-is-here---the-arrc-recommends-cme-group-s-term-sofr-ra.html204 PRIVATE DEBT
the historical five-year median spread between USD Libor and com￾pounded average of SOFR at the time of the recommendation.7
EARLY OBSERVATIONS
■ Of BSLs, 81% priced over SOFR instead of Libor in January 2022, and 
90% in February. This compares to only 15% during the entire fourth 
quarter of 2021.
■ While 60% of loans priced with some form of CSA in January 2022, 
55% priced with a CSA in February 2022. Loans pricing as a one-part 
construct (SOFR + spread) grew from 22% of total new issues in January 
to 34% of new issues in February.
■ New CLO formation referencing SOFR totaled $4.9 billion during Janu￾ary 2022, plus $4.0 billion of SOFR-linked deal resets and refinancings, 
Base Rate January February
LIBOR 19% 10%
SOFR + spread (one-part construct) 22% 34%
SOFR + spread + Flat CSA 10 bps (two-part construct) 9% 9%
SOFR + spread + CSA 10/15/25 bps (two-part construct) 49% 43%
SOFR + spread + CSA “other” (two-part construct) 3% 3%
EXHIBIT 24.1 SOFR adoption rates in 2022.
Source: Refinitiv, “2022 Broadly Syndicated New Issue Loans.”
7
“Summary of the ARRC’s Fallback Recommendations,” October 6, 2021, https://
www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/Microsites/arrc/files/2021/spread-adjustments￾narrative-oct-6-2021
Fallback Spread Adjustments
LIBOR tenor being replaced Spread applied to SOFR base rate (bps)
1-month USD LIBOR 11.448
3-month USD LIBOR 26.161
6-month USD LIBOR 42.826
12-month USD LIBOR 75.513Enter SOFR 205
which compares to only $0.1 billion that priced with SOFR-linked 
tranches in all of 2021. Almost all SOFR-linked CLOs have priced with 
no explicit CSA but did price with a spread 15 to 20 bps higher than the 
equivalent Libor spread, effectively embedding the CSA into the spread.8
The Libor/SOFR transition has proven uneventful. Adopting SOFR, as 
well as use of the CME Group’s term SOFR curve, has proven acceptable 
with broad market acceptance. Use of an explicit CSA in the corporate loan 
market has proven more mixed, however. While still early, the trend points 
to the market dropping a Libor-equivalent credit spread adjustment in favor 
of embedding the risk premium into a higher SOFR + spread construct.
8
“CLO Libor/SOFR Transition Report,” J. P. Morgan Securitized Products Research, 
February 2, 2022.CHAPTER 25
207
T
he European corporate direct lending market has grown rapidly since 
the early 2010s, following a similar pattern in the United States. On both 
sides of the Atlantic, alternative lenders are competing with commercial 
banks to provide leveraged financing to middle market companies and their 
financial sponsors.
However, important differences exist between the US and European 
direct lending markets. Chief among them is the slower development of 
private direct lenders in Europe due to a still significant regional and local 
banking system in Europe. European corporate sponsors value banks’ 
lower cost of capital, relationships, prior deal history, and reliability. The 
European banking system is estimated to represent roughly one-third of the 
market, down from approximately half of the market in 2019 as direct lend￾ers have gained market share.
Based on research into roughly 60 European direct lenders and con￾versations with more than 20 European middle market buyout sponsors, 
European private direct lenders are likely to continue increasing market 
share, but considerable time may pass until they achieve the level of institutional 
success and market share enjoyed by nonbank corporate direct lenders in 
the United States.
European direct lending historically exhibited a modest return pre￾mium over US direct lending, but that gap has since disappeared as spread 
compression has affected both markets over the last few years. In the cur￾rent market, spreads are marginally wider and up-front fees approximately 
1% higher for European direct loans, but when accounting for the differ￾ence in base rates, all-in expected yields are modestly higher for US direct 
loans. US investors seeking geographic diversification by adding a Euro￾pean component to their domestic direct lending portfolios should be cogni￾zant of the risks inherent in European exposure, including the younger and 
European Middle Market 
Direct Lending208 PRIVATE DEBT
smaller nature of the European market, unequal levels of experience among 
European direct lenders, differing creditors’ rights regimes across countries, 
and potential currency exposure.
KEY CHARACTERISTICS OF THE EUROPEAN DIRECT 
LENDING MARKET
As in the US, direct lending in Europe (or alternative lending, as some mar￾ket participants have labeled the market) represents a growing portion of 
the middle market–leveraged finance universe. These loans are provided by 
private lenders as an alternative to traditional bank finance for leveraged 
buyouts, debt recapitalizations, growth finance, and general corporate pur￾poses. Borrowers are typically privately held companies controlled by a pri￾vate equity sponsor, although borrowers may also be family-owned or even 
publicly traded. The businesses are, overall, smaller enterprises, with annual 
EBITDA, or operating cash flow, of less than €100 million. Occasionally, 
larger European direct lenders have financed upper middle market bor￾rowers that otherwise would have been financed by the capital markets, a 
prominent trend seen in the US. These borrowers and/or their private equity 
sponsors source debt financing directly from prospective lenders as opposed 
to raising debt via a public issuance or a syndicated bank group. Oftentimes, 
the debt package is structured with the help of a financial advisor, who 
maintains lender relationships. By contrast, the US sponsor-lending market 
typically does not involve intermediaries and instead is managed directly by 
the direct lender and the sponsor, or often through the sponsor’s internal 
capital markets function. In Europe, loans are provided by one or a limited 
number of lenders, with a plan to hold the loans to maturity. Given the 
relatively small size of the loan packages, usually less than €500 million in 
size and often less than €250 million, there is essentially no trading market.
Direct loans for the most part represent senior secured claims on the 
borrower’s assets and are structured typically with five-year maturities. 
However, they can also be second lien loans, which have junior priority to 
senior secured loans in the event of a default, or mezzanine loans, which are 
subordinated to senior debt and may be secured or unsecured. An increas￾ingly popular structure is the unitranche loan, which is a single loan facility 
that takes the place of a traditional senior debt-plus-mezzanine package. 
Unitranche loans have recently been offered at up to five times EBITDA, rep￾resenting half of the enterprise value of a middle market–leveraged buyout.
European direct loans, like their US counterparts, usually carry floating 
rates of interest and are priced at a spread over Libor or Euribor. In today’s 
market, unitranche loan pricing is in the range of 6–7.5% per annum over European Middle Market Direct Lending 209
the benchmark rate. The lender’s return is further enhanced by meaningful 
closing fees and/or an original issue discount, which can range from 1–4% 
of the loan commitment amount and usually average approximately 3%. 
Further, lenders may also negotiate to receive additional fees for loan prepay￾ment and covenant waivers. These loan rates are comparable to those seen in 
similar US transactions, although the closing fees tend to be higher in Europe.
From an essentially standing start in the early 2010s, direct lending has 
grown across Europe in the wake of the GFC, as banks have curtailed some 
lending activities and new lenders have emerged to fill the gap. However, 
direct lenders tend to be more expensive than commercial banks, who con￾tinue to work to retain local customer relationships. While in the United 
States direct lenders have grown to represent approximately 85% of the 
middle market–leveraged lending,1
 in Europe commercial banks have rep￾resented more than one-third of the market. Banks in general offer more 
attractive rates than the direct lenders but are also seen as being less creative 
in terms of deal structuring. The UK has traditionally been the largest mar￾ket for direct lending in Europe, followed by France and Germany. While 
new participants have emerged across Western Europe, the market remains 
to some degree segregated geographically, due largely to the strength of local 
relationships, as well as lenders being unaccustomed to creditors’ rights laws 
outside of their local countries.
EVOLUTION OF THE EUROPEAN DIRECT LENDING MARKET
The European private debt market has existed since about 2000 in different 
forms, but it has more recently evolved following the 2008 GFC and imple￾mentation of Basel III risk capital and liquidity requirements. The market 
development occurred earlier in the US, where senior secured direct lending 
funds had developed during the early 2000s and emerged more definitively 
in 2009 and 2010 to fill the void where banks were no longer lending. By 
contrast, the evolution of direct lending in Europe has been more gradual, 
trailing the US by two to three years before the emergence of the first direct 
lending fund.
The banking landscape in Europe has not changed as uniformly as in 
the US where banks largely do not lend beyond asset-based revolvers in the 
US middle market. In Europe, regional banks are still very active, though 
their activity somewhat varies by country. Direct lending firms have gained 
market share by following the US model in offering unitranche products 
1
S&P LCD Leveraged Lending Review.210 PRIVATE DEBT
that compete with a traditional senior bank and private mezzanine pack￾age to meet middle market–leveraged finance needs. Buyout sponsors have 
accepted the unitranche solution in deals where flexibility and simplicity win 
over pricing. The emergence of direct lenders in Europe has also made the 
mezzanine product less competitive and, therefore, mezzanine providers have 
been forced to shift to unitranche structures or have disappeared altogether.
Though the US and Europe have similar-sized economies, the 
European banking system is nearly three times the size of the US mar￾ket. Banks continue to be very active middle market lenders in Europe, 
particularly when comparing the size of the banking system as a percentage 
of GDP. The capital markets in the US are much more advanced, filling 
financing needs of upper middle market and large cap companies. In Europe, 
the capital markets are approximately one-quarter of the size of the US, 
serving an economy that is roughly the same size.
In Exhibit 25.1, European banks continue to provide a significant por￾tion of the debt capital to middle market borrowers, based on their desire to 
retain local company relationships. Private equity sponsors, which generate 
the lion’s share of leveraged loan demand in Europe, still often use local 
banks as they are consistent in their approach and offer financing pack￾ages that are 1–2% less expensive than those offered by alternative lenders. 
Private lenders have gained more acceptance by sponsors in recent years 
as their flexibility and speed have been sufficient to convince borrowers to 
move their business to the direct lenders.
US banks, by comparison, have lost most of the middle market–leveraged 
finance market to private direct lenders in recent years, because the banks 
have shrunk their balance sheets and face new regulatory constraints on 
leveraged loans. US borrowers and private equity sponsors have come to 
appreciate the speed and deal-structuring flexibility of the private lenders.
Capital structures have evolved as alternative lenders have entered the 
market, most notably with the introduction of the unitranche product that 
has started to compete with a senior bank loan plus second lien/mezzanine 
combination. In general, there are three types of unitranche. The first is a 
single loan provided by an alternative lender or club of alternative lenders, 
with interest rates in the current market equal to Euribor/Libor plus a spread 
between 6.00% and 7.50%. The second is called a bifurcated unitranche, 
where the loan is taken down by a partnership between a first-out senior piece 
typically held by a bank or other institution and a last-out piece provided by 
an alternative lender seeking a higher return. Both the unitranche and bifur￾cated unitranche provide a similar blended cost of capital to the borrower. 
The last structure is a combination unitranche and Holdco pay-in-kind note, 
which is typically unsecured and structured as a fixed-rate instrument.European Middle Market Direct Lending 211
It is noteworthy in Exhibit 25.1 that direct lending terms in the cur￾rent market are, for the most part, consistent between the US and European 
markets with the exception of the difference in base rates that is currently 
driving higher yields in the US. While the US market is appreciably larger 
than that of Europe, with more consistently experienced managers (given 
their longer tenures managing loan portfolios), deal structures and pricing 
are comparable.
Compared to the US, where there has been a structural shift of profes￾sionals leaving the leveraged finance groups of banks to form private lend￾ing firms, European banks are still active, and a similar talent exodus has 
not yet occurred.
Europe United States
Size of the corporate 
lending market1
$2.8 trillion $10 trillion
Estimated number of 
alternative lenders2
Approx. 60 managers Approx. 250 managers
Estimated size of private 
debt market2
$300 billion $1.0 trillion
Fund leverage2 European investors prefer 
unlevered; managers 
offer dollar-levered 
sleeves with leverage 
typically up to 1.0 times 
investor commitments
Most managers offer 
unlevered and levered 
vehicles with lever￾age of 1.0 to 2.5 times 
investor commitments
Interest rates3 Typically, Libor/EURIBOR/
SONIA + 600 bps to 
Libor/EURIBOR/SONIA 
+ 750 bps for unitranche 
loans; up-front fees/OID 
of 1–4%
Typically, SOFR + 550 
bps to SOFR + 700 bps 
for unitranche loans; 
up-front fees/OID of 
0.50–2%
Average middle market 
leverage4
6.0 times debt to EBITDA 6.2 times debt to EBITDA
EXHIBIT 25.1 Comparison of European and US direct lending markets.
1
 Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association.
2
 Cliffwater Research.
3
 Based on Cliffwater Research; indicative pricing in the current market as described by managers.
4 S&P LCD Europe and US LBO Review Q2 2022.212 PRIVATE DEBT
The geographic distribution of European direct loans is concentrated in 
three countries: UK, France, and Germany. Together they represent more than 
two-thirds of all direct loans. Direct lenders have tended to be more focused 
on the UK because of strong creditor rights and high market efficiency.
CAPITAL STRUCTURE OF EUROPEAN DIRECT LOANS
As noted, most European direct lenders have made market inroads and 
achieved the most success with so-called unitranche structures, whereby the 
lender provides all of the debt finance required in a transaction under one 
loan facility. This structure works in place of the traditional senior bank 
debt–mezzanine loan combination, which has dominated middle market 
European leveraged lending for decades. The unitranche loan is priced at a 
level that essentially blends the pricing (interest rate) of the senior bank debt 
plus the mezzanine structure. The appeal to the borrower and deal sponsor 
of the unitranche model is that there is only one lender, thus obviating the 
need for complex inter-creditor subordination negotiations, which can help 
accelerate the closing process. Also, in the event of the need for future cov￾enant waivers or debt restructurings, there is only one lender with whom the 
borrower needs to negotiate.
In recent years, European middle market–leveraged buyouts (the larg￾est user of unitranche financing) have been valued at approximately 11 
times EBITDA, with half of the capital being provided by the equity spon￾sor and the other half provided by the unitranche lender. In the European 
leveraged buyout market, rising purchase price multiples since 2013 have 
largely been addressed by higher equity contributions, which averaged 
47% in the three years since 2019. Leverage levels have climbed mod￾estly in recent years, averaging 5.7 times debt to EBITDA over the same 
time period.
Similarly, in the US buyout market, company valuations and debt lev￾erage have increased since the financial crisis. In fact, average debt lever￾age has increased to 6.2 times EBITDA as of the second quarter of 2022, 
slightly higher than average leverage in Europe. Equity contributions to 
buyouts as a percentage of total capitalization in Europe and the US have 
converged in recent years to approximately 47% since 2019 after his￾torically being higher in Europe. In any event, leverage and pricing are 
elevated in both markets, which bears close monitoring by direct lending 
investors.European Middle Market Direct Lending 213
RISK FACTORS
Direct lending has made significant strides in recent years in the United 
States and Europe, having raised and invested a meaningful amount of 
capital and having taken an important share of the market for middle market–
leveraged finance from the commercial banks. With a multiyear head start, 
the US market leads Europe in terms of sophistication, depth, and experience 
of market participants, as they have filled a void left by banks exiting 
the space to a much larger degree than witnessed in Europe. However, 
European debt managers are expanding rapidly, especially in sponsored 
buyout transactions, and deal structures and pricing are largely similar 
across the two markets.
European direct lending market will continue to grow and gain market 
share, but there are several risks US investors should consider when look￾ing at a potential allocation. The first concern is the possibility of adverse 
currency movements eating into euro- or sterling-based interest streams. 
US investors in private equity often assume the currency exposure of 
European investments, believing the long life and high expected returns of pri￾vate equity will more than offset the impact of any currency moves. For a direct 
lending investor looking for a short duration, stable income investment, the risk 
of currency moves can be more problematic. Some European managers have 
instituted currency hedging procedures for their US investors, which may help 
alleviate the currency exposure; however, these programs do add complexity.
A second potential concern involves the inconsistency of experience of 
European direct lenders. While most of the US market leaders began their 
careers and/or firms before the GFC and have thus been through at least 
one severe credit downturn, some European lenders have much shorter ten￾ures. Since the initial rise of European direct lending, credit conditions have 
been benign, and it remains to be seen how these newer lenders hold up 
during the next down cycle.
A third potential concern has to do with country risk. As noted, direct 
lending in Europe has been dominated by deals in the UK, France, and 
Germany, with those countries representing more than two-thirds of total 
deal flow. However, the European market remains quite fragmented, with 
direct lenders often focusing their efforts in specific countries, including, 
not surprisingly, their home markets, based on local familiarity with com￾mercial conventions and the legal framework covering creditor’s rights 214 PRIVATE DEBT
and insolvency. Given this home market bias, there are a number of country￾specific direct lenders in Europe whose portfolios are exposed to the vagar￾ies of those countries’ economic and political developments.
While the European private debt industry continues to grow and take 
market share from the commercial banking system, the nonbank lending 
market is not as developed as it is in the US. European commercial banks 
continue to be active in providing middle market–leveraged finance, and 
sponsors value price and relationships first and foremost. Preferences are also 
driven by geography, as commercial banks in Europe are conscious about 
retaining local market share. While European direct lending provided a return 
premium to US direct lending structures in earlier years as the market first 
developed, the pricing differences have largely disappeared. Further, the direct 
lending market is smaller relative to the United States, and given continued 
active bank participation in the European middle market–leveraged finance 
space, it remains to be seen whether European direct lending will become as 
successful a market as it has become in the US.
Given the smaller size of the European market, the involvement of some 
less-experienced loan managers in Europe, and the similar pricing and lev￾erage structures between the US and European buyout markets, coupled 
with inconsistent creditor rights regimes across European countries and 
the risks of adverse currency movements, US-based investors seeking geo￾graphic diversification for their direct lending portfolios should be aware of 
the additional issues inherent in European investments. That said, the Euro￾pean market continues to develop, and as the relative risk-reward balance 
between the two markets changes in the future, an allocation to European 
managers may become increasingly compelling.CHAPTER 26
215
US BORROWERS
A continuing concern among investors in direct loans is whether oppor￾tunities will continue to exist in the future if the tight bank regulations put 
in place after the GFC are somehow relaxed and commercial banks try to 
regain market share. With their lower cost of capital and the importance 
of financing costs to particularly leveraged buyout borrowers, a rewind 
scenario is possible but unlikely. This chapter provides narrative from US 
middle market private equity sponsors—the borrowers—on their decision-￾making process as to whether to use bank or nonbank financing. The pur￾pose was to understand what factors other than price might influence equity 
sponsors on which lender—bank or nonbank—to use.
A survey of private equity firms was conducted to better understand the 
growth in nonbank lending in the private equity (sponsored) market. Private 
equity general partners (sponsors) shared that increased bank regulation, 
including capital requirements and limits on types of lending, has curtailed 
bank lending. However, sponsors cited the flexibility of nonbank lenders 
to structure creative deals, their ability to take on larger portions of a loan 
(both senior and junior), and the speed at which they can close, and their 
willingness to do delayed draw loans and revolvers as attractive reasons 
for moving business to nonbank lenders and away from traditional banks. 
Despite these trends, the most important consideration continues to be the 
relationship between the sponsor and lender, regardless of whether it is a 
bank or another supplier of debt financing.
The rapid post-­2008 growth in nonbank middle market lending (defined 
as lending to companies with less than $100 million in EBITDA) has largely 
been attributed to increased bank regulation. Both the 2010 Dodd-­Frank 
Act and the 2013 Inter-­Agency Guidance on Leveraged Lending limited the 
The Borrower’s Perspective216 PRIVATE DEBT
amount of risk capital that banks can hold on their balance sheets and the 
amount of leverage that banks can underwrite in levered transactions.
However, research points to other important reasons for the success of 
nonbank lending, particularly in the middle market. To better understand 
the reasons for why private equity sponsors may use nonbank lenders, a 
broad group of 20 middle market buyout firms were surveyed and asked to 
share their primary considerations when looking for debt financing.
The survey showed that the most important consideration in choosing 
a middle market lender was the pre-­existing relationship that sponsors had 
with their lenders, regardless of whether it was a bank or nonbank source. 
Every sponsor surveyed highlighted the stable, pre-­existing roster of bank 
and nonbank lenders that they return to for financing. These relationships 
are built over time based on a successful history of closed deals and positive 
working experiences. Each sponsor placed very high importance on cultivat￾ing lenders who participate in club financing deals. Failing to make the pre￾ferred group can effectively shut a lender out of most of the sponsor’s deals.
When comparing the differences in bank versus nonbank middle 
market lending, some recurring themes appeared. First, middle market 
banks have ceded market share, primarily due to a diminished ability to 
hold loans on their balance sheets and the need to arrange club deals. 
As a result, many middle and lower middle market sponsors have turned 
entirely to nonbank lenders to provide solutions. Nonbank lenders have 
become more flexible when it comes to out of the credit box transactions 
and tend to be a bigger participant in club deals and in junior structures. 
Banks still participate in clubs and can remain competitive at the senior 
level in terms of pricing. However, for more complex deals, middle market 
banks generally have tougher underwriting standards, demand a heavier 
amortization schedule, and require extra covenants. A full comparison is 
provided in Exhibit 26.1.
When sponsors were asked about the specific impact of regulation, most 
sponsors noted the acceleration in the share of middle and lower middle 
market lending toward nonbanks. Changes in bank behavior specifically 
attributed to regulation included the tilt toward more conservative under￾writing and tighter covenants, the diminished ability to hold loans on their 
balance sheets and relegation to club deals, the cap on 6× leverage, and the 
higher principal amortization rate.Survey Findings
Underwriting Flexibility Nonbank lenders tend to have more flexibility in structuring loans (leverage multi￾ples, covenants, etc.), although for cleaner deals, banks remain competitive, particu￾larly at senior levels of the capital structure.
Pricing Nonbanks tend to charge a premium of 25 to 100 basis points (bps) for their flex￾ibility. Interestingly, most sponsors have expressed low sensitivity to pricing as their 
higher return-­on-­equity requirements leads to a preference for nonbank lenders who 
are able to finance very attractive deals in exchange for the premium charged.
Leverage Restrictions Most middle market sponsors noted that they do not participate in highly leveraged 
deals, although a few have noticed that banks are no longer participating in highly 
leveraged transactions. When applicable, banks tend to primarily participate in sen￾ior loans, whereas nonbank lenders are brought in for unitranche, second lien, and 
mezzanine structures.
Capacity and Deal Size Middle market banks that compete for deals below $50 million in EBITDA have 
experienced eroding market share as their capacity to hold loans on their balance 
sheets has shrunk relative to the past. Additionally, nonbank lenders can accom￾modate add-­on transactions, while banks are limited by the absolute dollar amount 
they can lend to any credit. Notably, investment banks that compete on deals over 
$50 million in EBITDA with the goal of syndication have seen only minor changes 
as a result of lending regulation.
Speed to Close Almost all sponsors have noted that nonbank lenders tend to be faster due to 
quicker internal processes and fewer committees. Additionally, nonbanks can move 
quicker in refinancing and add-­on transactions because of dedicated coverage that 
maintains closer familiarity with the credit and the sponsor.
EXHIBIT 26.1 US sponsor survey on choosing bank versus nonbank financing. 
217
(continued)
Nesbitt944393_c26.indd 217 12/12/2022 1:08:24 PMSurvey Findings
Covenants Banks tend to have tougher covenants than nonbank lenders. However, the differ￾ences are usually limited to one or two more covenants and are driven by the desire 
for nonbank lenders to be more flexible than banks. A number of sponsors also 
cited a requirement by banks to amortize a large amount of the deal in the loan (i.e., 
approximately 50% over seven years).
Reporting Requirements Most sponsors have reported no differences, although nonbank lenders may require 
more detailed reporting or board observer rights (in junior structures).
Industry Expertise Banks generally tend to have more industry expertise, but while it can be helpful, 
it does not seem to be high on the sponsor’s wish list given that a lot of nonbank 
finance company professionals are former bankers with some level of industry exper￾tise.
Access to Capital Interestingly, a few sponsors have noted that in late 2015 and early 2016, and again 
during the COVID turbulence in credit markets, nonbank lenders dependent on 
capital markets for funding (particularly BDC platforms) lacked the ability to 
provide timely capital and saw reduced negotiation leverage.
Restructuring Troubled Deals Many sponsors have not seen enough troubled deals over the past ten years to 
provide comments. The few that have had challenges pointed to the importance of 
lender relationships in working out a troubled loan (and as such the importance of 
the participants in the club) as opposed to any differences in bank versus nonbank 
workouts. One common theme was the dislike for bank workout groups. This is a 
positive for nonbank finance companies, where troubled credits stay with the origi￾nal coverage officer.
EXHIBIT 26.1 (continued)
218
Nesbitt944393_c26.indd 218 12/12/2022 1:08:24 PMThe Borrower’s Perspective 219
EUROPEAN BORROWERS
The speed and certainty by which US sponsors have embraced the nonbank 
lending market has not been echoed consistently in Europe. Therefore, to 
understand the reasons why private equity sponsors utilize nonbank lenders 
and their possible hesitancy to embrace nonbank lending in Europe, a survey 
of 20 European middle market buyout firms was conducted with results 
presented in Exhibit  26.2. In this survey, nonbank lenders were cited by 
sponsors as being less reliable and more likely to retrade a negotiated deal. 
Nonetheless, several middle market sponsors noted that they work with 
nonbank lenders where they can obtain better covenants and more covenant 
headroom, with less equity in the deal. The spread in the cost of financing 
between bank lenders and alternative direct lenders for unitranche debt is 
approximately two to four percentage points on an all-­in basis.
Perhaps the most important takeaway from both the US and European 
surveys is the importance of pre-­existing lender-­borrower relationships. This 
is an important finding because it puts significant value on the origination 
process used by direct lenders. It also highlights the similarities between 
private equity and private debt. Both require bespoke expertise and solutions 
executed by experienced professionals who understand that a major asset is 
the relationships they maintain.European Sponsor Survey Findings
Most Important Considerations Sponsors noted that the choice of using a bank versus nonbank lender was deal spe￾cific. Banks are still active and willing to provide low-­cost financing for straightfor￾ward deals and therefore remain the preferred choice. If a deal is more complicated 
or has a more aggressive growth plan, sponsors value nonbank lenders’ ability to 
be flexible on leverage, sponsor equity contribution, covenants, and speed to close. 
However, many sponsors value existing relationships with their bank lenders and 
initially were reluctant to adopt the nonbank lending model.
Underwriting Flexibility Nonbank lenders tend to have more flexibility in structuring loans (leverage multi￾ples, covenants, etc.), although for cleaner deals, banks remain competitive, particu￾larly at senior levels of the capital structure.
Pricing Generally, nonbank lenders charge a premium of two to four percentage points 
more than bank lenders in exchange for being more flexible. Bank financing is 
cheaper unless there is a need for mezzanine debt, in which case a unitranche loan 
can provide a competitive all-­in cost. However, some sponsors are seeing banks 
partner with mezzanine lenders to compete with nonbank lenders by providing a 
synthetic unitranche product.
Leverage Restrictions Most banks are limited on leverage of up to 5.0× net debt to EBITDA. Furthermore, 
banks tend to primarily participate in senior loans, whereas nonbank lenders are 
brought in for unitranche, second lien, and mezzanine structures. Nonbank lenders 
are generally willing to provide leverage of up to 6.0× net debt to EBITDA or more 
in some situations.
EXHIBIT 26.2 European sponsor survey on choosing bank versus nonbank financing.
220
Nesbitt944393_c26.indd 220 12/12/2022 1:08:24 PMEuropean Sponsor Survey Findings
Capacity and Deal Size Responses from sponsors were mixed on the capacity and deal size targets depend￾ing on the region. For example, banks in the Nordic region are able to take down 
relatively larger deals. Generally, banks and nonbank lenders have strong appetites 
for providing financing. Larger nonbank lenders may have an advantage when the 
syndicated market is less accessible. While most sponsors prefer to work with one 
counterparty, they will typically arrange a club when needed for larger deals.
Speed to Close Some sponsors have noted that nonbank lenders tend to be faster due to quicker 
internal processes and fewer committees. Additionally, nonbanks can move quicker 
in refinancing and add-­on transactions because of dedicated coverage that maintains 
closer familiarity with the credit and the sponsor. However, other sponsors noted 
that newer lenders were slower at times, most likely due to newly formed teams and 
processes.
Covenants Covenant packages don’t seem to be uniform across Europe and are dependent on 
size and geography. For middle market deals, nonbank lenders on average require a 
leverage covenant, whereas banks may require additional financial covenants such 
as cash flow covenants. Sponsors noted that nonbank lenders tend to provide more 
headroom in the covenants. Smaller deals may require additional covenants for both 
bank and nonbank lenders, whereas larger deals may be covenant lite. The most 
consistent difference between banks and nonbank lenders cited by sponsors was that 
banks have higher amortization requirements over the life of the loan.
EXHIBIT 26.2 (continued)
221
Nesbitt944393_c26.indd 221 12/12/2022 1:08:24 PMEuropean Sponsor Survey Findings
Industry Expertise Banks generally tend to have more industry expertise relative to nonbank lenders. 
Some sponsors noted that a nonbank lender’s lack of industry knowledge may pre￾vent them from moving quickly on a deal or cause them to back out.
Geographic Considerations Given different cultural and business relationships across Europe, as well as differ￾ent bankruptcy and creditors’ rights regimes across different European countries, 
there tends to be meaningful country-­specific debt financing in Europe. Regional and 
country-­specific banks want to retain their local relationships. In addition, a number 
of the alternative lenders also are country-­specific in their lending. This dynamic is 
much less pronounced in the US, where the legal framework is uniform, and where 
lenders (both bank and nonbank) have operated across geographic markets for 
years.
EXHIBIT 26.2 (continued)
222
Nesbitt944393_c26.indd 222 12/12/2022 1:08:24 PMCHAPTER 27
223
DIRECT VERSUS ENHANCED LENDING
In Exhibit 8.2, the private debt landscape was depicted as two hemispheres. 
The first represented direct lending and the second was called enhanced 
lending. This chapter covers ten of the enhanced lending strategies more fre￾quently used by institutional investors in their private debt portfolios. These 
strategies are mostly managed by firms that specialize in them but there is a 
concurrent trend among larger credit managers to include multiple strate￾gies, including direct lending.
The ten strategies can be divided into roughly two groups. The first 
group of four strategies includes mezzanine debt, CLOs or structured 
finance, venture debt, and rescue finance. What they have in common is 
an exposure to corporate risk, like direct lending. However, that exposure 
tends to be higher risk and more specialized. If direct lending is low beta, 
these corporate-related enhanced lending strategies are higher beta with a 
broader range of outcomes more dependent on the quality of the manager/
lender than the strategy itself.
The second group of six enhanced lending strategies do not have explicit 
corporate risk exposure, but exposures to noncorporate risks. These six 
strategies are asset-backed lending, real estate debt, infrastructure debt, roy￾alties (pharma and entertainment), reinsurance, and litigation finance. Other 
noncorporate credit strategies, such as marketplace lending (fintech), reg 
cap lending, fund finance, and life settlements, have generated interest but 
not to the same scale as the six covered in this chapter.
Investors in both enhanced lending groups generally expect to earn 
10–15% net returns and understand that they are taking on more manager/
lender risk and strategy risk than the 7–10% returns they expect from direct 
lending. In well-diversified portfolios, direct lending risk mitigation comes 
from having lots of loans, and enhanced lending risk mitigation comes from 
having multiple strategies, overseen by the best managers.
Enhanced Lending224 PRIVATE DEBT
MEZZANINE DEBT AND STRUCTURED CAPITAL
Mezzanine debt and structured capital are both higher-risk corporate pri￾vate debt that are sometimes used and will sit between second lien and 
equity in the capital structure depiction in Exhibit 1.2.
Mezzanine Debt
Mezzanine debt is one of the older forms of leveraged finance for middle 
market companies, having originally developed in the 1980s as a solution 
for companies seeking capital for growth or ownership transaction 
purposes that was beyond the capacity of bank lenders and that was less 
dilutive than equity. In the 1980s and 1990s, as the leveraged buyout 
market developed, mezzanine also became a popular form of financing for 
middle market buyouts, as it permitted private equity sponsors to further 
leverage the equity they were investing into buyout deals (sponsored 
deals)—lending to these sponsored deals became a primary focus of many 
specialty mezzanine lenders. More recently, with the advent of the direct 
lending market, including unitranche and second lien loans, mezzanine has 
increasingly become a niche product that represents the smallest portion of 
the corporate leveraged finance market.
The term mezzanine initially referred to the portion of the capital 
structure created in a mezzanine financing: below the senior secured 
level but above unsecured subordinated debt and equity. More recently, 
financings provided by mezzanine lenders can be broader, as part of a capital 
solutions product, encompassing parts of senior and subordinated debt, 
and may also include a significant portion of common and preferred equity.
Market Size and Structure
There is no reliable data on the actual size of the mezzanine market, due to the 
private nature of most mezzanine investment firms and deals, and the variety 
of deal structures. However, some market estimates do exist. As of 2021, 
Preqin reported that the global mezzanine market was estimated to have 
approximately $180 billion including invested capital and dry powder. This 
market size is meaningfully smaller than that of the buyout and senior direct 
lending markets and highlights the niche nature of the mezzanine world.
Expected Return and Risk
The long-term expected return for mezzanine strategies is 9% with an 
estimated risk of 11%. Returns are composed of 9–12% gross unlevered Enhanced Lending 225
interest rates and fees plus 3–5% returns from equity co-investments. 
Strategies vary in their use of equity co-investments, but most strategies 
that include equity target 5–10% of the portfolio in common equity. Loss 
rates are expected to be 1–3% on an annualized basis excluding potential 
offsetting gains or losses from equity co-investments.
Investment Strategies
The initial providers of mezzanine were insurance companies and specialty 
finance companies that were willing to provide patient, subordinated capi￾tal to companies with predictable cash flows in exchange for above-market 
pricing. Borrowers tended to be small or middle market, often privately 
owned businesses that did not wish to access (or simply did not have access 
to) the capital markets. Many of these financing opportunities were negoti￾ated directly between the borrower and the mezzanine debt provider, and 
typical uses included capital for growth initiatives such as building a new 
manufacturing facility or acquiring a competitor, or shareholder-related 
transactions such as the repurchase by the company of a minority interest 
holder or an ownership transfer between generations.
Today, mezzanine lenders tend to fall into two camps: smaller specialty 
firms financing lower middle market deals, either sponsored or unsponsored, 
and larger firms, including affiliates of major investment banks and diversi￾fied asset managers, which raise large pools of capital to serve as high-yield 
replacement during times of market dislocation.
Most mezzanine lenders are specialized firms that raise private funds. 
Given mezzanine’s traditional focus on privately held, middle market com￾panies, loan sizes tend to be relatively small (between $10  million and 
$50 million), so the fund sizes are modest size as well, generally less than 
$1 billion. There are also a small number of much larger funds, ranging from 
$3 billion to $10 billion, which focus on larger buyout and opportunistic 
situations, including periods of capital market dislocation and deals where 
speed and secrecy are valued. There are more than 300 private mezzanine 
firms active globally, over 200 of which are focused on the US market. 
Between 2020 and September 2022, these firms raised between 20 and 
40 new private funds per year, aggregating between $12 billion and $30 bil￾lion.1
 Other players in the mezzanine market include insurance companies, 
investment bank affiliates, and diversified asset management companies.
Private mezzanine funds are typically structured similarly to private 
equity funds, with ten-year total lives including five- to six-year investment 
1
Preqin.226 PRIVATE DEBT
periods. Annual management fees are in the range of 1.5–2% of net invested 
capital or, less commonly, capital commitments during the investment period 
and 1.5–2% of net invested capital during the harvest period. Managers 
also receive 15–20% of fund profits as a carried interest, above a hurdle 
rate or preferred return of 6–8% per annum. Most mezzanine funds usually 
incur no leverage at the fund level, though few use modest leverage, and 
most managers make use of a capital commitment line of credit to stream￾line capital calls and to shorten the length of any J-curve period.
As noted, mezzanine debt is used in a variety of leveraged finance appli￾cations. Loan sizes are generally in the $5 million to $100 million range, 
although most transactions are between $10 million and $50 million. Buy￾out deals represent the lions’ share of mezzanine use, and in these transac￾tions, the mezzanine loan represents between one and two turns of leverage, 
and between 10 and 20% of the capital structure. For example, a typical 
buyout transaction valued at 10× EBITDA may use senior debt equal to 
4–5× EBITDA, mezzanine debt of 1× EBITDA, and equity of 4–5× EBITDA.
The vast majority of mezzanine loans are directly negotiated financings 
between the lender and the borrower, with the introducing party either a 
buyout sponsor or, in the case of an unsponsored deal, an intermediary hired 
by the borrower to source potential capital providers. Similar to the direct 
lending market, sponsored buyouts are estimated to represent approximately 
60–70% of total mezzanine transaction volume. Mezzanine lenders focused 
on unsponsored transactions often market themselves as solution providers 
to borrowers in that they can create bespoke capital structures tailored to a 
borrower’s specific needs. For example, based on the borrower’s cash flows, 
financial leverage, and equity dilution sensitivity, the lender could structure 
a mezzanine financing package composed of a mix of subordinated debt, 
cash pay, or PIK preferred stock and common stock.
STRUCTURED CAPITAL
Structured capital encompasses bespoke financing packages or solutions 
capital that fills the gap between traditional debt and for-control equity. 
Also referred to as hybrid capital, structured capital is both junior debt capi￾tal that is subordinate to senior, unitranche, and mezzanine debt, and equity 
that is structurally senior to common equity. Instruments can include term 
loans with warrants, convertible debt, holding company PIK notes, convert￾ible preferred equity, preferred equity with dividends, or some other combi￾nation of junior debt securities and senior equity instruments.
Generally, financings are structured to include both contractual mini￾mum returns via cash or PIK yield (often on a floating rate basis) and equity Enhanced Lending 227
upside optionality. Downside protection comes in the form of contractual 
yield, maintenance covenants, debt incurrence limitations, call protection, 
amortization requirements, minimum multiple of money liquidation prefer￾ence, redemption and put rights, and 40–60% LTV detachments. Sometimes 
packages include governance protections like board seats. Upside option￾ality is achieved through equity conversion features, warrants, or revenue 
participation.
Structured capital has become a popular form of solutions capital 
because for borrowers it is more flexible than traditional debt and less dilu￾tive than traditional equity. Borrower or company profiles span the spec￾trum from lower middle market, nonfinancial sponsor–owned companies to 
upper middle market, sponsor-owned companies and even large cap public 
companies. Traditionally, borrowers are EBITDA positive and use proceeds 
for growth initiatives, acquisition financing, shareholder recapitalizations, 
or medium-term liquidity needs. More recently, structured capital financ￾ings are popular with the private equity sponsor community looking to 
acquire expensive, high-enterprise-value software and tech-focused busi￾ness, because structured capital tranches allow them to limit their check 
size and achieve required returns despite high-entry multiples or valuations.
Market Size and Structure
As with mezzanine debt, there is no reliable data on the actual size of the 
structured capital market due to the private nature of most deals and the 
variability of the financing packages, which can range from first lien term 
loans with warrants to senior-equity-only instruments and thus they are 
difficult to categorize neatly. The market for structured capital is likely the 
sum of some subset of the traditional mezzanine debt market and special 
situation or opportunistic credit market, which totals about $500 billion 
in available investment capital as of June 30, 2022. Of course, structured 
capital financings are only a subset of that dry powder estimate, but 
certainly a growing fraction, as traditional mezzanine providers increasingly 
also offer structured capital packages, and traditional opportunistic or 
distressed debt providers move into the structured capital space as distress 
credit opportunities have abated since the GFC.
Expected Return and Risk
Contractual returns for structured capital financings range from 10–14% 
interest income, either part cash pay and PIK or all PIK, together with equity 
upside or equity options providing another 3–5% return, together total￾ing a 13–17% range in gross return. Net of manager fees, carried interest, 228 PRIVATE DEBT
and whether a manager applies fund level leverage, investors can expect a 
10–15% net return.
In terms of risk, structured capital tranches will attach at about 6.5× 
EBITDA and detach at 8.5× EBITDA on a 14× EBITDA total enterprise 
value company. Of course, many companies are valued less than 14×, 
and many companies are valued more than 14×, so investors normalize 
measurements of attachment/detachment by translating to a LTV basis. 
As such, a 6.5× EBITDA attachment point translates to a 46% LTV on a 
14× company valuation and an 8.5× detachment point translates to a 60% 
LTV. The median structured capital tranche thickness is 1.5–2× EBITDA, 
with a 60% LTV detachment or 40% (1/LTV) equity cushion beneath 
the structured capital tranche’s last dollar at risk, often referred to as the 
creation point.
Investment Strategies
Structured capital providers are specialized firms that raise private, closed￾end vehicles similar to private equity funds. A typical structured capital fund 
will feature a three- to five-year investment period and eight- to ten-year 
final term. Management fees average 1.5% on committed capital or net 
invested capital with carried interest averaging 20% of profits once a 7 or 
8% preferred return hurdle is met. Some funds will incur no leverage and 
some funds will apply up to 0.3× through a capital call facility.
Structured capital managers are entering the market from two sides: 
private credit and private equity. Private credit managers, many of whom 
have traditionally managed second lien or mezzanine debt strategies, as 
well as managers who have traditionally managed distressed and rescue 
financing strategies, are both increasingly coming to market with standalone 
structured credit funds or collapsing structured capital financings into 
existing fund offerings, as the opportunity for strictly mezzanine financing or 
distressed and rescue financing has waned since the GFC. On the equity side, 
many private equity managers directly experience the need for structured 
capital tranches and recognize its long-term potential and importance to the 
sponsor community. As such, many private equity managers are organizing 
in-house teams and launching dedicated structured credit funds, which 
oftentimes fundraise alongside the private equity manager’s flagship equity 
fund. This way, the economics and future growth of this tranche of financing 
accrues to the private equity franchise instead of leaking out to a third-party 
credit manager. Private equity–affiliated structured capital funds can be 
either fully captive or non-captive funds. Captive funds are fully committed 
to providing structured capital for all of a private equity sponsor’s deals 
while non-captive funds have flexibility to choose between doing deals with Enhanced Lending 229
the private equity parent or doing deals with other nonaffiliated private 
equity sponsors.
Like managers, investors and limited partners also come into the 
structured capital market from credit-focused or equity-focused perspectives. 
Many credit investors like structured capital for its contractual pay and 
downside protection features, with a view that the equity upside optionality 
balances the downside asymmetry of traditional credit investing. Private 
equity investors allocate to structured capital as a way to add some downside 
protection or dampen volatility in their private equity portfolio without 
sacrificing too much return.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, credit-focused investors often prefer non￾affiliated structured credit funds, as they tend to believe a manager should 
be beholden to limited partners alone as opposed to having conflicts or 
perceptions of conflicts with incentives, economics, and loyalty to a par￾ent or affiliate private equity firm. However, many private equity investors 
have close and long-standing relationships with private equity firms. These 
investors are less concerned about an affiliate fund’s conflicts or perception 
of conflicts, and instead they focus on the plausible assumption that affili￾ated structured capital funds, and those teams leading them, can underwrite 
deals with an ownership or equity perspective and step in or influence man￾agement of a company should something go wrong with the credit story. 
It’s worth noting that many private equity firms that raise oversubscribed 
private equity funds and have an affiliate structured capital fund will require 
or suggest that limited partners also subscribe to their structured capital 
fund to secure allocations to the oversubscribed flagship private equity fund.
Although structured capital financings can take many forms, prospec￾tive return expectations settle into a relatively tight range. Realized losses 
will, therefore, make the difference between outperformance and underper￾formance within the category. Structured capital as an investment category, 
however, is too nascent, with financing packages too diverse, performance 
date too disparate to neatly assess what type of style or risk factors might 
generate under- or overperformance—be it lower middle market versus 
upper middle market and large cap deals, nonsponsor- versus sponsor￾owned company deals, cash flowing or negative cash flowing (high-growth) 
deals, or affiliated funds versus nonaffiliated funds.
Nevertheless, the use case and utility of the structured capital tranche 
promises that this will be a growing and important part of the private credit 
and private equity ecosystem. Borrowers value the flexible solutions-oriented 
capital, and investors value low teens returns with a balanced return/risk 
profile. As such, structured capital is likely to become a mainstay allocation 
for both private credit and private equity investors, with many forms of 
fund offerings spanning the style and risk spectrum.230 PRIVATE DEBT
COLLATERALIZED LOAN OBLIGATIONS
Collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) are legal structures designed to pro￾vide investors access to the economics found in a diversified portfolio of 
high-yield leveraged loans. However, unlike the mutual funds, ETFs, and 
managed accounts that invest holistically in leveraged loans, CLOs parti￾tion leveraged loan economics into multiple securities, allowing investors 
to select a higher or lower level of expected return and risk, rather than 
the pooled average. This report describes how CLOs parcel leveraged loan 
portfolio economics and the return and risk that can be expected from CLO 
securities typically offered.
Leveraged Loans
CLO economics are based on leveraged loans. A by-product of the lever￾aged buyouts (LBOs) begun in the 1980s, leveraged loans are non￾investment grade, five- to seven-year floating rate corporate loans, syndi￾cated and traded by major money center banks. The long-term success of 
LBOs and private equity generally has helped push the global leveraged loan 
market to approach $2 trillion. Investors have been attracted to leveraged 
loans because of their higher yield, floating rate, medium-term maturity, 
and relative liquidity. Today, leveraged loans have become an institutional￾ized asset class supporting investments by pensions and endowments, with 
management services offered by most large, fixed income advisory firms. 
Morningstar LSTA and Credit Suisse both support widely used leveraged 
loan indexes that serve as useful guides for measuring return and risk and 
serve as performance benchmarks.
CLO Structure
CLO assets total approximately $1 trillion, or 50% of the leveraged loan 
market, and were created soon after the leveraged loan market began to 
encourage investors with much different risk preferences to finance lev￾ered loans.
The CLO is an indenture agreement between lenders (noteholders) and 
a Delaware/Cayman legal entity as borrower. A portfolio manager,2
 typi￾cally also the CLO sponsor, selects a portfolio of leveraged loans that serves 
as the sole collateral to service notes issued by the CLO. The CLO also 
provides for various administrative functions including trustee, custodian, 
2
Also known as the collateral manager.Enhanced Lending 231
administrator, and underwriter. Notes and other CLO securities are gener￾ally exempt from SEC registration.
The CLO increases demand for leveraged loans by issuing a series of 
notes with different priorities over the cash flows and principal repayments 
produced by the CLO-leveraged loan collateral portfolio. Higher (lower) 
priority notes have lower (higher) expected risk of nonpayment and, 
therefore, lower (higher) yield to compensate for expected risk. Though 
individual CLO indentures differ, most issue first-priority senior AAA￾rated notes equal to ~60% of total CLO assets, lower priority investment 
grade notes equal to ~20% of total CLO assets and rated AA to BBB, non￾investment grade or non-rated mezzanine notes equal to ~10% of CLO 
assets, and last, notes entitled only to CLO asset cash flows after all other 
obligations have been satisfied. This last note is generally referred to as 
CLO equity.
CLO Return and Risk
The size and longevity of the CLO market is due to its successful match￾ing of assets with liabilities. A mismatch in interest rate risk (duration) has 
undermined many fixed income structures when unexpected rate changes 
occur. In the case of CLOs, both assets (loans) and liabilities (notes) are a 
floating rate, so changes in interest rates increase assets and liabilities in the 
same direction and magnitude. Loan prepayments from lower credit spreads 
can be a challenge, but prepayment penalties and note resets help to mitigate 
the modest risk this presents.
CLO economics centers on the transference of interest income and 
principal (less potential credit losses) from a portfolio of non-investment 
grade loans, which serves as collateral to CLO noteholders and CLO equity.
In Exhibit 27.1, we use the Merton model3
 to illustrate how the CLO 
collateral asset returns should theoretically be distributed across CLO debt 
(notes) and CLO equity.
Given a set of assumptions, most important leveraged loan volatility,4
Exhibit 27.1 plots the cost of debt at different levels of financing. Line 1 
reflects a 2.25% Libor rate, which all CLO noteholders receive. Line 2 
shows the average cost of financing spread across all debt (notes) up to the 
debt levels shown on the horizontal axis. Dashed line 3 shows the marginal 
3
Robert C. Merton, “On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of 
Interest Rates,” The Journal of Finance (May 1974).
4
Leveraged loan volatility at debt maturity primarily reflects cumulative credit 
losses.232 PRIVATE DEBT
cost of financing for each additional dollar of debt. For example, the Merton 
model with our assumptions would require an average combined cost of 
financing for 90% of CLO assets to equal 3.72%, or 1.47% above Libor. 
The marginal cost of financing at the 90% debt level equals 10.99%.
The remaining 10% of financing in Exhibit  27.1 comes from CLO 
equity. The required cost of financing the remaining 10% equals 13.22%, 
using the Merton model. This would represent the return that CLO equity 
would require for providing the last 10% of financing and accept first loss 
on loan defaults.
In our example, suppose further that the collateral assets yield Libor 
plus a 2.95% spread, net of management fees, or total yield of 5.20%. 
If 90% of the financing for that collateral can be had at an average cost 
of 3.72%, then the remaining 10% residual financing, representing CLO 
equity, will earn 18.52%.5
 Because the 18.52% CLO yield exceeds the 
required 13.22% financing for the last 10% of CLO assets, the CLO equity 
0%
16.0%
Credit Risk Premium (Marginal Rate)
Credit Risk Premium (Average Rate)
Libor
14.0%
12.0%
10.0%
8.0%
Cost of Debt
6.0%
4.0%
2.0%
0.0%
10% 20% 30% 40%
Debt Financing as a Percent Total CLO Assets
50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
10.99%
3.72%
1
2
3
Average
Cost of Debt
Marginal
Cost of Debt
EXHIBIT 27.1 Model pricing of CLO notes and CLO equity.
5
Collateral Yield = (Avg. Financing Cost) × (Percentage Debt Financed) + (CLO Equity 
Yield) × (Percentage Equity Financed), or [5.20% = (3.72% ×90%) + (18.52% × 10%)].Enhanced Lending 233
looks like an attractive investment. Theoretically, this imbalance between 
actual yield and required yield would be arbitraged away by additional 
CLO creation and narrowing leveraged loan spreads.
CLO Mechanics
A CLO goes through four stages. Before the CLO is created, the CLO 
sponsor (generally the collateral manager) and a bank create a warehouse 
facility to build a portfolio of leveraged loans that later will be used to 
launch the CLO. The sponsor contributes most of what will become the CLO 
equity, and the bank provides partial financing (leverage) to begin building 
a portfolio of leveraged loans. Expectations are that after approximately six 
months the warehouse has reached a size equal to approximately 70% of 
the final CLO structure.
If the underwriters have done their job placing the CLO notes, the CLO 
structure goes effective and the CLO enters a ramp-up stage of approxi￾mately three months when all assets are invested in a diversified portfolio of 
leveraged loans and the CLO is operating at its maximum efficiency.
The reinvestment stage is designed to be three to six years in length, long 
enough to give noteholders and equity holders a sufficient cash return on 
their investment, primarily in the form of current income. Principal proceeds 
from loan maturities and prepayments are reinvested during this period, 
keeping the size of the CLO structure constant.
When the reinvestment period ends, the amortization stage begins. All 
cash flow from the leveraged loan portfolio, including principal payments, 
is distributed to the noteholders and equity holders in priority of their 
claims. In the case of the equity holders, the likely outcome is only partial 
payment of their initial capital contribution as they absorb the first loss on 
all defaults.
For example, assume the CLO-leveraged loan portfolio experiences 
credit losses equal to 0.5% of its principal value per year, a level equal 
to the historical average default rate for leveraged loans. If the life of the 
CLO is six years, then the cumulative loss from defaults will equal 3% 
(6 years × 0.5%). The CLO equity holders will absorb all those losses 
and will receive just 70% of their initial capital back. To compensate for 
these losses, CLO equity holders will be receiving all the cash yield from 
the leveraged loan portfolio above noteholder financing costs. In our previ￾ous example, we calculated an 18.52% yield for CLO equity holders, with 234 PRIVATE DEBT
no defaults. If the leveraged loan portfolio experiences 0.5% in annual 
credit losses, then the actual return (IRR) received by the equity holders 
equals 14.89%. If annual credit losses are 1.0%, rather than 0.5%, then 
the CLO equity holders get back only 40% of their original capital but 
still receive an annualized return equal to 10.41%.
CLO Collateral Manager
The CLO collateral manager serves two roles. The first is to minimize the 
cost of financing by satisfying noteholders by reputation and portfolio 
construction that the manager will be a good steward of assets and meet all 
obligations under the indenture. The second is to maximize CLO equity 
returns by ongoing management of CLO assets and liabilities. This would 
include minimizing credit losses through strong underwriting of leveraged 
loans, engaging in market transactions that maximize yield over the life of 
the CLO without compromising covenants, and identifying opportunities to 
refinance or recall CLO debt.
VENTURE DEBT
Venture debt is a form of senior secured lending with equity upside oppor￾tunity, where the borrower is most likely a small, often venture capital–
backed, high-growth company. These businesses may be losing money at the 
operating level, given their focus on investing for rapid growth, and some 
may even be pre-revenue. With this fact pattern, the normal rules of com￾mercial credit, such as requiring positive cash flow to repay indebtedness, do 
not always apply. Therefore, the providers of venture debt base their credit 
facilities on a conservative estimated LTV, as well as the amount of current 
balance sheet cash raised by the borrower from venture capitalists and the 
current and projected burn rate of that cash.
Market Size and Structure
Venture debt developed in the 1980s as venture capital–backed companies 
sought ways to accelerate their growth without the need to launch further 
rounds of equity finance and/or incur additional ownership dilution. What 
ensued was the creation of a new type of debt financing that combined 
aspects of senior secured lending with mezzanine finance. Specifically, 
since these venture-backed companies did not have the necessary financial 
statistics (e.g., a history of profitability), they were traditionally capitalized Enhanced Lending 235
solely with equity capital. If their growth slowed or their prospects weakened 
(or the venture market simply was not open for a further equity investment 
round) at the time the companies required additional growth capital, they 
were forced to seek alternative financing methods. Equipment leasing was 
an option but was limited in availability and scope. The other option was a 
line of credit from a venture debt provider secured by the company’s balance 
sheet assets (which are typically composed of cash and significant intangible 
assets, such as technological know-how and goodwill).
To compensate themselves for the heightened credit risk of lending to 
small, perhaps money-losing companies, venture lenders limit their expo￾sure to any one borrower to a conservative, perhaps 10–15%, LTV, and 
require equity warrants in the borrower as additional compensation. Even 
with the warrants, the total cost of the venture debt is still below the returns 
required by equity investors, so the venture debt facility is less dilutive to 
the existing equity investors in the company. Therefore, venture debt can be 
a relatively attractive temporary source of capital.
The majority of venture debt is targeted at venture capital–backed 
companies, although some venture debt providers will also consider non￾venture-backed companies as well. It is estimated that an average of $32.2 
billion of venture loans have been completed per year between 2019 and 
June 30, 2022.6
 However, this includes commercial banks and larger 
generalist lenders financing later stage growth companies. Venture-backed 
companies are staying private longer than ever, which has continued to 
expand the opportunity set for venture lenders. As with much of the venture 
world, relationships are critical to landing venture lending opportunities, 
as the venture capitalists that control potential borrowers seek to find 
capital partners in whom they trust and that have a reputation for serving 
as effective capital providers to other similar businesses. Accordingly, the 
universe of active, professional venture debt providers is small, perhaps 
less than two dozen firms. Most of these firms are structured similarly to 
private equity or mezzanine firms, and they raise private funds to finance 
their loans. As with the venture capital space, fund sizes tend to be small, 
generally less than $500  million. Each fund may hold between 25 and 
80 loans, although the total number of positions in a lender’s portfolio may 
be higher due to unexercised warrants of companies that have already paid 
off their loans. A small number of venture debt providers are structured as 
public or private BDCs.
6
Pitchbook NVCA Venture Monitor Q2 2022.236 PRIVATE DEBT
Expected Risk and Return
Relative to other private credit strategies, the venture debt strategy has 
limited competition from traditional lending sources and high barriers to 
entry, due to the relationships needed in the venture capital space and the 
expertise needed to evaluate small, rapidly growing companies operating in 
new technology sectors. Additionally, venture debt has seniority in claim to 
the borrower’s assets and is over-collateralized via a conservative LTV. Given 
the high rate of company failure, venture lending can be a risky undertaking, 
so venture lenders seek to compensate themselves for this added risk by 
requiring some form of return upside, such as equity warrants and exit fees, 
in addition to traditional interest rate and closing fee compensation.
The interest rate on venture debt is typically set between 8 and 12% per 
annum (either a fixed rate or a floating rate over SOFR, LIBOR, or prime), 
and the lender may also charge a closing fee (typically 1–2% of the amount 
of the loan) and a back-end fee of up to 10% of the loan amount, to be paid 
at the time the loan is repaid. In addition, the lender will seek warrants with 
an estimated value of between 5 and 15% of loan amount as additional 
compensation. All in, the lender will price the loan package to generate a 
gross internal rate of return of 15–25% and will target a cash yield on the 
loan of 10–15%.
As this strategy is limited in size and capacity, and involves lending 
to small, mostly private, high-risk companies with limited track records, 
venture debt should be considered by institutional investors as a return￾enhancing, niche strategy, which should represent only a modest allocation 
of a diversified credit portfolio.
Investment Strategies
In a typical venture debt financing opportunity, the lender seeks a bor￾rower who possesses a number of key characteristics: (1) a company in the 
information technology, life sciences, media and entertainment, and finan￾cial technology sectors; (2) the existing involvement of a strong syndicate 
of venture capitalists who express interest in continuing to back the com￾pany; (3) an attractive business and revenue model; (4) substantial mon￾etizable intellectual property; and (5) a realistic business plan for future 
capital raising and growth. The company most likely has raised an A round, 
and perhaps a B round of venture equity and is seeking between $2 million 
and $25  million of debt capital. The company and its shareholders are 
typically seeking ways to continue to fund the business growth between 
equity rounds (extend the company’s runway), while minimizing equity 
dilution. The lender will seek to limit its exposure to a modest, perhaps 
10–15% LTV, with value based on the lender’s estimate of enterprise value Enhanced Lending 237
of the company. The enterprise value may be based on the previous venture 
capital round valuation, as well as company progress since the last round, 
current market conditions, and the valuation of comparable companies. 
The  loan amount may also take into consideration the borrower’s cash 
balance and burn rate if the business is not yet cash positive.
The loan structure will often be a fixed or floating rate loan of three to 
five years in length, perhaps beginning with an interest-only period of up 
to two years followed by an amortizing period. Loans are usually repaid 
when the borrower raises its next round of financing, or via the company’s 
IPO or third-party sale.
Venture debt remains a modestly sized, niche strategy within private 
credit. Given the still-developing nature of the market, there are limited data 
on total fund size. That said, there are approximately 20 active institutional 
investment firms in the space. These firms raise fewer than five new private 
funds each year, with aggregate annual capital raised annually totaling less 
than a billion dollars.
The Cliffwater Direct Venture Lending Index (CDLI-V)
CDLI-V is composed of only venture-backed loans within the overall CDLI 
to investigate the comparative performance of this lesser-known type of lend￾ing against the entire universe of middle market loans represented by CDLI.
CDLI-V follows the same construction methodology as CDLI but only 
includes loans held by managers of BDCs that have an investment style 
that is determined to clearly focus on venture lending. The same quarterly 
performance and portfolio data that is available for CDLI is also available 
for CDLI-V, except that the beginning date is March 31, 2005, for CDLI-V 
compared to September 30, 2004, for CDLI. As with the CDLI, CDLI-V should 
not suffer from biases (backfill and survivorship) found in other databases 
because all source data comes from required SEC filings.
Some key differences between the CDLI and CDLI-V indexes at March 
31, 2022, are shown here:
CDLI-V CDLI
# Loans 608 9,475
Total Assets $5.9 billion $223 billion
EBITDA (median) n/a $46 million
Nonaccrual (as % of Cost) 2.1% 1.1%
Implied Recovery Rate 36% 58%
% Sponsor 100% 79%
% Senior 91% 76%238 PRIVATE DEBT
Exhibit 27.2 reports performance for CDLI-V over its entire 17-year 
history with comparisons to the broader CDLI for the same time period.
Venture lending, as represented by CDLI-V, has performed well from 
its inception, achieving an 11.96% total return compared to 9.51% for the 
CDLI for the same time period. The reason for the higher return primar￾ily lies with higher interest income, which equaled 13.02% from inception 
compared to 10.95% for CDLI. This higher interest income for CDLI-V, 
however, did not come with higher realized losses, which total −0.83% from 
inception for CDLI-V, compared to a −1.16% realized loss rate for CDLI 
for the same period.
Unfortunately, our CDLI-V return series does not include the period 
from 2000 to 2003 when venture capital was hardest hit from the internet 
bubble. We would expect much higher realized losses from venture lending 
for that period, which is not captured by our data.
Total Return and 
Components Q1 2022
Last Four 
Quarters
Last Five 
Years*
From CDLI-V 
Inception 
March 2005
CDLI-V Returns
CDLI-V Total Return** 1.51% 12.30% 12.37% 11.96%
= Income 2.66% 11.96% 12.71% 13.02%
+/− Net Realized Gains 
(Losses)
−0.13% 0.24% −0.93% −0.83%
+/− Net Unrealized 
Gains (Losses)
−1.03% 0.06% 0.61% −0.17%
CDLI Returns
CDLI Total Return** 1.76% 11.17% 8.63% 9.51%
= Income 1.93% 8.67% 9.75% 10.95%
+/− Net Realized Gains 
(Losses)
0.03% 0.49% −1.23% −1.16%
+/− Net Unrealized 
Gains (Losses)
−0.19% 1.85% 0.18% −0.20%
*Annualized return.
**Return subcomponents may not add to total return due to compounding effects.
EXHIBIT 27.2 Venture direct loan performance (CDLI-Venture).Enhanced Lending 239
RESCUE FINANCING
Rescue financings occur when a company has a critical near-term liquidity 
issue that they are unable to solve through traditional channels such as 
the high-yield bond or loan market. Rescue financings may avoid the need 
to resort to bankruptcy, provide a borrower with immediate cash needs, 
and enable the lenders to improve the economic and collateral position 
of their loan. The reasons for the company’s financing problems may be 
related to general financial stress, market conditions, or time constraints 
due to upcoming maturities. In certain situations, the lender may be acting 
as a lender of last resort and thus is able to extract more favorable terms, 
including higher interest rates and better call protections.
The term rescue financing includes a broad market of distressed 
opportunities that is considered a subsector of distressed investment. For 
the purposes of this discussion, we focus on a more defined part of the 
market—debtor in possession, or DIP, financings. DIPs refer to financing for 
a company that retains control of its assets and continues to operate while 
under the Chapter 11 bankruptcy process. Under a Chapter 11 bankruptcy, 
a company files for protection from creditors while it reorganizes itself. 
DIP financings provide capital for companies to turn themselves around 
as they work through a restructuring.
DIP financing provides a company that is seeking bankruptcy court pro￾tection with funds to operate its business while it develops and implements 
a plan of reorganization. As an incentive to lenders to provide funding, 
the US Bankruptcy Code provides DIP lenders strong creditor protections. 
Under Chapter 11 of the US Bankruptcy Code, DIP lenders receive super￾priority creditor status that grants them the right to be repaid from col￾lateral proceeds before any pre-petition creditors, including existing senior 
secured lenders.
Companies file for bankruptcy for many reasons, and each company 
takes a different path through this process. Most large companies that enter 
bankruptcy are able to reorganize and emerge, in which case the DIP loan 
is repaid. However, some companies’ reorganizations fail, resulting in a 
liquidation scenario, which may increase potential losses for DIP creditors.
DIP loan maturities can range from six months to two years, but most 
maturities are less than 12 months. The loans are typically shorter duration 
relative to corporate bond and loan issuance, as the financings provide a 
specific function: enable the debtors with enough time to reorganize.
A typical exit for rescue financings involves the company refinancing 
the debt once the no-call period expires or after the call premiums expire, 240 PRIVATE DEBT
unless a strong market emerges for the debt that enables the lender to exit 
through a secondary sale. Some DIP financings have included the option to 
convert to outstanding amounts on the DIP loan to equity, providing the 
lenders potential upside.
Market Size and Structure
The market size for DIP loans and rescue financings is highly dependent on 
the distressed cycle and the amount of total debt outstanding in the market. 
Rising default rates on corporate debt are likely to increase the need for DIP 
financing and rescue financings for corporate entities. It is important to note 
that DIP financings are a subset of the broader rescue financing market. 
Given the broad definition of rescue financings, it is a difficult market to 
define. Consequently, we used market data on the size of the DIP financing 
market as an estimation of the rescue financing market.
The demand for DIPs will generally peak following a distressed cycle 
when the amount of companies in distress peak. The demand for DIP financ￾ings peaked in 2009 following the financial crisis but has since decreased 
as default rates have remained low relative to historical standards. From 
2000 to 2009, the DIP market’s annual volume ranged from $5 billion to 
$15 billion. In 2009, it was estimated that the total DIP financing market 
exceeded $55 billion. Post the financial crisis, the DIP financing market was 
heavily affected by several large capital structures that defaulted, including 
GM, Lyondell, and Chrysler. Since 2009, the DIP market’s annual volume 
has ranged from a low of less than $4 billion in 2010 and 2011 to a high 
of $16 billion in 2016, following the energy crisis, and $27.8 billion fol￾lowing the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.7
 Notable companies driving 
the surge in 2020 include those in industries heavily affected by shutdowns 
such as Hertz and LATAM Airlines Group. DIP financings in 2021 dropped 
dramatically to $2.4 billion as the economy quickly rebounded and adapted 
to the post-COVID environment. However, in 2022 year to date through 
August, DIP financings have started to trend upward totaling $5.8 billion as 
stress created by inflation and supply chain issues affect companies.
Expected Return and Risk
Most investors require double-digit returns on DIP financings, depending 
on the level of SOFR/LIBOR rates. At the peak of a distressed cycle, DIP 
7
Reorg Research, Inc. (September 2022).Enhanced Lending 241
financings can range from SOFR/LIBOR plus 600 bps to SOFR/LIBOR 
plus 2,100 bps. However, in more benign credit default environments, DIP 
financings typically range from SOFR/LIBOR plus 600 bps to SOFR/LIBOR 
plus 1,000 bps. DIP financings also include significant up-front, and, less 
frequently, exit fees, each often ranging from 2–4% of the loan amount. 
Up-front fees recently have been closer to 2%. As noted, DIP lenders are 
often able to extract above-market terms for their loan packages, including 
no-call periods and laddered call premiums, original issue discounts (OIDs), 
equity warrants, and structural features including blocking rights that allow 
the lender to control the company’s ability to restructure its balance sheet. 
Such opportunities are more market cycle dependent and may be shorter 
in duration.
Under the bankruptcy code, DIP financings are granted super-priority 
creditor status and therefore have a first lien on company assets. According 
to Moody’s, the default risk of DIPs for large public companies has been 
historically low, which translates into low loss ratios for these loans.
Investment Strategies
Historically, commercial banks were a major provider of DIP financings. 
However, commercial banks have retreated from this market since the finan￾cial crisis. The biggest providers of capital in this space include major debt 
lenders, hedge funds, private equity funds, and other distressed managers. 
In many cases, the major debt lenders who do not want to be involved in 
a restructuring situation may sell their position in the secondary market 
ahead of a bankruptcy filing, typically to distressed managers (hedge fund 
or private equity fund, for example). These types of investors are typically 
involved in stressed/distressed companies prior to a bankruptcy filing, which 
gives them a seat at the table during restructuring negotiations. Many DIP 
lenders are already interested parties in the distressed company financing, 
seeking to protect their position in the capital structure. In general, only 
20% of DIP financing comes from third-party lenders.
There is not generally pooled capital raised specifically for DIP fin￾ancings. Rather, DIP financings are managed as part of a broader distressed 
investment strategy. There are hundreds of managers that employ some type 
of distressed strategy, which may include DIP financings. The number of DIP 
financings per year peaked at over 160 following both the financial crisis 
and the COVID-19 pandemic but has remained fewer than 100 in years 
following both events. Total DIP financings in recent years have ranged from 
approximately $2 billion to $28 billion, while peak volume reached $58 
billion in 2009.242 PRIVATE DEBT
ASSET-BASED LENDING
Asset-based lending (ABL) encompasses a variety of corporate- and 
consumer-oriented finance strategies where the credit is backed, either 
directly or indirectly, by tangible or financial assets. Unlike traditional lever￾aged finance strategies, such as direct or mezzanine lending, where the loan 
is supported predominantly by the general creditworthiness and enterprise 
value of the borrower, asset-based loans are backed predominantly by the 
value of specific assets that serve as collateral for the loan.
Market Size and Structure
As with other types of private credit, there is no reliable data on the actual 
size of the asset-based lending market, due to myriad different sub-specialties 
and the private nature of most ABL providers. However, some broad market 
estimates do exist. The Federal Reserve Economic Data of June 2022 reports 
that there was $733 billion of US consumer credit outstanding owned and 
managed by finance companies. There is also reported to be $347 billion of 
small business financing outstanding including $193 million of equipment 
loans and leases as well as $79 billion of other receivables including loans 
on commercial accounts receivable and factored commercial accounts. Of 
course, these figures include assets held by the major consumer and com￾mercial card companies and lenders, so the opportunity set for the specialist 
ABL participants is likely a very small subset.
Asset-based finance is a broad category of private credit. Some of the 
more prevalent sub-strategies include the following:
1. Working capital finance: a large subset of ABL includes revolving lines 
of credit provided to small and midsized companies seeking to finance 
the growth of their inventory and accounts receivable. Historically this 
type of ABL was provided primarily by local and regional banks. How￾ever, in recent years increased bank regulation and heightened bank 
capital adequacy requirements have led to reductions in the quantity of 
bank lending targeting this borrower universe, and private lenders have 
entered the field. In a working capital line of credit facility, the lender 
will advance to the borrower a percentage of the value of inventory and 
receivables on the borrower’s books.
2. Equipment finance: this broad category of ABL encompasses loans 
and lines of credit made against hard assets. Sub-categories include 
small business finance, such as equipment leasing and retailer point of 
purchase equipment finance; transportation finance, including aircraft 
and aircraft equipment, rolling stock, trailer and shipping containers, Enhanced Lending 243
and cargo vessels; and floorplan finance, such as warehouse lines for 
auto retailers. Similar to working capital finance, this type of business 
lending was once largely the purview of commercial banks, as well as 
commercial finance companies. In the wake of the GFC, many commercial 
banks have pulled back from this type of finance, while a number of the 
larger commercial finance companies have gone out of business. Private 
lenders have begun to fill the void on an opportunistic basis, seeking 
out more complex situations with enhanced expected returns.
3. Financial asset lending and rediscounting: a third major category of 
ABL involves a specialty lender providing portfolio-based loans or lines 
of credit to other consumer or commercial finance companies to support 
the growth of those lenders’ portfolios. Examples of portfolios financed 
include (1) for consumer lenders: credit card receivables, installment 
loans, auto loans, and small ticket leases; and (2) for commercial 
lenders: merchant cash advances (purchases of future receivables), small 
business loans, and rediscount facilities (a note purchase facility for 
other finance companies such as factoring providers). In each case, the 
lender provides a credit facility collateralized by the underlying loans or 
leases, which may themselves be secured or unsecured obligations of the 
ultimate borrower. These credit facilities are often highly structured, to 
protect the lender against cash leakage and fraud.
Expected Return and Risk
Asset-based lending has varied levels of competition from traditional lend￾ing sources, based on the specific strategy employed. Additionally, ABL 
strategies have seniority in claim to the assets being financed and have an 
income component that is commensurate with the liquidity and quality of 
the asset and the complexity of the financing structure.
For example, working capital finance is offered by a variety of lender 
types, including commercial banks, commercial finance companies, and 
private investment funds. This strategy is the most traditional of ABL 
strategies and has the lowest barriers to entry, and thus the most competitive 
pricing. Such loans are almost always floating rate, such as a spread over 
SOFR or LIBOR. In today’s market, spreads range from 300 to 600 bps. 
The lender may also charge a modest (25- to 50-bp) fee on undrawn 
commitments. Unlevered gross annual returns are therefore in the mid- to 
upper-single digit percentages. Given the short-term nature of the assets 
being financed, these ABL loans turn over multiple times per year. So, the 
loan facility may only run for one year, with cleanups of line outstandings 
on seasonal borrowings.244 PRIVATE DEBT
Alternatively, financial asset lending and rediscounting is a very specia￾lized niche that requires significant investment in monitoring systems and 
operational controls. Accordingly, lenders offering this strategy enjoy sig￾nificant competitive advantages, which can lead to the opportunity for pre￾mium returns. These financing packages typically carry a floating rate of 
interest, such as SOFR/LIBOR + 800 basis points to SOFR/LIBOR + 1200 
bps per annum. The lender may also charge structuring and unused commit￾ment fees and will target a gross annualized return of 12–15%.
Fixed asset finance tends to fall somewhere in the middle of these two 
extremes. These loans and leases typically have a tenor that approximates 
the useful life of the asset being financed, which may range from 2 years to 
over 20 years. Interest rates can be fixed or floating, and spreads vary with 
the quality, secondary market value, and relative liquidity of the asset.
Because of the small company and/or asset-specific risk of asset-based 
lending, investors should consider the strategy to be a satellite position in a 
diversified private credit portfolio, which would be a smaller allocation than 
core strategies, such as direct lending or real estate lending.
Investment Strategies
Most ABLs are specialized firms that raise private funds or are finance com￾panies with balance sheets owned by BDCs and asset managers. Given ABLs’ 
focus on privately held, small market and middle market borrowers, loan 
sizes tend to be relatively small (between $10 million and $50 million), so 
the fund sizes are modestly sized as well, generally less than $1 billion. Parts 
of the corporate ABL market have expanded in recent years as upper middle 
market companies, particularly in the retail sector, look to ABL funds as a 
source of liquidity. Due to the still-developing institutional investor interest 
in the sector, market size details are limited, but there are approximately 40 
active private lenders in the space, which collectively raise multiple billions 
of dollars per year of new private vehicles with a focus on ABL. As noted, 
other players in the ABL market include local and regional banks.
Private ABL funds are typically structured similarly to private equity 
funds, although they frequently employ shorter funds lives, for example, 
a five- to eight-year total fund life with a two- to three-year investment 
period. The primary reason for the shorter fund life is the self-liquidating 
nature of the assets being financed, such that investment hold periods in 
ABL are on the whole meaningfully shorter than those of typical private 
equity investments.
ABL fee structures, however, are largely analogous to those seen in 
private equity, although lower in absolute level. Annual management fees 
are typically charged on invested capital. In general, annual management Enhanced Lending 245
fees are in the range of 1−2% of gross invested assets, which may include 
leverage applied to investor contributions. Managers may also receive 
10−20% of fund profits as a carried interest, above a hurdle rate or preferred 
return of 6−8% per annum. Use of leverage at the fund level varies based on 
the underlying sub-strategy: while financial asset lending often does not use 
leverage, other more straightforward strategies may employ leverage.
As noted, ABL is used in a variety of corporate and asset finance 
applications. Loan sizes are generally in the $5  million to $200 million 
range, although the majority of transactions are between $10 million and 
$75 million. Portfolio finance transactions involving large numbers of 
underlying assets can be larger.
REAL ESTATE DEBT
Real estate debt is a large, multifaceted market that encompasses a wide 
range of participants and loan and investment structures covering the entire 
universe of commercial property types around the globe. Real estate debt 
is used by property owners and developers to finance the acquisition or 
development of a property or construction project and to leverage the equity 
invested. Loan sizes and structures vary widely, with loans ranging from 
less than $1 million to hundreds of millions of dollars, and structures that 
include senior secured first mortgages, whole loan packages composed of a 
senior loan and mezzanine loan, syndicated loans, and loan tranches created 
and sold to structured product vehicles such as commercial mortgage￾backed securities (CMBS).
Historically, traditional lenders like banks and life insurance compa￾nies supplied the majority of real estate debt capital to property owners. 
The real estate debt landscape began to evolve in the 1990s. The CMBS 
market developed following the savings and loan crisis, allowing nonbank 
institutions and investors to access real estate debt through the securitized 
market. The real estate debt market underwent further evolution following 
the 2008 GFC. As bank lenders pulled back from real estate lending as a 
result of the post-2008 banking regulations, private real estate managers 
and mortgage REITs emerged to fill the commercial real estate financing 
gap left by banks.
Private real estate debt has emerged as a well-developed market for 
institutional investors. There are more than 200 active private fund managers 
operating in the space, with most of them operating in the US. Over the past 
five years, these managers have raised between 40 and 50 new private funds 
per year, generally aggregating over $30 billion per year.246 PRIVATE DEBT
Current Market Environment
The market for real estate debt is large and deep, both in the US and 
globally. Average annual real estate loan origination in the US has ranged 
between $450 billion and $600 billion since 2016. After a slowdown in 
2020 as a result of COVID, the real estate debt market recovered quickly. 
The total volume of real estate loans closed in 2021  was $578 billion. 
There is a projected $400 billion in average annual loan maturities through 
2026. A large proportion of the underlying properties for these maturing 
loans will  likely require private real estate debt solutions resulting from 
the  properties falling out of stabilization during the previous loan term. 
Equity sponsors are expected to continue to seek higher leverage and more 
flexible structures through private loans to execute their business plans.
Private real estate debt as an asset class is particularly well-suited for an 
inflationary environment. Since about 2010, approximately 78% of private 
real estate loans have been structured with floating-rate coupons.
Private Real Estate Debt Funds
Private real estate debt funds are typically structured similarly to private 
equity real estate funds, with eight- to ten-year fund terms including three￾to five-year investment periods.  Annual management fees range between 
1.00 and 1.50% on invested capital. Mezzanine loan managers may charge 
management fees on committed capital. Managers also receive 10−15% of 
fund profits as a carried interest, above a hurdle rate or preferred return 
of 7−8% per annum. Fund managers may use leverage at the fund level, 
depending on the strategy and relative security of the cash flows supporting 
the loan investments. Leverage on individual loans or total portfolios of 
loans can range up to four times invested capital for first lien strategies, with 
lower amounts of leverage (or no leverage at all) for mezzanine strategies. 
Managers may also make use of capital commitment lines of credit to 
streamline capital calls and to shorten the length of the J-curve period.
Investors should consider real estate debt to be a core holding in 
their private credit portfolios, since the market is significant and well 
established, with many experienced managers. Furthermore, real estate is 
subject to a different set of risk factors than corporate direct lending, so an 
allocation to real estate debt provides a degree of portfolio diversification. 
Senior secured debt exposure is the most core of the real estate debt 
strategies and merits a permanent allocation. Mezzanine real estate debt, 
like corporate mezzanine, should be viewed as a more opportunistic 
strategy.  Mezzanine should perform better (and offer outsized returns) 
when the real estate market is coming out of a downturn, and there is less Enhanced Lending 247
senior real estate available to finance properties. Alternatively, mezzanine 
exposure should be reduced toward the peak of a real estate cycle, when 
creditor protections have weakened, LTV levels are elevated, and credit 
spreads have narrowed.
Real Estate Loan Uses, Characteristics, and Structures
Real estate loans are used for the refinancing, acquisition, or construction 
of real estate properties. Loan sizes vary widely between $5  million and 
$1 billion, although the majority of transactions are between $10 million 
and $100  million.  Senior first lien mortgage debt is typically provided 
up to 55−65% loan to value, while mezzanine loans may go as high as 
85−90% LTV. Whole loan lenders will finance the entire debt portion of 
the capital structure and split the loan into senior and mezzanine tranches 
post-close. These whole loan lenders then sell off the senior loan portion 
of the loan to third-party debt investors seeking that level of risk exposure, 
retaining the mezzanine tranche for their own portfolio. As an example, a 
whole loan may be $65 million, representing a loan to value of 65% on 
a property valued at $100 million. The whole loan lender may repackage 
the loan into a $50 million first lien mortgage loan with an LTV of 50% 
and a $15 million mezzanine loan with an attachment point LTV of 50% 
and a detachment point LTV of 65%. In today’s market, the whole loan may 
have been priced at an interest rate of SOFR + 700 basis points, while the 
new senior loan is priced at SOFR + 300 basis points and the new mezza￾nine loan at SOFR + 900 basis points. Loan maturities will vary depending 
on the use of the loan. For instance, construction loans will typically have 
short maturities of 12−24 months. Permanent loans feature longer maturi￾ties (five or more years), depending on property and lease type.
The vast majority of real estate debt represents directly negotiated 
financings between the lender (or group of lenders) and the borrower, 
with the introducing party either the equity sponsor of the property or an 
intermediary hired by the borrower to source potential capital providers.
Expected Return and Risk Profiles
Expected returns on real estate debt depend on a variety of factors includ￾ing the seniority or loan type and the LTV of the loan. Senior secured debt 
is typically structured as a floating rate loan, with interest at a spread over 
SOFR. In the current market, senior loans are priced at SOFR + 300 to 
500 bps, and these loans also include a closing fee of 1.0−1.5% of the loan 
principal. Mezzanine loans (and other subordinated debt types), by com￾parison, are priced at SOFR + 700 to 1000 bps, also with an up-front fee.248 PRIVATE DEBT
Broadly, lower-risk strategies (e.g., senior secured loans with low under￾lying leverage, on institutional-quality real estate properties) typically gen￾erate a 5−7% yield. Higher-risk strategies (e.g., subordinated debt or more 
highly levered senior loans) typically generate an 8−10% yield. Oppor￾tunistic strategies that include higher LTVs, noncore real estate sectors or 
geographic markets, or loans on construction or heavy redevelopment prop￾erties may generate 10%+.
In addition to loan seniority and LTV, the most significant determination 
of risk in real estate debt is the nature of the underlying real estate itself. There 
are three key real estate factors to consider when determining risk: property 
sectors, geographic focus, and property cash flow profile (outlined next).
Property Sector
Property Sector Benefits Risks/Challenges
Office: subsectors include 
core CBD and trophy 
assets, suburban and 
creative office
▪ Properties with longer 
weighted average lease 
terms (WALT) to credit 
tenants offer stable cash 
flow streams
▪ Higher liquidity for 
quality, well-located 
assets
▪ Higher capex 
requirements for 
renovations and 
lease-up costs (tenant 
improvements and 
leasing commissions)
▪ Less liquidity for larger 
properties in periods of 
market uncertainty
Industrial: subsectors 
include flex, 
warehouse, logistics/
distribution, logistics 
fleet parking, and 
manufacturing
▪ Logistics, distribution, 
and warehouse 
properties require 
minimal releasing 
capital compared to 
other sectors
▪ Market fundamentals 
driving low vacancy 
rate and high rent 
growth
▪ Tenant-specific 
specifications and 
buildouts for custom 
properties may present 
higher costs in a 
releasing scenario
▪ E-commerce tailwinds 
have driven demand, and 
capital-seeking industrial 
exposure has resulted in 
rate compression
Multifamily: subsectors 
include urban high￾rise, suburban mid-rise 
and garden communi￾ties, and single-family 
rentals
▪ Properties with WALT 
to credit tenants offer 
stable cash flow streams
▪ Higher liquidity for 
quality, well-located 
assets
▪ High capex requirements 
for renovations and 
lease-up costs (tenant 
improvements and 
leasing commissions)
▪ Less liquidity for larger 
properties in periods of 
market uncertaintyEnhanced Lending 249
Property Sector Benefits Risks/Challenges
Retail: subsectors include 
high street retail, 
grocery-anchored shop￾ping center, lifestyle 
center, regional power 
centers, enclosed malls
▪ Higher coupon rate 
and lower leverage 
commanded in the 
credit markets due to 
sector risk
▪ Some subsectors 
insulated from 
e-commerce trends (e.g., 
grocery-anchored and 
daily needs centers) and 
remain stable
▪ Broad sector challenges 
related to the rise of 
e-commerce
▪ Constantly changing 
consumer trends and 
fluctuating tenant credit
▪ Capital-intensive 
repositioning and 
releasing
Hospitality/Leisure:
subsectors include lim￾ited and select service, 
full service, luxury 
resorts
▪ Higher coupon rate 
and lower leverage 
commanded in the 
credit markets due to 
sector risk
▪ Leisure and luxury 
resorts benefiting from 
pent-up consumer 
demand following 
COVID-19 impact
▪ Urban properties and 
those dependent on 
business travel remain 
challenged due to 
COVID-19 impact
▪ Capital-intensive 
refurbishment required 
to maintain market 
position
Specialty: examples 
include medical office, 
student housing, 
seniors housing, data 
centers, and entertain￾ment venues
▪ Subsectors less familiar 
to traditional real 
estate lenders provide 
an opportunity for 
sophisticated managers
▪ Lower correlation 
to macroeconomic 
dynamics (e.g., medical 
office, student housing)
▪ Idiosyncratic risks 
require sector expertise
▪ Sector-specific risks 
include university 
enrollment growth 
for student housing, 
technology obsolescence 
for data centers, 
and hospital system 
consolidation for 
medical office
Geography
Market Type Characteristics Examples
Primary ▪ Globally recognized 
urban metros with 
diversified economies 
and significant 
infrastructure
▪ New York
▪ Los Angeles
▪ Boston
▪ San 
Francisco
▪ Houston
▪ London
▪ Sydney
▪ Paris
▪ Tokyo
(continued)250 PRIVATE DEBT
Market Type Characteristics Examples
Secondary ▪ Sizable regional 
commercial hubs and 
population centers
▪ Includes distinct cities 
in proximity to larger 
primary markets
▪ Indianapolis, 
IN
▪ Sacramento, 
CA
▪ Salt Lake 
City, UT
▪ Oklahoma 
City, OK
▪ Milwaukee, 
WI
▪ Columbus, 
OH
▪ Manchester, 
UK
▪ Lisbon, 
Portugal
Tertiary ▪ Smaller markets outside 
of the sphere of major 
metros
▪ Potentially high-growth 
markets but with more 
concentrated economies 
or singular growth 
drivers
▪ Boise, ID
▪ Greenville, 
SC
▪ Colorado 
Springs, CO
▪ Tucson, AZ
▪ Tallahassee, 
FL
Property Cash Flow Profile
■ Stabilized: The property is substantially leased with significant in￾place cash flow and limited near-term tenant rollover. There is minimal 
repositioning or lease-up risk. Typically financed through banks, bank 
syndication, or securitization given the stability of the cash flow profile.
■ Light transitional: The property may have moderate vacancy or face 
near-term tenant expirations, but there is material in-place cash flow 
supporting debt service. Modest refurbishment or releasing is required 
to maximize value, presenting execution risk and potential lease-up risk.
■ Heavy transitional or redevelopment: The property is largely vacant 
or facing significant near-term tenant expiration. The property may 
also face physical obsolescence. There is minimal in-place cash flow 
and significant near-term risk to any existing cash flow. A major 
redevelopment or value-add program is subject to execution risk or 
lease-up risk.
■ Construction: No in-place cash flow and subject to significant execu￾tion, budget, timing, and lease-up risk.
■ Unentitled land: No in-place cash flow and subject to entitlement and 
zoning risk. Binary outcomes and lack of cash flow is not conducive to 
typical debt fund profile.
(continued)Enhanced Lending 251
Market Outlook
The amount of capital raised for real estate debt funds in 2021 recovered 
from the COVID-related decrease in 2020 but was still less than peak 
amount raised in 2017. Fewer managers are raising capital, indicating a 
less crowded field of competitors. Larger managers are raising the major￾ity of capital for private real estate credit funds, and those larger managers 
are also able to command more accretive leverage and borrower-friendly 
structures from senior bank lenders, delivering stronger levered yields. 
The historical lower-volatility profile of real estate credit and the inherent 
inflation-defensive nature of floating rate loans coupled with the volume 
of near-term commercial real estate loan maturities results in an optimistic 
outlook for private real estate credit strategies going forward.
INFRASTRUCTURE DEBT
Infrastructure is essential, capital-intensive assets with high barriers to 
entry that generate stable, long-term cash flows, often under long-term 
contracts and/or regulatory frameworks. Infrastructure debt consists of 
debt financing relating to the development, expansion, and maintenance 
of infrastructure assets and is distinguished by strong downside protection 
and capital preservation when compared to debt in other asset classes. 
Municipalities, government authorities, and private entities (operating 
companies and projects) borrow money to develop, construct, and operate 
infrastructure projects.
Target financing opportunities within several infrastructure sectors 
include transport (rail, mass transit, ports, toll roads, airports, etc.), renew￾able power (hydro, wind, solar, distributed generation, storage), utilities 
(electricity, natural gas connections, smart meters, water and wastewater, 
district energy), midstream (transmission pipelines, natural gas storage/pro￾cessing), data (communication towers, fiber networks, data centers, etc.), 
and social (public services such as education, courthouses, health care, etc.). 
The amount of capital required to achieve the buildout of these key sectors, 
as well as ongoing refinancing needs, will contribute to a significant invest￾ment opportunity within the infrastructure debt space. In addition, debt 
investments in infrastructure assets exhibit the following characteristics:
■ Monopolistic features: Infrastructure assets often exhibit monopolistic 
features of the services they provide through regulatory-based controls 
and/or high barriers to entry.252 PRIVATE DEBT
■ High barriers to entry: Due to high capital costs, geographic location 
advantages, and contractual and regulatory frameworks, infrastructure 
assets typically have high barriers to entry and often face little or no 
competition.
■ Predictable and stable cash flows: The underlying infrastructure 
assets generally comprise long-life assets and benefit from stable cash 
generation profiles driven by regulatory regimes and/or medium to 
long-term contracts.
■ Inflation-linked revenues: Cash flows produced by the underlying 
infrastructure assets are generally linked to measures of economic 
growth such as inflation, in which, in some cases, revenue increases 
due to inflation are embedded in concession agreements, licenses, and 
contracts.
■ Default and recovery rates: Moody’s Default and Recovery Rates 
study shows that infrastructure debt has a relatively lower probabil￾ity of default and high recovery rates versus comparably rated corpo￾rate credits.
Historically, commercial banks were the principal source of debt for 
infrastructure assets. While banks and insurance companies continue to 
play a primary role in larger, investment-grade deals, post-financial crisis 
bank regulation and stricter lending criteria have limited the universe of 
infrastructure companies and projects that can access commercial banks. 
Banks typically limit themselves to investment-grade transactions and 
avoid transactions with structural subordination. As a result, this has 
created an opportunity for structured or nonbank financing specializing 
in infrastructure assets to fill the gap by expanding into bespoke direct 
lending. Cliffwater tracks approximately 60 private infrastructure funds 
totaling more than $37 billion of commitments.
Market Environment
The infrastructure debt market has expanded significantly since the early 
2010s. Specifically, the exponential increase in data consumption globally, 
the universal push toward decarbonization of the economy, and an accelera￾tion toward e-commerce are emerging amid other longer-term trends, such 
as aging utility and telecom assets, requiring significant capital for upgrades 
and governments and corporations seeking private sector capital solutions 
to ever-increasing debt loads as borrowing costs normalize from historic 
lows. These factors are also driving increased complexity and risk for infra￾structure investors, especially as highly leveraged governments are increas￾ingly seeking private sector solutions to their more complex infrastructure Enhanced Lending 253
needs. With budgetary constraints prevailing globally, governments are 
actively seeking private investors to provide the necessary capital and deliv￾ery expertise needed to maintain and develop critical infrastructure. Infra￾structure borrowers are seeking capital providers who understand their 
businesses and are able to provide customized bridge capital to scale and 
de-risk their businesses. Once stabilized, these infrastructure businesses will 
be able to attract cheaper, permanent capital from banks and capital mar￾kets investors.
Overall, there is a compelling market need for structured or nonbank 
financing by infrastructure asset owners. The demand for financing for infra￾structure assets is supported by the following drivers of borrower demand:
■ Acquisition financing: In asset acquisition scenarios, subordinated debt 
can decrease a bidder’s cost of capital by reducing the amount of equity 
needed—enhancing the bidder’s competitiveness.
■ Sponsor recapitalization: For existing infrastructure asset owners, the 
introduction of a subordinated debt tranche can release capital for dis￾tributions and/or reinvestment toward new projects without a loss of 
ownership or control.
■ Refinancing transactions: Subordinated debt can be used to refi￾nance existing debt approaching maturity or restore senior leverage to 
investment-grade levels.
■ Funding capital expenditures: For new projects, the addition of a sub￾ordinated debt tranche can help optimize a sponsor’s cost of capital, 
enhancing project viability and/or the sponsor’s overall competitiveness.
Within infrastructure more broadly, through the pandemic, unlisted 
equity infrastructure demonstrated resilience during 2020. Despite some 
infrastructure sectors being particularly hard hit (e.g., airports and toll 
roads), infrastructure generally rebounded strongly in 2021. Demand with 
some of the infrastructure sectors reached an even higher level than pre￾pandemic levels, with the pandemic exposing the importance of robust 
health care, digital infrastructure, and energy transition. Overall, infrastruc￾ture investing is a long duration strategy that provides stable and reliable 
returns (much like credit-oriented investments), which served well during 
the volatility of the pandemic. In addition, infrastructure assets are an effec￾tive hedge against inflation.
The Preqin 2022 investor survey found inflation hedging was the third 
most influential reason to invest in infrastructure, behind diversification 
and reliable income streams. Pension plans, for example, have long-dated 
liabilities that are sometimes directly linked to inflation; therefore, to fund 
these liabilities, pensions look for assets where income is indexed to inflation 254 PRIVATE DEBT
measures. Moreover, rising rates accompanied by inflation will also have 
little impact on infrastructure valuations in the medium to long term as 
most current infrastructure assets have strong contractual protections with 
fixed rate debt, and with new infrastructure projects, most assets will also 
include strong contractual agreements with pass-through protections.
Market Size and Structure
Infrastructure debt financing has become much more prevalent in recent 
years. In 2021, Moody’s rated approximately $3.1 trillion of infrastructure 
securities globally, including $1.2 trillion of North America infrastructure 
and project finance transactions and $739 billion of US municipal bond 
transactions. Utilities, both regulated and unregulated, comprise the vast 
majority (73%) of new issuance by volume, a sector that includes energy, 
power, and water-related utilities. Transportation sectors, including airports, 
roads, ports, and rail, account for most of the remainder (27%).
Infrastructure debt carries investment-grade and below-investment￾grade ratings. According to Moody’s, 92% of the infrastructure securities 
are investment grade. More specifically, when excluding municipal securi￾ties, which are nearly all investment grade, more than 80% of corporate 
infrastructure and project finance issues carry an investment grade rating, 
compared with about 40% for nonfinancial corporate issuers.
Banks have traditionally been the primary originators of project finance 
loans, but nonbank finance companies are now entering the origination 
market as banks have reduced their activity, in particular as relates to the 
origination of below-investment grade and unrated loans. Nonbank lenders 
focus primarily on below-investment grade or unrated securities. Standard 
& Poor’s finds similarly strong default avoidance for non-investment grade 
infrastructure debt, along with high recovery rates of near 90%. This is not 
surprising, given the long-term stable cash flows provided by infrastructure 
assets, the value of their collateral, and their critical role in the operation of 
the economy.
Expected Return and Risk
Infrastructure debt is distinguished by strong downside protection and 
capital preservation when compared to debt in other fixed income asset 
classes. For example, in aggregate, according to Moody’s, infrastructure 
debt has been less likely than nonfinancial corporate issuers to incur credit 
losses, especially over longer time horizons. On average, infrastructure debt 
strategies raised for institutional investors have an expected gross return 
of 7–10%, depending on seniority, structure, and leverage. The bulk of Enhanced Lending 255
infrastructure debt return is in the form of current yield, as infrastructure 
debt does not typically trade at distressed levels or offer non-coupon eco￾nomics. Senior secured infrastructure debt, which typically has an LTV of 
50–70%, carries interest rates of 4–6%, while subordinated/mezzanine 
deals have higher coupon rates in the range of 7–10%. The incremental 
coupon compensates for the additional downside risk based on the mez￾zanine debt being subordinated to senior obligations. Volatility for the 
sector is dampened by the consistent long-term, contracted cash flows of 
many infrastructure assets, low default rates, and high recovery rates. Over￾all, within infrastructure debt strategies, returns are primarily generated 
through the following key components:
■ Cash interest: current income received from coupon payments
■ Original issue discount (OID): a discount in price from a loan’s face 
value that is treated as interest because the lender is repaid the face value 
at maturity
■ Up-front fees: origination fees that may be generated as part of a trans￾action and are considered fee income
■ Prepayment/exit fees: the lender generally seeking to incorporate struc￾tural protections against prepayment risks, such as no-call periods, and 
various prepayment penalties, such as a make-whole premium
■ Amendment/waiver fees: at times, borrowers seeking amendments or 
waivers under the terms of the loan agreement, which may generate 
fee income
Since expected returns and risk are on the low end of private credit, 
investors typically allocate to infrastructure debt as a lower-risk option 
within a broader private credit portfolio or as a diversifier and volatility 
dampener within an infrastructure portfolio.
Investment Strategies
Managers that offer infrastructure debt strategies to institutional investors 
are typically large, globally diversified infrastructure investors. These firms 
have traditionally focused on equity infrastructure strategies but have begun 
offering credit strategies to capture additional management fee revenue. 
These strategies typically focus on the non-investment grade and non-rated 
portion of the market since the investment-grade portion does not offer 
high enough returns to overcome private fund management fees and still 
offer an attractive return. Investors of infrastructure debt funds focused on 
investment-grade transactions are typically insurance companies that accept 
lower returns from rated debt.256 PRIVATE DEBT
There are approximately 100 investment firms involved in private infra￾structure debt globally. Between 2014 and 2021, these managers have col￾lectively raised between five and ten new infrastructure debt funds per year, 
aggregating between $4 billion and $7 billion of new capital. More spe￾cifically, since the COVID-19 pandemic, 34 investment firms have closed a 
dedicated infrastructure debt fund, totaling over $14.5 billion in aggregate 
capital commitments. Moreover, there are currently more than 60 invest￾ment firms raising a dedicated infrastructure debt fund, seeking over $30 
billion in aggregate capital commitments.
Infrastructure debt strategies are generally global and multisector in 
scope, though some have a primary focus on a particular sector, such as 
energy. Infrastructure debt is typically not a portion of other corporate 
credit managers’ portfolios given the sector expertise and presence required 
to source infrastructure deals and underwrite assets prudently. As noted, 
managers may focus on senior secured debt or mezzanine debt strategies. 
Mezzanine loans can be achieved through a variety of structures, includ￾ing second lien secured loans, first lien loans made to a holding company 
(instead of the operating company, which has direct ownership of the infra￾structure assets), or preferred equity with debt-like features.
Infrastructure debt funds are typically structured similarly to private 
equity funds, with a 10- to 12-year term, including a four- to five-year 
investment period, though there are some open-ended structures. Fee 
structures vary depending on the target return of the strategy (higher target 
return leads to higher management and performance fees) and whether 
leverage is employed. Annual management fees are in the range of 1.0–1.5% 
and, like most private credit strategies, are charged on invested capital. 
Managers also receive 10–20% of fund profits as a carried interest above 
a hurdle rate or preferred return of 5–8% per annum. Infrastructure debt 
funds may use leverage at the fund level.
ROYALTIES
Royalties strategies invest in cash flow streams generated by intellectual 
property (IP). IP represents an idea, invention, or process used in making 
product and services. Inventors and entrepreneurs are rewarded for 
developing valuable IP by capturing economic rents; in most developed 
countries these rents are protected by patents. Patents provide patent 
owners with the exclusive right to market patented products and services 
for a prespecifed period of time. The patent owner might be the original 
developer of the patent or it may be an entity that purchased the patent. 
The value of patents are monetized through royalty payments made by Enhanced Lending 257
companies that, in turn, license a product or service to sell to businesses and 
consumers. This stream of royalty payments can be sold to free up capital 
to invest in the development of new products or services, to fund growth 
of existing products or services, to retire existing debt, or as collateral for 
new loans.
The three main areas in which royalties strategies typically invest are 
as follows:
■ Health care, including drugs, treatments, and medical devices
■ Media/entertainment, including films, TV shows, games, music, and 
other media
■ Consumer brands, including apparel, accessories, housewares, electron￾ics, and food/beverage
The largest and most popular of these sectors is health care royalties, 
which includes both traditional and structured royalties strategies.
Market Size and Structure
The health care royalty opportunity is supported by the increasing 
medical demands of the growing and aging population globally, and the 
development of new medicines and medical device advancement requires 
a significant amount of capital. Small health care companies are unable to 
access traditional bank financing and do not want to accept dilutive equity.
The inventory for traditional royalty investments are a derivative of 
the global life science revenues generated from biopharma, medtech, and 
diagnostic companies. Global life science revenues have steadily increased 
from $1.1 trillion in 2009 to $1.6 trillion in 2021.8
 It is estimated that 1–2% 
of the annual global life sciences revenue is sold through a licensing agree￾ment. Assuming that global life science revenues average $1 trillion for the 
next ten years, the size of the market opportunity for traditional health care 
royalties is between $100 billion and $200 billion.
The size of the structured royalty market opportunity is harder to ascer￾tain than the traditional royalty opportunity. The best way to estimate the 
size of the opportunity is based on the number of commercial-stage health 
care companies and the revenues they generate. Neuberger Berman esti￾mates there are approximately 7,000 commercial-stage health care compa￾nies with revenues between $15 million and $500 million.
8
CapitaIQ public companies with industry classifications pharmaceuticals, bio￾technology, and health care equipment as of September 16, 2021.258 PRIVATE DEBT
The global media and entertainment market is estimated at over 
$2.5 trillion, and growing at over 8% annually.9
 The proliferation of new 
internet-based media platforms, such as YouTube, Disney+, Netflix, Ama￾zon, Spotify, and so on, has increased demand for content, creating more 
opportunities for new royalty streams. For consumer brands, global retail 
sales from the top 88 licensors totaled $261 billion in 2021 alone.10
Expected Return and Risk
Relative to other private credit strategies, the structured royalty strategy has 
limited competition from traditional lending sources and higher barriers to 
entry. Additionally, structured royalty strategies have seniority in claim to 
underlying company assets, are over-collateralized, and have a high-income 
component with upside potential through options and warrants.
The traditional royalty investment strategy is dominated by a small 
number of large institutional investors and asset management firms. Unlev￾ered traditional royalty investments are passive and yield an 8.0–10.0% 
gross return. Investors in the traditional space typically use leverage of 1.0–
2.5 times equity to achieve an all-in net return in the low to mid-teens. The 
downside of traditional royalty investments is that the investment is passive 
and returns are highly dependent on product-level revenue projections.
Structured royalty returns have a significant yield component due to 
contracted rights associated with direct revenue participation and interest 
payments. Revenue participation and interest payments each represent half 
of the mid-teens yield when fully invested. Additionally, structured royalty 
returns are enhanced by fees generated from origination and exit, or covenant 
breach, and upside participation through options and warrants. Structured 
royalties typically have a five-year loan term; however, on average they 
are paid back in three to four years. The prepayment of the loan increases 
the overall internal rate of return and allows for the recycling of capital. 
In aggregate, the repayment of principal, yield, fees, and equity upside 
result in a total net return target for structured royalties of about 20%. 
The reasons structured royalty investments have the potential to generate 
outsized returns are (1) these companies are too small to access the public 
debt markets, (2) borrowers may be unattractive to traditional lenders as 
they may be cash flow negative, and (3) the structured royalty space has 
9
PricewaterhouseCoopers, Entertainment & Media Outlook 2022–2026. Global 
revenues of media & entertainment companies.
10License Global, The Top Global Licensors Report (July 2022). Total revenue 
reported by 83 participating consumer brands for FY2021.Enhanced Lending 259
relatively high barriers to entry—managers need to have experience creating 
flexible financing structures, have insight into patent protection and patent 
competition, and be able to value the intellectual property.
Expected returns for the other major royalties categories, media/enter￾tainment and consumer brands, are similar, with a net return of about 8–12%.
Since expected returns are broadly in line with corporate private credit, 
investors typically allocate to consumer finance strategies as a diversifier 
within a broader private credit or opportunistic credit portfolio, as they 
provide exposure outside of the corporate credit sector.
Investment Strategies
Health care royalties can be categorized as traditional or structured. 
Traditional royalties include the purchase of a long-term royalty stream 
from an inventor of a patented technology for a discount to the net present 
value of future royalty payments. Typical sellers of traditional royalties are 
universities, hospitals, or large public and private life science companies 
that want to divest mature royalty streams. These organizations will use 
the proceeds to fund capital projects or increase research and development 
capabilities.
Structured royalties investments allow public and private companies 
with commercial health care products or services to borrow against 
their future revenue or royalty income. The typical company that uses a 
structured solution tends to be owned by entrepreneurs who do not want 
their ownership to be diluted. These small companies use the capital to 
expand their salesforce and to fund product launches and expansion, 
research and development acceleration, acquisition financing, and balance 
sheet management. Structured royalty investments are typically senior in 
the capital structure of a borrower and possess substantial underlying asset 
value coverage to protect against capital loss.
Royalty streams are typically purchased at a market multiple. For health 
care royalties this typically ranges between 5–7× annual royalties.
Royalty funds are typically structured similarly to private equity funds, 
with a four- to six-year investment period and 8- to 12-year fund term. 
Annual management fees are in the range of 1.5–2.0% of committed capital 
during the investment period, which may drop during the harvest period. 
While less common in this strategy, some funds charge on invested capital 
rather than committed capital. Managers typically also receive 20% of fund 
profits as a carried interest above a hurdle rate or preferred return of 6–8% 
per annum. Royalty funds typically do not use leverage at the fund level, 
except for traditional health care royalties strategies.260 PRIVATE DEBT
Media/entertainment royalties can be acquired from a variety of firms 
involved in production or distribution, including talent agencies, production 
companies, and artists and their estates. Consumer brand royalties are based 
on licensing agreements acquired from product manufacturers and retailers.
REINSURANCE
Reinsurance is insurance provided to an insurer to cover losses from a 
catastrophe event, such as a natural disaster. Reinsurance allows for one 
insurer to transfer a specific set of event-linked risks to another insurance 
provider. Purchasers of reinsurance, or sponsors, include primary underwriters 
or reinsurers, public and governmental insurance and reinsurance entities, 
and corporations that choose to self-insure. Sponsors seek to reinsure to 
reduce capital requirements and to reduce outsized risk exposures. Providers 
of reinsurance are mainly reinsurance companies and investors.
Sponsors pay a series of predetermined premiums in exchange for 
protection against losses from uncertain catastrophes. Reinsurance providers 
pay claims in exchange for a fixed dollar amount of known premiums. The 
maximum amount of claims liability that a reinsurance provider is obligated 
to pay is the principal amount of the reinsurance contract or bond. Any 
losses that occur on the reinsurance contract are paid out of the principal 
amount, which is typically held in a high-quality, liquid collateral account 
during the term of the contract. Reinsurance providers (investors) earn a 
reinsurance spread, equal to the reinsurance premium divided by principal. 
This is similar to the yield on a bond and is often referred to as the reinsurance 
risk premium, or yield.
Market Size and Structure
The reinsurance market has been rapidly evolving since the new millennium. 
Historically, the providers of reinsurance were traditional reinsurance 
companies, such as Munich RE, Renaissance RE, and Lloyds of London, 
which assumed the catastrophe risk and kept it on their balance sheets. With 
the advent of nontraditional reinsurance (or alternative reinsurance), these 
risks have become increasingly transferred to capital market investors. As 
a result, a wide range of investors have been able to enter the reinsurance 
market—from asset management firms to public companies.
Today the reinsurance market is divided between traditional reinsurance 
and alternative reinsurance. A series of private contracts and securities have 
been developed for the alternative reinsurance market, commonly referred 
to as insurance linked securities (ILSs). The most well-known of these ILS Enhanced Lending 261
are catastrophe bonds (cat bonds), which are listed and traded securities. 
Many of the ILS are private contracts negotiated between a sponsor and 
investor to cover losses from specific events over a defined time frame.
Examples of ILS securities include the following:
■ Reinsurance involves the transfer of insurance risk directly from 
sponsors. These are private contracts that may be collateralized and are 
sometimes independently rated. The contracts are sourced from brokers 
or direct relationships and are individually structured to cover specific 
events and dollar levels of loss above which the reinsurance provider 
has claims responsibility. The term of reinsurance contracts is generally 
one year. The estimated size of this market is $35 billion.
■ Catastrophe bonds are 144A (unregistered) securities that are traded on 
a secondary market and generally have a short duration (one to three 
years). Cat bonds are typically focused on lower reinsurance risks, as 
they cover low probability events. They are structured as floating rate 
notes whose principal is tied to specified trigger conditions that need to 
be met before accumulating losses. The estimated size of this market is 
$26 billion.
■ Retrocessional contracts transfer reinsurance directly from sponsors. 
A retrocession contract will bundle exposures from many reinsurance 
layers across different companies into a single entity. Due to the com￾plex nature of the contract, transparency is extremely limited. These 
contracts have a one-year duration. The estimated size of this market is 
$10 billion.
■ Industry loss warranties (ILWs) are option-like contracts, or swaps, 
where the payout is triggered based on industry-wide claims that are in 
excess of a predetermined trigger amount. These provide investors with 
the ability to be long or short risk and can be used as hedges. These 
contracts have a one-year duration. The estimated size of this market is 
$4 billion.
■ Sidecars, also known as quota shares, involve property risk that is 
sourced and transferred directly from sponsors, where the investor 
takes a slice of the sponsor’s entire exposure. This allows an investor 
to take on the full portfolio of an insurer or reinsurer and earn the risk 
and return of that business. Investors will pay additional fees to the 
company to access its portfolio. The estimated size of this market is 
$7 billion.
Insurance-linked investments come in tradable and nontradable form. 
Liquid, tradable instruments include catastrophe bonds. Illiquid, nontrad￾able instruments include collateralized reinsurance, retrocessional, ILWs, 262 PRIVATE DEBT
and sidecars. Private reinsurance and retrocessional contracts typically run 
for one year, while cat bonds have a one- to three-year term. The contracts 
are mostly underwritten biannually (in January and June/July) and tend to 
be both short duration and offer a floating rate.
Catastrophe events, or perils, covered by reinsurance include both 
natural and human-made perils. Natural perils are hurricanes, earthquakes, 
wind, tornado and hail, flood, typhoon, and wildfire. Human-made perils 
include marine, terrorism, energy, cyber, aviation, and space/satellite. 
Generally, reinsurers will have the most exposure to peak perils, which 
include US wind, US earthquake, European wind, Japan wind, and Japan 
earthquake.
Reinsurers diversify across geographic regions and perils. Contracts and 
bonds are structured to provide coverage at different attachment points, 
which are dollar levels of loss above which the reinsurance provider has 
claims responsibility. The higher the attachment point, the lower the likeli￾hood that the reinsurance provider will be responsible for paying a claim. 
Most reinsurance underwriting takes place twice a year. January 1 is the key 
renewal date for most reinsurance and retrocessional contracts. In the mid￾dle of the year, US wind contracts are underwritten, just before the start of 
the hurricane season in the Atlantic and Caribbean.
Expected Return and Risk
The universe of reinsurance investments can provide a very wide range of 
returns. Returns are highly dependent on the type of ILS held in the portfolio 
and the attachment points of the reinsurance contracts. Investors receive a 
reinsurance return that is equal to the insurance premiums plus the collateral 
return less any insured losses. Investors typically do not use leverage.
For lower risk strategies, a portfolio primarily composed of cat bonds 
will generate expected annualized returns between 5.0% and 7.0%. For 
a diversified portfolio of ILS, expected annualized returns range between 
7.0% and 8.5%.
Historically, yields on reinsurance investments have been comparable 
to high-yield securities, although with less volatility. The coupon paid by 
the Swiss RE Cat Bond Index has averaged 8.4% since 2007, compared to 
8.1% for the Bloomberg High Yield Index. The Swiss RE Cat Bond Index 
reflects the returns of the catastrophe bond market and is the industry’s key 
point of reference for cat bond sector returns.
Reinsurance returns tend to decline after periods with limited or no 
insured losses. However, an active hurricane season in the Atlantic or other 
catastrophe events that lead to above-average insured losses can result 
in losses for reinsurance securities. Periods following catastrophe events Enhanced Lending 263
typically see higher returns resulting from higher premiums. For example, in 
2005, the reinsurance industry experienced more than $125 billion in losses 
after Hurricanes Katrina, Rita, and Wilma, which hit the US mainland. The 
following year, reinsurance spreads increased by 35%, to 8.8% per annum. 
In 2011, there were a series of global natural disasters (tornadoes in the 
United States, floods in Australia and Thailand, and a major earthquake in 
Japan) that caused in excess of $134 billion in insured losses. Reinsurance 
spreads jumped from 7.7% in 2011 to 10.2% in 2012. However, from 2012 
to 2016 there was a lack of notable storm activity and annual insured losses 
were less than $50 billion. As a result, reinsurance spreads compressed 
during this period.
Reinsurance returns are primarily driven by losses from natural perils 
that are not related to economic or financial conditions. Therefore, reinsur￾ance returns have a low correlation with financial markets. The correlation 
of the Swiss RE Cat Bond Index with major equity and fixed income market 
indexes has been very low. Since its inception in 2002 to 2018, the Swiss 
RE Cat Bond Index has had a correlation of 0.13 to the S&P 500 Index 
and 0.18 to the Bloomberg Barclays Aggregate Bond Index. For investors, 
the low correlation with public securities makes reinsurance attractive as a 
portfolio diversifier.
Since expected returns and risk are on the low end of private credit, 
investors typically allocate to reinsurance as a differentiated source of yield 
and a diversifier that is uncorrelated to other investments in their portfolios, 
rather than as a return-enhancing strategy.
Investment Strategies
Managers offer reinsurance strategies to investors in several different vehi￾cles, including institutional separate accounts, traditional hedge fund struc￾tures, and liquid mutual funds. Managers generally accept subscriptions 
near the underwriting cycle at the end of December and June but may take in 
smaller amounts of capital throughout the year. Managers also offer a wide 
range of funds that have different return and risk objectives, which dictate 
the types and mix of ILS in which they invest. These can range from funds 
that primarily invest in cat bonds, and therefore have lower return and risk 
objectives, to funds that are primarily focused on the higher-returning (and 
riskier) segments of the collateralized reinsurance and retrocessional mar￾kets. Managers further differentiate themselves in their origination, struc￾turing, and modeling capabilities.
There are several different ways investors can access reinsurance, 
including separate accounts, where terms are negotiated directly between 
the fund manager and investor; a hedge fund structure, which typically 264 PRIVATE DEBT
includes an initial lock-up period of one year, with interim subscription 
periods; and open-end funds, which typically accept monthly subscriptions 
and offer quarterly redemption windows, with quarterly or semiannual 
payouts. Management fees range from 1–1.5%; in cases when performance 
fees are in place there is often a hurdle rate.
Cliffwater believes there are approximately 50 investment firms involved 
in reinsurance globally. Collectively, these managers raise between 10 and 
20 new reinsurance funds per year (mostly opportunistic/contingent vehi￾cles), aggregating between $10 billion and $15 billion of new capital.
LITIGATION FINANCE
Litigation finance is a relatively nascent but growing specialty finance strat￾egy whereby returns are dependent on the outcome of individual legal cases 
or portfolios of cases. Although litigation finance in its modern form had 
begun to develop in the 1990s in Australia and the United Kingdom and 
in the mid-2000s in the United States with respect to commercial litigation 
finance, the industry had begun to ramp in the 2010s. Borrowers and capital 
recipients are primarily law firms and corporate entities that are plaintiffs in 
legal matters but may also include government entities and even individuals. 
Litigation finance firms may provide capital to corporate entities to cover 
litigation expenses associated with specific cases, including attorneys’ fees, 
or general operating expenses or to monetize future awards and to law firms 
to cover operating expenses, to grow their businesses or to monetize legal 
fee receivables.
The market for litigation finance exists for claimant financing because 
claimants either lack the internal funding available to pursue litigation and 
cannot secure funding from traditional sources like banks, need to free up 
working capital to pursue other projects, or wish to distribute some of the 
risk tied to highly uncertain litigation outcomes. Many litigations can be 
very costly and protracted, often taking several years to resolve. Plaintiff 
law firms that borrow from litigation funders are typically engaged by their 
clients on a contingency basis, and, therefore, obtain payments only after the 
plaintiff receives an award or settlement, which can create operating cash 
flow challenges for the law firms. Therefore, plaintiff law firms typically bor￾row from litigation funders to cover operating expenses as well as to grow 
their businesses. Specifically, for mass tort or personal injury plaintiff law 
firms, they may borrow to fund their marketing budgets for case acquisi￾tions. In addition, for participating in a less efficient market than traditional 
capital market, litigation finance providers are typically compensated with a Enhanced Lending 265
higher return than financiers in more traditional asset classes for taking on 
litigation risks.
Market Size and Structure
The size of the litigation finance market is not readily available as it is a 
private market with limited aggregated data on total activity. What is clear 
is that the addressable market is potentially very large, and the receptivity 
of claimants and law firms seeking third-party capital is growing. Each year, 
hundreds of billions of dollars are spent globally on legal fees (one study 
estimated the total legal spend in the United States at $437 billion in 201611) 
and an estimated commercial litigation spend of $170 billion in the United 
States in 2018.12 Furthermore, the total addressable market would be even 
larger when including contingency fees from mass tort and personal injury 
claims.13 A 2020 survey of law firms and in-house legal departments across 
the US, UK, and Australia conducted by Burford provides insights into the 
recent growth trajectory of litigation funding.14 Of the respondents, 76% 
indicated their organizations have used legal finance, which was increased 
from 37% in 2017. In a 2021 survey conducted by Bloomberg, 69% of the 
respondents indicated they are more likely to use litigation funding now 
than they were five years ago.15
The size of funding amounts sought varies significantly, from less than 
$100,000 to $50  million or more. Typically, for single case fundings, a 
funder would target an advance rate of 10%, meaning the target claim value 
coverage to funded amount is 10 to 1. The small size of the funding sought 
relative to other credit strategies and claim value indicates that this is a very 
bifurcated market and that putting significant amounts of capital to work 
takes time and patience.
11Thompson Reuters. (2016). “How Big is the U.S. Legal Services Market?” The 
Legal Executive Institute.
12IMF Bentham Annual Report 2019.
13In 2016, total compensation of the US tort system exceeded $429 billion according 
to US Chamber Institute for Legal and Compensation of the U.S. Tort report dated 
October 2018. Assuming a 35% contingency fee rate, plaintiff law firms would have 
been entitled to approximately $150 billion of fees. Further, assuming a loan to value 
ratio of 25%, funders could have lent approximately $30 billion collateralized by 
such fees.
14Burford Capital—2020  Legal Finance Report: A Survey of In-house and Law 
Firm Lawyers.
15Bloomberg Law—Litigation Finance Survey 2021.266 PRIVATE DEBT
The small size of most litigation funding also helps explain why legal 
finance funders largely comprise relatively small, private funds. Most legal 
finance providers’ balance sheets are sized in the hundreds of millions of 
dollars or less. As in other sectors of specialty finance, technology is starting 
to reshape the litigation finance market, specifically in how capital recipi￾ents and funders interact. For example, Legalist, founded by two Harvard 
dropouts, uses proprietary software to scrape court dockets in search of 
claimants that may need fundings. Using technology can help funders scale 
their investment strategies.
Another reason for the relatively small number of financiers in the legal 
finance space is that relative to other investment strategies, there is lim￾ited competition from traditional financing sources given a higher barrier to 
entry. In most instances, due diligence requires both legal expertise as well 
as structuring expertise, and the lack of a steady income stream increases 
operational risks for credit providers. In addition, sourcing is largely rela￾tionship based,16 and with the legal community only in the last decade or 
so beginning to adopt the use of third-party capital, existing firms have a 
decided advantage in giving comfort to law firms and claimants who are 
new to the space. Finally, banks may also be reluctant to finance claimants 
or law firms due to their fear of indirectly financing a lawsuit against their 
other banking clients.
Expected Return and Risk
The economic terms attached to the capital provided can vary widely, 
but the most common transaction involves the capital provider securing 
a senior claim on the proceeds of litigation for funding claimants, which 
would include any awarded judgments or settlement amounts accruing to 
the claimants or on legal fee receivables for funding law firms. The capital 
providers may receive only a fixed interest rate, a preferred rate of return 
in addition to a percentage of the proceeds above the preferred return, only 
a percentage of proceeds, or a multiple on their invested capital. Interest 
payments are typically paid in kind, and cash payments ultimately depend 
16Auctions are uncommon in legal finance as clients would unlikely be willing to pay 
law firms by the hour to work through due diligence with multiple potential funders, 
and attorney-client privilege may limit law firms from disclosing sensitive informa￾tion to multiple potential funders. With respect to law firms obtaining fundings for 
their own businesses, they typically would not be willing to dedicate the time or the 
effort to seek out many bids as their time is best spent to work on cases, and the cost 
of capital is typically a small fraction of the law firm’s return on investments when 
using the funds to grow their case inventories.Enhanced Lending 267
on the availability of proceeds from settlement or award amounts or 
attorney fees as they are collected. Litigation funding is typically structured 
on a nonrecourse basis, meaning the capital provider is fully exposed to 
the risk of loss from unsuccessful litigation or a collection failure. There 
is, however, a meaningful segment of the market that includes loans to law 
firms that have recourse against the law firms and in certain transactions, 
even personal guarantees from the law firm partners.
The return and risk profile of litigation funding strategies can vary 
widely depending on the type of financing that is involved. The highest 
return and risk is associated with risk-sharing with plaintiffs in single cases. 
In such arrangements, the financing provider is subject to a complete loss in 
the instance that the litigation fails. The capital provider is compensated for 
this binary risk through equity-like upside potential measured in multiples 
of invested capital, which they may target a return of 3–5× their invested 
capital. However, the lowest return and risk is associated with loans to 
law firms secured by or a purchase of fee or award receivables from law 
firms or claimants stemmed from settled cases. Because the return from 
these investments is generated from settled cases, litigation risk would 
have been eliminated, and on occasion credit risk with respect to the 
defendants would have been reduced if there were a funded escrow account. 
For such investments, the primary risk considerations are fraud risk and 
duration risk. However, the return would also be commensurately lower 
for such investments as funders would typically target a gross return in the 
low-teens IRR.
A fast-growing segment of the market is portfolio financing, whereby 
capital providers provide capital to claimants secured by the collective out￾come of a cross-collateralized portfolio of cases or law firms secured by 
contingency fee receivables from a cross-collateralized portfolio of cases. 
For  the capital providers, portfolio financings have the benefit of reduc￾ing the binary risk of single case financing and allowing them to deploy 
more capital in a single investment than a single case financing would. For 
the capital recipients, portfolio financings would lower the cost of capital. 
Though portfolio financing is decidedly less risky, it can still carry higher 
interest rates relative traditional debt investments. In such funding arrange￾ments, a gross interest rate of mid-teens to low-twenties with additional 
servicing fees of 1.5–3% is not uncommon for financings secured by a port￾folio of pre-settlement cases that still carry litigation risks and a gross inter￾est rate in the low-teens for financings secured by a portfolio of settled 
cases that do not carry litigation risks. While loan maturities are typically 
about two to four years, the expected payoff time can be shorter subject to 
the duration of the underlying cases, though prepayment penalties can help 268 PRIVATE DEBT
the lender achieve its desired multiple on invested capital even when the 
time line shrinks.
Risk is entirely dependent on the mix of funding arrangements in a liti￾gation finance portfolio. The reported investment results reasonably diversi￾fied portfolios by type of loans or equity-like investments provide a sense 
of the potential variation in returns. Gross of operating expenses, for non￾loss concluded cases by vintage year from 2010 through 2021, the IRRs 
have ranged from 10% to 1,125%, and the returns on invested capital have 
ranged from 1% to 3,278%.
In a broad credit portfolio context, the risk profile of litigation financing 
has more merits. The return outcome of each litigation finance investment is 
idiosyncratic and uncorrelated to other debt or equity investments and has 
minimum influence from economic cycles. Thus, investors typically allocate 
to litigation finance as a diversifier within a broader opportunistic credit 
portfolio.
Investment Strategies
Litigation finance is still relatively early in its development as an institu￾tional asset class. While there are a few dozen firms that offer funds in the 
sector, the bulk of the assets are managed by a handful of small to mid-size 
firms. Fund sizes range from $50  million to $750  million. According to 
Westfleet Advisors, in 2021, there were 47 active funders in the commercial 
litigation finance space (not including those that focus on mass tort and 
other personal injury claims) with $12.4 billion in assets under manage￾ment, increasing from $11.3 billion in 2020.17 These funders committed 
$2.8 billion to new investments from July 2020 through June 2021, increas￾ing from $2.5 billion from the prior 12 months.
Litigation finance funding can be broadly categorized as equity-like 
or credit-like investments and be bifurcated into pre-settlement or post￾settlement financings. As discussed previously, equity-like investments are 
generally made in connection with financing the cost of prosecuting a 
single case where the funder is typically targeting a return of multiple of 
their invested capital and on average with longer duration than credit-like 
investments. Credit-like investments are generally made in the form of a 
loan with an interest rate secured directly or indirectly by future proceeds 
from multiple cases or a single case with the litigation risk eliminated.
17Westfleet Insider—2021 Litigation Finance Market Report.Enhanced Lending 269
■ Pre-settlement investments involve providing capital in active litiga￾tion where the cost of capital is largely driven by idiosyncratic litiga￾tion risks. Capital is used by companies or law firms in all types of 
claims and deployed at various stages of the legal process prior to the 
settlement of the case or cases. In addition to considering the merits 
of a case, funders will also need to consider the potential duration 
risks, collection risks (credit profile of the defendants and, in the case 
of foreign defendants, the ability to enforce a judgment or settlement), 
the quality of the attorneys, and the commercial reasonableness of the 
claimants. Pre-settlement investments can be structured as an equity￾like investment or a credit-like investment.
■ Post-settlement investments are more akin to credit opportunities where 
the investments are made in or secured by post-judgment or settled cases. 
Event risk for these investments is low, and funders generally target a 
low-teens IRR for these investments. Law firms seek to monetize legal 
fees and claimants seek to monetize judgment or settlement awards 
after litigation is largely resolved and risk has shifted from legal to 
credit and duration risks. The investments can be made in the form of a 
loan collateralized by or a forward purchase of one or more judgment 
or settlement awards to be received by a claimant or fee receivables of a 
law firm from settled cases.
Litigation finance funds are structured similarly to private equity and 
private lending funds, with a two- to three-year investment period and a 
four- to seven-year fund term. In general, annual management fees are in 
the range of 1.0–2.5% of invested capital or commitments with a 15–25% 
carried interest, above a hurdle rate or preferred return of 6–8% per annum. 
Litigation finance funds typically do not use leverage. Funds may focus on 
single case funding or multiple case (portfolio) funding or pursue both 
strategies. In either case, funds will diversify by duration, counterparty, 
industry, type of claims, and geography to reduce total risk.271
Conclusion
T
he United States has witnessed and supported tremendous growth in finan￾cial assets since the middle of the 20th century with a significant fraction 
smartly warehoused in pension plans, insurance companies, endowments, 
and foundations to provide for the future needs of the old, the young, and 
the needy. Few places elsewhere in the world have established the institutions 
and policies that grow, house, and protect this type of capital.
The 2008 GFC placed a severe strain on these institutions, not only cre￾ating historic losses in the value of assets held but also causing interest rates 
to fall to near zero. As a result, asset growth suffered, further jeopardizing 
the future obligations of these institutions. A recovering economy and stock 
market has helped, but fiduciaries know all too well that it is too risky to 
rely on stocks alone for their institutions’ well-being. As a result, a search 
for yield megatrend has manifested to find safe assets that throw off a steady 
stream of cash flow of at least mid-single-digit percentage levels that can 
help maintain institutional status quo.
During the same time, regulation and stepped-up capital requirements 
forced commercial banks to step back from their leadership role of financing 
middle market companies. Private asset managers replaced them and in so 
doing introduced a new asset class called corporate direct lending. Its grow￾ing acceptance is helping fill the yield demands of investors.
Institutional investors seldom buy on yield alone, so in constructing this 
book, the intent was to examine the asset class from the many perspectives 
institutions find important. In so doing, several unique contributions were 
presented.
■ First is the CDLI as a useful benchmark for measuring return and risk 
in an objective, unbiased way. Institutionally, asset classes seldom exist 
without an agreed-on benchmark, and the CDLI has the potential to 
serve that role. The CDLI is also important in defining realized credit 
losses as the source of return that largely defines the value added that 
managers contribute. Ultimately, manager alpha is represented by the 
track record for credit losses. Yield reflects risk taken, or beta, rather 
than manager skill. This second edition introduced two additional 
CDLI subindexes: a senior-only direct loan index called CDLI-S and 272 Conclusion
a venture-only direct loan index called CDLI-V. The senior-only direct 
loan index is particularly valuable to investors that look to allocation 
to only senior secured loans. Chapter 9 showed that while senior-only 
loan yields are lower, they have offsetting advantages in lower loss rates 
and easier financing terms.
■ Second is the identification of systematic risk factors in direct corporate 
loans and the measurement of risk premiums that compensate lenders 
for taking those risks. In so doing, investors will better understand what 
risks they are engaging when they buy yield. New data were presented 
in Chapter 11 showing the persistence of premiums for the four major 
risk factors over time. Unlike the public markets, where risk factors are 
seemingly inconsistent and tend toward zero, the risk factors for private 
debt appear increasingly consistent and of meaningful value.
■ Third is a methodology for cataloging direct lending managers by their 
risk factor exposures that is useful in differentiating managers and 
putting them together in a multi-lender portfolio. The importance of 
diversification can’t be stressed enough, and the ability of most single 
lenders to achieve a sufficient number of credits in a portfolio can be a 
challenge, particularly in a more competitive environment. Diversifica￾tion places challenges on investors as well, particularly those without 
resources to engage in the administrative and legal challenges of mul￾tiple private funds. Chapters 15 and 16 showed how private BDCs, 
interval funds, and tender funds have emerged to help those investors 
that need convenience as well as performance.
■ Fourth is the application of early models of credit risk to explain and 
differentiate yields and risks across the firm capital structure and, 
importantly, place a value on covenants that are so important to lenders 
in protecting principal.
■ Fifth is applying the all-weather label to private debt and direct lend￾ing in particular. High inflation combined with economic stagnation, 
has been dormant since the 1980s but has now re-emerged as a major 
future risk factor. Chapters 7 and 23 were added to support the thesis 
that private debt should perform well in such an environment, primarily 
due to the floating rate nature of direct loans and their safety through 
senior positioning in the borrower capital structure and the presence of 
covenants.
Looking ahead, direct lending to US middle market companies will only 
grow. Bank regulation may become more lenient, but risk-taking by banks is 
very unlikely to reach pre-GFC levels. The evidence presented from surveys 
of sponsored borrowers speaks to their willingness to pay a little more for 
execution size, convenience, speed, flexibility, and reliability. These are more 
the characteristics of unregulated private sector direct lenders than they are 
of today’s commercial banks.Conclusion 273
Growth can have risks, and for direct lending, like other asset classes, 
it is too much money chasing too few opportunities. In the past, the loan 
middle market has been immune to the credit cycle that governs the traded 
and broadly syndicated loan and bond markets. But as institutional inves￾tors increasingly penetrate the middle market, risk may increase and 
spreads narrow. Offsetting this is the increasing acceptance of nonbank 
lenders among borrowers among sponsor-linked borrowers. Evidence pro￾vided in these chapters shows little degradation in the return opportunity 
for private debt. In fact, prospects for private debt look strong as the entire 
private market ecosystem continues to outpace the public markets.
Size does beget attention, and private debt is now seeing arrows thrown 
its way. Some in Washington are concerned with an unregulated market sec￾tor supplying capital to borrowers that banks can no longer serve. Are alter￾native lenders creating risks for investors and a monetary system that will 
need new supervision and controls? Hopefully the answer is an emphatic 
no. Excesses will always appear in isolation. That seems inevitable. But the 
existence of broader systemic risks of the type that brought on the GFC does 
not exist with private debt. Diversification, transparency, safety, and inno￾vation are key characteristics of the private debt market today that should 
ensure that growth continues.
The motivation for this second edition was to give new readers an 
updated history on the progress private debt has made. That it proved to be 
a safe asset during the COVID crisis and thus far in 2022 during the Russian 
invasion of Ukraine. That its cash yield remained robust in the face of near￾zero interest rates and now as rates rise, private debt yields are rising with 
them. That innovation in private debt is at work helping individual investors 
access the best that private debt offers through new structures that deliver 
both attractive risk-adjusted returns and convenience.
Finally, we come back to the equation underlying private debt econom￾ics described in the Introduction:
Private Debt Return Income Realized Gains Losses
Unrealiz
 
ed Gains Losses Fees
It is just not that difficult. Income is fairly certain and much higher than 
anything publicly traded. Realized losses are small compared to interest 
earned and almost insignificant if better lenders are used. Unrealized gains 
(losses) cancel each other out definitionally over a short three-year window 
so they don’t really matter. So that leaves the investor with assessing fees 
against the quality of lender. Above all, surprises are to the downside so 
add diversification to high-quality lenders and reasonable fees and resulting 
investment outcomes should be rewarding to the investor.275
Glossary
’40 Act The 1940 Investment Companies Act, an act of the US Congress that regu￾lates the oversight of investment companies and their product offerings.
AFFE Acquired fund fees and expenses are fees charged by BDCs that mutual 
funds and other registered funds must aggregate with their own fees when 
reporting expense ratios.
Alpha That portion of total investment return attributable to manager skill and 
not market return.
Alternative risk premia That portion of total investment return attributable to 
common factors (value, growth, momentum) that are thought to potentially 
provide long-term incremental return due to investor behavioral biases.
ASC 820 The generally accepted accounting principal (GAAP) standard that dic￾tates how the fair value of assets is determined, breaking up the process of 
valuation into three levels (see also Level 3 assets).
Asset weighted An index or portfolio whose security holdings and returns are 
weighted by the asset value, as opposed to equal weighting.
Base rate A short-term, typically floating, interest rate (e.g., Libor, SOFR, Prime, 
T-bill, Fed Funds), which, in addition to a constant spread to compensate for 
credit risk, determines the amount of interest periodically paid to the lender by 
the borrower; also called the reference rate.
BDCs ’40 Act investment vehicles called business development corporations that 
invest in securities, mostly loans, to middle market US companies.
Benchmark return The return of an index, known as the benchmark index, that 
serves as a comparative measure to assess portfolio composition and gauge 
relative performance.
Benchmark risk The degree to which the return of a portfolio deviates from that 
of its benchmark; also known as tracking error.
Beta The measure of an asset’s price volatility relative to a market index. For 
example, a security with an equity beta measured at 0.80 moves up or down 
0.80 multiplied by the market index return.
Black-Cox model A formulation for valuing covenants using option pricing theory.
Black-Scholes model A formulation for valuing security options based on price, 
exercise price, the risk-free interest rate, and time to expiration.
Bloomberg Barclays High Yield Bond Index A commonly used index of publicly 
traded non-investment grade, or junk, bonds.
Broadly syndicated loans (BSLs) Larger secured and unsecured corporate loans 
originated by banks and nonbank lenders, with smaller shares then sold (syn￾dicated) to other investors (see also Leveraged loans).276 Glossary
Broker quote A price representing what a broker would pay for a specified security 
at a point in time. Used to value broadly syndicated loans that trade among 
broker dealers.
C&l loans A commercial bank classification for commercial and industrial loans 
made primarily to the bank’s corporate borrowers.
Cambridge U.S. Buyout Index An index based on financial information of US buy￾out funds. Source: Cambridge Associates LLC; data provided “as is” and at no 
cost to Cliffwater LLC.
Capital International Index The earliest index of non-US stock performance that 
is now Morgan Stanley Capital International.
CAPM The capital asset pricing model, a framework developed by Nobel Laure￾ate William Sharpe for separating the idiosyncratic (diversifiable) and system￾atic (undiversifiable) risk of an asset and how exposure to these risks affect 
expected returns.
CDLI The Cliffwater Direct Lending Index, an asset-weighted index of direct US 
middle market loans originated by private and public BDCs.
CDLI-S The Cliffwater Senior Direct Lending Index, an asset-weighted index of 
senior-only direct US middle market loans and a subset of CDLI.
CDLI-V The Cliffwater Venture Direct Lending Index, an asset-weighted index of 
venture-only direct US middle market loans and a subset of CDLI.
Collateralized loan obligation (CLO) A structured investment vehicle composed 
of loans and other fixed income securities. CLO cash flows are pooled into 
tranches and packaged as securities, with a separate credit rating for each, and 
sold to investors. The most junior security, which is last in receiving coupon 
and principal payments, is referred to as CLO Equity. The purpose of the CLO 
is to allow loan originators to offload their exposure to these loans and also to 
obtain a lower cost of capital for making new loans.
Common factor risk Risks related to prespecified systematic (non-diversifiable) fac￾tors, such as price momentum, carry, and earnings quality, that are expected 
to generate above-market returns under certain conditions. Certain invest￾ment strategies such as Risk Premia rely on quantitative models to identify and 
assign weightings to common factor risks.
Convexity The degree to which asset returns are affected by the change in, as 
opposed to the level of, a systematic risk factor, such as beta or duration. For 
example, assets with positive convexity to equity beta will perform better dur￾ing down markets, as their convexity offsets the negative impact on returns of 
equity beta.
Correlation The degree to which the prices of assets move in relation to each other. 
Portfolio diversification is improved when adding assets with low correlation 
to a legacy portfolio.
Cost value The initial amount paid for an asset, which is compared with the fair 
value of the asset to measure its realized or unrealized gain or loss.
Covenant Part of a loan or bond issue requiring the borrower to fulfill certain 
conditions on an ongoing basis. A covenant violation can lead to the lender 
declaring the borrower to be in default of their loan. Covenants may include 
taking on additional debt or maintaining a certain level of interest coverage.
Covenant lite A loan agreement or bond issue with a relatively small number of 
covenants, or where covenants are less stringent. These make it easier for a 
borrower to avoid default.Glossary 277
Credit premium The additional yield of a fixed income security to compensate 
the lender or investor for credit risk. Higher credit risk leads to a higher 
credit premium.
COVID crisis The period beginning February 2020 and ending June 2020 when 
the COVID pandemic caused a drawdown in risky assets, including stocks and 
credit securities.
Credit rating agency A firm that assigns credit ratings to securities, enabling inves￾tors to assess their credit risk; the big three rating agencies are S&P Global, 
Moody’s, and Fitch Group.
Credit risk The probability of a borrower defaulting on their loan.
CRSP The Center for Research in Security Prices, part of the University of Chicago 
Booth School of Business, was launched in 1960 to provide objective, accu￾rate, and comprehensive data on listed stocks.
Current yield The annual coupon payments of a bond or loan divided by its cur￾rent price.
Default The failure of a borrower to make scheduled coupon and/or principal 
payments. When a borrower defaults, the lender(s) have certain remedies, 
including foreclosure on collateral used to back the loan.
Delayed draw loan A loan whose principal can be increased at the option of the 
borrower, subject to size and time limitations.
Dispersion The spread of returns or prices within a group of securities or portfo￾lios. For example, a higher dispersion of prices among related securities, or 
wider spread between the high and low observations, can indicate the market 
is less efficient, providing more opportunity to generate alpha.
Dodd-Frank Act The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection 
Act, or Dodd-Frank Act, signed into law by President Obama in 2010, which 
created new, and amended existing, regulations to improve the stability of the 
US financial system and protect consumers against abusive lending practices. 
The law was a consequence of the 2008–2009 global financial crisis.
Down-and-in option A type of option that becomes active when the price of an 
underlying security falls below a certain level, called the barrier price; once 
this occurs the option behaves like a normal put or call option.
Duration A measure of how changes in interest rates inversely affect the price of an 
asset. For example, an asset with a five-year duration would decrease in price 
by 5% with a 1% increase in interest rates.
EBITDA Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization is an 
adjusted measure of the net income of a business that enables better compara￾bility across companies.
Effective life A measure of how long a depreciating asset will generate cash flow.
Effectively connected income Income generated in the US by commercial or invest￾ment activity of a foreign person or business.
Equity The residual value of a company after deducting debt and other liabilities; 
investors purchase equity in a company through common or preferred stock.
Euribor Euro Interbank offered rate is a daily reference rate based on several 
money market rates at which eurozone banks lend to one another for uncol￾lateralized loans (see also Libor).
Euro Crisis The European debt crisis, which effectively began in 2009 and has 
continued to the present day, refers to the inability of certain members of 
the eurozone to maintain the total debt of their countries within the initial 278 Glossary
guidelines set when the euro was originally created; this affects the perceived 
creditworthiness of their sovereign debt. The adoption of a single currency 
creates less flexibility for member countries in refinancing debt.
Fair value An estimate of the market value of an asset, typically provided by an 
auditor during the appraisal process.
Fair value accounting An accounting industry approach to establish an estimate of 
the market value of an asset, using independently observable inputs in lieu of a 
market transaction.
Fiduciary A person or legal entity holding assets, or making business or invest￾ment decisions, as an agent-in-trust on behalf of a principal, such as a stock￾holder or trust beneficiary.
First-out loan The senior component of a unitranche loan where first-out lenders, 
in exchange for a lower coupon rate, are the first to receive interest payments 
and have a more senior repayment position if the loan is paid off or refinanced, 
as opposed to last-out loans.
Floating rate Loans whereby the coupon payment is not fixed but adjusted with the 
level of a reference rate, such as US T-bills, Libor, or SOFR.
Global financial crisis (GFC) (2007–2009) A reference to the period 2007–2009, 
generally considered the worst global financial crisis since the Great Depression 
in the 1930s. The GFC was sparked by aggressive mortgage lending practices, 
which enabled unqualified borrowers to obtain mortgage loans, on which they 
subsequently defaulted. Exposure to these loans spread throughout the global 
financial system through structured securities, worsened by excessive leverage 
taken by banks and other financial institutions. These dislocations led to fail￾ures and government bailouts of many banks and investment firms worldwide, 
including most notably Lehman Brothers in September 2008.
Gordon model, or Gordon Growth model A method of estimating the intrinsic 
value of a security, whereby the value of the security equals the present value 
of future dividends, measured by the sum of current cash yield plus cash flow 
growth. Also known as the Dividend Discount model (DDM).
Illiquidity premium The incremental return of an asset resulting from it being 
priced and traded infrequently, compared with a more liquid asset having oth￾erwise similar characteristics; it represents the return required by an investor 
to hold an illiquid asset.
Impairment A permanent reduction in the fair value of a loan to below its cost 
basis, due to the increased probability that the interest and/or principal of a 
loan will not be repaid.
Income return The portion of an asset’s total return from interest or dividend 
income, rather than capital gains.
Incurrence covenant Part of a loan agreement or bond issue whereby the borrower 
is not allowed to take certain affirmative actions, such as incurring additional 
debt, an additional dividend payment or share repurchase, or acquiring or 
divesting a business (see also Maintenance covenant).
Intercept The constant in a model regression, or the number that results if the 
variable equals zero.
IPO Initial public offering, whereby a company or subsidiary is first listed on a 
stock exchange.
J-curve The initial period of a private investment whereby returns are low or nega￾tive due to the payment of management fees and expenses before investment Glossary 279
gains are captured. Being out of the J-curve means investment gains more than 
offset cumulative fees and expenses.
Junk bonds Bonds rated below investment grade; also known as high-yield bonds.
Last-out loan The junior component of a unitranche loan where last-out lenders, 
in exchange for a higher coupon rate, are the last to receive interest payments 
and have a more junior repayment position if the loan is paid off or refinanced 
(as opposed to first-out loans).
Level 3 assets Assets whose fair value cannot be determined using broker quota￾tions or observable inputs or measures; this is part of an accounting classifica￾tion system used for valuing assets introduced by FASB 157 as ASC 820.
Leverage Obtaining debt to increase investment capital for purchasing assets or 
originating loans.
Leveraged buyout The acquisition of another company using a high level of debt 
financing.
Leveraged loans Secured and unsecured loans originated by banks or nonbank 
lenders that are then syndicated to a group of investors; also known as broadly 
syndicated loans.
Libor London Interbank Offered Rate is a widely used reference rate set daily 
among the main UK banks, at which banks around the world lend to one 
another for uncollateralized loans. Libor is being phased out in 2023 and 
replaced by SOFR in the US.
Liquidity premium The incremental value of an asset resulting from it being priced 
and traded frequently, compared with an illiquid asset having otherwise simi￾lar characteristics. For example, public companies generally trade at higher 
price-to-earnings multiples than similar private companies.
Loan-to-value ratio The amount of aggregate debt compared with the total value 
of an asset, including equity and debt, typically used in the real estate industry. 
It is frequently cited as a measure of financial leverage and risk.
Log scale A logarithmic scale is a nonlinear scale used when the y-axis represents 
a percentage change or multiplicative factor, such as a compounded rate of 
return.
Lower middle market Typically represents companies with annual EBITDA of less 
than $25 million.
Maintenance covenant Part of a loan agreement or bond issue whereby the bor￾rower must maintain certain financial tests, such as net interest coverage or 
profitability (see also Incurrence covenant).
Marginal yield The change in yield relating to increased leverage, used to measure 
the relationship between increased leverage and higher borrowing costs.
Maximum drawdown The maximum historical drop in the market value of an 
asset or portfolio from peak to trough.
Mean-variance analysis An analytical framework first posited by Nobel Laureate 
Harry Markowitz that compares the expected risk of an asset or portfolio, typ￾ically measured by the standard deviation of returns, with its expected return.
Merton model A model proposed by Robert Merton that uses an options pricing 
model to value a company’s equity, with equity as a call option on its assets.
Mezzanine The layer of a company’s financing, or capital structure, that falls 
between senior secured and asset-backed debt and equity. Mezzanine financ￾ing often covers multiple capital structure segments, including subordinated 
debt, and may include equity warrants.280 Glossary
Middle market direct loans Loans originated by banks or nonbank lenders directly 
to middle market corporate borrowers (defined as having annual EBITDA 
between $10  million and $100  million). These loans are typically bilateral 
(not broadly syndicated) or may be syndicated to a small group of lenders. 
The companies may be sponsor-backed (controlled by a private equity firm) or 
nonsponsored (often family-owned businesses).
Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan Index An index designed to reflect the 
performance of the largest facilities in the leveraged loan market.
Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 Index An index designed to measure the 
performance of the largest 100 loan facilities in the US leveraged loan market.
NCREIF National Council of Real Estate Investment Fiduciaries, an industry 
association serving real estate investors in the US that seeks to collect, aggre￾gate, and disseminate real estate industry data.
NCREIF Property Index (NPI) A market-value-weighted index sponsored by 
NCREIF that is composed of commercial real estate properties in the US used 
to measure the performance of private real estate funds. Returns are reported 
gross-of-fees and unlevered.
Net annualized returns Annual returns from an investment inclusive of market 
value gains and losses, and net of all fees and expenses.
Net asset value The market value of a fund’s assets minus its liabilities, divided by 
the number of shares outstanding.
Non-investment grade loans Loans rated below investment grade by one or more of 
the major credit rating agencies; direct loans are typically non-investment grade.
Nonsponsored borrower A company borrowing from a direct lender that is not 
controlled by a private equity firm or investor.
Oil crisis (2015–2016) The period during which oil and natural gas prices fell 
precipitously due to a rapid increase in production by the US, paired with 
decreased demand from China and a refusal by OPEC to slow production. 
This led to distress among energy producers refinancing outstanding debt.
Original issue discount A form of loan origination fee, typically 2–4% of the 
loan balance, structured so that the loan amount received by the borrower is 
slightly less than the par value of the loan.
Origination The sourcing and structuring of a loan.
Pari passu A financing arrangement that gives multiple lenders equal claim to 
assets used to secure a loan.
PIK income, or payment-in-kind A bond interest payment in the form of additional 
securities of the same bond issue rather than cash.
Prepayment The settlement of bonds or loans before maturity; bond issues often 
have terms or penalties limiting prepayment to mitigate reinvestment risk for 
the lender.
Prepayment penalties Fees charged to the borrower for settling a loan or bond 
before maturity.
Principal The notional amount of a bond or loan, representing the amount bor￾rowed, on which coupon payments are calculated.
Private equity The ownership and/or control of companies that are not listed on 
public exchanges; can also represent private partnerships formed for the pur￾pose of raising investment capital.
Random walk Refers to price changes that do not follow a discernable pattern or trend.Glossary 281
Realized gains The profit resulting from selling an asset at a higher price than its 
cost basis.
Recovery The collection of a portion of the remaining amount due on a defaulted loan.
Reference rate A short-term, typically floating, interest rate (e.g., Libor, SOFR, 
Prime, T-bill, Fed Funds), which, in addition to a constant spread to compen￾sate for credit risk, determines the amount of interest periodically paid to the 
lender by the borrower.
Reinsurance Insurance purchased by insurance companies to reduce the risk of 
catastrophic events.
REIT Real estate investment trust, a type of regulated investment company (RIC) 
that owns real estate assets and is required to pass through at least 90% of 
related income to the shareholders.
Revolver A secured credit line, typically provided by a commercial bank, for a 
company’s short-term funding needs; revolvers are senior in the capital struc￾ture to other debt and equity; also called revolving credit facility.
RIC Regulated investment company, a legal entity regulated by the SEC that is 
publicly traded, like common or preferred stock. RICs are required to pass 
through at least 90% of capital gains, dividends, or net interest earned to 
maintain their tax-exempt status.
Risk premium A yield or return in excess of the risk-free rate, compensating the 
lender or investor for the various sources of risk relating to the investment.
Risk-off A capital shift by investors to limit or reduce exposure to riskier invest￾ments in favor of those perceived as being less risky.
R-squared A statistical measure representing the proportion of variance for a depend￾ent variable explained by an independent variable; a higher R-squared suggests a 
stronger relationship between two variables and a more powerful regression model.
Rule 17d The rule prohibits first- and second-tier affiliates of a fund acting as 
principal or engaging in a joint arrangement with the fund; what this means 
in practice for direct lending is that investment managers cannot allocate par￾ticipation interests in loans they buy or originate to both private and registered 
funds without a 17d exemptive order.
Russell 3000 Index A market capitalization weighted index maintained by FTSE 
Russell designed to represent the broad investible US equity universe. It 
includes approximately the 3,000 largest stocks listed in the US.
Russell 2000 Index A small-cap stock market index including approximately the 
2,000 smallest stocks in the Russell 3000 Index.
Senior debt, or senior secured debt A priority claim over subordinated debt, mez￾zanine, and equity in a company’s capital structure, typically secured with 
collateral such as property, plant and equipment, and receivables.
Senior first lien A senior secured claim to second lien and other subordinated and 
junior debt, mezzanine, and equity in a company’s capital structure, and is 
typically junior only to bank revolvers, accounts payable, and other short-term 
secured financing.
Senior second lien A junior secured claim to first lien debt in a company’s capital 
structure, which is senior to subordinated debt, mezzanine, and equity.
Serial correlation The degree to which the value of a variable at a given time (t) is 
related to its value in the immediately preceding period (t−1), measured over 
various time periods.282 Glossary
Shadow rating An unofficial credit rating given by a credit rating agency to a bond 
that is not publicly announced.
Short volatility An investment strategy designed to profit from a decrease in mar￾ket volatility.
Skew A measure of the asymmetry of a probability distribution.
Smoothing of asset values When the fair values of assets don’t change significantly 
over time due to their being appraisal-based rather than marked to market.
SOFR Secured Overnight Financing Rate, the new reference rate for loans and 
derivatives that has replaced Libor for most new financial agreements in the US.
Sponsored borrower A company borrowing from a direct lender that is controlled 
by a private equity firm or investor; the direct lender typically works directly 
with the private equity sponsor to negotiate the size and terms of the loan.
Standard deviation A measure of risk or volatility of an asset’s prices and returns, 
it is the degree to which individual observations within a statistical set vary 
from their mean.
Stretch senior A type of hybrid loan structure that combines senior debt and junior 
debt; the senior debt stretches to include junior parts of the capital structure.
Subordinated debt Unsecured debt that is junior to more senior secured debt; sub￾ordinated claims are paid out only after senior claims are satisfied.
Syndicate A group of investors and lenders that contribute capital to participate in 
a loan; syndicate members acquire their loan interests from the loan originator 
or underwriter.
Tracking error The degree to which the return of a portfolio deviates from that of 
its benchmark; also known as benchmark risk.
Unitranche loan A flexible hybrid loan that combines senior secured debt and sub￾ordinated debt at a single blended interest rate.
Unrealized gains The profit on an investment that remains unsold.
Unrelated business taxable income Income generated by a tax-exempt entity for 
investment and business activities outside the main function of the entity.
Unsmoothing A technique to more accurately reflect the degree to which an 
appraised asset’s fair value changes over time based on market conditions.
Upper middle market Typically represents companies with annual EBITDA of 
more than $75 million.
Valuation agent An agent or entity responsible for determining the value of an asset.
Variance The square of the standard deviation.
Vintage weighting A measure of business cycle diversification of an investment 
portfolio.
Vintage year The year in which capital is first called for a private partnership.
VIX Shorthand for an index created by the Chicago Board Options Exchange 
that measures the stock market’s expected volatility based on the pricing of 
S&P 500 Index options, formally known as the CBOE Volatility Index.
Warrants A derivative security that entitles the holder to purchase an underlying 
security at a fixed price up to an expiry date.
Yield Interest income plus fee income, divided by fair value.
Yield-to-three-year takeout The equivalent of yield-to-maturity for a loan, reflect￾ing that middle market corporate loans are typically refinanced within about 
three years, rather than their five-year stated maturity.
Yield-to-maturity The estimated rate of return based on the assumption that it 
will be held until its maturity date and not prepaid or called.283
About the Author
Stephen L. Nesbitt is chief executive officer and chief investment officer of 
Cliffwater LLC, an investment management and advisory firm specializing 
in alternative investments including private equity, private debt, real assets, 
and hedge funds.  At Cliffwater, Steve manages more than $13 billion in 
assets and advises institutional clients on another $55 billion in alternatives.285
Index Citations
Bloomberg U.S. Aggregate (Bloomberg US Agg Total Return Value Unhedged USD Index)
Source: Bloomberg Index Services Limited. BLOOMBERG® is a trademark and service 
mark of Bloomberg Finance L.P. and its affiliates (collectively “Bloomberg”). Bloomberg or 
Bloomberg’s licensors own all proprietary rights in the Bloomberg Indices. Bloomberg does not 
approve or endorse this material or guarantee the accuracy or completeness of any information 
herein, nor does Bloomberg make any warranty, express or implied, as to the results to be 
obtained therefrom, and, to the maximum extent allowed by law, Bloomberg shall not have any 
liability or responsibility for injury or damages arising in connection therewith.
Bloomberg High Yield (Bloomberg US Corporate High Yield Total Return Index Value 
Unhedged USD Index)
Source: Bloomberg Index Services Limited. BLOOMBERG® is a trademark and service 
mark of Bloomberg Finance L.P. and its affiliates (collectively “Bloomberg”). Bloomberg or 
Bloomberg’s licensors own all proprietary rights in the Bloomberg Indices. Bloomberg does not 
approve or endorse this material or guarantee the accuracy or completeness of any information 
herein, nor does Bloomberg make any warranty, express or implied, as to the results to be 
obtained therefrom, and, to the maximum extent allowed by law, Bloomberg shall not have any 
liability or responsibility for injury or damages arising in connection therewith.
Cambridge (CIA) US Buyout (Cambridge Associates US Buyout Benchmark)
Source: Cambridge Associates US Buyout Benchmark by S&P Dow Jones Indices. S&P® is 
a registered trademark of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC and Dow Jones® is a 
registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. © 2022 S&P Dow Jones Indices 
LLC, its affiliates and/or its licensors. All rights reserved.
Cambridge Private Equity (Cambridge Associates Global Private Equity and Venture Capital 
Benchmark)
Source: Cambridge Associates Global Private Equity and Venture Capital Benchmark by S&P 
Dow Jones Indices. S&P® is a registered trademark of Standard & Poor’s Financial Services 
LLC and Dow Jones® is a registered trademark of Dow Jones Trademark Holdings LLC. © 
2022 S&P Dow Jones Indices LLC, its affiliates and/or its licensors. All rights reserved.
Cliffwater Direct Lending Index (Cliffwater Direct Lending Index – Total Return)
Source:  Cliffwater LLC. Cliffwater Direct Lending Index is sponsored by Cliffwater LLC. 
Copyright © 2004 - 2022 Cliffwater LLC. All rights reserved.
HFRI Fund Weighted (HFRI Fund Weighted Composite Index)
Source: HFR Inc., www.hfr.com, © 2022 HFR, Inc. All rights reserved.286 Index Citations
Merrill Lynch 0-3 Month T-Bill (ICE BofA US 3-Month Treasury Bill Index)
Source: ICE Data Indices, LLC (“ICE DATA”), is used with permission. ICE® IS A 
REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF ICE DATA OR ITS AFFILIATES, AND BOFA® IS A 
REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF BANK OF AMERICA CORPORATION LICENSED 
BY BANK OF AMERICA CORPORATION AND ITS AFFILIATES ("BOFA") AND MAY 
NOT BE USED WITHOUT BOFA’S PRIOR WRITTEN APPROVAL. ICE DATA, ITS 
AFFILIATES AND THEIR RESPECTIVE THIRD PARTY SUPPLIERS DISCLAIM ANY 
AND ALL WARRANTIES AND REPRESENTATIONS, EXPRESS AND/OR IMPLIED, 
INCLUDING ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A 
PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR USE, INCLUDING THE INDICES, INDEX DATA AND 
ANY DATA INCLUDED IN, RELATED TO, OR DERIVED THEREFROM. NEITHER 
ICE DATA, ITS AFFILIATES NOR THEIR RESPECTIVE THIRD PARTY SUPPLIERS 
SHALL BE SUBJECT TO ANY DAMAGES OR LIABILITY WITH RESPECT TO THE 
ADEQUACY, ACCURACY, TIMELINESS OR COMPLETENESS OF THE INDICES OR 
THE INDEX DATA OR ANY COMPONENT THEREOF, AND THE INDICES AND 
INDEX DATA AND ALL COMPONENTS THEREOF ARE PROVIDED ON AN “AS 
IS” BASIS AND YOUR USE IS AT YOUR OWN RISK. ICE DATA, ITS AFFILIATES AND 
THEIR RESPECTIVE THIRD PARTY SUPPLIERS DO NOT SPONSOR, ENDORSE, OR 
RECOMMEND ANY PART OF THIS PUBLICATION.
Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 (Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 100 Total 
Return USD Index)
Source: © 2022  Morningstar, Inc.  All rights reserved.  Reproduced with permission. The 
information contained herein: (1) is proprietary to Morningstar and/or its content providers; 
(2) may not be copied or distributed; (3) does not constitute investment advice offered by 
Morningstar; and (4) is not warranted to be accurate, complete or timely. Neither Morningstar 
nor its content providers are responsible for any damages or losses arising from any use of 
this information. Past performance is no guarantee of future results. Use of information from 
Morningstar does not necessarily constitute agreement by Morningstar, Inc. of any investment 
philosophy or strategy presented in this publication.
NCREIF Property (Real Estate) (NCREIF Property Total Return Index)
Source: US commercial real estate indices: the NCREIF property index. All rights reserved.
Russell 3000 (Russell 3000 Total Return Index)
Source: London Stock Exchange Group plc and its group undertakings (collectively, the “LSE 
Group”). © LSE Group 2022. FTSE Russell is a trading name of certain of the LSE Group 
companies. FTSE® and Russell® are trademarks of the relevant LSE Group companies and are 
used by any other LSE Group company under license. All rights in the FTSE Russell indexes 
or data vest in the relevant LSE Group company which owns the index or the data. Neither 
LSE Group nor its licensors accept any liability for any errors or omissions in the indexes 
or data and no party may rely on any indexes or data contained in this communication. 
No further distribution of data from the LSE Group is permitted without the relevant LSE 
Group company’s express written consent. The LSE Group does not promote, sponsor 
or endorse the content of this communication. This book is not in any way connected to or 
sponsored, endorsed, sold or promoted by the London Stock Exchange Group plc and its 
group undertakings (collectively, the “LSE Group”). The LSE Group does not accept any 
liability whatsoever to any person arising out of the use of this book or the underlying data.287
Index
A
Acquired fund fees and expenses (AFFEs), 
usage, 114
Acquisition financing, borrower demand 
driver, 253
Active litigation, capital provision, 269
Add-backs, inclusion, 98
Administrative expenses, 186–187
Administrative fees, 101
AFAS 157, usage, 19
Affirmative covenants, 96, 97
Agent (direct loan agreement 
component), 96
All-in lending rates, CSA inclusion, 203
Alpha, 140, 147, 183
Alternative lending, 208
Alternative risk premia, harvesting, 87
Alternatives, democratization, 107–109
Amendment/waiver fees, returns 
generation, 255
Amortization, initiation, 233
Amortization rate, increase, 216
Annual capital expenditures, limitations 
(negative covenants), 97
Annualized firm-level risk, simulation 
input, 77–78
Annualized unrealized losses, 
comparison, 133
ASC 820 fair value protocols, 
quality, 153–154
Asset allocation, 107, 188
Asset-based finance, sub-strategies, 242–243
Asset-based lending (ABL), 223, 242–245
expected return/risk, 243–244
fee structures, 244–245
investment strategies, 244–245
market size/structure, 242–243
Asset classes, 183
comparisons, Volcker-like policy regime 
(impact), 198–200
correlations, 189e
cumulative returns, 25e
cumulative total returns, 31e, 35e
defining, 57–61
direct lending, comparison, 199e
expected return/risk, 189e
max drawdown/recovery period, 
32e, 35e
performance, comparisons, 23
return/risk, 24e, 25e
separation, 57
status, achievement (absence), 57
value, investor discovery, 91
Assets
allocations, 191
levels, 153–154
sales, prohibitions/restrictions (negative 
covenants), 97
usage, 19
value, FASB definition, 153
Available balance sheet cash, minimum, 97
Average debt leverage, increase, 212
B
Backfill, 66
Bank financing, selection
European sponsor survey, 220e–222e
US sponsor survey, 217e–218e
Bankruptcy
filings, 241
Merton model provision, absence, 83
Banks
behavior, changes, 216
loans, price comparison, 155e
middle market lender activity, 210
Benchmarks
characteristics, 173–174
direct lending benchmarks, 167–168
importance, 168, 170, 172–173
risk, 173288 Index
Beta
coefficients, 157
equity beta, forecast, 184
exposure, 91
Black-Cox model, 69–70, 83–85, 95
Black-Scholes option pricing formula, 
Merton adaptation, 70
Bloomberg Aggregate Bond Index, 4, 
7, 28–29, 53
interest rate changes, impact, 55e
investment grade bond 
measurement, 30–31
Bloomberg Barclays High Yield Bond 
Index, 82, 263
Bloomberg High Yield Bond Index, 27, 
81–82, 156
usage, 175
yield to worst, 41
Bloomberg US Aggregate Bond Index 
measurement, 102
Board of directors meetings, observer rights 
(affirmative covenants), 97
Bona fide hedging, permissions (negative 
covenants), 97
Borrower debt addition, imitation 
(affirmative covenants), 97
Borrower size averages, dispersion, 135
Broadly syndicated loans (BSLs), 2–3
yield, availability, 89
Business development companies (BDCs), 3
defining, 111–116
dividend yield, 123–124
eligibility, 10
fees, comparisons, 165
industry statistics, 116e
market indexes, 122–123
private BDCs, 117–120
private non-listed BDCs, 119e–120e
public BDC market, performance tiers, 123
publicly traded BDCs, 120–122, 
121e–122e
restrictions, 111
SEC-registered investment company 
status, running (operational 
requirements), 112–113
total return, 125–126
C
Calendar year interest income, realized credit 
gains (correlation), 140
Call premiums, expiration, 239–240
Cambridge Associates US Buyout Index, 
performance measurement, 26
Cambridge US Buyout Index, 28
Capital asset pricing model (CAPM), 69–70
Capital commitments, investment, 109
Capital expenditures, funding (borrower 
demand driver), 253
Capital structures, evolution, 210
Capped index weightings, 122–123
Captive funds, 228–229
Carried interest (statistic), 164
Cash flow, 225
growth, 185
predictability/stability, debt investment 
characteristics, 252
Cash interest, returns generation, 255
Cash yield, adjustment, 184
Catastrophe bonds, ILS security 
example, 261
Catastrophe events/perils, 262
Charge-offs, 45
Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) Term 
SOFR Rates, usage, 203
Cliffwater BDC Index (CWBDC Index), 123
dividend yield, 125
five-year Treasury yields, 
comparison, 124e
market return, net operating return 
(comparison), 125e
price premium/discount to NAV, 124e
price return, NAV return 
(comparison), 126e
Cliffwater Direct Lending Index 
(CDLI), 9–11
benchmark, usefulness, 271–272
CDLI-S, comparison, 66e, 68e
CDLI-V index, differences, 237
construction, description, 10
current yield, yield-to-three-year takeout 
(comparison), 39e
direct lending asset managers, cumulative 
net realized gains/losses, 139e
direct lending managers, net realized gains/
losses, 138e
historical yield, 67e
industry weightings, 177e
interest rate changes, impact, 55e
nonaccruals, 46e
performance, 11e
price returns, serial correlations, 157
private debt benchmark, 173–175Index 289
recovery rates, 46e
regression equation, meaning, 56
returns, 55–56, 139
senior secured direct lending growth, 
percentage, 66e
total return, 141e
yield, calculation, 92
Cliffwater Direct Venture Lending Index 
(CDLI-V), 237–238
Cliffwater Senior-Only Direct Lending Index 
(CDLI-S), 65–67
Collateralized loan obligations (CLOs), 
148–149, 230–234
collateral manager, role, 234
formation, 204–205
leveraged loans, 230
mechanics, 233–234
notes/equity, model pricing, 232e
return/risk, 231–233
structure, 230–231
takeouts, warehouse financing, 149
Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans, 2, 9
Commercial mortgage-backed securities 
(CMBSs), 245
Comparative credit loss rates, 43
Comparative loss rates, 44–45
Conditions precedent (direct loan agreement 
component), 95
Consolidations, prohibitions/restrictions 
(negative covenants), 97
Consumer brands, royalty strategy 
investment, 257
Consumer Price Index (CPI) values, 
addition, 188, 190
Corporate books/records (affirmative 
covenants), 97
Corporate direct lending, 185, 192
expected return calculation, 186e
growth, 182
Corporate lender, perception, 70
Correlations, 189e
Counterparty credit risk spread, 
absence, 203
Country risk, 213–214
Covenants
affirmative covenants, 96, 97
covenant lite, 98
financial covenants, 96–98
impact, 85e, 86e
loan agreement, relationship, 95
negative covenants, 96, 97
usage, 83–86
COVID
crisis, 155, 240, 246
stress test, direct lending 
(relationship), 34–36
Credit
asset class separation, 57
loss, 43, 44e
premium, calculation, 71
return/risk, 58e–59e
seniority, pricing/volatility 
(understanding), 158
theory, 69
Credit markets, price changes (impact), 16
Credit-oriented interval funds, 128, 129e
Credit risk
level, differentiation, 144
models, application, 272
Credit risk premium
calculation, 71
firm risk, comparison, 74e
risk-free rate, comparison, 75–76, 76e
time to maturity, comparison, 77e
Credit spread adjustment (CSA)
references, 203
separation, 201–202
Credit Suisse Leveraged Loan 
Index, 167, 230
Current yield, 37
yield-to-three-year takeout, 
comparison, 39e
D
Debt capital, 5, 236–237
Debt costs, 72e, 85e
Debt investment characteristics, 251–252
Debtor in possession (DIP) 
financing, 239–240
Debt to EBITDA ratio, maximum, 97
Default event
direct loan agreement component, 96
trigger, 16
Default rates
debt investment characteristics, 252
reporting, 45
Definitions (direct loan agreement 
component), 95
Deleveraging, impact, 77–78
Democratization of alternatives, 107–109290 Index
Direct corporate loans
GICS sector weights, 176
systematic risk factors, identification, 272
Direct lenders
confidence level, 179
credit losses, 138–140
fees, 162e
loan, origination/construction/
monitoring, 145, 146
selection, institutional approach, 142–143
Direct lending, 5–7
all-weather label, 272
asset classes, comparison, 199e
asset managers, cumulative net realized 
gains/losses, 139e
benchmarks, 167–168
core investment, 61
COVID stress test, relationship, 34–36
diversification, 175–179
drawdown, 32
enhanced lending, contrast, 223
expected returns/risks, 181
fees, interest (alignment), 165–166
firms, market share (increase), 209–210
GFC stress test, 30–34
partnerships, 109
performance attribution, 33e, 36e
performance, Volcker-led Fed policy 
regime (impact), 195
private partnerships, portfolio 
characteristics, 147e
returns, 12e, 102, 138, 196
risk factors, 213–214
senior direct lending, 65
unitranche direct lending, 65
Direct lending managers, 142–143
cataloguing, methodology, 272
direct loan yield, 134–137
investment strategy, 143–144
net realized gains/losses, 138e
performance, comparison, 132e
selection, 131–133
total return, 141e
Direct lending return forecast, 197e
fees/expenses, 198
income, increase, 197–198
realized losses, 197–198
unrealized losses, 198
Volcker-like policy regime, 
impact, 196–198
Direct loans
borrower/lender agreements, structure, 95
borrower perspective, 215
comparison, 208–209
duration/life, 4–5
fair value, par (principal) value 
(contrast), 39e
income, loan asset value percentage, 13e
liquidity, 49, 51
manager yield (interest income), 134e
portfolios, leveraging/usage, 99–103
price comparison, 155e
risk factors, manager exposure, 136e
total return, percentage, 21e
valuations, integrity (testing), 156–157
yield, 13–15
yield (CDLI), 40e
Directly originated, upper middle market 
risk premiums, values, 89
Direct middle market loans
valuation, statistical methods 
(usage), 159–160
volatility, reduction, 156
Direct US middle market corporate loans, 
risk premiums (availability), 88e
Distress credit opportunities, 
reduction, 227
Diversification, 175–179
Diversified direct loan portfolios, 
valuations, 160
Dividend payments, limitations (negative 
covenants), 97
Down-and-in option, example, 84e
Downside protection, 227
Drawdown, 29–30
E
Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, 
and amortization (EBITDA), 95, 144
borrower size, 161
company, capital structure, 6e
growth, 159
involvement, 97–98
leverage conditions, 34
measurement, 93
positivity, 227
Economy, decarbonization, 252
Effectively connected income (ECI), 
generation (absence), 113
Efficient frontier portfolio, 181–182Index 291
Enhanced lending, direct lending 
(contrast), 223
Enhanced private debt strategies, 
description, 63e
Entry barriers, debt investment 
characteristics, 252
Equipment finance (asset-based finance sub￾strategy), 242–243
Equity beta, forecast, 184
Equity real estate, NPI measurement, 31
Equity, return/risk, 58e–59e
European borrowers, 219
European direct lending market
characteristics, 208–209
evolution, 209–212
growth, 213
US direct lending market, 
comparison, 211e
European direct lending, risk 
factors, 213–214
European direct loans, capital structure, 212
European Middle Market Direct 
Lending, 207
European middle market-leveraged 
buyouts, 212
Excess returns, display, 60
Expected direct loan yield, calculation, 91
Expected fault frequency, 145
Expected return, 183–188, 189e
asset-based lending, 243–244
calculation, 183
calculation, corporate direct lending 
usage, 186e
direct lending, 181
infrastructure debt, 254–255
litigation finance, 266–268
mezzanine debt, 224–225
reinsurance, 262–263
rescue financing, 240–241
royalties, 258–259
structured capital, 227–228
venture debt, 236
Expected risks, 188, 189e, 190, 224–225
asset-based lending, 243–244
direct lending, 181
expected return/risk, 224–225
infrastructure debt, 254–255
litigation finance, 266–268
reinsurance, 262–263
rescue financing, 240–241
royalties, 258–259
structured capital, 227–228
venture debt, 236
F
Fair value
par (principal) value, contrast, 39e
quarterly changes, 16
Fallback spread adjustments, 204
Fee variation, explanation factors 
(statistic), 164–165
Financial asset lending/rediscounting, 243
Financial covenants, 96–98
Financing
costs, 103–106
leverage cost, explanation factors, 105e
leverage financing, 148–150
sources, 149–150
Finite private partnerships, usage, 109
Firm-level risk estimate, risk source 
division, 78
Firm-level volatility, Merton model 
requirement, 77
Firm risk, credit risk premium 
(comparison), 74e
Firm volatility, 73–75, 75e
First lien 100 loan portfolios, simulation 
results, 80e
First lien loan
principal value, 78
simulation results, 79e
First lien portfolios, simulation 
results, 81e
Five-year Treasury yields, Cliffwater BDC 
Index (comparison), 124e
Fixed charge coverage ratio, minimum, 97
Fixed income risk, Bloomberg US Aggregate 
Bond Index measurement, 102
Floating interest rates, simulation input, 77
G
Global Financial Crisis (GFC), 3–4, 
17–18, 107
losses, realization, 138
maximum drawdown, 29
stress test, 30–34, 151
Global Industry Classification Standard 
(GICS) sector weights, 176, 177e
Gross assets, fees (majority lender 
charges), 166292 Index
Gross assets valuation (GAV), 163
Gross income, total fees percentage 
(statistic), 164
H
Health care, royalty strategy investment, 257
Hedge funds
strategies, 107
usage, 192
High-yield bank loans, addition, 194
High-yield bonds
addition, 194
price comparison, 155e
yield (CDLI), 40e
Hybrid capital, 226
I
Implied recovery rate, 46
Incentive fees, charging, 115, 166
Industry loss warranties (ILWs), ILS security 
example, 261
Inflation hedging, 253–254
Inflation-linked revenues, debt investment 
characteristics, 252
Infrastructure assets, debt investment 
characteristics, 251–252
Infrastructure debt, 251–258
expected return/risk, 254–255
investment strategies, 255–256
market environment, 252–254
market size/structure, 254
strategies, 255, 256
Institutional credit portfolios, 
components, 57, 60
Insurance linked securities (ILSs), 
260–261
Intellectual property (IP), 
development, 256–257
Interest, direct lending fees 
(alignment), 165–166
Interest income
incentive fees, charging, 166
increase, 196–197
Interest rates
changes, impact, 55e
increase, middle market loans 
(hedge), 53
ratios, history, 199e
return/risk, 58e–59e
US short-term interest rates, inflation 
(contrast), 54e
Internal rate of return (IRR), 234
increase, 149
reliance, 151
Internal Revenue Code (1986), Subchapter 
M (impact), 113
Interval funds, 111, 127–129, 129e
Intra-quarter price discovery, requirement, 160
Investment
fees, 161
opinions, reflectiveness (benchmark 
characteristic), 174
Investment Company Act of 1940
interval fund operation, 127
Section 54, impact, 111
Investment grade bonds, 198
Bloomberg Aggregate Bond Index 
measurement, 30–31
Investment strategy, 143–144
asset-based lending, 244–245
infrastructure debt, 255–256
litigation finance, 268–269
mezzanine debt, 225–226
reinsurance, 263–264
rescue financing, 241
royalties, 259–260
structured capital, 228–229
venture debt, 236–237
J
J-curve period, length, 246
J-curve phenomena, mitigation/
elimination, 162
Junk bonds, direct loan performance 
(relationship), 7
L
Lender alpha, 140
Lender incentive fees, hurdle rates 
(variation), 166
Lender valuations, usage, 20
Leverage
financing, 148–150
levels, 102, 106, 112
statistics, 163
usage/analysis, 103–106
Leveraged buyouts (LBOs), 230
Leveraged finance, 6–7Index 293
Leveraged loans, 2–3, 40e, 230
Levered direct lending, 105e, 193e
Levered portfolio, impact, 187
Light transition property (property cash flow 
profile), 250
Liquid alternative funds, failure, 108
Liquidity gap, bridging, 108
Liquid leverage loans, middle market loans 
(price relationship), 159e
Litigation finance, 264–269
expected return/risk, 266–268
funding, categorization, 268–269
investment strategies, 268–269
market size/structure, 265–266
Litigation funding strategies, return/risk 
profile (variation), 267
Loan assets
net realized gains/losses, percentage, 18e
net unrealized gains/losses, percentage, 20e
value, 13e, 21e
Loan risk
estimation, 77–78
simulation inputs, 77–78
simulation results, 79e
Loans
agreement, covenants (relationship), 95
assumptions, 161–162
commitment (direct loan agreement 
component), 95
covenants, usage, 83
direct lender, origination/construction/
monitoring, 144–146
information, SEC disclosures (usage), 10
leverage, 246
nonaccrual status, 45
portfolio risk, estimation, 80
prepayments, impact, 258–259
seniority, significance, 105–106
structure, forms, 237
valuation, 10, 153
values, establishment, 16
Loan-to-value (LTV)
amount, 247
detachment/equity cushion, 228
ratios, Merton model representation, 72e
London Interbank Offered Rate (Libor) 
(LIBOR), 202, 236, 240–241, 244
Lower middle market, risk premiums 
(values), 89
M
Maintenance covenant, EBITDA 
involvement, 97–98
Majority lenders, fees (charges), 166
Management expenses, 198
Management fees, 162–163, 198
effective management fees, 163
Manager
alpha, 183
direct loan manager yield (interest 
income), 134e
direct loan risk factor exposure, 136e
direct loan yield, 134–137
fees/expenses, 150–151
yields, 92, 135
Marginal yields, 72–73
Market environment, infrastructure 
debt, 252–254
Market participants, SOFR 
(relationship), 202
Market-related risk (beta), 78
Market size/capital
mezzanine debt, 224
structured capital, 227
Market size/structure
asset-based lending, 242–243
infrastructure debt, 254
litigation finance, 265–266
reinsurance, 260–262
rescue financing, 240
royalties, 257–258
venture debt, 234–235
Master Limited Partnerships (MLPs), 37, 
107, 111, 114
Media/entertainment, royalty strategy 
investment, 257
Mergers, prohibitions/restrictions (negative 
covenants), 97
Merton, Robert (model) (Black-Cox model), 
69–73, 231
covenants, usage, 83–86
representation, 72e
testing, 81–82
Mezzanine debt
structured capital, relationship, 224–226
usage, 226
Mezzanine investment strategies, 225–226
Mezzanine lenders, types, 225
Mezzanine market size/structure, 224294 Index
Mezzanine real estate debt, 246–247
Mezzanine strategies, expected return/
risk, 224–225
Middle market corporate loans
implied recoveries, 45–47
nonaccruals, 45–47
simulation input, 77
Middle market debt, Moody’s study, 94
Middle market direct corporate loans, risk 
premium model, 93
Middle market direct lender, due diligence 
checklist, 142e
Middle market direct loans
investment, private partnerships 
(usage), 109–110
total income, PIK percentage, 15e
Middle market loans
hedge, 53
liquid leverage loans, price 
relationship, 159e
Middle market loans, performance data 
(usefulness), 53–54
Middle market risk premiums, volatility, 89
Middle market yield potential, 
measurement, 137
Money management firms, organization 
ability, 143
Monte Carlo simulation, usage, 69
Morningstar LSTA US Leveraged Loan 
100 Index, 4, 26–27, 81–82, 167
CDLI price returns, serial correlation 
(comparison), 157
quarterly data/price, 159, 160
returns, 172
usage, 93, 175, 230
yield to maturity, 41
MSCI All Country World Index, 190
Multi-asset strategies, 107
N
NCREIF Property Index (NPI), 
usage, 168, 173
Negative covenants, 96, 97
Net asset value (NAV), 163
overstatement, 153
total fees, statistic, 164
Net gains/losses, 15–17
Net realized gains/losses, 17–19
percentage, 18e
Net realized losses, buildup (investor 
recognition), 17
Net unrealized gains/losses, 19–21, 20e
New liens, prohibitions (negative 
covenants), 97
No-call period, expiration, 239–240
Nonaffiliated structured credit funds, 
credit-focused investor preference, 229
Nonbank financing, 192
European sponsor survey, 220e–222
US sponsor survey, 217e–218e
Nonbank lending, 2–4
Nonmarket idiosyncratic risk, 78
Nonsponsored borrowers, risk premiums 
(values), 89
O
Oil crisis, impact, 155
Ongoing compliance (affirmative 
covenants), 97
Operating cash flow, 208
Opportunistic credit strategies, 64
Optimized portfolios, unlevered/levered 
direct lending, 193
Original issue discount (OID), 14–15, 
137, 161
annualization, 71
returns generation, 255
Origination, 144–145
P
Payment in kind (PIK), 227
income, 93
percentage, middle market direct 
loan total income (relationship), 
14, 15e
yield, 226–227
Pensions
state pension asset class returns, 
distribution, 171e
ten-year state pension fund 
returns, 169e
Performance
asset classes, comparisons, 23
data, usage, 168
direct lending performance attribution, 
33e, 36e, 195
Performance, visualization, 12
Portfolios
characteristics, 103–106
construction, 146–148, 167
direct lending portfolio, specifications/
usage, 100e, 104eIndex 295
direct lending private partnerships, 
portfolio characteristics, 147e
direct loan portfolios, leveraging/
usage, 99–103
diversification, impact, 80
financing, 267–268
indicative direct lending portfolios, fees/
expenses/leverage (subtraction), 100e
optimized portfolios, unlevered/levered 
direct lending, 193e
Preferred return (statistic), 164
Price-earnings ratios
decline, 198
history, 199e
Principal-related cash flow, decline, 51
Private ABL funds, structure, 244
Private assets
classes, performance, 170
investing, private partnership 
model, 109–110
Private BDCs, 117–120
Private debt, 61–64
all-weather label, 272
benchmark, 173–175
debt costs, Merton model 
representation, 72e
enhanced private debt strategies, 
description, 63e–64e
funds, carried interest statistics, 164
landscape, examination, 62e
loan-to-value ratios, Merton model 
representation, 72e
strategies, performance 
expectations, 62, 64
Private direct lending funds, BDC 
offering, 114
Private equity
firms, survey, 215
performance, 28
Private equity-affiliated structured capital 
funds, types, 228–229
Private mezzanine funds, structure, 225–226
Private non-listed BDCs, 119e–120e
Private non-listed credit interval 
funds, 129e
Private partnership
direct loans, 146–147
model, 109–110
portfolio statistics, BDCs (comparison), 148
Private real estate
beta characteristics, 61
debt, 245–247
Public asset classes, returns distribution, 173
Public BDCs, 117–118, 123
Publicly traded BDCs, 120–122, 
121e–122e
Q
Quota shares, ILS security example, 261
R
Real asset strategies, 107
Real estate debt, 245–251
expected return/risk profiles, 247–248
funds, capital (recovery), 251
geography, 249–250
market environment, 246
market outlook, 251
private real estate debt funds, 246–247
property cash flow profile, 250
property sector, 248–249
Real estate investment trusts (REITs), 
37, 111, 245
Real estate loan uses/characteristics/
structures, 247
Realized gains, unrealized gains (link), 16
Realized losses, 197–198
benchmarking, 197
default event trigger, 16
impact, 17
unrealized losses, link, 16
Rebalancing, 10
Recovery rates
debt investment characteristics, 252
reporting, 45
Redevelopment, 250
Rediscounting, 243
Reference rates, usage, 13–14
Reflective of current investment opinions 
(benchmark characteristic), 174
Regulated investment company (RIC), BDC 
treatment, 113
Reinsurance, 260–264
expected return/risk, 262–263
ILS security example, 261
investment strategies, 263–264
market size/structure, 260–262
Reinvestment period, cessation, 233
Remedies (direct loan agreement 
component), 96296 Index
Reported quarterly index characteristics, 10
Representations (direct loan agreement 
component), 96
Rescue financing, 239–241
expected return/risk, 240–241
investment strategies, 241
market size/structure, 240
Retrocessional contracts, ILS security 
example, 261
Return, 26–28
correlation, 156
return-enhancing strategy, 182
Return-to-risk ratio, reduction, 
102, 105e
Revolvers, 5
Risk, 28–29, 216
country risk, 213–214
dependence, 268
measurement, 157
parity, 107
reduction, 85
sources, division, 78
Risk-adjusted excess returns, 60
Risk factor exposures, 176
Risk-free rate, 75–76, 76e
Risk premiums, 87
availability, 88e
calculation, methodology, 93–94
understanding, 91
values, 89
Royalties, 256–260
expected return/risk, 258–259
investments, 257–260
market size/structure, 257–258
strategies, investment, 257
Russell 2000 Index, 74, 82
companies, proxy selection, 77–78
industry weightings, 178e
sector weightings, 177
Russell 3000 Index, 26, 28, 158, 167
S
Second lien 100 loan portfolio, simulation 
results, 80e
Second lien loans, 78, 79e
Second lien portfolio, simulation results, 81e
Second lien risk calculations, 
comparison, 82
Second lien, subordinate debt risk premiums 
(values), 89
Secured overnight financing rate (SOFR), 
4, 197, 201
adoption rates, 204e
conventions/practices, 202–204
counterparty credit risk spread, 
absence, 203
Libor replacement issues, 202–203
overnight rate function, 203
referencing, CLO formation 
(impact), 204–205
term structure, absence, 203
Senior debt structures, variation, 73
Senior direct lending, 65
Senior-focused direct lending manager, net 
cost savings, 92–93
Senior loan, comparison/contrast, 158, 158e
Senior middle market loans, yield 
earnings, 67
Senior secured direct lending, growth, 66e
Sidecars, ILS security example, 261
Simulated direct loan portfolios, leverage 
(usage), 101–103
Simulated risk calculations, actual risk 
calculations (contrast), 82e
Small business investment companies (SBICs)
investment, 112
setup, 150
Smart beta, 107
Sourcing, capabilities, 140
Special purpose vehicle (SPV), creation, 149
Speculation, prohibition (negative 
covenants), 97
Sponsor recapitalization, borrower demand 
driver, 253
State pension asset class returns, 
distribution, 171e
Statistical methods, usage, 159–160
Stay-private perpetual BDC, popularity, 118
Structured capital, 226–229
expected return/risk, 227–228
financings, forms, 229
investment strategies, 228–229
market size/structure, 227
mezzanine capital, relationship, 224–226
Structured royalty returns/
investments, 258–259
Structure premium, 87
Subordinated loan
fair value/cost principal, comparison, 158e
pricing, senior loan pricing (contrast), 158Index 297
Subscription lines, 149
Survivorship, 66
Systematic risk factors, identification, 272
T
Tactical asset allocation, 107
Target financing opportunities, 251–252
Tax reporting, Form 1099 (usage), 115–116
T-Bills, yields, 67e
Tender funds, 111, 127, 129
Ten-year state pension fund returns, 169e
Term structure, absence, 203
Theory of credit. See Credit
Time periods, subset division, 56
Time to maturity, 76, 77e
Time-varying middle market loan risk 
premiums, 90e
Total fees (statistic), 164
Total returns, 11–12, 21–22, 140, 141e
U
Unambiguous (benchmark 
characteristic), 173, 174
Underwriting, capabilities, 140
Underwriting, process, 145–146
Unentitled land, property cash flow 
profile, 250
Unitranche direct lending, 65
Unitranche loans, 6
debt capital, 72
pricing, 144, 212
simulation results, 79e
Unlevered direct lending, 193e
Unlevered firm volatility (standard 
deviation), 75e
Unrealized gains, realized gains (link), 16
Unrealized losses, 198
impact, 33
increase, 17
realized losses, link, 16
realized loss replacement, 17
Unregistered (144A) securities, trading, 261
Unrelated business taxable income 
(UBTI), 113
Upfront fees, returns generation, 255
US consumer credit outstanding, Federal 
Reserve Economic Data, 242
US corporate debt market, breakdown, 2e
US direct lending market, European direct 
lending market (comparison), 211e
US direct lending, risk factors, 213–214
US middle direct loan assets, liquidity 
measurements, 50e
US middle direct loan performance, 11–13
US middle market corporate direct lending, 1
US middle market direct lending, risk 
premiums (impact), 94
US middle market direct loans
historical performance, 9
investing, benefit, 49
US middle market lending, risk premiums, 87
US short-term interest rates, inflation 
(contrast), 54e
V
Valuation changes, 183
Value barrier (creation), loan covenants 
(usage), 83
Venture debt, 234–238
expected risk/return, 236
investment strategies, 236–237
market size/structure, 234–235
Venture direct loan performance (CDLI￾Venture), 238e
Venture lending, performance, 238
Vintage diversification, importance, 51
Volatility Index (VIX), movement, 73
Volcker-like Fed policy regime, impact, 195
Volcker-like policy regime, impact, 196–198
Volcker, Paul, 195
W
Warehouse financing, 149
Warranties (direct loan agreement 
component), 96
Weighting, 10
Working capital finance (asset-based finance 
sub-strategy), 242
Workout (investment process step), 146
Work-out capabilities, 140
Y
Yield calculation, 134
Yield to maturity, calculation, 37–38
Yield-to-three-year takeout, 37–41, 39e, 184
Yield to worst, usage, 40–41WILEY END USER LICENSE 
AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s eb￾ook EULA.
