Process Gas ChromatographyProcess Gas Chromatography
Advanced Design and Troubleshooting
A Companion Volume of Process Gas
Chromatographs (2020)
TONY WATERS
California, USAThis edition first published 2025
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial technologies or similar technologies. No part of this
publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise, except as permitted by law. Advice on how to obtain permission to reuse material from thistitle is available at http://www.
wiley.com/go/permissions.
The right of Tony Waters to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with law.
Registered Offices
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, New Era House, 8 Oldlands Way, Bognor Regis, West Sussex, PO22 9NQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, customer services, and more information about Wiley products visit us at www.wiley.com.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some content that appears in standard print versions of
this book may not be available in other formats.
Trademarks: Wiley and the Wiley logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliatesin the United States
and other countries and may not be used without written permission. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. John
Wiley & Sons, Inc. is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty
In view of ongoing research, equipment modifications, changes in governmental regulations, and the constant flow of information relating to the
use of experimental reagents, equipment, and devices, the readeris urged to review and evaluate the information provided in the package insert or
instructions for each chemical, piece of equipment, reagent, or device for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of
usage and for added warnings and precautions. While the publisher and authors have used their best efforts in preparing this work, they make no
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties,
including without limitation any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or
extended by sales representatives, written sales materials or promotional statements for this work. The fact that an organization, website, or
product is referred to in this work as a citation and/or potential source of further information does not mean that the publisher and authors
endorse the information or services the organization, website, or product may provide or recommendations it may make. This work is sold with
the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be
suitable for your situation. You should consult with a specialist where appropriate. Further, readers should be aware that websites listed in this
work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read. Neither the publisher nor authors shall be liable
for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data applied for
Hardback ISBN: 9781119791478
Cover Design: Wiley
Cover Image: Courtesy of ABB Inc.
Set in 11/13pt STIXTwoText by Straive, Pondicherry, IndiaFor Sonia
“I pray you choose Joy.
Anything else is a waste of time.”
Rev. Dr. Sonia E. Waters (1972–2023)Process Gas Chromatographs at the INEOS Olefin Plant in Cologne, Germany.
Photo © INEOS in Cologne 2019.
“We cannot teach people anything;
we can only help them discover it within themselves”
Attributed to Galileo Galilei 1564-1642Contents
Contributors xxiii
Preface to the first book xxviii
Preface to the second book xxx
Acknowledgments xxxi 1 Fundamentals 1
Introduction
1
Gas chromatography
1
A unique analytical technique
1
A basic gas chromatograph
2
The columns
3
The detector
3
The chromatogram
4
The science of GC
4
The basic science
5
The gas chromatograph
7
The basic instrument
7
The process instrument
7
The contents
8
Becoming
a PGC expert 10
Knowledge Gained 11
Did You Get It? 12
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 01 12
References 13
Further reading 13
Cited 13
Figures 13
New technical terms 13
2 Measures of perfection 15
Performance indicators 15
Chromatogram data 16
Two fundamental measurements 16Significance of the air peak 17
Time in each phase 17
Calculated performance indicators 19
Average carrier gas velocity 19
Retention factor 19
Separation 21
Resolution 21
Practical aspects of theory 23
Plate theory 23
SCI-FILE: On Plate Theory 24
Ideal peak shape 24
Peak width 25
Measures of column efficiency 25
Plate height 25
Development of peak shape 26
Peak shape at elution 27
Chromatogram peak shape 27
Column efficiency 28
Effective plate number 28
Using the theory 29
Resolution on longer columns 29
Estimating plate number 30
Estimating plate height 32
Knowledge Gained 33
Did you get it? 34
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 02 34
On Practice 35
On Theory 35
References 35
Cited 35
Figures 35
Symbols 35
Equations 36
New technical terms 38
3 Column technology 39
Introduction 39
Column types 40
Two types of column 40
viii ContentsPacked columns 40
Capillary columns 41
Mechanism of retention 42
Mutual affinity 42
SCI-FILE: On Mutual Affinity 43
Molecular forces 43
Dispersion forces 43
Polar forces 44
Ionic forces 45
Nomenclature 45
Summary 46
Packed columns for GSC 46
Solid-phase columns 46
Active solids 46
Operation and maintenance 47
Pros and cons of GSC 48
Packed columns for GLC 49
Solid support 49
Coating the support 50
Pros and cons of GLC 51
Packed column technology 51
Tubing 52
Mesh size 52
Packing the tube 54
Conditioning the column 54
Pros and cons of packed columns 55
Micropacked columns 56
Typical operating conditions 57
Capillary column technology 57
Capillary tubing 57
Wall-coated open tubular (WCOT) columns 60
Porous-layer open tubular (PLOT) columns 60
Support-coated open tubular (SCOT) 60
Phase ratio 61
Carrier gas flow rate 63
Separating power 64
Pros and cons of capillary columns 64
Packed or capillary?
A comparison 64
Acknowledgment 64
Contents ixDesign of equipment 65
Efficiency and resolution 65
Sample size 67
Feed volume 67
Sample capacity 68
Measurement sensitivity 71
Analyte rangeability 71
Column bleed 72
Knowledge Gained 74
Did you get it? 77
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 03 77
References 77
Further reading 77
Cited 78
Tables 79
Figures 79
Symbols 80
Equations 80
New technical terms 81
4 The stationary phase 82
Liquid phases 82
The need for variety 82
Column identification 83
Liquid phase polarity 83
Solute affinity 85
Polar or Nonpolar? 86
Silicone liquid phases 87
Methyl silicones 87
Phenyl silicones 88
More possibilities 89
Nonpolar silicones 89
Fluoro silicones 90
Cyano silicones 91
Multifunctional silicones 91
Bonded phases 92 A precaution 92
Non-silicone liquid phases 92
x ContentsDialkyl esters 92
Polyesters 93
Waxy polymers 95
Nitrile ethers 95
Column temperature effects 96
Liquid phase temperature rating 96
Liquid phase viscosity 96
Choosing
a liquid phase 96
The practical method 96
Using retention data 98
SCI-FILE: On Retention Data 98
Retention index 98
McReynolds constants 99
Using McReynolds 100
System constants 102
Making
a choice 102
Are McReynolds constants useful? 102
Adsorption columns 103
Distribution in GLC and GSC 103
Adsorption isotherms 104
Nonideal peak shape 104
Activation 105
Molecular sieves 106
Carbon 106
Silica gel or porous silica 107
Alumina 108
Porous polymers 108
Knowledge Gained 110
Did you get it? 113
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 04 113
References 113
Further reading 113
Cited 114
Tables 117
Figures 117
Symbols 117
Equations 118
New technical terms 118
Contents xi5 PGC column design 119
The design objective 119
Design strategy 120
It
’
s always about resolution 120
SCI-FILE: On Resolution 121
Theory 121
The resolution equation 121
Endnote 122
Achieving resolution 123
The resolution equation 123
Interaction between factors 123
The column length 124
A deeper understanding 125
SCI-FILE: On Distribution 125
Retention volume 125
Distribution constant 126
Definition of retention factor 127
Definition of separation factor 128
Optimizing liquid phase performance 128
Adjusting the separation factor 128
Adjusting the retention factor 128
SCI-FILE: On Retention Factor 129
Optimum resolution 129
Optimum analysis time 130
Optimum retention factor 130
Exploring the power region 131
Optimizing retention factor 133
Ineffective variables 133
Effective variables 133
Optimizing the column temperature 134
Temperature programming 134
Optimizing the column phase ratio 134
A worked example 135
Evaluation of options 136
How to optimize liquid phase performance 137
Reducing the column length 139
Getting
a faster analysis 142
Knowledge Gained 142
Did you get it? 144
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 05 144
References 144
xii ContentsFurther reading 144
Cited 144
Figures 145
Symbols 145
Equations 146
New technical terms 148
6 Optimizing performance 149
Caution 149
Optimum flow rate 150
Experimental 150
The optimization procedure 151
Relation to theory 153
SCI-FILE: On Rate Theory 153
Too much theory? 153
Rate theory 154
What we learn 154
Carrier gas velocity 154
Solute band velocity 155
The van Deemter equation 155
The A-term 155
What we learn 156
The B-term 156
What we learn 156
The C-term 156
What we learn 157
Extended van Deemter equation 157
The Golay equation 158
What we learn 158
Other effects 158
Getting
a fast analysis 159
A worked example 160
Introduction 160
Initial assumptions 160
Step #1: Evaluate the existing column 161
Summary of chromatogram 6.4a 164
Step #2: Use
a longer column 164
Summary of chromatogram 6.4b 165
Step #3: Regain the analysis time 166
Summary of chromatogram 6.4c 168
Contents xiiiStep #4: Faster analysis with the same resolution 168
Summary of chromatogram 6.4d 169
Time efficiency 170
Designing for fast analysis 170
The efficiency curve 170
Narrow column diameter 171
Choice of carrier gas 171
Liquid phase loading 172
Liquid phase viscosity 173
Knowledge Gained 173
Did you get it? 174
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 06 174
On practice 174
On theory 174
References 175
Further reading 175
Cited 175
Tables 175
Figures 176
Symbols 176
Equations 177
New technical terms 178
7 Extracolumn broadening 179
Introduction 179
Sample injection 180
Sample volume 181
Solubility limit 181
Peak width 181
Overall effect 182
Feed volume 183
Practical outcomes 184
Sample size calculations 185
Duration of injection 185
An example 186
Flow path geometry 187
Open tubing 188
Mixing chambers 188
Dead volumes 188
Detectors 189
xiv ContentsThe theory 190
SCI-FILE: On Extracolumn Variance 190
Introduction 190
Acceptable dispersion 190
Sources of variance 191
Warning 191
Sample injection profile 191
Plug injection 191
Exponential injection 191
Gaussian injection 191
What we learn 192
Dispersion in open tubes 192
Laminar flow 192
What we learn 193
Dispersion by mixing 193
What we learn 194
Dispersion in dead volumes 194
What we learn 194
Dispersion in detector 194
Mass flow detectors 194
Concentration detectors 194
What we learn 194
Response speed 195
What we learn 195
Practical limits 195
More detail 196
Worked examples 196
Sample injection 196
Open tubing 197
Knowledge Gained 198
Did you get it? 199
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 07 199
On practice 199
On theory 200
References 200
Further reading 200
Cited 200
Table 201
Figure 201
Symbols 201
Contents xvSubscripts 201
Equations 202
New technical terms 203
8 Evaluating peak shape 204
Real chromatogram peaks 204
Three peak shapes 204
Normal asymmetric peaks 206
Measuring peak asymmetry 206
What causes asymmetry? 207
Limited isotherm linearity 207
Curved isotherms 209 A second retention mechanism 209
Column overload 211
SCI-FILE: On Asymmetric Peaks 212
Natural deviations from perfection 212
Poisson distribution 212
Transformation to the time domain 212
Thermal peak distortion 213 A second retention mechanism 214
Problems with asymmetric peaks 214
Retention time shift 215
Loss of resolution 216
Tailing peaks 216
All peaks are tailing 217
Some peaks are tailing 217
Offscale peaks are tailing 217
Diagnosis of deviant peak shapes 218
Reading the chromatogram 218
Overlapping peaks 219
Offscale peaks 221
Partial peaks 222
Knowledge Gained 225
Did you get it? 226
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 08 226
On practice 226
On theory 227
References 227
Further reading 227
xvi ContentsCited 227
Table 228
Figures 228
Symbols 228
Equations 229
New technical terms 229
9 Columns in series 230
The need for multiple columns 230
To minimize analysis time 230
To do the housekeeping 231
To regroup
a set of components 231
To enhance the separation 231
To separate trace amounts of analyte 232
To protect
a sensitive column or detector 232
History of the technique 232
Development of laboratory chromatographs 232
Development of process chromatographs 233
The power of dissimilar columns 235
Pressures in series columns 237
SCI-FILE: On Pressure Drop 238
Pressure loss in columns 238
Average pressure in
a column 238
Average velocity in
a column 238
Velocity in series columns 239
Retention time in series columns 239
Retention time in series columns 239
Pressure effect on solubility 240
Example calculations 240
Pressure in series columns 240
Velocity in equal columns 242
Retention time in equal columns 242
Choosing column lengths 243
Column systems 243
Knowledge Gained 244
Did you get it? 245
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 09 245
References 246
Further reading 246
Contents xviiCited 246
Tables 247
Figures 247
Symbols 247
Subscripts 248
Equations 248
Technical terms 249
10 Backflush systems 250
Introduction 250
Backflush functions 250
Backflush to vent 251
Backflush to measure 252
Pressure balance switching 254
Setting the backflush time 256
Stuttering backflush 257
Parallel chromatography 257
Regrouping systems 257
Backflush theory and practice 259
Limitations 259
Column design and operation 260
Using the same stationary phase 260
Using different stationary phases 261
A worked example 262
Calculated backflush event timing 262
Valley point 263
Timed events 264
Peak
B retention time 267
Regrouping effectiveness 268
Regrouping column 269
Knowledge Gained 269
Did you get it? 271
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 10 271
References 271
Further reading 271
Cited 271
Tables 272
Figures 272
Subscripts 272
New technical terms 273
xviii Contents11 Heartcut systems 274
Origin and development 274
Early days 274
Heartcut functions 275
Heartcut column system 276
Pressure balance column switching 277
Column system design 278
Making the cuts 279
Modes of operation 279 A single cut for one analyte 279 A single cut for two analytes 281
Multiple cuts 282
Avoiding complexity 283
Adding
a backflush 284
Setting the valve timing 284
The setup procedure 284
Setting multiple cuts 286
General rules of procedure 286
Diagnosis 286
Observing the remnant peak 287
Observing the analyte peak 288
Similar column systems 289
Trap-and-hold column system 289
Distribution column system 290
Parallel chromatography 290
The real power 291
Knowledge Gained 292
Did you get it? 294
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 11 294
References 295
Further reading 295
Cited 295
Figures 295
Symbols 296
New technical terms 296
12 PGC troubleshooting 297
Is there
a problem? 297
The usual suspects 297
Why validation? 298
Contents xixChoose your champion 298
Benefits 298
Validation strategies 299
Watching process data 300
Alarming the calibration factors 301
Statistical quality control 301
Alarming the validation fluid analysis 302
Comparing PGC and laboratory analyses 303
Comparing redundant PGC analyzers 303
Comparing PGC with another analyzer type 303
Troubleshooting 303
Two kinds of problem 303
Evaluating the baseline 304
What is a baseline? 304
Checking the baseline 306
Prime suspect – the detector 306
Concentration-sensing detectors 307
Mass flow-sensing detectors 307
Another thought 307
A logical approach 307
The detector is working but responding to external influences 308
The detector is not working correctly 309
The detector is responding to molecules 309
The detector is not generating the anomaly 310
Working from the symptoms 310
Diagnosis 312
Diagnosing baseline drift 312
Diagnosing wander 315
Diagnosing cycles 317
Diagnosing noise 319
Overall effect 322
Knowledge Gained 323
Did you get it? 326
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 12 326
References 326
Further reading 326
Cited 326
Tables 327
Figures 327
New technical terms 327
xx Contents13 Troubleshooting chromatograms 329
Reading the chromatogram 329
Your ultimate skill 329
Diagnosing chromatographic faults 330
Noticing
a problem 330
Recognizing
a malfunction 331
Seeking the cause 332
Identifying artifacts 333
Confirming the diagnosis 335
SCI-FILE: On Diagnosis 335
Worked example 335
Checking the history 335
Finding the valve actions 336
Studying the shape 336
Estimating elapsed times 336
Seeking the cause 336
Confirming the diagnosis 337
Other observations 337
Fixing
a chromatographic fault 337
Key properties of peaks 338
What to know about peaks 338
Retention time pattern 338
Retention time shift 339
Peak width 339
Peak height 340
Unusual peak shape 341
Unexpected peaks 341
Disappearing peaks 348
Negative peaks 349
Diagnosing peaks: An example 349
Key properties of spikes 352
What we know about spikes 352
Key properties of bumps 352
What we know about bumps 352
Key properties of steps 356
What to know about steps 356
Epilog 359
Last words 359
Chromatogram troubleshooting 359
Knowledge Gained 359
Contents xxiDid you get it? 361
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 13 361
References 362
Further reading 362
Vendor troubleshooting guides 362
Cited 363
Tables 363
Figures 363
New technical terms 364
Answers to self-assessment questions 365
Subject index of SCI-FILEs 378
Glossary of terms 379
Index 417
xxii ContentsContributors
An international team of expert chromatographers has peer reviewed the technical content of this text.
This Editorial Advisory Board comprised the experienced analyzer engineers listed below. Together
with the author, this team has accumulated 487 years of practical experience with process gas chroma￾tographs. We gratefully acknowledge their contributions.
Massimo Baldizzone, PhD
Area Market Manager
ABB Measurement
and Analytics
Milan, Italy.
Massimo holds both Bachelor’s and Master’s
degrees in Chemistry, as well as a PhD in the same
field. Additionally, he has earned an Executive
Master in Marketing and Sales (EMMS) from Boc￾coni and ESADE School of Management. Through￾out his career, he served as Technical Sales Support
for ABB Lewisburg Process Analytics. Currently,
he holds the position of Area Market Manager
for the Process Gas Chromatographs product line
at ABB Measurement and Analytics.
Massimo has 15 years of experience with process
gas chromatographs.
Jerry Clemons, PhD
Process Gas
Chromatograph Consultant
Formerly, General Manager
ABB Process Analytics
Ronceverte, West
Virginia USA.
Jerry has worked with gas chromatographs during
his entire career starting at Virginia Polytechnic
University where he earned his PhD with Dr Har￾old McNair.
He has held many engineering and management
positions at ABB Process Analytics and its prede￾cessors, always focused on their process gas chro￾matographs. Now retired from active duty, Jerry
continues to provide his technical expertise as a
consultant to that company.
Jerry has 50 years of experience working with proc￾ess gas chromatographs.
R. Aaron Eidt, BSc
Process Analyzer Consultant
PEAK PERFORMANCE
Analytical Consulting Ltd.
Delta, British Columbia, Canada.
Formerly, Analyzer and PGC
Manager Dow Chemical
Canada ULC
Fort Saskatchewan,
AB, Canada.
Aaron is a chemist with 25 years of experience
developing GC methods for research and industrial
chromatographs at Dow Chemical Canada. Aaron
specialized in process analyzer validation, trouble￾shooting, and performance improvement. For
several years, he led the Dow Global Process Chro￾matography Technology Network. Since retiring
from Dow, Aaron has had process analyzer con￾sulting engagements with the Sadara Chemical
Company in Jubail, Saudi Arabia, and most cur￾rently with MEGlobal.
Aaron has 35 years of experience practicing indus￾trial gas chromatography.Michael Hoffman
Business Development
Manager Siemens
Industry, Inc.
Gas Chromatography
Systems MAXUM LLC
Houston, Texas, USA
Michael started the industry in 1979 at Phillips 66,
Bartlesville, OK. The journey continued with
Standard Oil Chemicals, BP, Innovene, and INEOS
before Siemens, soon to be Valmet.
Michael initially worked with laboratory chroma￾tographs but transitioned to process chromato￾graphs in the early 1980s. Primarily focusing on
online analyzer reliability, the journey expanded
to advanced process control, materials handling,
and analyzer data management technologies.
Michael joined Siemens in 2007 and is now respon￾sible for the marketing and technical support of
analytical solutions, data communications, process
GC applications, and sample system designs.
Michael has 41 years of experience working with
laboratory and process gas chromatographs.
Dirk Horst
Freelance Trainer and
Consultant Process
Analyzer and Custody
Transfer Systems
Formerly Global QMI
Engineer and Consultant
Shell Global Solutions
Team The Hague,
The Netherlands
Dirk has a long experience with process analyzers,
including startup assignments at Shell jobsites in
India, Germany, Nigeria, and Russia. He is also well
known for his many classroom and practical train￾ing programsfor analyzer maintenance technicians.
Dirk has 34 years of experience working with proc￾ess gas chromatographs.
Junji Koyama, ME
Process Gas
Chromatograph
Application Specialist
YPHQ System
Analyzer Center
Yokogawa Electric
Corporation Mitaka,
Tokyo, Japan.
Junji-san has been a leader of the PGC application
development team at Yokogawa, holding engineer￾ing and management roles in application develop￾ment and column design. Additionally, Junji-san
looks after Yokogawa’s global application labs
while also providing technical support to sales
and service engineers.
Junji-san has 16 years of experience working with
process gas chromatographs.
Dr. Daniel Kuehne
Process Gas
Chromatograph Consultant
Head of Global GC Proposals
and FEED Support
Gas Chromatography
Systems MAXUM GmbH;
Part of Valmet Group
Karlsruhe, Germany.
Daniel studied Chemistry at the University of
Bremen, earning his diploma and completing a
doctorate thesis in Analytical Chemistry. He joined
Siemens in 2005 as a method developer for process
GCs. He stayed in method development for
11 years, the last 5 years as head of the PGC method
developer team. In 2016, he joined the technical
proposals team for PGC and worked as a technical
consultant for sales and customers. Daniel has
been in his current role as head of the global team
for GC proposals and FEED support since 2022.
Daniel has 19 years of experience working with
process gas chromatographs.
xxiv ContributorsJames Leonard, PhD
Senior Technical Associate
Corporate Analytical Division
Eastman Chemical
Company Kingsport,
Tennessee, USA.
James received his PhD in Analytical Chemistry
from The Ohio State University. He has 24 years
of experience working in the field of Process Analyt￾ics at Eastman Chemical. During this time, James
has designed, installed, and commissioned analyzer
systems incorporating modern on-line techniques
throughout the world. He has presented lectures
on process analytics at university and other organi￾zations to promote the use of on-line technologies
to improve process control and reduce waste.
James has 20 years of experience working with
process gas chromatographs.
Harald Mahler
Business Development
Professional Gas
Chromatography
Systems MAXUM GmbH
Karlsruhe, Germany.
Harald Mahler studied chemistry at Reutlingen
University. Since 1989, he gained experience in
process analytics from various engineering and
management positions within Siemens Process
Analytics; these include assignments in the appli￾cations and method development laboratory, proj￾ect management, and industry marketing and
product management. Currently, he is Global Sales
and Business Development Manager for process
analytics within Gas Chromatography Systems
MAXUM GmbH. Major working areas are the
(petro)chemical and oil and gas industries includ￾ing decarbonization markets.
Harald has presented technical papers at several
international symposia and conferences in Europe
and North America. He has also authored articles
in technical magazines and books and acted as ses￾sion chair at several conferences.
Harald has 35 years of experience working with
process gas chromatographs and other process
analyzers.
Gen Matsuno, ME
Manager, Analyzer
Marketing
Sensing Center
Yokogawa Electric
Corporation Mitaka,
Tokyo, Japan.
Matsuno-san was the leader of the Yokogawa
GC8000 PGC development team. In addition to
his experience of designing process gas chromato￾graphs, he has five years of experience as a labora￾tory GC user.
Gen-san has 17 years of experience working with
process gas chromatographs.
Takashi Matsuura, BE
Senior Field Engineer
Nippon Swagelok FST, Inc.
Yokohama, Japan
Formerly, Manager of
Process GC Development
Yokogawa Electric
Corporation.
Taka designed the Yokogawa GC1000 PGC oven
and was the leader of the engineering team
that developed the Yokogawa GC1000 Mk2 PGC.
He wrote the specification for the Yokogawa
GC8000 PGC.
Taka has over 25 years of experience working with
process gas chromatographs.
Contributors xxvPhillip McKay
Process Gas Analyser
Specialist
Australia and Pacific Region
Support Services Manager
at Integrated Analytical
Systems
Service Manager at Tresco
International (Aust) Pty. Ltd.
Phil came into gas chromatography with a strong
electronics background. In the early 1980s, he
joined Beckman Instruments as a service engineer
specializing in process gas chromatographs and a
wide range of process gas analyzers. He has exten￾sive practical experience of process analyzers
including sample system design and commission￾ing; troubleshooting and repair; and programming
and data communications interfacing. Phil also
teaches introductory and advanced training
courses on the operation and maintenance of proc￾ess gas chromatographs.
Phil has over 40 years of experience with process
gas chromatographs.
Suru Patel, PhD
Process Analyzer
Consultant
Patex Controls Ltd.
Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
Formerly, Distinguished
Engineering Associate for
Process Analyzers
Exxon Chemical
Company Sarnia,
Canada and Singapore.
In addition to his process analyzer engineering
work, Suru developed PGC training courses for
process analyzer technicians and PGC data users.
Previously, for several years, Suru was a PGC
Applications Engineer at Servomex Company in
the UK and was the Lead Analyzer Engineer in
Houston for Exxon`s Singapore Chemical Complex
Project. He was also the development engineer for
a new flame ionization detector.
Suru has 40 years of experience working with proc￾ess gas chromatographs.
Eric Schmidt, PhD
R&D Fellow
The Dow Chemical Company
Analytical Sciences
Freeport, Texas, USA.
Eric Schmidtreceived his PhD in Analytical Chem￾istry from The University of Texas at Austin. He
has worked at the Dow Chemical Company in
Freeport, TX, for over 25 years as a Research Scien￾tist where he spends his time developing new on￾line process measurements for R&D and manufac￾turing. He is currently leading the On-line Chro￾matography Strategic Capability Team at Dow.
Eric has 20 years of experience working with proc￾ess gas chromatographs.
Ivan Rybár, PhD
Head of the Electrical and
Automation Maintenance
Slovnaft Refinery MaO, a.s.
Bratislava, Slovakia.
Formerly, Research and
Teaching Assistant,
Department of Analytical
Chemistry Comenius University
Bratislava, Slovakia.
For 15 years, Ivan has been responsible for the reli￾ability of process analyzers at the Slovnaft refinery,
including managing the maintenance of existing
systems and designing new analytical equipment.
During his career, he worked on more than 120
projects. As a supervisor for process analyzers, he
creates work procedures and provides consultation
and support to his team.
xxvi ContributorsHe was awarded the accolade “Slovnaft Star”
twice, in 2013 and 2015.
Previously, he worked as an analyzer engineer for
several companies providing engineering services
to industrial plants, including the selection of ana￾lyzers and the design of entire sampling systems.
During his time at the university, Ivan developed
new methods in liquid chromatography, taught
several postgraduate courses, and published four
scientific papers in this field.
Ivan has 20 years of experience working with proc￾ess gas chromatographs.
Contributors xxviiPreface to the first book
Welcome to the world of Process Gas Chromatography!
This book (Waters 2020) focuses on the Process Gas Chromatograph (PGC). There are dozens of fine
books on the science of gas chromatography but few on the technology of the process instrument. I found
only two previous books dedicated to online gas chromatographs (Huskings 1977; Annino and Villalo￾bos 1992).
Process gas chromatographs are complex instruments and the people that design and operate them
need special knowledge and unique skills. With that in mind, I designed the book to serve the needs
of the journeyman analyzer technician, the process instrument engineer, and the process analyzer
specialist.
PGC is a practical technology and this is a practical book. It’s an effective classroom training manual
for those currently learning the art and a handy reference manual for those already practicing it.
Chapters are deliberately compact, suitable for a weekly reading program or as focused lessons in an
educational course. Each chapter ends with a summary of knowledge gained and a self-assessment quiz
with answers provided. In addition, there are nine optional test questions for students; three easy, three
moderate, and three challenging.
Why is such a book necessary?
Anyone working in the fluid processing industries knows that their knowledge base is in full flight.
Due to staffing reductions and mass retirements, our industry is losing decades of hard-won experience.
Walter Jennings and Colin Poole recently expressed this situation rather well (Jennings and Poole
2012, 16):
This [automation of gas chromatographs] has led to a continuing decline in the expertise of the
average practicing chromatographer from the mid-1980s to the present time. This can be perilous,
because everything from column selection to trouble-shooting skills is based on a fundamental
knowledge of chromatographic principles, the absence of which degrades the quality and useful￾ness of the information acquired by these instruments. To address these problems requires a mas￾sive educational effort before the knowledge is lost and the usefulness of gas chromatography to
decision makers is called into question.
There can be no clearer call to justify this book. While the authors were writing to laboratory chemists,
those working on process gas chromatographs also need a fundamental knowledge of chromatographic
principles presented in a way that facilitates a massive educational effort. This book sets out to satisfy those
needs. It’s primarily written for process analyzer engineers and technicians but should be helpful to any￾one using or maintaining a process gas chromatograph.
To succeed in its mission, a book needs to so excite the reader that they want to read more. It should be
so useful that they immediately return to it when they need information. Yet the average book on gas
chromatography is abysmally boring and poses an intellectual challenge even to post-doctoral scientists,
let alone the lonely guy faced with fixing a broken process chromatograph at midnight.
This text teaches the fundamental knowledge of process gas chromatography by encouraging the
reader to think critically about what is happening in the instrument, mostly without recourse to analogy
or math. It also describes some practical procedures for design or troubleshooting.So, here you have it. A clear yet detailed book that is ideal for classroom instruction, private study, or
distance learning. Focused chapters unfold the technology of a process gas chromatograph to an engineer
or technician who may have no previous experience of the technique. The content is basic, yet thorough,
so it should meet the needs of many readers.
I’m glad that you’re here. I hope you enjoy the book!
Tony Waters
Atascadero, California
January 2020
Preface to the first book xxixPreface to the second book
Welcome back to the world of Process Gas Chromatography!
This second book about process gas chromatographs picks up from its predecessor, going deeper into
PGC application and care. As such, companion volume to the first book takes off where the first one
landed. The focus here is on the columns and the chromatograms they generate. We take a detailed look
at how to design chromatographic columns, how to make them work together to speed analysis, and how
to diagnose symptoms that presage trouble.
There’s more than enough theory here, but it’s mostly set out in optional SCI-FILES forthose who need
to know the mathematical foundation for the practical procedures given. This compilation of theoretical
and practical knowledge is a highly focused resource for applications engineers who design column
systems for industrial applications, for service engineers who maintain them, and for anyone else working
with gas chromatographic columns. Analytical chemists in industrial laboratories, pilot plants, and
academia will appreciate the detailed information on column design and the automation of routine
chromatographic analyses.
Unless you’re very familiar with process gas chromatographs, you’ll want to own both books. They
work together to provide a complete knowledge of the technology without reference to the subtleties
of the brand. This second book is designed not only to support an advanced-level course in Process
Gas Chromatography but also to serve as a handy reference to anyone needing a quick answerto an imme￾diate problem. It is a great reference source to have by your side when you need it.
Enjoy your work with process gas chromatographs!
Tony Waters
Atascadero, California
August 2024
References Cited
Annino, R., and Villalobos, R. (1992). Process Gas Chromatography. Research Triangle Park, NC: Instrument Society
of America. ISBN: 1-55617-272-9.
Huskings, D.J. (1977). Gas Chromatographs as Industrial Process Analyzers. New York, NY: Pergamon Press, Inc.
Jennings, W.G. and Poole, C.F. (2012). Milestones in the development of gas chromatography. In: Gas Chromatog￾raphy (ed. C.F. Poole), 1–17. Oxford, UK: Elsevier. ISBN: 978-0-12-385540-4.
Waters, T. (2020) Process Gas Chromatographs: Fundamentals, Design and Implementation. Chichester, UK: John
Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Waters, S.E. (2023). Letter to the President, Princeton Theological Seminary. Princeton, NJ.Acknowledgments
Hearty thanks to friends and associates who contributed material to thistext. Their valuable contributions
of time and knowledge are much appreciated.
Andy Evans
Analyzer Engineer
Dow Corning
Swansea, Wales, UK.
Jay Brown
General Manager
Ohio Valley Specialty
Company Marietta,
Ohio USA.
Daren Brumley
Senior Technical
Instructor
ABB Process Analytics
Skiatook, Oklahoma
USA.
Damian Huff
Senior PGC
Applications Engineer
ABB Process Analytics
Bartlesville,
Oklahoma USA.
Andrzej Jopek
Director
Process Analytical
Middle East WLL
Bahrain.
Fusan Karaburun
Technical Product
Owner
Qmicron B.V.
Enschede,
Netherlands.
Dorothy Kwidama
Technical Product
Specialist
Qmicron B.V.
Enschede,
Netherlands.
Bert Laan
Process Analyser
Consultant
Olpass Ltd
Hereford,
England UK.
Ryan McSherry
Analytical
Solutions
Yokogawa
Corporation of
America
Newnan,
Georgia USA.
Nicholas Meyer
Manager—Industry
and Product Marketing
Yokogawa
Corporation of
America
Newnan,
Georgia USA.
Martin Pijl
Product Manager Gas
Analyzers
Yokogawa Europe B.V.
Amersfoort, Netherlands.
Wouter Pronk
Business
Development & Trainer
B.E.S.T. Fluidsysteme
GmbH Neuss,
Germany.
Asad Tahir
Director of Product Management
Emerson Process Management
Houston, Texas
USA.
John Wasson
President
Wasson-ECE
Instrumentation
Fort Collins,
Colorado USA.
Henk van Well
Manager Analytisch
Technischer
Service
INEOS Manufacturing
Deutschland
GmbH Köln,
Deutschland.
Dr. Martin Wieser
Process Analyzer
Engineer
BASF SE
Ludwigshafen,
Germany.A Modern Process Gas
Chromatograph.
Source: Reproduced with
permission from Yokogawa
Electric Corporation.1
Fundamentals
“This is our second book on the process gas chromatograph. Written as a
companion volume, this book doesn’t supersede its predecessor; it builds
on that firm foundation to examine the special nature of process gas
chromatography rather than the process instrument itself.”
Introduction
Academic theories of gas chromatography have been hugely successful in
explaining the chromatographic process and predicting waysto improve its per￾formance. Many books and scientific papers are available to those looking for a
rigorous dissertation on the subject, but they are often inscrutable. This book
takes a pragmatic approach without disregarding well-established theory. As
optional reading, separate SCI-FILEs located at key moments throughout
the book capture a simplified and accessible explanation of the relevantscience.
There’s a list of these technical asides in Appendix B.
We assume the reader has a good understanding of PGC hardware gained
from practical experience or from studying our previous book. That said,
this chapter has the simple goal of introducing some of the concepts and
terminology used herein.
Gas chromatography
A unique analytical technique
Gas chromatography1 is a powerful method of chemical analysis that has
been adapted for use in industrial processes to measure the concentration of
selected chemical substances in a small sample of the process fluid.
1
The bold font used in the text indicates a technical term further defined in the Glossary of
terms (pp 379–416).
Process Gas Chromatography: Advanced Design and Troubleshooting, First Edition. Tony Waters.
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2025 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.The chemicals present in the sample are known as components. Of
these, the ones actually measured are the analytes. An analyte is usually
a single chemical substance but sometimes can be several components
measured together as a group.
Unlike other process stream analyzers, a PGC doesn’t try to measure a
desired analyte in the presence of the other substances in the sample. It’s
always difficult to do that. Instead, it separates each target analyte from eve￾rything else and then measures it independently. The two-stage procedure of
separation-before-measurement is why the PGC is so versatile. It allows a
PGC to measure almost anything in any process gas or volatile liquid.
A basic gas chromatograph
Figure 1.1 shows the main parts of a basic gas chromatograph. To start an
analysis, the sample valve injects a discrete sample of the process fluid into
a stream of inert carrier gas, typically hydrogen, helium, or nitrogen. The
injected sample can be a gas or a volatile liquid that immediately vaporizes.
The flowing carrier gas immediately carries the vapor sample into the
column, a narrow tube containing an active solid or an immobilized liquid.
As they pass through the column, the analytes separate from the other com￾ponents and from each other, arriving at the end of the column at different
times. In practice, most PGCs need two or more columns to fully separate the
analytes. Then, each analyte passesin turn through a detector, which senses
its presence and outputs an electronic signal proportional to its concentra￾tion in the original sample.
When expressed in more formal terminology:
The carrier gas is the mobile phase.
It’s the driving force that powers the chromatography.
The active solid or immobilized liquid is the stationary phase.
It’s the agent that creates the separation.
COLUMN OVEN
Column
Sample Inlet Flow Sample Outlet Flow
Sample
Injection
Valve
Pressure
Control
Separating
Column Detector
Detector
Vent
Carrier
Gas Inlet D
When actuated, the sample injection valve transfers a miniscule aliquot of the sample fluid 
into the flowing carrier gas. The carrier transports the injected sample though one or more 
columns where separation of the desired analytes occurs. The detector senses the 
component molecules exiting the columns and generates an electronic measurement 
signal.
Figure 1.1 A Basic Gas
Chromatograph.
2 FundamentalsA mobile phase moving in contact with a stationary phase is the essence
of chromatography. In gas chromatography, the mobile phase and the
sample (after injection) are both gases. In another kind of chromatography,
the mobile phase and the sample are both liquids. That’sliquid chromatog￾raphy, a technique rarely used in process analyzers and not further
discussed herein.
The columns
As the carrier gas carries the analytes through the column, they experience an
affinity for the stationary phase which delays their progress more or less than
the other components. A careful choice of stationary phases can combine
these delays to accomplish a complete time-separation of the desired analytes.
PGC column systems are custom designed to isolate the desired ana￾lytes from all the other components in the sample. An applications engineer
chooses the stationary phases and an arrangement of columns to accomplish
that. The special techniques of column design, optimization, and trouble￾shooting are the core subjects of this book.
Gas chromatographs employ two types of column:
A packed column is typically a ⅛ or 1 16 o.d. tube closely packed with
small particles. In a solid-phase column the particles themselves are the
adsorbent solid that performs the separation. In a liquid-phase column
the particles are inert but they have a thin coating of the selected liquid
phase.
A capillary column istypically a long 0.53 mm (orsmaller) i.d. tube that
has an internal wall coating. Most capillary columns have the selected
liquid phase coated or chemically bonded to their inner walls. A few have
a finely powdered solid adsorbent on their walls.
The detector
After a predictable delay, each analyte emerges from the column system as
pure vapor diluted with carrier gas, an easy mixture to measure. The carrier
gas carries it into a detector which responds with an electronic signal to the
data processor.
As each component emerges from the column system the detector signal
gradually increases from its quiescent baseline level, transits through a
maximum, and then decays back to the baseline forming a nearly symmet￾rical peak shape over time. Analyte peaks are typically between 1 and
10 seconds wide and separated in time from all other peaks.
It’s normal to refer to the bands of solute molecules migrating along the
column as “peaks” even before they reach a detector.
A PGC uses the elapsed time between sample injection and peak apex to
identify each analyte peak. It also measures the area of each analyte peak to
Gas chromatography 3determine its concentration in the original sample. The concentration is usu￾ally a linearfunction of the peak area, a relationship established by calibration.
The chromatogram
The detector signal viewed as a function of time is a chromatogram. The
chromatogram contains all the analytic information generated by a PGC
and a display or printout is indispensable for design, maintenance, or
troubleshooting work. In normal operation, though, the PGC processes
the detector signal automatically and displays a visible chromatogram only
on demand.
Figure 1.2 shows a chromatogram as displayed on a typical PGC. This one
shows the separation of small amounts of aromatics2 and higher paraffins in
natural gas. The C11 and higher components are backflushed3 and elute first
as a partly regrouped composite peak.
The science of GC
The theory of gas chromatography is complex and its technology intricate, but
once you get past all the equations, the simplicity of the core science may come
as a shock. We introduce it here and define some of the terms we use.
In this chromatogram to measure impurities in natural gas, the C11 and later components are 
backflushed and elute first as a “C11+” composite peak. The dashed lines show the limits of 
peak area measured by the PGC processor. The cyclohexane peak has not fully separated 
from the benzene peak, so the processor drops a perpendicular between them to get a good 
estimate of their individual concentrations.
Figure 1.2 A Typical PGC
Chromatogram.
Source: Reproduced with
permission from ABB, Inc.
2
The Glossary of terms (pp 379–416) explains the names of many chemicals mentioned in
the text. 3
See Chapter 10 for a detailed explanation of backflush.
4 FundamentalsThe basic science
The two forms of gas chromatography use different stationary phases, solid
or liquid. Their mechanisms of separation are different. Solid phases delay
components by adsorbing their molecules onto an active surface, whereas
liquid phases delay molecules by dissolving them. Yet the result is much
the same: the molecules can’t move while dissolved or adsorbed by the sta￾tionary phase. Solid phases have a strong affinity for gas molecules, which
makes them suitable for separating low-density gases such as hydrogen, oxy￾gen, nitrogen, carbon oxides, and lighter hydrocarbons. Liquid-phase
columns separate most other components, so the majority of PGC columns
have liquid stationary phases. Let’s see how those work.
When in the vapor phase most substances will dissolve in a liquid, but to
different degrees. Two technical terms apply to the resulting solution:
The substance dissolving in the liquid is the solute.
It’s a general term for any component of the analyzed sample retained by
the stationary phase.
The liquid dissolving the solute is the solvent.
We usually just call it the liquid phase.
We rarely use the word solvent in process gas chromatography because it
can be confusing. The confusion arises from the common laboratory practice
of dissolving samples in a solvent before injecting them into a gas chromat￾ograph. This creates a huge solvent peak on the chromatogram. PGCs don’t
dilute their samples, so solvent peaks don’t occur.
Let’s examine what happens when a solute contacts a stationary phase.
When a small amount of sample gas enters an enclosed space containing
a gas and a liquid, solute molecules distribute themselves between the gas
phase and the liquid phase. This happens because molecules possess kinetic
energy and move rapidly and randomly in every direction. Their motion
brings them into contact with the liquid surface where some of them dis￾solve. Then, as their number in the liquid phase increases, they start to reen￾ter the gas phase. This rapid exchange inexorably leads to a situation where
their rates of arrival and departure at the liquid surface become equal, form￾ing a dynamic equilibrium. It then seems like nothing is happening
because the number of solute molecules in each phase remains constant.
Yet solute molecules continue to move rapidly between the phases.
At equilibrium, the solute concentration in the gas phase and the solute
concentration in the liquid phase are both constant, but not identical. Their
values depend only on the temperature and the inherent solubility of the
solute in the selected liquid.
Then:
The ratio of solute concentration in the liquid phase to solute concentra￾tion in the gas phase is the distribution constant.
Increasing the temperature reduces the distribution constant, and
vice versa.
The science of GC 5The distribution constant4 is the fundamental science of chromatogra￾phy. In a column, it determines the number of dissolved solute molecules
left behind when the gas phase moves, carrying with it the undissolved sol￾ute molecules. We shall see that the position of each peak on the chromat￾ogram is a simple function of its distribution constant.
The science of chromatography comes down to this simple concept: gases
dissolve in liquids to different extents.
That’s it. Chromatographic separation occurs because different sample
components each have their own unique solubility in the liquid phase. As
the carrier gas moves, the more soluble solute molecules tend to stay in
the liquid phase, delaying them longer than those having lower solubility.
When their solubility difference is sufficient the solutes separate from each
other.
No chemistry is involved. Interaction with the stationary phase is a simple
physical process of dissolving in a liquid or adsorbing onto a solid surface.
If that was all, this book would be very short and gas chromatography would
be simple, as indeed it was in the early days. Back then, two incompatible
needs pulled process and laboratory chromatography apart, dragging them
both into realms of increased complexity:
In the laboratory, sample composition is often unknown, so there’s a
need to separate and identify many components – sometimes hundreds
of them. The eventual solution was to use a capillary column and contin￾ually raise its temperature during analysis to separate dozens of compo￾nents, a procedure known as temperature programming. Then, a
mass spectrometric detector can identify and measure the plethora
of peaks.
In the process plant, the stream compositions are known and the PGC
measures only a few designated analytes. Barring simple mistakes,
there’s rarely an issue with peak identity but the process control systems
need fast results – sometimes in less than one minute. The eventual solu￾tion for the fastest separation was to use multiple columns and special
valves to direct each component peak into the desired column.
The employment of multiple columns is a distinctive hallmark of process
gas chromatographs. Although a few multiple-column arrangements have
migrated into the laboratory, it’s still uncommon to find more than one col￾umn in a laboratory gas chromatograph. In contrast, virtually all PGCs use
multiple columns to separate and measure a few known analytes in the
shortest time with the highest reliability and lowest cost.
Temperature programming is a distinctive hallmark of laboratory gas
chromatographs as most use it to separate and identify large numbers of ana￾lytes. The technique is available in modern PGCs but when designed for
4
For a detailed discussion on the distribution constant see the SCI-FILE On Distribution in
Chapter 5, pages 119–148.
6 Fundamentalsautonomous operation in hazardous environments it tends to be costly and
demand more maintenance than an isothermal analyzer. Therefore, PGCs
employ temperature programming only when it confers a significant
advantage.
The gas chromatograph
The basic instrument
A gas chromatograph is an analytical instrument that uses the techniques
of gas chromatography to measure the concentration of selected chemical
compounds in a small sample containing a mixture of compounds.
The essential hardware devices found in any gas chromatograph include:
One or more temperature-controlled zones.
A carrier gas supply and pressure control system.
A sample injector that injects a repeatable volume of sample into the
flowing carrier gas.
One or more separating columns.
One or more detectors.
A processor to control operations and calculate results.
While all gas chromatographs have these basic functions, there are large
variations in their design and fabrication.
The process instrument
A gas chromatograph working at an industrial processing plant is strikingly
different from a gas chromatograph sitting on a laboratory bench. The main
reasons for these differences are:
The PGC operates in a potentially hot, cold, dusty, wet, windy, corrosive,
or hazardous environment.
The PGC operates continuously 24 hours per day, 7 days per week.
The PGC must operate reliably with almost no human intervention – per￾haps only one calibration check each month.
The PGC applications engineer knows in advance the components and
concentrations expected in the sample.
The PGC can focus on measuring just a few of the components in a
sample – the ones needed for process control.
The PGC suffers a fanatical quest to minimize the analysistime, to ensure
that its measurements are valid for process control.
The gas chromatograph 7For all the above reasons, a process gas chromatograph may include some
devices and properties not shown in Figure 1.2, such as:
External devices to condition the incoming process sample to make it
compatible with the PGC; that is, a sample conditioning system.
Multiple columns with special devices to switch analyte molecules from
one column to another, thus maximizing the rate that separated compo￾nents arrive at the detector. Laboratory instrumentsrarely need this addi￾tional complexity.
Housekeeping columns that allow strongly retained components to
quickly exit the column system. These are also becoming popular in lab￾oratory chromatographs used frequently for routine analyses. Those used
only a few times each day have plenty of time to recover between sample
injections.
Robust column systems and stable devices, all designed to operate for a
long time without adjustment.
Hardened microprocessor systems to capture and process the detector
signal and to schedule timed events.
Self-diagnostics and alarm generation and optional software for centra￾lized maintenance.
Optional applications software for autonomous validation and statistical
quality control.
Protected and suitable for continuous operation in a dirty, corrosive, and
potentially hazardous environment.
Housed in an analyzer shelter or building to protect the analyzers and the
workers from the plant environment.
For further information, refer to our companion book on the hardware of
process gas chromatographs (Waters 2020). The present volume focuses on
the design, optimization, and troubleshooting of PGC column systems.
The contents
Here’s a brief review of the information this book contains.
Chapter 2 illustrates a few simple chromatogram measurements we can
make to evaluate and optimize column performance.
When looking at a chromatogram an inexperienced observer sees a range
of mountain peaks on a flat plain. There’s so much more to see. From a few
simple measurements we learn what’s going on in the columns and find
ways to optimize their performance. The chapter also introduces the use
of plate theory to explain and then quantify peak shape, separation, and
resolution.
Chapter 3 is a detailed review of PGC column technology, comparing and
contrasting the structure and properties of the different kinds of columns.
8 FundamentalsThis practical chapter describes how packed and capillary columns are
made and how they work. It examines in fine detail the molecular forces
involved in various mechanisms of separation and defines what we mean
by the affinity between a solute and a stationary phase.
Chapter 4 examines the choice of PGC stationary phases and tabulates
the properties of many solid and liquid phases.
This is a detailed review of the liquid and solid stationary phases typically
used in process gas chromatography. It provides practical guidance on the
use of Kovâts indexes and McReynolds constants for selecting a suitable liq￾uid phase and gives the polarity factors for many liquids.
Chapter 5 recognizes the need to tune the stationary phase to deliver the
best resolution between analyte peaks in the shortest time.
It expounds the theories of distribution and resolution and examines the
practical consequences, deducing the optimum conditionsfor maximum res￾olution of peaks. This leads into a practical example that shows how to
obtain improved resolution in less analysis time.
Chapter 6 introducesthe rate theory of gas chromatography and explains
its use for optimizing the operating conditions of a single column.
You’ll learn how to determine the optimum carrier gas flow rate and why
it’s not used in process chromatographs. A practical example illustrates the
optimization of flow and column length, achieving the same or better reso￾lution in less time by using a longer column!
Chapter 7 discusses the causes and remedies for asymmetric peaks.
Real peaks are slightly skewed, they rise to their apex a little faster than
they decline to their baseline. This minor asymmetry isn’t a problem. But
some peaks are grossly misshapen and we need to know why. Here, we dis￾cover the reasons for tailing and fronting (or “leading”) peaks and what we
can do to minimize the problem: the handy troubleshooting table given here
might be helpful.
Chapter 8 identifies causes for peak broadening in the analyte flow paths
external to the column.
Peaks become wider as they travel through devices such as the sample
injector, column valve, detector, or even connecting tubing. If significant,
this broadening can spoil a perfect resolution. The text gives quantitative
methods for evaluating these effects and suggests some ways to minimize
their influence on column performance.
Chapter 9 examines the effect of the pressure gradient in series columns.
Most process gas chromatographs employ multiple column arrangements
to achieve the necessary separation in the shortest possible time and this
results in columns working at different pressures. While the mass flow rate
is constant within columns in series, the volumetric flow varies with the
pressure. The chapter develops quantitative methods for determining
the retention times of peaks in each column and gives some examples for
the calculation of column lengths.
Chapter 10 examines the backflush column system in detail, giving both
theoretical and practical outcomes.
Neary all PGC column systems include a backflush function, so it’s essen￾tial to understand its function and its quirks. The text describes backflush
The contents 9column systems using valve and valveless arrangements, then looks at why
practical outcomes differ from the theoretical ideal. The discussion includes
the optimization of column lengths.
Chapter 11 examines the heartcut column system in detail, giving both
theoretical and practical outcomes.
PGCs always use the heartcut function to measure low concentrations of
impurities in otherwise pure samples. The chapter explains why heartcut is
necessary and then describes heartcut column systems that use both valve
and valveless column switching. The discussion includes the column design
features necessary for successful operation of single and multiple heartcuts.
Chapter 12 describes useful troubleshooting techniques for diagnosing
baseline problems.
When only carrier gas is emerging from the column, the chromatogram
should display a flat baseline with no change over time. If not, any visible
disturbance is a potential symptom of trouble. The discussion includes diag￾nostic techniques for finding the root cause of drifting, wandering, cycling,
or noisy baselines. The extensive troubleshooting tables may be helpful.
Chapter 13 describes useful troubleshooting techniques for diagnosing
chromatographic problems.
After obtaining a flat and smooth baseline any symptoms that remain
must be due to the cyclic operation of the PGC analysis. The often subtle
symptoms of incipient failure may escape the notice of a casual observer
but are bright red flags to an experienced troubleshooter. They include unex￾pected peaks, spikes, bumps, or steps in the baseline. The extensive trouble￾shooting tables may be helpful.
The Glossary of terms is an extensive dictionary of the technical terms
and expressions used in gas chromatography and a useful resource. It also
includes the name, formula, and molar mass of many chemicals found on
chromatograms. If you’re uncertain about the meaning of an English word
or phrase, look it up in the Glossary!
Becoming a PGC expert
In contrast to holistic methods of analysis, measuring an isolated analyte is
simple and rarely troublesome. But the chromatographic process used to
secure that isolation is not so easy to understand. It’s often arcane and hard
to grasp. We intend to demystify that process by describing many practical
ways to evaluate and optimize column performance or diagnose column
malfunction.
It turns out that most of the evidence you need is plainly visible on the
chromatogram and the secret skill of the expert is simply knowing how to
decipher the information it contains.
The secret skill of the PGC expert is their ability to read a chromatogram
and understand what it’s telling them.
10 FundamentalsThe chromatogram readout is a vital design and troubleshooting tool; so
much so that it’s difficult to overstate its usefulness. Discounting calibration
errors and electrical failures that are easy to fix, all faults are visible on a
chromatogram, either directly or by comparing the current chromatogram
with a previous one.
If you aspire to be an expert PGC applications engineer or troubleshooter,
learn to read the chromatogram. You’ll find the knowledge you need on the
following pages.
Knowledge Gained
Chromatography uses a fluid mobile phase
passing over a liquid or solid station￾ary phase.
In gas chromatography, the mobile phase is
gas; in liquid chromatography, the mobile
phase is liquid.
Chromatographic analyzers separate the
desired analytes and then measure them one
by one.
Other analyzers attempttomeasurethe analyte
molecules in the presence of other molecules.
Gas chromatographs inject a tiny volume of
sample into the flowing carrier gas.
The sample must be a gas or a volatile liquid
that quickly vaporizes and enters the column
as a vapor.
Process gas chromatographs (PGC) use an
automatic injection valve to inject the sample.
The carrier gas carries the sample into the
column where it contacts the stationary phase.
The stationary phase may be a solid adsorb￾ent or an immobilized nonvolatile liquid.
Contact with the stationary phase delays
some peaks more than others, so separation
occurs.
Special routing devices may direct the peaks
into different columns to finish the desired
separation.
PGCs can use either packed columns or cap￾illary (open tubular) columns.
The separation process takes time; typically
1 to 10 min, sometimes longer.
The carrier gas elutes peaks from the column
into a chosen detector for measurement.
The detector responds to a property of analyte
molecules that differs from carrier gas
molecules.
The detector output signal forms a chromat￾ogram display when plotted against
elapsed time.
Analyte molecules cluster together at different
times to form separate chromatogram peaks.
The PGC typically measures peak area to
compute the concentration of an analyte.
The chromatogram is a most valuable source
of information, but one must learn to read it.
To the expert troubleshooter, all chromato￾graphic faults are visible on the
chromatograms.
Becoming a PGC expert 11Did You Get It?
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 01
Q1. In gas–liquid chromatography, what are the gas and liquid doing?
Select the one correct answer:
A. They are both moving.
B. The gas is moving and the liquid is stationary.
C. The gas is stationary and the liquid is moving.
D. They are both stationary.
Q2. In a gas chromatograph, which of the gases listed below would be suitable as
the carrier gas?
Select all the correct answers:
A. Oxygen
B. Nitrogen
C. Hydrogen
D. Helium
Q3. In a gas–liquid chromatograph, which one of the materials listed below might
be the stationary phase?
Select the one correct answer:
A. An inert gas
B. A granular adsorbent solid
C. A volatile liquid
D. A nonvolatile liquid
Q4. In a gas–liquid chromatograph, what really causes the separation?
Select the one best answer:
A. The carrier gas causes the separation.
B. The mobile phase causes the separation.
C. The stationary phase causes the separation.
D. The chromatogram causes the separation.
Q5. In a gas chromatograph, what do the columns do?
Select the one best answer:
A. They convert all the components into peaks.
B. They separate the analytes from all other components and from each other.
C. They separate all the components of the sample.
D. They allow only measured components to enter each detector.
Q6. In a gas chromatograph, what does a detector do?
Select the one best answer:
A. It provides a continuousflat baseline as a reference for measuring the peaks.
B. It generates a signal proportional to the instantaneous number of compo￾nent molecules leaving the column.
C. It measures the area of each peak.
D. It converts each component of the sample to a concentration.
Q7. Why is the chromatogram so important?
Select the one best answer:
A. It shows the baseline used for measuring the peaks.
B. It shows the shape of each peak.
C. It shows the separation between peaks.
D. All of the above.
Check your SAQ answers with those given at the end of the book.
12 FundamentalsReferences
Further reading
The companion book (Waters 2020) establishes the basic functions and hardware of
the PGC and is essential reading to those who desire a full understanding of the
equipment.
The 26-page encyclopedia article by Clemons (2011) is an excellent review of process
gas chromatographs and their applications in industry. It’s highly recommended
for those seeking a wide overview of the techniques and applications of the PGC.
The delightful book by Ettre (2008) is an interesting historical account of the devel￾opment of chromatographic science by one who was there.
The two earlier books on process gas chromatographs by Huskings (1977) and
Annino and Villalobos (1992) may be of interest for their historical perspectives.
Cited
Annino, R. and Villalobos, R. (1992). Process Gas Chromatography: Fundamentals
and Applications. Research Triangle Park, NC: Instrument Society of America.
ISBN: 1-55617-272-9.
Clemons, J.M. (2011). Chromatography in process analysis. In: Encyclopedia of Ana￾lytical Chemistry (ed. R.A. Meyers). Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Ettre, L.S. (2008). Chapters in the Evolution of Chromatography (ed. J.V. Hinshaw).
London, UK: Imperial College Press. ISBN 1-86094-943-6.
Huskings, D.J. (1977). Gas Chromatographs as industrial process analyzers. New
York, NY: Pergamon Press, Inc.
Waters, T. (2020). Process Gas Chromatographs: Fundamentals, Design and Imple￾mentation. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Figures
1.1 A Basic Gas Chromatograph.
1.2 A Typical PGC Chromatogram.
New technical terms
When first introduced, these words and phrases were in bold type. You
should now know the meaning of these technical terms. If still in doubt,
consult the Glossary at the end of the book:
analyte housekeeping column
baseline liquid chromatography
capillary column mobile phase
carrier gas packed column
chromatogram peak
column sample conditioning
column system solubility
References 13component solute
detector solvent
distribution constant solvent peak
dynamic equilibrium stationary phase
gas chromatograph temperature programming
gas chromatography
14 Fundamentals2
Measures of perfection
“Never underestimate the chromatogram. The information you need to
evaluate column performance or diagnose faults is all hiding there in plain
sight. You just need to read it. This chapter examines some ways to evaluate
column efficiency. Later, we’ll use the chromatogram to diagnose a host of
instrument faults. It’s the best troubleshooting tool you’ll ever have.”
Performance indicators
This chapter introduces some useful column performance indicators derived
from two simple chromatogram measurements. There are lots of equations
here, but the math is not difficult.
The main text discussesthe five equations you will need in your PGC tool￾box. These are the sharp implements of practical chromatography. They are
simple ratios of chromatogram measurements that are easy to calculate and
tell you how well your columns are doing: retention factor, separation factor,
and resolution. And after a little theory, plate number and plate height.
The theory behind this practical work isin the SCI-FILE: On Plate Theory
and is optional reading.
Since the majority of PGC columns have a liquid stationary phase, we use
gas–liquid chromatography as a common example of theory and practice.
Solid stationary phases work in a different way, but the outcome is much
the same. A later chapter will examine the properties of solid adsorbent
columns.
Also, to keep itsimple at this point, we start by looking at a single column.
Or maybe it’s several columns in series that use the same stationary phase
and act like a single column. It’s a little more difficult to assess the perfor￾mance of series columns that use differentstationary phases,so we defer that
discussion until later.
With those disclaimers, let’s get back to the key question: How can you
tell whether your column is working perfectly – or not? It will take just two
easy chromatogram measurements to find out.
Process Gas Chromatography: Advanced Design and Troubleshooting, First Edition. Tony Waters.
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2025 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Chromatogram data
Two fundamental measurements
Start by measuring the position and width of a peak on a chromatogram.
That’s all the data we need to evaluate column performance.
The theory of chromatography is quite complex, so it’s good to remember
that the only real data is the measurement of peak position and peak width
on a chromatogram. There are reams of theory to explain why peaks are
where they are and as wide as they are, but from a practical perspective all
you need to do is measure them.
A microcomputer PGC may calculate peak measurements automatically,
and we’ll certainly take advantage of that luxury when troubleshooting.
But you’ll need to know what your computer is doing, and the best way
to learn is by doing it manually.
To prepare for a manual measurement, obtain a printout or chart record
of your chromatogram. Then draw tangents at both sides of the peak and
extend them downward to intersect an extended baseline drawn across
the base of the peak, as shown in Figure 2.1. Chromatographers call this pro￾cedure triangulating the peak.
Then, make the following measurements:
Measure the holdup time (tM) from the injection time mark to the apex
of the air peak.
Measure the retention time (tR) of each component peak from the injec￾tion time mark to the intersection of its tangent lines.
Measure the base width (wb) of each component peak between the inter￾sections of the tangent lines with the extended baseline.
0 1 2 3 4 5 7 8
Elapsed Time (Minutes)
tM tR′ = tR – tM
Air
Peak Holdup time: tM = 60 s
Retention time: tR = 360 s
Base width: wb= 60 s
Half-width: wh= 35 s 
tR
6
wb
Inj
wh
You can make simple measurements from a chromatogram to discover how well 
the columns are performing. The data most often collected are shown in this 
illustrative chromatogram, and are further discussed in the text. Obtaining such 
data is an essential prerequisite for optimizing or troubleshooting column 
performance.
Figure 2.1 Typical
Chromatogram Measurements.
16 Measures of perfectionSome chromatographers prefer to measure the peak width at half
height (wh). Simply measure the horizontal peak width at an elevation of
half the peak height. This is often easier to do than triangulating the base
width and is perhaps a more accurate method, since no triangulation errors
occur. The two width measurements are related and either of them is valid
for evaluating column performance.
For clarity of display, the single component peak in Figure 2.1 is very
wide. You may have many component peaks on your chromatogram, and
they are likely much narrower. It’s difficult to measure the width of a narrow
peak. To obtain a good measurement, you might have to expand the time
base on a computer display or increase the chart speed on a recorder.
Most workers like to make chromatogram measurements in millimeters,
since it’s a convenient way to get a precise measurement on a chart or print￾out. It works well in practice because most performance parameters are a
ratio of two values and the units cancel out. Yet it’s essential to remember
that chromatogram measurements of peak position and peak width repre￾sent time durations, whether you express them in millimeters, chart divi￾sions, digital counts, or seconds.
The distinction is important because some column variables are true
lengths measured in real millimeters. On a chromatogram, a measurement
in millimeters is not really a length; it’s just a surrogate for time. If you mix
the two units of measure, your calculations won’t work.
Significance of the air peak
The air peak is a valuable indicator of liquid-phase column performance,
but not applicable to solid-phase columns. Since air doesn’t dissolve in col￾umn liquids to any significant extent, the air peak remains in the gas phase
all the way through the column – traveling at full gas velocity.
If using a detector that doesn’t respond to air, another unretained peak
can act as a surrogate. For instance, methane often serves as an adequate “air
peak” on a flame ionization detector.
The significance of the air peak is that it travels at the same speed as the
carrier gas. Its position on the chromatogram tells us the elapsed time for the
carrier gas to travel from one end of the column to the other end. It also gives
us a way to measure the average carrier gas velocity in the column, an impor￾tant variable used in optimization (Chapter 6).
Time in each phase
The holdup time is the time that each component molecule spends in the gas
phase. Recall that component molecules can move along the column only
when they are in the carrier gas. So, to get through the column, every com￾ponent molecule must spend the same time in the carrier gas as the air
peak does.
Chromatogram data 17Each sample molecule that passes through a column spends the same
amount of time in the carrier gas as every other sample molecule does –
whatever its chemical composition!
After the air peak, the additional retention time taken by a component mol￾ecule to reach the detector isthe time it was stationary in the liquid phase. By
random chance, identical molecules don’t stay in the liquid for identical
times; they reach the detector at different times. Thisisthe root cause of peak
shape. The time measured from the air peak to the apex of a component peak
is therefore the average time1 those molecules spent in the liquid phase, not
moving. We call that the adjusted retention time.
Thus, the retention time (tR) of a peak is the sum of two times: the time
that the peak spends in the gas phase (tM) plusthe time itspends in the liquid
phase (tR ):
tR = tM + tR (2.1)
Figure 2.2 illustrates the point rather well; the air peak neatly divides the
chromatogram into two independent time zones and makes them easy to
measure:
From injection to the air peak is the time that all components spend in
the gas phase. Some workers call this time the “dead time” of the column
because it doesn’t contribute to separation. It’s formal name is the
holdup time.
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Retention Time (tR)
Propane
Time In 
Liquid Phase
air
“Adusted 
Retention Time”
(tR′)
“Holdup
Time”
(tM)
Time In 
Gas Phase
CO2 1-Butene
Inj
An air peak tells us how long the carrier gas takes to get through the column, which 
is also the time that each component spends in the gas phase. The additional 
retention time for each peak is the time that the peak spends in the liquid phase. 
For example, on this chromatogram, the propane peak spends three minutes in the 
gas phase and three minutes in the liquid phase for a total retention time of six 
minutes.
Figure 2.2 Significance of an
Air Peak.
1 This assumes the peak is symmetric, which is close enough for our present discussion. Real
peaks rarely enjoy perfect symmetry and we have some work to do before we can explain why.
18 Measures of perfectionFrom the air peak to the apex of each peak is the average time that each
component spends in the liquid phase. It’s formal name is the adjusted
retention time.
The air peak location is also useful for troubleshooting. Since none of the
component molecules can travel faster than the carrier gas, any peak that
appears on the chromatogram before the air peak can’t be from the current
sample injection.
Calculated performance indicators
Having measured peak position and peak width, you can calculate several
useful indicators of column performance.
Average carrier gas velocity
Since you know the column length (L), the air-peak time (tM) allows you to
calculate the average carrier gas velocity (u) in m/s:
u = L
tM
(2.2)
We’ll come back to the average velocity in Chapter 6, where it helps to opti￾mize the carrier gas flow rate.
Retention factor
The stationary phase istotally responsible forseparation,so the peaksshould
not waste too much time in the mobile phase. Nothing happens there. So an
important measure of column performance is the ratio of the time a peak
spends in the liquid phase to the time it spends in the gas phase. This param￾eter is the retention factor (k), previously known as the capacity factor.
Later, we shall see that the retention factor is very helpful when optimizing
the operating conditions of a column.
The measurements made in Figure 2.1 illustrate the data you’ll need to
determine the retention factor for a selected peak. The air-peak time tells
you the time-in-gas-phase (tM) and reveals the time-in-liquid-phase (tR ).
The retention factor then follows from:
k = tR − tM
tM
= tR
tM
(2.3)
In Figure 2.2, for example, the propane peak spends three minutes in the
liquid phase and six minutes in the column, so its retention factor is:
k = 6 − 3
3
= 1 0
By similar logic, you should see that the retention factor of the 1-butene peak
is k = 3.0.
Calculated performance indicators 19When there are two or more component peaks on a chromatogram, a
fixed ratio exists between the adjusted retention times of two selected peaks.
This ratio is the separation factor for the two components, and it tends to
remain constant for a given liquid phase regardless of the column operating
conditions.
For a specified liquid phase, the separation factor between two peaks is
essentially constant, whatever you do. There are a few exceptions, but for
most analytes the only way to change the separation factor is to use a dif￾ferent liquid phase.
Figure 2.3 shows the chromatogram measurements you’ll need. Again, the
chromatogram must include an air peak. Use the holdup time (tM) to
calculate the adjusted retention times (tR ) of the two component peaks.
Alternatively, just measure the adjusted retention times directly from the
chromatogram, as done in Figure 2.3. The separation factor (α) is then:
α = tR B
tR A (2.4)
For example, inserting the values from Figure 2.3 gives a separation factor
of 1.25:
α = 300 s
240 s
= 1 25
The separation factor indicates the ability of the liquid phase to separate the
peaks, so it’s sometimes called the selectivity of that stationary phase for
those components.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Elapsed Time (Minutes)
A B
Separation Factor:
α = 300/240
α = 1.25
Air Peak
Inj
tR′(B) = 300 s
tR′(A) = 240 s
The separation factor is a property of the stationary phase, so the chromatogram 
measurements needed are the adjusted retention times of the peaks, starting from 
the air peak. For clarity of display, this illustrative chromatogram shows two very 
wide peaks; in practice, a separation factor of 1.25 would normally yield a nice 
baselne separation of the two peaks.
Figure 2.3 Measurements for
Separation Factor.
20 Measures of perfectionIt’s useful to know the alpha-value when selecting or troubleshooting a
column to separate two components. Generally, the separation is easy when
the separation factor is greater than 1.1 and becomes more difficult as it
approaches unity. A separation factor of 1.0 indicates that the two compo￾nents will not separate on that liquid phase whatever you do.
For most peaks, the only way to change the separation factor is to select a
different liquid phase. But even a different liquid phase won’t change the
separation factor unless the molecules of the two peaks are chemically dif￾ferent. For instance, all paraffins have a similar chemical structure, so their
separation factors are about the same on all columns. Adjacent paraffins
have a separation factor of about 2.0 on any liquid column under any oper￾ating conditions.
Separation
As a technical term, separation (S) simply means the time between the two
peak apexes.
S = tR B − tR A (2.5)
But people tend to use “separation” in its everyday sense of moving peaks
apart from one another. So when two peaks overlap each other, they say
it’s a poor separation. Because of this potential misunderstanding the chro￾matography world now shuns the use of separation as a variable, but we still
find it useful for simple explanations. The separation of the peaks in
Figure 2.3 is 60 seconds. This says nothing about how they part or overlap
at the baseline. To capture that information we need a different variable,
one that includes the effect of peak separation and peak width.
Resolution
The resolution of adjacent peaks expresses peak separation relative to peak
width and is an effective measure of column performance.
Figure 2.4 shows how this works. Measure the retention time (tR) of the
peaks and their triangulated base widths (wb). Get their separation (S) from
Equation 2.5 as before. Then, figure their average base width wb :
wb = wb B + wb A
2 (2.6)
Alternatively, measure the peak widths at half height (wh) and get their aver￾age width (wh) from:
wh = wh B + wh A
2 (2.7)
Finally, calculate their resolution (Rs) from:
Rs = S
wb
(2.8)
Calculated performance indicators 21To use peak width at half height, refer to the SCI-FILE: On Plate Theory
(below) for this data on the properties of a Gaussian curve:
wh
wb
= 2 354 σ
4 σ
= 0 59
Substitute into Equation 2.8:
Rs = 0 59
S
wh
(2.9)
The peaks in Figure 2.4 have a resolution of 1.0, which always generates an
overlap at the baseline: the valley point between the peaks is about 25 % of
each peak height. Yes, a computer program can estimate the area belonging
to each peak but its digital procedure is subject to error. Always try to get the
best possible resolution.
Computer programs can’t resolve peaks. Only chromatographic columns
can do that.
Well-resolved peaks are essential for accurate measurement.2 When the res￾olution is 1.5, the valley between two equal peaks almost touches the base￾line. That’s defined as a perfect resolution and is adequate for their
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Elapsed Time (Minutes)
Inj
Separation: S= 60 s
Base widths: wb= 60 s
Resolution: Rs= 1.0
B
wb(B)
A
wb(A)
tR(A) = 300 s
tR(B) = 360 s
An adequate resolution between adjacent peaks is the goal of any column system. 
The figure shows a resolution of 1.0, which is not enough to accurately measure the 
peaks. A resolution of 1.5 would be adequate to accurately measure adjacent peaks 
of similar size, but even more resolution is necessary when the two peaks have 
radically different heights.
Figure 2.4 Measurements for
Resolution.
2 Later, we will find that the exigency to achieve a fast analysis often produces a design with
inadequate resolution for accurate measurement. You may have the opportunity to rec￾tify that.
22 Measures of perfectionaccurate measurement. But peaks that are unequal in size require even more
resolution. The resolution necessary for accurate measurement will always
depend on the relative size of the peaks.
Practical aspects of theory
Plate theory
There are two prominent theories of chromatography, the plate theory
described here and the rate theory described in Chapter 6.
Waters (2020, 28–36) uses plate theory to explain the formation of peaks.
This theory easily shows why the peaks should be symmetrical and grow
wider as they stay longer in the column. The theory imagines that the
injected sample transits a series of “plates” where equilibrium occurs
between the molecules in the mobile phase and the molecules in the station￾ary phase. Of course, there are no separate plates inside a column, so we call
them theoretical plates. The basic idea is that each theoretical plate is the
equivalent of one equilibrium.
The theoretical plate theory of chromatography arose by analogy with the
liquid distillation process. Industrial distillation towers have traysthat hold a
liquid in equilibrium with a vapor above; the vapor moves up the tower,
reaching a new equilibrium with the liquid on each tray. In the laboratory,
the apparatus for distillation is much smaller. Chemists say their distillation
tower is a column and they call each tray a plate. Laboratory stills don’t
always use plates; instead, they use a column containing irregular-shaped
glass or ceramic objects (called saddles or Raschig rings) packed inside a
straight vertical tube. Although such columns don’t have real plates, che￾mistsrate them by the effective number of vapor–liquid equilibria that occur;
thereby specifying the number of theoretical plates.
The original plate theory of chromatography used that same terminology,
but a later standard simplified the nomenclature from number of theoretical
plates to plate number (Ettre 1993).
The theoretical plate model of chromatography effectively explains the
shape of chromatographic peaks. The movement of individual component
molecules is a random process; some move with the carrier gas while others
stay in the liquid phase. This random motion tends to disperse the narrow
band of solute molecules, spreading them apart. After many such move￾ments, the linear position of molecules along the column follows the nor￾mal distribution of statistics – often called the “bell curve” – that
features in the SCI-FILE that follows. Another name for this symmetrical
shape is a Gaussian peak.
Most chromatogram peaks are close to being Gaussian in shape but are
never exactly so. The theories of chromatography always start from the
assumption that peaks are Gaussian and modify their conclusions to account
for observed deviations from the normal distribution. We shall do the same.
Practical aspects of theory 23As a practical chromatographer, you’re probably anxious to know why
you have non-Gaussian peaks on your chromatogram. As yet, we can’t
answer that more-complex question. First, we need to explore the properties
of simple Gaussian peaks. Once you understand those, you’ll be ready for the
more complex discussion on how peaks can become asymmetric.
The following SCI-FILE: On Plate Theory is optional reading, but you
might find it interesting. The main text continues after the SCI-FILE and
employs a few of the equations introduced there to illustrate the practical uses
of plate theory to evaluate the performance of chromatographic columns.
SCI-FILE: On Plate Theory
Ideal peak shape
A chromatogram peak represents the distribution of
the component molecules in time as they pass
through the detector. It’s obvious that all the mole￾cules don’treach the detector at the same time. Some
arrive earlier and some later, due to the cumulated
effect of multiple random processes in the column.
Theories of chromatography posit that the arrival
times of molecules at the detector are normally dis￾tributed. Figure 2.5 is an example of a normal distri￾bution. It’s a well-known curve found in many
random processes and often called a “Gaussian” dis￾tribution in honor of the mathematician Carl Gauss.
Real peaks on a chromatogram don’t quite live
up to the expectation of being normal, but they
come close and that allows us to make deductions
about their shape.3
A Gaussian peak is an ideal symmetrical peak
and its central point is the mean. The average mol￾ecule is also at the center, with an equal number of
molecules arriving earlier and later in time. The
time coinciding with the apex of the peak is the
retention time recorded for that solute.
Since all chromatograms are a plot of detector
response versus time, measurements made on the
chromatogram to determine the retention time
and width of a peak are time measurements. This
istrue even when you measure distances on a print￾out in millimeters.
Of course, the shape of the peak forms inside the
column before the molecules arrive at the detector.
As the injected band of molecules (that is, an
embryo “peak”) works its way down the column,
the band tends to spread, occupying a small but
gradually expanding segment of the column length
as it inexorably migrates toward the detector.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.5
–5 –4 –3 –2 –1 0 1 2 3 4 5
Standard Deviation σ (or τ)
@ Inflexion Points
w0.607=2σ
wh= 2.354 σ
@ Half height
wb= 4 σ
Probability
A perfect peak would follow the Gaussian distribution, which 
has the known characteristics are shown here. Real peaks 
show slight deviations from perfection that demand a more 
complex theory.
Figure 2.5 The Gaussian Peak Shape.
3 To study the reasons for asymmetric peaks, refer to Chapters 7 and 8.
24 Measures of perfectionThus, the band of molecules in the column
becomes distributed in space; although all the mole￾cules have traveled for the same amount of time,
some of them get farther along the column than
others do. Therefore, when the molecules are inside
the column we express the width or position of the
band in length units, not time units.
In gas chromatography, it’s not practical to
measure the location of molecules inside the col￾umn; we must wait until they reach the detector.
We deduce their behavior in the column by mea￾suring the time they appear on the chromatogram.
Peak width
The standard deviation of a normal distribution
is a measure of the spread of values around the
mean. It’s therefore a very good indicator of
peak width.
In gas chromatography, we employ two alterna￾tive symbols to represent the standard deviation.
We use sigma (σ) to represent the distribution of
molecules occurring in the column, so sigma
always carries units of length, usually millimeters.
We introduce tau (τ) to represent the time distri￾bution of a chromatogram peak, so tau always car￾ries units of time, usually seconds.
Really, the two distributions are equivalent; only
the units have changed. Even so, failure to appreci￾ate the difference will lead to confusion and per￾haps to errors in calculation.
The length and time distributions are related in a
simple way. The distance a peak travels is the
length of the column (L) and the time that it travels
is its retention time (tR). Thus, for a specified peak:
σ
τ = L
tR
(2.10)
From statistical theory, the normal curve has
inflexion points at 60.7 % of its height, where its
width is ±τ from the mean. Figure 2.5 shows that
tangent lines drawn at these inflexion points inter￾sect the baseline at ±2 τ from the mean, a known
property of the normal curve.
Thus, the base width (wb) of an ideal chromato￾gram peak is:
wb = 4 τ (2.11)
Note that the standard deviation of a chromato￾gram peak is one-fourth of its base width, measured
in time units.
Also from the standard shape of the normal
curve, the peak width measured at half the peak
height (wh) is:
wh = 2 354 τ (2.12)
Some workers prefer the latter measurement
because it avoids the need to draw tangents. Note,
however, that it is a narrower width and may be
more difficult to measure precisely.
Measures of column efficiency
A tenet of plate theory is that the solute molecules
moving in the gas phase form many successive
equilibria with the solute molecules stuck in the
liquid phase. The alternative approach taken by
rate theory discounts the notion of equilibrium
occurring anywhere in the column because the
constant movement of the mobile phase will not
allow it. Yet the terms plate number (previously
called the number of theoretical plates) and plate
height have persisted in both theories for evaluat￾ing the efficiency of columns.
Plate theory defines the relation between plate
number (N), plate height (H), and column length
(L) as:
N = L
H (2.13)
By rearranging Equation 2.13, you can see that
plate height is the length of column needed to cre￾ate one plate:
H = L
N (2.14)
Plate height
As noted above, standard deviation (σ) is a conven￾ient measure of the width of a solute band in the
column as it has the same units as the distance that
the band has moved.
Another valid measure of the dispersion of mole￾cules is the variance of the band. The variance of a
normal distribution is the square of its standard
deviation (σ
2
).
Practical aspects of theory 25Many random processes act on the sample mole￾cules from the instant of their injection to the
instant of their detection. Statistical theory shows
that the variances of these independent and ran￾dom processes are additive, whereas their standard
deviations are not. Therefore, the width of a chro￾matogram peak reflects the cumulated variance of
these dispersive processes.
As a band of molecules migrates along the column
it tendsto spread; the fartherit goes, the widerit gets.
On average, its molecules are moving farther and far￾ther from themean. This continuing dispersionofthe
moleculesincreasesthe variance ofthe band indirect
proportion to the distance it has traveled.
A poor column will facilitate dispersion and allow
the variance of the band to increase rapidly with dis￾tance traveled,whereas a good column willminimize
dispersion and keep the molecules closer together.
To evaluate column performance, we need to
know the rate of dispersion per distance moved
and we use plate height to measure it. You can
visualize plate height as the “rate of generating
variance” within the column.
This gives plate height (H) an unusual unit of
measure, being the variance (σ
2
) of the band of
molecules divided by the distance it has moved (d):
H = σ2
d (2.15)
Plate height has length units, typically mm or
cm. It’s the best measure we have for identifying
the causes of dispersion and then prescribing ways
of reducing it. Any change in operating conditions
that reduces plate height always improves the res￾olution of peaks on the chromatogram.
Development of peak shape
The molecules in a migrating solute band are nor￾mally distributed. At any point in the column, the
base width (wb) of the band measured in length
units is:
wb = 4 σ (2.16)
Combining Equations 2.15 and 2.16 gives an
equation for the base width after it has moved a dis￾tance (d) along the column:
wb = 4 H d (2.17)
Since faster-moving bands travel more distance,
the above equation indicates that faster bands
will become wider than slower bands. Figure 2.6
illustratesthis odd behavior. The gray area to the left
shows the spatial distribution of the solute bands
within the column at the instant that the air peak
reaches the detector (that is, 90 s in this diagram).
0 30 60 120 150 180 210 240 270 300
Elapsed Time (s)
Position in Column
(@ 90 s time)
Leading Peaks are Wider
Position in Column n
(@ 90 s time)
Leading Peaks are Wider
Final Time on Chromatogram
(detector signal)
Air @
90 s
(tM)
Peak C Peak B Peak B Peak C
Detector
Peak A
Inj Following Peaks are Wider
This example shows an air peak (A) and two analyte peaks (B and C). When the air peak reaches the detector, the analyte 
peaks are still in the column – shown in the gray area to the left of the air peak. At that time, we imagine the three peaks are 
equally spaced along the column. Then, since Peak B took 90 s to travel two-thirds of the column, it will take another 45 s to 
travel the remaining one-third, for a retention time of 135 s. Peak C traveled only one-third of the column in 90 s and will need 
180 s to reach the detector, for a retention time of 270 s. Thus, the linear spacing in the column turns into logarithmic spacing 
on the chromatogram. 
[This simplified explanation ignores the effect of pressure, which we’ll consider in a later chapter.] 
Figure 2.6 Spatial and Temporal Separations.
26 Measures of perfectionIn this simple example, the solute bands within
the column are equally spaced. The molecules of
Peak C form not only the slowest band, but also
the narrowest one. This is strange. Slower peaks
being narrow is contrary to our experience with
gas chromatographs. We just know that the later
peaks on our chromatograms are always widerthan
the early ones.
Yet it’s true that fast peaks are wider than slow
peaks when inside the column, where they are sep￾arate in space but not yet separate in time. This
reverse-width effect always occurs inside a column
but is unnoticed when a single column goesstraight
to a detector.
The reverse-width effect becomes important
only when two columns operate in series or when
a single column istemperature programmed. When
evaluating what is happening inside a column at a
certain time, you may need to remember that a
slow-moving component peak is still a very com￾pact band of molecules.
Peak shape at elution
Gas chromatography is an elution technique. Ana￾lyte molecules don’tremain in the stationary phase;
they continue to travel until they exit the column
and reach the detector, forming peaks on the chro￾matogram. Of course, all peaks leaving the column
have traveled the same distance; that is, the column
length (L).
So for eluted peaks, Equation 2.15 becomes:
H = σ2
L (2.18)
Equation 2.18 defines plate height as the vari￾ance per unit length of the column, which is a
measure of the dispersion rate of solute molecules
within the column. As such, it is constant for the
same solute on different lengths of column working
under the same conditions.
In practice, it’s not possible for all the column
operating conditions to be identical. When the col￾umn length changes, the carrier gas pressure must
also change. But the effect of pressure is usually
quite small, so plate height is almost independent
of column length.
To get the eluted peak width (wb), combine
Equations 2.16 and 2.18:
wb = 4 H L (2.19)
Since each peak has a constant value of H, the
widths of all peaks change in proportion to the
square root of column length as per Equation 2.19.
This slow growth of peak width explains why
longer columns always give better resolution: the
separation of the peaks increases linearly with col￾umn length, which outpaces the slower increase in
peak width.
Plate height is not constant for every component
of the injected sample; the physical properties of
components differ, leading to different rates of dis￾persion inside the column. In practice, later-eluting
peaks typically have larger plate numbers and
smaller plate heights.
Chromatogram peak shape
The right side of Figure 2.6 shows the chromato￾gram obtained after peaks B and C have exited
the column. As expected, later peaks are wider than
early peaks.
In passing, it’s interesting to observe that the
peaks on the chromatogram are no longer equally
spaced, which is an effect we first met in Waters
(2020, 48–49). The process of transforming the
peaks to the time domain converts their linear sep￾aration in the column to a logarithmic separation
on the chromatogram.
The calculation of column performance para￾meters from chromatogram measurements of peak
width and retention time is straightforward if you
pay attention to the units.
Since a chromatogram peak is a time distribu￾tion, you can’t use the length-based plate
height (H) to calculate its width. The chroma￾tography literature sometimes misses this
important point.
To avoid confusion, this text introduces a new
symbol (Ht) for the plate height expressed in time
units, where:
Ht = H
τ
σ
(2.20)
Practical aspects of theory 27Hence, from Equation 2.10:
Ht = H
tR
L (2.21)
Now convert Equation 2.18 to time units by
inserting the expressions for σ and H from Equa￾tions 2.10 and 2.21, respectively:
Ht = τ2
tR
(2.22)
As expected, this defines Ht as the variance gen￾erated per second.
Combining Equations 2.12 and 2.13 now gives
the peak base width in seconds:
wb = 4 Ht tR (2.23)
On a given chromatogram, the plate heights of
peaks in time units (Ht) tend to remain constant.
The peak widths therefore increase in proportion
to the square root of their retention times as per
Equation 2.23.
Column efficiency
Theories of chromatography use different assump￾tions about what happens inside a column, yet they
all agree on plate number as the best measure of the
column’s ability to limit the molecular dispersion
within a peak. Larger values of plate number
indicate less dispersion, so the peaks are relatively
narrow compared to their retention time. Conse￾quently, plate number is useful for measuring the
overall column efficiency.
The original concept of plate number came from
distillation theory as the “number of theoretical
plates.” It’sthe number of equilibrium stepsthe peak
would have passed through to produce the observed
peak width (Martin and Synge 1941, 1359).
If you have already calculated the column plate
height (H), get plate number from Equation 2.13.
Alternatively, to estimate plate number (N) from
chromatogram values, convert Equation 2.13 to
time units by inserting the expression for H from
Equation 2.21:
N = tR
Ht
(2.24)
Now combine Equations 2.22 and 2.24 to obtain
the classic definition of plate number:
N = tR
τ
2
(2.25)
From this, substituting τ from Equation 2.11
generates the familiar equation for calculating
plate number from chromatogram data:
N = 16
tR
wb
2
(2.26)
Some chromatographers prefer an alternative
equation derived by substituting τ from Equa￾tion 2.12 instead:
N = 5 54
tR
wh
2
(2.27)
The latter calculation doesn’t need the drawn tan￾gents. It’s a simpler procedure, but the measured
width is only about 60 % of the base width, so it
might be difficult to get an accurate measurement.
Effective plate number
The plate number is not the same for every peak on
the chromatogram – it improves when peak reten￾tion time increases. This is partly due to the holdup
time, which has less effect on the later peaks. Some
workers prefer an alternative measure known as
the effective plate number, based on the adjusted
retention time (tR ):
Neff = 16
tR
wb
2
(2.28)
Or alternatively:
Neff = 5 54
tR
wh
2
(2.29)
Process chromatographers seldom use this alter￾native measure.
28 Measures of perfectionUsing the theory
Resolution on longer columns
To evaluate the effect of a longer column on resolution, recall the definition
of resolution from Equation 2.8. For adjacent peaks, the resolution (Rs) is the
ratio of their separation (S) to their average base width wb :
Rs = S
wb
At the same temperature and carrier velocity, the retention time of both
peaks is directly proportional to the column length. Therefore, their separa￾tion (S) is also a linear function of column length.
But on a longer column the width of the peaks does not increase as much
as the separation does. From Equation 2.19, the peak width increases in pro￾portion to the square root of column length. It follows that the resolution of
adjacent peaks is a function of the square root of column length:
Figure 2.7 shows the effect of increased column length graphically:
The blue line represents the increase of peak width by the square root of
column length.
The orange line represents a peak pair with a high separation factor that
are easy to resolve. Their separation (S) increases rapidly with column
length.
The purple line represents a peak pair that are more difficult to resolve;
their separation (S) increases more slowly with column length.
0 2 4 6 8 10
S and 
Wb
Column Length (m)
wb= c·√L
S =c·L
S=wb
For a Hard 
Separation
(low α)
S=wb
For an Easy
Separation
(high α)
Peak separation (S) increases in direct proportion to column length (orange and 
purple lines), but peak width (wb) increases only by the square root of column length 
(blue curve). Where a straight line crosses the blue curve, peak width is equal to 
separation giving a resolution of 1.0. To achieve this resolution, the low-alpha 
separation (purple) needs about 6.3 m of column, whereas the high-alpha separation 
(orange) needs only 2.2 m of column. In principle, any resolution is achievable given 
a long enough column.
Figure 2.7 Achieving
Resolution.
Source: Giddings, J.C.
(1965)/with permission of
Taylor & Francis Group.
Using the theory 29At the points where the lines intersect:
S = wb
Therefore, at those intersections the column is just long enough to form a
resolution of 1.0. In principle, there must be a column length that will
achieve any desired resolution.
In the next chapter, we shall see that the necessary carrier gas pressure
poseslimits to the length of columns, particularly packed columns. The pres￾sure required for open tubular columns is much lower, so they can be very
long and can achieve wonderful resolutions.
The ultimate constraint to column length is the analysis time. A single
long column might take hours to resolve a peak pair having a separation fac￾tor close to 1.00, yet most process plants need the analysis in just a few min￾utes. A PGC often solves that problem by using multiple columns. After
partial separation of components on one column, the unresolved analytes
enter another column having a much larger separation factor.
Estimating plate number
Plate number of a peak is a measure of column efficiency. It comes from the
plate theory described in the SCI-FILE: On Plate Theory. Thistheory equates
plate number to the number of equilibria that would be necessary to form
that peak shape on the chromatogram.
Knowing the plate number of a peak is not an academic pursuit, it’s a
practical necessity. All the practical procedures for optimizing column per￾formance will require you to estimate the plate number from chromatogram
measurements. To understand the theory behind those measurements, refer
to the SCI-FILE above.
Two measurements – peak position and width – are enough to evaluate
the performance of a single column. You won’t need an air peak. As an
example, let’s calculate the plate number (N) for the peak in Figure 2.8 using
Equation 2.26:
N = 16
tR
wb
2
Inserting the data from Figure 2.8 gives:
N = 16
360
60
2
= 576
A plate number of 576 is low and would indicate an inefficient column, since
a good column would generate about 2,000 plates per meter. Of course, we
drew this peak wide to clearly illustrate the measurements. A real peak
would be much narrower: a more typical peak might have one-third of
the width and nine times the plate number.
30 Measures of perfectionPlate number measures the sharpness of a peak and is easy to visualize:
A plate number of 100 means the peak retention time is 2.5 times its base
width. That would be a wide peak!
A plate number of 10,000 means the peak retention time is 25 times its
base width. That would be a nice sharp peak!
Some chromatographers prefer to calculate plate number using the peak
width at half height (wh) because there’s no need to draw tangent lines and
it’s potentially more accurate. By Equation 2.27:
N = 5 54
tR
wh
2
By inspecting the above equations, you’ll see that a higher plate number
improves resolution. A higher plate number must be due to an increase in
the retention time or a reduction in the peak width, or both. Therefore, a
higher plate number will always increase the resolution of adjacent peaks.
Plate number is a good measure of the efficiency of a column. Any change
of operating conditions that increases plate number automatically
improves the resolution of adjacent peaks.
Plate number is not the same for every peak on a chromatogram. It tends to
improve with increased time in the liquid phase,so later peaks typically have
larger plate numbers than earlier peaks do. In a similar way, longer columns
have larger plate numbers and are more powerful than shorter columns are.
In effect, increasing the length of a column is just like adding more plates.
0 60 120 180 240 300 420 480
elapsed time (s)
wh
wb
Inj
tR
Retention Time: tR= 360 s
Base Width: wb= 60 s
Width@half-ht: wh= 35 s
Plate Number: N = 580 
The plate number is a good indication of column performance and needs only two 
measurements from a single chromatogram peak. Any change of operating 
conditions that increases plate number will improve the resolution between analyte 
peaks.
Figure 2.8 Measurements for
Plate Number.
Using the theory 31Estimating plate height
Plate height is a fundamental measure of column efficiency because it
doesn’t vary with column length. To calculate plate height (H), divide the
column length (L) by its plate number (N) as per Equation 2.14:
H = L
N
As calculated above, plate height has units of length, usually millimeters
(mm). You can imagine plate height to be the length of column needed to
make one equilibrium. This is still a good way to visualize the chromato￾graphic process, although we will shortly discover that modern theorists pre￾fer to downplay the idea of equilibrium occurring in the column.
When calculating plate height, it’s convenient to enter the column length
in mm, which returns the plate height in mm. An efficient liquid phase col￾umn typically has a plate height of about 0.6 ± 0.2 mm. It doesn’t take much
column to make one equilibrium!
Open tubular columns may have somewhat better (smaller) plate heights
than packed columns, but for practical PGC columns the difference is not
great. It’s often thought that wall-coated columns are inherently more effi￾cient, but that’s not their real advantage. They’re just longer. Open tubes
have low flow resistance and can be very long. That’s the main reason they
have more plates.
Plate height is a useful parameter as it evaluates the operating efficiency
of the separating mechanism itself. Any change in the design or operation of
a column that reduces plate height must also increase the plate number and
thereby must improve the resolution of adjacent peaks.
Plate height is the primary variable used for optimizing column perfor￾mance. It’s a good measure of internal column efficiency and is independ￾ent of the column length.
Plate height can also indicate the condition of a column. A liquid phase
packed column exhibiting a plate height of about 0.5 mm is working well
and needs no remedial action. Conversely, a column with a plate height
of more than 1 mm might not be operating optimally. Later chapters will
describe some practical ways to optimize column performance.
A gradual increase in plate height indicates cumulative column damage,
perhaps from overheating or from nonvolatile substances in the injected
sample.
The complementary theory of chromatography – rate theory – also recog￾nizes plate height as the fundamental measure of column efficiency. Rate
theory seeks to identify the various causes of peak broadening in columns
and includes some more complex notions, so we’ll defer it until later.
32 Measures of perfectionKnowledge Gained
Practice
You can measure the holdup time, peak reten￾tiontime, and peakwidthonthe chromatogram.
When measuring base width, triangulate the
peak and extend the baseline under the peak.
Alternatively, measure the peak width at half
the peak height.
A chromatogram measurement may be in
seconds or millimeters, but always represents
a time.
The air peak doesn’t dissolve in the liquid
phase, so it travels at the same speed as the
carrier gas.
No peak fromthe same injection can appear on
the chromatogram earlier than the air peak.
To get through the column, all injected mole￾cules spend the same time moving as the air
peak does.
Additional retention time beyond the air peak
time is the time the peak stopped in the liq￾uid phase.
The air peak divides the chromatogram into
two zones: peak time-in-gas and peak time￾in-liquid.
Holdup time is the time each component mol￾ecule spends in the gas phase.
Adjusted retention time isthe average time the
component moleculesstop in the liquid phase.
Retention time is the sum of time traveling in
the gas phase and time stopped in the liq￾uid phase.
The average carrier gas velocity is the column
length divided by the holdup time.
Retention factor is the adjusted retention time
of a solute peak divided by the holdup time.
Separation factor is the ratio (>1.0) of the
adjusted retention times of two peaks on a
chromatogram.
To change the separation factor, use a differ￾ent liquid phase.
Separation is the time between the apexes of
adjacent peaks on a chromatogram.
Resolution is the separation of adjacent peaks
divided by their average width.
Under the same operating conditions, separa￾tion increases in proportion to the column
length.
Peak width and resolution both increase by
the square root of the column length.
Resolution improves by the square root of col￾umn length, but with lower peaks and longer
analysis.
To calculate plate number, use chromato￾gram measurements of retention time and
peak width.
Any change in operating conditions that
increases plate number also increases the res￾olution of peaks.
To calculate plate height, divide the column
length by its plate number.
Plate height is a good measure of column effi￾ciency; packed columns should be about 0.6
± 0.2 mm.
Wall-coated columns may have lower plate
heights and can be much longer, giving even
more plates.
Theory
The times that identical solute molecules
arrive in the detector closely follow a normal
distribution.
Using the theory 33Did you get it?
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 02
A gas chromatograph uses a single 4.0 m column. On the chromatogram printout,
there are two peaks. A pair of intersecting tangents drawn along the sides of each
peak extend downwards to cross the baseline. The distance between the injection
marker and the intersection of tangents is 370 mm for Peak A and 410 mm for Peak
B. The base peak width along the baseline between the two tangent crossovers is
19 mm for Peak A and 20 mm for Peak B.
A normal distribution issymmetrical, butreal
chromatogram peaks may not be exactly so.
While in the column, the positions of the indi￾vidual solute molecules also follow a normal
distribution.
The broadening of a peak is the cumulated
effect of many random processes occurring
in the column.
Standard deviation (σ or τ) is a measure of
the width of a “Gaussian” peak (that is, a nor￾mal distribution).
Variance is another measure of Gaussian
peak width and is equal to σ (or τ) squared.
A Gaussian peak has inflexion points at 60.7
% of its height, where its width is equal to 2 σ
(or τ).
Tangents from the inflexion points cross the
baseline to delineate a peak base width equal
to 4 σ (or τ).
If measured at half the peak height, the width
of a Gaussian peak is equal to 2.354 σ (or τ).
Plate theory sees plate height as the length of
column equivalent to one equilibrium.
Rate theory sees plate height as the rate of var￾iance accumulation as a peak migrates along
the column.
On-column peaks get wider with distance
moved; chromatogram peaks get wider with
elapsed time.
Peaks that have migrated only a short dis￾tance along the column are still a very narrow
band.
A linear spacing of peaks inside the column
converts to a logarithmic spacing on the
chromatogram.
The spatial distribution of peak molecules
inside the column has units of millimeters.
The time distribution of peak molecules on a
chromatogram has units of seconds.
Plate height is the effective length of column
necessary to create one equilibrium.
Plate height (mm) is constant for the same
peak on a longer or shorter column, given
the same conditions.
Plate height (mm) tends to be smaller for later
solute peaks on a chromatogram.
Plate height (s) is about the same for different
solute peaks on a chromatogram.
To calculate plate number, use the retention
time and width of a peak.
Plate number is a measure of column effi￾ciency, a higher value is always good.
Plate number is the number of equilibria that
would be necessary to generate the
observed peak.
Plate number tends to be higher when calcu￾lated for later peaks on a chromatogram.
34 Measures of perfectionOn Practice
Q1. Estimate the plate number (N) for Peak A.
Q2. Estimate in length units the column plate height (H) for Peak B.
Q3. What is the resolution (Rs) between Peaks A and B?
On Theory
Q4. Estimate in time units the width at half height (wh) of Peak A.
Q5. Estimate in time units the variance (τ
2
) of Peak B.
Q6. Estimate in time units the chromatogram plate height (Ht) for Peak B.
Q7. If working under the same conditions, what column length would give a res￾olution of 1.5 for Peaks A and B?
Check your SAQ answers with those given in the back of the book.
References
Cited
Ettre L.S. (1993). Nomenclature for Chromatography: IUPAC Recommendations
1993. Research Triangle Park, NC: International Union of Pure and Applied
Chemistry.
Giddings, J.C. (1965). Dynamics of Chromatography: Principles and Theory.
New York, NY: Marcel Dekker.
Martin, A.J.P. and Synge, R.L.M. (1941). A new form of chromatogram employing
two liquid phases. Biochemical Journal 35, No. (12), 1358–1368.
Waters, T. (2020). Process Gas Chromatographs: Fundamentals, Design and
Implementation. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Figures
2.1 Typical Chromatogram Measurements.
2.2 Significance of an Air Peak.
2.3 Measurements for Separation Factor.
2.4 Measurements for Resolution.
2.5 The Gaussian Peak Shape.
2.6 Spatial and Temporal Separations.
2.7 Achieving Resolution.
2.8 Measurements for Plate Number.
Symbols
Symbol Variable Unit
d Distance a band of molecules has moved along the
column
mm
H Plate height of an on-column peak (length units) mm
Ht Plate height of an eluted peak (time units) s
References 35k Retention factor none
L Length of column mm, m
N Plate number by chromatogram peak none
Neff Effective plate number by chromatogram peak none
Rs Resolution of adjacent chromatogram peaks none
S Separation4 of adjacent chromatogram peaks s
tM Gas holdup time s
tR Retention time of chromatogram peak s
tR Adjusted retention time of chromatogram peak s
u Average carrier gas velocity m/s
wb Base width of a solute peak mm or s
wb Average base width of adjacent solute peaks mm or s
wh Width at half height of a solute peak mm or s
wh Average width at half height of adjacent solute peaks mm or s
α Separation factor of two specified peaks none
σ Standard deviation of an on-column peak mm
τ Standard deviation of a chromatogram peak s
Equations
2.1 tR = tM + tR Peak retention time as the sum of its time in
the gas and liquid phases.
2.2 u = L
tM
Average velocity of carrier gas.
2.3 k = tR
tM
Retention factor of a specified peak.
2.4 α = tR B
tR A Separation factor of adjacent Peaks A and B.
2.5 S = tR(B) − tR(A) Separation of adjacent Peaks A and B.
2.6 wb = wb B + wb A
2 Average base width of adjacent peaks.
2.7 wh = wh B + wh A
2 Average peak width at half height.
2.8 Rs = S
wb
Resolution of adjacent peaks (by base width).
2.9 Rs = 0 59
S
wh
Resolution of adjacent peaks (by half height).
4
Separation is not an officially recognized variable.
36 Measures of perfection2.10
στ
=
LtR
Relationship between peak distribution in
distance and time units.
2.11
w
b
=
4
τ Known base width of
a Gaussian peak in time
units.
2.12
w
h
= 2.354
τ Known width-at-half-height of
a Gaussian
peak in time units.
2.13
N
=
LH
Definition of plate number in length units
(frequently used).
2.14
H
=
LN
Definition of plate height in length units
(frequently used).
2.15
H
=
σ
2d Plate height defined as variance generated
per distance moved.
2.16
w
b
=
4
σ Known base width of an on-column
Gaussian peak in length units.
2.17
w
b
=
4
H
d Base width of an on-column peak versus
distance moved.
2.18
H
=
σ
2L
Defines column plate height as variance per
column length.
2.19
w
b
=
4
H
L Peak base width per column length.
2.20
H
t
=
H
τσ
Definition of plate height in time units.
2.21
H
t
=
H
t
RL Relation of plate height in time or length
units.
2.22
H
t
=
τ
2
t
R
Definition of chromatogram plate height as
variance per second.
2.23
w
b
=
4
H
t
t
R Base width of
a chromatogram peak in time
units.
2.24
N
=
t
RHt
Plate number in time units.
2.25
N
=
t
Rτ
2
Definition of plate number in time units.
2.26
N
= 16
t
Rwb
2
Plate number from chromatogram peak base
width (frequently used).
2.27
N
=
5 54
t
Rwh
2
Plate number from chromatogram peak
width at half height (frequently used).
2.28
Neff
= 16
t
Rwb
2
Effective plate number from chromatogram
peak base width.
2.29
Neff
=
5 54
t
Rwh
2
Effective plate number from peak width at
half height.
References 37New technical terms
When first introduced, these words and phrases were in bold type. You
should now know the meaning of these technical terms:
adjusted retention time
air peak
band
base width
carrier gas velocity
column efficiency
Gaussian peak
holdup time
mean
rate theory
resolution
retention factor
retention time
selectivity
separation
separation factor
standard deviation
normal distribution
perfect resolution
plate height
plate number
plate theory
theoretical plates
triangulating
unretained peak
variance
width at half height
For more information, consult the Glossary of terms (pp 379–416).
38 Measures of perfection3
Column technology
“The column is the heart of a process gas chromatograph and if it doesn’t
perform well, neither will the instrument. Understanding the properties of
columns will help you to optimize the measurements and troubleshoot any
problems that arise.”
Introduction
Among the inestimable contributions to gas chromatography made by
Dr Leslie Ettre (1922–2010) is a review article about capillary columns, in
which he said:
Today, capillary columns exist; users don’t have to worry how they
are made. They simply open a supply house catalog, check the appli￾cation they are interested in, and order the proper column by its code
name and part number (Ettre 2001).
He made his point well and it remains true today. We buy columns online
from a catalog – nobody cares what’sinside. You install them in the PGC and
they work: what more is there to know?
For routine maintenance, this is just as it should be. You should not need
to reinvent the application. If a column fails, you install a new one and
restart the instrument; check the carrier flow rates, chromatogram separa￾tions, event timing, and calibration; and return the PGC to service. Fast
and efficient.
But what if it still doesn’t work?
To troubleshoot column failure you’ll need to know how columns work.
Otherwise, you won’t know why the column failed – or whether it failed at
all. Perhaps the column is not the problem; there are plenty of other reasons
for failure. To discover the root cause of failure and prescribe the correct
solution, you’ll need to know what’s inside those coiled tubes.
Process Gas Chromatography: Advanced Design and Troubleshooting, First Edition. Tony Waters.
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2025 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Unless you’re a PGC manufacturer, it’s unlikely that you will make your
own columns. You can go to the catalog for those. Therefore, the limited goal
of this chapter is to provide a general understanding of what columns are,
how they work, and what affects their performance. We’ll leave the column
design techniques until the next chapter.
Column types
Two types of column
Industrial gas chromatographs use two different kinds of column: packed
columns or capillary columns. Here’s the difference:
In a packed column, a granular solid containing the stationary phase
completely fills the tube, so the carrier gas has to percolate through it.
Most packed columns work at constant temperature.
In a capillary column, also called an open-tubular column,1 the sta￾tionary phase resides on the inside wall of the tube, allowing free passage
of carrier gas down the middle. Capillary columns may work isother￾mally or on a temperature program.
There are many varieties of chromatographic column, but they all fit into
one of those two categories.
This chapter will develop a detailed comparison between packed columns
and capillary columns. Both types of column have several advantages and
disadvantages, but an overall evaluation will often focus on two opposing
features:
A capillary column is likely to have a higher plate number than a packed
column and thus may provide more resolution between peaks.
A packed column is likely to have a larger sample capacity than a cap￾illary column and thus may provide more sensitivity for measuring a low
concentration of analyte.
The sample capacity of a column is the maximum amount of an analyte
that will produce an undistorted peak shape. We’ll look at it in more
detail later.
Packed columns
The original PGCs used packed columns made from ¼-inch o.d. (outer diam￾eter) stainless-steel tubing. This quickly changed as theoretical develop￾ments predicted narrower columns would be more efficient. By 1980 most
PGCs had adopted ⅛-inch o.d. packed columns as standard.
1
For the purposes of this text the adjectives capillary and open-tubular are synonymous.
40 Column technologyToday, PGCs often use 1 16-inch o.d. micropacked columns for appro￾priate applications and they are rapidly supplanting the popular ⅛-inch o.d.
packed columns. Many older PGCs installed in the plants use traditional
packed columns, while more recent installations are likely to have the
new micropacked columns.
Capillary columns
The invention of the capillary column by Golay (1957, 1958) gave us a
glimpse of the future. Golay showed that ultrafast separation was possible
by gas chromatography, but clunky 1960s PGC technology wasn’t ready
for such speed; our sample injectors, valves, detectors, and chart recorders
were too big or too slow for rapid analysis. Our equipment is much better
now and most PGCs can accept capillary columns.
Figure 3.1 illustrates the three kinds of capillary column used today:
Wall-coated open-tubular (WCOT) columns have a thin layer of liquid
phase coated or chemically attached to their inner wall.
Porous-layer open-tubular (PLOT) columns have a thin layer of adsorb￾ent solid on their inner wall.
Support-coated open-tubular (SCOT) columns have a thin layer of liquid￾coated support particles on their inner wall.
Capillary columns have low flow resistance, so they can be very long. The
practical limit for a packed column is about 12 m, but a capillary column can
be over 100 m in length: 30–50 m is common. When operated with temper￾ature programming, such columns can separate hundreds of peaks allowing
the analysis of complex and unpredictable mixtures. This ability is highly
valued by the analytical laboratory, where most samples are liquid and con￾tain many components. Therefore, most laboratory gas chromatographs
today use a single, temperature-programmed capillary column.
WCOT PLOT SCOT
Wall-Coated
Open Tubuler
Porous Layer
Open Tubular
Support Coated
Open Tubular
The original capillary columns had steel tubes and gave poor 
performance for polar analytes that adsorbed onto the metal surface. 
Desty et al. (1960) were the first to develop glass capillaries. For a long 
time, these were very popular in laboratory chromatographs but were far 
too fragile for process use. 
Figure 3.1 Three Kinds of
Capillary Column.
Column types 41A process chromatograph isn’t like that. Nearly every PGC uses a multi￾ple-column system to analyze a predictable process sample of fairly constant
composition. The PGC column system needs to separate a few nominated
analytes and it must do it fast. Speed is critical – the industrial process can’t
wait.
Capillary columns work well in some process applications, but notso well
in others. Therefore, we don’t expect capillary columns to totally replace
packed columns in process chromatographs as they did in the majority of
laboratory instruments. For process work, the current trend still favors
micropacked columns over open-tubular columns, as evident in Table 3.1.
Mechanism of retention
Mutual affinity
For both packed columns and capillary columns, there are two types of sta￾tionary phase, a solid phase or a liquid phase. The dominant mechanism of
retention by a solid stationary phase is adsorption – the active surface
attracts and holds component molecules. The mechanism for a liquid sta￾tionary phase is different; it works mainly by solvation – component mole￾cules dissolve in the liquid. Either way, a brief contact with the stationary
phase selectively retains component molecules as the carrier gas moves
on, causing separation to occur.
The actual mechanisms involved in retention and separation are quite
complex and can be difficult to grasp. The generic explanation is that the
molecules of different analytes have a different affinity for the stationary
phase. For some analytes, the mutual attraction is weak, while for others
it’s strong. The concept of mutual affinity is adequate for most purposes.
Table 3.1 Subjective Evaluation of Columns Used in PGCs.
Materiala Style Installed Base Recent Shipments
Stainless steel
>⅛-inch o.d.
Large packed 1 % 0 %
Stainless steel
⅛-inch o.d.
Small packed 61 % 46 %
Stainless steel
1 16-inch o.d.
Micropacked 24 % 33 %
Stainless steel
1 16-inch and less
Open tubular
WCOT, PLOT, SCOT
4 % 10 %
Fused silica
Most 0.53 mm i.d.
Open tubular
WCOT, PLOT, SCOT
10 % 11 %
This anecdotal data illustrates a trend toward micropacked and capillary columns in
recently shipped PGCs compared with those already working on site. a
Teflon tubing is still used for some highly corrosive samples.
Source: Adapted from Tony Waters.
42 Column technologyPut simply, gas chromatography happens because the carrier gas
carries injected solute molecules into a column where they touch
a stationary phase. That contact briefly retains the molecules. The
duration of retention varies for different kinds of molecule, depend￾ing on their affinity for the stationary phase, resulting in the sepa￾ration of one kind of molecule from another kind of molecule.
When discussing the affinity between solutes and liquid phases we often
invoke the concept of polarity. A polar molecule is a neutral molecule that
has an unevenly distributed electronic charge within – and the intensity of
that imbalance is what we call polarity. A nonpolar molecule is a neutral
molecule that has an evenly distributed electronic charge within. The gen￾eral principle is that polar solutes are more soluble in polar liquid phases,
and nonpolar solutes are more soluble in nonpolar liquid phases. There’s
more to it than that. If you want more, wade into the SCI-FILE: On Mutual
Affinity for a full exposition.
SCI-FILE: On Mutual Affinity
Molecular forces
By presuming that gas molecules don’t interact
with each other, the kinetic theory of gases was
able to explain Boyle’s observation that gas volume
and pressure are inversely related to each other.
That was a huge jump in understanding, yet we
soon found it lacking, as real gases tend to deviate
from such ideal behavior.
The behavior of molecules is always a conse￾quence of the forces acting upon them. The
observed deviations from Boyle’s law imply that
real gas molecules actually do affect each other,
so forces must be involved. And the same is true
of their interaction with a solid or liquid surface.
All intermolecular forces are electronic and
occur in three related flavors: dispersion, polar,
and ionic.
Dispersion forces
Consider two proximate molecules, neither
having an uneven distribution of electrons, as in
Figure 3.2a. Due to their uniform electron distribu￾tion, no electronic force exists between them. We
call them nonpolar molecules. For example, all
homonuclear diatomic gases and all paraffins
(alkanes) are nonpolar.
Yet the electrons in a molecule are in rapid
motion. Their random movement inevitably leads
to a fluctuating electron density at any chosen loca￾tion in the molecule. Clearly, an instantaneous
high electron density at one location implies a
low electron density elsewhere. These high and
low electron densities create a fleeting electronic
charge differential within the molecule called a
dipole, illustrated in Figure 3.2b.
Then, if the electrons in the second molecule are
free to move, a high electron density in the first
molecule will repel them and a low electron density
in the first molecule will attract them. Thus, a fluc￾tuating dipole in the first molecule will induce a
synchronous dipole of opposite polarity in the sec￾ond molecule per Figure 3.2c. Opposite charges
attract, so the net result is a fluctuating but always
attractive force between the two molecules. The
aggregate of myriads of such random fluctuating
forces forms a small but sustained force of
attraction.
The net dispersive force is the weakest force
between molecules but is always present. Its
strength depends on the contact area of the
Mechanism of retention 43molecules, the number of electrons they have, and
how tenaciously they hold on to those electrons.
The overall ability of the electrons to disperse is
the polarizability of the molecule. Thus, hydrocar￾bons containing double or triple bonds are more
polarizable than those that don’t. Similarly, larger
molecules have more electrons and form a stronger
mutual attraction.
The universal presence of dispersion forces
explains the behavior of all solutes on a nonpolar
liquid phase. The affinity of a solute for a nonpolar
liquid phase depends only on its polarizability.
For this reason, larger molecules always elute after
smaller ones. And since the boiling points of the
solutes are a result of those very same forces, they
elute from the column in boiling-point order.
Dispersion forces also explain the retention
behavior of paraffins on any liquid phase. Paraffin
molecules are nonpolar so they elute by molar
mass. Again, that’s because it’s easier to polarize
a heavier molecule. As an example, consider the
isomers of a normal paraffin. They all have the
same molar mass, but the more compact forms
are less polarizable and elute before those with
longer carbon chains. Therefore, the normal paraf￾fin is always the last one out.
Dispersion forces are often called London forces
after Fritz London who first identified them
(London 1937).
Polar forces
In a molecule containing identical atoms – like
nitrogen (N2), for instance – each atom has the
same influence over the electrons present, so
the electrons are symmetrically distributed and
the molecule has no dipole. But within a neutral
molecule having two or more different atoms there
may be an asymmetric distribution of electrons.
Each unique atom in the molecule hasits own com￾plement of protons and electrons that unevenly
attract or repel the electrons that bond one atom
to another atom and in doing so generate a perma￾nent dipole within the molecule.
The electronegativity of an atom is a calculated
property that indicates its ability to attract elec￾trons. In the periodic table of the elements, elec￾tronegativity increases by group number (from
left-to-right) and decreases by period number
(from top-to-bottom). Of the reactive elements,
fluorine is the most electronegative element and
cesium is the least. When two different atoms form
a chemical compound, the more electronegative
atom will pull electrons away from the other atom,
thus creating a permanent dipole.
In passing, we should also mention that a
compound that contains many atoms may exhibit
several dipoles due to electron displacement. Each
+ - -
- - - - -
-
-
- - -
-
- - -
+ - -
- - - - -
-
-
- - -
-
- - -
+ - -
- - - - -
-
-
- - -
-
- - -
+ -
-
- -
- - -
-
-
- - -
- - - -
+
Transient 
Dipole
+
Induced 
Dipole
+
- -
- -
-
-
-
-
-
- - -
-
-
- -
+ -
-
- -
- - -
-
-
- - -
- - - -
+
Transient 
Dipole
Attractive 
Force
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.2 Origin of Dispersive Forces. (a) Two adjacent
neutral atoms or molecules. (b) Random electron shift
causes a transient dipole. (c) Induced dipole forms an
attractive force.
44 Column technologydipole is a vector acting along the line between two
atoms. In an entirely symmetric molecule, the
polarity vectors then cancel, resulting in a nonpolar
molecule. For example, in the methane molecule
[CH4] depicted in Figure 3.3, the central carbon
atom attracts the bonding electrons to create four
weak C─H dipoles equally spaced in three dimen￾sions. Since they are symmetrical, the dipole vec￾tors cancel, so the methane molecule is nonpolar.
In contrast, the ammonia [NH3] molecule also
shown in Figure 3.3 is an asymmetric molecule.
Ammonia has three N─H dipoles on one side of
the nitrogen atom, so their vectors reinforce each
other to create a strong permanent dipole. Thus,
ammonia is very polar.
A polar molecule will attract another polar mol￾ecule – even one of its own kind, asfamously occurs
between water molecules. The force of attraction is
strong, but not as strong as a chemical bond. In
these interactions, the electropositive atom is often
hydrogen, so the weak bond formed between the
two molecules is known as a hydrogen bond. By
this mechanism, a polar liquid phase will strongly
retain a polar solute.
To interact with a nonpolar molecule, a polar
molecule must first polarize it and that might not
be easy. In general, a polar solute will not be able
to polarize a nonpolar liquid phase, limiting their
mutual affinity to only the omnipresent dispersion
forces. That’s why polar solutes tend to elute in
boiling point order from a nonpolar column, along
with their nonpolar relatives.
A polar column acts differently. The permanent
dipole present in the liquid phase clings to the per￾manent or induced dipole in a polar solute, retain￾ing the solute either strongly or weakly depending
on their respective electron potentials. Thus, a
polar column often gives an excellent separation
of polar or polarizable solute molecules.
Finally, consider a nonpolarsolute on a polarliq￾uid phase. Their only mutual affinity comes from
the weak dispersion forces. This explains the weak
retention of alkanes and other nonpolar solutes on
polar columns.
As a general principle, maximum retention
occurs between solutes and liquid phases that are
chemically alike. Thus, a polar polyethylene glycol
column is good for separating alcohols and a non￾polar silicone column is good for paraffins.
Ionic forces
An ion is an atom or molecule that has totally lost
or gained an electron, bestowing a full electronic
charge and a strong dipole. Ionic interactions are
stronger than the dispersive and polar forces dis￾cussed herein. When present, all three forces con￾tribute to affinity: dispersive, polar, and ionic.
Ionic liquid phases are a recent development
in column technology that provide high stability
and good peak shape when separating highly polar
solutes. We expect to see more of them in future
PGCs. For more about them, see the review by
Poole and Poole (2011).
Nomenclature
Dispersion forces are known as London forces in
honor of the physicist Fritz London (1900–1954).
The interactions between a permanent dipole
and an induced dipole are Debye forces, after
physicist Peter Debye (1884–1956).
The interactions between two permanent dipoles
are Keesom forces, after physicist Willem Keesom
(1876–1956).
A generic term for the above intermolecular
forces is Van der Waals forces, after Johannes
Van der Waals (1837–1923).
The methane molecule (left) is symmetric and nonpolar, 
while the ammonia molecule (right) is asymmeric and 
higly polar.
Figure 3.3 Nonpolar and Polar Molecules.
Mechanism of retention 45Summary
As detailed in the above SCI-FILE, the two major causes of retention, and
hence separation, are:
The effect of dispersion forces: these forces also determine the boiling
point of a solute, so nonpolar solutes elute in boiling point order on
any liquid phase.
The additional effect of polar forces: these forces occur when a polar sol￾ute interacts with a polar liquid phase, and act in addition to the disper￾sion forces.
Note also that polar solutes can polarize some nonpolar liquid phases
adding to their retention time.
While only a simplification, it’s helpful to think of the observed retention
as the sum of two individual retentions. A nonpolar column retains a peak
mostly in proportion to its boiling point, and a polar or polarizable column
retains a peak by both its boiling point and its polarity.
Packed columns for GSC
When a gas chromatograph uses an adsorbent solid as stationary phase, the
full name of the technique is gas-solid chromatography (GSC). In a gas-solid
column, the gas is moving and the solid is stationary.
Solid-phase columns
Columns for GSC use an adsorbent granularsolid asstationary phase. Typical
adsorbent solids include carbon, alumina, silica gel, and porous polymers.
These solids have a large surface area that attracts solute molecules, ulti￾mately causing separation. Another useful solid is a molecular sieve – a car￾bon or zeolite packing that works a little differently. It has minute pores
that differentiate molecules according to their size and has the useful ability
to separate oxygen and nitrogen.
Within the general category of GSC columns, there are two subcategories
that exhibit different behaviors: the brittle active solids such as carbon or
zeolite molecular sieves, silica gel, and alumina; and the relatively soft
porous polymers.
Active solids
The adsorbent active solids are valuable in PGCs for their ability to separate
permanent gases like hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen, as well as carbon
monoxide and methane. They are not suitable for the analysis of more con￾densable gases as their strong and nonlinear adsorption characteristics can
cause severely distorted peaks. Anyway, their analysis times would be long –
an anathema to the process industries.
46 Column technologyThis behavior curtails the use of active solids in process chromatographs.
It’s true that temperature programming can mitigate this limitation in the
laboratory, but it adds unwelcome complexity to a process instrument.
Therefore, PGCs tend to use active-solid columns to analyze only the light
gases that fail to separate on any other column. Common measurements
include:
Hydrogen or deuterium.
Helium, neon, argon, and krypton.
Oxygen, nitrogen, methane, and carbon monoxide.
The less-problematic porous polymers give good separations of carbon
dioxide and the light paraffin and olefin gases, and strongly retain water.
Consult Chapter 4 for more information.
Operation and maintenance
Solid-phase columns are simple in construction, yet complex in operation. In
particular, columns employing the hard, adsorbent solids demand more
maintenance attention than those using a liquid phase and are lacking in
long-term stability.
The main disadvantage of active solids is their gradual deactivation in
use. Depending on the solid used, the retention time of large or polar mole￾cules can be essentially infinite,so these substances gradually accumulate on
the solid surface and block access to adsorption sites by other molecules. The
squatter molecules may be substances present in the injected sample or in
the carrier gas. An effective column design will backflush the harmful com￾ponents in the sample, but it can’t protect the active solid from the carrier
gas. Traces of water vapor in the carrier gas will gradually deactivate any
active solid column, and carbon dioxide will deactivate a molecularsieve col￾umn. Even with stringent precautions, expect gradual deterioration. Over a
period of several months, peak retention times will gradually fall with an
eventual loss of resolution. To minimize the rate of decline:
Never leave the PGC without carrier gas flow unless the column system
inlets and outlets are all capped to prevent ingress of water or other
vapors from headers, vents, or atmosphere. This applies also to shipment
from the shelter fabricator.
The carrier gas must pass through an absorption dryer2 to remove traces
of carbon dioxide, moisture, and other polar substances before it enters
the PGC. The maintenance schedule must ensure timely replacement of
the dryer.
The carrier gas purifier should not remove oxygen as traces of oxygen are
essential for the wellbeing of some porous polymers.
2
Refer to Waters (2020, 100–101) for more information about carrier gas purifiers.
Packed columns for GSC 47A protective column must always precede the active-solid column to
retain and divert water and heavies and prevent them from entering
the analytical column. This precolumn may contain Sorbitol or a porous
polymer such as PoraPak T3 or HaySep T.4
Routine checking and adjustment may be necessary to compensate for
the gradually shortening retention times. The frequency of this mainte￾nance depends on the effectiveness of the carrier gas dryer and the back￾flush column.
The analysis method should never reverse the flow in an active-solid col￾umn as the packings are friable and don’t tolerate pressure pulses well –
this includes PLOT columns.
It may be possible to restore an active-solid column by prolonged heating
at the manufacturer-specified temperature while continuously purging with
a dry inert gas. Don’t do this in the analyzer: remove the column and heat it
in a laboratory oven. During the activation procedure, a copious amount of
steam may emerge from the column. After several hours, turn off the heat
and maintain the purge flow while the column cools, then immediately
cap the ends to prevent the ingress of moisture. When the column is back
in the PGC and in stable operation, adjust Method settings to allow for
any change in component retention times.
Porous polymer columns may also need activation, but in a well-designed
column system this should be necessary only once, before use, and often
done by the column manufacturer. A well-designed column system does
not allow any invasive molecules to accumulate over time.
If taking the PGC out of service, don’t allow a hot column to cool without
carrier gas flow as it will suck in water and oxygen from the ambient air. If
it’s necessary to stop the carrier gas flow, wait until the column is cold, then
immediately seal both ends to prevent the ingress of water vapor and other
atmospheric gases. This general Best Practice applies to all PGC columns and
is particularly relevant to those containing an active solid.
Active-solid packings are friable – particularly graphitized carbon and
molecular sieves – so treat such columns gently. Don’t drop them on the
ground or tightly bend them.
Pros and cons of GSC
In summary, active-solid columns are more troublesome than liquid-phase
columns, so PGCs use them only when a liquid phase is not available to
achieve the separation. Porous polymers are more versatile and less friable
and are popular for the separation of low-molecular-weight gases, such as
light hydrocarbons.
3
PoraPak is a trademark of Waters Corporation (no relation to the author). 4
HaySep is a trademark of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany.
48 Column technologyPacked columns for GLC
When a gas chromatograph uses an involatile liquid as stationary phase, the
full name of the technique is gas–liquid chromatography (GLC). In a
gas–liquid column, the gas is moving and the liquid is stationary.
GLC columns are by far the most common in use. In a packed column,
like those shown in Figure 3.4, an inert granular solid supports a thin coating
of the desired liquid phase. The inert solid support has a large deactivated
surface area which, when coated, holds a very thin and wide layer of liquid.
The extensive area of the liquid film and its shallow depth enable a rapid
exchange of solute molecules between gas and liquid phases.
Solid support
An ideal support particle would be strong enough to resist abrasion, have a
large surface area, and be chemically inert. It should exert no affinity for the
analyte molecules. Such perfection is unattainable in practice. We do our
best to deactivate the surface but some residual forces remain, which tend
to make the peaks asymmetric.
The traditional and still most common solid supports are for self-evident
reasons called the pink and white supports. More recently, graphitized car￾bon has also become common in narrow-bore columns.
The pink and white supports both derive from 5
Celite®, a diatomaceous
earth. The raw material occurs naturally in rock strata, notably in Europe
and North America, and is the fossilized skeletal remains of ancient marine
algae. The material is mostly silica and retains the fine structure of the
original microscopic organisms, usually as a pair of species-dependent
Figure 3.4 Typical Packed
Columns.
Source: Reproduced with
permission from Ohio Valley
Specialty Company.
5
CELITE is a trademark of Imerys Minerals California, Inc.
Packed columns for GLC 49half-shells finely perforated with micron-sized holes. Its complex structure
gives Celite a large surface area and multiple pathways for gas flow.
The white support (for example, 6
Chromosorb® W) isfrom diatomaceous
earth that has been calcined at 900 C with sodium carbonate flux. This fuses
the particlestogether and converts the iron oxide into a colorlesssilicate. The
white support has an inertsurface that isideal for polarliquid phases, but the
particles are friable and easily fractured during packing.
The pink support (for example, Chromosorb® P) is also from diatoma￾ceous earth. Basically, it’s crushed firebrick, made by calcining diatomite
at about 1000 C without the flux. The pink color is due to the metal oxides
present. The pink support is harder and can hold larger amounts of liquid
phase. Its surface is more active than the white support and is not suitable
for polar analytes, but it delivers excellent performance for hydrocarbons
and other nonpolar analytes.
The pink support is about twice as dense as the white support. Therefore,
if the two supports had an equal weight percent of liquid phase, a column
using the pink support would contain twice as much liquid phase as an iden￾tical column using the white support. The extra liquid increases peak reten￾tion factors and makes the pink support superior for the separation of the
lighter hydrocarbons.
For more detailed information about supports, refer to the classic review
by Ottenstein (1963).
Several companies produce proprietary solid supports refined from Celite
to reduce itssurface activity. The Celite is acid washed (AW) to remove traces
of metal oxides and reacted with a silicon compound7 to kill polar hydroxyl
groups at the silica surface. Additional treatments, often closely held trade
secrets, suppress the surface affinity for targeted polar substances and
thereby improve the symmetry of those peaks.
The adsorbent solids occasionally act as solid supports when deactivated
by a liquid coating. In addition, some of the porous polymers are effective
supports in special applications.
Coating the support
The total quantity of liquid phase in a column is an important parameter. For
a packed column, it’s specified as the liquid loading, that is, the weight per￾centage of the liquid phase coated on the support. A potential confusion
arises because the stated percentage may be relative to the weight of the pre￾pared packing or the weight of support used. According to IUPAC (2014), a
column packing made with 20 g of liquid on 80 g of support is a 20 % liquid
load, not a 25 % liquid load.
A common procedure for preparing a packing is to dissolve a known
weight of the liquid in a suitable solvent and mix the solution with an
6
Chromosorb is a trademark of Imerys Minerals California, Inc. 7
Common treatments are hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS), dimethylchlorosilane (DMCS), or
dimethyldichlorosilane (DMDCS).
50 Column technologyappropriate weight of support to form a slurry. Then, to allow the solvent to
evaporate naturally or with vacuum assistance.
The liquid phase loading for PGC columns istypically in the range 1–25%.
The higher percentages are generally less efficient because the liquid tends
to form puddles or bridges between particles which reduce the rate of mass
transfer between phases. Even so, the higher loadings may be necessary
when injecting large sample volumes to measure low ppm concentrations
and are also effective for separating the lighter hydrocarbons. Chapter 5
prescribes a method for optimizing the liquid loading to maximize
resolution.
Pros and cons of GLC
Liquid-phase columns are far more versatile than solid-phase columns and
PGCs use them in all applications except the small group of GSC applications
mentioned above. Their advantages over solid-phase columns are:
There’s a myriad of liquid phases to choose from.
They are more durable than solid-phase columns and don’t need activa￾tion (although some conditioning may be necessary).
They have a higher sample capacity and produce more symmetri￾cal peaks.
They allow the optimization of retention factor by adjusting percent load￾ing or film thickness.
They tolerate flow surges well, as in backflush for instance.
The main disadvantage of liquid-phase columns is their limited ability to
separate light gases. For instance, a liquid-phase column can’t separate
hydrogen, methane, carbon or nitrogen oxides, or the gases found in the
atmosphere.
Packed column technology
Packed columns have large sample capacity and we can often use them to
analyze components that other techniques can’t easily separate. In the past,
packed columns suffered from unstable liquid phases that produced high
rates of column bleed and short column life. In addition, the stainless-steel
tubing used for packed columns was not inert, allowing active compounds to
interact with its inner surface. These woes are now behind us and modern
packed columns are often preferred for PGC.
Since we don’t expect you to make your own columns, the information
given here is an overview of how the vendors make packed columns, not
a full prescription of how to make them yourself.
Packed column technology 51Tubing
The tubing used for packed columns in PGCs is usually Type 304 or 316 L
stainless-steel tubing, and rarely pure nickel or Hastelloy8 alloy. The tubing
must be seamless, not welded, and its inner wall must be super clean. The
cleaning procedure uses a sequence of solvents to remove oil and soluble
salts from the wall. These may include a dilute mineral acid, pure water,
a ketone like acetone, an alcohol like methanol, or a paraffin like n-hexane.
It’s best to avoid chlorinated solvents because residual traces of chlorine may
reach the detector and cause corrosion. Most column makers purchase pre￾cleaned tubing from a specialist column supplier.
For analyzing highly reactive analytes, the tubing may have a fused silica
lining, but this would be unusual. The inner wall of the tubing is usually sur￾face-deactivated by chemical treatmentssuch as electropolishing and sil￾icon coating. Such passivation procedures are mandatory for accurate low
ppm measurements of sticky components like alcohols or hydrogen sulfide.
Generally, PGCs don’t use packed columns made from glass, aluminum,
copper, or polymer tubing, although you may occasionally encounter a Tef￾lon9 packed column for highly active analytes.
Older instruments used 3 16-inch or even ¼-inch o.d. columns, but nearly
all packed columns in PGCs now working onsite have an outside diameter
no greater than ⅛-inch. Table 3.2 lists some common tube dimensions.
Mesh size
A packed column is a tube tightly packed with a granular material already
described. The objective is to reduce the free gas volume to a minimum,
while not causing an excessive pressure drop. Ideally, all the individual gran￾ules would be the same size, so they form a homogeneous bed when packed
inside the tube. Otherwise:
Larger particles might create open spaces in the bed – called voids – that
are devoid of packing. Voids increase peak dispersion and reduce column
efficiency.
Table 3.2 Typical Tubing for Packed PGC Columns.
Outside Diameter Inside Diameter
(inch) (mm) (inch) (mm) Comment
1 16 1.59 0.039 1.0 Micropacked
⅛ 3.18 0.085 2.2 Packed
3 16 4.76 0.118 3.0 Older analyzers
¼ 6.35 0.180 4.6 Now obsolete
8
Hastelloy is a registered trademark of Haynes International, Inc. 9
Teflon is a registered trademark of The Chemours Company.
52 Column technologySmaller particles might clog the gas passages through the bed and cause
an unacceptable pressure drop. Smaller particles may also come from
rough handling.
Column packings are friable and demand gentle handling. Never
drop a packed column or bend it aggressively. Otherwise, you
may create a pinch point that will change the distribution of pres￾sure along the column and blunt its performance.
In practice, the granules are not precisely the same size but have a narrow
range of diameters. The column maker sieves the packing to remove any lar￾ger or smaller particles that would disrupt the uniformity of the bed. The siz￾ing procedure uses two sieves in series. The upper sieve rejects any larger
particles and allowsthe target particlesto passthrough, while the lowersieve
retains the target particles and allows smaller particles to pass. The proce￾dure isn’t perfect and about 90 % of the granules in the product are within
the mesh sizes of the two sieves.
Unfortunately, the mesh size of a laboratory sieve is a somewhat arbi￾trary dimension based on the number and size of wires in the wire weave.
Table 3.3 relates the mesh number to hole size. Most packed PGC columns
use a particle size range of 60–80, 80–100, or 100–120 mesh, resulting in
medial particle diameters of 214, 163, or 137 μm, respectively.
The choice of particle size is a compromise. Larger particles give less flow
resistance while smaller particles enhance column efficiency.
You should recall that higher efficiency means narrower peaks and
more resolution. A column with the smallest plate height will have
the largest plate number and achieve the best resolution of ana￾lyte peaks.
In theory, the lowest attainable plate height is about twice the particle size.
Thus, for a column packed with 100–120 mesh particles, the theoretical limit
is a plate height H ≈ 0.3 mm (about 3,300 plates per meter). Real columns
Table 3.3 Selected Mesh Sizes.
Metric Size (mm) Sieve Number (#) Hole Size (inch) Hole Size (μm)
0.420 40 0.0165 420
0.354 45 0.0139 354
0.297 50 0.0117 297
0.250 60 0.0098 250
0.177 80 0.0070 177
0.149 100 0.0059 149
0.125 120 0.0049 125
0.104 150 0.0041 104
0.074 200 0.0029 74
Packed column technology 53would not realize that utopian value, but it illustrates that smaller particles
are inherently good. A practical aspiration for the minimum plate height is
three times the average particle size, so 0.5 mm ± 0.1 mm is a fair estimate.
That’s about 2000 plates per meter. However, we shall see that PGCs often
run their columns under suboptimal conditions to achieve the fastest possi￾ble analysis time. Don’t be surprised to see plate height approaching or
exceeding 1.0 mm under those operating conditions. There’s more on fast
analysis in Chapter 6.
The rub is the pressure drop. Smaller particles require more carrier gas
pressure and this limits the column length. In practice, the particles in con￾ventional packed PGC columns are rarely smaller than 100–120 mesh
because the column pressure needed for finer particles would be too high
for the analyzer. However, a short micropacked column might use smaller
particles.
Packing the tube
To ensure effective packing, typical packed columns are seldom more
than 6 m long. When a longer column is necessary, the PGC will use two
columns in series. Micropacked columns are more difficult to pack and
are unlikely to be longer than 2 m.
To make a ⅛-inch column, the column maker installs a sintered stainless￾steel frit or glass-wool plug into one end of a straight tube and pours the gran￾ular packing into the other end. For short columns, it may be adequate to
allow the granular packing to flow into the tubing by gravity, assisted by gen￾tle vibration. Another method isto pressurize the feed hopper or apply suction
to the other end of the tube, or both, thereby creating a gas flow that gently
drives the packing down the tube. To check for proper filling, the maker
records the packing weight and compares it to known standards. When done,
they install a frit in the end of the tube to hold the packing in place.
It’s usually acceptable to coil columns after packing, although there are
some procedures to pack pre-coiled tubing.
To make a micropacked column, use tubing with an internal diameter of
at least three times the particle size. The diameter of 100–120 mesh particles
is <0.149 mm, so they will even fit inside a 0.53 mm i.d. “megabore” column.
One way to ensure tight packing is to vibrate the coiled column tube by
immersing it in an ultrasonic bath (Cramers and Rijks 1979).
Instead of sintered frits, micropacked columns may use short lengths of
silicon-treated braided wire as end seals, held in place by a crimp in the tub￾ing. To ensure leak-free connections, do not install a ferrule on the crimped
area of the tubing.
Conditioning the column
After packing, condition the column by purging it for several hours with
helium or nitrogen while heating it to about 20 K above its normal operating
temperature. It’s best to depower the detector and disconnect it from the
54 Column technologycolumn during this purge time. If not for immediate use, continue the purge
until the column is cool, then cap both ends to prevent ingress of atmos￾pheric contaminants. Install the conditioned column in the usual way and
set the oven temperature and carrier gas flow per the application. Reconnect
the detector and observe the baseline. It might take a while before the base￾line settles and becomes flat.
Pros and cons of packed columns
Except for a few special applications, packed columns are now quite rare in
the laboratory, yet they are still employed by about 80 % of PGCs. Over the
years, capillary columns have outperformed packed columns, which have
now lost many of their original advantages. Those that tenuously remain are:
Packed columns enjoy a wider range of liquid phases that may be useful
for difficult separations.
In some applications, they accept a larger sample size enabling the anal￾ysis of low parts-per-billion concentrations.
From a single sample injection, they can separate and measure multiple
analytes on widely different measurement ranges.
They are rugged and durable in the process plant environment and may
require less-frequent replacement.
Their connections are easier to work with.
They may better tolerate occasional process upsets such as solids, liquids,
or polymers present in a gas sample injection.
They work in older equipment that is too voluminous for capillary
columns.
They are easy to make and less expensive to replace.
They are familiar and reassuring to process-plant personnel, whose pre￾ferences are slow to change.
Newer technology allows dual capillary columns to perform the back￾flush and heartcut techniques discussed later in this book. This capability
nulls some previously touted advantages of packed columns. Now, both
kinds of column can achieve these important objectives:
Multiple column systems can remove all injected components from the
columns before injecting another sample. This is a housekeeping task
that is essential in a continuous industrial chromatograph.
Multiple columns often can separate analytes that no single column can.
When measuring only a few components, multiple columns may achieve
a shorter analysis time than is possible on a single column.
Packed column technology 55Frankly, if a packed column works – use it! Yet, when compared with cap￾illary columns, packed columns have several disadvantages:
They are generally less efficient because their high flow resistance limits
column length and plate number.
Their inner surfaces are less inert, so their chromatogram peaks are
always a little more asymmetric.
They use a lot more carrier gas.
Their conventional liquid phases may release more vapor or reaction pro￾ducts into the detector, causing additional baseline offset or noise.
They tend to be less reproducible when replaced.
They are less suited to temperature programming.
They suffer large pressure surges during flow reversal.
Micropacked columns
To mitigate the above drawbacks while retaining some of the advantages of
the packed column, researchers developed the micropacked column. The
tubing most used for micropacked columns in PGCs is 1 16-inch o.d. stainless
steel with a 1 mm inside diameter, although 0.95 mm × 0.75 mm tubing is
also available. As such, micropacked columns are intermediate in size
between regular packed columns and capillary columns. Generally, a micro￾packed column contains particles closely sized to 10–30 % of the tube bore.
Column efficiencies of 3000–5000 plates per meter are attainable (Cramers
and Rijks 1979, 134).
Micropacked columns are particularly effective for separating gases as
they are more efficient than regular packed columns and contain more liquid
than a capillary column, a combination that provides sharp peaks and good
retention factors. Applications include ammonia, sulfur gases, and the C1 to
C6 hydrocarbons.
Micropacked columns are economical in service as they use less carrier
gas than a packed column, but they are expensive and commercially avail￾able only in lengths of 2 m or less. PGC manufacturers sometimes make
longer columns, but they are difficult to pack and less reproducible than reg￾ular packed columns.
Most applications use hydrogen carrier gas as any other carrier would
incur significant pressure.
A micropacked column can accept a larger sample volume than a
capillary column but not as much as a ⅛-inch o.d. packed column,
which puts a limit on their ultimate measurement sensitivity. Some
applications can overcome this limit by injecting a large sample into a reg￾ular precolumn and transferring only the smaller peaks into the
micropacked column.
56 Column technologyTypical operating conditions
Most PGCs using packed columns or micropacked columns now operate at
constant temperature. Subambient operation is possible, but rare. The oven
temperature setting for most packed column applications is within the range
of 60–150 C, although a few are much hotter – up to 275 C. Do not exceed
the upper-temperature limit for the stationary phases in use.
Carrier gas flow rates for packed columns vary by application, so always
follow the application data. As a guide, typical gas flows are:
For ≈1 mm i.d. micropacked columns:
(mostly 1 16 -inch o.d.)
5–10 mL/min
For ≈2 mm i.d. packed columns:
(mostly ⅛-inch o.d.)
20–40 mL/min
For ≈4 mm i.d. packed columns:
(mostly ¼-inch o.d. and obsolete)
80 mL/min
With helium carrier, a typical micropacked column will need a pressure
differential of about:
For 80–100 mesh packing: 200 kPa/m
For 100–120 mesh packing: 280 kPa/m
A typical ⅛-inch o.d. packed liquid-phase column will need about:
For 80–100 mesh packing: 50 kPa/m
For 100–120 mesh packing: 55 kPa/m
Adsorbent solid-phase columns may need twice these pressures. If using
hydrogen carrier, the required pressure is about half of the above values.
Capillary column technology
Capillary tubing
The original capillary columns for gas chromatography used metal or glass
tubing. If you are interested in the historical development of such columns,
the books by Hinshaw and Ettre (1994) and Jennings(1978) provide an excel￾lent overview.
The early metal and glass capillary columns were capable of much higher
resolution than a packed column but were troublesome to make and use.
Glass capillaries are brittle and easily broken, and their glossy surface is dif￾ficult to coat with an even layer of a liquid phase. Metal capillaries are easier
to coat but tend to adsorb polar analytes – as do the metal ions in the walls of
Capillary column technology 57a glass tube. Thus, both metal and glass tubes distort the peak shape for low
concentrations of a polar analyte.
In 1976, Siemens experimented with glass capillary columns in a Model
200 PGC and found them to be stable; they observed no decline in the res￾olution of peaks after 16,000 injections of a test sample (Müller and Oreans
1977). Siemens went on to sell many PGCs with glass capillary columns in
Europe, establishing the feasibility of capillary column technology in process
chromatography (Mahler 2021).
The game changed when Dandeneau and Zerenner (1979) developed a
method of making capillary columns from fused silica capillary tubing. They
used a machine that melted and extruded a quartz rod, originally intended
for making optic fibers for data-transmission lines. Astutely replacing the
quartz rod with a quartz tube, they got the machine to extrude a long capil￾lary tube instead of a solid optical fiber. To protect each virgin tube from
moisture, which can cause cracking, they immediately coated its outer sur￾face with a brownish polyimide sheath. The Hewlett-Packard company
received US Patent Number US4293415A for this invention, but they didn’t
enforce their patent rights and many chromatography supply companies
started to produce fused silica columns.
Figure 3.5 pictures fused silica columns in a PGC oven. Fused silica
turned out to be an ideal material for capillary column construction: it’s
highly flexible and almost free of metal ions, providing a more inert surface
than the previous soda-lime and borosilicate glasses. In confirmation, Lipsky
(1983) thoroughly evaluated fused silica capillary columns and found them
Fused silica columns in a Siemens Maxum process gas chromatograph.
This column system has two parallel analytical trains, each with backflush 
initiated by valveless column switching.
Figure 3.5 Typical PGC
Capillary Columns.
Source: Author’s Collection.
58 Column technologyto be essentially free of the problems noted with soft-glass capillary columns.
That was the end-of-the-road for glass capillary columns.
From 1980 onward, chromatographs equipped with a single fused silica
column gradually became the preferred laboratory method of analysis. Often
running each analysis with a programmed increase of column temperature,
these wall-coated open tubular (WCOT) columns now satisfy about 90 % of
laboratory applications.
Yet, despite their huge success in the laboratory, fused silica columns
have enjoyed only limited acceptance in PGCs. When first used on site, fused
silica columns suffered frequent breakages due to process vibration, mainte￾nance clumsiness, or even turbulence in an air-bath oven. They were not
popular at all. Nevertheless, their separations were spectacular and many
jobsites learned to live with them.
Then, in 1987, Hewlett-Packard requested substantial royalties on the
sale of fused silica columns. At that time, Restek was a small chromatog￾raphy supply company, and the additional royalty cost would have a sub￾stantial effect on their business. Of necessity, they set out to find an
alternative. They found a way to coat the inside wall of a stainless-steel cap￾illary tube with an exceedingly thin layer of silicon. The inner surface then
became similar to a fused-silica tube – but unbreakable and more suitable
for a process instrument. PGCs quickly adopted the new product and cap￾illary columns using deactivated stainless-steel tubing are now common
in PGCs.
Table 3.4 lists some typical sizes of capillary tubing used for PGC columns
and their properties. PGCs often opt for the so-called megabore tubing. Its
strangely precise 0.53 mm internal diameter came from the laboratory need
to insert a standard 0.47 mm syringe needle into the tube for on-column sam￾ple injection – not a practice we employ in process analyzers.
Table 3.4 Typical Tubing for PGC Capillary Columns.
Type Fused Silica Stainless Steel Properties
Megabore Tube i.d.; 0.53 mm
Length: 10–105 m
Tube i.d.; 0.53 mm
Length: 10–60 m
Capacity: 1–2 mg
ΔP: 0.7 kPa/m
Hmin = 0.50 mm
Wide bore Tube i.d.; 0.32 mm
Length: 10–60 m
Tube i.d.; 0.32 mm
Length: 10–30 m
Capacity: 110–220 μg
ΔP: 3.4 kPa/m
Hmin = 0.33 mm
Narrow bore Tube i.d.; 0.25 mm
Length: 10–100 m
Tube i.d.; 0.25 mm
Length: 10–30 m
Capacity: 80–160 μg
ΔP: 4.6 kPa/m
Hmin = 0.25 mm
Sample capacity isfor each analyte on a liquid phase ofsimilar polarity and may be a lot less
on other liquid phases. The approximate differential pressure (ΔP) is for helium carrier.
Plate heights (Hmin) are theoretical minima.
Source: Adapted from de Zeeuw (2015).
Capillary column technology 59Wall-coated open tubular (WCOT) columns
The liquid film coating of capillary tubing is a procedure best left to the pro￾fessionals. For general information only, there are two waysto do it. The sim￾plest way is to make a solution of the liquid phase in a volatile solvent, and
then use dry nitrogen to push a plug of this mixture slowly through the tub￾ing followed by a dry nitrogen purge to evaporate the solvent. It’s difficult to
control the liquid film thickness by this method.
The other way is to fill the capillary with the liquid phase solution, block
one end, and then allow the solvent to slowly evaporate from the other end.
It’s sometimes possible to expedite solvent removal by the judicious applica￾tion of heat or vacuum. By this method, the film thickness is more pre￾cisely known.
The first WCOT capillary columns used the same liquid phases as used in
packed columns. These early columns often failed to meet expectations due
to a tendency by some liquid phases to form puddles rather than a uniform
thin-film wall coating. This imperfection most often occurred with polar liq￾uid phases that failed to wet the ultra-smooth wall of the tube.
Further development focused on the development of liquid phases based
on various copolymers of methyl and phenyl siloxanes. Researchers varied
the types and percentages of monomers in the copolymer, to make several
new liquid phases with very low vapor pressures and a wide range of polar￾ity, as described in Chapter 4.
The next breakthrough was to polymerize the siloxane monomers in situ
on the column wall, forming a crosslinked polymer coating bonded to the
tube surface. The polymer so formed has a very low vapor pressure and is
less reactive with trace impurities in the carrier gas, so less column bleed
flows into the detector, reducing baseline offset and noise. The bonded phase
also occupies the active sites on the tube wall, blocking the adsorption of
analyte molecules and reducing peak tailing.
Porous-layer open tubular (PLOT) columns
The inner wall of a PLOT column holds a thin layer of active solid particles –
molecular sieve, alumina, or porous polymer. These columns achieve effi￾cient separations but have limited sample capacity and can suffer damage
by moisture or other impurities in the carrier gas. The original columns were
prone to particle shedding and although later bonding techniques have
improved their reliability PGCs seldom use them.
Support-coated open tubular (SCOT)
Due to their increased liquid phase loading, SCOT columns can perform effi￾cient separations of lighter molecules such as the lower hydrocarbons. To
make a SCOT column, the manufacturer first coats the inner walls of the
capillary tube with a layer of solid support, such as diatomaceous earth,
about 30 μm thick. Then they coat the deposited solid support with the
60 Column technologychosen liquid stationary phase. PGCssometimes favor a SCOT column for its
greater sample capacity and higher detector sensitivity than a more efficient
WCOT column.
Phase ratio
An important property of a WCOT column isthe phase ratio, the ratio of gas
volume to liquid volume in the column.
The phase ratio is a function of the internal diameter of the capillary tub￾ing and the thickness of the liquid film. These two column variables are the
equivalent of the liquid loading in a packed column.
The internal diameter of most capillary columns is in the range of
0.1–0.53 mm and their liquid film thickness runs from 0.1 to 18 μm. The nar￾rowest tubes and thinnest films are rare in process work.
By geometry, neglecting the liquid film thickness, the volume of the gas
phase (VG) is proportional to the column length (L) and the square of its
internal diameter (dc):
V G = L π
dc
2
2
(3.1)
Equation 3.1 is accurate enough for thin liquid films. For columns with
thickerfilms, it’s best to use a modified equation that allowsforthe reduction
in diameter caused by the liquid film thickness (df):
V G = L π
dc
2 − df
2
(3.2)
The volume of the liquid phase (VL) is proportional to the tube bore and the
liquid film thickness:
VL = L π dc df (3.3)
Dividing Equation 3.1 by Equation 3.3 gives the effect of column diameter
and film thickness on the ratio of gas volume to liquid volume:
V G
VL
= dc
4df
This fraction is the phase ratio (β) of the column, an important factor in col￾umn design:
β = V G
VL
(3.4)
β = dc
4df
(3.5)
Capillary column technology 61The equations presented here return a β-value uncorrected for pressure in
the column, but this is a normal practice when working with capillary col￾umns. The uncorrected value is adequate for comparing one column with
another, as similar columns operate at similar pressures. Anyway, most cap￾illary columns operate at low pressure, so any correction factor would
be small.
Table 3.5 summarizes the phase ratio of typical columns.
Columns with a low β-value have relatively more liquid in them and this
increases the peak retention factors and separations achieved. They are use￾ful for separating gases and light components having low affinity for the sta￾tionary phase, and for injecting larger samples for ppm analysis. These are
the columns most often used in PGCs.
Columns with a high β-value have higher efficiency and are able to
resolve dozens of components. They are useful for separating heavy compo￾nents that have high affinity for the liquid phase, but they require smaller
samples which limits measurement sensitivity.
Table 3.6 illustrates some properties of columns with high and low
phase ratio.
Table 3.5 Phase Ratios of WCOT Columns.
df (μm) 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.50 1.0 3.0 5.0
dc (mm)
0.18 450 300 225 180 90 45 15 9
0.20 500 333 250 200 100 50 17 10
0.22 550 367 275 220 110 55 18 11
0.25 625 417 313 250 125 63 21 13
0.32 800 533 400 320 160 80 27 16
0.53 1325 883 663 530 265 133 44 27
Phase ratio (β) calculated by Equation 3.5 for combinations of tube bore (dc) and film
thickness (df). Equal-length columns with about the same phase ratio, like the two
highlighted values, would give the same analysis time.
Table 3.6 Phase Ratio and Column Performance.
Column Performance High β-Value Low β-Value
Peak asymmetry and tailing Worse Better
Typical efficiency (plate height) 0.2 mm 0.5 mm
Typical efficiency (plates-per-meter) 5000 2000
Allowable sample volume <3 nmol <30 μmol
Resolution of small molecules Poor Good
Resolution of large molecules Good Excessive
Analysis time Shorter Longer
Data for capillary columns compiled from multiple sources.
62 Column technologyTwo columns of equal length and equal β-value have equal peak retention
times and may substitute for each other. Then:
The narrower thin-film column demands less sample volume and gener￾ates sharper peaks. It may also produce less column bleed and less base￾line noise.
The wider thick-film column gives less resolution but improved peak
shapes and can accept a larger sample volume to enhance measurement
sensitivity.
The phase ratio is a column fabrication variable; it decreases when there
is more liquid in the column relative to the open gas space.
While the concept of phase ratio applies to all liquid-phase columns, it’s
easy to quantify the phase ratio for a capillary column but not so easy for a
packed column. Consequently, those using packed columns rarely refer to
phase ratio. In packed column parlance, liquid loading is the preferred
parameter. It’s evident that halving the liquid loading is closely equivalent
to doubling the β-value and will halve the peak adjusted retention times
and separations, and reduce the analysis time. The typical range of phase
ratio values for packed columns is from 5 to 35 (Jennings 1978, 9).
Carrier gas flow rate
It turns out that all columns return their maximum efficiency at about the
same carrier gas velocity. To maintain the same velocity, it’s evident that the
carrier flow rate must be proportional to the square of the diameter. Thus, a
narrow-bore column will exhibit its full efficiency at a very low flow rate, as
noted in Table 3.7. That’s not to say that a capillary column must run at a low
flow rate; in practice, PGCs often run capillary columns fast. In doing so,
they sacrifice a part of the enormous separating power of the capillary in
favor of a faster analysis.
Jones (2008) provides an interesting insight: the speed of analysis, sample
capacity, and analyte resolution form three corners of the performance tri￾angle shown in Figure 3.6. You can’t optimize one of these objectives without
degrading the other two. In process chromatography, speed is often para￾mount, so we typically use heavily loaded capillary columns, run them faster
Table 3.7 Optimum Flow Rates for Capillary Columns.
Tube Bore 0.25 mm 0.32 mm 0.53 mm
Nitrogen carrier 0.4 mL/min 0.6 mL/min 0.9 mL/min
Helium carrier 1.4 mL/min 1.8 mL/min 3.0 mL/min
Hydrogen carrier 1.8 mL/min 2.3 mL/min 3.7 mL/min
The listed flow rates are optimum for maximum column efficiency. Most PGC columns
operate at higher flow rates to achieve lower analysis times.
Source: Adapted from de Zeeuw (2015).
Speed
Capacity Resolution
Optimum speed, capacity, and 
resolution are mutually exclusive. 
Improving one automatically limits 
the other two.
Figure 3.6 The Column
Performance Triangle.
Source: Adapted from Agilent
Technologies, Inc.
Capillary column technology 63than optimum, and then inject larger samples. As a result, a PGC may not
realize the awesome efficiency that a capillary column is capable of, yet that
column is still more efficient than a packed column.
Separating power
It’s possible to compute the theoretical minimum plate height (HTh) of a cap￾illary column from its internal diameter (dc) and the retention factor (k) of a
chosen component (Annino and Villalobos 1992, 175):
HTh = dc
1+6k + 11k2
12 1 + k 2 (3.6)
From this equation, Figure 3.7 displays the theoretical minimum plate
height of various column diameters at their optimum flow rate. Real col￾umns never achieve such perfection, so we sometimes express their meas￾ured plate number as a percentage of the theoretical maximum, a
measure known as the utilization of theoretical efficiency (UTE) and
a useful indicator of column condition. A good column will typically have
a UTE of about 60–70 % when running at its optimum flow rate.
Pros and cons of capillary columns
The advantages of capillary columns are:
Excellent resolution: can separate dozens of peaks.
Fast analysis: quick separation of multiple peaks.
Long life: bonded stationary phases eliminate column bleed.
Economy: carrier gas consumption is minuscule.
The potential disadvantages of capillary columns vary with application.
When run at maximum efficiency, they require a sample splitter to reduce
sample volume, an oftentimes troublesome device. The small sample may
also limit the ultimate analyte sensitivity and measurement range. The next
section below explores these limitations in detail.
When used with temperature programming, a capillary column may need
more frequent replacement. Also, the process instrument becomes more
complex and inherently less reliable than an isothermal PGC.
Packed or capillary? A comparison
Acknowledgment
Before starting to examine the advantages and disadvantages of different col￾umns, we need to moderate expectations: this section will give insight into
0 0.2 0.4
Tubing Bore (mm)
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
Min. Plate Height (mm) 0.1
0.0
k = 5
k = 1
Showing the increased efficiency 
possible from narrow-bore 
columns. Real columns achieve 
about 1.5 times these minima.
Figure 3.7 Theoretical Minimum
Plate Height.
Source: Adapted from Equation 3.6.
64 Column technologythe many variables affecting PGC column technology, but it can’t reduce this
complex subject to a few simple rules. Column selection is as much art as it is
science, and the performance of a PGC is ultimately dependent on the skill of
the applications engineer.
For the following discussion, the author acknowledges with gratitude the
valuable counsel of our expert contributors listed on pages xxi-xxv, many of
whom gave freely from their own unique experiences.
Design of equipment
In the new millennium, PGCs quickly adapted to the peculiar needs of cap￾illary columns. Mostly, the design changes were to reduce the volume of the
analytical flow path. The internal volume of a capillary tube is small, so the
flow rate is low and any unpurged volumes in the flow path cause rapid dis￾persal of peak molecules – in other words, the peaks get wider. So you can’t
install a capillary column in a PGC not designed for it. Small-bore columns
require small sample volumes, which may require special injection technol￾ogy; and the detector volume must be close to zero. Even the interconnecting
tubing must be short, with no unpurged cavitiesfor molecules to diffuse into.
Chapter 8 examines these extra-column requirements in full detail.
You can’t install a capillary column in a PGC not designed for it.
Capillary columns have stringent requirements for sample size,
detector volume, and column-switching techniques.
Efficiency and resolution
First and foremost, a capillary column has far more separating power than a
packed column. It can generate an astounding plate number, typically
50,000–100,000 or more, which is way above the maximum attainable plate
number for a packed column, at best 15,000–20,000. This high efficiency
allows a capillary column to resolve hundreds of peaks. If that’s what you
want, this is a clear win for the capillary column.
Since resolution increases by the square root of plate number, a capillary
column may achieve double the best resolution that a packed column can
offer. This ultra-high resolution of analyte peaks is the key performance
advantage of capillary columns, making them invaluable forseparating com￾plex samples with dozens of analytes. But most process applications are not
like that; they commonly measure only one or two analytes. In these appli￾cations, resolution is not the main issue, which immediately diminishes the
key advantage of the capillary. Then, another performance criterion might
swing the decision toward packed columns.
It’s useful to know that capillary columns are not especially efficient
when measured by plate height. When working at maximum efficiency, a
capillary column might achieve a plate height of 0.25 mm, but that’s not
the way we use them in a process chromatograph. In practice, we mainly
use thicker-film columns with a plate height of 0.5–1.0 mm and that’s hardly
Packed or capillary? A comparison 65different from the plate height of an efficient packed column. To get the fast￾est analysis PGC columns usually run faster than optimum, so neither vari￾ety of column will operate with minimum plate height – as becomes
abundantly clear in the experiment that follows.
Hinshaw and Ettre (1994, 92–96) ran two practical tests to compare a
packed column and a thick-layer megabore column, both containing the
same liquid phase. Table 3.8 summarizes their results. In the first test, they
ran both columns at the same flow rate and injected into each column a test
sample containing 10 components. Peak retention times were similar on
both columns, giving about the same analysis time; but the capillary column
produced narrower and more symmetric peak shapes than those obtained
with the packed column, improving resolution.
In practice, we find that a 0.53 mm i.d. megabore column with a
well-chosen liquid film thickness is often a direct replacement for
a 1.0 mm i.d. micropacked column and sometimes for a regular
⅛-inch o.d. packed column.
A key point to note is that the megabore column in this first test is working
under extremely inefficient conditions, much too fast to realize its true capa￾bility. Its plate height of 6.28 mm is really terrible, being eight times the plate
height of the packed column and delivering only 159 plates-per-meter. The
column succeeds only because of its enormous length; 25 m versus 2 m for
the packed column.
The second testran the megabore at close to its optimum flow rate. It then
returned a plate height of 1.22 mm and a plate number of 20,540 – almost
eight times the plate count of the packed column. This is great, but plate
number is not the only goal of column design. The laboratory chemist might
be ecstatic to see such a beautiful chromatogram, but the process control
engineer would not be happy at all. The analysis time is now six times longer
Table 3.8 Experimental Comparison of Packed and Capillary Columns.
Column Parameters Packed Capillary
Length and bore 2m× 2.0 mm 25 m × 0.53 mm
Liquid loading/film thickness 8 % 5.0 μm
Experimental Data Reference First Test Second Test
Helium flow rate 20 mL/min 20 mL/min 1.4 mL/min
Column temperature 90 C 90 C 110 Ca
Differential pressure 207 kPa 124 kPa 7 kPa
Retention time (last peak) 172 s 166 s 1029 s
Plate number 2,585 3,978 20,540
Plate height 0.78 mm 6.28 mm 1.22 mm
a
The second test used a higher temperature to reduce the long retention times.
Source: Adapted from Hinshaw and Ettre (1994, 94).
66 Column technologythan it was before. Speed of analysis is often more important to a process
measurement than it is to a laboratory test.
In summary, packed and capillary columns have similar plate heights,
but capillary columns can achieve awesome resolution because their
open-tubular construction offers far less resistance to flow. A long capillary
column requires modest carrier gas pressure: for the second test in Table 3.8,
the megabore used only 7 kPa for 25 m. This low-pressure gradient allows a
capillary column to be extremely long, and a long column has more plates.
However, more resolution may not be good if it comes at the price of extra
analysis time and severely reduced sample size.
PGC column selection has to balance a number of conflicting variables,
including analysis time. Fast analysis puts a strain on the equipment and
reduces reliability, yet a fast analysis may be a sales necessity. Purchasing
decisions are often influenced by promises made rather than real process
requirements. Then, the column designer is forced to prioritize analysis time
rather than long-term reliability.
Sample size
Injecting an excessive sample volume into any column will distort the chro￾matogram peaks and shift theirretention times. There are two quite different
constraints on sample size:
The feed volume is the total volume of gas entering the column with the
sample. It includes the sample volume plus any carrier gas mixed with it
and is an indication of the total width of the sample injection profile.
The sample capacity is the maximum amount of a specified analyte that
a column can tolerate without excessively distorting its chromato￾gram peak.
Note that these apparently similar constraints originate from different
chromatographic limitations and have opposite effects on the chromatogram
peak shape.
Feed volume
The feed volume represents the width of the sample profile as it enters the
column. An ideal injection profile is a narrow rectangular pulse, with all the
sample molecules clustered together. It’s evident, though, that the physical
width of even such a perfect injection profile must depend upon both the
injected sample volume and the sectional area of the column. Therefore,
to maintain the same injection width, a column with half the internal diam￾eter would require one quarter of the sample volume. Thus, narrow capillary
columns demand smaller samples to avoid a reduction in efficiency.
In practice, the injection profile is unlikely to be ideal and will probably
include some carrier gas, making the feed volume wider than expected.
Packed or capillary? A comparison 67As an additional complication, an increase in peak width due to a larger
feed volume has more effect on the performance of an efficient column than
it does on an inefficient column. A narrow, highly efficient capillary column
needs an extremely small sample to realize its full separating power. But the
automated, reproducible injection of microgram samples is difficult. The
PGC can use a sample splitter to reduce sample size and minimize feed vol￾ume, but laboratory experience with sample splitters has not been good.
Sample splitters cause many of the problems reported with laboratory
chromatographs.
A symptom of excessive feed volume, often called column overload, is a
fronting peak on the chromatogram that falls more rapidly than it rises, as
in Figure 3.8. This peak shape is due to an increase in solute affinity for the
liquid phase at higher concentrations. As the peak rises, more solute dis￾solves in and becomes part of the liquid phase, which then retains the peak
apex more strongly than its base. In extreme cases these peaks can look like
right triangles, ramping up slowly and then falling rapidly to the baseline.
See Chapter 8 for further details.
Peak fronting also occurs when the vaporization temperature of a liquid
sample is too low, leading to a slow injection profile. This is not an issue with
sample volume but rather with the speed of injection.
Sample capacity
Sample capacity10 is the maximum amount of an analyte that a column can
accept without excessive peak distortion. The specified sample capacity
refers to an individual analyte and not to the whole sample volume. It’s
not unusual to deliberately overload a column with the major component
of the sample when that component is not a target analyte. While excess
analyte volume is rarely a problem with packed columns, it can severely dis￾tort the shape of an analyte peak on a narrow or lightly loaded capillary
column.
It’s also possible for a large component concentration to generate a flat￾top peak. This may be due to saturation of the liquid phase without a change
in component affinity, resulting in an on-column band of constant
concentration.
A symptom of an excessive analyte amount is a tailing peak on the chro￾matogram that rises more rapidly than it falls, as in Figure 3.9. All normal
peakstail to some extent,so thisis more pronounced tailing than normal and
affects only the largest peaks on the chromatogram. Generally, this peak
shape indicates that the affinity of the analyte for the stationary phase falls
off at higher concentrations allowing the peak apex to move faster than
its base.
Increasing the sample volume has at first only a small effect on column
efficiency, but beyond a certain limit, additional sample volume causes a
10It’s important not to confuse sample capacity with capacity ratio, an obsolete term for reten￾tion factor.
320 340
Retention Time (s)
360 380
A fronting peak rises more slowly 
than it falls and may be a symptom 
of an excessive sample volume. 
Figure 3.8 A Fronting Peak.
380 400 420
Retention Time (s)
440
A tailing peak falls more slowly 
than it rises and may be a 
symptom of an excessive amount 
of the analyte. 
Figure 3.9 A Tailing Peak.
68 Column technologyprogressive increase in peak width and asymmetry. The specified sample
capacity of a column permits a minor loss of efficiency – perhaps 20 % reduc￾tion in plate number. A minor distortion will not affect the measured area of
the analyte peaks, as long as it doesn’t spoil their resolution.
Theoretically, it’s possible to show that the maximum volume (Vmax) of a
single analyte that a given column can tolerate depends on the retention fac￾tor (k) of the peak and the square root of plate number (N):
V max
1 + k
N (3.7)
We will examine this relationship in Chapter 8. An exact calculation isn’t
possible as the relevant equation contains an undefined constant (Ettre
and Hinshaw 1993, 100–102). Yet Equation 3.7 demonstrates that sample
capacity is worse for early peaks in a chromatogram with low retention fac￾tors and improves for later peaks with more retention. It also confirms that
very efficient columns with enormous plate numbers will not tolerate large
samples.
From a practical standpoint, sample capacity is a subjective measure and
reported values vary widely. This variation is understandable, considering
the several column variables that affect its value. Here are the variables that
improve sample capacity by increasing analyte retention factor:
The selected liquid phase: a liquid with higher affinity for the analyte will
tolerate a larger sample.
The measurand: analyte peaks with higher affinity for the liquid phase,
have increased sample capacity.
The amount of liquid phase in the column: columns with higher percent
loading (a lower phase ratio) contain more liquid which dissolves more
analyte, thereby increasing retention factor and sample capacity.
The column temperature: a lower column temperature increases analyte
solubility in the liquid, thereby increasing retention factor and sample
capacity.
And these variables increase sample capacity by reducing plate number:
An increase in plate height of the column: a column with a high rate of
carrier gas flow has a larger plate height and will produce less resolution,
but it will tolerate a larger volume of each analyte.
Having more liquid in the column (that is, a lower phase ratio): in addi￾tion to its effect on retention time, more liquid tends to increase plate
height, so wider-bore or thicker-film capillary columns can tolerate lar￾ger samples than those with narrower bore or thinner films.
In an attempt to quantify these effects, Hinshaw and Ettre (1994, 109)
used a calculation similar to Equation 3.7 to calculate the relative change
Packed or capillary? A comparison 69to sample capacity when one column variable changes. According to their
calculations:
Effect of column diameter: a 0.53 mm i.d. column with a 1.0 μm liquid film
(phase ratio: 53) has 2.5 times the theoretical sample capacity than a
0.32 mm i.d. column with the same film thickness (phase ratio: 32).
Effect of film thickness: a 0.53 mm i.d. column with a 5.0 μm liquid film
(phase ratio: 106) has 3.7 times the theoretical sample capacity than the
same column with a 1.0 μm liquid film (phase ratio: 53).
These relative values may be useful for comparison, but they assume the
column is operating at optimum velocity and the ratios may not be the same
at higher flow rates.
Since a theoretical estimate of sample capacity is elusive, these authors
decided to directly measure the sample capacity of several capillary columns
working at their optimum carrier gas velocity (op. cit., 107–111). Their find￾ings were informative, for instance:
For a 25 m 0.53 mm column with a film thickness of 5.5 μm and a plate
height of 0.472 mm, the empirical sample capacity was 2.5 μg (540 nL of
undecane at 130 C). Phase ratio: 24.
For a 25 m 0.32 mm column with a film thickness of 0.26 μm and a plate
height of 0.217 mm, the empirical sample capacity was 0.115 μg (24 nL of
undecane at 110 C). Phase ratio: 308.
The 0.53 mm thick-film column can tolerate 20 times more analyte than
the 0.32 mm thin-film column. The capacity of more efficient columns is
even less; their sample capacity drops rapidly with reduced bore size and
reduced film thickness.
Larson (2006, 3) calculated the theoretical sample capacity for several
equal-length capillary columns of different bores but with film thickness
adjusted to give the same phase ratio. Thus, the retention data would be
the same on each column. On that basis, he found a fivefold capacity differ￾ence between the 0.53 and 0.32 mm columns.
Figure 3.10 displays the effect of these two variables – bore size and film
thickness – on the maximum mass of analyte recommended by a column
manufacturer. These data are the maximum loading for an analyte with
strong affinity for the liquid. For analytes with weak affinity, the sample
capacity is much reduced. Contrarily, the capacity factor increases when a
column operatesinefficiently to yield a lower plate number, possibly because
it has a thick liquid film or a high carrier gas flow rate. Such inefficient oper￾ating conditions are quite normal in process work as optimal flow rates can
be painfully slow.
Finally, a note about units. Column vendors specify sample capacity in
nanograms, the preferred unit of the laboratory. For process work, we need
to think in volumetric terms. Here’s a comparison:
1 μg of propane liquid is about 2.0 nL. That’s a 1 % peak from a 0.2 μL
liquid injection.
0
1
2
3
4
5
0 1 2 3 4 5
Max. Analyle Mass ((μg)
Film Thickness (μm)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Max. Analyle Mass (μg)
Internal Diameter (mm)
(a)
(b)
Showing recommended sample 
capacities for (a) different column 
diameters, and (b) different liquid 
film thicknesses. The stated 
sample capacity is for an analyte of 
similar polarity as the liquid phase 
and high retention factor. For a 
dissimilar analyte, capacity may be 
drastically less. 
Figure 3.10 (a) Sample Capacity
and Column Diameter. (b)
Sample Capacity and Film
Thickness.
Source: Adapted from Agilent
Technologies, Inc.
70 Column technology1 μg of propane gas is about 0.63 μL at 60 C. That’s a 1,000 ppm peak
from a 0.63 mL gas injection.
Measurement sensitivity
Since the capacity factor is a constraint on the maximum concentration of an
analyte, it has no effect on the minimum detectable concentration of that
analyte. More relevant to ultimate sensitivity is the effect of feed volume.
Larger sample volumes increase the width of the sample injection pulse,
which makes the peaks a little wider and reduces the efficiency of the col￾umn. Clearly, the detrimental effect of a small width increase is much more
pronounced in a high-efficiency column than it is in a low-efficiency col￾umn. This looks like a big win for a packed column.
Again, that would be true if comparing two columns at their maximum
efficiencies. In process chromatography, though, we often separate only a
few analytes and it’s rare to need the maximum efficiency achievable by nar￾row-bore, thin-film capillary columns. We tend to use less efficient capillary
columns and run them fast. Such columns can still provide plenty of resolu￾tion and a small loss of column efficiency due to a larger sample volume is
not a big concern. It’s not unusual to deliberately overload the first column
when measuring low concentrations.
When making comparisons, it’s always important to distinguish between
performance variables quoted at maximum efficiency and the real-world
conditions experienced by the columns. In process chromatography, it’s rare
for a column to run at maximum efficiency because it’s too slow. Low￾efficiency capillary columns have two additional advantages over packed
columns:
They produce better peak shapes: their thick liquid films block adsorp￾tion sites in the column walls leading to taller, symmetrical peaks.
They produce less baseline noise: their more refined or bonded liquid
phases reduce the bleed of foreign molecules into the detector.
In summary, capillary columns often compensate for reduced sample size
by better chromatographic performance. However, when trying to resolve
two peaks with similar retention factors, the demand for maximum effi￾ciency will certainly limit the sample size and the achievable measurement
sensitivity. That would be the time to look for a different liquid phase.
Analyte rangeability
Here, we consider the maximum difference in measurement range for two
analytes on the same column. The sample size would be set to provide suf￾ficient detector sensitivity for the analyte with the lower concentration. If
that analyte requires a very low measurement range, the sample size would
be large. Then, the analyte with the higher concentration might exceed the
Packed or capillary? A comparison 71sample capacity of the column for that analyte. This is unlikely to occur with
a packed column.
There are too many variables to prescribe any mathematical rules, but we
can quickly see some general principles. The sensitivity of the detector deter￾mines the sample size, so the focus is on the larger peak. How large can it be?
To maximize the sample capacity for this peak:
A larger retention factor increases sample capacity, so choose a liquid
phase having a strong retention for the larger peak. It’s best for the trace
peaks to come out first.
A lower plate number increases sample capacity, so choose a liquid phase
having a high separation factor to reduce the plate number needed for
resolution.
Since small-bore capillary columns with thin liquid films have high plate
numbers and lower sample capacity, those are the columns most likely to
limit rangeability. Luckily, a PGC rarely needs such enormous plate num￾bers, so we tend to use the wider-bore capillaries with thicker films, and
we run them fast. Such conditions increase plate height, reduce plate num￾ber, and usually provide adequate rangeability. Even so, you should be wary
of applications that attempt to use capillary columns to measure percent and
ppm ranges from the same sample injection. A packed column might be a
better choice.
Column bleed
When carrier gas leaves a column and enters a detector it always contains
traces of foreign molecules picked up during its passage through the last col￾umn. If the detectorissensitive to these molecules, they will elevate the chro￾matogram baseline and exacerbate detector noise. The presence of these
alien molecules is known as column bleed. Although all columns bleed,
it’s the bleed created by the column feeding the detector that is of primary
concern; that column may permanently retain or smooth the bleed from
prior columns.
The column bleed may comprise molecules from various sources. Always
present are molecules of the liquid phase. The carrier gas emerging from a
liquid-phase column inevitably contains traces of that liquid phase due to its
saturated vapor pressure at the oven temperature. To minimize this compo￾nent of bleed, we choose liquid phases of high molar mass and low vapor
pressure and operate them at the lowest workable temperature. Anyone
familiar with a programmed-temperature chromatogram would attest to
the increase in baseline seen asthe temperature rises. That’s why most liquid
phases now in use are long-chain polymers having very low vapor pressures.
In isothermal applications, the liquid-phase bleed is constant, and the
PGC automatically zeroes the detector signal to compensate for any offset.
72 Column technologyYet it’s still necessary to minimize the bleed to avoid baseline upsets due to
column switching or minor temperature variations. Capillary columns have
the advantage here as they can use crosslinked polymers that bond to the
active site in the column wall, practically eliminating bleed by vapor
pressure.
Another consequence of liquid phase vapor pressure is the gradual loss of
liquid phase from the column. Some packed columns in older PGCs used
volatile liquid phases and suffered a progressive loss of resolution and lim￾ited column life. This is no longer a problem due to advances in column tech￾nology, but it’s still worth noting that PGC columns should always operate
far below the maximum temperature specified for their liquid phase.
A second cause of column bleed occurs with a new column and may be
due to residual traces of the solvent used for its preparation, random mole￾cules absorbed from the air, contaminated tube fittings, or fingerprints.
These impurities elute as multiple broad peaks on an elevated baseline that
exponentially approachesitsfinal level. With a sensitive detector, it may take
many hoursfor the baseline to become flat enough to use, and several days to
become truly flat and level.
A third cause of column bleed is from chemical reactions occurring inside
the column. These reactions are probably between the liquid phase and
traces of oxygen or moisture that are always present in the carrier gas. In
addition, thermal cracking of polymeric liquid phases may occur at higher
temperatures. It’s found that capillary columns with thick liquid films have
more bleed than those with thin films, presumably due to more reaction
products.
Detector signal noise seems to be correlated to the amount of liquid in the
column, so reaction products may be a major contributor to random baseline
noise. Signal noise may also correlate to the flow rate of carrier gas entering
the detector. On both counts, this is a clear win for capillary columns. Those
are unproven conjectures, but the empirical observation is that capillary col￾umns exhibit less detector signal noise than packed columns, allowing the
detector to measure smaller analyte peaks. This increased detector sensitiv￾ity often compensates for the smaller sample capacity of the capillary.
Finally, we should note that column bleed can also damage the detector.
We don’t use halogenated liquid phases because the products of combustion
would corrode a flame detector. Of liquid phases used today, only silicon
derivatives might harm the detector. Any bleed from a polysiloxane column
would form silica deposits in a flame detector. However, most capillary col￾umns use crosslinked and bonded polymers that have very low vapor pres￾sure and the carrier gas flow rate is much lower than an equivalent packed
column. These features severely limit the amount of silicon entering the
detector.
Table 3.9 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of the various
packed and wall-coated columns.
Packed or capillary? A comparison 73Table 3.9 Comparison of PGC Column Types.
Column Type Advantages Disadvantages
Packed
i. d. > 1 mm.
Wide variety of available stationary phases.
Larger sample capacity gives good measurement
linearity.
High sensitivity for permanent gases.
Tolerant of older hardware.
More durable at jobsite.
Least expensive option.
The high pressure drop limits column length
and plate number.
Limited resolution.
Consumes more carrier gas.
Liquid phase may be unstable.
High column bleed.
Low maximum temperature.
Micropacked
i. d. ≤ 1 mm
Fast analysis for a few peaks.
More efficient; can resolve many peaks.
Uses less carrier gas than packed column.
Higher pressure drop limits length and plate
number.
Lower sample capacity may limit analyte
sensitivity.
Columns are expensive.
Megabore
0.53 mm i.d.
With thick liquid
film (df > 1 μm)
Practically unlimited column length.
Can quickly resolve several analyte peaks: fast
analysis.
More inert, less peak tailing.
High sample capacity for good analyte sensitivity.
Can directly replace a micropacked column.
Low carrier gas consumption.
Risk of blockage.
Fused silica type is fragile.
Not suitable for analytes with high affinity for
liquid phase.
Peaks may tail.
More column bleed than thin films.
Limited selection of liquid phases.
Megabore
0.53 mm i.d.
With thin liquid
film (df ≤ 1 μm)
Practically unlimited column length.
More efficient, can resolve dozens of peaks.
Bonded phases produce less column bleed. resulting
in less baseline offset and noise.
Low carrier gas consumption.
Metal capillaries are durable.
Risk of blockage.
Low sample capacity may limit analyte
sensitivity.
Can’t measure multiple analytes with large
disparity of measurement range.
Not suitable for analytes with low affinity for
liquid phase.
Fused silica type is fragile.
Needs compatible hardware.
Wide bore
0.32 mm
Resolves scores of peaks.
Lower column bleed.
Less baseline noise.
Less often used in PGC.
More risk of blockage.
Lower sample capacity may limit analyte
sensitivity.
Difficult to ensure small sample injection
repeatability.
Tolerates less measurement range disparity.
May need a temperature program.
Narrow bore
≤0.25 mm
Resolves hundreds of peaks. Not supported by most PGCs.
Needs sample splitter.
Knowledge Gained
About Theory
In gas chromatography, the stationary phase
may be a solid (GSC) or a liquid (GLC).
In a GLC column, separation is due to solva￾tion of molecules into a stationary liquid.
In a GSC column, separation is due to
adsorption of molecules onto a solid surface.
Separation is due to sample molecules having
differing affinity for the stationary phase.
74 Column technologyThree electronic forces contribute to the overall
affinity: dispersion, dipole, and ionic forces.
Random electron movement causes multiple
transient forces between molecules.
This electronic dispersion force is ubiquitous
between molecules but is weak.
Larger molecules experience larger dispersion
forces causing longer retention times.
Boiling points also depend on dispersion
forces, so they correlate with retention times.
Retention on a nonpolar column is by disper￾sion forces and homologs elute in boiling
point order.
Excessive feed volumewill overload the column
and produce fronting chromatogram peaks.
Excessive analyte volume may exceed sample
capacity and produce a tailing analyte peak.
Retention on a polar column is additional and
is caused by an attraction between dipoles.
A dipole is an electronic charge due to the dis￾placement of molecular electrons.
Amoleculeis permanently polarized ifit has an
asymmetric structure with dissimilar atoms.
A neutral molecule can be polarized by the
dipole of an adjacent polar molecule.
Ionic phases offer the highest polarity and
may become popular in the future.
A good rule-of-thumb is to use a liquid phase
that is chemically similar to the analytes.
The phase ratio (β) used in column design is
the volume ratio of gas and liquid in the
column.
Same β-value columns give the same separa￾tion but the thinner film gives better
resolution.
Column design is always a compromise
between speed, capacity, and resolution.
To get a faster analysis, PGCs often run faster
than the optimum carrier gas flow rate.
The sample capacity for an analyte is higher
for lower plate numbers and for later peaks.
About packed columns
A packed column is full of particles that con￾tain the stationary phase and are all about
the same size.
Most PGCs now use ⅛-inch o.d. packed col￾umns or 1 16-inch o.d. micropacked columns.
Before packing, clean the column tubing with
a sequence of polar and nonpolar solvents.
A GSC packing may be solid particles of acti￾vated charcoal, silica gel, or molecular sieves.
A GSC packing may be solid granules of a
polymer material such as crosslinked
polystyrene.
A GLC packing may be inert support particles
coated with an involatile liquid phase.
The carrier gas must be free of water vapor,
particularly for active solid columns.
It may be possible to reactivate an active solid
column by heating it with a dry nitro￾gen purge.
In theory, the best plate height is twice the par￾ticle size (≈0.3 mm) but is about 0.5 mm in
practice.
Micropacked columns can achieve plate
heights of 0.2–0.3 mm and are now popular
in PGCs.
Packed columns have a high flow resistance
so they have limited length and limited plate
number.
Packed or capillary? A comparison 75Packed columns have a largersample capacity,
which may result in more detector sensitivity.
They may generate more column bleed and
detectornoise thatlimitstheir overallsensitivity.
They have awide dynamic rangeformeasuring
multiple analytes at different concentrations
Most PGCs use packed columns, although
capillary columns are popular for certain
applications.
Most PGCs use packed columns isothermally
to separate only a few analyte peaks.
About capillary columns
A capillary column is an open tube with sta￾tionary phase coated on or bonded to its
inner walls.
To use capillary columns, a PGC must have
low internal volumes and no unswept
flow paths.
Most laboratory chromatographs use capil￾lary columns made from fused silica tubing.
But PGCs prefer silicon-coated stainless-steel
tubing, as it’s more durable than fused silica.
Open tubular columns are porous layer
(PLOT), support coated (SCOT), or wall
coated (WCOT).
PLOT columns have a thin layer of adsorbent
solid on their inner wall.
SCOT columns have a thin layer of liquid￾coated support particles on their inner wall.
WCOT columns have a thin layer of liquid
phase on their inner wall, 0.1–10 μm thick.
The liquid phase is often a copolymer of
methyl and phenyl siloxanes that may bond
to the tube wall.
PGCs can’t use the most efficient columns
that use <0.25 mm i.d. tubing and ≈0.1 μm
liquid film.
Such columns get plate heights of ≈0.2 mm
and high plate numbers but need very small
samples.
Most PGCs use the 0.53 mm i.d. or 0.32 mm
i.d. columns with relatively thick liquid films.
As used in PGCs, capillary and packed col￾umns achieve similar plate heights.
Capillary columns have low flow resistance so
they can be long, generating very high plate
numbers.
They need smaller sample volumes than
packed columns, which may decrease detec￾tor sensitivity.
To achieve fast injection, a sample splitter
may be necessary and these can be
troublesome.
Capillary columns may generate less column
bleed and detector noise, enhancing their
overall sensitivity.
They have limited ability to measure high
and low concentrations on the same
chromatogram.
Most laboratory GCs use capillary columns
with a temperature program to separate
many analytes.
As yet, capillary columns are less popular
than packed columns in process gas
chromatographs.
76 Column technologyDid you get it?
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 03
Q1. True or false?
Generally speaking, when compared with capillary columns, packed columns:
A. Can be much longer.
B. Have smaller internal diameters.
C. Have lower plate heights and are less efficient.
D. Have higher plate numbers.
E. Can accept larger sample size.
F. Are more likely to employ a temperature program.
Q2. True or false?
Generally speaking, when compared with packed columns, capillary columns:
A. Can be much longer.
B. Have smaller internal diameters.
C. Have lower plate heights and are less efficient.
D. Have higher plate numbers.
E. Can accept larger sample size.
F. Are more likely to employ a temperature program.
Q3. True or false?
When compared with regular packed columns, micropacked columns generally:
A. Can be much longer.
B. Have smaller internal diameters.
C. Have lower plate heights and are less efficient.
D. Have lower plate heights.
E. Can accept larger sample size.
F. Are more likely to employ a temperature program.
Q4. Consider a sample mixture of three components: isobutane, 1,3-butadiene
(a polarizable molecule), and n-butane, having boiling points of −11.7, −4.4,
and −0.5 C, respectively. Predict their order of elution from (a) a nonpolar col￾umn and (b) a polar column.
Q5. Is it best to use a column having a high phase ratio (β) to separate sample com￾ponents of low molar mass? Explain.
Q6. Nominate and explain at least two reasons for running a column much faster
than its optimum carrier velocity.
Q7. Calculate the theoretical maximum plate number for a peak having a retention
time of five times the holdup time on a capillary column that is 30-m long and
has 0.53 mm bore.
Check your SAQ answers with those given in the back of the book.
References
Further reading
This chapter is about the columns used in PGCs. For a more general over￾view of column technology in analytical chemistry and research, refer to:
An up-to-date review article: Evolution and Evaluation of GC Columns by
Mametov et al. (2019).
References 77A comprehensive encyclopedia article: Basic Overview on Gas Chroma￾tography Columns by Rahman et al. (2015).
A short book by two expert professors: Columnsfor Gas Chromatography
by Barry and Grob (2007). Excellent.
A fascinating personal reminiscence: Evolution of Capillary Columns for
Gas Chromatography by Ettre (2001).
A delightfully clear and non-theoretical handbook: Introduction to
Open-Tubular Column Gas Chromatography by Hinshaw and Ettre
(1994). Highly recommended.
Cited
Annino, R. and Villalobos, R. (1992). Process Gas Chromatography: Fundamentals
and Applications. Research Triangle Park, NC: Instrument Society of America.
Barry, E.F. and Grob, R.L. (2007). Columns for Gas Chromatography: Performance
and Selection. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Cramers, C.A. and Rijks, J.A. (1979). Micropacked columns in gas chromatography:
An evaluation. In: Advances in Chromatography, Volume 17 (eds. J.C. Giddings,
E. Grushka, J. Cazes, and P.R. Brown), 101–162. New York, NY: Marcel Dek￾ker, Inc.
Dandeneau, R.D. and Zerenner, E.H. (1979). An investigation of glasses for capillary
chromatography. Journal of High Resolution Chromatography & Chromatography
Communications 2, 351–356. https://doi.org/10.1002/jhrc.1240020617
de Zeeuw, J. (2015). The impact of GC parameters on the separation, Parts 1–6.
A series of technical articles published by Restek Corporation, Middelburg, Neth￾erlands. Accessed 2020/10/27 at: www.restek.com/pdfs/Impact-of-GC-Parame￾ters_Part1.pdf et seq.
Ettre, L.S. (2001). Evolution of capillary columns for gas chromatography. LCGC
North America, Vol. 19, No. 1 (January). Accessed 2020-10-25 at: https://www.
chromatographyonline.com/view/evolution-capillary-columns-gas￾chromatography.
Ettre, L.S. and Hinshaw, J.V. (1993). Basic Relationships of Gas Chromatography.
Cleveland, OH: Advanstar Communications, Inc.
Golay, M.J.E. (1957). Theory and practice of gas-liquid partition chromatography
with coated capillaries. Gas Chromatography; Proceedings of the 1957 ISA Analysis
Instrumentation Division Symposium at Lansing, MI (eds. V.J Coates, H.J. Noebels,
and I.S Fagerson), 1–13. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Golay, M.J.E. (1958). Theory of chromatography in open and coated columns with
round and rectangular cross-sections. In Gas Chromatography – Amsterdam 1958
(ed. D.H. Desty), 36–55 and 62–68. London, UK: Butterworths Scientific Publica￾tions Ltd.
Hinshaw, J.V. and Ettre, L.S. (1994). Introduction to Open-Tubular Column Gas
Chromatography. Cleveland, OH: Advanstar Communications, Inc.
IUPAC (2014). Compendium of Chemical Terminology, Second Edition. Compiled
by A.D. McNaught and A. Wilkinson (last revised February 2014). Oxford, UK:
Blackwell Scientific Publications. Accessed 2020/04/17 at: https://goldbook.
iupac.org/terms/view/D01814.
78 Column technologyJennings, W. (1978). Gas Chromatography with Glass Capillary Columns. New York,
NY: Academic Press Inc.
Jones, S. (2008). Secrets of GC Column Dimensions. PowerPoint presentation dated
May 20, 2008. Accessed 2020/05/18 at: www.agilent.com/cs/library/slidepresen￾tation/Public/Secrets_GC_Column_Dimensions.pdf.
Larson, P. (2006). Column technology in gas chromatography. In Encyclopedia of
Analytical Chemistry. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. https://doi.org/
10.1002/9780470027318.a5502.
Lipsky, S.R. (1983). Flexible soft glass capillary columns vs. flexible fused silica cap￾illary columns for gas chromatography – a critique. Journal of High Resolution
Chromatography 6, 359–365. https://doi.org/10.1002/jhrc240060703.
London, F. (1937). The general theory of molecular forces. Transactions of the
Faraday Society 33, 8–26.
Mahler, H. (2021) Personal communication, 2021/02/21.
Mametov, R., Ratiu, I.A., Monedeiro, F., Ligor, T., and Buszewski, B. (2019). Evolu￾tion and evaluation of GC columns. Critical Reviews in Analytical Chemistry.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10408347.2019.1699013.
Müller, F. and Oreans, M. (1977). Experience and problems with capillary glass col￾umns in process chromatography. Chromatographia, 10, No. 8 (August), 473–477.
Ottenstein, D.M. (1963). Column support materials for use in gas chromatography.
Journal of Chromatographic Science, 1, No. 4 (April), 11–23. https://doi.org/
10.1093/chromsci/1.4.11.
Poole, C.F. and Poole, S.K. (2011). Ionic liquid stationary phases in gas chromatog￾raphy. Journal of Separation Science 34, 888–900. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.
KGaA, Weinheim.
Rahman, M.M., El-Aty, A.M.A., Choi, J.H., Shin, H.C., Shin, S.C., and Shim, J.H.
(2015). Basic overview on gas chromatography columns. In: Analytical Separation
Science, First Edition (eds. V.P. Estévez, A.M. Stalcup, J.L. Anderson, and A.
Berthod), 823–834. Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.
Tables
3.1 Subjective Evaluation of Columns Used in PGCs.
3.2 Typical Tubing for Packed PGC Columns.
3.3 Selected Mesh Sizes.
3.4 Typical Tubing for PGC Capillary Columns.
3.5 Phase Ratios of WCOT Columns.
3.6 Phase Ratio and Column Performance.
3.7 Optimum Flow Rates for Capillary Columns.
3.8 Experimental Comparison of Packed and Capillary Columns.
3.9 Comparison of PGC Column Types.
Figures
3.1 Three Kinds of Capillary Column.
3.2 Origin of Dispersive Forces.
(a) Two adjacent neutral atoms or molecules. (b) Random electron shift
causes a transient dipole. (c) Induced dipole forms an attractive force.
References 793.3 Nonpolar and Polar Molecules.
3.4 Typical Packed Columns.
3.5 Typical PGC Capillary Columns.
3.6 The Column Performance Triangle.
3.7 Theoretical Minimum Plate Height.
3.8 A Fronting Peak.
3.9 A Tailing Peak.
3.10a Sample Capacity and Column Diameter.
3.10b Sample Capacity and Film Thickness.
Symbols
Symbol Variable Unit
dc Internal diameter of column tubing mm
df Film thickness of liquid phase in column μm
HTh Theoretical minimum plate height mm
L Column length mm
k Retention factor of component peak none
N Plate number of column none
VG Gas volume of column mL
VL Liquid volume of column mL
Vmax Maximum volume of analyte injected mL
β Phase ratio none
Equations
3.1 V G = L π
dc
2
2
Volume of the column gas phase
(approximate).
3.2 V G = L π
dc
2 − df
2
Volume of the column gas phase (exact).
3.3 VL = L π dc df Volume of the column liquid phase.
3.4 β = V G
VL
Phase ratio.
3.5 β = dc
4df
Calculation of phase ratio for a capillary
column.
3.6 HTh = dc
1+6k + 11k2
12 1 + k 2
Theoretical minimum plate height of a
capillary column.
3.7 V max
1 + k
N
Theoretical maximum analyte injection
volume.
80 Column technologyNew technical terms
When first introduced, these words and phrases were in bold type. You
should now know the meaning of these practical terms.
capillary column
column bleed
column overload
diatomaceous earth
electropolishing
film thickness
fronting peak
ionic liquid phase
liquid loading
megabore tubing
mesh size
micropacked column
molecular sieve
packed column
open-tubular column
PLOT column
sample splitter
SCOT column
silicon coating
solid support
tailing peak
WCOT column
You should also know the meaning of these theoretical terms.
adsorption
affinity
Debye forces
dipole
dispersive forces
electronegativity
feed volume
hydrogen bond
induced dipole
Keesom forces
kinetic theory
London forces
nonpolar
nonpolar column
permanent dipole
phase ratio
polar
polar column
polarization
polarizability
sample capacity
solvation
surface deactivation
UTE
Van der Waals forces
Consult the Glossary at the end of the book for more information.
References 814
The stationary phase
“Most PGC columns use liquid stationary phases. There are vastly more
liquid phases available than there are solid phases, so our primary focus
is on liquid phase selection and use. However, solid phases do separations
that no other column can do, so they are important too.”
Liquid phases
Since it’s unlikely that you’ll make your own columns, this text discusses
liquid phases in general terms with typical examples. For a more com￾plete listing of liquid phases and their properties, refer to the resources
in the Further Reading section at the end of the chapter. Be aware,
though, that manufacturers are continually developing new liquid phases,
so consult the sales literature of a specialist GC supplier for the most
recent data.
The need for variety
Packed columns employ a wider variety of liquid phases than capillary col￾umns do. The reason is partly historical – early researchers tried just about
every available liquid as a stationary phase! But, a more pressing issue is the
limited efficiency of the rugged columns preferred in most PGCs. We shall
see that low-efficiency columns need a high separation factor between peaks,
sometimes called selectivity. And high separation factors need a wide range
of liquid phases.
In contrast, a typical laboratory gas chromatograph can achieve most
of the separations it needs using just a few capillary columns operating at
high efficiency. When a column has a high plate number, the separation
factor is less important and there’s no need for a large selection of liquid
phases.
Process Gas Chromatography: Advanced Design and Troubleshooting, First Edition. Tony Waters.
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2025 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.It’s certainly true that future PGCs will use more capillary columns, but
many of those columns will not operate at high efficiency. To achieve fast
analysis, large sample capacity, and adequate detector sensitivity, it’s likely
that the capillary columns in future PGCs will continue to exhibit modest
plate numbers. And again, that will demand liquid phases with high
selectivity between analyte peaks. A wide choice of stationary phase will
always be a high priority for a PGC.
Column identification
In the beginning, PGC manufacturers always specified the columns used,
including full details of the stationary phase, liquid loading, mesh size,
and solid support. Before long, third-party suppliers entered the replacement
column business, so to protect their spare parts revenue the PGC vendors
resorted to tagging their columns with arcane part numbersinstead of giving
us detailed and useful information. Then, asthe competition grew, aftermar￾ket suppliers were themselves obliged to label their columns and even their
liquid phases with cryptic code names. Now it’s hard to make any sense of
their product catalogs.
Most suppliers label their proprietary liquid phases by an alpha-numeric
code, often two alpha characters followed by a number. There are over 1,000
branded code namesfor GC liquid phases. Nobody knowsthem all. Table 4.1
lists the alpha codes for the main suppliers.
With so many brand names it’s confusing to search for a suitable liquid
phase. The largest suppliers recommend the type of analysis each phase is
good for – like “aromatics” – but that’s not helpful if you need a specific sep￾aration. They also provide an equivalence table showing for each of their
phases which competitive products they consider essentially equivalent.
That might be useful if you are replacing a known column, but there can
be subtle differences between column manufacturers that can spoil
critical-pair resolution or analyte peak symmetry.
Liquid phase polarity
We loosely categorize liquid phases as nonpolar, semipolar, and strongly
polar. This polarity scale alludes to the dipole moment of the electronic
charges occurring within the liquid phase molecules and their ability or ina￾bility to form hydrogen bonds, concepts we explored in Chapter 3.
In reality, polarity is an imperfect way to categorize a liquid phase
because the affinity of a solute for a stationary phase depends on a combi￾nation of electronic forces that varies with the solute:
Polarity is an imperfect measure of liquid phase behavior. It’s like knowing
the strength of a magnet: it cannot tell you the force of attraction until you
know what it’s attracting.
Table 4.1 Vendor Codes for
Columns and Liquid Phases.
Code Manufacturer
ArD ASDevices
AT Alltech
BP Trajan (SGE)
CP Agilent Varian
DB Agilent J&W
DC Dow Corning
EC Alltech
HP Agilent HP
MXT Restek
OPTIMA Macherey-Nagel
OV Ohio Valley
QF Dow Corning
Rtx Restek
SE Agilent (J&W)
SPB Supelco
TG Thermo
Scientific
TR Thermo
Scientific
VB Valco
Instruments
VF Agilent Varian
ZB Phenomenex
007 Quadrex
Liquid phases 83Therefore, solute polarity is just as important as liquid phase polarity. As a
general guide, Table 4.2 indicatesthe relative polarity ofsome typicalsolutes.
The table is imprecise because the observed polarity of a solute also depends
on the liquid phase it’s contacting.
Table 4.2 Typical Polarity of Solutes.
Solute Type Typical Examples Typical Stationary Phases
Nonpolar Solutes
Permanent gases Hydrogen, oxygen,
nitrogen, methane,
carbon monoxide
Molecular Sieves, n-Octane on
Res-Sil C, HayeSep, Carbosieves,
Carboxen
Argon in oxygen ArDSieve
Carbon oxides, noble
gases
Porous polymers
Saturated hydrocarbons with single C─C bonds n-Paraffins, isoparaffins,
cycloalkanes
Porous polymers
Dimethyl silicones, low-phenyl
silicones (XX-5), SE-30, SPB-Octyl
Symmetric sulfides and halides Carbon disulfide,
symmetric mercaptans,
halocarbons
Dimethyl silicones, low-phenyl
silicones
Polarizable Solutes
Hydrocarbons with double or triple C─C bonds Alkenes, alkynes,
aromatics, carbon
disulfide
Fluorosilicones, cyanosilicones,
polyols
Olefin cis and trans
isomers
High-cyano cyanosilicones (for
example, OV-275, SP-2340)
Weakly Polar Solutes
Hydrocarbons containing an ether, carbonyl, or nitrile
group
These compounds are also proton acceptors and form
hydrogen bonds with a proton-donor liquid phase
Ethers Polyesters, FFAP, TCP, polyols
Aldehydes and ketones Fluorosilicones, dialkyl
phthalates, FFAP, polyols
Esters Fluorosilicones
Nitrile, nitro, tertiary
amines, or sulfur
compounds
Fluorosilicones
Moderately Polar Solutes
Hydrocarbons containing a hydroxy or amine group and
asymmetric alkyl halides These compounds are also proton
donors and form strong hydrogen bonds with a proton￾acceptor liquid phase
Alcohols, phenols,
organic acids,
halocarbons, freons
Cyanosilicones, polyols, dialkyl
phthalates
Ammonia, amines Porous polymers, not polyols
Hydrogen cyanide Polyesters
Highly Polar Solutes
Compounds containing multifunctional groups, and some
compounds of sulfur, phosphorus, or halogens
Hydroxyl acids, glycols,
thiols
Porous polymers, dicyano and
phenylcyano silicones, TCEP
Ionizable substances Water, acids Ionic liquid phases
See Tables 4.4, 4.5, 4.9, and 4.10 for an interpretation of stationary phase names.
Source: Adapted from Supelco (2015a).
84 The stationary phaseLiquid phase polarity is still a useful guide for column selection. Liquid
phase suppliers sometimes have their own scale of polarity, often based on
squalane as 0-polarity and TCEP (1,2,3-tris(2-cyanoethoxy) propane) as 100-
polarity. Other polarity scales use the silicone equivalents of those traditional
phases instead, as discussed herein.
Solute affinity
Recall that, for separation to occur, the sample components must dissolve in
the liquid phase. The chemist’s adage that “like dissolves like” is helpful
here. Simplistically, we should choose a liquid phase having a molecular
structure similar to the analytes we wish to separate.
Since “like dissolves like,” it’s often good to choose a liquid phase that is
chemically similar to the analytes we wish to measure.
When evaluating the behavior of different solutes on a liquid phase, recall
from Chapter 3 that four electronic forces are potentially at work inside
the column, three of them polar:
Dispersive London Forces proportional to the size of the interacting solute
and solvent molecules.
Polar Debye Forces due to the interaction of a permanent dipole with a
dipole induced in another molecule.
Polar Keesom Forces due to the presence of permanent dipoles in both of
the interacting molecules.
Polar hydrogen bonding, a strong attraction typically between a
hydrogen atom and an electronegative atom like oxygen or sulfur.
The affinity of a solute for a given liquid phase is the cumulative effect of
all four of these forces,so the size of the interacting moleculesis asimportant
as their polarity. Let’s examine how this affects the retention time of a solute.
A fully nonpolar liquid phase has no dipole moment, cannot be polarized,
and has no hydrogen-bonding capability; so it cannot exert a polar force on a
solute molecule regardless of solute polarity. On such a column, the adjusted
retention time of a peak depends solely on the net dispersion force between
solvent and solute. It turns out that the vapor pressure of a substance also
depends on dispersion forces, so the adjusted retention time of a solute on
a nonpolar column is a function of its vapor pressure. In other words, the
peaks come out in boiling point order.
Recall that dispersion forces are always present, so all columns produce
an underlying separation in boiling point order. On top of that, a polar liquid
phase exerts an additional affinity for polar solutes, retaining them
longer than their nonpolar siblings. Polar columns can therefore separate
substances having similar boiling points.
But even a highly polar liquid phase can’t exert a dipole attraction for
a fully nonpolar solute because that solute has zero dipole moment and
Liquid phases 85cannot share hydrogen bonds. Common experience tells us that a polar
solvent (think water) won’t dissolve much of a nonpolar solute (think
oil). Thus, nonpolar solutes elute rapidly from a polar column in boiling
point order.
Table 4.3 summarizes these interactions. To get a polar attraction, solute
and solvent must both have some degree of polarity. Luckily, many polar
liquids are available, so we have more opportunities for separating polar
solutes than nonpolar solutes.
Polar or Nonpolar?
When there’s a choice, we prefer nonpolar phases. However, for polarsolutes
like alcohols and ketones, a polar liquid phase is often needed to get good
separations and avoid distorted peaks. The general rule is to use a liquid
phase similar to the analytes you wish to measure.
Nonpolar liquid phases tend to be more stable and resistant to oxygen or
moisture in the carrier gas or sample. They give better coating efficiencies
and sharper peaks than polar phases and create less column bleed. And,
of course, their separations dutifully follow the solute boiling points: it’s
all very bland, and reliably so.
In contrast, polar phases are the spices that raise column design to a work
of art. The skilled practitioner chooses from a delightful array of delicate
flavors to separate and measure just about anything.
PGC’s often use two or more columns to get a fast analysis and it’s not unu￾sual for one column to be nonpolar and the other to be polar. For instance, a
common PGC column system uses a nonpolar first column to hold back hea￾vies (high-boiling components) until the lighter components have entered
the following polar column. The first column is then backflushed to remove
the heavies. Since the heavies never enter it, the second column can strongly
retain the polar components without fear of them colliding with any heavies
peaks. Another application might do the opposite: a polar first column
removes the highly polar components so the nonpolar second column can
separate the paraffins.
For more about backflush systems, refer to Chapter 10.
Table 4.3 Strength of Solvent–Solute Interaction.
Solute Nonpolar Polar
Solvent Peak order on chromatogram
Nonpolar By boiling point By boiling point (BP)
Polar By boiling point By BP plus polarity
86 The stationary phaseSilicone liquid phases
In any discussion about liquid phases, long chemical names are inevitable.
Unless you are a chemist, such names can be daunting at times, but try not to
let them intrude in your understanding of how liquid phases work. Actually,
the mechanism of retention is entirely electronic!
For reference, the Glossary of Terms at the end of the book has a short
explanation of each chemical name used herein.
Methyl silicones
The most-used liquid phases nowadays are pure silicone oils or viscous
gums. Although there are dozens of varieties, all silicones are siloxane
polymers. These polysiloxanes are ideal liquid phases as they exhibit low
vapor pressure and high structural stability. In a PGC, a packed or capillary
column with a silicone liquid phase will operate reliably over a wide range of
column temperatures with low levels of column bleed.
In a laboratory gas chromatograph operating on a temperature program,
the column temperature can sometimes get high enough to fracture their
polymer chains (Blomberg 2001). The volatile fragments then released are
visible as an elevated baseline on the chromatogram.
The basic silicone, chemically speaking, is poly[dimethylsiloxane] and
is by far the most used liquid phase. As seen in Figure 4.1, the backbone of
this polymer comprises a large number (n) of alternate oxygen (O) and
silicon (Si) atoms. In addition, each silicon atom bonds to two methyl
groups ( CH3).
For economy of space, we can represent that structure as:
CH3 3Si O Si CH3 2 n O Si CH3 3
Poly[dimethylsiloxane] is an almost nonpolar liquid phase. Compared with
squalane, the classic zero-polarity liquid phase, it’s slightly polar but has
CH3
Si Si
CH3
CH3 CH3
O O
n
CH3
Si
CH3
CH3 CH3
The oxygen–silicon chain structure of the polysiloxanes gives them low vapor pressure 
and high stability – ideal for process gas chromatography. Shown is the structure of 
poly[(dimethyl)siloxane]. Note that each silicon atom in the chain bonds to two methyl 
groups.
Figure 4.1 Structure of
Poly[dimethylsiloxane].
Silicone liquid phases 87lower vapor pressure and higher stability, both desirable features for process
gas chromatography.
This silicone oil is also the base from which we build all the other
silicones. By replacing some of its methyl groups with other functional
groups, we can tune the silicone for low, medium, or high polarity. This
is the secret of its success.
Phenyl silicones
There are two ways to install replacement groups in the polymer; either
change the structure of the dimethylsiloxane monomer or make a copolymer
from a mixture of two different monomers.
The first method is simply to replace one or both of the methyl groups in
the dimethylsiloxane monomer with another group. If we replace one of the
methyl groups ( CH3) with a phenyl group ( C6H5), the polymer becomes
poly[methylphenylsiloxane], a more polar silicone:
CH3 3Si O Si CH3 C6H5 n O Si CH3 3
This polymer owes its high polarity to the large number of phenyl groups in
its structure – one on each silicon atom. Note that the polar phenyl groups
have replaced exactly 50 % of the nonpolar methyl groups along the
polysiloxane chain, so the polymer is predicably symmetric. But that sets
a limit to the flexibility of this technique because each attached group
inevitably becomes 50 % of the total attachments.
The second method is more flexible. To make a bespoke phenyl-silicone
of any desired polarity, we adjust the phenyl content of the polymer by
starting from a known mixture of two monomers. This is how it works: a
copolymer of (100 − n) % dimethylsiloxane and n % diphenylsiloxane has
those same percentages of dimethyl and diphenyl nodes randomly scattered
along its backbone:
CH3 3Si O Si CH3 2 100 − n O Si C6H5 2 n O Si CH3 3
The polarity of the copolymer depends on the percentage of phenyl in its
structure. Multiple varieties are available with 5–75 % of phenyl, and their
polarity increases accordingly. The trade-off isthat the efficiency of a silicone
column falls off as its polarity increases; that is, columns with higher polarity
tend to have a reduced plate number.
The copolymer made by this method is not quite the same as the polymer
made by the first method because each silicon atom now carries two iden￾tical groups, rather than one of each. For instance, in the 50 % phenyl copol￾ymer half of the silicon atoms have two methyl groups and the other half
have two phenyl groups. However, when we test the two liquids we find very
little difference in performance. It’s the total amount of phenyl that dictates
polarity, not the location of those phenyl groups.
88 The stationary phaseFor their competitive products, manufacturers know that their customers
are looking for a specific phenyl percentage, so they mark their products
accordingly. But they market their unique formulations without stating
the copolymer percentages, or even as “proprietary” with no information
at all. It’s safe to say there are many different and unknown percentages
in use.
The presence of phenyl groupsin the silicone increasesits affinity for both
nonpolar and polar solutes. The increase in nonpolar retention is due to
stronger dispersion forces between the large phenyl groups and solute mole￾cules. In addition, the phenyl groups are highly polarizable and will selec￾tively retain olefinic and aromatic analytes, as well as polar solutes
containing oxygen, nitrogen, or sulfur atoms. These strong interactions
allow us to adjust the selectivity of the liquid phase to suit the desired ana￾lytes simply by changing its phenyl content.
More possibilities
To get an even larger range of polarities and some subtle differences in spe￾cific separations, polysiloxanes can contain novel functional groups. These
new functional groups can substitute for one or both of the methyl groups
in the original dimethylsiloxane monomer. The modified monomer can then
form a polymer alone, or as a copolymer with a known percentage of another
siloxane, original or modified.
The key to understanding this bewildering array of silicone liquid phases
is to realize that there are four points of attachment in the copolymer, repre￾sented as A, B, C, and D in the structure:
CH3 3Si O Si − A
− B 100 − n O Si − C
− D n O Si CH3 3
The manufacturer can select each of the groups A–D from a wide range of
potential attachments and then decide the percentage (n) of each monomer
in the copolymer product. That’s enormous flexibility. Yet many of the pro￾prietary concoctions offered for sale are effectively equivalent to each other.
Their composition remains secret, hidden behind a cryptic product code.
Table 4.4 gives several examples of these modified silicones and illustrates
their wide polarity range.
Nonpolar silicones
Dimethyl silicone is considered to be nonpolar, but in practice it’s about 5 %
polar when compared with squalane, a branched-chain C30 paraffin. You
can see this in Table 4.4. Replacing some of its methyl groups with longer
paraffinic groups, such as n-octyl ( C8H17) makes the phase even less polar.
The 50 % n-octyl polymer closely mimics the performance of squalane, while
capable of operating at a much higher temperature. Some manufacturers peg
it as zero polarity on their own polarity scale.
Silicone liquid phases 89Fluoro silicones
Replacing one or more of the methyl groups in the siloxane monomers
with a fluorinated alkyl group yields a moderately polar silicone oil with
unique selectivity: it retains carbonyl groups more than hydroxyl groups
(Yancy 1994b).
Table 4.4 Popular Polysiloxane Liquid Phases.
Siloxane Monomer Co-Monomer Phenyl Polar Typical Liquid Phases
Methyl and Phenyl Polysiloxanes
100 % dimethyl none 0 % 5 XX-1, CP-Sil 5CB, SE-30, SP-2100, DC200,
OV-101
95 % dimethyl 5 % diphenyl 5 % 8 XX-5, CP-Sil 8CB, SE-52, SE-54, PE-2, 007-2
94.5 % dimethyl 5.5 % diphenyl 5.5 % 10 OV-73
80 % dimethyl 20 % methylphenyl 10 % 10 OV-3, PE-3
60 % dimethyl 40 % methylphenyl 20 % 14 XX-20, OV-7, 007-7
80 % dimethyl 20 % diphenyl 20 % 15 XX-20, VOCOL
67 % dimethyl 33 % diphenyl 33 % 19 OV-61
30 % dimethyl 70 % methylphenyl 35 % 19 XX-11, DC-710
65 % dimethyl 35 % diphenyl 35 % 19 XX-35
100 % methylphenyl none 50 % 21 XX-17
50 % dimethyl 50 % diphenyl 50 % 21 XX-50, SP-2250, CP-Sil 24
70 % methylphenyl 30 % diphenyl 65 % 26 OV-22, XX-65
35 % dimethyl 65 % diphenyl 65 % 26 XX-65
50 % methylphenyl 50 % diphenyl 75 % 28 OV-25
Fluoro and Cyano Polysiloxanes
methyl(cyanopropyl) dimethyl none 11 OV-105, ZB-50
6 % phenyl(cyanopropyl) 94 % dimethyl 3 % 13 XX-624, XX-1301
14 % phenyl(cyanopropyl) 86 % dimethyl 7 % 19 XX-1701, BP-10, CP-Sil 19CB
100 % methyl(trifluoropropyl) none none 37 XX-210, SP-2401, QF-1, AT-201, OV-202,
OV-215
50 % methyl(cyanopropyl) 50 % methylphenyl 25 % 58 XX-225, CP-Sil 43CB, SP-2300
80 % bis(cyanopropyl) 20 % phenyl(cyanopropyl) 10 % 67 SP-2330, Silar 3C
90 % bis(cyanopropyl) 10 % phenyl(cyanopropyl) 5 % 70 SP-2380
100 % bis(cyanopropyl) none none 88 XX-88, XX-2560, BPX-90, Silar 10CP
100 % dicyanoallyl none none 101 OV-275
Data is typical and not exclusive. The polarity scale is a linear interpolation between squalane as 0 and TCEP as 100 (see
Table 4.8). Capillary columns with bonded and crosslinked phases may exhibit small polarity variations. The notation “XX”
refers to the brand codes of multiple suppliers as listed in Table 4.1. These suppliers often sell capillary columns with the same
suffix to indicate the incorporated liquid phase. Column brands with the additional suffix “MS” (not shown) use a low-bleed
bonded and crosslinked liquid phase suitable for use with a mass spectrometer detector. At this time, only one commercial
PGC has an MS detector (Wasson).
Sources: Compiled from Agilent (2021), Barry and Grob (2007), Restek (2021b), Rotzsche (1991), and Supelco (1999, 2013).
90 The stationary phaseA common replacement is the trifluoropropyl ( C2H4CF3) group, yielding
poly[methyl(3,3,3-trifluoropropyl)siloxane], a silicone with 50 % trifluoro and
50 % methyl content. This is the formulation of the classic QF-1 liquid phase.
The trifluoro group imparts a dipole moment to the liquid phase that can
polarize and attract olefins and aromatics. More importantly, the electronega￾tive fluorine atoms have a strong affinity for solutes having free electron pairs,
notably those containing oxygen or nitrogen atoms. Thus, they strongly retain
nitriles ( CN) and carbonyl compounds (: CO) such as aldehydes and ketones.
Cyano silicones
Replacing some of the silicone methyl groups with cyanoalkyl groups like
cyanopropyl ( C3H6CN) increases the polarity and selectivity of the phase
for certain solutes. Poly[methyl(cyanopropyl)siloxane] is the basic polymer
that contains a fixed 50 % of cyano groups. As with other substitutions,
though, a copolymer of dimethyl and bis(cyanopropyl) siloxanes can have
any desired percentage of cyano nodes, allowing manufacturers to tune
the product for optimal selectivity.
Each cyano or “nitrile” group ( CN) is distant from the polymer back￾bone, which bestows a strong dipole moment for attracting polar solutes
and polarizable molecules like olefins and aromatics. Some of these phases
are adept atseparating cis- and trans-olefin isomers. In a key distinction from
the fluoro silicones, the cyano nitrogen atom can attract only electron accep￾tor molecules, giving the phase a strong affinity for alcohols, phenols, and
nitro compounds. The cyano-silicones are the most polar of the siloxane
polymers and can even supplant TCEP as #100 on the polarity scale. They
can also withstand much higher column temperatures than TCEP.
However, these highly polar phases have very low retention for nonpolar
solutes like the normal paraffins, so their high McReynolds1 constants may
be somewhat deceptive.
Multifunctional silicones
Finally, there are endless possibilities for replacing the four copolymer
methyl groups with two or more mixed functional groups to yield a unique
silicone oil having the ability to perform a desired peak separation. Here’s an
example; can you draw its structure?
poly[methyl(cyanopropyl)methylphenylsiloxane].
The profusion of possible copolymers explains the diversity of the silicone
liquid phases, yet also conveys a warning:
Proprietary liquid phases said to be equivalent are unlikely to be identical
and may not give the same performance.
Even two liquid phases with the same polymeric formula might not meet
your expectations as the polymer chain length and crosslinking may not
1
See the SCI-FILE: On Retention Data, below.
Silicone liquid phases 91be the same. To be sure, it’s wise to install only the spare columnssupplied by
the original PGC manufacturer.
Bonded phases
The copolymer production technique led to an important advancement in
capillary column technology: the bonded phase column. By reacting the
monomer inside the column itself, it’s possible to form a thin polymer film
chemically attached to the inside walls of the capillary tube. The polymer
layer can also be crosslinked by adding a little methyl vinyl siloxane into
the monomer mix. During the conditioning process, the vinyl double bond
opens to build bridges between the long polysiloxane strands. These techni￾ques reduce the vapor pressure of the liquid phase and increase its resistance
to high temperatures. For long-term operation in a PGC, the bonded and
crosslinked liquid phases are more durable than wall-coated columns. Their
liquid phase deteriorates slowly, if at all, so it generates far less of the classic
carrier gas contamination known as column bleed, resulting in reduced
detector signal noise and enhanced sensitivity.
In the past, a drawback of using a silicone packed column with a flame
detector was the silica deposits forming on the flame jet due to oxidation of
the column bleed. With a bonded-phase capillary, though, the low bleed and
low flow rate pretty much eliminate this problem. You can even rinse a
bonded-phase capillary column with a solvent without damaging its liquid
film. Consequently, when using capillary columns in a PGC, we prefer to use
bonded phases whenever possible. However, many of the highly polar liquid
phases are not available in bonded form.
A precaution
Silicone oil columns are very stable and should perform reliably for a very
long time. Nevertheless, the silicone may react with traces of oxygen or mois￾ture in the carrier gas (particularly at high column temperature), which
eventually degrades its performance. As a precaution, install oxygen and
moisture absorbers in the carrier gas line.
Prevent any strong acids or bases in the sample from reaching a silicone
column as they may react with the liquid phase and reduce column life
(Yancey 1985a). However, it’s often possible to cut off and discard the first
half-meter of a damaged capillary column with little detriment to its
performance.
Non-silicone liquid phases
Dialkyl esters
Organic esters were among the first liquid phases used in PGCs. They exhibit
a wide range of polarities and have useful selectivities, but they also have
relatively low temperature limits and are unsuitable for capillary columns.
Consequently, their usage has declined.
92 The stationary phaseYou’ll find these traditional non-polymer PGCliquid phases only in packed
columns. They are pure chemical compounds derived from the alpha–omega
dicarboxylic acids; those with acid groups at both ends of their carbon chain.
Replacing both of the acidic hydrogen atoms with identical alkyl groups (R)
forms the dialkyl ester. Typical attachments are dibutyl, di(2-ethylhexyl),
dioctyl, dinonyl, di(iso-decyl), and didecyl; all nonpolar. Another kind of
attachment includes methoxy or ethoxy groups that are more polar.
Common esters are:
The dialkyl succinates: RO2C (CH2)2 CO2R
These diesters are generally too volatile for use in industrial PGCs.
The dialkyl adipates: RO2C (CH2)4 CO2R
For example, di(isodecyl) adipate (DIDA).
The dialkyl sebacates: RO2C (CH2)8 CO2R
For example, di(2-ethylhexyl) sebacate (DEHS).
The dialkyl phthalates: RO2C C6H4 CO2R
For example, dinonyl phthalate (DNP).
Table 4.5 provides further examples. Having different dialkyl groups
tends to change the physical properties of the ester, like its vapor pressure
and viscosity, but has little effect on phase selectivity. However, the optional
methoxy and ethoxy groups do provide additional polarity.
The moderate polarity of the dialkyl adipates and sebacates derives from
the double-bonded oxygen atoms in their structure. The electron pairs on
these atoms provide targets for solutes like alcohols, capable of hydrogen
bonding.
The phthalates enjoy the additional polarizability of the central benzene
ring structure ( C6H4 ), which bestows good selectivity for olefins and
aromatics.
PGCs today rarely use the dialkyl esters. While they exhibit interesting
separation factors for special applications, they lack long-term reliability.
Their high volatility and low stability can cause more detector noise than
an equivalent silicone oil. In fact, the silicone-phase column may have an
upper temperature limit as much as 200 C higher than the dialkyl ester col￾umn it’s replacing.
Polyesters
These polymer liquid phases have a wider range of polarities and highertem￾perature limits than the dialkyl esters. An example is [poly] diethylene glycol
succinate (DEGS), popular for its high polarity. Note that the names of these
polyesters usually omit the “poly” designator, potentially causing confusion.
Like the organic esters, the core structure of a polyester is from its parent
dicarboxylic acid, from whom it inherits its name: succinate, adipate,
Non-silicone liquid phases 93sebacate, or phthalate. Each unique polyester is a copolymer of the chosen
acid and a diol. For instance:
Poly[ethylene glycol succinate] is the copolymer of ethylene glycol (HO
C2H4 OH) and succinic acid (HOOC C2H4 COOH), with the structure:
HO C2H4O CO C2H4 COO nH
Poly[diethylene glycol succinate] (DEGS) has two glycol units for each
succinic acid unit:
HO C2H4O 2 CO C2H4 COO nH
Table 4.5 Popular Non-silicone Liquid Phases.
Chemical Name Code Polar Min Max Typical Liquid Phases
C C
Moderately-Polar Ester Phases
Di(2-ethylhexyl) sebacate DEHS 16 130 Octoil S, PE-B
Bis(2-methoxyethyl) adipate BMEA 17
Diisodecyl phthalate DIDP 18
Dinonyl phthalate DNP 19 20 130 Narcoil 40
Bis(2-ethoxyethyl) sebacate BEES 30
Bis(2-butoxyethyl) phthalate BBEP 30
Tricresyl phosphatea TCP 34 20 110
High Polarity Polyol, Polyester, and Cyano Phases
Poly[propylene glycol] PPG 20 100 Ucon LB-550X
Poly[propylene glycol] PPG 38 160 Ucon 50-HB-2000
Poly[ethylene glycol] PEG-20M PEG 55 70 250 XX-Wax, Carbowax 20M, BP-20
Free fatty acid phase (modified PEG) FFAP 61 60 240 OV-351, XX-FFAP, SP-1000, BP-21
Poly[butane-1,4-diol succinate] BDS 64 50 200
Poly[ethylene glycol adipate] EGA 65 100 190 Reoflex 400b
Poly[diethylene glycol adipate] DEGA 66 50 190
Poly[ethylene glycol] PEG-1540 PEG 67 50 175 Carbowax 1540c
Poly[diethylene glycol succinate] DEGS 82 20 200 PE-P, Polyester A
Poly[ethylene glycol succinate] EGS 90 50 180
1,2,3-Tris(2-cyanoethoxy) propane TCEP 100 20 170 Fractonitril IIId
Extreme-Polarity Ionic Liquid Phases
Ionic liquid phases: >100 SLB-IL100 (#indicates polarity)
a
CAUTION: Tricresyl phosphate may contain a mixture of isomers and the ortho isomer is highly toxic. b
Reoflex is a trademark of Obschestvo s ogranichennoy otvetstvennostyu “EKOPOL.” c
Carbowax is a trademark of Dow, formerly Union Carbide, Inc. d
Fractonitril is a trademark of Merke, E.
Data istypical and not exclusive. The polarity scale is a linearinterpolation between squalane as 0 and TCEP as 100 (see Table 4.8).
The notation “XX” refers to the brand codes of multiple suppliers as listed in Table 4.1.
Sources: Data compiled from Anderson and Armstrong (2005), Barry and Grob (2007), Poole and Poole (2011), Restek (2021a),
Rotzsche (1991), and Supelco (1999, 2013).
94 The stationary phaseLike the alkyl esters, the polyesters were popular for packed columns in
older PGCs and are now becoming obsolete, in favor of cyano-substituted
silicone oils with similar selectivity and superior long-term stability.
Waxy polymers
Poly[ethylene glycol], also known as PEG or by its trade name Carbowax®, is
always a popular choice of stationary phase. Chemically, it’s a polyol (or
polyether), having a polymer chain containing many oxygen atoms:
H O C2H4 n OH
The numeral suffix, as in PEG-1540, indicates the average molar mass of the
polymer. Since the repeating unit has a molar mass of 44 da, one can estimate
the polymer chain length. For Carbowax 20M, it’s about 450 repeating units.
This waxy polymer has become the favorite PEG liquid. It performs well and
is less volatile than the lower-mass products.
PEGs are particularly good at separating polar solutes and remain popu￾lar even for capillary columns, where they invariably go by the name
“WAX.” Their strong selectivity is due to their oxygen atoms forming hydro￾gen bonds with solutes containing OH groups. They strongly retain alcohols
and phenols.
Conversely, the PEG phases are terrible for separating paraffins. As with
other highly polar phases, all nonpolar solutes elute quickly from a PEG col￾umn with little separation achieved.
The polyethylene glycols are very susceptible to damage by reaction with
oxygen or moisture in the carrier gas at high oven temperatures. Install suit￾able absorbers in carrier gas lines and run the column at the lowest feasible
temperature.
Modified PEGs are available for acidic samples. The reaction of Car￾bowax 20M with 2-nitroterephthalic acid forms Carbowax 20M-TPA.
This phase is suitable for acidic samples and is the basis of the popular
free fatty acid phase (FFAP), among others. These are general-purpose
phases and are especially good for the analysis of acidic organic com￾pounds such as phenols and carboxylic acids. They are not for basic
compounds like amines nor for aldehydes. Other formulations are avail￾able for those.
Nitrile ethers
These highly polar liquid phases are pure chemical compounds containing
multiple cyanoethoxy groups ( OC2H4CN). The most popular of these is
1,2,3-tris(2-cyanoethoxy)propane (TCEP), which is available in packed or
capillary columns. TCEP is traditionally the most polar liquid phase and acts
as #100 on the 0–100 polarity scale.
Waxy polymers 95Column temperature effects
Liquid phase temperature rating
Most PGC columns operate at moderate temperature, only occasionally
above 180 C. Even so, it’s advisable for the liquid phase rating to be as
high as possible, as that is an indication of its probable long-term stability.
The temperature ratings of chromatographic-quality silicone phases are
generally above 300 C and they are ideal for process chromatographs.
Temperature-programmed chromatographs often need to reach higher
temperatures, so temperature rating then becomes an important factor in
the choice of liquid phase.
For most solutes, column operating temperature has only a small effect
on separation factors, although there are some exceptions.
Liquid phase viscosity
A polymer isn’t a defined substance. It can have any number of repeating
monomer units. The range is enormous: a dimethyl silicone, for instance,
can have as few as 80 units (liquid) or as many as 35,000 units (gum),
resulting in a molar mass anywhere between 6,000 and 2,500,000 and a
viscosity as low as 10 mPa s or as high as 10 kPa s (Rotzsche 1991, 207).
Thus, commercial silicones said to be similar may differ in molar mass
and viscosity. Luckily, these differences have little effect on the selectivity
and polarity of the phase, but they may affect column efficiency.
In a later chapter, we’ll see how a high viscosity liquid phase reduces the
mobility of solute molecules and thereby increases the plate height of a
column, reducing its plate number. From that perspective, we prefer
low-viscosity phases. Paradoxically, however, it’s not easy to smoothly coat
a capillary surface with a thin film of low-viscosity liquid, particularly a polar
one. It’s likely to cling together and form isolated globules. A high-viscosity
phase is more likely to completely cover the capillary walls or solid support
for maximum column efficiency. Capillary column suppliersseek to mitigate
this difficulty by improving the passivation of the contact surfaces and by
bonding and crosslinking the polymer film.
Choosing a liquid phase
The practical method
The practical approach to column selection in process chromatography is
rarely the scientific or mathematical endeavor you might imagine it to be.
Indeed, a prominent professor of chromatographic science once found it
appropriate to write:
The bottom line is that stationary phase selection is often largely guesswork
(Miller 2005, 107).
96 The stationary phaseMore recently, three well-known professors offered this homely advice: Ask
someone who knows (McNair et al. 2019, 69). You might get the impression
that these experts don’t expect the well-developed theories of column perfor￾mance to be much help in selecting a stationary phase. Sadly, it’s true.
The difficulty comes down to the vast number of potential solute-solvent
pairs and the many unquantifiable interactions between them. It’s not pos￾sible to know them all. So PGC column designers work from their own expe￾rience, with some help from the performance data published by the
manufacturers of chromatographic stationary phases.
For all their diversity, many liquid phases give similar separations, so a
PGC applications team tends to limit their columns to a few stationary
phases they know well. A long time ago, Hawkes et al. (1975) concluded that
six liquid phases would be enough to perform most analyses. This was their
recommended toolkit:
A polydimethylsiloxane like OV-101, SE-30, or SP2100.
A 50 % phenyl silicone like OV-17 or SP2250.
A polyethylene glycol like Carbowax 20M.
Diethylene glycol succinate (DEGS).
A cyanopropyl silicone like Silar 10C or SP-2340.
A trifluoropropyl silicone like OV-210 or SP-2401.
A few years later, Yancey (1986) published a comparable list but with no
mention of DEGS. Today, most PGC column designers work with a similar
set of liquid phases, although there have been some developments
since 1975:
For capillary columns, silicone phases with a wide range of polarities
have replaced most of the traditional non-silicone columns. A notable
exception is poly[ethylene glycol], now universally dubbed “wax”.
For packed columns, the rush to silicones is more like a dawdle. It’s not
that the advantages of silicones don’t apply; it’s more about tradition and
habit. Of course, the nonpolar dimethyl silicone has been a favorite since
the very first PGCs. For more polar separations, though, tradition favors
the alkyl esters, polyesters, and polyols.
It’s understandable that PGC application chemists tend to favor the few
phases they know well; they would need to invest in some experimental time
before adding new liquid phases to their armory. In a busy factory, research
time is always in short supply – it’s quicker to copy columns from a previous
project that worked well. Yet, if you are a column designer, perhaps now
would be a good time to consider a wider choice of liquid phases? A new
approach might improve the long-term reliability of your product.
In addition to choosing the stationary phase, the column designer must
decide whether to use packed or capillary columns. Again, tradition plays a
role, but other motivators might factor into this decision: capillary columns
Choosing a liquid phase 97are more expensive than traditional packed or micropacked columns and
they take more space in the oven – a larger oven might be required. At
the time of writing, micropacked columns are becoming the strong favorite
for process applications.
Using retention data
Notwithstanding the influence of tradition, some science remains. For an
unfamiliar separation, an applications chemist or troubleshooter needs a
way to evaluate many liquid phases and select the best one for the job.
We have seen that liquid phase polarity is an imperfect guide to column per￾formance because polarity has multiple dimensions. Struggling with this
complexity, investigators sought to understand (and then predict) the
nuanced affinity of liquid phases for different solutes.
They almost succeeded.
In the early years of chromatography, a host of researchers published the
retention times of hundreds of solutes on a plethora of liquid phases. Unfor￾tunately, this surfeit of data was not all that useful because retention times
are totally dependent on column design and operating conditions. We
needed a standard data format.
The SCI-FILE: On Retention Data that follows describes the standard
data reporting formats and liquid phase classifications that arose, flourished,
then faded away. The SCI-FILE is optional reading as these data formats are
no longer in general use, although prevalent in the scientific literature. Yet
we encourage you to study these techniques of column classification, as they
reveal a lot about how columns work and will help you understand the mul￾tidimensionality of polarity.
SCI-FILE: On Retention Data
Retention index
To reduce the uncertainty in published retention
data, Kováts (1958) proposed the retention index.
This data reporting system is based on two proper￾ties of columns that you already know:
• The separation factor between two solutes on a
given liquid phase is largely independent of
column structure and operating conditions.
• In isothermal separations, the adjusted reten￾tion times of homologs such as the normal
paraffins increase exponentially with carbon
number.
Kováts realized he could express the retention
time of any solute relative to the retention times
of two nearby straight-chain paraffins on the same
column. Just like a separation factor, this relative
value is the ratio of two peak retention times and
tends to be independent of the column operating
conditions. It’s a true property of the liquid phase.
Kováts used the knownlinear relation between the
number of carbon atoms (n) in the normal paraffins
and the logarithm of their adjusted retention times.
To avoid having decimals, he assigned a retention
index (I) of 100n to each paraffin. For example,
n-pentane (C5) has a defined retention index of
500 on any column under any operating conditions.
98 The stationary phaseFigure 4.2 demonstrates a graphical way to esti￾mate the retention index of a solute. It’s clear that a
peak eluting between n-pentane and n-hexane
must have a retention index between 500 and 600.
To directly calculate the retention index of an
analyte, you would need to know, under identical
column conditions, the adjusted retention times
(tR ) of the analyte peak, the preceding n-paraffin
peak, and the following n-paraffin peak. There
are techniques for using more distant paraffins,
but the assumption of linearity is best reserved
for those with consecutive carbon numbers.
Then, use Equation 4.1 to get the analyte’s
retention index (Ii), a dimensionless number:
Ii = 100 n + log 10 tR i − log 10 tR n
log 10 tR n + 1 − log 10 tR n
(4.1)
Wherein the subscripts indicate:
• i is the measured peak.
• n is the immediately preceding n-paraffin.
• n + 1 is the immediately following n-paraffin.
Due to its logarithmic nature, 100 retention
index units represents a fixed multiplier of adjusted
retention time – about double for most homologs:
therefore, n-hexane (I = 600) has about twice the
adjusted retention time of n-pentane (I = 500)
and four times the adjusted retention time of n￾butane (I = 400). While there are exceptions, this
predictable retention behavior is true for many
homologous series. An additional methylene group
in a solute’s molecular structure adds about 100 to
its retention index and doubles its adjusted reten￾tion time on that column.
The retention index of a solute immediately tells
you where its peak will appear on the chromato￾gram. For instance, if I = 559, the analyte peak is
between the n-pentane and n-hexane peaks on
any column using that liquid phase. What’s more,
due to the logarithmic scale, any peak with an
index ending in 59 is midway between two paraffin
peaks on the chromatogram.
The Kováts index is simpler for columns operat￾ing on a temperature program. A uniform temper￾ature ramp creates a linear relation between the
adjusted retention time of an n-paraffin and its car￾bon number. Equation 4.1 then reduces to a simple
function of retention times (tR):
Ii = 100 n +
tR i − tR n
tR n + 1 − tR n
(4.2)
McReynolds constants
Retention index was a key improvement for report￾ing experimental data as it expresses the retention
time of a solute peak relative to the retention time
of paraffin peaks, thereby eliminating the effect of
several column variables like column length, liquid
loading, and carrierflow.Yetit’slimited to a specified
chemical compound on a specified liquid phase and
doesn’t provide a useful guide to column polarity.
The problem is that “polarity” is a vague concept
that tries to capture the affinity of a liquid phase
along a single dimension, whereas in reality affinity
is due to many different forces between the mole￾cules. From that realization, researchers sought to
discover an adequate number of polarity dimensions.
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
100 1,000
Retention Index
Adjusted Retention Time 
I = 559
tR′ = 330 s
The blue line plots the adjusted retention time of four 
paraffins, C4 – C7, on a logarithmic scale. The red lines 
indicate that the retention index of a component peak 
halfway between C5 and C6 is 559.
Figure 4.2 Principle of Retention Index.
Choosing a liquid phase 99Rohrschneider(1966) proposed that the retention
index of five standard solutes – known as probes –
would reveal the affinity of a liquid phase to specific
chemical structures in the sample molecules. Later,
McReynolds (1970) modified those standard probes
and suggested five more. However, it turned out that
the last three of the new probes were ineffective pre￾dictors, leaving seven at most. For most purposes,
though, the first five are adequate, and these are
the ones usually specified. Table 4.6 lists these
probes and the affinities they purport to reveal.
To classify a liquid phase, one measures the
retention index of each probe at 120 C and then
subtracts its retention index on squalane under
the same conditions. The difference is the McRey￾nolds Constant (MRC) for that probe on that liq￾uid phase. We deem squalane to be completely
nonpolar, so the derived MRC is solely due to the
polarity of the phase for that probe.
Suppliers often use the average of five McRey￾nolds constants to indicate the overall polarity of a
liquid phase. Mostly, they adopt a linear scale that
has squalane at zero polarity and TCEP at 100,
although they may use the nearest paraffins instead.
Several authors studied the effect of column tem￾perature on the MRC. Ashes and Haken (1973)
found the MRC of nonpolar silicones are almost
independent of temperature, while the MRC of polar
silicones tended to increase with temperature. In a
more detailed study, Santiuste and Takács (1999)
discovered negative and positive variations in each
MRC value for eight liquid phases, but the effects
were not highly significant. So the effect of temper￾ature is not of concern when using the MRC values
to choose a suitable liquid phase.
Unfortunately, the maximum operating tempera￾ture for squalane (C30H62) is about 120 C. To over￾come this constraint, several investigators studied
Apolane-87 (C87H176) as a potential zero-polarity liq￾uid phase for classification schemes (Riedo et al.
1976; Matisová et al. 1988; Poole et al. 1989). This
synthetic paraffin has a higher temperature limit
and is available in pure form. Not much became of
this idea because the new fused-silica capillary col￾umns were so efficient that liquid phase selection
tools quickly became irrelevant.
Yet PGC columns sometimes need higher selec￾tivity than those used in the laboratory and an
applications chemist may need to consider a wider
range of liquid phases. McReynolds constants
might still be useful for that more-complex task.
Using McReynolds
McReynolds constants for liquid phases are quoted
in suppliers’ literature and remain a useful way to
explore the five dimensions of polarity; they’re a
good place to start when looking for a suitable col￾umn. Table 4.8 lists MRC for an illustrative set of
phases, but the vendors publish far more.
One use for the McReynolds constants is to con￾firm that certain liquid phases are equivalent. Con￾sider the five silicones listed in Table 4.7. Their
MRCs show them to be nonpolar phases, all with
essentially identical selectivity.
Table 4.6 McReynolds Probes.
# Probe Reveals liquid affinity for:
X Benzene Aromatics, olefins
Y 1-Butanol Alcohols, nitriles, acids, and
halogen compounds
Z 2-Pentanone Aldehydes, ketones, ethers,
esters, and epoxides
U Nitropropane Nitro and nitrile compounds
S Pyridine Heterocyclic compounds
Each of the probe samples purports to test the liquid phase
for its affinity for different structural features in the solute
molecules. These affinities are related to the different
intermolecular forces involved in polarity.
Table 4.7 Confirming Equivalent Liquid Phases.
Phase X Y Z U S
SE-30 15 53 44 64 41
OV-1 16 55 44 65 42
OV-101 17 57 45 67 43
SP-2100 17 57 45 67 43
DC-200 16 57 45 68 44
The McReynolds constants show that these five dimethyl
silicone phases are practically identical in selectivity and
will give much the same separations. However, the phases
may differ in viscosity and temperature rating.
Source: Adapted from Ohio Valley Specialty Company.
100 The stationary phaseThe McReynolds constants contain more infor￾mation than is immediately apparent. Recall that
the science behind the retention index system is
the logarithmic increase of solubility – and hence
adjusted retention time – of the n-paraffins. Each
additional methylene group ( CH2 ) in a paraffin
increases its retention index by 100, and its adjusted
retention time about doubles. This predictable
behavior also occursin other chemical series that dif￾fer only by methylene count. When you know the
retention index of one member of the series, you
can instantly predict the index of another member.
As an example, consider the tricresyl phosphate
data in Table 4.8. For 1-butanol, the MRC value is:
Y = 321. From NIST (2018), the retention index
for 1-butanol on squalane is 644. Therefore, the
retention index for 1-butanol on TCP is:
I
TCP
1 − C4OH = 644 + 321 = 965
That index value indicates that the 1-butanol
(C4H9OH) will elute between n-nonane and
n-decane as shown in Figure 4.3. In addition, we
know that alcohols follow the methylene rule: each
methylene group contributes 100 units to the reten￾tion index. We thereby deduce that:
• 1-Propanol (C3H7OH) has an index value of
about 865 and elutes between n-octane and
n-nonane with about half the adjusted retention
time of the 1-butanol.
Table 4.8 Selectivity of Common Liquid Phases.
Liquid Phase Typical McReynolds Constants
X Y Z U S Mean Polarity
Squalane (reference phase) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Nonpolar
50:50 Poly[methyl (n-octyl) siloxane] 3 14 11 12 11 10 1
Apolane-87 21 10 3 12 25 14 2
Poly[dimethyl siloxane] 16 55 44 65 42 44 5
20:80 Poly[diphenyl and dimethyl siloxanes] 69 113 111 171 128 118 14
Slightly
Di(2-ethylhexyl) sebacate – DEHS 72 168 108 180 125 131 16
polar
Dinonyl phthalate 83 183 147 231 159 135 16
35:65 Poly[methylphenyl and dimethyl siloxanes] 102 142 145 219 178 157 19
50:50 Poly[diphenyl and dimethyl siloxanes] 125 175 183 268 220 194 23
Moderately polar
50:50 Poly[diphenyl and methylphenyl siloxanes] 160 188 191 283 253 215 26
Tricresyl phosphate – TCP 176 321 250 374 299 284 34
Poly[trifluoropropyl methyl siloxane] 146 238 358 468 310 304 37
Poly[neopentyl glycol adipate] – NPGA 234 425 312 402 438 362 46
Carbowax® 20Ma 322 536 368 572 510 462 56
Poly[diethylene glycol adipate] – DEGA 378 603 460 665 658 553 66
Highly polar
Carbowax 1540 (PEG1540) 371 639 453 666 641 554 67
Poly[diethylene glycol succinate] – DEGS 496 746 590 837 835 701 84
Poly[bis(3-cyanopropyl) siloxane] 520 757 659 942 800 736 88
1,2,3-Tris(2-cyanoethoxy) propane – TCEP 594 857 759 1,031 917 832 100
Poly[dicyanoallyl siloxane] 629 872 763 1,106 849 844 101
a
Carbowax is a registered trademark of Dow Chemical.
McReynolds probes: X = benzene, Y = 1-butanol, Z = 2-pentanone, U = nitropropane, and S = pyridine.
The overall polarity of aliquid phaseis alinearinterpolationofitsaverageMcReynolds constant,withsqualane= 0 and TECP = 100.
Data is typical, not exclusive, and compiled from manufacturer’s published data sheets. Reported McReynolds constants vary
by about ±4 index units, but such small variations usually have an insignificant effect on separation.
Sources: Ohio Valley (2013), Phenomenex (2020), Restek (2021a, 2021b), and Supelco (1997).
Choosing a liquid phase 101Making a choice
Are McReynolds constants useful?
The SCI-FILE explains the origin and use of the McReynolds constants to
categorize liquid phases. We recommend that you learn how they work.
They certainly give insight into the retention behavior of a column and
• 1-Pentanol (C5H11OH) has a retention index
of about 1065 and elutes after n-decane with
about twice the adjusted retention time of the
1-butanol.
Figure 4.3 shows the predicted positions of the
alcohol peaks on the TCP chromatogram.
System constants
From an academic perspective, McReynolds con￾stants give an imprecise insight into the interac￾tions between the liquid phase and solute. An
updated approach after Abraham et al. (1999)
attempts to model the mechanisms involved in
the solvation process. As it happens, this solvation
parameter model also results in five liquid phase
descriptors known as system constants.
In addition, each solute has five moderating fac￾tors – one for each system constant – to calibrate
the ability of that solute to participate in the speci￾fied intermolecular interaction. The goal is to
develop procedures to calculate these solute factors
from the known structure of a solute molecule.
In theory, the retention factor of any solute on
any liquid phase obtains from the sum of the mod￾ified system constants (Poole 2012, 140):
log k = c + eE + sS + aA + bB + lL (4.3)
Wherein, lowercase letters represent the fixed
system constants of the liquid phase and uppercase
letters are the structural modifiers of the solute.
At present, column designers don’t find the solv￾ation parameters model useful in their daily work
of selecting liquid phases for PGC columns.
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600 650 700 750 800 850 900 950 1000
Elapsed Time (s) n-Octane
I = 800
n-Nonane
I = 900
n-Decane
I = 1000
n-Undecane
I = 1100
Predicted
1-Propanol
@ I = 865
Predicted
1-Pentanol
@ I = 1065
Predicted
1-Butanol
@ I = 965
Air @
30 s
(tM)
Predicted peak positions for alcohols on a tricresyl phosphate column. See text for explanation. 
Figure 4.3 Predicting Retention by McReynolds Constants.
102 The stationary phasealmost succeed in predicting its behavior with different analytes. Yet most
practical chromatographers don’t use them and some suppliers no longer
specify them for their products.
It seems there are three reasons for this neglect:
Most gas chromatographs perform standard analytical methods with spe￾cified columns; their owners have no incentive to experiment with differ￾ent liquid phases. Vendors now sell columns for standard applications
without even specifying what the column contains.
Most laboratory applications now use capillary columns, so the choice of
liquid phase is not a critical issue. A few highly efficient capillary col￾umns can separate almost any mixture of analytes.
The McReynolds constants don’t provide an intuitive way to select a liq￾uid phase. There’s no direct connection between McReynolds values and
the separation of specific peaks; it takes knowledge and experience to
interpret their meaning. It’s often easier to try a few columns and see
what works.
Nevertheless, PGC applications engineers need to design columns for the
fastest possible analysis in a wide variety of applications. On occasion, they
may need some help to find a suitable liquid phase. Perhaps then, McRey￾nolds will be useful. Table 4.8 gives examples of the McReynolds constants
for a few popular liquid phases. For those not listed, visit the vendor’s web￾site or consult the reference works listed in Recommended Reading at the
end of this chapter.
Adsorption columns
Distribution in GLC and GSC
Unlike the nonvolatile liquid used in gas-liquid chromatography (GLC), the
stationary phase in gas-solid chromatography (GSC) is an adsorbent solid.
The theories of chromatographic peak formation for solid-phase col￾umns and liquid-phase columns are similar. In their simple forms, both
theories presume that a sequence of instantaneous equilibria occurs as
an analyte migrates through the column. In all these equilibria, the ratio
of analyte concentration in the stationary phase [A]S to analyte concentra￾tion in the gas phase [A]M is constant and is the distribution constant
(Kc), where:
Kc = A S
A M
(4.4)
Given this core assumption, the theoretical plate theory introduced in
Chapter 2 predicts that chromatogram peaks will follow the symmetric
Gaussian shape. In GLC, our best peaks really do follow this expectation
of symmetry, albeit slightly distorted due to the imperfections discussed in
Adsorption columns 103Chapter 8. This empirical evidence supports the idea that the distribution
constant for a solute between a liquid phase and a gas phase is indeed con￾stant, at least for small sample volumes.
We find no such assurance in GSC. With solid adsorbents, peak asymme￾try is the rule, rather than the exception. Unlike solvation in a liquid, adsorp￾tion on a solid is often a nonlinear process. There are two forms of
nonlinearity that can affect adsorption. In both cases, the distribution of
adsorbate molecules between the solid phase and the gas phase is not con￾stant but varies with the amount of analyte involved.
The most common type of nonlinearity is a reduction in the distribu￾tion constant as the analyte concentration increases: fewer molecules
stick. Theorists conject that a finite number of adsorption sites exist at
the surface and as these become filled, gas molecules have fewer opportu￾nities to adhere.
A less common type of nonlinearity occurs when the first few molecules
adsorbed on a surface facilitate the adsorption of more molecules. This
results in an increase of the distribution constant as the concentration of
adsorbate increases: more molecules stick.
Adsorption isotherms
The adsorption process is temperature dependent; less gas adsorbs at a
higher temperature. An isothermal graphic that relates the amount of an
analyte adsorbed to the amount of that analyte remaining in the gas phase
is known as an adsorption isotherm. Any deviation from linearity is clearly
visible in the isotherm.
Figure 4.4 illustrates the nonlinear adsorption behavior predicted by the
Langmuir isotherm, a simple model of gas-solid equilibrium that predicts
a lower rate of adsorption at high solute concentrations (Langmuir 1918).
The curves in this figure are for illustrative purposes and don’t pertain to
a real gas-solid system. The two curves are the same isotherm plotted at dif￾ferentsensitivity. The green curve expandsthe lower end of the blue curve by
25 times and reveals that the quantity of gas adsorbed can be quite linear
when the solid surface is not close to saturation.
The solid surface is more likely to approach saturation when an analyte is
at a high concentration or when its molecules have a strong affinity for that
surface. Thus, the chromatogram peaks for low-concentration analytes and
low-affinity gases are often quite symmetrical, but the peaks for strongly￾held substances may be severely distorted.
Nonideal peak shape
To understand the effect of inconstant adsorption on peak shape, recall that
the migration rate of peak molecules through a column depends on the
percentage of solute molecules retained by the stationary phase. If this
percentage isn’t constant, neither is the rate of migration.
104 The stationary phaseA chromatogram peak represents a varying analyte concentration. So
when fewer molecules adsorb at higher concentrations, the top of the peak
migrates faster than its base, forming a tailing peak on the chromatogram
like the blue peak in Figure 4.4.
Less commonly, the percentage of the analyte molecules adsorbed rises as
their concentration increases, driving the adsorption isotherm to curl
upwards instead of drooping downwards like the blue curve does in
Figure 4.4. The extra adsorption at higher concentrations causes the top
of the peak to migrate slower than its base thereby forming a fronting peak
on the chromatogram as shown by the orange peak in Figure 4.4.
Note that an irregular peak shape due to the asymmetric distribution of
analyte molecules doesn’t affect the detector sensitivity, and all the mole￾cules are counted. Therefore, the area of the peak is unaffected by its asym￾metry and is still valid. However, peak height measurement is inappropriate
with asymmetric peaks.
Activation
Active-solid adsorbents strongly retain water, polar solutes, or oil mist in the
sample – an irreversible process at low-column temperature. The adsorbed
molecules then block access to the adsorption sites by the analyte molecules.
You can slow the deactivation process by the meticulousremoval of moisture
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
0
0.06
0.12
0.18
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.9
0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0
Blue Curve: Analyte Partial Presssure in Gas Phase (kPa)
Green Curve: Analyte Adsorbed (mL)
Blue Curve: Analyte Adsorbed (mL)
Green Curve: Analyte Partial Presssure in Gas Phase (kPa)
High Conc
Low Conc
390 410 430
390 410 430
The same isotherm plotted at low gas concentrations (green and red curves) and at 25 times higher gas concentration 
(blue curve).
 The amount of gas adsorbed onto a solid surface may be closely linear with concentration at low gas concentrations 
(green and red curves) but significantly nonlinear at higher concentrations (blue curve). This nonlinearity distorts the 
peak shape. Commonly, a lower percentage of the gas adsorbs when the gas concentration is high (blue curve), so 
the center of the peak moves faster than its base and causes a tailing chromatogram peak (blue peak). Rarely, a 
higher percentage of the gas adsorbs when the gas concentration is high (isotherm not shown), so the center of the 
peak moves slower than its base and causes a fronting chromatogram peak (orange peak).
Figure 4.4 Effect of Adsorption Isotherm on Peak Shape.
Adsorption columns 105from the carrier gas and by using a protective column arrangement, but you
can never eliminate it. The separation always deteriorates over time, even￾tually requiring column replacement or reactivation.
You can reactivate an adsorption column by heating it forseveral hours at
a specified temperature, typically (300 C ± 50 C), with carrier gas flow.
Molecular sieves
These traditional column packings are based on natural minerals known as
zeolites, although the pure forms needed for industrial applications are
manufactured products. Their crystalline structure incorporates cage-like
formations about the same size as gas molecules. These formations retain
some gas molecules and allow others to pass by, yielding a separation by
molecular size. There are hundreds of known structures, but only two are
useful as stationary phases:
Molecular sieve 5A has a pore size of 5 Å (0.5 nm) and is a calcium
aluminum silicate.
Molecular sieve 13X has a pore size of 13 Å (1.3 nm) and is a sodium
aluminum silicate.
These columns are fragile and need special care. The carrier gas must be
devoid of water vapor and carbon dioxide as these gases are permanently
adsorbed, spoiling the separation of analytes. The adsorbent particles are fri￾able and don’t tolerate shock, including shock from column switching.
Never backflush a molecular sieve column.
PGCs use the zeolite molecular sieves only for the permanent gas separa￾tions listed in Table 4.9, notably the separation of nitrogen from oxygen.
Packed columns can’t separate argon from oxygen at typical PGC column
temperatures.
It’s now possible to coat the wall of a metal capillary column with a layer
of a molecular sieve to form a rugged porous-layer open-tubular (PLOT) col￾umn. A “thick-film” (50 μm) PLOT column can separate all permanent and
noble gases – even argon from oxygen (de Zeeuw 2000).
Carbon
The two forms of carbon used as a stationary phase are carbon molecular
sieves and graphitized carbon. A wide array of materials are available that dif￾fer in particle form, pore size and shape, and surface treatment. For detailed
technical information refer to the informative review by Supelco (2015b).
Carbon molecular sieves are rigid spherical beads made by the controlled
pyrolysis of a pure polymer. Unlike the zeolites, their mechanism of separa￾tion relies on molecular velocity rather than molecular size. Their nonpolar
surface chemistry enables them to separate polar molecules without exces￾sive adsorption. For example, hydrogen sulfide, formaldehyde, and water, as
well as the inorganic gases and C1–C3 hydrocarbons (Poole 2019).
Graphitized carbon is granular and friable. When coated on the wall of a
capillary tube, it forms a PLOT column. The manufacturer can treat the car￾bon particles with potassium hydroxide or picric acid for separating basic or
106 The stationary phaseacidic compounds, respectively. Another option is to coat the particles with a
non-silicone liquid phase, which gives the carbon a unique selectivity, even
for polar analytes like alcohols in water. As stationary phases, graphitized
carbon comes in two varieties: a product with low surface area that can hold
up to 1 % of a liquid phase, and another with high surface area that can hold
up to a 10 %. Favorite liquid phases are Carbowax 20M or TCEP.
Silica gel or porous silica
Silica gel was the first column packing used in gas chromatography. When
activated by heating to remove adsorbed water, silica gel can separate some
of the permanent gases and light hydrocarbons. PGC columns rarely use
activated silica gel nowadays because it inexorably adsorbs water and grad￾ually deactivates, spoiling the separation.
For packed columns, poroussilica beads have a range of characteristicsthat
depend on their pore size. For example, Unibeads 1S, 2S, and 3S are spherical
silica beadswith pore sizes 2.5, 7, and 10 nm,respectively, and three size ranges:
30–60, 60–80, and 80–100 mesh. All are good for operation up to 200 C.
Unipak S beads can separate methane, ethane, ethylene, and acetylene.
When using a temperature program, they can also separate many of the
C3–C5 hydrocarbon gases. A very popular column for light hydrocarbon
separation is n-octane bonded on silica (Burger 2013).
Silica can also coat the wall of a PLOT column giving excellent selectivity
and rapid analysis of the C1–C3 hydrocarbons or halocarbons. Sharp peaks
obtain also for sulfur compounds such as hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide,
and carbonyl sulfide (de Zeeuw 2000).
Table 4.9 Typical Active Solid Stationary Phases.
Type Product Namea Typical Applications
Molecular sieves Type 5A
Type 13X zeolites
Separation of permanent gases: hydrogen, oxygen + argon, nitrogen, methane,
and carbon monoxide
ArDSieve® Separation of permanent gases including argon and oxygen
Carbosieve®, Carboxen®,
or Spherocarb®
Permanent gases, carbon oxides, light hydrocarbons, dinitrogen oxide, sulfur
dioxide, and hydrogen sulfide in the presence of water vapor
Graphited
carbon
Carbopack®,
CarboBlack®
Versatile when coated with a liquid phase
Porous silica Silica gel Light hydrocarbons (rarely used in PGC)
Unibeads® C Permanent gases, carbon monoxide, and carbon dioxide
Unibeads® S Carbon dioxide; C1–C4 paraffins, olefins, and acetylenes
Other adsorbents Salted alumina Can separate all of the C1–C4 hydrocarbons
Bentone® 34 Separates ethylbenzene and the three xylene isomers
a
ArDSieve is a trademark of ASDevices; Bentone is a trademark of Elementis Specialties, Inc.; CarboBlack is a trademark of
Restek Corporation; Carboxen, Carbopack, Carbosieve, and Spherocarb are trademarks of Sigma-Aldrich Inc.; Chromosorb is
a trademark of Manville Corporation; Unibeads is a trademark of Mitsubishi Chemical Company.
For a highly detailed wall chart on porous polymers and other solid stationary phases, refer to Camsco (2009).
The temperature limits for these stationary phases are way above PGC operating temperatures, mostly 400 C.
Sources: Data compiled from Barry and Grob (2007), Rotzsche (1991), Hepp and Klee (1987), and Supelco (2003, 2015a, 2015b).
Adsorption columns 107Alumina
Activated alumina was a common packing in early chromatographs but was
unreliable because of its propensity to absorb water and other polar mole￾cules, thereby deactivating itself. It’s also friable. A modern approach is to
deactivate the alumina with salts like potassium chloride or sodium sulfate.
Alumina PLOT columns are excellent for laboratory petroleum analysis as
they can separate all of the C1–C4 hydrocarbons(about 20 compounds). Even
so, they are generally too unstable for autonomous online operation and
rarely used by PGC’s.
Porous polymers
Porous polymers are the synthetic polymer beads first introduced to gas
chromatography by Hollis (1966). Here are the main commercial products:
Chromosorb column packings offer a choice of eight different polymers
identified by a suffix numeral from 101 to 108. The numeral is nominal
and doesn’t indicate polarity. They are available in three mesh sizes
60–80, 80–100, and 100–120. As noted in Table 4.10, several of the orig￾inal varieties are now obsolete; discontinued by the manufacturer.
HayeSep column packings come in three mesh sizes 60–80, 80–100, and
100–120, and in 10 varieties designated in increasing polarity as D, Q, P,
S, R, C, A, B, N, and T. Hayes claims that HayeSep and Porapak products
with identical letter grades are interchangeable, although the match may
not be perfect.
Porapak column packings are available in three mesh sizes 50–80,
80–100, and 100–120, and in 6 varieties designated in increasing polarity
as P, Q, R, S, N, and T (Waters 2008). There are also silanized versions of
P and Q designated as PS and QS.
Even when their polymer formulations are nominally identical, products
from different suppliers may differ in selectivity. Table 4.10 identifies some
approximate equivalents.
Typical PGC applications for porous polymers are process gases or vola￾tile liquids: permanent gases; light hydrocarbons; carbon, nitrogen, or sulfur
oxides; halocarbons; nitrogen or sulfur compounds; and water. They can
uniquely produce a symmetric peak for water and you can locate it anywhere
on the chromatogram by selecting an appropriate polymer.
The porous polymers are intermediate in affinity, typically stronger than
a liquid phase but weaker than an active solid adsorbent. Chemically, they
mostly comprise crosslinked styrene-divinylbenzene polymer chains.
The more polar products incorporate various additives into the polymer
chain structure to increase polarity.
Hepp and Klee (1987) studied the polarity of Chromosorb and Porapak
polymers using three of the McReynolds probes. They classified polymer
polarity along three dimensions: proton donating, proton accepting, and
dipole attraction. Their results indicate that Chromosorb 104 is extremely
108 The stationary phasepolar, an evaluation which differsfrom that of Hayes(2020) but is now moot;
the manufacturer has discontinued Chromosorb 104. Yet it serves to remind
us that polarity is an elusive concept, highly dependent upon the variables
measured and the column operating conditions. In addition, all porous poly￾mers are susceptible to small batch variations and ageing during use.
We can now make porous polymers by in situ polymerization, depositing
a layer of crosslinked polymer on the inside tube wall of a passivated metal
capillary tube. These PLOT columns can separate most volatile substances
and are durable enough for process applications.
Table 4.10 Typical Porous Polymer Stationary Phases.
Product Namea Typical Applications
Chromosorb
HayeSep
Porapak
Max
T C
Note: The products grouped together have similar but not identical selectivity.
The Chromosorb brand products listed in parens are no longer available from
the manufacturer, but column supply companies may have limited stocks. We included
them here for reference only.
Lower polarity
D 290 Light hydrocarbons, carbon oxides, acetylene, hydrogen sulfide, methanol, ethylene
oxide, and impurities in water
106 Q Q 275 Alkane–alkene–alkyne separation, organics in water (water elutes quickly), hydrogen
sulfide, alcohols, nitrogen oxides, and freons
101 P P 275
250
Permanent gases, light hydrocarbons, ammonia, water, alcohols, aldehydes, ketones,
and chloroform (no amines)
S S 250 Alcohol isomers, carbonyls, and halogens (no nitro compounds)
(102)
(105)
250
200
Alkane–alkene–alkyne separation and organics in aqueous solution
Higher polarity
R R 250 Alcohols, chlorine, hydrogen chloride, ethers, esters, nitriles, nitroalkanes, and water
107 225 Medium polarity analytes, sulfur gases, and formaldehyde
(104) C 250 Hydrogen cyanide, nitriles, nitroalkanes, sulfur dioxide, hydrogen sulfide, vinyl
chloride, carbon dioxide, and water
A 165 Permanent gases, argon–oxygen, carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxide, hydrogen sulfide,
and water
(103) B 190 Alkali gases: ammonia, light amines, hydrazine, phosphine, water, alcohols,
aldehydes, and ketones (no glycols or nitro compounds)
N N 165 Ammonia, carbon dioxide, and water; ethane, ethylene, and acetylene; hydrogen
sulfide and carbonyl sulfide
T T 165 Light hydrocarbons, ammonia, alcohols, and aldehydes. Strongly retains water
108 225 Polar analytes, oxygenates, and water holdup.
a
Chromosorb is a trademark of Imerys Minerals California, Inc.; HayeSep is a trademark of Hayes SeparationsInc.; Porapak is
a trademark of Waters Corporation.
Arranged approximately in ascending order of polarity according to Hayes (2020). For a highly detailed wall chart on porous
polymers and other solid stationary phases, refer to Camsco (2009).
Sources: Data compiled from Barry and Grob (2007), Hayes (2020), Hepp and Klee (1987), Ohio Valley (2013), Rotzsche (1991),
Supelco (2019), and Waters (2008).
Adsorption columns 109Knowledge Gained
Theory
Adjusted retention times of the n-paraffins
increase in exponential proportion to their
carbon numbers.
Kováts assigned a retention index (I) to n‑par￾affins equal to 100 timestheir carbon numbers.
I is the carbon number (×100) of a hypothet￾ical n‑paraffin with the same retention as the
solute.
I indicates the logarithmic location of a solute
peak relative to the two-bracketing n-paraffin
peaks.
Adding a methylene group to any compound
increases its retention index by about 100.
The retention index with a constantly increas￾ing column temperature is linear, not
logarithmic.
Rohrschneider said that five probe solutes
would reveal multiple dimensions of liquid
phase polarity.
McReynolds measured the retention index of
10 probes on the tested liquid phase and on
squalane.
Each probe intends to represent a different
kind of electronic interaction with the tested
liquid phase.
McReynolds deducted the probe retention
indices on squalane from those on the tested
liquid phase.
McReynolds constants (MRC) are the
observed retention index differences for each
probe solute.
It’s now thought that five probes are enough to
adequately characterize a liquid phase.
MRC values can confirm that two liquid
phases will produce essentially equivalent
separations.
MRC values can predict the position of cer￾tain peaks (but not all) on the chromatogram.
The weakness of MRC is that all probe solutes
have multiple interactions with the liq￾uid phase.
A newer theory uses System Constants to iso￾late individual interactions, but interest
has waned.
Liquid phases
Most PGCs use low-efficiency packed or capil￾lary columns and need good separationfactors.
Therefore, process GCs employ many more
liquid phases than laboratory GCs do.
PGC manufacturers no longer label their col￾umns with full specifications – they use codes
instead.
Nominally equivalent columns from two ven￾dors might not perform identically.
If changing a PGC application, consider a new
column system from the original PGC vendor.
The concepts of affinity and polarity are
vague and subject to subjective interpretation.
Polarity is a unique and complex mix of forces
that depend upon the solute, as well as the
solvent.
For experienced designers, liquid phase polar￾ity is still a useful guide for column selection.
A useful starting point is to choose a liquid
phase that resembles the analytes: “like dis￾solves like.”
110 The stationary phaseA nonpolar column separates all analytes by
vapor pressure and peaks are in boiling point
order.
A polar column also separates in boiling
point order, then adds retention from polar
interactions.
There exists a profusion of polar liquid phases
giving the column designer many options.
We prefer nonpolar liquid phases for their
stability, predictability, efficiency, and ease
of coating.
But polar liquid phases create many unique
separations that nonpolar liquids cannot do.
The best way to choose a liquid phase may be
to ask someone who knows.
Most PGC column designers select from about
one dozen stationary phases they know well.
The standard toolbox will include several
methyl, phenyl, fluoro, and cyano silicones
and a PEG wax.
Packed columns are popular for PGCs and
are less expensive than wall-coated metal
capillaries.
Silicone phases
The many silicones are all polysiloxanes hav￾ing low vapor pressure and high stability.
The polymer chain length may vary, so sili￾cone oils and gums may have widely different
viscosities.
The basic silicone, polydimethylsiloxane, is
almost nonpolar and the most popular of
all liquid phases.
The dimethyl silicone has a long polymer
chain of alternate silicon and oxygen atoms.
The polymer chain has two methyl groups
attached to each silicon atom.
In othersilicone phases phenyl, fluoro, or cyano
groups replace some of the methyl groups.
A polymer from a single monomer can have
50 % or 100 % of methyl groups replaced by
new groups.
A copolymer from multiple monomers can
have any chosen percentage of many substi￾tute groups.
Replacing the methyl groups with longer par￾affinic attachments makes a silicone even
more nonpolar.
Adding phenyl groups increases the retention
of both nonpolar and polar solutes.
Phenyl silicones have an increased affinity for
olefins, aromatics, and polar solutes.
Fluoro silicones have enhanced polarity, and
a unique affinity for carbonyl and nitrile
compounds.
Cyano silicones have the highest polarity, and
an affinity for alcohols, phenols, and nitro
compounds.
The formulation of many silicones is propriety
and may include multiple functional groups.
By polymerizing the siloxane monomers in
situ, the liquid phase chemically attaches to
the tube wall.
Bonded liquid phases have reduced column
bleed, allowing higher detector sensitivity.
A small addition of vinyl siloxane will cross￾link the polymer chains for additional phase
stability.
To avoid damage to a silicone column, remove
all oxygen and moisture from the carrier gas.
Non-silicone phases
Older PGCs often used dialkyl esters like dino￾nyl phthalate but these are now becoming
obsolete.
Adsorption columns 111With medium polarity, the diesters can sepa￾rate olefins, acetylenes, alcohols, and
aromatics.
But diester phases have high volatility, low￾temperature limits, and low long-term
stability.
Polyesters like DEGS have low volatility and
high polarity and remain popular in packed
columns.
Polyesters are losing market to cyanosilicones
with similar selectivity and higher tempera￾ture ratings.
Polyols (sometimes called polyethers) remain
popular for their high polarity and selectivity.
Polyethylene glycol (reimagined as “wax”) is
the favorite polar phase in packed or capillary
columns
The name of a polyethylene glycol includes its
molar mass as a suffix; like Carbowax 1500.
PEG columns are highly polar and give excellent
separations of polar solutes, notably alcohols.
Hydrocarbons and other nonpolar analytes
are not well separated on highly polar col￾umns like PEG.
Remove moisture and oxygen from the carrier
gas to avoid damaging a PEG column.
Modified polyethylene glycol phases are avail￾able for acidic or basic samples.
Nitrile ethers like TCEP have long been the
liquid of choice to separate polar analytes.
Solid phases
The distribution constant for a gas–solid
equilibrium is unlikely to be constant.
Often, the proportion of molecules adsorbed
by a solid decreases as their concentration
increases.
A decrease in the percent adsorbed at higher
concentration can create a severely fron￾ting peak.
Rarely, the proportion of molecules adsorbed
by a solid increases as their concentration
increases.
An increase in the percent adsorbed at higher
concentration can create a severely tail￾ing peak.
An isotherm is a plot of amount adsorbed ver￾sus analyte concentration at constant
temperature.
An isotherm is linear only if the distribution
constant is really constant.
Solid adsorbents lose their retention ability
due to adsorbing water and other polar
substances.
Zeolite molecular sieves will separate perma￾nent gases including oxygen and nitrogen.
A PLOT molecular sieve column can separate
all noble and permanent gases.
Water doesn’t deactivate carbon molecular
sieves and they can separate many gases
and vapors.
Graphitized carbon PLOT columns can be
acid or alkali treated or coated with a non￾silicone liquid.
Porous silica PLOT or packed columns sepa￾rate light hydrocarbons and other volatiles.
A salted alumina PLOT column can separate
all of the C1–C4 hydrocarbons.
Porous polymers can separate a wide range of
compounds and several polarities are
available.
Polymerizing the styrene in situ forms a thin
porous-polymer coating on the PLOT col￾umn wall.
112 The stationary phaseDid you get it?
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 04
Q1. What kind of forces cause the affinity that a liquid phase hasfor a solute? Select
one answer:
A. Chemical forces
B. Electronic forces
C. Magnetic forces
D. Kinetic forces
E. Gravitational forces
Q2. What properties of an analyte can we use to predict its retention on a nonpolar
column? Select all the correct answers:
A. The polarity of the analyte molecule.
B. The size of the analyte molecule.
C. The vapor pressure of the analyte at column temperature.
D. The boiling point of the analyte.
E. The analyte retention index on that column.
F. The McReynolds constants of that column.
Q3. What kind of column would you use to separate some paraffins having the
same formula; that is, isomers of each other?
A. A poly[dimethylsiloxane] column like OV-1.
B. A poly[ethylene glycol] column like Carbowax 20M.
Q4. There are two silicone liquid phases with 50 % phenyl groups along their pol￾ymer backbone (that is, discounting the ends). In what way are their molecular
structures different? The two liquid phases are:
A. A polymer of methyl phenyl siloxane.
B. A 50:50 copolymer of dimethyl siloxane and diphenyl siloxane.
Q5. Researchers using beeswax as a stationary phase found it’s McReynolds con￾stants are: 43, 110, 61, 88, and 122. What is the polarity of beeswax on the
0–100 scale used in Table 4.8?
Q6. Given that an isothermal column has a holdup time of 50 seconds, and a
retention time of 350 seconds for n-pentane, estimate the retention time of a
component that has a retention index of 550.
Q7. When using a solid adsorbent column, what shape are the peaks when:
A. The adsorption isotherm is linear?
B. The adsorption isotherm curves downward for increasing adsorbate
concentrations?
C. The adsorption isotherm curves upward for increasing adsorbate concen￾trations?
Check your SAQ answers with those given in the back of the book.
References
Further reading
For technical information about liquid phase selection and performance, refer to:
The detailed update on silicone liquid phases and their properties; Silicone Sta￾tionary Phases for Gas Chromatography by Lars Blomberg (2001).
The lucid encyclopedia article: Liquid Phases for Gas Chromatography by Nich￾olas Snow (2012).
References 113The comprehensive textbook: Columns for Gas Chromatography: Performance
and Selection by Barry and Grob (2007).
The cyclopedic reference work: Stationary Phases in Gas Chromatography by
Harald Rotzsche (1991).
The now-dated but still relevant early textbook: Stationary Phases in Gas Chro￾matography by Baiulescu and Ilie (1975).
There’s also a series of articles by Yancey (1985–1994) that may be helpful. Joel Yan￾cey was a petroleum chemist at BP America,so his experience isrelevant to gas chro￾matography in the oil and chemical industries.
For online selection tools and practical information, visit the suppliers’ websites
and also download their helpful literature, for example:
Gas Chromatography Supplies Catalog 62 from Ohio Valley (2013).
GC Column Selection: Tips and Guidelines and Separation Solutions Guide from
Phenomenex (2017, 2020).
GC Column Selection Guide from Supelco (2013).
Rxi GC Columns and Guide to GC Column Selection and Optimizing Separations
from Restek (2021a).
Unfortunately, the more recent editions of supplier guides are becoming less infor￾mative, following a trend in the industry to promote proprietary columns forspecific
applications.
Cited
Abraham, M.H., Poole, C.F., and Poole, C.K. (1999). Classification of stationary
phases and other materials by gas chromatography. Journal of Chromatography
A 842, 79–114.
Agilent (2021). Standard Polysiloxane GC Columns. Santa Clara, CA: Agilent Tech￾nologies. Accessed 2021-01-11 at: www.agilent.com. Inc.
Anderson,J.L. and Armstrong, D.W. (2005). Immobilized ionic liquids as high-selec￾tivity/high-temperature/high-stability gas chromatography stationary phases.
Analytical Chemistry 77, 6453–6462.
Ashes,J.R. and Haken,J.K. (1973). The effect of temperature on the retention behav￾ior and polarity of several polysiloxane stationary phases. Journal of Chromatog￾raphy A 84, 231–239.
Baiulescu, G.E. and Ilie, V.A. (1975). Stationary Phases for Gas Chromatography.
Oxford, UK: Pergamon Press.
Barry, E.F. and Grob, R.L. (2007). Columns for Gas Chromatography: Performance
and Selection. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Blomberg, L.G. (2001). Silicone Stationary Phases for Gas Chromatography. In:
LC•GC Europe, February 2001.
Burger, B. (2013). Res-Sil C Bonded GC Packings for Analyses of Light Hydrocarbons.
Bellefonte, PA: Restek Corporation. Product literature accessed 2023/12/21 at:
www.restek.com/en/technical-literature-library/articles/res-sil-C-bonded-GC￾packings-for-analyses-of-light-hydrocarbons.
Camsco (2009). Camsco Sorbent Selection Chart. Houston, TX: Camsco, Inc.
114 The stationary phaseHawkes, S., Grossman, D., Hartkopf, A., Isenhour, T., Leary, J., and Parcher, J.
(1975). Preferred stationary liquids for gas chromatography. Journal of Chromat￾ographic Science 13, No. 3, 115–117.
Hayes (2020). Specifications — HayeSep® porous polymers. Accessed on 2021/03/07
at: www.vici.com/hayesep/polyspec.php.
Hepp, M.A. and Klee, M.S. (1987). Characterization of porous polymers by polar
strength and selectivity. Journal of Chromatography A 404, 145–154.
Hollis, O.L. (1966). Separation of gaseous mixtures using porous polyaromatic pol￾ymer beads. Analytical Chemistry 38, No. 2, 309–316.
Kovats, E. (1958). Gas-chromatographische Charakterisierung organischer Verbin￾dungen. Teil 1: Retentionsindices aliphatischer Halogenide, Alkohole, Aldehyde
und Ketone. Helvetica Chimica Acta 41, 1915. https://doi.org/10.1002/hlca.
19580410703.
Langmuir, E. (1918). The adsorption of gases on plane surfaces of glass, mica and
platinum. Journal of the American Chemical Society 40, No. 9, 1361–1403.
https://doi.org/10.1021/ja02242a004
Matisová, E., Moravcová, A., Krupcˇík, J., Čellár, P., and Leclercq, P.A. (1988). Pro￾blems with the reproducibility of retention data on capillary columns with hydro￾carbon C87 as the stationary phase. Journal of Chromatography A 454, 65–71.
McNair, H.M., Miller, J.M., and Snow, N.H. (2019). Basic Gas Chromatography,
Third Edition. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
McReynolds, W.O. (1970). Characterization of some liquid phases. Journal of Chro￾matographic Science 8, 685–691.
Miller, J.M. (2005). Chromatography: Concepts and Contrasts, Second ed., Hoboken,
NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
NIST (2018). Chemistry WebBook: NIST Standard Reference Database Number 69.
Accessed 2021/02/09 at: https://webbook.nist.gov.
Ohio Valley (2013). Gas Chromatography Supplies Catalog 62. Marietta, OH: Ohio
Valley Specialty Company.
Phenomenex (2017). GC Column selection: Tips and Guidelines. Product brochure:
BR44870117_I. Torrance, CA: Phenomenex, Inc.
Phenomenex (2020). LC & GC Separation Solutions Guide – Chemical Industry. Prod￾uct Brochure: BR67480319_W. Torrance, CA: Phenomenex, Inc.
Poole, C.F. (2012). Gas Chromatography. Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Poole, C.F. (2019). Gas chromatography: column technology. In: Encyclopedia
of Analytical Science, Third Edition, 118–134. Amsterdam, Netherlands:
Elsevier B.V.
Poole, C.F., Pomaville, R.M., and Dean, T.A. (1989). Proposed substitution of
apolane-87 for squalane as a nonpolar reference phase in gas chromatography.
Analytica Chimica Acta 225, 193–203.
Poole, C.F. and Poole, S.K. (2011). Ionic liquid stationary phases in gas chromatog￾raphy. Journal of Separation Science 34, 888–900. Weinheim: Wiley-VCH Verlag
GmbH & Co. KGaA.
Restek (2021a). Guide to GC Column Selection and Optimizing Separations. Product
brochure: Lit. Cat.# GNAR1724A-UNV. Bellefonte, PA: Restek Corporation.
Restek (2021b). GC Column Cross-Reference: Columns by Phase. Product Brochure.
Bellefonte, PA: Restek Corporation.
Riedo, F., Fritz, D., Tarján, G., Kováts, E.sz. (1976). A tailor-made C87 hydrocarbon
as a possible non-polar standard stationary phase for gas chromatography. Jour￾nal of Chromatography A 126, No. 3, 63–83.
References 115Rohrschneider, L.J. (1966). Eine methode zur chrakterisierung von gaschromatogra￾phischen trennflüssigkeiten (A method of characterization of gas chromato￾graphic stationary phases). Journal of Chromatography A 22, 6–22.
Rotzsche, H. (1991). Stationary phases in gas chromatography. Journal of Chroma￾tography Library 48. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier Science Publishers B.V.
ISBN: 9780444987334.
Santiuste, J.M. and Takács, J.M. (1999). Temperature dependence study of several
polarity scales used in gas–liquid chromatography stationary phase characteriza￾tion. Journal of Chromatographic Science 37, No. 4, 113–120. https://doi.org/
10.1093/chromsci/37.4.113.
Snow, N.H. (2012). Liquid phases for gas chromatography (updated). In: Encyclope￾dia of Analytical Chemistry. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Supelco (1997). The Retention Index System in Gas Chromatography: McReynolds
Constants. Bulletin 880 T194880. Bellefonte, PA: Supelco division of Sigma￾Aldrich Company LLC.
Supelco (1999). Packed Column Application Guide. Bulletin 890A T195890A. Belle￾fonte, PA: Supelco division of Sigma-Aldrich Company LLC.
Supelco (2003). Carboxen GC PLOT Capillary Columns. Product brochure T403146B.
St. Louis, MO: Sigma-Aldrich Co. LLC.
Supelco (2013). GC Column Selection Guide: Achieve Optimal Method Performance.
Product Brochure KCX 11873/T407133C 1103. St. Louis, MO: Sigma-Aldrich
Co. LLC.
Supelco (2015a). Separation of Hydrocarbons by Packed Column GC. Bulletin 743L
T100743L. St. Louis, MO: Sigma-Aldrich Co. LLC.
Supelco (2015b). Specialty Carbon Adsorbents. Product bulletin MQR 82950/
T410081. St. Louis, MO: Sigma-Aldrich Co. LLC.
Supelco (2019). GC Column Selection Guide. Product catalog KCX11873/T407133C.
St. Louis, MO: Sigma-Aldrich Company LLC.
Waters (2008). Porapak Gas Chromatography Column Packing Materials. Care and
use manual: WAT027255 Rev 4. Milford, MA: Waters Corporation.
Yancey, J.A. (1985a). Liquid phases used in packed gas chromatographic columns.
Part I. Polysiloxane liquid phases. Journal of Chromatographic Science 23, No. 4,
161–167. https://doi.org/10.1093/chromsci/23.4.161.
Yancey, J.A. (1985b). Liquid phases used in packed gas chromatographic columns.
Part II. Use of liquid phases which are not polysiloxanes. Journal of Chromato￾graphic Science 23, No. 8, 370–377. https://doi.org/10.1093/chromsci/23.8.370.
Yancey, J.A. (1986). Liquid phases used in packed gas chromatographic columns.
Part III. McReynolds constants, preferred liquid phases, and general precautions.
Journal of Chromatographic Science 24, No. 3, 117–124. https://doi.org/10.1093/
chromsci/24.3.117.
Yancey, J.A. (1994a). Review of liquid phases in gas chromatography, Part I: inter￾molecular forces. Journal of Chromatographic Science 32, No. 8, 349–357. https://
doi.org/10.1093/chromsci/32.8.349.
Yancey, J.A. (1994b). Review of liquid phases in gas chromatography, part II: appli￾cations. Journal of Chromatographic Science 32, No. 9, 403–413. https://doi.org/
10.1093/chromsci/32.9.403.
de Zeeuw, J. (2000). Gas–solid gas chromatography. In: Encyclopedia of Separation
Science (ed. I.D. Wilson), 481–489. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Academic Press. doi:
10.1016/B0-12-226770-2/00151-4.
116 The stationary phaseTables
4.1 Vendor Codes for Columns and Liquid Phases.
4.2 Typical Polarity of Solutes.
4.3 Strength of Solvent–Solute Interaction.
4.4 Popular Polysiloxane Liquid Phases.
4.5 Popular Non-Silicone Liquid Phases.
4.6 McReynolds Probes.
4.7 Confirming Equivalent Liquid Phases.
4.8 Selectivity of Common Liquid Phases.
4.9 Typical Active Solid Stationary Phases.
4.10 Typical Porous Polymer Stationary Phases.
Figures
4.1 Structure of Poly[dimethylsiloxane].
4.2 Principle of Retention Index.
4.3 Predicting Retention by McReynolds Constants.
4.4 Effect of Adsorption Isotherm on Peak Shape.
Symbols
Symbol Variable Unit
[A]S Concentration of solute “A” in the
stationary phase
mol/mL
[A]M Concentration of solute “A” in the
mobile phase
mol/mL
e (Also s, a, b, l) System constants
of liquid phase.
E (Also S, A, B, L) System constants
of solute
molecule.
I Retention index None
k Retention factor of peak None
Kc Distribution constant None
n Number of atoms or functional groups
in a molecule
None
S Fifth McReynolds probe: pyridine
tR Retention time of peak s
tR Adjusted retention time of peak s
U Fourth McReynolds probe:
nitropropane
X First McReynolds probe: benzene
Y Second McReynolds probe: 1-butanol
Z Third McReynolds probe: 2-pentanone
References 117Equations
4.1 Ii = 100 n + log 10 tR i − log 10 tR n
log 10 tR n + 1 − log 10 tR n
Isothermal
retention index.
4.2 Ii = 100 n +
tR i − tR n
tR n + 1 − tR n
Retention index
under a linear
temperature ramp.
4.3 k = c + eE + sS + aA + bB + lL System constants.
4.4 Kc = A S
A M
Distribution constant.
New technical terms
When first introduced, these words and phrases were in bold type. You
should now know the meaning of these technical terms.
adsorbent solid
adsorption isotherm
bonded phase
distribution constant
homolog
Langmuir isotherm
McReynolds constants
probe
retention index
siloxane
solute polarity
system constants
This chapter also introduced many chemical names. Refer to the Glossary
for an explanation of these terms.
118 The stationary phase5
PGC column design
“Column designers have the awesome responsibility of cajoling a gas chro￾matograph to do exactly what the user needs it to do. They act like computer
programmers, using their own arcane language to breathe purpose into a
lifeless machine, thereby transforming it into an autonomous analytical
device. Here, we attempt to penetrate some of their secrets.”
The design objective
Most process gas chromatographs rely on several columns working in con￾cert to achieve the desired analysis. The overall column system must
achieve an adequate resolution between each analyte peak and all other
components of the sample. But an individual column has a more limited
and focused role.1 It might, for example, only be responsible for holding back
heaviesso they can be backflushed.2 Or perhapsforseparating just two peaks
after another column has removed all other components and flushed them
to vent.
Each column should reliably perform its designated role so the column sys￾tem as a whole delivers sufficient resolution of each desired analyte from
all other components in the sample and does so in minimum time.
For measurement, the resolution doesn’t need to be perfect, but it must be
good enough to achieve accurate results. A process chromatograph has some
clever ways to compensate for a not-quite-perfect resolution, but we should
be careful not to expect too much of the data processing routines. It’s also a
1
Clearly, having columns in series complicates the design process. This chapter has the lim￾ited goal of understanding the design and operation of a single column. Chapter 9 considers
the additional complexity of columns in series. 2
Backflush is a technique for removing heavies by reversing the flow in the first column.
Refer to Chapter 10 for more information.
Process Gas Chromatography: Advanced Design and Troubleshooting, First Edition. Tony Waters.
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2025 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.mistake for the method to rely on critical settings that might be beyond the
skills of the maintenance personnel.
In other words, always start with good chromatography.
Notice the additional requirement of minimum analysis time. Even a
busy laboratory can benefit from more analyses per hour. For a process
gas chromatograph, it’s critical: if the analysis time is too long, the analyzer
might be completely useless for its intended purpose.
Design strategy
The column designer hasto ensure that each column performs a specific task,
efficiently and reliably. The designer must therefore come up with a peak sep￾aration strategy, and each application might require a different approach.
There are many questions to answer and decisions to make. For instance:
Should the analyte peaks initially stay together, so heavies can be
backflushed?
In what order will the analyte peaks occur on the chromatogram?
What column will move the unmeasured peaks out of the way?
Will the separation of certain analytes require a second or third station￾ary phase?
What is the best column design for samples with both high and low ana￾lyte concentrations?
What is the effect of operating a column in series with another column?
Is it quicker to analyze duplicate samples in parallel column trains?
… and many more.
What’s more, designers have to realize that their initial plan might fail
and they must be flexible enough to change direction when it’s not working
out. We will study all these issues in later chapters of the book. For now, it’s
sufficient to know that each column has a specific job to do and the appli￾cation engineer must ensure that it does it expeditiously and reliably.
It’s always about resolution
For each column in a process chromatograph, there is always a critical pair
of adjacent peaks that it must resolve. This mandate might arise from the
necessity of separating a peak for measurement, or because two or more
peaks must pass into a different column for further separation.
Therefore, the prime objective of a single column is to generate adequate
resolution between two peaks or two groups of peaks, while not detracting
from the separation of other peaks.
120 PGC column designWhen a column isfeeding a measurement detector, the resolution of the ana￾lyte peaks must be enough to precisely measure their concentrations. In con￾trast, when a column feeds another column, it might need to create an even
greaterresolution – enough forswitching designated peaksinto a second col￾umn while diverting others to a different fate.
It turns out that only three column design parameters affect the resolu￾tion of adjacent peaks and they might not be the ones you would expect. The
plate theory of chromatography identifies the variables involved and reveals
a useful relationship between them known as the resolution equation.
This useful equation employs only the simple chromatogram measurements
we made in Chapter 2, peak retention times and widths.
Before discussing the three parameters and how to use them in column
design, the following SCI-FILE: On Resolution explains how the resolution
equation follows from first principles. It’s not difficult to understand, so if
you want to follow along, delve right in. Else, you can skip the theory and
continue with the practical discussion that follows. Either way, you will need
to recognize the three column-design parameters and comprehend their
combined effect on resolution.
SCI-FILE: On Resolution
Theory
The complete theory of chromatographic separa￾tion is complex and is the subject of many full￾length books. An attempt to cover it here would
be futile. Yet, from the simple equations you
already know, we can discover the column factors
that determine resolution. Then, we can calculate
the length of column necessary to obtain the
desired analysis.
The resolution equation
Chapter 2 defines the resolution of adjacent peaks
as a function of their retention times (tR) and their
average base width. Consider the resolution (Rs) of
two adjacent peaks with Peak A eluting before Peak
B. Since the peaks are close, it’s reasonable to
assume their base widths (wb) are approximately
equal. Therefore, from Equation 2.8, we get:
Rs = tRB − tRA
wb
(5.1)
Chapter 2 also introduces plate number as the
prime measure of column efficiency, since it relates
to the peaks being well retained and narrow. From
Equation 2.26, the observed plate number (N) is a
function of peak retention time (tR) and peak base
width (wb):
N = 16
tR
wb
2
Hence:
wb = 4
tR
N (5.2)
To discover the plate number (Nr) required to
achieve a desired resolution (Rs), substitute for wb
in Equation 5.1:
Rs = Nr
tRB − tRA
4 tR
Nr = 4Rs
tR
tRB − tRA
Design strategy 121Now use Equation 2.1 to convert the retention
times to adjusted retention times (tR ):
tR = tM + tR
Nr = 4Rs
tM + tR
tRB − tRA
(5.3)
Equation 5.3 has two solutions, one for Peak
A and one for Peak B. The solutions are similar
but not identical and both appear in the literature,
potentially causing confusion. Peak B has the
longer retention time so it yields the more conserv￾ative estimate of required plate number.
Updating Equation 5.3 for Peak B yields:
Nr = 4Rs
tM + tRB
tRB − tRA
Divide by tRB :
Nr = 4Rs
tM tRB + 1
1 − tRA tRB
(5.4)
Now we’re getting close. The two ratios in the
above equation are inverted forms of the retention
factor (k) and the separation factor (α) defined in
Chapter 2:
k = tR
tM
α = tRB
tRA
Substitute (k) and (α) into Equation 5.4 and
rearrange:
Nr = 4Rs
1 kB + 1
1 − 1 α
Nr = 4Rs
α
α − 1
1 + kB
kB
Finally, the required plate number for Peak B is:
Nr = 16Rs
2 α
α − 1
2 1 + kB
kB
2
(5.5)
Rearranging Equation 5.5 forms an equation
for calculating the resolution obtainable from a
column:
Rs = α − 1
α
kB
1 + kB
N
4 (5.6)
This well-known resolution equation reveals that
the best resolution requires optimum values for
separation factor (α), retention factor (kB), and
plate number (N). If one of these values is too
low, an adequate resolution will not be possible.
It’s good to see that all three of these values come
from simple chromatogram measurements.
Purnell (1960 and 1962, 114) was the first to
derive this useful equation. Several authors have
commended its use in PGC, including Annino
and Villalobos (1992, 349). We discuss its implica￾tion for column design in the main text that follows.
Endnote
Other authors, including Knox (1961) and Scott
(1998, 59), derive a variant of Equation 5.5 that cal￾culates the required plate number based on the
retention time of Peak A. Since you may see this
equation in the literature, we simply state it here:
Nr = 16Rs
2 1
α − 1
2 1 + kA
kA
2
(5.7)
If you are up for a challenge, see if you can derive
this equation for yourself. It’s a good way to learn.
From Equation 5.3, it’s clear that a calculation
for Peak A must return a lower value for required
plate number than a calculation for Peak B. Thus,
Equation 5.7 will return a lower value for the
required plate number. For closely adjacent peaks,
the difference is small.
122 PGC column designAchieving resolution
The resolution equation
If you skipped the SCI-FILE: On Resolution, you should know that Equa￾tion 5.6 therein clearly identifies the three factors that affect the resolution
(Rs) of two chromatogram peaks. Here it is again:
Rs = α − 1
α
kB
1 + kB
N
4
This is the resolution equation. It looks rather complex at first, but for two
adjacent peaks on a chromatogram, it simplifies to:
Rs =a b c
Each of the parameters (a), (b), and (c) is a function of just one column
variable, so it’s easy to assess the effect of each variable on the obtained
resolution. This book devotes a chapter to each variable:
Parameter (a) is a function of the separation factor (α) between the two
peaks of interest. Getting an adequate α-value is the main focus of
Chapter 4.
Parameter (b) is a function of the retention factor (kB) of the second peak.
Optimizing the k-value is the highlight of this chapter.
Parameter (c) is a function of the plate number (N) of the second peak.
We’ll see how to optimize the column N-value in Chapter 6.
Chapter 2 provides procedures for calculating these values from simple
chromatogram measurements.
In practice, experienced PGC column designers rarely calculate column
variables explicitly. Instead, they rely on intuition gained from their long
experience with columns. They instinctively understand that getting more
theoretical plates is not the only route to resolution. Now, just by looking
at Equation 5.6, those of us with less experience can also see that a high plate
numberis not the only goal. Getting an adequate separation factor and reten￾tion factor is also important. To obtain the desired resolution in minimum
time requires an optimum combination of all three variables.
Interaction between factors
We can use the resolution equation to examine the relative effect of the sep￾aration and retention factors. Figure 5.1 is a graphical plot of Equation 5.6 for
various values of separation factor (α) and retention factor (kB). It shows the
plate number necessary for a resolution of Rs = 1.0 between two peaks.
Before getting into detail, recall that a resolution of 1.0 is barely adequate
to measure equal peaks. To get a baseline separation of those equal peaks,
we’ll need a resolution of Rs = 1.5. Equation 5.6 also shows that resolution
is proportional to the square root of plate number, so a baseline separation
Achieving resolution 123will require 2.25 times the plate numbers shown in Figure 5.1. To resolve a
pair of unequal peaks, you might need Rs = 2.0 and four times the indicated
plate numbers!
Figure 5.1 shows how the separation and retention factors interact. It’s
evident that a resolution of Rs = 1.0 is easy to achieve when α = 1.5 or greater.
A small plate number will do it. It gets more difficult when the separation
factor is lower. For instance, for two peaks with a separation factor
α = 1.1, we see that:
The column needs 3,000 plates when k = 5 (yellow line).
The column needs 18,000 plates when k = 0.5 (blue line).
Packed columns can easily deliver such efficiencies. But when the liquid
phase yields an even lower separation factor, a packed column may be inad￾equate for the task. Consider the plate number you would need for two peaks
with a separation factor α = 1.05:
The column needs 10,000 plates when k = 5 (yellow line).
The column needs 64,000 plates when k = 0.5 (blue line).
Only a capillary column can do that.
The column length
After calculating the required plate number (Nr) from Equation 5.5, it’s easy
to calculate the necessary column length from the plate height (H) of the
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
1 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5
Required Plate Number (Nr)
Separation Factor (α)
k = 0.5
k = 1.0
k = 2.0
k = 5.0
Retention
Factor
Showing plate number required (Nr) versus separation factor (α) for a 
minimal resolution of Rs= 1.0 at different values of retention factor (k). 
The required column length in mm is roughly equal to the plate numbers 
shown. This is because a baseline resolution needs about twice these 
plate numbers and an efficient column has a plate height of
about 0.5 mm.
Figure 5.1 Plate Number for
Resolution.
124 PGC column designcolumn. If all else is constant,3 the plate height doesn’t change with column
length. Rearranging Equation 2.3 gives the column length (L) as:
L = Nr H (5.8)
Now let’s see what it takes to get better resolution. We’ll use the green line in
Figure 5.1. This line is for a retention factor of k = 2, so the peaks are in the
liquid phase for two-thirds of the time. Again, if α = 1.05:
For Rs = 1.0, the column needs 16,000 plates (from Figure 5.1).
It would be about 8 m long.
For Rs = 1.5, the column needs 36,000 plates (calculated).
It would be about 18 m long.
For Rs = 2.0, the column needs 64,000 plates (calculated).
It would be about 32 m long.
The column lengths noted above are just forillustration; they are minimal
estimates from Equation 5.8 with an optimistic plate height H = 0.5 mm. The
actual column lengths might be twice as long, depending on the measured
plate number of the column.
We shall soon discover an optimum range for the retention factor: not too
small and not too large. In the present example, we assumed k = 2, which is
actually pretty good!
A deeper understanding
For a deeper understanding, we need to look more closely at the physics of
distribution because it’s the basic science behind gas chromatography. The
following SCI-FILE: On Distribution defines the distribution constant and
explores its relationship to retention factor and separation factor. The
SCI-FILE is optional reading but highly recommended.
3
In practice, of course, the carrier gas pressure cannot be the same for different column
lengths working at the same carrier velocity which complicates the issue. See Chapter 9.
SCI-FILE: On Distribution
Retention volume
Chapter 2 describes a way to get column perfor￾mance data directly from the chromatogram by
measuring peak retention times and widths. It was
convenient to measure those distances in milli￾meters, although they are really times. It works out
fine because our main performance parameters –
retention factor, separation factor, plate number,
and resolution – are allratios,so the units cancel out.
To understand the distribution constant and the
variables derived from it, we go one stage further
and convert the measured retention times to
volumes. This is easy to do if you know the carrier
A deeper understanding 125flow rate (Vo ) at the column exit. To convert
the retention time (tR) of a peak to its retention
volume (VR), multiply by the flow rate:
VR = tR Vo
Tc
Ta
(5.9)
If retention time is in seconds, the flow rate
should also be in seconds (for example, 0.5 mL/s)
and retention volume comes out in milliliters. Since
it’s necessary to measure carrier flow at ambient
temperature (Ta), Equation 5.9 includes a factor
to correct the measured flow rate to the column
temperature (Tc). If using a soap-film flowmeter,
a correction for the added water vapor saturation
is also necessary.
Retention volume of a solute is the volume of
carrier gas needed to elute an average molecule
of that solute from the column. It’s a more funda￾mental measure than retention time because it
doesn’t vary with carrier gas flow rate. Its inde￾pendence from flow rate makes retention volume
a better unit for reporting and cataloging experi￾mental retention data.
Equation 5.9 will also convert other measured
times to volume units, including holdup time,
adjusted retention time, and peak width. For exam￾ple, here’s Equation 2.1 expressed in volume units:
VR = VM + VR (5.10)
This shows that retention volume is the sum of
holdup volume (VM) and adjusted retention
volume (VR ).
For accurate work, it’s best to adjust the holdup
volume by subtracting the extracolumn volume
inside valves, connection tubes, and detectors. Gen￾erally, however, this level of detail is unwarranted
for work on process gas chromatographs. The cor￾rection is significant only for low-volume capillary
columns and to avoid band broadening a PGC
designed to use those columns should already have
negligible extracolumn volume.
It’s necessary to use volume units in the discus￾sion on the distribution constant that follows. In
PGC practice, though, the calculations we need
are mostly ratios that work equally well in time
units, so retention volumes are not particularly use￾ful to us on a daily basis.
Distribution constant
This is important. To become proficient at gas chro￾matography, it helps to understand how our chro￾matogram measurements relate to the underlying
science. So let’s look at what happens inside a
column.
In Waters (2020, 36–37), the SCI-FILE: On Solu￾bility introduced the dynamic equilibrium that exists
between the concentration of a solute in the liquid
phase [A]L and the concentration of that solute in
the gas phase [A]G. At constant temperature and
pressure, the ratio of those concentrations is con￾stant and defines the distribution constant (Kc):
Kc = A L
A G
(5.11)
The distribution constant is the fundamental sci￾ence that all chromatography rests upon. Luckily, it
isindeed constant for very dilute solutions and that’s
the reason why ideal chromatogram peaks are sym￾metrical. Yes, real peaks are a little asymmetric and
that imperfection is the subject of Chapter 8.
In Equation 5.11, note that the distribution con￾stant is a ratio of concentrations: the amount of sol￾ute per unit volume of each phase. There are two
ways to measure the amount of solute; one can
weigh it or count the number of molecules present.
Analytical chemists like to weigh stuff because
it’s the most accurate way to measure quantity in
a laboratory. They often measure analyte quantities
in nanograms (ng). A PGC can’t weigh anything,
so this book prefers to state quantities in moles.
We express concentration as nanomoles-per-liter
(nmol/L), or similar.
One mole is a count of 6.022 × 1023 molecules,
so a nanomole is only 6.022 × 1014 of them!
A mole is the number of molecules you get
when their total weight in grams is equal to
their molar mass. It’s too many to count, so
we usually weigh them first, and then convert
their weight to a number of moles.
As noted in Chapter 2, plate theory models a col￾umn as a series of plates. In a single plate at equi￾librium, the solute distributes itself between the
liquid and gas phases in the plate. Then, the solute
126 PGC column designconcentration in the liquid phase is the number of
moles in the liquid (nL) divided by the volume of
that liquid (vL):
A L = nL
vL
(5.12)
And the solute concentration in the gas phase is:
A G = nG
vG
(5.13)
Inserting these concentrationsintoEquation 5.11
leads to a more useful statement of the distribution
constant:
Kc = nL
vL
vG
nG
(5.14)
Equation 5.14 contains the phase ratio (β),
defined as the ratio of gas phase volume to liquid
phase volume:
β = vG
vL
(5.15)
The volumes of liquid phase (vL) and gas phase
(vG) are those contained in one plate. To get the
volumes for the whole column, multiply by the
plate number.
β = N vG
N vL
= V G
VL
(5.16)
Then, VG is the total gas volume in the column
(equal to the holdup volume VM) and VL is the total
liquid volume. As one might expect, the phase ratio
is the same throughout the column. It’s a function
of the liquid loading in a packed column or internal
diameter and liquid film thickness in a capillary
column.
To calculate the phase ratio from Equation 5.16,
it’s necessary to adjust the value of VG to allow for
the average pressure in the column. Chapter 9
reviews the effects of pressure drop in a column
and gives the appropriate equation.
Definition of retention factor
Equation 5.14 also includes the peak retention fac￾tor, although it’s not immediately visible. The true
definition of retention factor (k) is the ratio at
equilibrium of the amount of solute in the liquid
phase (nL) to the amount of solute in the gas phase
(nG):
k = nL
nG
(5.17)
This definition is similar to the distribution con￾stant but invokes the actual amounts of solute in
one plate, rather than their concentrations.
We can use the theoretical plate model to recon￾cile this basic definition of retention factor with the
calculation from chromatogram measurements
done in Chapter 2. For one equilibrium, the k-value
defines the number of solute molecules in each
phase. When the carrier gas movesto the next plate,
it leaves exactly nL solute molecules behind in the
liquid phase.
Clearly, a solute of higher k-value would leave
more molecules behind. For example, a solute
B with k = 4 will always leave twice as many mole￾cules in the liquid phase than a solute A with
k = 2. Then, the adjusted retention time of Peak
B will be twice that of Peak A. This is why we
can calculate the k-values from peak locations
on the chromatogram.
We now have definitions for β and k. Inserting
these in Equation 5.14 highlights a useful
correlation between these three column design
variables:
Kc = k β (5.18)
Wherein:
• The k-value is the dependent variable that
quantifies the retention of a peak and hence
its separation from other peaks.
• The Kc-value is a measure of solute affinity for
the stationary phase and is a function of the
temperature of the column.
• The β-value is a function of the physical
volumes of gas and liquid present and is con￾stant for a given column.
These are the variables most used in column
design. However, the absolute value of Kc would
be difficult to determine so we use a relative value
instead; this is the separation factor (α).
A deeper understanding 127Optimizing liquid phase performance
Adjusting the separation factor
The above SCI-FILE explains how the distribution constant (Kc) is the funda￾mental science behind chromatographic retention. Simply put, it’s a measure
of the solubility of an analyte in the liquid phase. For two peaks to separate,
they must have different solubilities. The separation factor (α) is simply the
ratio of those solubilities; that is, the ratio of their distribution constants.
Unfortunately, it’s usually not possible to increase the separation factor
on a given column. Most changes in operating conditions will affect both
peaks equally and leave their α-value unchanged. To improve column selec￾tivity, you’ll need a different stationary phase and that means a new column.
Refer to Chapter 4 for the many options available.
Adjusting the retention factor
The resolution equation tells us that peaks with low retention factors will be
difficult to resolve. At the limit, when k = 0, the solutes don’t enter the liquid
phase at all and no resolution is possible, even if their separation factor is
good. That might get you thinking that the k-value should be as high as pos￾sible; but then the analysis time would be too long. There must be an opti￾mum value somewhere in between.
Definition of separation factor
The use of retention volumes also allows insight
into the true nature of the separation factor. In
Chapter 2, Equation 2.4 calculates separation factor
(α) from the ratio of adjusted retention times of two
chromatogram peaks, Peak B and Peak A. When
converted to volume units, that equation is:
α = VRB
VRA
(5.19)
Thus, separation factor is also the ratio of the
adjusted retention volumes of the two peaks.
Similarly, Equation 2.3 is an equation for the
adjusted retention time of a peak. In volume units,
it becomes:
VR = k VM (5.20)
Combining Equations 5.19 and 5.20, we discover
that separation factor is also the ratio of retention
factors for Peak B and Peak A:
α = kB
kA
(5.21)
Finally, the merging of Equations 5.18 and 5.21
shows that separation factor is also the ratio of dis￾tribution constants for Peak B and Peak A. This
anchors the α-value to the fundamental science
of chromatography and is the true definition of
separation factor:
α = KcB
KcA
(5.22)
In summary, there are several equalities for sep￾aration factor:
α = KcB
KcA
= kB
kA
= VRB
VRA
= tRB
tRA
(5.23)
And this is why we can calculate separation fac￾tor from simple chromatogram measurements.
128 PGC column designForliquid-phase columns,there’s a universalretention factorthat yieldsthe
best combination ofresolution and analysistime.Therefore,since the retention
factor increases with a peak’s position along the chromatogram, there’s a
unique location on any chromatogram that delivers optimum resolution.
Of course, all the peaks cannot be at one location, but we can design and
operate a column so the peaks that are most difficult to resolve are near that
location. Here, we call it the power region of the chromatogram.
The optimization procedure focuses on the two peaks that are most dif￾ficult to resolve. By adjusting the column design and operating conditions,
we move those two peaks into the power region of the chromatogram,
thereby maximizing their resolution.
The lower limit of the power region is about twice the holdup time, where
k = 1. A peak at this location has been in the liquid phase for half of its reten￾tion time, thereby allowing the liquid to have some effect. Since this proce￾dure targets the pair of peaks that are most difficult to resolve, there may be
other peaks closer to the air peak. In most applications, this is acceptable
because their resolution must be better than the target pair.
The SCI-FILE: On Retention Factor explains that the fastest analysis
occurs when the peaks are at three times the holdup time, where k = 2.
Beyond that point, resolution increases faster than analysis time up to about
four times the holdup time (k = 3), when the column delivers the maximum
resolution per second – its optimum performance. Yet the curve is not steep
and you won’t gain much by having the peaks exactly at the optimum loca￾tion; anywhere in the power region will suffice.
For process work, the upper limit of the power region is about six times
the holdup time, where k = 5. Beyond this point, the resolution continues to
improve, but the analysis time increases faster than the resolution. It’s still
common for some well-separated peaks to be out beyond the power region.
There’s nothing wrong with that unless they are too wide and low, and dif￾ficult to measure.
Maximum column performance occurs in the power region of the chro￾matogram, the time zone that lies between two times the holdup time
and six times the holdup time.
The following SCI-FILE: On Retention Factor explains the theoretical basis
for the power region.
SCI-FILE: On Retention Factor
Optimum resolution
The optimization procedure discussed in the main
text targets the most difficult pair of peaks to resolve
and aims to move them to a position on the chro￾matogram where k = 3 ± 2; the “power region.”
The theory supporting the power region is com￾plex and this SCI-FILE gives only a summary.
Consult the cited sources for the full derivation of
equations.
We start from the resolution Equation 5.6 previ￾ously discussed:
Rs = α − 1
α
kB
1 + kB
N
4
Optimizing liquid phase performance 129Recall that the three terms in the equation are
functions of separation factor (α), retention factor
(k), and plate number (N). The complexity of the
equation diminishes when you focus on the iso￾thermal separation of two specified peaks by a
given liquid phase. Then, we can consider the sep￾aration factor to be constant. For small changes in
k, the plate number is also constant and the effect of
retention factor on resolution is:
Rs = Q
kB
1 + kB
(5.24)
where Q is a constant.
The blue line in Figure 5.2 plots this effect graph￾ically. Notice that the resolution increases rapidly
up to about k = 5, and not much thereafter. There
islittle gain in resolution when retention factors are
high (k > 5).
Optimum analysis time
Skoog et al. (2007, 767) derive a general equation
for peak retention time (tR):
tR = 16 Rs
2
H
u
α
α − 1
2 1 + kB
3
kB
2
Again, for a specified pair of peaks on a given
column, we consider the separation factor and
plate height to be constant. If we also assume that
the carrier velocity (u) doesn’t change and we
need a fixed resolution, the necessary retention
time is:
tR = Q 1 + kB
3
kB
2 (5.25)
where Q is another constant.
The red line in Figure 5.2 plots the above rela￾tionship. The necessary retention time is very high
for k < 1 and rapidly decreases to a minimum
at k = 2.
By comparing the plot lines in Figure 5.2, you
can see the disadvantage of operating a column
with low or high k-values. It would be a mistake
to set up a column with k < 1 because the resolution
would be poor, and the analysistime would be long.
Having k > 5 may also be an unattractive option
because the analysis time increases faster than
the resolution does.
In conclusion, the time zone on a chromatogram
that lies between k = 1 and k = 5 generatesthe max￾imum resolution in the shortest analysis time.
Optimum retention factor
The practical optimization procedure described in
the main text focuses on the pair of peaks that
are the most difficult to resolve. The procedure
adjusts the column operating conditions to move
these two peaks into the “power region” between
k = 1 and k = 5.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Rs /Q : tR /Qʹ : Rs /tR
Retention Factor (k)
Power Region
Rs / tR
Rs / tR
Rs
tR
tR
Optimal
The red line shows that the retention time (and analysis 
time) necessary to achieve a required resolution 
reaches a minimum when k = 2. The blue line indicates 
that resolution improves rapidly with increased 
retention factor up to about k = 5 and not much beyond. 
The orange line traces the resolution per unit time, 
which peaks at k = 3 and then slowly declines. Thus, the 
“power region” of the chromatogram lies approximately 
between k = 1 and k = 5. 
The chart assumes that Q and Qʹ remain constant 
when k varies.
Figure 5.2 Optimum Retention Factor.
Source: Adapted from Skoog et al. (2007).
130 PGC column designExploring the power region
It’s easy to locate the power region on a chromatogram. To do so, you will
need to know the column holdup time: that is, the retention time of an “air
peak.” It’s unlikely that your process sample will actually contain air, so to
discover the holdup time you may have to inject a sample containing a gas
that doesn’t much dissolve in the liquid phase such as air, nitrogen, or hydro￾gen. Methane may be an adequate substitute if you’re using a flame ioniza￾tion detector (FID) that can’t detect the diatomic gases. For a given column
and carrier gas flow rate, you only need to do it once.
Consider the isothermal chromatograms in Figure 5.3. In each case, the
holdup time is one minute, so the power region on all three chromatograms
lies between two and six minutes, as the green shading indicates. The two
peaks X and Y are the same components in each case but they appear in dif￾ferent locations on the chromatogram. The advantage of peaks in the power
region (Figure 5.3b) is immediately clear:
In Figure 5.3a, the peaks are too close to the air peak and their resolution
is inadequate: Rs = 1.2.
In Figure 5.3b, the same two peaks are in the power region and the
resolution is excellent: Rs = 3.1.
In Figure 5.3c, the same two peaks are beyond the power region and the
resolution is excessive, leading to a longer analysis time and lower peak
heights.
Given the above, you might like to practice your diagnostic skills. Why do
the peaks appear at different locations on these three chromatograms? What
could be causing them to arrive at the positions shown?
Before reading on, try to identify the variables that might be responsible
for the different peak positions. For each variable, predict the direction of
change that will move the peaks in Figure 5.3a and 5.3c into the power
region. For the moment, ignore the effect of the column pressure; a later
chapter will examine that more-complex subject.
From Equation 5.18, only two variables are
effective for adjusting the retention factor (k) of
a peak:
k = Kc
β (5.26)
For example, to increase k:
• Increase the distribution constant (Kc) of the
peak (that is, its “solubility”) by reducing the
temperature of the column.
• Reduce the phase ratio (β) of the column.
The main text describes this procedure in more
detail and gives a worked example to illustrate its
efficacy.
Exploring the power region 131Here’s a place to record your suggestions:
Column Variable to Adjust Direction of Change
To move peaks into power region: For Figure 5.3a For Figure 5.3c
1.
2.
3.
4.
Stop for a moment to think. Are you a good troubleshooter? Write your
answers above or on a separate notepad. Be sure to include all possible
variables.
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Air
Inj
XY Power region 5.3 (a)
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Air
Inj
Power region 5.3 (b)
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Elapsed Time (mins)
Air
Inj
X
Power region 5.3 (c)
Y
X Y
In these three isothermal chromatograms the power region is the same, 
between two and six minutes. Only the middle chromatogram (b) has peaks X 
and Y in the power region. In the top (a) and bottom (c) charts, what variables 
Figure 5.3 The Power Region. could we adjust to bring the peaks into the power region?
132 PGC column designOptimizing retention factor
To move the target peaks into the power region, you’ll need to make some
changesto column design or operating variablesthat bring peak retention fac￾tors into the range: k = 3 ± 2. There are not many variables that can do that.
Ineffective variables
A sure way to change the retention factor of a peak is to use a different liquid
phase. Yet “the chromatograms use different liquid phases” is not an acceptable
diagnosis of the above troubleshooting exercise. Why? Because the separation
factor in Figure 5.3 is the same on each chromatogram (α = 1.5), which
strongly implies that they use the same liquid phase. Therefore, the different
peak locations in Figure 5.3a and 5.3c are not due to different liquid phases.
They must be due to different column designs or operating conditions.
To change the retention factor of a target peak, it’s retention time must
change relative to the air peak. A change in column length or carrier gas flow
rate won’t do it because those variables affect the retention times of all peaks,
including the air peak. The retention factor is a ratio, so when a variable
moves all peaks equally their retention factors are unaffected and they do
not move into or out of the power region.
Ironically, people looking for more resolution often increase the column
length, and it always seems to work because the additional column length
increases the plate number. But the longer column will probably increase
the analysis time too, soitmaynot be the bestmove.First, youneed to shepherd
the target peaks into the power region. Only then isit okay to increase the col￾umn length if necessary to do so. But you may be in for a pleasantsurprise: the
resolution may have improved so muchthat you can reduce the columnlength!
Effective variables
The SCI-FILE: On Retention Factor explains that only two variables affect the
retention factor of a peak, distribution constant (Kc) and phase ratio (β), so to
optimize liquid-phase performance these are the ones we need to manipulate.
Here again is Equation 5.26 that expresses the relationship succinctly:
k = Kc
β
The distribution constant (Kc) of a solute is a precise way to express its solu￾bility in the liquid phase and hence its position on a chromatogram. Temper￾ature has a major effect on solubility, so it’s a powerful tool for optimizing
peak retention factors. Carrier gas pressure also has an effect but becomes
important only when a column operates under elevated gas pressure, as
may occurin a multiple-column system. There’s more about that in Chapter 9.
The phase ratio (β) is a way to indicate the amount of liquid available in
the column to dissolve the solutes. Clearly, if there were no liquid in the
Optimizing retention factor 133column there would be no retention, so retention factor depends on the
quantity of liquid present. Perhapsless clearly, it also depends on the amount
of gas in the column. The phase ratio incorporates both of these effects.
Optimizing the column temperature
Often, the easiest way to optimize the retention factor is to change the col￾umn temperature. Temperature has a large effect on retention time.
A decrease in temperature of about 15 K (15 C) is often sufficient to double
the retention factor (Zeeuw 2021). This is why the precise control of oven
temperature is so important! Yet it gives us a powerful way to optimize peak
retention factors; a small change in temperature will often move the target
peaks into the power region with little effect on their separation factor.
For isothermal PGC applications, we prefer to operate with low column
temperature to reduce column bleed and extend column life. However, some
liquid phases can solidify or gel at low temperatures resulting in reduced effi￾ciency. Set the column temperature as low as the application will allow.
Temperature programming
When the column temperature starts low and gradually increases during
analysis, each peak elutes at a different average temperature, increasing
the retention factor of the more volatile solutes while reducing the retention
factor for those less volatile. This reduced range of peak retention factors
allows more peaks to elute within or close to the power region.
Capillary columns are typically much longer than packed columns yet
they work at about the same carrier gas velocity. Therefore, the holdup time
of a capillary column may be quite long, resulting in a wide power region
that can accommodate many peaks.
When a capillary column employs temperature programming, the double
advantage of a reduced range ofretentionfactor and awide power regionallows
many peaks to enjoy optimum resolution.Contrary towhatwe’re often told, the
fabulous resolution exhibited by capillary columns is not solely due to their
high plate numbers. Recall the resolution equation. The resolution of peaks
depends more on their retention factors than on the column plate number.
The rate of temperature rise also affects the retention factors. Peaks that
elute quickly from the column do not experience the higher temperatures
occurring towards the end of the program, so a slower ramp reduces their
average temperature and increases their observed retention factors.
Optimizing the column phase ratio
The other way to move target peaks into the power region is to adjust the
phase ratio. Equation 5.16 defines phase ratio (β) as the volume (VG) of
gas in a column relative to the volume (VL) of liquid phase:
β = V G
VL
134 PGC column designThus, a column with a lower phase ratio has more liquid phase in it and will
provide higher retention factors for all component peaks. To reduce
phase ratio:
Packed columns will require an increased percent loading of liquid phase
on the solid support.
Capillary columns will need an increased liquid film thickness or a
reduced internal diameter, or both.
Phase ratio is not a useful concept for a solid-phase column.4
A worked example
It’s fun to see how easy (and how effective!) it is to choose the liquid-phase
loading and operating temperature of an isothermal column.
Evaluate the two chromatograms in Figure 5.4. You can assume they
come from isothermal liquid-phase columns. The resolution of Peaks
A and B is identical in each case, so either chromatogram is adequate for
measuring those two peaks. Yet one of the chromatograms offers an
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900
A B
Air
250 s
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900
Retention Time (s)
A B
Inj
Air
100 s
Figure 5.4b
ΔtR = 40 s
HB = 0.60 mm
NB = 5000
Rs = 1.65
w–
b = 24.3 s
L = 3.0 m
Figure 5.4a
ΔtR = 40 s
HB = 0.60 mm
NB = 5000
Rs = 1.65
w–
b = 24.3 s
L = 3.0 m
Inj
Chromatogram (a) (top) and (b) (bottom) achieve the same resolution of 
Peaks A and B. But which one offers the best opportunity for improvement? Figure 5.4 Challenge Question.
4
The retention factor of a component on a solid-phase column can be adjusted only by chan￾ging the column temperature.
A worked example 135opportunity for improvement that the other does not. Which chromatogram
would you choose to improve?
Make your choice before reading on.
Evaluation of options
If your only interest is to measure the two peaks, both chromatograms offer
the same resolution and the same analysis time, so they are equally good for
the job. Pick any one you like.
If you want to optimize the peak resolution, though, there’s a clear dif￾ference between the two chromatograms. The key, of course, is the air peak
time. Figure 5.4b has the peaks in the power region and Figure 5.4a does not.
Therefore, it’s unlikely that you can improve Chromatogram 5.4b but Chro￾matogram 5.4a may have hidden potential not yet realized.
To evaluate the two options, calculate the peak separation factor (α) on
each chromatogram using Equation 2.4:
α = tRB
tRA
For Figure 5.4a:
αa = 190 s
150 s
= 1 27
For Figure 5.4b:
αb = 340 s
300 s
= 1 13
The separation factors are different, which implies that the chromatograms
are from different liquid phases. The liquid phase used for Chromatogram
5.4a is capable of far superior separation than the liquid phase used for Chro￾matogram 5.4b (about double, actually).
So why are the two resolutions identical? It’s because the column used for
Chromatogram 5.4a does not allow the peaks to stay in the liquid phase long
enough. The peaks are not in the power region so both their retention factors
are less than optimum. This liquid phase is capable of much better perfor￾mance. Let’s see how we capture that potential.
Before getting into the calculations, here are the starting conditions we
used to draw the chromatogram in Figure 5.4a:
CONDITIONS for FIGURE 5.4a: Air Peak A Peak B
Retention Time tR 250 s 400 s 440 s
Peak Base Width wb 23.7 s 24.9
Average Base Width wb 24.3 s
136 PGC column designHow to optimize liquid phase performance
To improve the performance of Chromatogram 5.4a, we need to move the
peaks into the power region. You should already know which variables to
change. Reduce the column temperature or the phase ratio.
It’s easier to lower the column temperature, but a liquid-phase column
should not be too cold or its efficiency may suffer. If a lower column temper￾ature is inadvisable, install a new column with a lower phase ratio.
These adjustments will have little effect on the column holdup time, so
they don’t shift the power region. That’s why they can move peaks into
the power region.
Note the effect of the variables:
The effect of liquid phase loading (or liquid film thickness) is linear. If
you have twice as much liquid in the column, the peaks will spend twice
as long in the liquid phase.
The effect of temperature on the adjusted retention time is highly non￾linear. As noted above, a temperature reduction of about 15 K is usually
enough to double the adjusted retention time.
For simplicity of argument, let’s reduce column temperature or column
phase ratio by just enough to double the peak retention factors. We are not
changing the liquid phase, so separation factor remains the same.5
Figure 5.5 illustrates the result of this change when the column operates
at the same carrier gas velocity (that is, the air peak is at the same position).
Notice that the peaks are now in the power region.
The new chromatogram is impressive. The air peak time is the same, but
the adjusted retention times have doubled; Peak A from 150 to 300 seconds,
and Peak B from 190 to 380 seconds.
Inj
Air
250 s
Power Region
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900
Retention Time (s)
A B
Figure 5.5
L = 3.0 m
ΔtR = 80 s
w
−
b= 28.8 s
Rs=2.78
NB= 7150
HB = 0.42 mm
Starting from Figure 5.4a, this chromatogram illustrates the effect of reducing column 
temperature or phase ratio to move the peaks A and B into the power region. The 
resolution has improved by 68 % from 1.65 to 2.78, as evidenced by the flat baseline now 
between the peaks.
Figure 5.5 Peaks in Power
Region.
5
There are a few exceptions, but it’s generally true that column temperature has only a small
effect on separation factor.
A worked example 137Therefore, the new retention time for Peak A is:
tRA = 250 + 300 = 550 s
And the new retention time for Peak B is:
tRB = 250 + 380 = 630 s
Of course, the peaks are wider now, due to their additional time in the col￾umn, but they are not twice as wide. To estimate the new base widths,
assume that the plate height has not changed6 and apply Equation 2.23:
wb = 4 Ht tR
wb new
wb old
= tR new
tR old
The new base width of Peak A is:
wbA = 23 7 ×
550 s
400 s
= 27 8 s
The new base width of Peak B is:
wbB = 24 9 ×
630 s
440 s
= 29 8 s
In summary, here are the new conditions used to draw the chromatogram in
Figure 5.5:
CONDITIONS for FIGURE 5.5: Air Peak A Peak B
Retention Time tR 250 s 550 s 630 s
Peak Base Width wb 27.8 s 29.8 s
Average Base Width wb 28.8 s
Notice that the peak separation doubled from 40 to 80 seconds but the
average peak width wb increased only 19 % from 24.3 to 28.8 seconds. From
Equation 2.8, the new resolution is:
Rs = ΔtR
wb
Rs = 80 s
28 8 s
= 2 78
Thisis a massive increase in resolution. The column is now very efficient due
to a significant reduction in plate height. Using Equation 2.26, the plate
number for Peak B is now:
6
The next chapter reveals that the plate height will not be exactly the same but it’s close
enough for the present discussion.
138 PGC column designNB = 16 ×
630 s
29 8 s
2
= 7150
And from Equation 2.14, the plate height for Peak B is:
HB = 3000 mm
7150
= 0 42 mm
Nice. The only negative outcome is the analysis time, which increased by
43 % from 480 to 680 seconds. The column is now producing more resolution
than we really need. The column is too long!
The reduction in plate height means more plates per meter. It’s the plate
number that indicates the efficiency of a column, not its length. A shorter
column can be more powerful if it has smaller plates.
Reducing the column length
The peaks are now in the power region with optimum retention factors. This
makes the column very efficient, so it doesn’t need to be so long. It’s okay to
reduce the column length as it won’t move the peaks out of the power region
nor will it affect the plate height.
Notice that we intend to reduce the column length, not increase it!
To start, let’s reduce the column length enough to revert to the original
analysis time, using the same carrier gas velocity. That means reducing the
retention time of Peak B from 630 to 440 seconds. With the same carrier gas
flow rate (and velocity), the retention time is directly proportional to the col￾umn length, so the new length (L) needs to be:
L = 3000 mm ×
440 s
630 s = 2100 mm
Figure 5.6b shows the new chromatogram.
This is magic! Look closely at Figure 5.6b and compare it with the original
chromatogram in Figure 5.6a. The new column is only 70 % of the original
length and the analysis time is the same. Yet the separation between peaks
has improved from 40 to 56 seconds and the resolution is up from 1.65 to
2.32, a significant improvement in performance. You don’t need math to
verify this: just look at the baseline now visible between the peaks! However,
a few calculations will reveal why the resolution has improved. None are
difficult to understand.
The retention time of Peak B on the shorter column is 440 seconds, as
expected from the calculated change in length. The air peak time (tM) also
drops in proportion to the new column length:
tM = 250 s ×
2100 mm
3000 mm = 175 s
Therefore, the adjusted retention time of Peak B is now:
tRB = 440 − 175 = 265 s
A worked example 139We can use this Peak B data to discover the exact position and width of Peak
A. To find the adjusted retention time of Peak A, use the separation factor
between the peaks that we calculated above for this liquid phase (α = 1.27):
α = 1 27 = tRB
tRA
tRA = 265 s
1 27 = 209 s
Therefore, the retention time for Peak A is:
tRA = 209 + 175 = 384 s
Inj
Air
250 s
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900
A B
Power Region
Figure 5.6a
L = 3.0 m
ΔtR = 40 s
w
−
b= 24.3 s
Rs=1.65
NB= 5000
HB = 0.60 mm
Original chromatogram
Inj
Air
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900
A B
Power Region With shorter column:
Lower β or
Lower Temperature
More resolution, same time!
Inj Air
0 100 200 300 400 500
Retention Time (s)
600 700 800 900
A B
Power Region Even shorter column:
Same resolution, less time!
Figure 5.6b
L = 2.1m
ΔtR = 56 s
w
−
b= 24.1s
Rs= 2.32
NB= 5000
HB = 0.42 mm
Figure 5.6c
L = 1.16 m
ΔtR = 28 s
w
−
b= 17.0 s
Rs= 1.65
NB= 2740
HB = 0.42 mm
For reference, Figure 5.6a (top) is the original chromatogram from Figure 5.4a showing a resolution of 1.65. 
Figure 5.6b (middle) uses a shorter column, yet the resolution improves to 2.32 because the peaks are now 
in the power region. Figure 5.6c (bottom) uses an even shorter column yet achieves the original resolution 
in far less time.
Figure 5.6 Optimum Performance.
140 PGC column designAnd the time between the peaks (ΔtR) is:
ΔtR = 440 − 384 = 56 s
This is a significant improvement on the original 40 seconds. Since the oper￾ating conditions for the 2.1 m column are the same as the 3.0 m column, the
plate height for Peak B has not changed, it’sstill 0.42 mm. From Equation 5.4,
the new plate number (NB) for Peak B is:
N = L
H
NB = 2100 mm
0 42 mm = 5000
Wow! Thisisthe same plate number asthe original, which means Peak B has
the same width (24.9 seconds) asthe original, yet the time between peaks has
increased by 16 seconds. Sixteen seconds of additional separation is huge.
By again using Equation 2.23, you can estimate the base width of Peak
A from the base width of Peak B and the retention times of the two peaks:
wbA = 24 9 s ×
384 s
440 s
= 23 3 s
From this, the average base width wb is now:
wb = 23 3 s + 24 9 s
2
= 24 1 s
And the new resolution is:
Rs = 56 s
24 1 s
= 2 32
Let’s pause to evaluate our success. In Figure 5.6b:
The column is 30 % shorter than it was.
The column temperature is about 15 C lower, or
The phase ratio is half of what it was.
The carrier gas flow rate is the same.
The resolution has increased by 41 % from 1.65 to 2.32.
The analysis time has not changed.
You might be wondering whether such impressive gains in performance
are commonly achievable. Probably not. To illustrate the calculations, we
started with a column operating a long way from optimum. Hopefully, your
columns are not like that. If your peaks are already near the power region
only minor improvements will be possible.
A worked example 141Getting a faster analysis
The resolution in Figure 5.4a was 1.65, which was enough to give a baseline
separation between equal peaks. With the new column conditions, what
length of column would be enough to regain that same resolution?
As before, the resolution is proportional to the square root of the column
length. To change the present resolution (Rs = 2.32) back to the original res￾olution (Rs = 1.65), the new column length must be:
L = 2100 mm ×
1 65
2 32
2
= 1060 mm
Thisis about one-third of the original column length, yet the resolution isthe
same! And the analysis time is now about half of the original. That’s why we
call it the power region.
Figure 5.5c shows the new chromatogram. Amazing, isn’t it?
Feel free to practice the calculations on this chromatogram, following the
above procedures. By doing so, you will start to become familiar with what to
expect when working on column systems.
You’re on your way to becoming an expert chromatographer!
Knowledge Gained
Theory
Resolution is the combined effect of reten￾tion factor, separation factor, and plate
number.
The resolution equation quantifies the effects
of these three factors on the achieved
resolution.
Peaks with small retention factors are not
long in the liquid phase and achieve poor
resolution.
Peaks with small separation factors are close
together and difficult to resolve.
Analysis time drops rapidly as the retention
factor increases, reaching a minimum at
about k = 2.
The maximum resolution per unit time
occurs at four times the air peak time,
when k = 3.
Resolution continues to rise at higher k values,
but at diminishing rates of improvement.
Beyond k = 5, the analysis time increases
more than resolution does.
The power region of a chromatogram lies
between two and six times the air peak time
(1 < k < 5)
To increase k, reduce the column temperature
or phase ratio (increase the liquid-phase
loading).
To reduce k, increase the column temperature
or phase ratio (reduce the liquid-phase
loading).
Retention volumes provide a deeper under￾standing of the relationship between variables.
Volumetric retention data is useful in theo￾retical work, but not in practical process
chromatography.
142 PGC column designMultiply a retention time by carrier gas flow
rate (at column temperature) to get retention
volume.
Distribution constant (Kc) is the equilibrium
ratio of solute concentrations in the liquid
and gas phases.
Phase ratio (β) is the ratio of liquid phase
volume to gas phase volume within the
column.
Retention factor (k) is the equilibrium ratio of
the amounts of solute in liquid phase and
gas phase.
Distribution constant is the product of reten￾tion factor and phase ratio.
Separation factor (α) is the ratio of the distri￾bution constants for Peaks B and A on a liq￾uid phase.
Separation factor (α) is also the ratio of the
retention factors of Peaks B and A on a
column.
Practice
The main objective of column design is to
achieve adequate resolution of two adja￾cent peaks.
The secondary objective of column design is to
achieve the desired resolution in mini￾mum time.
A column system must resolve the analyte
peaksfrom all other components of the sample.
The resolutions must be adequate for reliable
operation and easy maintenance.
The column designer needs to have an overall
strategy that includes the goals for each
column.
Recognizing that the initial design might fail,
the designer needs to keep many options open.
Each column in a column system has a spe￾cific goal, a resolution it must achieve in min￾imum time.
In any analysis, there’s always one pair of
peaks that are most difficult to resolve.
Resolution is a function of separation factor
(α),retention factor(k), and plate number(N).
It’s necessary to optimize all three factors to
get the best resolution in minimum time.
There is a minimum plate number to resolve
peaks with known separation and retention
factors.
Resolution becomes difficult as the separation
factor approaches 1.0.
Resolution becomes difficult as the retention
factor approaches zero.
The “power region” of a chromatogram is
between two and six times the air peak time.
If peaks stay longer in the liquid phase, they
get wider and lower, and more difficult to
measure.
To optimize the resolution, move the peaks
into the power region of the chromatogram.
To increase the retention factor, reduce the
column temperature or its phase ratio.
To reduce the retention factor, increase the
column temperature or phase ratio.
For a temperature program, a slow ramp
increases retention factors, while a fast ramp
reduces it.
Then, adjust the column length and operating
conditions to yield the necessary plate number.
A worked example 143Did you get it?
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 05
This SAQ also uses your knowledge from previous chapters. Consider the chromat￾ogram in Figure 5.3b:
Q1. Estimate the retention factors for Peak X and Peak Y.
Q2. Estimate the separation factor for Peak X and Peak Y.
Q3. Given that the plate number for Peak Y is 3600, estimate in seconds the base width
of Peak X and Peak Y.
Q4. What is the resolution of Peak X and Peak Y in Figure 5.3b?
Q5. Using a shorter column under the same operating conditions, what plate number
would achieve a resolution of 2.0 between Peak X and Peak Y?
Q6. Given that the original column length was 1.6 m and the operating conditions are
unchanged, what are the retention times of Peak X and Peak Y on the new
column?
Q7. For the new resolution of 2.0, estimate in seconds the base widths of Peak X and
Peak Y.
Check your SAQ answers with those given in the back of the book.
References
Further reading
For more information about column tuning and performance refer to:
Guide to GC Column Selection and Optimizing Separations, published by Restek
(2021) and available online.
Optimizing GC parameters for faster separations with conventional
instrumentation, an article by Anila Khan (2013).
Cited
Annino, R. and Villalobos, R. (1992). Process Gas Chromatography: Fundamentals
and Applications. Research Triangle Park, NC: Instrument Society of America.
Khan, A.I. (2013). Optimizing GC parameters for faster separations with conven￾tional instrumentation. Thermo Literature: TN20743 E 02/13S. Runcorn, UK:
Thermo Fisher Scientific.
Knox, J.H. (1961). The speed of analysis by gas chromatography. Journal of the
Chemical Society 1961, 433–441.
Purnell, J.H. (1960). The correlation of separating power and efficiency of
gas-chromatographic columns. Journal of the Chemical Society 1960,
1268–1274.
Purnell, J.H. (1962). Gas Chromatography. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Restek (2021). Guide to GC Column Selection and Optimizing Separations. Lit. Cat.#
GNAR1724A-UNV. Bellefonte, PA: Restek Corporation.
144 PGC column designScott, R.P.W. (1998). Introduction to Analytical Gas Chromatography. Book 76 of
Chromatographic Science Series. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker Inc.
Skoog, D.A., Holler, F.J., and Crouch, S.R. (2007). Principles of Instrumental
Analysis, Sixth Edition. Thomson Publishing USA.
Waters, T. (2020). Process Gas Chromatographs: Fundamentals, Design and
Implementation. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Zeeuw, J. de (2021). Impact of GC parameters on the separation, Part 5: Choice of
column temperature. Accessed on 2024/10/30 at https://www.restek.com/
resource-hub-search?s=Impact-of-GC-Parameters.
Figures
5.1 Plate Number for Resolution.
5.2 Optimum Retention Factor.
5.3 The Power Region.
5.4 Challenge Question.
5.5 Peaks in Power Region.
5.6 Optimum Performance.
Symbols
Note: the text may add subscripts A and B or subscripts X and Y to indicate the
first and the second peak, respectively; “none” indicates a dimensionless
quantity.
Symbol Variable Unit
[A]L Concentration of solute “A” in the liquid phase mol/mL
[A]G Concentration of solute “A” in the gas phase mol/mL
H Plate height mm
k Retention factor of peak none
Kc Distribution constant none
L Column length m
nG Amount of solute in gas phase per plate mol
nL Amount of solute in liquid phase per plate mol
N Plate number (observed) none
Nr Plate number (required) none
Q A constant none
Q Another constant s
Rs Resolution of adjacent peaks none
tM Holdup time s
tR Retention time of peak s
tR Adjusted retention time of peak s
ΔtR Time between adjacent peaks; that is, “separation” s
Ta Temperature of flow measurement K
References 145Tc Temperature of column K
vG Volume of gas phase in one plate mL
vL Volume of liquid phase in one plate mL
VG Column holdup volume mL
VL Volume of liquid phase in column mL
VR Retention volume of peak mL
VR Adjusted retention volume of peak mL
Vo Flow rate of carrier gas at column outlet mL/s
wb Base width of chromatogram peak s
w Average base width of adjacent peaks s
α Separation factor between Peaks B and A none
β Phase ratio of column none
Equations
Note: subscripts A and B refer to the first and second peak but the text some￾times substitutes X and Y, respectively.
5.1 Rs = tRB − tRA
wb
Conservative resolution of
Peaks A and B.
5.2 wb = 4
tR
N
Base width of a peak.
5.3 Nr = 4Rs
tM + tR
tRB − tRA
Required plate number for a
selected peak.
5.4 Nr = 4Rs
tM tRB + 1
1 − tRA tRB
Required plate number for
Peak B using ratios of retention
times.
5.5 Nr = 16Rs
2 α
α − 1
2 1 + kB
kB
2
The necessary plate number
from Peak B data.
5.6 Rs = α − 1
α
kB
1 + kB
N
4
The resolution equation based
on Peak B.
5.7 Nr = 16Rs
2 1
α − 1
2 1 + kA
kA
2
The necessary plate number
from Peak A data.
5.8 L = Nr H Column length from required
plate number.
5.9 VR = tR Vo
Tc
Ta
Retention volume from
retention time and corrected
flow rate.
146 PGC column design5.10
VR
=
VM
+
VR Holdup volume and corrected
retention volume.
5.11
K
c
=
A
L
A
G
Definition of distribution
constant.
5.12
A
L
=
n
L
v
L
Molar concentration ofsolute in
the liquid phase of one plate.
5.13
A
G
=
n
G
v
G
Molar concentration of solute
in the gas phase of one plate.
5.14
K
c
=
n
L
v
L
v
GnG
Distribution constant from
molar concentrations.
5.15
β
=
v
GvL
Definition of phase ratio in one
plate.
5.16
β
=
V
G VL
Phase ratio of whole column.
5.17
k
=
n
L
n
G
Definition of retention factor.
5.18
Kc
=
k
β Distribution constant from
practical variables.
5.19
α
=
VRB VRA
Separation factor from adjusted
retention volumes.
5.20
VR
=
k
VM Adjusted retention volume per
holdup volume.
5.21
α
=
k
B
k
A
Separation factor as ratio of
retention factors.
5.22
α
=
KcB KcA
Definition of separation factor.
5.23
α
=
KcB KcA
=
k
B
k
A
=
VRB VRA
=
tRB tRA
Equalities for separation factor.
5.24
R
s
=
Q
k
B
1 +
k
B
Effect of retention factor on
resolution.
5.25
t
R
=
Q 1 +
k
B
3
k
B
2 Effect of retention factor on
retention time.
5.26
k
=
K
c β Retention factor from
distribution constant and
phase ratio.
References 147New technical terms
When first introduced, these words and phrases were in bold type. You
should now know the meaning of these technical terms
adjusted retention volume
column system
critical pair
holdup volume
power region
resolution equation
retention volume
Refer to the Glossary at the end of the book for an explanation of
these terms.
148 PGC column design6
Optimizing performance
“There’s always an optimum carrier gas flow rate that maximizes a col￾umn’s resolving power. With the flow rate set at optimum and the peaks
in the power region, the resolution you get is the very best that a column
can do. Yet you might be surprised to find that process gas chromatographs
rarely work under such ideal conditions …”
Caution
Before we start, a word of caution. This chapter discusses methods for
optimizing the performance of a single column. Our goal is to understand
the effect of carrier flow rate and column length on the performance
of a column. A real PGC column works in series with at least one
other column so any change in flow rate or column length affects the
performance of both columns, an additional complexity discussed in
Chapter 9.
Your existing PGC column system should be a nuanced design where
each column has a specific purpose. Don’t attempt to change the column
or its operating conditions unless you fully comprehend what each column
is doing and why it’s doing it:
Don’t change a column or the settings of a PGC column system unless you
know what you are doing!
If you decide to proceed, save all the settings before you change anything.
Always have a way to get back to where you started.
All the examples given here relate to liquid-phase columns. The theory of
solid-phase columns is different but the end results are similar.
Process Gas Chromatography: Advanced Design and Troubleshooting, First Edition. Tony Waters.
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2025 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Optimum flow rate
For every column, there is an optimum carrier flow rate that achieves the
best resolution that the column can deliver. In this section, we describe a
practical way to discover that optimum flow rate.
The optimizing procedure uses measurements from the chromatogram to
calculate a column performance parameter at different carrier gas flow rates.
Then, a graphical plot of that parameter immediately reveals the optimum
flow rate. The graph also shows the performance to expect when the column
runs at a non-optimum flow rate.
The procedure given here is for optimizing a single column, but most
PGCs use multiple columns in series. Of course, the procedure also works
for columns in series when they use the same stationary phase and the same
liquid-phase loading.
For different columns connected in series the theory is less clear, but
the procedure will still find their best overall performance. However,
you’ll need to be careful. Any change of flow rate will necessitate a change
in carrier gas pressure and this change will have a different effect on
each column. It may significantly alter the contribution of the first
column to the overall separation, perhaps spoiling the resolution of peaks.
For a detailed look at the properties of serial column arrangements, see
Chapter 9.
Before proceeding, ensure that the most difficult peaks to resolve are in
the power region of the chromatogram, following the procedure given in
Chapter 5.
Experimental
Finding the optimum flow rate is an experimental procedure: inject the same
sample several times, each time with the carrier gas set to a different flow
rate. From each resulting chromatogram, record two values: an attribute
of the flow rate and a measure of column efficiency. A graphical plot of this
data displays the nonlinear relationship between these two variables and
reveals the optimum flow rate.
In theory, column performance depends on the velocity of the carrier gas,
rather than its flow rate. It would not be easy to measure the velocity of the
carrier gas but we have a convenient surrogate – an unretained peak travels
through a column at the same speed as the carrier gas, so its holdup time is a
measure of carrier gas velocity.
Thus, to calculate the average carrier gas velocity (u), measure the holdup
time (tM) of an unretained peak on each chromatogram. Then divide by the
column length (L) using Equation 2.2:
u = L
tM
You’ll need an unretained peak on each chromatogram, often called an “air
peak.” We don’t really want to put oxygen into the column, so it’s best
150 Optimizing performanceto inject a sample containing a little nitrogen (for a thermal conductivity
detector) or a little methane (for a flame-ionization detector).
This procedure assumes that the nitrogen or methane has essentially zero
solubility in the liquid phase.It may not be applicable to a solid-phase column.
Working in velocity units (m/s) gives you the flexibility of applying your
column efficiency curve to different column lengths but if you have no inten￾tion of changing the column length, it’s okay to plot the curve in flow units.
Measure the column exit flow rate (V) for each chromatogram.
With open-tubular columns, you can compute the carrier velocity directly
from the measured flow rate using the column internal diameter (dc) and the
liquid film thickness (df):
u = 4 V
π dc − 2df
2 (6.1)
This calculation uses the flow rate at vent pressure, so it will return the col￾umn exit velocity (u). To get the average velocity, apply the pressure correc￾tion given in Chapter 9.
The optimization procedure
The procedure for finding the optimum flow rate is simple and well-worth
doing. This method is applicable to any liquid-phase column:
Use a test sample that produces a fully separated analyte peak, preferably
with a retention factor of k = 4 ± 1.
You can save time by including an unretained component (nitrogen or
methane) in the test sample. Otherwise, it’s okay to inject a second sam￾ple that contains that unretained component.
If you prefer to measure the carrier flow rates, you won’t need the unre￾tained component but you’ll have to measure the column exit flow rate
for each chromatogram.
Run several chromatograms at widely different carrier flow rates.
Then, for each chromatogram:
If working in velocity units, measure the holdup time (tM) of the unre￾tained component.
Calculate the average carrier gas velocity u from the column length (L)
and the air peak time (tM) using Equation 2.2:
u = L
tM
Measure the retention time (tR) and width of the analyte peak. You can
measure peak width at the baseline (wb) or at half-height (wh).
Optimum flow rate 151Calculate the plate number (N) for the analyte peak using Equation 2.26
or Equation 2.27, as appropriate:
N = 16
tR
wb
2
N = 5 54
tR
wh
2
Calculate the plate height (H) for the analyte peak using Equation 2.14:
H = L
N
Finally:
Plot the column efficiency curve – plate height as a function of average
carrier velocity (or exit flow rate). Your curve should look like the one in
Figure 6.1. It has a similar characteristic shape on any column.
If necessary,run a few more chromatograms at different carrierflow rates
to clearly define the whole curve.
Notice that the dip in the curve gives the minimum plate height (Hmin)
and therefore the maximum plate number. This is the optimum velocity
(or flow rate) for the best resolution of peaks. Of course, Figure 6.1 is just
an example; your curve will have different values for the optimum velocity
(or flow rate) and for the minimum plate height.
1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40
Plate Height (
H) mm
0.20
0.00 0.10 0.20
Optimum
Carrier Gas
Velocity
Hmin
Average Carrier Gas Velocity (u
–) m/s
0.30 0.40 0.50
This is a useful plot, showing the performance of your column. In addition to 
finding the optimum flow rate for the column, you can use your graph to estimate 
the plate height at any flow rate. 
Later, we will need this data in an exercise to optimize the length of a typical 
column and minimize the analysis time.
Figure 6.1 Typical Column
Efficiency Curve.
152 Optimizing performanceRelation to theory
It’s easy to mix up theory and reality here. Often, the graph in Figure 6.1 is
called a van Deemter curve in honor of the leader of the team that originally
developed a theory to explain it (van Deemter et al. 1956).
Be aware, though, that the well-known relationship between carrier gas
velocity and plate height is not a theory; it’s an empirical fact. That’s easy to
confirm, just do the experiment!
A knowledge of theory and practice are both important for success with
gas chromatographs but be careful to distinguish between the two. The true
van Deemter curve shown in Figure 6.2 is a theoretical construct, not an
empirical one. As such, it’s unlikely to exactly match your experimental
findings.
Your experimental results are not a theory; they are real and specific to
the column you are working with. So maybe you shouldn’t label your graph a
“van Deemter curve.” To highlight the distinction between reality and
theory, this text uses column efficiency curve to refer to the empirical
relationship between plate height and carrier gas velocity (or flow rate)
on a given column. Figure 6.1 illustrates a typical column efficiency curve.
That said, you can gain some useful insights from studying the theory
of this famous curve. If you would find that interesting, read the following
SCI-FILE On Rate Theory for a more detailed explanation.
SCI-FILE: On Rate Theory
Too much theory?
Before studying the lessons learned from rate the￾ory, it will be good to clarify the role of theory in
a book like this. We have no wish to undermine
the great success of chromatographic theory; it
has led to many amazing improvements in gas
chromatography and has totally transformed liquid
chromatography.
Yet it’sstill pertinent to ask; what use is the theory
to a modern process chromatographer?
Let’s be realistic; no worker outside of academia
ever uses the theoretical equations to calculate col￾umn parameters from first principles. The usual
way is to try a column and see how well it does
the job; then modify that column as necessary to
get an acceptable result.
After working with columns for many years, a
column designer ortroubleshooter may have signif￾icant experience of what works and what doesn’t.
Yet their working environment will always limit
that experience to the norms of their workplace.
A petrochemist and a biochemist have different
chromatographic experiences. While both are
experts in their own field, they don’t know what
they don’t know.
That’s where the theory comes in. We won’t
need all the math because you can find that in
any standard textbook on chromatography. But
it’s vital to know the variables that affect col￾umn performance and how you can opti￾mize them.
So this book focuses on how the theory can help
with column design and troubleshooting. For
those who enjoy the math the equations are given,
but the emphasis is not on mathematical proof.
Instead, we concentrate on what theory reveals
about column performance and how to maximize
it. With that proviso, let’s take a look at the rate the￾ory of chromatography.
Optimum flow rate 153Rate theory
Unlike plate theory, the rate theory of chromatogra￾phy is not based on solute–solvent equilibrium.
Contrarily, by alluding to the continuous movement
of carrier gas, it discounts the possibility of an equi￾librium occurring anywhere in a column. Instead,
rate theory seeks to explain how dynamic processes
inside the column cause peak broadening.
Rate theory adopts the same measure of broad￾ening used by plate theory, the plate height. But it
then goes beyond the mere existence of plates to
discover mathematical relationships between col￾umn variables and the observed plate height. The
identity of those variables and their effect on peak
width is what makes rate theory so important to us.
The earlier plate theory started from the funda￾mental idea of theoretical plates and then figured
plate height simply as the equivalent length of col￾umn occupied by one plate. But rate theory looks
for causes. It starts from the realization that while
a peak is in the column, it is inherently unstable;
the higher concentration of molecules at its center
is continuously spreading into the lower concentra￾tion gas on either side. Thus, the longer the peak is
in the column, the wider it becomes.
The technical term for this linear spreading
of molecules along the column axis is dispersion.
Rate theory triesto identify and quantify the sources
of dispersion.
To understand this approach, recall that vari￾ance is a statistical measure of dispersion and that
the overall variance (σ
2
) of a Gaussian peak might
be the sum of several independent variances:
σ2 = σ1
2 + σ2
2 … + σn
2 (6.2)
Recall from Equation 2.18 that the plate height
(H) is the variance generated per unit length of
column:
H = σ2
L
The length (L) of a given column is constant, so
the observed plate height is the sum of the plate
heights of all the individual dispersive processes
occurring in that column:
H = H1 + H2 … + Hn (6.3)
This is why all the equations developed by rate
theory follow the form of Equation 6.3.
What we learn
We already know that to get the best performance,
we should operate a column at its optimum flow
rate, thereby achieving the minimum plate height,
maximum plate number, and best resolution. We
now learn from Equation 6.3 that plate height itself
may have several independent contributors, so we
can focus on reducing each one of those separately.
Rate theory is all about motion and several
movements occur in gas chromatography. Let’s
start with the dominant pair: the incessant move￾ment of the carrier gas and the gradual migration
of the solute peaks along the column.
Carrier gas velocity
The movement of the carrier gas drives most
dynamic effects occurring in a column, so many
sources of peak broadening are functions of the car￾rier gas velocity.
We use the column length (L) and the holdup
time (tM) to estimate the average linear carrier
gas velocity u in the column. Per Equation 2.2:
u = L
tM
The carrier gas velocity is not the same at every
place in the column because the carrier gas pres￾sure drops continually from inlet to outlet. As the
pressure drops, the gas expands and its velocity
increases, so the inlet end of the column experi￾ences a lower velocity than the outlet end does.
In Chapter 9, we shall find that a knowledge
of pressure drop is important when designing a
multiple column system for a process gas chromat￾ograph. For a single column, though, we can simply
evaluate its overall performance.
154 Optimizing performanceSolute band velocity
The other velocity in a column is the migration
rate of a solute. Each band of solute molecules
is moving along the column at a lower average
velocity v than the carrier gas:
v = L
tR
(6.4)
Clearly, the migration rate of a solute is also
related to its retention factor (k):
v = u
k (6.5)
The van Deemter equation
Van Deemter (1956) and his associates were the
first of many scientists to offer progressively more
complex theories to explain the observed depend￾ence of plate height on carrier gas flow rate.
The original van Deemter equation has the
advantage of being easy to understand and still
gives the closest agreement with the experimental
results for packed columns. For open-tubular col￾umns, use the Golay equation reviewed below.
The van Deemter equation expresses the plate
height (H) as a function of average carrier gas veloc￾ity u in the sum of three terms:
H =A+
B
u
+ Cu (6.6)
Figure 6.2 is a graphical representation of
Equation 6.6. The green curve shows the nonlinear
relationship between plate height and carrier gas
velocity (or flow rate). The minimum point of the
green curve marks the optimum carrier gas velocity
for the column studied. The additional curves in
Figure 6.2 show the individual contribution of
the three terms in the van Deemter equation.
The original van Deemter equation applied to a
packed column and still does. The values of the
constants A, B, and C are dictated by column design
and operating parameters. We are interested in dis￾covering the effect of these parameters on column
performance.
The A-term
The first term in the van Deemter equation is a con￾stant (A), which is unaffected by the flow rate. The
blue plot line in Figure 6.2 represents its value.
The A-term applies solely to packed columns. It
recognizes that there are multiple gas pathways
through the packing bed, each of different length.
Solute molecules randomly take longer or shorter
pathways through the bed, so they travel different
distances to reach the end of the column. Conse￾quently, they arrive in the detector at different
times, adding to the width of the peak.
We call this first dispersion process eddy diffu￾sion. It causes the same degree of peak broadening
at any carrier gas velocity.
The contributors to A are the particle diameter
(dp) and packing factor (λ):
A = 2λ dp (6.7)
0.00 0.10 0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50
Carrier Gas Velocity (u) m/s
Plate Height (
H) mm
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
Optimum
Carrier
Velocity
A B/u
Cu
This graphical representation of the van Deemter equation 
(green curve), shows how column efficiency varies with 
carrier gas velocity. Plate height is the sum of three terms: 
the A-term (blue line) is constant, the B-term (orange line) 
declines exponentially with velocity, and the C-term 
(purple line) increases lineally with velocity. The optimum 
carrier velocity occurs at the lowest point of the combined 
curve.
Figure 6.2 van Deemter Curve.
Optimum flow rate 155What we learn
From Equation 6.7, we learn that smaller particles
and more-perfect packing will improve column
efficiency.
The use of smaller particles in liquid chromatog￾raphy has provided enormous gains in column effi￾ciency. In gas chromatography, though, the A-term
is only a small contributor to plate height and the
gains are less dramatic. While gains are sometimes
possible, small particles will create more pressure
drop, and this tends to limit column efficiency. In
practice, packed columns for PGCs rarely use par￾ticles less than about 125 μm.
To minimize the packing factor (λ), we use parti￾cles of uniform size and endeavor to pack them
tightly in the column. Unfortunately, it turns out that
smaller particles are more difficultto pack uniformly.
The B-term
The second term in the van Deemter equation is a
constant (B) divided by the average carrier gas
velocity. In Figure 6.2, the orange curve represents
the B-term.
The B-term recognizes that solute molecules in
the gas phase are constantly diffusing away from
the peak center, thereby causing a peak to contin￾uously spread lengthwise in the column.
The rate of thislongitudinal diffusion depends
on the diffusion coefficient (DM) of the solute in the
chosen carrier gas:
B = 2ψ DM (6.8)
In Equation 6.8, the obstruction factor (ψ) is
applicable only to packed columns and allows for
the permeability of the packed bed.
What we learn
The diffusion process is continuous, so the extent of
the band spreading depends on how long the solute
is in the gas phase. The orange plot in Figure 6.2
shows the effect of carrier velocity. When the car￾rier velocity is low, the solute spends a lot of time
in the gas phase and the B-term is dominant, caus￾ing low column efficiency. When the gas velocity is
high, the solute spends less time in the gas phase
and the B-term becomes insignificant. Since PGCs
tend to run fast, the B-term is rarely of concern in
process gas chromatography.
A dense carrier gas, such as nitrogen or argon,
would reduce the solute diffusion rate and thereby
reduce the B-term. But we choose carrier gases
mostly for other reasons (for example, to suit the
detector), seldom to reduce the B-term.
The C-term
The third term in the van Deemter equation is a
constant (C) multiplied by the average carrier gas
velocity. This term is called the resistance to mass
transfer. It allows for the peak broadening caused
by the slow transfer of solute molecules into and
out of the liquid phase.
Figure 6.3 illustrates this effect. In each diagram,
the blue curve is a snapshot of the distribution of
molecules in the gas phase, while the orange curve
is the concurrent distribution in the liquid phase.
In Figure 6.3a, the two distributions are in equi￾librium, but this can happen only if the carrier gas
stops moving. Figure 6.3b illustrates what really
happens when the gas phase is moving. The move￾ment disturbs the equilibrium and makes the over￾all peak wider.
The next step is important. As indicated by
arrows in Figure 6.3b, some of the leading mole￾cules enter the liquid phase to reestablish the lead￾ing-edge equilibrium, and some of the trailing
molecules enter the gas phase to reestablish the
trailing-edge equilibrium. Given that the gas phase
continues to move, a fast mass transfer will incur
only a small increase in peak width, whereas a slow
mass transfer will cause significant broadening.
The column variables associated with the rate of
mass transfer in the liquid phase are the depth of
the liquid film (df) and the rate of diffusion of the
solute in the liquid phase (DS).
The expression for C recognizes that a thick liq￾uid film will slow down the mass transfer rate,
while a high diffusion rate will speed it up:
C = f k df
2
DS
(6.9)
where f(k) is a function of the retention factor (k).
156 Optimizing performanceWhat we learn
Equation 6.9 contains the square of film thickness,
so a thinner liquid film will give a significant
improvement in column efficiency. Yet very thin
films can be problematic. For some practical limits
to the thinness of the liquid film, refer to that dis￾cussion in Chapter 4.
Reducing the viscosity of the liquid would allow
more rapid diffusion of the solute. To that end, it
seems that the column should operate at a high
temperature, but Chapter 4 has several caveats to
following that advice. Most PGC columns run best
warm, not hot.
The full expression of Equation 6.9 also includes
a function f(k) of the peak retention factor. Here is
the expansion of f(k):
f k = 8
π2
k
1 + k 2 (6.10)
Table 6.1 lists the numerical values of this func￾tion for typical values of k. The function reaches a
maximum value at k = 1 and declines at higher
values of k, which indicates that the C-term has less
effect for later peaks on the chromatogram.
Note that a higher column temperature will
reduce the peak retention factor and that will tend
to negate any benefit gained from reduced liquid
phase viscosity. One might propose to increase
the film thickness to maintain constant retention
factors, but a quick look at Equation 6.9 would
quash that idea: film thickness is squared!
Looking again at Figure 6.3b, the time taken for
mass transfer will cause more peak broadening at
higher gas velocities than at low velocities. To cap￾ture this effect, the van Deemter equation multi￾plies the constant (C) by the carrier gas velocity.
Since PGC columns tend to run fast, the C-term
has a large effect on plate height and is of most con￾cern for PGC column design.
Extended van Deemter equation
The original van Deemter equation did not consider
resistance to mass transfer in the gas phase, reason￾ing that this transfer would be very fast and thus
negligible in a packed column. But the development
of open-tubular columns quickly showed the neces￾sity of including an extra term to account for the
mass transfer rate in the gas phase.
Conc. in Gas Phase Conc. in Liquid Phase Conc. in Gas Phase Conc. in Liquid Phase
6.3 (a)
6.3 (b)
Gas Phase
Liquid Phase
Location Along Column (mm)
Location Along Column (mm)
Liquid Phase
Gas Phase
A static equilibrium (6.3a) would result in perfect alignment 
between the distributions of solute in the gas and liquid phases. 
But when the carrier gas moves (6.3b), the solute in the gas 
phase moves ahead of the solute in the liquid phase, making 
the peak wider. The effect is more pronounced when the rate of 
transfer between phases is slow.
Figure 6.3 Effect of Slow Mass Transfer.
Source: Adapted from Miller (2005, 78) for a solute peak
having Kc = 0.5.
Table 6.1 Values of the k-Function in Equation 6.10.
k 1 2 5 10 20
f(k) 0.20 0.18 0.11 0.067 0.037
Optimum flow rate 157So the extended van Deemter equation appli￾cable to open-tubular columns (and to liquid chro￾matography) incorporates two mass transfer
constants, one for the mobile phase (CM) and one
for the stationary phase (CS):
H = A +
B
u
+ CM + CS u (6.11)
As previously noted, the A-term allows for mul￾tiple pathways in the column packing and is not
applicable to open-tubular columns. Thus, the
Golay equation for capillary columns (reviewed
below) does not include the A-term.
The Golay equation
Laminar flow in an open-tubular column sets up a
wide range of carrier gas velocities, very slow near
the walls due to friction and faster at the center.
These different velocities would inevitably distribute
the solute molecules randomly along the axis of the
column, causing severe peak broadening. Fortu￾nately, another effect limits the lengthwise distribu￾tion; the molecules also diffuse radially between the
center of the tube and the tube wall.When thisradial
diffusion is fast, it mixes the high and low velocities
and tends to negate the longitudinal broadening.
Golay (1958) developed an extended van Deem￾ter equation for capillary columns that includes
resistance to mass transfer in the gas phase (CM)
and is still valid today. Golay recognized the advan￾tage of fast radial movement inside the column. His
CM term includes the internal diameter (dc) of the
column and the diffusion coefficient of the solute in
the gas phase (DM):
CM = f k dc
2
DM
(6.12)
where f(k) is a new function of the retention factor.
What we learn
Equation 6.12 shows that a narrow column diame￾ter and a fast rate of diffusion will improve the effi￾ciency of a column.
The squared column diameter in the Golay equa￾tion predicted that thinner columns would return
a large improvement in efficiency. The diameter
of columns has been shrinking ever since. The
remarkable efficiency of modern narrow-bore
open-tubular columns confirms that prediction.
To improve the diffusion rate, use low-density car￾rier gases (hydrogen or helium). A higher column
temperature might help, subject to the limitations
discussed above.The full expression ofEquation 6.12
includes a new function f(k) of the peak retention
factor. Here is the expansion of this function:
f k = 1 + 6k + 11k2
96 1 + k 2 (6.13)
Numerically, this rather foreboding function of k
is very simple and has little effect on plate height.
Table 6.2 shows that its value varies by only a factor
of two for normal values of k. Thus, later peaks
experience a higher value of CM and will be slightly
less efficient.
Interestingly, this increase in CM tends to com￾pensate for the larger and opposite effect of k on
the mass transfer rate in the liquid phase (CS).
Table 6.3 summarizes the variables associated
with rate theory and their effect on column perfor￾mance, as discussed above.
Other effects
Over the years, researchers have proposed other
modifications to the original van Deemter equa￾tion with the intent of more closely modeling
the empirical efficiency curve. These modified
equations are generally not applicable to process
gas chromatography.
A source of variance not covered by columntheory
is the dispersion that occurs in the instrumentation,
the so-called extracolumn variance. Dispersion
occursin the sample injection device,in unsweptside
volumes (“dead legs”) of the flow path, in the tube
connections between devices, and in the detector.
We examine these issues in Chapter 8.
Also missing from the above discussion is the
effect of pressure on column efficiency. In gas
Table 6.2 Values of the k-Function in Equation 6.13.
k 1 2 5 10 20
f(k) 0.047 0.066 0.089 0.100 0.107
158 Optimizing performanceGetting a fast analysis
It may come as a surprise that PGC columnsrarely run at their optimum flow
rate. It’s usually too slow. Often, the last step in PGC performance optimi￾zation is to optimize the analysis or cycle time.
From a practical point of view, the procedure for fast analysis is rather
simple: install a long column and run it fast. To fully understand the pro￾cedure, though, it’s best to follow the calculations given in the Worked
Example below, so you don’t waste your time with a column that’s never
going to work. The calculations are not difficult, and the results are
astounding!
The Worked Example that follows starts with a fully optimized column
and deliberately runs it under non-optimal conditions to gain some useful
performance improvements, such as
chromatography, the gradual decompression of
the carrier gas as it moves down the column
length has a significant effect on peak
broadening, particularly in packed columns.
Refer to Chapter 9 for more information on the
effects of pressure drop.
Table 6.3 Quick Reference Guide to Rate Theory.
Column Variable Symbol Column Type Action to Reduce Plate Height
and Improve Column Efficiency
Equation
Number
Average Carrier Velocity u All Run at optimum carrier gas velocity (or flow rate). 6.6
Particle Diameter dp Packed Use smaller particles but beware of creating too much
pressure drop across column.
6.7
Packing Factor λ Packed Use particles of uniform size.
Ensure column is snugly packed with no voids.
6.7
Obstruction Factor ψ Packed Use smaller particles to reduce the A term, but this
will cause more pressure drop.
6.8
Diffusion Coefficient of
Solute in Gas Phase
DM All Run at higher carrier gas velocity to reduce the
contribution of the B-term.
Use a dense carrier gas (nitrogen or argon).
6.8
Liquid Film Thickness
(Squared!)
df
2 All Use a low liquid phase loading, but not too low!
(see Chapter 4).
6.9
Diffusion Rate of Solute
in Liquid Phase
Ds All Use a low-viscosity liquid phase.
For some liquid phases, a higher temperature might
help.
6.9
Retention Factor of Peak k All Only a minor effect – and not easily adjusted.
Focus on having the peaks in the power region.
6.9
& 6.12
Column Internal
Diameter (Squared!)
dc
2 Open Tubular Reduce column diameter but beware of exceeding
maximum sample volume (see Chapter 4).
Check detector sensitivity to a reduced sample
volume.
6.12
Diffusion Rate of Solute
in Gas Phase
DM Open Tubular Use a low-density carrier gas (hydrogen or helium). 6.12
Getting a fast analysis 159More resolution with the same analysis time.
Faster analysis with the same resolution.
These are advantages that you don’t want to miss.
A worked example
Introduction
This is a practical procedure for improving column performance in
four steps.
The first step shows the calculations needed to fully understand the
base case. It shows you how to use the efficiency curve of a column
to calculate the resolution of adjacent peaks and the overall efficiency
of the column.
The second step examines a longer column, but for ease of understanding,
the other operating conditions remain unchanged. Naturally, the longer col￾umn gives a longer analysis time. Example calculations illustrate the inevi￾table changes to peak width and resolution.
The third step considers the possibility of increasing the carrier gas veloc￾ity in the longer column to regain the original analysistime. The calculations
are similar, so we show them in summary form. The outcome of this change
may surprise you.
The final step shows how it might be possible to achieve a faster analysis
using the longer column at an even higher carrier gas flow rate. We will dis￾cuss this paradoxical result in detail but challenge you to do the calculations
yourself. It’s a good practice exercise for you.
Initial assumptions
Now for the actual procedure. We start from the following arbitrary
assumptions:
The column length is 10 m.
The retention time of Peak A is 285 s.
The retention time of Peak B is 300 s.
The column efficiency curve displayed in Figure 6.1 applies to Peak B on
this column.
The column is running at its optimum flow rate.
Therefore, from Figure 6.1:
The carrier gas velocity at optimum flow rate is 0.20 m/s.
The plate height for Peak B at optimum flow rate is 0.40 mm.
160 Optimizing performanceAlthough we will consider four different column conditions, the above
starting data, together with the efficiency curve in Figure 6.1, is all the infor￾mation we need to calculate performance parameters for the entire exercise.
Step #1: Evaluate the existing column
Look at the starting chromatogram in Figure 6.4a.
Before changing anything, we first need to understand the base case. The
column in this example is doing a good job. It’s separating Peak A and Peak
B in 300 seconds with a clear baseline resolution. It’s evident that the column
is operating under optimum conditions since both peaks are in the power
region and the flow rate is set at the optimum velocity.
On the face of it, the performance of this column cannot be improved but
we are going to improve it anyway!
To get a faster analysis, one could propose a shorter column or a higher
flow rate and accept the loss of resolution incurred. In a real application,
though, that’s hardly likely to be an acceptable outcome. Therefore, let’s
place a constraint on this exercise; that any modified configuration shall pro￾duce at least as much resolution as before.
To ensure this, we need to know the starting resolution. You can calculate
the resolution from the time separation of the peaks and their average width.
The time separation (ΔtR) is simply the difference between the retention
times of Peak B and Peak A, and we have that data:
ΔtR = 300 s − 285 s = 15 s
Now we need the peak widths. That’s an easy calculation, but the units can
be confusing. The plate height obtained from Figure 6.4a is in length units
(0.4 mm), whereas the calculation of chromatogram peak widths must be in
time units, normally seconds. So, before calculating the peak widths, convert
the length-based plate height (H) to the time-based plate height (Ht) using
Equation 2.21 to:
Ht = H
tR
L
From Figure 6.4a:
HB = 0 40 mm
tR = 300 s
L = 10 m
Therefore,
Ht = 0 40 mm ×
300 s
10,000 mm = 0 0120 s
A worked example 161(a) 10 m Column at Optimum Velocity
(b) 15 m Column at Optimum Velocity
(c) 15 m Column at Original Time, Better Resolution
Retention Time (s)
(d) 15 m Column at Original Resolution, Faster Time
Air
50 s
Air
75 s
Air
75 s
A B
Air
38 s
B A
0 100 200 300 400 500
0 100 200 300 400 500
0 100 200 300 400 500
0 100 200 300 400 500
Inj
Inj
Inj
Inj
A B
Column 10 m
u= 0.20 m/s
HB= 0.40 mm
tB= 300 s
NB= 25000
Rs= 2.0
Column 15 m
u= 0.20 m/s
HB= 0.40 mm
tB= 450 s
NB= 37500
Rs= 2.45
Column 15 m
u= 0.30 m/s
HB= 0.43 mm
tB= 300 s
NB= 31,250
Rs= 2.24
Column 15 m
u= 0.40 m/s
tB= 225 s
NB= 25,000
HB= 0.60 mm
Rs= 2.0
A B
PGC columns tend to be longer and run faster than optimum, thereby gaining better time efficiency. In this sequential 
example, chromatogram: 
(a) Uses a column running at optimum flow rate and achieving an adequate resolution;
(b) Uses a longer column running at optimum flow rate and achieves excess resolution in long time; 
(c) Increasing the carrier flow yields the same analysis time but with better resolution than the original column – better time 
 efficiency;
(d) Running even faster yields the same resolution as the original chromatogram in less analysis time.
Figure 6.4 Advantages of Using a Longer Column.
162 Optimizing performanceOur column is producing about 83 plates-per-second; one equivalent equi￾librium occurs every 12 milliseconds. The phase distribution process is fast!
Now calculate the base widths (wb) of Peaks A and B using Equation 2.23:
wb = 4 Ht tR
wb A = 4 0 012 × 285 s = 7 397 s
wb B = 4 0 012 × 300 s = 7 589 s
You may notice that the above calculations use the plate height derived from
Peak B data to calculate the widths of both peaks. This is allowable because
the plate height in time units is sensibly constant for all peaks on the chro￾matogram, as noted in the SCI-FILE On Plate Theory in Chapter 2.
To continue, calculate the average peak width w of the two peaks:
w = 7 397 s + 7 589 s
2
= 7 49 s
Finally, get their resolution from Equation 2.8:
Rs = ΔtR
wa
Rs = 15 s
7 49 s
= 2 00
As shown by the chromatogram in Figure 6.4a, this resolution produces a
very good baseline separation.
To evaluate the changes that we are about to make, we will also need to
know the separating power of the column, given by its plate number. The
plate number (N) is not the same for both peaks, it comes out higher for Peak
B than for Peak A. Using Equation 2.26:
N = 16
tR
wb
2
NA = 16 ×
285 s
7 40 s
2
= 23,730
NB = 16 ×
300 s
7 59 s
2
= 25,000
If you think about it, this difference is not surprising. The width of a peak
doesn’t increase as fast as its retention time does; peak width is proportional
to the square root of peak retention time. It’s inevitable, therefore, that each
peak on a chromatogram has a different plate number that gradually
increases with peak retention time. That’s why a longer column always
A worked example 163improve resolution – the additional peak separation outweighs the increase
in peak width. But this extra resolution is not free; the cost to you is lower
peak heights and longer analysis time.
For a given peak, plate number always indicates the resolving
power of the column. If the plate number increases, it’s a certain indica￾tion that the resolution has also increased. For us, this is a good reason to
keep an eye on the plate number for Peak B when making changes to the
column.
Finally, recall that the power region lies between two times and six times
the holdup time. For this chromatogram, that’s from 100 to 300 seconds and
both peaks are in the power region.
Summary of chromatogram 6.4a
In summary, these are the key starting conditions:
The column is running at its optimum flow rate.
Carrier gas velocity is 0.2 m/s.
Plate height is 0.40 mm.
Peak B plate number is 25,000.
Peak B retention time is 300 s.
Time between peaks is 15.0 s.
Average peak width is 7.49 s.
Resolution is 2.00.
This column is fully optimized and doing a fine job. It’s the very best
that the column can do. You would think that all columns would run like
this – set at their optimum flow rate. But no, most PGC applications need
the fastest analysis time and the optimum flow rate tends to be slow. It’s
counterintuitive, but a longer column may provide a faster analysis.
To examine this apparent paradox, let’s take it one step at a time.
Step #2: Use a longer column
In the second chromatogram, we replace the 10 meter column with a 15
meter column of the same type and run it at the same average carrier velocity
as before. Because of the additional carrier gas pressure, the column exit flow
rate might not be the same; to obtain the same average velocity, adjust the
flow rate until the air peak elutes at 75 seconds.
Figure 6.4b shows the new chromatogram.
Here’s what we know:
The column length is now 15 m.
The carrier gas flow rate is about the same.
164 Optimizing performanceThe average carrier gas velocity has not changed –it’s still optimized at
0.20 m/s.
The plate height has not changed – it remains at 0.40 mm.
Here are the calculations to evaluate the new column condition.
The retention time of Peak A increases in proportion to column length:
tR A = 285 s ×
15 m
10 m
= 427 5 s
Similarly, the retention time of Peak B also increases:
tR B = 300 s ×
15 m
10 m = 450 s
So, the time separation between peaks is more than it was before:
ΔtR = 450 s − 427 5 s = 22 5 s
The column is still working at optimum velocity, so its plate height is the
same as it was before, 0.012 s.
Again using Equation 2.23, the new base widths of Peaks A and B are:
wb A = 4 0 012 s × 427 5 s = 9 060 s
wb B = 4 0 012 s × 450 s = 9 295 s
And, the average peak width has increased to 9.18 s:
w = 9 060 s + 9 295 s
2
= 9 18 s
Yet the resolution is much better, as expected with the longer column. The
resolution increased from 2.00 to 2.45:
Rs = 22 5 s
9 18 s
= 2 45
And from Equation 2.13, the plate number of the new column is:
N = L
H = 15,000 mm
0 40 mm = 37,500
Summary of chromatogram 6.4b
Table 6.4 lists the values of column parameters for the longer column run￾ning under optimum conditions. Noted below are the most important results
of this change:
The column is 1.5 times longer.
The carrier gas velocity is the same.
A worked example 165The plate height is the same.
The Peak B retention time increased from 300 to 450 s.
The time between peaks improved from 15.0 to 22.5 s.
The average peak width worsened from 7.49 to 9.18 s.
The Peak B plate number went up from 25,000 to 37,500.
The resolution improved from 2.00 to 2.45.
The analysis time is about 1.5 times longer than it was.
There should be no surprises here. As expected, the longer column pro￾vides a much better resolution at the expense of a longer analysis time.
Step #3: Regain the analysis time
The next step is to increase the carrier gas velocity. That will certainly speed
up the analysis, but the column will no longer be operating at its optimum
velocity. Figure 6.1 shows that plate height will increase when the carrier
velocity increases and this will cause a loss of resolution. But that may
not be a problem because we now have more resolution than we need.
In the third chromatogram, the carrier gas flow rate is just high enough to
bring Peak B back to its original location, reducing its retention time from
450 to 300 s. To achieve thisreduction in retention time, the carrier gas veloc￾ity u must be:
u = 20 m s ×
450 s
300 s = 30 m s
Figure 6.4c shows the new chromatogram.
Table 6.4 Four-Step Optimization of Analysis Time.
Key Performance Data Figure Number
6.4a 6.4b 6.4c 6.4d
Column Length m 10 15 15 15
Carrier Gas Velocity m/s 0.20 0.20 0.30 0.40
Plate Height mm 0.40 0.40 0.48 0.60
Plate Number of Peak B 25,000 37,500 31,250 25,000
Resolution A–B 2.0 2.45 2.24 2.0
Retention Time of Peak B S 300 450 300 225
Plates per Second Hz 83 83 104 111
Peaks in Power Region Yes Yes Yes Yes
Plate number and resolution are the same in both original and final conditions (yellow highlight) but the time efficiency has
improved (green highlight). However, it’s fair to note this improvement in analysis time comes at the cost of twice the carrier gas
consumption.
166 Optimizing performanceHere’s what we know:
The column length remains at 15 m.
The column is not running at its optimum flow rate.
The average carrier gas velocity is now 0.30 m/s.
From Figure 6.1, the plate height has increased to 0.48 mm.
Calculate the new column parameters in much the same way as before,
noting the effect of the changes:
The retention time of Peak A is now the same as the original:
tR A = 427 5 s ×
0 20 m s
0 30 m s = 285 s
The retention time of Peak B is now the same as the original:
tR B = 450 s ×
0 20 m s
0 30 m s = 300 s
The separation between peaks is now the same as the original:
ΔtR = 300 s − 285 s = 15 s
The plate height is now 0.48 mm.
The plate height converted to time units is:
Ht = 0 48 mm ×
300 s
15,000 mm = 0 0096 s
So, the new peak widths are:
wb A = 4 0 0096 s × 285 s = 6 616 s
wb B = 4 0 0096 s × 300 s = 6 788 s
And, the average peak width is:
w = 6 616 s + 6 788 s
2
= 6 70 s
The column is achieving a better resolution, with the same analysis time!
Rs = 15 s
6 70 s
= 2 24
And, the plate number of Peak B is higher than the original value of 25,000 –
as one would expect with the increased resolution:
NB = L
H = 15,000 mm
0 48 mm = 31,250
A worked example 167Summary of chromatogram 6.4c
As noted in Table 6.4, this is a great improvement. Here are the most impor￾tant performance parameters compared with their original values:
The column is 1.5 times longer than the original.
Carrier gas velocity is 1.5 times faster than optimum.
Plate height is worse, increasing from 0.40 to 0.48 s.
Both peaks are back to their original retention times.
Both peaks are narrower.
The resolution is better, improving from 2.0 to 2.24.
Plate number went up from 25,000 to 31,250.
The analysis time is the same as it was before.
Nice. Compare the new chromatogram in Figure 6.4c with the original
in Figure 6.4a. Notice that the retention times of Peaks A and B are now the
same as they were in the original chromatogram, but the peaks are nar￾rower! That’s why the resolution improved. This increased resolution
explains why PGC columns are often longer and run faster than you might
expect.
Actually, it’s useful to know that your PGC column may have untapped
separating power. If you need more resolution and you don’t mind a longer
analysis time, just reduce the flow rate a little. In most cases, the reduced
carrier gas velocity will give you more resolution. It just takes time.
Step #4: Faster analysis with the same resolution
The final change aims to get the shortest analysis time. Our present column
is still producing more resolution than the original, so it should be
possible to increase the velocity until the resolution falls back to its original
value. This would give the same resolution in less time, a worthy goal
indeed.
Once again, more carrier gas pressure is necessary. With all three of the
proposed changes needing more pressure, you may reach a limit to what is
possible. It depends on the starting conditions and the carrier gas in use. The
section on Time Efficiency below discusses the choice of carrier gas for fast
analysis.
Figure 6.4d shows the final chromatogram. Here’s what we know:
The column length remains at 15 m.
The column is running twice as fast as its optimum flow rate.
The average carrier gas velocity is now 0.40 m/s.
From Figure 6.1, the plate height is now 0.60 mm.
168 Optimizing performanceWe calculated the new column parameters in much the same way as
before, and briefly note the changes below. You can write in the calculation
of each item yourself; it’s a good training exercise:
The retention time of Peak A is now 71 seconds less than the original:
tR A = = 213 8 s
The retention time of Peak B is now 75 seconds less than the original:
tR B = = 225 s
The separation between peaks is now 3.8 seconds less than the original:
ΔtR = = 11 2 s
The plate height converted to time units is:
Ht = = 0 0090 s
So the new peak widths are:
wb A = = 5 549 s
wb B = = 5 692 s
And the average peak width is less than on the original chromatogram:
w = = 5 62 s
The resolution is the same as the original, with 75 seconds faster analy￾sis time:
Rs = =20
And the plate number of Peak B is back to its original value of 25,000:
NB = = 25,000
Summary of chromatogram 6.4d
Table 6.4 lists most of this new data. Here’s a summary that compares the
final column performance with the performance of the original column:
The column is 1.5 times longer than it was.
Carrier gas is now flowing at twice the optimum velocity.
Plate height is much worse, having increased from 0.40 to 0.60 mm.
Peak B is now 75 s faster than in the original chromatogram.
The peaks are closer together.
A worked example 169Both peaks are narrower.
Resolution is the same as the original column.
Plate number is the same as it was in the original column.
The analysis time is about 75 s faster than it was before.
Look again at Figure 6.4d. It’s an amazing improvement in the speed of
analysis.
A good thing to remember:
Optimum column performance is usually slow. A better resolution or a fas￾ter analysis is often possible by running a longer column faster than its
optimum flow rate.
Time efficiency
This Worked Exercise illustrates the possibility of using a longer column
running fast to get an improved resolution (per Figure 6.4c) or a reduced
analysis time (per Figure 6.4d). To get these advantages, PGC columns tend
to run fast. It’s not unusual for the carrier gas to be set at about twice the
optimum flow rate.
In the end, the best performance comes from generating the most theo￾retical plates in the shortest time. So, when analysis time is an issue, as it
often is with a PGC, the best measure of performance is time efficiency,
measured in plates-per-second. Table 6.4 includes the values of this new
parameter, confirming that Figure 6.4d provides the best time efficiency
of the four examples examined.
An interesting property of time efficiency is its constancy. Unlike plate
number, which increases with retention time, time efficiency is about the
same for every peak on the chromatogram. Because of itsindependence from
the peak used to measure it, time efficiency is an ideal parameter for eval￾uating the performance of the column itself.
Designing for fast analysis
The efficiency curve
The ability to drive a column faster and yet get more plates depends upon the
slope of the efficiency curve. The above worked example adopted the effi￾ciency curve in Figure 6.1. If you look closely at that curve, you will see that
any increase in carrier gas velocity beyond its optimum value results in a
smaller increase in plate height. For instance, at twice the optimum velocity,
the plate height increases by only 50 %.
This is the key to fast analysis; it relies on the slope of the right incline of
the efficiency curve. Long columns with shallow curves lose little efficiency
when running fast. Their time efficiency in plates-per-second is higher than
a shorter column running at optimum speed. This advantage is lost for
170 Optimizing performancesteeper efficiency curves, and for very steep curves, the time efficiency of the
column may decline as the velocity increases. That kind of column must
operate at or near its optimum flow rate.
The SCI-FILE On Rate Theory discusses the factors that determine the
slope of the efficiency curve at high flow rates. In brief, a shallow slope is
desirable and more likely to occur with reductions in column diameter, car￾rier gas density, liquid phase loading, or liquid phase viscosity.
Narrow column diameter
It’s well known that narrower column diameters yield flatter efficiency
curves and thus allow faster analysis. For PGC columns, though, the need
for stability and reliability for long periods in an industrial environment will
often outweigh the advantage of using a very narrow column with a very thin
liquid film. Modern PGC columns aim to last more than one year in contin￾uous operation.
Choice of carrier gas
The rate theory predictsthat lower-density carrier gases will exhibitshallower
efficiency curves than higher-density gases, thus allowing higher velocities
with minimal loss of column efficiency. Thisistrue in practice. Figure 6.5 illus￾trates typical efficiency curves for hydrogen, helium, and nitrogen carrier gas.
Hydrogen is best for fast analysis on two counts:
The efficiency curve for hydrogen is much flatter than for nitrogen, and
this favors high-speed analysis with little loss of efficiency. Helium is
similar in this regard. Plate Height (
H) mm
Nitrogen
Carrier Gas
Helium
Carrier Gas
Hydrogen
Carrier Gas
Carrier Gas Velocity (u
−) m/s
Higher density carrier gases generate more theoretical plates when running at 
optimum velocity but yield slow analyses. Because of the severe slope of their 
van Deemter curve, running at a faster flow rate is unlikely to improve 
resolution or analysis time. Hydrogen is the best carrier gas for fast analysis. 
Its curve is flatter and it requires only half the pressure drop of helium.
Figure 6.5 Effect of Carrier Gas
Density.
Source: Adapted from Miller
(2005, 86).
Designing for fast analysis 171Hydrogen is a low-density and low-viscosity gas and flows through a col￾umn at about twice the flow rate of helium, when at the same inlet pres￾sure. The ability to flow fast is a strong advantage of hydrogen carrier
when designing for fast analysis, particularly with packed columns.
Historically, most PGCs in the USA used helium as carrier gas because it
was safe and inexpensive. But helium is now sometimesin short supply and is
costlier than it was. So, many US plants are converting their PGCs to use
hydrogen carrier gas, sometimes achieving faster analysis. Helium has always
been expensive outside the USA, so most of the PGCs at other jobsites use
hydrogen carrier gas.
Note, however, that hydrogen may react with unsaturates in your sample,
creating extra peaks and reducing the analyte measurement. It’s well known
that hydrogen reacts with butadiene at temperatures above 100 C to form sev￾eral additional C4 peaks, probably paraffins and olefins. If you need to meas￾ure butadiene at high injection temperature, it’s best to use helium carrier gas.
Liquid phase loading
The depth of the liquid phase layer has a major effect on the slope of the effi￾ciency curve at high carrier gas velocities. Whenever possible, avoid deep liq￾uid layers. It takes time for solute molecules to diffuse through a deep layer
and this results in a steep efficiency curve. Figure 6.6 shows that a low liquid
load (or thin liquid film) is much better for fast analysis because it allows
rapid mass transfer and leads to a flatter efficiency curve.
Low liquid loadings are not always possible. If the solutes are not very sol￾uble in the chosen liquid phase, a thickerliquid film may be necessary to bring
5% Liquid
Load
10% Liquid
Load
25% Liquid
Load
Carrier Gas Velocity (u
−) m/s
Plate Height (
H) mm
It takes time for the solute to penetrate the liquid layer so a thicker liquid film 
loses efficiency more rapidly at higher carrier gas flow rates. The effect is 
worse for high-viscosity liquid phases. Thin liquid films (low loading) provide 
the best efficiency, but first confirm your closest analyte peaks are in the 
power region.
Figure 6.6 Effect of Film
Thickness or Liquid Loading.
Source: Annino et al., 1992/with
permission of International
Society of Automation.
172 Optimizing performancethe peaks into the power region. Chapter 5 explains why the best peak reten￾tion time for fast analysis is three times the gas holdup time i e , k = 2 .
Also, a large sample volume may overload a lightly loaded column, yet a
large sample may be necessary to get the needed detector sensitivity.
Liquid phase viscosity
A liquid phase with low viscosity allows faster diffusion of the solute mole￾cules when they are in the liquid phase, which then allows a rapid transfer of
solute molecules between phases. The fast mass transfer minimizes band
spreading in the column and produces a flatter efficiency curve.
It’s useful to know that low viscosity is a desirable property of a liquid
phase. In practice, though, we choose liquid phases for their ability to sep￾arate the peaks, not for their low viscosity.
As noted in the SCI-FILE On Rate Theory, a higher column temperature
will reduce the viscosity of many liquid phases and may help to flatten the
efficiency curve. Even so, the advice sometimes given to run a column hot is
shortsighted. It’s much more important to set the column temperature so the
peaks are in the power region. Refer to Chapter 4 for a more detailed discus￾sion of column temperature limitations.
Knowledge Gained
Practice
On every column, there is an optimum car￾rier gas flow rate that delivers the best
resolution.
A simple experimental procedure discovers
the optimum carrier flow rate.
The procedure is applicable to a single column
or to similar columns connected in series.
Before starting, ensure that the peak pair that
are hardest to resolve is in the power region.
Measure the plate number and plate height
of a peak at several different carrier flow
rates.
Record the flow rates, or optionally calculate
the carrier gas velocity from the holdup time.
Plot a column efficiency curve of plate height
against carrier gas velocity (or flow rate).
Note the optimum velocity (or flow rate) that
gives the minimum plate height.
PGC columns tend to be longer and run faster
than their optimum flow rates.
It’s possible to achieve better resolution or fas￾ter analysis on a longer column running fast.
Hydrogen is usually the best carrier gas for
fast analysis.
A thin film of low-viscosity liquid phase allows
fast analysis with little loss of resolution.
Theory
Rate theory assumes that equilibrium cannot
form because the mobile phase is always
moving.
Rate theory seeks to understand the causes of
molecular dispersion within the column.
Designing for fast analysis 173Did you get it?
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 06
On practice
For questions 6Q1–6Q5, assume you are working with Peaks A and B on an 8 m
column, for which Figure 6.1 is the Peak B column efficiency curve. The retention
time of Peak A is 185 s. The retention time of Peak B is 200 s.
Q1. What is the maximum plate number for Peak B on this column?
Q2. What is the holdup time of this column when it is generating the maximum plate
number for Peak B?
Q3. Are the Peaks A and B in the power region?
Q4. What is the base width of Peak B?
Q5. What is the plate number for Peak B when the column is operated at twice its
optimum flow rate?
On theory
Q6. Which of the following statements is/are true of the van Deemter curve shown in
Figure 6.2?
A. The B u term contributes less to the minimum plate height than the Cu
term does.
Variance is a statistical measure of the disper￾sion of solute molecules in the column.
The variance of a peak is the sum of the var￾iances of all independent dispersions.
Plate height is a measure of the variance gen￾erated per unit length of column.
Rate theory expresses plate height as the
sum of several independent sources of
dispersion.
The van Deemter equation equates plate
height to the sum of three terms: A, B, and C.
The A-term is the dispersive effect of
multiple gas pathways through a packed
column bed.
The A-term is lower for small particles of
uniform size, tightly packed in the column.
The B-term is due to the longitudinal diffu￾sion of solute molecules away from the peak
center.
The B-term is lower with a high-density
carrier gas or increased carrier gas velocity.
The C-term is due to slow transfer of
solute molecules into and out of the liq￾uid phase.
The C-term is lower with a thin liquid film, a
low-viscosity liquid phase, or a slowcarrier gas.
The extended van Deemter has an extra C￾term forslowtransfer ofsolute in the gas phase.
The extra C-term applies mainly to capillary
columns.
The extra C-term is lower for smaller dia￾meters or lighter carrier gases.
174 Optimizing performanceB. The B u term contributes about the same to the minimum plate height as the
Cu term does.
C. The B u term contributes more to the minimum plate height than the Cu
term does.
Q7. For the van Deemter curve shown in Figure 6.2, which of the following changes
might be effective to reduce the slope of the curve at high carrier gas velocities?
A. Reduce the carrier gas flow rate.
B. Increase the liquid loading.
C. Use a lower-viscosity liquid phase.
D. Increase column temperature.
E. Change to hydrogen carrier gas.
F. Use a longer column.
G. Use a wider-bore column.
References
Further reading
The helpful little reference book by Leslie Ettre and John Hinshaw (1993) is a must
have guidebook on the equations of theoretical gas chromatography.
Cited
Annino, R. and Villalobos, R. (1992). Process Gas Chromatography: Fundamen￾tals and Applications. Research Triangle Park, NC: Instrument Society of
America.
Ettre, L.S. and Hinshaw, J.V. (1993). Basic Relationships of Gas Chromatography.
Cleveland, OH: ADVANSTAR Communications, Inc.
Golay, M.J.E. (1958). Theory of chromatography in open and coated tubular
columns with round and rectangular cross-sections. In: Gas Chromatography
1958 (The Amsterdam Symposium) (ed. D.H. Desty), 36–55. London, UK:
Butterworths.
Miller, J.M. (2005). Chromatography: Concepts and Contrasts. Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons.
Van Deemter, J.J., Zuiderweg, F.J., and Klinkenberg, A. (1956). Longitudinal
diffusion and resistance to mass transfer as causes of nonideality in chromatog￾raphy. Chemical Engineering Science 5, 271–289.
Tables
6.1 Values of the k-Function in Equation 6.10.
6.2 Values of the k-Function in Equation 6.13.
6.3 Quick Reference Guide to Rate Theory.
6.4 Four-Step Optimization of Analysis Time.
References 175Figures
6.1 Typical Column Efficiency Curve.
6.2 van Deemter Curve.
6.3 Effect of Slow Mass Transfer:
a. Distribution of solute at equilibrium.
b. Band broadening due to gas movement.
6.4 Advantages of Using a Longer Column:
(a) 10 m Column at Optimum Velocity.
(b) 15 m Column at Optimum Velocity.
(c) 15 m Column at Original Time, Better Resolution.
(d) 15 m Column at Original Resolution, Faster Time.
6.5 Effect of Carrier Gas Density.
6.6 Effect of Film Thickness or Liquid Loading.
Symbols
Symbol Variable Unit
a Effective cross-sectional area of gas pathway in column m
A van Deemter constant – eddy diffusion term m
B van Deemter constant – longitudinal diffusion term m2
/s
C van Deemter constant – resistance to mass transfer term s
CM Expanded van Deemter – mass transfer into mobile phase s
CS Expanded van Deemter – mass transfer into stationary
phase
s
dc Internal diameter of open tubular column m
df Liquid phase film thickness m
dp Diameter of particles in a packed column m
DM Diffusion coefficient of solute in gas phase m2
/s
DS Diffusion coefficient of solute in liquid phase m2
/s
H On-column plate height in length units m
Hmin Minimum plate height in length units m
Ht Chromatogram plate height in time units s
k Retention factor none
Kc Distribution coefficient none
L Length of column m
N Plate number none
Rs Resolution of adjacent peaks none
tR Peak retention time s
u Carrier gas velocity at column exit m/s
u Average carrier gas velocity m/s
v Average migration rate of a solute m/s
V Carrier gas flow rate mL
176 Optimizing performancew Average base width of two adjacent peaks on
chromatogram
s
wb Base width of a solute peak on chromatogram s
wh Width at half height of a solute peak on chromatogram s
ΔtR The time separation between adjacent chromatogram
peaks
s
λ Packing factor for the uniformity of column packing none
σ Standard deviation of an on-column peak in length units m
ψ Obstruction factor for diffusion in a packed column none
Equations
6.1 u = 4 V
π dc − 2df
2 Open tubular column exit velocity.
6.2 σ
2 = σ1
2 + σ2
2 … + σn
2 Addition of variances for a Gaussian
peak.
6.3 H = H1 + H2 … + Hn Plate height as sum of independent
variances.
6.4 v = L
tR
Migration rate of a solute along
column.
6.5 v = u
k
Relation between velocities and
retention factor.
6.6 H = A +
B
u
+ Cu The original van Deemter Equation.
6.7 A = 2λ dp Van Deemter A-term: eddy diffusion.
6.8 B = 2ψ DM Van Deemter B-term: longitudinal
diffusion.
6.9 C = f k df
2
Ds
Van Deemter C-term: resistance to
mass transfer in liquid phase.
6.10 f k = 8
π2
k
1 + k 2 f(k) for the van Deemter C-term in
Equation 6.9.
6.11 H = A +
B
u
+ CM + CS u The extended van Deemter Equation.
6.12 CM = f k dc
2
DM
Golay expression for resistance to mass
transfer in the gas phase.
6.13 f k = 1+6k + 11k2
96 1 + k 2 f(k) for the Golay CM term in
Equation 6.12.
References 177New technical terms
If you read the whole chapter, you should now know the meaning of these
technical terms:
column efficiency curve migration rate
dispersion obstruction factor
eddy diffusion resistance to mass transfer
extra-column variance time efficiency
Golay equation van Deemter curve
longitudinal diffusion van Deemter equation
For more information, refer to the Glossary at the end of the book.
178 Optimizing performance7
Extracolumn broadening
“Peaks also get wider as they travel through flow passages outside the
column. Nearly every process gas chromatograph incorporates at least
one sample injection valve, one column switching valve, one detector,
and various lengths of connecting tubing that run between these devices
and the columns. These extracolumn flow paths cause some additional
peak broadening.”
Introduction
When our process chromatographs used quarter-inch outside diameter col￾umns, we didn’t have to worry about peaks getting wider as they traveled
through the one-sixteenth-inch connecting tubes or became exposed to the
internal volumes of sample valves and detectors. That was a long time ago.
By 1962, many PGCs were using three-sixteenth-inch columns, and soon
thereafter one-eighth-inch columns became the de facto standard for all
brands of PGC. This quiet change reduced the internal volume of columns
by a factor of 6.8, yet we still had no concern about external volumes. Eve￾rything worked well because the volume of external devices, notably detec￾tors, had also changed.
Turns out, we were lucky back then. Later, when we tried to use capillary
columns in PGCs, we discovered that the old way of connecting columns to
clunky valves and detectors was inadequate. The whole instrument had to
change.
Capillary columns can produce astounding separations, but only with
very small samples. As peak volumes became smaller, the internal volume
of the flow-path external to the column became critical. There’s no point in
generating 100,000 plate peaksif they mix with the carrier gas on their way to
the detector, or if the detector is so big that adjacent peaks are both in the
detector at the same time!
A modern PGC, even one using micropacked columns, will inject a very
small sample, so peak broadening in the flow passages external to the
Process Gas Chromatography: Advanced Design and Troubleshooting, First Edition. Tony Waters.
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2025 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.column is always a concern. To ensure the most efficient system design and
to properly maintain that system on-site, it’s important for everyone to
understand the deleterious effect of extracolumn volumes on the efficiency
of separation.
Peaks get wider because their molecules drift apart, or disperse, with time.
Two sources of peak dispersion account for most of the broadening expe￾rienced by a peak while it’s outside the columns:
the sample volume and its injection profile.
the geometry of the flow passages that the sample molecules encounter
between and within injectors, valves, and detectors.
In older equipment, the response time of the detector and its signal￾processing circuits also distorted the peaks. Modern detectors respond much
faster than their ancestors did, but detection speed may still limit the meas￾urement of very fast peaks from capillary columns.
Sample injection
Sample injection is a crucial function of a PGC – the reliability, repeatability,
and accuracy of the entire analyzer depend on it. The effect of sample injec￾tion on column performance rests on two significant variables: the sample
volume and the injection profile.
The injection profile is an imagined plot of sample concentration versus
time, as seen at the column entry point. Figure 7.1 is an idealized example.
After the sample injection event, there’s a short transport delay for the sam￾ple to travel to the head of the column, arbitrarily shown as 400 ms in the
figure. Ideally, the sample concentration in the carrier gas then rises
instantly from 0 to 100 % and soon thereafter falls rapidly back to 0 %.
We call this ideal condition a rectangular injection profile, or more colloqui￾ally a plug injection.
A plug injection has the shortest duration possible for a given volume of
sample and has two distinct advantages:
The narrow injection profile adds little to the inevitable dispersion of
molecules in the column, thereby ensuring narrow chromatogram peaks.
For a given amount ofsolute, narrow peaks generate more detectorsignal
than wide peaks do, thereby improving signal-to-noise ratio and analyte
detectability.
Clearly, the duration of a plug injection depends on the volume of sample
injected. A large volume of sample gas takes more time to enter the column
than a small volume does. This extended entry time distributes the analytes
over a longerstretch of column, making the chromatogram peaks wider than
they would otherwise be.
It’s wise to keep the sample volume small and the injection fast.
100%
80% Delay
400 ms
Width
470 ms
60%
40%
Concentration
20%
0%
0 200 400
Typical Time (ms)
600 800 1000
Figure 7.1 An Ideal Injection
Profile.
180 Extracolumn broadeningSample volume
The injected sample volume must be sufficiently small to avoid overloading
the column, yet large enough for the detector to provide the desired sensi￾tivity. A large sample volume may overload the stationary phase, distorting
peaks on the chromatogram. This distortion can take many forms, including
fronting, tailing, or even flat-topped peaks as seen in Chapter 8.
All columns have a maximum injection volume to avoid peak distortion.
It depends partly on the limits to solute solubility (or adsorption) and partly
on the width of the injection profile.
Solubility limit
Symmetrical peak shapes in gas chromatography occur only when the ratio
of analyte concentrations in the liquid and gas phases is constant. This ratio
is the distribution constant (Kc). Yet there’s always an upper limit to the
injected amount of an analyte. This upper limit is the sample capacity of
the column, a concept first introduced in Chapter 3. Injecting more analyte
than the sample capacity of a column exceeds the linear range of the distri￾bution constant and causes peak distortion.
Sample capacity is a column property that isspecific to a given analyte and
may vary widely according to the solubility of the analyte in the liquid phase,
the amount of liquid present in the column, and the linearity of the analyte
partition isotherm. Refer to Chapter 8 for more discussion on the latter.
Recall that the retention factor(k) of a peak is a function of the solubility of
that analyte in the liquid phase and the amount of liquid phase present in the
column. Therefore, you can improve the sample capacity of your column for
a specific peak by increasing its retention factor. Your options are:
Choose a liquid phase that strongly retains the analyte.
Use a higher liquid loading or thicker film thickness.
Operate the column at a lower temperature.
Peak width
The second factor affecting sample capacity is the width of the analyte peak.
Think of a peak like a constant-area isosceles triangle: a wider base means a
lower apex. Therefore, a wider peak can accept a larger quantity of analyte
without exceeding the concentration limit.
Since sample capacity is proportional to peak width, very narrow
peaks always have low sample capacity.
In Chapter 2, we found that the base width of a peak (wb) depends on the
plate height (H) and the column length (L) per Equation 2.17:
wb = 4 H L
Sample injection 181And from Equation 2.14:
H = L
N
Therefore,
wb = 4L
N (7.1)
Thus, the width of a peak varies inversely by the square root of its plate num￾ber (N). A capillary column with a high plate number will provide excellent
resolution but the trade-off for those narrow peaks is a low sample capacity;
highly efficient columns always need miniscule samples. This is why PGCs
using capillary columns tend to employ the less efficient “megabore” col￾umns having thicker liquid films.
Overall effect
We have seen that the permissible injected volume (Vmax) of an analyte
increases with peak retention volume and reduces with the square root of
its plate number. Hence, we can write:
V max = a VR
N (7.2)
Wherein:
The corrected retention volume (VR) of a peak is its retention volume
(VR) corrected for the average pressure in the column. This procedure
uses the gas compressibility factor (j) as fully explained in Chapter 9.
The empirical constant (a) relates to the pairing of an analyte with a
liquid phase and is a function of analyte solubility and the linear extent
of its partition isotherm. Reported values of (a) range between 0.02 and
0.6 (Annino and Villalobos 1992, 60).
To discover the constant (a) for a specific application, reduce the sample
size until there is no further improvement in resolution. After finding the
optimum sample volume, though, it’s unlikely that anyone would want to
go back to the equation!
Before moving on, realize that sample capacity calculated by Equation 7.2
is due to solubility limits and is applicable only to a specified analyte on a
specified stationary phase at a specified temperature. Moreover, sample
capacity limits only the quantity of that analyte in the injected sample; if
a sample contains a lower percentage of the analyte, the injected sample
volume can be larger.
Worked example
Sample capacity
As an example, consider
a peak with a retention
volume of 200 mL eluting
from a column having
10,000 plates.
Using the most conserv￾ative value cited for the
constant (a), Equation 7.2
indicates a maximum injec￾tion volume of 0.04 mL:
V max = 0 02 × 200 mL
10,000
= 0 04 mL
Note that this is the
injected volume of a partic￾ular component. If the
concentration of that com￾ponent in the sample gas
is 10 % by volume, it would
be okay to specify a sample
volume of 0.4 mL.
182 Extracolumn broadeningFeed volume
The technical literature often quotes Equation 7.2, but not always for the
right reason. A similar equation can calculate the maximum sample volume
from an entirely different criterion: the number of plates (and therefore the
length of column) that the injected sample occupies. This is the feed volume
limit for a column also introduced in Chapter 3.
Although the feed volume equation looks very much like our Equa￾tion 7.2, it isn’t based on solubility and has nothing in common with sample
capacity. Instead, it uses a principle from statistical theory:
To have an insignificant effect on a peak, the average duration of the injec￾tion profile shouldnot exceed one-half ofthe standard deviation ofthe chro￾matogram peak: that is, one-eighth of its base width (Purnell 1962, 110).
Applying this constraint to the theoretical plate equation yields an expres￾sion for the maximum duration (tmax) of the injection profile.
Recall Equation 2.26, which computes plate number (N) from retention
time (tR) and base width (wb) in time units:
N = 16
tR
wb
2
Therefore,
wb = 4 tR
N
Apply the constraint (tmax = wb/8):
tmax = tR
2 N (7.3)
Therefore,
tmax
tR
= 0 5
N (7.4)
The ratio (tmax/tR) is the maximum duration of the injection profile as a frac￾tion of the retention time. Therefore, the maximum number of plates (Nmax)
that the injected sample volume should occupy is:
Nmax = tmax
tR
N
Substituting from Equation 7.4:
Nmax = 0 5 N (7.5)
This is a quick way to estimate the maximum feed volume of a column.
Sample injection 183When expressed as a volume, the duration of a plug injection is the feed
volume of the column. Although calculated for a particular peak, it’s about
the same for any peak on the chromatogram. To calculate the maximum feed
volume (Vmax) of a column, apply the fraction (tmax/tR) to the corrected reten￾tion volume (VR) of the peak:
V max = tmax
tR
VR
Substituting again from Equation 7.4:
V max = VR
2 N (7.6)
Clearly, the above equation is equivalent to Equation 7.2 with the constant
set at (a = 0.5), yet it is based on quite different constraints. Both equations
are valid.
Note that the feed volume equations calculate the maximum sample vol￾ume from the duration of a plug injection, regardless of the analyte concen￾trations. They neither consider the limits to solubility nor calculate the
sample capacity for individual solutes.
Practical outcomes
Purnell examined the permissible sample volume (Vmax) calculated from
Equation 7.6 and concluded that it would overload any column (ibid,
167). Therefore, analyte solubility in the liquid phase is more likely to be
the controlling factor, not the feed volume.
In practice, the two constraints are inseparable. Experimental estimates
of the constant (a) in Equation 7.2 automatically include the influences of
solubility and feed volume, so it’s the preferred equation to use.
You can use the calculated feed volume as a starting point for estimating
the permissible sample volume, but it might be excessive. Usually, a smaller
sample volume will be necessary in practice.
All the equations confirm that high-efficiency columns demand smaller
samples. They predict that the maximum injection volume decreases in pro￾portion to the square root of increasing plate number. This concurs with
experience: a highly efficient capillary column can accept far less sample
than a typical packed column can.
In addition, the solubility equations show that the maximum sample
volume of a substance depends on the retention volume of that substance.
Therefore, when you need a high detector sensitivity it might help to
increase the retention volume of an analyte, so the column can accept a
larger sample.
One way to increase the retention volume isto increase the internal diam￾eter of the column. A wider column tube will allow a larger sample and
increase the overall sensitivity of the PGC. Unfortunately, however, the
wider column may be less efficient, making the desired resolution more
difficult to achieve.
184 Extracolumn broadeningLuckily, there are some other ways to increase sample capacity. The
retention volume of a peak also depends on the chosen liquid phase, the vol￾ume of that liquid in the column, and the column operating temperature. To
increase the sample capacity of the column, use a higher liquid loading, a
lower oven temperature, or even a different liquid phase.
For a given column, the only way to be sure about your sample volume is
to run several chromatograms with different sample volumes and observe
the detector sensitivity and peak resolution accomplished. For the latter,
it would be sufficient to look at the depth of the valley (or the extent of base￾line separation) between the closest analyte peaks on the chromatogram and
note the sample volume that significantly degrades their resolution. Then,
choose a sample volume that provides good detectorsensitivity and adequate
resolution between the measured peaks.
Since each peak may have its own sample capacity, ensure that each
analyte peak can reach itsfull-scale concentration withoutsignificant
distortion.
When measuring very low analyte concentrations, it’s inevitable that the
large sample size will distort the unmeasured major component peak. This
distortion is normal and is acceptable provided that the injected volume of
each analyte doesn’t exceed its own maximum.
Chapter 11 introduces column-switching techniques to circumvent the
major peak distortion.
In summary, a smaller sample volume is appropriate when:
The analyte has a higher concentration.
The analyte peaks appear earlier on the chromatogram.
The column has a higher efficiency.
The column has a narrower bore (for example, a capillary column).
The column is providing inadequate resolution.
Whereas a larger sample volume is appropriate when:
The detector has insufficient sensitivity to measure the analytes.
The detector signal-to-noise ratio is too low.
The analyte peaks appear later along the chromatogram.
The column has a wider bore (for example, a packed column).
Sample size calculations
Duration of injection
The duration of a plug injection (ti) is easy to compute. It’s a simple function
of the vapor sample volume (Vi) entering the column and the volumetric
flow rate (Vc ) of the carrier gas inside the column. If the measurements
Sample size calculations 185of sample gas volume and carrier gas flow rate are at the same temperature
and pressure, no correction is necessary:
ti = Vi
Vc
(7.7)
Otherwise, correct the sample volume for differences in pressure or temper￾ature inside the column entry (Pi, Ti) and inside the flowmeter (Pf, Tf).
ti = Vi
Vc
Pi
Pf
Tf
Ti
(7.8)
Gassample injections are often close to ideal, provided the analyte molecules
don’t adsorb onto the tube walls. Upon injection, the carrier gas compresses
the sample gas and then pushes it onto the column.
Liquid sample injections tend to be slower because the liquid must vapor￾ize and thistakes time. The injection profile for a liquid sample is more likely
to resemble a tailing chromatogram peak than a square wave. The slower
injection inevitably causes wider peaks. The following SCI-FILE gives an
equation to calculate the dispersion caused by the injection profile, whether
it’s rectangular, exponential, or Gaussian.
In summary, the width of the injected band of molecules usually
decreases with decreasing sample size, thereby reducing chromatogram
peak widths. Although column efficiency may improve with smaller sample
size, the dispersion occurring in the connecting tubes and detector will
remain the same – and will be responsible for a larger percentage of the chro￾matogram peak width.
An example
The worked example on the duration of a plug injection (see margin) may
help you to visualize the sample injection profile for a 300 μL plug injection
on a typical column and illustrates the calculations involved. The previously
shown Figure 7.1 illustrates the outcome: after a short transport delay, the
sample enters the column as a compact 470 ms pulse.
The academic theories of chromatography assume a plug injection no wider
than a single plate (Perry 1981, 27). Clearly, this is an ideal notion not achiev￾able in practice. Yet it’s evident that the plug duration should be as short as
possible to get the narrowest peak widths on the final chromatogram.
Let’s see how close our worked example gets to meeting the theoretical
ideal. How many plates does the 470 ms sample occupy?
For that, we need the plate height. An average plate height for a packed
column is about 0.6 mm. To convert the plate height from length units (H) to
time units (Ht), use Equation 2.21:
Ht = H
tR
L
Worked example
Duration of a plug
injection
Consider a gas sample
volume of 0.30 mL filled
at atmospheric pressure,
then injected into a packed
column at 100 C. The car￾rier gas flow rate is 30 mL/
min measured at atmos￾pheric pressure and 20 C.
By Equation 7.8, the
plug injection width (ti) is:
ti = Vs
Vc
Pi
Pf
Tf
Ti
The pressure is con￾stant, so:
ti = 0 30 mL
30 mL min ×
293 K
373 K
×
60 s
1 min
ti = 0 47 s
Figure 7.1 illustrates
this injection profile.
186 Extracolumn broadeningFor example, say the column length (L) is 6 m and our peak of interest has a
retention time (tR) of 300 s. Its plate height in time units is:
Ht = 0 6 mm ×
300 s
6,000 mm = 30 ms
Now we see the effect of the 470 ms plug injection. The plate height is 30 ms,
so the injected sample occupies about 16 plates. While this is certainly not a
single-plate injection, it’s very narrow.
From Equation 2.24, the plate number (N) of this peak is 10,000:
N = tR
Ht
= 300 s
30 ms
N = 10,000
So from Equation 7.5, the permitted occupation is 50 plates:
Nmax = 0 5 N =05× 10,000
Therefore,
Nmax = 50
In conclusion, the plug injection spread of 16 plates easily complies with
the theoretical limit for maximum feed volume, but the injected sample vol￾ume may still exceed the sample capacity of the column. That can be deter￾mined only by experiment.
Flow path geometry
Each device and each connecting tube in the carrier flow path allows more
dispersion of the sample molecules, increasing the width of the chromato￾gram peaks. Because the extracolumn volumes tend to be constant in each
PGC analyzer, they become increasingly significant when you reduce the
column bore and sample size.
Narrow-bore columns require smaller sample volumes. But the peaks
are then smaller and need even smaller volumes in connecting tubes
and detectors!
As the sample molecules pass through the system from injector to detector,
they may encounter three distinct flow-path geometries that worsen their
dispersion:
Small-diameter open tubing and borings that carry the flow between
devices.
Wider flow passages and larger volumes where mixing can occur.
Unswept side volumes where static gas can collect – often called dead
volumes.
Flow path geometry 187Open tubing
The dispersion in open tubing is notsevere, provided that the tubing does not
have a larger internal diameter than the column tube. You can easily calcu￾late the time delay (tot) in the tubing by assuming plug flow prevails and
adapting Equation 7.7:
tot = Vot
Vc
(7.9)
A worked example at the end of this chapter illustrates the use of this
calculation.
In practice, the gas in the tubing is in laminar flow, not plug flow. The
laminarflow profile causes additional dispersion of the peaks due to the wide
range of carrier gas velocities occurring across the radius of the tube. In most
cases, this additional dispersion is insignificant.
The following SCI-FILE showsthat peak dispersion in empty tubes is pro￾portional to the length of the tube, but it’s also proportional to the fourth
power of the diameter. Don’t use large tubing!
The important points to note are:
The internal diameter of flow passages should be small and never greater
than the internal diameter of the column tube.
However, the connecting tubes should not be small enough to cause
blockage or a noticeable pressure drop.
The connecting tubes should be as short as possible.
Mixing chambers
When a peak flows into a larger chamber, it tends to mix with the carrier gas
causing an exponential delay. This mixing causes 12 times as much disper￾sion than caused by plug flow in tubes of constant diameter.
In addition, the gas entering the mixing chamber is moving at higher
velocity than the gas in the chamber. This may cause a complex turbulent
flow pattern that drastically multiplies the peak width, causing gross peak
distortion and loss of resolution.
To avoid these adversities, it’s wise to avoid any change in diameter along
the flow path. Try to maintain a constant diameterfrom the point of injection
to the point of detection.
Dead volumes
Another very poor design feature is a side volume that is not swept clean
by the flow of carrier gas. Usually, a dead volume is a tee junction in the
flow passage where one leg of the tee is not flowing. Such visible dead
volumes were present in older detector designs, when they were not a
188 Extracolumn broadeningbig problem because of the enormous sample volumes used. As samples
became smaller, the old detectors proved inadequate and had to change.
The effect of a dead volume always worsens as the peak volume becomes
smaller.
Visible dead volumes no longer occur in modern PGC equipment, but
small pockets may persist at tube connections, inside valves and detectors,
or even in the walls of the tubing. Unswept pockets are particularly impor￾tant because their effect on a peak depends on the fourth power of the depth
of the pocket. For the smallest peaks, the connecting tubing should be inter￾nally smooth, silicon coated, and butt jointed to valves and devices using spe￾cial fittings.
Detectors
Three very different effects contribute to peak broadening in detectors.
The first contribution isthe dispersion that occursin the detector flow pas￾sages. The internal flow paths in a detector are much the same as the con￾necting tubes, mixing chambers, and dead volumes already discussed. These
detrimental effects all depend on the geometry of internal volumes. Conse￾quently, the development of detectors has focused on simplifying their flow
paths and reducing their volumes.
The second contribution to peak broadening is quite different and is an
inherent feature of concentration-sensing detectors like the thermal con￾ductivity detector (TCD). While detecting a peak, the concentration of ana￾lyte entering the detector is rapidly changing, but the detector can respond
only to the average concentration in its sensing volume. Therefore, the inter￾nal volume of the detector causes a lag in response that extends the true peak
width. To faithfully track a peak, the sensing volume must be small in com￾parison to the peak volume. This source of peak broadening doesn’t occur in
mass-sensing detectors like the flame ionization detector (FID). These
detectors respond to the instantaneous mass flow of analyte exiting the col￾umn and no averaging occurs. It’s even possible to add a diluent gas to the
column effluent to accelerate its passage through the detector with no effect
on the true peak width.
The third contribution to peak broadening originates from the limited
speed of response that to some extent afflicts all detectors. In addition to
the sensor speed of response, the time constant of a detector includes the
ability of the electronic circuits to follow the rate of change of the signal.
When the electronic response lags the true peak profile, it increases the
width and asymmetry of the peak and reduces its resolution from adjacent
peaks. In older equipment, the signal-processing circuits may respond too
slowly to faithfully follow fast peaks, even those from packed columns.
Electronic circuits are now fast enough to follow the response from any
detector; so fast, in fact, that the response may be dampened to reduce
detector noise. Then, the dampened signal may not be as fast as expected
(Waters 2020, 283).
Flow path geometry 189The theory
A little more math is necessary to figure out the effect of extracolumn dis￾persion on the chromatogram peak widths. The theoretical approach is to
treat all sources of dispersion outside the column in the same way as we treat
sources inside the column. To accomplish that, the theory assigns the statis￾tical parameter variance to the dispersion that peaks experience when they
pass through each type of flow passage, including the column itself. Since
multiple and independent variances are additive, the total variance foretells
the width of the final chromatogram peak.
Any dispersion occurring external to the column increases the width of
the peaks and spoils resolution. The SCI-FILE On Extracolumn Variance
provides some procedures for estimating the effect of sample injection pro￾files and flow path geometries on the final resolution of peaks. Feel free to
follow along; the math is not difficult.
SCI-FILE: On Extracolumn Variance
Introduction
Inside the column, a peak is an unstable concentra￾tion of molecules surrounded by pure carrier gas,
so it’s continuously spreading and getting wider
as it travels along the flow path from injector to
detector. Various diffusion and velocity effects
accentuate that dispersal.
In Chapter 2, we noted that the width of a peak is
a function of standard deviation (σ), a measure of
the distribution of its molecules. By definition,
the variance of the distribution is equal to the
square of the standard deviation (σ
2
). Thus, vari￾ance is a measure of dispersion.
In Chapter 6, we discovered that rate theories of
chromatography identify several causes of peak dis￾persion within the column and then rely on the sta￾tistical principle that independent variances are
additive. From this, Equation 6.2 expresses the total
peak variance occurring in the column as the sum
of the contributing variances:
σ2 = σ1
2 + σ2
2 + σn
2
In a similar way, we express dispersion occurring
external to the column as variances and then add
them to those caused by the column itself. Some
external sources include the sample injection valve,
the column switching valves, the detector, and the
tubing that connects these devices.
Collectively, these deleterious effects are known
as extracolumn sources of peak broadening. They
derive from the physical design of the PGC instru￾ment itself.
In the end, it doesn’t matter whether the disper￾sal occurs inside the column or outside the column.
The effect is exactly the same, so extracolumn var￾iances and intracolumn variances are equally
important. Both increase the width of the chromat￾ogram peaks and reduce resolution.
Acceptable dispersion
To evaluate the effect of additional variance, adapt
Equation 2.18 to show that peak variance (σ
2
) is the
product of column length (L) and plate height (H):
σ2 = L H (7.10)
From this, a 10 % increase in the variance of a
peak will also increase plate height by 10 %.
Equation 2.19 gives the base width (wb) of a
peak as:
wb = 4 H L
190 Extracolumn broadeningTherefore, a 10 % increase in plate height widens
the peak by a factor of 1 1, which in turn reduces
the resolution by the same factor; that is, about 5 %.
Klinkenberg (1960, 182-183) was the first to sug￾gest that 10 % extra plate height is a sensible limit
for extracolumn variance, a limit generally
accepted by laboratory workers. Additional vari￾ance is never welcome in a PGC because it results
in longer analysis times, particularly in applica￾tions using efficient capillary columns. Although
some extracolumn variance is inevitable, we must
strive to minimize it.
Sources of variance
There are several places in a PGC system where
additional peak dispersion can occur. Here are
the five main sources:
The sample injection.
Flow through empty tubes and tube fittings.
Mixing volumes in the flow path.
Dead volumes along the flow path.
Response speed of detectors and signal￾processing circuits.
To quantify the effect of these dispersions on the
chromatogram peak shape, it’s more convenient to
work in time units. By analogy with Equation 6.2,
the total peak variance in time units (τ
2
) is the sum
of the independent time variances experienced by
the peak, whether they occur inside or outside of
the column:
τ2 = τ1
2 + τ2
2 + τn
2 (7.11)
Warning
The concept of variance is challenging, and not all
published works are correct. Part of the problem
lies in the units of measure. Variance can be
expressed in units of length (mm2
), volume
(mL2
), or time (s2
). When reading the literature
be careful to note the units used in equations, as dif￾ferent units change the equations given.
Sample injection profile
Sternberg (1966, 231) derived equations for calcu￾lating the variance added by sample injection.
His equations use the shape of the injection profile
and it’s time constant. He identified six different
shapes for the injection profile, of which only three
are likely to occur in a PGC.
Plug injection
A valve injection of a gas or a rapidly vaporizing liq￾uid usually results in a plug injection and the time
constant is simply the duration (ti) of the inlet plug
per Equation 7.7:
ti = Vi
Vc
Then, the additional variance (τi
2
) generated by
the injection profile is:
τi
2 = 1
12
Vi
Vc
2
(7.12)
Exponential injection
During the injection of a slowly evaporating liquid,
the injection profile will decline exponentially. The
time constant (t63) is the time for the sample con￾centration to drop by 63 %. This time is more diffi￾cult to estimate, but it’s clearly longer than a plug
injection.
The variance (τi
2
) generated by the injection pro￾file is then:
τi
2 = t63
2 (7.13)
Gaussian injection
An injection profile that is Gaussian in shape adds
the least variance. Such an injection occurs when a
peak enters the column from another column.
The additional variance (τi
2
) generated by the
injection profile is:
τi
2 = 1
36
Vi
Vc
2
(7.14)
The theory 191If the columns are close coupled, the additional
variance is often negligible.
What we learn
As expected, Equation 7.14 predicts that smaller
sample volumes will provide narrower peaks. But
it’s the ratio between sample size and the carrier
gas flow rate that ultimately determines the incre￾mental peak width due to sample injection.
This shows why capillary columns need very
small samples. If running at the same velocity, a
column that has half the bore size has only one￾fourth of the flow rate. Therefore, to maintain the
same injection variance, the smaller column can
accept only one-fourth of the sample volume.
Even then, the smaller sample size is only
enough to maintain the same injection variance.
In practice, the smaller column will produce nar￾rower peaks, so the same amount of variance
may cause an excessive widening of the peaks.
The worked examples at the end of this chapter
explore this criticalrelationship between additional
variance and chromatogram peak width.
Dispersion in open tubes
A peak also suffers dispersion when it passes
through an empty tube or a tubular volume within
the injector, column valve, or detector.
A simple approach is to assume plug flow occurs
in the tubes, and then adapt Equation 7.12 to esti￾mate the additional variance caused by the plug
flow (Annino & Villalobos 1992, 67).
Then, the variance (τot
2
) caused by the open tube
depends on its internal volume (Vot) and the volu￾metric flow rate (Vc):
τot
2 = 1
12
Vot
Vc
2
(7.15)
Laminar flow
The assumption of plug flow is reasonable for most
purposes, but the actual flow profile is laminar at
the low carrier flow rates used in chromatography.
Laminar flow is quite different from plug flow;
in laminar flow, the gas velocity at the center of the
tube is twice the average. It then drops to near zero
at the walls. This difference in velocity tends to
spread the molecules over time and distance,
thereby increasing peak width.
Dispersion also occurs by diffusion of molecules
from regions of high concentration to regions of
low concentration. In an empty tube, dispersion
occurs in two directions, by axial diffusion and
radial diffusion. To a small extent, the mixing
induced by radial diffusion tends to diminish the
effect of velocity differences.
These velocity and diffusion effects are the same
as those that occur in open-tubular columns, so the
gas diffusion terms of the Golay equation give a bet￾ter estimate of the open-tube variance.
To derive a Golay expression for the plate height
(H) of the open tube, start with Equation 6.11 and
omit the A term and the CS term as these don’t
apply to an open tube:
H = B
u
+ uCM (7.16)
Then, substitute for B from Equation 6.8 omit￾ting the inapplicable packing factor (ψ) and substi￾tute for CM from Equations 6.12 and 6.13 noting
that the retention factor (k) is zero in an open tube:
H = 2 DM
u
+
ud2
96 DM
(7.17)
where:
d is the internal diameter of the open tube.
DM is the coefficient of diffusion of the solute in
the gas phase.
u is the carrier gas velocity at column exit.
In Equation 7.17, the first term accounts for dis￾persion due to longitudinal (axial) diffusion, the
second term for dispersion caused by a combina￾tion of radial diffusion and the wide range of gas
velocities in laminar flow.
In small empty tubes, we find that u DM, so
the first term is negligible, leaving:
H = ud2
96 DM
(7.18)
192 Extracolumn broadeningThis gives the plate height of the tubing in length
units. To convert the plate height to variance (σot
2
)
per Equation 2.18, simply multiply by the tube
length (Lot):
σot
2 = Lot
ud2
96 DM
(7.19)
Then, to get the variance in time units (τot
2
) per
Equation 2.10, divide by velocity squared:
τot
2 = Lot
u
d2
96 DM
(7.20)
To rewrite this equation as a function of the flow
rate, substitute u = 4Vc πd2
τot
2 = πd2
Lot
4 Vc
d2
96 DM
Hence:
τot
2 = π d4
Lot
384 Vc DM
(7.21)
Giddings (1963) takes another approach to the
variance added by connecting tubes, deriving the
plate height in open tubing (Hot) as:
Hot = Lc
Not
Vot
VR
(7.22)
By introducing the column length (Lc) and the
corrected retention volume (VR ), the equation
allows for the peak shape passing through the open
tube. This tactic is of theoretical interest, but it
doesn’t help with practical PGC applications.
What we learn
The variance caused by tubing increases by the
fourth power of the tube diameter, but only by the
first power of its length.
Beware of wide tubing! The bore of the connect￾ing tubes should be narrow, never wider than the
column tubing, but not so narrow that it causes
pressure drop or blockage. Keep the tubes short.
Dispersion by mixing
A mixing chamberis an undesirable larger-diameter
tube or vessel in the flow path, where mixing occurs.
Solute molecules disperse when they mix with car￾rier gas, increasing the peak width. The exit profile
from a mixing chamber is exponential.
Sternberg derives an equation forthe variance due
to an inline mixing chamber.The time constantisthe
volume of the chamber(Vmc) divided by the flow rate
passing through it, and the variance (τmc2
) is:
τmc2 = V mc
V
2
(7.23)
But a mixing chamber implies a change in diam￾eter of the flow path. When a gas flows from a nar￾row passage into a wider one, turbulence occurs in
the larger tube. The turbulence persists for a dis￾tance of about eight tube diameters, after which
laminarflow resumes(Maynard and Grushka 1972).
Based on this information, one might consider
the first eight diameters of the larger tube to be a
mixing chamber, followed by normal laminar flow.
Clearly, the behavior at a diameter change is
rather complex. Sternberg identifies four possible
behaviors, depending on tube layout and flow rate.
We have already discussed three of these behaviors:
laminar flow, mixing effect, and peak diffusion. The
fourth behavioris dispersion, which is dominated by
lateral diffusion between the inlet jet and the more
static gas around it. This kind of dispersal would
atypically multiply the entering peak variance
(τin
2
) by the fourth power of the diameter change:
τout
2 = τin
2 d2
d1
4
(7.24)
Accordingly, a peak entering a tube that is twice
as wide would suffer a 16-timesincrease in variance
and a fourfold increase in width. This is enormous
and illustrates the potential disaster of using wide
connecting tubes.
Luckily, the actual behavior is likely to be a com￾plex mix of the four limiting cases. But seeing that
fourth power multiplier should convince you to
The theory 193avoid an increase in diameter at any point in the
flow path.
Mixing chambers have the same effect wherever
they are in the flow path.
What we learn
The additional dispersion due to a simple mixing
chamber creates 12-times the variance found in
open tubes.
The concomitant diameter change has a complex
effect on variance and might cause a disastrous
increase in peak width.
Mixing chambers are highly undesirable in the
flow path and should be eliminated from PGC
equipment.
Dispersion in dead volumes
A dead volume is an unswept cavity in the flow
path that traps analyte molecules and holds them
for a while. The molecules exit the dead volume
exponentially and thereby increase peak tailing
and asymmetry.
Sternberg gives an equation for the variance
added by a dead space, showing that it depends
upon the pocket depth (ddv), and the diffusion coef￾ficient (DM) of the solute in the carrier gas:
τdv
2 = ddv
4
4 DM
2 (7.25)
Interestingly, the variance caused by a dead vol￾ume is independent of the carrier gas flow rate,
whereas the variance caused by a mixing volume
lessens with increased flow. These different beha￾viors might offer a practical diagnostic test.
Carrier gas density is higher at the beginning ofthe
column, reducing the diffusion rate. A dead volume
at the column inlet therefore has a more severe effect
than a similar dead volume at the column outlet.
What we learn
A dead volume in the flow path is one of the most
damaging deficiencies found in PGC design, partic￾ularly when located at the column inlet.
The devastating effect of a dead volume comes
from its fourth-power dependency on the depth
of the cavity. A deep pocket or side volume along
the flow path will severely distort the peaks and
lead to loss of resolution.
For example, the very small dead volumes in
standard tube fittings had a minimal effect on the
efficiency of packed columns, but when capillary
columns came along, special tube connectors
became necessary.
Dispersion in detector
Mass flow detectors
A mass-sensing detector like the FID has virtually
zero sensor volume. If the internal tubing to the
jet is not wider than the column and connection
tubing, it will have almost no effect on the peak
shape. If hydrogen is added to the column efflu￾ent, the much-increased flow rate will effectively
eliminate any open-tube or mixing chamber
dispersion.
The integrated area of a peak from a mass-flow
detector is unaffected by peak shape because the
total mass entering the sensor is the same, no mat￾ter how it’s distributed over time.
Concentration detectors
A concentration-sensing detector like a TCD often
has wide flow passages and the sudden increase in
width can cause catastrophic peak dispersion, as pre￾viously discussed. A high-performance TCD has no
dead volumes and a small diameter flow path.
A TCD responds to the moving-average concen￾tration of analyte molecules in contact with its sen￾sor. The variance so caused depends on the effective
volume of gas (Vde) that continually acts on the sen￾sing element. The variance (τde
2
) added by this sur￾rounding volume of gas follows the form of a plug
injection:
τde
2 = 1
12
Vde
Vc
2
(7.26)
194 Extracolumn broadeningWhat we learn
Ideally, the detector flow passages should be no lar￾ger than the columns and connecting tubes.
The FID comes close to achieving this goal, but
it’s more difficult for a TCD to comply.
Table 7.1 lists four examples of detector volume
necessary to get a detector variance equal to 5 % of
the peak variance. Few PGC detectors can boast
internal volumes as small as these.
Response speed
The net response time of detection is a combination
of sensor reaction time and signal processing time.
Sensor reaction time depends on the rapidity of
the detecting principle, which might include ther￾mal or capacitive time delays. For instance, older
TCDs were too slow to accurately follow a fast hydro￾gen peak, but extensive development has improved
the TCD response time to rival that of an FID.
Signal processing time depends on the dynamic
response of electronic or pneumatic signal trans￾mission and recording mechanisms. Digital proces￾sing is very fast, but PGC peak integration and
noise cancellation algorithms may dampen the
final response.
The combined sensing response characteristic is
typically exponential, so it increases the asymmetry
and width of a peak, bringing down its height.
This loss of height is of concern in older equip￾ment that measures analyte peak height. For a peak
with a base width of one second, a detector time
constant of 50 ms is enough to drop the peak height
by about 2 % (Sternberg 1966, 258).
The increased peak width doesn’t affect peak area
measurement, but it does reduce peak resolution.
The sensing time lag also increases the observed
retention time. It may be useful to know that the
top of a delayed peak always falls on the original
peak curve (albeit on the trailing side), regardless
of the degree of signal distortion.
What we learn
For very fast peaks, there may be a problem with
the electronic speed of response. Be careful when
setting noise suppression parameters to avoid
excessively dampening the response.
Practical limits
From the theory, several authors estimate the lim￾iting conditionsfor each source of variance that will
ensure acceptable contributions to the total vari￾ance (for example, Scott 1998, 96).
McGuffin (2004, 34) accepts 12 % of the total
variance as a reasonable budget for extracolumn
effects. She then assigns 5 % each to the injector
and detector, and 1 % each to the connecting tubes
and electronics. Table 7.1 lists a small selection
of her calculated data on four typical columns
working at their optimum flow rates.
In the table, the optimum plate height (Hmin)
was assumed to be equal to the particle diameter
for a packed column, or equal to the internal diam￾eter of a capillary column. This simple way to pre￾dict the ultimate efficiency of a column may
overestimate the performance of a real column.
These data confirm that the internal diameter of
connecting tubing is far more important than its
Table 7.1 Extracolumn Limit Parameters.
Variable and Unit Packed Open Tubular
L m 2.0 10 10 10
d mm 4.0 0.50 0.32 0.20
V mL/min 64 1.2 2.1 2.0
Hmin mm 0.25 0.50 0.32 0.20
N 8,000 20,000 31,000 50,000
Acceptable parameter limits
Vi μL 110 6.2 2.0 0.6
dot mm 1.0 0.5 0.32 0.2
Lot m 0.65 1.9 2.0 1.9
Vde μL 110 6.2 2.0 0.6
τel ms 22 71 38 18
The acceptable limits would cause 5 % additional variance
each in injector and detector, and 1 % additional variance
each in connecting tubes and electronics.
Source: Adapted from McGuffin (2004, 34).
The theory 195Worked examples
A few calculations will illustrate the application of the theory to practical
PGC design. These examples use equations from the above SCI-FILE.
Sample injection
Let’s start with a plug injection and compare two sample volumes, 75 and
300 μL, injected into a packed column, with a corrected flow rate of
15 mL/min.
From Equation 7.12, the plug injection variance is:
τi
2 = 1
12
Vi
Vc
2
For a 75 μL sample:
τi
2 = 1
12
0 075 mL
15 ml min
60 s
min
2
= 0 0075 s
2
For a 300 μL sample:
τi
2 = 1
12
0 3 mL
15 ml min
60 s
min
2
= 0 12 s2
The largersample volume creates 16 timesthe variance asthe smaller one
does, but its ultimate effect on the chromatogram will depend on the mag￾nitude of the column variance. Let’s see how the change in sample volume
would affect a typical eluted peak with a base width of eight seconds.
You should immediately see1 that our 8 s wide peak has a standard devi￾ation of 2 s and a variance of 4 s
2
.
Consider the 75 μL injection and assume that no other extracolumn var￾iances apply. From Equation 7.11, the observed chromatogram peak vari￾ance (τ
2
) is equal to the sum of the column variance (τc
2
) and the
injection variance (τi
2
):
τ2 = τc
2 + τi
2
length. In the table, the connecting tubes used for
capillary columns are the same bore as the column,
to avoid any turbulence due to diameter change.
The allowable volumes for the injector and
detector are interesting. These maxima would add
5 % each to the variance of a peak, together increas￾ing its width by about 5 % as noted above.
Also note the detector volume and response time
requirements. For many PGCs, these may be the
most difficult parameters to satisfy.
More detail
For those who yearn for a rigorous mathematical
discourse on extracolumn variance, the article by
Sternberg 1966 (205–270) is recommended. This
1
If not, see Figure 2.1
196 Extracolumn broadeningTherefore, the column variance τc
2 is:
τc
2 = 4 − 0 0075 = 3 9925 s2 For 75 μL
Then, from Equation 2.16, the base width of a column peak is four times
its standard deviation:
wb = 4 τ
wb =4× 3 9925 = 7 99 s For 75 μL
The 75 μL injection volume has added 0.01 seconds to the peak width,
which is clearly negligible. Now, check what happens if you inject 300 μL:
τ2 = 3 9925 + 0 12 = 4 1125 s2 For 300 μL
wb =4× 4 1125 = 8 11 s For 300 μL
The contribution of the injection to peak width is now 0.12 seconds (about
1.5 %), thereby decreasing resolution, also by about 1.5 %. Such a loss in reso￾lution is unlikely to be a problem in most applications, butit’sstarting to notice.
The effect of these sample volumes would be much greater for a narrower
peak. Had we started with a four-second peak, the change from 75 to 300 μL
would have increased the peak width and reduced the resolution by nearly 6 %,
becoming quite significant.
Open tubing
The plug flow equation for empty tubes is functionally the same as the equa￾tion for plug injection.
For example, consider a plan to add 500 mm of one-sixteenth-inch tubing
to connect the column to the detector. The volume of this tube is 0.30 mL.
Given a flow rate (Vc) of 20 mL/min, Equation 7.14 returns the additional
variance (τot
2
) due to plug flow in the open tube:
τot
2 = 1
12
Vot
Vc
2
τot
2 = 1
12
0 30 mL
20 ml min
60 s
min
2
= 0 0675 s
2 For 20 mL min
Consider a peak that had a base width of two seconds before installing the
additional tube.
You should immediately see that this peak had a standard deviation of
0.5 s and a variance of 0.25 s
2
.
Upon installing the connecting tube, the total variance rises to 0.3175 s
2
and the peak width increases to:
wb =4× 0 3175 = 2 254 s Equation 2 16
The increase is about 13 %, which is a significant loss of resolution. But the
loss of performance would be much worse with a capillary column. The flow
Open tubing 197rate in a capillary column might be only one-tenth of the flow rate used in
the example above.
Dropping the flow rate to 2 mL/min increases the variance in the con￾necting tube by a factor of 100:
τot
2 = 1
12
0 30 mL
2 ml min
60 s
min
2
= 6 75 s2 For 2 mL min
Adding the 6.75 s
2 of extracolumn variance totally overwhelms the orig￾inal peak, whose variance increases to 7.0 s
2
.
From Equation 2.16, the peak width (wb) is now:
wb =4× 7 0 = 10 58 s
The peak is now over 10 s wide, and the resolution is ruined! Adding 500 mm
of one-sixteenth-tube has increased the peak width by 500 %.
Although these examples use the approximate plug-flow equation, they
clearly show that capillary columns will not work in a PGC designed for
packed columns. Capillary columns need different equipment.
Knowledge Gained
Practice
Peaks get wider as they pass through flow pas￾sages external to the column.
Additional dispersion occurs during sample
injection, and in connecting tubes and
detector.
The finite response time of electronic circuits
may also distort the peak width and shape.
Column overload may cause fronting, tailing,
or even flat-topped peaks.
Sample capacity is the maximum volume of
an injected substance to avoid peak distortion.
Sample capacity decreases in proportion to
the square root of the plate number.
Sample capacity is larger for later peaks on
the chromatogram.
Increase sample capacity by using another
liquid phase, higher liquid load, or lower
temperature.
Use the smallest sample volume that provides
adequate detector sensitivity.
The duration of the sample injection profile
affects the width and shape of chromatogram
peaks.
The ideal injection profile is rectangular but
has a finitewidth that increasesthe peakwidth.
The sample feed volume should not occupy
more than 50 plates.
The feed volume limit is statistical, not based
on solubility or linearity, but the equation is
similar.
A smaller sample has a shorter injection pro￾file, leading to narrower peaks.
198 Extracolumn broadeningDid you get it?
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 07
On practice
Q1. In a well-constructed PGC, what are the two main sources of peak dispersion
outside the column?
Q2. Give two independent reasons why a large sample volume can increase
peak width.
Q3. Which symptom in the list below is the best reason for using a smaller sample
volume?
A. The analyte peak is fronting.
B. The analyte has a very low concentration in the sample.
C. The peaks are appearing late in the chromatogram.
Gas sample injections often come close to the
ideal plug injection profile.
Liquid sample injection profiles may be rec￾tangular or exponential in shape.
Extra dispersion from flow passages comes
from open tubes, mixing chambers, or dead
volumes.
The connecting tubes should be as short as
possible, but the internal diameter is far more
important.
The bore of connecting tubes should be as
small as possible and never wider than the
column tube.
Mixing occurs when the carrier gas flows from
a smaller tubular conduit into a larger one.
The entry to a wider-bore chamber may cause
a disastrous dispersion of narrow peaks.
Unswept cavities cause extreme dispersion
and must be assiduously avoided in analyzer
design.
Theory
Peaks suffer dispersion of their molecules as
they travel in flow paths external to the
columns.
Variance is a measure of dispersion in flow
paths both inside and outside the column.
Independent variances are additive and
increase the width of chromatogram peaks.
Academics propose that 10–12 % of extracol￾umn variance is acceptable.
But PGC design must always seek to minimize
extracolumn variance.
Dispersal occurs at injection and in empty
tubes, dead volumes, mixing chambers, and
detectors.
The diameter of connecting tubing is far more
important than its length.
Dispersion in empty tubes increases with the
fourth power of tube diameter.
A sudden increase in flow-path diameter
causes severe peak distortion and may ruin
resolution.
Highly efficient capillary columns require
small injections and low-volume flow paths.
Did you get it? 199On theory
Q4. Explain the difference between plate height and variance.
Q5. Consider a peak having a base width of four seconds:
A. Calculate the extra variance caused by installing an additional connecting
tube that has a volume of 0.2 mL. Assume plug flow at a rate of 2 mL/min in
the connecting tube.
B. Calculate the new peak base width, after the additional connecting tube is
installed.
Q6. Which has the largest effect on peak width?
A. Long connecting tubes between devices.
B. Wide connection tubes between devices.
Q7. Consider two peaks exiting a capillary column both having a base width of two
seconds and a separation of three seconds. If they enter a connecting tube that
has twice the internal diameter, what happens to their resolution?
References
Further reading
The recent chapter by Vicky McGuffin includes an academic, yet practical review of
extracolumn effects in chromatography (McGuffin 2004, 33–38).
A short book by Scott is available online and provides a good summary of extracol￾umn effects in gas and liquid chromatography (Scott 2003).
Those involved in the design or application of process gas chromatographs should
study the original article by Sternberg (1966).
Cited
Annino, R. and Villalobos, R. (1992). Process Gas Chromatography: Fundamentals
and Applications. Research Triangle Park, NC: Instrument Society of America.
Giddings, J.C. (1963). Principles of column performance in large scale gas chroma￾tography. Journal of Gas Chromatography 1, 12.
Klinkenberg, A. (1960). Prepared contribution. In: Gas Chromatography (ed. R.P.W.
Scott). London, UK: Butterworths Scientific Publications, Ltd.
Maynard, V. and Grushka, E. (1972). Effect of dead volume on efficiency of a gas
chromatographic system. Analytical Chemistry 44, No. 8, 1427–1434.
McGuffin, V.L. (2004). In: Chromatography, 6th edition. Journal of Chromatography
Library, Vol. 69A (ed. E. Heflmann). Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier B.V.
Perry, J.A. (1981). Introduction to Analytical Gas Chromatography. New York, NY:
Marcel Dekker Inc.
Purnell, H. (1962). Gas Chromatography. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Scott, R.P.W. (2003). Extra column dispersion. Book 10: Chrom-Ed Book Series ©
LIBRARY4SCIENCE, LLC. Accessed 2022-05-22 at: https://www.academia.edu.
Scott R.P.W. (1998). Introduction to Analytical Gas Chromatography, Second
Edition. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker, Inc.
Sternberg, J.C. (1966). Extracolumn contributions to chromatographic peak broad￾ening. In: Advances in Chromatography, Vol. 2. (eds. J.C. Giddings and R.A.
Keller), 205–270. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker Inc.
Waters, T. (2020). Process Gas Chromatographs: Fundamentals, Design and Imple￾mentation. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
200 Extracolumn broadeningTable
7.1 Extracolumn Limit Parameters.
Figure
7.1 An Ideal Injection Profile.
Symbols
Symbol Variable Unit
a An empirical constant None
B Golay constant for axial diffusion None
Csub Golay constant for resistance to mass transfer None
d Internal diameter of tube or pocket depth mm
Dsub Diffusion coefficient of solute (see subs below) None
H On-column plate height in length units mm
Ht Chromatogram plate height in time units s
j Gas compressibility factor None
k Retention factor None
Kc Distribution constant None
L Length of column m
Lsub Length of open tube, etc. (see subs below) m
N Plate number None
Pi Pressure of injected gas volume kPa
Pf Pressure of carrier gas at flowmeter kPa
Nmax Maximum plates occupied by injected sample None
Rs Resolution of adjacent peaks None
tsub Time delay (see subs below) s
ti Duration of a plug injection s
tR Peak retention time s
Tsub Temperature (see subs below) K
u Carrier gas velocity at column exit m/s
Vc Carrier gas flow rate at column inlet mL/min
V Volume (see subs below) mL
Vmax Maximum feed volume mL
VR Peak retention volume mL
VR Retention volume, corrected to average column
pressure
mL
wb Base width of a solute peak s
σ Standard deviation of peak in length units mm
τ Standard deviation of peak in time units s
ψ Obstruction factor for diffusion in a packed column None
Subscripts
Sub63 Exponential time constant (time for 63% change)
Subc Pertaining to the column
Subde Pertaining to the detector
References 201Subdv Pertaining to a dead volume
Subel Pertaining to the signal-processing circuits
Subf Pertaining to the flowmeter
Subi Pertaining to injection
Subin Going in
Submc Pertaining to a mixing chamber
SubM Pertaining to the mobile phase
Subot Pertaining to open tubing
Subout Coming out
SubS Pertaining to the stationary phase
Equations
7.1 wb = 4L
N Peak width as a function of plate number.
7.2 V max = a VR
N
Sample capacity of a column for a specified
substance.
7.3 tmax = tR
2 N
Maximum plug injection duration to limit
peak broadening.
7.4 tmax
tR
= 0 5
N
Maximum plug injection time as a fraction of
retention time.
7.5 Nmax = 0 5 N Maximum number of plates occupied by the
feed volume to limit peak spreading.
7.6 V max = VR
2 N
Maximum sample feed volume to limit peak
spreading.
7.7 ti = Vi
Vc
Width in time units (duration) of a plug
injection.
7.8 ti = Vi
Vc
Pi
Pf
Tf
Ti
The injection duration corrected for
differences in pressure and temperature.
7.9 tot = Vot
Vc
Time delay in open tubing assuming plug flow.
7.10 σ
2 = L H Relation between variance and plate height.
7.11 τ
2 = τ1
2 + τ2
2
… + τn
2 Variance in time units as the sum of individual
variances, both intracolumn and extracolumn.
7.12 τi
2 = 1
12
Vi
Vc
2 Additive time variance of a plug injection due
to sample volume and carrier gas flow rate.
7.13 τi
2 = t63
2 Additive time variance of an exponential
sample injection profile.
7.14 τi
2 = 1
36
Vi
Vc
2 Additive time variance of a Guassian sample
injection (a peak from another column).
202 Extracolumn broadening
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by ibrahim ragab - Oregon Health & Science Univer , Wiley Online Library on [27/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License7.15 τot
2 = 1
12
Vot
Vc
2 Additive time variance due to open tubing,
assuming plug flow obtains.
7.16 H = B
u
+ uCM
Golay equation for plate height of an open tube.
7.17 H = 2 DM
u
+
ud2
96 DM
Plate height of an open tube derived from the
Golay equation for wall-coated capillary
columns.
7.18 H = ud2
96 DM
Simplified Golay equation for plate height in
length units of an open tube.
7.19 σot
2 = Lot
ud2
96 DM
Additive length variance due to an open tube,
from the simplified Golay equation.
7.20 τot
2 = Lot
u
d2
96 DM
Additive time variance due to an open tube,
from the simplified Golay equation.
7.21 τot
2 = π d4
Lot
384 Vc DM
Additive time variance due to an open tube, as
a function of tube dimensions and flow rate.
7.22 Hot = Lc
Not
Vot
VR
Giddings equation for the plate height of an
open tube.
7.23 τmc2 = V mc
V
2 Additive time variance due to an inline mixing
chamber.
7.24 τout
2 = τin
2 d2
d1
4 Multiplicative time variance caused by a
sudden diameter change in the flow path.
7.25 τdv
2 = ddv
4
4 DM
2
Additive time variance due to the fourth
power of the depth of an unswept pocket (dead
volume).
7.26 τde
2 = 1
12
Vde
Vc
2 Additive time variance due to the sensing
volume of a detector.
New technical terms
If you read the whole chapter, you should now know the meaning of these techni￾cal terms:
axial diffusion
concentration-sensing detector
corrected retention volume
dead volume
laminar flow
injection profile
mass-sensing detectors
mixing chamber
peak dispersion
plug flow
plug injection
radial diffusion
sample volume
For more information, refer to the Glossary at the end of the book.
References 2038
Evaluating peak shape
“Chromatogram peaks are rarely symmetrical as some deviation from the
exact Gaussian shape often occurs. The art of troubleshooting is to recog￾nize the different forms of deviation and to know which forms are normal
and thus acceptable and which forms are abnormal and need attention.”
Real chromatogram peaks
We have seen that the theories of chromatography assume chromatogram
peaks are Gaussian in shape or close enough to Gaussian to make no differ￾ence. This assumption is convenient for the theorist but not for the practi￾tioner, since real chromatogram peaks (particularly those obtained from
packed columns) often show a noticeable deviation from the pure Gaussian
shape.
As a PGC column designer or troubleshooter, you will encounter mis￾shapen peaks and will need to know the many possible causes. You’ll need
to recognize the peak shapes that cause imprecise or inaccurate measure￾ment. A peak shape that can’t be precisely integrated, or has a nonlinear
response to analyte concentration, or interferes with the measurement of
another peak is unacceptable.
Three peak shapes
Perfect Gaussian peaks are rare on process chromatograms, although the
very narrow peaks from capillary columns may come close. When examined
closely, most real peaks are somewhat distorted. They come in three distinct
shapes as illustrated in Figure 8.1.
The majority of chromatogram peaks look slightly skewed toward their
direction of travel as illustrated by the blue peak in Figure 8.1a. Such peaks
fall more slowly than they rise and many authors call them “tailing peaks.”
Process Gas Chromatography: Advanced Design and Troubleshooting, First Edition. Tony Waters.
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2025 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.But it’s also possible for a nearly symmetrical peak to form a distinct tail as it
returns to the baseline. The green peak in Figure 8.1b shows this undesirable
effect, also called “tailing.”
These two symptoms, skewing and tailing, are due to quite different
underlying causes, so clear thinking requires us to distinguish between
them. Calling both of them “tailing” can lead to confusion.
The blue peak in Figure 8.1a is certainly a skewed peak but is not tailing;
herein, we call it the normal peak shape. Such peaks return promptly to the
baseline and rarely cause any trouble with following peaks. Unless the skew
becomes extreme, this is normal behavior of a chromatogram peak and does
not require corrective action.
We reserve the term “tailing” for a peak followed by a low-level tail that
approaches the baseline exponentially and often has a duration longer than
the peak itself. The green peak in Figure 8.1b fits our definition of a tailing
peak. If your chromatogram includes a peak like this, it may be a fault con￾dition requiring some attention. Tailing is normally due to the strong adsorp￾tion and slow release of a few solute molecules on contact surfaces along the
carrier flow path. Adsorption can occur inside a sample injector, column, or
detector, or even in the tubing connections between them. An earlier cause
of tailing, now mostly eliminated, was the presence of unswept side volumes
(called dead legs) in the flow path.
A less common kind of peak is the fronting peak, sometime called a lead￾ing peak, one leaning backward away from the direction of travel as illus￾trated by the red peak in Figure 8.1c. Fronting peaks rise more slowly than
they fall. A fronting peak might be normal behavior for some stationary
phases or can be due to injecting a sample volume too large for the column
in use.
(a) Normal
Peak
(b) Tailing
Peak
325 350 375 400 425 450
Retention Time (s)
475 500 525 550
(c) Fronting
Peak
Real chromatogram peaks typically deviate from the ideal symmetrical shape. Three common 
peak shapes are (a) the normal peak, (b) the tailing peak, and (c) the fronting peak 
(sometimes called a leading peak).
Peak
tail
Figure 8.1 Three Asymmetric
Chromatogram Peaks. (a)
Normal Peak. (b) Tailing Peak.
(c) Fronting Peak.
Real chromatogram peaks 205It’s also possible for a single peak to split into two partially separated
peaks – sometimes called a bimodal peak. This is more likely to happen
with capillary columns. The two potential causes of a split are:
Partial condensation of sample components in the injector or column
entrance followed by their evaporation. A higher temperature might
be necessary.
Partial chemical reaction in the injector or column creates a second com￾ponent, particularly with hydrogen carrier. A lower temperature or
helium carrier might be necessary.
If you are certain that the bimodal peak is a single analyte, it would be
possible to calibrate its integrated area, but it’s best to find the cause and
fix the problem.
Normal asymmetric peaks
Measuring peak asymmetry
A measure of peak asymmetry is useful in tracking the shape of a peak sus￾pected of abnormal behavior. It may also allow the more accurate calculation
of column efficiency, as noted in the SCI-FILE: On Asymmetric Peaks that
follows.
To measure the asymmetry ratio of a chromatogram peak body, exclud￾ing any tailing effects close to the baseline, first bisect the peak with a vertical
line through its apex and then measure the leading and trailing widths at
10 % of the peak height. Figure 8.2 illustrates this procedure.
Then, Equation 8.1 defines peak asymmetry (As) as the ratio of trailing
width (b) to leading width (a):
As = b
a
(8.1)
The asymmetry of normal peaks is slightly higher
than one, whereas the less-common fronting peaks
have an asymmetry of lessthan one. Forthe peak in
Figure 8.2:
As = 13 7 s
9 3 s
= 1 47
A peak asymmetry of 47 % may be somewhat
excessive.
Most chromatographers accept a skew of ±20 %
as normal, requiring no remedial action. To quan￾tify an analyte, modern PGCs measure the area
under the peak rather than the peak height, and
the area measurement is generally unaffected by
a small degree of skew.
180 190 200 210
Retention Time (s)
220 230 240
The ratio of trailing width to leading width is a measure of 
peak asymmetry. It’s conventional to measure the leading 
and trailing widths at 10 % of the peak height.
Trailing
Width
b≈13.7 s
Leading
Width
a≈9.3 s
10% Height
Figure 8.2 Measuring Peak Skew.
206 Evaluating peak shapeA skew of greater than 20 % may be cause for concern. It will require
some judgment to determine whether the observed asymmetry is a
symptom of a fault or just a normal benign condition. The following
subsection discusses some causes of skew, which may be helpful.
What causes asymmetry?
There are many reasons why a peak might not be perfectly symmetrical, so a
real chromatogram peak shape is due to a combination of causes, making
diagnosis difficult.
Some of the reasons for peak distortion are fundamental to the chromat￾ographic process and are unavoidable. The SCI-FILE: On Asymmetric Peaks
discusses these rather esoteric causes. Mostly, they have only a minor effect
and tend to skew the peak in a trailing direction, resulting in the normal
peak shape seen on many chromatograms. Other causes of peak distortion
may be correctible and of more general interest so we examine them here.
Limited isotherm linearity
It’s useful to remember that the chromatographic peak shape is a concentra￾tion profile. As the band of molecules passes a designated location in the col￾umn, the concentration of the solute rises from zero to a maximum and then
declines back to zero again. To maintain a symmetrical peak shape, the frac￾tion of molecules held by the stationary phase must be constant for all of the
solute concentrations occurring within the peak.
In other words, the distribution constant should indeed be constant.
If the “distribution constant” is not constant, a smaller percentage of the
molecules might dissolve at higher concentrations. Then, the top of the peak
would move faster than its base, creating a normally skewed peak. Con￾versely, should a higher percentage of molecules dissolve at higher concen￾trations, the top of the peak would move slower than its base, creating a
fronting peak. For a symmetrical Gaussian peak to form, the distribution
constant must not change with concentration.
For a liquid-phase column, the distribution of an analyte between the gas
phase and the liquid phase is known as partition. The partition isotherm is
a graphical plot at constant temperature of the equilibrium concentration of
solute in the liquid phase versus its concentration in the gas phase. To get a
symmetrical peak, it must be a perfectly straight line.
The left side of Figure 8.3 illustrates the partition isotherm typical of most
liquid phases. At the low concentrations usually occurring in gas chromatog￾raphy, the isotherm is perfectly linear and small peaks like the one shown on
the right of the figure are symmetrical, or nearly so.
But larger peaks may exceed the linear region. As the solute concentra￾tion increases, a limit to linearity is inevitable. Beyond this limit, the liquid
phase may be unable to dissolve the same fraction of molecules. The iso￾therm then droops away from the desired straight line – like the blue dashed
line in Figure 8.3.
What causes asymmetry? 207If so, consider what happens in the column as a large solute peak passes
by. The concentration of solute molecules rises from zero and initially stays
within the linear region of the isotherm. But if the solute concentration rises
above the linearity limit, the solubility starts to fall and the solute molecules
travel a little faster, thereby distorting the peak in the normal direction.
Figure 8.4a illustrates this effect, common with liquid-phase columns.
It’s possible but uncommon for the isotherm to rise above the expected
straight line at high solute concentrations, as shown by the red dashed line
in Figure 8.3. This occurs when the presence of a few solute molecules in or
on the stationary phase encourages more molecules to attach. If that hap￾pens, the top of the peak will travel more slowly than its base and distort
the peak in the fronting direction, as shown in Figure 8.4c.
Isotherm
Nonlinear region
limit to
linear isotherm
Concentration in Liquid Phase
Concentration in Gas Phase Retention Time (s)
This isotherm is linear at low concentrations indicating a constant distribution constant. A peak 
that stays under the linearity limit is symmetrical. 
Ideal Peak
within linear portion of partition
isotherm
(thus symmetrical)
Figure 8.3 Typical Partition
Isotherm.
300 350 400 450
Retention Time (s)
Partition Isotherms
500 550
(a)
Normal
Peak
(b)
Ideal
Peak
(c)
Fronting
Peak
The partition isotherm determines peak shape. A symmetrical peak (green) is possible only 
when the isotherm is linear, often true at low analyte concentrations. Above the linearity limit, 
the isotherm is likely to droop downward (blue) causing normal skew but might occasionally 
soar upward (red) to yield a fronting peak.
Figure 8.4 Isotherms and Peak
Shape. (a) Normal Peak.
(b) Ideal Peak. (c) Fronting Peak.
208 Evaluating peak shapeLimited linearity will distort a peak, but it cannot cause tailing. The peak
will quickly return to the baseline as its concentration declines. Also, it can￾not cause a nonlinear calibration when the PGC measures peak area because
all the analyte molecules reach the detector. For more information about the
effect of excessive sample volume, colloquially known as column overload,
refer to the sections on Sample Size, Feed Volume, and Sample Capacity in
Chapter 3 (pp 67–71).
Curved isotherms
When a column uses a solid stationary phase, a linear isotherm is unlikely.
Solid columnsseparate the solutes by their different affinity for a solid surface,
which isthe process of adsorption. Most adsorption isotherms are curves, indi￾cating nonlinearity over the whole range of solute concentrations.
It’s also possible to get a curved isotherm for certain combinations of sol￾ute and liquid phase, perhaps because of an electrochemical attraction
between them.
With a curved isotherm, it’s impossible to get a symmetrical peak. The
reason should be obvious:
When the distribution constant is different at each solute concentra￾tion, every elevation of the peak will be traveling at a different speed.
If the isotherm curves downward at higher concentrations, the peak mole￾cules will migrate faster and faster as their concentration rises and the result￾ing peak will be severely asymmetric in the normal direction.
The chromatogram from a severely downward-curving isotherm exhibits
peaks that look triangular, with a rapid rise and a slow decline, but without
significant tailing as they return to baseline. If the isotherm is highly curved,
the peak front will be almost vertical, rising sharply from the baseline like
the front of a square wave. Such peaks are known as self-sharpening
peaks. The propylene peak on the real chromatogram in Figure 8.5 shows
a clear example of this effect.
An isotherm that curves upwards will have the opposite effect, generating
a severely fronting peak. Again, the peak may be triangular, rising as a slow
ramp, then descending rapidly to the baseline.
A second retention mechanism
We have seen how large peaks become distorted when they enter a nonlinear
portion of the partition isotherm. Yet experimenters have found that even
the smallest peaks are often asymmetric in the normal direction and they
can’t explain this asymmetry by nonlinearity.
To explain this unexpected result, theorists invoke a second retention
mechanism operating in parallel to partition; the entrapment of solute
molecules on scarce adsorption sites within the column. The basic idea is
that desorption is a much slower process than partition, so the active sites
What causes asymmetry? 209retain molecules adsorbed from the leading half of a peak long enough to
release them into the trailing half of the peak, thereby creating peak asym￾metry. Figure 8.6 illustrates this mechanism.
Note that in thistype of adsorption, the analyte molecules are notstrongly
held and are released into the back of the peak as soon as its apex passes and
the number of analyte molecules declines. Later, we shall see that some ana￾lytes suffer a stronger form of adsorption that doesn’t release their molecules
until after the peak has passed, causing a peak tail to form.
30 40 50
Seconds
60 70 80
0,00 32,400
0,00 34,900 0,00 35,800
0,00 37,900
0,00 53,600
0,00 55,700
0,00 56,900
Propane 6,35 vol.% 43,100
Propylene 89,99 vol.% 60,100
This real chromatogram is typical of light gas separations on porous polymers, where the 
separation is mainly due to adsorption rather than partition. Clearly, this porous polymer has a 
significantly curved adsorption isotherm, but peak asymmetry doesn’t affect peak area. 
Figure 8.5 Typical Adsorption
Peaks.
Source: Courtesy of Slovnaft
Refinery.
260 270 280 290 300
Retention Time (s)
310 320 330 340
Molecules Adsorbed Molecules Desorbed
A perfectly symmetrical peak (red dashes) may become distorted by adsorption of molecules 
at active sites on contact surfaces. The active sites subtract molecules from the peak front, 
hold them for random times, then release them into the peak back thereby forming a normal 
asymmetric peak shape (blue).
Symmetrical Peak
from Partition
Asymmetric Peak After
Adsorption
Figure 8.6 A Second Retention
Mechanism.
Source: Giddings, J.C. (1965)/
with permission of Taylor
& Francis Group.
210 Evaluating peak shapeThis peak-shaping process does not imply a nonlinear adsorption iso￾therm; it requires only that the desorption rate is slower than the adsorption
rate. A nonlinear adsorption isotherm would further distort the peak, as dis￾cussed above.
It turns out that even the smallest amount of adsorption will distort a
symmetrical peak. Giddings (1965, 77) found that the active sites have only
to adsorb the average solute molecule once during its passage through the
column to cause significant peak asymmetry.
In Chapter 4, we emphasized the importance of eliminating adsorption
sites from liquid-phase columns and discussed the techniques available
for doing so. The manufacturers of PGC columns routinely follow these tech￾niques but it’s not practical to eliminate all adsorption sites from a PGC col￾umn, especially a packed column. Thus, it’s likely this second retention
mechanism affects the shape of many solute peaks and is probably the main
architect of the normal peak shape; slightly asymmetric in the trailing direc￾tion as exemplified by the blue peak in Figure 8.6.
The ultimate effect of the adsorption mechanism depends on the time
delay that occurs before the active sites release the molecules back into
the gas stream. If the delay is less than the peak width, the molecules
adsorbed from the front of the peak tend to add to the back of the peak, caus￾ing the asymmetry discussed above. But if the delay is longer than the peak
width, they return to the gas phase after the peak has moved on, forming a
true tail like the one on the green peak in Figure 8.1c. Since the activity of
adsorption sites varies, they will release the molecules after a wide range of
delay times thereby forming a long exponential tail that interferes with the
measurement of subsequent peaks. This desorption delay is the primary
cause of peak tailing.
Again, note this tailing mechanism is due only to time delay and can
occur even when the adsorption isotherm is perfectly linear.
Column overload
The most common cause of a fronting peak is column overload due to an
excessive sample injection volume.
Generally, a fronting peak occurs when the distribution constant
increases with solute concentration. While this can be due to an upward￾curving isotherm, it’s more likely to be a symptom of column overload.
When the injected sample volume is too high, the large number of solute
molecules immobilized by the stationary phase can attract and hold addi￾tional molecules of the same kind, reducing the rate of migration for high
analyte concentrations. For more on fronting peaks consult the section on
sample size in Chapter 3, pages 67–71.
What causes asymmetry? 2111
And to the theoretical principles elucidated by researchers over
several decades of patient work. Their vital contributions are
acknowledged by reference in this book.
SCI-FILE: On Asymmetric Peaks
Natural deviations from perfection
There are so many potential causes of chromato￾gram peak asymmetry that you might expect nice
Gaussian peaks to be a rarity. Yet most of our peaks
turn out to be only slightly distorted, which is a
credit to the skill of the instrument manufacturers.1
The main text discusses some causes of peak
asymmetry that might be amenable to improve￾ment, including the effect of nonlinear isotherms
or slow desorption processes.
This SCI-FILE focuses on the reasons for peak
asymmetry inherent in the chromatographic proc￾ess itself. These mechanisms skew the peaks in the
normal direction (As > 1.0) and generally do not
cause tailing. Mostly, they are not amenable to mit￾igation, although the magnitude of their effect may
depend on column operating conditions.
Poisson distribution
Processes distributing solute molecules along the
column are often assumed to be random, leading
to the formation of Gaussian peaks. Yet the plate
theory of chromatography predicts a peak shape
that follows the Poisson distribution rather than
the classic Gaussian shape (Giddings 1965, 35; Scott
2003, 31).
For a column having a plate number greater
than a few hundred, there is no practical difference
between the two distributions; both are symmetric.
But for a column with very few plates, the Poisson
distribution generates asymmetric peaks. So chro￾matogram peaks from low-efficiency packed col￾umns may tend toward the Poisson shape
illustrated in Figure 8.7, slightly skewed in the nor￾mal direction.
Since this contribution to asymmetry only affects
low-efficiency columns, it rarely occurs. Most of
our PGC columns have enough theoretical plates
for their peaks to become Gaussian in shape.
Transformation to the time domain
As noted before (see Figure 2.6), the distribution of
solute molecules in the column is spatial, which
means some molecules in a peak have traveled fur￾ther along the column than the average molecule,
and some not so far.
For the moment, assume the on-column spatial
distribution is perfectly Gaussian with a variance of
σ
2 and a peak base width of 4σ mm. Consider what
happens when the leading edge of the peak reaches
the detector. At that instant, the peak starts to
appear on the chromatogram. Yet the center of
the peak must still travel a distance of about 2σ
mm (half the peak base width) in the column
before it reaches the detector, and the trailing edge
of the peak must travel yet another 2σ mm, an addi￾tional distance of 4σ mm.
Since the trailing edge of a peak stays longer in
the column than the leading edge does, it follows
50 100 150 200
Retention Time (s)
250 300 350
The plate theory of chromatography predicts a Poisson 
distribution rather than a Gaussian one. As shown here, the 
Poisson distribution is slightly asymmetric for low plate 
numbers, but becomes essentially Gaussian for plate 
numbers above a few hundred.
Figure 8.7 The Poisson Distribution.
212 Evaluating peak shapethat the molecules toward the back of the peak will
suffer progressively more dispersion as the peak
gradually elutes from the column. This additional
dispersion makes the trailing half of a chromato￾gram peak wider than the leading half, so all chro￾matogram peaks are to some extent asymmetric.
While there is no way to change the peak skew￾ing inherent in transforming a spatial separation
into a temporal one, we can be sure narrow peaks
will be less affected than wide peaks.
To get an estimate of the extent of this effect,
consider each half of the Gaussian peak as if it were
a separate peak. Recall that the base width of a
Gaussian chromatogram peak is equal to 4τ, so
the leading half-peak elutes from the column at
about (tR − τ) and the trailing half-peak elutes at
about (tR + τ).
For a peak whose base width is one-tenth of its
retention time, τ = 0.025 tR; so the leading half￾peak elutes at 0.975 tR and the trailing half-peak
at 1.025 tR.
From Equation 2.23, we know the base width of
a peak is proportional to the square root of itsreten￾tion time.
Therefore, the ratio of their base widths is:
wtrailing
wleading
= 1 025 tR
0 975 tR
= 1 025
This asymmetry (2.5 %) would be hardly visible.
Narrower peaks would exhibit even less asym￾metry so, once again, this type of peak distortion
occurs only with wide peaks from low-efficiency
packed columns.
Equation 2.26 gives a plate number of 1,600 for
the peak used in this example:
N = 16 10 2 = 1,600
A wider peak might have a base width equal to
one-fourth of its retention time. Then:
N = 16 4 2 = 256
This chromatogram peak has a standard devia￾tion τ = tR/16, so the width ratio of its trailing
and leading half-peaks is:
wtrailing
wleading
= 1 0625 tR
0 9375 tR
= 1 065
An asymmetry of 6.5 % is visually noticeable and
confirms low-efficiency peaks suffer more skew.
This contribution to peak asymmetry is entirely
due to the transformation of the on-column peak to
the time-based domain of the chromatogram. As
demonstrated here, even a perfectly symmetrical
peak will suffer the distortion. To minimize this
effect, increase column efficiency to reduce the
peak widths. The peaks from highly efficient capil￾lary columns exhibit very little skew.
Thermal peak distortion
When the solute dissolvesinto (or adsorbs onto) the
stationary phase, it releases heat energy, increasing
the local temperature. Then, when the solute
returns to the gas phase, it adsorbs an equivalent
amount of heat energy, reducing the local
temperature.
Since the leading half of a peak is continuously
dissolving as it travels through the column, it
migrates at a slightly higher column temperature
than the oven set point. Conversely, the trailing
half of the peak migrates at a slightly lower
temperature.
The temperature change depends on the size of
the peak. For a very small peak it’s negligible, but
for a large peak it might reach ±0.5 K (Scott
2014, 64).
We know from Chapter 4 that retention times
are highly dependent on column temperature and
may change as much as 4 % per kelvin. Clearly, if
the trailing half-peak travels an average of 4 %
slower than the leading half-peak, the chromato￾gram peak will be asymmetric in the trailing direc￾tion. And because the temperature difference is
proportional to the size of the peak, large peaks will
suffer more distortion than small peaks.
The contribution of the heat of solution (or heat
of adsorption) to overall peak asymmetry is another
natural consequence of the chromatographic proc￾ess. There is no way to avoid the heat of solution,
but a smaller sample volume will minimize its
effect on peak shape.
What causes asymmetry? 213Problems with asymmetric peaks
Most chromatogram peaks are slightly asymmetric and this small deviation
from perfection has no effect on the measurement of peak area and the com￾putation of analyte concentration.
The height of an asymmetric peak may not be linear with analyte concen￾tration, but PGCs are usually set up to measure peak area and will reliably
measure even the most severely distorted peak. Yet grossly asymmetric
peaks can cause problems of peak detection during automatic operation.
Of main concern are:
The retention time of an asymmetric peak may change when its concen￾tration changes.
A second retention mechanism
As noted in the main text, even very small peaks
from liquid phase columns can exhibit a normal
asymmetric shape. Theorists now believe this dis￾tortion is due to the combined effect of two separate
retention mechanisms: rapid gas–liquid partition
and slow gas–solid desorption at active sites on
all contact surfaces.
In support of this hypothesis,skewed peaks often
follow the exponentially modified Gaussian
(EMG) function, which combines the Gaussian
equation with an exponential decay function (see
Foley & Dorsey, 1983, 1984; Foley 1987). If you
are interested in this approach, you may wish to
review the many references provided by these
authors.
Figure 8.8 compares the pure Gaussian peak
shape to the EMG peak shape. From this, you
can imagine how adsorption removes molecules
from the front of the peak and releases them into
the back of the peak after a short delay.
The EMG function also provides a more accurate
estimation of chromatographic variables from
asymmetric peaks. In particular, our standard
equations for plate number (Equations 2.26 and
2.27) are inaccurate when applied to significantly
asymmetric peaks. Using the measurements shown
in Figure 8.2, Foley and Dorsey (op. cit.) proposed
this more-accurate equation for plate number:
N = 41 7 tR w0 1
2
b a + 1 25 (8.2)
370 380 390 400
Retention Time
410 420 430
The chart compares a perfectly symmetrical Gaussian peak 
(green) with a “normal” chromatogram peak (orange) as 
modeled by the EMG function. The orange peak has an 
asymmetry ratio (b/a) of 1.35 and is typical of 
chromatogram peaks from packed columns.
Figure 8.8 The EMG Peak Model.
214 Evaluating peak shapeThe resolution of adjacent peaks may change when the area of the asym￾metric peak changes.
The wide integration window makes peak area measurement more sus￾ceptible to baseline error.
Retention time shift
Figure 8.9 illustrates (in a rather exaggerated way) that the observed reten￾tion time of a severely asymmetric peak can change with its size. This illus￾tration is typical of a substance with a curved-down isotherm on the
stationary phase in use. As the peak grows larger, the additional molecules
experience a lower distribution constant and move a little faster through the
column. The additional molecules then make the peak wider by adding to its
front, while the peak tail stays about the same shape. Of course, the mirror
image of this effect occurs when the substance has a curved-up isotherm on
the stationary phase.
If the peak measurement window is manually set for the smaller peak, a
larger concentration of the analyte may push the front of the peak out of the
window, causing a measurement error. And in systems that automatically
identify the peak by its retention time, the time shift of the peak apex
may cause an incorrect identification of the peak.
Figure 8.9 also illustrates the self-sharpening effect occurring at the lead￾ing edge of the peak, which is a sure symptom of a curved isotherm.
340 360 380 400 420
Retention Time (s)
440 460 480 500
The apparent retention time of a severely asymmetric peak will vary with the concentration of 
the analyte. The peak shape shown indicates a downward-curved isotherm. As its 
concentration increases, the stationary phase holds a smaller percentage of the analyte 
allowing the additional molecules to move faster through the column.
Figure 8.9 Retention Shift with
Concentration.
Problems with asymmetric peaks 215Loss of resolution
The varying width of a severely asymmetric peak can cause loss ofresolution.
At higher concentrations, the additional width of the peak will reduce the
resolution between the two peaks and may even cause them to merge, as
shown in Figure 8.10. It follows that application testing must use samples
containing the maximum expected concentration of the asymmetric peak,
whether measured or not.
Tailing peaks
The peaks on your chromatogram should be more-or-less symmetric and
quickly return to the baseline like those in Figure 8.11a. Ideally, they should
not form tails although some tailing is unavoidable in some applications.
A tailing peak will take up more space on the chromatogram baseline,
spoiling the resolution, and making it difficult to get an accurate measure￾ment of the following peak. It will also make peak-end detection more dif￾ficult and more variable, thereby reducing the precision of peak area
measurement.
Different troubleshooting symptoms include:
All onscale peaks are tailing.
Some onscale peaks are tailing.
Offscale peaks are tailing.
Let’s consider these.
360 380 400
Retention Time (s)
420 440 460 360 380 400
Retention Time (s)
420 440 460
(a) At low concentration (b) At high concentration
An asymmetric peak grows wider as its concentration increases and this additional width might 
spoil the resolution of an adjacent peak.
Figure 8.10 Effect of Peak Shape
on Resolution. (a) At Low
Concentration. (b) At High
Concentration.
216 Evaluating peak shapeAll peaks are tailing
When a chromatogram includes polar and nonpolar substances and all
peaks are tailing, the analyzer may need attention. If both polar and nonpo￾lar peaks tail, the columns are unlikely to be the cause. The observed tails
may indicate a slow sample injection, dead legs in the analytical flow path,
or a detector malfunction.
Injecting a wide-boiling liquid sample can cause a slow sample injection
due to the time taken for the liquid to vaporize. Increasing the injector tem￾perature or reducing the sample volume might be an effective remedy.
Dead legs are small upswept volumes that can harbor any kind of peak
molecules for a while, then release them to follow the main peak. Examine
the flow paths in your injector, detector, and tube connections in between.
Even a simple tube union can have minute unswept volumes around the
tube ends and every side-volume adds to the peak tail. Special tube connec￾tors are available to eliminate such dead legs.
In older PGCs, thermal detectors and their electronics were slow to
respond, but modern detector systems are less likely to cause tailing.
Some peaks are tailing
Polar solutes are much more likely to form tailing peaks than nonpolar
solutes. In Figure 8.11b, the first two peaks are nonpolar and are not tailing,
whereasthe last two peaks are polarsolutes with tails. Thisselective tailing is
usually due to the adsorption of analyte molecules on active metal surfaces.
To reduce this kind of tailing, replace all tubing and fittings in the flow path
with surface-deactivated components.
Tailing of polar peaks may also occur when using a nonpolar liquid
phase. A very nonpolar phase might not completely neutralize the active
sites on a capillary-column wall or packed-column support. Sometimes a
small increase in the polarity of the liquid phase is enough to minimize
the tailing, with little affect on the separation of the analytes.
Occasionally, tailing might be due to deposits of nonvolatile solids or oils
within the injector, connecting tube, or column inlet. When such deposits
come from substances dissolved in a liquid sample, it will be necessary to
clean or replace the injector and its connecting tube, or even replace the first
column. It’s also possible to cut a short length from the front of a long cap￾illary column.
When the deposits are polymer oils due to the polymerization of a gas
sample, a lower injector temperature will reduce the accumulation rate.
However, this is often impractical as PGC gas injectors are normally at col￾umn-oven temperature.
Offscale peaks are tailing
When a large peak goes offscale, it may seem wider than the onscale peaks.
You can see this effect on the second peak in Figure 8.11a. Yet the triangu￾lated base width of the peak hasn’t changed. If the second peak was onscale,
it wouldn’t look much different than the first peak.
200 300 400
(b) Some peaks tail
(a) No peaks tail
500 600
200 300 400
(c) Major peak tail
500 600
200 300 400
Retention Time
500 600
The normal peaks in chromatogram 
(a), are slightly asymmetric but 
exhibit no tailing. In chromatogram 
(b) the last two peaks suffer 
moderate tailing – a more polar 
column might help. In 
chromatogram (c) the second peak 
is so large it has formed a tail which 
overlaps the third peak. 
Figure 8.11 Normal and Tailing
Peaks. (a) No Peaks Tail.
(b) Some Peaks Tail. (c) Major
Peak Tail.
Tailing peaks 217To understand this effect, look back at the perfect Gaussian peak in
Figure 2.5 and imagine how it would appear at a higher sensitivity. Most
of the peak is now offscale. The increased sensitivity amplifies the small tails
on either side of the peak (those outside the triangulated base width) even￾tually driving them offscale. The peak then appears wider because you’re
seeing only its magnified base. The peak itself hasn’t changed.
An offscale peak looks wider than onscale peaks, but if it quickly returns
to the baseline it’s not a problem. Yet when a large peak tails exponentially it
can be a real challenge. Figure 8.11c reveals how a major peak tail can inter￾fere with the measurement of a following peak. However, the figure shows
only the first stage of tailing when the analyte peaks are a few hundred parts￾per-million (ppm) and are still visible on the chromatogram. To display
lower analyte concentrations the sensitivity would be perhaps 100 times
higher, which would bury the analyte peaks in the magnified major-peak
tail. Analysis is impossible under such conditions.
All columns suffer this shortcoming, ultimately caused by the large vol￾ume of sample needed to detect and measure a few ppm. The only solution is
to remove most of the major peaks by column switching. The heartcut tech￾nique discussed in Chapter 11 is a powerful way to measure these very low
concentrations.
Diagnosis of deviant peak shapes
Reading the chromatogram
The chromatogram is the fundamental readout of a PGC and contains all the
information necessary for calculating the analyte concentrations. It also
exhibits all symptoms necessary to diagnose potential or actual problems
with the analysis.
The essential skill for troubleshooting a PGC is your ability to read
information from a chromatogram. Everything else is just electronics.
One of your chromatogram-reading skillsshould be to notice and to correctly
diagnose the cause of misshapen peaks. It requires a keen eye and a logical
brain. In this chapter, we have seen how peaks may not be perfectly symmet￾rical. This is true, but even asymmetric peaks must display a smooth curve
without sudden change in direction or slope. Look very carefully at your
chromatogram peaks. Even the slightest deviation from the expected curva￾ture is a vital clue; it’s telling you something isn’t right.
Observed deviations from the expected peak curvature may indicate:
An unknown peak is overlapping the analyte peak and causing a high
measurement value.
A slice of the peak is missing, cut by inaccurate timing of a column valve
and causing a low measurement value.
218 Evaluating peak shapeOverlapping peaks
An asymmetric peak may be a composite of two or more peaks merged
together. When a small partly resolved peak closely follows a larger peak,
the combination of the two peaks may look like a single asymmetric peak
on the chromatogram. But it’s rare for the second peak to be exactly the right
size and position to completely disappear into the trailing edge of the first
peak. If you look carefully at your chromatogram, you may see the telltale
signs of overlapping peaks.
The classic signs of a merged peak are the strange shapes generated when
two peaks overlap. Published examples typically show the chromatogram
generated by the overlap of two equal ideal peaks at various resolutions.
For example, see Waters (2020, 70).
Those curves are revealing and give a good first lesson in diagnosis, but
we now know that real peaks are slightly asymmetric and this changes the
game. Figure 8.12 compares unequal symmetric and asymmetric peaks at a
resolution of 1.5. The baseline separation of ideal symmetric peaks is ade￾quate but look what happens when the more realistic “normal” peaks
overlap!
It gets worse as resolution declines. Figure 8.13 shows the merged peak
obtained at a resolution of 1.0 – the second peak is still noticeable if you have
your eyes open. At even lower resolutions, it’s just a minor inflection in the
side of the peak and easily missed.
On the chromatogram in Figure 8.14 are two symmetrical peaks partly
merged. The first peak is three times the size of the second peak. At a reso￾lution of 0.75, chromatogram (a) clearly shows the presence of the two peaks
but reducing the resolution to 0.50 results in a single asymmetric peak.
It’s important to recognize the symptoms of peak asymmetry caused by
merged peaks because any measurement of the composite peak would
include two different substances. This is not unusual in a laboratory analysis
separating dozens of components but it’s unexpected in a PGC; the extra
350 400 450
Retention Time Retention Time
500 350 400 450 500
(a) (b)
In (a), the resolution of 1.5 is adequate for perfectly symmetric peaks even when the second 
peak is only one tenth as tall as the first peak. Yet for the “normal” asymmetric peaks in (b), a 
resolution of 1.5 is not enough for accurate measurement.
Figure 8.12 Resolution of
Normal Asymmetric Peaks.
350 400
Retention Time
450 500
A resolution of 1.0 is inadequate 
for the measurement of normal 
asymmetric peaks. Carefully note 
the resulting shape of the blue 
curve. The deviation from a 
smooth curve indicates another 
peak is hiding there (orange 
curve).
Figure 8.13 Normal Peaks at
Low Resolution.
Diagnosis of deviant peak shapes 219peak is probably a fault condition causing a large error in the analyte meas￾urement. A PGC troubleshooter must closely inspect the gradual change of
slope of each analyte peak, searching for any inconsistency. To get a better
look at its shape, try stretching a narrow peak by using a fast chart recorder
or by expanding the display time base.
Figure 8.15 illustrates this technique. In chromatogram (a), the single
peak gives little indication that it’s really two merged peaks. In chromato￾gram (b), the stretched baseline reveals a second peak. Can you see it?
0 100 200 300 400 380 400 420 440 460
Retention Time Retention Time
(a) Full chromatogram (b) Stretched display
500
In (a), it’s difficult to detect the presence of a merged peak in the full chromatogram. 
Stretching the timebase in (b) visually reveals an inflection on the trailing side of the peak due 
to a 20 % second peak hiding there. To see it more clearly hold the page at an angle with your 
eye aligned with the trailing edge of the peak.
Figure 8.15 Looking for Merged
Peaks. (a) Full Chromatogram.
(b) Stretched display.
350 400 450
Retention Time
(a) Rs= 0.75 (b) Rs= 0.5
500 350 400 450
Retention Time
500
When two or more normal peaks merge together, the resulting chromatogram (blue) may 
show a partial separation (a) or just a single asymmetric peak (b) depending on the 
resolution. To diagnose the presence of two peaks in (b) realize the composite peak is wider 
than a normal peak. Hint: look at the individual peaks (green and orange).
Figure 8.14 Asymmetry due to
Merged Peaks. (a) Rs = 0.75.
(b) Rs = 0.5.
220 Evaluating peak shapeIn this book, we show simulated chromatograms with wide peaks to
clearly show their characteristic shapes. The peaks from high￾resolution capillary columns may be too narrow to evaluate – to
see more, stretch their time base!
Some merged peaks show no irregularity whatsoever. For instance, the blue
peak in Figure 8.14b apparently has a normal shape. The ultimate test is to
compare the peak width with the width of nearby peaks. This is easy to do in
Figure 8.14 because the graphic includes the green and orange traces of the
individual peaks. A real chromatogram would show only one curve like
the blue line in the figure. Yet an expert troubleshooter would notice that
the peak is too wide and would deduce the combination of real peaks
necessary to generate the observed shape.
An easy clue is when an onscale peak is wider than the peaks on either
side of it. If all the peaks are from the same column, it’s a sure sign that the
wide peak is a composite of two or more peaks.
Offscale peaks
There are two kinds of chromatogram display:
A time-based plot of the raw detector signal at constant sensitivity, show￾ing the relative size of each peak. Often, the tops of one or more peaks
will be offscale.
A time-based plot of the modified detector signal, showing each meas￾ured peak at a sensitivity selected to keep it onscale. The top of any
unmeasured peak may be offscale.
Figure 8.16 illustrates the effect of different size peaks on peak separa￾tion. The blue line shows the chromatogram at constant sensitivity, so the
large peak goes offscale. The green line traces the shape of the large peak
when attenuated to bring it back onscale.
In chromatogram 8.16a, the two peaks have a concentration ratio of
about 2:1. Their resolution is excellent.
In chromatogram 8.16b, the concentration ratio has increased to 100:1
and the first peak is now offscale and wider than before. The green peak
shows the shape of this peak when attenuated by a factor of 100. Notice that
its retention time and width have not changed much. When looking at an
offscale peak remember that its retention time is not at the center of its
width; it’s much closer to the front of the peak. Realize that the extra width
of the blue peak is mainly due to amplifying its base and is mostly on itstrail￾ing side because the peak is asymmetric. However, the large peak has not
formed a tail and the resolution is still good; both peaks are measurable.
In chromatogram (c), the first peak is much larger and is way offscale.
Again, its retention time has not changed but the peak is wider and has
formed a tail that runs into the second peak, interfering with its measure￾ment. The tailing is due to an increase in the second retention mechanism,
(a) Small
Peaks
(b) Large
first peak
(c) Tailing
first peak
200 300 400 500 600
200 300 400 500 600
200 300 400 500 600
Simulated chromatograms in 
blue, same peaks at reduced 
sensitivity in green. In (a), two 
peaks of similar size exhibit 
excellent resolution. In (b), the 
first peak is offscale but shows 
no significant tailing. In (c), the 
first peak is so large that it has 
overloaded the column forming 
a tail that overlaps the second 
peak. 
Figure 8.16 Effect of Peak Size.
(a) Small Peaks. (b) Large First
Peak. (c) Tailing First Peak.
Diagnosis of deviant peak shapes 221more molecules have adsorbed on contact surfaces because of the larger
number of molecules present. At an even higher concentration, the peak tail
will totally obliterate the second peak. This illustrates the classic problem of
trying to measure ppm of an analyte that follows a 99.99 % major peak. As
you increase sample volume to gain the sensitivity needed to measure a ppm
peak, you also overload the column with the major component.
Note that the first peak retention time isthe same in each case (400 s). The
peak has become more asymmetric and the width increase is mostly on the
downside of the peak. To overcome this extreme tailing problem, a ppm
measurement usually requires the heartcut column switching system dis￾cussed in Chapter 11.
Partial peaks
Looking back at Figure 8.14a, it’s easy to misidentify the peak as a partial
peak, a peak missing a piece due to column switching. Seeing the sudden
drop at the trailing edge of the peak, one might think column switching
has removed a slice from the peak tail. Yet in this case, we know the peculiar
peak shape is due solely to overlapping peaks.
When column switching removes a portion of a peak and only a part of
the peak reaches the detector, the resulting partial peak will exhibit some
characteristic features. A later chapter explores the advanced troubleshoot￾ing skills you’ll need to diagnose those special shapes.
Table 8.1 summarizes the causes of common peak shapes and may assist
with troubleshooting.
Table 8.1 Troubleshooting Peak Shapes.
Observed
Shape Proximate Cause Root Cause Mitigation
Normal
skew
Transferring a spatially
symmetrical peak from the
column to the time domain of the
chromatogram.
Inherent in all gas chromatographs. Minimize sample volume.
Use a more efficient column to keep
peaks narrow.
Poisson distribution occurs in
column.
Very low plate number. Use a more efficient column.
Center of peak migrates faster
than peak edges.
Nonlinear isotherm: solubility falls
at higher peak concentrations.
Reduce sample volume to avoid
excess analyte concentration in
column and to minimize thermal
effect.
Heat of solution: front of peak is
warmer than back of peak.
Second retention mechanism. Some peak molecules adsorb from
the front of peak and desorb later,
adding to the back of peak.
Minimize adsorption sites in
column and in flow path.
Composite peak. Precisely timed overlap of two or
more chromatogram peaks having
little resolution.
Modify columns to get adequate
resolution.
Measure the integrated sum of both
peaks.
Increase injector temperature.
(continued )
222 Evaluating peak shapeTable 8.1 (continued)
Observed
Shape Proximate Cause Root Cause Mitigation
Tailing
peaks
Polar and nonpolar solute peaks
are both exhibiting tailing.
A large liquid sample or one
containing high boilers takes time
to vaporize resulting in a slurred
injection profile.
Reduce sample size.
If using a sample splitter increase
split vent flow.
Dead legs in the analytical flow
path.
Dead legs affect the sharp early
peaks more than the wide later
peaks and large peaks more than
small ones.
Ensure no dead legs exist in
injector, detector, and tube
connections.
Increase carrier gas flow rate. For a
mass-flow detector, increase flow
by adding a makeup gas.
Porous polymer surfaces in valve
rotors or sliders, or tubing.
Employ less-porous materials, for
example, PEEK.
A slow accumulation of solids or
oils in injector, connecting tube, or
first column.
Improve filtration of sample fluid in
the external sample conditioning
system.
Lower injector temperature to
reduce the formation of polymer
oils.
Clean or replace affected parts.
The columns may be contaminated. Replace the column set.
Overloading a PLOT column. Reduce sample size.
Only the polar solutes are tailing –
the nonpolar peaks are
unaffected.
A small proportion of the polar
peak molecules are migrating
along the column much slower
than the main peak does.
Adsorption and randomly delayed
desorption of low-concentration
polar analytes at active sites on
contact surfaces.
If a packed column, consider using
a treated support.
If a capillary column, the liquid
coating may not be fully covering
the tube walls. Consider increasing
the film thickness.
Increase oven temperature.
Shorten all the connection tubes.
Consider silicon-treated tubing for
column and connections.
Using a nonpolar liquid phase
incompatible with polar solutes.
Use a more polar liquid phase.
Solute has a severely nonlinear
isotherm on the chosen phase
(probably an adsorbent solid
column).
If possible, work at a higher column
temperature.
Use a different stationary phase.
Harsh sample (acidic, basic, or
reactive) may have created active
sites in the flow path.
Employ columns, fittings, and
tubing of resistant material.
Only the nonpolar peaks are
tailing (unusual).
Severe mismatch between solutes
and liquid phase.
Use a less polar or nonpolar liquid
phase.
Only one peak is tailing. A large offscale peak is tailing.
Normal in ppm analysis due to very
large concentration ratios.
Use a heartcut column system to
remove most of the major
component.
A small coeluting peak is
overlapping the back of a normal
peak.
Use a different stationary phase.
Measure the integrated sum of both
peaks.
(continued )Table 8.1 (continued)
Observed
Shape Proximate Cause Root Cause Mitigation
The solute is decomposing or
reacting with the carrier gas or
liquid phase.
Reduce column temperature.
Don’t use hydrogen carrier gas.
Use a different stationary phase.
Fronting
peak
Front of peak migrates slightly
faster than back of peak.
Nonlinear isotherm: solubility rises
as concentration falls.
Reduce sample volume to avoid
excess analyte concentration in
column.
Solid stationary phase with curved
isotherm.
Find a better stationary phase.
Column overload. Excessive sample feed volume
changes composition of liquid
phase.
Reduce sample volume.
Increase column diameter.
Overlapping peaks. A small coeluting peak is
overlapping the front of a normal
peak.
Use a different stationary phase.
Measure the integrated sum of both
peaks.
Triangular
peak (no tail)
Steep front: migration rate rapidly
increases with peak height.
Solid phase with strongly
downward-curved isotherm.
Reduced adsorption at higher
concentrations.
Increase column temperature.
Find a better stationary phase.
Steep back: migration rate rapidly
decreases with peak height.
Liquid phase with strongly upward￾curved isotherm. Solubility of
analyte increases as more analyte
molecules dissolve.
Use a liquid phase of similar
polarity as the analyte.
Reduce the sample size.
Overlapping
peaks
Partially separated peaks Two peaks with insufficient
resolution.
Optimize column temperature to
put peaks in Power Region.
Use a longer column.
Use a different stationary phase.
Onscale peak is wider than
adjacent peaks from the same
column.
Two or more merged peaks –
separation factor is too low.
Measure the integrated sum of both
peaks.
Use a different stationary phase.
May be a single heavies peak from
previous analysis cycle.
Adjust backflush settings to remove
the heavies peak.
Partial peak Front is missing. Column valve switching too late. For diagnosis and time settings
consult Chapters 10 and 11. Back is missing. Column valve switching too early
(or may be intentional).
Remnant peak. Normal heartcut remnant peak (see
Chapter ).
No action required.
Split peak
(bimodal)
Peak forms a valley at its apex. Partial condensation of vaporized
sample
Increase injector or column
temperature.
Looks like a plateau between two
peaks
Analyte is reacting with carrier gas,
liquid phase, or itself to form
another chemical compound with a
different retention factor.
Reduce the column temperature.
Don’t use hydrogen carrier gas.
Flat-top
peak
Peak has a flat top.
Signal processing routines
looking for a slope change may
fail to detect the peak.
Flat-top peak is actually two or
more overlapping peaks of similar
size.
This sometimes occurs with
backflushed peaks.
Use a different liquid phase or
measure the sum of both peaks.
Change Method settings to forced
integration mode.
(continued )Table 8.1 (continued)
Observed
Shape Proximate Cause Root Cause Mitigation
Detector response has exceeded
PGC signal limit.
If peak is to be measured, reduce
sample size.
Modify electronics to reduce
detector sensitivity.
Jagged peaks The narrow peaks on a
chromatogram don’t exhibit
smooth curves.
Processor is sampling the peak
signal too slowly. Inadequate data
points to properly represent the
peak.
Increase the sampling frequency.
40 Hz is often considered minimal
and may be too slow for the sharp
peaks from a capillary column.
Data smoothing by simple
averaging reduces the number of
datapoints per peak.
Inhibit data smoothing routine.
Knowledge Gained
Practice
A symmetrical Gaussian peak is the ideal
shape of a chromatogram peak but not often
seen in practice.
Real chromatogram peaks are rarely symmet￾rical and some deviation from perfection is
normal.
Normal peaks rise to their apex faster than
they return to the baseline.
Tailing peaks exhibit a long exponential
return to the baseline that may indicate a
fault condition.
Fronting or leading peaks rise to their apex
slower than they return to the baseline.
Normal peaks have more than 1.0 of meas￾ured skew, and fronting peaks have less than
1.0 skew.
A skew of 0.8–1.2 (about ±20 %) is normal
and usually acceptable for measurement.
Theory shows the normal peak shape with a
small positive skew is inevitable (see below).
In addition, slow desorption from scarce active
sites may contribute to normal peak skew.
A partition or adsorption isotherm having
limited linearity may skew the larger peaks.
If the center concentration of a peak has a
lower solubility, it travels faster than the peak
edges.
A continuously curved isotherm is common
for solid stationary phases and guarantees
skewed peaks.
A curved isotherm may cause a triangular￾shaped peakwith an almost verticalrise orfall.
A skewed peak may be the combination of two
or more partially resolved peaks.
When its concentration changes, a skewed
peak islikely to exhibit a shift in retention time.
An increase in concentration of a skewed
peak may reduce its resolution from an adja￾cent peak.
Diagnosis of deviant peak shapes 225Did you get it?
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 08
On practice
Consider the following mechanisms of retention:
A. A linear partition isotherm.
B. A linear partition isotherm that droops at high concentration.
C. A linear partition isotherm that rises at high concentration.
D. A linear partition isotherm coupled with slow desorption from scarce
active sites.
E. A continuously curved partition or adsorption isotherm.
F. The injection of an excessively large sample volume.
Q1. Which of the above conditionsislikely to form large orsmall perfectly sym￾metrical peaks?
Q2. Which of the above conditions may form a normal asymmetric peak?
A slow response of detector or electronics will
make a fast peak asymmetric in the trailing
direction.
Fronting peaks are uncommon and may
indicate column overload due to a large sam￾ple volume.
All peaks tailing may be due to slow injection,
deposits in the injector, or dead legs in
connections.
Polar peaks may tail on a nonpolar column
or by adsorption on surfaces or on deposits
in the injector.
Moderately offscale peaks may seem wider
than onscale peaks due to amplification of
their base.
In ppm analysis, the very large major peak
forms a tail which can hide a small ana￾lyte peak.
An asymmetric peak might be a composite of
two or more overlapping peaks.
Diagnosis of peak shape is an important skill
for the PGC troubleshooter.
Theory
For several reasons, a small degree of peak
asymmetry is inevitable in chromatography.
In theory, peak shape is a Poisson distribu￾tion, which is asymmetric at low plate
number.
The trailing half of a peak spends longer in
the column and widens due to additional
dispersion.
The distortion due to additional dispersion is
significant onlywithwide,low-efficiency peaks.
The heat of sorption makes the front of a peak
warmer and faster than the rear of the peak.
The asymmetry caused by heat of sorption is
more significant with larger peaks.
Excessive sample volume may overload the
column and produce a fronting peak.
There is a different equation to calculate the
efficiency of a column from an asymmet￾ric peak.
226 Evaluating peak shapeQ4. Which one of the above conditions is most likely to form a tailing peak?
On theory
Consider the following mechanisms that may affect peak shape:
A. A Poisson distribution of molecules.
B. A Gaussian distribution of molecules.
C. An exponentially modified Gaussian distribution of molecules.
D. The transformation of an on-column peak into a chromatogram peak.
E. The heat of solution or adsorption.
F. Adsorption and desorption of analyte molecules at active sites.
Q5. Which of the above mechanisms always forms a perfectly symmetri￾cal peak?
Q6. Which of the above mechanisms might form a normal asymmetric peak?
Q7. Which one of the above mechanisms might form a tailing peak?
References
Further reading
Although focused on capillary columns in laboratory practice, the GC troubleshoot￾ing book by Rood (2007) is a good guide.
For a more theoretical analysis of peak asymmetry, you might try the article by Hsu
and Chen (1987).
Cited
Foley, J.P. (1987). Equations for chromatographic peak modeling and calculation of
peak area, Analytical Chemistry 59, 1984–1987.
Foley, J.P. and Dorsey, J.G. (1983). Equations for calculation of chromatographic
figures of merit for ideal and skewed peaks. Analytical Chemistry 55, 730–737.
Foley, J.P. and Dorsey, J.G. (1984). A review of the exponentially modified gaussian
(EMG) function; evaluation and subsequent calculation of universal data. Journal
of Chromatographic Science 22, 40–46.
Giddings, J.C. (1965). Dynamics of Chromatography: Principles and Theory.
New York, NY: Marcel Dekker.
Hsu, J.T. and Chen, T.L. (1987). Theoretical analysis of the asymmetry in chromat￾ographic peaks. Journal of Chromatography A 404, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0021-9673(01)86831-X.
Rood, D. (2007). The Troubleshooting and Maintenance Guide for Gas Chromatogra￾phers. Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.
Scott, R.P.W. (2003). Extra-Column Dispersion, Book 10 Chrom-Ed Book Series by
LIBRARY4SCIENCE, LLC. Accessed 2017/7/30 at: http://www.chromatography￾online.org.
References 227Scott, R.P.W. (2014). The Plate Theory and Extensions, Book 6 of Chrom-Ed Book
Series by LIBRARY4SCIENCE, LLC. Accessed 2017/7/30 at: http://www.
chromatography-online.org.
Waters, T. (2020). Process Gas Chromatographs: Fundamentals, Design and Imple￾mentation. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Table
8.1 Troubleshooting Peak Shapes.
Figures
8.1 Three Asymmetric Chromatogram Peaks.
(a) Normal Peak. (b) Tailing Peak. (c) Fronting Peak.
8.2 Measuring Peak Skew.
8.3 Typical Partition Isotherm.
8.4 Isotherms and Peak Shape.
(a) Normal Peak. (b) Ideal Peak. (c) Fronting Peak.
8.5 Typical Adsorption Peaks.
8.6 A Second Retention Mechanism.
8.7 The Poisson Distribution.
8.8 The EMG Peak Model.
8.9 Retention Shift with Concentration.
8.10 Effect of Peak Shape on Resolution.
(a) At Low Concentration. (b) At High Concentration.
8.11 Normal and Tailing Peaks.
(a) No Peaks Tail. (b) Some Peaks Tail. (c) Major Peak Tail.
8.12 Resolution of Normal Asymmetric Peaks.
(a) For Perfectly Symmetric Peaks. (a) For Normal Asymmetric Peaks.
8.13 Normal Peaks at Low Resolution.
8.14 Asymmetry due to Merged Peaks.
(a) Partial Separation at Rs = 0.75. (b) Single Merged Peak at Rs = 0.50.
8.15 Looking for Merged Peaks.
(a) Full Chromatogram. (b) Stretched display.
8.16 Effect of Peak Size.
(a) Small Peaks. (b) Large First Peak. (c) Tailing First Peak.
Symbols
Symbol Variable Unit
As Asymmetry ratio. None
a Peak front half-width at 10 % of height. s
b Peak back half-width at 10 % of height. s
N Plate number. None
tR Peak retention time. s
τ Standard deviation of chromatogram peak. s
w0.1 Peak width at 10 % of height. s
σ Standard deviation of on-column peak. mm
228 Evaluating peak shapeEquations
8.1 As = b
a
Peak asymmetry ratio.
8.2 N = 41 7 tR w0 1
2
b a + 1 25
Plate number of an asymmetric peak.
New technical terms
If you read the whole chapter, you should now know the meaning of these
technical terms:
asymmetry ratio
bimodal peak
column overload
dead leg
exponentially modified Gaussian
leading peak
normal peak
partial peak
partition isotherm
Poisson distribution
second retention mechanism
self-sharpening peak
For more information, refer to the Glossary at the end of the book.
References 2299
Columns in series
“For a general introduction to the practices and applications of multiple￾column systems in PGCs, refer to our companion volume (Waters 2020,
157–181). Multicolumn systems all have one feature in common, columns
in a series configuration always operate with different carrier pressures
and velocities, and this affects their performance.”
The need for multiple columns
For many reasons, most process gas chromatographs use more than one col￾umn. These column arrangements attempt to satisfy more than one of these
desired outcomes:
To minimize the analysis cycle time.
To remove all injected components before injecting another sample.
To regroup and measure the aggregate concentration of a set of similar
components.
To obtain a resolution between components that no single column can
achieve.
To resolve and measure very small amounts of an analyte in the presence
of a very large amount of something else.
To protect a sensitive column or detector from damage by incompatible
compounds in the injected sample.
To minimize analysis time
On an isothermal column, the retention time of solutes increases logarith￾mically with their molar masses (and with their boiling points) resulting
Process Gas Chromatography: Advanced Design and Troubleshooting, First Edition. Tony Waters.
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2025 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.in the so-called general elution problem; that is, resolving the lighter peaks
will always cause the heavier peaks to be strongly retained.
While fast analysis may not be an important criterion for a research or
laboratory chromatograph, it’s always a high priority for a PGC used for
process control. A multiple-column system working at constant temperature
can give analytes a shortcut to a detector and unwanted components a quick
exit to vent, thereby completing the desired analysis in less time than a tem￾perature-programmed column could achieve. An isothermal PGC is also less
costly to buy, consumes less energy, and is easier to maintain than a temper￾ature-programmed PGC.
To do the housekeeping
The housekeeping rule of column system design requires a PGC to remove
all injected components from the columns before injecting another sample.
If not, the later components may interfere with a subsequent analysis. Even
worse, they may accumulate in the columns and eventually reach the detec￾tor, upsetting the chromatogram baseline and invalidating the measure￾ments. With solid-phase columns, such accumulation can even deactivate
the stationary phase causing a complete loss of separation.
Temperature programming acceleratesthe heavies peaks but cannot guar￾antee to remove all componentsfrom the column. In contrast, we trust an iso￾thermal backflush column system (described in Chapter 10) to remove all
the later eluting components from the injected sample, whatever they are.
To regroup a set of components
Sometimes the user wants to measure the sum total of several components.
The classic case is backflush-to-measure which regroups all the heavies into
one peak for measurement. In other cases, the plant may need to measure
groups of similar analytes, such as Total C4 and Total C5. We shall see that
a regrouping column system always involves flow reversal in one of the
columns.
To enhance the separation
Using two different stationary phases can have an enormous effect on ana￾lyte resolution. For instance, the first column may resolve Analyte A but not
Analytes B and C. The second column may resolve Analyte C but not Ana￾lytes A and B. Working together, the two columns achieve what neither col￾umn could do alone: a fast resolution of all three components: A, B, and C.
The simple distribution column system described in Chapter 11
extends this principle to two or more second columns working in parallel.
It does a partial separation on the first column, then distributes groups of
analytes to different columns for final separation.
Even when one stationary phase is capable of separating all the analyte
peaks, a second phase may be an advantage. Two carefully selected phases
The need for multiple columns 231may provide optimal resolution between all the adjacent pairs of component
peaks and thereby minimize the time for analysis.
To separate trace amounts of analyte
A chromatographic system has a limited dynamic range. The large sample
volume and high detector sensitivity necessary to measure parts-per-million
(ppm) of trace analytes results in severe column overload by the major com￾ponent which precludes the separation of ppm analytes from the major tail.
A heartcut column system (see Chapter 11) elegantly solves the problem.
A short first column holds back the ppm peaks while most of the major com￾ponent flows to vent. A switching device then allows the analytes and a
much smaller amount of major component to enter a longer second column
which performs the final separation.
To protect a sensitive column or detector
There might be compoundsin a processsample that would damage a column
or contaminate a detector if they came into contact with it. A classic example
is the need to protect an active-solid column like molecular sieves from deac￾tivation by water in the injected sample; another is to avoid contaminating a
sensitive electron capture detector with halogen compounds. A two-column
column system can isolate deleterious components and flush them to vent or
steer them toward a compatible detector.
History of the technique
The early development of commercial gas chromatographs diverged, with
process and laboratory instruments adapting to the needs of their respective
users and to their different operating environments.From a column designper￾spective, they reached the apogee of their divergence in the 1980s. At that time
process chromatographersstarted to adopt capillary columns while laboratory
chromatographers rediscovered the advantages of dual-column systems.
Development of laboratory chromatographs
In the laboratory, the ability to separate and measure many analytes took
precedence over analysis time. Often, laboratory GCs are set up for qualita￾tive analysis – discovering what chemicals are present in the sample as well
as how much of each. For this task, capillary columns were a godsend for
laboratory analysis and won quick acceptance. With temperature program￾ming, a single capillary column could quickly separate and identify scores of
components, so the development of laboratory gas chromatographs focused
on the special needs of capillary columns: low dead volumes, split injec￾tion, bonded stationary phases, temperature programs, and column ovens
to reach ever-higher temperatures.
232 Columns in seriesUntil about 1990, most laboratory GCs employed a single capillary col￾umn, but the demand for separating and identifying even more components
inexorably led to the adoption of capillary columns in series. Researchers
anxious to put their mark on this “new” GC technique named it two￾dimensional gas chromatography (Dimandja 2020). This new approach
goes far beyond the simple act of combining two stationary phases. The first
column is a powerful capillary to achieve a good separation of dozens of
peaks. Forsamples containing scores or even hundreds of peaks, though, this
is just a start. The second column is a short capillary with a liquid phase cho￾sen to rapidly separate bunches of components not resolved by the first col￾umn. Of course, we are familiar with the idea. But when there are hundreds
of peaks competing for a space on the chromatogram some of the peaks held
back on the second column coelute with later peaks from the first column.
The technique needed something to delay those later peaks.
The solution came with the invention of new methods of peak transfer
between columns. The transfer device is generically known as a modulator
and takes many forms, sometimes just a column valve or Deans switch. To
get a programmable delay, more complex modulators use a low temperature
trap to focus a bunch of peaks into a narrow band before reinjecting them
into a second column (Liu and Phillips 1991).
A moment’s thought reveals that the spacing between reinjections must
be small so it’s unlikely that the second column will be able to separate all
the reinjected components. This is where it gets complicated. The modulator
may reinject slugs of partially separated peaks into Column 2 that are only
about one second wide. These slugs then separate and arrive at the detector
as overlapping bands. The detector output is then a correlogram rather
than a chromatogram and requires a complex mathematical procedure to
deconvolute the mixed peak waveform.
The plethora of peaks generated by dual capillary columns raised the
question of how to positively identify them all. The answer was to develop
new detectors that use spectrometric methods to measure and identify the
peaks. These new techniques fit neatly into the evolving classification of
“hyphenated methods” in analytical chemistry and gave birth to the meth￾odologies listed in Table 9.1.
Development of process chromatographs
Most process analyzers are based on established laboratory techniques
adapted to suit the process environment. In contrast, the development of
the process gas chromatograph occurred in parallel with its laboratory coun￾terpart. Instrument manufacturers were not the first to design a process gas
chromatograph. That recognition falls upon chemical and oil companies
(notably Phillips Petroleum and Union Carbide) who seized upon the unique
ability of a PGC to measure a few selected analytes quickly and accurately in
a process stream containing many other components. The PGC rapidly
advanced on its own independent trajectory, focused on the fast measure￾ment of a few known analytes.
History of the technique 233PGCs adopted multicolumn systems for all the reasons outlined above.
They had backflush column systems soon after their 1956 introduction
(Simmons and Snyder 1958). The heartcut column systems came a little
later, after the flame ionization detector introduced by McWilliam and
Dewar (1958) became commercially available. Isothermal PGCs equipped
with multiple-column systems proved more adept at fast analysis and
were less expensive and more reliable than those using temperature
programming.
By design, most early PGCs could house only simple dual-column sys￾tems. Their key constraint was having a single detector, with no possi￾bility of adding a second one. Column system designers had to be highly
creative to use one detector to measure all the analytes. Unfortunately,
these creative designs used complex multiple-column systems that were
difficult to maintain, and hence unreliable. Relief eventually came from
microprocessor technology, specifically the ability to process several
detector signals simultaneously. This spurred the development of PGCs
with multiple detectors and multiple column ovens, allowing a complex
analysis to be broken down into a few simple backflush trains, each with
its own detector.
PGC’s also differ in their preference for packed columns over capillary
columns. Even today, most PGCs use two or more packed columns. Back
in 1964, McEwen demonstrated the use of capillary columns in a PGC,
but their adoption has been slow. Simply installing a capillary column in
place of a packed column is not enough. The whole PGC instrument must
be adapted for the low flow rates used by capillary columns; the original
valves and detectors were far too voluminous. The other drawback was
the fragility of fused silica columns – many of the new capillary-column
Table 9.1 A Lexicon of GC Methods.
1D GC Single column gas chromatography
2D GC Two-dimensional gas chromatography
C2DGC Comprehensive 2-D gas chromatography
GC–GC Selective 2-D gas chromatography (heartcut)
GCxGC Comprehensive 2-D gas chromatography (all peaks)
GC-MS Single column with mass spectrometric detector
GCxGC–MS Dual column with mass spectrometric detector
GCxGC–VUV Dual column with vacuum ultraviolet detector
This table is nonexclusive and is for general information only. Note that “heartcut” has a
somewhat different meaning here than in PGC. In laboratory parlance, heartcut
methods analyze only selected components, whereas comprehensive methods analyze
them all.
Source: Adapted from Elsevier.
234 Columns in seriesPGCs failed due to recurrent column breakage. When fitted with Silcosteel1
(silicon-coated) metal capillary columns, a modern low-volume PGC offers a
durable alternative. Yet it’sstill true that packed columns in series are often a
better alternative for quickly measuring a few known analytes.
Table 9.2 summarizes the features of older and newer chromatographs.
The power of dissimilar columns
The real power of serial columns is their ability to adjust the net retention
factor of each analyte to achieve optimum separation in minimum time.
By eliminating unproductive time on the chromatogram when no peaks
are emerging, series columns with different stationary phases can often
Table 9.2 Comparing Laboratory and Process Gas Chromatographs.
Laboratory GC Process GC
Operating Environment: Indoor, safe, and stable. Outdoor, hazardous, and inconstant.
Earlier Models
Separations: Many known analytes. A few known analytes.
Sample Inject: By manual syringe. By automatic valve.
Column Types: Single packed column.
Single capillary column (later).
Dual and multiple packed columns.
Column Switching: Usually none. Complex multiple-valve arrangements.
Detector(s) Single detector, wide choice. Single detector, limited choice.
Several detectors (later).
Peak Identification: By retention time. By retention time.
Oven Temperature: Wide range, high limit.
Often programmed.
Narrow range, lower limit.Mostly isothermal.
Oven Type: Single oven with internal fan. Single oven; mostly air bath, but some using
the thermal mass type (airless).
Later Models
Measurements: Vast numbers of unknown analytes. Several known analytes.
Sample Inject: Automated syringe and valve injection. Multiple valve injections. Simple column trains.
Column Types: Single or dual capillary columns.
Two-dimensional chromatography.
Micropacked or capillary columns.
Several parallel dual-column systems.
Column Switching: Deans switch. Complex analyses divided into several simple
column systems, each with its own injector
and column valve (or Deans switch)
and detector.
Detector(s) Per PGC: Supports few detectors, many types. Supports many detectors, limited types.
Peak Identification: By spectrometric detector (confirms). By retention time (subject to error).
Oven Temperature: Wide range, very high limit.
Usually programmed temperature.
Narrow range, lower limit.
Mostly isothermal.
Oven Type: Single oven with internal fan. Multiple ovens; many airless.
1
Silcosteel is a trademark of Silco Tek Corporation.
History of the technique 235resolve several analytes faster than any single column could achieve. When
combined with column-switching techniques like backflush and heartcut,
different columns in series can quickly resolve almost any limited set of
designated analytes.
The separating power of dual stationary phases allows PGC applications
chemists to limit their search to about one dozen phases they know well.
Most column designers maintain a chart or database that gives them the
retention factor of all the industrial chemicals they are likely to encounter
on their chosen stationary phases. They may save this data as retention indi￾ces or more simply as retention times on standard columns, sometimes at
two column temperatures.
Given this data, Figure 9.1 shows an easy way to choose the relative effect
of each column. The chart has the retention times for each stationary phase
on the left and right vertical axes. Then, the vertical line with the bestspacing
of analyte retention times indicates the optimum combination of columns.
In selecting the best line, remember that later peaks will require a little more
spacing than the early ones.
After determining the desired residence times on each phase, one must
decide which phase shall be Columns 1 and 2, probably determined by
the retention of components that need to be backflushed or heartcut – also
clear from the diagram. Next, you’ll need the total length of column required
to get the desired resolution. While it’s possible to calculate that, it’s most
often estimated from experience and confirmed by experiment.
It often takes several practical trials to find the optimum length of each
column and this experimental work increases the cost of application engi￾neering. Each trial also incurs the cost of new columns with different lengths
or different liquid loadings. An option is to use a PGC that has multiple
250
200
150
Retention Time (s) 100
50
0
0 20 40 60
Percent of Phase B
80 100
Peak 1
Peak 2
Peak 3
Peak 4
Peak 5
Peak 6
The retention time for each component of the sample is determined for 
stationary phase A and stationary phase B on standard columns. The 
values for Phase A are on the left vertical axis and for Phase B on the 
right vertical axis. In this example, the vertical red line indicates that a 
combination of 30 % Phase A and 70 % Phase B will provide the best 
separation of all six components. 
Figure 9.1 Dual Phase
Selection Chart.
236 Columns in seriescolumn ovens operating at different temperatures. It may be cost-effective to
fine-tune the contribution of each column by simply changing the temper￾ature of a column.
The final task is to allow for the different carrier gas pressure in each col￾umn. When columns are in series each column works at a different pressure
and this affectsthe retention times of the peaks. The nextsection explainsthe
effect of pressure drop and how to adjust column lengthsto compensate forit.
Pressures in series columns
A multiple-column system inevitably comprises two or more columns con￾nected in series. In most process applications, the series columns have the
same internal diameter and are running at the same carrier flow rate but
they don’t experience the same pressure. Therefore, their carrier gas veloci￾ties must be different.
This effect is present even in a single column, but we don’t notice it. The
mass flow of carrier gas is constant throughout the column but the gas
expands as the pressure drops, causing its velocity to gradually increase.
As the velocity increases, the rate of pressure loss also increases, causing
a nonlinear pressure drop along the column. The carrier gas reaches its high￾est velocity and its highest rate of pressure loss at the column outlet.
From van Deemter (Equation 6.7), we know that column efficiency
depends on carrier gas velocity, but velocity varies along the column, so dif￾ferent parts of a column work at different efficiencies. This is one reason that
capillary columns are more efficient than packed columns; they exhibit
smaller pressure drop so every part of the column isrunning closer to its opti￾mum velocity.
Working with a single column, we observe only its average velocity and
its average efficiency. But when that column is in two parts, the different
velocities and efficiencies become apparent; the first column operates at a
lower velocity than the second column.
When working with multiple columns, it’simportant to recognize the
effects of low velocity on the first column. Peaks will elute more slowly
from the first column than one would expect, judging by its length.
The extent of the nonlinearity depends on the absolute pressure ratio
between the column inlet and the column outlet. In practice, it’s mainly
an issue with packed columns. This is because:
Packed columns are more common in serial configurations.
Packed columns are more flow resistive than capillary columns and tend
to run with higher pressure differentials.
The SCI-FILE: On Pressure Drop quantifies the effects of pressure drop in
series columns. While it may be unnecessary to study the SCI-FILE in detail,
note that the rest of this chapter will use the equations developed therein.
Pressures in series columns 237SCI-FILE: On Pressure Drop
Pressure loss in columns
The rate of pressure loss isn’t linear throughout
a column nor is the rate of velocity increase.
They both reach maximum values at the column
outlet. The extent of the nonlinearity depends
on the ratio of the absolute pressures at the inlet
and the outlet – a larger ratio results in a more
severe effect.
The equations for calculating the pressure and
velocity at specific points along a column use two
ratios:
Pr isthe ratio of column inlet pressure (pi) to col￾umn outlet pressure (po):
Pr = pi
po
(9.1)
Prz is the ratio of the pressure (pz) at a point (z)
to the column outlet pressure (po):
Prz = pz
po
(9.2)
Equation 9.3 calculates the pressure ratio (Prz) at
a specified point (z) along the column:
Prz = Pr
2 − Z
L
Pr
2 − 1 (9.3)
where Z is the distance from the column inlet to
point (z) and L is the column length (Ettre and
Hinshaw 1993, 51; Jennings et al. 1997, 120).
From Equation 9.3, Figure 9.2 plots gas pres￾sure versus the distance along the column for
various pressure ratios. As instantly evident, non￾linearity is more severe with large pressure
differentials.
Average pressure in a column
Due to the nonlinear pressure drop, the average
pressure in a column is higher than the average
of its inlet and outlet pressures. The average pres￾sure (p) is a function of outlet pressure (po):
p = po
j (9.4)
where j < 1.
The gas compression factor (j) is a function of
the pressure ratio (Pr) applied to the column:
j = 3
2
Pr
2 − 1
Pr
3 − 1 (9.5)
Equation 9.5 is important when working with
columns in series as each column has different inlet
and outlet pressures.
Average velocity in a column
In Equation 2.2, we measured the average carrier
velocity (u ) in a column by dividing the length
(L) of the column by the retention time (tM) of an
unretained component:
u = L
tM
(9.6)
10.00
8.00
6.00
4.00
2.00
0.00
0 0.2 0.4 0.6
Location along Column (Z/L)
0.8 1
Pressure Ratio (
Pz/po) The rate of pressure loss along a column is 
nonlinear. Most of the pressure drop and the 
concurrent velocity increase occurs near the end of 
the column, particularly for high pressure ratios.
Pr = 10:1
Pr = 8:1
Pr = 6:1
Pr = 4:1
Pr = 2:1
Figure 9.2 Nonlinear Pressure Drop.
238 Columns in seriesHowever, the average velocity is of limited use
for columns in series; we need to know the average
velocity in each column. Fortunately, there’s an
easy way to calculate the average velocity in a col￾umn from its average pressure.
Since the mass flow rate is constant throughout,
the carrier gas velocity (uz) at any point in a single
column is inversely proportional to the carrier gas
pressure (pz) at that point. Expressed relative to the
outlet pressure (po) and outlet velocity (uo):
uz
uo
= po
pz
(9.7)
Velocity in series columns
Equation 9.7 is also true for multiple columns in
series provided they have the same permeability;
that is, the same internal diameter and packing
density.2 If so, the average velocity (u) of the car￾rier gas in each column is inversely proportional to
its average pressure (p) in that column.
The average velocity in each column (designated
by subscripts 1 and 2) follows from Equation 9.7
applied to each column. As a ratio, it reduces to:
u2
u1
= p1
p2
(9.8)
Equation 9.8 is true for any column lengths.
Retention time in series columns
From Equation 9.6, the retention time (tM) of an
unretained component in a column of length (L) is:
tM = L
u
(9.9)
And from Equation 2.3, the retention time (tR) of
a retained component is:
tR = tM k + 1 (9.10)
where (k) is the retention factor of the retained
component.
Combining Equations 9.9 and 9.10, the retention
time of any component on any column is:
tR = L
u
k + 1 (9.11)
Therefore, if two columns operate in series and
have different stationary phases, and tR1/tR2 is the
ratio of retention times for a particular component
on Columns 1 and 2, then:
tR1
tR2
= L1
L2
u2
u1
k1 + 1
k2 + 1 (9.12)
Equation 9.12 is the general rule for the reten￾tion of a designated peak in series columns.
If the permeability of the two columns is the
same, we can combine Equations 9.8 and 9.12 to
give a similar expression based on the average pres￾sure in each column:
tR1
tR2
= L1
L2
p1
p2
k1 + 1
k2 + 1 (9.13)
Retention time in series columns
When both columns have the same stationary
phase, the retention factor of the peak is the same,
therefore:
k2 = k1
Then, from Equation 9.13:
tR1
tR2
= L1
L2
p1
p2
(9.14)
And if the two columns are also the same length:
L1 = L2
∴
tR1
tR2
= p1
p2
(9.15)
Equation 9.15 reveals that the retention time in
each column is proportional to its average carrier
2
This may not be true for packed columns or for particle-coated
capillaries due to variations in packing or coating geometry.
Pressures in series columns 239Example calculations
These examples use equations from the SCI-FILE above. Since most of these
equations use ratios of pressures, they can accept any units of measure, but
they must be expressed as absolute pressures. In this book, we use pressure
units of kilopascal (kPa) or bar (bar), where 100 kPa = 1 bar. To emphasize
the use of absolute pressure, we use the symbol bara for absolute pressure
and the symbol barg for gauge pressure.
Pressure in series columns
Let’s look at two identical columns connected in series with an inlet pressure
of 5 bara and an outlet pressure of 1 bara. Simple averaging predicts a junc￾tion pressure of 3 bara but Equation 9.3 gives a higher value; using Pr = 5 and
Z/L = 0.5, the relative pressure (Prz) at the junction is:
Prz = 25 − 0 5 25 − 1
Prz = 3 61
Then, from Equation 9.2:
pz = Prz po = 3 61 bara
pressure. Therefore, if the columns were identical,
Column 1 would retain each peak longer than Col￾umn 2. This would be undesirable in most separa￾tions, so the first column is usually shorter than the
second one. The main text gives some examples of
column length calculations.
Pressure effect on solubility
By combining Equations 9.8 and 9.15, we discover
that peak retention times in identical serial col￾umns differ only by their average carrier velocity:
tR1
tR2
= u2
u1
(9.16)
It may come as a surprise that the carrier pres￾sure in a column doesn’t have a direct effect on
the peak retention time.
The distribution constant (Kc) is the fundamen￾tal physical law governing the solubility of a gasin a
liquid, and hence, gas chromatographic behavior.
At equilibrium, the ratio of solute concentration
in the stationary phase [A]S to solute concentration
in the mobile phase [A]M is constant. Equation 4.4
defines the constant:
Kc = A S
A M
Note that the ratio of solute concentrations stays
constant, not the ratio of solute masses. Although a
change in carrier gas pressure automatically affects
the partial pressure of a solute vapor, it does not
change its concentration. Therefore, it has no effect
on solute solubility. Since the distribution constant
does not change, the gradual drop of carrier pres￾sure in a column doesn’t affect retention times
directly – but the associated increase in carrier
gas velocity certainly does.
240 Columns in seriesFrom this, we know that Column 1 has an inlet pressure (pi) of 5 bara and an
outlet pressure (po) of 3.61 bara. From Equation 9.1, its pressure ratio (Pr1) is:
Pr1 = pi
po
= 1 39
From Equation 9.5, its gas compressibility factor (j1) is:
j1 = 3
2
1 392 − 1
1 393 − 1
= 0 831
Then, from Equation 9.4, its average pressure (p1) is:
p1 = po
j1
= 4 34 bara
Now consider Column 2. Its inlet pressure is 3.61 bara and its outlet pressure
is 1.00 bara, therefore:
Pr2 = pi
po
= 3 61
j2 = 3
2
3 612 − 1
3 613 − 1
= 0 392
p2 = po
j2
= 2 55 bara
Figure 9.3 illustrates these data. Although the columns are identical, they are
working at different pressures. On average, the carrier pressure in Column 1
is 1.7 times higher than in Column 2:
p1
p2
= 4 34
2 55
=17
Fortwo identical columns connected in series, Table 9.3 showstheirjunction
pressure and the ratio of their average pressures(p1 p2) for variousinlet pres￾sures. The table assumes the second column vents to 1 bara, as most second
columns connect to a detector at atmospheric pressure.
Average
4.34 bara
Carrier Gas Vent Flow
5.00 bara
Column 1 Column 2
3.61 bara 1.00 bara
Average
2.55 bara
Ratio
1.7
Showing the pressure distribution in two identical columns connected in series
with an inlet pressure of 5 bara and an outlet pressure of 1 bara.
Figure 9.3 Pressure Distribution
in Series Columns.
Example calculations 241Velocity in equal columns
In our current example, the two columns are equal in length. With a carrier
gas inlet pressure of 5 bara, the ratio of average pressures is 1.7. From Equa￾tion 9.8, it follows that the average carrier velocity (u2) in Column 2 is 1.7
times faster than the average velocity (u1) in Column 1:
u2 = p1
p2
u1 = 1 7 u1
Retention time in equal columns
For column system design or troubleshooting, we need to predict the time a
component peak will spend in each column. For a peak on two identical col￾umns, any difference in retention is due only to their average carrier gas velo￾cities, which in turn depends on their average pressures. Equation 9.15
confirms that for equal columns, the retention time of a peak in Column 1
is 1.7 times longer than its retention time in Column 2:
tR1 = p1
p2
tR2 = 1 7 tR2
For example, if a component peak passesthrough both columns with an over￾all retention time of 270 s, we calculate its retention (tR) in each column as:
tR1 + tR2 = 270 s
tR1 = 1 7 tR2
tR2 = 100 s
tR1 = 170 s
Note the much longer time in Column 1.
Table 9.3 Average Pressures in Identical Series Columns.
Inlet
pi Bara
Column 1
p1 Bara
Junction
pz Bara
Column 2
p2 Bara
Ratio
p1 /p2
10 8.64 7.11 4.82 1.79
8 6.92 5.70 3.90 1.77
6 5.20 4.30 2.99 1.74
4 3.49 2.92 2.11 1.65
3 2.64 2.24 1.70 1.55
2 1.80 1.58 1.31 1.37
Junction and average column pressures for two identical columns in series, assuming outlet
pressure is 1.00 bara. These ratios apply to two equal columns of any length. Notice that the
ratio of average pressures is about the same for inlet pressures above 4 bara.
242 Columns in seriesChoosing column lengths
A long retention time on the first column is rarely appropriate in column
systems. Usually, Column 1 does a quick partial separation, then passes a
group of components to another column for final separation. Therefore, Col￾umn 1 is usually short – sometimes only one-tenth of the length of column 2.
For two columns with the same packing or coating and various length ratios,
Table 9.4 showsthe percentage of its overall retention time that a component
spends in Column 1. With a pressure ratio of 5.0, Column 2 must be 1.6 times
longer than Column 1 just to achieve an equal retention time.
It’s possible to build a simple computer program to calculate column
lengths (see Annino and Villalobos (1992, 339–360) but PGC column
designers usually rely on the trial-and-error method based on their experi￾ence of peak retention in serial columns.
The adjustment of PGC settings for timed events is always empirical.
Uncertainties in column construction and operation have an unpredicta￾ble effect on retention times. The packing or coating of serial columns
might not be exactly uniform, their endplugs may not exhibit the same
pressure drop, and the two columns might not be at exactly the same tem￾perature. Due to these random inconsistencies, the adjustment of column
valve timing is always a practical task requiring skill and understanding.
Even so, the calculations presented here may help you to visualize what’s
happening inside your columns and to improve your column design and
troubleshooting skills.
Column systems
Multiple-column systemsin PGCs comprise two or more columns and one or
more devices to direct different component peaks to different columns.
Table 9.4 Pressures and Retention Times for Columns in Series.
Length
L2/L1 Ratio
Col 1
p1 Bara
Junction
pz Bara
Col 2
p2 Bara
Ratio
p1 /p2 Time in Col 1
1 4.34 3.61 2.55 1.70 63 %
1.6 4.51 3.92 2.78 1.62 50 %
2 4.58 4.12 2.88 1.59 44 %
3 4.69 4.36 3.03 1.55 34 %
5 4.79 4.58 3.17 1.51 23 %
7 4.85 4.69 3.24 1.49 18 %
9 4.88 4.75 3.29 1.48 16 %
Showing the junction and average pressures for two similar columns of different length,
assuming the inlet pressure is 5.00 bara and the outlet pressure is 1.00 bara. The Time
column shows the percentage of its retention time that a peak spends in Column 1 when
both columns have identical packing or coating.
Column systems 243Traditional switching devices are mechanical, including diaphragm, rotary,
and slide valves using pneumatic or solenoid actuators.3
PGCs using capillary columns may use the pressure balance technique
introduced by Deans (1965, 1968) and now enhanced by electronic pressure
regulation.
PGCs can now host several detectors. This allows an applications engi￾neer to break a complex application into several simple column systems each
working independently to measure only a few of the analytes, a rapid￾analysis technique known as parallel chromatography. The individual
column systems each have a sample injector, two or more columns, a col￾umn switch, and a detector. They are variously known as “applets” or “col￾umn trains” and may be intermingled in a common oven or encapsulated for
easy maintenance. Parallel chromatography is a welcome simplification to
column system design.
The next two chapters describe the functions performed by column
switching and some key points in their design and usage. They fall into
two categories:
Those thatreverse the flow direction in a column, discussed in Chapter 10.
Those thatmaintainthe flow directionina column, discussed inChapter 11.
A complete column system will often combine functions. For instance, a
system using heartcut should also include a backflush to protect it from
strongly retained components.
Knowledge Gained
Multiple-column systems are effective in
PGCs to separate analytes in minimum anal￾ysis time.
Backflush removes with certainty all injected
compounds from columns before the next
injection.
Regrouping a class of compounds into a single
peak enables a single aggregate measurement.
Distribution of peaks on different stationary
phases achieves separations impossible on
one phase.
Heartcut can resolve low-ppm impurities in
99.99 % pure samples, not possible with a sin￾gle column.
Column switching can protect a column or
detector from damaging components in the
sample.
Process and laboratory GCs evolved to suit the
disparate needs of their users.
Laboratory GCs favored a capillary column
with temperature ramp, good for many
unknown peaks.
3
For an introduction to chromatographic valves, see Waters (2020, 157–181).
244 Columns in seriesDid you get it?
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 09
Q1. Which of these is NOT an advantage gained by running columns in series?
A. removing all injected compounds from the columns before injecting another
sample.
B. analyzing different components on independent parallel systems, each having
its own sample injector, column valve, columns, and detector.
C. achieving a complete separation of analytes faster than is possible by any sin￾gle stationary phase.
D. reliably measuring less than 100 ppm of an impurity in a 99.99 % pure proc￾ess fluid.
E. completing the analysis of several designated components faster than any
single column could achieve.
Q2. What is the housekeeping rule in process gas chromatography and what kind of
column system can satisfy it?
Q3. What is the general elution problem in gas chromatography and what are the two
options for overcoming it?
Some now use multiple columns in arrange￾ments called two-dimensional gas
chromatography.
Process GCs favored many isothermal packed
columns, good for measuring a few speci￾fied peaks.
Some now use capillary columns and temper￾ature-programmed column ovens.
Dual columns with different stationary
phases can separate a few analytes from
almost any sample.
Peak resolution on two phases may be opti￾mized simply by adjusting the column
temperatures.
Columns in series run at different pressures
and different carrier velocities.
The pressure drop along a column is nonlin￾ear, mostly occurring near the column exit.
Equation 9.3 gives the pressure at any point in
the column, and at the junction of two series
columns.
From this, one can calculate the inlet and out￾let pressure for each column.
The gas compression j-factor relates the aver￾age pressure to the column inlet and outlet
pressures.
The average velocity in any column is
inversely proportional to its average pressure.
The peak residence time in a column is
directly proportional to its average pressure.
The first column is at high pressure and peaks
move slowly, so it’s often shorter than the sec￾ond column.
Packed columns have more pressure drop
than capillaries and suffer more velocity
change.
A PGC may deploy several independent
applets, each measuring a few of the desired
analytes.
These parallel systems each have a simple col￾umn arrangement with dedicated injector
and detector.
Did you get it? 245Q4. Why have process gas chromatographs been slow to adopt the laboratory practice
of using mainly capillary columns?
Q5. What are two disadvantages of using identical columns in series that have the
same packing or coating?
Q6. Two columns having the same internal diameter and packing operate in series.
The second column is twice the length of the first column. Given that Column 1
inlet pressure is 3.0 barg and a Column 2 outlet pressure is zero barg:
A. What is the pressure at the junction of the two columns?
B. What is the average pressure in Column 1?
C. What is the average pressure in Column 2?
D. What is the average pressure in both columns combined?
Q7. In Question Q6, if an analyte peak has a 100 s retention time on Column 1, what
will be its retention time on both columns combined?
References
Further reading
You might like the paper by Villalobos and Annino (1992), one of the few published
papers on serial columns in PGCs.
For a good historical review on the development of the process gas chromatograph,
read Bostic and Clemons (2009).
If you would like more detail on the use of multiple-column systems in both labo￾ratory and process gas chromatographs, read the article by Mahler et al. (1995).
Finally, if you’re interested in the new laboratory GC techniques, you’ll enjoy the
detailed anthology edited by Snow (2020).
Cited
Annino, R. and Villalobos, R. (1992). Process Gas Chromatography. Instrument Soci￾ety of America.
Bostic, S.M. and Clemons, J.M. (2009). Online gas chromatography: Celebrating
50 years. Process and Control Engineering, 12 February 2009, 1–6. Accessed on
2024/08/03 at: https://pacetoday.com.au/50-years-online-gas-chromatograph/
Deans, D.R. (1965). An improved technique for back-flushing gas chromatographic
columns. Journal of Chromatography A 18, 477–481.
Deans, D.R. (1968). A new technique for heart cutting in gas chromatography. Chro￾matographia 1, 18–22. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02259005.
Dimandja, J.-M.D. (2020). Introduction and historical background: the “inside”
story of comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography. In Basic Multidi￾mensional Gas Chromatography (ed. N.H Snow), 1–40, London, UK: Aca￾demic Press.
Ettre, L.S. and Hinshaw, J.V. (1993). Basic Relationships in Gas Chromatography.
Cleveland, OH: Advanstar Communications.
Jennings, W., Mittlefehldt, E., and Stremple, P. (1997). Analytical Gas Chromatog￾raphy, Second edition. San Diego, CA: Academic Press
Liu, Z. and Phillips, J.B. (1991). Comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatogra￾phy using an on-column thermal modulator interface. Journal of Chromato￾graphic Science 29 (6), 227–231.
246 Columns in seriesMahler, H., Maurer, T., and Mueller, F. (1995). Multi-column systems in gas
chromatography. In: Chromatography in the Petroleum Industry, Journal of
Chromatography Library Volume 56 (ed. E.R. Adlard), 231–268. Amsterdam,
Netherlands: Elsevier.
McWilliam, I.G. and Dewar, R.A. (1958). Flame ionization detector for gas chroma￾tography. In Gas Chromatography 1958 (ed. D.H. Desty), 142–152. London, UK:
Butterworths Publications Ltd.
Simmons, M.C. and Snyder, L.R. (1958). Two stage gas-liquid chromatography.
Analytical Chemistry 30 (1), 32–55.
Snow, N.H. ed. (2020). Basic Multidimensional Gas Chromatography, Volume 12 in
the Separation Science and Technology series. London, UK: Academic Press.
Villalobos, R. and Annino, R. (1989). Series coupled capillary columns in process gas
chromatography – theory and practice. Paper 89-0311. In Proceedings of the 1989
Calgary Symposium 57–67. Research Triangle Park, NC: International Society of
Automation.
Waters, T. (2020). Process Gas Chromatographs: Fundamentals, Design and Imple￾mentation. Chichester, UK: John Wiley and Sons, Ltd.
Tables
9.1 A Lexicon of GC Methods.
9.2 Comparing Laboratory and Process Gas Chromatographs.
9.3 Average Pressures in Identical Series Columns.
9.4 Pressures and Retention Times for Columns in Series.
Figures
9.1 Dual Phase Selection Chart.
9.2 Nonlinear Pressure Drop.
9.3 Pressure Distribution in Series Columns.
Symbols
Symbol Variable Unit
[A]M Solute concentration in the mobile phase μg/L
[A]S Solute concentration in the stationary phase μg/L
[A]M Solute concentration in the mobile phase μg/L
j Gas compression factor none
k Retention factor none
Kc Distribution constant none
L Length of column m
pi Carrier gas pressure at column inlet bara
po Carrier gas pressure at column outlet bara
p Average carrier gas pressure in column bara
pz Carrier gas pressure at point (z) along column bara
Pr Ratio of carrier pressures at column inlet and outlet none
References 247Subscripts
Sub1 Pertaining to Column 1 in a series column system
Sub2 Pertaining to Column 2 in a series column system
Equations
9.1 Pr = pi
po
Column inlet/outlet pressure ratio.
9.2 Prz = pz
po
Ratio of pressure at point (z) to column
outlet pressure.
9.3 Prz = Pr
2 − Z
L
Pr
2 − 1 Pressure ratio at a specified point (z)
along the column.
9.4 p = po
j Average pressure in a column.
9.5 j = 3
2
Pr
2 − 1
Pr
3 − 1 Gas compression factor.
9.6 u = L
tM
Average carrier gas velocity in column.
9.7 uz
uo
= po
pz
Carrier gas velocity ratio at a specified
point (z) along the column.
9.8 u2
u1
= p1
p2
Average carrier velocities are inversely
proportional to average pressure.
9.9 tM = L
u
Retention time of an unretained
component.
9.10 tR = tM (k + 1) Retention time of a retained component.
9.11 tR = L
u
k + 1 Retention time of any component on any
column.
9.12
tR1
tR2
= L1
L2
u2
u1
k1 + 1
k2 + 1
General expression for relative retention
times on series columns.
9.13 tR1
tR2
= L1
L2
p1
p2
k1 + 1
k2 + 1
Retention times on series columns
having the same permeability.
9.14 tR1
tR2
= L1
L2
p1
p2
Retention on the same phase depends
on the column lengths and average
pressures.
9.15 tR1
tR2
= p1
p2
Retention on identical series columns is
proportional to their average pressures.
9.16 tR1
tR2
= u2
u1
Retention on identical series columns
is inversely proportional to average
velocity.
248 Columns in seriesTechnical terms
If you read the whole chapter, you should now know the meaning of these
technical terms:
absolute pressure general elution problem
average pressure heartcut methoda
average velocity heavies
backflush column system housekeeping rule
bara and barg modulator
comprehensive methoda parallel chromatography
correlogram regrouping column system
cycle time split injection
distribution column system two-dimensional GCa
gas compression factor
a
As used in Laboratory GCs.
For more information, refer to the Glossary at the end of the book.
References 24910
Backflush systems
“The backflush function is so useful in process chromatography that it’s
present in nearly all PGC column systems. Backflushing keeps the first
column clean and protects the second column from damaging chemicals
in the process sample, while also delivering the fastest analysis.”
Introduction
Backflush functions
Backflush is the most common function of serial column systems and
features in nearly all process gas chromatographs (PGCs), so it’s important
to thoroughly understand it. The primary reason backflush is so popular in
PGCs is the need for a housekeeping function. Backflushing will easily and
quickly remove all injected substances from the first column before injecting
another sample.
Another reason for a backflush system is to provide a guard column to
prevent reactive components from reaching the main analytical column. An
example is the necessary use of a Porapak T (or equivalent) guard column to
prevent water from reaching and deactivating a molecular sieve column.
Reversing the flow in a column can also regroup selected peaks for meas￾urement or further separation by a subsequent column.
The main varieties of the backflush technique are:
Backflush to vent.
Backflush to measure.
Backflush to regroup.
In addition, the backflush column contributes to the final separation of
analyte peaks. The second column completes the separation and sometimes
contains a different stationary phase. This adds to the power of a backflush
Process Gas Chromatography: Advanced Design and Troubleshooting, First Edition. Tony Waters.
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2025 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.system; two different columns in series can often accomplish separations
that no single column could achieve within the analysis time constraint.
Backflush to vent
The simplest backflush system uses two columns in series coupled to a 6-
port, 8-port, or 10-port valve. Figure 10.1 shows the popular 10-port valve
system that combines sample injection and backflush functions into one
valve. This single-valve system is always applicable for gas samples, but most
liquid samples need a separate sample injection valve as discussed below.
From Figure 10.1, it’s evident that actuation of the 10-port valve injects
the gas sample and places the two columns in series. The valve stays in
the inject position while the analyte peaks (for example, A and B) pass
through Column 1 and enter Column 2. At that time, the valve is deactuated
to reverse the carrier flow in Column 1 while sustaining an identical flow in
Column 2. From that moment onwards, the column system saves time by
doing two jobs at once; Column 2 completes the resolution of the analyte
peaks while Column 1 flushes all the heavies (for example, C and D) to
an atmospheric vent.
The simple explanation of backflush is straightforward. Although every
component remaining in Column 1 traveled a different distance along the
column, they all traveled for exactly the same time. Assuming, for the
moment, that the backward flow rate equals the forward flow rate, each
of these components takes the same time to return to the starting point,
regardless of how strongly the liquid phase retains them. Thus, all the
Sample Out
Sample In
Carrier Gas
Detector
Column 1
Restrictor
B/F Vent
D
Sample
Loop
Column 2 Detector 
Vent
Restrictor
Backflush
B A
D C
Showing the popular 10-port diaphragm valve in the deactuated state; other 10-port valves have an 
equivalent function. The valve has two positions. In the rest condition shown, the system is 
backflushing Column 1 and refilling the sample loop. Valve actuation connects the two columns in 
series and diverts the carrier gas through the sample loop to inject the sample into Column 1. The 
small peaks show the typical position of sample components just before and just after valve 
deactuation. 
Figure 10.1 Ten-port Backflush
Column System.
Introduction 251backflushed peaks elute from the column at exactly the same time and
emerge as a single composite peak.
Be sure to understand why the heavies peaks all come out of Column
1 at the same time, regardless of their retention time in Column 1.
After backflushing Column 1 for a time equal to the forward-flow time, the
center of the combined heavies peak reaches the front end of the column, so
half the peak is still in the column. A little more time (or a higher backflush
flow rate) is necessary to completely remove the heavies.
We shall see that this regrouping function is not perfect. Even so, the
backflush technique is a wonderful asset to a PGC because it removes all the
injected substances, even if we don’t know what they are.
In Figure 10.1, note the use of flow restrictors to control column flow
rates. The first restrictor has the same flow resistance as Column 1 and
ensures that the detector flow is the same in both valve positions. The second
restrictor sets the backflush flow rate, discussed in detail below. These flow
restrictors may be small needle valves or capillary tubing cut to the appro￾priate length. The latter method is cumbersome but may ultimately be more
reliable. In modern PGCs, electronic pressure regulators (EPRs) may replace
some of these passive flow restrictors.
The valve arrangements in Figures 10.1 and 10.3 illustrate an
important principle of column system design: upon power failure,
they put the columns into backflush mode and don’t inject any more
samples. Always ensure that loss of power or actuating gas leaves the
column system in safe mode.
1
Backflush to measure
The backflush-to-vent mode discards the heavies peak, venting it to atmos￾phere. The alternative backflush-to-detector mode allows the PGC to
regroup the later components and measure them as a composite heavies
peak, as shown in Figure 10.2.
There are two ways to do this.
In an older PGC that has only one detector, the backflush vent flow tees
into the flow from Column 2 and both flows mix together before entering the
detector. In this arrangement, the backflush peak must arrive at the detector
when no other peaks are eluting from Column 2. Often, it’s the first peak on
the chromatogram.
A modern PGC will dedicate a second detector to separately measure the
heavies peak in the backflush vent flow, as shown in Figure 10.3. The detec￾tion of the heavies is then independent of the main analysis and peak timing
is no longer an issue; both detectors can measure peaks concurrently.
1
The exception is a diaphragm valve actuated solely by the pressure of an actuating gas, with
no spring return. Loss of actuating gas pressure may leave all ports open to each other, poten￾tially damaging the columns.
252 Backflush systemsSample In
Carrier Gas
Injector
Detector
Column 1 Column 2 Detector 
Vent Flow D
D C
Restrictor #1
B A
Restrictor #2
Sample 
Volume
Sample Out
Backflush 
Vent Flow
Detector
(option)
D
INJ B/F
Showing two six-port diaphragm or rotary valves in the deactuated state. In the rest condition (blue connections), the system 
is backflushing Column 1 and refilling the sample loop. Actuation of the column valve (red connections) connects the two 
columns in series. A brief actuation of the injector valve then injects the sample into Column 1. When the desired analytes are 
in Column 2, deactivation of the column valve backflushes all the heavies from Column 1. It’s easier for a second detector to 
measure the heavies peak; otherwise, it may tee into a sole detector. The six-port injector shown is suitable for gas sample 
injection; liquid samples may use four-port rotary or plunger valves. 
Figure 10.3 Six-port Backflush Column System.
(a) (b)
15 20 25
4 6
5
1 2 3 1 propane
2 i-butane
3 n-butane
4 neo-pentane
5 i-pentane
6 n-pentane
1 C6+
1
30 35 (seconds) 15 20 25 (seconds)
On the chromatogram in Figure 10.2a, this micro-PGC measures paraffin impurities in natural gas within about 35 s. 
Concurrently, the analyzer backflushes the heavies from the first column into a second detector, regrouping them into a 
single C6+ peak. These chromatograms illustrate the rapid analysis achievable with capillary columns.
Figure 10.2 PGC Chromatogram using Backflush to Measure.
Source: Qmicro B.V. Reproduced with permission.
Introduction 253The calibration of a composite heavies peak cannot be exact because it
comprises multiple substances – some unknown – that have differing
detector sensitivities. Calibration is often based on a single substance in
the calibration sample that is commonly present in the process sample,
such as n-pentane. The measurement is then known as “total heavies as
n-pentane.” While slightly less accurate than measuring a single peak, this
measurement is often useful and it can become essential when normalizing
all measurements to sum to 100 %.
Pressure balance switching
Valveless column switching is an attractive option for a PGC. The Live Tee is
a device that can switch capillary or micropacked columns without a
mechanical valve and with virtually no extracolumn volume. It’s an adapta￾tion of the Deans Switch, which controls carrier gas flow by applying external
pressures to a special column coupling (Deans 1965, 1968).
To follow the flow paths in the Live Tee, refer to Figure 10.4. When
attached, the two columns are almost butt jointed and a narrow-bore capil￾lary tube enters the end of each column forming slim annular passages
between the outer diameter of the capillary and the inner diameter of the
column ends. Carrier gas must then flow from Column 1 into Column 2
via the capillary connector, wherein it incurs a small pressure drop.
The Live Tee has carrier gas inlets and vents on both its upstream (Pm–)
and downstream (Pm+) sides. The upstream vent is known as the Cut Vent.
Chapter 11 will discuss its function in more detail. It usually vents via a
restrictor to the atmosphere or to a detector. The downstream vent is known
as the Purge Vent and normally connects via another restrictor to the main
EPR EPR
Column 1 Column 2
Cut Vent Purge Vent
Pm– Pm+
Measured 
Components
Unmeasured 
Components
This mode allows the measured peaks into Column 2 prior to backflushing Column 1. The 
electronic pressure regulators (EPR) are set so that Pm– is higher than Pm+, causing carrier gas 
from Pm– to flow through the connecting capillary, taking the flow from Column 1 with it (red 
arrows). See the main text for a full explanation.
Figure 10.4 Live Tee in Pass￾through Mode.
254 Backflush systemsdetector to act as makeup or fuel gas. Some applications have these vent con￾nections reversed.
A Live Tee works by adjusting the Column 1 inlet pressure (not shown)
and the Pm– and Pm+ pressures applied to the tee. In the pass-through mode
shown in Figure 10.4, carrier gas flowing from Column 1 to Column 2 via the
capillary tube creates a slight pressure drop. An EPR then sets the pressure
on the Pm– inlet slightly higher than the outlet pressure of the upstream col￾umn. This creates a carrier gas flow into the inlet which purges the annular
space between the inner column wall and the capillary connector, adding a
small increment to the carrier flow going into Column 2. Some of the added
gas exits via the cut vent restrictor.
In this mode, carrier gas flows through Column 1 in the normal way and
analyte peaks pass from Column 1 into Column 2.
Meanwhile, the downstream EPR sets the gas pressure on the Pm+ inlet
slightly higher than the outlet of the capillary connector, causing carrier gas
to flow through the annular space between the column and capillary and
adding another small increment of flow to the main column. The small flows
introduced to the column at both sides of the tee eliminate unswept dead
volumes to prevent any broadening of peaks as they pass through.
To backflush Column 1, a valve or EPR (not shown) drops the column
inlet pressure low enough to allow flow of carrier gas from the Pm– side
of the live tee backward through Column 1 and out the backflush vent as
shown in Figure 10.5. If the PGC uses split injection, the splitter vent will
usually double as a backflush vent, but in the case of direct injection, a pneu￾matic valve can open to induce backflush flow (Siemens 2008, 2-89–2-94).
EPR EPR
Column 1 Column 2
Cut Vent Purge Vent
Pm– Pm+
Backflushed 
Components
Measured 
Components
This mode backflushes Column 1 and continues the constant flow though Column 2. To initiate 
backflush, a valve (not shown) vents the Column 1 head pressure via a restrictor or detector, 
reversing the flow in Column 1. The reversed differential pressure causes carrier from Pm+ to flow 
through the connecting capillary to backflush Column 1 (green arrow). See the main text for a full 
explanation.
Figure 10.5 Live Tee in
Backflush Mode.
Introduction 255While highly effective and reliable when operating correctly, the Live Tee
setup procedure is more complex than a valved system and may be beyond
the capabilities of some analyzer technicians. In addition, it relies on the per￾formance of the EPRs to maintain constant pressure under varying flow con￾ditions. Note that a Live Tee backflushes the first column at a much lower
pressure than its forward flow. We shall see this is a good way to remove all
the heavies from the column, but it’s not so effective at regrouping the hea￾vies peaks for composite measurement.
In a PGC, the Live Tee typically provides both backflush and heartcut
functions. When the application needs only backflush a simplified version
called a “Back-T” is adequate. This version doesn’t have a capillary tube
between the columns and has a single EPR inlet and a single vent. The
EPR is set slightly higher than the exit pressure of Column 1 to ensure a
small inlet flow. Since the EPR then maintains a constant pressure at the
column junction, venting the Column 1 inlet pressure to atmosphere is suf￾ficient to reverse its flow direction, thereby backflushing the column to an
atmospheric vent (Siemens 2008, 4-127–4-139).
Setting the backflush time
We use a trial-and-error procedure to find the optimum backflush event
time. The goal is to ensure the last analyte peak from Column 1 is fully into
Column 2 before initiating backflush. Adjust the timing while analyzing a
constant sample that contains the analyte most strongly retained by Column
1. Use the process sample if possible. If using a separate test sample, itshould
have a composition similar to the process sample; analytes blended in nitro￾gen are unlikely to have the same retention times on the first column.
Many samples contain a high concentration of one substance, called the
major component. Typically, the tail of this component is not completely
backflushed and a small background amount remains in the columns. It
takes a few analysis cycles for the retained amount to settle and form a
steady-state background level, adding to the ever-present column bleed. This
background level may affect peak retention times, so don’t adjust any event
time settings until the PGC completes several analysis cycles.
Some systems include an intercolumn detector, strangely known as an
“ITC”, to monitor the effluent from Column 1. In column systems using
valve switching, the peaks exiting the first column will pass through this
thermal conductivity detector and enter Column 2 unchanged. In systems
using Live Tee switching, the gasfrom the purge vent may flow into the main
detector to provide the same function. The ITC chromatogram may be help￾ful for setting the backflush timing. However, the partial separation of com￾ponents on Column 1 can sometimes make it difficult to interpret the ITC
signal.
When checking the valve timing, temporarily increase the backflush
event time by two seconds and confirm the area of the last analyte peak
256 Backflush systems(or its measured concentration) does not increase. When measuring peak
area, peak height is an unreliable indicator of valve timing because the back￾flush might remove a large chunk of the peak tail with no effect on the peak
height. If the later backflush event has no effect on peak area the timing is
correct. Don’t forget to reset the event time.
Stuttering backflush
Backflush can also assist in a difficult separation. A short-duration backflush
delays a few analyte peaks, briefly moving them backward in Column 1, and
then forward again into the next column. Of course, the backflush valve
must be separate from the injector valve and has more work to do, poten￾tially reducing its reliability. This stuttering technique allows some time
forthe peaksin Column 2 to move ahead of those briefly delayed in Column 1.
Once all the analyte peaks have eluted from Column 1, the analyzer performs
a complete backflush-to-vent or backflush-to-detector routine.
Parallel chromatography
A modern PGC will often employ parallel chromatography to analyze a com￾plex sample. Several independent modules operate in parallel, each designed
to measure a few of the analytes. Typically, each self-sufficient module com￾prises a single 10-port valve, two columns, and a detector, and is set up to
measure a few of the analytes and backflush all later peaks. Effectively, each
module is a separate gas chromatograph tasked with a simple analysis. These
individual modules are easier to design and simpler to maintain than trying
to measure all the analytes from one sample injection. PGC manufacturers
can also save their custom engineering costs by creating standard modules
for common applications.
Regrouping systems
A three-column system, as in Figure 10.6, can employ backflush of the mid￾dle column to group classes of analytes together for composite measurement
(Nuss 1963; Villalobos and Turner 1963).
To measure total C4 and total C5, for instance, the system uses nonpolar
columns to keep all the C5 peaks separate from all the C4 peaks. Early peaks,
such as C3 and lighter, pass through Column 2 and enter Column 3 before
the column valve actuates. When all C4 peaks are in Column 2 and the C5
peaks are still in Column 1, the column valve actuates, reversing the flow in
Column 2 and loading the C4 peaks into Column 3 in reverse order.
Meanwhile, the C5 peaks enter the other end of Column 2. When the valve
deactuates, these C5 peaks enter Column 3 in reverse order. Column 3
negates the separation done by Column 1, bringing each batch of peaks back
together again.
Introduction 257Although not shown in Figure 10.6, a regrouping system will usually
backflush Column 1 after the last analyte enters Column 2.
To determine the length of Column 3, calculate the average pressure in
each column and adjust the length of Column 3 to achieve retention times
equal to Column 1. From Chapter 9, we know that Column 3 should be at
least 1.6 times longer than Column 1. Column 2 should be as short as pos￾sible to ensure effective regrouping but long enough to contain each set of
analyte peaks coming out of Column 1. It might need a higher liquid loading
or a different liquid phase altogether.
Regrouping column systems rely on critical column lengths to work suc￾cessfully and may not be reliable in the long term. They’re also susceptible to
setup errors that end up measuring the wrong peaks. A modern PGC is more
likely to employ a simple column system to measure the individual compo￾nents and to sum them electronically, even if not fully resolved.
(a)
Injector
Carrier Gas Column 1 Column 3 Detector
Vent Flow
Column 2
Detector
D
C5 C4
(b)
Injector
Carrier Gas Column 1 Column 3 Detector
Vent Flow
Column 2
Detector
D
C5
C5
C4
This system uses backflush to regroup classes of analytes together for composite measurement. 
In Figure 10.6a, the first class (e.g. the C4 peaks) enters Column 2 which is long enough to hold them all, while the second 
class (e.g. the C5 peaks) stays in Column 1. 
In Figure 10.6b, actuation of the column valve backflushes the C4 peaks from Column 2 into Column 3 in reverse order. 
Meanwhile, the C5 peaks enter the other end of Column 2. 
Then, deactuation of the valve backflushes the C5 peaks into Column 3, again in reverse order. Column 3 is exactly long 
enough to undo the separation caused by Column 1 regrouping each class together for measurement.
Figure 10.6 A Regrouping Column System. (a) Components to be regrouped are loaded into Column 2. (b) Components in
Column 2 are backflushed into Column 3 for regrouping.
258 Backflush systemsBackflush theory and practice
Limitations
The backflush technique yields important benefits in process chromatogra￾phy, so the theory and practice of backflushing developed rapidly alongside
the first commercial PGCs (Villalobos et al. 1961; McEwan 1964).
Simple backflush theory predicts an exact regrouping of peaks after flow
reversal, but regrouping is never perfect. It’s instructive to discover why.
Consider a backflush system with the reversed carrier flow in Column 1
set equal to its forward flow; that is, the Column 1 flow rate is the same in
both valve positions. We have seen that each heavies peak should then
migrate backward through Column 1 at the same speed as it went in. All
the heavies peaks would then arrive at the front end of the column at exactly
the same time, regardless of their various retention times on that column. If it
worked like that, regrouping would recombine all the heavies peaks remain￾ing in Column 1 as a single composite peak.
In practice, backflush doesn’t regroup the heavies precisely. Strangely,
the more strongly retained peaks elute first, followed by those less strongly
held; in Figure 10.3, Peak D beats Peak C to the end of the column. This effect
is also visible in the real chromatogram in Figure 10.2. The failure to regroup
is at first surprising. The explanation comes down to pressure variations
within the columns:
Peak C travels almost the entire length of the first column thereby experi￾encing an average carrier gas pressure and velocity about equal to those
for the whole column. When the flow direction reverses, Peak C again
travels the length of the column, so its forward and reverse retention
times are about equal – as expected.
Peak D enters the column at full carrier gas pressure and exits at lower
pressure and higher velocity. Therefore, its reverse retention time is less
than its forward retention time and it elutes slightly before Peak C.
When backflushing to vent, the premature elution of the heavier peaks is
a good feature as it guarantees the removal of all injected components. If we
ensure the removal of Peak C, the backflush is certain to remove all other
heavies – whatever they are.
To guarantee the removal of heavies, most chromatographers set the
backflush flow from 50 to 100 % higher than the forward flow. Unfortu￾nately, this extra flow in the backflush column reduces its exit pressure
and allows a strongly retained peak (like Peak D) to elute even faster than
one lessstrongly retained (like Peak C), aggravating the regrouping problem.
Instead of increasing the backflush flow rate, it’s better to design the
columns to ensure the backflow period is longer than the forward-flow
period. Given more time, backflushing guarantees the removal of all heavies
without additional flow rate. Ultimately, it’s necessary for the net flow in
Backflush theory and practice 259Column 1 to be backward, and the designer can accomplish this with more
time or more flow.
The net carrier flow direction in a backflush column must be back￾ward, so any traces of heavy components move inexorably toward
the backflush vent.
If a PGC starts the backflush after the half-time point, it becomes necessary
to increase the backflush flow rate to compensate for the shortage of time.
We shall see that this practice may be indicative of a poor column design
or simply due to a bad habit. It wastes carrier gas and increases the pressure
pulse felt by the column each time the valve switches.
Another pressure effect is the sudden inrush of gas that occurs at the
instant of flow reversal. The backflush valve reversesthe column flow, apply￾ing full carrier pressure to the tail end of Column 1. As the pressure gradient
reverses, there is a sudden inflow of gas at one end of the column and a sud￾den outflow at the other end. In our example, Peaks C and D are near the
ends of the first column, so they would both get a short velocity boost due
to these transient increases of carrier flow. This is another potential cause
of ineffective regrouping.
Column design and operation
In general, the column designer has three options:
Use the same packing or coating in both columns.
Use a nonpolar Column 1 and a polar Column 2.
Use a polar Column 1 and a nonpolar Column 2.
Using the same stationary phase
When both columns contain the same packing or coating, the backflush
function has only one task: to remove the heavies from Column 1. The
designer chooses a stationary phase and decides the total column length nec￾essary to separate the analyte peaks from each other and from any other
components that might be present. Generally, this is possible only when
measuring a few light components – the separation of heavier analytes
becomes difficult on a single liquid phase because the number of dissimilar
molecules increases rapidly with molar weight.
The designer then apportions part of the total length to each column.
Generally, the two columns must not be equal in length, yet we often see
backflush systems with two identical columns. This is poor design. With
equal columns, we know from Table 9.4 a peak will spend 63 % of the anal￾ysis time in Column 1 and only 37 % in Column 2. If the last analyte peak
fully elutes from Column 1 in 126 s, it will zoom through Column 2 and fully
elute in 74 s for an analysis time of 200 s. Meanwhile, an equal-flow
260 Backflush systemsbackflush will take another 126 s for a total of 252 s plus a little extra time to
fully elute the composite heavies peak. The analysis is complete in 200 s but
the cycle time must extend to about 270 s, an increase of 35 %.
Now we see a reason for chromatographers to increase the backflush flow
rate: it might be to compensate for poor design. Let’s see how we might do
better.
Given a total column length adequate for good analyte resolution, how
should we divide that length between the two columns? We already know
that the first column should be shorter than the second column, so let’s con￾sider a length ratio of 1.6. From Table 9.4, we see that peak retention times
on each column will then be equal, in our example 100 s each.
Note that the table is based on a column head pressure of 5 bara, so you
might have to recalculate a column length ratio for your actual inlet
pressure.
Now, the last analyte fully elutes from Column 1 in 100 s and is com￾pletely clear of Column 2 in an additional 100 s, for the same 200 s analysis
time. Backflush also elutes the heavies in 100 s, synchronizing the analysis
and cycle times. However, to completely clear the column, the backflush will
need a little extra time or perhaps a little higher flow rate.
To avoid having a higher backflush flow consider a higher length ratio,
perhaps 2.0 would be enough? Look again at Table 9.4. When the second
column is twice the length of the first column, a peak that fully exits both
columns in 200 s will now exit the first column in 88 s (44 % of the cycle
time) and the second column in 112 s. The backflush now has 112 s to flush
out the heavies, 24 s longer than the forward flow. This is a good design – it
saves carrier gas and is gentle with the columns.
The final constraint is the need for Column 1 to separate the last analyte
from the following unmeasured component. If Column 1 is too short, it may
not have enough resolution to separate and backflush the following compo￾nent and part of that component will enter Column 2. Ifso, it willseparate on
Column 2 and appear at the end of the chromatogram as an unmeasured
partial peak. Some chromatographers like to see this, as the size of the partial
peak gives a very good indication that the backflush timing is correct or not.
But it does increase the cycle time.
The other approach is to make Column 1 long enough to fully separate
the first backflushed peak from the last analyte peak. If that results in exces￾sive analysis time, there isjustification for increasing the backflush flow rate.
Using different stationary phases
A common arrangement is a nonpolar first column followed by a polar sec￾ond column. For example, the nonpolar column might retain and then back￾flush the heavy hydrocarbons allowing the polar column to separate some
alcohol peaks from the remaining light hydrocarbons. In effect, the back￾flush clears a space on the chromatogram for the alcohol peaks.
Backflush theory and practice 261The opposite arrangement of a polar column followed by a nonpolar one
is less common, but useful for backflushing the polar components before
separating the nonpolar components. For example, the polar column might
retain and then backflush the aromatics, clearing a space for the nonpolar
column to separate the nonaromatic peaks in boiling point order.
A worked example
Calculated backflush event timing
For backflush to work as desired, the column valve must initiate the back￾flush at exactly the right time. This eventtime is one of the Method settings
you program into the PGC controller. In actual practice, the optimum back￾flush time is set by trial and error, but it’s easier to troubleshoot if you can
visualize what’s happening inside the columns. To gain that understanding,
we offer a worked example of calculations one can perform to discover the
optimum backflush event time and analysis cycle time. By working through
the math, we will discover why the heavies peaks do not exactly regroup
when backflushed.
Please realize this mathematical approach is only to enhance your
understanding; it’s not intended as an exact procedure for column
design or maintenance.
Consider a backflush column system like the one in Figure 10.3. Let’s start
with these assumptions:
Both columns use the same packing or coating.
The second column is twice as long as the first column.
The carrier gas pressure at Column 1 inlet is 4.00 bara.
The carrier gas pressure at Column 2 outlet is 1.00 bara.
Peaks A and B are analyte peaks and the overall retention time of Peak
B is 180 s.
Peaks C and D are backflushed from Column 1 and when backflush
starts, Peak D is half the distance down the column as Peak C.
In a backflush system, Column 1 must fully separate all the slow-eluting
heavies peaks from the desired analyte peaks. Figure 10.3 illustrates this key
requirement by arbitrarily showing Peaks A and B continuing to the detector
while Peaks C and D flow backward to the backflush vent. The resolution
created by Column 1 between the last analyte peak (B) and the first heavies
peak (C) is critical.
262 Backflush systemsValley point
Ideally, the PGC should initiate backflush when all the molecules of Peak B
have entered the second column and no molecules of Peak C have left the
first column – in other words, right at the valley point between Peak B
and Peak C.
Valley points move through a column in the same way that peaks move.
To grasp that concept, it’s helpful to imagine that a marker peak exists
between Peaks B and C, and the marker peak has a retention time coincident
with the valley point. Let’s call it Peak V. Then, the ideal time to initiate
backflush is the retention time for Peak V on Column 1.
To ensure complete separation of B and C molecules, Column 1 should
deliver an adequate resolution between them. Asshown in Figure 10.7, a res￾olution of Rs = 2 is enough to completely separate similar-sized peaks. In
practice, more resolution is desirable, and it may be necessary if the peaks
differ in size. You can adapt these calculations to suit any desired resolution.
Working from the desired resolution, estimate the location of Peak B and
Peak C at the instant of backflush initiation. Recall from Equation 2.5 that
resolution (Rs) is a function of peak separation (S) and base width (wb), both
measured in distance units:
Rs = S
wb
To get a resolution of Rs = 2, the separation between Peaks B and C must be
twice the average peak width. Therefore, when the valley point reaches the
Valley Measured
Point
87.4 s
Rs= 2.0
Backflushed
Column 1 Column 2
“PEAK”
V
PEAK
C
PEAK
B
wb wb
Distance:
Pressure:
0.300
3.39
0.333
3.32
0.367
3.24
ratio
bara
Shows the idealistic location of peaks at the instant of backflush. The fictitious 
“Peak V” is the valley point between the last analyte peak (B) to exit Column 1 
and the next peak (C), which is backflushed. From the desired analysis time 
and the average column pressures, we estimate the backflush event time. In 
this example, the calculated event time is 87.4 s. In reality, it would then be 
necessary to optimize the setting by experiment. 
Figure 10.7 Idealized Backflush
Event Setting.
A worked example 263end of Column 1, it has traveled one-third of the total column length (L) and
the center of Peak B must be one base width ahead of it. That puts the center
of Peak B at a distance (ZB) from the inlet of Column 1:
ZB = 0 33 L + wb
At the same instant, the center of Peak C must be one base width behind the
valley point, at a distance (ZC) from the inlet of Column 1:
ZB = 0 33 L − wb
These deductions assume the base widths of Peaks B and C are about the
same. The width of the marker Peak V would also be the same. Find the base
width of Peak V in distance units by rearranging Equation 2.26 to express
base width as a function of its plate number (N) and retention distance (ZV):
wb = 4 ZV
N
For a short, packed column a conservative estimate of plate number is 1600,
giving a Peak V base width (wb) of ZV/10, or 10 % of its retention distance. If
using more efficient columns, adjust this number to suit. On this basis, the
base width of our imaginary Peak V is:
wb = 0 033 L
And the locations of Peak B and Peak C are:
ZB = 0 367 L
ZC = 0 300 L
Figure 10.7 illustrates these peak locations. This data is the basis for calcu￾lating the average carrier gas pressure and velocity experienced by each
peak. The next section estimates the backflush event time simply by calcu￾lating the retention time of Peak V on Column 1.
Timed events
In any backflush system, the PGC processor must issue two timed com￾mands, start backflush and start next analysis (that is, inject next sample).
When the columns have the same packing or coating, both of these events
depend on the timing of the valley point, “Peak V”:
The start backflush event should occur when the valley point reaches the
end of the first column.
The start next analysis event should occur when the valley point reaches
the end of the second column.
264 Backflush systemsIdeally, the analysis ends when the valley point reaches the detector. Of
course, it’s not a valley anymore because no sample molecules can elute after
this time – they’re all backflushed. That’s why it’s safe to inject the next
sample.
The following calculations use equations from the SCI-FILE On Pressure
Drop in Chapter 9.
To evaluate the valley point timing, start by calculating the carrier gas
pressure ratio at the junction of Column 1 and Column 2. In this example,
the column inlet pressure (pi) is 4.00 bara and the vent pressure (po) is 1.00
bara giving an overall pressure ratio (Pr) of 4.00.
By Equation 9.3, the junction pressure ratio (Prz) is:
Prz = 16 − 0 333 × 16 − 1
Prz = 3 32
From Equation 9.2, the actual junction pressure is:
pz = Prz po = 3 32 bara
This is what we now know:
Column 1 has an inlet pressure of 4.00 bara and an outlet pressure of
3.32 bara, for a pressure ratio Pr = 1.21.
Column 2 has an inlet pressure of 3.32 bara and an outlet pressure of
1.00 bara, for a pressure ratio Pr = 3.32.
The columns together have an inlet pressure of 4.00 bara and an outlet
pressure of 1.00 bara, for a pressure ratio Pr = 4.00.
Now calculate the average pressure in each column. First, use
Equation 9.5 to work out the compressibility factor (j) for each column
individually and for both columns together:
j1 = 3
2
1 212 − 1
1 213 − 1
= 0 904
j2 = 3
2
3 322 − 1
3 323 − 1
= 0 423
j1+2 = 3
2
4 002 − 1
4 003 − 1
= 0 357
Then, from Equation 9.4, calculate the average carrier gas pressure (p) in
each case:
p1 = 3 32
0 904 = 3 67 bara
p2 = 1 00
0 423 = 2 37 bara
A worked example 265p1 + 2 = 1 00
0 357 = 2 80 bara
From these average pressures, calculate the retention time of Peak V on each
column. For columns with the same packing or coating, Equation 9.13 sim￾plifies to:
tR1
tR1 + 2
= L1
L1 + 2
p1
p1+2
In this example, the desired cycle time is 200 s, which defines the retention
time (tR1+2) of Peak V on both columns. Therefore, the retention time (tR1) of
Peak V on Column 1:
tR1 = 200 ×
1
3
×
3 67 bara
2 80 bara = 87 4 s
And the retention times of Peak V on Column 2 is:
tR2 = 200 − 87 4 = 112 6 s
Table 10.1 summarizes these data. The backflush event time is 87.4 s, or
43.7 % of the cycle time. That leaves 112.6 sfor backflushing the heaviesfrom
Column 1, about 29 % longer than their time going in. This is good column
design.
Table 10.1 Calculation Data for Backflush Event Time.
Serial Pressure Effects
Forward Flow
Peak V Peak B
Variable Equation Column 1 Column 2
Both
Columns
Traveled
Column
Remaining
Column Unit
Peak migration
distance
(Z/L) 0.333 0.667 1.00 0.367 0.633 ratio
Inlet pressure (pi) 9.3 4.00 3.32 4.00 4.00 3.24 bara
Outlet pressure (po) 9.3 3.32 1.00 1.00 3.24 1.00 bara
Pressure ratio (Pr) 9.1 1.21 3.32 4.00 1.23 3.24 ratio
Compression factor (j) 9.5 0.904 0.423 0.357 0.892 0.432 ratio
Average pressure (p) 9.4 3.67 2.37 2.80 3.63 2.32 bara
Retention time (tR) 9.13 87.4 112.6 200.0 87.4 96.3 s
Backflush start and
finish times
87.4 200.0 Retention time = 183.7 s
This data illustrates the calculation of backflush event time, as described in the text. Starting data (bold) includes the carrier
gas inlet and outlet pressures, desired analysis time, and the relative lengths of the two columns. Both columns have the same
internal diameter and the same packing or coating. The “Peak V” data is for the valley point between the measured Peak B and
the backflushed Peak C.
266 Backflush systemsPeak B retention time
The calculation of peak location and movement is much the same as out￾lined above. Follow this procedure:
Estimate the location of the peak at a particular time of interest.
Calculate the pressure at that location, using Equation 9.3.
Calculate the pressure ratiosfrom column inlet to peak location and from
peak location to column outlet.
Calculate the average pressure experienced by the peak when migrating
to that location.
Calculate the pressure ratio and average pressure in both columns
combined.
From the retention distance yet to travel and the average carrier gas pres￾sures, estimate the retention time of the peak.
The first step is to estimate the location of the peak at a particular time of
interest. In this example, we know from Figure 10.7 that:
Peak B has migrated 0.367 of the column length when the backflush initi￾ates at 87.4 s into the cycle.
Therefore, Peak B has 0.633 of the column length yet to go.
Calculate the carrier gas pressure at the Peak B location using
Equation 9.3. Then use Equation 9.2 to find the pressure ratios across the
column lengths the peak has already traveled and has yet to travel.
Here are the numbers for Peak B:
Pressure at the start of column is 4.00 bara.
Pressure at the current peak location is 3.24 bara.
Therefore, the pressure ratio already traveled is 1.23.
Pressure at the end of column is 1.00 bara.
Therefore, the pressure ratio yet to travel is 3.24.
Apply Equations 9.4 and 9.5 to get the average pressures experienced by
the peak. Table 10.2 lists the calculated values. Here are the key results:
Average pressure Peak B has traveled is 3.63 bara.
Average pressure Peak B is yet to travel is 2.32 bara.
Finally, estimate the time it takes for Peak B to reach the detector by
applying the ratios of average pressures and column lengths, per
Equation 9.13. Here’s how it works out:
The peak has already traveled for 87.4 s.
A worked example 267The remaining travel distance is longer by the ratio 0.633/0.367.
The remaining average pressure is lower by the ratio 2.32/3.63.
Apply Equation 9.13 to find the retention time of Peak B on Column 2.
Because it’s the same peak on the same liquid phase k2 = k1. So the only fac￾tors affecting this retention time are the column length ratio and the average
pressure ratio:
tR2 = tR1
L2
L1
p2
p1
tR2 = 87 4 ×
0 633 L
0 367 L
×
2 32 bara
3 63 bara = 96 3 s
Thus,
The additional peak travel time is 96.3 s.
The overall retention time of Peak B is 183.7 s.
The center of Peak B arrives at the detector 16.3 s before the end of the
analysis. This is perfect column design! In practice, the cycle time may be
extended to allow for other functions before the next sample injection.
Regrouping effectiveness
To calculate the time necessary to flush out the backflushed peaks, follow the
same procedure as used above. Start by estimating where the peaks are at the
Table 10.2 Calculation Data for Backflushed Peaks.
Pressure Effects Column 1
Variable Eqn
In Forward Flow In Backward Flow
Peak B Peak C Peak D Peak C Peak D Unit
Peak migration distance (Z/L) 0.367a 0.300a 0.150 0.300 0.150 ratio
Starting pressure (pi) 9.3 4.00 3.94 3.64 bara
Ending pressure (po) 9.3 3.24 3.39 3.71 3.32 bara
Pressure ratio (Pr) 9.1 1.23 1.18 1.08 1.19 1.10 ratio
Compression factor (j) 9.5 0.892 0.916 0.962 0.913 0.953 ratio
Average pressure (p) 9.4 3.63 3.70 3.86 3.64 3.48 bara
Retention time (tR) 9.13 87.4 85.8 78.8 s
Backflushed peaks separation 7.0 s
Total retention time 183.7 173.2 166.2 s
a
From Figure 10.7.
Illustrating the calculation of peak movement in forward and backflush modes, as described in the text. Data in bold are from
Table 10.1. Both columns have the same internal diameter and the same packing or coating. The data show that Peak D reaches
the end of the backflush column seven seconds before Peak C, causing an imperfect regrouping of the backflushed peaks.
268 Backflush systemsinstant of backflush. In this example, Figure 10.7 shows Peak C has reached
0.300 of the column length and it’s given that Peak D is at half that distance.
Next, use Equation 9.3 to calculate the pressure at those locations. Then
compute the pressure ratios and the average pressures each peak experiences
over its distance traveled in the forward direction. Of course, you already
know the time of travel – it’s the time before the backflush event, 87.4 s.
Now consider the backward travel. During backflush, the column has
the same starting and ending pressures, but in reverse. At the instant of
backflush, you know the location of Peak C and Peak D. Again, use
Equation 9.3 to find the pressure at those peak locations. Then calculate their
pressure ratios and average pressures during backflush.
Each peak travels the same distance forward and backward. To get their
travel times, simply multiply the forward travel time of each peak (87.4 s) by
its ratio of average pressures in backward and forward travel.
These calculations are not difficult but are tedious to do manually. It’s
best to set up a simple spreadsheet to do the job. Check your answers with
the data given in Table 10.2. You should find that Peak D reaches the back￾flush detector about seven seconds before Peak C, causing partial separation
of the backflushed peaks:
The overall retention time of Peak C is 173.2 s.
The overall retention time of Peak D is 166.2 s.
Regrouping column
A PGC measuring total heavies might include a short additional column
before the detector to fully regroup them. In the present example, for
instance, it would be easy to calculate the add-on column length necessary
to retain Peak D exactly seven seconds longer than it retains Peak C. While
effective for a few known components, this practice is risky because a com￾ponent strongly retained in Column 1 would take a long time to transit the
extra column. It’s better to improve regrouping by minimizing the pressure
drop across Column 1. Make it as short as possible and set the backflush flow
equal to the forward flow. In a difficult application, it might be effective to
increase the permeability of Column 1 by using a coarser mesh size or a lar￾ger internal diameter.
Knowledge Gained
In PGC, it’s necessary to remove all injected
sample components before injecting another
sample.
Backflush does the housekeeping and is the
most common function of a multiple column
system.
Backflush removes all injected components
from the columns even if we don’t know what
they are.
The PGC may vent backflushed components
or regroup them together for measurement.
A worked example 269The backflush system uses two columns that
may contain the same or different stationary
phases.
The PGC may use a mechanical valve or pres￾sure balance switching to reverse the flow in
Column 1.
The column valve can be a diaphragm, rotary,
or slide type, typically with 6 or 10 ports.
All heavies in Column 1 travel forward for the
same time,so they take the same time to return.
Thus, all the heavies peaks regroup and elute
together at about the same time.
Peaks that travel only a short distance in Col￾umn 1 are backflushed at a lower pressure,
higher velocity.
Thus, the strongly held peaks elute slightly
before the less-retained peaks.
An additional column may regroup specified
B/F peaks but it will strongly retain any
later peaks.
The backflush starttime isset by trial and error,
to ensure no analyte peak is reduced in size.
To ensure the backflush is not cutting an ana￾lyte peak, peak area is a better indication
than height.
An intercolumn detector may assist in the set￾ting of backflush start time.
The PGC may measure the composite
regrouped backflush peak as a “total hea￾vies” peak.
A composite regrouped peak cannot be accu￾rately calibrated but may still be a useful
measurement.
A brief backflushmay be a delayingtacticto give
time for earlier peaks to separate on Column 2.
In parallel GC, several independent backflush
modules may each measure a few of the
analytes.
Backflushing can regroup a bunch of analyte
peaks into one composite peak for
measurement.
Most PGCs have the backflush flow rate
higher than the forward flow rate, which
may not be necessary.
Careful selection of column lengths may per￾mit the backflush flow to equal the for￾ward flow.
To remove every trace of heavies, the average
flow in a backflush column must always be
backward.
Thus, to ensure complete heavies removal, the
backflush must use extra flow, extra time,
or both.
Some PGCs use the same packing or coating
in both columns, others use different station￾ary phases.
If the same packing, the second column
should be about twice the length of the first
column.
Backflush starts at the valley point between
the last analyte peak and the first hea￾vies peak.
Valley points move through columns in the
same way as peaks – they also have retention
times.
If both columns have the same packing, the
analysis ends when the B/F valley point
reaches the detector.
We can calculate peak retention times in each
column using the equations developed in
Chapter 9.
270 Backflush systemsDid you get it?
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 10
Q1. Why is the backflush function used in almost all PGCs?
Select all the correct answers:
A. To remove all injected components from the column system before inject￾ing another sample.
B. To enable the measurement of very low concentrations of one or more ana￾lytes in a sample of the process fluid.
C. To measure the total heavies concentration in a sample of the process fluid.
D. To minimize the analysis time by removing unmeasured components.
E. To measure different analytes in two identical samples of a process fluid
analyzed concurrently.
Q2. Explain why the backflushed heavies peaks don’t all exit the column at the
same time.
Q3. What is an intercolumn detector and how is it used?
Q4. Why can’t we accurately calibrate a backflushed heavies peak?
Q5. What two methods are available to ensure the net flow in the first column is
backward?
Q6. State three different options for the types of column in a two-column backflush
system.
Q7. Explain why two identical columns are unlikely to be a good arrangement for a
backflush column system.
References
Further reading
The classic book on process chromatography (Annino and Villalobos 1992)
gives a good account of backflush as practiced by PGCs in the late 1980s.
Cited
Annino, R. and Villalobos, R. (1992). Process Gas Chromatography: Fundamentals
and Applications. Research Triangle Park, NC: Instrument Society of America.
Deans, D.R. (1965). An improved technique for back-flushing gas chromatographic
columns. Journal of Chromatography A 18, No. 1965, 477–481. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0021-9673(01)80403-9.
Deans, D.R. (1968). A new technique for heart cutting in gas chromatography.
Chromatographia 1, (1968) 18–22.
McEwen, D.J. (1964). Backflushing and two-stage operation of capillary columns in
gas chromatography. Analytical Chemistry 32, No. 2, 279–282.
Nuss, G.R. (1963). Applications of group-type analyses in multiple column
configurations and in trace analysis. In: Gas Chromatography (ed. L. Fowler),
119–125. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Siemens (2008). Maintenance Manual, MAXUM Edition II Process Gas Chromato￾graph. 6/2008 Edition 2000596-001. Houston, TX: Siemens Energy & Automation,
Inc.
References 271Villalobos, R., Brace, R.O., and Johns, T. (1961). The role of column backflushing in
gas chromatography. In: Gas Chromatography – 1959 ISA Symposium (ed. H.J.
Noebels, R.F. Wall, and N. Brenner), 39–54. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Villalobos, R. and Turner, G.S. (1963). The role of column backflushing in gas chro￾matography: II. Multiple column systems. In: Gas Chromatography (ed. L.
Fowler), 105–118. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Tables
10.1 Calculation Data for Backflush Event Time.
10.2 Calculation Data for Backflushed Peaks.
Figures
10.1 Ten-port Backflush Column System.
10.2 PGC Chromatogram using Backflush to Measure.
10.3 Six-port Backflush Column System.
10.4 Live Tee in Pass-through Mode.
10.5 Live Tee in Backflush Mode.
10.6 A Regrouping Column System.
(a) Components to be regrouped are loaded into Column 2. (b) Compo￾nents in Column 2 are backflushed into Column 3 for regrouping.
10.7 Idealized Backflush Event Setting.
Symbols
Symbol Variable Unit
j Gas compression factor none
k Retention factor none
L Tolal length of column mm
N Plate number none
pi Carrier gas pressure at column inlet bara
po Carrier gas pressure at column outlet bara
p Average carrier gas pressure in column bara
pz Carrier gas pressure at point (z) along column bara
Pm– Pressure upstream of Live Tee barg
Pm+ Pressure downstream of Live Tee barg
Pr Ratio of carrier pressures at column inlet and outlet none
Prz Ratio of carrier pressures at point (z) and outlet none
Rs Resolution of adjacent peaks none
S Spatial separation between adjacent peaks mm
tR Retention time s
wb Spatial base width of peak mm
Z Distance to point (z) from column inlet mm
Subscripts
Sub1 Pertaining to Column 1 in a series column system
Sub2 Pertaining to Column 2 in a series column system
Sub1+2 Pertaining to both columns in a series column system
272 Backflush systemsSubB Pertaining to Peak B
SubC Pertaining to Peak C
SubV Pertaining to Peak V
New technical terms
These are the technical terms rendered in bold font in this chapter. You
should now know the meaning of these terms.
electronic pressure regulator Method
event time regrouping function
guard column start backflush
intercolumn detector start next analysis
Live Tee stuttering technique
major component valley point
For more information, refer to the Glossary at the end of the book.
References 27311
Heartcut systems
“Although originally coined in PGC parlance for a column system that
could measure low concentrations of impurities in process fluids, labo￾ratory analysts now use “heartcut” to describe any multiple column sys￾tem that separates and measures a limited number of components in the
injected sample. Recognizing this trend, this chapter looks at several
ways to quickly separate a few analytes from a process fluid.”
Origin and development
Early days
Early PGCs with chunky thermal conductivity detectors (TCD) had no prob￾lem measuring peaks larger than 1,000 parts-per-million (ppm), but the
introduction of the flame ionization detector (FID) changed all that
(McWilliam and Dewar 1958). The FID was an instant success as it allowed
the PGC to measure a few ppm of hydrocarbons. Several other high￾sensitivity detectors soon followed for the ppm-level measurement of
selected analytes, such as the flame photometric detector (FPD) for sulfur
and the electron capture detector (ECD) for halogen compounds.
The new detectors not only opened a new application area for the PGC –
trace analysis – but also brought some new challenges as their high sensi￾tivity revealed baseline problems not previously observed. Chief among
these is the difficulty of measuring a very small peak that follows a very large
one.
To measure a low concentration, a large sample volume is necessary and
thisis likely to exceed the sample capacity of the column. As the large sample
volume enters the column it occupies a significant space, becoming a wide
peak. The high concentration of major component then saturatesthe station￾ary phase and aggravates the adsorption problem, causing extreme tailing.
Figure 11.1a illustrates the enormity of the problem, even when measuring
Process Gas Chromatography: Advanced Design and Troubleshooting, First Edition. Tony Waters.
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2025 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.700 ppm. A modern PGC could easily measure these ethene and ethane
peaks using electronic baseline correction routines, but the tail of the major
peak would still be a problem. The tails from subsequent sample injections
would accumulate and eventually drive the baseline offscale, rendering the
analysis impractical.
At lower concentrations, the problem becomes worse. When attempting
to measure lessthan 100 ppm, the baseline afterthe major peak is offscale for
the whole time the analyte peaks come out, obscuring their presence on the
chromatogram and making an analysis possible only with a heartcut system.
In the petrochemicals industry, for example, heartcut makes it possible for a
PGC to measure a few ppm of the carbon oxides and acetylene in polymer￾grade ethylene. Similarly, heartcut enables the measurement of a few ppm of
propyne and propadiene in polymer-grade propylene. These industrial appli￾cations combine backflush and heartcut to achieve otherwise impossible
analyses in just a few minutes.
Heartcut functions
The heartcut column system enables a PGC to measure concentrations less
than 100 ppm. It’s not difficult to measure such low concentrations – an FID
can easily measure 1 ppm of a hydrocarbon. The difficult part is separating
the 1 ppm from 99.9999 % of something else.
Early PGC applications engineers developed the heartcut technique to
separate these low-concentration analytes for measurement (McEwen
1964). The etymology of the word “heartcut” incorporates the notion of sur￾gically removing a small peak from an encompassing large one, and this
remains its meaning in PGC today. As we shall see, the heartcut action
doesn’t literally “cut out a peak,” it samples a time slice of the gas emerging
Methane
Offscale Ethane
700 ppm
Ethene
Methane
Peak
700 ppm 
Ethene
(a) (b)
These older chromatograms illustrate the problem well. On the left, Figure (a) shows the effect of allowing all the peaks 
into the second column. The ethene and ethane peaks are riding on the methane tail. On the right, Figure (b) shows 
the effect of backflushing the methane tail. Column 2 has pulled the ethene peak away from the methane peak, yielding 
a baseline separation. To measure a 700 ppm ethene peak, backflush is an adequate solution, but it’s not good enough 
for measuring less than 100 ppm. If you look closely there is still about 1 % of baseline interference, and that would be 
a problem at higher sensitivities. 
Figure 11.1 Large Peak Tailing Problem.
The chromatogram in (a) is without heartcut, whereas the one in (b) is after heartcut.
Source: Author’s collection.
Origin and development 275from the first column and we strive to ensure that slice contains all the ana￾lyte molecules.
In laboratory usage, however, heartcut has come to mean the isolation of
a selected group of components for further separation and analysis by two￾dimensional gas chromatography – in contrast with the term comprehensive,
meaning the complete analysis of all components in the sample (Dimandja
2020). This definition of heartcut abandons the concept of a vast size differ￾ential between the concentrations of analyte and major component. Yet one
common characteristic of heartcut systems remains; they all maintain a sin￾gular direction of carrier gas flow, a feature that distinguishes all heartcut
systems from all backflush systems.
The heartcut technique might not be necessary for peaks preceding the
major component. For low-ppm peaks eluting before the major, you can
measure the desired analytes and then backflush the major component to
vent. Although the backflush might not totally remove the tailing molecules,
the net reverse flow in the backflushed column should keep the major tail
out of the second column.
For analytes at higher ppm concentrations, backflush can be effective
even for a peak that elutes after the major component. Figure 11.1b illus￾trates how backflush can remove part of the major tail, thereby enabling
a baseline separation of the small peak that follows.
Heartcut column system
PGCs use the heartcut column system to measure trace amounts of impuri￾ties in process fluids. It’s a powerful technique, sometimes capable of separ￾ating peaks that are a million-to-one in size disparity, yet it uses the simple
column system shown in Figure 11.2. Described later is a valveless system
using the Live Tee device.
Sample In Sample Out
Carrier Gas
Heartcut
Vent Injector
Detector
Column 1
Column 2 Detector
Vent D
R1
R2
(B)
B (A)
A
Showing a four port rotary valve in its rest position (blue path); other valves have equivalent 
function. After sample injection, most of the major component (A) flows to vent. Just before 
an analyte peak is due to exit Column 1, a short-duration 90° valve rotation (red path) 
allows that peak to enter Column 2, together with a small slice from the unseparated tail of 
the major component. Once the analyte is fully into Column 2 the valve reverts to its rest 
state (blue path) and Column 2 separates the small analyte peak (B) from the remnant of 
major component (A). 
Figure 11.2 Heartcut Column
System.
276 Heartcut systemsIn contrast to the backflush systems discussed in Chapter 10, a heartcut
column system experiences no change in flow direction or flow rate when
the column valve operates. In Figure 11.2, the flow restrictor R1 (which
might instead be an electronic pressure controller) ensures the carrier gas
flow rate from the detector vent is identical in both valve positions. Flow
restrictor R2 then ensures the very same flow rate from the heartcut vent.
After sample injection, the column valve remains in its rest condition to
allow the major component peak to quickly pass through the first column
and flow to vent via flow restrictor R2. This column (sometimes called the
cutter column) retains the analyte peak but cannot completely separate
it from the major tail. The valve actuates when the analyte peak is about
to leave Column 1, allowing that peak and a slice of the major tail to enter
the second column. As soon as the analyte peak is fully into Column 2, the
column valve returns to its rest state directing the remaining major tail and
any other components to flow out of the heartcut vent. In effect, the heartcut
action injects a sample into the second column that contains carrier gas plus
only two components – the whole analyte peak and a small portion of
the major component. It’s usually easy to separate two components, so
Column 2 tends to be reliable.
Pressure balance column switching
An option to using mechanical valves for column switching is the Live Tee.
As discussed in Chapter 10, the Live Tee is a device that uses carrier gas pres￾sure to switch capillary or micropacked columns without a mechanical valve
and with virtually no extracolumn volume (Deans 1968).
As shown in Figure 11.3, the two columns are almost butt jointed and a
narrow-bore capillary tube enters the end of each column forming slim
EPR EPR
Column 1 Column 2
Cut Vent Purge Vent
Pm– Pm+
Unmeasured 
Components
This mode diverts the effluent flow from Column 1 to the Cut Vent and continues the constant 
flow through Column 2. The carrier gas pressure on Pm+ is higher than on Pm–, reversing the 
flow through the connecting capillary. No components enter Column 2 until the device 
switches to the heartcut mode shown in Figure 11.4.
Figure 11.3 Live Tee in
Vent Mode.
Heartcut column system 277annular passages between the outer diameter of the capillary tube and the
inner diameter of the column ends. Carrier gas can flow between the col￾umns only via the capillary connector, wherein it incurs a small pres￾sure drop.
The carrier gas inlet and vent ports on both upstream (Pm–) and down￾stream (Pm+) sides of the Live Tee allow it to control the flow direction in
the columns. When operating in vent mode (Figure 11.3), the pressure
applied to Pm– is slightly lower than the pressure on Pm+, reversing the flow
through the capillary tube and diverting the entire flow from Column 1 into
the upstream Cut Vent, from where it flows to atmosphere via a flow-control
restrictor. The downstream Purge Vent flow normally goes via another
restrictor to the detector as makeup gas or fuel gas.
To execute a cut (Figure 11.4), the upstream electronic pressure regulator
applies a pressure at Pm– slightly higher than the pressure at Pm+, driving
the flow from Column 1 through the capillary tube and into Column 2.
After completing its heartcut functions, the Live Tee can also backflush
the first column as described in Chapter 10. As noted therein, the setup pro￾cedure for a Live Tee is more complex than for a valved system and may
require special training for maintenance technicians.
Column system design
Application engineers work from experience and empirical trials when
designing columns for heartcut systems. Calculation is ineffective for decid￾ing column lengths but it’s good to remember that the first column runs
EPR EPR
Column 1 Column 2
Cut Vent Purge Vent
Pm– Pm+ Heartcut
Components 
This mode directs the measured peaks and a small remnant of the major component into 
Column 2. The electronic pressure regulators (EPR) are set so that Pm– is higher than Pm+, 
causing carrier gas from Pm– to flow through the connecting capillary, taking the flow from 
Column 1 with it (red arrows).
Figure 11.4 Live Tee in
Heartcut Mode.
278 Heartcut systemsabout half as fast as the second one. Thus, the first column will be short,
probably less than one-fifth the length of the second one.
Making the cuts
Modes of operation
There are three ways to operate a heartcut column system:
Make a single cut to capture and measure only one analyte.
Make a single cut to capture and measure two or more analytes.
Make two or more cuts to capture and measure multiple analytes.
These three modes of operation are progressively more difficult to design
and maintain. While the column configuration is the same in each case, the
columns need to separate the increasing flock of analyte peaks and remnants
captured by the more complex heartcut actions.
A single cut for one analyte
The real chromatogram in Figure 11.5 shows the power of heartcut when
measuring a single analyte. Look at the flat baseline on both sides of the
Ethene
700 ppm
Remnant of
Methane
Sample
Inject
0 s 60 s Time 120 s
This older chromatogram illustrates heartcut well. Both columns are Porapak Q. The 700 ppm 
ethene peak enters Column 2 together with a small portion of the methane tail. Column 2 
easily separates the ethene peak for measurement, with a nice flat baseline on both sides of 
the peak. We see from the size and shape of the remnant that Column 1 has separated the 
ethene peak well away from the major methane peak and only a small amount of methane tail 
has entered Column 2. It’s interesting that the top surface of the remnant retains the original 
curvature of the methane peak tail, superimposed here in red.
Figure 11.5 Single-cut Heartcut
Chromatogram.
Source: Author’s collection.
Making the cuts 279peak. Of course, a 700 ppm peak is easy to measure, yet thissimple technique
can quickly separate almost any analyte – at any concentration – in any proc￾ess sample. We shall see that it gets more difficult when multiple measure￾ments are necessary.
When configured to make just one measurement, a PGC can quickly
separate and measure almost any analyte – at any concentration –
in any process sample.
The schematic diagram in Figure 11.6 shows the elegance of a single cut.
This is the simplest and most reliable heartcut system. Make sure you fully
understand its exceptional performance before delving into the complexity
of multiple cuts.
After sample injection, the first column retains the desired analyte, par￾tially separating it from the major component which mostly flows to vent. To
capture the analyte peak, the column valve turns ON a moment before it
starts to exit the first column. The valve remains ON just long enough for
all the analyte to flow into the second column. Then, as soon as the analyte
peak has completely entered the second column, the column valve
turns OFF.
The chromatogram displays only two peaks: one is the analyte and has a
typical peak shape and the other is a peculiar-shaped artifact. The artifact is a
slice of the major component tail that entered the second column while the
valve was open – along with the analyte peak. Some users like to call it a
B A
Column 1
Column 2 D
Heartcut
Vent
Detector
Vent
R2
R1
(A)
Detector
B
Showing the heartcutting of a single analyte (B) into the second column, together with a 
small slice of the major component. Since the remnant peak (A) is similar in width to the 
analyte peak (B), the separation of A and B is easily accomplished by the second column. 
Figure 11.6 Schematic of a
Single Cut.
280 Heartcut systemsramp as it often has a triangular shape. We prefer the more general term,
remnant peak.
A modern PGC chromatogram will also feature marker spikes on the
baseline added by the processor to indicate the event times for sample injec￾tion, column switching, and analyte peak gating. Nothing else should appear
on the chromatogram as all the other components discharge to vent.
A single cut for two analytes
When a PGC must measure two or more ppm analytes, there are two possible
heartcut solutions. Here, we review the method of catching two components
with one valve action – it’srarely possible to catch more than two. In the next
section, we consider multiple valve actions to capture several analytes.
To capture two analytes with one cut it’s necessary for the first column to:
Separate both analyte peaks from the major and its tail.
Not separate the two analyte peaks from each other, so we can capture
them both in a single cut.
Immediately, we notice the extra complexity of measuring two compo￾nents. What kind of column would separate the two analytes from the major
but not from each other?
That depends on the nature of the analytes. It might be easy if there are no
other components to worry about and the two analytes each have the same
number of carbon atoms, like measuring propane and propene in ethane, for
instance. For that analysis, a nonpolar column would hold both C3 peaks
back from the ethane peak without separating them from each other. Then,
a single heartcut would deliver both C3 peaks to a porous polymer column
for final separation. The chromatogram would show three peaks, one rem￾nant, and two analytes. Not all applications are that easy, though. If you are
measuring higher carbon numbers, for instance, the choice of columns is
more difficult due to the large number of possible components (realistically,
about 15 C4 hydrocarbon peaks are possible). A single cut might capture frag￾ments of several peaks.
Unfortunately, even when we select the first column to get minimal sep￾aration between the two analytes, there is always some separation. This
immediately makes the heartcut more difficult, as depicted in Figure 11.7.
A partial separation between analyte peaks means the valve has to be ON
longer and this makes the remnant peak wider. The second column then
has the more difficult task of separating the two analyte peaks from a wider
remnant. In most cases the remnant will appear first, followed by both ana￾lyte peaks, but occasionally the second column will move one analyte peak
in front of the remnant and the other behind it.
For some types of analytes, a single cut can never work. If we are measur￾ing ppm levels of two chemical homologs, for instance, we know they will
separate on any column by the doubling rule, so a single cut would be impos￾sibly wide. This kind of analysis always needs multiple heartcuts.
Making the cuts 281Multiple cuts
A single heartcut can rarely capture more than two analytes. Three or more
analytes are likely to separate on the first column, creating a remnant peak
that is too wide to separate from all the analyte peaks. To solve this problem,
we use a different tactic; instead of trying to keep the analyte peaks together
on the first column, we deliberately separate them and then do multiple cuts,
one for each analyte – shown schematically in Figure 11.8.
Heartcut 
Vent
Column 1
R2
Detector
Detector 
Vent D
R1
Column 2
D C B A
D C (B)
B A
Showing the single cut of two analytes (C and D) into the second column, together with a slice 
of the major component. Since the remnant peak (B) is wider than the analyte peaks (C and 
D), it’s more difficult for the second column to separate the two analytes from the remnant. 
Figure 11.7 Single Cut for Two
Analytes.
Heartcut 
Vent
Column 1
R2
Detector
Detector 
Vent D
R1
Column 2
D C B A B A
D (B) C (B)
Showing two separate heartcuts of analytes C and D into the second column, together with 
two small slices of the major component. The first column determines the spacing of the two 
remnant peaks (B) and since they are both made up of identical molecules the second column 
cannot increase their separation. The second column must be the exact length necessary to 
fit the analyte peaks between the remnants. 
Figure 11.8 Multiple Cuts for
Two Analytes.
282 Heartcut systemsWhen the PGC performs a separate heartcut for each analyte, each cut
loads a different analyte peak into the second column, together with a grad￾ually declining remnant of major tail. The second column separates the ana￾lyte peaks from the remnant peaks but it cannot increase the separation
between remnants because all remnants contain the same molecules:
Each of the remnants entering the second column comprises the
same kind of molecules, so that column cannot increase the separa￾tion between them.
Once the remnants enter the second column, their widths and the time
between them are fixed by the heartcut timing and cannot be changed. There￾fore, the first column must create a gap between the analyte peaks wide
enough to contain one of the analyte peaks. Actually, the baseline time
between remnants decreases as they pass through the second column due
to the rounding of theirsquare sides. And the analyte peaks get wider. There￾fore, the time between the two heartcuts must be greater than their duration.
That amount of separation might be difficult to achieve and once accom￾plished forthe first two analytes,subsequent analytes can be very late indeed.
As an additional challenge, the design of the second column is more dif￾ficult for multiple heartcuts. The second column must be exactly the right
length to drop each peak neatly into the fixed gap between remnants. Usu￾ally, an analyte peak lands in the gap just after its associated remnant – but
not always. Occasionally, the second column will rapidly elute an analyte
before its remnant, or strongly retain an analyte to elute much later on the
chromatogram, after two or more remnants have passed.
Avoiding complexity
Clearly, multiple heartcuts are more difficult to design,setup, and maintain –
and are unlikely to be reliable. For the highest reliability, keep in mind the
familiar yet eternally true mantra: KISS (keep it simple, stupid!).
When a PGC measures ppm concentrations, analytical difficulty seems to
follow a square law. While we can’t rigorously prove it to be true, this law
serves to illustrate our argument:
A PGC can easily measure one analyte in any sample.
Measuring two analytes is four times harder.
Measuring three analytes is nine times harder.
Four is sixteen times harder and unlikely to work.
Seven is forty-nine times harder and guaranteed to fail.
At a Mid-West refinery, we found a PGC making seven heartcuts on
each sample injection. The chromatogram contained seven analyte
peaks and seven remnant peaks, all mixed up together. The site per￾sonnel could not make it work. Nothing was gained.
Making the cuts 283From experience, we strongly recommend you dedicate each heartcut sys￾tem to measuring only one or two analytes. Resist the ever-present tempta￾tion to do more. Highly skilled application engineers can make a heartcut
system do just about anything you ask for, but your maintenance people will
not be able to keep it working on site.
When measuring low concentrations:
Request only measurements vital to process operations.
Be satisfied with a few reliable measurements.
Never ask for an additional measurement that would be “nice to know”.
Adding a backflush
Once heartcutting is complete, it’s best to backflush the first column.
Although backflush adds a valve function, it doesn’t increase measurement
complexity and is a sensible precaution. Without backflush, a heavy compo￾nent from a previous injection might coelute with the analyte and enter the
second column. Such recurring incursions of heavy peak remnants, no mat￾ter how small, will eventually disrupt the baseline and spoil the analysis.
The saving gained by running without backflush is not worth the
risk. Never run an isothermal PGC without backflushing the first
column.
Never run without backflush (Gokeler 2011). Applications engineers some￾times omit the backflush in an attempt to save money or to simplify mainte￾nance. Theirjustification isthat the first column is very short (sometimes only
half a meter) and the heartcut valve action is very early in the analysis cycle.
Therefore, the first column has a long forward flush to vent, which should
remove any late components before the next injection. That might be true
for some exceptionally pure process fluids, most of the time. But it risks the
occasional process upset that will take the analyzer out of service for a long
time. And without experttroubleshooting that analyzer may never be the same
again. For more information on backflush systems refer to Chapter 10.
Setting the valve timing
The heartcut valve ON and OFF times must be precisely set. When measur￾ing low-ppm levels of the analyte, setting these times is always a delicate
trial-and-error procedure. For ppm analysis, an intercolumn detector is
unlikely to be helpful because the excessive tail of the major peak will make
it impossible to see the tiny analyte peak.
The setup procedure
Whenever possible, use a testsample known to contain a constant amount of
each analyte within the upper half of the measurement range. Settings made
284 Heartcut systemswith a lower concentration may not accommodate higher analyte concentra￾tions in the process sample.
The main constituents of your test sample should closely match the com￾position of the processfluid. Don’t use a test sample with a radically different
composition (such as one with nitrogen as its major component) because it
will change the analyte peak retention times on the first column, invalidat￾ing your valve time settings. When a high concentration of major component
saturates the stationary phase, the solubility of the analytes decreases and
their retention times diminish.
Another issue to watch is the frequency of sample injections. You need to
set the heartcut times when conditions within the first column are stable. The
first few sample injectionssetup a background level of major componentin the
stationary phase of the first column. Analyte retention times won’t become
constant until that background level is constant, so run the PGC through sev￾eral automatic cycles before you set the valve timing and then allow the
Method to continue uninterrupted while you make the adjustments. If your
column system also backflushes the first column, ensure the backflush occurs
just after the last heartcut on every cycle while you are setting the heartcut
times. Don’t adjust the backflush after completing the heartcut timing.
Adjust the column valve ON and OFF times to get the maximum analyte
peak and the minimum remnant peak on the chromatogram. To finalize
each setting make small adjustments that reduce the valve ON duration.
Stop when the analyte peak gets smaller and revert to the previous setting.
Then add a safety margin that increases the valve ON duration by one or two
seconds while ensuring that the larger remnant peak thus caused doesn’t
spoil the resolution of the analyte peak. Technicians sometimes use the ana￾lyte peak height to indicate the correct setting, but the integrated peak area is
a better confirmation that none of the analyte is missing.
Once your heartcut is properly set and working well, note the duration of
valve actuation. Since the cut duration is a function of the peak width, it’s
unlikely to change. For future performance checks, move the entire cut
one second forward and backward in time to confirm that the whole peak
(or group of peaks) is cut into Column 2.
Setting the heartcut times is a blind procedure which can make it a dif￾ficult one. There is always a risk of catching the wrong peak:
When setting up a PGG heartcut take time to confirm that you have
captured the correct peak. The PGC measures what you tell it to
measure and measuring the wrong peak is by far the worst error
it can make!
To confirm that your heartcut is set correctly, spike your test sample with a
little – a very little – of the analyte. The chromatogram peak should increase,
confirming that your heartcut will measure the analyte. Recall that this out￾come doesn’t confirm the identity of the peak captured from a process sam￾ple. For that to be true, the first column must separate the analyte from all
other components in the process fluid. This is a reasonable assumption only
Setting the valve timing 285if the composition of the sample is well known and a trusted application
engineer designed the column.
A simple way to spike a sample is to run the pure analyte through a short
length ofrubber or polymertubing. Then disconnect the tubing, blow out the
analyte with compressed air or nitrogen, and insert the tubing into the line
connecting your test sample to the PGC sample inlet. The doctored tubing
will contaminate the test sample with your analyte, perhaps too much at
first, but the level will decline as the test sample purges out the tubing.
When better facilities are available, collect a process sample in a gas blad￾der and analyze it with the PGC until constant results are obtained. Then,
using a syringe, inject a calculated amount of one analyte into the bladder.
After mixing, an increased PGC response confirmsthat you are capturing the
correct component. Continue to test other analytes in the same way.
Setting multiple cuts
Although the carrier gas flow rates in a heartcut column system should be
equal in both valve positions, their settings will not be perfect. And even if
they are, the injection of a large sample will affect the flow rate in the first
column. Thus, each heartcut may cause a small change in the retention time
of subsequent peaks and it’s necessary to set multiple heartcuts in retention￾time order. After the first cut is working well, keep it running while setting
up the second cut. Then progressively add any further cuts. Do this even if
some early analytes are not present in your current test sample.
General rules of procedure
The general rules are:
Never adjust the valve timing on a single sample injection.
Always set the heartcut valve times while the PGC is running continuous
automatic cycles.
Allow several automatic analysis cycles to run before making an
adjustment.
Never setup a later cut before setting up an earlier one.
Always check the subsequent cuts after adjusting an earlier cut.
Never adjust the backflush timing after the heartcut timing is set.
Diagnosis
Precise observation of peak shape and a logical interpretation of the cause
are essential prerequisites to successful troubleshooting. A single heartcut
generates a chromatogram like Figure 11.9 with only two peaks, yet many
286 Heartcut systemsclues are visible that tell you what the columns are doing. Take the time to
fully understand this simple chromatogram and you’ll be well-prepared to
diagnose more complex heartcut techniques.
Look closely.
Observing the remnant peak
Take a moment to think about the shape of the remnant peak. Recall that its
sides are vertical when it enters Column 2 because pure carrier gas enters the
second column before and after valve actuation. Then, asthe remnant travels
through the second column itsleading and trailing edges form standard peak
shapes. If you look closely at Figure 11.9, you can see that both edges of the
remnant look like half a peak, but compared with the analyte peak they are a
little sharper than expected for a peak at that location on the chromatogram.
This is because they passed through only one column. Also, you should
notice that the leading edge of the remnant is sharper than its trailing edge.
This is because it spent less time in the column. The unnaturally sharp sides
are one way to distinguish a remnant peak from a bunch of compo￾nent peaks.
All the molecules that make up the remnant peak are identical, so they
migrate along the column at the same speed. Therefore, discounting the
spreading of its sharp sides, the remnant doesn’t get any wider as it passes
through the second column. Its core width on the chromatogram is a good
indicator of the valve ON duration. If the remnant core is much wider than
the analyte peak, the valve stays ON too long.
Separation by 
Column 2
Time in 
Column 2
Time in 
Column 1
Peak looks 
whole
Cut is not 
too wide
This figure illustrates information deduced from a heartcut chromatogram. The 
observed separation is due solely to Column 2 and is adequate. The remnant is small 
and narrow, indicating good separation by Column 1 and proper valve timing. Note the 
half-peak shapes on either side of the remnant are sharper than a true peak would be 
because the remnant travels only through the second column. Triangulation reveals no 
evidence that column valve switching has cut into the sides of the analyte peak, but it's 
best to check this by observing the integrated area of the peak. 
Valve Actions
Figure 11.9 Deductionsfrom the
Chromatogram.
Diagnosis 287The chromatogram in Figure 11.9 also shows how the top of a remnant
retains the shape of the major tail. It’s unusual to see this because remnant
peaks are usually much larger and go offscale. When the chromatogram sig￾nal is highly sensitive, a large remnant can look like a square wave, flying
offscale for a while and then rapidly returning to the baseline. But if the chro￾matogram sensitivity is low enough, the remnant may show a slice of the
major tail dropping rapidly. Then, the remnant appears on the chromato￾gram as an almost triangular peak. Seeing these triangular remnants led
chromatographers to call them ramps.
The shape of the remnant is a good indicator of how well the first column
is separating the analyte peak from the major component. Recall that the
ethene peak and methane remnant enter Column 2 at the same time. There￾fore, the low curved top of the methane remnant in Figure 11.9 is where the
ethene peak was at the beginning of Column 2. We see that Column 1 was
powerful enough to pull the ethene peak well down the methane tail. In
most heartcuts, the first column doesn’t achieve such a large separation
and more of the major tail enters the second column, forming a large rem￾nant peak. Conversely, some heartcuts can form very small remnants that
look like peaks. This can happen when capturing a later peak well separated
from the major, and even when capturing a peak that elutes before the major.
An early cut can catch a low-levelremnant from the tail of the previousinjec￾tion. This tiny remnant might look like a rogue peak on your chromatogram.
If you backflush the first column it should go away.
Observing the analyte peak
The analyte peak enters Column 2 while the column valve is ON, so the aver￾age of the valve ON and OFF times is a good estimate of analyte retention
time on Column 1. To trim your estimate, you can even make a small allow￾ance for the expected skewness of the peak. The chromatogram shows the
total retention time of the analyte peak, so it’s easy to estimate its retention
time in Column 2.
When the timing of the column valve is set correctly, its ON duration
exactly contains the analyte peak. The ON duration is therefore an indicator
of the full width of the analyte peak as it enters the second column. The ana￾lyte peak will spread as it travels through the second column and appear a
little wider on the chromatogram, yet its width should still be similar to the
remnant width. If the remnant is much wider, the valve timing is wrong.
When the valve timing is correct, we can deduce that:
If the separation is good but the remnant is too large, Column 1 has
failed. This is the most likely occurrence, due to the large injections of
process fluid into Column 1.
If the remnant peak is a reasonable size and shape, yet the analyte sep￾aration is inadequate, Column 2 is at fault.
If the analyte peak is widerthan the remnant peak. Column 2 is at fault. It
must be causing the additional width.
288 Heartcut systemsIt’s possible to cut the back or front of an analyte peak without affecting
its height. Look closely at the shape of the analyte peak to assess whether any
part of it is missing. This can be difficult to see; expanding the horizontal axis
and drawing triangulation lines might help. To completely avoid this con￾cern set the valve timing by monitoring peak area rather than peak height.
Similar column systems
Today’s analytical lexicon extends heartcut terminology to any chromato￾graphic system that doesn’t measure all components of the sample. While
we exclude backflush systems from that category, some simple PGC column
systems do fit into the definition. Here, we consider:
The trap-and-hold column system.
The distribution column system.
Parallel chromatography.
Trap-and-hold column system
This unique technique – now rarely used – is also known as trap-and-release
or trap-and-bypass and allows a complex analysis using a single detector.
The trap-and-hold column system immobilizes selected peaks while
other peaks separate and clear the columns. It then releases the trapped
peaks for further separation and measurement. Refer to Figure 11.10. When
the column valve operates, Column 2 traps selected analyte peaks while
Sample In Sample Out
Carrier Gas
Injector
Detector
Column 1 Column 3
Column 2
Detector
D Vent
E D
C B
Restrictor
A
The six-port rotary or diaphragm valve in its rest state (blue paths) puts all three columns in series. Other valves have similar 
function. The flow resistance of the restrictor is equivalent to Column 2. A valve rotation of 60° (red paths) seals Column 2, 
trapping selected peaks (for example, B and C), and connecting Column 1 to Column 3 to allow later peaks (for example, D 
and E) to bypass Column 2. When the column valve returns to its rest state (blue) the trapped peaks enter Column 3 for further 
separation before reaching the detector. 
Figure 11.10 Trap-and-Hold Column System.
Similar column systems 289some other peaks pass from Column 1 into Column 3. When released, the
trapped peaks enter Column 3 for final separation.
A good feature of the trap-and-hold system is the conservation of carrier
gas. It uses only half the carrier gas as a conventional heartcut system.
Trap-and-hold can sometimes act as a heartcut and at other times just to
delay a few components while the other peaks are clearing Column 3. Most
complete systems also include a backflush for Column 1 thatstarts as soon as
all of the analyte peaks have exited the first column.
While the trap-and-hold technique was useful for expanding the applica￾tion of older PGCs having limited detector capability, it has some
disadvantages:
The trapped component peaks gradually become wider due to longitudi￾nal diffusion of their molecules, thereby reducing the resolution of adja￾cent peaks.
The trapped peaks take longer to elute, increasing the analysis time.
Switching the trap column in and out of circuit may cause pressure and
flow upsets that disturb the detector baseline.
Although parallel column systems have generally superseded trap-and￾hold, you may encounter some older systems in the field still using the
technique.
Distribution column system
One of the original PGC column arrangement is the distribution column sys￾tem. The simplest version of this is the dual column system shown in
Figure 11.11. The idea is to divide the sample into small groups of compo￾nents and then distribute each group to a different second column for final
separation. The first column partially separates the injected sample. The col￾umn valve then directs each group of components to an appropriate second
column. To optimize the resolution of the analytes, the secondary columns
usually employ different stationary phases and might be different lengths.
Serial restrictors equalize their flow rates. Secondary columns may have ded￾icated detectors, otherwise their effluents merge and flow into one detector.
The system might also include a backflush of the first column to remove
unwanted heavies.
Parallel chromatography
Microprocessors can now monitor several detectors at once, making it pos￾sible for PGCsto house two or more complete chromatographic systems each
with a dedicated sample injector, column system, and detector. Each of these
systems can independently measure a selected few of the desired analytes
using a simple column system. This parallel chromatography simplifies
application engineering and maintenance and allows manufacturers to
design standard column systems for common applications, reducing cost.
290 Heartcut systemsThe real power
We have seen that column-switching techniques can reduce analysis time,
do the housekeeping, and separate extremely small peaks for measurement.
Yet valve configurations are just the tools we use; the real power of a column
system is in the columns themselves.
All isothermal column systems have one feature in common; they employ
two or more columns in series. If the serial columns contain the same sta￾tionary phase, their performance is easy to predict. All peaks will have
the same retention time and width as on a single column of the same length,
so system design is straightforward. The designer determines the total
length of column needed to separate the analyte peaks, then apportions that
length between the serial columns.
But to release the real power of a serial column system one of the columns
must employ a different stationary phase. Then, the first column will partly
separate the desired analytes from other components, and a second column
will use a different stationary phase to complete their separation.
Though hundreds of stationary phases are available, most application
engineers limit their choice to about one dozen, which they get to know well.
Even so, over 100 stationary phase combinations are possible in a
column system having two columns. This is the true power of the serial
column system.
Injector
Detectors
Column 1
Column 2
Column 3 Detector
Vent D
D C
E B A
Sample Out
Sample In
Carrier Gas
Detector
Vent D Restrictor
The four-port rotary or diaphragm valve in its rest state (blue paths) allows partially separated 
components from Column 1 to pass into Column 2 for final separation (for example, A and B). A 
valve rotation of 90° (red paths) sends selected peaks (for example, C and D) to Column 3. 
Then, moving the valve back to the rest position may allow later analytes (for example, E) into 
Column 2. After all analyte peaks are out, Column 1 ideally would be backflushed to remove 
unwanted heavies (not shown). Other valves have similar function. A flow restrictor or electronic 
pressure regulator ensures the detector flow is the same in both valve positions. Another flow 
restrictor may be in series with one of the secondary columns to equalize the carrier gas flow 
rates in both columns. 
Figure 11.11 Distribution
Column System.
Similar column systems 291Knowledge Gained
On trace analysis
The high sensitivity of some detectors enables
a PGC to measure low-ppm concentrations.
Low-ppm measurements need a large sample
volume that overloads the column.
Highly sensitivity detectors reveal the long tail
of molecules following a major component.
Without heartcut, it may not be possible to
measure small peaks eluting after the major.
Backflushing the major tail may be adequate
to measure a following high-ppm analyte.
Removing the major tail before and after a
small peak allows measurement of low-ppm
analytes.
In laboratory usage, heartcut means any sys￾tem that doesn’t measure all the components.
On heartcut systems
The heartcut column systemissimple, compris￾ing just two columns and one column valve.
Some PGCs use a “Live Tee” instead of a
valve, especially with small-bore columns.
The valve directs selected analyte peaks from
Column 1 into Column 2 and all other peaks
to vent.
Column 2 separates analyte peaks from the
small slice of major that enters with the
analytes.
With heartcut, a PGC can measure almost
any analyte, at any concentration, in any
process fluid.
The simplest and most reliable heartcut
makes one cut for a single analyte.
A single cut generates just one remnant peak
and one analyte peak.
In a simple heartcut, the separation visible on
the chromatogram is entirely due to Column 2.
The shape of the remnant peak is entirely due
to the analyte separation by Column 1.
It’s more difficult to design a system to cap￾ture and separate two analytes with one cut.
It’s most difficult to capture multiple analytes
with multiple cuts, so the PGC is likely to fail.
PGC complexity and risk of failure increases
with the square of the number of analytes.
Measure only the analytes needed for
process control; never add “nice-to-know”
measurements.
PGCs with a heartcut column system should
also have a backflush function.
On valve timing
Always adjust the timing of the first cut before
adjusting the second and subsequent cuts.
Check the heartcut timing with a test sample
similar in composition to the process fluid.
Always run several automatic analyses before
adjusting the valve timing.
If using backflush, set it to occur on every cycle
while setting the heartcut timing.
292 Heartcut systemsSpike the test sample to confirm the heartcut
is selecting and measuring the correct
component.
Measuring the wrong peak is the worst error a
PGC can make!
On remnants
A remnant has vertical sides when entering
Column 2, which soften as it transits that
column.
The width of the remnant is the same as the
duration of the cut that formed it.
The core width of a remnant doesn’t increase
in Column 2, but its sides spread into
half peaks.
If correctly adjusted, the cut duration is
slightly wider than the full width of the ana￾lyte peak.
If the remnant peak is much wider than the
analyte peak, the valve timing is wrong.
The top of a remnant follows the downslope of
the major tail and is sometimes called
a ramp.
The height of a remnantindicates howwellCol￾umn 1 separates the analyte from the major.
The center of a cut indicates the retention time
of that analyte on Column 1.
The time between a remnant and its analyte
peaks is their separation on Column 2.
Column 1 must separate analytes enough to
make wide gaps between multiple remnants.
Column 2 cannot increase the separation
ofremnants asthey all move at the same speed.
If the remnant peak is the right size but not
separated from an analyte, Column 2 has
failed.
If the separation is good but the remnant is
too large, Column 1 has failed.
On similar systems
Stopping the flow in a column can trap-and￾hold selected peaks for later separation.
A trap-and-hold column can delay certain
peaks or perform a heartcut function.
A dual column distributes selected peaks to
two or more second columns for final
separation.
The secondary columns each have their
own detector or the flows merge into one
detector.
Parallel chromatography uses two or more
complete GC systems to measure all the
analytes.
Each of the parallel systems uses a simple
designto measure a fewofthe desired analytes.
Standardized parallel systems are simple to
design, maintain, and troubleshoot.
The real power of a column system comes
from using different stationary phases for fast
analysis.
Similar column systems 293Did you get it?
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 11
Q1. Which one of the following statements best describes the basic function of a
heartcut system as used in a PGC?
A. To adequately isolate for measurement one or more low-ppm analytes that
elute after a high-percentage component.
B. To adequately isolate for measurement a low-ppm analyte that coelutes at
the same time as another low-ppm analyte.
C. To adequately isolate for measurement a low-ppm analyte by combining
the effects of two different stationary phases.
D. To adequately isolate for measurement a low-ppm analyte by backflushing
the tail of the major component.
Q2. Consider a simple PGC heartcut system:
A. At minimum, how many columns does it need?
B. Which column would typically be the longest?
C. At minimum, how many column valves does it need?
D. At minimum, how many detectors does it need?
E. At minimum, how many atmospheric vents does it have?
F. How many different carrier gas flow rates does it use?
Q3. Consider the chromatogram from a PGC heartcut system and assume all
desired analytes are present in the injected sample and are well separated
by the columns:
A. For a single cut for one analyte, how many peaks and remnants are present
on the chromatogram?
B. For a single cut for two analytes, how many peaks and remnants are pres￾ent on the chromatogram?
C. For two cuts for two analytes, how many peaks and remnants are present
on the chromatogram?
Q4. Imagine you want to check the timing of a single heartcut to ensure that none
of the analyte peak is missing. Which of the adjustments listed below would be
an appropriate temporary change to the valve timing?
A. Set the valve ON command one second earlier.
B. Set the valve ON command one second later.
C. Set the valve OFF command one second earlier.
D. Set the valve OFF command one second later.
Q5. Assess the relative difficulty of designing a PGC column system to use each
type of heartcut listed below:
A. One cut for one analyte.
B. One cut for two analytes.
C. Two cuts for two analytes.
Q6. List the reasons why it’s more difficult for a heartcut system to make multiple
cuts than to make a single cut.
294 Heartcut systemsQ7. Graduate Question: Look at the chromatogram in Figure 11.5 and assume the
column valve goes ON at 33 seconds and OFF at 52 seconds. Then, in the listed
order, estimate the retention time of:
A. Ethene in the first column.
B. Ethene in the second column.
C. Methane in the second column.
D. Methane in the first column.
References
Further reading
The book chapter by Mahler et al. (1995) summarizes their experience of multiple
column applications in Siemens PGCs.
Gokeler (2011) gives a good summary of the advantages and disadvantages of tradi￾tional and modern PGC column arrangements.
Cited
Deans D.R. (1968). A new technique for heart cutting in gas chromatography. Chro￾matographia 1, No. 1–2, 18–22. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02259005.
Dimandja, J.-M.D. (2020). Introduction and historical background: the “inside”
story of comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography. In: Basic
Multidimensional Gas Chromatography (ed. N.H. Snow), 1–40. London, UK:
Academic Press.
Gokeler, U. (2011). Column switching simplification in process gas chromatogra￾phy. Paper S01.2 in: Proceedings of the ISA 56th Analysis Division Symposium
2011, League City, TX. Research Triangle Park, NC: International Society of
Automation.
Mahler, H., Maurer, T., and Mueller, F. (1995). Multi-column systems in gas chro￾matography. In: Chromatography in the Petroleum Industry (ed. E.R. Adlard).
Journal of Chromatography Library Volume 56, 231–268. Amsterdam, Nether￾lands: Elsevier.
McWilliam, I.G. and Dewar, R. A. (1958). Flame ionization detector for gas chroma￾tography. In: Gas Chromatography 1958 (ed. D. H. Desty). London, UK: Butter￾worths Publications Ltd.
McEwen, D.J. (1964). Backflushing and two-stage operation of capillary columns in
gas chromatography. Analytical Chemistry 36, No. 2, 279–282.
Figures
11.1 Large Peak Tailing Problem.
11.2 Heartcut Column System.
11.3 Live Tee in Vent Mode.
11.4 Live Tee in Heartcut Mode.
11.5 Single-cut Heartcut Chromatogram.
11.6 Schematic of a Single Cut.
References 29511.7 Single Cut for Two Analytes.
11.8 Multiple Cuts for Two Analytes.
11.9 Deductions from the Chromatogram.
11.10 Trap-and-Hold Column System.
11.11 Distribution Column System.
Symbols
Symbol Variable Unit
Pm– Pressure upstream of Live Tee barg
Pm+ Pressure downstream of Live Tee barg
New technical terms
If you read the whole chapter, you should now know the meaning of these
technical terms:
cutter column
dual column system
KISS
marker spikes
ramp
remnant peak
trace analysis
trap-and-hold column system
For more information, refer to the Glossary at the end of the book.
296 Heartcut systems
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by ibrahim ragab - Oregon Health & Science Univer , Wiley Online Library on [27/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License12
PGC troubleshooting
“Don’t rush into troubleshooting until you’re sure a problem exists. Then,
determine whether the problem is an instrument problem affecting the
baseline or a chromatographic problem affecting the measurements. If
you don’t know which, you may spend a long time trying to solve a non￾existent problem.”
Is there a problem?
The usual suspects
It’s not unusual for Operations to suspect a measurement and they might
have good reasons for doing so, based on their knowledge of plant operation
at that time. Yet there are likely to be several other possibilities. Perhaps the
measurement is correct and its unexpected value indicates a process prob￾lem. Or perhaps the sample arriving at the PGC is not representative of
the process; it’s well known that most problems with PGCs are due to an
inadequate sampling system. Or perhaps the PGC really is the culprit.
Often a maintenance technician will instinctively respond to a call for
service by recalibrating the PGC. Indeed, the operators may specifically
ask for a calibration, believing it to be the solution to all measurement pro￾blems. But there’s at least one problem with this unthinking response:
Either: recalibrating a sound PGC that doesn’t need calibrating has just
introduced more variability into perfectly good measurement data.
Or: recalibrating a failing PGC has just masked a problem for a while,
hiding an incipient failure and creating more work for later.
Even a well-executed calibration procedure doesn’t prove the analyzer is
working well. Forinstance, there might be an error in the stated composition
of the calibration fluid or the PGC might not be integrating the peaks
Process Gas Chromatography: Advanced Design and Troubleshooting, First Edition. Tony Waters.
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2025 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.properly. Calibration may not detect such underlying errors. If calibration
can’t be trusted, how does anyone know whether a PGC is generating accu￾rate data – today, tomorrow, or any day? Without a validation program
they don’t know and never will. No one knows.
To avoid this intolerable situation, you need a way to prove the measure￾ment is correct. It would be a mistake to make any changes to a PGC without
knowing for certain that there’s something wrong with it. To gain that con￾fidence, you need a validation program.
Why validation?
A robust validation program will rapidly detect analyzersystem failures, pro￾vide proof of analyzer accuracy, improve analyzer reliability, and ultimately
build trust in the analyzer. A multitude of things can go wrong with a PGC
system; some occur suddenly, some gradually. Without a way to detect fail￾ures, Operations could receive bad analyzer data over an extended period
with potentially costly or even dire consequences. That’s why regular
PGC validation is a nonnegotiable necessity. The validation data will convince
you, Operations, and other interested parties that the PGC is operating cor￾rectly or not. And your validation program can go beyond simply reporting
malfunctions, it can employ statistical quality control tools to enhance PGC
accuracy, precision, and reliability.
An effective PGC validation program is a nonnegotiable necessity.
Note that a validation program does not fix analyzer failures, it merely illu￾minates them. Unless a validation program is accompanied by a quick action
to investigate and repair detected faults, it will do nothing to improve PGC
performance and credibility. Acting on the information that validation pro￾vides and implementing repairs that eliminate the root cause of failure will
prevent recurrence, increase availability, and enhance trust.
Choose your champion
Implementing a robust validation program can be a significant undertaking
in any process plant, depending on the chosen validation strategy. The crit￾ical firststep isfor the responsible manager to designate a responsible Cham￾pion charged with managing the project implementation and accountable
for its success. Your champion should also be a skilled politician, able to sat￾isfy the diverse needs and wishes of the many interested parties in Opera￾tions, Maintenance, Laboratory, and Process Automation.
Benefits
A key benefit of a validation program is having constantly updated perfor￾mance data when the PGC is working properly. The user always knows
298 PGC troubleshootinghow well the PGC is currently performing each measurement. The perfor￾mance data might include:
Precision of measurement.
Accuracy of measurement.
Repeatability of peak retention time.
Detector noise levels.
Overall availability or reliability.
Mean time between failures and mean time to repair.
Having logged this base-level information, the PGC can advise when its
performance is faltering, allowing the user to plan needed repairs before an
expected failure occurs. Signs of future failure could include:
Calibration drift predicting time to next calibration.
Retention time drift predicting column failure.
Peak gradually moving out of its integration window.
Gradual decline of repeatability.
Increasing detector noise level.
Incipient failure needing attention.
Imminent failure needing urgent attention.
Catastrophic failure disrupting other work priorities.
Validation strategies
The purpose of a validation program is to increase our confidence in the ana￾lyzer measurements and to provide hard evidence to support that trust.
To have confidence in our analyzers we must prove to ourselves and
anyone else who questions the data that the measurements are valid
and worthy of our trust.
A validation program can take many forms, some simple and inexpensive
and others comprehensive and more costly. The appropriate form will
depend on the value of the measurement to process operations.
A detailed discussion of validation techniques is beyond the scope of this
book. For a deeper understanding, consult the sources of information cited
in Further Reading at the end of this chapter. What follows is a brief overview
of the key validation practices commonly employed in a robust PGC valida￾tion program.
Validation strategies 299Watching process data
An essential maintenance practice isto routinely examine the trend of recent
PGC measurements, as illustrated in Figure 12.1. Regular inspection of the
process data history will familiarize an analyzer specialist on what is “nor￾mal” for their process. In most processes, the analyte concentrations change
gradually. The sudden onset of noise, spikes, or steps in the data may indi￾cate the analyzer is in trouble. Knowing this, perhaps you can preempt that
call from Operations by fixing the problem before it has a detrimental effect
on their process.
80
70
60
% Ethane
50
40
11/23/17 11/24/17 11/25/17
Process Data - Step Changes
11/26/17 11/27/17
80
70
60
% Ethane
50
40
11/23/17 11/24/17 11/25/17
Process Data - Spiking
Process Data - Worsening Precision
11/26/17 11/27/17
80
70
60
% Ethane
50
40
11/23/17 11/24/17 11/25/17 11/26/17 11/27/17
An effective and inexpensive procedure to add to your validation program is a routine 
visual check of trends in the process measurement data from the PGC. Some fault 
symptoms may be clearly visible. For instance:
Top: Steps and plateaus have recently appeared in the process data.
Middle: Spikes are endemic in the process data.
Bottom: Severe noise has recently appeared in the process data.
Figure 12.1 Diagnosing Process
Data Trends.
Source: Courtesy of Peak
Performance Analytical
Consulting.
300 PGC troubleshootingAlarming the calibration factors
A PGC shouldn’t need frequent calibration. If it does, the root cause should
be investigated and clearly understood. Yet, even with lengthy calibration
intervals, much value is gained by logging the peak calibration factors
and setting alarms to detect significant deviation. Any drift in sensitivity
or peak retention time, or deterioration of a calibration sample will show
as a calibration change. Set an alarm from the analyzer if a calibration factor
changes by more than (say) 5 %.
Statistical quality control
This classical validation procedure requires the PGC to analyze at regular
intervals a validation fluid containing the analytes and known to have a
constant composition similar to the process fluid. The results are plotted
on a control chart to make unexpected variations clearly visible. Setting
up the control chart involves some statistics but most modern PGCs can
do the math for you. The math detects trends and lets you know when an
analyzer needs attention before it fails! Maintenance is then proactive and
unnecessary work is eliminated.
With statistical performance validation, routine calibration is no
longer necessary – in fact, unnecessary calibrations are detrimental,
they just increase the measurement variance.
To track measurement precision and predict future trends, a validation fluid
need not be certified. A large cylinder filled with process fluid will often suf￾fice. It’s good practice to ask the process laboratory to analyze this sample
several times and record the average results. This agreed composition will
help with the future diagnosis of any difference between the laboratory
and process analyzer measurements.
When a PGC has to demonstrate product or environmental quality, meas￾urement accuracy becomes the prime concern. Measurement accuracy is
more difficult to validate because it requires the validation fluid composition
to be traceable to an agreed reference value.
For some analytes, validation may not be possible because their concen￾tration in a stored sample is unstable. Yet you might be able to validate other
components separated by that PGC and thereby capture some of the benefits.
The frequency of validation is an important consideration and for each
PGC it will depend on the perceived value of accurate measurements. As
always, value has a cost. Frequent validation will ensure the best data quality
at the highest cost. A lower frequency of validation is less costly but risks
substandard measurements going undetected for a longer time.
Statistical validation uses performance data gathered over a past time
period. It takes about 15 validations to establish this historical data. For non￾critical measurements, the optimum validation frequency is daily. The sys￾tem will then take 15 days to build an adequate historical database from
which it can make predictions. Often this span will increase to 20 or 30 days
Validation strategies 301and then remain constant, with each new datum replacing the oldest one.
From this database, performance errors will be detected within one day. This
is a recognized best practice in many quality assurance (QA) laboratories;
they validate their analyzers by analyzing a constant QA sample at the begin￾ning of each day.
The basic control chart validates only the precision of the measurements.
To also validate their accuracy the analyzer must be calibrated to an agreed
reference value (ARV), which might be the analysis of a calibration sample
certified by its manufacturer or the analysis of a validation fluid attested by
the plant laboratory. It’s important for all interested parties to agree on the
validity of the reference value.
For a process analyzer, automated validation is essential. The validation
fluid is connected to the PGC as another stream and programmed to run at
the appropriate time. A modern PGC will collect the data, do the stats, and
output alarm notifications when it needs attention.
Some arguments for control charting are:
It provides automatic daily assurance that the analyzer is working well.
It determines the statistical precision of the measurement.
It quantifies confidence in the measurements.
It anticipates failures before they happen.
It eliminates unnecessary calibrations and reduces the usage of an expen￾sive calibration sample.
Some arguments against control charting are:
The need to provide a quantity of validation fluid large enough to last for
many months of validations.
The need to take an analyzer offline for one or two analyses per day.
However, if the analysis is that critical so is the need for validation!
The cost and complexity to set up and maintain the Analyzer Manage￾ment System that collects and processes the data may hinder its adoption
and utilization.
Alarming the validation fluid analysis
This is a simplified version of the control charting technique just described.
It’s the simplest, cheapest, and least labor-intensive strategy to build confi￾dence in the analyzers and alert Maintenance and Operations to occasional
failure. The PGC measures a validation fluid each day (or other period) but
doesn’t perform a statistical analysis. Instead, a simple alarm warns when a
validation result deviates by more than (say) ±5 % from its nominal value.
The alarm levels should be set to the best compromise between too many
nuisance alarms and failing to detect important deviations. This technique
detects failures but cannot predict them. It catches faulty injection, retention
302 PGC troubleshootingtime change, detector malfunction, inadequate peak integration, calibration
error, or validation fluid deterioration.
Comparing PGC and laboratory analyses
Casual comparison of PGC results with the Plant Laboratory analysis is com￾mon and should lead to an investigation to find the cause for any mismatch –
it usually comes down to differences in sampling techniques.
Many process plants perceive or designate the laboratory analysis as the
most trusted measurement and use it to evaluate PGC performance. But even
the most careful comparison adds the variance of the laboratory analysis to
the variance of the PGC results. Sadly, this strategy is also prone to generat￾ing false alarms mostly due to different tapping points, asynchronous sample
grabs, dissimilar conditioning techniques, or perhaps the failure of the lab￾oratory method itself.
An automated and more scientific approach employing statistical princi￾ples is available but rarely encountered. With the continuing integration of
plant data systems, the automated comparison of PGC and laboratory results
may become commonplace. Already, some plants have assigned a single
manager responsible for all analytic functions, both laboratory and process.
The day may come when the main function of the Process Laboratory is to
validate the process analyzers.
Comparing redundant PGC analyzers
The most effective way to validate is to duplicate the measurement by
another analyzer. In critical applications, it’s not unusual to see three oxygen
analyzers measuring the same process stream. In most plants, PGCs are too
expensive for that. However, it may now be cost-effective to duplicate a
measurement or an entire analysis using a second column train in the same
PGC. Although susceptible to common-mode errors affecting both column
trains, duplicate measurements give an immediate validation of the selected
measurements in real time. Statistical comparison of the duplicate results
yields a high level of confidence in the validity of the measurements.
Comparing PGC with another analyzer type
This is a similar technique to duplicating analyzers, but rarely plausible as
PGCs measure analytes that other techniques can’t measure.
Troubleshooting
Two kinds of problem
As noted earlier, troubleshooting always starts with the sampling system.
Waters (2013) has described in detail the many techniques of sampling sys￾tem design and optimization. PGC troubleshooting work should not start
Troubleshooting 303until the sampling system has been exonerated: it must be known without
doubt that the sample reaching the analyzer is fully representative of the
process composition and is compliant with relevant analyzer specifications.
Troubleshooting is like detective work; you look for evidence and make
logical deductions to reach tentative conclusions. Evidence for the root cause
of PGC failure is usually visible on a chromatogram, and the first task of the
expert troubleshooter is to distinguish between two radically different kinds
of symptom:
Instrumentation symptoms are indications that something is wrong
with the detection system, preventing it from producing a flat and
smooth baseline.
Chromatographic symptoms are indications that something is wrong
with the separation of components and the measurement of analytes.
You need to know which of these problems you’re dealing with.
Here, we show how to regain a flat and smooth baseline by diagnosing
and fixing instrumentation problems. To avoid the risk of a wrong diagnosis,
always test and confirm the baseline is truly flat and smooth before continu￾ing with the next step. If fixing the baseline also eliminates the problem, exit
the procedure with the problem solved.
The next chapter introduces a unique method for diagnosing chromato￾graphic problems. It explains what the symptoms indicate and why they are
there. This complete understanding of what’s happening in the PGC is a nec￾essary prelude to diagnosis and repair. It finds the root cause of the problem
and indicates some ways to eliminate it.
Our recommended procedures don’t include indiscriminately changing
the PGC settings or randomly swapping the hardware devices. Guesswork
isn’t a reliable approach to PGC troubleshooting. A keen observation of
symptoms and some clear thinking are more likely to yield success.
Evaluating the baseline
What is a baseline?
An ideal PGC detector would respond only to analyte molecules and have
zero response to anything else. Then, the baseline would be true zero and
any signal from the detector would accurately represent the number of mole￾cules present. But real detectors respond to the presence of other molecules
and to variations in their operating conditions such as temperature and pres￾sure. These additional responses are still present and contributing to its out￾put signal while the detector is responding to an analyte peak. Since no
detector can measure its own baseline while measuring a peak, the PGC
processor must predict the baseline level under each analyte peak.
The baseline under a peak is the estimated trajectory of the detector
signal if no peak were present.
304 PGC troubleshootingSome chromatography software is able to predict a curved baseline under a
peak, but that option is not generally available. PGC data processors assume
the baseline is a straight line, either horizontal or sloping. When using the
horizontal setting the processor measures the detector signal at a convenient
time when no peaks are present, and then assumes it doesn’t change. If
expecting a sloped line, it measures the detector signal just before and just
after the peak and uses the average of the two as the best estimate of the
underlying baseline.
Why is it important? The PGC baseline measurement is more critical than
a typical instrument zero because the peak integration process magnifies any
error. Consider the area of a simple triangular peak: base times half height.
A 1 % error in estimating base level would add or subtract a rectangular area
equal to 2 % of the triangular area. It’s worse for a chromatogram peak
because we can’t measure the baseline level that close to the peak.
From Figure 2.5, we know the triangulated base width of a Gaussian
peak is four times its standard deviation (σ) and includes about 95.5 %
of its molecules. An integration period of twice the base width (8σ) would
include 99.99 % of the analyte molecules and is wide enough to measure
the baseline before and after the peak with negligible error from the peak
itself. The effect of a baseline error equal to 1 % of the peak height is then
given by:
Area (Ap) of Gaussian peak of height (h): Ap = hσ/0.40.
Area (Ar) of rectangle 8σ wide and 0.01h: Ar = 0.08hσ.
Percentage error in peak area estimate is: 0.08 × 0.4 = 3.2%
This calculation illustrates the importance of getting a flat and smooth
baseline. When using automatic peak detection, any additional baseline
noise necessitates a higher threshold setting for the start and end of integra￾tion, potentially omitting a large rectangular area from the bottom of the
peak. Forced integration provides a better area estimate because it averages
out the noise (Waters 2020, 284–285), yet itstillrelies on an accurate estimate
of the baseline level. Either way, the quality of the analytical measurement is
highly reliant on the quality of the baseline.
What’s the problem? Baseline troubleshooting starts with an observation –
the baseline is not flat and smooth:
A flat baseline is a chromatogram zero that follows a straight line. Ideally,
it should be exactly horizontal but a slight slope is tolerable provided it is
smooth.
A smooth baseline is a chromatogram zero essentially devoid of the rapid
jitter usually characterized as noise or spiking. However, noise is always
present; it must be low enough to have an insignificant effect on peak
detection and measurement.
Evaluating the baseline 305Any deviation from flat and smooth is an anomaly that could inter￾fere with the accurate measurement of analyte concentration. Our trou￾bleshooter must diagnose the root cause of the anomaly and then
eliminate it.
Chromatogram troubleshooting is challenging because three things hap￾pen at once. In addition to measuring the analyte peaks eluting from the col￾umn, the detector is responding to its baseline conditions and to carrier gas
variations caused by column switching. It makes sense to separate these
effects by ensuring the baseline is flat and smooth before attempting to diag￾nose a chromatography problem.
Checking the baseline
Baseline problems may be visible on a full chromatogram but it’s best to eval￾uate them without the added complexity of sample injection and column
switching.
Ensure your column and detector ovens are at the correct temperature
and the carrier gas flow rates are properly set. Power-up the detector. Then,
run your PGC in standby mode with the Method paused and no programmed
actions occurring. Set the baseline at about 10 % of scale on the display
device, or higher if it’s dropping rapidly.
Observe the baseline. If the PGC has been out of service, it may take sev￾eral hours or days for the chromatogram signal to stabilize. This is due to the
long elution times of substances absorbed by the columns during downtime.
If the contamination is severe, protect the detector by shutting off its power
and, if necessary, by disconnecting it from the column effluent. Continue the
carrier gas flow for a day or two before checking again. Be patient; there’s not
much you can do but wait. It might be possible to accelerate the process by
increasing the oven temperature, but only if you’re certain that a higher tem￾perature won’t damage the columns.
If facilities are available, consider a plan to remove the columns
and recondition them in a laboratory oven following the manufacturer’s
recommendations.
If the baseline is improving, wait for it to become flat and smooth.
A slight downslope is normal after column contamination; it’s okay to
continue troubleshooting while it levels out. If the baseline is not improv￾ing, a fault exists and the troubleshooting task is to find the cause and
fix it.
Prime suspect – the detector
The detector is the source of the chromatogram signal, so when the base￾line is not flat and smooth, it’s natural to focus on the detector. PGCs use
two kinds of detector, those that respond to the concentration of analyte
306 PGC troubleshootingmolecules in the carrier gas and those that respond to the number of
analyte molecules in the carrier gas. You need to know their different
behaviors.
Concentration-sensing detectors
These detectors output a signal proportional to the instantaneous concentra￾tion (g/mL) of analyte molecules currently present in the carrier gas. The
common example is the thermal conductivity detector (TCD).
A TCD will respond to any foreign molecules in the carrier gas and its
baseline signal is sensitive to variation in carrier flow rate and to pressure
waves. It also responds to variation in detector block temperature or detector
vent pressure, and the reference element doesn’t fully compensate for these
effects. Having a low source impedance gives the TCD some immunity from
induced signal noise and spiking.
Mass flow-sensing detectors
These detectors output a signal proportional to the instantaneousrate of arri￾val (g/s) of analyte molecules in the detector. As such, they are immune to
the addition of pure makeup gas, making them ideally suitable for use with
low-flow capillary columns. The most common example is the flame ioniza￾tion detector (FID).
The FID baseline signal is highly sensitive to hydrocarbon molecules in
the carrier gas but is not affected by other molecules nor by variation in
temperature, vent pressure, or carrier gas flow rate. However, it will out￾put spurious signals from any hydrocarbon impurities in the carrier gas,
fuel gas, or combustion air. If the flame jet gets dirty it can release particles
into the flame causing random spikes on the baseline. A high source
impedance renders the FID susceptible to radio frequency interference
and spiking.
Another thought
The detector may not be causing the problem.
It’s easy to assume you know the cause and then spend a long time trying
to justify it. You might get lucky, but it’s not an efficient procedure. Trouble￾shooting starts with a clear symptom of malfunction; it should then proceed
logically from a knowledge of the possibilities. If you don’t know what’s pos￾sible, you may miss the root cause.
A logical approach
To avoid the chance of missing something, start by dividing the potential
causes into binary categories that cannot exclude any cause, even those pres￾ently unknown. The detector is certainly a good place to start. There are two
Prime suspect – the detector 307mutually exclusive possibilities: something is wrong with the detector or
nothing is wrong with the detector. No other option is tenable. We could eas￾ily design experiments to test for those two options but for the moment it’s
sufficient just to think about them. In each case, there are two mutually
exclusive consequences:
If something is wrong with the detector:
The observed baseline includes features caused by the detector respond￾ing to variations in its external working environment, or:
The observed baseline includes features caused by an internal detec￾tor fault.
If nothing is wrong with the detector:
The observed baseline is the correct detector response to molecules pres￾ent in the carrier gas, or:
The observed baseline has features introduced during signal processing
that are not present in the original detector output signal.
That logic provides four comprehensive and mutually exclusive reasons
for the baseline anomaly. The root cause must be hiding in one of these.
While further binary divisions may be possible, these four categories may
be enough to highlight the possible causes of a baseline anomaly. Let’s try
to identify them.
The detector is working but responding to external influences
In this scenario, the detector is working well but is responding to changes in
its external working environment. These environmental influences normally
should not be present. Concentration detectors are much more sensitive to
their working environment than mass flow detectors.
As a practical test, disconnect the detector vent outlet at the PGC from the
vent piping, allowing it to vent freely to atmosphere.
If the anomaly disappears:
Pressure variations in the vent piping are causing the anomaly.
Find the cause and fix it.
If not, consider these other possible causes:
The detector temperature is changing – which should initiate an alarm.
Air flow or drafts are affecting the detector, possibly from a fan or
oven purge.
The flow rate of carrier or fuel gas is changing, possibly due to column
ageing or the mechanical failure of a valve or regulator.
The detector is subject to excessive vibration.
308 PGC troubleshootingThe detector is not working correctly
In this case, the baseline anomaly is coming from the detector itself and is
due to a local support inadequacy or a detector hardware failure.
If due to a local support inadequacy:
Is the flow rate of carrier, makeup, or fuel gas excessive or inadequate?
Is the detector excitation voltage abnormal or unstable?
If due to an internal fault:
Are there deposits ofsolid orliquid material inside the detectorflow paths?
For a TCD, is a sensor element aged or damaged?
For a flame detector, is the flame alight? Is the flame too small, too large,
or unstable? Is the collector electrode correctly aligned with the jet? Is
liquid water collecting in the detector (more likely with an FPD)?
For an ionization detector, is the applied voltage within acceptable limits?
Is ambient light leaking into a photon sensor or has the sensor failed?
Is there a partial short circuit or preamplifier fault?
Clean, repair, or replace the detector.
The detector is responding to molecules
According to this notion, there’s nothing wrong with the detector. The base￾line anomaly is due to the detector correctly responding to molecules in the
carrier gas. If so, where did the molecules come from?
The suspect molecules came from outside the PGC:
The molecules are part of the injected sample that escaped backflush or
heartcut.
The injector valve isleaking sample moleculesinto the carrier gasstream.
The molecules come from a contaminated gas cylinder, pressure regulator,
or gas supplyline. Perhaps the gas purifiers need reconditioning or replacing.
The suspect molecules came from inside the PGC:
The molecules are column bleed from an unstable liquid phase, perhaps
due to temperature change.
The molecules are a product of the high-temperature oxidation of the liq￾uid phase by air diffusing into the carrier gas.
The molecules are coming from solid or liquid deposits anywhere in the
carrier gas path.
The contamination is due to desorption of molecules previously adsorbed
on tubing or stationary phase.
Prime suspect – the detector 309If the anomaly is a correct detector response to foreign molecules in the
carrier or fuel gases, the detector is not at fault; it’s indicating a fault else￾where in the gas flow path.
The detector is not generating the anomaly
This option postulates that the baseline anomaly is not coming from the
detector at all. The detector output signal is flat and smooth, but it’s then
modified by electronic interference. For a practical test, connect a display
device directly to the analog output of the PGC (if available). For trouble￾shooting it’s best to see the real detector output signal, not one recon￾structed from digital data. If the anomaly disappears, the problem is
most likely electronic and caused by the data processing system, not by
the PGC itself.
If the baseline symptom is still present, suspect an electronic problem
within the PGC rather than a signal processing issue:
Insufficient shielding of signal wires or preamplifier, allowing radio￾frequency interference.
Poor grounding.
Dirty, corroded, or loose electrical connections.
Inadequate insulation, partial short circuits.
Dirty electric power.
Electronic component instability or failure.
Display device instability or failure.
Working from the symptoms
Armed with a clear understanding of the possible malfunctions, you are
ready to diagnose the root cause of the anomaly. If the baseline is improving,
wait. If the baseline is not improving, distinguish between these four instru￾ment symptoms:
Baseline Drift: continuous upward or downward change in the detector
signal, often exponentially approaching a flat baseline, as in Figure 12.2a.
Baseline Wander: a slow, random, and cumulative variation in the
detector signal, as in Figure 12.2b.
Baseline Cycling: a smooth waveform impressed upon an otherwise
constant detector signal, as in Figure 12.2c.
Excessive Baseline Noise: erratic short-term variations in an otherwise
constant detector signal, as in Figure 12.2d. Noise may also include reg￾ular or random spikes.
310 PGC troubleshootingEach kind of disturbance forms a distinct pattern on the baseline that is
easy to recognize when none of the others are present. When several are
active at the same time it’s more difficult, as the patterns can combine to
yield a noisy, drifting baseline. Figure 12.2x shows a baseline affected by
all four of the basic patterns. The appearance of a real baseline critically
depends on the amplitude of each individual contribution.
When present, each of the four contributing patterns indicates a different
fault condition. Since it might not be easy to identify all the patterns present
when combined in the baseline, the best approach isto identify the dominant
pattern, find itssource, and try to correct it.Reducing orremoving thatsource
is certain to improve the baseline signal. Then, other patterns may emerge
that require a different resolution.
x
a
b
c
d
Four types of detector instability may contribute to baseline noise. The first diagnostic task 
is to recognize which of these are present in the suspect baseline: 
x: Observed (blue curve) is the actual baseline signal output from the PGC.
a: Drift (green curve) is a gradual change in the baseline level, usually downward. 
b: Wander (red curve) comprises random small changes in the baseline level. 
c: Cycling (purple curve) is a regular and smooth oscillation of the baseline level. 
d: Noise (brown curve) is short-term random variation in an otherwise flat baseline. 
The observed baseline (x) is the cumulation of the four detector instabilities. It’s easy to see 
the contribution of the gradual downward drift (a). The fast-acting noise component (d) is 
also clearly visible. Without seeing the individual curves, though, it would be more difficult to 
distinguish the presence of both wander (b) and cycling (c).
Figure 12.2 Four Patterns of
Baseline Disturbance.
Prime suspect – the detector 311Diagnose the instrumentation symptoms and repair the underlying mal￾functions before attempting to troubleshoot a chromatographic symptom.
Diagnosis
Diagnosing baseline drift
Drift is a gradual change in the detector baseline signal, as in Figure 12.3.
The main causes of drift are:
The slow elution of solvent traces remaining in a new column recently
installed. The detector response will be very high at first and then decay
exponentially to a flat baseline. There may be several long bumps in the
decay curve due to minor components present in the original solvent.
Multiple real peaks eluting from a column that has not been used for a
while. When a column is in contact with the atmosphere it absorbs a sur￾prising array of chemical compounds. It can take many days to purge all
these foreign substances from the column. The baseline may slowly go up
and down as discrete components elute from the column.
The slow conditioning of a new detector or a gradual change in the detec￾tor environment, including temperature, pressure, and carrier or fuel gas
flow rates.
Contamination of the sample injector, detector, carrier gas, or detector
fuel gases. A newly installed carrier gas cylinder may contain impurities
that affect the detector. It’s a good practice for the process laboratory to
analyze the gas from each cylinder before connecting it to the PGC.
In programmed temperature operation, an upward drift is common due
to the increased column bleed at higher temperatures. Column bleed is the
contamination of the carrier gas by molecules from the liquid phase in the
column. For packed columns, the contamination is most likely due to an
increase in liquid phase vapor pressure, resulting in a gradual upward drift
as the column temperature rises. For capillary columns, it’s more likely due
to a polymeric liquid phase breaking down to form more volatile fragments.
This process starts to occur at a higher column temperature, resulting in a
distinct rise in the baseline later in the analysis cycle. Some laboratory
GCs attempt to eliminate this predicable drift by storing a blank baseline
(one with no sample injection) and subtracting it from each live analysis
chromatogram.
Drift is rarely due to pressure changes in the detector as those are usually
more erratic. Yet a slow change in barometric pressure, if uncompensated,
could result in an upward or downward drift in the baseline.
A little drift is common, and the PGC data processing techniques com￾pensate for it by running autozero routines and acquiring baseline measure￾ments before and after each measured peak. Table 12.1 gives guidance for
troubleshooting a more severely drifting baseline.
Figure 12.3 Baseline Drift.
312 PGC troubleshootingTable 12.1 Diagnosing a Drifting Baseline.
Observation Indication
Baseline level has changed or is gradually changing,
possibly moving in discrete steps.
Newly installed gas cylinder?
Yes A higher baseline may indicate contamination of the carrier gas
or detector fuel gas with something the detector responds to.
The baseline may go up in steps as different carrier gas
contaminants get through the columns:
• A newly installed gas cylinder is a prime suspect.
• A cylinder containing the wrong gas was installed as
carrier gas.
A lower baseline means the new gas is purer than the old gas.
No • Replace or repair any conditioning device in the carrier gas
or fuel gas supply lines.
Baseline level is very high and is decreasing
exponentially toward its normal level.
Newly installed column?
Newly installed detector?
Yes A new column contains traces of the solvent used in its
manufacture. The column manufacturer may recommend
conditioning at a higher temperature:
• Wait for baseline to become adequately flat. If you’re
certain the column can withstand a higher temperature,
increase the oven temperature to accelerate the process.
• Be patient: it might take several days. To shorten the time,
condition the new column in a laboratory oven before
installation.
A new detector may also take some time to stabilize.
No The column feeding the detector contains one or more large,
highly retained components that have escaped backflush or
heartcut. Check the column valve is working and is correctly
timed:
• Wait. It may take hours or days for the column to recover.
The contamination can also come from the environment. See
the next step below.
Baseline is moving up and down in random
smooth humps, each very much wider than
a normal peak.
Was the PGC recently shut down without carrier
gas flow?
Was a new carrier gas regulator recently installed?
Yes Multiple large peaks are eluting from the column and are not
separating from each other:
• When the PGC is not in use, always maintain a low carrier
gas flow. When the columns have no gas flow, they absorb
many different chemicals from the environment.
A new carrier gas regulator may contain traces of oil or solvent
that is contaminating the carrier gas. The level of
contamination can depend on ambient temperature:
• Use only non-venting stainless-steel regulators for carrier
and detector gases, not those with polymeric diaphragms.
Wait for the columns to clear. Be patient: it might take several
days.
No The humps may be unresolved heavies peaks from a prior
sample injection. Check the backflush operation and timing.
If the backflush is working but the problem persists, it might be
(continued )
Diagnosis 313Table 12.1 (continued)
Observation Indication
due to the injector valve continuously leaking sample fluid into
the carrier gas:
• Purge the sample injector with carrier gas to remove all
traces of sample fluid. Then run the Method for several
cycles, injecting carrier gas samples. If the humps
gradually disappear, repair or replace the leaking valve.
• If the baseline doesn’t recover, it might be due to a severely
contaminated column or detector:
• Replace the columns and try again.
• To test the detector, bypass the columns with a capillary
tube, allowing pure carrier gas to flow into the detector.
Baseline rises toward the end of analysis.
Programmed temperature?
Yes Increased column bleed at higher temperature:
• This is probably normal for the analysis. If intolerable, it
may be necessary to reduce the final column temperature
and accept a longer analysis.
No It’s unlikely, but the baseline rise might be due to many
partially separated heavy peaks:
• If so, check the backflush operation and timing.
Baseline gradually and continually
rises or falls during each analysis.
Programmed temperature?
Yes In programmed temperature operation, the carrier flow rate
into the detector will decrease slightly as the column
temperature rises:
• To overcome this problem,some programmed temperature
GCs use a carrier gas flow controller instead of a pressure
regulator.
An upward slope in the baseline may be due to column bleed
from a packed column.
The volatility of some non-silicone liquid phases gradually
increases as column temperature increases and the detector
responds to the increasing column bleed:
• If intolerable, use a less volatile liquid phase.
Valve or column leak. Inward diffusion of air causes oxidation
of liquid phase and subsequent column bleed, increasing as
temperature rises:
• Check for leaks with an electronic leak detector or by
pressurizing the entire column system and confirming no
loss of pressure in 15 minutes.
Don’t use a liquid bubble solution for leak-checking capillary
columns!
No In isothermal operation, drift may be from a cumulative
contamination of detector or injector:
• Clean or replace the detector or sample injection valve.
Otherwise, it’s probably an electronic problem.
314 PGC troubleshootingDiagnosing wander
Wander is a distinct form of baseline instability in which the actual baseline is
moving, whereas the other disturbances are deviations imposed on an other￾wise flat baseline. A wandering baseline will randomly move up or down at
random intervalsresulting in no repetitive pattern, asin Figure 12.4. The base￾line changes depicted in this figure truly are random, yet this curve seems to
have adopted a cyclic overtone which doesn’t exist in the actual data. It shows
how easy it is to misread the chromatogram. Be careful in your interpretation.
True wander is random in both time and extent, so the upward move￾ments of the baseline will tend to be balanced by equivalent downward
movements. If a wandering baseline moves continually up or continually
down, baseline drift is also present and should be diagnosed separately.
Common causes of wander include contamination of the sample injector
and its outlet tube, inconstant pressure at the detector vent, or unstable detec￾tor electronics. Otherwise, the detector is probably at fault. The jet of a FID
may be dirty and spontaneously releasing carbon into the flame. A TCD may
also respond to the presence of solids or become damaged in abnormal oper￾ation. Table 12.2 may be helpful when troubleshooting a wandering baseline.
Figure 12.4 Baseline Wander.
Table 12.2 Diagnosing a Wandering Baseline.
Observation Indication
Baseline is wandering up and down.
Does wander disappear when you temporarily
disconnect the detector vent line from the PGC?
Yes Minor pressure changes in the vent system are changing the
pressure in the detector and shifting the baseline. This symptom is
more likely to occur with concentration sensors like the thermal
conductivity detector.
Is detector vent connected to a common vent header?
Flow changes of other gases in the common header are causing
pressure variations:
• Separate the detector vent from other vent flows.
Is detector vent connected to a flare header?
Flare pressure can change dramatically during flaring operations,
having a much larger effect on the baseline:
• Never connect a detector vent to the flare; it must go to
atmosphere.
Is detector vent line connected to an outside vent?
Baseline wander is evident on some days and not on others.
Wind pressure on the outside vent is causing pressure variations in
the detector and shifting the baseline:
• Shield the vent from the wind or install a vent diffuser.
No If using a flame detector, suspect a contaminated vent tube. Traces
of chlorine compounds form hydrochloric acid that corrodes and
gradually blocks the vent tube.
• Inspect the detector and its vent tubing and clean as necessary.
Wander might be caused by solid or oily deposits contaminating
the sample injector or first column.
(continued )
Diagnosis 315Table 12.2 (continued)
Observation Indication
• Clean or replace the injector valve and tube connecting to the
first column.
• Backflush the first column for an extended time period,
preferably at a higher temperature.
• Replace the first column.
Wander might be due to inconstant quality of carrier or utility gases.
• Replace the gas cylinder.
• If using an absorbent trap to remove impurities, recondition or
replace the trap.
Don’t connect PGC gases with polymer tubes asthey are permeable
to atmospheric gases. Yes, permeation leaks can contaminate a
higher-pressure gas stream!
• Use cleaned stainless steel tubing (new tubing has an oily film
inside).
• Clean the tubing before installation by flushing with pure
hexane followed by methanol, then dry with a pure
nitrogen purge.
• Clean the tubing again during annual maintenance.
• Replace any gas pressure regulator that has a polymeric body
or diaphragm with an all-stainless-steel regulator.
Wander is jerky and erratic. Yes A gas leak at one of the detector connections may cause baseline
instability:
• Check the gas connections for leaks.
Liquid in the vent system may cause irregular backpressure on the
detector:
• Remove any liquid trap points in the detector vent line or vent
header. Or heat the lines to avoid condensation.
No Continue.
Wander is more pronounced when column valve
is on or off.
Yes Carrier gas leak in valve or column.
• Check for leaks with an electronic leak detector or by
pressurizing the entire column system and confirming no loss
of pressure in 15 minutes.
Don’t use a liquid bubble solution for leak checking!
No Continue.
Wander becomes more rapid when detector flow
rates are temporarily increased.
Yes Loose solid material is present in the detector:
• Clean or replace the detector.
No The fault is likely to be electronic, due to a damaged detector, loose
wire connection, dry solder joint, or component malfunction:
• Check all electronic connections.
• Repair or replace the detector.
316 PGC troubleshootingDiagnosing cycles
A cyclic baseline looks like a low-frequency sine, square, or sawtooth wave￾form imposed upon a flat baseline, as in Figure 12.5. If the baseline is also
rising or falling, treat it as a combination of drift and cycling errors. Cycling
is always due to something oscillating at the same frequency as the observed
baseline. The troubleshooting task is to find the synchronous source:
If using a TCD, the most likely causes are cyclic variations in the detector
temperature or its vent pressure.
If using a FID, the most likely cause is a regular variation in column bleed
due to inadequate control of column temperature. For this kind of bleed
to occur, the column feeding the detector would most likely be a packed
column containing a volatile liquid phase.
Ionization detectors are high-impedance devices that can be susceptible
to radio-frequency interference due to inadequate shielding.
Photometric detectors are extremely sensitive to light and may respond to
diurnal ambient light variations or changes in local illumination if inad￾equately shielded.
Otherwise, the root cause could be something outside the analyzer such
as a regular pressure variation on the detector vent. A square wave could be
due to electrical interference impressed upon the electricity supply by the
intermittent operation of an air conditioner or a nearby process motor.
Table 12.3 provides guidance for troubleshooting a cycling baseline.
Figure 12.5 Baseline Cycles.
Table 12.3 Diagnosing a Cycling Baseline.
Observation Indication
Baseline exhibits a sinusoidal
waveform.
Yes If using a thermal conductivity detector, its temperature is cycling:
• Check the detector temperature control.
• If in air-purged oven, ensure the detector is not in the direct air flow
from the oven heater.
If using an ionization detector, it’s responding to variations in column bleed
due to column temperature cycling:
• Check the column oven temperature control.
• If in air-blown oven, ensure the columns are not in the direct air flow
from the oven heater.
A faulty electronic pressure controller (EPC) is causing a ripple in the
pressure of a detector gas.
• Tune or replace the EPC.
No Continue.
Baseline exhibits a square waveform. Yes Most likely an electric interference. The up and down movements may be
synchronous with an electrical device switching on and off,such as a local air
(continued )
Diagnosis 317Table 12.3 (continued)
Observation Indication
conditioner, motor, or heater:
• Check PGC enclosure is properly grounded.
• Check detector wiring shield is properly grounded.
• Find the synchronous device by shutting down potential sources of
interference.
• Connect the PGC to an independent and clean power source.
No Continue.
Baseline exhibits a sawtooth
waveform.
Yes Pressure may gradually build up in the detector vent system, then suddenly
release. Test for a vent problem by temporarily disconnecting the detector
vent line from the vent header. If the waveform disappears you have a vent
problem:
• Check for liquid in the local vent header – more likely with a flame
detector. Remove any low spots where liquid can collect.
• Check for ice in the external vent pipework. Heat the vent line, as
necessary.
• Look for a restriction in the detector vent system that could cause
pressure buildup. Remove a found device such as a backpressure
regulator, pressure relief valve, check valve, bug protector, incinerator,
or water trap – the detector must vent freely to atmosphere.
• Never connect a detector vent to a flare header orsample recovery system.
No Continue.
Baseline exhibits regular spiking.
Are the spikes evenly spaced like the
positive spikes in Figure 12.6?
Yes Liquid in vent header:
• Check for liquid traps in the vent pipework.
• Eliminate low pockets.
With an FID, condensate may be dripping from a vent line:
• Install a short length of wider-diameter tubing to prevent the formation
of drips that block the flow of vent gases.
Electronic interference from on–off switching of heater, air conditioner, fan,
or pump:
• Find synchronous device and suppress contact arcing or run it on a
different power circuit.
• Consider installing a mains power conditioner for the PGCs.
No Any other waveform is probably due to an electronic fault.
318 PGC troubleshootingDiagnosing noise
While it’s possible to define all modes of baseline irregularity as noise, with
each having its own characteristic frequency (Annino and Villalobos 1992,
252–258), chromatogram noise usually refers to a continuous pattern of fast,
random, and erratic deviations from a smooth baseline. The noise depicted
in Figure 12.6 also includes synchronous and random spiking.
All measurements contain noise, defined as random variation in the
measurement signal caused by myriads of uncontrollable variations in
the measurement environment. Instrument designers strive to minimize
noise by specifying high-quality components and by finely controlling
the physical and electronic variables that affect the detector signal. Yet some
noise always remains.
Noise can be minimized but not eliminated. Focus on the noise
that is adversely affecting the detection and measurement of analyte
peaks.
We can measure noise simply as the peak-to-peak limits of its random var￾iation or more precisely by assessing a statistical property such as standard
deviation (σ). The peak-to-peak estimate is about 6σ.
Noise limits the ability of an instrument to detect the measurand. For reli￾able detection, the signal due to the measurand must be at least twice the
noise level and some scientists double that. Standard GC methods for labo￾ratory analysis often specify their limit of detection (LOD) on this basis.
PGCs rarely specify their LOD because they usually don’t attempt to meas￾ure trace quantities of analytes with concentrations close to the LOD. PGC
users generally consider measurement range to be more important –
together with an implicit expectation of accuracy.
All process measuring devices suffer some instability in their baseline sig￾nal.Thisinstability isstill presentwhenthe instrumentis measuring an upscale
value, so it adds to the sensor output signal and reduces the precision of meas￾urement. The loss of precision is particularly noticeable when measuring low
values of the measurand, due to the reduced signal-to-noise ratio at that time.
Like all direct sensors, early PGCs measured peak height above a baseline
level thereby incorporating the baseline noise into their measurementsignal.
In addition, the detector response was itself imperfect, adding more random
variation not present in the baseline noise.
PGCs now measure peak area and this has a different relation to noise.
When the PGC integrates the area of a chromatogram peak, it accumulates
dozens of data points. Each of these data pointsis a height above the baseline
and includes a sample of the baseline noise level at that instant. Peak inte￾gration sums all the data points which tends to cancel the positive and neg￾ative deviations due to signal noise – for random deviations the noise cancels
out. Yet, as mentioned previously, the baseline noise at the start and end of
peak integration still affect the calculated zero line used to quantify the inte￾grated area of the peak.
Figure 12.6 Baseline Noise.
Diagnosis 319Signal noise reduces the precision of the chromatographic measurement,
but a more troublesome effect is the unwanted and untimely triggering of
commands to start or stop peak integration.
A more troubling effect of PGC baseline noise is its ability to trigger
peak integration commands.
A modern PGC can reduce the signal noise level by applying a data smooth￾ing technique. The PGC digitizes the analog detector signal by sampling its
voltage at a preset rate, typically up to 40 times per second. It can then
dampen the noise level by averaging data points. There are two ways to
average the data. The PGC may average an odd number of successive data
points, thereby reducing the noise and the data storage requirement, or cal￾culate the moving average and retain the same number of data points
(Waters 2020, 281–283). The technique employed depends on the model
of PGC in use.
If carefully applied, data smoothing can reduce the noise level, but it also
reduces the speed of response and might cause inaccurate integration of fast
peaks. Most PGC applications don’t need it and chromatographers often dis￾able the function:
Don’t use data smoothing to hide a noisy signal; find the cause of the
noise and fix it.
Don’t even use data smoothing on a smooth signal because it will hide a
future noise problem that you need to be aware of.
Most PGC signal noise is caused by gas leaks in valves, columns, or detec￾tor; by contamination of the detector; or by electronic interference.
Table 12.4 may help with troubleshooting a noisy baseline.
Table 12.4 Diagnosing a Noisy Baseline.
Observation Indication
Disconnect the display device and short its signal input
connections.
Does the baseline noise disappear?
Yes The display device is not causing the noise.
• Reconnect the display and continue.
No The noise is from the display device.
Disconnect the detector vent tubing from the analyzer
and allow the detector to vent directly to the
atmosphere.
Does the baseline noise diminish when the detector vents
directly to atmosphere?
Yes Pressure pulses on the vent:
• If noise is variable day-by-day, check for wind buffeting
on an atmospheric vent. Install vent shield or muffler.
• Eliminate pressure variations due to the operation of a
vent scrubber or incinerator.
• Look for liquid accumulation in the vent pipe that forces
the vent gas to bubble through. Install an effective
liquid drain.
• Check the entire vent system and rectify any vent
restriction that might cause a variable backpressure on
the detector.
(continued )
320 PGC troubleshootingTable 12.4 (continued)
Observation Indication
• Replace the vent connection and confirm an improved
baseline.
Never connect a detector vent to a flare header – it must vent
to atmosphere.
No Continue.
Reduce the carrier gas flow rate into the detector.
Does this cause a change in the level or frequency
of the baseline noise?
Yes The noise is flow-sensitive:
• Noise sources may include too much flow in detector,
solid matter or involatile liquid in detector, or a
detector leak.
• A TCD sensor element may be damaged.
A high air flow into an FID may cause noise by flame flutter.
• Reduce the air flow.
No The noise is mechanical:
• Check for excessive vibration at detector.
The noise is electronic:
• Sources may include a loose connection or dry joint,
ungrounded cable shield, insulation breakdown of the
high voltage source (for ionization detector), RF
interference from process motors, etc.
• Consider a power conditioner to smooth the PGC power
supply.
Noise varies in duration or intensity (not uniform and
continuous as in Figure 12.6d).
Yes A gas leak in the connection between the column and
detector or on a detector fuel gas line:
• Check all detector gas connections for leaks.
• Fix the leaks.
No Noise is probably electronic.
For a flame detector, shut off the fuel supply to
extinguish the flame.
Has the baseline noise lessened?
Yes Solid material in detector is causing spurious signals:
• Clean or replace detector and its inlet tubing.
• Check internal surfaces and vent tube for corrosion.
Liquid water is collecting in the detector body:
• Increase the detector body temperature.
Incorrect gas flows:
• Check the flow rates of fuel and air in detector.
• Reset as necessary.
A capillary column inserted too far into the detector jet,
causing overheating of the column end:
• Remove the column from the detector, cut off and
discard a few centimeters, then carefully reinstall in the
correct position.
(continued )
Diagnosis 321Overall effect
Figure 12.7 illustrates the cumulative effect of baseline instability on the
detector signal and the observed chromatogram. The four detector distur￾bances combine with a true chromatogram signal to yield a noisy, drifting
chromatogram signal that is difficult to interpret. In an extreme case, the
noise can hide a true peak or create a false one. The baseline noise will also
cause errors in peak integration and a consequent loss of measurement
accuracy.
The four kinds of baseline disturbance must be minimized before
attempting to diagnose a chromatographic malfunction by the techniques
outlined in the next chapter. Indeed, eliminating the baseline anomalies
may suffice to solve the problem and obviate the need for further
diagnosis.
Table 12.4 (continued)
Observation Indication
No Continue.
For a thermal conductivity detector, switch off the
detector and check for leaks with an electronic leak
detector or by pressurizing the entire column system,
isolating the gas supply, and confirming no loss of
pressure in 15 minutes.
Leaks observed?
Yes A gas leak anywhere in the system; valves, columns, or
detectors:
• Find and fix the leaks.
Don’t use a liquid bubble solution for leak-checking
capillary columns!
No Continue.
The noise includes rapid spikes of similar amplitude
and duration.
Are the spikes equally spaced in time?
Yes Check the duty cycle of any local electrical device internal or
external to the PGC that might be synchronous with the
spikes such as a thermostat, relay, light switch, level
controller, conveyer, elevator, process motor, or sample
recovery system:
• If possible, add arc suppression devices to identified
sources.
• Connect the PGC to an independent and clean power
supply.
• Check the electrical shielding of signal wires is effective.
No Random spikes may be due to detector vent gas bubbling
through condensate in the detector vent piping:
• Eliminate any low points in vent lines where liquids can
collect.
Vent pressure pulses by wind buffeting on detector vent outlet:
• Install vent shield or muffler.
Solids contamination in detector, possibly emitted from a
solid-phase column such as a PLOT column.
• Clean or replace detector and its inlet tubing.
322 PGC troubleshootingKnowledge Gained
About validation
Don’t rush into troubleshooting until you’re
certain that the problem resides in the PGC.
Issues with the sampling system are the root
cause of most PGC problems.
A validation program may use several proce￾dures to collect data and discover faults.
Watching process data and logging calibration
factors are low-cost validation procedures.
x
y
a
b
c
d
Four types of detector baseline instability can distort the true chromatogram signal 
to produce the observed chromatogram from a PGC: 
x: Observed (blue curve) is the actual chromatogram output from the PGC.
 y: Real (gray curve) is the true chromatogram produced by the columns.
a: Drift (green curve) is a gradual change in the baseline level, usually downward. 
b: Wander (red curve) is random medium-term changes in the baseline level. 
c: Cycling (purple curve) is a regular and smooth oscillation of the baseline level. 
d: Noise (brown curve) is short-term random variation in an otherwise flat baseline. 
Note how the baseline instability changes the shape of the peaks and makes their
true area difficult to measure. 
Figure 12.7 Chromatogram with
Unstable Baseline.
Diagnosis 323Control charting establishes known perfor￾mance data and can predict incipient
failure.
Analyzing a constant sample without statis￾tical analysis is a simpler way to detect
failures.
Comparing PGC results with laboratory
results often reveals sampling errors.
Comparing redundant process analyses is a
very effective way to gain confidence in
the data.
About troubleshooting
Use binary logic to find potential root causes
of a problem without omitting any possibility.
All chromatogram symptoms indicate either
instrumentation or chromatography problems.
Instrumentation faults prevent the PGC from
outputting a flat and smooth baseline.
Chromatographic faults prevent a PGC from
accurately measuring the analytes.
Random settings or hardware swaps are not a
reliable approach to troubleshooting.
An ideal detector would respond only to ana￾lyte molecules, so its baseline would be
true zero.
Real detectors respond to other molecules and
to changes in their operating conditions.
The baseline is the chromatogram signal that
would exist if the analyte peak was not there.
Any error in the estimated baseline level
causes a larger error in the analyte
measurement.
Alwaystest and confirm the baseline isflat and
smooth before diagnosing other symptoms.
If the baseline is improving, wait. It may take
hours or days for it to recover.
Since the baseline signal comes from the
detector, it’s natural to suspect the detector.
The TCD responds to the concentration of
analyte molecules in the carrier gas.
The FID responds to the rate-of-arrival of
analyte molecules in the detector.
Another thought: there may be nothing wrong
with the detector.
Divide the possible errors into mutually exclu￾sive groups; for example, the detector IS or
ISN’T at fault.
Divide each group into mutually exclusive sub￾groups, four categories are probably enough.
Having understood the possibilities, evaluate
the symptoms visible on the PGC baseline.
The baseline may exhibit drift, wander, cycling,
or excessive noise, or any combination of these.
The four kinds of baseline instability combine
to form a complex pattern that is difficult to
interpret.
About drift
Drift is a continuous upward or downward
change in the chromatogram baseline.
Drift is often caused by low-volatility mole￾cules slowly eluting from a column.
324 PGC troubleshootingDrift can be caused by column bleed, particu￾larly if columns are temperature programmed.
Drift can be caused by a flow change, partic￾ularly if columns are pressure programmed.
About wander
Drift can be caused by column bleed, particu￾larly if columns are temperature programmed.
Drift can be caused by a flow change, partic￾ularly if columns are pressure programmed.
About wander
Drift can be caused by column bleed, particu￾larly if columns are temperature programmed.
Drift can be caused by a flow change, partic￾ularly if columns are pressure programmed.
About wander
Drift can be caused by column bleed, particu￾larly if columns are temperature programmed.
Drift can be caused by a flow change, partic￾ularly if columns are pressure programmed.
About wander
Wander is a slow and random upward and
downward change in the baseline signal.
Wander is random and forms no repetitive
pattern of baseline disturbance.
Wander is often due to pressure variations at
the detector vent.
Wander may be due to a leak in the carrier
gas connection to the detector.
Wander could indicate a dirty or contami￾nated detector.
Wander may indicate a poor electrical con￾nection or an electronic fault.
About cycling
Cycling is a low-frequency waveform
impressed upon an otherwise flat and smooth
baseline.
A cycling baseline is due to something oscil￾lating at the same frequency as the baseline.
The cycling baseline may exhibit a sinusoidal,
square, sawtooth, or spikey waveform.
The baseline cycle may be synchronous with
the temperature variation of a column or
detector.
The baseline cycle may be due to cyclic pres￾sure variation at the detector vent.
The cycle may be from the duty cycle of a
power load transmitted via the main power
supply.
The cycle may be due to RF interference
picked up by a poorly shielded high-imped￾ance detector.
The cycle may be due to light leakage onto a
poorly shielded photometric detector.
About noise
Noise is erratic high-frequency variation in
an otherwise flat and smooth baseline.
The precision and accuracy of all measure￾ments are limited by their baseline noise.
Baseline noise may be electronic or from ran￾dom flow or pressure variations in the
detector.
Peak integration tends to cancel noise, but the
imputed baseline is still dependent on noise.
A noise error in baseline level measurement is
magnified by the peak integration procedure.
A more troubling effect of noise is its ability to
trigger peak integration commands.
PGCs can smooth data to reduce noise but
this also limits the detector response to sharp
peaks.
Diagnosis 325Did you get it?
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 12
Q1. What are the two types of problem that may be visible on a chromatogram?
Q2. Consider a symmetrical peak that’s 40 % high on the display range with a
forced integration window timed to start one base width before the peak
apex and end one base width after the peak apex. What measurement error
would be caused by a constant error in the baseline level equal to 1 % of
the display height? Express your answer as a percentage of the true
peak area.
Q3. True or false?
A. The fuel gas added to the carrier gas entering an FID dilutes the peaks and
reduces detector sensitivity.
B. The area of a peak from an FID doesn’t change when the carrier flow
rate changes. For this purpose, assume the detector sensitivity is
unchanged.
C. The area of a peak from a TCD doesn’t change when the carrier flow rate
changes. For this purpose, assume the detector sensitivity is unchanged.
D. The TCD baseline is more sensitive to environmental factors like temper￾ature and pressure than an FID baseline is.
Q4. What are some typical causes of baseline drift?
Q5. What are some typical causes of baseline wander?
Q6. What are some typical causes of baseline cycling?
Q7. What are some typical causes of baseline noise?
References
Further reading
The principles of metrology including statistical concepts of precision, accuracy,
confidence, and control charting are detailed in Waters (2013, 612–650).
The statistical validation procedure is described in Horst and van Burgh (2022) and
in Waters (2020, 304–306). When getting into detail, refer to the latest editions of
ASTM D3764 (2022a) and ASTM D6299 (2022b).
The foremost troubleshooting guide for gas chromatographers is the cited book by
Dean Rood (2007). While aimed specifically at capillary columnsin laboratory gas
chromatographs, this useful book provides a concise review of GC theory and
gives countless hints and tips for resolving problems with GC hardware. It
may therefore be helpful for diagnosing PGC baseline problems.
An older but comprehensive guide is Part II: Gas Chromatography in the mainte￾nance and troubleshooting book by Walker et al. (1977, 95–304).
Cited
Annino, R. and Villalobos, R. (1992). Process Gas Chromatography: Fundamentals
and Applications. Research Triangle Park, NC: Instrument Society of America.
ASTM D3764 (2022a). Standard Practice for Validation of the Performance of Process
Stream Analyzer Systems. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International.
326 PGC troubleshootingASTM D6299 (2022b). Standard Practice for Applying Statistical Quality Assurance
and Control Charting Techniques to Evaluate Analytical Measurement System
Performance. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International.
Horst, D. and van Burgh, M. (2022). Practical Guide for Validation of Process Ana￾lyzer Systems According to the International Standards. Proceedings of the Ana￾lyzer Technology Conference (ATC 2022) on 2022/05/16-18. Galveston, TX: AT
Conference International Inc.
Rood, D. (2007). The Troubleshooting and Maintenance Guide for Gas Chromatogra￾phers, Fourth Edition. Weinheim, Germany: WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &
Co., KGaA.
Walker, J.Q., Jackson Jr., M.T., and Maynard, J.B. (1977). Chromatographic Systems:
Maintenance and Troubleshooting, Second Edition. New York, NY: Academic
Press Inc.
Waters, T. (2013). Industrial Sampling Systems: Reliable Design and Maintenance for
Process Analyzers. Solon, OH: Swagelok Company.
Waters, T. (2020). Process Gas Chromatographs: Fundamentals, Design and Imple￾mentation. Chichester, UK: John Wiley and Sons.
Tables
12.1 Diagnosing a Drifting Baseline.
12.2 Diagnosing a Wandering Baseline.
12.3 Diagnosing a Cycling Baseline.
12.4 Diagnosing a Noisy Baseline.
Figures
12.1 Diagnosing Process Data Trends.
12.2 Four Patterns of Baseline Disturbance.
12.3 Baseline Drift.
12.4 Baseline Wander.
12.5 Baseline Cycles.
12.6 Baseline Noise.
12.7 Chromatogram with Unstable Baseline.
New technical terms
If you read the whole chapter, you should now know the meaning of these
new technical terms.
References 327agreed reference value
baseline
baseline cycling
baseline drift
baseline noise
baseline wander
calibration sample
chromatographic symptoms
control chart
instrumentation symptoms
limit of detection
measurement environment
measurement range
root cause
validation
validation fluid
validation program
For more information, refer to the Glossary at the end of the book.
328 PGC troubleshooting13
Troubleshooting chromatograms
“All chromatographic faults are visible in the chromatogram if you know
where to look. Learn how to read a chromatogram and you’ll be better prepared
to diagnose problems – or even predict them in advance!”
Reading the chromatogram
Your ultimate skill
Successfully troubleshooting a PGC is the ultimate skill of the process ana￾lyzer specialist. It will take all the knowledge you gained from prior chapters
and all your practical experience. You will have to think deeply about the
symptoms you see and what they really mean.
Successfully troubleshooting a PGC isthe ultimate skill of the process
analyzer specialist.
Troubleshooting is like detective work, and all the clues are in the chromat￾ogram. Learn to read the chromatogram and you will be a better trouble￾shooter. Gather as many clues as you can: some may implicate the
perpetrator and some will exonerate the innocent. Eventually, the evidence
will reveal the guilty party. You’ll enjoy the elation of solving some difficult
problems. And you will never be without a job!
The chromatogram is the unprocessed signal from a detector and
contains all the information generated by the chromatographic system.
This information includes the desired analysis but also reveals signs of
inadequate chromatography or faulty hardware. If anything is wrong with
the measurement the error must be visible along the chromatogram. The
challenge is to find it.
All chromatographic faults are visible in the chromatogram if you
know where to look.
Process Gas Chromatography: Advanced Design and Troubleshooting, First Edition. Tony Waters.
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2025 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.This is the first rule of PGC troubleshooting:
Rule #1: If there’s nothing wrong with the chromatogram there’s noth￾ing wrong with the chromatograph.
This general principle doesn’t apply to calibration errors nor elec￾tronic failures that shut down the chromatogram display. Some might
also doubt it applies to peak integration and identification errors, but
even these data processing faults leave clues on the chromatogram from
a modern PGC.
A competent analyzer technician can perform a calibration or diagnose
and repair an electronic problem – the manufacturer’s training courses pro￾vide good instruction on those procedures. But it’s not enough. To fully
understand the PGC, you must know how to read the chromatogram
and to use the information found there to diagnose an existing or incipient
problem that others might not see. Therefore, this last chapter of the book
focuses on the chromatogram and what it can teach us.
The previous chapter introduced two different kinds of symptoms that
may be seen on a chromatogram: symptoms of instrumentation or chromat￾ographic malfunction. Refer to that chapter for the diagnosis and repair of
instrument problems – those that disrupt a flat and smooth baseline. Once
the baseline is good, we can focus on the chromatogram and the information
it contains.
This is the second rule of PGC troubleshooting:
Rule #2: Get a flat and smooth baseline.
Diagnosing chromatographic faults
Noticing a problem
After obtaining a flat and smooth baseline, the focus moves to the chromat￾ogram itself. A full diagnosis and repair will require four actions:
Recognizing that a problem exists.
Seeking the most likely cause.
Confirming that the diagnosis is correct.
Rectifying the problem.
The hardest of these is recognizing that a problem exists. Many PGCs suf￾ferfrom chronic issuesthat would be easy to fix if only someone noticed. This
is why in Chapter 12 we strongly recommended a validation program to
monitor analyzer performance and react to insipient faults before they affect
the quality of the PGC data.
You can’t fix a problem you don’t know about.
330 Troubleshooting chromatogramsRecognizing a malfunction
Recognition depends on your ability to notice small deviations from normal.
Of course, this assumes you know what normal looks like. Expert chroma￾tographers instantly notice slight abnormalities in peak shape or position
and intuitively know whether a baseline disturbance is worrisome or not.
These skills come from experience, but don’t despair because there’s a logical
procedure to reach the same conclusions. Start by comparing the current
chromatogram with an older reference chromatogram – one that exem￾plifies perfect performance.
Modern PGCs can store one or more reference chromatograms and super￾impose them over a current chromatogram on the display – a powerful diag￾nostic tool. It’s a good idea to keep two reference chromatograms, one of the
calibration sample and one of the process fluid. The two samples will have
different amounts of the analytes and some different background compo￾nents. These differences can be helpful when diagnosing a problem with
your current chromatogram.
Look at the typical example in Figure 13.1. The peaks in a current chro￾matogram will not be the same height as those on the reference chromato￾gram, so focus instead on any change in their retention time or width. Look
closely at their shape. Is any peak rising more rapidly than on the reference
chromatogram? Or falling more slowly and tailing as it approaches the base￾line? Or is any part of a peak missing? Look also at the baseline. Do both
chromatograms exhibit the same baseline disturbances or has something
new appeared?
Be skeptical about your reference chromatograms – watch out for imper￾fections that have been present from the start. The following SCI-FILE:
Overlaying the current chromatogram with a reference chromatogram stored when the PGC 
was performing well is a powerful method for detecting small changes. Here we see that the 
retention times of all the peaks have shifted. But look closely. Since the earliest peaks have 
moved by the same factor as the latest peaks, we diagnose a change of carrier gas flow rate. 
A change in column temperature or liquid phase performance would not affect the holdup 
time, so the early peaks would not have shifted as much.
Figure 13.1 Overlaid
Reference Chromatogram.
Source: With permission
from ABB, Inc.
Diagnosing chromatographic faults 331On Diagnosis gives an example of a chromatogram problem missed during
factory inspection and still present during commissioning at the jobsite. If
you solve a problem like that, don’t forget to save the new reference
chromatogram.
Seeking the cause
The need to troubleshoot a chromatogram may be due to an acute malfunc￾tion that is disabling the PGC and urgently needs attention. Or the PGC is
working well but you notice something that doesn’t seem right and wonder
what’s causing it. In both situations, it’s helpful to know the prime cause of
everything.
Yes, there is one (and only one) cause for everything on the chromatogram!
Consider this logic:
When the PGC is in standby condition with no programmed events
occurring, the baseline is flat and smooth.
When the Method is running, programmed events occur.
Therefore, everything on the chromatogram that’s not flat and smooth is
caused by a programmed event.
Stop for a moment and think about that: it’s powerful.
Events that affect the chromatogram include turning chromatographic
valves ON or OFF, making baseline adjustments like autozero, adjusting dis￾play sensitivity to keep peaks onscale, and inserting marker spikes to indi￾cate event timing. Of these, valve actions are the cause of all the peaks and
baseline disturbances. We include pressure-balance column switching in the
generic phrase, valve actions.
Valve actions are the key to PGC troubleshooting because they cause
everything on the chromatogram, including all the peaks and all the
baseline disturbances.
This key role of valve actions is peculiar to process gas chromatographs,
since laboratory gas chromatographs rarely use valves. It’s captured by
the third rule of PGC troubleshooting:
Rule #3: Everything on the chromatogram is caused by valve actions.
Except the inserted marker spikes, yet even those small marks reveal
important information about event timing.
At first, it seems there must be exceptions to this simple rule. It assumes
that the columns are performing well, and the pressures, temperatures, and
flow rates are properly set. True, but we shall see that applying the third rule
also leads to deductions about those important variables, so it can help to
diagnose them too. For instance, checking the time between a valve action
and a peak can reveal a difference in carrier flow rate or a column failure and
can even point to which column is at fault (Waters 2017).
332 Troubleshooting chromatogramsIdentifying artifacts
Now we know valve actions cause everything on the baseline, it’s natural to
ask what kinds of thing can we expect to see on a PGC chromatogram? And
what do they look like? Let’s call them artifacts.
Four categories of artifact might appear on a flat and smooth baseline:
Peaks: hopefully the familiar detector response to real injected compo￾nents – but they might be alien to the sample. We’ll call them artifacts
until they’re confirmed as real peaks.
Spikes: momentary baseline deflections due to detector malfunction or
electronic interference.
Bumps: the fleeting detector response to transient pressure or flow
variations.
Steps: the sustained detector response to a changed flow rate or a newly
contaminated carrier gas.
Every deviation from flat and smooth must fit into one of these categories,
so the initial diagnostic task is to correctly assign each artifact to one of the
four. To do that, you’ll need to discover and evaluate two key properties of
each artifact: its overall shape and its retention time.
If a fast diagnosis is important, it’s okay to focus on the anomaly that is
interfering with a measurement and urgently needs resolution. The best
practice, though, is to evaluate every artifact on the chromatogram. There
may be a chronic problem or a developing fault that no one has yet noticed.
See the SCI-FILE: On Diagnosis for a good example of how that can
happen.
The approach to troubleshooting outlined here is rapid and conclu￾sive. Instead of guessing and making arbitrary changes – hoping to
find the problem by blind luck – this logical procedure always leads
to a solution.
The first task is to pinpoint the valve switching times, usually identified by
marker spikes. In a simple backflush system using a 10-port valve there are
only two valve actions, valve ON and valve OFF. It’s perhaps surprising to
realize that these two actions are responsible for every artifact on the chro￾matogram. There’s no need to come up with fanciful notions; these two valve
actions are the prime cause of everything. Look no further, one of them must
be causing the anomaly you are trying to diagnose.
More complex column systems will have more valve actions and it’s
important to locate them all because one of them must be the cause.
Carefully estimate the elapsed time from each prior valve action to the
suspect artifact. For a peak, note the time to its apex; for other artifacts note
the time to their onset. There might have been several valve actions prior to
the artifact and each one is a potential cause, so you may have several times
to consider.
Diagnosing chromatographic faults 333Taken together, the shape and elapsed time of each artifact determine
whether it’s a peak, spike, bump, or step. Each deviation from the baseline
must be one of these, including the anomaly itself. Later in the chapter we
discuss the key properties of these four artifacts, which will help to confirm
their root cause. For a tentative initial diagnosis, though, here are the main
properties to look for:
A peak has a familiar near-Gaussian shape and a known retention time
that is longer than the holdup time of each column. On liquid-phase col￾umns, peak widths follow a distinct pattern increasing by the square root
of their retention time, as in Figure 13.2. Any peak that doesn’t fit that
pattern must have entered the column system at a different time than
the other peaks. However, peak widths can be irregular on solid-phase
columns. For instance, a branched paraffin peak may be wider than
the normal paraffin that follows it.
A spike can be due to transient detector vent pressure disturbances, par￾ticles from a PLOT column, or electronic interference. Spikes synchro￾nous with the PGC Method are associated with programmed events,
per the example in Figure 13.3. These spikes are instantaneous with
no delay from their causative event. A typical spike has zero rise time
but might exhibit a slightly dampened decay, sometimes going a bit neg￾ative before returning to the baseline. Any spikes asynchronous with the
Method will also occur during baseline testing and those tests should
have diagnosed and eliminated them. Electronic spikes rarely occur in
digital measurement systems but were common in the older analog
systems.
A bump is due to a pressure or flow disturbance in the carrier gas passing
through the detector. Bumps are more prevalent with thermal conductiv￾ity and other concentration detectors. Figure 13.4 shows a typical exam￾ple. A valve action can generate a pressure wave that travels at the speed
ofsound and reachesthe detector immediately afterthat event. Typically,
the bump will look like a small, distorted peak that rises more rapidly
than it falls. Flow disturbances are temporary flow upsets typically
caused by reversing the flow in a column. They often look like a dam￾pened sine wave and travel at carrier speed, delayed only by the holdup
time of the column.
A step is a shift in the baseline due to a sustained change in carrier gas
flow rate or purity. Figure 13.5 shows the typical short delay before a flow
step appears. This delay is typically equal to the holdup time of the last
column. An equal delay occurs before the baseline returns to its original
level. A contamination step can take much longer to appear as the delay
is equal to the retention time of the contaminant molecules in the last
column. A good example is the retention of a remnant peak after a heart￾cut valve action.
Inj
Air B E F C G
D
True peaks exhibit a gradual increase of 
width and may display the doubling rule 
as evident with Peaks B, C, E and G 
above.
Figure 13.2 Typical Peaks.
Inj
Event
A spike that occurs at the same time 
on successive chromatograms is the 
result of a scheduled event. The spike 
occurs immediately after the event 
with no time delay. 
Figure 13.3 Typical Spikes.
Instant 
Pressure 
Pulse
Delayed Flow 
Disturbance
Event
Inj
A bump due to a pressure wave 
reaches the detector immediately after 
the event that caused it. A bump due 
to a flow disturbance suffers delay due 
to the holdup time of a column. Both 
kinds of bump may look like a small 
peak. Make a temporary change in the 
event time to confirm it’s a bump and 
not a peak.
Figure 13.4 Typical Bumps.
334 Troubleshooting chromatogramsThis is the fourth rule of PGC troubleshooting:
Rule #4: Identify a chromatogram artifact by comparing its shape with
the time elapsed since each valve action that might have caused it.
Confirming the diagnosis
In most cases, you can confirm a valve action is causing the artifact by mak￾ing a small temporary change to its event time. The artifact should follow the
change, staying the same time after the event – but remember the affected
artifact may be in the next analysis cycle! If the artifact doesn’t move, you are
looking at the wrong valve action.
This is the fifth rule of PGC troubleshooting:
Rule #5: Confirm the diagnosis by making a small change to the suspect
event time and seeing the same change in the time of the artifact.
Another useful test is to rig the PGC to inject its own carrier gas. For a
PGC with a thermal conductivity detector, simply divert the reference vent
flow into the sample inlet. Then, run the Method as usual. All the sample
peaks will disappear leaving the valve artifacts in full view.
The logical approach has identified the artifact and the valve action caus￾ing it. The following SCI-FILE: On Diagnosis provides a worked example of
this powerful procedure.
SCI-FILE: On Diagnosis
Worked example
This case study outlines the logic used to diagnose
the “Transient” artifact seen in Figure 13.6. We
obtained this chromatogram at an onsite startup
in Sweden.
Checking the history
The first step was to compare this chromatogram
with the original one obtained six months ago
during the factory acceptance test. We found the
artifact was also present on that original chromat￾ogram and was about the same shape and
height and in the same position as on the current
chromatogram. The spikey artifact was strangely
reproducible.
When chromatographers call an artifact a
Transient, it means they don’t know what it is.
Inject
0 s
B/F
43 s
End
123 s
Repeat
Trace Nitrogen
0.3 % Ethane
Transient
This chromatogram has a large spikey artifact that occurs 
repeatably just before the ethane peak on each 
chromatogram. The column designers didn’t know what it 
was, so they labeled it “Transient.” Here we demonstrate 
a definitive diagnosis by logical troubleshooting direct 
from the chromatogram record.
Figure 13.6 Troubleshooting Example.
VON New Flat 
Baseline
Same
Delay
VOFF
Same
Delay
A step due to a flow change will occur 
a short time after the event that 
caused it – usually the holdup time of 
the last column. It takes the same time 
to return to the original baseline. 
Steps due to introducing a 
contaminated carrier gas may take 
much longer to reach the detector.
Figure 13.5 Typical Steps.
Diagnosing chromatographic faults 335This artifact was not affecting the measurement
and was doing no harm, yet we were curious about
what it was and why it was there. Our curiosity
led to a good example of logical troubleshooting.
Finding the valve actions
Only two valve actions occur on the chromatogram,
so it’s probable that this column system uses a sin￾gle valve to inject a sample and backflush the first
column. The first programmed event turns the col￾umn valve ON at time zero to inject the sample. The
second event turns the valve OFF to start backflush
at 43 s into the 123 s analysis cycle.
This PGC uses hydrogen carrier gas and mea￾sures the ethane content of a propane stream.
The propane peak is backflushed along with any
later components.
Studying the shape
The artifact is very narrow compared with the adja￾cent ethane peak and we can’t expand the timebase
to examine itsshape in more detail. At first glance it
looks like a spike, but it might be a true peak.
Estimating elapsed times
The given cycle time is 123 s, so each division on
the chromatogram chart is 20 s and the estimated
elapsed times are:
From valve action: #1 #2
• Nitrogen peak: 20 s n/a
• Suspect artifact: 55 s 12 s
• Ethane peak: 70 s 27 s
Seeking the cause
The nitrogen peak comes out in 20 s, so if the arti￾fact is from sample injection it has an additional
retention of 35 s. Of the 4 artifacts, only a peak
can have a longer retention than nitrogen, but
the artifact is far too narrow to be a 55 s peak when
compared with the adjacent 70 s ethane peak.
Deduction: the artifact may be a peak but it didn’t
come from the first valve action.
As an aside, the most likely extra peak is methane
and by the doubling rule (discussed in the main
text) this would elute at 45 s, about halfway
between nitrogen and ethane. Even if we disregard
the width disparity, the artifact can’t be methane.
Perhaps the artifact is a spike caused by elec￾tronic interference? No, the artifact is synchronous
with the analysis and no event occurs at that time.
An electronic interference can’t wait for 12 s before
it spikes.
Deduction: the artifact is not a spike.
The only viable conclusion is that the artifact is a
peak that is introduced into the column system
by the second valve action. But that raises another
issue: how can a peak reach the detectorin only 12 s
when the nitrogen peak takes 20 s? There’s only
one way; the artifact peak doesn’t pass through
both columns.
Deduction: the artifact is a true peak that enters
the second column when the valve turns OFF.
Since it takes only 12 s to traverse the second col￾umn the peak is highly likely to be air or nitrogen.
Nothing else could travel that fast. The peak is
probably air, as there is no constant supply of nitro￾gen available. It can’t be hydrogen because this
PGC runs on hydrogen carrier gas.
Deduction: a reproducible volume of air enters the
second column each time the valve turns OFF.
This PGC uses a slide valve. Inspection of the
valve diagram in Figure 13.7 reveals that the
valve slider traps and holds a small volume of car￾rier gas during the valve ON duration – a com￾mon feature of all linear valves. Our diagnosis
suggests that the trapped hydrogen leaks out
and air leaks in to replace it. When the valve
turns OFF, this precise volume of air enters the
second column – which explains why the artifact
is so reproducible.
Final diagnosis: the valve has a damaged slider
or gland allowing atmospheric air to replace the
trapped volume of hydrogen carrier gas.
336 Troubleshooting chromatogramsFixing a chromatographic fault
We know that the prime cause of everything on a chromatogram is valve
actions, but to discern the root cause of a particular artifact you need
to know:
Which kind of artifact is it?
Which valve action caused it?
How did it get to that location in the chromatogram?
Now you do. You know what the artifact is and how it got there. That
knowledge may be enough to reveal the root cause of the problem. If so,
fix the problem and exit this troubleshooting procedure.
Confirming the diagnosis
Set the valve OFF time two seconds earlier and run
a chromatogram. A change in artifact elution time
from 55 to 53 s (staying 12 s after the OFF time) will
confirm the diagnosis.
Another confirmation is to purge the sample gas
from the valve with a stream of carrier gas, then run
the PGC to inject only carrier gas. If the artifact
remains even without sample gas it must be an
air peak.
The solution is to repair or replace the column
valve and reset the valve timing. The artifact will
disappear.
Other observations
The chromatogram includes artifacts due to pres￾sure waves formed by the reversal of the first col￾umn. Their typical shapes appear immediately
after valve actions. Look closely at how they differ
from the true shape of the ethane peak.
The first column is in forward flow mode for 43 s
and in backflush mode for 80 s, which shows good
design. Since the backflush runs for 65 % of the
time, there is no need for a high backflush flow.
If the backflush flow is high, reduce it to match
the forward flow. The lower flow rate will minimize
the pressure waves and reduce the artifacts they
generate during column switching.
Slide Moves Up
Column 1
Sample 
Gas
Carrier 
Gas (H2)
Sample 
Vent
Sample Loop
Column 2
Detector
Restricted
Backflush 
Vent
Regulated
Carrier 
Gas (H2)
This is the 10-port gas sample injection and backflush valve 
used to produce the chromatogram in Figure 13.6. When in 
backflush mode the slider is up allowing the hydrogen carrier 
gas to pass through the hole in the slider. Then, when the 
slider comes down to inject the sample it traps carrier gas in 
the hole. The trapped hydrogen (colored red above) leaks 
out and air leaks in to replace it. When the slider moves up 
to backflush the first column the precise volume of air in the 
hole enters Column 2 and quickly reaches the detector, 
forming the sharp peak seen on the chromatogram in Figure 
13.6.
Figure 13.7 Valve Diagram.
Diagnosing chromatographic faults 337But knowing what the artifact is – peak, spike, bump, or step – and dis￾covering how it got into the system might not be enough. The final task is to
look closely at the artifact:
Why is it that shape?
Why is it in that location?
Where did it come from?
These can be difficult questions. The answers will come from a keen
understanding of the properties of the different artifacts and why they
may not behave as expected. It’s impossible to catalogue all possible faults,
so we list below the key properties of peaks, spikes, bumps, and steps. We
hope this listing will help you discover the root cause of the problem you
are trying to solve and thereby reveal the proper solution.
Key properties of peaks
What to know about peaks
A peak is the detector response to component molecules in the carrier gas.
Only molecules experience more delay than the carrier gas as they pass
through the columns. It follows that any baseline artifact that experiences
a delay more than the expected carrier gas delay must be due to molecules
whether it looks like a peak or not.
Peaks from liquid phase columns form a pattern. Their retention time is
predictable, and their width increases with their time in the columns. Know￾ing this, we expect a peak to fit in with the peaks around it. A peak that
doesn’t fit this pattern is an anomaly. It might be a true peak that entered
the column system at a different time than the other peaks – or it might
not be a peak at all. Either way, it shouldn’t be there.
Carefully examine each peak on the chromatogram to confirm it really is
a peak and it fits the pattern, then check that its identification conforms
with all the visible evidence. Keep in mind that the retention time of a peak
can’t tell you for certain what the peak is, but it can certainly tell you what
it isn’t.
Retention time pattern
When several substances have chemical structures that differ from each
other only by their number of methylene groups (─CH2─), they are known
as homologs.
Homolog peaks form a distinctive pattern on the chromatogram. Each
additional methylene group in a homolog doubles the adjusted retention
time of its peak. Thus, an n-pentane peak has double the adjusted retention
time of an n-butane peak. This is the doubling rule (Waters 2020, 61–64)
338 Troubleshooting chromatogramsand it works for every liquid phase. If you know the retention times of any
two n-paraffins (or one n-paraffin and the air peak), this simple rule predicts
the location of every n-paraffin on that chromatogram.
The doubling rule also works for the iso-paraffins, alcohols, ketones, or
any other homologous series of peaks on an isothermal column. The multi￾plier may not be exactly 2.0 but it’s usually in the range 1.9–2.0.
Temperature programming of the column eliminates the doubling.
The locations of the homolog peaks are still predictable; they are
equally spaced when they experience a uniform rate of temperature
increase.
Thisis a very useful rule when troubleshooting peak identities. If a peak is
at its predicted location, there’s a good chance that the identification is cor￾rect. And if the peak is somewhere else it’s almost certain the peak is incor￾rectly identified.
Retention time shift
Process chromatographs identify peaks by their retention times so it’s
important for the retention times to be reasonably constant. If the peaks
on your current chromatogram don’t line up exactly with the reference
chromatogram there’s something wrong. Look closely:
Did all the peaks move by the same absolute amount? This would be
unusual and could indicate that the injection time marked on one of
the chromatograms is incorrect.
Did all the peaks move by the same retention multiplier? This would
indicate a change in the carrier gas flow rate. You can see this effect
in Figure 13.1.
Did all the peaks move by the same retention multiplier starting from
the estimated holdup time? This would indicate a change in column tem￾perature or column damage (such as contamination or loss of liquid
phase), which always causes a reduction in retention times.
Did one or more peaks move, and the others stayed put? This would indi￾cate a flow change (or a temperature change) in only one of the columns.
Or perhaps the time of a valve action changed?
Was peak movement random? Suspect a carrier gas leak in a column
valve or one of its column connections. A midway leak increases the flow
through upstream columns and reduces the flow through downstream
columns.
Peak width
A key property of a peak from a liquid-phase column is the relationship
between retention time and width. From Equation 2.23, we know that the
Key properties of peaks 339base width of a peak varies by the square root of its retention time. Any peak
on the chromatogram that doesn’t fit that relationship is suspect:
Any peak narrower than an earlier onscale peak probably hasn’t been in
the columns aslong asthe other peaks – it didn’t enter the column system
at sample injection time. Look for another valve action that could have
injected it.
Any onscale peak wider than a later peak has been in the column system
longer than the other peaks. Most likely it’s a peak left over from
the previous analysis. Or perhaps it’s a composite of two or more
overlapping peaks, although it’s rare for a combined peak to have a
perfect shape.
A misshapen peak may be naturally wide, as often happens on solid￾phase columns. Severely tailing or fronting peaks are often wider than
those around them. This is also true of offscale peaks.
Peak height
If all peaks are higher than expected, suspect an abnormal detector response
or, for a gas sample, a pressurized sample volume. All peaks lower can be due
to a partly plugged sample volume, an inadequate detectorresponse, or a leak:
The leak might be in the sampling system; purge nitrogen leaking into
and diluting the sample gas flow. Install block-and-bleed isolation valves
on the nitrogen inlet.
An internal injector valve leak allowing carrier gas or air to leak into the
sample volume would dilute the injected sample, reducing all the peak
heights.
An outward leak anywhere in the path between injector and detector
would reduce the height of all peaks traveling that path.
Leaks are a common problem with PGCs. Carrier gas leaks can occur in
the injector valve, column valve, or detector, or in their column connections.
A leak can reduce the peak heights and change the carrier flow rate, affecting
retention times. In addition, a column valve leak might upset the flow bal￾ance of the columns, possibly spoiling the separation. A leak at the detector
inlet would allow air ingress, probably causing baseline noise.
An enhanced detector response from a TCD might be due to a higher ele￾ment current or lower block temperature. With an FID, it might indicate a
change in the flow rate of carrier, makeup, or fuel gas going to the detector.
With an FPD, it could also be due to a flow change or to an increased exci￾tation voltage on the photomultiplier tube. A reduced detector signal would
indicate the inverse of these effects.
If some peaks are affected and some are not, it’s most likely a chromatog￾raphy problem. A retention time shift may have moved some peaks out
of sync with the fixed timing of a column valve. If the PGC uses parallel
340 Troubleshooting chromatogramschromatography and all the affected peaks are in one column train, trouble￾shoot that train. If the fault affects only one type of analyte – olefins or acet￾ylenes, for instance – suspect a chemical reaction, especially with hydrogen
carrier gas.
Randomly variable peak heights (loss of precision) can be due to many of
the causes for higher or lower peaks cited in Table 13.1a.
As noted in Chapter 12, it’s a very good practice to keep records, electron￾ically or manually, of the calibration factors for each PGC measurement.
A gradual or sudden change in calibration factor is likely an indication of
something wrong and must be investigated.
Unusual peak shape
True peaks have a characteristic shape that makes them easy to recognize.
Most are approximately Gaussian in shape, slightly skewed toward their
direction of travel.
There are a few exceptions. A severely tailing or triangular peak may
occur when the polarity of its molecules is grossly different from the polarity
of the stationary phase. Such tailing is frequently seen with active solid
columns. A fronting peak is more likely due to injecting a sample volume
that exceeds the maximum feed volume or sample capacity of the column –
especially with capillary columns. For more information on peak shape,
review Chapters 7 and 8.
Newly appearing peak shapes that demand investigation are overlap￾ping peaks, sliced peaks, and flat-topped peaks. Table 13.1b provides
some advice for troubleshooting these malfunctions.
A valve action event should never occur during or just before the
integration window of a measured peak as the associated baseline upset
could distort the peak shape and cause errors in peak detection and
quantification.
Unexpected peaks
When a new peak appears on the chromatogram, the task is to discover what
it is and why it is there. If the new peak fits the existing pattern, it’s probably
just an extra component in the processsample or a normally present one that
should not reach the detector – perhaps it should have been backflushed? It
might be easy to identify a peak like this.
Are you sure it’s a peak? Some baseline disturbances look like peaks. The
main difference is in their timing. Most baseline upsets occur at or soon after
the event that caused them. A peak is different, it has a significant retention
time from its causative event.
If the rogue peak doesn’t fit the existing pattern, carefully examine its
shape and measure its retention time from any prior valve actions. If one
of those retention times is consistent with the width of the peak, examine
that valve closely. It’s likely that an internal leak in the valve is allowing
Key properties of peaks 341Table 13.1a Procedure for Diagnosing Peak Size Problems.
Observation Indication
No peaks on chromatogram.
Is the chromatogram signal
attenuated to zero?
Yes No signal is reaching the display:
• Adjust the signal attenuation or display sensitivity to suit.
• Repeat the observation.
No No sample was injected:
• Check sample flow and adjust as necessary.
• Check sample injector valve operation – repair or replace as necessary.
• Check for a severe leak of carrier gas into the sample volume.
Detector failure:
• Check detector is powered.
• For a flame detector, check flame is alight.
• For a thermal conductivity detector, check for broken element.
All the peaks were backflushed:
• Check the backflush valve timing and reset as necessary.
Refer to Chapter 10.
The heartcut valve failed to operate so no peaks entered the second column:
• Check operation of the column valve – repair or replace as necessary. Refer to
Chapter 11.
No sample components reached the detector due to:
• Broken fused-silica capillary column.
• Blocked valve, column, or connecting tube.
• Incorrect valve connections (after service).
• Severe carrier gas leak.
The size of all chromatogram
peaks from the same
detector has increased by the
same factor.
Was the detector sensitivity
increased by a change to the
carrier or fuel gas flow rates
or by electronic means?
Yes If there was a good reason for changing the flow rates or electronic sensitivity, the PGC
must be recalibrated:
• Recalibrate the PGC and repeat the observation.
No Gas sample pressure in the injector valve has increased. This has no effect on liquid
sample injection:
• Check the PGC has an atmospheric referencing valve (ARV) installed. If not,
install one.
• Check the ARV is operating correctly.
• Ensure the ARV vent goes to atmosphere and not to flare.
One or more (but not all)
peaks has increased in size.
Check the calibration. Is it
still correct?
Yes The extra peak height is a correct response to a process change:
• Check process data to confirm a change.
(continued)
342 Troubleshooting chromatogramsTable 13.1a (continued)
Observation Indication
Not an analyzer problem.
The process sample contains a new component that is coeluting with the analyte:
• Check process data to confirm a change.
• If a permanent change, consider a redesigned column system.
If a multistream PGC, a stream valve is leaking and contaminating the analyzed
stream:
• Repair or replace the leaky valve.
• Ensure the stream selector uses double-block-and-bleed switching.
Catalytic reactions in the analyzer or sample system are making more of the analyte:
• Reduce temperature of sample lines and injector, while avoiding condensation.
• Clean entire sample pathway to remove catalytic deposits.
• Replace with surface-deactivated items.
• Change from hydrogen to helium carrier gas.
No Calibrate the analyzer and repeat observation.
The size of all chromatogram
peaks from the same
detector has decreased by
the same factor.
Was the detector sensitivity
reduced by a change to the
carrier or fuel gas flow rates
or by electronic means?
Yes If there was a good reason for changing the flow rates or electronic sensitivity, the PGC
must be recalibrated:
• Recalibrate the PGC and repeat the observation.
No Carrier gas is leaking into the sample volume and displacing some of the sample (more
likely with gas sample injection):
• Repair or replace the injector valve, as necessary.
If process sample is under vacuum,
sample may be diluted by an air leak:
• Check full sampling system for leaks.
When PGC uses an ARV to compress sample to atmospheric, ARV failure would result
in a subambient sample injection:
• Check ARV function.
A partial loss of sample via a carrier gas leak to atmosphere at the exit of the sample
injector valve or at its connection to the first column. Column pressures and flows are
unaffected:
• Check and secure any leaks from the valve or its connections.
A leak at the valve joining two columns might cause a reduction in size of all peaks, but
it would also affect the flow rates in both columns and change the timing of the valve
action:
• Check and secure any leaks from the valve or its connections.
(continued)
Key properties of peaks 343Table 13.1a (continued)
Observation Indication
The sample injector is partially blocked – more likely with liquid sample injection, due
to the small sample volume:
• Clean or replace the injector valve.
• Ensure a liquid sample injector is at the correct temperature to vaporize the
injected sample.
There is a carrier gas leak at the detector inlet connection, so the same fraction of each
peak is leaking to atmosphere. The leak may also be causing baseline noise:
• Check for leaks and seal as necessary.
Detector sensitivity has declined. The detector may still have about the same flow rate
due to the makeup gas – particularly with capillary columns:
• Check flows of carrier, makeup, and fuel gases into the detector and adjust as
necessary.
• Check the detector power supply (voltage or current) has not changed and reset as
necessary.
• Clean, repair, or replace the detector.
One or more (but not all)
chromatogram peaks are
reduced or completely
missing.
Are you sure the missing
peak(s) are present in the
sample?
Yes Incorrect column valve timing or a flow or temperature change in the first column:
• Check the carrier flows and valve timing – reset as necessary.
• For an air-bath oven, ensure the columns are not in the direct air flow from the
heater.
If using backflush, the missing peak may be backflushed:
• Check for a leak of blockage in the column valve or its connections that’s causing
reduced flow in the first column.
• Find the leak or blockage and fix it.
• Reset the flow rates and backflush times.
• Review the backflush procedures in Chapter 10.
If using heartcut, you may not be capturing the missing peak.
If the heartcut remnant peak has also disappeared from the chromatogram:
• Check the heartcut valve is operating correctly on command.
If the remnant peak is still present:
• Check the heartcut valve timing and adjust if necessary.
• Review the heartcut procedures in Chapter 11.
Certain analytes may be reacting with hydrogen carrier or with other components of
the sample:
• Switch to helium carrier.
(continued)
344 Troubleshooting chromatogramsTable 13.1a (continued)
Observation Indication
Small polar peaks might be absorbed by liquid or solid deposits in the sample or carrier
flow paths:
• Clean the entire sampling system.
• Clean the sample injector valve and its connecting tube to the first column.
• Replace the first column.
• Clean or replace the connecting tubes between valves and columns.
• Clean the detector and its connecting tube.
If the problem has persisted since initial commissioning, you may need to replace all
contact materials with surface-deactivated items.
If using a flame detector, a peak not detected by that detector may be coeluting with an
analyte peak. The presence of the undetected peak may quench the detector’s response
to the analyte:
• Check whether the column valve functions are supposed to eliminate the rogue
peak and adjust the timing if necessary.
• Consider a change in column design to prevent the coelution.
Using a nitrogen-based calibration, sample may not yield an accurate calibration:
• Use a calibration sample similar in composition to the process fluid.
No Spike the sample with the missing component and repeat the observation.
One or more additional
peaks are present on the
chromatogram.
Does the width of the
additional peak match the
normal progression of peak
widths along the
chromatogram?
Yes An extra component is present in the sample:
• Check for a process change that might have created the extra component.
Valve timing error. One or more extra peaks were allowed into the last column.
• Adjust backflush, heartcut, or dual-column timing to remove the unwanted peaks.
No The alien peak was not injected at the same time as the other peaks.
• Evaluate the width of misfit peaks by comparing their retention from other valve
actions to determine when and where they entered the columns.
A single peak was split and the fragments appear in two places. For instance, part of a
peak could escape backflush and appear with the analytes, while the other part is
backflushed to a detector.
• Check the column flow rates and valve event times.
Ghost peaks from a previous analysis due to sample being absorbed by polymer
material (or contaminants) and then released into a subsequent injection:
• Clean or replace the injector – particularly polymer slides or rotors.
Key properties of peaks 345Table 13.1b Procedure for Diagnosing Peak Shape Problems.
Observation Indication
Some peaks are negative, going down from
the baseline instead of up.
Was a new carrier gas cylinder recently
installed?
Yes The sample is purer than the carrier gas. The new carrier gas contains
significant amounts of the analytes and cannot produce accurate
measurements:
• Replace the carrier gas cylinder with an uncontaminated one.
• Replace the carrier gas cylinder regulator with a non-venting two￾stage regulator containing no rubber or polymer parts.
• Replace any polymer tubes with cleaned stainless-steel tubing.
• Replace any cleanup device used to purify the carrier gas.
The negative peaks are known as vacancy peaks and appear at the
correct position on the chromatogram for each substance. They go
downwards because their concentration in the sample is less than their
concentration in the carrier gas.
No The sample has recently become purer than the carrier gas.
This reveals that the carrier gas has always contained traces of the
analytes causing the PGC to operate with a false zero and reduced
measurement accuracy:
• Fix the carrier gas purity problem as noted above.
• Recalibrate the PGC.
The detector response to those analytes is naturally negative. Usually,
the data processor reverses the polarity of a naturally negative peak, so
it appears positive on the chromatogram:
• Review the reference chromatogram to see if the peaks were
positive before.
• Check if there is a Method setting for a negative peak – maybe it
was changed?
A large upset in carrier gas flow rate – often when a column valve
switch and EPC pressure change not synchronized.
• Eliminate the flow change.
All peaks are now tailing.
Was work recently done on columns or
detector?
Yes Excessive or unswept volume inside GC devices, connection tubing, or
fittings anywhere between injector and detector inlet:
• Reduce connection volumes.
• Eliminate unswept volumes.
Contamination of contact surfaces, for example, by oil, fingerprints, or
graphite ferrule fragments:
• Clean or replace GC devices and their connection tubing.
Inadequate flow of detector makeup gas when using capillary columns:
(continued)
346 Troubleshooting chromatogramsTable 13.1b (continued)
Observation Indication
• Check and reset flow rate.
Polymeric items in the injected sample pathway are adsorbing and
releasing the sample components.
• As possible, remove or replace polymer items.
No Sample is leaking from injector into carrier gas stream:
• Service or replace injector valve.
Contamination by solid or condensed liquid deposits from process
samples:
• Clean or replace GC devices and their connection tubing.
• Replace the first column or if a long capillary cut 50 cm off the
front end.
If using a sample splitter, inadequate split vent flow rate.
Some (but not all) peaks have started to tail
as they return to the baseline.
Are all the newly tailing peaks polar (active)
components like olefins and alcohols?
Yes If the PGC uses nonpolar columns, this tailing effect might have been
present from the start:
• Compare with the reference chromatogram to see if a real change
has occurred. If not, skip this observation.
Contamination in the valves, columns, or detector is adsorbing the
polar molecules and causing their peaks to grow tails.
If the tailing becomes intolerable:
• Eliminate oil or condensate from injected gas sample.
• Clean or replace the sample injector valve and replace the tubing
(if any) connecting the injector valve to the first column, then
repeat the observation.
• Clean or replace the detector and replace the tubing (if any)
connecting the column to the detector, then repeat the
observation.
• Replace the columns and repeat the observation.
No Refer to Chapter 8 for more information on tailing.
Some peaks have split, forming a single
bimodal peak or double peaks.
Has the process changed?
Yes Another peak has appeared in the process sample:
• Process change? Consult with Operations.
• Consider a new column design.
No Inadequate sample vaporization, liquid sample is entering column:
• Increase injector temperature.
Some peaks have flat tops – generally
observed only with capillary columns.
Has the sample volume recently increased?
Yes The sample volume is too large and is exceeding the maximum feed
volume of the column (usually occurs only with capillary columns):
• See Chapter 8 for a discussion on feed volume.
(continued)
Key properties of peaks 347a small amount of air or process sample to enter the carrier gas stream as the
valve actuates.
To identify a rogue peak, compare its retention time with the known
times of the other peaks. Bear in mind that the extra peak may not have
passed through the same columns, so it might be narrower and faster than
those other peaks.
Disappearing peaks
When an expected peak partly or wholly disappears from the chromatogram
it’s nearly always due to a timing problem. The valve timing hasn’t changed,
but the peak has moved. The main suspects are a changed carrier flow rate
(likely due to a valve leak) orthe deterioration of a column. This has changed
the elution time of the peak and it’s now getting backflushed or eluding
heartcut. Or the peak hasn’t moved, and the valve timing is wrong.
Certain analytes mightreact with hydrogen carrier gas or with each other.
This is more likely when a catalyst is present. For example:
The original flow tube in the Live Tee valveless column switch was a
platinum capillary tube that catalyzed reactions, so it was replaced
with a stainless-steel capillary.
Table 13.1b (continued)
Observation Indication
• Reduce sample volume or change the capillary column for one
that has a wider bore, thicker film thickness, or both.
No The sample composition has changed and some peaks now exceed
their sample capacity
• See Chapter 8 for a discussion on sample capacity.
• Reduce the sample volume and recalibrate the PGC.
Extra volume might be due to a damaged injector valve:
• Repair or replace the injector valve.
If a sample splitter is used, the extra volume might be due to a
decreased split flow:
• Reset the split flow.
The peak height may have exceeded the range of the detector or its
amplifier:
• Reduce sample size or detector sensitivity.
One side of a peak that should be normal in
shape is distinctly sharper than the other
side. The peak has an unusually fast rise or
fall time.
Yes Part of the peak is missing – it has been cut by column switching.
• Check the column valve timing and reset as necessary.
Problem solved? Yes Exit.
No Refer to Chapter 7 and Chapter 8 (Table 8.1) for more help to diagnose
a misshapen peak.
348 Troubleshooting chromatogramsA high-temperature injector may also cause trouble, especially when con￾taminated with catalyst dust from the process. The best defense is to use
helium carrier instead of hydrogen.
Negative peaks
The signal polarity of a concentration detector like the TCD is arbitrary, so if
all chromatogram peaks are negative, simply reverse signal polarity in the
software or swap the detector output connections. Infrequently, a PGC will
use nitrogen or argon carrier gas and a few peaks might be negative. If so,
their polarity reversal is accomplished in the Method.
The strange behavior of a hydrogen peak in helium carrier is well docu￾mented. As expected, the hydrogen peak is negative at low concentrations rel￾ative to all other peaks, but it turns inside out as the concentration increases,
soon becoming positive. Such extreme nonlinearity is impossible to correct by
calibration so the only solution is to use a different carrier gas. In the labora￾tory, a mixed carrier gas of about 7.5 % hydrogen in helium gives a positive
peak for all concentrations of hydrogen. But it doesn’t work on a PGC because
the mixed gas separates when the carrier flow rate changes during column
switching, particularly when backflushing. When a column experiences a
sudden inrush of carrier gas, the hydrogen gets ahead of the helium due to
its low viscosity, leading to severe baseline upsets. One solution would be
to use helium carrier gas for the columns and add a makeup flow of hydrogen
at the detector inlet. Another method sometimes used in PGCs is to use the
reference element of a thermal conductivity detector(TCD) to measure hydro￾gen in nitrogen carrier. These days, it’s much easier and more reliable to ana￾lyze the hydrogen by a separate applet using nitrogen or argon carrier gas.
Unexpected negative peaks are a prime symptom of impure carrier gas.
When the carrier gas contains a higher concentration of a component pres￾ent in the injected sample, the peak for that component will appear on the
chromatogram at the expected retention time, but will be negative. This kind
of peak is known as a vacancy peak and is a sure indication of contaminated
carrier gas. To test for contamination, inject a sample of ultra-pure carrier
gas; all the vacancy peaks will then be visible and will provide a measure
of the identity and amount of each contaminant. To confirm, rig the PGC
to inject its own carrier gas: all the vacancy peaks should disappear.
Diagnosing peaks: An example
Figure 13.8 shows a chromatogram with two valve actions and seven arti￾facts which have symmetrical Gaussian shapes and look like peaks, albeit
idealized. The ones identified as propane, n-butane, and n-hexane have
adjusted retention times that follow the doubling rule. They also have grad￾ually increasing widths. This visible evidence supports their assigned iden￾tities. But there are serious doubts about the identities of the peaks labeled
isobutane, n-pentane, and unknown.
The “isobutane” peak is too narrow to be part of the injected sample. The
width of this artifact tells us it has spent less time in the columns than the
Key properties of peaks 349adjacent n-butane peak; thus, it did not enter the column system during sam￾ple injection. Look for a valve action that could have caused it. The clue here
is the VALVE OFF function that occurs at 85 s. The rogue peak is as narrow
as the air peak and elutes at 110 s, exactly 25 s after VOFF. Since 25 s is the
holdup time, there is a strong indication that the injection valve is allowing
air to enter the columns as it switches off.
The “unknown” peak has an adjusted retention time of 200 s, exactly the
position we would expect for n-pentane. This peak probably is n-pentane,
but caution is appropriate here; although the peak is in the exact position
that we expect to find n-pentane, it doesn’t confirm that the peak really is
n-pentane. Another peak might have the same retention time. On the other
hand, the peak eluting at 175 sis certainly not n-pentane. If the identity of the
propane, n-butane, and n-hexane peaks are correct, n-pentane cannot come
out at 175 s on any column.
Did you notice another problem with this peak? Yes, it’s too wide. It’s not
normal for a wider peak to turn up on a chromatogram before a narrower
peak. There are two possible explanations:
The observed peak is two or more overlapping peaks – unlikely, since
there is no visual evidence of shape distortion.
The peak doesn’t belong to this sample injection at all. Being wider, we
know it has spent more time in the columns than the other peaks, so it’s
probably from a previoussample injectionandmay have escaped backflush.
A test for a wide peak isto run a few chromatograms on the processsample,
then inhibit sample injection while continuing to run the Method. This test
should reveal the true retention time of the wide peak and confirm it’s from
a previoussample injection. A similar test isto extend an analysis cycle by 10 s
and see if the suspect peak appears 10 s earlier on the next chromatogram.
A test for a narrow peak is to rig the PGC to inject samples of its own car￾rier gas. This test will eliminate all the sample peaks, but if the narrow peak
0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250 275 300 325 350 375 400 425 450
VON
Air
25 s
Propane n-Butane n-Pentane
Unknown
n-Hexane
VOFF
Isobutane
The artifacts on this chromatogram all look like peaks but some of them don’t follow the expected 
pattern. The peak labeled “Isobutane” is too narrow and cannot be from the sample injection at VON. 
Its retention time from the valve action at VOFF is the same as air, so it’s likely an air peak introduced 
as the valve goes OFF. The peak labeled “n-Pentane” is too wide and doesn’t look like two fused 
peaks so it’s probably a late peak coming from the previous analysis. The doubling rule indicates the 
“unknown” peak is at the expected time for n-pentane, so this observed peak probably is the 
n-pentane. The peak labeled n-pentane cannot be n-pentane; its identity is unknown. 
Figure 13.8 Diagnosing Chromatogram Peaks.
350 Troubleshooting chromatogramsat 110 s is due to air ingress it will appear on every chromatogram – even
without sample injection!
Tables 13.1a, 13.2b and 13.1c provide procedures for diagnosing problems
with peaks.
Table 13.1c Procedure for Diagnosing Peak Separation Problems.
Observation Indication
The resolution between peaks has
decreased and some analyte peaks are
starting to merge making measurement
difficult.
Are the carrier gas flow rates correctly set?
Yes Column temperature is too high:
• Check the application data and reset oven temperature as necessary.
An active solid column has been deactivated by absorbing polar
substances.
• Regenerate column in laboratory oven per manufacturer’s
instructions.
Columns are damaged or depleted, at the end of their useful life:
• Replace the column set.
No • Reset the carrier flow rates to the original settings and repeat the
observation.
Another peak has appeared and is
overlapping an analyte peak.
Check with Operations – Is the new
component expected in the process fluid?
Yes Choose to tolerate the new interference or redesign the column system:
• Tolerate the interference, or
• Redesign the column system to separate the new peak.
No The extra peak is normally diverted by column switching like backflush or
heartcut:
• Reset the valve timing to eliminate the peak.
The remnant peak in a heartcut system
has become very large and is merging
with the analyte peak.
Are the carrier gas flow rates correctly set?
Yes The heartcut timing is too wide:
• Retune the heartcut valve timing.
• Refer to Chapter 11 for more details.
If not effective, the first column of the heartcut system has lost its
separating power (a common fault):
• Install a new first column and retune the heartcut timing.
No • Reset the flow rates and repeat the observation.
An analyte peak in a heartcut system is
not fully resolved from its remnant peak.
Are the carrier gas flow rates correctly set?
Yes The heartcut timing is too wide:
• Retune the heartcut valve timing.
• Refer to Chapter 11 for more details.
If not effective, the second column of the heartcut system has lost its
separating power (an unusual fault):
• Replace the second column, reset the flow rates, and retune the
heartcut timing.
No • Reset the flow rates and repeat the observation.
(continued)
Key properties of peaks 351Key properties of spikes
What we know about spikes
Spikes have no appreciable width, but they can look like narrow peaks due to
the limited time response of the display device. The giveaway is that an elec￾tronic pulse travels at the speed of light and is virtually instantaneous with
the event that caused it. A peak always has a retention time delay after the
event that caused it.
There are two possible reasons for spikes in the chromatogram display:
• A spike that is synchronous with the Method is due to an event during the
analysis and occurs at the same place on each chromatogram –
immediately after the event. Such spikes rarely occur in modern equip￾ment. Older PGCs may use relays to switch solenoid valves and these
may need arc suppressors to eliminate induced spikes.
• Asynchronous spikes are caused by induction from switching electrical
loads that are external to the PGC or by pressure fluctuation in the detec￾tor vent. They are baseline problems and should be cured by the methods
of Chapter 12 prior to chromatogram troubleshooting.
Table 13.2 gives a procedure for diagnosing spikes on a chromatogram.
Key properties of bumps
What we know about bumps
Bumps on the baseline are usually due to pressure or flow upsets and occur
most often with thermal conductivity detectors. A pressure wave forms when
Table 13.1c (continued)
Observation Indication
The backflush event time is now much
earlier than it used to be.
Are the carrier flow rates correctly set?
Yes The backflush column has lost its separating power (a common fault):
• Replace the first column, reset the flow rates, retune the backflush
timing, and repeat the observation.
No • Reset the flow rates, retune the backflush timing, and repeat the
observation.
One or more of the poorly resolved peaks
is much larger than it used to be.
When the large peak was smaller, was it
unmeasured and partly removed by
backflush or heartcut?
Yes Too much of the large peak is escaping backflush or heartcut:
• Adjust the column valve timing to remove most of the unwanted peak.
No The process has changed, increasing the concentration of the large peak
and reducing the resolution:
• Replace the column set with a new set designed to resolve the new
sample concentrations.
352 Troubleshooting chromatogramsa valve action connects a column to a different pressure source. Pressure
waves travel at the speed of sound and hit the detector immediately after
the valve action. A pressure wave consists of compressed carrier gas mole￾cules and will affect only a concentration detector – in the absence of column
bleed, ionization detectors are immune.
Table 13.2 Procedure for Diagnosing Chromatogram Spikes.
Observation Indication
Spikes in the chromatogram occur at
random times.
Yes Refer to baseline troubleshooting in Chapter 12.
No • Continue.
A spike appears at the same time on
each chromatogram.
Does the spike occur at the same time as a
chromatogram event?
Yes The chromatogram event is causing the spike, possibly by switching an
inductive load:
• Install an arc suppressor on each inductive device that operates from
the chromatogram event.
The column valve is operating slowly and interrupting the carrier flow,
causing a pressure wave in the detector:
• Check the valve actuation pressure is adequate and not leaking.
• Service or replace the column valve.
The valve action is causing an instant pressure pulse on the detector:
• A backflush system using Live Tee switching might connect a
pressurized column directly to a detector.
• Review the column system design for the possibility of a pressure pulse,
perhaps due to valve failure.
• If necessary, install a capillary restrictor to moderate the pulse and
reprogram the analysis.
The valve action is briefly depriving a flame detector of combustion air
causing the spike:
• Separate the valve air and detector air supplies.
The spike is electronic and generated by the data processing system.
No If the spikes are asynchronous with the Method, refer to the diagnosis of
baseline problems in Chapter 12.
The event is a valve action and there’s a
significant delay (several seconds)
between the event and the spike.
Does the artifact exhibit the same delay
from the valve action when you move the
valve event by a few seconds?
Try each prior valve event in reverse
order.
Yes The artifact is a peak that entered a column during the valve action and has
spent less time in the columns than the other peaks.
• Continue with the peak diagnostics above:
No The artifact is not a peak:
• Continue.
To confirm the diagnosis, rig the PGC to
inject its own carrier gas. Run the
Method as usual.
Is the artifact still present?
Yes The artifact is an air peak, probably from a leaky valve.
No The spike is a baseline problem:
• Rectify by the methods of Chapter 12.
Key properties of bumps 353On the chromatogram, a pressure wave looks like a small, distorted peak –
asshown in Figure 13.9. Note the exact shape of the disturbance: it has a rapid
onset and a slower recovery. Be careful with the diagnosis; even a five-second
delay is impossible at the speed of sound. If you have a delay followed by a
bump, it can’t be a pressure wave and might be a real peak. On the other hand,
if the bump is immediately after sample injection and before the air peak, it
can’t be a peak and is certainly a pressure wave.
Flow disturbances are due to reversing a column during backflush or
inserting a column in series with other columns. The transient flow
change reestablishes the pressure gradient in the column and is unavoid￾able. For instance, when a column returns from backflush its high￾pressure end connects to the lower pressure at the head of the second col￾umn, causing a flow surge into the second column. Meanwhile, the pres￾sure at its low-pressure end suddenly increases, causing a flow surge into
that column. The flow surges take a little time to dissipate as they rees￾tablish the pressure gradients in both columns. A flow-sensitive detector
will respond with a baseline disturbance that’s not instantaneous and
may end with a small negative excursion, reminiscent of a dampened sine
wave. Figure 13.9 illustrates a typical flow disturbance; in most column
systems it lasts about 30 s. Sometimes the positive deviation is not fol￾lowed by a noticeable negative one and it may look very much like
a peak.
A simple test is to temporarily move the valve action time and see if the
bump follows it. The ultimate test is to set up the chromatograph to inject a
sample of pure carrier gas; another option is to inhibit sample injection. In
both cases, all the real peaks will disappear, but the pressure bumps will
remain.
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900
Retention Time (s)
VON
Air
50 s
Propane n-Pentane n-Hexane
VOFF
Delayed 
Flow 
Disturbance
Instant 
Pressure 
Pulse
Transient pressure or flow changes can cause bumps on the baseline from a thermal conductivity 
detector. A pressure wave causes a baseline bump immediately after the responsible valve action 
(VOFF in this example). VOFF might also cause a flow transient that arrives at the detector after the 
holdup time of an intervening column. A flow bump can take the form of a dampened sine wave and 
might not go negative as shown above; it sometimes looks like a peak. Pressure and flow bumps are 
transitory and don’t affect the overall chromatogram. They are problematic only when they occur 
close to an analyte peak and interfere with baseline detection. 
Figure 13.9 Diagnosing Chromatogram Bumps.
354 Troubleshooting chromatogramsSince baseline bumps are due to valve actions they can’t be moved at will.
If a bump is interfering with the baseline under a peak, the only solution is
to change the column lengths to move the valve actions and peaks far￾ther apart.
Table 13.3 is a procedure for diagnosing chromatogram bumps.
Table 13.3 Procedure for Diagnosing Chromatogram Bumps.
Observation Indication
A bump on the chromatogram that was not
present during baseline tests.
Does the PGC use a concentration-sensitive
detector, such as a thermal conductivity
detector (TCD)?
Yes The artifact is likely to be a pressure bump caused by column switching:
• Continue.
No The artifact is unlikely to be a pressure bump and is probably a true
peak:
• Continue.
The bump immediately follows a valve
action.
Does the bump stay close to the valve action
when you move the event by a few seconds?
Yes The artifact is a pressure bump caused by the valve action. Most likely,
the valve reverses the flow direction in a column:
• If backflushing, consider reducing the backflush flow rate to
minimize the pressure wave upon switching.
• Before changing anything, refer to Chapter 10 for more details.
No Continue.
The bump is located many seconds after the
previous valve action.
Does the bump stay the same time after the
valve action when you move the event by a
few seconds?
Yes The artifact is caused by the valve action. It’s a flow bump or a true peak
injected by the valve action.
No The artifact is not caused by this valve action. It’s caused by a previous
valve action and may be a flow bump or a true peak which enters the
column system when that valve actuates:
• Move the previous valve action by a few seconds and observe
whether the artifact follows the move.
• If so, continue to determine whether it’s a peak or a flow bump.
Consider the width of the bump.
Is the bump wider than a true peak would be
if injected at the time of the valve action now
known to be its cause?
Yes A relatively wide bump is a transient flow disturbance due to column
switching:
• It’s probably unavoidable.
If the flow bump interferes with a peak measurement:
• Increase the length of the last column to move the peak away from
the bump.
No A narrow artifact is a peak that enters the columns when the valve
actuates. It’s probably an air peak:
• Continue with the above procedure for diagnosing peaks.
To confirm the diagnosis, rig the PGC to
inject its own carrier gas. Run the Method
as usual.
Yes The “bump” is a true peak due to a component in the sample:
• Study the peak width and retention time compared with other
peaks on the chromatogram:
(continued)
Key properties of bumps 355Key properties of steps
What to know about steps
There are two main reasons for baseline steps:
A valve action has caused a change of carrier gasflow rate through a flow￾sensitive detector.
A valve action has introduced a continuous flow of contaminated carrier
gas into a detector.
The left side of Figure 13.10 illustrates the effect of a carrier flow change.
A short time after the V1ON valve action, the baseline moves to a new stable
position. When the valve is deactivated, a similar delay occurs before the
baseline returnsto its original position. This often happens with a TCD when
a flow balancing restrictor is incorrectly set, causing different detector
flow rates in the two column valve states. The elevated or depressed baseline
Table 13.3 (continued)
Observation Indication
Has the artifact disappeared from the
chromatogram?
• If the peak is too narrow, it may be a slice of a peak cut by column
switching.
No The artifact is not a peak from the sample. It’s a flow bump or an air peak
caused by column switching, as determined above.
Air Propane n-Pentane n-Hexane
V1ON
0 100 200 300 400
Retention Time (s)
500 600 700 800 900
V1OFF V2ON V2OFF
This figure illustrates the features of two different kinds of baseline step. The step between 50 s 
and 250 s is caused by a flow change. The short delays before its start and end are equal and due 
to the holdup time in the column feeding the detector. The step between 400 s and 600 s is caused 
by contaminated carrier gas. The longer delays before its start and end are also equal, but due to 
the retention time of the contaminating substance in the column feeding the detector. Each step 
starts with vertical sides that soften as they pass through the column, becoming half-peaks whose 
width reflects their time spent in the last column 
Half-Peak
Shape
Molecule
Retention
Time
Molecule
Retention
Time Same
Delay
Same
Delay
New Flat
Baseline
Half-Peak
Shape
Figure 13.10 Diagnosing Chromatogram Steps.
356 Troubleshooting chromatogramsis not detrimental to measurement and would not affect the propane
measurement.
At the instant of valve action the flow change is near instantaneous, but it
takes time for that change to reach the detector (the holdup time of the inter￾vening column), delaying the appearance of the step on the chromatogram.
The same delay occurs when the valve action is reversed returning the col￾umns to their original conditions. Asthe step passesthrough the column, gas
diffusion effects soften the vertical rise and fall of the baseline and each
adopts a half-peak shape, as depicted on the left side of Figure 13.10.
The other cause of steps is contamination. The detector is responding to a
new and constant level of foreign molecules in the carrier gas. Since the car￾rier gas supply hasn’t changed, the additional molecules must be from a con￾taminated column, a column with higher bleed rate, or a leaking sample
injector. Then, a valve action such as V2ON in Figure 13.10 applies a constant
flow of the contaminated carrier gas to a column connected to the detector.
After the retention time delay, the detector responds to the arrival of the for￾eign molecules, elevating the baseline. Since the concentration of foreign
molecules is constant, the baseline stays at the elevated level until the valve
turns off.
A similar effect always occurs in a heartcut system used to measure
parts-per-million of an analyte. The contamination is due to a major com￾ponent saturating the first column. After this contaminated carrier gas is
switched into the second column, there’s a short delay before a step change
occurs. The delay is equal to the retention time of the contaminating mole￾cules on the second column. The same delay occurs before the baseline
returns to zero after pure carrier replaces the contaminated supply. We call
this step a remnant peak. Its top is not flat but slopes downward, reflecting
the slope of the major component tail. Consult Chapter 10 for more
information.
In diagnosis, remember this: only molecules experience significant delay
in the column system. The other baseline artifacts are over within 30–60 s.
Molecules can take a long time to get through a column, but that time is
predicable; for the baseline step on the rightside of Figure 13.10, the contam￾inant molecules take 100 s to reach the detector. They take the same time to
clear the column after V2OFF. The shift in baseline has no effect on the meas￾urement of n-pentane.
The stepping response to a sustained sample input is a well-known phe￾nomenon called frontal chromatography. When the carrier gas contains
several significant contaminants, the intervening column will delay each
contaminant by its own unique retention time, forming multiple and
cumulative steps on the baseline. The chromatogram then shows a whole
staircase of steps, the height of each one reflecting its concentration in the
carrier gas.
The diagnosis of component steps can be more difficult than flow steps.
The best clue is when the retention time for each step to fall is the same as its
time to rise and exceeds the holdup time of the column. That delay can help
to identify the contaminant.
Key properties of steps 357Note the different rise and fall profiles of the step. Each is a true half-peak
shape, but the fall profile is wider than the rise profile reflecting its extended
time in the column.
Table 13.4 is a procedure for diagnosing chromatogram steps.
Table 13.4 Procedure for Diagnosing Chromatogram Steps.
Observation Indication
Baseline suddenly steps to near-zero at the same time in
each analysis cycle.
Yes Method autozero command. Not related to column
performance.
No • Continue.
The baseline changes to a new constant level partway
through the analysis and returns to the original level
before the next analysis starts.
Does the baseline go to a constant lower level?
Yes Step is due to a flow change:
• Carefully balance the carrier flow rates into the
detector so no change occurs with valve switching.
• Repeat the observation.
No A raised step in the baseline is due to a flow change or to
contaminated carrier gas:
• Continue.
The step rises to a higher level.
Does the step rise a short time (about 30–60 s) after the
previous valve action.
Yes Step is probably due to a flow change:
• Carefully balance the carrier flow rates into the
detector so no change occurs with valve switching.
• Repeat the observation.
No A delay of more than 60 s is most likely due to
contaminated carrier gas.
The time duration of the step is equal to the elapsed time
between a previous valve action and the reversal of that
valve action.
Yes Confirms that the step width is due to the actuation and
deactuation of the same valve.
No The step rise and fall are due to different valve actions.
Observe the elapsed time between the previous valve
action and the top of the rise.
Is the elapsed time equal to the expected retention time in
the last column for a major component in the sample?
Yes The step is due to contaminated carrier gas entering the
column when the valve action occurs:
• The retention time identifies the contaminant.
• This always occurs in heartcut systems.
No The contaminant is unknown: The carrier gas is coming
from the same source as before, so contamination must
occur within the column system:
• If using a backflush system, ensure the sample
injector is backflushed along with the first column.
• Clean or replace the injector valve and its connection
to the first column.
• Clean or replace the column valve and its tubing.
• Replace the columns with a new column set.
358 Troubleshooting chromatogramsEpilog
Last words
When giving advice on how to select the right column for a gas
chromatograph, three distinguished professors came up with a sage recom￾mendation which also applies to PGC troubleshooting:
Ask someone who knows. (McNair et al. 2019, 69)
How true that is. A few words with an experienced person can save many
hours of struggle. Don’t hesitate to ask for help; it doesn’t make you weak,
and you’ll likely learn a lot more than you expect.
Chromatogram troubleshooting
Enjoy your work with PGCs. Chromatogram troubleshooting can be frustrat￾ing, but it’s always fun. We’ll leave you with a summary of the rules: you can
add your own insight and inspiration:
Rule #1: If there’s nothing wrong with the chromatogram there’s noth￾ing wrong with the chromatograph (discounting calibration error or elec￾tronic malfunction).
Rule #2: Start with a flat and smooth baseline.
Rule #3: Everything on the chromatogram is caused by valve actions.
Rule #4: Identify a chromatogram artifact by comparing its shape with
the time elapsed since each valve action that might have caused it.
Rule #5: Confirm the diagnosis by making a small change to the suspect
event time and seeing the same change in the time of the artifact.
Knowledge Gained
On chromatograms
• All chromatographic faults are visible on the
chromatogram if you know where to look.
• If there’s nothing wrong with the chro￾matogram, there’s nothing wrong with the
chromatograph.
• The difficult part is noticing that a problem
exists – you can’t fix a problem you don’t
know about.
• To spot minor changes, overlay the current
chromatogram on a reference chromatogram.
• If you improve PGC performance, don’t forget
to update your reference chromatogram.
• Valve actions are the cause of everything
visible on the chromatogram.
Epilog 359On artifacts
• Artifacts are deviations from the flat baseline
that occur only when the PGC Method is
running.
• Artifacts may be true peaks, spikes, bumps, or
steps – all caused by valve actions.
• Identify an artifact by noting its shape relative
to the elapsed time from the event that
caused it.
• Confirm by moving the event a few seconds
and seeing the same time change in the
artifact.
• To see the artifacts without the peaks, rig the
PGC to inject its own carrier gas.
• This logical procedure identifies the root
cause of unfamiliar artifacts on the PGC
chromatogram.
• Fixing a problem may require full knowledge
of the properties of peaks, spikes, bumps,
and steps.
On peaks
• A peak has a characteristic shape and reten￾tion time longer than the column holdup
time.
• Peaks have a predicable retention time and
homolog peaks follow the doubling rule.
• The retention time of a peak can’t certainly
tell you what it is but can certainly tell you
what it isn’t.
• If the peaks on your chromatogram have
moved, evaluate the percent movement of
each peak.
• If all peaks moved by the same percentage,
suspect a flow change.
• If early peaks move by a smaller percentage
than later peaks, suspect a temperature
change.
• If not a flow or temperature change, suspect a
valve timing error.
• If not a valve timing error, the fault is most
likely due to a column failure.
• Peak width increases with the square root of
retention time.
• A peak that doesn’t fit the pattern was not
injected at the same time as the peaks
around it.
• A very narrow peak might indicate air ingress
in a faulty column valve.
• An excessively wide peak is probably from the
previous sample injection.
• Some peaks from certain columns are natu￾rally wide and misshapen.
• New tailing of polar peaks may indicate a
contaminated injector valve, column, or
detector.
• Abnormal peak heights may be due to carrier
gas leaks or a change in gas sample-loop
pressure.
• A negative peak may be a vacancy peak that
indicates contaminated carrier gas.
• The vacancy shows a lower concentration of
the component in the sample than in the car￾rier gas.
• The TCD gives an anomalous response to
hydrogen with helium carrier gas.
360 Troubleshooting chromatogramsDid you get it?
Self-assessment quiz: SAQ 13
Q1. Classify the chromatogram features listed below as symptoms of instrumenta￾tion or chromatographic problems:
A. Signal noise.
B. Bumps on the baseline.
C. Baseline steps.
D. Random spikes on the chromatogram.
E. Drifting baseline.
On spikes
• Spikes are voltage pulses induced by electro￾magnetic waves that travel at light speed.
• There is no delay between the source
and the appearance of the spike on the
chromatogram.
• Most random or regular spikes should be
eliminated during baseline troubleshooting.
• New spikes are due to Method events that
switch inductive devices such as relay coils
or solenoids.
On bumps
• A bump in the baseline is due to a pressure
wave or flow upset reaching the detector.
• Pressure waves form when a valve connects a
column to a different pressure source.
• Pressure waves hit the detector immediately
after the valve action that causes them.
• Concentration detectors are more sensitive to
pressure waves than mass-flow detectors.
• A flow bump is usually due to a valve action
reversing the flow in a column.
• Flow bumps have an elapsed time from the
valve action due to the holdup time of the last
column.
• A flow bump may look like a dampened sine
wave but the negative curve may not be visible.
On steps
• A baseline step is due to a valve causing a flow
change or introducing contaminated car￾rier gas.
• A flow step rises or falls to a new baseline after
the holdup time of the last column.
• A component step rises after the retention
time of that component in the last column.
• Steps return to their original baseline when
the valve action is reversed.
• The delay in a step returning to baseline is the
same as the delay in its original formation.
• The width of the half-peak shapes at step
begin and step end reflects their time in the
column.
• Component steps experience more delay after
the causal valve action than flow steps do.
• If the new carrier gas contains several con￾taminants, they will form a staircase of steps.
Epilog 361Q2. What is a reference chromatogram? Choose the one best definition:
A. It’s a chromatogram constructed from an online database showing typical
fault conditions.
B. It’s a chromatogram supplied by corporate management to illustrate the
required performance of the PGC.
C. It’s a chromatogram stored at a time in the past when the PGC was per￾forming to expectations.
D. It’s a chromatogram from the internet that shows the predicted separation
of the analytes.
Q3. What is the prime cause of everything on a PGC chromatogram?
Q4. What are the four kinds of artifact that may occur on a PGC chromatogram?
Q5. What two visible patterns may be useful for diagnosing issues with peaks on a
chromatogram?
Q6. On the chromatogram in Figure 13.6, why isit impossible forthe transient to be
a spike?
Q7. State the five rules of chromatogram troubleshooting.
References
Further reading
The prime troubleshooting guide for gas chromatographers is the cited book
by Dean Rood (2007). While aimed specifically at capillary columns in lab￾oratory gas chromatographs, this useful book provides a concise review of
GC theory and gives countless hints and tips for resolving problems with
GC hardware. As such, it may also be helpful for diagnosing PGC chromat￾ogram problems, except those related to packed columns or column switch￾ing systems.
Vendor troubleshooting guides
The user guides published by instrument manufacturers and column suppli￾ers also relate mostly to laboratory GC applications using capillary columns.
The many issues with manual and automatic syringe injection dominate this
field, so the advice given is of limited use for troubleshooting PGC chroma￾tograms. However, you may find some useful hints in the booklets by the
manufacturers listed below, particulary in the packed column troubleshoot￾ing guide by Supeloc (1999a):
Agilent (2018). Agilent 8860 Series Gas Chromatograph: Troubleshooting. Booklet,
part number G2790-90016. Wilmington, DE: Agilent Technologies, Inc.
Elmer, P. (2022). Quick Reference Guide to Troubleshooting Your Chromatography.
Waltham, MA: PerkinElmer Inc.
Kofel, M.S.P. (2005). Gas Chromatography Troubleshooting and Reference Guide.
Zollikofen, Switzerland: MSP Kofel.
Phenomenex (2014). GC Troubleshooting Guide. Torrance, CA: Phenomenex
Company.
Shimadzu (undated). Gas Chromatography Troubleshooting Guide. Kyoto, Japan:
Shimadzu Corporation.
362 Troubleshooting chromatogramsSinnott, M. (2017). Practical Steps in Troubleshooting: Techniques, Tips, and Tricks.
Santa Clara, CA: Agilent Technologies.
Stenerson, K. (1999). Capillary GC Troubleshooting: A Practical Approach.
Bellefonte, PA: Supelco Division of Sigma-Aldrich Company.
Supelco (1999a). Packed Column GC Troubleshooting Guide: How to Locate Problems
and Solve Them. Bulletin 792C. Bellefonte, PA: Supelco Division of Sigma-Aldrich
Company.
Supelco (1999b). Capillary GC Troubleshooting Guide: How to Locate Problems and
Solve Them. Bulletin 853B. Bellefonte, PA: Supelco Division of Sigma-Aldrich
Company.
Cited
McNair, H.M., Miller, J.M., and Snow, N.H. (2019). Basic gas chromatography, Third
Edition. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Rood, D. (2007). The Troubleshooting and Maintenance Guide for Gas Chromatogra￾phers, Fourth Edition. Weinheim, Germany: WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &
Co., KGaA.
Waters, T. (2017). The fine art of chromatogram reading. In: Proceedings of the ISA
Analyzer Division Symposium, Pasadena, California. Research Triangle Park, NC:
International Society of Automation.
Waters, T. (2020). Process Gas Chromatographs: Fundamentals, Design and Imple￾mentation. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Tables
13.1a Procedure for Diagnosing Peak Size Problems.
13.1b Procedure for Diagnosing Peak Shape Problems.
13.1c Procedure for Diagnosing Peak Separation Problems.
13.2 Procedure for Diagnosing Chromatogram Spikes.
13.3 Procedure for Diagnosing Chromatogram Bumps.
13.4 Procedure for Diagnosing Chromatogram Steps.
Figures
13.1 Overlaid Reference Chromatogram.
13.2 Typical Peaks.
13.3 Typical Spikes.
13.4 Typical Bumps.
13.5 Typical Steps.
13.6 Troubleshooting Example.
13.7 Valve Diagram.
13.8 Diagnosing Chromatogram Peaks.
13.9 Diagnosing Chromatogram Bumps.
13.10 Diagnosing Chromatogram Steps.
References 363New technical terms
You should now know the meaning of these technical terms:
artifact
chromatogram bumps
chromatogram peaks
chromatogram spikes
chromatogram steps
doubling rule
elapsed time
flat-topped peak
frontal chromatography
ghost peaks
homolog
prime cause of everything
read the chromatogram
reference chromatogram
sliced peak
vacancy peak
For more information, refer to the Glossary at the end of the book.
364 Troubleshooting chromatogramsAnswers to self-assessment questions
SAQ-01 Answers
1Q1. Correct answer: B. In gas–liquid chromatography, the liquid phase is held stationary while the carrier gas
moves down the column.
1Q2. Correct answers: B, C, and D. Oxygen would not be used as carrier gas because it might react with and damage
the liquid phase inside the column.
1Q3. Correct answer: D. For a gas–liquid chromatographic column, only a nonvolatile liquid is suitable as a sta￾tionary phase.
1Q4. Correct answer: C. While all parts of the chromatographic system are necessary, it’s the contact with the sta￾tionary phase that causes the separation.
1Q5. Correct answer: B. It’s only necessary to separate the analytes designated to be measured, not the unmeasured
components.
1Q6. Correct answer: B. The detector generates a continuous signal proportional to the instantaneous number of
component molecules leaving the column. This chromatogram signal is processed to measure the concentra￾tions of the analytes.
1Q7. Correct answer: D. The chromatogram shows the baseline, peak shape, and peak separation.
SAQ-02 Answers
In the following, mm∗ designates a value in time units.
2Q1. By Equation 2.26, the plate number for peak A is:
N = 16
tR
wb
2
= 16
370
19
2
= 6068
2Q2. By Equation 2.26, the plate number for peak B is:
N = 16
tR
wb
2
= 16
410
20
2
= 6724
Then, by Equation 2.14, the plate height for peak B is:
H = L
N = 4000 mm
6724
= 0 59 mm
The answer is in distance units (mm).
Process Gas Chromatography: Advanced Design and Troubleshooting, First Edition. Tony Waters.
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2025 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.2Q3. By Equation 2.5, the peak separation (S) is:
S = 410 − 370 = 40 mm∗
By Equation 2.6, the average base width is:
wb = 19 + 20
2
= 19 5 mm∗
Then, by Equation 2.8, the resolution is:
Rs = 40 mm∗
19 5 mm∗ = 2 05
2Q4. From Equations 2.11 and 2.12:
wh
wb
= 2 354 τ
4 τ = 0 5885
Therefore:
wh A = 0 5885 × wb A = 11 8 mm∗
2Q5. Equation 2.11 gives the standard deviation (τ) for peak B:
τ = wb B
4
= 5 0 mm∗
Therefore, the variance (τ
2
) of peak B is:
τ
2 = 25 mm∗2
2Q6. From Equation 2.21:
Ht = H
tR
L
Using the values for peak B calculated above:
Ht = 0 59 mm ×
410 mm∗
4000 mm = 0 060 mm∗
The distance units cancel out leaving the answer in time units, though expressed in mm.
2Q7. From Answer 2Q3 above, the resolution on a 4 m column is 2.05. Resolution is proportional to the square root
of the column length. Therefore, for a new resolution of 1.5, the minimum new column length (L), rounded
up, needs to be:
L = 4 m ×
1 5
2 05
2
L = 2 15 m
366 Answers to self-assessment questionsSAQ-03 Answers
3Q1. True or false?
A. False – capillary columns can be much longer than packed columns.
B. False – packed columns have larger internal diameters.
C. False – any column with a lower plate height would be more efficient.
D. False – capillary columns generally have higher plate numbers.
E. True – a packed column can accept a larger sample size.
F. False – packed columns rarely employ a temperature program.
3Q2. True or false?
A. True – capillary columns can be much longer than packed columns.
B. True – capillary columns have smaller internal diameters.
C. False – any column with a lower plate height would be more efficient.
D. True – capillary columns generally have higher plate numbers.
E. False – a packed column can accept a larger sample size.
F. True – capillary columns are more likely to employ a temperature program.
3Q3. True or false?
A. False – micropacked columns are limited to shorter lengths.
B. True – micropacked columns have smaller internal diameters.
C. False – any column with a lower plate height would be more efficient.
D. True – micropacked columns generally have lower plate heights.
E. False – a regular packed column can accept a larger sample size.
F. False – micropacked columns rarely employ a temperature program.
3Q4. Order of elution:
A. On a nonpolar column we would expect the components to elute in boiling-point order: first isobutane,
then 1,3-butadiene, and then n-butane.
B. On a polar column, the polarizable butadiene peak will be retained relative to its boiling point location,
probably changing the elution order to: first isobutane, then n-butane, and then 1,3-butadiene.
3Q5. Phase ratio:
No. It would be better to use a column having a low phase ratio because it contains more liquid phase and
would increase the retention ratio of light components and hence their separation.
3Q6. Fast operation:
Two reasons for running a column much faster than its optimum carrier velocity are (A) to achieve a shorter
analysis time and (B) to reduce plate number and thus allow a larger sample injection volume.
3Q7. Plate number:
The peak retention factor: k = tR/tM = 5.
From Equation 3.5, the theoretical minimum plate height (Hmin) is:
Hmin = dc
1 + 6k + 11k2
12 1 + k 2
Hmin = 0 53 1 + 30 + 275
12 × 36
= 0 45 mm
Answers to self-assessment questions 367Therefore, the theoretical maximum plate number (Nmax) is:
Nmax = L
HTh
= 30,000 mm
0 45 mm = 66,700
SAQ-04 Answers
4Q1. Correct Answer: B
B. The intermolecular forces are electronic, due to asymmetric arrangements of electrons.
4Q2. Correct answers: B, C, D, and E
A. No. The polarity of the analyte molecule would not affect its retention on a nonpolar column.
B. Yes. Dispersion forces are the only cause of retention on a nonpolar column and the affinity is propor￾tional to the size of the analyte molecules. This is why an iso-paraffin always elutes before the normal
paraffin.
C. Yes. The analytes with lower vapor pressure spend more time in the liquid phase.
D. Yes. The analytes with higher boiling point have lower vapor pressures and spend more time in the liq￾uid phase.
E. Yes, of course. See SAQ 4Q6.
F. No. The McReynolds constants are not properties of the analyte!
4Q3. Correct Answer: A
A. The paraffin isomers would have different molecular sizes and different boiling points, so a nonpolar col￾umn such as OV-1 is likely to separate them. The n-paraffin would come out last.
B. The paraffin isomers are all nonpolar. Although a polar column like Carbowax 20M has an underlying
boiling point retention, it has only a weak affinity for nonpolar solutes and is unlikely to separate
them well.
4Q4. Correct Answers:
A. The polymer has one methyl group and one phenyl group attached to each silicon atom.
B. The copolymer has two methyl groups randomly attached to half the silicon atoms and two phenyl groups
attached to the other silicon atoms.
The two formulations both have 50 % phenyl content and the different structures have a negligible effect on
performance.
4Q5. Correct Answer: 10
The average of the beeswax McReynolds constants is:
MRCAvg = 43 + 110 + 61 + 88 + 122
5
= 84 8
The 0-100 polarity scale is based upon squalane = 0 and TCEP = 100. From Table 4.8, the average MRC for
TCEP is 832. Therefore, the integer polarity number (P#) for beeswax is:
P# = 84 8 ×
100
832 = 10
With only 10 % polarity, beeswax is a slightly polar liquid phase.
4Q6. Correct Answer: 475 s
The adjusted retention time tR for n-pentane (C5) is 300 s:
tR = tR − tM = 350 − 50 = 300 s
The adjusted retention time for n-hexane (C6) should be about 600 s (i.e., double that of n-pentane).
368 Answers to self-assessment questionsTo find the adjusted retention time of a component i having I = 550 use Equation 4.1:
Ii = 100 n + log 10 tR i − log 10 tR n
log 10 tR n + 1 − log 10 tR n
550 = 100 5 + log 10 tR i − log 10 300
log 10 600 − log 10 300
0 50 = log 10 tR i − 2 477
2 778 − 2 477
log 10 tR i = 2 628
tR i = 425
tR i = 425 + 50 = 475 s
4Q7. Answers:
B. For a linear isotherm, the peaks should be symmetrical, the Gaussian peak shape. In practice, some other
effects would tend to cause slight tailing – see Chapter 8.
C. For an isotherm exhibiting a downward curve, the higher analyte concentrations at the center of the peak
would migrate faster than the lower concentrations at the peak base, causing a tailing peak.
D. For an isotherm exhibiting an upward curve, the higher analyte concentrations at the center of the peak
would migrate slower than the lower concentrations at the peak base, causing a fronting peak.
SAQ-05 Answers
5Q1. Retention factor (k) for Peak X = 2/1 = 2.0
Retention factor (k) for Peak Y = 3/1 = 3.0
5Q2. Separation factor (α) for Peaks X & Y = 3/2 = 1.5
5Q3. For Peak Y: tR = 240 s, N = 3600
N = 16
tR
wb
2
wb = 4
tR
N
wbY =4×
240
60 = 16 s
For Peak X: tR = 180 s
wb = 4 H tR Eqn 2 23
Under constant conditions, plate height (H) is constant:
wbX = wbY
H tRX
H tRY
= 16 ×
180 s
240 s
= 13 86 s
Note that peak width is proportional to square root of retention time.
Answers to self-assessment questions 3695Q4. Resolution is separation (S) divided by average base width (wb).
Rs = 2 240 − 180
16 + 13 86 = 4 02
5Q5. Let the new column length be a fraction (x) of old column length.
Under constant conditions, the separation of two peaks is proportional to column length. The old separation
was 60 s, therefore, the new separation in seconds is:
Snew = x Sold = 60 x
From 5Q3, we see that under constant conditions, average base width is proportional to the square root of
column length. The old average base width was:
wb old = 29 86
2
= 14 93 s
Also from 5Q3, peak width is proportional to the square root of retention time. Therefore, the new average
width in seconds is:
wb new = x wb old = 14 93 x
The new resolution is 2.0 so:
Rs new = Snew
wb new
=20
60 x
14 93 x
=20
x = 14 93
30
2
x = 0 248
The conditions are the same so the plate height is unchanged and the new plate number is directly propor￾tional to the column length:
Nnew = 3600 × 0 248 = 893
5Q6. Under constant conditions (of temperature and average carrier gas velocity), retention time is proportional to
column length.
tR new = x tR old
For Peak X:
tR new = 0 248 × 180 = 44 64 s
For Peak Y:
tR new = 0 248 × 240 = 59 52 s
As a check, this new separation is 14.88 s which is equal to 60 x.
370 Answers to self-assessment questions5Q7. From 5Q5 above:
wb new = x wb old
For Peak X:
wb new = 0 248 × 13 86 = 6 90 s
For Peak Y:
wb new = 0 248 × 16 = 7 97 s
As a check, the new resolution is:
Rs new = 2 × 14 88
6 90 + 7 97
= 2 00
SAQ-06 Answers
6Q1. NB = 20,000
6Q2. tM = 40 s
6Q3. Yes.
6Q4. (wb)Peak B = 5.66 s
6Q5. (N)Peak B = 13,300
6Q6. In Figure 6.2, the B/u term has about the same contribution to the minimum plate height as the Cu term does.
6Q7. These changes might be effective to reduce the slope of the column efficiency curve at high carrier gas
velocities.
Correct answers:
C. Use a lower-viscosity liquid phase.
D. Increase column temperature (doubtful).
E. Change to hydrogen carrier gas.
SAQ-07 Answers
7Q1. If the PGC is well-constructed the extracolumn contributions to dispersion due to connecting tubes and elec￾tronics should be minor. The most likely dispersions remaining are those caused by the sample injection pro￾cedure and those caused by the internal volume of the detector.
7Q2. The first reason would be because the injected sample volume exceeds the sample capacity of the column. The
amount of a sample component is higher than the linear range of its partition isotherm.
The second reason is because the injected sample volume exceeds the maximum feed volume of the column.
The total volume of the sample is occupying too many plates.
7Q3. A. Yes, a fronting peak may be the outcome of having a solute volume that exceeds the linear portion of its
partition isotherm. The higher concentrations at the peak top are less soluble and move faster than the
lower base concentrations, thereby distorting the peak.
B. No, low concentrations are unlikely to cause fronting.
C. No, later peaks tolerate larger sample volumes and are less likely to suffer fronting.
7Q4. Equation 7.10 exemplifies the difference between plate height and variance:
σ2 = L H
Answers to self-assessment questions 371The variance (σ2
) of a peak is a measure of the total longitudinal dispersion of its molecules during its passage
through the column. From Equation 7:10, plate height (H) isthe amount of variance created per unit length of
column. Variance and plate height are both measured in length units within the column and in time units on
the chromatogram.
7Q5. Existing peak has a base width (wb) of 4 s. Per Equation 2.16:
wb = 4 τ
So existing peak standard deviation (τ) is 1.0 s and existing peak variance is 1.0 s
2
.
A. Equation 7.14 gives the additional time variance from a connecting tube:
τot
2 = 1
12
Vot
Vc
2
τot
2 = 1
12
0 2 mL
2 mL min
60 s
min
2
= 3 s2
Extra variance is 3 s
2
.
New total variance is 4 s
2
.
New standard deviation is 2 s.
New peak base width is 8 s. Twice as wide!
7Q6. Variance increases linearly with empty tube length but by the fourth power of empty tube diameter! Peak
width increases with the square root of tube length and the square of diameter.
7Q7. The resolution achieved by the capillary column is:
Rs = 3 s
2 s
=15
The standard deviation (τ) of each peak is:
τ = wb
4
=05s
The variance (τ
2
) of each peak is:
τ2 = 0 25 s2
The peak variance after a twofold change in diameter is given by Equation 7.23:
τ2 = 0 25 × 24 = 4 s2
Their standard deviation is now:
τ =2s
And their base widths are:
wb = 4τ =8s
372 Answers to self-assessment questionsSo their resolution is now only one-fourth of what it was when leaving the column:
Rs = 3 s
8 s
= 0 375
Lesson learned: Never use connecting tubing having a larger internal diameter than your column!
SAQ-08 Answers
8Q1. A
8Q2. D
8Q3. F
8Q4. E
8Q5. B
8Q6. A, C, D, and E
8Q7. F
SAQ-09 Answers
9Q1. The best choice is (B). Although parallel column systems will most likely include columns in series, that
arrangement of columns is not what gives them an advantage. Their advantage comes from using simple
column arrangements (reliable, easy to design and maintain) for concurrently analyzing selected sets of
analytes (fast analysis). Parallel chromatography would have those two advantages whatever columns
they used.
9Q2. The housekeeping rule requires a column system to surely remove all injected sample molecules from the
columns before injecting another sample. The backflush column system meets this requirement by reversing
the flow direction in the first column and flushing strongly retained components to a vent or detector.
9Q3. The general elution problem expresses a range limitation of gas chromatography. Any column that separates
the early peaks will take an excessively long time to elute the strongly retained components. And vice versa: a
column that separates the later peaks in reasonable time will not be able to separate the early peaks. The two
options for ameliorating the problem are column switching (mainly used by process GCs) and temperature
programming (mainly used by laboratory GCs).
9Q4. The basic answer is that PGCs don’t need them. Capillary columns are more expensive to buy and more chal￾lenging for the maintenance technician. Most PGCs measure only a few known components, a task often
accomplished faster and more reliably by a column-switching system using packed columns. Some would
disagree, and it’s probable that technical improvements will make capillary columns more attractive in
the future.
9Q5. When columnsin series use the same packing or coating, the system does not exploit the additionalseparating
power of two different stationary phases. The retention factor is the same for each column. For some easy
separations, a single stationary phase is adequate, but more difficultseparations benefit from the combination
of two phases. A second stationary phase might move peaks to unoccupied segments of the chromatogram,
improving resolution and reducing analysis time.
A second disadvantage of identical columns is their equal lengths. Because of their different average pres￾sures, the carrier gas velocity is much higher in the second column and components typically will get through
it in about half the time they spent in the first column. Often, this doesn’t give enough time for the next proc￾ess in the analytical method – such as further separation or backflush. To avoid this issue, the second column
is often about twice the length of the first one.
9Q6. A. The inlet/outlet pressure ratio is: 4 bara
1 bara = 4 0
The junction distance down the column: Z = 0.333 L
Answers to self-assessment questions 373To find the junction pressure (Pz), apply Equation 9.3:
Prz = Pr
2 − Z
L
Pr
2 − 1
Prz = 16 − 1
3
16 − 1 = 11
Prz = 3 32
From Equation 9.2:
pz = 3 32 po = 3 32 bara
B. The pressure ratios (Pr) come from Equation 9.1:
Column 1: Pr = 4.00 bara/3.32 bara = 1.20
Column 2: Pr = 3.32 bara/1.00 bara = 3.32
Both Columns: Pr = 4.00 bara/1.00 bara = 4.00
The compressibility factors (j) come from Equation 9.5:
j = 3
2
Pr
2 − 1
Pr
3 − 1
Column 1: j = 0.907
Column 2: j = 0.422
Both columns: j = 0.357
The average pressures (p) come from Equation 9.4:
p = po
j
Column 1: p = 3 66 bara (2.66 barg) = answer to 9Q6. B
Column 2: p = 2 37 bara (1.37 barg) = answer to 9Q6. C
Both Columns: p = 2 80 bara (1.80 barg) = answer to 9Q6. D
9Q7. The retention time in Column 1 is 100 s. Get the retention time in Column 2 by rearranging Equation 9.14:
tR2 = tR1
L2
L1
p2
p1
tR2 = 100
2
1
2 37
3 66
tR2 = 130 s
374 Answers to self-assessment questionsSAQ 10 Answers
10Q1. A, C, and D are correct:
A. Yes, backflush does the housekeeping.
B. No, this would need a heartcut system.
C. Yes, by backflushing into a detector.
D. Yes, by removing unmeasured components, backflush enables faster analyses.
E. No, this would be an example of parallel chromatography.
10Q2. A weakly retained peak might travel almost the length of the first column before being backflushed. It then
experiences about the same average column pressure as it returns to the front end of the column, so its travel
time is about the same in both directions. However, a strongly retained peak travels slowly into the column
at high pressure and faster when exiting at low pressure, so it elutes from the front end of the first column
before the weakly retained peak gets there.
10Q3. An intercolumn detector is a low-volume thermal conductivity detector installed between two columns to
track the peaks eluting from the upstream column. Seeing the peaks emerge from the column can assist in
setting column-switching times, particularly in backflush systems.
10Q4. A regrouped peak may contain several unique substances that have different detector sensitivities. Unless
they are always present in the same proportions, the detector response cannot be accurately calibrated.
10Q5. To ensure the net flow in the first column is backward, the column must be backflushed at a higher flow rate
or for a longer time than in forward flow.
10Q6. The two columns may contain the same packing or coating, a polar column may follow a nonpolar column,
or a nonpolar column may follow a polar column.
10Q7. Since the first column is at higher pressure, its average carrier velocity is lower. A peak just escaping
backflush will get through the second column in about half the time it spent in the first column. But
the backflush will not be complete for twice as long. To avoid waiting for the backflush, the backflush
flow must be higher than the forward flow, wasting carrier gas and subjecting the column to larger pres￾sure pulses.
SAQ 11 Answers
11Q1. A. Is the best description.
11Q2. A. Two
B. The second column
C. One
D. One
E. Two – one detector vent and one column vent
F. Only one - all flow rates are the same
11Q3. A. Two
B. Three
C. Four
11Q4. A. Yes, if the peak gets larger, part of it was missing. If the peak stays constant, don’t forget to reset the
timing back to what it was.
B. No, this might cut the peak and doesn’t reveal whether a part of it was missing.
C. No, this might cut the peak and doesn’t reveal whether a part of it was missing.
D. Yes, if the peak gets larger, part of it was missing. If the peak stays constant, don’t forget to reset the
timing back to what it was.
11Q5. A. This is the least difficult method.
B. This is a more difficult method.
C. This is the most difficult method.
11Q6. A. The first column must separate the two analyte peaks from the major component and from each other –
enough to create a sufficient gap for the first analyte peak to fit between the two remnant peaks.
Answers to self-assessment questions 375B. The second column cannot increase the separation between the two remnants because they are the same
component.
C. The second column must be exactly long enough to place the first analyte peak between the two rem￾nants, or it must be so powerful that it retains both analytes more than both remnants.
D. The first cut may interfere with the timing of the second cut.
E. The second analyte peak is likely to be strongly retained, extending the analysis time.
11Q7. A. Ethene exits the first column while the valve is ON (between 33 and 52 s), so 42.5 s is an acceptable
answer but allowing for normal peak asymmetry 41 s is a better estimate.
B. Estimate the total retention time of ethene on the chromatogram (about 106 s), then subtract its time on
the first column (41 s) giving its retention on the second column as 65 s.
C. The methane remnant enters the second column while the valve is on (centered at 42.5 s) and its center
on the chromatogram is about 67.5 s, giving a retention of 25 s on the second column.
D. The ratio of times for ethene on the two columns is 41/65 and the columns have the same packing, so the
retention time of methane on the first column is 25∗41/65 s = about 16 s.
NOTE: your math is not important – but your logic is!
SAQ 12 Answers
12Q1. Instrumentation problems that affect the baseline and chromatographic problems that affect the measure￾ment of analyte peaks.
12Q2. The given baseline error is 2.5 % of the peak height. According to the chapter text, a baseline error of 1 % of
peak height causes 3.2 % error in the area measurement when integrating for a duration of two peak base
widths. Therefore, a baseline error of 2.5 % of peak height is 8.0 % of the peak area.
12Q3. True or false:
A. False: the FID is a rate detector. Provided analyte molecules arrive at the same rate per microsecond the
detector response doesn’t change, it ignores the presence or absence of diluent molecules.
B. True: the FID gives an elemental signal for every molecule in the peak. If the flow rate into the detector is
halved, the detector outputs half the signal for twice the time resulting in the same peak area.
C. False: the TCD gives a signal proportional to concentration and the flow rate doesn’t affect the concen￾tration. If the flow rate into the detector is halved, the detector outputs the same signal for twice the time
resulting in the twice the peak area.
D. True.
12Q4. Some causes of baseline drift include molecules being flushed from the columns, inadequate detector
temperature control, and contamination of carrier gas, injector, or detector.
12Q5. Some causes of baseline wander include a varying pressure at the detector vent, a detector leak, and
contamination of the detector.
12Q6. Some causes of baseline cycling include inadequate temperature control of detector or column, wind
buffeting on the vent outlet, and interference from a synchronous electrical load switching.
12Q7. Some causes of baseline noise include pressure pulses in the detector vent line, solid or liquid material in
the detector, leaking detector gas connections, random switching of electrical loads, electronic component
failure, and dirty electrical connections.
SAQ 13 Answers
13Q1. (A), (D), and (E) are symptoms of an instrumentation problem.
(B) and (C) are symptoms of a chromatographic problem.
13Q2. (C) is the best definition.
13Q3. Valve actions.
13Q4. Peaks, spikes, bumps, and steps.
376 Answers to self-assessment questions13Q5. Visible patterns:
A. Peak width increases with the square root of retention time.
B. Peaks from homologous compounds follow the doubling rule.
13Q6. The 12 s delay between the prior valve action and the artifact rules out a spike. Spikes occur instantaneously
with the event that causes them.
13Q7. Here are the rules:
Rule #1: If there’s nothing wrong with the chromatogram there’s nothing wrong with the chromatograph
(except calibration or electronic failures).
Rule #2: Start with a flat and smooth baseline.
Rule #3: Given a flat and smooth baseline, valve actions cause everything on the chromatogram.
Rule #4: Identify a chromatogram artifact by comparing its shape with the time elapsed since each valve
action that might have caused it.
Rule #5: Confirm the diagnosis by making a small change to the suspect event time and seeing the same
change in the time of the artifact.
Answers to self-assessment questions 377Subject index of SCI-FILEs
The more-scientific information is captured in SCI-FILES throughout both of our Wiley books on Process Gas
Chromatographs. For quick reference, the below tabulation of SCI-FILEs includes those from this book and our
previous book: Process Gas Chromatographs: Fundamentals, Design and Implementation (Waters 2020).
SCI-FILE Booka Chapter Pages
On Analytic Units 1 7 123
On Asymmetric Peaks 2 8 212–214
On Chemical Names 1 4 60–61
On Column Types 1 1 12–13
On Detectors 1 10 187–189
On Diagnosis 2 13 335–337
On Distribution 2 5 125–128
On Extracolumn Variance 2 7 190-196
On Mutual Affinity 2 3 43–45
On Plate Theory 2 2 24–27
On Pressure Drop 2 9 238–240
On Rate Theory 2 6 153–159
On Resolution 2 5 121–122
On Response Factors 1 15 312–313
On Retention Data 2 4 98–102
On Retention Factor 2 5 129–131
On Solubility 1 2 36–37
a
Book 1 refers to Waters (2020) and Book 2 is this volume.
Process Gas Chromatography: Advanced Design and Troubleshooting, First Edition. Tony Waters.
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2025 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Glossary of terms
The glossary defines the new technical terms listed at the end of each chapter and some general terms used in gas
chromatography. In addition, the list includes the names and formulae of components that often appear on chro￾matograms, including all the C1─C4 hydrocarbons, and the chemical elements involved. The cryptic notation shown
for some of these is a shorthand version of their name often used by chromatographers. The included atomic mass or
molar mass (M) of each substance may be useful when converting measurement units.
Cross references within the glossary are in bold font. To find more information within the book on any technical
term of interest, please use the index.
A
Absolute pressure The real fluid pressure on a scale starting at absolute zero (a complete vacuum) and
measured in pascals (Pa), kilopascals (kPa), megapascals (MPa), or bar absolute
(bara). Must be used in calculations.
Acetylene See ethyne.
Acetone See 2-propanone.
Acetylenes
CnH2n − 2
The alkyne family of hydrocarbons.
Active solid A granular solid that has a large surface area capable of adsorbing gas molecules.
Used as a stationary phase in early PGCs but now mostly replaced by synthetic
column packings. Examples include molecular sieves, silica gel, charcoal, and
alumina.
Adipate An ester of adipic acid: HO2C (CH2)4 CO2H
Adjusted retention time
(tR)
Peak retention time as measured from the air peak, equal to the time component
has spent in the stationary phase.
Adsorption The entrapment of gas molecules onto the surface of an active solid due to physical
or electronic attraction.
Adsorbent solid A granular solid used as a stationary phase in gas–solid chromatography, having a
large surface area that adsorbs gas molecules.
Adsorption isotherm A graphical plot of molecules adsorbed on a surface versus their partial pressure in
the gas phase when at equilibrium at a specified constant temperature.
Affinity A general term to indicate the degree of attraction between a solute and the
stationary phase which is a function of three forces: dispersion, polar, and ionic.
Process Gas Chromatography: Advanced Design and Troubleshooting, First Edition. Tony Waters.
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2025 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Agreed reference value (ARV) The concentration of an analyte in a calibration sample or validation fluid
deemed correct by all interested parties in Operations, Maintenance, Laboratory,
and Process Automation.
AID See argon ionization detector.
Air peak An unretained peak. Any component that is insoluble in the liquid phase and
therefore travels through the column at the same speed as the carrier gas.
Alcohol
[─OH]
A member of the alcohol family of organic chemical compounds, containing the
[OH] functional group.
Aldehyde
[─CHO]
A member of the aldehyde family of organic chemical compounds, containing the
[CHO] functional group.
Alkane
CnH2n + 2
The generic name for a member of the paraffin family; that is, noncyclic
hydrocarbons without double or triple bonds.
Alkene
CnH2n
The generic name for a member of the olefin family; that is, noncyclic
hydrocarbons with at least one double bond.
Alky group
CnH2n+1
The generic name for an alkane radical, usually an attachment to an organic
molecule. Not an independent chemical substance.
Alkyne
CnH2n − 2
The generic name for a member of the acetylene family; that is, noncyclic
hydrocarbons with at least one triple bond.
Allene See propadiene.
Allotrope A different physical form of the same chemical element; for example, diamond and
graphite are allotropes of carbon.
Alumina
Al2O3
M = 101.960 g/mol
An active solid capable of adsorbing gas molecules, previously used as a solid
stationary phase.
Amide
[=NCO]
An organic chemical compound containing the [N─C=O] functional group.
Amine
[─NH2]
A member of the amine family of organic chemical compounds, containing the
[NH2] functional group.
Amount of substance The number of molecules present. A more fundamental measure than the weight
or volume of the molecules. The actual number is enormous, so chemists often
count them in multiples of a mole.
Ampere (A) The SI base unit of electric current (I).
Analysis time The time from sample injection to final presentation of results. May be less than
cycle time.
Analyte A substance or a group ofsubstances whose concentration in the sample fluid isthe
target of an analytical measurement. A more general term applicable to any
measured quantity is the measurand.
Analytical measurement A measurement of composition. May be qualitative (to discover what is present)
or quantitative (to assess how much is present).
Analytical units The fraction of molecules in a sample that conform to a desired identity or quality,
usually expressed as a percentage by volume, mole, or weight.
Anion An atom or a fragment of a molecule that has gained an electron, becoming a
negatively charged ion. Attracted to an anode.
380 Glossary of termsAnode A positively charged electrode that attracts anions.
Applet In PGC, a simple valve and column arrangement that injects, separates, and
measures some of the desired analytes in a sample, but not all. To perform the
complete analysis, two or more independent applets are necessary.
Application engineering The art of configuring a PGC to perform a desired analysis. Central to the art is the
design of a column system and the specification of the individual columns.
Argon
Ar
M = 39.95 g/mol
The chemical element with atomic number (Z) = 18. A monatomic gas, the third of
six noble gases. An extremely inert gas sometimes used as a carrier gas. As an
analyte, argon is difficult to separate from oxygen.
Argon ionization detector
(AID)
A GC detector that is highly sensitive to most organic compounds; uses a
radionuclide to ionize argon gas, which in turn ionizes the analyte molecules. Now
obsolete in PGCs, mostly superseded by the flame ionization detector.
Aromatic compound Any organic compound that contains a structure comprising six carbon atoms in a
ring, apparently with alternating single and double bonds. Benzene [C6H6] is the
founding member of the category.
Aromatics A group of aromatic compounds.
Artifact Any disturbance to the baseline other than a genuine peak originating from the
current sample injection. Artifacts often have unknown cause, but it’s worth the
effort to find the cause as it may be a valve or column malfunction that will
eventually spoil the measurement.
Asymmetry ratio (As) A measure of the asymmetry (or skew) of a peak, the ratio of its trailing to leading
part-widths measured at an elevation of 10 % of the peak height.
Atmospheric pressure The pressure of the atmosphere at the location of the measurement, which varies
by elevation and local weather. For reporting data, the international standard
reference pressure is 1.0 bara (about 14.5 psig). In the USA, the traditional
reference pressure is 14.7 psig (101.325 kPa).
Atmospheric referencing Allowing a gas sample to equilibrate to atmospheric pressure immediately before
sample injection.
Atmospheric referencing
valve (ARV)
A device to adjust the pressure of a gas sample volume to atmospheric pressure
before sample injection. One or two valves stop the sample flow and connect the
sample loop to atmosphere for a few seconds. Must vent to outside air, not to flare.
Atomic mass The mass of one atom of a chemical element, measured in daltons or amu.
Atomic mass unit (amu) One-twelfth of the mass of the carbon-12 atom. The dalton (Da) is the name now
given to the amu.
Autosampler A laboratory device thatsequentially draws a sample from the next vial in a moving
line of vials and injects that sample into a laboratory chromatograph.
Autozero A timed event that resets the detector baseline signal to zero. The chromatogram
baseline is often set slightly higher than zero to make negative excursions visible.
Availability A measure of reliability. Availability is the fraction of time that an analyzer is
properly calibrated and available to deliver the measurements, expressed as a
percentage of the time the plant is running. Most PGCs achieve 95 %–98 %
availability.
Average pressure (p) The pressure drop in a column is nonlinear, so the average pressure cannot be
found by averaging the inlet and outlet pressures. Instead, divide the absolute
outlet pressure by the gas compression factor (j).
Glossary of terms 381Average velocity (u) The carrier gas velocity is inversely proportional to its absolute pressure, so it
accelerates down the column. The average velocity occurs at the average
pressure. It may be calculated by dividing the column length by the holdup time
of an unretained component.
Axial diffusion The spreading of molecules along the axis of the column tube due to the difference
of molar concentration within the band of molecules and the pure carrier gas on
either side of the band.
B
Backflush A method of removing heavies from a column by reversing the direction of carrier
flow. Used in most PGCs to remove all undesired components from the first
column before injecting another sample.
Backflush column The initial column in a column system designed to separate heavies from analytes
so the heavies can be backflushed. The heavies emerge as a composite peak that is
flushed to vent or sent to a detector for a measurement.
Backflush column system A system of valves and columns to accomplish the backflush function.
Backflushed peak A peak that has been backflushed from a column into a detector and may comprise
several components fully or partially regrouped together by the reversed
backflush flow.
Backflush-to-detector A backflush column system that includes a detector to measure the backflushed
peak.
Backflush-to-vent A backflush column system that does not include a detector to measure the
backflushed peak.
Backflush vent An unrestricted outlet to atmosphere, not connected to a flare. Emits a small flow
of carrier gas plus a recurrent but miniscule amount of heavies.
Band A group of component molecules traveling inside a column: an embryo peak.
Bar An international unit of pressure defined as 100 kPa and adopted as the standard
reference pressure for measurements that depend on pressure. 1 bar is
approximately equal to 14.5 psig.
Bara Absolute pressure in bar, equal to the gauge pressure plus the local barometric
pressure.
Barg Gauge pressure in bar. Most pressure gauges measure differential pressure relative
to the local atmospheric pressure.
Base width (wb) The width of a chromatogram peak in distance or time units, measured between
the intersections of the triangulated peak sides with the extended baseline.
Bargraph An obsolete method of displaying concentration data by the length of vertical bars
on a strip-chart recorder.
Baseline The detector signal when no peak is passing through the detector. The PGC
computes peak heights or peak areas relative to the baseline. When displayed on a
screen or printed on a chart, the baseline should be flat and smooth.
Baseline cycling Any repetitive up and down change in the baseline signal. Generally applied to
baselines that exhibit a rectangular, triangular, or sinusoidal waveform oscillating
around a constant level with a fixed wavelength. Usually caused by imprecise
temperature control of the detector block or synchronous interference from the
switching of nearby equipment.
382 Glossary of termsBaseline drift Gradual change in the baseline signal in one direction, up or down. A downward
drift is often observed after startup due to absorbed impurities purging from the
columns, and also following a large offscale peak.
Baseline noise Jagged, irregular, and high-frequency variations impressed upon a flat baseline.
Often due to a carrier gas leak, contaminated detector, or electronic malfunction.
May include spikes from RF interference or from pressure pulses in the
detector vent due to wind buffeting or vent gas bubbling through condensate in
vent line.
Baseline wander Slow, random changes in the baseline around a constant level. Causes include
pressure variations at the detector vent due to wind buffeting or variations in vent
manifold pressure. Never connect a detector vent to a flare header. Also caused by
injector valve or detector contamination, or by air drafts impinging on a detector.
Benzene
C6H6
M = 78.114 g/mol
A colorless, flammable, liquid hydrocarbon. The benzene molecule has six carbon
atoms arranged in a ring structure. Simply stated, the bonding comprises alternate
double and single bonds between carbon atoms. Benzene is the founding member
of all aromatic compounds and an important intermediate in the synthesis of many
useful chemicals. Therefore, it often occurs on chromatograms.
Selected as the first McReynolds probe.
Benzene ring The six-carbon ring structure of benzene which is present in all aromatic
compounds.
Bimodal peak A peak that has split and exhibits two apexes. Often due to condensation of the
vaporized sample on cooler surfaces in the injector or column. When the vapor
peak passes, the condensate revaporizes creating a second peak. Another
possibility is a chemical reaction that creates a new chemical species with a
different retention factor. This might cause peak tailing or a bridge between two
apexes.
Bleed See column bleed.
Bonded phase A stationary phase polymerized onto the inner surface of a capillary column thus
forming a polymer film with low vapor pressure and low bleed.
Bridge component A component measured by two or more parallel applets to link their measurement
sensitivities and thus enable full sample computations such as normalization.
Bump A brief disturbance to the baseline due to a pressure wave or flow upset caused by
valve action. Pressure waves form a bump immediately after the valve action that
caused them but flow upsets are delayed by the holdup time of an intervening
column.
1,2-Butadiene
C4H6 1,2-C4
M = 54.092 g/mol
A hydrocarbon having four carbon atoms and two double bonds, with the carbon
skeleton C=C=C─C. Often measured in the analysis of 1,3-butadiene streams and
in other light olefin samples.
1,3-Butadiene
C4H6 1,3-C4
M = 54.092 g/mol
A hydrocarbon having four carbon atoms and two double bonds, with the carbon
skeleton: C=C─C=C. 1,3-butadiene is an important monomer used in the
production of synthetic rubber, notably for vehicle tires. It tends to polymerize in
sample systemsto form the notorious green oil, particularly at temperatures above
60 C.
1,3-Butadiyne
C4H2 C4
M = 50.060 g/mol
Also called diacetylene. A hydrocarbon having four carbon atoms and two triple
bonds, with the carbon skeleton: C=--C─C=--C. Often an analyte in light
hydrocarbon samples.
Glossary of terms 383Butane
C4H10 nC4
M = 58.124 g/mol
Also called n-butane. A straight-chain paraffin having four carbon atoms that
commonly occurs in light hydrocarbon gas streams.
1-Butanol
C4H9OH
M = 74.123 g/mol
Also called n-butyl alcohol. Occurs as an industrial intermediate.
Selected as the second McReynolds probe.
1-Butene
C4H8 1-C4
M = 56.108 g/mol
Also called 1-butylene. One of the four butene isomers. A straight-chain olefin
having four carbon atoms with the carbon skeleton: C=C─C─C. Commonly occurs
in light olefin gases such as ethylene, propylene, or butadiene plant streams.
cis-2-Butene
C4H8 cC4
M = 56.106 g/mol
One of the four butene isomers. A straight-chain olefin having four carbon atoms
with the carbon skeleton: C─C=C─C. The “cis” tag indicates that the terminal
methyl groups are adjacent, on the same side of the double bond. This makes the
molecule more compact than the “trans” version, so this peak elutes first on a
chromatogram. Commonly occursin light olefin gasessuch as ethylene, propylene,
or butadiene plant streams.
trans-2-Butene
C4H8 tC4
M = 56.106 g/mol
One of the four butene isomers. A straight-chain olefin having four carbon atoms
with the carbon skeleton: C─C=C─C. The “trans” tag indicates that the terminal
methyl groups are on opposite sides of the double bond. This makes the molecule
less compact than the “cis” version, so this peak elutes after that component on a
chromatogram. Commonly occursin light olefin gasessuch as ethylene, propylene,
or butadiene plant streams.
Butenyne
C4H4 C4
M = 52.075 g/mol
Also called vinyl acetylene. A straight-chain hydrocarbon having one double bond
and one triple bond with the carbon skeleton: C=C─C--=C. Commonly occurs in
light olefin gases such as ethylene, propylene, or butadiene plant streams.
1-Butyne
C4H6 1-C4
M = 54.091 g/mol
Also called ethyl acetylene. A straight-chain hydrocarbon having an initial triple
bond with the carbon skeleton: C--=C─C─C. Commonly occurs in light olefin gases
such as ethylene, propylene, or butadiene plant streams.
2-Butyne
C4H6 2-C4
M = 54.091 g/mol
Also called dimethyl acetylene. A straight-chain hydrocarbon having a central
triple bond with the carbon skeleton: C─C=--C─C. Commonly occurs in light olefin
gases such as ethylene, propylene, or butadiene plant streams.
C
Cal gas A gaseous calibration sample. Sometimes erroneously applied to a liquid
calibration sample!
Calibration The procedure for ensuring that a PGC will accurately measure the concentration
of the selected analytes in a process sample.
Calibration factor The mathematical relationship between measured peak area (or height) and the
known concentration of an analyte in the injected calibration sample. Typically,
the calibration factor stored by a PGC is the reciprocal of the response factor.
Calibration fluid A gas or liquid calibration sample.
Calibration sample A contained gas orliquid mixture having specified analyte concentrations accepted
as correct. Often this acceptance will be contingent upon a certified chemical
analysis by a trusted laboratory.
Candela (cd) The SI base unit of luminous intensity (Iv).
384 Glossary of termsCapillary column General term for any narrow-bore open-tubular column, including WCOT, PLOT,
or SCOT versions.
Carbon
C
M = 12.011 g/mol
The chemical element with atomic number (Z) = 6. The sixth element, having six
electrons and four chemical bonds. The foundation of all life on Earth and present
in every organic molecule. Exists in several allotropic forms: charcoal, graphite,
and diamond.
Carbon Dioxide
CO2
M = 44.01 g/mol
A colorless, asphyxiant gas. Usually separated by a porous polymer column and
measured by a thermal conductivity detector. For low ppm measurement, a PGC
may catalytically convert it to methane for measurement by a flame ionization
detector.
Carbon Disulfide
CS2
M = 76.139 g/mol
A highly volatile and flammable liquid that usually has a pungent odor due to
sulfurous impurities. A flame photometric detector can measure low-ppm
concentrations of carbon disulfide.
Carbon Monoxide
CO
M = 28.01 g/mol
A toxic and flammable gas. Usually separated by a molecular sieve column and
measured by a thermal conductivity detector. For low ppm measurement, a PGC
may catalytically convert it to methane for measurement by a flame ionization
detector.
Carbonyl Sulfide
COS
M = 60.07 g/mol
A toxic and flammable gas with an unpleasant odor. Has a linear molecule with the
structure: O=C=S. A flame photometric detector can measure low-ppm
concentrations of carbonyl sulfide.
Carrier gas The mobile phase of a gas chromatograph that carries the component molecules
through the column. A PGC maintains constant carrier gas pressure and flow,
except in the rare applications of pressure and flow programming. Common carrier
gases include hydrogen, helium, nitrogen, and argon.
Carrier gas velocity See velocity.
Cathode A negatively charged electrode that attracts positive ions.
Cation An atom or a fragment of a molecule that has lost an electron, becoming a
positively charged ion and attracted to a cathode.
Cavity ring-down
spectroscopy
A powerful photometric technique capable of measuring parts-per-trillion of
certain analytes in gas samples.
Celite A granular solid with high surface area often used as the inert support in packed
columns. Comprises the fossilized remains of diatoms – a common type of algae
found in natural waters. See diatomaceous earth.
Charcoal An amorphous granular form of carbon that is capable of adsorbing gas molecules;
previously used as a solid stationary phase.
Chemical reaction Many measurements in analytical chemistry involve a chemical reaction with the
analyte. For process analysis, though, we prefer instrumental methods like PGC
where no chemical reactions occur.
Chemometrics Chemometrics is a mathematical procedure that discovers a set of characteristics
(such as photon absorption wavelengths) that can predict a physical property of a
fluid. It does that by comparing the spectra of dozens of known training samples. If
the training samples are representative of the likely process variation, the
instrument can predict the desired physical property or analyte concentration of a
process stream with adequate accuracy – and can do so very much faster than
conventional methods.
Glossary of terms 385Chlorine
Cl
M = 35.45 g/mol
The chemical element with atomic number (Z) = 17. Usually encountered in PGC
as the chlorinated derivatives of hydrocarbons, the lightest of which is
chloromethane.
Chlorine gas
Cl2
M = 70.90 g/mol
Chlorine is a yellow-green, highly poisonous gas at room temperature and
extremely reactive.
Chloromethane
CH3Cl
M = 50.49 g/mol
Also called methyl chloride. A colorless, odorless, and flammable gas widely used
in industrial chemistry. Has the structure of methane in which a chlorine atom
replaces one hydrogen atom.
Chromatogram A chart or display showing the variation in a GC detector output signal over time.
Generally, the chromatogram shows a predicable number of peaks on a mostly flat
baseline. The chromatogram is an essential aid for setting up or troubleshooting a
PGC.
Chromatogram signal The detector output signal. It may be a raw analog signal direct from the detector, a
live digitized detector signal, or a representation of an analog chromatogram
reconstructed from digital memory.
Chromatograph An analytical instrument using the principles of chromatography.
Chromatographic symptoms Symptoms of malfunction that appear on a flat and smooth baseline only when the
PGC Method is running. Mainly due to valve operations.
Chromatography The science and art of separating substances by a mobile phase moving across or
through a stationary phase. For analysis, quantitative detection follows the
chromatographic separation.
Colorimetry In this very sensitive wet-chemistry method of laboratory and process analysis, the
analyte reacts with a chemical to produce an intense color. The instrument then
measures the color density using a photometer tuned to respond to that color.
Column The heart of any gas chromatograph. A long tube that allows the carrier gas to
transport the injected sample across a large surface area ofsolid or liquid stationary
phase.
Column bleed Detectable molecules coming from the stationary phase. With liquid phases, a
combination of liquid-phase vapor pressure and products of reaction. The latter
may be due to thermal cracking of the liquid phase or its reaction with impurities
in the carrier gas, notably oxygen.
Column, capillary See capillary column.
Column efficiency The ability of the stationary phase to resolve solutes, indicated by plate height.
For equal column lengths, a lower plate height produces improved resolution.
Column length (L) The length of a column in meters.
Column, micropacked See micropacked column.
Column, nonpolar See nonpolar column.
Column, polar See polar column.
Column oven The column oven maintains a very constant column temperature or precisely
varies the temperature during analysis to follow a predefined pattern.
Column overload An excessive sample volume that resultsin a fronting peak on the chromatogram.
See also sample capacity and feed volume.
Column, packed See packed column.
386 Glossary of termsColumn switching The technique of allowing selected components to pass through different columns,
thus improving analyte resolution and analysis time.
Column system An arrangement of two or more columns and column-switching devices capable of
performing a designated separation of components.
Column vent A carrier gas outlet that must flow to atmosphere, not to a recovery or flare line.
Come read An instruction transmitted to a computer to inform that new data is available. The
computer then reads the new value.
Component Any unique chemical substance present in the sample fluid. A measured
component is an analyte.
Composite peak A peak or group of partially separated peaks containing two or more components.
Either the column doesn’t separate those components or the column system has
intentionally regrouped them together. Since perfect synchronicity of peaks is
unlikely, the composite peak may have an irregular shape.
Comprehensive method Laboratory term for a GC analysis that identifies and measures all the components
in a sample, as opposed to a heartcut method. Not used in PGC.
Concentration See mole fraction.
Concentration detector A gas chromatograph detector that responds to the concentration of the analyte in
the column eluent.
Concurrent separations The concurrent analysis of different components of the same processstream by two
or more independent applets housed in a single process gas chromatograph, each
applet having its own sample injector, columns, and detector.
Concurrent streams The concurrent analysis of two or more process streams using independent applets
housed in a single process gas chromatograph, each applet having its own sample
injector, columns, and detector.
Confidence level The estimated probability that the true value of the measurand falls within the
uncertainty interval.
Continuous variable A variable having an infinite number of possible values. It would require an
infinite number of digits to exactly represent the value of a continuous variable, so
a measurement can only estimate its approximate value.
Control chart A plot of sequential measurements of a constant sample, represented as deviations
from the mean value, that also exhibits warning and action limit lines. These limits
are typically at ±2 and ±3 standard deviations from the mean, respectively.
Applying the standard rules of Statistical Quality Control can warn of impending
failure or dictate the need for calibration.
Control unit An electronic device capable of controlling the time-dependent events in a process
gas chromatograph and processing a chromatogram signal to produce useful
information. All modern instruments use an integral microcomputer for these
functions.
Corrected retention volume
(VR)
The retention volume of a component peak corrected for the average pressure in
the column by applying the gas compressibility factor (j).
Correlogram Detector output signal from an advanced laboratory GC technique that splits a
composite peak into short segments which are partially separated in a second
column. The resulting correlogram is mathematically deconvoluted to measure the
individual components.
Glossary of terms 387Count An exact value having zero uncertainty, but not necessarily an integer. Any defined
quantity is a count, not a measurement. For instance, pi (π) is a count.
Cut peak Can refer to a whole peak successfully cut from the tail of a major component or to
an incomplete sliced peak, one with a piece removed by column switching.
Cutter column See heartcut.
Cyano group
[─CN]
Also called nitrile. An attachment to an organic molecule having a carbon atom
bonded to a nitrogen atom. Not a separate chemical compound.
Cycle time Usually the time elapsed between sample injections. May also refer to the time
needed to complete the whole cycle of a multistream sequence.
Cyclobutane
C4H8 cyclo-C4
M = 56.107 g/mol
An isomer of butene. A hydrocarbon gas with a molecular structure comprising
four carbon atoms connected in a circular formation by single bonds. Sometimes
appears as a peak on chromatograms of light hydrocarbon samples.
Cyclohexane
C6H12 cyclo-C6
M = 84.16 g/mol
A hydrocarbon liquid with a molecular structure comprising six carbon atoms
connected in a circular formation by single bonds. Cyclohexane is a powerful
industrial solvent. It often occurs on chromatograms separating aromatic
compounds.
Cycloparaffins
CnH2n
The family of cyclic hydrocarbons having only single bonds between carbon atoms.
No double or triple bonds. Cyclopropane is the smallest member.
Cyclopentane
C5H10 cyclo-C5
M = 70.1 g/mol
An isomer of pentene. A hydrocarbon gas with a molecular structure comprising
five carbon atoms connected in a circular formation by single bonds. Rarely
appears as a peak on chromatograms of light hydrocarbon samples.
Cyclopropane
C3H6 cyclo-C3
M = 42.08 g/mol
An isomer of propene. A hydrocarbon gas with a molecular structure comprising
three carbon atoms connected in a circular formation by single bonds. Often
appears as a peak on chromatograms of light hydrocarbon samples.
D
Dalton (Da) The SI unit of atomic mass, defined as one-twelfth of the massin grams of a carbon￾12 atom. Thus, one mole of daltons is a mass equal to one gram.
Debye force The molecular interaction between a permanent dipole and an induced dipole.
Dead leg An unpurged cavity, recess, or tube that can retain prior concentrations of sample
molecules and allow them to diffuse into the current analyzed sample.
Dead volume See dead leg.
Decane
C10H22 nC10
M = 142.286 g/mol
Also written as n-decane. A normal paraffin with ten carbon atoms.
Detector A device that generates a signal, usually electronic, proportional to the
instantaneous number of component molecules in the effluent from a column. All
PGC detectors are differential, responding to the difference between the baseline
condition and the presence of a peak.
Detector vent The outlet for gases discharged from a detector. It’simportant neither to restrict the
detector vent nor to subject it to pressure pulses.
Diaphragm valve A valve that applies pressure to a diaphragm in a manner that blocks one or more
flow paths while opening others.
388 Glossary of termsDiatomaceous earth The fossilized skeletal remains of ancient marine algae. Retains the fine structure
of the original microscopic organisms, usually as a pair of species-dependent half￾shells finely perforated with micron-sized holes. Used as a solid support, its
complex structure provides a large surface area and multiple pathways for gas flow.
Dielectric constant Traditionally, the ratio of the capacitance of a capacitor filled with the measured
material to the capacitance of an identical capacitor in a vacuum. Now called
relative permittivity.
Diffusion A movement of molecules that gradually ensures uniform composition in an
enclosed space. For a gas, the driving force of diffusion is a difference in its partial
pressure at separate locations in the enclosed space. The rate of diffusion is
proportional to the square root of the gas density (Graham’s law).
1,2-Dimethylbenzene
C8H10 o-Xy
M = 106.16 g/mol
Also called ortho-xylene. Frequently measured by PGCs in an aromatics plant. The
three xylene isomers are difficult to separate with liquid stationary phases.
1,3-Dimethylbenzene
C8H10 m-Xy
M = 106.16 g/mol
Also called meta-xylene. Frequently measured by PGCs in an aromatics plant. The
three xylene isomers are difficult to separate with liquid stationary phases.
1,4-Dimethylbenzene
C8H10 p-Xy
M = 106.16 g/mol
Also called para-xylene. Frequently measured by PGCs in an aromatics plant. The
three xylene isomers are difficult to separate with liquid stationary phases.
Dimethylether
C2H6O DME
M = 46.07 g/mol
Also called ether. The smallest member of the ether family having the structure
CH3─O─CH3. A volatile and highly flammable liquid.
2,2-Dimethylpropane
C5H12 neo-C5
M = 72.15 g/mol
Also called neopentane. An isomer of pentane with a central carbon atom
connected to four other carbon atoms. Its compact shape gives neopentane a low
boiling point and low retention time on liquid columns, being the first C5 peak to
appear on the chromatogram.
Diolefin
CnH2n–2
A hydrocarbon having two double bonds between carbon atoms. The smallest
diolefin is propadiene.
Dipole An electronic charge within molecules due to an uneven distribution of electrons.
Dipole, induced A temporary dipole created within a nonpolar molecule by the influence of an
adjacent polar molecule.
Dipole, permanent A sustained dipole due to electron displacement within a molecule containing two
or more atoms of different electronegativity.
Dispersion force A sustained attractive force between molecules due to myriad fleeting
polarizations caused by the random motion of their electrons.
Distribution In gas chromatography, distribution is the process by which solute molecules
distribute themselves between a gas phase and a liquid phase to form a steady-state
equilibrium.
Distribution column system One that partially separates the analytes into two or more groups, then routes each
group to a different secondary column optimized for the final separation of that
group.
Distribution constant (KD) In effect, the solubility of a solute in the liquid phase. The distribution constant of
a component is the ratio between its liquid-phase concentration and its gas-phase
concentration, at equilibrium. The ratio is constant at low concentrations but may
deviate as the concentrations increase. Such deviations are one of the causes of
asymmetric peaks.
Glossary of terms 389Disulfide A chemical compound whose molecule contains two sulfur atoms. For organic
disulfides, the two sulfur atoms bond together and have carbon chains attached at
each end.
The simplest example is dimethyl disulfide: H3C─S─S─CH3
Dodecane
C12H26 nC12
M = 170.340
Also called n-dodecane. A straight-chain paraffin having 12 carbon atoms in each
molecule.
Doubling rule The adjusted retention time approximately doubles for each (─CH2─) unit added
to a member of a homologous series.
Dual column A term that is not well defined but may indicate a distribution column system.
Dynamic equilibrium A stable state where two opposing processes are occurring at the same rate, so the
outcome is unchanging.
E
ECD See electron capture detector.
EMG See exponentially modified Gaussian.
Elapsed time The duration between a valve action and its effect on the chromatogram baseline.
Electrochemical A chemical reaction that produces or consumes electrons. Electrochemical devices
often measure contaminants in water – such as dissolved oxygen, for instance.
Electrode potential A voltage that forms on a wire immersed in an aqueous solution due to metal ions
entering the solution. It may also occur between two solutions due to a difference
in their concentrations. Electrode potentials can measure oxygen, pH value, and
selective ion concentrations, among others.
Electropolishing A technique for smoothing the inner wall of metal tubing. The tube is filled with
electrolyte and an insulated wire drawn through. An electric current from the wire
tip preferentially hits the high spots, wearing them down.
Electron capture detector
(ECD)
A detector used in chromatography to measure low concentrations of gases with
high electron affinity, like chlorine. It uses a radionuclide to ionize nitrogen carrier
gas, releasing low-energy electrons. Two polarized electrodes then generate a
constant baseline current that decreases when an analyte captures some electrons.
Electronegativity A measure of the tendency for the nucleus of an atom to attract electrons, a
function of the number of protons it has.
Electronic pressure controller
(EPC)
An electronic device that actively controls gas pressure and may have a set point
under the control of the PGC microprocessor.
Electronic pressure regulator
(EPR)
See electronic pressure controller.
Electronic signal
(4–20 mA)
The standard analog data-transmission signal for process control.
Elute To carry a component peak out of a column. All PGCs use elution chromatography,
where a carrier gas elutes a band of component molecules out of the column and
into the detector, thereby forming a peak on the chromatogram.
Energy (E) Defined as force multiplied by distance moved, the SI unit of energy is the joule (J)
where:
J = kg m2
/s2
Electrically, a joule is equal to a watt-second (W s).
390 Glossary of termsEster An organic compound made by replacing the hydrogen of an organic acid by an
organic group.
For example, ethyl acetate.
Ethane
C2H6 C2
M = 30.07 g/mol
A hydrocarbon gas, the second member of the paraffin homologous series. Occurs
on chromatograms of natural gas and refinery gases.
Ethene
C2H4 C2
M = 28.05 g/mol
Also called ethylene. A hydrocarbon gas, the first member of the olefin
homologous series. Commonly occurs on chromatograms of samples from
petroleum and petrochemical plants.
Ether
[C─O─C]
A series of organic chemicals containing an oxygen atom between two carbon
atoms. Colloquially, ether means the simplest member of the series:
dimethylether.
Ethoxy group
[─OC2H5]
An attachment to a long-chain molecule connecting an ethyl group via an oxygen
atom. Found in many stationary phases, the ethoxy group instills additional
polarity to the phase. Not a separate chemical compound.
Ethylene See ethene.
Ethyl group
[─C2H5]
An attachment to an organic molecule having two carbon atoms and five hydrogen
atoms. Not a separate chemical compound.
Ethyne
C2H2 C2
M = 26.04 g/mol
Also called acetylene. A hydrocarbon gas, the first member of the acetylene
homologous series. Occurs on chromatograms of light hydrocarbon gases,
particularly in olefin process streams.
Event time Any timed function occurring during an analysis and controlled by the PGC clock.
For most events, the user enters a time into the analysis Method. Ideally, the data
entry is the time after injection the event must occur, but some PGCs inject the
sample a few seconds into the analysis cycle, so the time entered is nominal.
Explosion-proof enclosure See flameproof enclosure.
Exponentially modified
Gaussian (EMG)
The combination of a symmetrical Gaussian function and an exponential function
to model the effect of a minor degree of surface adsorption on the shape of
a chromatogram peak. The model closely resembles a normal peak.
External standard A calibration gas or liquid in a container, external to the process analyzer.
F
Feed volume The total injected volume of sample and intermixed carrier gas, a measure of the
width of an injection profile. Theory says feed volume should not exceed the
volume of 50 plates.
FID See flame ionization detector.
Film thickness The thickness of a liquid phase film on the walls of a capillary column.
Flame arrestor A safety device to prevent a flame from propagating into a flammable process
environment. Comprises a set of narrow metal pathways that cool the flame below
the gas ignition temperature.
Flame ionization detector
(FID)
A popular PGC detector that uses a hydrogen flame to ionize hydrocarbon
molecules. High-voltage electrodes then collect the ions and released electrons.
The resulting electron current provides an extremely sensitive and linear measure
of carbon content that follows the profile of each eluting peak. The detector
responds only to organic compounds.
Glossary of terms 391Flame photometric detector
(FPD)
A PGC detector that uses a hydrogen flame to excite the fluorescence of infrared
radiation by sulfur or phosphorus atoms. An optical filter selects the fluorescence
due to sulfur, which then impinges on a photomultiplier tube. This device is very
sensitive to light and outputs a signal that follows the profile of each eluting peak
that contains sulfur.
Flame photometry A method for the chemical analysis of certain metal elements that examines the
wavelengths of light emitted by an analyte sprayed into a flame.
Flameproof enclosure Also called an explosion-proof enclosure. An enclosure that complies with
applicable codesforinstallation in a specified hazardous area. Quenches a flame by
cooling it below the ignition temperature of the gas in question.
Flash point The lowest temperature at which a flammable fluid will burn in air when exposed
to an ignition source.
Flat-topped peak A peak with its top flattened parallel to the baseline. May be due to an electronic
range limit or a sample volume that exceeds the sample capacity or maximum
feed volume of the column – more likely with capillary columns.
Fluoresce To emit electromagnetic radiation.
Fluorescence The emission of photons due to electronsreturning to their ground state after being
excited by heat, radiation, or chemical reaction. The emitted fluorescence may be
in the infrared, visible, ultraviolet, or X-ray regions of the spectrum.
Fluorine
F
M = 18.998 g/mol
The chemical element with atomic number (Z) = 9. The lightest of the halogen
group of elements.
Fluorine gas
F2
M = 37.996 g/mol
A yellow-green gas that is extremely reactive.
Force (F) The physical influence that accelerates the motion of an object, defined as mass
multiplied by acceleration.
The SI unit of force is the newton (N) where:
N = kg m
s2
Forced integration A method of chromatogram peak area integration. The integration proceeds
continuously from the start command until the stop command. The accumulated
integral includes all deviations of the baseline during that period.
Formaldehyde See methanal.
Fourier transform A mathematical procedure that converts a signal occurring in time to an equivalent
set of sinusoidal waveforms that are easier to analyze.
FPD See flame photometric detector.
Freon One member of a family of fluorocarbon refrigerant gases.
Fronting peak Sometimes called a leading peak. An asymmetric peak that falls more rapidly than
it rises, typically due to a nonlinear adsorption isotherm or a column overload.
The peak shape is due to an increase in solute affinity for the liquid phase at higher
concentrations. In extreme cases, these peaks can look like right triangles, ramping
up slowly and then falling rapidly to the baseline.
Fused peaks Two or more partially separated chromatogram peaks, particularly those that
exhibit no valley between them.
392 Glossary of termsG
Galvanic current An electric current produced solely by chemical reaction as in a dry cell battery. In
process analyzers, the most common application for a galvanic cell is to measure
oxygen at sub-ppm concentrations in a gas stream.
Gas chromatograph The analytical instrument.
Gas chromatography (GC) The technique of separating analytes prior to measuring them by injecting a vapor
sample into a gas mobile phase that moves in contact with a liquid or solid
stationary phase.
Gas compression factor (j) A factor used to calculate the average pressure in a column, which allows for the
expansion and increasing velocity of the carrier gas as it travels down the column.
Gas-liquid chromatography
(GLC)
Gas chromatography using a liquid stationary phase.
Gas-solid chromatography
(GSC)
Gas chromatography using a solid stationary phase.
Gate See peak gate.
Gaussian peak An ideal peak having the shape of a normal distribution, also known as the
standard curve of error. When inside the column, peaks closely approximate to this
shape. On the chromatogram, the peaks appearslightly skewed because the back of
the peak stays in the column longer than the front, thus becoming a little wider.
General Elution Problem The realization that any column to separate the light components would
excessively retain the heavy ones. A consequence of the doubling rule, the
General Elution Problem is solved by temperature programming.
Ghost peak A small peak or set of peaks appearing in the next injection due to sample
molecules adsorbing on surfaces in the sample injector. More common in
laboratory chromatographs.
Grab sample Also called a spot sample. A discrete sample of a process fluid contained in a
balloon, cylinder, or bottle. Most grab sampling is manual and is subject to
uncontrolled variations in procedure.
Gram mole The massin grams of one mole of molecules, numerically equal to their molar mass
in atomic mass units.
Green oil A polymer oil containing the dimer and tetramer of butadiene or other unsaturated
C4 hydrocarbons. Commonly occurs in gas samples containing C4 olefins and
acetylenes, particularly if they flow in heated lines. Tends to form more rapidly at
temperatures above 60 C.
Guard column A column whose main function isto protect any following columns or devicesfrom
damage by reactive componentsin the sample. The guard column is backflushed to
remove retained components so it also acts as a housekeeping column.
A common example is the use of a Porapak T column to protect a molecular sieve
column.
H
Halogenated solvent Excellent solvents capable of dissolving many compounds. They have a basic
hydrocarbon structure but contain one or more halogen atoms in the place of
hydrogen atoms.
Glossary of terms 393Halogens The group of similar elements that includes fluorine, bromine, chlorine, and
iodine.
Hastelloy™ A nickel–molybdenum–chromium–tungsten alloy with excellent corrosion
resistance in a wide range of severe environments.
Hazardous area An area, or more correctly a volume, of space in a processing plant where a
flammable atmosphere might exist.
Heartcut A technique that enables the measurement of ppm-level analyte peaks following a
large major component peak of high percentage concentration. Essentially, the
technique concentrates the analytes by separating and removing most of the major
component.
Heartcut column system Uses an initial column to achieve a partial separation of the analytes while venting
the bulk of the major component. A column switch then allows the analyte peak(s)
and a small amount of the major component to enter a second column for final
separation.
Heartcut method Laboratory term for any kind of GC analysis that measures only selected analytes
in a sample as opposed to a comprehensive method. Uses different techniques
than those used in PGCs, including a modulator to transfer selected peaks to a
second column. Not used in PGCs.
Heavies Component peaks that elute from a column later than the analyte peaks. These are
typically larger molecules with higher molar mass than the analytes, but not
always so. Heavies are usually backflushed to vent or regrouped into a single peak
for measurement.
Helium
He
M = 4.0026 g/mol
The chemical element with atomic number (Z) = 2. Also, a monatomic gas; the
lightest of the six noble gases and extremely inert. Because of its safety and high
thermal conductivity, it was the favorite carrier gas for PGCs in North America but
is becoming scarce and expensive. PGCs are now more likely to use hydrogen
carrier gas.
Helium ionization detector
(HID)
A highly sensitive detector that can measure almost any analyte. A radionuclide
ionizes the helium carrier gas, which then ionizes the analytes. Now obsolete in
PGCs due to its instability and the odious regulations for operating a radioactive
source.
Henry’s law At equilibrium, the amount of dissolved gasin a liquid is directly proportional to its
partial pressure above the liquid.
Heptane
C7H16 nC7
M = 100.205 g/mol
Also called n-heptane. A normal paraffin often measured in liquid process streams
and in natural gas. The column system may group the heptane with heavies to give
a composite C6+ measurement.
HETP Height equivalent to a theoretical plate.
See plate height.
Hexane
C6H14 nC6
M = 86.178 g/mol
Also called n-hexane. A normal paraffin often measured in liquid process streams
and in natural gas. The column system may group the hexane with its many
isomers and heavies to give a composite C6+ measurement.
HID See helium ionization detector.
Holdup time (tM) The time taken by the carrier gasto passthrough a column, conveniently measured
by the retention time of an air peak.
Homolog A member of a homologous series.
394 Glossary of termsHomologous series A set of carbon compounds having identical molecular structure except for the
length of the main carbon chain. A classic example is the paraffin series, whose
members differ only by the incremental addition of a methylene group: ─CH2─.
Host computer A computer, typically a process-control system, which receives analytical
measurements from a PGC and may exercise some control over its operation.
Hot-wire detector A thermal conductivity detector that uses heated wire elements, rather than
thermistors.
Housekeeping column A column that ensures the removal of all heavies before the PGC injects another
sample. Typically, the first column in a backflush column system.
Housekeeping rule A PGC column system must remove all components of an injected sample from the
columns before it injects another sample.
Hydrocarbon
CxHy
A chemical compound containing only carbon and hydrogen atoms.
Hydrogen
H
M = 1.00794 g/mol
The chemical element with atomic number (Z) = 1. The first element.
Hydrogen bond The strong attractive force between two polar molecules, often but not always due
to the weak electronegativity of a hydrogen atom.
Hydrogen gas
H2
M = 2.01588 g/mol
The lightest gas; transparent, odorless, and flammable. As a carrier gas, hydrogen is
less expensive than helium. It generates a somewhat lower plate number than
helium or nitrogen carrier gas but provides much faster separations.
Hydrogen chloride
HCl
M = 36.46 g/mol
A toxic gas that readily dissolves in water to form hydrochloric acid. When wet, it is
highly corrosive. The molecule is covalent but highly polarized, so it tends to
adsorb on surfaces.
Hydrogen cyanide
HCN
M = 27.0253 g/mol
A colorless and highly toxic liquid or gas with an almond odor. The liquid boils at
26 C. The molecule is covalent and has the structure: N--=C─H.
Hydrogen fluoride
HF
M = 20.006 g/mol
A colorless and highly toxic liquid or gas. The liquid boils at 19.5 C and is highly
acidic. Dissolves in water to form the corrosive hydrofluoric acid.
Hydrogen sulfide
H2S
M = 1.00794 g/mol
A colorless, flammable, and highly toxic gas with an odor of rotten eggs.
Commonly occurs in samples of industrial gases and when at low ppm levels is
often a designated analyte for PGC measurement.
I
Induced dipole See dipole, induced.
Inert support An inert solid like Celite that can hold a liquid phase immobile in a packed
column. The liquid coats the large surface area of the support.
Infrared (IR) The portion of the electromagnetic spectrum with wavelengths between 700 nm
and 1 mm.
Injection profile An imaginary plot of the concentration of the sample in the carrier gas as it leaves
the injector. The idealshape is often thought to be a square wave, rising instantly to
100 % concentration for a minimum duration, then rapidly returning to zero.
Actually, a Gaussian profile would return the highest column efficiency.
Glossary of terms 395Injector A mechanism for injecting a precise volume of gas or liquid sample into the carrier
gas and hence into the column, usually a mechanical valve.
Inorganic compound Generally, a chemical compound that contains no carbon atoms, although we
often classify the oxides of carbon, carbonates, and bicarbonates as inorganic.
Instrumentation symptoms Symptoms of malfunction that upset a flat and smooth baseline when the PGC
Method is not running and no valve operations occur.
Integration The measurement of peak area.
Intercolumn detector (ITC) A low-volume thermal conductivity detector placed between columns to allow
visual indication of peaks transiting from one column into another and thereby to
facilitate the setting of column switching times.
Internal standard A selected component that is always present in the analysis. The calibration
procedure uses an external standard to calibrate only that peak. The PGC then
calculates the concentration of other peaks based on their response factors relative
to the internal standard.
Intrinsically safe An electrical device or circuit that is incapable of releasing enough energy to ignite
an explosive atmosphere, under normal or abnormal conditions.
Ion An atom or group of atoms that has gained or lost one or more electrons, becoming
a negatively or positively charged entity.
Ionic liquid phase An ionic and extremely polar phase that provides high stability and good peak
shape when separating highly polar solutes.
Ionization The process of becoming an ion.
Isobutane See 2-methylpropane.
Isobutene Also called isobutylene. See 2-methylpropene.
Isomers Two or more compounds with the same chemical formula and the same molar
mass, but having a different structure, leading to different physical properties and
different chemical reactions. Hydrocarbon isomers having branched carbon chains
tend to have a more compact molecule than their straight-chain homologs and
therefore elute first on a gas–liquid column.
Isoparaffins Branched chain isomers of the normal paraffins, of which there are many. When
used to indicate a homologous series, typically refers to the 2-methyl isomers of the
n-paraffins. For example, see 2-methylbutane.
Isopentane See 2-methylbutane.
Isothermal analysis A chromatographic separation performed at constant column temperature,
followed by detection and measurement of the analyte concentrations.
ITC See intercolumn detector.
J
Joule (J) The SI derived unit of energy (E). An electrical definition: one joule is the energy
dissipated as heat when an electric current of one ampere passes through a
resistance of one ohm for one second.
K
Katharometer Prior name for a thermal conductivity detector.
Keesom forces The interactions between two permanent molecular dipoles.
396 Glossary of termsKelvin (K) The SI base unit of temperature (T).
Ketone
[─CO─]
A member of the ketone family of organic compounds, containing the [CO]
functional group.
Kilogram (kg) The SI base unit of mass (m).
Kinetic theory The Bernoulli (1738) notion that gases consist of great numbers of molecules
rapidly moving in random directions. This led to the realization that gas pressure is
due to molecules colliding with the walls of the container and temperature is due to
their average kinetic energy.
KISS An acronym that emphasizes the relation between reliability and simplicity of
design: Keep It Simple, Stupid!
Krypton
Kr
M = 83.798 g/mol
The chemical element with atomic number (Z) = 36. A monatomic gas, the fourth
of six noble gases. Not used in PGC.
L
Laminar flow A smooth kind of fluid flow in tubes that occurs at low flow velocity, in which all of
the fluid is traveling parallel to the axis of the tube and no radial motion occurs.
The velocity profile acrossthe tube diameteris parabolic with the fluid at the center
of the tube traveling at twice the average velocity and the fluid in contact with the
tube walls hardly moving.
Langmuir isotherm A simple equation representing the adsorption isotherm of an adsorbate on an
adsorbent surface. The equation relates the partial pressure of the absorbate in the
gas phase to its volume adsorbed at the surface at a specified constant temperature.
Leading peak See fronting peak.
Limit of detection The value in measurement units of the smallest peak that one can reliably
distinguish from the background noise, often computed as twice the peak-to-peak
noise level.
Liquid chromatography (LC) The technique of separating analytes prior to measuring them by injecting a
sample into a liquid mobile phase that flows over or through a solid stationary
phase. A process liquid chromatograph was once available for sale but was not
commercially successful. The technique is common in the laboratory for the
analysis of food, drugs, and other complex mixtures, but rarely used online in the
industrial process industries.
Liquid loading In a packed column, the percentage by weight of liquid phase deposited on a solid
support. In effect, a measure of liquid film thickness.
Liter Also called a litre. A unit of volume equal to one-thousandth of a cubic meter.
Live Tee A valveless method of column switching that controls the direction of carrier gas
flow by manipulating the column pressures. A short capillary tube connects two
columns. Electronic pressure regulators control the upstream or downstream
pressure on the capillary, thereby dictating the direction of flow through the
capillary. This flow reversal can be set up to perform backflush or heartcut
functions.
The main advantage of the Live Tee is its extremely low volume, making it suitable
for use with capillary columns.
London force See dispersion force.
Glossary of terms 397M
Major component The main constituent of an analyzed sample. Usually refers to a very large peak
that tends to interfere with the analysis of ppm concentrations of other
components in the sample.
Marker spikes Small vertical upward or downward spikes impressed upon the chromatogram
baseline by the processor to indicate event times such as valve actions, peak
detection, and integration windows.
Mass-flow detector A rate-sensitive detector that responds to the instantaneous population of analyte
molecules present, thus effectively measuring their mass flow.
Mass percent See weight percent.
Mass-sensing detector See mass-flow detector.
Mass spectrometry (MS) An analytical technique that ionizes the sample gas under vacuum and then
accelerates the ions through a magnetic or electronic field, which defects their
motion in proportion to their mass and electronic charge. Alternatively, the
analyzer separates the ions according to their time-of-flight. The analyzer may
detect specific ions by their mass-to-charge ratio or output a complete mass
spectrum for further analysis.
McReynolds constants A measure of liquid phase polarity based on the retention of five or more probes,
standard solutes. One measures the retention index of each probe at 120 C on
the subject liquid phase and subtracts its retention index on squalane under the
same conditions. Thus, each probe reveals different aspects of the liquid phase
polarity.
Mean The arithmetic average of a set of results.
Measurand A general term used in metrology to identify the “quantity intended to be
measured.”
Measurement environment The totality of variables, internal and external of the measuring device, that may
affect and degrade the measurement in any way.
Measurement range The span in measurement units from zero to the highest measurement limit.
Usually denotes the current instrument setting rather than the maximum or
minimum limit.
Measurement span The span in measurement units from the lowest to the highest measurement limit.
Usually denotes the current instrument setting rather than the maximum or
minimum limit.
Megabore column A capillary column with an internal diameter of 0.53 mm.
MEMS Micro-ElectroMechanical Systems: refers to tiny integrated devices or systems that
combine mechanical and electrical components. They are fabricated using
integrated circuit batch processing techniques and can range in size from a few
micrometers to millimeters.
Mercaptan
[─SH]
A hydrocarbon derivative containing the ─SH functional group. Used to odorize
natural gas.
Mesh size A measure of particle size based on the sieves used for grading the particles. For
instance, 80–100 means the particles pass through an 80-mesh sieve and are
blocked by a 100-mesh sieve. About 90 % of the granules in the product are within
the mesh sizes of the two sieves.
The US definition of mesh size is the number of openings in one square inch of a
screen.
398 Glossary of termsMeter (m) Also called a metre. The SI base unit of length (L).
Methanal
CH2O
M = 30.026 g/mol
Also called formaldehyde. The smallest aldehyde; a colorless, toxic gas with a
pungent odor.
Not detected by an FID, unless converted to methane by a methanator.
Methanator A device that converts ppm amounts of carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, or
formaldehyde to methane, so a flame ionization detector can measure them. The
column effluent mixed with hydrogen passes through a heated catalyst tube to
convert the peaks to methane.
Methane
CH4 C1
M = 16.04 g/mol
A hydrocarbon gas; initial member of the paraffin homologous series. Occurs on
chromatograms of petroleum gases and comprises about 85 % of natural gas.
Methanol
CH3OH MeOH
M = 32.04 g/mol
Also called methyl alcohol. The smallest member of the alcohol family of organic
chemical compounds.
Method In chemistry, a protocol for doing a chemical analysis.
In PGC, a software tabulation of instructions specifying the timed events and
calculations necessary to perform an analysis of one or more process streams.
Method settings can be modified by the userso it’s best practice to save a copy of the
original file.
Methoxy group
[─OCH3]
An attachment to a long-chain molecule connecting an ethyl group via an oxygen
atom. Found in many stationary phases, the methoxy group instills additional
polarity to the phase. Not a separate chemical compound.
Methyl acetylene See propyne.
Methylbenzene
C7H8
M = 92.141 g/mol
Also called toluene. An aromatic compound having a single methyl group attached
to a benzene ring. Often designated as an analyte for PGCs in aromatics plants.
2-Methylbutane
C5H12 iC5
M = 58.12 g/mol
Also called isopentane. A paraffin having five carbon atoms with the second
carbon atom connected to three other carbon atoms. An isomer of n-pentane.
Methyl chloride See chloromethane.
Methylcyclopropane
C4H8
M = 56.108 g/mol
An isomer of cyclobutane that often occurs in light hydrocarbon streams.
Methylene group
[─CH2─]
The repeating chain component in paraffin molecules and many polymers.
Methyl group
[─CH3]
A common feature of branched-chain hydrocarbon molecules. Not a separate
chemical compound.
2-Methylpropane
C4H10 iC4
M = 58.12 g/mol
Also called isobutane. The simplest branched chain hydrocarbon. Due to its more
compact molecule, isobutane elutes before n-butane on all liquid columns.
Frequently occurs on chromatograms of light hydrocarbon gases.
2-Methylpropene
C4H8 iC4
M = 56.106 g/mol
Also called isobutene or isobutylene. The simplest branched chain olefin, and one
of the four isomers of butene. Frequently occurs on chromatograms together with
other light olefins.
Microliter (μL) One millionth of a liter (=1 mm3
).
Micropacked column A packed column <⅛-inch o.d., typically about 1 mm i.d.
Glossary of terms 399Migration rate The net rate of progress of a whole peak through the column. On a given column,
the migration rate of a peak is inversely proportional to its retention factor.
Milliliter (mL) One-thousandth of a liter (=1 cm3
). Often colloquially called a “cc”.
Mixing chamber A larger diameter space in the flow path where mixing can occur. When the carrier
enters a wider tube, a peak experiences an increase in width in proportion to the
square of the diameter change.
Mobile phase For a PGC, this is the carrier gas. Common choices are hydrogen, helium, or
nitrogen, but others are possible. The gas must be pure and dry.
Modulator Generic laboratory term for any device that transfers component peaks from one
capillary column to another. The terminology covers a host of resampling
techniques including valves, pressure balance switching, peak slicers, and cold
traps. Not used in PGC.
Molar weight The force of gravity acting on one molar mass.
Mole (mol) The SI base unit of quantity (n).
A way to count molecules or other small entities. One mole is about 6.022 × 1023 of
them.
Molecular sieves A series of solid stationary phases capable of separating oxygen and nitrogen as
well as other light gases such as hydrogen, methane, and carbon monoxide. Is
prepared from a mineral known as a zeolite, which can selectively sort molecules
based on their size, due to its very regular pore structure. The maximum size of
molecule that can enter the pores of a zeolite depends upon the dimensions of the
pores.
Molecular weight See molar mass.
Molecule The smallest amount of a chemical substance that can independently exist and still
retain the properties of that substance.
Mole fraction The fraction of the molecules in a sample that conforms to a specified identity or
type.
Mole percent The mole fraction expressed as a percentage. For a gas sample at low pressure, the
mole percent and the volume percent are approximately equal.
Monel™ A group of nickel alloys, primarily composed of nickel (from 52 to 67 %) and
copper, with small amounts of iron, manganese, carbon, and silicon. Monel alloys
are resistant to corrosion by many agents, including rapidly flowing seawater.
N
Naphthalene
C10H8
M = 128.17 g/mol
A dual-ring aromatic hydrocarbon with a strong mothball odor.
Naphthenes An obsolete and confusing term for cyclic hydrocarbons, not related to the
chemical substance naphthalene.
Near infrared (NIR) The portion of the electromagnetic spectrum having wavelengths between 780 and
2500 nm.
Newton (N):
N = kg m
s2
The SI unit of force: the force required to give a mass of one kilogram an
acceleration of one meter-per-second-per-second.
400 Glossary of termsNitrogen
N
M = 14.007 g/mol
The chemical element with atomic number (Z) = 7, and a valency of 3.
Nitrogen gas
N2
M = 28.014 g/mol
The familiar, colorless, and odorless gas. Mostly inert. Sometimes used as a PGC
carrier gas.
Nitro group
[─]
An attachment to an organic molecule having a nitrogen atom bonded to two
oxygen atoms. Not a separate chemical compound.
Nitropropane
C3H7NO2
M = 89.094 g/mol
Selected as the fourth McReynolds probe.
Neopentane See 2,2-dimethylpropane.
Noble gas Generic name given to the elemental gases helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon,
and radon. All are chemically inert, occur in trace amounts in the atmosphere, and
are often measured by gas chromatography.
Nonane
C9H20 nC9
M = 128.259 g/mol
A normal paraffin often measured in liquid process and natural gas streams. The
column may group the nonane with its many isomers and heavies to give a
composite C9+ measurement.
Nonpolar Having an even distribution of electrons and no permanent dipole. However, a
nonpolar substance might be polarizable by the influence of an external
electromagnetic field.
Nonpolar column A column with a stationary phase that separates solutes solely by dispersion forces
so the solutes elute in order of their boiling points. However, some nonpolar liquid
phases can be polarized by and retain a polar solute.
Normal distribution A function that represents the distribution of many random variables, having a
symmetrical bell-shaped graph.
Normalization A mathematical procedure to proportionally adjust all measured concentrations so
they total 100 %. The technique is valid for percent-level measurements but may
not work for ppm-level measurements. The PGC must measure all components of
the sample that have a significant effect on the total – typically all those greater
than 0.1 % by volume.
Normal peak Most chromatogram peaks are slightly asymmetric due to multiple processes that
tend to cause a slightly slower return to baseline than the rise to apex. This
asymmetry is considered normal and is more pronounced in wider peaks from
packed columns than in narrow peaks from capillary columns.
O
Octane
C8H18 nC8
M = 114.232
Also called n-octane. A straight-chain paraffin having eight carbon atoms in each
molecule.
Octane number A measure of the quality of gasoline related to its tendency to pre-ignite under
compression and “knock.”
On the arbitrary octane number scale, 2,2,4-trimethylpentane has an octane
number of zero and n-octane has an octane number of 100. Other values of octane
number derive from simple binary mixtures of these standard liquids.
Olefin [>C=C<]
CnH2n
A member of the alkene family of hydrocarbons having one or more double bonds
between carbon atoms.
Glossary of terms 401Open tubular column A column that has no packing so there’s an open path for gas flow. Such columns
have little flow resistance, so they can be long and narrow, and thereby very
powerful. The stationary phase is a thin film of liquid phase or a thin layer of solid
particles attached to the wall.
Optical filter A device that allows a selected band of photon frequencies to pass through but
blocks any higher or lower frequencies.
Order of magnitude To differ by a factor of ten; for example, a difference of three orders of magnitude is
one thousandfold.
Organic compound Any chemical compound containing carbon, except the carbon oxides, carbonates,
bicarbonates, and sulfides.
Oxygen
O
M = 15.999 g/mol
The chemical element with atomic number (Z) = 8. Present in the molecular
structure of many chemical compounds analyzed by PGCs.
Oxygen gas
O2
M = 31.998 g/mol
The familiar gas in the atmosphere and present in many gases analyzed by PGCs.
Difficult to separate from argon by gas chromatography.
P
Packed column A tube packed with small particles that may or may not have a thin film of liquid
phase deposited on them. The original PGCs used packed columns and they are
still popular today. Tube sizes have gradually changed from ¼-inch o.d. to 1/16-inch
o.d. The most common size found in a PGC is ⅛-inch o.d.
Paraffin
[─C─]
CnH2n + 2
A member of the alkane family of hydrocarbons having only single bonds between
carbon atoms.
Parallel chromatography Two or more independent chromatographic separations occurring concurrently in
the same analyzer, each using a separate sample injector, column system, and
detector. Mostly, the several sample injectors inject the same process sample and
the different column trains concurrently separate and measure different analytes,
thereby reducing analysis time and complexity. Alternatively, the injections are
phased to provide a more frequent analysis, or the injected samples are even from
different process streams.
Paramagnetism A form of magnetism induced in some materials by an external magnetic field. In
analysis, the paramagnetism of oxygen is a prime example. The movement of
oxygen when exposed to a magnetic field is the principle employed by many
process oxygen analyzers.
Partial peak An incomplete peak on the chromatogram that has lost some of its molecules,
usually due to column switching.
Partial pressure The portion of the absolute pressure of a gas that is due to a specific compound,
often expressed in kilopascals (kPa). The total pressure of a mixture of gases is the
sum of the partial pressures of its constituents.
Partition An obsolete technical term now superseded by distribution in gas
chromatography but retained to describe the similar process in liquid
chromatography.
Partition isotherm A graphical plot at specified temperature of analyte concentration in the liquid
phase versus analyte concentration in the gas phase. Any deviation from a straight￾line relationship results in an asymmetric peak shape.
402 Glossary of termsPascal (Pa) The SI derived unit of pressure (P). A force of one newton acting on a surface of
one square meter: Pa = N/m2
Pascal-second (Pa s) The SI derived unit of dynamic viscosity (η or μ).To convert from centipoise
(cP): 1 Pa s = 1000 cP.
PDD See pulsed discharge detector.
Peak Literally, the shape of the detector response to an eluting component, when
recorded on the chromatogram. Colloquially, a compact group of component
molecules migrating through the column.
Peak dispersion The broadening of a peak due to its molecules moving farther apart.
Peak gate The time between two preset scheduled events bracketing the expected retention
time of a single named peak or a group of peaks.
Peak, normal See normal peak.
Peak, partial See partial peak.
Peak picker An analog pneumatic or electronic device used in early PGCs to capture the height
of a peak so a computer could read its value. Alternatively, the peak picker would
transfer the held value to a long-term memory to output a continuous trend signal.
Peak tail A trail of component molecules following a peak that distorts the peak and may
form an extended baseline offset declining exponentially. May be due to slow
sample injection, non-linearities in the phase equilibria, adsorption of component
molecules on surfaces, or entrapment of molecules at unpurged cavities in the
walls of the flow path.
Peak width at base (wb) The width of a chromatogram peak in distance or time units, measured between
the intersections of the triangulated peak sides with the extended baseline.
Peak width at half height (wh) The width of a chromatogram peak in distance or time units, measured parallel to
the baseline at half the peak height.
PEEK Polyether ether ketone. A thermoplastic polymer having good mechanical
properties and chemical resistance at high temperatures.
Pentane
C5H12 nC5
M = 72.15 g/mol
Also called n-pentane. A straight-chain paraffin having five carbon atoms in its
molecule. Often seen on chromatograms of light hydrocarbons.
1-Pentanol
C5H11OH
M = 88.150 g/mol
Also called n-pentyl alcohol. Used in the production of artificial flavors and as a
solvent.
2-Pentanone
C5H10O
M = 86.13 g/mol
Also called methyl propyl ketone. Used as a solvent.
Selected as the third McReynolds probe.
Percent (%) A concentration of one part in one hundred. The percent sign is numerically equal
to 0.01.
Perfect resolution Defined as a resolution of 1.5, which is just adequate for measuring equal
symmetric peaks. More resolution is necessary for adjacent peaks of different size,
particularly when the smaller peak elutes after the larger one.
Permanent dipole See dipole, permanent.
Permeation The act of gas molecules passing through an apparently solid material like the
walls of polymer tubing. Don’t use polymer tubing for ppm gas samples.
Glossary of terms 403May also refer to gas leaks at threaded or compression joints in stainless steel tube
assemblies.
As in diffusion, the rate of permeation is proportional to the partial pressure
differential. Increasing the sample pressure will not stop its contamination by
permeation of gases from the atmosphere or flare line.
Phase ratio (β) The phase ratio is the ratio of gas-to-liquid volume in a column. In a capillary
column, it’s a function of the internal diameter of the tubing and the thickness of
the liquid film. These two column variables are the equivalent of the liquid
loading in a packed column.
Phenyl
[─C6H5]
A functional group attached to an organic molecule, structurally a benzene ring
that has lost one hydrogen.
Phosphorus
P
M = 30.974 g/mol
The chemical element with atomic number (Z) = 15. As a pure solid, it exists astwo
allotropic forms: red and white. Phosphorus is a highly reactive element and a very
common component of minerals and living things, but not often encountered in
PGC.
Photoionization detector
(PID)
A photoionization detector employs ultraviolet photons from a discharge lamp to
ionize the analyte molecules. The ions and electrons formed then migrate to the
charged electrodes, as they do in an FID.
Photometry The science and art of measuring analytes by their absorption or emission of
electromagnetic radiation.
Photomultiplier A highly sensitive electronic device to detect photons of light and generate a
proportional electric current.
Photon adsorption Most chemical compounds absorb photons of certain characteristic wavelengths,
allowing measurement of their concentration by detectors tuned to those
wavelengths.
Photon emission Some chemical compounds absorb photon or heat energy and then emit photons of
certain characteristic wavelengths, allowing measurement of their concentration
by detectors tuned to those wavelengths.
Phthalate An ester of phthalic acid: HO2C C6H4 CO2H
Physical property A unique property of a molecule that can indicate its concentration in the sample,
such as the paramagnetism of oxygen or the thermal conductivity of hydrogen.
Physical property analyzer An instrument that measures a quality of the process sample other than its
chemical composition. PGCs can calculate a few physical property measurements
such as heating value or boiling point.
PID See photoionization detector.
Piston valve See spool valve.
Plate A theoretical concept equivalent to the physical space within the column needed to
create one equilibrium between the solute molecules in the gas phase and those in
the liquid phase.
Plate height (H) The length of column required to generate one plate.
Plate number (N) The effective number of equilibria exhibited by a component peak.
Plate theory The original theory (by analogy with liquid distillation columns) that separation
was due to successive equilibria of solute molecules between a mobile gas phase
and a stationary liquid phase. See rate theory.
404 Glossary of termsPLOT column The stationary phase in a porous-layer open-tubular column is a very thin layer of
solid material coated on the inside wall of the tube to selectively adsorb sample
molecules from the sample gas.
Plug flow An idealized flow regime where all the molecules are moving at the same velocity,
that is, at the same speed in the same direction.
Plug injection An ideal sample injection profile having the minimum width.
Plunger valve A valve designed to inject liquid samples. The sample volume is a hole or
circumferential groove in a rod. Liquid sample fills the volume in a cold part of the
valve. Actuation drives the rod into a hot zone typically within the column oven
where the sample rapidly vaporizes.
Pneumatic detector A PGC detector that uses a flow orifice and capillary tube in series to generate a
pressure signal. The pressure signal is due to changes in gas viscosity and density
when a component peak enters the detector.
Pneumatic signal
(3–15 psig)
The standard pneumatic analog data-transmission signal for process control.
Poisson distribution The probability distribution that closely models the outcome of the theoretical
plate theory of peak formation in a chromatographic column. For very low plate
numbers, the Poisson distribution predicts asymmetric peaks but these become
symmetrical and Gaussian in shape at the higher plate numbers found in typical
columns.
Polar Any solute or stationary phase whose molecules have an uneven distribution of
electrons within, creating an internal dipole.
Polar column A column with a polar stationary phase that retains solutes in order of their boiling
point plus additional retention due to their polarity.
Polarizability The ability of an external force to disrupt the even electron distribution within a
nonpolar molecule, thereby creating an internal dipole.
Polarization Disruption of the even electron distribution within a nonpolar molecule by an
external force, thereby creating an internal dipole.
Polyimide A lightweight, heat-resistant, chemical-resistant, and flexible plastic used for
electrical and thermal insulation and for the manufacture of molded parts.
Polymer A substance having long-chain molecules of indeterminate length comprising
repetitive structural elements due to the repeated attachment of monomer
segments. The simplest polymer is polyethylene with the chain structure:
[─CH2─CH2─]n.
Porous polymer A synthetic solid stationary phase. The original porous polymers developed by
Hollis were small polystyrene beads with varying degrees of polymer crosslinking.
Hollis, O.L. (1966). Separation of gaseous mixtures using porous polyaromatic
polymer beads. Analytical Chemistry 1966382, 309–316 (February 1, 1966).
10.1021/ac60234a38
Pound mass (lb) The American unit of mass or weight, now defined as exactly 0.45359237 kg.
Poundal (pdl) An American unit of force: the force required to give a mass of one pound an
acceleration of one foot-per-second-per-second.
Pound force (lbf ) An American unit of force: the gravitational force exerted on a mass of one pound
on the surface of Earth.
Power The rate of energy use in joules per second (J/s) or watts (W).
Glossary of terms 405ppb A concentration of one part in a billion (1 × 10−9
).
ppm A concentration of one part in a million (1 × 10−6
).
ppt A concentration of one part in a trillion (1 × 10−12).
Precision Also called repeatability. See uncertainty interval.
Pressure (P):
P = F
A
Defined as the force (F) exerted by a fluid on a unit area (A) of the walls of its
container, in newtons-per-square-meter. The SI unit of pressure is the pascal (Pa),
where: Pa = N/m2
The American unit of pressure is the pound-per-square-inch (psi).
Pressure, absolute The total pressure exerted by a fluid.
Pressure balance switching See live tee.
Pressure, gauge The fluid pressure in excess of atmospheric pressure at the location and time of
measurement.
Prime cause of everything A troubleshooting mantra that recognizes valve actions as the proximate cause of
every peak, spike, bump, or step in an otherwise flat and smooth baseline.
Prime rule See housekeeping rule.
Priority interrupt An older data-acquisition protocol thatsends a signal to instruct a host computer to
interrupt routine processing and read new data available at the PGC.
Process analyzer Colloquially, any quality-measuring instrument (QMI).
Probe (to test liquid phases) One of a set of standard analytes used to compare the polarity of liquid phases.
The probes most often used to measure McReynolds constants are: benzene,
1-butanol, 2-pentanone, nitropropane, and pyridine.
Program A sequence of timed events and calculations that control the operation of a process
gas chromatograph.
Programmer A device, usually electromechanical, that controlled the sequence of operations in
early process gas chromatographs. Superseded by the microprocessor-based
control unit.
Propadiene
C3H4 C3
M = 40.065 g/mol
Also called allene. The smallest diene with the carbon skeleton: C=C=C. Occurs
on chromatograms of light olefin process streams.
Propane
C3H8 C3
M = 44.097 g/mol
A hydrocarbon gas. The third member of the paraffins homologous series, with the
straight carbon skeleton:
C─C─C. Frequently present in petroleum gases.
1-Propanol
C3H7OH
M = 60.096 g/mol
Also called n-propyl alcohol. Used as a solvent and disinfectant.
2-Propanone
CH3─CO─CH3
M = 58.08 g/mol
Also called acetone or methyl-methyl-ketone. Smallest molecule in the ketone
family. A flammable, volatile solvent used to clean tubing.
Propene
C3H6 C3
M = 42.081 g/mol
Also called propylene. A hydrocarbon gas, the second member of the olefins
homologous series with the straight carbon skeleton: C=C─C. An important
monomer for producing polypropylene.
Propyl group
[─C3H7]
An attachment to an organic molecule comprising three carbon atom and seven
hydrogen atoms. Not an independent chemical compound.
Propylene See propene.
406 Glossary of termsPropyne
C3H4 C3
M = 40.064 g/mol
Also called methyl acetylene. A reactive hydrocarbon gas, the second member of
the acetylenes homologous series with the straight carbon skeleton: C=--C─C. Often
a desired analyte in light olefin gases.
Pulsed discharge detector
(PDD)
The PDD uses a pulsed electric discharge in helium, or helium doped with another
noble gas, to raise helium atoms to an energetic state while emitting ultraviolet
photons. The detector is popular in PGCs as it can mimic other ionization detectors
without using a radionuclide.
Pyridine
C5H5N
M = 79.102 g/mol
An intermediate in the industrial production of herbicides.
Selected as the fifth McReynolds probe.
Q
Qualitative analysis To determine what chemical substances are present in a sample.
Quality-measuring
instrument (QMI)
An instrument to measure a quality of a process fluid as distinct from its current
condition. The category includes analytical instruments measuring composition
and non-analytical instruments measuring a physical property of the fluid, but
both types are “process analyzers.”
Quantitative analysis To determine the amount of selected chemical substances present in a sample.
Quantum cascade laser (QCL) A wide-range tunable laser that produces a high optical power output at ambient
temperature.
R
Radial diffusion The spreading of peak molecules across the radius of the column tube due to the
laminar flow profile of the carrier gasflow in the column. The band of component
molecules in the fast-moving central flow is in contact with a lower concentration
of molecules near the walls causing radial movement and band spreading.
Radical In organic chemistry, a radical is an atom or molecule that has at least one
unpaired valence electron, often due to the loss of a hydrogen atom. This enables
the radical to attach to another atom or molecule.
Raman spectroscopy A type of spectroscopy used in chemistry to identify molecules and study chemical
bonding. The vibrational frequencies of a molecule are specific to its chemical
structure and bonding. Industrial Raman spectrometers can identify and quantify
the various types of molecules present in a sample.
Ramp (peak) A term sometimes used for a remnant peak, particularly when it includes a slice
from the rapidly declining tail of the major component, which gives the remnant a
triangular ramp-like shape.
Ramp (temperature) The gradual increase of column oven temperature during a temperature￾programmed analysis.
Random error Unpredictable variation in a measurement due to uncontrollable variations in
environment or procedure. Limits the precision of a measurement.
Range See measurement range.
Rate-of-arrival detector A detectorthat outputs a signal proportional to the arrivalrate of analyte molecules
into the sensor. Often called a mass-flow detector.
Rate theory A theory that disallows the formation of equilibria and sees peak width as a
cumulation of multiple random effects, the statistical variances of which are
additive.
Glossary of terms 407Read the chromatogram A mnemonic to remind troubleshooters that all chromatographic faults are
discernable in the chromatogram record if they know where to look.
Reference chromatogram A stored chromatogram that’s trusted to represent perfect (or at least adequate)
PGC performance. It’s a good idea to save two reference chromatograms, one on
calibration sample and one on process sample.
Reference peak A selected peak that is always present on the chromatogram and used to predict the
location of other peaks.The processor predictsthe positionof another analyte by using
the fixed ratio between the retention times of analyte peak and reference peak.
Regrouping column system A system that reverses the carrier gas flow in one of the columns to recombine a set
of separated peaks. Generally, this term is not used for backflush systems. It’s
focused more on column systems that regroup a set of analytes (such as all the C4’s)
for measurement as a composite peak.
Regrouping function See regrouping column system.
Relative response factor
(RRF)
The detector response factor of an analyte relative to a standard substance like
benzene, measured under the same operating conditions. Retrieve RRFs from the
literature. The ratio of two RRFs gives their relative sensitivity on the specified
detector and may allow the calibration of an analyte without using an external
standard.
Relative retention The ratio of the adjusted retention times of two peaks on a chromatogram.
Formally called their separation factor.
Remnant peak Sometimes called a ramp.
A distorted peak on the chromatogram due to a small slice of major component
captured together with the analyte(s) during a heartcut valve action.
The top of a remnant retains the shape of the major tail, but its vertical sides soften
as it migrates through the second column, adopting the shape of half peaks.
Repeatability See precision.
Resolution (Rs) The degree to which the peak areas of two adjacent peaks are separate from each
other, defined as the separation between the peaks divided by their average base
width.
Response factor A factor obtained during calibration by dividing the analyte peak area by its known
concentration. To calculate analyte concentration, the analyst divides each peak
area by its response factor.
See calibration factor.
Response time The total response time of a PGC is the sum of the delays in the sampling system
plus the analysis time.
Retention factor (k) The retention factor of a peak is the ratio of its adjusted retention time to the
holdup time of the column.
Retention index (I) A way to express the retention time of any solute relative to the retention times of
two nearby straight-chain paraffins on the same column. The n-paraffins are
assigned index values of 100n, where n is their number of carbon atoms. A solute
with an index of 560 will elute between n-pentane and n-hexane. Since the index is
a ratio of two peak retention times, it tends to be independent of the column
operating conditions.
Also called the Kováts Index.
Retention time (tR) The elapsed time to a component peak apex, measured from the instant of sample
injection, being the average time that those component molecules spend in the
408 Glossary of termscolumn. Also, equal to the sum of the holdup time and the adjusted retention time
of that component.
Retention volume (VR) The retention time of a peak expressed in volume units and equal to the volume of
carrier gas needed to elute that peak from the column.
Root cause The fundamental and original cause of a malfunction as distinct from the
proximate and observable cause.
Rotary valve A chromatographic valve, typically having two positions. When actuated, a rotor
turns on a stator to make the desired connections.
S
Sample capacity The maximum amount of an analyte that will produce an undistorted peak shape.
It’s usually measured with a solute ofsimilar polarity as the liquid phase and might
be a lot less for a dissimilar solute. Each analyte has its own sample capacity for a
particular set of conditions.
Sample conditioning The process of modifying the condition of the process sample to match the
conditions required by the analyzer. For a PGC, it may include temperature and
pressure control, removal of solid or liquid matter that might damage or
contaminate the injector or columns, and maintaining a constant flow rate.
Sample flow As applied to a PGC, the flow of sample fluid passing through the sample inject
valve. Liquid flow is commonly set at 30 mL/min but might be as low as 10 mL/
min. Gas flow is much higher, often 100–150 mL/min.
Sample injector A means to inject reproducible samples of the process fluid into the carrier gas
stream.
Sample loop An external loop of tubing on a gas sample injector valve that provides the desired
sample volume.
Sample splitter A device for injecting extremely small samples into capillary columns. The carrier
gas containing the injected sample is split into two flows, one entering the column
and the other (containing most of the sample) going to vent.
Sample volume The precisely dispensed volume of sample gas or liquid injected into a
chromatographic column.
SCOT column The stationary phase in a support-coated open-tubular column is a liquid coated on
very fine support particles in a uniform layer on the inner wall of the tube.
Sebacate An ester of sebacic acid: HO2C (CH2)8 CO2H
second (s) The SI base unit of time (t).
Second retention mechanism The notion that peak molecules are always subject to additional delay due to
adsorption at active sites on contact surfaces. This is likely the main cause of the
normal peak shape, slightly asymmetric.
Selectivity The ability of a stationary phase to separate two solutes, indicated by their
separation factor.
Self-sharpening peak This is an asymmetric peak from a stationary phase with a severely curved
adsorption or partition isotherm. Then, every elevation of the peak is traveling at a
different speed, faster (or slower) than the base. By this mechanism, the top of the
peak tends to become sharp with an almost vertical front (or rear). The other side
forms an even ramp, so the peak is almost triangular.
Semi-diffusion An arrangement of passages in a thermal conductivity detector that has the
thermal elements partly in and partly out of the direct flow path of the carrier gas.
Glossary of terms 409Separation (S) The distance ortime between the apexes of two adjacent peaks on a chromatogram.
Separation does not indicate the degree of overlap between peaks as it doesn’t
account for peak width. See resolution.
Separation factor (α) The ratio of adjusted retention times between a specified later peak and a specified
earlier peak on an isothermal chromatogram. The ratio is usually constant on a
given liquid phase and independent of column operating conditions, provided
those conditions are constant during analysis.
Signal noise Minor random variation in detector output signal caused by a myriad of small
electronic, fluidic, or environmental instabilities that are uncontrollable.
Silica gel
SiO2
An active solid capable of adsorbing gas molecules, previously used as a solid
stationary phase.
Silicon
Si
M = 28.085 g/mol
The chemical element with atomic number (Z) = 14. A nonmetal with chemical
properties similar to carbon.
Siloxane Chemically, an organic compound containing the Si─O functional group.
Colloquial, for dimethylsiloxane that when polymerized yields
poly(dimethylsiloxane), the least polar of the silicone oils.
Silicon coating An effective way of minimizing the attraction between a polar solute and the tube
wall. The silicon layer acts as a barrier to prevent the solute from touching the
metal.
Silicone oil A siloxane polymer. All silicone oils are polysiloxanes.
SI unit An international standard unit of measure approved and certified by the Système
international d’unités in France. All SI units are based upon seven invariant base
units and are directly related to other SI units by the equations of physics.
Therefore, they need no conversion factors.
Skew Of a peak: see asymmetry ratio.
Sliced peak A peak cut by column switching and having a piece missing. The vertical cut of the
valve action may be smoothed by passing through a column, but it’s often visible as
a peak front rising faster than its back, or vice versa. Keep records of calibration
factors to detect a newly sliced peak.
Slide valve A two-position chromatographic valve that uses a sliding plate to switch the
connections between ports. Slide valves may use an electric or pneumatic actuator
and are functionally equivalent to rotary or diaphragm valves.
Slope detect A software method of determining when a peak is about to emerge from a column
by measuring the rate of change of a chromatogram signal. Typically, the processor
recognizes the start of a peak when the rate of change exceeds a preset threshold
value. A similar procedure determines when the peak has finished.
Solenoid valve A two-position valve operated electromagnetically by an electric current in a wire
coil. Solenoid valves for ac power have a copper ring that may be in contact with
the fluid. Copper in contact with acetylenes can form an explosive acetylide, so
don’t use ac solenoid valves with hydrocarbon samples.
Solid support A granular inert solid such as Celite on which is coated the liquid phase.
Solubility As used here, solubility refers to the percentage of component molecules dissolved
in the liquid phase at equilibrium. This usage of solubility incorporates the volume
410 Glossary of termsratio of the two phases, so a change in phase volume ratio would also change the
observed solubility.
A more technical approach using the concentration of molecules in the phases is
independent of phase ratio.
See distribution coefficient.
Solute The substance that dissolves in a solvent. Mostly synonymous with component in
gas–liquid chromatography.
Solute polarity The strength of a permanent or induced dipole within the solute molecules. The
retention of the solute is a function of both solute- and liquid-phase polarities.
Solvation The act of dissolving a solute in a solvent.
Solvent In the theory of GC, this is the liquid stationary phase that dissolves the solutes. It
should not be confused with the solvent used in laboratory GC to dissolve the
sample before analysis.
Solvent peak A large peak at the beginning of a laboratory chromatogram due to the solvent used
to dissolve the sample before injection. Not applicable to PGC chromatograms.
Span See measurement span.
Spatial separation The distance separation of components within a column, for which the doubling
rule does not apply.
Specific heat (c) Also called the specific heat capacity. Simply stated, the specific heat of a substance
is the amount of energy required to raise the temperature of a unit mass of the
substance by one degree. The SI unit for specific heat is the joule-per-kelvin-per￾kilogram J/(kg K).
The specific heat of a substance may vary, sometimes substantially, depending on
the starting temperature and pressure of the sample. For gases, the specific heat at
constant pressure (cP) is different than the specific heat at constant volume (cV).
Spectrophotometer An analytical instrument that splits the radiation absorbed or emitted by a sample
into its spectral wavelengths and measures the intensity of certain characteristic
wavelengths to determine the concentration of an analyte.
Spectroscopy The science and art of measuring the intensity of emitted or absorbed radiation as a
function of wavelength, particularly when applied to the identification and
analytical measurement of chemical compounds.
Spike An instantaneous deflection of the baseline with little observed duration. Due to
fine solids in the detector, pressure perturbations in the detector vent,
electromagnetic interference (radiated or carried in the power supply), or
electronic malfunction. Spikes may occur atrandom orin sync with chromatogram
events – when diagnosing it helps to know which.
Split ratio When using a split injection technique, the split ratio is the amount of an injected
sample that enters the column versus the amount vented. In practice, it’s simply
the ratio between the carrier gas flow rate into the column and the carrier gas flow
rate exiting the splitter vent.
Split injection See sample splitter.
Splitter See sample splitter.
Spool valve An early PGC valve, now obsolete, used for gas sample injection and column
switching. A rod carrying O-rings restrained in grooves slides in a tube to make the
desired connections.
Glossary of terms 411Spot sample See grab sample.
Squalane
C30H62
M = 422.826 g/mol
A nonpolar liquid phase that acts as a standard for zero polarity. However,
squalane is too volatile for most PGC applications and is often superseded by a
nonpolar silicone oil.
Chemical name: 2,6,10,15,19,23-hexamethyltetracosane.
Standard deviation (σ) A measure of the random variation in a measurement equal to the square root of its
variance.
Standard sample A contained fluid with composition known to the desired level of uncertainty.
Start backflush A timed event in the Method that initiates the backflush function.
Start next analysis An event in the Method that results in sample injection. Ideally, it’s time zero on
the analysis clock, but some PGCs perform other functions first, so the actual
injection occurs several seconds into the analysis cycle.
Stationary phase The active solid or immobilized liquid in a column that is responsible for
chromatographic separation.
Step A sustained change in baseline level, usually returning to the original level before
the end of the cycle. Caused by a valve action that initiates a flow change or feeds
contaminated carrier gas into a column. A step occurring after a short delay is
probably a flow change, while contamination will take more time to reach the
detector. In both cases, the delay to recover after valve return is the same as the
initial delay.
Step stream An instruction in the program or Method to stop the current sample flow and start
sample flow from the next process stream scheduled for analysis.
Stream switching The manual or automatic practice of sequencing samples for analysis from two or
more process streams.
Stripper column See backflush.
Stuttering technique Two or more short backflush operations designed to keep components longer in
the first column. After other components have progressed along the second
column, the stuttered components are allowed in. Then a full backflush occurs.
Succinate An ester of succinic acid: HO2C (CH2)2 CO2H
Sulfur
S
M = 32.06 g/mol
Also called sulphur. The chemical element with atomic number (Z) = 16. A yellow
solid that forms several stable allotropes.
Surface deactivation The passivation of a surface (particularly of a metal) by chemical treatments
including electropolishing and silicon treatments to minimize the adsorption of
polar gas molecules.
Systematic error A constant bias from the correct measurement value due to a zero or span error, or
because of a nonlinearity in the response curve.
System constants A proposed modification of the first five McReynolds constants where each
constant includes a solute factor and a liquid phase factor. Ideally, these ten
variables would derive the retention factor of any solute on any liquid phase. At
present, only of academic interest.
T
Tailing peak Has two similar meanings. For an asymmetric peak, it indicates the peak falls
slower than it rises. All normal peaks have this distortion to a minor degree, so this
usage of “tailing” is not encouraged. The more important usage is to describe a
412 Glossary of termspeak that doesn’t return all the way to the baseline but instead trails long behind
the main body of the peak.
TCD See thermal conductivity detector.
Temperature programming Operating a column on a preprogrammed temperature schedule comprising one or
more periods of running at a constant set temperature, one or more periods of
ramping at a set rate to a higher temperature, and a final period of rapid cooling.
Temporal separation The time separation of components on a chromatogram and subject to the
doubling rule.
Thermal conductivity The ability of a material to transfer heat energy between two points when a
temperature differential exists between them.
Thermal conductivity detector
(TCD)
The original and still common detector in process gas chromatographs, capable of
detecting any substance in the carrier gas. It detects the change in heat loss from a
heated element when analyte molecules enter the detector.
Thermistor A temperature-sensitive metal-oxide resistor, typically glass coated. Used as a
detector element in some TCDs.
Theoretical plate See plate.
Timed event An event such as a valve actuation or peak gate that must occur at a preset time
after sample injection.
Timer Any device that enables the occurrence of timed events.
Titanium
Ti
M = 47.867 g/mol
The chemical element with atomic number (Z) = 22. A lightweight, strong, and
corrosion-resistant metal.
Titrator A wet-chemical analyzer that measures the volume of a standard reagent that
reacts with the analyte in a fixed volume sample.
Toluene See methylbenzene.
Trace analysis The measurement of low concentrations. The term is mostly applied to the analysis
of low ppm amounts of impurities in otherwise pure fluids.
Trap-and-hold column system A PGC column system that traps selected peaks in a non-flowing column and
releases them later for further separation.
Trend record The historical record of a trend signal presented on a chart recorder trace.
Trend signal A continuous measurement signal that changes after each new analysis to
represent the latest analyte value.
Triangulating A graphical method of characterizing a peak by drawing straight lines through the
inflexion points at each side of the peak and extending them to intersect the
projected baseline.
1,1,2-Trichloroethene A halogenated solvent.
Trichloroethylene See 1,1,2-trichloroethene.
Trueness The closeness of a measurement to the true value of the measurand. In standard
terminology, accuracy is equal to trueness plus precision.
Tunable diode laser(TDL) A sensitive photometric gas analysis technique. It’s high sensitivity comes from
using a powerful diode laser source tuned to exactly match the wavelength most
strongly absorbed by the analyte.
Two-dimensional GC A laboratory term for any separation achieved by two columns containing different
stationary phases. Not used in PGC.
Glossary of terms 413U
Ultraviolet The portion of the electromagnetic spectrum with wavelength from 10 to 400 nm,
shorter than that of visible light but longer than X-rays. Many process gas analyzers
use ultraviolet absorption photometry, wherein the bonding electrons in analyte
molecules strongly absorb ultraviolet energy at certain wavelengths that are
characteristic of molecular structure.
Uncertainty interval The range of measurement values believed to contain the true value of the
measurand. The measurement must also state the confidence level.
Undecane
C11H24 nC11
M = 156.313
Also called n-undecane. A straight-chain paraffin having 11 carbon atoms in each
molecule.
Unretained peak See air peak.
Utilization of theoretical
efficiency (UTE)
A measure of column efficiency used mainly with capillary columns. Expresses
their measured plate number as a percentage of their theoretical maximum, a
useful indicator of column condition. A good column will typically have a UTE of
about 60–70 % when running at its optimum flow rate.
V
Vacancy peak A negative peak appearing on the chromatogram at the retention time of a known
component, due to the carrier gas containing more of that component than the
injected sample does.
Valency The number of chemical bonds exhibited by an element. For instance, carbon has a
valency of 4.
Validation A procedure for checking the calibration of an instrument by periodically
measuring a sample of constant composition. Validation doesn’t change the
calibration of the instrument. The PGC compares the validation results statistically
with a large number of previous validations to evaluate the need for recalibration
or maintenance attention.
Validation fluid The validation sample must be constant, so a large volume of fluid is necessary.
However, the PGC doesn’t need to know the concentration of the analytes because
it will measure them. Sometimes the validation sample is simply a large cylinder
filled with the process fluid.
Validation frequency 10–20 prior validations are necessary for statistical analysis, so the PGC should
automatically validate at least once daily to build up a collection of historical
values.
Validation program A series of regular analyses observations to gain confidence in the performance of a
PGC. A program can adopt multiple techniques, including observing process data,
statistical quality control, and comparison with other analyzers.
Valley point The lowest point between adjacent peaks on the chromatogram.
Valve Most process gas chromatographs use special chromatographic valves. They route
the flow of carrier gas and component peaksinto a selected column, detector, or vent.
Valve timing The actuation and deactuation times of chromatographic valves are timed events
specified in the analysis Method. To achieve the desired resolution of analyte
peaks, most column systems rely on highly repeatable valve timing.
Van der Waals force A generic term forintermolecularforces; includes dispersion, polar, and ionic forces.
414 Glossary of termsVapor pressure (of liquid) The vapor pressure of a liquid is the equilibrium partial pressure of its vapor above
the surface of that liquid. Liquids boil when their vapor pressure becomes equal to
the surrounding pressure. Under that condition, the gas phase above the liquid is
all vapor from the liquid.
Variable A measurable property of an object or phenomenon that may change. Metrology is
the science of evaluating a continuous variable.
Variance (σ2
) A measure of the variability of a measurement due to random error. Estimated
from a set of results by dividing the sum of the squares of the deviations from the
mean value by the number of results −1.
Velocity (u) of carrier gas
(m/s)
The velocity of the carrier gas at the column exit as calculated by dividing the flow
rate by the free cross-sectional area of the column. See also, the average velocity
of the carrier gas calculated by dividing the column length in meters by the holdup
time in seconds.
Viscosity – dynamic
(μ or η)
(Pa s)
A measure of a fluid’s resistance to flow due to internal friction within the moving
fluid. A high-viscosity fluid resists motion because it has a lot of internal friction.
The SI unit of viscosity is the pascal-second (Pa s). The more common unit is the
centipoise (cP), equal to the millipascal-second (mPa s).
Viscosity – kinematic (ν)
(m2
/s)
The ratio of the viscosity of a fluid to its density.
The SI unit of kinematic viscosity is the square-meter-per-second (m2
/s) but rarely
used. The common unit is the stokes (St) or centistokes (cSt) where:
1 St = 1 cm2
/s
Voltage-to-frequency
converter
A device that converts an analog voltage signal to a proportional frequency signal.
As used in chromatographs, the output frequency was a square wave so the peak
integrator could count the pulses.
Volume (V) The size of a three-dimensional space, measured in cubic-meters (m3
) or cubic-feet
(ft3
).
Volume percent A unit of concentration: the ratio of analyte volume to total volume of a sample,
expressed as a percentage.
W
watt (W) The SI derived unit of power (P). The definition of one watt is a power dissipation of
one joule-per-second (J/s).
WCOT column A wall-coated open-tubular column comprising a liquid stationary phase coated
onto the walls of capillary tube often made of fused silica. While highly effective,
the fused silica is fragile, so process gas chromatographs prefer metal capillary
columns with silicon-treated internal walls.
Weight percent A unit of concentration: the ratio of analyte weight to total weight of a sample,
expressed as a percentage. Effectively equal to mass percent.
Wet chemistry Methods of chemical analysis involving chemical reactions in aqueous or
nonaqueous solution.
Wheatstone bridge An electrical circuit for detecting a small change of resistance. Has four resistors
connected in a series-parallel arrangement. When the resistances are equal, the
voltages at the junction of each series pair are equal giving a differential of zero
millivolts. If one or more of the resistances changes, the differential voltage rapidly
varies from zero giving a sensitive detection of resistance change.
Width of peak See peak width at base or peak width at half height.
Glossary of terms 415X
Xenon
Xe
M = 131.293 g/mol
The chemical element with atomic number (Z) = 54. A heavy, colorless, odorless,
and monatomic gas, the fifth of six noble gases. Not used in PGC.
X-ray fluorescence (XRF) Exposing an element to high-energy X-rays or gamma rays may cause the atoms to
fluoresce, emitting X-rays at wavelengths that are characteristic of that atom. For
each element measured, a dedicated process instrument would measure the
incident fluorescent energy at one selected wavelength. However, a laboratory
instrument might scan a range of X-ray wavelengths and output a spectrum of
peaks representing the concentration of many different elements.
m-Xylene See 1,3-dimethylbenzene.
o-Xylene See 1,2-dimethylbenzene.
p-Xylene See 1,4-dimethylbenzene.
Z
Zeolite See molecular sieves.
Zero line As used herein, the zero line is the baseline for integration. The integrated peak
area comprises the total area above the zero line. Thus, setting up an appropriate
zero line is an important prerequisite to accurate measurement.
416 Glossary of termsIndex
Absolute pressure, see Pressure
Accuracy 180, 298–302, 319, 322
Acetylenes 341
Acid washed 50
Adipates 93
Adjusted retention time, see Retention
Adjusted retention volume, see Retention
Adsorbent solid, see Solid phases
Adsorption
columns 103–109
isotherm 104
sites 206, 218, 223
Affinity 3, 5, 42–48, 49, 50, 62, 68–70, 74, 83, 85, 89, 91,
98–100, 104, 108, 127, 209, see also Mutual affinity
Agreed reference value (ARV) 302
Air peak 17–20, 26, 30, 129, 131, 133, 136–139, 150, 151,
164, 339, 350, see also Holdup time
Alpha (α), see Separation factor
Alarms 8, 301–302, 308
Analysis time 30, 46, 54–55, 62–67, 120, 128–142, 152,
159–173, 191, 230–231, 251, 260–261, 266, 290, 291,
see also Cycle time
Analyte 2–10, 27, 49, 67–73, 103–105, 119, 181–185,
214–215
Analytical difficulty 283
Analyzer management system 302
Analyzer shelter 8
Apolane-87 100–101
Applet 224, 349
Argon
as analyte 47, 84, 106–107, 109
as carrier gas 156, 159, 349
Asymmetric peaks 205–225, see also Peak shape
SCI-FILE 212–214
Asymmetry ratio 206, 214
Availability, see Reliability
Average pressure, see Carrier gas pressure
Average velocity, see Carrier gas velocity
Backflush
column design 260–262
diagnosis 350–351
event timing 256–257, 262–269
flow rate 251–252, 259–269
full details 250–273
with heartcut 284, 285, 286, 288
housekeeping 231, 234, 244
limitations 106, 259–260
major tail cut 275
to measure 252–254
regrouping 252–253, 256, 257–260, 268–269
settings 256–257
stuttering 257
theory 259–262
valveless 254–256
valve systems 251, 253, 258
to vent 250, 251–252
Band 23–27, 155–156, 173, 208, 223
Bara and barg 240
Baseline
anomaly 306, 308–310
correction 4, 319
disturbance 311, 322, 331–332, 341, 354
flat and smooth 304–310, 359
Baseline symptoms
cycling 310–311, 317–318, 323
drift 310–315, 317, 323
noise 56, 60, 63, 71–74, 92–93, 180, 185, 189, 195,
299–300, 305, 307, 310–311, 319–323, 340, 344
wander 310–311, 315–316, 323
Base width, see Peak width
Bell curve, see Gaussian distribution
Process Gas Chromatography: Advanced Design and Troubleshooting, First Edition. Tony Waters.
© 2025 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2025 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.Beta (β), see Phase ratio
Bladder 286
Boiling point
elution order 44–46, 85–85, 230, 262
sample injection 217
Bonded liquid phase, see Liquid phase
Boyle’s law 43
Bumps on baseline 312, 333–334, 338, 352–355
Calibration, see also Validation
alarm 299, 301, 341
check 342–343
error 11, 209, 254, 303, 330, 345, 349, 359
frequency 7, 302
inappropriate 297–298
sample 302, 332, 345
Capacity factor, see Retention factor
Capillary columns
comparison 64–74, 82–83, 92, 179, 232–235
description 3, 6, 39–40, 41–42, 57–62, 96–97
fused silica 58
metal 59, 106
performance 103, 134, 182, 192, 214, 218, 237, 312,
346–348
Carbon, see Solid phases
Carrier gas
argon 156, 159, 349
choice 171–172
helium 2, 57, 59, 63, 66, 158, 159, 171–172, 207, 343,
344, 349
hydrogen 2, 56, 57, 63, 158, 159, 171–172, 207, 225,
336–337, 341, 343, 344, 349
mixed 349
nitrogen 2, 63, 156, 159, 171, 349, 352
Carrier gas flow
diagnosis 332, 340, 344, 349, 351–353, 356, 358
measurement 126
optimum 63, 149, 150–153, 162
path 187–188, 192, 206, 237
settings 63, 251, 259–260
Carrier gas pressure
calculations 240–244, 262–269
drop 52–54, 74, 127, 154, 156, 159, 171, 188, 237
effect 260, 193, 243
SCI-FILE 238–240
Carrier gas purifier 47
Carrier gas velocity
effect 17, 134, 137, 139, 192, 237, 259,
260, 264
calculations 19, 150–172, 238–242
optimum 63, 70, 150–153
Celite, see Diatomaceous earth
Chart record 16, 17, 41, 221, 336
Chemical Names, see in Glossary 379–416
Chromatogram
diagnosis 304, 329–364, 335
display 4, 6, 26
measurements 16–19, 24
Chromatogram diagnosis
bumps 334, 352–353
peaks 334, 338–352
SCI-FILE 335–337
spikes 334, 352–356
steps 334, 356–358
Chromatographs, see Gas chromatographs
Chromatography, see Gas chromatography
Chromosorb 50
Column
care 106
codes 39, 83, 94
conditioning 51, 54, 92, 313
identification 83
life 51, 64, 73, 92, 134, 351
train, see Applet
Column names
cutter 277
guard 250
vendor codes 39, 83, 89, 94
Column parameters
diameter 40, 52, 54, 56, 59–70, 127, 135, 158–159, 171,
184, 239, 269
flow rate, see Carrier gas flow
length 24–27, 29–30, 32, 54, 56, 74, 99, 124–125, 133,
139, 142, 149–151, 154, 160–170, 237, 240–243, 258,
260–269, 278
pressure, see Carrier gas pressure
temperature 69, 92, 96, 100, 134–141, 157–158, 173, 214,
225, 312, 314, 331, 351
Column performance
bleed 51, 60, 63, 64, 71, 72–74, 86–87, 90, 92, 134, 256,
309, 312, 314, 317, 340, 357
efficiency 25, 28, 30–32, 52–53, 62–71, 82, 83, 88, 96,
121, 134, 137, 139, 144, 150–160, 180, 186, 213–214,
237, see also Golay and van Deemter
418 Indexoverload, see Feed volume and Sample capacity
time efficiency 170
Columns in series Chapters 9–11, passim
Column system design
fail safe 252
pressure effects, see Carrier gas pressure
Column tubing
cleaning 52
electropolishing 52
fused silica 42, 52, 58–59, 74, 100, 234, 342
glass 41, 52, 54, 57–59
Hastelloy™ 52
silicon coating 52, 189, 235
Teflon™ 42, 52
Column types
capillary 3, 6, 40, 41–42, 57–64, 64–74, 92, 96, 106, 124,
127, 134, 179, 321, 432, 438
micropacked 41–42, 52, 54, 56–57, 66, 74, 98, 179, 235,
254, 277
open tubular (WCOT) 41–42, 59–62
packed 3, 32, 40–41, 49–56, 64–74, 127, 155, 157, 184,
224, 234–235, 314, 317
porous layer (PLOT) 41, 48, 60, 106–109, 224, 322, 334
support coated (SCOT) 60–61
Component 6, 85, 207, 342, 347
Comprehensive method (as in Laboratory GC)
234, 276
Compressibility factor 182, 241, 265, 374
Concentration detectors, see Detector types
Control chart 301–302
Copolymer 60, 88–94
Correlogram 233
Credibility 298
Critical pair 83, 120
Cutter column, see Column names
Cyano silicones, see Liquid phases
Cycle time 159, 230, 261–262, 266, 268, 336, see also
analysis time
Cycling baseline, see Baseline symptoms
Dead legs 158, 206, 217, 223, see also Peak dispersion
Dead time, see Holdup time
Deans switch, see Live Tee
Debye forces, see Forces
Desorption 209–211, 212, 214, 223, 309
Detector
damage 73
dispersion 189, 194, 196
function 3–8, 41, 52, 65, 72, 73, 179, 189, 192, 194–195,
217, 223, 225, 235, 304–310, 310–323
intercolumn (ITC) 256, 284
malfunction 226, 303, 307–310
response time 195–196
sensitivity 61, 71, 72, 73, 83, 92, 105, 159,
184, 185
troubleshooting 304–323, see also Baseline symptoms
volume 65, 158, 173, 179, 180, 195
Detectors
electron capture (ECD) 232, 274
flame ionization (FID) 131, 151, 189, 194, 195, 234, 274,
275, 307, 315, 317, 318, 321, 340
flame photometric (FPD) 274, 309, 340
mass spectrometric (MSD) 6, 90, 234
thermal conductivity (TCD) 151, 189, 194–195, 274,
307, 309, 315, 317, 321, 340, 349, 355, 356
vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) 234
Detector types
concentration 189, 194, 307
mass-flow 189, 194, 223, 307
Deuterium 47
Diagnosis, see also Troubleshooting
SCI-FILE: On Diagnosis 335–337
Diatomaceous earth (Celite) 43, 49–50. 60
Diffusion, see also extracolumn broadening
axial (longitudinal) 156, 192–196, 290, 357
coefficient 156, 158, 159, 194
eddy 155
in gas phase 157–158, 159
leak 314
in liquid phase 156–157, 159, 173
radial 158, 192, 193–196
Dimethyl silicone 89, 96, 97, 100
Dipole, see Forces
Dispersive forces, see Forces
Distribution
constant 5–6, 103–104, 125, 128–131, 133, 181, 208–212,
216, 240
definition 126
SCI-FILE 125–128
Distribution column system 290–291
Doubling rule 63, 281, 334, 338–339
Drift, see Baseline symptoms
Dual column system 232, 234–235, 290, 345
Dynamic equilibrium, see Equilibrium
Index 419Eddy diffusion 155
Effective plate number 28
Electronegativity 44
Electron capture detector (ECD), see Detectors
Electronic pressure controller (EPC) 244, 252, 254,
277–278, 291, 314
Electronic pressure regulator (EPR), see EPC
Electropolishing 52
Equilibrium 5, 23, 25, 32, 104, 126–127, 154–157, 163,
208, 240
Event times, see Timed events
Exponentially modified Gaussian (EMG) 215
Extracolumn
broadening 179–203 passim
SCI-FILE 190–196
variance 158, 190, 195
volume 126, 180, 187, 254, 277
worked examples 196–198
Failure 39, 252, 259, 297–299, 303–310
Fast analysis 54, 64, 67, 74, 83, 86, 159, 168, 170–173
Feed volume 67–68, 71–72, 183–187, see also Sample
capacity
Film thickness 51, 60–62, 66, 70, 80, 127, 135, 137, 151,
157, 159, 172, 181, 223, 348
Flame ionization detector (FID), see Detectors
Flame photometric detector (FPD), see Detectors
Flow, see Carrier gas flow
Fluoro silicones 84, 90–91, 97, 111
Forces
dispersion (London) 43–45
generic (Van der Waals) 45
induced dipole (Debye) 45
ionic 45
permanent dipole (Keesom) 44–45
Frontal chromatography 357
Fronting peak, see Peak shape
Fused silica, see Column tubing
Gas chromatographs
comparing process and laboratory 235
development of 232–235
laboratory 6, 41, 82, 87, 232, 326, 332
process 5–6, 8, 9, 87, 88, 119–120, 126, 154, 156, 158,
230, 233, 250, 332
Gas chromatography
gas-liquid (GLC) 15, 49, 103
gas-solid (GSC) 46, 103–104, 214
Gas compressibility, see Compressibility factor
Gaussian distribution 24
General elution problem 231
Golay 41, 155, 158, 192
Guard column, see Column types
HayeSep 84, 108, 109
Heartcut 274–296
column system 276–279
event timing 281, 284–286
function 55, 219, 222–224, 232, 236, 244, 256, 274–276
in laboratory work 234
by Live Tee 277–278
multiple cuts 282–284
single cut 279–28
by valve 276–277
Heat of solution or adsorption 213, 222
Heavies
definition 86
measure 252–254
regroup peak 224, 252, 256, 259, 269, 313
removal 48, 86, 119, 120, 231, 251, 252, 260–261,
262–269, 290–291
Height equivalent to a theoretical plate (HETP), see Plate
height
Helium
as analyte 47
as carrier 2, 57, 59, 63, 66, 158, 159, 171–172, 207, 343,
344, 349
purge 54
Holdup
time 16–20, 28, 129, 131, 134, 137, 150–153, 154, 164,
173, 334–225, 339, 350, 357, see also Air peak
volume 126–127
Homolog 338–339
Housekeeping, see also Backflush
column 8, 55, 250, 291
rule 231
Hydrogen
as analyte 5, 46, 47, 51, 84, 107, 195, 348
anomalous response 349
bonding 45, 83, 84, 85–86, 93, 95
as carrier 2, 56, 57, 63, 158, 159, 171–172, 336
leak 335–337
makeup gas 194
reaction 207, 225, 341, 343, 344, 348
420 IndexInduced dipole, see Forces
Inflection points 24–25
Instrumentation symptoms, see Troubleshooting baselines
Integration
error 195, 216, 299, 303, 305, 319, 320, 322,
330, 341
forced 224
Intercolumn detector, see Detector
Injection
capillary columns 65
plug 180, 184–187, 191, 194, 196–197
profile 26, 67, 68, 71, 158, 180–181, 190, see also Feed
volume
sample 2, 3
split 68
time mark 3, 16, 18, 19
volume 70–71, 72, 74, 185–187
Ionic liquid phase, see Liquid phase
Isotherm
adsorption 104–106, 212
linear 182
nonlinear 104–105, 181, 210, 216, 222, 223, 224
partition 181, 182, 208–209
Keesom forces, see Forces
Kinetic theory of gases 43
KISS principle 283
Kováts Index, see Retention Index
Krypton 47
Laminar flow 158, 188, 192–193
Langmuir isotherm 104
Leading peak 26, 206–207, 211, see also Peak shape
(fronting)
Lexicon of laboratory GC Methods 234
Limit of detection (LOD) 319
Liquid chromatography 6
Liquid loading 50, 51, 61–65, 83, 99, 127, 181, 185, 258,
see also Phase ratio
Liquid phase
bonded 3, 60, 64, 71, 73, 74, 90, 92, 232
ionic 45, 84, 94
polarity 43–46, 50, 59, 60, 70, 83–101, 108, 109, 218, 223,
224, 257, 260–262, 281, 341, 347
selection 65, 67, 82, 85, 96, 100, 236
selectivity 20, 82, 83, 89, 90, 91, 93, 95, 96, 100–101,
107–109, 128
temperature limits 92, 93, 107
vendor codes, see Column codes
viscosity 157, 159, 171–173
Liquid phase performance
bleed, see Column bleed
optimization 16, 51, 123, 128–142
Liquid phases
Carbowax™ 94, 95, 97, 101, 107
DEGS 93, 94, 97, 101
dialkyl esters 92–93, 111
FFAP 84, 94, 95
making a choice 96–103
nitrile ethers 95
non-silicone 92–95
PEG 94, 95
polyesters 93, 94
polyethers (polyols) 45, 95, 97
polysiloxanes (silicone oils) 45, 60, 85, 87–92, 95–97,
101, 107
silicone, cyano 84, 85, 90, 91, 94, 95, 97, 101
silicone, fluoro 84, 90–91, 97
silicone, methyl 60, 84, 87–90
silicone, phenyl 84, 88–90
squalane 85, 87, 89, 90, 94, 100–101
TCEP 84, 85, 90, 91, 94, 95, 100–101, 107
Live tee 254–256, 277–278, 353
London forces, see Forces
Longitudinal diffusion, see Diffusion
Major component 68, 185, 222, 223, 232, 256, 273–291
Marker spikes 281, 332, 333
Mass-flow detectors, see Detector types
McReynolds constants 99–103, 108
McReynolds probes 100–101, 108
Mean 24–25
Measurement, see also Calibration
accuracy 180, 298–299, 301–302, 319, 322
confidence 298–299, 302–303
precision (repeatability) 74, 180, 216, 298–302,
319–320, 241
range 64, 71, 74, 284, 319
Megabore 54, 59, 66–67, 74, 182
Mesh size 52–54, 83, 269
Methane
as air peak 131, 151
as analyte 84, 107, 336
as major 275, 279, 288
Index 421Method 48, 225, 262, 285, 306, 314, 332, 334–335, 346, 349,
350, 352, 353, 355, 358
Micropacked columns, see Column types
Microprocessor 8, 234, 290
Migration rate 104, 154–155, 176, 211, 224, 266, 268
Mobile phase 2–3, 19, 23, 25, 158, 240, see also Carrier gas
Modulator 233
Molecular sieve 46, 47, 60, 64, 106, 107, 232, 250
Mutual affinity 42–43, 45
SCI-FILE 43–45
Negative peaks, see Peak shape
Neon 47
Nitrogen
as air peak 131, 151, 156, 335–337
analyte 5, 46, 47, 84, 106, 107
as carrier, see Carrier gas
calibration mixture 256, 285, 345
oxides 51, 107, 108, 109
purge 54, 60, 340
Noise, see Baseline symptoms
Noise reduction 189, 195, 320
Nonpolar, see Liquid phase polarity
Normal curve, see Peak shape Gaussian
Normal distribution, see Peak shape Gaussian
Normal peak, see Peak shape
Number of theoretical plates, see Plate number
Obstruction factor 156, 159
Olefins 47, 84, 91, 93, 100, 107, 172, 341, 347
Open-tubular column, see Column types
Optimize
analysis time 63, 159, 170–173
column 10, 16, 19, 30, 63, 123, 149–173
k-value 123, 129–131, 133, 134–142, 225, 159–170, 225
SCI-FILE: On Rate Theory 153–159
SCI-FILE: On Retention Factor 129–131
Optimum flow rate, see Carrier gas flow
Overlapping peaks, see Peak shape
Oxygen
as analyte 5, 46, 47, 84, 106, 107, 109
atoms 87, 89, 91, 93, 95
in carrier gas 47, 48, 86, 92
reactions 73
Packed columns, see also Column types
factor 155–156, 159, 192, 239
packing 50, 54, 57, 106–108, 158, 243
Paraffins 4, 21, 43–45, 84, 86, 91, 95, 98–101, 339
Parallel chromatography 58, 120, 244, 257, 289, 290, 340
Parallel columns 231, 235
Partial peak, see Peak shape
Partition 181–182, 207–210, 214
coefficient, see Distribution constant
isotherm, see Isotherm
Parts-per-million (ppm) 51, 52, 62, 72, 219, 222, 223,
274–291
Peak area measurement 4, 195, 209, 210, 214–216, 257,
289, 305, 319
Peak height measurement 195, 206, 224, 257, 305, 319,
340, 342, 348
Peak shape
asymmetric (skewed) 24, 49, 56, 105, 126, 204–229
bimodal (split) 207, 224, 347
flat top 181, 224
fronting (leading) 68, 105, 181, 205–211, 224
Gaussian 22, 24, 103, 154, 186, 191, 204, 207, 212–214,
218, 305, 334, 341, 349
merged (overlapping) 218–224, 233, 240, 341, 349, 351
negative 346, 349
normal (real) 205, 207, 208, 211, 220
offscale 216–218, 221, 223, 275, 288, 340
partial 222, 224, 261
remnant 224, 276–288, 334, 344, 351, 357
self-sharpening 209, 215
tailing 60, 62, 68, 74, 105, 181, 194, 204–205, 209,
216–218, 221–223, 275, 331, 340, 341, 346–347
triangular 288, 305, 341
Peak width
at base 16, 17, 21, 24–29, 31, 121, 136–141, 183, 190,
195–197, 212–218, 263–264, 305
at half-height 17, 21–24, 31
Performance data 97, 125, 166, 298, 301
Performance triangle 63
Permanent dipole, see Forces
Permanent gases, see Separation
Phase ratio (β) 61–63, 69–70, 127, 131, 133–135, 137, 141
Phenyl silicones, see Liquid phases
Phthalates, see Liquid phases
Plate height
in distance units 15, 25–28, 32, 65–70, 96, 124–125, 130,
138–141, 152–172, 181, 190
theoretical minimum 53–54, 59, 62, 64, 195
in time units 186–187, 193
422 IndexPlate number 15, 23, 25, 28, 30–32, 40, 53, 56, 64–66,
69–72, 82, 88, 96, 121–125, 127, 130, 133, 134, 138–142,
154, 163–170, 182–187, 212–214, 222
effective 28
Plate theory
SCI-FILE: On Plate Theory 24–28
PLOT columns, see Column types
Plug flow 188, 192, 197–198
Plug injection, see Injection
Poisson distribution 212, 222
Polar column, see Liquid phase
Polarity
scale 83, 85, 89, 90, 91, 94, 95
Polarizable 44–46, 84, 89, 91, 93
Polyesters 84, 93, 95, 97
Polyimide 58
Polyols 84, 94, 95, 97
Polysiloxanes 87, 89, 90
Porapak™ 48, 108, 109, 250, 279
Power region 129–142
ppm, see Parts-per-million
Precision (repeatability) 216, 298–302, 319–320
Pressure
absolute 237, 240
average 127, 238, 182, 238–244, 258
effect on solute solubility 240
in series columns 237–244, 262–269
Pressure drop
calculations 265–269
in columns 52, 53, 54, 74, 127, 154, 156, 159, 171,
188, 243
nonlinearity 237, 238
SCI-FILE: On Pressure Drop 238–240
in tubes 188, 193
Prime cause of everything 332, 333, 337
Prime objective 120
Probe
McReynolds 100, 101, 108
Rohrschnider 100
Process gas chromatographs
development of 232, 233, 274
Processor, see Microprocessor
Programmer, see Microprocessor
Raschig rings 23
Ramp
remnant peak, see Peak shape
temperature, see Temperature programming
Rate theory
SCI-FILE 153–159
Real power 235, 291
Regroup 230, 231, 250, 252, 258, 259, 262, 269
Reliability 9, 60, 67, 93, 97, 171, 180, 257, 283, 298, 299
Remnant, see Peak shape
Resistance to mass transfer 51, 156–158, 172–173
Resolution
adequate 119, 120–121
of asymmetric peaks 215–222, 224
on capillary columns 65–67, 69, 71–72, 134, 182–198
and column length 27, 29–30, 133
definition 21–23
equation 121–122, 123–131
improving 51, 57, 59, 62, 63, 83
introducing 11, 15, 26, 64
optimizing 63, 134–142, 150, 154, 160–171
on packed columns 74
perfect 22
and plate number 26, 31–32, 40, 47, 53, 73
and retention factor 130, 134–142
SCI-FILE: On Resolution 121–122
Response factor 384
Retention
data 70, 98, 126
database 236, 301–302
factor (k) 15, 19, 51, 64, 69, 70, 72, 102, 122–134, 151,
155–159, 181, 192, 224, 235, 239
index (Kováts) 98–102
mechanism 42, 45, 87, 106
mechanism (second) 209–211, 214, 221, 222
optimum 130, 139
SCI-FILE: On Retention Data 98–102
SCI-FILE: On Retention Factor 129–131
time (adjusted) 18–19, 24
time (definition) 16, 24–27, 130
volume 125–126, 182, 184–185, 193
Rohrschneider probes 100
Root cause of failure 222–225, 298, 301, 304–308, 310, 317,
334, 337–338
Saddles 23
Sample
capacity 40, 51, 59–61, 63, 67, 68–74, 83, 181–187, 209,
274, 341, 348, see also Feed volume
conditioning 8, 223
Index 423Sample (cont’d)
gas 5, 55, 180, 182, 186, 218, 251, 253, 291, 337, 314, 339,
342, 343, 347
flow rate 342
injection, see Injection
liquid 68, 186, 217, 223, 251, 253, 344, 347
pressure 342
size 55, 65, 67–68, 71–72, 182, 192, 209, 223–225, 384
size calculations 185–187
splitter 64, 68, 74, 223, 232, 255, 347–348
volume 56, 62–64, 67–68, 71, 159, 173, 180–187, 192,
196, 205, 209, 211, 213, 217, 222, 224, 232, 253, 274,
340–348
SCI-FILE Subject Index 378
SCOT columns, see Column types
Sebacates 93
Second retention mechanism 209–211, 214, 221, 222
Selectivity 20, 82, 83, 89–93, 96, 100, 101, 107–109, 112
Self-sharpening, see Peak shape
Separation
calculation 27, 263
definition 21
factor (α) 15, 20–21, 29, 30, 72, 82, 98, 122, 123–125,
127–130, 133–137, 140, 224
linear 27
logarithmic 27
Separation of
acetylenes 107, 341
alcohols 45, 52, 64, 91, 93, 95, 100, 107, 109, 339, 347
aldehydes 84, 91, 95, 100, 106, 109
aromatics 84, 91, 93, 100, 262
carbon oxides 5, 84, 107, 109, 27
cis/trans isomers 84, 91
ethers 84, 100, 109
ketones 84, 86, 91, 100, 109, 339
noble gases 106
olefins 91, 93, 100, 107, 172, 341, 347
paraffins 4, 21, 43–45, 84, 86, 95, 98–101, 107,
172, 339
permanent gases 46, 74, 84, 107, 108, 109
sulfides 52, 84, 106, 107, 109
water 47, 48, 84, 86, 106, 107, 108, 109
Shelter, see Analyzer shelter
Sigma, see Standard deviation
Signal processing 189, 195, 224, 308, 310
Silicon coating 52
Silicon oils, see Polysiloxanes
Siloxane polymers, see Polysiloxanes
Solid phase(s) 3, 17, 42, 46, 47, 51, 57, 103, 104, 135, 149,
151, 224, 231, 232, 334
alumina 46, 60, 107, 108
Bentone 107
carbon molecular sieves 46, 48, 75, 84, 106, 107
graphitized carbon 48, 49, 106, 107
porous polymers 46–48, 50, 60, 84, 107, 108, 109, 210,
223, 281
porous silica 107
silica gel 46, 107
zeolite molecular sieves 46, 48, 106, 107
Solid support 49, 60, 83, 96, 135
Solubility 5, 6, 101, 128, 151, 209, 222, 224, 285, see also
Distribution coefficient
limit 181–184, see also Sample capacity
pressure effect 240
temperature effect 69, 131, 133
Solute
affinity 68, 85, 127
concentration 127, 207–209, 211, 240
definition 5
polarity 83, 84, 85
Solvation 42, 102, 104
Solvent see also liquid phase
affinity 85, 97, 154
coating 50–52, 60, 73, 92, 312, 313
definition 5
peak 5
Span 301
Spatial separation 26, 213–214
Spikes
baseline 300, 305, 307, 310, 318, 319, 322, 333,
334, 336, 338, 345, 352, 353, 361, see also Baseline
symptoms
marker 281, 322, 333
Spiking a sample 285, 286
Split injection, see Injection
Squalane, see Liquid phases
Standard deviation 24–25, 183, 190, 196–197, 213,
305, 319
Start backflush 264, 336
Start next analysis 264
Stationary phase, see also Liquid phase; Solid phase
affinity 3, 42–43, 68, 103, 127
424 Indexdefinition 2, 40, 46, 49
equilibrium 5, 23, 104, 207–209, 213, 240
full details 82–118
function 6, 15, 61
identification 83, 84
mass transfer 158
overload 181–182, 211, 274, 285
polarity 83, 341
retention 19, 62, 215, 239, 309
SCI-FILE: On Mutual Affinity 43–45
selection 96, 97, 120, 223, 224, 231, 236, 250,
260, 291
selectivity 20, 27, 82, 128
Statistical
quality control 8, 298, 301–303
theory 25, 26, 154, 183, 190, 319
Steps, see Baseline symptoms
Stuttering, see Backflush
Succinate 93, 94, 97, 101
Surface deactivation 49, 50, 52, 218, 343, 345
Support 41, 49–51, 60, 83, 96, 135, 214, 218, 223
Symptoms 206, 216, 218, 219, 300, 304, 310, 312, 329, 330,
see also Baseline
System constants 102
Tailing 60, 62, 68, 74. 105, 181, 186, 194, 204–206, 209,
211–212, 216–218, 221–223, 274–276, 331, 340, 341,
346–347
Tau 25, see also Standard deviation
Temperature
effects of 6, 66, 69, 96, 100, 105, 126, 157, 214,
317, 331
maximum 73, 74, 87, 92
optimum 134, 135, 137–141, 158, 173, 224, 351
programming 6–7, 27, 41, 47, 56, 59, 64, 134, 231, 232,
234, 312, 314, 339
Temporal separation 26, 214
TCD, see Detectors
TCEP 84, 85, 90, 91, 94, 95, 100, 101, 107
Theoretical plates, see Plate theory
Thermal conductivity detector, see TCD
Thermal peak distortion 213, 222
Time
delay 188, 195, 211, 334, 352, 356, 357
domain 27, 212, 222
Time efficiency 162, 166, 168, 170, 171
Timed events 8, 243, 264, 381
Trace analysis, see Parts-per-million
Trap-and-hold column system 289–290
Triangular peaks, see Peak shape–triangular
Triangulating a peak 16–17
Troubleshooting see also Diagnosis
baselines 304, 305, 306, 312–314, 315–316, 317–318,
319–322, 323
chromatograms 4, 11, 15, 217, 219, 304, 306, 329, 330,
332, 333, 335, 336, 352–359
column performance 8, 16, 19, 21, 133, 153,
243, 284
detector problems 306–307
peak position 242, 335, 336, 338–339, 341, 345
peak separation 351–352
peak shape 222, 286, 336, 338, 341, 346–348, 349
peak size 340–341, 342–345, 349
sampling system 303–304
SCI-FILE: On Diagnosis 335–337
techniques 3, 297, 304, 307–310
Tubing, see Column tubing
Two-dimensional GC 234, 235
Unibeads 107
Unretained component 17, 150–151, 238–239, see also
Air peak
UTE (utilization of theoretical efficiency) 64
Validation 8, 298–303, 330
control chart 301–302
frequency 301
procedure 301
Valley 22, 185, 224, 263–266
Valve types, see also Live Tee
diaphragm 244, 251, 253, 289, 291, 316
rotary 244, 253, 276, 289, 291
slider 336–337
Van Deemter
curve 153, 155–58
equation 155, 158
SCI-FILE: On Rate Theory 153–159
Van der Waals, see Forces
Vapor pressure 60, 72–73, 85, 87–88, 92, 93, 312
Variance
on column 25–28, 154, 158, 213
extracolumn 190–195, 196–198
Index 425Variance (cont’d)
SCI-FILE: On Extracolumn Variance 190–195
validation 301, 303
Velocity, see Carrier gas velocity
Vendor codes, see Column names
Wander, see Baseline symptoms
Water
as analyte 84, 106, 107, 108, 109, 232
backflushed 47, 48, 250
in carrier gas 47, 48, 106
deactivation 105, 108
flushing 52
WCOT columns, see Column types
Width at half height, see Peak width
Zeolite 46, 106
426 Index
