PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT 
AND MANAGEMENT 
BODY OF KNOWLEDGEPRODUCT 
DEVELOPMENT AND 
MANAGEMENT BODY 
OF KNOWLEDGE
A Guidebook for Product Innovation 
Training and Certification
Third Edition
Allan Anderson
Chad McAllister
Ernie HarrisCopyright © 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under 
Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the 
Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 750-4470, or on the web at www.copyright
.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley
.com/go/permission.
Trademarks: Wiley and the Wiley logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/
or its affiliates in the United States and other countries and may not be used without written permission. All other 
trademarks are the property of their respective owners. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. is not associated with any product or 
vendor mentioned in this book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in preparing this 
book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of 
this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No 
warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies 
contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. 
Further, readers should be aware that websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when 
this work was written and when it is read. Neither the publisher nor authors shall be liable for any loss of profit or any 
other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our Customer 
Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax 
(317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be 
available in electronic formats. For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data applied for:
Paperback ISBN: 9781119829942
Cover Design: Wiley
Cover Image: © aditya M S/Shutterstock
Set in 11/13 pts and Helvetica Neue LT Std by Straive, Chennai, India.Contents
About the Authors vii
Acknowledgments ix
Introduction xi
1 Management
1.1 What is Product Innovation? / 4
1.2 Managing Product Innovation / 9
1.3 The Product Manager / 11
1.4 The Product Life Cycle / 15
1.5 Managing the Product Life 
Cycle / 19
1.6 The Chasm in the Product Life 
Cycle? / 23
1.7 Roadmaps Used in Product 
Innovation / 30
1.8 Project Management / 34
1.9 Risk Management / 37
1.10 Metrics and Key Performance 
Indicators / 39
1.11 In Summary / 46
2 Strategy
2.1 What is Strategy? / 60
2.2 Establishing the Organization’s 
Direction / 62
2.3 Business and Corporate 
Strategy / 65
2.4 Preparing a Business 
Strategy / 68
2.5 Innovation Strategy / 74
2.6 Innovation Strategy 
Frameworks / 77
2.7 Strategies that Support 
the Innovation Strategy / 83
2.8 Open Innovation / 97
2.9 Sustainable Innovation / 100
2.10 In Summary / 105
3 Portfolio
3.1 What is a Product Innovation 
Portfolio? / 114
3.2 Portfolio Value 
Maximization / 116
3.3 Portfolio Alignment 
with Strategy / 135
3.4 Balancing the Portfolio / 137
3.5 The Right Number 
of Projects / 139
3.6 New Product Portfolio Management: 
A Dynamic Process / 143
3.7 Portfolio Governance / 146
3.8 Portfolio Management 
Benefits / 148
3.9 In Summary / 149
4 Process
4.1 Introduction to Product 
Innovation / 156
4.2 The Product Innovation Charter 
(PIC) / 161
4.3 Specific Product Innovation 
Processes / 164
4.4 Comparing Product Innovation 
Process Models / 194
4.5 Product Innovation Process Control 
and Management / 197
4.6 In Summary / 199vi Contents
5 Design & Development
5.1 Design and Development Process 
Steps / 208
5.2 Introduction to Design / 209
5.3 Introduction to 
Development / 226
5.4 In Summary / 244
6 Market Research
6.1 How Market Research Contributes 
to Product Innovation / 252
6.2 Selecting the Right Market Research 
Methodology / 254
6.3 Primary Vs. Secondary Market 
Research / 256
6.4 The Quality of Market Research 
Data / 258
6.5 Market Research Methods / 261
6.6 Multivariate Research 
Methods / 274
6.7 Product Use Testing / 278
6.8 Market Testing and Test 
Marketing / 280
6.9 Market Research and Voice of 
the Customer: Integral to Product 
Innovation / 282
6.10 Market Research at Specific Stages 
of Product Innovation / 284
6.11 Market Research Metrics and Key 
Performance Indicators / 289
6.12 In Summary / 291
7 Culture and Teams
7.1 Product Innovation Culture and 
Climate / 298
7.2 Management 
Responsibilities / 301
7.3 Product Innovation Team 
Structures / 303
7.4 Team Development / 309
7.5 Team Leadership / 315
7.6 Virtual Teams / 318
7.7 Incentivizing Product 
Innovation / 323
7.8 In Summary / 325
Appendix A Glossary of Terms 331
Appendix B  The BoK in Practice 
Cases 359
Appendix C  Examples of Product 
Innovation Best 
Practice from PDMA’s 
Outstanding Corporate 
Innovators’ (OCI) Awards 387
Index 397Allan M. Anderson, PhD, BTech (Hons), FNZIFST, NPDP
Allan is currently Emeritus Professor in Product Development in the School of 
Engineering and Advanced Technology at Massey University, New Zealand. 
He has extensive experience in product innovation over 40years in general 
management, product management, consultancy, and academia. Research, 
teaching, and application of innovation management in a wide range of organi￾zations internationally has provided Allan with a depth of knowledge and expe￾rience across the broad spectrum of practices, processes, and techniques 
that define product innovation management.
Allan was part of the establishment team for PDMA-NZ in 2007; president 
of PDMA-NZ until December 2011; was Vice President Asia-Pacific until 2015 
and PDMA President and Chairman from 2016 to 2019; has NPDP certifica￾tion; and is an accredited NPDP training provider. Allan’s passion for product 
innovation education prompted his active involvement in the expansion of 
PDMA’s New Product Development Professional Certification (NPDP) into new 
markets including China, India, and Indonesia. In 2016, he compiled the first edition of PDMA’s Body of 
Knowledge (BoK) which laid the foundation for the second edition in 2019 and for this, the third edition.
Chad McAllister, PhD, PMP, NPDP, CIL
Chad is a recognized Top  40 Product Management Influencer and a 
Top 10 Innovation Blogger. He is the host of Product Mastery Now, a top-1% 
business podcast enjoyed by thousands of product managers, leaders, and 
innovators since 2014. Each week he provides a valuable discussion exploring 
topics that equip you for success. Find the podcast on your favorite podcast 
player by searching for Product Mastery Now, or at www.ProductMasteryNow
.com.
With 30+ years of product experience, he helps product managers and 
leaders move toward product mastery, creating greater value for customers 
and their organizations. He frequently works with product teams, facilitating 
their move to higher performance. He also teaches product and innovation management graduate courses 
at Boston University, Colorado State University, University of Fredericton, and other universities. He holds 
two degrees in Electrical Engineering, a PhD in Innovation, and professional certifications from PMI (Project 
Management Professional), PDMA (New Product Development Professional), and AIPMM (Certified 
Innovation Leader). Connect with Chad via LinkedIn at https://www.linkedin.com/in/chadmcallister/.
About the Authorsviii About the Authors
Ernie Harris
For more than 30years, Ernie has been involved in new product innovation in 
the software and services industry. Ernie was part of the establishment of the 
PDMA Tampa chapter in Florida and since joining PDMA in 2007 has gone on 
to serve in many capacities. Ernie has chaired PDMA’s International Innovation 
conference, founded multiple chapters, and served as the Treasurer for the 
PDMA International Board of Directors. In 2019, he was elected President 
and Chairman of PDMA International where he helped build on the foundation 
of PDMA’s international growth through education and certification. Working 
closely with the Board of Directors and many others, he also helped to expand 
PDMA into countries like Turkey, Egypt, and more.
Ernie holds the NPDP certification and sits on the International NPDP cer￾tification committee supporting the global NPDP exam. He has traveled on 
behalf of PDMA as a recognized innovation leader speaking on innovation 
management best practices in China.
Ernie currently serves as the President and Chief Operating Officer of a leading Third-Party 
Administrator offering employee benefits administration solutions to employers in the United States of all 
sizes.PDMA’s Body of Knowledge is founded on over 40 years of research and application of “best practices” 
in product innovation and product management. Those who have contributed to the evolution of PDMA’s 
Body of Knowledge are far too many to list individually. We are reminded of Sir Isaac Newton’s saying, “If 
I have seen further, it is by standing on the shoulders of giants.” Thank you to all the PDMA “giants” who 
have made BoK3 a reality.
Following is specific acknowledgement to those who have been directly involved in the preparation of 
BoK3.
Chapter authors BoK 2nd edition
Stephen Atherton, NPDP
Jean-Jacques Verhaeghe, MBA-LS, PMP, NPDP
Carlos M Rodriguez, PhD, NPDP.
Karen Dworaczyk, BS (chemeng), NPDP
Teresa Jurgens-Kowal, PhD, PMP, NPDP
Jerry Fix, B.S., MBA, NPDP and Allan Anderson PhD, NPDP
Contributors the 1st, 2nd
, or 3rd editions of the BoK
Aruna Shekar, PhD
Brenna Leever, BS Design
Brian Ottum, PhD
Chad McAllister, PhD, PMP, NPDP
Charles H Noble, PhD
Doug Collins, MBA
Ernie Harris, NPDP
Greg Coticchia, MBA
Jack Hsieh, NPDP
Jama L Bradley, PhD, PMP, NPDP
Jelena Spanjol, PhD
Lou Zheng, NPDP
Mark Adkins, NPDP
Mark Tunnicliffe, PhD
Martijn Antonisse, PhD, NPDP
Nikhil Kumtha, MBA, PMP
Peter Bradford, MSTC, NPDP
Sophie Xiao, PhD
Steve Johnson, Pragmatic CPM
Susan Burek, MS, NPDP
Vicky Zachareli, MSc, MBA
CASE STUDIES
Thanks to the following who have provided case studies for BoK3, presented in Appendices B and C:
Strategy: Global Dairy Co, Allan Anderson
Process: LeanMed, Mark Adkins
Design and Development: Stingray Digital Radio, Jessica Braddon-Parsons, Errol Chrystal, Afnan 
Kayed, Jacob Patrick
Market Research: OBO Hockey Equipment, Simon Barnett
Culture and Teams: Aobe Kickbox and rready®, Chad McAllister
Outstanding Corporate Innovator Awards: Sally E. Kay
AcknowledgmentsThe Product Development and Management 
Association (PDMA) is proud to introduce the 
3rd edition of its Body of Knowledge (BoK).
1 ABOUT PDMA
The Product Development and Management Association (PDMA) was founded in 1976. Founded in the 
USA, it has International Affiliates in Europe, South/Central America, and Asia/Pacific. It is the premier 
association worldwide for everyone involved in product innovation.
Membership includes practitioners, academics, and service providers and represents a broad cross￾section of product and service industries, both “business-to-business” (B2B) and “business-to-consumer” 
(B2C). Members come from many industries, with a few including:
• Consumer goods
• Heavy machinery
• Information Technology
• Food and beverage
• Banking
• Healthcare
• Software
• Consultancy
Central to PDMA is its Body of Knowledge (BoK). This book is the guide to the PDMA BoK. PDMA 
also provides a professional qualification, the New Product Development Professional (NPDP) certification. 
Earning the certification demonstrates competency in the BoK concepts.
The BoK is founded on a broad spectrum of independent research, gathered by PDMA globally, from 
academic and practitioner sources, over the past 50 years. These include:
• The Journal of Product Innovation Management: an interdisciplinary, international journal that 
seeks to advance theoretical and managerial knowledge of innovation management and product 
development. The journal publishes original articles on organizations of all sizes (start-ups, small to 
medium-sized enterprises, and large corporations) and from the consumer, business-to-business, 
and policy domains.
• The PDMA Knowledge Hub (kHUB): a website of resources facilitating the creation and exchange 
of product management and development knowledge and best practices.
• The Outstanding Corporate Innovators Award (OCI): a rigorous assessment of the innovation 
capabilities of award applicants. The award-winning company or companies have created and cap￾tured long-term value through product and service innovation, demonstrating their innovation leader￾ship.
• Research forums and Conferences: virtual and in-person meetings organized to facilitate the 
global exchange of ideas and practices among thought leaders.
• Publications covering a range of topics: PDMA explores current and emerging topics through a 
variety of publications. These are listed at the end of this introduction.
Introductionxii Introduction
• Best Practice Surveys: these research studies started in 1997 and are conducted globally on a 
regular basis. The survey results identify the factors leading to high product innovation performance 
in organizations. Specifically, the results identify what is different between the best-performing organi￾zations and the rest, lower-performing organizations.
The latest PDMA Best Practice Survey (Bsteiler & Noble, 2023) provides a compelling finding in sup￾port of the imperative for ongoing improvement in product innovation practices.
2 ABOUT THIS BOOK
PDMA’s 3rd edition of its Body of Knowledge (the BoK3) is designed to present a holistic view of Product 
Innovation Management, discussing individual components and their integration into the whole.
The Product Development Handbook, 4th edition (also published by PDMA) presents an Innovation 
Management (IM) Framework to help new product development managers identify those activities required 
to be a successful innovator (Markham, 2023). The IM Framework (Figure 1) was developed by the Center 
for Innovation Management Studies (CIMS). It describes a systematic way to think about managing innova￾tion, breaking it down into competencies across several dimensions that can be learned, practiced, meas￾ured, and improved.
Levels:
Dimensions:
Competences:
• Firm
• Industry
• Macroenvironment
• Strategy
• Processes
• Metrics
• Techniques and tools
• Organization and culture
• Idea management
• Market management
• Portfolio management
• Platform management
FIGURE 1 An innovation management framework. 
Source: Markham, 2023 / John Wiley & Sons.
PDMA Best Practice Survey 2021 Finding
“The overall NPD [New Product Development] success rate (59.6%) has not changed materially in 
30 years of PDMA’s Best Practice surveys. Although many differences between the Best and the Rest 
are statistically significant, the absolute differences are not that large. Numerous new tools and prac￾tices such as stage-gate, concurrent, waterfall, and agile product development processes, Voice-of-the￾Customer research, virtual team management, and electronic communication techniques and advanced 
digital development tools, have been implemented by firms, and they have improved the efficiency and 
effectiveness of NPD programs. Together, these results imply that all firms must continually evolve their 
NPD capabilities just to “stay in the game” as circumstances and the environment change.”Introduction xiii
3 THE BOOK STRUCTURE
Inspired by the IM Framework, BoK3 provides a structured description of the key activities involved in 
product innovation management, comprising an “end to end” description of the product innovation: prod￾uct strategy, portfolio management, product innovation processes, product design and development, mar￾ket research, and organizational culture. All are presented in the context of an overall framework of product 
innovation management.
BoK3 is divided into seven chapters, diagrammatically presented in Figure 2. At the center of the figure 
is strategy, which defines the direction and goals for product innovation. This provides the basis for the 
product innovation portfolio, for the process leading to individual new products, and the consequent man￾agement of these products through their life cycles. Contributing at all levels of strategy, portfolio, and life 
cycle management are market research, specific tools for design and development, and people (culture, 
organization, leadership, and teams).
A brief outline of each chapter is provided below:
Chapter 1 Product innovation management
The first chapter addresses the role of product innovation management. The first part defines 
product innovation and the key factors that lead to successful products. The breadth of the prod￾uct innovation management role is discussed, together with the skill sets and knowledge required 
to manage across a range of disciplines and functions and how this differs from project manage￾ment. Management of product innovation through the stages of the product life cycle – development, 
FIGURE 2 The seven chapters of PDMA’s BoK3xiv Introduction
introduction, growth, maturity, decline, and retirement – is addressed with a focus on the product 
innovation strategies required at each stage. The second part focuses on the product life cycle and 
how product innovation is managed through this life cycle. While specific tools and techniques are 
discussed in other chapters, specific reference in this chapter is placed on road-mapping – product 
and technology, and light coverage of project management with reference to the Project Manage￾ment Institute’s PMBoK (2021).
Throughout BoK3, we emphasize the fundamentals for successful product innovation. There is 
no single recipe that can be used across all organizations. The third part of this chapter discusses 
the development and application of product innovation metrics, particularly how these form critical 
ingredients in organizational learning and continuous improvement.
Chapter 2 Strategy
The strategy chapter covers various strategies, from corporate, business, and functional strate￾gies. An emphasis is placed on the innovation strategy, particularly as it sets out the framework and 
provides direction for product innovation. The benefits and limitations of specific innovation strategic 
frameworks are discussed. The role of supporting strategies from technology, marketing, platforms, 
intellectual property, and capability are presented, both as being directed by higher-level business 
strategy and in their mutual contribution to the overall business strategy.
Chapter 3 Portfolio management
The portfolio management chapter relates strategy to project selection, selecting the right inno￾vation projects for the organization. A product portfolio is defined as the set of current and poten￾tial new products that can form the basis for a program of product innovation, including product 
improvement, cost reductions, line extensions, and new-to-the-company products.
Methods for project selection are presented, both as a means of assessing project potential and 
of achieving strategic alignment regarding individual project prioritization and balance across specific 
categories of product innovation. Portfolio management is presented as a cross-functional activity 
that encompasses the development of new products through to launch and the ongoing review of 
existing products to ensure optimal alignment with strategy and resource availability.
Chapter 4 Product innovation process
Rapid changes in technology, communication, and market demands have placed considerable 
pressure on companies to become more effective and efficient in their product innovation. A greater 
understanding of the success factors for new product innovation has resulted in the application of a 
range of new product processes to specific contexts. This chapter outlines many of these processes, 
including Stage-Gate®, Concurrent Engineering, Integrated Product Innovation, Hybrid Agile-Stage￾Gate, Lean, Agile, and Lean Startup. The benefits and limitations of each process are discussed, and 
specific contexts for application are recommended. Reference is made to the tools and metrics that 
are required to underpin a successful new product process.
Chapter 5 Product design and development
This chapter focuses on the Design and Development stage of the product innovation process. 
The chapter is divided into two sections: Design (concept and embodiment design) and Develop￾ment (specifications, usability testing, performance testing, endurance testing, quality assurance, 
design for manufacture and assembly, and design for sustainability). The evolution of the product 
through each of these phases is discussed, and specific tools are introduced together with their ben￾efits and limitations. Some of these tools are applicable across a range of industries and products, 
while others are more specific in their application.Introduction xv
Chapter 6 Market research in product innovation
Market research is required to provide market-related information and data to underpin decision￾making in all aspects of strategy development, portfolio management, product design and develop￾ment, and life cycle management. The application of market research extends across the full cycle of 
product innovation, from initial idea generation to final product launch and post-launch reviews. This 
chapter covers a range of market research tools, including primary vs. secondary research, qualita￾tive vs. quantitative, focus groups, customer site visits, ethnography, consumer panels, social media, 
big data, crowdsourcing, alpha and beta testing, biometric methods, multivariate techniques, and 
market testing. The benefits and limitations of each tool are discussed together with their potential for 
application at various stages of product innovation. Specific emphasis is placed on the accuracy and 
reliability of the various tools and their value in decision-making.
Chapter 7 Culture and teams
It is widely recognized that new product innovation cannot be successful through good pro￾cesses alone. Success is dependent on people, the culture of the company, and the environment 
that is created to foster innovation. This chapter outlines the characteristics of an innovative culture. 
It also focuses on the requirements for a high-performing team and of team structures to support 
cross-functional teams in an innovative environment and in different project contexts, including vir￾tual. Management roles and responsibilities at various levels and within different stages of product 
innovation are also discussed.
4 WHAT IS NEW IN BoK3?
New product innovation techniques and practices are continually being developed. PDMA is committed to 
keeping abreast of this through a periodic update of its BoK. This, the 3rd edition, succeeds the 2nd edition 
published in 2020. Following is a summary of changes made in this latest edition:
1. Although much of the concepts remain unchanged from previous editions, emphasis in BoK3 has 
been placed on the interrelationships between content across the various chapters, thus providing 
a greater appreciation of how individual components of the BoK work in concert to deliver improved 
product innovation performance. Examples and case studies have also been added to provide rel￾evance and application of specific techniques and processes. This includes an appendix summariz￾ing the practices of PDMA’s Outstanding Corporate Innovators award winners (Appendices B and C).
2. Chapter 1, Product Innovation Management provides an overview of the Product Innovation Man￾agement role and a context for the remaining chapters of the BoK3. The basic content remains much 
the same, moved from Chapter 7 in BoK2, with greater details in some areas, including product life 
cycle management and benchmarking for continuous improvement. Feasibility analysis and financial 
valuation have been moved from this chapter to Chapter 3, Portfolio Management.
3. Chapter 2 has added Porter’s 5 forces to the Strategy Framework section, and the Digital Strategy 
and Open Innovation section have been expanded.
4. Chapter 3, Portfolio Management has been re-structured based on four goals of portfolio manage￾ment: value maximization, business strategy alignment, balance, and the right number of projects. 
Although some may argue that ideation is not strictly part of portfolio management, we have included 
it at the beginning of Chapter 3 to demonstrate its relationship with and value to portfolio manage￾ment. Chapter 3 also includes an extensive discussion of financial analysis as applied to selection 
of projects to be included in the product portfolio. Some new techniques have been added to this 
section – Bang for Buck Index, Expected Commercial Value, and Options Pricing Theory. Other new 
topics included in this chapter include the challenges of adapting traditional portfolio management to 
dynamic processes such as agile and hybrid Agile-Stage-Gate.xvi Introduction
5. Chapter 4, Product Innovation Process, places greater emphasis on the front end of innovation (FEI)
and the product innovation charter (PIC) in providing context at the start of the chapter. Discussion 
of most processes included in previous editions continues in BoK3 with the addition of benefits and 
limitations of each process. The sections on design thinking, lean product innovation, and hybrid 
models have been extended. A new section on jobs to be done has been added. The chapter con￾cludes with a comparison of the various processes and a discussion of the question, “is there a right 
process?”.
6. Chapter 5, Design and Development, although focusing on most of the tools discussed in previous 
editions, has been structured into two sections: design and development. This is intended to better 
describe the stage of application and the contribution of each tool to the design and development 
stages of product innovation.
7. Chapter 6, Market Research includes most of the tools as the previous edition, expanding sections 
including biometrics-based methods and multivariate techniques. Summaries of the strengths and 
weaknesses of most techniques have been added.
8. Chapter 7, Culture and Teams addresses similar topics as the previous edition with the addition of 
examples and expansion of the virtual team section.
5 WHO WILL BENEFIT FROM THIS BOOK?
PDMA’s BoK provides a singular reference for anyone currently involved in or planning a career in product 
management and product innovation. It provides a proven framework for product innovation which can 
be applied to a wide cross-section of product and service industries at various levels of an organization, 
including and not limited to:
• Senior executives
• Product managers
• Brand managers
• Product owners
• Portfolio managers
• Program managers
• Project managers
• Business analysts
• Product designers
• Product developers
• Educators and trainers
6 HOW TO READ THIS BOOK?
The book is organized in a logical manner from the beginning to the end. You can read it straight through 
and be introduced to the topics (practices, concepts, tools, processes, and methodologies) that lead to 
successful product innovation. If you are new to product innovation or beginning a career that emphasizes 
innovation, you will gain a better understanding of how the topics relate to each other by reading the chap￾ters in order. Perhaps unexpectedly, we suggest the same reading order for those moving into an innova￾tion leadership role. Many practitioners have found the tremendous breadth of topics presented in BoK3 
allows them to integrate their previous experiences while strengthening a strategic perspective they must 
have as leaders. The need for strategic thinking is both blatant and subtle throughout the chapters. For 
the strategic thinker, the chapters are organized like scaffolding, with later chapters building upon previous 
chapters.
However, suppose you already have product innovation knowledge and experience, and your immedi￾ate needs don’t involve moving into a leadership role. In that case, you will find benefit in reading specific 
chapters to meet your needs. For example, if viable product ideas are failing to gain support and resourc￾ing, the Strategy topics in Chapter 2 along with the project selection topics in Chapter 3 are essential to 
apply. If proper team formation or fostering an innovation culture are where current challenges are, skip to 
Chapter 7 to learn about both topics. So, if you have a clear immediate need and already possess a rea￾sonable framework for product innovation, skip to the chapter(s) addressing your needs.Introduction xvii
7 WHAT IS A PRODUCT?
A product is a term used to describe all goods, services, and knowledge comprising bundles of attributes 
(features, functions, benefits, and uses). A product can be tangible, as in the case of physical goods; intan￾gible, as in the case of those associated with service benefits; or can be a combination of the two.
Products are classified into two categories: Consumer and Industrial. Each of these are divided into 
further categories as shown in Figure 3.
Consumer Products
Consumer products can be further classified as convenience products, shopping products, specialty prod￾ucts, unsought products, and services:
• Convenience products are purchased by consumers repeatably and without much thought. Once 
consumers choose their convenience products, they typically keep to it unless they see a reason to 
switch — such as an interesting advertisement that compels them to try it or mere convenience at 
the checkout aisle.
• Shopping products include higher-end items like cars or houses or smaller items like clothing and 
electronics. Consumers typically spend more time conducting research, comparing prices, and chat￾ting with salespeople when they’re looking to purchase shopping goods. These are more one-off 
purchases and are typically more important and higher economic-impact products compared to toi￾let paper, soap, and other convenience products.
• A specialty product is the only one of its kind on the market, which means consumers typically 
don’t feel the need to compare or deliberate as much as they would with other products. Examples 
include the iPhone or Mercedes car, where consumers have become dedicated to a specific brand.
• Unsought products are those that people aren’t typically excited to buy and, don’t buy on impulse. 
Good examples of unsought goods include fire extinguishers, batteries, and life insurance.
• Services normally should not be considered as a separate product classification. Depending on the 
particular service, they are either consumer or industrial goods. They are activities, benefits, or satis￾factions offered for sale or are provided in connection with the sale of goods.
Industrial Products
Industrial products can be further classified into capital, raw materials, component parts, major equipment, 
accessory equipment, operating supplies, and services.
• Capital products are directly used in production. Capital goods consist of installations and acces￾sory equipment. Buildings, plants, and machinery are examples of installations.
• Raw materials are used in the making of other products. This category includes natural resources 
such as forest products, minerals, water, oceanic products, agricultural products, and livestock. In 
most instances, raw materials lose their individual identities when used in the final product.
Product categories
Industrial
Capital Component
parts
Major
equipment
Convenience Specialty Unsought
Shopping Services
Operating
systems
Raw
materials Services
Consumer
FIGURE 3 Types of productsxviii Introduction
• Component parts, unlike raw materials, parts usually have been processed before being used in 
the finished product. Although they may not be visible, parts are left intact and assembled into the 
total product.
• Major equipment comprises industrial products used to make, process, or sell other goods. These 
include machinery, typewriters, computers, automobiles, tractors, engines, and so on. This equip￾ment includes industrial products used to facilitate the production process or middleman sales. It 
does not become part of the finished product but aids in the overall production or selling effort.
• Accessory equipment includes tools, shelving, and many other products that tend to have a lower 
cost and shorter life than major equipment.
• Operating supplies include office stationery, repair, and maintenance items. Supplies can be 
treated as convenience products of the industrial market as they are purchased with minimal effort.
• Industrial services include maintenance and repair services, factory premise cleaning, office equip￾ment repair, and business consultancy services. These services are generally provided through con￾tracts by small producers and manufacturers of the original equipment.
8 WHAT IS PRODUCT INNOVATION?
Innovation is turning a creative idea into value.
Product innovation is the creation and subsequent introduction of a good or service that is either new or 
an improved version of previous goods or services.
In BoK3, product innovation is used as an all-embracing term to include all aspects of bringing a prod￾uct to market from strategy and initial idea through to commercialization, and includes the processes and 
tools required throughout. It encompasses product improvement, line extensions, cost reductions, and 
new-to-the-company products.
Although the term product innovation specifically refers to product, most of the principles discussed 
throughout the book are equally applicable to services and not only products (either where the service is a 
product in its own right or where the service is part of a product offering).
The scope of product innovation
Put simply, successful product innovation is about choosing the right products to develop (doing the right 
things) and using the right processes, practices, and tools to develop the products (doing things right). 
Figure 4 extends this to include the essential ingredients of people (culture, organization, and teams), and 
performance metrics used as a basis for continuous improvement.
The Scope of the BoK
The fundamental principles and framework used in this book are applicable to all the above catego￾ries and for profit and not-for-profit organizations, with the application of specific techniques and the 
emphasis with which they are applied.
The definition of a new product as applied in the BoK
The PDMA BoK regards a “new product” as being a product that is new in any aspect. This includes 
improvement to an existing product, a line extension, a new to the organization product or a new to the 
world product.Introduction xix
9 THE ROLE OF PRODUCT INNOVATION IN THE ORGANIZATION
Most organizations rely on their products or services for both sustenance and growth. The ongoing review 
and refreshing of an organization’s product offering, through product improvement and new product inno￾vation, is fundamental to its survival. New products and services are frequently referred to as the lifeblood
of an organization, providing new revenue. Here are some insights from business leaders about the value 
of product innovation:
• “Investing in new product innovation and expanding the product catalog are the most difficult things 
to do in hard times, and also among the most important.” Bill Hewlett and David Packard.
• “I would rather gamble on our vision than make a ‘me too’ product.” Steve Jobs.
• “We see our customers as invited guests to a party, and we are the hosts. It’s our job to make every 
important aspect of the customer experience a little better.” Jeff Bezos, founder of Amazon.
• “I think that too often, companies tend to have engineers working in individual cubes. They are iso￾lated. They often don’t see themselves as part of a larger process with a complex web of interde￾pendencies.” Jim Morgan, senior advisor, Lean Enterprise Institute.
10 APPLICATION OF PDMA’S BODY OF KNOWLEDGE
The BoK has been applied in several ways, including self-learning for career advancement, personal and 
in-company training, university courses, and its major focus, preparation for PDMA’s professional certifica￾tion, the NPDP.
11 THE NEW PRODUCT INNOVATION PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION
(NPDP)
The NPDP was first introduced in 2001, mainly in the USA. It is now a recognized qualification for product 
management and product developers worldwide.
Detailed information on the NPDP can be obtained from the Certification section of the PDMA website: 
www.pdma.org.
Innovation
strategy
goals
Doing the right
innovation
Doing innovation
right
Measuring performance
Continuous improvement
Culture and climate
Organization
FIGURE 4 A macro view of product innovationxx Introduction
The Benefits of Certification:
For individuals: Confirms mastery of product innovation principles and best practices leading to profes￾sional advancement, new job opportunities, and greater remuneration.
For management: Identifies those who have the product innovation skills and knowledge to move into 
leadership roles.
For organizations: Promotes better product innovation discipline, leading to greater new product suc￾cess with associated obvious benefits.
About the Examination
The exam consists of 200 multiple-choice questions. The allocation of questions across the seven chap￾ters of the BoK.
To pass the examination, 150 questions must be answered correctly (75 percent).
12 RELATED PDMA BOOKS
BoK3 is a guide to the product innovation body of knowledge, drawing on research and practice from 
multiple sources, including other PDMA resources. Over a number of years PDMA has supported the pub￾lication of a range of books related to product innovation. For additional information, refer to the PDMA 
website at www.pdma.org.
PDMA Toolbook 1
The first of the Toolbook series, it provides practical cross-functional coverage of the entire product 
innovation process from idea generation through delivery of the final assembled product. Includes 
sections on benchmarking and changing your new product innovation process and managing your 
product portfolio (Belliveau et al., 2002).
PDMA Toolbook 2
This book covers all aspects of product innovation, from the creation of the concept through devel￾opment and design to the final production, marketing, and service (Belliveau et al., 2004).
PDMA Toolbook 3
The third volume in the Toolbook series covers the best practices of product innovation, including 
critical aspects of product innovation from the creation of the concept through development and 
design, to the final production, marketing, and service (Griffin & Somermeyer, 2007).
PDMA History, Publications, and Developing a Future Research Agenda
This book describes the many publications that PDMA has created and provides influences that may 
impact the future of PDMA itself (Hustad, 2013).
PDMA Handbook of New Product Development 3rd Edition
The handbook provides a comprehensive picture of what managers need to know today for effective 
new product innovation (Kahn et al., 2013).
Open Innovation: New Product Innovation Essentials from the PDMA
Many organizations have adopted Open Innovation. This book provides a comprehensive guide to 
the theory and practice of Open Innovation (Griffin et al., 2014).Introduction xxi
Design Thinking: New Product Innovation Essentials from the PDMA
This is a guide to better problem-solving and decision-making in product innovation and beyond. 
You’ll learn how to approach new product innovation from a fresh perspective, with a focus on sys￾tematic, targeted thinking that results in a repeatable, human-centered problem-solving process 
(Luch et al., 2015).
Leveraging Constraints for Innovation
This PDMA Essentials Book, the third in this series, provides a framework of individual, organiza￾tional, market, and societal constraints that guides managers in identifying specific constraints 
related to their innovation activities, and provides them with corresponding tools and practices to 
overcome and leverage those constraints (Gurtner et al., 2018).
PDMA Handbook of New Product Development and Innovation 4th Edition
The 4th edition continues in providing an updated contribution to product innovation professionals for 
effective new product innovation, “revisiting familiar topics with fresh approaches and insights and 
will likely introduce you to entirely new concepts that take you to the leading edge of this exciting 
world of new product development and innovation” (Bsteiler & Noble, 2023).
13 THE 10 PRINCIPLES OF SUCCESSFUL PRODUCT INNOVATION
There is no singular recipe for product innovation success. The diversity of industry, organizational size and 
structure, products and services, markets, internal capabilities, geographic spread, and external environ￾ment are some considerations that preclude a “one size fits all” approach to applying product innovation 
processes and practices. However, there are some basic principles that provide a foundation for success, 
irrespective of organizational differences. Based on concepts in this book, the principles are:
1. People first, affirmed by the creation and maintenance of the right culture and climate to enable the 
successful application of process and practice, not vice versa.
2. Empower all employees to identify opportunities for creating new value instead of designating 
specific individuals or teams as the sole innovators.
3. Clarity of direction, provided through a well-developed organizational strategy and vision, com￾municated to, and understood by the whole organization.
4. Effective product portfolio management, ongoing, and founded on clear strategic goals and cri￾teria throughout all stages of the Product Life Cycle. This includes rigor in selecting the right projects, 
managing resources responsibly, and investing in the future.
5. A product innovation process or processes tailored to the specific needs of teams and the 
whole organization, well communicated, understood, and adhered to.
6. A strong emphasis on the Front End of Innovation to ensure that continuation to the more 
expensive and risky stages of product innovation is well founded.
7. A strong focus on the customer, capturing the voice of the customer throughout product innova￾tion with the application of appropriate market research techniques.
8. Development and maintenance of high-performing teams, based on cross-functional mem￾bership and the practices that create high performance (i.e., trust, accountability, positive conflict, 
result-focused, clear communications, and appropriate recognition/rewards).
9. A strong focus on sustainability, including the triple bottom line or the three Ps of People, Profit, 
and Planet.
10. Continuous improvement through applying performance metrics and benchmarking that underpin 
a culture of learning, both from successes and failures.xxii Introduction
REFERENCES
Belliveau, P., Griffin, A., and Somermeyer, S. (ed.) (2002). The PDMA toolbook 1 for new product development. John Wiley & Sons.
Belliveau, P., Griffin, A., and Somermeyer, S. (ed.) (2004). The PDMA toolbook 2 for new product development, 2e. John 
Wiley & Sons.
Bsteiler, L. and Noble, C.H. (2023). The PDMA handbook of innovation and new product development, 4e. John Wiley and Sons.
Griffin, A., Noble, C.H., and Durmusoglu, S.S. (2014). Open innovation: New product development essentials from the PDMA. 
John Wiley & Sons.
Griffin, A. and Somermeyer, S. (ed.) (2007). The PDMA toolbook 3 for new product development, 3e. John Wiley & Sons.
Gurtner, S., Spanjol, J., and Griffin, A. (2018). Leveraging constraints for innovation: New product development essentials from the 
PDMA. John Wiley & Sons.
Hustad, T.P. (2013). PDMA history, publications and developing a future research agenda: Appreciating our PDMA 
accomplishments—Celebrating people, lasting friendships, and our collective accomplishments. Xlibris Corporation.
Kahn, K. B., Evans Kay, S., Slotegraaf, R. J., & Uban, S. (Eds.). (2013). The PDMA handbook of new product development 3 John 
Wiley & Sons. doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118466421
Luchs, M.G., Swan, S., and Griffin, A. (2015). Design thinking: New product development essentials from the PDMA. John 
Wiley & Sons.
Markham, S.K. (2023). An innovation management framework: A model for managers who want to grow their business. In: The 
PDMA handbook of innovation and new product development, 4e (ed. L. Bsteiler and C.H. Noble), 45–58. John Wiley and Sons.
Project Management Institute (2021. APA). A guide to the project management body of knowledge (PMBOK® Guide), 7e. Project 
Management Institute.Product Development and Management Body of Knowledge: A Guidebook for Product Innovation Training and Certification,Third Edition. 
Allan Anderson, Chad McAllister, and Ernie Harris.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
1
Product
Innovation
Management
Maximizing the return from product 
innovation through application of sound 
management practices throughout the 
product life cycle2 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS CHAPTER
This book presents a comprehensive overview of product innovation from the definition of clear strategic 
goals, through the development of a balanced portfolio to the processes required for successful new prod￾uct outcomes. Supporting this overall product innovation framework are the tools related to design and 
development, market research, business analysis, culture, teams, and leadership. This breadth of activi￾ties requires input from, and coordination of, wide-ranging disciplines, making management of product 
innovation both complex and challenging. In this chapter, we present the key factors for product innovation 
success and the attributes required in Product Innovation Management from strategic planning to initial 
product concept through to launch and onwards through the product’s entire life cycle.PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 3
CHAPTER ROADMAP
What makes product innovation management
so complex and challenging? What
management structures are used for product
innovation? 
What is product innovation?
What are the critical success factors for
product innovation?
What is the role of the product manager in
product innovation?
What skill set is
required for a product
manager?
What is the
impact of the PLC
stages on cash
ow?
What are the different
categories of customer
adoption throughout
the PLC?
What strategies
can be used at
different stages of
the PLC?
What is the impact
of the PLC on the
product portfolio?
What is the difference
between a product manager
and a project manager?
What is the Product Life Cycle (PLC)?
What are the specic stages of the PLC?
What is the product manager’s role at
different stages of the PLC?
What is “Chasm” – the critical stage of the PLC
before growth kicks in? How best to cross the
Chasm? Go-to-market processes.
What are product and technology roadmaps?
How are these used in product management?
What are the basic principles of project
management and risk management as
applied to product innovation?
How are metrics and key performance
indicators used for continuous improvement in
product innovation?
How does the product
manager’s role relate to
the content of this BoK?4 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
1.1 WHAT IS PRODUCT INNOVATION?
To best understand product innovation, let’s break the term into two components.
Innovation is the combination of creativity and realization, as shown in Figure 1.1.
Product innovation is defined as the creation and subsequent introduction of a good or service that is 
new or an improved version of previous goods or services.
The scope of product innovation from strategy direction through portfolio management and from indi￾vidual project management through to commercialization, implies a high degree of complexity. It is influ￾enced by a wide range of inputs and variables, some of which are controllable by the organization and 
others that are not:
• Controllable: company culture, strategy, capability, organization, finances.
• Uncontrollable: competitors, government policies, international environment.
It involves a cross-section of players:
• Internal: board of directors, general management, marketing, sales, engineering/development, pro￾duction, finance, purchasing.
• External: consultants, suppliers, regulators, agents, customer/consumers.
Successful product innovation seldom happens by accident. Reports from a range of sources quote 
failure rates for new product launches from 40% to 90% (Catstellion & Markham,  2013; Kocina,  2017; 
Schneider & Hall, 2011). Moreover, a large proportion of financial and human resources devoted to product 
innovation are focused on products that will fail in the marketplace.
PDMA’s 2021 Best Practice Survey concludes that organizations “. . .must continually evolve their NPD 
capabilities just to stay in the game” (Knudsen et al., 2023).
1.1.1 Variation Across Industry and Product Sectors
This book focuses on a basic framework and core principles that are generally applied across all industries 
and product sectors. Strategic planning, portfolio management, a defined product innovation process, 
appropriate design and development tools, the voice of the customer, and an over-arching innovation cul￾ture and environment are fundamental to successful product innovation, irrespective of industry and prod￾uct. The specific application of each of these fundamental elements will vary among industries and product 
sectors and even between organizations within the same sector, as each seeks to apply the most fit-for￾purpose practices for their specific organization.
INNOVATION
+
=
idea
Creativity Realization
$ $ $
FIGURE 1.1 Innovation as a combination of creativity and realizationPRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 5
1.1.2 Critical Factors for Product Innovation Success
Results from PDMA benchmarking studies (Markham & Lee, 2013; Knudsen et al., 2023) point to the fol￾lowing differentiating factors for organizations that are high performers in product innovation:
Innovation culture in the best companies:
• Failure is an understood aspect of innovation.
• Managers establish objectives.
• Innovation is considered in recruitment.
• External sources are used.
• Innovation and risk-taking are valued.
• Constructive conflict is encouraged.
• Internal communication is effective.
New product strategy in the best companies:
• Use a well-defined new product strategy to direct all new product innovation activities.
• Likely use a “first to market” strategy.
• Are more likely to focus on sustainability.
• Are more likely to apply intellectual property considerations.
• Apply a global business model (operations in multiple countries).
Portfolio management in the best companies:
• Use portfolio management tools to select projects and to ensure ongoing balance across projects:
○ Radical vs. incremental innovation.
○ Low vs. high risk.
○ New vs. existing markets.
• Specific tools used include:
○ Scoring models.
○ Strategic buckets.
○ Financial models.
New product process in the best companies:
• Use formal, cross-functional processes.
• Continuously re-design the process.
• Use specialized structures to drive new product innovation.
• Adopt flexibility according to product category.
• Have senior managers who understand and support the new product’s process.
The front end of innovation in the best companies:
• Spend considerably more effort to understand customer needs.
• Use formal processes for idea assessment (recognizing the importance of making the right decisions 
at this early stage).
Introducing the Core Principles of Product Innovation Management
Although examples of the application of various practices in different sectors are provided, empha￾sis throughout is placed on providing an understanding of the core principles and encouraging the 
reader to explore how these principles might best be applied within their specific context.6 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
• Use open innovation to gather and develop new ideas.
• Use social media – discussion forums, blogs, innovation hubs, wikis, etc. – to gather customer infor￾mation and opinion.
Development tools in the best companies:
• Use market research tools significantly more.
• Use engineering design tools more frequently.
• Place more emphasis on project planning tools.
Measures and metrics in the best companies:
• Use formal metrics for measuring and reporting on new product performance.
• Use metrics for both outputs and processes:
○ Outputs: such as profits from product innovation over the past five years.
○ Process: such as milestones on time or time to market.
• Use metrics as a basis for learning and continuous improvement.
Cooper (2023) provides further insight into what separates winners from losers in Chapter 1 of PDMA’s 
4th edition of its Handbook of Innovation and New Product Development (Bsteiler & Noble, 2023). He sum￾marizes these drivers for success under three headings as shown in Tables 1.1–1.3:
1. Success drivers of individual new-product projects.
2. Drivers of success: organizational and strategic factors.
3. The right systems, process, and methodologies.
TABLE 1.1 Success drivers of individual new-product projects
Driver name Success driver description
1. Product advantage A unique superior product – a differentiated product that delivers unique benefits & a 
compelling value proposition to the customer or user; also the role of “smart products”
2. VoC Building in the voice-of-the-customer – market-driven & customer-focused NPD
3. Up-front homework Pre-development work – doing the homework & front-end loading the project; doing 
the due diligence before Development gets underway
4. Product definition Sharp, early, & fact-based product definition to avoid scope creep & unstable specs; 
leads to higher success rates & faster to market
5. Iterative development Building into the project a series of “build & test” iterations; putting something in front 
of the customer, early & often, to get the product right; early & frequent technical 
validations of versions of the product
6. Speed & order of entry The impact of speed and time to market; timing & the order of market entry (first to market)
7. Agility Responsive to making rapid changes in the portfolio of projects; able to react to 
changing customer needs; ability to pivot from the original plan of action
8. Proficient launch A well-conceived, properly executed market launch, driven by a solid, properly 
resourced marketing plan
9. Global orientation A global or “glocal” product (global platform, tailored for local markets) and targeted at 
international markets (as opposed to the product designed to meet home-country needs)
10. Expectations of success Expect success, get success – success is a self-fulfilling prophecy: when project team 
members expect success, they are empowered & thus realize success
Source: Cooper, 2023 / John Wiley & Sons.PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 7
TABLE 1.2 Drivers of success – organizational and strategic factors
Driver name Success driver description
1. A Product Innovation 
Strategy
Having a product innovation strategy for the business: clear NPD objectives; defined 
strategic arenas (markets, product types) for the business to focus its NPD efforts on; 
and the product roadmap to define placemarks for future products
2. Sustainability Focus Social responsibility, sustainability, and a green orientation; launching green new products
3. Leveraging Core 
Competencies
Leverage, synergy, and familiarity: getting a good fit between the firm’s core 
competencies and the resource needs of the project to gain competitive advantage
4. Targeting Attractive 
Markets
Targeting large, growing, high-need markets with good long-term potential; avoiding 
intensively competitive markets with low margins and heavy price competition
5. Resources Adequately resourcing projects; having dedicated project teams
6. Effective Teams Cross-functional teams, with the right skills; a strong capable team leader; having clear 
goals and accountability for the project
7. Integrating the 
Supply Chain
Building the supply chain into NP projects; good communication with suppliers; 
seeking ideas and solutions from suppliers
8. Climate and Culture 
for Innovation
The right environment – a climate that supports innovation activities, risk taking, and 
freedom to experiment; also: rewards teams and idea-generators; allows time for 
creative work; and no micro-managing of teams
9. Organizational Design An organic structure – fluid and flexible in task execution, open channels of 
communication, decentralized decision-making, and few formal procedures
10. Top Management Transformational leadership that is committed to NPD; develops the organization’s 
vision, mission, NPD objectives, and innovation strategy; commits the necessary 
resources to NPD; is engaged in the NP process, makes Go/Kill decisions, and 
supports committed product champions
Source: Cooper, 2023 / John Wiley & Sons.
TABLE 1.3 The right systems, process, and methodologies
Driver name Success driver description
1. A NP Idea-to-Launch 
Gated Process
An effective gating process: a multistage, disciplined idea-to-launch system, such as 
Stage-Gate, with defined Go/Kill decision points or gates and stages with success 
drivers and best practices built in
2. Portfolio 
Management
Focus (doing fewer development projects) and making sharp project selection decisions 
(picking better projects and getting the right mix and balance of projects in the portfolio); 
using effective portfolio and project selection methods
3. Accelerated 
Development
Including: Lean Development; “build-and-test” iterations; and Agile Development. Also 
success drivers from this chapter, such as an innovative climate; effective cross-functional 
teams; and resourcing projects adequately (prioritizing projects, focusing resources)
4. Integrating Agile 
Into the NP Process
Borrowing Agile Development from the software world and applying Agile to physical 
products (includes sprints, scrums, demo’s, retrospectives, new roles, and the Agile 
values and mindset)
5. Effective Ideation VoC methods; Open Innovation and co-development; lead user analysis; strategic 
approaches; and Design Thinking
Source: Cooper, 2023 / John Wiley & Sons.8 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
1.1.3 A Synthesis of the Various Studies into Product Innovation Success Factors
There have been several other research studies into the factors contributing to successful product innova￾tion, including Cooper and Kleinschmidt (2010, 2015), Lester (2016), and Montoya-Weiss and Calantone 
(1994).
Although there may appear to be differences among the conclusions from these various studies, there 
is significant commonality. Following is a synthesis of these common success factors, based on an article 
by Kahn et al. (2013). These success factors are grouped under three headings: project level, people and 
environment, and organization and strategy.
Critical success factors – project level:
• Unique, superior products.
• Strong market orientation.
• Pre-development homework.
• Sharp, early, and stable product definition.
• Planning and resourcing the launch.
• Quality of execution of key activities from idea to launch.
• Speed – but not at the expense of quality of execution.
Critical success factors – people and environment:
• The way project teams are organized.
• The right environment – climate and culture.
• Top management support.
Critical success factors – organization and strategy
• Using a product innovation and technology strategy.
• Leveraging core competencies.
• Targeting attractive markets.
• Portfolio management.
• The necessary resources.PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 9
1.2 MANAGING PRODUCT INNOVATION
Clearly, managing product innovation is diverse and challenging. Its complexity is summarized by Johnson 
(2017) in the Quartz Open Framework for managing product innovation, shown in Figure 1.2. The six key 
elements of this framework are connect, discover, commit, describe, create, and deliver. All elements con￾tribute to learning and continuous improvement, which is essential for the ongoing delivery of successful 
products. This critical element of product innovation management is described further in Section 1.10.
Connect:
• Monitor success metrics
• Monitor market feedback
• Monitor customer usage
• Perform process retrospectives
Discover:
• Review market feedback
• Conduct problem discovery
• Isolate problems and personas
• Create product vision canvas
Commit:
• Engage leadership team
• Create business deliverables
• Define success criteria
• Get go-ahead for next steps
CONNECT
LEARN
DISCOVER
DESCRIBE
CREATE
DELIVER
COMMIT
FIGURE 1.2 The Quartz Open Framework. 
Source: Johnson (2017).10 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
Describe:
• Engage technical teams
• Roadmap initiatives or epics
• Describe personas and problems
• Define acceptance criteria
Create:
• Prioritize deliverables
• Formalize acceptance
• Communicate status
• Minimize interference and change
Deliver:
• Engage go-to-market teams
• Determine launch activities
• Develop readiness plans
• Prioritize deliverables
1.2.1 How to Manage Product Innovation
Structures for managing product innovation vary significantly among organizations, depending on the size, 
product range, and geographic spread.
Size of the organization: Small to medium-sized companies regularly rely on the chief executive 
to manage innovation. This is particularly evident in start-ups based on an innovation by the owner 
who has taken responsibility for managing the company with a small number of supporting staff. It’s 
interesting to note that the role of product innovation management is often likened to the role of chief 
executive because of its wide-ranging responsibilities and integration across the organization. How￾ever, this quickly changes as organizations scale, with a founding CEO focusing more on optimizing 
operations and less on innovation.
Product range: Diversity in the product range may necessitate delegation of specific aspects of 
product innovation management. So, for example, where an organization has extended its current 
product range into areas of greater technical specialization, specialist knowledge may be required to 
facilitate communication on aspects of technical development during the product innovation process. 
Similarly, where an organization is catering to a range of markets, an allocation of product innovation 
roles may be necessary. For example, a pharmaceutical company marketing directly to the consumer 
and to medical practitioners will need different roles.
Geographic spread: Organizations with multiple markets will almost certainly need to develop prod￾ucts specifically or modify existing products for individual markets. Knowledge of an individual market 
and responsibility for product innovation in that market will provide significant benefits.
Regardless of an organization’s internal and external environment, focus on the key elements shown in 
Figure 1.2 in the product innovation management structure remains essential for long-term success.PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 11
1.3 THE PRODUCT MANAGER
The responsibility of managing product innovation can lie in a range of job titles – from the CEO of small to 
medium-sized companies, VP of innovation in large companies, product innovation manager, brand man￾ager, product manager, and more. Currently, the role of the product manager is growing in prominence 
around the world. Product manager roles are increasingly coveted positions, with high salaries and ample 
opportunities for growth. In fact, product management ranks tenth on Glassdoor’s 2022 list of best jobs in 
America, with average salaries that rival many professional roles (Glassdoor, 2022).
The product manager is responsible for both product planning and product marketing. This 
includes managing the product throughout the product life cycle, gathering and prioritizing product and 
customer requirements, defining the product vision, and working closely with engineering to deliver win￾ning products.
Martin Eriksson, curator of Mind the Product, describes product management as the intersection 
between business, user experience, and technology, as shown in Figure  1.3 (Eriksson,  2011). A good 
product manager is experienced in at least one of these, deeply interested in all three, and can work 
with and learn from those who are experts in all three. As Marty Cagan, founding partner of Silicon Valley 
Product Group and a 30-year veteran of product management, puts it, “The job of a product manager is to 
discover a product that is valuable, usable, feasible, and viable” (Cagan, 2017).
Business: First and foremost, product managers are responsible for delivering value to their organization 
through revenue generated from products sold to customers. Meeting business objectives and goals is 
paramount, as success in those areas ensures the ability of a company to succeed and thrive, returning 
value to owners, shareholders, etc.
User experience: In current vernacular, “UX” is often associated with interface design, human factor 
design, etc., and while those are definitely a part of the “user experience,” UX ultimately comes down to 
understanding the customer; the jobs they are trying to get done and problems they are trying to solve. 
Product managers don’t have to be full-time designers, but they do need to make sure they are spending 
plenty of time with customers to discover these things.
Technology: Product managers need to have a level of understanding of not just “what” is being built but 
also “how” it’s built. They don’t need to be engineers or developers, and they don’t need to know how to 
code or design a PCB, but they do need to have a level of understanding that allows a shared language 
between themselves and developers and engineers.
User
experience
Technology
Business Product
management 
FIGURE 1.3 The product management intersection12 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
The product manager is the person who creates the internal and external product vision and leads prod￾uct management from scratch. The product manager develops the positioning strategy while working with 
stakeholders and teams throughout the process. Some of the key responsibilities of the product manager 
are to:
• understand customer experience.
• develop vision.
• prioritize processes and activities.
• contribute to product pricing and positioning strategies.
• negotiate with stakeholders.
• build and follow a roadmap.
• arrange product testing groups.
• drive product launch.
• participate in the promotion plan development.
• build and maintain product awareness on all levels among product teams.
The product manager is responsible for bringing an idea to life and commercializing it for the organiza￾tion. That includes providing methods to evaluate ideas and guiding the product innovation process. The 
product manager is ultimately responsible for the outcome of a product launch. It’s hard to measure all 
these activities with independent, measurable indicators, but some key ones typically include monetization, 
user engagement, and the level of user satisfaction. These measures will vary depending on the company 
and industry. Some product managers focus mainly on development, writing specifications, and supervis￾ing development progression, while others focus more on marketing and sales by developing a marketing 
plan and training a sales team.
It may seem as if a product manager performs administrative tasks rather than actually “mak￾ing” something, but that’s not true. They are constantly working on improving the existing product, ana￾lyzing data, doing market research, engaging in customer discussions, and observing current trends of 
the industry. Eventually, a product manager has to make the tough decision of what products to build or 
improve, how to price them, how to position them with customers, and how to guide them to commercial 
success.
1.3.1 Product Manager Skill Set
We have already emphasized the scope and complexity of product innovation. Clearly, the product man￾ager must have the skills and experience to cope with this breadth in scope and complexity. The product 
manager’s skill set includes:
• understanding the product and related needs of the customers.
• market knowledge.
• innovation awareness.
• strategic thinking.
• technical knowledge.
• expert communication skills.
• relationship management.
• understanding user behavior.
• empathy.
• ability to explain business and technical requirements to all members of a team.
• ability to measure the success of a product.PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 13
1.3.2 Product Manager vs. Project Manager
The difference between a project management role and a product management role is largely prescribed 
by the definitions of product and project.
A product is a good that satisfies the needs of a particular group, also known as a target market. 
A product can be anything, such as software, heavy machinery, pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, etc. It 
can even include services such as consulting or banking. Each product goes through a cycle from 
initial idea, validation, development, testing, market launch, and eventually, its life in the marketplace 
from introduction to growth, maturity, and decline.
A project, on the other hand, is a collection of tasks to accomplish a specific goal. Projects should 
have outcomes and deliverables, which can be anything from a website revamp to a new internal 
process.
Product management aims to oversee the products being developed within an organization, which 
includes managing every aspect of the product life cycle.
Project management helps teams organize, track, and execute work within a project. This includes 
managing stakeholders, tasks, and progress; seeing the project through to completion; and imple￾menting necessary tools for success.
The key differentiating factors between product and project management are summarized in Table 1.4.
1.3.3 Relating the Product Management Role to PDMA’s BoK
PDMA’s Body of Knowledge is designed to provide a framework and specific tools to support those who 
are charged with managing product innovation, which is often the product manager. The following is a brief 
discussion of how each chapter of BoK3 is relevant to product managers:
Chapter 2 – Strategy: In almost all organizations, new products and product updates provide the 
foundation for growth. The product portfolio and the contribution from product innovation are critical 
to this foundation and, as such, should form a key component of the corporate strategy. The prod￾uct manager’s direct or very close involvement with strategy development ensures strong alignment 
between product innovation initiatives and organizational goals.
TABLE 1.4 Product management vs. project management
Product Manager Project Manager
Key role Oversees all product needs throughout its 
life cycle from birth to death, consistent 
with organization strategy.
Oversees all project needs through assigning so as to 
achieve project completion on time, in budget and in 
specification.
Major focus Product strategy. Task coordination.
Significant 
tasks
Coordinate all functions to focus on 
product needs throughout its life cycle. 
Measure performance and learn for 
continuous improvement.
Plan and regularly monitor tasks and resources to 
ensure successful completion of a project, on time, in 
budget, and in scope.
Measure of 
success
Meets projected return on investment. 
Maintaining a good level of new product 
contribution to overall organization profits, 
consistent with strategy. Continuous 
improvement in practices and processes.
Positive team environment and performance. High 
level of inter- and intra-team communication. A high 
standard of ongoing reporting of project progress 
against forecasts. Completion of project, on time, in 
budget, and in scope.14 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
Chapter 3 – Product portfolio management: A key function of the product manager is the over￾sight or direct management of the product portfolio. The product portfolio provides the revenue 
source that supports the organization now and in the future. Managing this portfolio requires close 
adherence to organizational goals and strategy, resulting in a balance of product innovation projects, 
ranging from new to the company, line extension, and product/brand refreshments.
Chapter 4 – Product innovation process: Several processes have been put forward to optimize 
the effectiveness and efficiency of product innovation. Each of these processes has its merits, but no 
single process is appropriate for all situations. Selection and implementation of the process or com￾bination of processes is a critical function of product innovation management.
Chapter 5 – Design and development tools: A wide range of tools are available to assist product 
management in its decision-making. This chapter focuses on tools that improve the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the design and development aspects of product innovation. Selection, facilitation, 
and application of the best tools are essential to optimizing design and development outcomes.
Chapter 6 – Market research: Successful products are born out of a clear understanding of cus￾tomer needs and the delivery of these products in a way that is readily accessible to the customer. A 
wide range of market research tools is available to provide greater insights into articulated and unar￾ticulated customer needs. Selection and application of the right market research tools at different 
stages of the product innovation process are essential to maximizing product success.
Chapter  7  – Culture, teams, and leadership: Research over many years has underlined the 
importance of organizational environment and culture to successful product innovation. Product 
innovation management is complex and, in particular, requires input from a range of functions and 
disciplines. Formation, development, and leadership of multifunctional teams, together with clear and 
effective communication channels, are all essential components of product management.PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 15
1.4 THE PRODUCT LIFE CYCLE
What is the product life cycle, and how is product innovation managed through this life cycle?
1.4.1 Introduction to the Product Life Cycle
Most marketing texts define the product life cycle (PLC) as the sequence of stages from introduction to 
growth, maturity, and decline through which most products progress. In this chapter, we will extend this 
definition to include development, or product innovation, and retirement. Product innovation is not only 
important for the birth of the product but should continue throughout its life until it is removed from the 
market. This is important in the context of our Body of Knowledge as it emphasizes both the birth of the 
product and the ongoing contribution of innovation throughout the life of the product. The six stages of the 
PLC, shown in Figure 1.4, are briefly described as follows:
Development: generation of the product idea, further concept development, design and testing, 
and business analysis through to market launch.
Introduction: the first stage in the product life cycle is where a company tries to build awareness 
about the product or service in a market where there is often little or no competition.
Growth: having established a foothold in the market where there is greater customer awareness and 
limited competition, sales start to grow.
Maturity: competitors enter the market, and although total market sales may be expanding, the 
share of that market will be declining, resulting in a “flattening” of the life cycle curve.
Decline: increasing competition and possible lack of product novelty and differentiation will lead to a 
decline in sales.
Retirement: (often called end of life) occurs when a company decides to remove the product from 
the market. Products may be retired for various reasons, such as technology changes that make the 
product obsolete, competitive pressure that makes the product no longer viable, or the product sim￾ply can’t meet the required revenue or profitability thresholds.
Development Introduction Growth Maturity Decline Retire
Time
Sales
FIGURE 1.4 Product life cycle stages16 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
1.4.2 The Impact of the PLC Stages on Cash Flow
Development: The organization identifies, plans, and resources effort to develop a product intended to be 
commercialized and generate revenue. Investments are made, and cash flow is negative.
Introduction: During the introduction stage, there is generally little-to-no competition for the product. 
However, organizations still often experience negative cash flow at this stage as returns from sales still 
don’t exceed costs associated with establishing the product in the market.
Growth: During the growth phase, the product becomes more popular and recognizable. Although the 
organization may choose to continue investment in promotion and product differentiation, returns from 
sales will generally well exceed costs resulting in a significantly positive cash flow.
Maturity: As a product moves into maturity, cash flow becomes positive. Economies of scale result in 
lower unit cost and higher profitability. As the product reaches full maturity, competition increases and 
demand becomes more price elastic leading to falling price and reduction in profit margins.
Decline: Sales decline and the organization needs to make tough decisions on what to do with the prod￾uct. Cash flow declines as any additional investments do not drive incremental sales. Investments stop and 
are focused on other products.
Retirement: Zero cash flow.
Figure 1.5 provides an overview of the expected cash flows throughout the product life cycle.
1.4.3 The Length and Shape of the Product Life Cycle
The length of the product life cycle varies according to industry, product, and market factors. The rate 
of technical change, the rate of market acceptance, and the rate of competitive entry also influence the 
PLC shape. In some situations, a product may pass through the life cycle stages in a matter of months. 
However, in other cases, a product’s life cycle may last for several years. But, in almost all cases, product 
life cycles are getting shorter, as shown in Figure 1.6. The factors influencing this include:
Time
Opportunity
identified
Concept
development
Prototype
development
Break-even
time
Manufacture
and preparation
for launch 
Product
becomes
extinct 
Cash flow
Innovation cycle time
Net profit
period
Development Intro Growth Maturity Decline
First
customers
are satisfied 
FIGURE 1.5 Cash flow throughout the PLCPRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 17
• Customers become more demanding;
• Competition is increasing;
• Technology is constantly changing and improving;
• Global communication is increasing.
The shortening of the life cycle for most products has put significant pressure on:
• Constantly refreshing the organization’s products – including both new products and modifications 
and improvements to existing products.
• Strategic management throughout the product’s life cycle to extend its life through improvements 
(new features, improved functionality, reduced cost, enhanced branding, etc.) that will rejuvenate 
consumer interest and sales, as shown in Figure 1.7.
1.4.4 Customer Adoption of New Products
Rogers (1962) identified that people adopt new products and ideas in five distinct categories. These cat￾egories are based on the degree of risk that adopters are willing to take: innovators, early adopters, early 
majority, late majority, and laggards. You’ll see these categories overlaid on a similar model discussed later 
in Figure 1.10.
The innovators are the first group of people to try a new product. They are typically early adop￾ters who are willing to take risks. They are often thought- and opinion-leaders in their field. This group is 
Time
Sales
$
Product life cycles are getting shorter
FIGURE 1.6 Shortening of the product life cycle
Time
Sales
Product improvements
FIGURE 1.7 Product improvements to extend the PLC18 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
typically small, representing less than 5% of the population. Innovators are important to the product adop￾tion process because they help to create awareness of the new product.
The early adopters are the second group of people to try a new product. They are often opinion 
leaders in their field and are typically more risk-averse than innovators, but they are still willing to take 
some risks. This group represents 15–20% of the population. Early adopters are especially important in 
the product life cycle because they help to validate a new product and adopt it before it becomes main￾stream. Their endorsement can help to increase consumer confidence and encourage more people to try 
the product.
The early majority are the third group of people to try a new product. They are typically more risk￾averse than early adopters and only adopt a new product once it has been validated by their peers. The 
early majority are considered to be value shoppers because they wait to adopt new products until they are 
sure they will get value from them. This group represents around 35% of the population. The early majority 
is important in gaining acceptance by the mainstream market.
The late majority are the fourth group of people to try a new product. They are more risk-averse than 
the early majority and only adopt a new product once it is widely accepted. This group also represents 
around 35% of the population. The late majority help to solidify a new product’s position in the market.
The laggards are the last group of people to try a new product. They are typically the most risk-averse 
and only adopt a new product out of absolute need with no other choices. This group represents around 
15% of the population. Although late to the market, laggards add “icing on the cake” in terms of product 
sales and profitability.PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 19
1.5 MANAGING THE PRODUCT LIFE CYCLE
Different strategies are required at each stage of the PLC. The following is a brief description of the situa￾tion at each stage of the PLC and the strategies that may be employed for elements of the marketing mix 
(product, price, distribution, and promotion). Refer to Table 1.5.
TABLE 1.5 Managing the product throughout the PLC
PLC stage Situation Strategy
Development • New product progressing 
from concept to launch
• Investment required: R&D, 
market testing, capital 
equipment, launch
• Concept selection according to portfolio criteria.
• Concept development and design specifications consistent 
with production, marketing, and consumer constraints.
• Business analysis, return on investment.
• Prototype development and testing (functional and 
usability).
• Market testing.
• Design of marketing mix consistent with product concept: 
distribution, promotion, and price.
• Launch plan.
Introduction • Low sales
• High cost per customer
• Financial losses
• Innovative customers
• Few (if any) competitors
• Product branding and quality level are established, and 
intellectual property protection (such as patents and 
trademarks) is obtained.
• Pricing may be low penetration pricing to build market 
share or high skim pricing to recover development costs.
• Distribution is selective until consumers show acceptance 
of the product.
• Promotion is aimed at early adopters. Communications 
seek to build product awareness and to educate potential 
consumers about the product.
Growth • Increasing sales
• Cost per customer falls
• Profits rise
• Increasing number 
of customers
• Increase in competitors
• Product quality is maintained, and additional features and 
support services may be added.
• Pricing is maintained as the organization achieves increasing 
demand with little competition.
• Distribution channels are added as demand increases and 
more customers accept the product.
• Promotion is aimed at a broader audience.
Maturity • Peak sales
• Cost per customer stabilizes
• Profits high
• Mass market
• Stable number of 
competitors
• Product features may be enhanced to differentiate the 
product from that of competitors.
• Pricing may be lower due to new competition.
• Distribution becomes more intensive and incentives may be 
offered to broaden the opportunities for customers to purchase.
• Promotion emphasizes product differentiation and new 
features as they are added.
Decline • Cost per customer low
• Falling sales
• Falling profits
• Contracting customer base
• Decrease in competitors
• Maintain the product, possibly rejuvenating it by adding new 
features and finding new uses.
• Harvest the product by reducing costs. Continue to offer the 
product but to a loyal niche segment.
• Discontinue the product, liquidate remaining inventory, or 
sell it to another organization.
Retirement • Technology changes making 
product obsolete
• Competitive pressure makes 
product unprofitable
• Completely remove the product from the market without 
replacing.
• Replace the product with a new version.20 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
1.5.1 Impact of the PLC on the Product Portfolio
The management strategies at different stages of the PLC, outlined above, emphasize the importance 
of product improvement, addition of new features, line extensions, and cost reductions. All must be 
accounted for in the new product portfolio (further discussed in Chapter 2). The overall business strategy 
and the innovation strategy provide the direction and framework for product portfolio management. These 
strategies should establish the priorities across the various product innovation options, including:
• New-to-the-organization/world products
• Line extensions
• Cost reductions
• Product improvements
New-to-the-organization and line extensions have the potential to establish new products for the 
organization, while cost reductions and improvements are essential tools in PLC management to reju￾venate and prolong a product’s life.
The question, “What defines a product?” in terms of the classic product life cycle description, is 
an interesting one. In the case of the iPhone, is the iPhone itself the product or are the various model 
iterations – SE, 13, 14, etc. – the products? The answer is that the iPhone itself has a life cycle, and the 
individual models also have their own life cycles that contribute to extending the overall life of the iPhone. 
The extension of a product’s life through feature enhancement and new model release has become an 
important component of most organizations’ product innovation portfolio.
The trend toward more frequent product modification and feature enhancements  –  particularly in 
the electronics, software, and Internet industries – has placed greater pressure on speed to market and 
reduced product innovation cycle times. In turn, this strategic focus on product innovation has significantly 
influenced the new product process with a strong drive toward Lean and Agile.
In addition to ensuring a balance across the types of product innovation, it is also important that port￾folio management recognizes the need for a balance of products across the PLC. Obviously, having a 
high proportion of products in the introduction or launch phase places significant financial pressure on the 
organization. On the other hand, a high proportion of products in the decline phase does not present a 
very positive future for an organization. Figure 1.8 shows a distribution of products across the PLC.
FIGURE 1.8 Balancing the product portfolio across the product life cyclePRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 21
1.5.2 The Product Manager’s Role in the Product Life Cycle
The PLC has a significant impact on marketing strategy, the marketing mix, and product innovation. 
Product managers play a critical role in guiding a product through its life cycle. This role takes on different 
responsibilities during the PLC with an overall eye on maximizing the success (revenue, market share, cus￾tomer satisfaction – pick your KPI) of that product, as shown in Figure 1.9.
Product Introduction
Depending on the type of product (line extension, new-to-the-company, or new-to-the-world), a product 
manager’s role during the introduction phase will vary slightly. But in general, their responsibility involves 
validating the fit for the market, ensuring that the product is priced correctly, and being the expert and 
champion for the product as it’s trying to get a foothold. Validating the fit and being quick to adjust is a key 
part of what product managers often need to focus on for new-to-the-company (NTC) and new-to-the￾world (NTW) products. There should have been market research and concept validation prior to launching 
the product, but nothing provides solid, useful feedback as the type that comes from paying customers. 
Product managers have to be sure they are paying attention to customer feedback during this phase. 
Just as importantly, they have to take that feedback and build useful information for the development or 
engineering teams to use. Refining the value proposition is critical at this point as well. Feedback from 
real users may undermine existing value proposition points, necessitating that they be changed or elimi￾nated. New, previously unexpected values may also be uncovered that have to quickly be folded into the 
overall value proposition to ensure the product is still addressing its intended customers and solving the 
problems/doing the job(s) it was intended to do.
Pricing can also be challenging at this phase. For simple line extensions, it may be a relatively straight￾forward calculation. For products that are NTC or NTW, pricing may present challenges. Depending on 
the corporate/company focus, new products may be priced aggressively to capture market share early, or 
absent significant competition, may be priced to maximize operating KPIs like margin or revenue. In both 
cases, a misstep can have an impact on the potential success of the product. If pricing aggressively for 
market share, the dangers are that customers become conditioned to expect new features and capabili￾ties in new products at the same (or lower) price as a previous generation product. This may undermine 
a value proposition or set the market at the low end of the price scale with no room to maneuver as the 
FIGURE 1.9 Product manager roles in the product life cycle. ProductPlan®. 
Source: Used with permission.22 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
market matures. The pricing decision will have to be made so that it supports the value proposition and 
supports the business plan for the product. It is a dynamic decision to balance building momentum during 
a launch with the need to be sustainable over the long term.
In short, during the introduction phase, product managers have to be sure they are listening to the 
market and their customers, move the organization to adapt as needed, and provide the encouragement 
needed through proper pricing to accelerate the adoption of the product.
Growth
During the growth phase, the product manager can begin to focus on accelerating adoption, refining the 
pricing strategy, and identifying additional product innovation opportunities for the product.
As the product begins to develop some momentum, this is the time when a ramp-up in marketing can 
be beneficial. As the value proposition is clarified and feedback from the customer has been folded back 
into the product positioning, efforts to more broadly introduce the product to the market can be effective. 
During this phase, profit margins start to improve/increase due to economies of scale, reducing the piece￾part price of the product (if applicable). During the growth phase, product managers have a few key things 
to focus on. One is to be aware of the growing set of competitors that will likely begin to emerge, which 
can have an impact on pricing strategy. Competitors may try to undercut established pricing in order to get 
a foothold. Another key issue for product managers to focus on is ensuring that some of the profit being 
captured finds its way back into the product innovation process to help set the stage for product enhance￾ments and extensions. Lastly, this is the time to ensure that feedback from customers and the market is 
captured to fold back into the product positioning and value proposition, to make sure that the product 
continues to successfully navigate the chasm that can exist in the transition from introduction through the 
early growth period.
Maturity
During the maturity phase, most of the uncertainty around positioning and value proposition has been 
taken care of, which sounds good; however, it’s also during this phase that sales growth slows consider￾ably, with most customers who wanted to buy your product having already bought it. Many fewer new 
buyers are entering the market, so retaining existing customers becomes very important. For product man￾agers, this is often the time to focus on the numbers. Carefully managing product costs, marketing and 
sales costs, etc., can often extend the life of a mature product. This is also the time that customer feed￾back from the growth phase can be leveraged into product line improvements/extensions to prolong the 
effective life of the product.
Decline
All good things come to an end. There is a time for all products when their contribution to the organization 
begins to decline. This is due to newer products offering more effective competition, a change in the mar￾ket that has customers pivoting to a new/different solution, or even the decline of an entire market due to 
disruptive innovation that makes the entire category/market no longer relevant. As an example, Netflix and 
other video streaming services caused the decline of the DVD player.
Product managers have just as important a role during decline as in the other phases. The most impor￾tant may be to clearly understand what is driving the decline. If it is due to competitive changes, then 
additional marketing or promotion may be necessary. If market/customer needs are changing, then exten￾sions or updates to the product may extend its productive life. If there is a disruptive innovation causing 
the decline, product managers need to look at whether their company can become part of the disrup￾tion. Regardless of the diagnosis and the chosen path forward, a final critical responsibility of the product 
manager is to effectively manage the end-of-life and transition of the product to whatever comes next. An 
effective end-of-life transition is often overlooked but can make or break the effectiveness and success of 
future products and product enhancements and extensions.PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 23
1.6 THE CHASM IN THE PRODUCT LIFE CYCLE?
For product innovation, a critical part of the product life cycle occurs near the beginning, i.e., after intro￾duction, but before growth has fully kicked in. This section is often called the “Chasm” (see Figure 1.10). 
This term was introduced by Geoffrey Moore (2014) in his book, Crossing the Chasm.
This gap (or chasm) is one that must be navigated to fully realize the growth potential of a product. 
This entire process by which we describe how and when consumers are willing to accept new products (or 
innovations) is referred to as Diffusion of Technology, presented previously in Section 1.4.4.
The curve above is a complement to the PLC curve. You can overlay this adoption curve onto the PLC 
curve as innovators and early adopters typically appear during the introduction and early growth phase of 
a product.
So, why is there a chasm? In its simplest form, the answer is that innovators and early adopters buy 
innovation as a change agent. They want to be ahead of the curve and get ahead of the competition, even 
if it has bugs or is missing some capabilities. The early majority of adopters are buying an innovation as 
an enhancement to their productivity – to improve what they do. Consequently, they expect a complete 
(whole) product they perceive to be of good value. But in new product innovation, it’s rarely a seamless 
transition between early innovation and fast-growing successes.
1.6.1 Crossing the Chasm
Understanding why a chasm exists is important to begin to formulate ideas about how to cross that 
chasm effectively. Some products make the leap, while many don’t. Some of the reasons and ways the 
chasm is successfully negotiated:
1. Advantage: the product innovation has a relative advantage (that can be perceived) over the existing 
solution it is attempting to replace. This measurable advantage can take many forms – economic, 
social prestige, convenience, performance, etc. The greater this perceived advantage, the more likely 
that the product or innovation will make it past the chasm and continue to be adopted. There are no 
Technology adoption life cycle
Innovators Early
adopters
Early majority Late majority Laggards
Area under the curve
represents number
of customers 
"The chasm"
FIGURE 1.10 Crossing the chasm – Technology adoption cycle. 
Source: Moore (2014) / Harper Business.24 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
hard-and-fast rules, though, for what constitutes a relative advantage. It depends on the user group 
being targeted and its needs and perceptions.
2. Consistency: its perceived consistency with past or existing practices, values, past experiences, 
and needs of the user group. The degree to which the innovation demonstrates this consistency will 
influence how quickly it is adopted or if it is adopted at all.
3. Simplicity: the degree to which an innovation is perceived as being either easy or difficult to under￾stand will impact its adoption. The easier or simpler an innovation is perceived to be, the more likely 
it will make it across the chasm, and it will likely be adopted more quickly than innovations that are 
more complex.
4. Trialability: how easy is it for new users to “give it a try?” This is called trialability. The easier it is for 
users to test and experiment with the innovation on a limited basis before committing to it, the less 
risky the innovation appears and the more likely it is that users will adopt it.
5. Referability: the easier it is for new potential users to quickly and easily see the results of using a 
new innovation, the more likely they are to adopt it. These visible results again lower the perceived 
risk and uncertainty and make it easier for peers within the targeted user group to share experiences 
which can accelerate the acceptance and adoption of new technology.
1.6.2 The “Go-to-Market” Processes
A comparison of the old-school and the new-school Go-to-Market processes is shown in Figure 1.11. 
The old-school approach is very much a linear process of making the product and then figuring out how 
to sell the product, whereas the new-school approach to developing a go-to-market strategy is an iterative 
process.
An Example of the “New-School” Approach
The “Life Bike” was an innovative eBike, designed to be cool with a unique sitting position (refer to 
Figure 1.12).
Developing a go-to-market strategy
is an iterative process.
4 quadrants of a strong go-to-market strategy
What Who How
Go-to-market strategy
Where
Focus on the
product, the
‘what’
Next determine who you can sell
it to and how to reach them
Where to
promote it is an ? afterthought
OLD-SCHOOL APPROACH NEW-SCHOOL APPROACH
WHAT are you selling?
WHO are you selling to?
HOW
will you reach your
target audience?
WHERE
will you promote
your product?
Go-To-Market
FIGURE 1.11 Old-school and new-school go-to-market processesPRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 25
What are you selling?
The first step, shown in Figure 1.13, is to define exactly what it is you are selling. This should be based 
very much on the concept description and design specifications that evolved throughout the development 
process. What unique benefits does your product provide in comparison to competitors? Typically, com￾petition is based on either cost or differentiation. Remember that you are usually selling in a competitive 
environment where what you are selling impacts your competitors and vice versa.
The value proposition
This description of what product you are selling can now be developed into a value proposition, defined as 
“a short, clear, and simple statement of how and on what dimensions a product concept will deliver value 
to prospective customers. The essence of ‘value’ is embedded in the trade-off between the benefits a cus￾tomer receives from a new product and the price the customer pays for it” (Appendix A, PDMA Glossary).
Who are you selling to?
The next key question is, “Who are you selling to?” Think about segments, not market size or share of the 
market. See Figure 1.14.
Go-To-Market
WHAT
1. Value proposition
2. Whole solution
WHO
3. Market segmentation
4. Target segment
5. Channel(s)
HOW
6. Promotion plan
7. Messaging
WHERE
FIGURE 1.12 Go-to-market example
Value proposition: Compact, comfortable riding
position
Whole solution: 
• Core features: Assisted biking for ease, lower travel
expense, eco-friendly 
• Augmented features: Comfortable and ergonomic,
fitness tracking meter, auto-lock system
HOW
Go-To-Market
WHAT
1. Value proposition
2. Whole solution
WHO
HOW WHERE
FIGURE 1.13 Defining the “what” in go-to-market26 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
Refining the target market
This is the process of comparing the needs of each segment with the primary benefits. Figure 1.15 shows 
two benefit dimensions for the LifeBike example  –  ease of storage (compactness) and riding position 
(comfort).
Various segments of the target market are represented by circles. The two segments whose needs 
match the LifeBike benefits are university students and female professionals who live and work in a city. 
The major competition is positioned in a different area of the market and appeals to different market 
segments.
Reaching your target market
What channels of distribution will be used? The LifeBike channels are shown in Figure 1.16.
Gender
MARKET SEGMENTATION
Male
Female
Yes
No
Yes
No
Urban core? Age demographic? Market segments (size)
FIGURE 1.14 Defining the market
Refining the target market
Segment needs vs. solution benefits
Lifebike example
Go-To-Market
What Who
3. Market segmentation
4. Target segment
How Where
Portable/easy storage
“No sweat”/safe riding position
FIGURE 1.15 Segment needs vs. solution benefits for the LifeBikePRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 27
Channel(s) strategy
Many channel options are available for reaching the target market. A selection of these options is shown in 
Figure 1.17.
Factors to Consider in Channel Selection
Product factors
• In general, highly sophisticated products are distributed directly to buyers, whereas unsophisticated 
or standardized (commoditized) products with low value are typically distributed through indirect 
channels.
• The product may be year-round or seasonal, fragile or sturdy, durable or perishable.
• The stage of the product life cycle is important. At the early stage, gaining market share is important, 
and it may be an advantage to have a number of distributors. In the maturity phase, distribution effi￾ciency and cost savings are critical.
Go-To-Market
WHAT WHO
5. Channel(s)
HOW WHERE
Go-To-Market
5. Channel(s)
FIGURE 1.16 Getting the new product to the selected market segment
You Customer
You Customer Salesperson/
Reps
You Retailer Customer
You Customer
OEM
Distributor/
Reps Salesperson
You Customer
e-Commerce
Direct
personal
selling
Retail
(on/offine)
Indirect
Component
or private
label
In house
Outsourced
FIGURE 1.17 Channel options28 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
Organization factors
• Organizations that don’t have – or can’t afford – their own sales force are more likely to use agents or 
brokers to reach wholesalers or other buyers.
• Organizations that are targeting a wide range of markets are also likely to use channels external to 
the organization, whereas organizations that manufacture a range of products for a particular target 
market are probably best suited to direct channels.
Price factors
• Inclusion of a number of intermediaries in the distribution channel can add significant cost that results 
in a significantly higher final selling price.
Customer factors
• Ultimately, the key factor to consider is reaching your customer in the most effective way.
• You need to know your potential buyers, where they buy, when they buy, how they buy, and what 
they buy.
• In the case of products that are purchased by a customer at a physical outlet, there are three main 
levels of distribution coverage:
○	 Mass or intensive: a large number of outlets.
○ Exclusive: a single outlet or chain of outlets.
○ Selective: a few retail outlets in a specific area.
Where Will You Promote Your Product?
Not only must the new product be made available to the target market segment in the right place, but 
customers must be made aware of product benefits and features using the right messaging. Figure 1.18 
presents some of the types of promotion available, and Table 1.6 shows the positioning statement for the 
LifeBike.
WHERE TO PROMOTE LIFEBIKE
• Align promotion plan with your target market.
• Focus on reaching decision makers in the target
market. 
• Where do the decision makers get their
information?
• Types of promotion include internet/social media
(Google AdWords, Facebook), PR (mass market
publications vs. specialty publications), word-of￾mouth (social media promos), trade shows,
product demos, print media, and television. 
Go-To-Market
WHAT WHO
HOW
6. Promotion plan
7. Messaging
WHERE
FIGURE 1.18 Where to promote the productPRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 29
TABLE 1.6 LifeBike positioning statement
LifeBike . . . [what] A compact and “cool-looking” bike with a comfortable riding position.
. . . primarily for . . . [target market] University students and female professionals who live and work in the 
city.
The compelling reason to buy 
[benefits] . . .
• Power-assisted biking.
• Lower travel costs.
• Eco-friendly
• Comfortable and ergonomic
• “Cool” looking.
. . . unlike [competitors] . . . • Uncomfortable
• Not easy to stow away.
• Ugly30 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
1.7 ROADMAPS USED IN PRODUCT INNOVATION
Roadmaps are very important tools to assist in communicating the vision of a product line with internal and 
external stakeholders. They also help to organize and plan a logical and compelling release of features and 
capabilities over time. There are a number of dos and don’ts when it comes to roadmaps. There are also 
different types of roadmaps that can be used alone or in combination with others to properly communicate 
the product line vision.
There are a number of roadmap types. A roadmap is just a visual way to see the rationale and logic 
of how/why we’re moving from point A to point B. There can be HR roadmaps, sales roadmaps, project 
roadmaps, etc. When thinking about products or services intended for an end customer, several types of 
roadmaps can be very helpful.
1.7.1 Product Roadmaps
For product-driven companies (Hardware or Software, B2B or B2C), a product roadmap is essential to 
organizational alignment. A product roadmap illustrates high-level product strategy and demonstrates how 
a product will evolve over time. It includes upcoming features and the nitty-gritty of product innovation, 
like technical considerations and resourcing. A product roadmap is a powerful communication tool that 
product managers use to align different departments on one vision. It empowers the sales team to lead 
informed product conversations with prospects and the marketing team to plan campaigns that align with 
future product releases and product line extensions. Refer to Figure 1.19.
Release Plan
A release plan is a tactical document designed to capture and track the features planned for an upcom￾ing release. A release plan usually spans only a few months and is typically an internal working document 
for product and development teams. Differences between a roadmap and a release plan are shown in 
Table 1.7.
FIGURE 1.19 Multiple product roadmap. 
Source: Created using ProductPlan.PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 31
1.7.2 Kanban boards
Kanban (English: signboard) started as a visual scheduling system and is best known as part of the Toyota 
production system. The Kanban board has become one of the most useful Agile project management 
tools, used widely by Agile teams and often referred to as Agile task boards. Kanban boards use Cards, 
Columns, Swimlanes, and WIP Limits to enable teams to visualize and manage their workflows effectively.
• Kanban cards: This is the visual representation of tasks. Each card contains information about the 
task and its status, such as deadline, assignee, description, etc.
• Kanban columns: Each column on the board represents a different stage of your workflow. The 
cards go through the workflow until their full completion.
• Work-in-progress limits: They restrict the maximum number of tasks in the different stages of the 
workflow. Limiting WIP allows you to finish work items faster by helping your team focus only on cur￾rent tasks.
• Kanban swimlanes: These are horizontal lanes used to separate different activities, teams, classes 
of service, and more.
• Commitment point: A commitment marks a point in the work process where a work item is ready 
to be pulled into the system.
• Delivery point: The point in the workflow where work items are considered finished.
A frequently used roadmap in Kanban format consists of three columns for backlog work (available 
work to be done), work that is in progress, and work that is done. An example is shown in Figure 1.20.
TABLE 1.7 Product roadmap vs. release plan
Roadmap Release plan
High-level overview Detailed view of the specific steps
Covers a longer time frame – potentially 
multiple releases to customers
Covers a shorter time frame – the immediate release 
to customers
Mainly used to communicate with internal 
stakeholders
Often used to create alignment between product and 
engineering teams and set expectations with customers
Focuses on why you’re doing something based 
on user insights and strategy
Focuses on what you’re doing and when you’re committing 
to having it completed
Backlog 5 4 In Progress Done 3
Feature E Feature B Feature A
Feature D
Feature T
Feature C
Feature M
Feature P
Feature F
Feature G
Feature H
Feature ... +
+
FIGURE 1.20 Roadmap example in Kanban format. 
Source: Created using Miro.32 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
1.7.3 Technology Roadmaps
Technology roadmaps are an important complement to the product roadmap in aligning technology 
planning and development to overall planning for the launch of a single product or a range of products. 
Technology roadmapping is particularly important in organizations that have a strong strategic focus on 
technology in underpinning the innovation strategy and new product innovation.
Figure 1.21 shows an example of a technology roadmap that shows work in four areas (operations, 
infrastructure, compliance, and security) for a new product.
1.7.4 Platform Roadmaps
While a product roadmap focuses on what is envisioned for a product, a platform roadmap describes the 
high-level plan for developing a platform. Platforms are discussed more in Section 2.7.3.
Platform roadmaps like the one in Figure 1.22 are critical when creating software or firmware platforms 
that other developers will use to build solutions. Such platforms speed up product development, reduce 
risk, and increase consistency.
Q1
Company-wide departmental
documentation audit
Migrate departmental documentation
to new knowledge base
Knowledge base provider
research
Migration timeline/strategy
Internal
policy audit
3rd-party application audit
Implement SSO
Internal application audit
Document risks according to cloud
provider regulatory frameworks
Prepare cloud & onsite infrastructures:
restructure on-site networking, install physical cloud data
transport devices, architect cloud infrastructure, validate
hybrid-cloud connection
Audit existing applications’
compatibility Departmental QA
Functional validation audit
Deploy services Infrastructure
integration Migrate assets
Update any discrepancies found
Update, document, and implement security policies
External
audit
Cloud NACL audit
Cloud IAM audit
Penetration tests
Internal
documentation
consolidation
Hybrid cloud
migration
ISO certi
cation
Hybrid-cloud
access
SAML SSO
integration
Security Compliance Infrastructure Operations
Q2 Q3 Q4
FIGURE 1.21 Example of a technology roadmap. 
Source: Created by LucidChart.PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 33
1.7.5 Best Practices for Using Roadmaps
• Roadmaps set expectations with stakeholders. Regardless of how many times tentative, estimate, 
etc. are used on a roadmap, stakeholders may interpret the information as a commitment. Conse￾quently, be careful about how timelines and specific features are shown on roadmaps.
• Information on a roadmap must be updated when new information is learned. For example, if new 
market research shows that a product feature should no longer be implemented, remove it from the 
roadmap and communicate the reason with stakeholders.
• Use a single repository for roadmaps so that when an update is made, it is automatically pushed to 
all stakeholders who have access to the roadmap. The common but poor practice of using Excel or 
PowerPoint to create a roadmap and sending the file to stakeholders makes version control very dif￾ficult. You’ll never know when a stakeholder is making decisions based on an out-of-date roadmap file.
• Share roadmaps carefully. Roadmaps, by their very nature, contain a lot of information about your 
company’s strategies, plans, etc. Their power can also be their weakness in that they can cause 
problems if not carefully controlled. We’re not necessarily talking about corporate espionage, but 
even within your own company, an improperly controlled roadmap presentation can cause confusion, 
concern, and could set back your efforts.
• Be sure to mark your roadmaps as “Confidential – Do Not Distribute” whenever you do share them.
• Consider having versions of your roadmaps with different levels of granularity. This will help you 
ensure they are consistent, whether used within your company or outside. It also lets you share a 
high-level version with non-employees and more detailed versions with those directly impacted by 
the roadmap.
• Be sure your roadmaps are developed collaboratively and get feedback early and often. For a road￾map to be effective, it has to be fully supported by those it affects. Making sure the team fully buys 
into the roadmap will help ensure its effectiveness.
FIGURE 1.22 Example of a platform roadmap. 
Source: Created with ProductPlan.34 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
1.8 PROJECT MANAGEMENT
This section provides a general overview of project management as applied to product innovation. While 
project and product management are distinct disciplines with separate bodies of knowledge, product 
managers make use of project management principles. More in-depth information on project management 
can be gained through reference to the Project Management Institute and its associated reference material 
and qualifications (PMBOK®, 2021).
1.8.1 Project Management in the Context of Product Innovation
“The definition of a project includes a specific start and stop date for the work as well as achieving goals 
with a temporary team” (PMBOK®, 2021). Although the overall process of developing and commercializing 
a new product may be seen as a single project, it can also be viewed as a composite of a number of small 
projects, for example:
• Generating a list of potential new opportunities.
• Analyzing the commercial potential.
The five steps in a project are defined in the guide as (PMBOK®, 2021):
1. Initiating
2. Planning
3. Executing
4. Monitoring and controlling
5. Closing
These steps are somewhat different than those defined for a structured product innovation process 
(such as Stage-Gate®), primarily because the product innovation process defines the overall roadmap 
from ideation to commercialization, while project management defines the structure and detail required to 
achieve the individual goals within the product innovation process and, in turn, the overall goal of success￾ful commercialization.
1.8.2 The Triple Constraint
One of the most common challenges with any project is managing the Triple Constraint – scope, schedule, 
and budget – as shown in Figure 1.23.
Schedule/Time
Scope/Performance
Budget/Cost
FIGURE 1.23 The Triple Constraint. 
Source: Dobson (2004) / Berrett–Koehler.PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 35
The Triple Constraint is normally displayed as an equilateral triangle. If one of the core elements of a 
project changes, the project becomes unbalanced, e.g., if the scope of a project is increased, the sched￾ule and the budget will need to be adjusted. The Triple Constraint emphasizes the very important point that 
scope, schedule, and budget of a project are highly intertwined.
1.8.3 Project and Product Scope
The Project Management Institute provides two uses for the term scope (PMBOK®, 2021):
1. Project scope: “The work that needs to be accomplished to deliver a product, service, or result with 
the specified features and functions.”
2. Product scope: “The features and functions that characterize a product, service, or result.”
In product innovation, the scope (both in terms of project and product) is provided in the product inno￾vation charter, a tool presented in the chapter on process.
1.8.4 The Schedule
The schedule includes the activities and key milestones to successfully achieve the project goal. Project 
schedules are often constructed and illustrated using a bar chart or a Gantt chart, as shown in Figure 1.24. 
In any project, certain activities cannot begin before other activities have been completed. These activities 
are defined as critical path items whose delay will directly impact the budgeted completion of the project.
1.8.5 Critical Path Method (CPM)
In a project plan, the critical path is the longest path from start to finish or the path without any slack. Thus, 
the path corresponding to the shortest time in which the project can be completed. Refer to Figure 1.24.
FIGURE 1.24 The Gantt chart and critical path36 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
1.8.6 Schedule Compression
In many cases, a project’s end date is fixed, for example, the new product launch date. If a project falls 
behind, it will be necessary to seek ways to compress the schedule without a significant impact on the 
scope. Basically, there are two ways to achieve schedule compression:
1. Add resources (and cost) or,
2. Do tasks in parallel that otherwise would have been done in series.
1.8.7 Budget
The project budget is defined as the anticipated cost required to complete the scope of the work on time. 
There are several ways to prepare a budget:
• Bottom-up: Identify all individual cost elements and sum these across the project.
• Parametric: Infer the cost of the project from similar projects or other available data, applying an 
average, such as worst, best, and expected cost.
• Historical data: Use specific cost data from past projects, such as prototyping or market research, 
as a basis for budget estimation.
• Company-specific methods: larger companies may have specific models and methods that are 
applied to project budgeting.PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 37
1.9 RISK MANAGEMENT
1.9.1 What is Risk Management?
Project risk is “an uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or negative effect on one or 
more project objectives such as scope, schedule, cost, or quality” (PMBOK®, 2021).
Risk management is the identification, assessment, and prioritization of risks followed by coordinated 
and economical application of resources to minimize, monitor, and control the probability and/or impact of 
unfortunate events or to maximize the realization of opportunities.
Project risk management is an important aspect of project management. Risk management is one of 
the ten knowledge areas defined in PMBOK®. Project risk can be defined as an unforeseen event or activ￾ity that can impact the project’s progress, result, or outcome in a positive or negative way. A risk can be 
assessed using two factors: impact and probability.
The causes of risk can come from various sources, including a requirement, such as legal requirements 
imposed by laws or regulations; an assumption, such as the conditions in the market (which may change); 
a constraint, such as number of personnel available to work on any given phase of the project; or a condi￾tion, such as the maturity of the organization’s project management practices.
Known risks are those which can be identified and analyzed beforehand in such a way as to be able to 
(1) reduce the likelihood of their occurrence or (2) plan a risk response to reduce their impact in the event 
that they occur. Unknown risks, on the other hand, are those that are not identified beforehand. If they are 
not identified, they cannot be analyzed, and of course, cannot be managed proactively.
There are four possible responses to a risk, depending on whether there is low or high probability of it 
occurring and whether the financial impact, if it does occur, is either high or low:
1. Avoid: for high-probability, high-impact events.
2. Transfer (such as purchasing insurance): for low-probability, high-impact events.
3. Mitigate: for high-probability, low-impact events.
4. Accept: for low-probability, low-impact events.
1.9.2 Risk Management Steps
According to PMBOK® (2021), risk management includes six main steps, in summary:
1. Planning for risk management: Start with a risk management plan – plan the work, work the plan; 
how risks are managed.
2. Risk identification: Use prior documentation – such as the charter, budgets, schedules, plans, etc. 
Have the right people involved who know risks; have a risk owner. Use methods such as brainstorm￾ing, interviews, Delphi technique, and root cause analysis.
3. Qualitative risk analysis: Analyze probability and impact. Calculate and rank the risk score.
4. Quantitative risk analysis: Used for important risks, which can be quantified (limited number of risks). 
Quantitative models include discount cash flow and internal rate of return with sensitivity analyses.
5. Risk response planning: Strategies include avoid (don’t take risky actions); transfer to somebody 
else (take insurance, set up contracts); mitigate (make changes to reduce probability); accept (let it 
happen, establish contingency reserves such as cost, schedule, and performance).
6. Risk monitoring and control: Reassess new and existing risks. Use audits, variance, and 
trend analysis.
1.9.3 Risk Management in Product Innovation Projects
In Chapter  4, we introduce the new product process as one of risk and reward. A key element of this 
process is the recognition of the level of risk associated with the development and commercialization 
of the new product and taking appropriate steps to manage this risk. The decision-making gates in the 38 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
Stage-Gate® process are a critical element of risk management, where informed decisions are made on 
the basis of sound information and data. The outcomes of the new product’s process are impacted by two 
categories of risk:
Project-based risks, which include:
• Resource availability: the right resource at the right place and at the right time.
• Finance availability: sufficient to cover project and capital expenses.
• Resource capability: the types and numbers of available people with the appropriate knowledge 
and skills.
• Reliability of information: access to and level of confidence in the information necessary for reli￾able decision-making.
• Scope definition: clarity and communication of scope to ensure alignment of all people associated 
with the project.
Product-based risks, which include:
• Causes harm to customers.
• Fails to deliver promised benefits.
• Fails to meet regulatory requirements.
• Does not meet customers’ expectations with regards to aesthetics, features, functionality, or price.
Risk management in product innovation should be viewed as a combination of the PMBOK six￾step process and the application of the decision practices focused on the innovation strategy, the prod￾uct innovation charter, the specific new product process, and the underpinning tools that enable sound 
decision-making.
1.9.4 Decision Trees
A decision tree is a decision support tool that uses a tree-like graph or model of decisions and the possible 
consequences, including event outcomes, resources, and costs. It provides an effective structure to lay 
out options and investigate the possible outcomes of choosing those options. Decision trees help to form 
a balanced picture of the risks and rewards associated with each possible course of action. Decision trees 
can be developed by hand or using one of a number of software tools available. An example is shown in 
Figure 1.25.
New
product
Launch
12 months
Launch
6 months
80% market
share
0.7
0.3
0.5
0.5
40% market
share
80% market
share
40% market
share
0.8
0.2
Sales
potential
$3,000,000
$180,000
$1,200,000
$1,200,000
$480,000
FIGURE 1.25 Example of a decision treePRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 39
1.10 METRICS AND KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
Measuring product innovation performance is a key function of product managers, both in reporting on 
the return on product innovation and for continuous improvement on processes and practices that lead to 
greater product innovation success.
Key performance indicators (KPIs) are measurable values that show you how effective the organization 
(or group) is at achieving business objectives. In contrast, metrics are different in that they simply track the 
status of a specific business process. In short, KPIs track whether you hit business objectives/targets, and 
metrics track processes. All KPIs are metrics, but not all metrics are KPIs.
1.10.1 The Balanced Scorecard
The principle of the Balanced Scorecard was developed by Kaplan and Norton (1992). The Balanced 
Scorecard provides managers with a set of measures that give a fast but comprehensive view of the busi￾ness. The Balanced Scorecard includes financial measures that tell the results of actions already taken. 
It complements the financial measures with operational measures on customer satisfaction, internal pro￾cesses, and the organization’s innovation and improvement activities – operational measures that are the 
drivers of future financial performance.
Kaplan and Norton (1992) drew an analogy between organizational management and flying a plane. 
“Think of the Balanced Scorecard as the dials and indicators in an airplane cockpit. For the complex task 
of navigating and flying an airplane, pilots need detailed information about many aspects of the flight. They 
need information on fuel, airspeed, altitude, bearing, destination, and other indicators that summarize the 
current and predicted environment. Reliance on one instrument can be fatal. Similarly, the complexity of 
managing an organization today requires that managers be able to view performance in several areas 
simultaneously.”
The aim of the Balanced Scorecard, as designed by Kaplan and Norton, was “to align business activi￾ties to the vision and strategy of the business, improve internal and external communications, and moni￾tor business performance against strategic goals.” The Balanced Scorecard provides a relevant range of 
financial and non-financial information that supports effective business management.
The Basis of the Balanced Scorecard
Kaplan and Norton (1992) devised a framework based on four perspectives – financial, customer, internal 
processes, and organizational capability – each aligned with business vision and strategy. See Figure 1.26. 
The Balanced Scorecard is based on the principle that no single measure can provide the full picture of 
the organization’s health. A composite of a number of measures provides far more comprehensive and 
meaningful insight into the organization for learning and continuous improvement. The specific measures 
that are applied to each perspective will vary according to the organization’s vision and strategy and its 
strengths and weaknesses. Examples of specific measures are presented in Figure 1.26.
1.10.2 Product Innovation Metrics
Before discussing the application of the Balanced Scorecard approach to product innovation, it is impor￾tant to define further the terms Key Performance Indicator (KPI) and metrics, specifically in the context of 
product innovation.
As defined earlier, KPIs are measurable values that relate to business goals, whereas metrics are 
designed to track the status of business processes that contribute to successful KPI outcomes.
The official definition of performance metrics for product innovation is:
“Performance metrics are a set of measurements to track product innovation and to allow an 
organization to measure the impact of process improvement over time. These measures generally 40 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
vary by organization but may include measures characterizing both aspects of process, such as 
time to market and duration of particular process stages, as well as outcomes from product inno￾vation such as the number of products commercialized per year and percentage sales due to new 
products” (Appendix A, PDMA glossary).
Metrics for Reporting vs. Continuous Improvement
In many organizations, product innovation metrics are used as a key tool for management to report the 
returns on product innovation investment and to justify future investment. Metrics commonly used by sen￾ior management for reporting include:
• Vitality index (% of current year’s sales from product developed over the past “n” years)
• R&D expenses as a percent of revenue
• Break-even time, or time to profitability
• Number of patents filed and awarded
• Number of new products released over a specific time period.
Although these metrics are useful to justify investment in product innovation, they do not necessarily 
lead to learning and continuous improvement.
Let’s take the simple example of weight control. If you set a goal to reduce weight, you can stand on 
the scales and find your current weight. But the scale measurement, although useful in giving your current 
weight, doesn’t provide you with any direction for losing weight. And so, it is with the reporting metrics for 
product innovation listed above. You have a measure of the current (or past) situation, but this doesn’t pro￾vide you with a plan for future improvement.
Looking for Causal Relationships
If we can identify the causes or contributors to the final outcomes we have measured (e.g., break-even time), 
we can address these causes directly. SaaS product managers examining the retention rate for a product 
Financial
Customer
• Employee churn rate
• Employee core
competency profile
• Employee satisfaction
• Six sigma level
• Unit costs
• Machine downtime
• Energy consumption
• New product time to
market
• Revenue
• Net profit
• Gross profit margin
• Sales
• EBIT
• ROI
• Customer retention
• Market share
• Customer complaints
• Brand equity
Examples of measures for each of the
balanced scorecard perspectives
Organizational
capacity
Internal
processes
Financial Customer
Four perspectives of a balanced scorecard
Organizational
capacity
Vision &
strategy
Internal
processes
FIGURE 1.26 The four perspectives of a traditional Balanced ScorecardPRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 41
call this the activation metric, which is the key metric that indicates higher retention can be expected. For 
Facebook, their activation metric is the number of friends made during the first two weeks of use.
For our weight-loss analogy, there is ample evidence as to the contributors to weight loss. Addressing 
these contributing factors will directly lead to weight loss (a better scale measurement):
• Eat less and/or better
• Do more exercise
• Drink less alcohol
By measuring these contributing factors, we have a basis for action. So, we could measure the num￾ber of steps we take per day as an indicator of exercise. Setting a target number of steps per day, and 
achieving this target, should lead us to weight loss. Using target metrics for each of the three contributing 
factors will probably lead to even greater improvement (Anderson, 2015).
What are the Contributing Factors for Product Development Improvement?
There is a wealth of research carried out over recent years pointing to the key factors for product develop￾ment success. PDMA literature provides an excellent reference source:
• The Comparative Performance Assessment Studies (CPAS)
• The Journal of Product Innovation Management
• Presentations by the Outstanding Corporate Innovation winners
It is the responsibility of all involved in the product, especially the product managers, to research these 
key success factors and relate them to their own organization.
Following are some of the success factors identified in PDMA’s 2012 CPAS – focusing on what differ￾entiates the best companies from the rest (Markham & Lee, 2013). These success factors are categorized 
under the key headings of “doing the right things,” “doing things right,” and “culture, climate, and organiza￾tion” as shown in Figure 1.27 and previously discussed in the Introduction to this book.
From this single research study, we have a range of factors that have been linked to product develop￾ment success. Just as we suggested measuring exercise as a contributing metric for weight loss, so too 
Doing the right things Doing things right
The best companies:
• Spend more time per project,
but on fewer projects.
• Adopt a first-to-market strategy.
• Establish global strategies for
market and operations.
• Monitor new technology.
• Recognize the importance of
intellectual property.
• Have a clear portfolio
management strategy.
• Have formal idea generation
practices.
The best companies:
• Use a range of engineering, R&D,
and design tools (critical path,
FMEA, Lean NPD, TRIZ, etc.).
• Use qualitative market research
tools to identify customer needs.
• Use social media to gather
information.
• Have a customer feedback
system.
• Use a formal NPD process—but
with flexibility.
• Involve senior management.
• Focus on team development and
practices.
The best companies:
• Involve senior management.
• Focus on team development and
practices.
• Use cross-functional teams.
• Have good recognition and
reward systems.
• Support external collaboration
and open innovation.
Culture, climate,
and organization
FIGURE 1.27 Success factors for product innovation42 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
can we use a selection of these success factors as a basis for performance measures that are linked to, or 
contribute to, product development success.
1. Is the organization doing the right product innovation? Does it have a clear innovation strategy 
embedded with the overall business strategy? Does it have well-developed and applied portfolio 
management? Does it have the right KPIs and metrics in place to track strategic decisions and out￾comes? Does it learn and seek continuous improvement based on these metrics?
2. Is the organization using the right processes? Does it have a product innovation process that is 
appropriate to its company and products? Does it have a governance structure to ensure consistent 
application of the process or processes? Is the right team selection and development structure in 
place? Is there strong commitment and contribution from senior management?
3. Does the organizational structure and climate support its product innovation efforts? Does it actively 
foster the development and maintenance of a creative and innovative culture? Does it support active team 
development practices? Are there appropriate recognition and reward practices in place?
Table 1.8 presents a summary of specific KPIs and metrics within the context of the simplified product 
innovation framework.
TABLE 1.8 Examples of innovation KPIs and metrics
Innovation KPI’s
Metrics
Doing the right 
product 
innovation (PI)
Doing product 
innovation (PI) right
Culture, climate, 
and organization
Percentage revenue or profits from product 
innovation over the past three to fiveyears; 
often described as the vitality index. 
Targets vary with best practice of 20–25%.
Clearly defined 
innovation strategy 
linked to overall 
business strategy.
A well-developed PI 
process – appropriate to 
company and products.
Well-developed 
team selection and 
development.
Return on investment: Either individual or new 
products or the entire development portfolio. 
Targets will depend on specific “hurdle rates” 
established for individual companies or 
specific products or product categories.
Innovation strategy 
clearly communicated 
to all staff.
A formal idea generation 
process.
Cross-functional 
teams.
Development and/or growth of specific 
target markets: For example, a target to 
increase exported products to 20% of 
sales or to capture a 10% share of the 
“recent mothers” market.
A pool of new ideas. Strong voice of customer 
input throughout 
development.
A positive climate 
for innovation.
Develop a new product category based on 
a recently acquired technology to achieve 
a 20% contribution to EBIT in threeyears.
Well-structured and 
managed portfolio 
management.
Sound business case 
analysis.
Evidence of a 
“learning” culture.
Sound technology 
planning and 
roadmapping.
Fit for practice tools to 
support all stages of 
development.
Strong support for 
ongoing training.
Sound stakeholder 
and competitor 
intelligence.
Gates achieved on time. Strong support 
from senior 
management.
Break-even cycle time. Well-managed 
and appropriate 
recognition and 
reward practices.PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 43
Success Factor Examples
Examples of success factors and associated contributing metrics for “doing the right things,” “doing things 
right,” and “organization, climate, and culture” are shown in Figures 1.28, 1.29, and 1.30.
SUCCESS FACTOR
• Formal idea generation process
• Monitor new technologies
• Clear portfolio management strategy
CONTRIBUTING METRICS
• Number of ideas generated
• Success rate
• Number of reports on new technologies
• Number of meetings where new technologies are 
discussed
• Number of ideas generated 
• Success rate
FIGURE 1.28 Example of success factors and contributing metrics for “doing the right things”
SUCCESS FACTOR
• Use of market research tools for
consumer input
• Senior management involvement
• Formal NPD process
CONTRIBUTING METRICS
• Number of market research reports
• Number of customer visits
• Number of project meetings attended by senior manager
• Number of references to NPD by senior manager in
company reporting
• NPD processes actively used across organization
• Number of gates achieved on time
FIGURE 1.29 Example of success factors and contributing metrics for “doing things right”
SUCCESS FACTOR
• Use of cross-functional teams
• Open innovation – external
collaboration
• Appropriate recognition and reward
process
CONTRIBUTING METRICS.
• Representation of different functions at project meetings
• Number of sessions on developing a high performing team
• Number of projects involving external parties 
• Number of external collaborations 
• Performance rewards that promote individual and team
performance
• Examples of recognition and celebration of success
FIGURE 1.30 Example of success factors and contributing metrics for organization, climate, 
and culture44 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
1.10.3 Developing a Balanced Scorecard for Product Innovation
The following process can be used to develop a Balanced Scorecard for product innovation:
1. Form a cross-functional product innovation improvement team, preferably with senior management 
representation and support. This team should be charged with establishing the balanced scoreboard 
framework as a tool both for reporting on innovation performance against strategy and for learning 
as a basis for continuous improvement.
2. Identify the KPIs that truly represent the important contributions of product innovation to achieving 
overall business goals. Ensure that there is an objective and quantifiable measure associated with 
each KPI, e.g., a percentage or a dollar value.
3. Benchmark the organization either with other organizations or with reported surveys on best prac￾tices. Identify what areas of current innovation practice are weak relative to the benchmark data. 
For example, is there a demonstrable lack of senior management support? Is there a lack of cross￾functional representation in innovation teams? Is there a lack of technical capability? Is there a mis￾match between what customers are asking for and the attributes of newly developed products?
4. Select a small number of metrics to focus on (four to six). Do not select too many, as this will lead to 
a lack of focus and attention.
5. Monitor each metric based on quantifiable measures. For example, which functions are represented 
at innovation meetings? How often is senior management represented? Other measures may include 
an innovation climate survey, or the number of new ideas generated monthly.
6. Compare these data with benchmarked data and work toward continuous improvement. For exam￾ple, if specific functions are consistently lacking in team meetings, seek to rectify this. If there is a 
mismatch between product attributes and customer requirements, focus on increasing the voice of 
the customer research.
7. As specific metrics are improved significantly, these can be replaced with new metrics.
8. The overall goal is to improve the organization’s processes and practices that have been proven to 
lead to greater product innovation success.
1.10.4 Benchmarking and Continuous Improvement
Learning and continuous improvement are essential for ongoing success in product innovation. 
Throughout this book, we present the basic principles, processes, and tools that underpin product innova￾tion success. But, in themselves, these basic principles are just that, “basic principles.” All organizations 
are different and demand their own specific application of these principles and a unified approach to learn￾ing and continuous improvement. Benchmarking provides an excellent basis for this learning and continu￾ous improvement process.
What is Benchmarking?
Benchmarking is a tool for assessing and comparing performance to achieve continuous improvement. 
Benchmarking usually involves measuring performance against competitors in the same area of interest – 
in our case, product innovation.
An approach to product innovation benchmarking
The following are basic benchmarking steps leading to learning and continuous improvement:
1. Form a benchmarking team. Product innovation is multifunctional and, for true success, requires a 
common understanding and commitment across the organization. A benchmarking team, comprising 
cross-functional representation, ensures both agreement on the current strengths and weaknesses 
in product innovation and the commitment to the ways to resolve these strengths and weaknesses.PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 45
2. Identify current strengths and weaknesses. Appendix 1.A provides a questionnaire relating to 
specific areas of best practice in product innovation. This questionnaire should be completed by all 
members of the benchmarking team, and preferably wider if possible. Almost invariably, representa￾tives from different functions will have diverging views on performance. Collation of the results and 
subsequent discussion leads to stronger cross-functional cooperation in the continuous improve￾ment of the organization’s product innovation processes and practices.
3. Performance metrics: As previously discussed in Section 1.10.2, performance metrics provide a 
valuable tool for identifying areas for improvement.
4. External benchmarking: A comparison with other organizations will provide insights to how spe￾cific practices and processes can be improved. Although comparison with organizations with a 
similar focus is often recommended, valuable learnings can also be gained from outside the normal 
industry sector. Clearly, obtaining deep insights into a benchmarked organization requires a high level 
of agreement and cooperation which can seldom be found with competitors.
5. External surveys: A number of surveys have been carried out to determine the success factors for 
product innovation or to identify what separates the “best” from the “rest” in product innovation per￾formance, including Cooper and Kleinschmidt (1995, 2010), Markham and Lee (2013), and Bsteiler 
and Noble (2023).
6. Bringing it all together: The data and knowledge gathered in (1–5) above will provide the basis 
for identifying the areas to address for improvement in product innovation. This whole process, 
facilitated by the cross-functional team, provides the platform for immediate action and for ongoing 
learning and improvement.
Anderson (2008) provides an example of the application of benchmarking, demonstrating the approach 
above.
Key findings from PDMA’s 2021 Best Practice Survey, Bsteiler and Noble (2023):
• Firms must continually evolve their NPD capabilities just to “stay in the game” as the business and 
technology environments change.
• No one single practice is required for greater innovation performance. Rather, the Best firms are bet￾ter at employing and skillfully combining a variety of NPD capabilities and practices.
• The Best firms are much more likely to have a new product strategy that encourages radical inno￾vation, is oriented toward risk-taking and long-term, and strives for growth through entering new 
markets and new technologies. They also spend more than the Rest on developing all types of inno￾vations.
• The Best are more proactive in dealing with crises such as the global COVID-19 pandemic.46 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
1.11 IN SUMMARY
This chapter has focused on the role of product innovation management.
What is product innovation?
• Product innovation is defined as “the creation and subsequent introduction of a good or service that 
is either new or an improved version of previous goods or services.”
• The scope of product innovation – from strategy direction, through portfolio management, from indi￾vidual project management to commercialization  –  implies a high degree of complexity. It is influ￾enced by a wide range of inputs and variables.
Managing product innovation
• The role of managing product innovation can lie in a range of job titles, from the CEO of small to 
medium-sized companies, VP of innovation in large companies, product innovation manager, brand 
manager, product manager, and more. The role of the product manager is growing in prominence 
around the world.
• The job of a product manager is to discover a product that is valuable, usable, and feasible. The role 
of a product manager lies at the intersection of business decisions, user experiences, and technol￾ogy.
• A product manager is not a project manager. Project managers manage the process of creating a 
project or service. Product managers commercialize solutions to solve customer problems and/or 
meet a market need/demand.
• The principles and fundamentals of product innovation are common across most industries and prod￾uct types. Differences lie in the specific strategies, processes, and tools applied. The key to successful 
product innovation management is to understand the basic principles and fundamentals and recognize 
and implement fit-for-purpose strategies, processes, and tools for the specific organization.
Managing the product life cycle
• Most products have a life cycle that follows the stages of development, introduction, growth, matu￾rity, decline, and retirement.
• In general, the product life cycles from introduction to decline have become shorter over recent 
years, placing greater pressure on organizations to develop new products and regenerate existing 
ones.
• Product management in terms of all elements of the marketing mix – product, price, promotion, and 
place – is determined by the stage of a product’s life cycle.
• Product managers have a key role in guiding products through the life cycle.
• In the early stages of the product life cycle, the diffusion of innovation is very important. This is the 
process by which new innovations are accepted and begin to achieve market success. Products 
need to navigate the chasm between the introduction stage and the growth stage.
• Product and technology roadmaps are fundamental tools in product innovation planning.
• Although there is a fundamental difference between the roles of project and product managers, prod￾uct innovation management, while focused on product, does require the application of project man￾agement principles and tools. Complementing the New Product Development Professional (NPDP, 
from PDMA) certification with the Project Management Professional (PMP, from PMI) certification is 
ideal.
Measuring product innovation performance with a focus on continuous improvement
• Product innovation performance metrics that measure and report on the outcomes of product inno￾vation are essential to demonstrating the return on investment.PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 47
• Although the application of performance metrics for reporting is extremely important, their application 
to continuous improvement in product innovation processes is even more important to the long-term 
growth of an organization.
• Sound knowledge of the best practices for product innovation and regular benchmarking, both inter￾nal and external, is essential to high-performing product innovation management.
• Benchmarking against the processes and practices of other organizations can provide invaluable 
input to complement internal performance metrics in support of the process of continuous improve￾ment.48 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
1.A PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT PRACTICE QUESTIONS
1. Jane is the product manager for a toy manufacturing and marketing company. The company has just 
embarked on developing a new product targeted at children between 8 and 12years of age. Jane is 
charged with forming a cross-functional team to complete an early-stage feasibility analysis of the prod￾uct’s potential. She has chosen representatives from marketing, technical, R&D, and finance to be part of 
the team. What important function has Jane failed to include?
A. Repairs and maintenance.
B. Manufacturing.
C. Board of Directors.
D. Customer.
2. Key difference between old-school “go-to-market” processes and new-school is?
A. More leadership.
B. Strong product manager.
C. Vision-driven.
D. More iterative.
3. What is a set of measurements to track product development?
A. TRIZ.
B. Decision trees.
C. Metrics.
D. The critical path.
4. What illustrates high-level product strategy and demonstrates how a product will evolve over time?
A. Product roadmap.
B. Product dashboard.
C. Perceptual map.
D. Product life cycle.
5. Product management actions taken during the product life cycle are first determined by which of the 
following?
A. Life cycle assessment.
B. Sustainability plans.
C. Product, price, promotion, and place.
D. Phase of the product’s life cycle.
6. In the introduction stage of the product life cycle, which of the following product pricing strategies is most 
commonly used?
A. Penetration pricing.
B. Skimming pricing.
C. Either A or B.
D. Competitive pricing.
7. What type of consumer is most likely to purchase a product in its introduction stage?
A. Laggards.
B. Early adopters.
C. Innovators.
D. Early majority.PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 49
8. Jack is a product manager responsible for a product that has clearly entered the decline stage of its life 
cycle. What strategy should Jack adopt?
A. Seek to reduce costs and continue to sell to a loyal market.
B. Rejuvenate the product by adding new features and finding new users.
C. Discontinue the product.
D. Any of A, B, or C.
9. In the management of a product portfolio, it is important to:
A. Have a good mix of products across the introduction, growth, and maturity stages of the product life 
cycle.
B. Focus strongly on products in the introduction and growth stages of the product life cycle.
C. Place significant emphasis on the product in the maturity stage of the product life cycle.
D. Place significant emphasis on products in the growth and maturity stages of the product life cycle.
10. In reviewing a product’s contribution to the company’s product portfolio, the product manager observes 
that sales growth has slowed significantly, and a significant number of products have entered the mar￾ket. Price reductions have been necessary resulting in lower profit margins. What stage of the product 
life cycle has this product reached?
A. Growth
B. Maturity
C. Retirement
D. Decline
Answers to practice questions: product innovation management
1. B
2. D
3. C
4. A
5. D
6. C
7. B
8. D
9. A
10. B50 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
1.B A QUESTIONNAIRE FOR EVALUATING AN ORGANIZATION’S NEW 
PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT PRACTICES AND PROCESSES
Introduction
This self-evaluation questionnaire is designed to focus on the key areas which define success in product 
innovation management. Although reasonably comprehensive, the questionnaire is not intended to cover 
completely all issues that need to be addressed to achieve a high level of product innovation performance 
(Figure 1.B.1). It is intended that the questions will encourage an organization to critically examine its prod￾uct innovation management, its strengths, weaknesses, and opportunities for improvement.
Complete the Following Questionnaire
1. Respond to each question by circling a number from 1 to 5 in the associated box.
1 2 3 4 5
Not at all Always
2. In the summary section at the end of the questionnaire, add the scores for each major section. Briefly 
describe how the overall performance of product innovation could be improved and what specific 
areas to focus on.
3. There is no optimal or target score for this questionnaire. It is designed to encourage organizations to 
critically evaluate how they do new product innovation. It also provides an excellent basis for identify￾ing specific metrics that will lead to improved product innovation outcomes.
Innovation
strategy
goals
Doing the right
innovation
Doing innovation
right
Measuring performance
Continuous improvement
Culture and Climate
Organization
FIGURE 1.B.1 A model for product innovationPRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 51
SECTION 1: DOING THE RIGHT PRODUCT INNOVATION
1.1 Our company has a well-developed overall business strategy. 12345
 1.2 This strategy is well communicated and understood by all staff. 12345
1.3 Product innovation is an integral and clearly identified ele￾ment of the overall company strategy.
12345
1.4 The company strategy provides a clear context for an NDP, 
which defines the approach and direction for all product 
innovation.
12345
1.5 Our company has a product innovation strategy which pro￾vides a comprehensive direction for all aspects of product 
innovation including:
• Expected contribution to company growth targets;
• Product emphasis;
• Market emphasis;
• Product innovation risk profile;
• Intellectual property strategy;
• Core internal capability; and
• Use of external capability.
12345
1.6 The product innovation strategy provides clear and mean￾ingful direction for prioritization of all product innovation pro￾jects.
12345
1.7 The product innovation strategy is widely communicated 
and understood by all company staff. 12345
1.8 All staff involved in a product innovation project can articu￾late the strategic relevance of that project. 12345
1.9 The product innovation strategy is supported by a technology 
plan. 12345
1.10 The technology plan is benchmarked, where possible, 
against competitors. 12345
1.11 Our company has a well-developed process for technology 
planning and roadmapping. 12345
1.12 Our company has a formal set of criteria for project selection 
which is rigorously applied. 12345
1.13 Our company has a process for project prioritization to 
ensure best utilization of finance and resources. 12345
1.14 Our company has a well-defined framework for defining the 
optimal product innovation portfolio. 12345
1.15 Our company has an ongoing process for product portfolio 
analysis which is used to regularly review the product inno￾vation portfolio.
1234552 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
SECTION 2: DOING PRODUCT INNOVATION RIGHT
2.1 A detailed stakeholder analysis is carried out at the beginning 
of the NDP project. 12345
2.2 Regular stakeholder input is sought throughout the product 
innovation process. 12345
2.3 All elements of the 4Ps (product, price, promotion, and place) 
are integrated into the product innovation process from an 
early stage.
12345
2.4 Clear criteria are used for the selection of product innova￾tion projects. 12345
2.5 A well-defined selection process, involving all key parties, is 
used for all product innovation projects. 12345
2.6 A well-defined product concept is developed early in the 
product innovation process. This is communicated to, and 
agreed upon, by all key parties.
12345
2.7 A sound project plan is developed, involving all key par￾ties and including key activities, timelines, resourcing, and 
budgeting.
12345
2.8 Key project roles are defined before the project begins. These 
may include the project leader, key team members, and an 
overall senior management steering committee.
12345
2.9 A business case is developed early in the product innovation 
process, including an estimated return on investment based 
on sound estimates of target market and sales potential, 
manufacturing and marketing costs, and capital investment.
12345
2.10 A well-defined process is used for all product innovation pro￾jects. Although not necessarily the same for all projects, it is 
fit for the specific purpose. The process is clearly understood 
and followed by all parties involved.
12345
2.11 The product innovation process includes clear go/no-go 
decision points, or gates, with well-defined deliverables 
required for each gate.
12345
2.12 Go/no-go decisions are taken seriously – with projects being 
approved to proceed, re-directed, or concluded. 12345
2.13 Review meetings are carried out at the end of all product 
innovation projects. Learnings from these review meetings 
are used to bring about continuous improvement.
12345PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 53
SECTION 3: CULTURE, CLIMATE, AND ORGANIZATION
3.1 Senior management is very supportive of product innovation. 12345
3.2 Our chief executive regularly demonstrates support for prod￾uct innovation through:
 Reference to it in company presentations;
• Recognition of product innovation success;
• Leading initiatives for product innovation improvement;
• Leading committee for portfolio management; and/or
• Active involvement in steering committees for highly signifi￾cant projects.
12345
3.3 Our company regularly carries out climate surveys. 12345
3.4 Dimensions which are important to creativity and innovation 
are included in the climate survey. 12345
3.5 Results from the climate survey are actively used to improve 
the company’s performance. 1 2 3 4 5
3.6 Our company has a well-organized plan for appointment and 
development of product innovation capability. 12345
3.7 This plan focuses on a balance of core, internal capability, 
and external sourcing. 12345
3.8 This capability plan is based on the company’s product inno￾vation strategy and technology plan. 12345
3.9 Our company has a clearly defined set of core values, which 
are used in the recruitment of new staff. 12345
3.10 Our company has clear guidelines and processes for rec￾ognition and reward of individual contributions to product 
innovation.
12345
3.11 Our company has clear guidelines and processes for recogni￾tion and reward of team contributions to product innovation. 12345
3.12 Product innovation project teams are made up of a cross￾section of company functions. 12345
3.13 Involvement in the product innovation team is clearly identi￾fied as part of an individual’s overall roles and responsibilities. 12345
3.14 Members of product innovation project teams are involved in 
the project from start to finish. 1234554 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
SECTION 4: METRICS
4.1 Performance measures (metrics) are required by senior 
management to demonstrate the value of product innova￾tion investment.
12345
4.2 These metrics are soundly based on well-documented infor￾mation and provide a reliable valuation of product innovation 
investment.
12345
4.3 A comprehensive suite of product innovation metrics is used 
to address the key areas identified for improvement. 12345
4.4 Metrics cover all aspects of product innovation and not just 
those directly related to the product innovation department. 12345
4.5 Senior management demonstrates a commitment to 
the implementation of the product innovation metrics 
and to ensuring their application to product innovation 
improvement.
12345
4.6 Product innovation metrics are clearly linked to the perfor￾mance and development framework within our company. 12345
4.7 Product innovation metrics are used as a basis for continu￾ous improvement and are taken seriously across all func￾tions and levels of management.
12345
4.8 Product innovation metrics are changed from time to time, 
according to specific areas identified for improvement. 12345PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT 55
SECTION 5: SUMMARY
Total scores
Doing the right product innovation /75
Doing product innovation right /65
Culture, climate, and organization /70
Product innovation metrics /40
TOTAL /250
Areas of strength and weaknesses:
Opportunities for improvement:
Strategies for improvement:56 PRODUCT INNOVATION MANAGEMENT
REFERENCES
Anderson, A.M. (2008). A framework for NPD management: Doing the right things, doing them right, and measuring the results. 
Trends in Food Science and Technology 11: 553–561. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2008.01.015.
Anderson, A. M. (2015). Keynote: Performance metrics for continuous improvement [Conference paper]. The PDMA Annual 
Conference, Anaheim.
Bsteiler, L. and Noble, C.H. (2023). The PDMA handbook of innovation and new product development, 4e. John Wiley and Sons.
Cagan, M. (2017). Inspired, (2nd ed.).e. Silicon Valley Product Group.
Catstellion, G. and Markham, S. (2013). Myths about new product failure rates. Journal of Product Innovation & Management 30: 
976–979. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540–5885.2012.01009.x.
Cooper, R. (2023). What separates the winners from the losers and what drives success. In: The PDMA handbook of innovation 
and new product development, 4e (ed. L. Bsteiler and C.H. Noble), 3–44. John Wiley and Sons.
Cooper, R. and Kleinschmidt, E. (1995). Benchmarking the firm’s critical success factors in product development. Journal of 
Product Innovation Management 12: 374–391. https://doi.org/10.1111/1540-5885.1250374.
Cooper, R. and Kleinschmidt, E. (2010). Success factors for new product development. In: Wiley international encyclopedia of 
marketing (ed. J.N. Sheth and N.K. Malhotra), 1–9. John Wiley & Sons https://doi.org/10.1002/9781444316568.wiem05021.
Cooper, R. and Kleinschmidt, E. (2015). Winning businesses in product development: Critical success factors. Research￾Technology Management.
Dobson, M. (2004). The triple constraints in project management. Berrett-Koehler Publishers.
Eriksson, M. (2011). What, exactly, is a product manager? Mind the Product. https://www.mindtheproduct.com/what-exactly-is-a￾product-manager/
Glassdoor. (2022). Best Places to Work. https://www.glassdoor.com/index.htm.
Johnson, S. (2017). Turn ideas into products: A playbook for defining and delivering technology products. Independently 
Published.
Kahn, K.B., Evans Kay, S., Slotegraaf, R.J., and Uban, S. (ed.) (2013). The PDMA handbook of new product development, 3e. 
John Wiley & Sons https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118466421.
Kaplan, R.S. and Norton, D.P. (1992). The balanced scorecard-measures that drive performance. Harvard Business Review
70: 71–79.
Kocina, L. (2017). What percentage of new products fail and why? MarketSmart Newsletters. https://www.publicity.com/
marketsmart-newsletters/percentage-new-products-fail/
Knudsen, M.P., Zedtwitz, M., Griffin, A., and Barczak, G. (2023). Best practices in new product development and innovation: 
Results from PDMA’s 2021 global survey. Journal of Product Innovation Management 40 (3): 257–275.
Lester, D.H. (2016). Critical success factors for product development. Research-Technology Management.
Markham, S.K. and Lee, H. (2013). Product development and management association’s 2012 comparative performance assess￾ment study. Journal of Product Innovation Management 30 (3): 408–429. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12025.
Montoya-Weiss, M.M. and Calantone, R.J. (1994). Determinants of new product performance: A review and meta analysis. Journal 
of Product Innovation Management 11 (5): 397–417. https://doi.org/10.1111/1540-5885.1150397.
Moore, G.A. (2014). Crossing the chasm, 3e. Collins Business Essentials.
PMBOK®. (2021). A guide to the project management body of knowledge, 7e. Project Management Institute.
Rogers, E.M. (1962). Diffusion of innovations. Free Press.
Schneider, J., & Hall, J. (2011). Why most product launches fail. Harvard Business Review. https://hbr.org/2011/04/why-most￾product-launches-failProduct Development and Management Body of Knowledge: A Guidebook for Product Innovation Training and Certification,Third Edition. 
Allan Anderson, Chad McAllister, and Ernie Harris.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
2
Product
Innovation 
Strategy
Provides the context, goals, and direction 
for product innovation and ongoing product 
management58 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS CHAPTER
Strategy lies at the very heart of an organization’s sustenance and growth. It lays the foundation and 
provides the framework for all of the organization’s functions and activities. In this chapter, strategy is 
described as it is applied at various levels of the organization. In particular, emphasis is placed on the inno￾vation strategy, providing frameworks for analysis and development of the innovation strategy together with 
guidance on its implementation throughout the organization.PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 59
THE CHAPTER ROADMAP
What is strategy? Why is it so important to
business success?
How is strategy developed within
business? And how does it relate
to, inform, and direct all business
functions?
What specic processes and
techniques can be used to develop
a business strategy?
What is a product innovation strategy and
how does it relate to the overall business strategy?
What frameworks can be used to guide
the development of a product innovation strategy?
What specific functional strategies impact on, and are
impacted by, the innovation strategy: marketing,
technology, intellectual property, capability, technical,
and manufacturing platforms?
How can Open Innovation leverage knowledge from external
sources, through alliances, partnerships, and contractual
arrangements, to complement and enhance its internal
capability in pursuit of improved innovation outcomes?
How do sustainability considerations
complement and extend the product
innovation strategy?60 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
2.1 WHAT IS STRATEGY?
A strategy is broadly defined as a method or plan chosen to bring about a desired future, such as achieve￾ment of a goal or solution to a problem.
When applied within the business context:
“It defines and communicates an organization’s unique position and says how organizational 
resources, skills, and competencies should be combined to achieve competitive advantage” 
(Porter, 2008), or “An organization’s game plan for achieving its long-term objectives in light of its 
industry position, opportunities, and resources” (Kotler, 2012).
Key components of these definitions that stand out in the context of product innovation:
1. Unique positioning
2. Competency and capability utilization
3. Competitive advantage
4. The approach chosen in which to integrate and execute on the above.
2.1.1 The Importance of Strategy to Product Innovation Success
Since 1990, the Product Development and Management Association (PDMA) has carried out regular stud￾ies of a cross-section of organizations to better understand the product innovation practices and processes 
that lead to improvement in new product success. The aim of these studies is to identify what differentiates 
the “best” companies from the “rest” in terms of product innovation performance and outcomes.
Each study has found that defining a clear product innovation strategy contributes significantly to over￾all new product success. The best companies more frequently have strategies that direct and integrate 
their entire product innovation programs compared to the rest of the companies. The 2021 PDMA Best 
Practice Survey (Knudsen et al., 2023) highlighted the importance of an innovation strategy: “. . .overall, 
these results suggest that better performance is linked to both a more innovative strategy and more radi￾cal innovation projects.” Classification of innovation strategies, including radical innovation, is further dis￾cussed in Section 2.6.
2.1.2 Hierarchy of Strategies
An organization should be directed by an overarching strategy that provides goals, priorities, and focus for 
the whole organization. Where the organization is large and multifaceted, the organizational strategy may 
be referred to as a corporate strategy. In smaller companies, it may simply be referred to as the business 
strategy (discussed in greater in Section 2.3).
Most organizations rely on innovation, to some degree, for revenue growth. An innovation strategy, 
aligned with the business strategy, provides the direction and framework for innovation across the organi￾zation. Each of the key functions of an organization including marketing, sales, human resources, design, 
development, procurement, manufacturing, etc., will form its own strategy in contributing to the overall 
organizational strategy and in supporting the innovation strategy. Figures 2.1 and 2.2 show the hierarchy of 
decision-making strategy within an organization and where innovation fits into this hierarchy.
Figure 2.1 illustrates the importance of a fully integrated approach to strategic planning. This begins 
with the organization’s mission statement. The business strategy is how the organization will satisfy its mis￾sion. The innovation strategy is chosen to support the success of the business strategy. Finally, the specific 
functional strategies (marketing, sales, human resources, design, development, procurement, manufactur￾ing, etc.), underpin the achievement of the organization’s goals. In more successful organizations, all of 
these aspects are in harmony and are driven in the same direction.PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 61
Figure 2.2 provides an extension to Figure 2.1, emphasizing the importance of the organization’s mis￾sion in informing project selection, portfolio management, and the overall product innovation strategy. It 
also emphasizes the importance of alignment of functional strategies through to the development and 
implementation of the product innovation strategy.
Mission
Statement
Corporate/
Business Strategy
Innovation
Strategy
Functional
Strategy
The organization's most important reason for its
existence–to focus energy and resources
Plan of action to satisfy the mission
Goals, priorities, and direction for innovation
across the organization
FIGURE 2.1 The hierarchy of strategies
Mission,
vision,
values
Corporate
strategy
Business strategy Technology, merketing,
intellectual property
Innovation strategy
NPD portfolio strategy
NPD project strategy
Other functional strategies
FIGURE 2.2 Innovation and the strategic decision hierarchy62 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
2.2 ESTABLISHING THE ORGANIZATION’S DIRECTION
2.2.1 Organizational Identity
Fundamental to the long-term success of an organization is a clear definition and understanding of what 
the organization stands for and why it exists. Organizational identity answers the question, “Who are we as 
an organization?” (Whetten, 2006).
Key attributes of an organization’s identity are:
• Central: If an attribute is changed, the whole nature of the organization will be changed.
• Enduring: Attributes deeply ingrained in the organization are often explicitly considered sacrosanct 
or embedded in the organization’s history.
• Distinguishing: Attributes that the organization uses to separate itself from other similar organizations.
Organizational identity should not be confused with brand identity, which is how an organization wants 
to be perceived by its audience. Brand image is external perceptions held by consumers, whereas organi￾zational identity is about internal activities that shape these perceptions.
Organizational identity interacts with the organization’s vision, mission, and values. These attributes 
manifest in the organization’s day-to-day operations, including how the product innovation strategies are 
played out.
2.2.2 Vision
A Vision is defined as “an act of imagining, guided by both foresight and informed discernment, that 
reveals the possibilities as well as the practical limits. . .It depicts the most desirable future state of. . .an 
organization” (Kahn et al., 2013). A few examples of organization vision include:
• Nike: “Bring inspiration and innovation to every athlete* in the world. (*If you have a body, you are an 
athlete.)”
• Alzheimer’s Association: “A world without Alzheimer’s disease.”
Examples of Organizational Identity
Zappos.com
• Convenient buying with free, no hassle returns
• Customers are king
• Most customer-friendly
Ritz-Carlton Hotel
The hotel was opened by Swiss hotelier CésarRitz in May 1906, eight years after he established the 
HôtelRitzParis with the company’s credo specifically stating “authentic care and comfort of guests 
isRitz-Carlton hotels’ highest mission.” For many luxury travelers, the “point of difference” of theRitz￾Carltonhotel brand is its Club Level of enhanced accommodations. Club Level rooms and suites 
enjoy upgraded amenities such as complimentary Wi-Fi, butler-style services like laundry, and take￾home sizes of toiletries, and a personal gift.PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 63
• McDonald’s: “To be the best quick service restaurant experience. Being the best means providing 
outstanding quality, service, cleanliness and value, so that we make every customer in every restau￾rant smile.”
• Huawei: “To bring digital to every person, home and organization for a fully connected, intelligent 
world.”
• Amazon: “To be earth’s most customer centric organization; to build a place where people can 
come to find and discover anything they might want to buy online.”
2.2.3 Mission
A Mission is defined as “the statement of an organization’s creed, philosophy, purpose, business princi￾ples, and corporate beliefs. The purpose of the mission is to focus the energy and resources of the organi￾zation” (Kahn et al., 2013). A few better-known mission statements are listed below:
• Starbucks: “To inspire and nurture the human spirit – one person, one cup and one neighborhood 
at a time.”
• Google: “To organize the world’s information and make it universally accessible and useful.”
• Microsoft: “To empower every person and every organization on the planet to achieve more.”
• Kickstarter: “To help bring creative projects to life.”
• Tesla: “To accelerate the world’s transition to sustainable energy.”
• Alibaba: “To make it easy to do business anywhere. We enable businesses to transform the way 
they market, sell, and operate and improve their efficiencies.”
2.2.4 Values
Values are defined as “principles to which a person or organization adheres with some degree of emotion” 
(Kahn et al., 2013). Put simply, organizational values are the guiding principles that provide an organiza￾tion with purpose and direction. They help companies manage their interactions with both customers and 
employees. Examples of organizations’ values are listed in Table 2.1.
TABLE 2.1 Examples of values in organizations
Facebook:
• Focus on impact
• Move fast
• Be bold
• Be open
• Build social value
Huawei:
• Openness
• Collaboration
• Shared success
Adobe:
• Genuine
• Exceptional
• Innovative
• Involved
Starbucks
• Creating a culture of warmth and belonging, where everyone is welcome.
• Acting with courage, challenging the status quo and finding new ways to grow our 
company and each other.
• Being present, connecting with transparency, dignity, and respect.
• Delivering our very best in all we do, holding ourselves accountable for results.64 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
2.2.5 Organizational Identity and Product Innovation
The mission, vision, and values define not only what the organization is seeking to achieve, they also define 
the organization’s personality – how it acts and how it feels. The personality:
• Has a significant impact on reinforcing how important product innovation is to the organization.
• Significantly influences the focus for product innovation and how it is implemented. Managers should 
ensure that the mission, vision, and values provide the appropriate context and direction for product 
innovation.
• Has responsibility for ensuring the relevance and connection of the mission, vision, and values at all 
levels of the product innovation process. Communication and regular reinforcement of this relevance 
and connection across all functions and staff involved in product innovation is vitally important.
• Supports the brand identity and communication of the organizational identity and values to its cus￾tomers and other stakeholders.PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 65
2.3 BUSINESS AND CORPORATE STRATEGY
The corporate or business strategy underpins the goals and direction of an organization’s activities. 
The overall business strategy provides the foundation for functional strategies, including manufacturing, 
marketing, intellectual property, capability, and, most importantly, in the context of this book, innovation. 
Business strategy is informed by and informs the product innovation strategy. In turn, the product innova￾tion strategy informs the selection and on-going management of the organization’s product portfolio, prior￾itizing specific innovation projects.
2.3.1 Business Strategy
Tregoe and Zimmerman (1980) define business strategy as “the framework which guides those choices 
that determine the nature and direction of an organization.” Ultimately, this boils down to selecting prod￾ucts (or services) to offer and the markets in which to offer them.
Porter (1996) argues that competitive strategy is “about being different.” He adds, “It means deliberately 
choosing a different set of activities to deliver a unique mix of value.” In short, Porter (1996) argues that 
strategy is about competitive position, about differentiating the organization, and its offerings, in the eyes of 
the customer, about adding value through a mix of activities different from those used by competitors.
In essence, the amalgam of these two definitions leads to the following:
Business strategy is about choosing a set of activities to deliver a unique mix of value 
where, for most businesses, the unique mix of value is centered on the product and/or 
services the business offers to specific markets.
Product innovation and product management contribute to most business strategies. The business 
strategy provides the context and direction for the innovation strategy and product innovation. The key 
steps of business strategy leading to product innovation implementation are:
1. Define the business goals, including specific product categories and markets to focus on and respec￾tive growth targets.
2. Define the role that product innovation will play in achieving these goals. For example, some goals 
are best supported by mergers and acquisitions. Other goals are better reached through product 
innovation. With product innovation, the business has a number of potential options available, includ￾ing in-house development, external partnering, and licensing for development and/or marketing.
3. Define the attack plan for the product innovation strategy, such as focusing efforts on creating first￾to-market products or improving on competitor’s products. In later sections, we present several 
innovation strategy frameworks that direct a business into making decisions among major areas of 
focus for its product innovation. Broadly speaking, these center on decisions related to how much 
risk the business is willing to take in its product innovation. Does it want to be a market leader or a 
follower? Does it want its innovation to be technology or market-led? Does it want to differentiate 
its new products based on cost or specific features? Does it want to target a wide range of product 
and/or market areas, or does it want to pursue a narrow focus?
The strategic decisions outlined above, discussed in more depth later in this chapter, lay the foundation 
for further steps in new product planning, including individual project selection, product portfolio manage￾ment, and resource allocation. It ultimately also provides a basis for selecting the appropriate product inno￾vation methodology for a given product innovation opportunity.66 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
2.3.2 Corporate Strategy
Organizations can vary significantly in size and in the way in which they are structured. Large organizations 
will often be divided into business units, each centered on specific product categories, brands, services, 
markets, or regions. Figure 2.3 shows the organization structure for Coca-Cola, demonstrating the com￾plexity of multifaceted global corporations.
In these large and multifaceted organizations, it is generally desirable to have an overarching strategy 
for the whole organization with separate strategies for the individual business units linked to this overall or 
corporate strategy. A corporate strategy is, therefore:
• The overarching strategy of a diversified organization.
• It answers the questions of (1) in which businesses should we compete, and (2) how do these indi￾vidual businesses create synergy and/or add to the competitive advantage of the organization as a 
whole?
The role that product innovation plays within a large corporation will depend on the structure of the 
organization and particularly the level to which the organization seeks to achieve synergies across its busi￾ness units, as opposed to maintaining a high degree of business unit autonomy. Organizations should 
have a high-level strategy to optimize synergies across their business units. This will impact the mergers 
and acquisitions (M&A) strategy as well as the internal innovation strategy. Some hypothetical examples:
• A manufacturer of PCs may define a strategic goal of fully integrating its own operating system 
into its branded PCs. It could do this by developing its own operating system in-house, partnering 
Coca-Cola
(geographic divisions)
Europe,
Middle East
& Africa
Latin
America
North
America
North America
Latin America
Europe
Africa
Eurasia and middle east
Japan and south Korea
Greater China
Asean and South Pacific
India and Southwest Asia
Asia Pacific
Coca-Cola Sparkling
flavors
Nutrition,
juice, dairy
and plant
Emerging
Hydration,
sports,
coffee & tea
Global
ventures
Bottling
investments
Coca-Cola
(geographic divisions)
Coca-Cola
(non-geographic divisions)
Coca-Cola
(product categories)
FIGURE 2.3 An example of a corporate business structure, Coca-Cola as of August 2022PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 67
externally for the development, or acquiring a company that has either the requisite development 
skills or an operating system that meets the company’s needs.
• A global food manufacturing company with business units in 50 countries may decide to have a core 
platform of technologies that can be applied to a range of products. But the specific taste prefer￾ences in different countries may dictate a requirement for slight variations in product formulations. In 
turn, the company must decide whether it is better to have a large central R&D facility, focused facili￾ties in selected regions, or a combination of both.
• A large oilfield service company with over 20 business divisions in 80 countries has several R&D 
facilities worldwide. Each of the facilities has different R&D systems and processes. There is very little 
knowledge transfer across the R&D facilities. Strategically, the company has an important decision: 
do the advantages of standardized R&D and knowledge management practices outweigh the ben￾efits of highly focused, individual facilities with their own “fit for purpose” systems and practices? Or, 
is there a middle ground that creates knowledge sharing between the separate R&D facilities?68 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
2.4 PREPARING A BUSINESS STRATEGY
A comprehensive understanding of the business context is essential to informing the development of busi￾ness goals and strategy. This includes the organization itself, the industry within which the company oper￾ates, and the wider regional and global environment. Refer to Figure 2.4.
A number of tools can be used to provide a structured approach to provide the requisite knowledge 
on which to develop business goals and strategy. Following are some of the most commonly used tools. 
Instead of relying on a single approach, a combination of these tools is recommended to provide the most 
comprehensive coverage of the knowledge required to underpin strategic planning.
2.4.1 PESTLE Analysis
A PESTLE analysis is a structured tool-based, macro-environmental analysis of Political, Economic, Social, 
Technological, Legal, and Environmental factors. It is particularly useful as a strategic framework for seek￾ing a better understanding of trends in factors that will directly influence the future of an organization – 
such as demographics, political barriers, disruptive technologies, and competitive pressures. The tool 
should be used when starting a new business or entering a new foreign market or anytime the external 
business environment must be better understood (refer to Table 2.2).
FIGURE 2.4 The context for product innovationPRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 69
2.4.2 SWOT Analysis
SWOT stands for Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats, as shown in Figure 2.5.
Strengths: Characteristics of the business or project that give it an advantage over others.
Weaknesses: Characteristics that place the business or project at a disadvantage relative to others.
Opportunities: Elements that the business or project could exploit to its advantage.
Threats: Elements in the environment that could cause trouble for the business or project.
Opportunities and threats originate from external factors. Advantages can be taken of opportuni￾ties and plans made to protect against threats, but as external factors, they cannot directly be changed. 
Examples include competitors, prices of raw materials, and customer lifestyle changes. Recognizing 
opportunities and threats allows for plans to be made and appropriate management processes used to 
respond to external factors.
For a SWOT analysis to be effective, company senior management needs to be deeply involved. This 
isn’t a task that can be delegated to others.
However, organization leadership shouldn’t do the work on their own, either. For best results, a group 
of people who have different perspectives on the company should be involved. People should be selected 
to represent different aspects of your company, from sales and customer service to marketing and prod￾uct innovation. Some organizations even look outside their own internal ranks when they perform a SWOT 
analysis and get customer input to add their unique voice to the mix.
TABLE 2.2 Example of PESTLE analysis
Political Economic Social Technological Legal Environmental
• Government 
policy
• Political 
stability
• Foreign trade 
policy
• Tax policy
• Labor law
• Trade 
restrictions
• Economic 
growth
• Exchange 
rates
• Interest 
rates
• Inflation 
rates
• Disposable 
income
• Unemployed 
rates
• Population 
growth rate
• Age distribution
• Educational 
levels
• Safety 
emphasis
• Lifestyle 
attitudes
• Cultural 
barriers
• Technology 
incentives
• Level of 
innovation
• Automation
• R&D activity
• Technological 
change
• Technological 
awareness
• Discrimination 
laws
• Antitrust laws
• Employment 
laws
• Consumer 
protectionlaws
• Patent laws
• Health and 
safety laws
• Weather
• Environmental 
politics
• Climate change
• Pressure from 
NGOs
STRENGTHS WEAKNESSES OPPORTUNITIES
Characteristics of
the business or
project that give it
an advantage over
others
THREATS
Characteristics that
place the business
or project at a
disadvantage
relative to others
Elements that the
business or project
could exploit to its
advantage
Elements in the
environment that
could cause trouble
for the business or
project
S W O T
FIGURE 2.5 SWOT analysis70 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
2.4.3 Delphi Technique
The Delphi technique is a forecasting method based on the results of questionnaires sent to a panel of 
experts. Three or more rounds of questionnaires are sent out, and the anonymous responses are aggre￾gated and shared with the group after each round. It is mainly applied to future forecasting or foresighting, 
and to longer-term strategic planning. The aim of the Delphi technique is to clarify and expand on issues, 
identify areas of agreement or disagreement, and then begin to seek consensus.
The Delphi technique consists of following seven steps:
Step 1: Choose and appoint a facilitator
The first step is to choose your facilitator, preferably a neutral person familiar with research and data.
Step 2: Identify the subject-matter experts
The Delphi technique relies on a panel of experts. This panel may be members of the project team, 
including the customer or other experts from within the organization or industry. An expert is any 
individual with relevant knowledge and experience of the area being investigated. The choice of 
subject-matter experts directly influences the quality of the information Delphi can produce, so care 
is needed when selecting the experts.
Step 3: Define the problem
What is the problem or issue where understanding is being sought? The experts need to know what 
problem they are commenting on. A precise and comprehensive definition is required.
Step 4: Round one questions
Ask general questions to gain a broad understanding of the experts’ views on future events. The 
questions may go out in the form of a questionnaire or survey. Collate and summarize the responses, 
removing any irrelevant material and looking for common viewpoints.
Step 5: Round two questions
Based on the answers to the first questions, the next questions should delve deeper into the topic 
to clarify specific issues. These questions may also go out in the form of a questionnaire or sur￾vey. Again, collate and summarize the results, remove any irrelevant material, and look for common 
ground. The key goal is to achieve consensus among the experts.
Step 6: Round three questions
The final questionnaire aims to focus on supporting decision-making. Focus on the areas of agree￾ment. What is it the experts agree on? In some situations, more than three rounds of questioning are 
required to reach a closer consensus.
Step 7: Act on your findings
After the third round of questions, the experts should have reached a consensus with a view of future 
events.
Predicting the future is not an exact science, but the Delphi technique can help in understanding the 
likelihood of future events and what impact they may have on specific strategies or projects.
2.4.4 Business Model Canvas (BMC)
The Business Model Canvas (BMC), first developed by Osterwalder et al. (2010), is a simple yet effective 
visual strategy tool that organizations, big and small, use for business model innovation. The BMC pro￾vides the basis for the Lean Canvas approach used in Lean startups with its emphasis on entrepreneur￾focused business planning, discussed further in Section 4.3.11.
The organization’s business model in the context of strategy and innovation is very important. Business 
models, if incorrectly defined and not supporting the innovation strategy and management, the technol￾ogy strategy, and the product strategy, will not achieve the goal of value creation. A well-aligned business 
model produces value for multiple stakeholders, including customers, partners, and the organization.PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 71
The BMC addresses nine aspects of a business model: customer segments, value propositions, 
channels, customer relationships, revenue streams, key activities, resources, partners, and cost structures. 
A key component of the BMC is the aforementioned aspects of knowledge in a visual form, similar to 
Figure 2.6. It is designed to depict an entire business model on a single page. The right side of the BMC 
focuses on the customer, while the left side focuses on the business. The information is derived from ask￾ing and answering key questions:
1. Customer segments: An organization often focuses on a broad range of customers. These can 
be divided into distinct customer segments, each with specific needs and requirements. This allows 
for tailoring of specific value propositions, customer relationships, and channels for each segment.
2. Value propositions: The value proposition defines how an organization distinguishes itself from the 
competition. This distinction focuses on quantity such as price, service, speed, and delivery condi￾tions on the one hand. On the other hand, it also focuses on quality including design, brand status, 
and customer experience and satisfaction.
3. Channels: Which channels will be focused on to reach the desired customer segments? How are 
those channels integrated? Which are most cost-effective?
4. Customer relationships: What type of relationship is required for each customer segment? What are 
the expectations of these customers? How are they established? What would be the associated costs?
5. Revenue streams: What are the customers willing to pay and for what value? How would they 
prefer to pay? How are they currently paying? How does each stream add up to the total revenue?
6. Key activities: What key activities are required to successfully deliver the value proposition? These 
include R&D, marketing, manufacturing, and distribution channels.
7. Key resources: Resources can be categorized as physical, intellectual, financial, or human resources. 
Physical resources may include assets such as business equipment. Intellectual resources include 
(among other things) knowledge, brands, and patents.
8. Key partners: Who are the key partners? Key suppliers? Which key resources are they providing? 
Which key activities do the partners perform? Key partners are the external companies or suppliers 
the business needs to perform key activities and deliver value to the customers. Buyer–seller relation￾ships are necessary to optimize operations and reduce the risks associated with a business.
9. Cost structure: What are the most important cost drivers in the organization’s business model? 
Which key resources and activities are most expensive? The business can be either cost-driven or 
value-driven. A cost-driven organization looks to minimize all costs while a value-driven company is 
more focused on delivering great customer value in terms of quality or prestige.
Key Partners Key Activities
Key Resources
Value
Proposition
Customer
Relationships
Channels
Customer
Segments
Cost Structure Revenue Streams
• Who are the key partners?
• Who are key suppliers?
• Which key resources are we
 acquiring from partners?
• Which key activities do
 partners perform?
What are the activities you
perform every day to deliver
your value proposition?
What key resources do our
distribution channels, customer
relationships, revenue streams,
etc., require?
• What are the important costs inherent to the business model?
• Which key resources are most expensive?
• Which key activities are most expensive?
What is the value you deliver
to your customer? What is
the customer need your
value proposition addresses?
What relationship does each
customer segment expect you
to establish and maintain?
How do your customer
segments want to be
reached?
Who are your customers?
Who are you creating this
value for?
• How do customers value what you are providing?
• What are they willing to pay?
• What would they prefer to pay?
• How much does each revenue stream contribute to the total revenue?
FIGURE 2.6 Business Model Canvas (BMC) framework72 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
2.4.5 Porter’s Five Forces
Porter (1979) provides a framework that models an industry as being influenced by five forces. The strate￾gic business manager seeking to develop an edge over rival firms can use this model to better understand 
the industry context in which the firm operates. Specific issues to address under each of the five forces are 
shown in Figure 2.7.
2.4.6 Examples of Application of Techniques for Business Analysis
Scenario 1: A company offering telecommunications services to businesses is considering entering the 
cyber security market, but there is a lot of established competition. It wants to ascertain if the market is 
growing, can accommodate new players, and will prove lucrative for them. They cannot find good research 
on the topic. What model will work best to help establish this?
Answer: The Delphi technique is the best solution since the company is looking for a forecast on a spe￾cific market, which cannot be just “calculated” or looked up (unless specific local research is already 
conducted). Delphi provides a framework to leverage industry experts to develop a consensus that will 
develop as robust a forecast position as can be generated under these circumstances.
Scenario 2: A pharmaceutical firm is considering investing in an overseas manufacturing facility but wants 
to understand all the macro-environmental factors that might affect the success of the investment. Which 
model makes the most sense to use?
Answer: The PESTLE analysis tool is suitable to evaluate all the macro-environmental moving parts that 
could impact such an investment, whether they be political (e.g., stability of the political environment in the 
target country, changing foreign tax laws), economic (e.g., potential for currency fluctuations), technological 
(e.g., state-of-the-art with regards to manufacturing technologies), etc.
Scenario 3: A traditional accounting software application vendor is struggling to survive with “new 
entrant” over-the-top SaaS providers taking a lot of customers away. Its traditional model of major up-front 
Threat of new entrants
• The existence of barriers to entry
• Cost disadvantages independent of size
• Economies of scale
• Brand equity
Competitive rivalry
• Sustainable competitive advantage
 through innovation
• Competition between on-line and off-
 line companies
• Level of advertising expense
• Firm concentration ratio
Threat of substitutes
• Buyer propensity to substitute
• Buyer's switching costs
• Number of substitutes available in the
 market
• Ease of substitution
Threat of new entrants
• Supplier switching costs relative to firm
 switching costs
• Degree of differentiation of inputs
• Impact of inputs on cost and
 differentiation
Bargaining power of customers
• Buyer switching costs
• Buyer information availability
• Availability of existing substitute
 products
• Buyer price sensitivity
FIGURE 2.7 Porter’s five forces diagram (Porter, 1979)PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 73
perpetual license fees and modest annual support revenues seems out of favor in the market. Customers 
are hesitant for large capital expenditures every three years or so to upgrade their software. The vendor 
now wishes to examine alternative ways to generate net income that align with customer preferences. 
What might be a good option to consider?
Answer: The Business Model Canvas allows them to map their business model across all its dimen￾sions. Then, they can consider the ways they can potentially alter the business model to regain competitive 
advantage.
Scenario 4: A company with a chain of fitness clubs across the country has found that its traditional busi￾ness has stagnated. In some cases, customers are choosing alternative ways of working out (at home, in 
the park, etc.). However, many customers still love the camaraderie of going to a club, the different classes 
it offers, and support from the company’s expert fitness trainers. How should it evaluate its current capa￾bilities and consider what options it may have for the way forward for its business?
Answer: A SWOT analysis is ideal as it needs to create competitive differentiation and a SWOT analysis 
can identify where differentiation can be created. It allows the organization to create an inventory of all the 
good things it has to offer (e.g., premises, skilled fitness trainers, excellent classes), some weaknesses 
(e.g., lack of technical/online capability), and what are some of the opportunities and threats offered by the 
changing landscape of its business in the light of these.74 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
2.5 INNOVATION STRATEGY
“An innovation strategy is an essential tool for product innovation and continued growth in difficult 
times” (Cooper & Edgett, 2010).
“Managers should articulate an innovation strategy that stipulates how their firm’s innovation efforts 
will support the overall business strategy. This will help them make trade-off decisions so that they 
can choose the most appropriate practices and a set of overarching innovation priorities that align 
all functions” (Pisano, 2015).
Innovation within an organization should be far more than just a grab bag of good ideas and practices. 
Instead, it should be an integrated and coordinated effort across the organization aligned to the overall 
business strategy.
An overarching innovation strategy will provide the goals, direction, and framework for innovation 
across the organization. Individual business units and functions may have their own strategies to achieve 
specific innovation goals, but it is imperative that these individual strategies are tightly connected with the 
overarching organizational innovation strategy.
2.5.1 What Defines a Good Innovation Strategy?
The innovation strategy should be tailored to the specific organization. There is no standard recipe book 
that defines what an innovation strategy should be. The innovation strategy provides a sound basis for 
alignment across the organization, for establishing priorities, and for evaluating trade-offs.
A good innovation strategy:
• May be messy and should be embraced as such. While it is a process, it is a combination of art and 
science. It is most often non-linear in its application as it involves abstract concepts such creativity 
and perseverance.
• Is about experiential learning and development. It comprises iterations of trying out new things, cap￾turing the lessons, and then reprioritizing efforts. The journey is as important as the end-goal.
• Requires information that is generated and useful during the innovation processes.
• Requires intentional curiosity in order to search for the desired designs, outcomes, processes, sys￾tems, or products.
• Ultimately is about creating value, not necessarily new ideas and or inventions.
• Requires stakeholder input as early as possible.
• Requires the ability to integrate seemingly disparate (and unobvious) components into one.
• Is ongoing, so organizations need to design and implement support structures and systems that 
enable it to be continuous.
Although, in many cases, innovation remains more of art than a science, Reeves et al. (2017) suggest 
it doesn’t need to be. They suggest that “Innovation, much like marketing and human resources, can be 
made less reliant on artful intuition by using information in new ways. But this requires a change in per￾spective: We need to view innovation not as the product of luck or extraordinary vision but as the result 
of a deliberate search process. This process exploits the underlying structure of successful innovation to 
identify key information signals, which in turn can be harnessed to construct an advantaged innovation 
strategy.” Reeves et al. (2017) use a simple example of three children building new LEGO toys to explain 
different approaches to innovation.
“Think back to your childhood days. You’re in a room with two of your friends, playing with a big box 
of LEGOs (say, the beloved fire station set). All three of you have the same goal in mind: building as many PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 75
new toys as possible. As you play, each of you searches through the box and chooses the bricks you 
believe will help you reach this goal.
Let’s now suppose each of you approaches this differently. Your friend Joey uses what we call an 
impatient strategy, carefully picking LEGO men and their firefighting hats to immediately produce via￾ble toys. You follow your intuition, picking random bricks that look intriguing. Meanwhile, your friend Jill 
chooses pieces such as axles, wheels, and small base plates that she noticed are common in more com￾plex toys, even though she is not able to use them immediately to produce simpler toys. We call Jill’s 
approach a patient strategy.
At the end of the afternoon, who will have developed the most new toys? That is, who will have built 
the most new products? Our simulations show that this depends on several factors. In the beginning, Joey 
will lead the way, surging ahead with his impatient strategy. But as the game progresses, fate will appear 
to shift. Jill’s early moves will begin to seem serendipitous when she’s able to assemble complex fire trucks 
from her choice of initially useless axles and wheels. It will appear that she was lucky, but we will soon see 
that she effectively harnessed serendipity.
What about you? Picking components randomly, you will have built the fewest toys. Your friends had 
an information-enabled strategy, while you relied only on intuition and chance.
What can we learn from this? If innovation is a search process, then your component choices today 
matter greatly in terms of the options they will open up to you tomorrow. Do you pick components that 
quickly form simple products and give you a return now, or do you choose the components that give you a 
higher future option value?”
Research by Reeves et al. (2017) provide three crucial insights to innovation strategy:
1. Information-enabled strategies outperform strategies that do not use the information generated by 
the search process.
2. In an earlier phase of the development of the innovation space, an impatient strategy outperforms; in 
later stages, a patient strategy does.
3. It is possible to have an adaptive strategy, one that changes as a market develops and that out￾performs in all phases of the market’s development. Developing an adaptive strategy requires you, 
in effect, to know when to switch from Joey’s approach to Jill’s (in the above LEGO example). The 
switching point is knowable and occurs when the complexity of products starts to level off after 
increasing.
2.5.2 An Information-Advantaged Strategy
Reeves et al. (2017) provide a five-step process for constructing an information-advantaged strategy:
1. Choose your space: Where to play?
2. It’s not enough to analyze markets and customer needs. To innovate successfully you also need 
to fully understand everything in your “innovation space,” including competitors, regulations, tech￾nology, etc.
3. Select your strategy: How to play?
4. Look backward, not forward. How complex is the innovation space? Consider the range of product 
variations, unique components, number of competitors, maturity of technology, etc. If the level of 
complexity is low and relatively stable, then choose an impatient strategy. If complexity is high, then 
choose a patient strategy,
5. Apply your strategy: How to execute?
6. If you choose an impatient strategy your objective is to bring relatively simple products to market 
quickly, increasing R&D speed and decreasing time to market, often pointing to development of a 
minimum viable product.76 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
7. Sense shifts and adapt: How to extract a switch signal?
8. Remain adaptable. Continue to source information from your innovation space. Changes in this 
space may demand a change in your innovation strategy.
9. Brace for disruptions: How to reset the clock?
10. Although it is not always possible to pre-empt disruptions in the innovation space, maintaining key 
channels of information and open mind to changes in technology, regulations, and market demands 
is critical
2.5.3 The Relationship of Innovation Strategy to Overall Business and Individual Functional 
Strategies
Throughout this book, a number of specific strategies and processes are presented, which are guided 
by the overall innovation strategy, including:
• Across several chapters, technology strategy, marketing strategy, platform strategy, open innovation, 
intellectual property, sustainability.
• In Chapter 1, the stages of the product life cycle and their strategic importance in defining innovation 
priorities are discussed.
• In Chapter  3, portfolio management where project selection is aligned with, and directed by, the 
innovation strategy priorities.
• In Chapter  4, a range of processes that are appropriate to different innovation strategies are 
discussed.
• In Chapter 7, the various organization and team structures that are appropriate to different innovation 
strategies are discussed.
An Example of Integrating Innovation with Business Strategy
Several years ago, “Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS), as part of a broad strategic repositioning, decided 
to emphasize cancer as a key part of its pharmaceutical business. Recognizing that biotechnology￾derived drugs such as monoclonal antibodies were likely to be a fruitful approach to combat￾ing cancer, BMS decided to shift its repertoire of technological capabilities from its traditional 
organic-chemistry base toward biotechnology. The new business strategy (emphasizing the can￾cer market) required a new innovation strategy (shifting technological capabilities toward biologics)” 
(Pisano, 2015).PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 77
2.6 INNOVATION STRATEGY FRAMEWORKS
Several frameworks exist that contribute to creating and assessing innovation strategy. Following is a 
selection of approaches you should consider. No single one of these frameworks may be sufficient to fully 
develop an innovation strategy for an organization, but they should serve as foundational starting points.
2.6.1 Porter’s Strategic Framework
Michael Porter (2008) argued that an organization’s strengths ultimately fall under one of two headings: 
cost advantage and differentiation. By applying these strengths to a broad or narrow market, he defines 
three generic strategies: Cost leadership, differentiation, and segmentation. Refer to Figure 2.8.
Porter’s Cost Leadership Strategy
The specific features of this strategy and its focus on product innovation are shown in Figure 2.9.
NARROW MARKET
SCOPE
BROAD MARKET
SCOPE
UNIQUENESS
COMPETENCY
LOW COST
COMPETENCY
SEGMENTATION STRATEGY
DIFFERENTIATION STRATEGY COST LEADERSHIP STRATEGY
FIGURE 2.8 Porter’s three competitive strategies
HOW DOES IT FOCUS ON
PRODUCT INNOVATION?
• Level of product innovation funding is low—
often below 0.3% of sales revenue
• Major emphasis on minor product changes
(centered on cost reductions through
changes in manufacturing process and raw
materials)
• Little/no focus on long-term research or
development
• Technology often plays an important role in
improving manufacturing systems
(automation, robotics)
• Grows market share by appealing to “cost
conscious” customers
• Often adopted by commodity product
companies
• Achieved through:
• Economies of scale
• Offering “no frills” or “value” products that
reduce overall manufacturing cost
• Optimizing the supply chain
WHAT ARE ITS FEATURES?
FIGURE 2.9 Cost leadership strategy: Features and product innovation focus78 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
Advantages of a cost leadership strategy include:
• It is often the only way to break into or maintain a market position in a price-competitive market 
where there is intense competition, and customers are less concerned about product differentiation.
Disadvantages of a cost leadership strategy include:
• The constant drive for cost reduction can lead to a reduced emphasis on quality, to the point where 
customers switch to a competitor;
• Generally, lower margins that are constantly being squeezed, resulting in limited R&D investment.
Porter’s Differentiation Strategy
The specific features of this strategy and its focus on product innovation are shown in Figure 2.10.
Porter’s Segmentation Strategy
The specific features of this strategy and its focus on product innovation are shown in Figure 2.11.
HOW DOES IT FOCUS ON
PRODUCT INNOVATION?
• Significantly higher investment in product
innovation than cost leadership (around 2% of
revenue for food products to 20% for electronic
goods)
• Intimacy with customers, to fully understand
current and future needs
• Sound foresighting to predict short-to medium￾term trends
• Relatively strong emphasis on research and longer￾term development
• Technology often plays an important role (focused
on product features and functionality)
• Focus on a broad product base
• Gains market share through delivering unique
and superior products and establishing a loyal
customer base
• Customers focus on product quality and
features
WHAT ARE ITS FEATURES?
FIGURE 2.10 Differentiation strategy: Features and product innovation focus
HOW DOES IT FOCUS ON
PRODUCT INNOVATION?
• Higher product innovation funding than cost
leadership or differentiation
• Major emphasis on customer intimacy
• Working with lead user groups in the target
segment to identify new opportunities and
co-develop new products
• Technology plays an important role in the
development of new product features or
functionality
• Narrow market focus (unlike cost leadership
and differentiation)
• Based on an intimate knowledge of a key niche
segment or sub-section of the market—often
with specialized needs 
WHAT ARE ITS FEATURES?
FIGURE 2.11 Segmentation strategy: Features and product innovation focusPRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 79
Advantages of a segmentation strategy include:
• Providing a strong focus for the organization’s marketing and product innovation effort.
• Allowing the organization to drive for an in-depth understanding of and relationship with its custom￾ers. Therefore, this provides a strong competitive edge against newcomers.
• Providing the opportunity for higher margins and, therefore, product innovation investment.
Disadvantages of a segmentation strategy include:
• The danger of being dependent on a single, narrow market (putting the eggs in one basket). New 
technologies lead to your product being outdated. Refer to Section 2.6.3 on disruptive technologies, 
with examples such as Kodak’s focus on photography film and the impact of new digital technology.
2.6.2 Miles and Snow Strategic Framework
The timeless Miles and Snow (1978) framework continues to provide a useful method to describe a 
strategic approach to innovation. It is based on four specific strategy approaches: prospector, analyzer, 
defender, and reactor. The characteristics of each approach are presented in Figure 2.12.
PDMA’s 2021 Best Practice Survey (Knudsen et al., 2023), provide the following insights into the differ￾ences between the Best companies compared to the Rest with regards product innovation results:
• Prospectors are most likely to among to be among the Best.
• Reactors are most likely to be among the Rest.
• 80% of Prospectors, Analyzers, and Defenders indicate that their innovation efforts are driven by 
strategy, whereas less than 50% of Reactors claim this.
• A Proactive strategy leads to a higher level of radical innovation projects.
• Reactors are less likely to commercialize radical innovations.
LOW
EXPLORATION
HIGH
EXPLORATION
HIGH EXPLOITATION
LOW EXPLOITATION
PROSPECTOR
• First to market
• Seeks growth
• Risk taking
• Flexible with new technologies
REACTOR
• No clear strategic goals
• Responds only under duress
• Not successful long term
ANALYZER
• Moderately risk tolerant
• Fast follower, often better products
• Lower funding than prospectors
DEFENDER
• Maintains niche in a stable market
and focuses on core capabilities
• Risk averse and resists
radical developments
FIGURE 2.12 The characteristics of the Miles and Snow (1978) strategic framework80 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
2.6.3 Sustaining vs. Disruptive Product Innovation
A key strategic decision for many organizations is whether to focus their product innovation efforts on 
sustaining or disruptive innovation. Most organizations choose (or default to) sustaining innovation. Also, 
considering disruptive innovation opportunities in a product portfolio can create revolutionary opportunities.
The principle of disruptive innovation was first explored by Clayton Christensen (1997). He illustrated 
the difference between disruptive and sustaining innovation by using the diagram shown in Figure 2.13 and 
describing it as:
“A disruptive technology or disruptive innovation is an innovation that helps create a new market 
and value network, and eventually disrupts an existing market and value network. The concept 
of disruptive technology is widely used but disruptive innovation seems a more useful concept in 
many contexts since few technologies are intrinsically disruptive. It is rather the business model 
than the technology that enables and creates the disruptive effect. In contrast to disruptive inno￾vation, a sustaining innovation does not create new markets or value networks but only develops 
existing ones with better value, allowing the companies to compete against each other’s sustaining 
improvements.”
Although an organization can choose a sustaining or disruptive innovation strategy, often, it is a disrup￾tive innovation of a competing organization that has the greatest impact. The trap of disruptive innovation 
is that it does not happen overnight. It creeps up on companies – often unnoticed or disregarded. A well￾documented example is that Kodak was aware of the new digital technology being developed by other 
companies but disregarded it as a significant threat, believing that the quality of film was far better than 
digital could offer. This was true at the time until technology developed to the point where the digital defi￾ciencies were overcome. By this stage, it was too late for Kodak, as other companies that embraced digi￾tal technology took a significant share of Kodak’s market.
FIGURE 2.13 Sustaining vs. disruptive innovation. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Christensen (2016). Copyright 2016 by Harvard Business Publishing; all 
rights reserved.PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 81
Features of disruptive innovation
• The new product or service targets specific needs of an existing product or market segment.
• Although the new product may be inferior in some ways to the existing product, it offers special 
features that are truly valued by the small segment of the market with users who are leaders or influ￾ential to the market as a whole. This allows the new product to gain a foothold in the market.
• In time, the overall features of the new product are improved to the point where more and more 
customers are “converted.” The value of the new features now significantly outweighs any negative 
features or under-performance.
Examples of disruptive product innovation:
• Digital cameras: disrupting traditional film cameras.
• Uber: disrupting traditional taxi services (some purists may argue that this does not fully fit the true 
model of disruptive innovation).
• TripAdvisor: disrupting traditional travel agencies; Mobile phones: disrupting traditional land lines.
• 3D printing: disrupting traditional manufacturing in the future; Artificial intelligence: disrupting 
human-incumbent jobs.
• Cryptocurrency: potential to disrupt payment services systems and banking.
2.6.4 The Innovation Landscape Map
Although new technology is often the source of innovation, this is by no means always the case. In fact, 
over recent years, many leading companies, including Amazon, LinkedIn, and Alibaba, have mastered the 
art of business model innovation. A key decision in defining an organization’s innovation strategy is the 
relative effort and resources allocated to technological and business model innovation. BUSINESS
TECHNOLOGY
DISRUPTIVE
• Requires a new business model but not necessarily
 new technology
• Example: ride-sharing services for taxi an limos
ARCHITECTURAL
• Focuses on both technology and business.
• Example: Digital imaging for Polaroid and Kodak
RADICAL
• Focuses on the technological aspect
• Example: Biotechnology for biotech
 and pharmaceutical companies
ROUTINE
• Builds on existing technological competencies
 and fits with existing business models
• Focuses on feature improvement and
 new versions or models
• Example: A new generation of BMW
FIGURE 2.14 The innovation landscape map. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Pisano (2015). Copyright 2015 by Harvard Business Publishing; all rights reserved.82 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
The four quadrants of innovation described by Pisano in Figure 2.14 are:
1. Routine innovation: Builds on an organization’s existing technological competencies and fits 
with its existing business models. Innovation is focused on feature improvement and new versions 
or models.
2. Disruptive innovation: Requires a new business model but not necessarily new technology. Note 
that this is not the identical description of disruptive innovation described by Clayton Christensen 
previously, but it is similar when new technology is not driving the disruption. An example is the 
Disruptive innovation introduced by Uber, which used a new business model (ride-sharing) but not 
significantly new technology (mobile apps).
3. Radical innovation: Here the focus is mainly on technological advances. As an example, genetic 
engineering and biotechnology have had a significant impact on the pharmaceutical industry.
4. Architectural innovation: A focus is placed on both technology and business model change. 
A well-quoted example is digital photography, which caused significant disruption for traditional film 
companies.PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 83
2.7 STRATEGIES THAT SUPPORT THE INNOVATION STRATEGY
The overarching innovation strategy provides the goals, direction, and framework for innovation across the 
organization. Contributing to and impacting this strategy are a number of other organizational areas and 
functions. Each of these may have its own specific and discrete strategy. It is vitally important that these 
individual strategies, which are critical to successful innovation, be tightly linked to the overall innovation 
strategy – feeding off and contributing to its development, evolution, and execution. Examples include:
• marketing.
• technology.
• product platforms.
• intellectual property.
• capability.
• digital.
Each of these is discussed below.
2.7.1 Marketing Strategy
A marketing strategy is a process or model to allow an organization to focus limited resources on the best 
opportunities to increase sales and thereby achieve a unique competitive advantage.
The marketing strategy must be informed by, and be consistent with, the business goals identified in 
the overall business strategy. It is, therefore, an important contributor to the successful development and 
implementation of the innovation strategy.
The hierarchy of business goals, marketing strategy, and marketing planning are summarized in 
Figure 2.15.
1. Communicate business goals: start with business goals encapsulated in the vision and mission.
2. Develop the marketing strategy: high-level direction for the marketing efforts.
3. Define the marketing mix: product, price, promotion, and place.
4. Prepare the marketing plan: specific tasks and activities designed to achieve the marketing strat￾egy and business goals.
Business goals
Marketing strategy
Marketing mix
Marketing
plan
FIGURE 2.15 From business goals to marketing plans84 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
In developing the marketing strategy, the following questions need to be answered:
• What products will be offered? This includes determining the breadth and depth of product lines.
• Who are the target customers? Consider market boundaries and segments to be served.
• How will the customers be informed of the product’s availability and of its benefits?
• How will the products reach the customers? This specifies the distribution channels to be used.
The Marketing Mix
The marketing mix comprises the basic tools available to market a product. The market mix is often 
referred to as the four Ps – product, price, promotion, and place. Elements of the marketing mix are shown 
in Figure 2.16.
Developing the marketing mix for a product
In developing the marketing mix for a product, the following should be considered:
• All elements of the marketing mix should be synchronized around target market needs and expecta￾tions.
• The price should be aligned with customers’ expectations of the product value – evidenced by its 
functional and aesthetic attributes.
• The promotion should emphasize the core benefits, and the tangible and augmented features (see 
below for a description of core, tangible, and augmented product features).
• The place of sale should be consistent with the product’s quality, brand perceptions, features, and 
behaviors of the target market.
Chapter 1 further discusses the application of the marketing mix at various phases of a product’s life 
cycle, specifically emphasizing the introductory phase.
MARKETING MIX
PRODUCT
Aesthetics
Functionality
Uniqueness
Quality
Package
Support
Warranty
Brand
PLACE
Channels
Inventory
Logistics
Physical
distribution
PROMOTION
Theme/message
Social media
Publicity
Sales force
Trade fairs
Print media
PRICE
List price
Discounts
Bundling
Credit items
Penetration
Skimming
FIGURE 2.16 The marketing mixPRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 85
Levels of a Product
A product can be described at three levels (refer to Figure 2.17):
1. Core product: The benefits that the target market will derive from the product.
2. Tangible product: The physical and aesthetic design features that give the product its appearance 
and functionality.
3. Augmented product: These are benefits that may be provided extra to the product, either free of 
charge or for a higher price.
An example of levels: a luxury automobile
Core benefits: demonstration of wealth, power, and prestige to the owner.
Tangible features: sleek styling, powerful engine, heated seats, etc.
Augmented features: 5-year warranty, special payment terms, two years free service.
The three levels of a product will be developed further in Chapter 5 when we focus on product design 
and development.
The Value Proposition
Value proposition is defined as “a short, clear and simple statement of how and on what dimensions of a 
product concept will deliver value to prospective customers. The essence of ‘value’ is embedded in the 
trade-off between the benefits a customer receives from a new product and the price the customer pays 
for it.” (PDMA ToolBook 1).
Clarity of the value proposition associated with a new product under development is central to its ulti￾mate success in the marketplace. Appropriate market research to establish customer needs lays the foun￾dation for the product’s value proposition. This, in turn, can be developed into a clear concept description 
and product design specifications. Throughout the product innovation process, ongoing market research 
should ensure the product’s design continues to align with the value proposition.
CORE BENEFIT
OR SERVICE
STYLING
FEATURES
PACKAGING
BRAND
INSTALLATION
DELIVERY
& CREDIT
WARRANTY
AFTER SALES
SERVICE
CORE: Benefits for target market
TANGIBLE: Physical and
aesthetic design features
AUGMENTED: Extra benefit,
free of charge or higher in
price
FIGURE 2.17 The three levels of a product86 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
Analyzing the Current Product Portfolio
Analysis of an organization’s current product portfolio is central to both product management and product 
innovation planning.
A technique developed by the Boston Consulting Group (BCG) provides a 2×2 matrix framework for 
analyzing the current product portfolio on the basis of two dimensions, market share and market growth 
(refer to Figure  1.20). Using the 2×2  matrix, current products are placed into one of four categories  – 
stars, question marks, cash cows, and dogs – defined as follows:
Stars are products that command a significant market share in a growing overall market.
Question marks are products that are in a market of high overall growth but as yet have not cap￾tured a significant market share.
Cash cows are products that have a high share of a market that has low overall growth.
Dogs are products that have a low share in a market with low overall growth.
The strategies associated with product management and product innovation for each of these product 
categories are summarized in Figure 2.18.
The Product Roadmap
A product roadmap is a plan that matches short-term and long-term business goals with specific product 
innovation solutions to help meet those goals.
The purpose of a product roadmap is to communicate direction and progress to internal teams and 
external stakeholders. It shows the high-level initiatives and the planned steps to get there. Creating a 
product roadmap should be a continuous process throughout the life cycle of a product. It is also a col￾laboration tool to keep selected stakeholders informed of plans as well as provide a catalyst for input on 
plans. Product roadmaps have been further discussed in Section 1.7.
2.7.2 Technology Strategy
A technology strategy is a plan for the maintenance and development of technologies that supports the 
future growth of the organization and aids the achievement of its strategic goals.
Earnings: low, unstable, growing
Cash flow: negative
Strategy: determine if potential to
grow into a star or decline to a dog
Example: Oracle Cloud
Earnings: high, stable, growing
Cash flow: neutral
Strategy: invest in growth
Example: Amazon Web
Services
Earnings: low, unstable,
Cash flow: neutral or negative
Strategy: divest or focus on
changing value proposition
Example: Google+ (it was killed)
Earnings: high, stable,
Cash flow: high, stable
Strategy: milk or invest
Example: Coca-Cola
TOTAL MARKET GROWTH 
LOW H MARKET SHARE IGH
LOW
HIGH g
e
FIGURE 2.18 Adaptation of the BCG growth-share matrix. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from NetMBA.comPRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 87
Some questions to consider when developing an organization’s technology strategy include:
• Does the organization lead or follow in its adoption and development of new technologies?
○ What are the boundaries that will impact the organization’s innovation (the maximum level of risk 
and uncertainty it has on innovation projects)?
○ If and when it follows, does it acquire or imitate the leaders?
• What level of investment does the organization make in developing and owning new technologies?
• What methods does the organization use to acquire and protect technologies? Patents, trade 
secrets, standards, speed (refer to Section 1.7.3 on intellectual property).
• What comprises the company’s technology platform(s) – the technologies shared across products, 
services, and processes?
• Does the organization make or buy technologies?
○ To what extent does it open its innovation to the outside world?
○ To what extent and in what ways does it engage partners and suppliers in technology develop￾ment?
• What core competencies does it need to develop in-house? Core competencies are those absolutely 
critical to the successful development and implementation of the new technologies.
Technology Foresighting
Technology foresighting is a process of looking into the future to predict technology trends and their poten￾tial impact on the company. A wide range of tools is used for foresighting. These include brainstorming, 
expert panels, Delphi, SWOT analysis, patent analysis, and trend analysis. A basic framework is shown in 
Figure 2.19.
Technology Strategy: Link to the Business and Innovation Strategies
The role and importance of a technology strategy will depend on the strategic focus for the organization. 
Consider these guidelines:
• Technology-driven companies are highly dependent on achieving a competitive edge through new 
and innovative technologies.
Company R&D
and technical
experts
External
experts
Published
information
Businesses
and social
issues
Key
technologies
Business &
society
trends
Technology
trends
FIGURE 2.19 A basic technology foresighting framework88 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
• Market-driven companies are heavily focused on meeting customer needs, where the technology 
may or may not be a significant component.
• Most companies will fall somewhere in the middle ground, with a strong focus on meeting customer 
needs but where technology is an important consideration in achieving a competitive edge.
In Section 2.6.4, Pisano’s innovation landscape map was introduced. This presented four quadrants 
of innovation strategy based on the relative emphasis on business and technology. Architectural innova￾tion was defined as focusing on both business and technology, while radical innovation was defined as a 
more singular focus on technology. Organizations that have strategically positioned themselves in either 
the architectural or radical quadrants of Pisano’s innovation landscape will need to place a strong empha￾sis on the status and trending of relevant technologies (both current and future). Fundamental to technol￾ogy development and application is the principle of the technology life cycle or the technology S-Curve.
Technology S-Curves
The technology S-Curve (see Figure 2.20) shows the life cycle stages that apply to most technologies as 
they emerge, grow, and mature. The stages are:
1. Embryonic: this is where the technology is initially applied, often with limited performance. At this 
stage, there are significant risks for companies applying the technology. These risks, associated with 
potential product failure and lack of customer satisfaction, may be a deterrent to organizations that 
are employing relatively low-risk innovation strategies. On the other hand, organizations that have 
committed to higher-risk strategies may see technology at the embryonic stage as an opportunity to 
gain an early foothold in the market and to become a market leader.
2. Growth: at this stage, there is significant improvement in the technology and its performance. The 
more risk-adverse organizations will now be more willing to apply the technology. This leads to 
greater competition for other products also applying the technology.
3. Maturity: At this stage, the limits of the science required to increase the performance of the tech￾nology have been reached. Or possibly, the technology has been superseded with new and more 
advanced technology. An example is shown in Figure 2.21.
Technology Roadmap
Technology roadmaps are an important complement to the product roadmap in aligning technology 
planning and development to overall planning for the launch of a single product or a range of products. PERFORMANCE
EMBRYONIC
GROWTH
MATURITY
A technology’s performance
evolves slowly at the beginning
At some point a
breakthrough happens and
technology improves rapidly
Limits of what is
scientifically possible is
reached and
performance ceases to
increase
TIME
FIGURE 2.20 The technology S-CurvePRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 89
Technology road mapping is particularly important in organizations that have a strong strategic focus on 
technology in underpinning the innovation strategy and new product innovation. Refer to Section 1.7.3 for 
additional information on technology roadmaps.
2.7.3 Product Platform Strategy
A product platform strategy is fundamental to the development of new products for most companies.
A product platform strategy is defined as a set of subsystems and interfaces that form a common 
structure from which a stream of derivative products can be efficiently developed and produced.
“A product platform technology is not a product. It is a collection of common elements, especially 
the underlying core technology, implemented across a range of products. It is the foundation of 
product strategy, especially in high-tech companies where many products are built from a core 
technology” (McGrath, 1995).
Benefits of platform strategy
A product platform strategy offers the following benefits to an organization:
• It enables products to be deployed rapidly, consistently, and with lower technical risk.
• It encourages a longer-term view of product strategy.
• It can leverage significant operational efficiencies.
• It ensures that the underlying elements of the product platform are clearly understood by the organi￾zation and the market.
• It can provide a significant point of differentiation from competing products, especially if the platform 
contains unique IP.
TIME
PERFORMANC
E
Mechanical calculators
reached technological
maturity (1950s)
Electronic calculators were
initially more expensive
with lower performance
Integrated circuits provided a major
breakthrough. Electronic calculators
became better and cheaper,
displacing mechanical ones.
FIGURE 2.21 Technology disruption example: mechanical calculators90 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
Example: Platform strategy in the internet industry
Google turned its initial product into a platform for future products. In 1998, the Google search engine was 
released in beta form. Google’s search capability has since become a platform for other Google products, 
including a search hardware appliance for companies, Gmail, Maps, Docs, YouTube, and more.
Example: Platform strategy in the software industry
A software environment that is used to write applications and run them is a product platform. It includes 
software tools such as GUI builders, compilers, class libraries, and utilities for developing the applications, 
as well as a runtime engine for executing the applications because they are not able to run on their own. 
Sun’s Java and Microsoft’s NET Framework are examples of major software platforms.
Example: Platform strategy in the automobile industry
Key mechanical components that define an automobile platform include:
The floor plan, which serves as the foundation for the chassis and other structural and mechanical 
components.
• Front and rear axles and the distance between them (the wheelbase).
• Steering mechanism and type of power steering.
• Type of front and rear suspension.
• Placement and choice of engine and power train components.
For example, the Audi TT and the VW Golf share many mechanical components but appear entirely dif￾ferent visually.
2.7.4 Intellectual Property Strategy
Intellectual property (IP) refers to creations of the mind, such as inventions, literary and artistic works, 
designs, symbols, names, and images used in commerce. Just like other forms of property (land, build￾ings, etc.), IP can be sold, licensed, exchanged, or given away by its owner.
IP is particularly important in product innovation because it defines the potential for an organization to 
capture value from new products. This can be done either directly by the organization in its manufacturing 
and marketing of the new product, by licensing the product to another organization, or by selling the IP 
rights. Protection of IP ownership is, therefore, an essential component of an organization’s business strat￾egy. IP is protected under law in a number of ways that enable the owner to earn recognition or financial 
reward from what they invent or create.
Types of IP Rights
Patents, copyrights, and trademarks are the most common forms of IP in product innovation. Trade 
secrets and niche protection for plant varieties also exist.
1. Patent: a government authority or license conferring a right or title for a set period, especially the 
sole right to exclude others from making, using, or selling an invention.
2. Copyright: the exclusive and assignable legal right, given to the originator for a fixed number of 
years, to print, publish, perform, film, or record literary, artistic, or musical material.
3. Trademarks: a symbol, word, or words legally registered or established by use as representing an 
organization or product.
4. Trade secrets: information related to IP that is retained confidentially within an organization. Unlike 
the other forms of IP listed here, trade secrets are not registered with a government authority.
5. Plant variety rights: Based on the USDA Plant Variety Protection Act, this gives exclusive right to 
produce for sale and sell propagating material of a plant variety.PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 91
IP Management Maturity Model
As an organization progresses in its maturity in applying intellectual property as a business strategy, it 
moves from a reactive state, where the emphasis is simply on tracking IP developments, to a proactive 
state utilizing IP to drive competitive advantage. The decision on what emphasis is placed on IP as a com￾ponent of overall business strategy will depend on the organization’s goals and the environment in which it 
operates. Table 2.3 summarizes the management of IP under four specific headings – reactive, proactive, 
strategic, and optimized.
Figure 2.22 outlines the approach to managing IP in an optimized manner, where IP is front and center 
in achieving the organization’s strategic goals. Here, IP is used:
• To drive competitive advantage,
• As a key criterion in portfolio management, and
• As a key driver for company profitability and growth.
Competitive intelligence underpins strategic decisions and mitigates risks.
2.7.5 Capability Strategy
With the innovation strategy defined, it is time to move to execution. It is imperative to establish the right 
set of capabilities to implement that strategy.
Some Key Definitions
Competencies are based on human resources and refer to the combination of skills, knowledge, and 
ability that lead to superior performance in an organization and that allow it to be competitive in the mar￾ketplace. There are two main types, commonly referred to as “soft” or “behavioral” competencies and 
“hard” or “technical” competencies. Behavioral competencies include cognitive and personality character￾istics, while technical competencies include learned expertise such as project management.
TABLE 2.3 Approaches to IP management
Approach
Activity Reactive Proactive Strategic Optimized
Research 
and product 
innovation
Patent as an after￾thought
Freedom to operate Aligned with business 
strategy
IP drives strategic 
advantage – R&D 
investment
IP portfolio and 
management
Simple portfolio 
tracking
Relate portfolio to 
business
Build IP awareness
Portfolio management 
input to R&D and 
licensing
Portfolio management 
for competitive 
advantage
IP acquisition and 
monetization
Ad hoc response 
to IP licensing 
opportunities
Proactively identify 
licensing partners
IP royalty and revenue 
goals
Business drives 
IP monetization & 
acquisition targets
Competitive 
intelligence
Ad-hoc or situation￾driven intelligence
Competitive 
intelligence on key 
industry players
Ongoing analysis of 
complete IP competitive 
landscape
Competitive intelligence 
is key to business 
strategy
Risk management 
and litigation
Respond to surprise 
litigation
Risk profile monitoring
Defense patenting
Protective licensing Non-mitigated risks are 
insured92 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
Behavioral competencies involve characteristics such as analytical thinking, interpersonal ability, and ini￾tiative. Abilities rely on natural or inherent behaviors as opposed to learned ones. Although abilities can be 
developed to some extent, the majority of what constitutes ability cannot be learned.
Technical competencies involve the knowledge and skills which are learned through study and practice. 
Skills are the application of knowledge in work (a trade or profession) or leisure.
Core competencies are what give an organization one or more competitive advantages in creating and 
delivering value to customers. Whereas a standard set of competencies allow an organization to compete 
in the marketplace, core competencies are those that give the organization a truly competitive edge.
Resources are the operational inputs that allow an organization to perform its business activities. 
Resources are often divided into three categories:
• Physical assets,
• Human resources,
• Organizational capital.
Capabilities are the activities and functions an organization performs to utilize its resources (physical 
assets, human resources, and organizational capital) in an integrated way. Capabilities are practiced and 
developed over time. As they become stronger, the organization enhances its expertise in a particular 
functional or operational area. This expertise allows the organization to differentiate itself from competitors.
Capability-based strategies, also referred to as the resource-based view of the organization, are deter￾mined by those internal resources and capabilities that provide the platform for the organization’s strategy 
and those resources and capabilities that are the primary source of profit. A key management function is to 
identify what resource gaps need to be filled in order to maintain a competitive edge where these capabili￾ties are required.
A Basic Roadmap for Developing Capability-based Strategies for Product Innovation
1. Ensure a clear definition of organizational mission, goals, business strategy, and innovation strategy. 
As discussed in previous sections of this chapter, these underpin all organizational decision-making. 
Clear denition of IP value creation goals embedded in Business Strategy
Actively select new productopportunities on
the basis of IP value creation
Proactive search for IP licensing and partnering
opportunities to complement the product portfolio
Decide on mode of IP value realization Decide on IP Protection required
Within own organizationSell License Patent Trade secret
Which countries?
FIGURE 2.22 An optimized approach to IP strategyPRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 93
A precise alignment is needed between each element. For example, if the business strategy is based 
on cost leadership, a prospector innovation strategy would be out of alignment. Refer to Figure 2.23.
2. Carry out a SWOT analysis, specifically focusing on the organization’s capability to take advantage of 
opportunities and combat threats. What specific resources (physical assets, human resources, and 
organizational capital) are required?
3. Carry out a “capability audit” to identify current organizational resources and their strengths.
4. Identify the gaps between the required capability and the current capability. Specifically:
• What new resources are needed?
• Where do current resources need to be strengthened?
• What competencies are required to compete?
• What core competencies are required to provide a truly competitive edge?
5. How should the organization develop the desired capability and acquire the required resources? 
Specifically:
• Develop internally, e.g., train or re-train existing staff.
• Add roles to supplement or complement existing competencies.
• Use mergers, acquisitions, joint ventures, and/or open innovation to incorporate external 
competencies.
2.7.6 Digital Strategy
Digital Transformation History
The foundation for digital transformation dates back to the 1940s when digital communications were for￾malized in Claude Shannon’s article, A Mathematical Theory of Communication. The dispersion of com￾puters to organizations and individuals, along with the rapid expansion of the Internet, made digital 
communications commonplace. By 2010, many organizations had already moved manual systems into 
a digital world. For example, filling out a paper form became rarer as data was more likely captured on a 
web form, in a PDF, or other digital formats. This was the first significant step in what most people would 
recognize as a move from analog to digital, with organizations automating processes that were previously 
analog and more manually intensive. During this time, the strategy was often phrased as “we are going 
digital.” This was, and continues, to be aligned with the adoption of commercial enterprise-wide informa￾tion systems provided by SAP, Oracle, Microsoft, and a host of other companies and included Enterprise 
Resource Planning, Customer Relationship Management, Inventory Management, and many other large IT 
systems. This paved the way for what is now called the Digital Transformation strategy.
Ensureaclear definition of organizational mission, goals, business strategy,
and innovation strategy.
STRATEGY
Carry out a SWOT analysis
COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE
Carry out a capability audit to identify organization resources and strengths
ORGANIZATION FUNCTIONS
Identify gaps between required capability and current capability
CORE COMPETENCIES
Identify how the organization should develop desired capability and acquire
required resources
RESOURCES
1
2
3
4
5
FIGURE 2.23 The hierarchy of capability-based strategy94 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
It is generally agreed that the Covid-19 pandemic resulted in a significant acceleration in digital trans￾formation. Walker (2021), in his summary of the findings from the Harvard Business Review Pulse Survey 
on Accelerating Transformation for a Post-Covid-19 World, reported 95% of respondents said that digital 
transformation has grown in importance over the first 12 months of the pandemic; 90% said that Covid-19 
accelerated the timing or their organization’s transformation efforts; and 58% said their organization’s trans￾formation strategies since the start of the pandemic had been effective, up for 20% before the outbreak.
Following are some key definitions of terms that, to a large extent, have been used interchangeably 
over recent years (see Figure 2.24 showing the hierarchy of digital applications):
Digitization refers to creating a digital representation of physical objects or attributes. The goal of 
digitization is to make information more easily accessible, storable, maintained, and shared.
Digitalization refers to enabling or improving processes by leveraging digital technologies and digi￾tized data. The purpose of digitalization is to enable, improve, and transform business operations 
through the use of digitized data and technologies in order to transform how organizations conduct 
business and improve productivity.
Digital transformation: The Institute for Digital Transformation defines digital transformation as, 
“The integration of digital technologies into a business resulting in the reshaping of an organization 
that reorients it around the customer experience, business value, and constant change.” This defini￾tion recognizes that digital transformation is much more than just a change in IT technology such as 
hardware, software, or a digital platform. A digital transformation goes to the heart of the business 
processes and transforms them to leverage digital capabilities.
Digital Technology and the Development of New Products and Services
Sheen (2019) provides an illustrative list of categories of digital technologies that impact transformation in 
the development of new products and services.
• “Smart devices are products or appliances that are characterized by sensors or monitors, a user 
interface, processing capability, and digital communication. As such, these devices are essentially 
computers embedded in a product that provides additional functionality. Most smart devices can 
also be customized with a personal profile or programmable functionality that enables the user to 
create a unique pattern of interaction with the device.
• The Internet of Things is a digital technology that has proliferated during the past few years. It is 
characterized by any device or equipment with digital communication capability along with sensors 
Digitization
Digitalization
Digital
transformation
FIGURE 2.24 Hierarchy of digital applicationPRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 95
or monitors. The Internet of Things connects devices digitally across a network and allows either 
one-way or two-way communication.
• Analytics platforms provide aggregation of data into a dashboard or user interface. This enables a cus￾tomer to monitor and control a process that has multiple connected devices. The analytics can also be 
used to troubleshoot and analyze the performance of the different steps in the process being monitored.
○ Digital platforms are software applications that operate over the internet and connect individuals 
from different user group categories. Through the platform connection, individuals or corporate 
entities can exchange information, purchase products or services, and promote a cause or prod￾uct. Digital platforms can be very complex, with many user group categories and extensive shar￾ing capability for presenting and exchanging information. Or the platform can be very simple and 
focused on a small set of categories or type of information.”
Transformation and the Development of New Products or Services
The digital age has impacted product design and development in many ways. Sheen (2019) highlights the 
following:
• The customer’s perspective of the value of a product has extended beyond its aesthetics and perfor￾mance to the level of connectedness and relationship it provides:
○ Connection with other customers through user groups and product forums.
○ Connection with the manufacturer in providing feedback on the product’s performance.
○ Connection with other devices using a common platform.
• Input to the early stages of design and development has been enhanced through the use of social 
media, crowdsourcing, Big Data, and other on-line tools. Providing rapid feedback on design con￾cepts, often used computer-aided modeling to demonstrate the features and functionality of a prod￾uct concept.
• Launching of innovative new products – “Crossing the Chasm,” discussed in Section 1.6, has been 
facilitated through digital technologies such as computer-aided design and rapid prototyping that 
allow customers to experience a product before purchasing. The early adopters can provide feedback 
through a range of digital media, which can convince mainstream customers to purchase the product.
• The downside of developing products in the digital age is the availability of information that can ena￾ble competitors to enter the market more quickly.
Developing a Digital Transformation Strategy
The definition of a digital transformation highlights the integration of digital technologies throughout the 
entire organization. To be successful, a digital transformation strategy must, therefore, be inextricably 
linked to the overall vision and goals of the organization and to the supporting strategies of product inno￾vation, marketing, technology, intellectual property, capability, and sustainability. The basic steps in the 
development of a digital transformation strategy are:
1. Define the overall vision and goals for the organization. Critical steps in this process, discussed 
in some detail in Sections 2.2–2.4, are the analysis of the internal and external environments and 
forward projection in terms of consumer trends, competition, and technology. Techniques including 
Delphi and PESTLE should point to future technology and consumer trends and highlight the poten￾tial emergence and growth of new technologies and their potential for product innovation.
2. Identify specific areas of digital technology that are required to underpin the achievement of organi￾zational goals.
3. Define what is required to achieve digitalization.
• Which specific areas of the business need to be digitized?
• How will digitization be implemented within and across those areas of the business?96 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
• What capability is required to implement the new technologies?
• What capability is required to operate and maintain these technologies?
4. Define how digital transformation will be achieved.
• What capability is required for business continuance and improvement based on the new digital 
technologies?
5. How will the new business model be communicated across the organization?
• What training programs are required to upskill current staff?
• What specific KPIs will be implemented to measure and improve the digitalized business model?
• What structures and systems will be implemented to ensure ongoing improvement?
A Hypothetical Example
Know Your Farm is an agricultural consultancy providing advice and assistance to farmers for over 
20years. Sam, the son of the company founder, has recently taken over the leadership of the company. 
Sam has been trained in computer science and information technology and has worked for five years in 
the application of digital technologies in the pharmaceutical industry. Know Your Farm is a very traditional 
company, employing 20 people, mainly with farming backgrounds, working off paper-based systems and 
basic telephone communication with its farming clients. Recent years have seen significant changes in 
the farming industry with a growing emphasis on technology. Sam is keen to take advantage of this trend 
based on a new vision and goal for the company.
The Vision and Goal:
Transforming Know Your Farm into a digitally-based company, facilitating easy communication with farm￾ers and across the farming community. Providing rapid feedback and advice to farmers based on the most 
up-to-date information.
What specific areas of Know Your Farm need to be digitized?
The most important area is a digital toolkit for farmers and contractors that will enable them to boost pro￾ductivity, enhance safety, and reduce paperwork.
What is required to achieve digitalization?
• Input from farmers is required on what they would specifically value in this digital toolkit – its features 
and functionality. A lead user group of progressive farmers will provide on-going input to the develop￾ment of the final product.
• Although Sam has experience in digital technology, he recognizes the need for more support in this 
specific area of product application.
How will digital transformation be achieved?
• Although there is significant support among the company directors and employees for moving into 
the digital age, the support is not universal, and very few staff have digital technology experience 
beyond using a mobile phone.
• A training program will be provided to all staff, who will then be encouraged to actively participate in 
the development of the new digital toolkit through testing its features and functionality and involve￾ment with the farmer lead user group.
• Based on the feedback from staff and farmers, an implementation plan for transitioning to the new 
digital toolkit will be prepared together with feedback and customer support mechanisms.PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 97
2.8 OPEN INNOVATION
2.8.1 Foundations of Open Innovation
Open Innovation (OI) extends innovation resources beyond the boundaries of the organization. It is defined 
as the strategy adopted by an organization to actively seek knowledge from external sources through alli￾ances, partnerships, and contractual arrangements that complement and enhance its internal capability in 
pursuit of improved innovation outcomes. These innovation outcomes may be commercialized internally, 
through new business entities, or through external licensing arrangements.
OI can deliver many benefits, but applying it is challenging. Table 2.4 summarizes some potential ben￾efits as well as challenges of applying OI, organized around the six principles of OI (Tidd & Bessant, 2013).
2.8.2 Open Innovation Model Types
Searching for and then working with external parties (e.g., customers, suppliers, competitors, or research 
institutions such as universities) is labeled as “inbound open innovation.” Organizations can become dif￾ferent types of “inbound open innovators” depending on the number/types of partners with which they 
work (aka “partner variety”) and the number/types of phases of their innovation process that they “open” 
TABLE 2.4 The benefits and challenges of Open Innovation
Principle of OI Potential benefit Challenges in OI application
Tap into external knowledge • Increase pool of knowledge
• Reduce reliance on limited 
internal knowledge
• How to search for and identify 
relevant knowledge sources
• Breaking down traditional internal 
views on innovation
Acquire external R&D • Can reduce the cost and 
uncertainty associated with 
internal R&D and increase depth 
and breadth of R&D
• Less likely to lead to distinctive 
capabilities and more difficult to 
differentiate
• External R&D may also possibly 
come from competitors
Do not have to originate research in 
order to profit from it
• Reduce cost of internal R&D, 
more resources applied to 
external search strategies and 
relationships
• Need sufficient internal R&D 
capability in order to identify, 
evaluate, and adapt external R&D
Building a better business model is 
superior to being first to market
• Greater long-run profitability 
and success
• First-mover advantages depend 
on technology and market context 
and may be difficult to overcome
Best use of internal and external 
ideas, not generation of ideas
• Better balance of resources to 
search and identify ideas, rather 
than generate
• Many companies are better at 
generating superficial ideas than 
finding the long-term winners
• The cost of evaluation is often high 
when sifting through potentially 
thousands of ideas
Profit from others’ Intellectual Property 
(IP) (inbound OI) and others’ use of 
our IP (outbound OI)
• Gets IP in the hands of those 
companies best equipped to 
commercialize
• Conflicts of commercial interest or 
strategic direction
• Negotiation of acceptable forms 
and terms of IP licenses
Source: Adapted from Tidd and Bessant (2013).98 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
to external parties (aka “innovation openness”) (Tidd & Bessant, 2013). Figure 2.25 summarizes the four 
models of OI according to the level of innovation openness and the partner variety. Closed innovators have 
a low level of openness to innovation and a low range of partners. Integrated collaborators have a relatively 
low number of partners with a high level of collaboration. Specialized collaborators work with a wide range 
of partners but with a low level of openness. Open innovators have a high level of openness and work with 
a number of partners.
Organizations must exercise caution when deploying resources for inbound innovation. Research 
shows that at low levels of openness (being generally closed to outside ideas) and very high levels of 
openness (considering ideas from a vast array of sources), innovation performance seems to suffer, while 
organizations with a moderate amount of openness showed superior product and process performance.
The main success factors and appropriate managerial styles differ for these different types of open 
innovators (Tidd & Bessant, 2013). The main success factors for each of the four OI models and the asso￾ciated management styles are presented in Figure 2.26.
INTEGRATED COLLABORATORS OPEN
INNOVATORS
CLOSED
INNOVATORS SPECIALIZED COLLABORATORS
INNOVATION
FUNNEL
OPENESS
PARTNER VARIETY
High
Low
Low High
FIGURE 2.25 Open Innovation model types
Low Partner variety High
High
Innovation
funnel
openess
Low
Integrated collaborators Open innovators
Quality, service, time, brand equity, and others. Technological leadership
Mainly top down Highly participative
Closed Innovators Specialized collaborators
Quality, service, time, brand, technological
excellence, and others
Technological excellence, service, time, and
others
Mainly top down Participative
Main success factor
Managerial style
Main success factor
Managerial style
FIGURE 2.26 Success factors and management styles for OI modelsPRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 99
Becoming an open innovator improves innovation performance, but this effect is highly contingent on 
the number of potential partners, the use of pre-screening these partners, and the uncertainty of the indus￾try environment for the organization (Lazarotti & Manzini, 2014).
Organizations can participate in OI in various ways: innovation seeker, innovation provider, intermedi￾ary, or open innovator (Ellis et  al.,  2014). The mechanisms for participation in each are summarized in 
Table 2.5.
For further reading on Open Innovation, refer to Chesbrough (2003) and Noble et al. (2014).
TABLE 2.5 Mechanisms for participation in Open Innovation
OI participation type Mechanisms to participate
Innovation seeker Leverage user innovation; outsource and form alliances
Innovation provider Venture capital, licensing, and alliances
Intermediary Auctions and partnerships
Open innovator Outsource, form alliances, mergers and acquisitions, and venture capital licensing
Examples of Open Innovation
Open Innovation is used by many organizations, including a number of PDMA’s Outstanding Corpo￾rate Innovation (OCI) award winners.
• Novozymes, a leader in enzymes and microbial technologies, uses OI in various phases of the 
innovation process. They are particularly active in crowdsourcing in the idea generation stage: they 
collect ideas online for two weeks, screen these ideas and then mature the selected ones for one 
month. These matured ideas are then pitched to management as New Lead Project Proposals.
• Offshore Oil Engineering Co., Ltd (COOEC), the OCI winner in 2018, is the world’s leading sup￾plier of KIBS marine energy engineering and provides innovative integrated solutions to petroleum 
and gas field development. COOEC actively uses OI through partnering with university research 
centers, suppliers, and clients.
• The Smart Village initiative in impoverished rural Indian states. A number of companies, many of 
them competing against each other in other markets, collaborated to empower villagers so that the 
villagers can join in the supply chain and create a win-win environment both for themselves and for 
the participating companies (Darwin & Chesbrough, 2016).100 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
2.9 SUSTAINABLE INNOVATION
2.9.1 What is a Sustainable Business?
A sustainable business is an enterprise that seeks a positive impact on the global or local environment, 
community, society, or economy – a business that strives to meet the triple bottom line defined below. 
Sustainable businesses may also have progressive environmental and human rights objectives.
Sustainability in business generally addresses two main categories in addition to profit:
• The effect business has on the environment;
• The effect business has on society.
The goal of a sustainable business strategy is to make a positive impact on either of those areas. 
When companies fail to assume responsibility, the opposite can happen, leading to issues like environmen￾tal degradation, inequality, and social injustice.
Beyond helping curb those global challenges, sustainability can drive business success. Several inves￾tors today use environmental, social, and governance (ESG) metrics to analyze an organization’s ethical 
impact and sustainability practices. Investors look at factors such as a company’s carbon footprint, water 
usage, community development efforts, and board diversity.
According to McKinsey (n.d.) “the strongest motivating factors among company employees to adopt￾ing a sustainable mindset are to align with a company’s goals, missions, or values; build, maintain, or 
improve reputation; meet customers’ expectations; and develop new growth opportunities.”
2.9.2 Sustainability and Strategy
Most organizations now have an overarching framework for incorporating sustainability into standard 
organization operations. This implies that:
• Organizations develop a formal sustainability plan.
• Sustainability is used to drive competitive advantage.
• Sustainability is used as a driver for innovation and developing new products, following the triple bot￾tom line concept.
• Sustainability is included in the organization’s mission statement and values.
• Sustainability metrics are tracked at the executive level.
• A sustainability maturity model is in place, and progress is tracked regularly.
• Sustainable innovation is used to be compliant, market-driven, engaged, or shaping the future, or 
compliant, reactive, proactive, and purposeful.
The Triple Bottom Line
In traditional accounting, the “bottom line” refers to either the profit or loss at the very bottom of the state￾ment of revenue and expenses. It was the key indicator of business performance. Over recent years, busi￾nesses have sought to evaluate their performance from a broader perspective, taking into account social 
and environmental contributions or impact.
The triple bottom line reports performance against three dimensions:
1. Financial: pursuing profits because that creates a strong organization that can be responsible to 
the planet and people.
2. Social: treating people and communities with respect, in part because these are current and future 
employees and customers.PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 101
3. Environmental: interacting with the environment in a way that creates a sustainable (long-term) 
business model. Some companies have also found ways to reduce costs, such as converting a 
waste from their manufacturing process into a valued product.
These dimensions are often referred to as the three Ps of the triple bottom line:
• Profit
• People
• Planet
How to Create a More Sustainable Business Strategy
Step 1: Assess the problem and define objectives
The first step to driving change is assessing what sustainability means to your team, company, industry, 
and client. Consider the big problems each of these groups think is a priority. This information can be 
used to create a materiality matrix depicting the sustainability topics relative to the impact on your organi￾zation and its importance to your stakeholders. A simple example: https://www.greenbiz.com/article/
how-make-your-materiality-assessment-worth-effort
To guide this process, consider asking questions such as:
• Which societal and environmental topics are most important for the organization’s customer segments?
• Where can societal and environmental topics form a risk for the organization or its customers?
• What is the purpose of the organization?
• How much waste is the organization creating?
• Does the organization have a positive culture?
• Are the hiring practices attracting diverse job candidates?
• Are the organization’s products targeted to address the main topics in your materiality matrix?
• What impact does the organization have on the local community?
Answering these questions will help establish the organization’s sustainability objectives and improve 
the quality of input to a PESTLE analysis (Section 2.4.1).
Step 2: Establish the sustainability component of the organization’s mission
Decide on specific sustainability objectives and ensure that these are embodied in your company’s mis￾sion. Ensuring that these objectives are an integral part of the mission is an important part of becoming a 
more sustainable business. Here are two examples of companies with mission statements that effectively 
focus on sustainability:
Alignable: “We believe that local businesses are stronger together. Our goal is to help small business 
owners make the connections that lead to long-term relationships, generate more word-of-mouth referrals, 
and unlock access to the collective wisdom of the local business community.”
Patagonia: “Build the best product, cause no unnecessary harm, use business to inspire, and implement 
solutions to the environmental crisis.”
In each, it is clear what the company values are, and how they are executing against those values.
Step 3: Craft the sustainability strategy
A clearly defined contribution of sustainability to the organization’s mission is the starting point for a sus￾tainable business strategy.
In crafting a sustainable business strategy, it is important to ensure that the organization remains profit￾able. While each component of the triple bottom line is important, profit is the first priority as it enables the 
other elements of sustainability.102 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
Consider this: does the organization typically leave the electricity and heat on overnight, even while no 
employees are on site? Imagine how much savings could be realized, in both cost and energy resources, if 
the last person in the office simply shut them off or sensors were added to turn lights and other devices off 
when people are not present. Or are consumers willing to pay more for a sustainably produced product? 
A 2017 Unilever study found that 33 percent of consumers want to buy from brands doing social or environ￾mental good, creating an untapped opportunity in the market for sustainable goods (Unilever, 2017). Since 
then, annual surveys show the percentage of consumers choosing to buy from sustainable organizations is 
increasing. One study shows that 90% of Gen Z is willing to pay more for sustainable products (Petro, 2022).
There are several strategies for specific industries that can increase operational efficiency while driv￾ing social and internal value. Putting in the work to build a robust sustainability strategy can help both the 
organization and the environment in the long term.
2.9.3 Sustainable Product Innovation
This is the process in which new products or services are developed and brought to commercialization. 
Throughout this process the characteristics of sustainable development are respected from the economic, 
environmental, and social perspectives, in the sourcing, production, use, and end-of-service stage of the 
product life cycle. It has a global focus, beyond the primary life cycle of the product/service and takes all 
stakeholders into account.
Sustainable product innovation is supported by sustainable development, which is defined as “devel￾opment which meets the needs of current generations without compromising the ability of future genera￾tions to meet their own needs” (Brundtland Commission, 1987).
The Importance of Sustainability to Product Innovation
Over recent years, sustainability has become increasingly important in product innovation. A 2011 
Sustainability and Innovation Global Executive Study reported that 70 percent of the organizations surveyed 
included sustainability permanently on the management agenda and invested in it (Haanaes et al., 2012).
STAGE 1: BEGINNING
STAGE 2: IMPROVING
STAGE 3: SUCCEEDING
STAGE 4: LEADING
Corporate policies do not
recognize the triple bottom line
(economic, social, environmental)
Overall strategy is focused on
compliance with the minimum
legal requirements
Limited sustainability awareness
when setting new product goals
and specifications
Supplier policies do not
incorporate sustainability
Limited sharing and development
of sustainability metrics
Centralized sustainability
reporting function is in place
Environmental, health and safety
policy publicly states metrics and
goals
Carbon, energy and water
footprints are established and
measured at the plant level
Regulatory and policy issues are
actively communicated
throughout the organization
Business and product strategy
anticipates future customer
behavior based on sustainability
trends
Supplier assessment includes a
review of supplier’s sustainability
policies
Checklists and other tools used to
compare sustainability of new
products during the NPD process
Best practices for improving the
triple bottom line are consistently
leveraged across the entire
enterprise
Sustainability metrics are
established at the enterprise level
and linked to the business success
of the company
NPD processes consider and
encourage sustainability
throughout the phase-gate review
process
Company has shifted focus from
meeting government regulations
to exceeding requirements
(benign by design)
Supply chain impacts to the
corporate sustainability goals are
well understood and
improvement activities are
implemented
Supplier selection is based upon a
supplier’s environmental and
sustainability policies and efforts
Company publishes an annual
sustainability report that
discusses aspects of the triple
bottom line
Corporate sustainability policy is
fully integrated into other
company policies and viewed as
an important lever to drive
growth and profitability
Sustainable ideas and IP are
leveraged for broader use by way
of the supply chain, licensing, sale
of IP, joint ventures, etc. with the
specific intent of broader impact
Organization emphasizes R&D
innovation to develop new
technologies and design methods
that will reduce the overall
environmental footprint of new
products
Majority of company’s products
are “certified” according to
industry standards and third
party assessments
-
Product sustainability metrics
shared broadly and seen as
competitive edge
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
⧠
FIGURE 2.27 Innovation Maturity ModelPRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 103
In the 2012 PDMA CPAS, a third of the companies responded that sustainability contributed to their 
profits (Markham & Lee, 2013).
Figure 2.27 presents an Innovation Maturity Model, which shows the characteristics relating to sustain￾ability for organizations moving from what can be described as a “beginner” to a “leader.”
2.9.4 Externalities
Externalities are the effects of a product on people or the environment that are not reflected in the market 
price of the product. Externalities are a consideration for many companies. Government policy or regula￾tion can be used to incorporate externalities into product price. Carbon pricing is an example of a policy 
that incorporates an externality (i.e., greenhouse gas emissions) into a product (i.e., electricity).
In the absence of regulation or policy, some companies have found advantages in marketing the incor￾poration of externalities into products. For example, products labeled as having been produced from 
renewable resources may command a higher price from consumers who value the environment.
2.9.5 The Circular Economy and Innovation
Cradle-to-cradle (the beginning of a product’s life to the start of a new product’s life) thinking or focusing 
on the circular economy can become a strategic driver. In the circular economy, the aim is to create closed 
loops in the product life cycle based on three principles (Ellen Macarthur Foundation, n.d.).
Principle 1: Preserve and enhance natural capital by controlling finite stocks and balancing renew￾able resource flows.
Principle 2: Optimize resource yields by circulating products, components, and materials at the 
highest utility at all times in both technical and biological cycles.
Principle 3: Foster system effectiveness by revealing and designing out negative external influences.
Figure 2.28 shows examples of products in the circular economy.
Sustainability and Company Strategy Examples
IKEA: Is committed to only using renewable and recycled materials and to reduce the total IKEA cli￾mate footprint by an average of 70% per product.
Nike: Aims to use 100% renewable energy across all its owned facilities. In 2020, the company was 
only using 48% renewable energy in these locations. Plus, the company wants to reduce the use of 
energy in key operations by 25% (Nike, Inc., 2013).
Apple: Is committed to becoming carbon neutral by 2030and has made sustainability a major selling 
point in the marketing for new products.
Intel: Is committed to achieving net positive water, 100% renewable electricity, zero waste to landfill, 
and additional absolute carbon emissions reductions.
Unilever: Is committed to reducing the total waste footprint per consumer use of our products by 
32%, and achieving zero waste to landfill across all our factories. Reducing greenhouse gas emis￾sions from our own manufacturing by 65%, and achieving 100% renewable grid electricity across 
our sites.104 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
Raw materials
Method detergent
Plant-based
formula
Design Business
model
Braskem, ingeo,
corbion
Bio-based plastics Herman miller
office chairs
Designed for
disassembly and
materials
Caterpillar
Component recovery
Rype office
New, remade, or
refurbished furniture
Desso carpet tiles
Designed for
disassembly and
recycling
FIGURE 2.28 Examples of products for the circular economyPRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 105
2.10 IN SUMMARY
• Strategy lies at the very heart of an organization’s sustenance and growth. It lays the foundation and 
provides the framework for all of the organization’s functions and activities.
• Strategy starts from the corporate and business levels of the organization and feeds into the various 
functional strategies of the organization.
• Laying a strong foundation of knowledge related to the organization, the industry, the wider environ￾ment, competitors, and customers is essential to good strategy development. A number of tools can 
assist in this process, including SWOT, Delphi, PESTLE, and Business Model Canvas.
• An innovation strategy is essential to most organizations. It stipulates how the organization’s innova￾tion efforts will support the overall business strategy. This provides the basis for trade-off investment 
decisions across product categories or business units.
• A range of frameworks is available to help with defining an organization’s innovation strategy. Exam￾ples include those developed by Pisano (2015), Porter (2008), Chesbrough (2003), and Miles and 
Snow (1978).
• The innovation strategy is complemented by platform, technology, marketing, intellectual property, 
digital and capability strategies. All strategies must be aligned to achieve common innovation goals.
• Realization of the product strategy (development and launch) can be achieved either using internal 
or external capabilities – or a combination of both. Increasingly, organizations are adopting an Open 
Innovation strategy to actively promote innovation with external parties.
• Increasingly, sustainability is becoming an integral part of an organization’s overall mission with a spe￾cific strategy focused on sustainability. Most organizations now provide triple bottom line reporting 
based on the three Ps of profit, people, and planet.106 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
2.A STRATEGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
1. A platform strategy is defined as____________?
A. A common marketing plan for a series of products.
B. A common manufacturing system for a range of products.
C. A set of systems and interfaces that form a common structure from which a stream of derivative prod￾ucts can be effectively developed and manufactured.
D. A strategy that connects marketing, technology, and manufacturing.
2. A corporate vision is__________.
A. An NPD project goal.
B. A philosophy statement about the beliefs of the company.
C. A set of values.
D. A picture of some desired future state that the organization hopes to obtain.
3. Mission statements help organizations to_________.
A. Focus people and resources.
B. Initiate ideas.
C. Plan for product launch.
D. Borrow capital at a low rate.
4. A strategy can be defined as___________.
A. An organization’s philosophy.
B. A company’s game plan for achieving its long-term objectives.
C. An organization’s new product development plan.
D. The organization’s values statement.
5. Which of the following are not one of Porter’s Five Forces?
A. Threat of new entrants.
B. Bargaining power of customers.
C. Threat of substitutes.
D. Bargaining power of employees.
6. Who is responsible for setting the corporate and business strategy?
A. Process management.
B. Senior management.
C. The shareholders.
D. The board of directors.
7. Your competitors have launched a new product. As you evaluate your response to compete with them, 
you realize that the technology employed in your current product has reached its limits and cannot be 
improved to increase the performance to effectively compete and the only option is to consider supersed￾ing with newer and advanced technology. What stage on the technology S-Curve are you on?
A. Growth stage.
B. Embryonic stage.
C. Maturity stage.
D. Laggard.PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 107
8. A dairy product manufacturer has discovered a new microorganism that may have significant health 
benefits (probiotic). The company decides to initiate a significant research program to prove these health 
benefits. It plans to use the probiotic in a range of products including yogurts, health drinks, and infant 
formula. This is an example of what type of strategy:
A. Line extension.
B. Technology.
C. Platform.
D. Marketing.
9. Which of the following strategies is most likely to have a strong emphasis on technology?
A. Routine.
B. Architectural.
C. Radical.
D. Both B and C.
10. In the BCG Growth-Share matrix a “cash cow” is defined as a product with high market share but low 
growth potential. What strategy should the company adopt for this type of product?
A. Take as much profit from the product as possible.
B. Sell the product while it is still making money.
C. Carry out a detailed analysis of the product, the competitors, and the market, leading to a clear strat￾egy for the future of the product.
D. Make significant investment in product improvements.
Answers to practice questions: Strategy
1. C
2. D
3. A
4. B
5. D
6. B
7. C
8. C
9. D
10. C108 PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY
REFERENCES
Brundtland Commission. (1987). Report of the world commission on environment and development: Our common future. United 
Nations. https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/139811
Chesbrough, H.W. (2003). The era of open innovation. MIT Sloan Management Review 44 (3): 35–41.
Christensen, C. (1997). The innovator’s dilemma: When new technologies cause great firms to fail. Harvard Business 
Review Press.
Christensen, C. (2016). The innovator’s dilemma: When new technologies cause great firms to fail. Harvard Business Press.
Cooper, R. and Edgett, S. (2010). Developing a product innovation and technology strategy for your business. Research￾Technology Management 53 (3): 3–40. https://doi.org/10.1080/08956308.2010.11657629.
Darwin, S., & Chesbrough, H. W. (2016). Prototyping a scalable smart village to simultaneously create sustainable development 
and enterprise growth opportunities. The Berkeley-Haas Case Series. University of California, Berkeley. Haas School of Business. 
https://doi.org/10.4135/9781526430786
Ellen Macarthur Foundation. (n.d.). It’s time for a circular economy. https://ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/
Ellis, S.C., Gianiodis, P.T., and Secchi, E. (2014). Advancing a typology of open innovation. In: Open innovation research, manage￾ment and practice (ed. J. Tidd), 39–86. Imperial College Press https://doi.org/10.1142/9781783262816_0003.
Haanaes, K., Balagopal, B., Arthur, D., Kong, M. T., & Velken, I. (2012). The embracers seize advantage. MIT Sloan 
Management Review.
Kahn, K.B., Evans Kay, S., Slotegraaf, R.J., and Uban, S. (ed.) (2013). The PDMA handbook of new product development, 3e. 
John Wiley & Sons https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118466421.
Knudsen, M.P., von Zedtwitz, M., Griffin, A., and Barczak, G. (2023). Best practices in new product development and innovation: 
Results from PDMA’s 2021 global survey. Journal of Product Innovation Management 40 (3): 257–275. https://doi.org/10.1111/
jpim.12663.
Kotler, P. (2012). Marketing management. Prentice Hall.
Lazarotti, V. and Manzini, R. (2014). Different modes of open innovation: A theoretical framework and an empirical study. 
In: Open innovation research, management and practice (ed. J. Tidd), 15–38. Imperial College Press https://doi.org/10.1142/
9781783262816_0002.
Markham, S.K. and Lee, H. (2013). Product innovation and management association’s 2012 comparative performance assess￾ment study. Journal of Product Innovation Management 30 (3): 408–429. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12025.
McGrath, M. (1995). Product strategy for high technology companies. McGraw-Hill.
McKinsey. (n.d.). Insights on sustainability. https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/sustainability/our-insights
Miles, R.E. and Snow, C.C. (1978). Organizational strategy, structure and process. McGraw Hill https://doi.org/10.2307/257544.
Nike, Inc. (2013). Nike, Inc. FY12/13 sustainable business performance summary. https://unglobalcompact.org/participation/
report/cop/active/75941
Noble, C., Durmusoglu, S., and Griffin, A. (2014). Open innovation: New product innovation essentials from the PDMA. Wiley. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118947166.
Osterwalder, A., Pigneur, Y., and Smith, A. (2010). Business model generation: A handbook for visionaries, game changers, and 
challengers. Wiley.
Petro, G. (2022). Consumers demand sustainable products and shopping formats. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/
gregpetro/2022/03/11/consumers-demand-sustainable-products-and-shopping-formats/?sh=55da1b846a06
Pisano, G. (2015). You need an innovation strategy. Harvard Business Review 93 (6): 44–54.
Porter, M.E. (1979). How competitive forces shape strategy. Harvard Business Review 57 (2): 137–145.
Porter, M.E. (1996). What is strategy? Harvard Business Review 74: 61–78.
Porter, M.E. (2008). On competition, Updated and expandede. Harvard Business School Pub.
Reeves, M., Fink, T., Palma, R., & Harnoss, J. (2017). Harnessing the secret structure of innovation. MIT Sloan Management 
Review. https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/11858.003.0005PRODUCT INNOVATION STRATEGY 109
Sheen, R. (2019). Digital transformation in product development. Institute for Digital Transformation. https://www.institutefordigital
transformation.org/digital-transformation-in-product-development/
Tidd, J. and Bessant, J. (2013). Managing innovation: Integrating technological, market and organizational change, 5e. John Wiley 
& Sons http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002463010900051X.
Tregoe, B. and Zimmerman, J. (1980). Top management strategy. Simon and Schuster.
Unilever. (2017). Report shows a third of consumers prefer sustainable brands. https://www.unilever.com/news/press-and-media/
press-releases/2017/report-shows-a-third-of-consumers-prefer-sustainable-brands/
Walker, M. (2021). Accelerating transformation for a post-COVID-19  world. HBR Pulse Survey, Harvard Business School 
Publishing.
Whetten, D.A. (2006). Albert and Whetten revisited: Strengthening the concept of organizational identity. Journal of Management 
Inquiry 15: 219–234. https://doi.org/10.1177/1056492606291200.
Porter, M.E. (1979). How competitive forces shape strategy. Harvard Business Review 57 (2): 137–145.
Tidd, J. and Bessant, J. (2013). Managing innovation: Integrating technological, market and organizational change, 5e. John 
Wiley & Sons.Product Development and Management Body of Knowledge: A Guidebook for Product Innovation Training and Certification,Third Edition. 
Allan Anderson, Chad McAllister, and Ernie Harris.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
3
Product
Innovation 
Portfolio
Establishes and maintains an appropriate 
balance of new and existing product 
innovation projects aligned with the business 
and innovation strategies112 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS CHAPTER
Portfolio management ensures that the collection of product innovation projects is aligned with strategy 
and resource availability. In this chapter, we further define the relationship of the product innovation port￾folio to the overall business strategy. The types of projects that can be included in the portfolio are dis￾cussed, together with criteria and methods that are commonly used to select projects to achieve a desired 
portfolio balance.
Some of the practical issues in implementing portfolio management are highlighted, together with sug￾gested strategies to address these issues.PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO 113
THE CHAPTER ROADMAP
The corporate strategy or business strategy, and, in turn, the innovation strategy, are prerequisites of port￾folio management. In both its development and ongoing maintenance, an organization’s product portfo￾lio invariably has a set of projects competing for resources and investment. Portfolio management is an 
essential tool, informed by the innovation strategy, that ensures the right prioritization and balance of prod￾uct innovation and product management projects.
Achieving the desired
balance of projects.
What specic criteria
to use for alignment
with strategy?
What process to
use for desired
number of projects?
What is a portfolio?
How is portfolio management
applied to product innovation?
What is the relationship between
portfolio and strategy?
What are the key goals fo
product innovation
portfolio management?
Value maximization.
What techniques to
generate new product
ideas to include
in the portfolio?
How to evaluate these
ideas? Qualitative and
financial methods.
What alignment
method to use:
Top-down, Bottom-Up
Combination
What criteria to use:
New vs. modifications
New vs. existing market
High vs. low risk
What methods to use
for resource allocation to
achieve desired portfolio
outcomes?
What visual methods
can be used to
represent a portfolio?
What are the challenges of portfolio management as a
dynamic process? How have Agile and hybrid Agile￾Stage-Gate processes impacted these challenges?
Alignment with
strategy
What types of
projects are required
in the portfolio?
Selecting the
right number
of projects114 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
3.1 WHAT IS A PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO?
Let’s begin our understanding of a product innovation portfolio by considering a couple of terms:
Portfolio: “A portfolio is a collection of programs, projects and/or operations managed as a group. The 
components of a portfolio may not necessarily be interdependent or even related – but they are managed 
together as a group to achieve strategic objectives” (Project Management Institute, 2021).
Portfolio management: “There are two ways for a business to succeed at new products: doing projects 
right and doing the right projects. Portfolio management is about doing the right projects” (Cooper 
et al., 2002).
The activities of portfolio management are often erroneously separated as:
1. portfolio selection, and
2. portfolio review.
There should be no separation between these two activities. Portfolio management should be an ongo￾ing process, applied to projects once the product concept is selected for development through launch and 
its ultimate decline and final deletion. At any one time, the product portfolio will include existing products, 
new products, product enhancements, maintenance and support projects, and research and development 
projects. It is a process that ensures optimal alignment with the strategic goals and maximizes the return on 
investment. Figure 3.1 shows the overarching role that portfolio management plays; the projects that need to 
be considered; the scope, from ideation to “end-of-life”; the relationship to individual project execution; the 
reliance on performance metrics; and the critical linkage with financial planning and resource management.
3.1.1 Key Characteristics of Portfolio Management
• It is a decision-making process within a dynamic environment, requiring ongoing review.
• Projects are at different stages of completion.
• It deals with future events. There is no certainty of success. Portfolio management is used to 
increase the overall odds of success across the full range of projects or products.
• It is used to manage resource allocation. Resources for product innovation and product man￾agement are limited and often shared with other business functions. These resources need to be 
allocated to achieve the best return to the organization. Alignment with the overall goals of the organ￾ization and the innovation strategy is essential to successfully implementing these trade-off decisions.
Product portfolio management
Performance metrics and reporting
Process and practice
Finance and resource management
New product ideas
Product
enhancements
Maintenance
and support
Research and
development
Idea and evaluation Capacity planning
Road-mapping
Pipeline planning
Execution Launch In-market analysis End of life
FIGURE 3.1 Portfolio managementPRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO 115
3.1.2 Types of Projects Included in a Portfolio
Various project or product classifications are used to derive an appropriate balance of projects in the port￾folio. The application of some form of classification system helps with strategic alignment and prioritization. 
Commonly used projects or product types are:
• Breakthrough projects (sometimes referred to as radical or disruptive). These projects strive to 
bring a new product to the market with new technologies, depart significantly from existing organiza￾tional practices, and have a high level of risk.
• Platform projects, introduced in Section 2.7, produce a set of subsystems and interfaces that form 
a common structure from which a stream of derivative products can be efficiently developed and 
produced. They provide the platform for founding derivative products/projects (see below). They gen￾erally involve more risk than product enhancements or incremental improvements, but generally not 
as much as breakthrough.
• Derivative projects are spin-offs from other existing products or platforms. They may fill a gap in an 
existing product line, offer more cost-competitive manufacturing, or offer enhancements and features 
based on core organization technology. Generally, they are relatively low risk.
• Support projects can be incremental improvements in existing products or improvements in manu￾facturing efficiency of an existing product. Generally, they are low risk.
• Joint ventures or M&A projects. New product opportunities will often arise outside of the organi￾zation. These may include joint ventures or mergers and acquisitions. Just like the internal projects, 
these opportunities will consume finances and resources and should be considered as part of overall 
portfolio management.
3.1.3 Goals of Portfolio Management
Cooper et al. (2015) defined the goals of portfolio management as:
1. Value maximization: Allocation of resources to maximize the value of the portfolio (the sum of the 
commercial worth of the individual projects).
2. Business strategic alignment: Ensure that the overall portfolio continues to reflect the business 
strategy and the organization’s innovation strategy. Ensure that the investment across the portfolio 
aligns with the organization’s strategic priorities.
3. Balance: Achieve the right balance of the right projects in terms of some pre-determined criteria 
such as long vs. short term; high vs. low risk; growth vs. sustaining; specific product, or market 
categories.
4. Right number of projects: It is common for companies to have too many projects in their portfolio 
for the limited resources available. Portfolio management allows for resource allocation to be moni￾tored and controlled.
PDMA’s 2021 Best Practice Survey (Knudsen et al., 2023) supports these goals as having a greater 
focus for the Best performing companies compared to the Rest.
We now focus our discussion on each of these four goals.116 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
3.2 PORTFOLIO VALUE MAXIMIZATION
A good portfolio starts with a good pool of opportunities or ideas that have met defined criteria for inclu￾sion in the portfolio. Organizations should be continually looking for new product opportunities, either new 
to the organization, line extensions, or product improvements. Although new opportunities arise randomly, 
the best organizations have proactive systems in place using a range of techniques to source these oppor￾tunities. These techniques can be applied both internally within the organization and externally among cus￾tomers and other stakeholders.
Having generated this pool of opportunities, the challenge for the organization is then to evaluate and 
prioritize these opportunities. In the following sections, we present a range of techniques that can be used 
to generate the pool ideas, followed by techniques for evaluating, prioritizing, and selecting opportunities.
3.2.1 Generation of Opportunities
Ideation
Ideation is the creative process of generating, developing, and communicating new ideas. It is an essential 
part of the design process. Specifically applied to product innovation, “Ideation includes all those activities 
and processes that lead to creating broad sets of solutions to consumer problems. These techniques may 
be used in the early stages of product development to generate initial product concepts, in the intermedi￾ate stages for overcoming implementation issues, in the later stages for planning launch, and in the post￾mortem stage to better understand success and failure in the marketplace” (Kahn et al., 2013, pp. 453).
There are two types of thinking processes involved in ideation:
1. Divergent thinking is the process of coming up with new ideas and possibilities with little to no 
judgment or analysis. It is the type of thinking that allows for free-association, stretching the bounda￾ries, thinking outside the box, and thinking of new ways to solve difficult challenges that have no 
single, right, or known answer.
2. Convergent thinking is associated with analysis, judgment, and decision-making. It is the process 
of taking a lot of ideas and sorting, evaluating, analyzing the pros and cons, and making decisions.
Ideation Tools
Following is a selection of ideation tools available to managers. A brief description of each technique is 
provided. Further information and references to these and other techniques are provided by Dam and 
Siang (2021) and can be found at https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/article/introduction-to￾the-essential-ideation-techniques-which-are-the-heart-of-design-thinking.
When Do Ideas Enter Portfolio Management?
Every product innovation idea discussed in an organization won’t become part of the portfolio. Many 
ideas fizzle out and don’t go anywhere. Others may have value, but lose to ideas that are in some 
way better for the organization’s objectives. This raises the question of when do ideas enter portfolio 
management. The answer varies by organization, but at a minimum, projects that need wider visibility 
in the organization, resources committed, and funding allocated should be in portfolio management. 
Ideas that are still being formulated and are characterized by more unknowns than knowns should 
remain outside the portfolio. Many organizations have a process for incubating ideas and the ideas 
that are the most promising may be selected for further investigation and development as part of 
portfolio management.PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO 117
Scamper
Utilizes action verbs as stimuli for idea generation. It is particularly useful in helping to come up with ideas 
to modify existing products or for making a new product. SCAMPER is an acronym for the following action 
verbs:
S – Substitute
C – Combine
A – Adapt
M – Modify
P – Put to another use
E – Eliminate
R – Reverse
Brainstorming
A commonly used technique involving a group of people (typically 6–10) encouraged to generate many 
ideas where people can speak freely without fear of criticism. Frequently, ideas are blended or built on to 
create another good idea (1+1 = 3). The design firm IDEO has specific rules for its brainstorming sessions. 
These are: defer judgment, encourage wild ideas, build on the ideas of others, stay focused on one topic, 
have one conversation at a time, be visual, and provoke quantity of ideas vs. quality.
Although brainstorming continues to be widely used, decades of research also indicate it is a poor 
generator of ideas compared to other approaches. It is dramatically improved when participants are first 
given the topic and allowed to individually and silently generate ideas before working as a group.
Brainwriting
Instead of asking participants to verbalize ideas (traditional brainstorming), they are asked to write down 
ideas pertaining to a specific problem or question. Each participant then passes their ideas over to some￾one else. This person then adds to the list, and so the process continues. After about 15minutes, the lists 
are collected for group-focused discussion. An extension of this technique involves using graphic designs 
instead of writing ideas and then allowing all group members to enrich the designs of others.
Mind-mapping
A graphical technique for imagining connections between various pieces of information, ideas, or con￾cepts. The participant starts with a key phrase or word in the middle of a page, then works out from this 
point (branches) to connect to new ideas in multiple directions – building a web of relationships.
Storyboarding
Focuses on the development of a pictorial story about the consumer’s use and experience with a product, 
with the purpose of understanding the problems or issues that might lead to specific product design attrib￾utes or new requirements.
Six thinking hats
A tool developed by Edward de Bono, which encourages team members to separate thinking into six clear 
functions and roles. Each role is identified with six color-symbolic “thinking hats”:
1. White: Focus on facts.
2. Yellow: Look for positive values and benefits.
3. Black: The devil’s advocate. Look for problems or pitfalls.118 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
4. Red: Expresses emotions, communicating likes, dislikes, fears, etc.
5. Green: The creative that looks for new ideas, possibilities, and alternatives.
6. Blue: Controlling, to ensure that an appropriate process occurs.
Delphi technique
A forecasting method based on the results of questionnaires/inquiries sent to a panel of experts. Several 
rounds of questionnaires are sent out and the anonymous responses are aggregated and shared with the 
group after each round. It is applicable to problems that benefit from expert insight, such as future techni￾cal and consumer trends, forecasting, and foresighting (further described in the Section 2.4.3 as strategic 
planning tool).
Ethnographic approaches
This is a research approach based on observing users in their natural environment, such as a kitchen, 
office, construction site, etc. This method allows for a “deep dive” to understand the complexities, dimen￾sions, and factors that determine behaviors, beliefs, attitudes, and preferences. Further described in 
Section 6.5.3.
A day in the life
This method uncovers the routines, behaviors, and circumstances faced by users when experiencing 
products and services. It allows for the identification of the individuals’ activities, challenges, and emotions 
in a day.
Personas
These are fictional characters built based on objective and direct observations of groups of users. These 
characters become “typical” users or archetypes, enabling developers to envision specific attitudes and 
behaviors toward product features. These personas are described using demographic, behavioral, attitudi￾nal, lifestyle, and preference data. Later, these characteristics are used to identify possible user segments 
or possible targets, and the interaction persona-product is analyzed with the purpose of adjusting design.
Journey maps
A journey map is a representation as a flowchart of all the actions and behaviors consumers take when 
interacting with the product or service. The interaction moments are referred to as “touch points.” The 
map includes the emotions triggered as the experience evolves and attempts to identify gaps that provide 
value-creating opportunities.
Empathy analysis
Involves the capacity to connect with and understand customers deeply and have a direct emotional con￾nection with them. The designer needs to be immersed in the user’s world, understand his/her problems 
and propose solutions from their perspective. This is often an aspect of other ideation tools, such as eth￾nography, day in the life, personas, and journey maps.
Big data
Organizations of all sizes are increasingly using data they obtain about their customers, such as grocery 
chains’ loyalty programs, Tesla’s driving data from all their vehicles, and hotel brands’ data on the prefer￾ences of frequent guests. Big data is described as “a collection of large and complex data from different PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO 119
instruments at all stages of the process which go from acquisition, storage, and sharing, to analysis and 
visualization” (Pisano et al., 2015, p. 191).
Big data and the big data analytics industry have matured significantly in the last few decades. The act 
of gathering and storing large amounts of information for analysis is widely used. Zikopoulos and Tagaras 
(2015) provide a useful analogy with gold mining to explain the meaning and potential of big data: “In 
the old days miners could readily spot nuggets or veins (high value per byte data) because they were 
visible to the naked eye. But there was more gold out there that wasn’t readily visible. Trying to find it 
would have required the mobilization of millions of people. Today miners work differently. Gold mining lever￾ages new generation equipment that can process millions of tons of dirt (low-value per byte data) to find 
‘nearly-invisible to the naked eye’ strands of gold. And with modern equipment those small strands can be 
extracted from the mass of dirt and processed into gold bars (high-value data). Today there is a mass of 
data, residing in different forms in a range of different locations. The challenge for the future is to locate this 
data and process it into a form that is useful for a specific purpose.”
So, Big Data provides enormous potential in many aspects of product innovation, including the iden￾tification of new opportunities. The key challenge remains: how to distill the mass of data into those truly 
valuable new product opportunities.
The applications of Big Data are further discussed in Section 6.5.12.
Crowdsourcing
Crowdsourcing is described as the practice and use of a collection of tools for obtaining information, goods, 
services, ideas, funding, or other input into a specific task or project from a large and relatively open group 
of people, either paid or unpaid, most commonly via technology platforms, social media channels, or the 
Internet. Many companies and organizations also use their own websites as a means of crowdsourcing new 
product ideas.
As an example, LEGO has a dedicated website (LEGO Ideas) and online community for fans and cus￾tomers to contribute their own product ideas. The platform motivates and incentivizes participation by 
allowing users to vote for their favorite idea, state how much they would pay for it, and explain why they 
like it so much. If more than 10,000 people support the idea, then it goes to the official LEGO review 
board, which decides whether to put it into production. The creator even receives name recognition on the 
product package and a one percent royalty on worldwide sales if the idea is commercialized. See the plat￾form in action at https://ideas.lego.com.
As another example, in 2012, Anheuser-Busch ran a crowdsourcing project to create a new beer. It 
varied slightly from the typical consumer-led crowdsourcing projects as the initial recipes were created dur￾ing a competition involving the brewmasters at Budweiser’s 12 breweries. However, more than 25,000 
consumers were involved in the subsequent taste tests to decide the winning brew, so the wisdom of the 
crowd was involved at some points during the development process. The Black Crown variety came from 
the recipe created by a Los Angeles brewery and went on sale in 2013.
Additional applications of crowdsourcing are further discussed in Section 6.5.13.
Ideas from within the organization and its stakeholders
Some of the best new product ideas arise from within the organization. Sources of new product ideas 
include company employees, customers, competitors, outside inventors, acquisitions, and channel mem￾bers. Both solicited and spontaneous ideas may emerge from the sources, and some even occur by acci￾dent. Procter & Gamble’s Ivory soap was a result of an accident. Manufacturing over-mixed the ingredients 
in the manufacturing process, creating air bubbles in the soap, causing it to float. Perhaps the most com￾mon cited example is 3M’s Post-it Note which was developed through a combination of failed product 
innovation and an astute connection to the unintended invention. In 1968, a 3M adhesives engineer had 
invented a pressure-sensitive adhesive compound but could not think of an application for it. The glue 120 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
could barely hold two pieces of paper together but could be applied to surfaces and removed without 
leaving a residue. Some months after the “failed development” another 3M engineer was singing in a choir. 
He usually would place small pieces of paper in songbooks to mark specific sections of songs. In a flash 
of inspiration, the engineer remembered “weak glue” and recognized its potential in a reusable bookmark. 
And so the sticky note was born. Initially named Press’ n Peel and later, the Post-it Note (Belludi, 2021). 
Although examples of this type are not uncommon, more formal and structured “in-company” idea genera￾tion will lead to more sustained success. Specific suggestions include:
• Create and foster an innovative work environment and culture. A culture of innovation reinforces the 
value of innovation, encourages employees across the organization to be individually and collectively 
creative. More on this topic in Chapter 7.
• Idea management software. Provides a platform for employees to ideate and collaborate in a struc￾tured and transparent way to share, refine, and promote ideas.
• Invest work time in creative thought. Increasingly, organizations are allowing and encouraging 
employees to spend a proportion of their paid work time on personal projects that they believe would 
add value to the organization. Google has allowed employees 20% time for personal projects and 
3M has long used 15% time as the foundation of their innovation management.
• Recognition and reward. A clear connection between organization goals and individual employee 
goals is critical. Individual performance reviews then have real significance in terms of how the indi￾vidual has contributed to achieving the organization’s goals. Identifying new opportunities that have 
the potential to create real value can be recognized in a number of ways – financial bonus, a box of 
chocolates or bottle of wine, business class upgrade for next overseas flight, attendance at a confer￾ence, and so on. It is important to select an item of recognition that has real value and meaning to 
the recipient. Recognizing and rewarding in staff meetings, the organization’s newsletter, social plat￾form, or other corporate communications can be used. Often, a simple thank you is best – in person 
rather than through email or phone.
• Use external stakeholders. External stakeholders, including customers, secondary manufacturers, 
distribution channel parties, etc., can be an extremely valuable source of new ideas; either totally 
new products or improvements to existing products. Examples include the manufacturer of medi￾cal devices using primary health providers as well as dairy ingredient manufacturers seeking regular 
feedback from secondary manufacturers of their products. The 2016 winner of PDMA’s Outstand￾ing Corporate Innovator Award, Sherwin Williams Paint Group Stores, was recognized for its innova￾tive approach to utilizing in-store customer contact for pro-actively seeking new product ideas from 
home owners and trades people.
• Feedback. Above all else, it is critical that feedback is provided on all ideas submitted by employees 
and other stakeholders – not just the ideas that become commercial successes. A lack of feedback 
will quickly translate into a drying up of ideas.
3.2.2 Evaluation of Opportunities
The PDMA 2021 Best Practices Study (Knudsen et al., 2023) identified that the best companies used port￾folio management techniques significantly more than others, placing a great emphasis on portfolio man￾agement, and are more likely to have a single integrated product innovation and portfolio management 
process. This necessitates methods for evaluating potential innovation product projects. A summary of the 
relative usage of various project evaluation tools was collected in the 2012 PDMA research titled Product 
Innovation and Management Comparative Performance Assessment and is shown in Figure 3.2 (Markham 
& Lee, 2012).
Broadly speaking, techniques for evaluating and screening new product opportunities can be defined 
under two headings: qualitative and quantitative.PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO 121
Qualitative Evaluation
Qualitative or scoring methods are, by definition, subjective. Nevertheless, there is a sound body of evi￾dence that organizations using scoring methods in portfolio management achieve significant portfolio 
success (Markham & Lee, 2012; Cooper et al., 2001). These methods are usually based on evaluating 
opportunities against a specific set of criteria.
Evaluation criteria
These criteria can be a mix of known factors that lead to new product success and requirements specific 
to the organization.
Over the years, there have been several studies into the factors leading to successful new products. 
These are further discussed in Section 1.1.2. Some of the more important success factors come from the 
foundations of creating competitive advantage (Cooper et al., 2001).
• Having a unique, superior product. One that is differentiated from those of competitors offers unique 
benefits and provides superior value to the customer.
• Targeting an attractive market that is growing, large, has good margins, weak competition, and low 
competitive resistance.
• Leveraging internal organizational strengths  – products and projects that build from organization 
strengths, competencies, and experience in both marketing and technology.
Most of these success factors are relatively well known and understood by organizations, especially in 
traditional areas of business. They can be readily applied as criteria to evaluate new product opportunities 
with a reasonably high level of confidence.
Evaluation criteria specific to the organization include:
• Strategic alignment,
• Technical feasibility,
• Level of risk,
• Regulatory implications,
• Near-term financial return,
Bubble diagrams BEST companies
The REST Options pricing
Scoring methods
Rank ordering of projects
Strategic buckets
Discount cash ow
Checklist
Payback periods
0 20 40 60
% TIME
80
FIGURE 3.2 Project evaluation tools used by companies122 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
• Long-term financial return,
• R&D expense,
• Break-even time (time to profitability),
• Breadth of benefit among products or product lines, and
• Availability of investment funding.
For many organizations, sustainability is an integral part of their strategy and an essential factor in the 
products created. Sustainability should be considered in project selection. Examples of sustainability crite￾ria are:
• Triple bottom line,
• Carbon emissions,
• ISO-compliant Life Cycle Assessment, and
• Resource re-use or recycling.
Figure  3.1 presents a funnel-like process for moving from the very early stages of idea generation 
through to final product launch. This funnel process is commonly used to show the importance of eval￾uating many ideas or opportunities to arrive at those product concepts that are truly worthy of signifi￾cant investment and inclusion in the product innovation portfolio. Where the organization is presented with 
many new product opportunities, it may be worthwhile to do a simple pass/fail analysis to quickly reduce 
the list of opportunities to a more manageable size.
Pass/fail
The pass/fail technique is designed to quickly reduce many product ideas or new opportunities. It assesses 
whether an opportunity or idea meets some basic criteria. The process requires assigning a pass (P) or a 
fail (F) to each opportunity against specific criteria. Opportunities must pass all criteria to be carried forward. 
Basic guidelines for the application of the pass/fail approach include:
• Include a cross-section of functional representatives in this evaluation (marketing, technical, manu￾facturing) so as to represent a broad range of knowledge and experience.
• Use the individual evaluations from participants as a basis for discussion, leading to consensus eval￾uations.
Advantages of the pass/fail technique are:
• It does not require extensive research and analysis.
• It is quick and easy to do.
• It offers a relatively simple and quick way to involve a cross-section of people in the early stages of 
product innovation.
• It serves to highlight areas of uncertainty that need further research.
Disadvantages of the pass/fail technique are:
• It can result in early rejection of good ideas due to a lack of adequate research.
A simple example with three pass/fail criteria is shown in Table 3.1.PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO 123
Scoring
The scoring approach usually implies a more detailed analysis and would normally follow a pass/fail 
screening. More information is required to ensure greater reliability and confidence in the assessments. The 
process is as follows:
1. Assessment criteria are selected. Usually, 5–7 criteria is sufficient. The criteria applied will depend 
on the specific circumstances. So, for example, where there is a strong emphasis on the application 
of new technology, then “technical capability” will be an important criterion. Where a new product is 
being targeted in a highly competitive market, the level of differentiation of the new product idea will 
be important.
2. Weightings are assigned to each criterion to reflect its relative importance.
3. Each product idea is scored on a 10-point scale for each criterion and a weighted sum calculated 
across all criteria. This leads to a ranking of the product ideas.
4. As with the Pass/Fail approach, it is wise to employ a cross-section of people from different functions 
within the organization to do the scoring.
5. To ensure an objective approach to scoring, especially where a number of people are involved, it is 
important to provide descriptive reference points on a defined scoring scale.
6. Figure 3.3 shows evaluation of seven new product ideas against three criteria (or screening factors) 
each with a weighting reflecting its importance – sales potential (10), fit with strategy (7.5), and level 
of competition (5). Each product idea has been evaluated on a 10-point scale. So, for example, using 
the scale defined for sales potential, idea 1 is scored 8/10 reflecting an estimated sales potential of 
around 550,000 units. Idea 5 is estimated at around 80,000 units.
7. The total weighted score for each idea is calculated as follows, thus providing a basis for ranking the 
seven ideas.
Total weighted score for idea1 8     10     6 7.5 8     5  165
TABLE 3.1 Example of pass/fail evaluation
Product idea
Existing distribution 
channels
Manufacturing 
capability
Consistency 
with range Overall
One P F P F
Two P P P P
Three P P P P
Four F P P F
Five P F F F
Six P P P P
Seven F F F F124 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
Quantitative Evaluation
In the context of product portfolio selection and ongoing management, quantitative evaluation is most 
financially based and can be used either:
• To decide if the new product is financially viable – does it have the potential to deliver a satisfactory 
return on investment, or,
• To decide on the prioritization of projects as part of the portfolio selection or ongoing portfolio man￾agement process.
Figure 3.4 presents a framework for the financial analysis of a new product opportunity. This framework 
clearly demonstrates the information required to carry out a quantified financial analysis, namely:
• Returns (benefits): based on sales volumes and prices,
• Costs: based on the cost of manufacturing and marketing, and
• Capital costs: costs associated with the purchase of buildings, plant, and equipment.
Product idea
One 8 6 8 165 3
Two 8 9 7 182.5 1
Three 6 6 8 145 4
Four 5 6 5 120 6
Five 4 7 5 117.5 7
Six 8 3 6 132.5 5
Seven 7 8 8 170 2
Weighting (10) (7.5) (5)
Sales potential
/10
Fit with strategy
/10
Level of
competition
/10
Overall score
/10 Rank
Screening factors
12345678 9 10
No sales potential 100,000 units
30% market share
1 million units
70% market share
FIGURE 3.3 Example of scoring evaluationPRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO 125
Specific financial indicators are used to determine the projected value of the new product opportunity 
relative to the investment. These include:
• Payback period,
• Net Present Value (NPV),
• Internal Rate of Return (IRR),
• Bang-for-buck ratio,
• Expected commercial value,
• Options pricing.
Payback period
Payback period is defined as the length of time it takes to repay the capital investment. So, for example, if 
capital costs (for new plant and buildings) are $1 million, how many years does it take for cumulative profits 
to exceed $1 million?
Although payback period is a commonly used and relatively simple measure of return on investment, 
it fails to capture the important element of the time value of money. It fails to account for the timing of the 
receipts of returns on investment. However, the payback period is useful because it is simple and intuitive.
Table 3.2 shows three potential investment options (A, B, and C) with projected returns over a 5-year 
period. Each option requires the same capital outlay of $100,000 and has the same payback period of five 
years. Which would you choose? Why? Read on to the next section on Net Present Value for the answer 
to this question.
Capital cost
(investment)
Over 5-year period
Annual cash flow
Total cost Total return
Fixed Variable Unit sales Price per unit
Costs Returns
Financial indicators
NPV, IRR, breakeven Product potential
FIGURE 3.4 A framework for financial analysis
TABLE 3.2 Different schedules of returns for the same investment
Option Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5
A 20,000 30,000 40,000 10,000
B 20,000 20,000 20,000 20,000 20,000
C 10,000 30,000 50,000 10,000126 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
The key to answering the question posed for Table 3.2, “Which is the best option?” lies in the timing of 
the receipts over the five years. Table 3.3 shows the NPV calculation for the data in Table 3.2, based on a 
10% interest rate. The earlier timing of receipts makes Option A best. More detail on the calculation of NPV 
is covered later in this section.
More on the time value of money
A dollar that you invest today will bring you more than a dollar next year: having the dollar now provides 
you with an investment opportunity to earn more in the future.
$1 0. % 0 1 today at i 0 1 nterest $ = .10 in a year’s time
Present value (PV) provides a means of putting future money in today’s terms (or value). This is achieved 
by modifying the future value by a factor that represents the change in value of money from today’s value.
Future value original amount interest rate
number of peri
    1 ods
FV P  V   1 i n
Rearrangement of this equation gives the following for present value:
PV F   V/   1 i n
Net Present Value (NPV)
Net present value is the cumulative present value of returns (or benefits) minus the cumulative present 
value of costs.
Present value discount factors
Table 3.4 shows the factors that need to be applied at different time periods and interest rates. So, for 
example, a revenue of $1000 in five years’ time, where the interest rate is 10%, equates to a present value 
of $602.90.
TABLE 3.3 NPV calculation for options shown in Table 3.2
Option Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 NPV
A 20,000 30,000 40,000 10,000 79,858
B 20,000 20,000 20,000 20,000 20,000 75,616
C 10,000 30,000 50,000 10,000 77,597PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO 127
Calculating the cumulative NPV of a new product
Table 3.5 shows a relatively simple calculation of NPV for a new product. Clearly, a lot of work is required 
to derive the data included in this simple table:
• Decide on the potential life of the product or the time period for the NPV calculation (in this case, 
fiveyears).
• Project the benefits (returns) for each year of the product’s life.
• Project the costs for each year of the product’s life.
• Calculate the annual cash flows (the difference between returns and costs).
• Calculate the present value (PV) for each year’s net cash flow.
• Add together the individual PVs over the life of the product. This is the cumulative net present value 
(NPV). In this case, $25,673.
Internal Rate of Return (IRR)
Internal rate of return (IRR) is defined as the discount rate at which an investment has a zero net present 
value. It is used to evaluate the attractiveness of an investment in a project or product. Most organizations 
have a required level of return required for investments – this is often referred to as the hurdle rate, e.g., 
10% or 15%. The hurdle rate is determined by:
• Rates of return on alternative avenues of investment. An obvious example is, “Can I get a better 
return from putting the money in the bank rather than investing in a plant to manufacture a new 
product?”
TABLE 3.4 Discount factors for NPV calculation
Year
Rate
10% 20% 30% 40%
1 0.9091 0.8333 0.7692 0.7142
2 0.8264 0.6944 0.5917 0.5102
3 0.7513 0.5787 0.4552 0.3644
4 0.6830 0.4823 0.501 0.2603
5 0.6029 0.4019 0.2693 0.1859
10 0.3855 0.1615 0.0725 0.0346
20 0.1486 0.0261 0.0053 0.0012
TABLE 3.5 A simple example of NPV calculation (the discount rate applied is 10%)
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5
Benefits 3500 10,800 15,000 20,000 21,000
Costs 8370 3500 4800 7800 8000
Cash flow −4780 7300 10,200 12,200 13,000
Present value factor 0.9091 0.8264 0.7513 0.6830 0.6209
PV −4427 6033 7663 8333 8072
NPV 25,673128 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
• The level of risk. A higher hurdle rate is normally assigned to higher-risk investments – just as high￾risk shares and bonds may promise a potentially greater return.
Calculation of the IRR provides a comparison with both the company’s hurdle rate and with alternate 
forms of investment, either internally or externally. So, for a simple example, if the IRR for the project is 
less than the current bank interest rate, all other things being equal, it would be more profitable to put the 
money in the bank than execute the project.
Financial Sensitivity Analysis
Often there is significant uncertainty regarding the data used in new product investment analysis. This is 
especially true in the early stages of development – the “the front end of innovation or fuzzy front end.” 
Forecasting sales at different price points and estimating manufacturing costs from product specifications 
that are yet to be well defined are among the many variables impacting the financial analysis. The most 
common way to address these uncertainties is to apply what is referred to as “sensitivity analysis.” That 
is, trialing the impact of different scenarios on the financial outcomes. Most commonly used spreadsheets 
have embedded financial functions, including NPV and IRR, that provide the facility for “what-if” or “sensi￾tivity” analysis. For example, what is the effect on the IRR if the market share is half of what is projected? 
Or what is the impact if the cost of a major component doubles due to supply chain shortages?
Table 3.6 shows a simple example of a financial analysis spreadsheet for a new product opportunity. 
Most elements of this spreadsheet are linked to allow for quick and easy “what-if” analyses – an excel￾lent tool to provide a basis for a team discussion or senior management presentation, demonstrating the 
potential risk of certain outcomes.
The use of a simple spreadsheet can also provide an excellent tool for on-going updating of financial 
analysis as more reliable data becomes available. Highlighting specific variables within the spreadsheet 
where there is a high degree of uncertainty over the quality of the data, especially where sensitivity analysis 
points to the importance of theses variables, reinforces the need for more reliable data.
TABLE 3.6 Example of financial analysis spreadsheet
MARKET DATA
Year
1 2 3 4 5
Market growth (%) 14.00 1.20 1.20 1.20
Market (units) 100 1400 1680 2016 2419
Market share (%) 100% 100% 60% 54% 49%
Market share (units) 100 1400 1008 1089 1176
COSTS ($)
Variable cost/unit ($)
Direct materials ($) 120
Packaging ($) 20
Sales and marketing ($) 40
Direct labor ($) 240
Variable overhead ($) 40
Total 460
(Continued)PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO 129
Bang for Buck Index
Bang for the buck is an idiom meaning the worth of one’s money or exertion. The phrase originated from 
the slang usage of the words “bang” which means “excitement” and “buck” which means “money.”
NPV does not consider the resources required for a project. A project may have a very large and 
attractive NPV but requires significant resourcing, whereas another project with a slightly less attractive 
NPV may require significantly lower resourcing. A way to address this issue is to determine the “bang for 
buck” by calculating the ratio of the NPV to projected resource utilization:
Bang for Buck ratio = NPV of the project/Resources utilization
TABLE 3.6 (Continued)
Fixed costs ($)
Manufacturing ($) 40,000
Marketing ($) 30,000
Salaries ($) 80,000
Admin ($) 20,000
Total ($) 170,000
PRICING
Retail price, GST-incl ($) 3300
Retail price, GST-excl ($) 2933
Retailer gross margin (%) 0
Retailer gross margin ($) 1173
Manufacturing selling price ($) 1760
Cost of capital (%) 20%
Equipment cost ($) 2,600,000
SUMMARY OF OPERATING 
COSTS
Unit Year
Prices 0 1 2 3 4 5
Sales volume (units) 100 1400 1008 1089 1176
Sales revenue ($) 1760 175,980 2,463,720 1,773,878 1,915,789 2,069,052
Variable cost ($) 460 46,000 644,000 463,680 500,774 540,836
Contribution margin ($) 1300 129,980 1,819,720 1,310,198 1,415,014 1,528,215
Fixed costs ($) 170,000 170,000 170,000 170,000 170,000
Operating cash flow ($) −40,020 1,649,720 1,140,198 1,245,014 1,358,215
Investment ($) −2,600,000 —— —— —— —— ——
Total cash flows (4) −2,600,000 −40,020 1,649,720 1,140,198 1,245,014 1,358,215
Cost of capital, r 20%
NPV $318,374
IRR 24.4%130 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
Expected Commercial Value
One of the weaknesses of the NPV and bang for buck methods is that they fail to consider risk. The prob￾ability of technical and commercial success is not factored into these methods. The Expected Commercial 
Value (ECV) method seeks to maximize the expected commercial value, or worth, of a project using the fol￾lowing formula:
ECV       PV * P C cs * P D ts 
ECV = Expected Commercial Value
PV = Present Value
Pcs = Probability of commercial success
C = Commercialization (launch) costs
Pts = Probability of technical success
D = Development costs
Table 3.7 shows an example of the ECV calculation for a range of potential projects. It demonstrates 
the impact of the application of the probability of commercial and technical success to the project rankings 
based on PV and ECV.
ECV is particularly suitable for highly uncertain, iterative Agile or Agile-Stage-Gate projects. ECV pro￾vides a model for handling incremental or stepwise investments in a product innovation project. This is done 
using a decision tree approach that evaluates the investment a step at a time, making ECV appropriate 
where there are a number sprints, each with a defined level of investment. Further detail on the derivation 
and application of ECV to Agile-Stage-Gate projects can be found in Cooper (2019) and Sommer (2018).
Option Pricing Theory (OPT)
In a discount cash flow or net present value analysis, the assumption is that a project is an “all or nothing” 
investment decision. This is seldom the case in product innovation, where investments are made incre￾mentally, leading to Go/Kill decisions as new and improved information comes to hand. The detailed theory 
and computation of options-based pricing is complex and, in its purest form, may be beyond the capability 
of most organizations. At least the ECV method incorporates the principles of a stage-wise process with 
options together with probabilities of outcomes. The OPT approach is of greatest value for organizations 
with a strong research emphasis in their R&D. In these situations the research often has a long lead time to 
a commercial outcome. Directions may change throughout the research journey. The journey may end with 
no commercial value generated or, hopefully, a range of possible opportunities not conceived at the start. 
TABLE 3.7 ECV calculation example
Project PV
PV 
rank
Probability 
of technical 
success
Development 
cost
Probability 
of commercial 
success
Commercialization 
cost ECV
ECV 
rank
A 20 4 0.8 3 0.6 5 2.6 5
B 30 3 0.9 5 0.8 3 13.9 1
C 5 5 1.0 1 1.0 1 3.0 4
D 60 1 0.5 4 0.5 2 10.0 3
E 45 2 0.7 4 0.6 3 12.8 2PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO 131
Following is an example of how OPT could be applied in pharmaceutical company’s drug development. 
Pharmaceutical drug development is a long process, often several years, requiring several phases to final 
commercialization, including R&D, pre-clinical research, clinical research, and regulatory review.
In this case, the company is embarking on an R&D project with a $20m investment over a 3-year 
period. Management estimates a 5% chance of successful product outcome.
Each of the phases required for final commercialization has a high cost associated with it. For our 
example, we will assume a total cost of $200m. But if development is successful, the prize is a period 
of market exclusivity. In this case, let’s say 10years. In this situation, the R&D investment should not be 
viewed as an end but as generating an option to invest or the right to spend more money.
Potential returns for each of the 10years is estimated at $100m per year. The Net Present Value (NPV) 
for these returns over the 10-year period at a discount rate of 6% is $225m.
Now, let’s just calculate the NPV based on the R&D investment period of three years.
NPV
$ m
      
 
20 5 225 1 6
11
3
% / %
Based on R&D alone and the very low probability of development success, the project is unlikely 
to proceed. Using the options approach presents a different view of the project’s potential. Refer to 
Figure 3.5.
Deriving Data Input for Financial Analyses
Three key elements of data required for new product investment analysis are costs, sales, and selling 
price.
Cost determination
The basic elements of cost are fixed costs, variable costs, and capital costs:
Fixed costs are expenses whose total does not change in proportion to the activity of a business 
within the relevant time period or scale of production. Examples include administration, rent, rates, 
and general management.
Variable costs are expenses that change in proportion to the activity of a business. Examples 
include production labor, power, cleaning materials, and manufacturing materials.
Total cost   Fixed costs Variable costs
$20m Investment
Success
A new product is
developed
Failure
No new product
developed
5%
95%
$20m Investment
Success
$225m
Failure
No new product
developed
5%
95%
FIGURE 3.5 Example of options pricing analysis132 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
Capital costs are costs incurred on the purchase of land, buildings, construction, and equipment to 
be used in the production of goods or the rendering of services.
Working capital is the money spent on direct and variable costs associated with a product or ser￾vice while awaiting sales. This would include all costs of manufacturing and marketing, together with 
capital costs of new equipment, etc.
Selling price determination
The ex-factory price is the sum of all costs associated with the product plus any margins accruing to 
the company. It is the price at which the organization makes the product available to a buyer. The buyer is 
responsible for transportation and other costs to send the product where it is needed or on-sold to other 
customers.
When the product is sold beyond the “factory door,” the selling price to the final customer will be deter￾mined by the sum of the ex-factory price and all costs associated with getting it to the final customer, 
including the margins charged by distribution channel members. An example of a basic distribution chan￾nel is shown in Figure 3.6. The complexity of the distribution channel varies greatly from product to product 
and organization to organization. It will significantly impact the markup from ex-factory costs to the final 
customer selling price.
Potential Sales Determination
There are several approaches used to assess demand for new products. Given a particular demand, the 
organization can forecast the sales potential, which is critical for the overall new product feasibility analysis, 
financial projections, and production planning.
Several demand models include the Bass model, ATAR, purchase intention, chain ratio method, expo￾nential methods, and time series analyses. A description of the most important methods follows.
Bass model
The model is appropriate to forecast sales of an innovation, new technology, or a durable good. It assumes 
that the diffusion process is binary (either the consumer adopts or waits to adopt). The key application of 
this model is when you need to quantify the number of customers that will adopt the product over time 
and when they will adopt it. When customers adopt a product is based on the rate of adoption, known as 
the diffusion speed. This model is used in industry because of its effectiveness and simplicity.
The Bass model takes two forms: a basic and a generalized form. The basic model requires the 
assessment of three parameters: p, q, and N. The parameter p is the coefficient of innovation (initial trial 
of the product or penetration) and q is the coefficient of imitation (diffusion rate parameter). Both coef￾ficients p and q take a value between 0 and 1 and are affected by either product-related (low complexity, 
Profit margin Wholesale costs
wholesale margin
Retail costs
retail margin
Overheads
fixed costs
variable costs
Ex factory price Wholesale price Retail price
FIGURE 3.6 Example of a basic distribution channel, showing product cost markupsPRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO 133
high compatibility, observable benefits) or market-related (links among potential users, communica￾tion, etc.) factors. N represents the total number of customers in the adopting target who will eventually 
adopt the product. No repeat or replacement purchase is considered in the estimation. The model either 
requires some historical sales data or the input of the values for p and q to estimate demand over time. 
The demand generally shows an S-shaped curve.
ATAR model
Crawford and DiBenedetto (2011) presented a model for forecasting sales potential when historical sales 
data does not exist. The ATAR (Awareness-Trial-Availability-Repeat) model is a forecasting tool that tries to 
mathematically model the diffusion of an innovation or new product. For a person/organization to become 
a regular buyer/user of a new product or service, there must first be awareness that it exists. There must 
be a decision to try it. They must find that the item is available to them. Finally, the person or organization 
must be satisfied enough to adopt the product or service or become a repeat buyer; refer to Table 3.8 for 
an ATAR example.
Purchase intention methods
These methods use the results of concept testing as initial input and then adjust these with probability 
estimates from historical results or past experiences. For example, the results of a concept test for a hand 
cleanser (using an intent-to-buy scale from “definitely would buy” to “definitely would not buy”) showed 
that:
5% of potential consumers will definitely buy the product.
36% will probably buy the product.
80% of those who answer definitely buy, actually buy.
33% of those who answered probably buy, actually buy.
TABLE 3.8 Example of ATAR analysis
Number of buying units 3,000,000
Percent aware 40%
Percent trial 20%
Percent availability 40%
Percent repeat 50%
Annual units bought 1.5
Units sold (product of above 72,000
Revenue per unit $25.00
Cost per unit $12.50
Profit per unit $12.50
Profit = Units sold×Profit per unit $900,000134 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
The final calculation of an estimated market share will be:
Market share f  orecasted    0 8. %    5 0    . % 33    36  16%
Chain ratio method
This method estimates market demand by multiplying a base number by a chain of adjusting percentages. 
For example, let’s consider a clothing manufacturer planning to develop a new line of specialty sports train￾ing shirts with built-in capability for key physiological measurements – smart shirts. A simple explanation of 
the chain method to estimate sales potential for the new product is:
Total population of the country = 50 million
Percentage involved in sports activities = 30%
Percentage who value physiological monitoring = 5% of those involved in sports activities
Estimate of those who would buy = 10% of those who value physiological monitoring
Estimated sales potential   50 0 3. .   0 05 0. , 1 7  5 000
While the chain ratio approach and ATAR have similarities, note that only the ATAR model distinguishes 
the reachable market from the total market. Consequently, the chain ratio approach can result in higher 
and unrealistic estimated sales.PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO 135
3.3 PORTFOLIO ALIGNMENT WITH STRATEGY
“It all boils down to strategy. From your business’s new product innovation and technology strategy all else 
flows. The goal to maximize value of the portfolio is meaningless unless value is measured in terms of a 
company goal” (Cooper et al., 2015).
An organization’s vision, goals, and strategy should provide the context and direction to which product 
innovation projects it undertakes. So, for example, if a company has the vision to become the world leader 
in agribusiness pharmaceuticals, then the need for breakthrough products requiring a strong emphasis on 
R&D should be reflected in the emphasis on these projects in the portfolio.
3.3.1 Approaches for Linking Strategy to Portfolio
Cooper et al. (2001) suggest three broad objectives for achieving strategic alignment in portfolio management:
Strategic fit: Are the projects consistent with the articulated strategy? For example, if certain tech￾nologies or markets are specified as areas of strategic focus, do the projects fit into these areas?
Strategic contribution: What specific goals are defined in the business strategy? For example, 
“capture a larger share of an existing market” or “break into a new product category.” How well will 
the projects contribute to achieving these goals?
Strategic priorities: Does the breakdown of the investment across the portfolio reflect the strategic 
priorities? For example, if the organization seeks technology leadership, the portfolio’s balance of 
projects should reflect this focus.
Cooper et al. (2001) suggest three methods of project selection and ongoing review to ensure a clear 
link between strategy and product portfolio:
• Top-down,
• Bottom-up, and
• A combination of top-down and bottom-up.
All three methods are designed to ensure that the combination of projects in the portfolio optimally 
achieves the strategic goals subject to resource constraints.
The Top-down Method
The top-down approach is firmly based on the business vision, goals, and strategy. This provides the direction 
for portfolio composition and resource allocation. There are two general approaches to the top-down method:
1. Product roadmap: this approach is based on a strategy-led definition of key projects that need to 
be undertaken and the timing required for each project’s completion. This leads to a product road￾map and, in turn, in helping to shape the product portfolio.
2. Strategic buckets: this approach focuses more on resource allocation. Firstly, the business strat￾egy defines the amount of product innovation funding available. This funding is then allocated across 
various categories of projects. These could include product, market, or technology-based catego￾ries or a combination of these. So, for example, a biotechnology company may define its strategic 
buckets research, development, and improvements/modifications. These may be further divided into 
markets e.g., industrial, consumer, and technologies or genetic modification and microbial.
This method involves the following steps:
1. Clear definition of the organization and business strategies, and the strategic goals and priorities 
relating to innovation.136 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
2. Definition of the level of resourcing available for the entire project portfolio.
3. Prioritization of business units or product categories in strategic importance to the organization 
as a whole.
4. Identification of “strategic buckets” and allocation of the ideal spend across these various business 
units or product categories. Two examples are:
a. 10% breakthrough, 20% platform, 20% derivative, 50% support
b. 60% Business A, 30% Business B, 10% Business C
5. Allocation of projects into the strategic buckets according to their prioritization.
6. Prioritization of projects within strategic buckets according to potential added value.
The Bottom-up Method
As the name implies, the bottom-up method starts with a list of opportunities for projects that may arise 
from various sources throughout the organization. This requires a process of strict project evaluation 
and screening to ensure that the best opportunities rise to the surface and are funded. The bottom-up 
approach, therefore, relies on a sound project evaluation process that is clearly linked to the business’s 
strategy and goals. The key difference to the top-down approach is that the bottom-up approach starts 
with a list of potential projects and ends up, by a process of strict screening criteria, with projects that align 
with the business strategy:
• Potential projects are identified.
• Strategy criteria for evaluating projects are defined.
• Each potential project is evaluated against the selection criteria.
• Projects are selected primarily as a result of meeting the selection criteria with no specific considera￾tion of business unit or product category priorities, or for achieving any sense of balance across the 
projects in the portfolio.
The Combination Method
Both the top-down and bottom-up approaches have their deficiencies. The combination of the two 
approaches seeks to overcome these deficiencies. It starts at the top with a clear definition of goals and 
strategy, a product roadmap, and strategic buckets that define the allocation of funding. It then proceeds 
through generating opportunities per the bottom-up approach with a decision process that reconciles the 
project selection. Again, as the name implies, this approach combines the benefits of both the bottom-up 
and top-down methods:
• Strategic priorities with regard to the business unit or product category spend are established.
• All potential projects are ranked against strategic criteria and the spend for each project is estimated.
• The combination of individual project priority and budgeted spend is used to allocate the projects 
into strategic buckets in line with the priority of the business unit or product category.PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO 137
3.4 BALANCING THE PORTFOLIO
Most organizations should seek to have a range of new product opportunities in the portfolio. This helps 
balance risk with reward. Also, a more diverse portfolio is resilient to the effects of market change. The 
range and proportional representation of these new product opportunities should be directed by the over￾all corporate or business strategy, aligned with the innovation strategy. Categorization of the new product 
opportunities can be by business unit, product category, target market, or based on the characteristics of 
the project, for example:
• Breakthrough, derivative, platform, or support,
• Cost of R&D, or of commercialization,
• Potential returns or benefits,
• Level of risk – in development or in commercialization,
• Technical difficulty, to develop or to maintain,
• Time to market from the start of development to commercial returns,
• Capital investment in plant and equipment, or
• Potential for intellectual property value creation.
As described earlier, the representation and balance of new product opportunities in the portfolio 
should be directed by the business and innovation strategies. These strategies should provide manage￾ment with the basis for:
• Deciding on the key dimensions and criteria of the portfolio. For example, the proportion of the port￾folio that can be allocated to high-risk product ideas, or to new product opportunities that target 
new markets for the organization, or the emphasis on product improvements relative to “new to the 
organization” opportunities.
• Allocating product innovation opportunities to the portfolio to achieve the optimal balance by apply￾ing the key dimensions and criteria, thus ensuring alignment with strategy.
• Ongoing management of the portfolio to ensure appropriate selection and balance throughout the 
development pipeline and the products’ life cycles.
Figure 3.7 shows a simple table representing a proportional allocation of projects across product and 
market newness. This is an example of a way to represent the state of balance in a portfolio with regard to 
product and market newness.
3.4.1 Visual Representation of the Product Portfolio
Visual representations of the portfolio are useful in both the development and presentation of the portfolio. 
Bubble diagrams are a commonly used form of visual display.
Typically, a bubble diagram shows projects on a two-dimensional X–Y plot. The X and Y dimensions 
relate to specific criteria of interest (for example, risk and reward). Bubbles are plotted according to the 
Low market newness High market newness
Low product newness
Improvements to
existing products 30%
Additions to existing
product lines
15%
Medium product Newness Cost Reductions
25%
New Product Lines
10%
High product newness Repositioning
15%
New to the world
products 5%
FIGURE 3.7 An example of a product portfolio model138 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
projects’ ratings on the X and Y dimensions. The size of the bubbles represents a third criterion of interest, 
for example, the level of capital investment or the resource requirements.
Figure 3.8 shows bubble diagrams with different dimensions for representing balance in the portfolio.
Bubble diagrams and similar charts are particularly useful in senior management presentations to give 
a relatively simple at-a-glance overview of the state of a portfolio. It is easy to identify gaps in the portfo￾lio or inconsistencies with regard to business strategy and goals. For example, the right-hand portfolio in 
Figure 3.8 emphasizes low to moderate-risk projects with respect to both market and technology. Only 
one project is categorized as high risk for both market and technology, but this project demands a higher 
resource commitment. This quick overview provides management with insight as to the alignment of the 
portfolio with the organization’s overall strategy with respect to risk.
Risk vs. reward and capital investment Market-technology risk
Technology Risk
Circle area = capital investment Circle area = NPD resource required
Reward High
Reward Low
P4 P7
P5
P6
P2 P3
Risk Low Risk High
Market Risk
Low High
High Moderate Lo
w
FIGURE 3.8 Bubble diagram portfoliosPRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO 139
3.5 THE RIGHT NUMBER OF PROJECTS
3.5.1 Resource Allocation
A critical aspect of portfolio management is resource allocation. It is imperative that projects are ade￾quately resourced. Most organizations discover their product innovation success and ongoing product 
management are impacted by:
• Too many projects at the same time,
• Poor project planning and execution,
• Product innovation projects competing with other business priorities,
• Project delays that require heroic efforts to complete on time,
• Last-minute efforts to complete a task, only for it to sit in a queue downstream,
• Constantly changing priorities that force pulling of resources from one task to another,
• Lack of support (material, vendor, engineering), and
• Managers’ time consumed solving routine, urgent problems.
Invariably this results in delayed launches, lost opportunities, and poor product acceptance due to defi￾ciencies in features and functionality.
Resource allocation is a complex process. It is not simply a question of the numbers of individuals. It is 
having the right individuals with the right skills available at the right time.
The benefits of proper resource allocation are:
• Better project flow (fewer delays),
• Higher output (more launches),
• Higher employee satisfaction, and
• More effective portfolio management.
A key element of the innovation strategy is capability planning. That is, aligning internal and external 
capabilities to match the innovation goals and strategy. Application of portfolio selection criteria, based on 
the innovation strategy, provides a sound basis for resource allocation.
3.5.2 Methods for Resource Allocation
Cooper et al. (2015) recommend two fundamental bases for resource allocation: project resource demand 
and new product goals. These are best used in association with the overall portfolio management process.
Based on project resource demand:
• Prioritize the current project list from best to worst (using a scoring model or some form of financial 
analysis).
• Develop a detailed plan for each project. Use a project management software package.
• Allocate resources in the project plan according to specific categories (engineers, designers, manu￾facturing, etc.).
• Determine the cumulative resource requirements for each category by time.
• Match the resource demand for each category and time requirements against resource availability.
• Identify areas of resource overload. Re-prioritize projects in timing or delete projects from the portfo￾lio, or source additional resources through additional hiring or outsourcing.
Based on new business goals:
• Begin with new product goals. Ask, “What returns or profits are desired from new products?”
• Calculate the potential returns or profits from each potential new product in the portfolio using finan￾cial analysis, e.g., EVA or DCF.140 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
• Prioritize the projects and their potential returns against the business goals and select the projects 
that deliver the cumulative financial returns required to meet the business goals.
• Carry out the same exercise in individual project planning outlined in the “project resource demand” 
method above to determine the resource requirements by time against resource availability.
3.5.3 Resource Allocation as a Business Process
Without understanding the supply (resources) and the demand (projects), deploying a pull-based resource 
planning process is impossible.
Figure 3.9 shows four significant roles when establishing a resource allocation process. Depending on 
the size and structure of the organization, one or more people may fulfill these roles; not all organizations 
use separate employees for each role.
Figure 3.10 illustrates a typical resource allocation process.
Project
Manager
Responsible for
submitting
project
requirements to
resource owner
Resource
Owner
Converts project
requirements
into full-time
equivalent (FTE)
requests and
assigns FTEs to
projects
Resource
Planner
Meets monthly with
the Project Manager
and Resource Owner
to optimize resource
allocation and to
prepare portfolio
what-if scenarios
Product
Planners
Meet monthly with the
Resource Planner to
adjust resources to
optimize resource
utilization and
quarterly to prepare
portfolio what-if
scenarios
FIGURE 3.9 Roles and responsibilities for resource planning
New project is proposed or active
project is modified
Project manager provides scope of
work to pool owner
Pool owner loads requested demand
and then assigns FTEs
Monthly resource optimization
meeting
What if scenarios are developed for
quarterly strategy meeting
Results of quarterly strategy review
communicated
1. Resources are
reassigned as
projects evolve
2. Reorganize the
process and project
focus on results of
quarterly strategy
review
FIGURE 3.10 Typical resource allocation processPRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO 141
3.5.4 Tools to Support Resource Allocation
In large organizations, collecting information about available resources can be difficult. Optimizing the 
allocation of potentially competing resources across a range of projects can be extremely challenging. 
Figure 3.11 presents a process for collecting resource information based on resources required by individ￾ual projects and resources available. Resources required are identified by project managers and resources 
available are identified by the resource owners – functional or departmental managers.
A resource requirements input form provides a standard and consistent template to capture the 
resource demand from all project teams. This form contains pre-defined fields requesting specific types 
and formats of information. Consistency in defining the type of resource required is essential to the 
resource owner. For example, simply stating a requirement for three engineers does not necessarily pro￾vide the level of detail to the resource owner on the type of engineers required. Are they three process 
engineers or one structural engineer and two process engineers? The answer impacts the resources actu￾ally needed.
The resource owners use the requirements input forms to consolidate the resources required by the 
project teams. Inevitably, as projects start and end, this will lead to an imbalance of resources available 
relative to the resources required.
In Table 3.9, the data from the forms have been input into a table to show which types of resources are 
scarce, or possibly where resources are in over-supply. After assessing the resource gaps, where “percent￾age utilization” exceeds 100%, action can be taken to address them, such as adding resources, shrinking 
projects, or choosing smaller projects. A clear innovation strategy and goals are critical in providing the 
basis for cross-functional discussions on the allocation of competing resources.
Employee 1
Employee 2
Employee 3
Employee 4
Employee 5
Project 1 Project 2 Project 3 Project 4 Project 5
Vertical 1 Shared Projects Vertical 2
Resource
Input Form
Requirements
Input Form
12 Monthly
Reports &
Charts
12 Monthly
Reports &
Charts
12 Monthly
Reports &
Charts
FIGURE 3.11 Process of collecting resource requirements142 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
TABLE 3.9 Output showing where and when the resource gaps will occur
All Roles
Required Hours from Roles on Projects
Total Hours 
Req’d. Capacity Utilization %
Project 
1
Project 
2
Project 
3
Project 
4
Project 
5
Project 
Manager
120 80 40 80 40 360 500 72%
Mechanical 
Engineer
 0 100 60 20 0 180 180 100%
Precision 
Engineer
10 10 10 0 0 30 60 %0%
Tool Designer 30 40 0 20 10 100 120 83%
Service Part 
Technician
20 10 5 0 5 40 20 200%PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO 143
3.6 NEW PRODUCT PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT: A DYNAMIC PROCESS
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, the new product portfolio comprises a range of products at different 
stages of the product life cycle and with different requirements:
• Initial ideas and concepts: Are these worthy of inclusion in the portfolio? Do they meet the defined 
screening criteria?
• Products in development: Once an idea has passed the screening criteria, it can enter the devel￾opment process, based on one of the processes to be described in the Process Chapter 4.
Most well-developed processes will have review points where the project can be assessed and a deci￾sion made on whether to proceed, change direction, or “kill” the project. Each of these decisions can 
potentially impact the product portfolio and the resources required. Proceeding may have no immediate 
impact on the portfolio. Changing direction may require a change in resources and funding requirements. 
Killing the project may provide an opportunity for the addition of another project to be included in the 
portfolio.
As described in Section 1.5, products invariably have a life cycle, basically defined by six stages: devel￾opment, introduction, growth, maturity, decline, and retirement. Strategies employed at each of these 
stages will have an impact on the portfolio. In particular, there may be a demand for product variants or 
improvements during the growth and maturity stages. In the decline stage, decisions need to be made 
regarding retention, which may require product modifications or retiring the product, which may free up 
resources to be put to better use.
3.6.1 New-Product Portfolio Management Challenges
The overall aim of new-product portfolio management is a higher proportion of high-value projects and a 
better balance between projects and resources (Cooper et al., 2004). Cooper and Sommer (2020) suggest 
that only a small proposition of businesses achieve these outcomes as they struggle with portfolio man￾agement challenges. The two main challenges are overloaded pipelines compared to the resources avail￾able and the lack of reliable data on which to base portfolio decisions.
1. Overloaded pipeline. A common problem is too many projects for the resources available, resulting 
in resources being spread too thin and most projects being under-resourced. This typically results 
in lower revenue as the most strategically important projects are completed later than they would 
have been with appropriate research allocation. One of the reasons for too many projects is the 
failure to kill bad projects either due to adequate information, poor decision processes, or an over￾commitment to pet projects.
2. Lack of reliable data. Sound go/kill decision-making through the product innovation project relies 
on rigorous analytical methods underpinned with reliable inputs – sales estimates, pricing, manu￾facturing costs, etc. The front end of innovation, which is the project’s early phase from ideation 
to serious commitment to design and development, has long been recognized as a vital decision￾making period. It is characterized as requiring low levels of investment. Sound go/kill decisions dur￾ing this period can significantly reduce significant downstream investment in failed projects and loss 
of opportunity to add new projects and resources to the portfolio (Markham, 2013). The front end of 
innovation is discussed further in Section 4.1.4.
3.6.2 New-Product Portfolio Management: Stage-gate and Agile
Managing the new product portfolio is clearly a complex and dynamic process. Until recent years, much 
of this has been founded on the Stage-Gate process. The advent of Agile and Agile-Stage-Gate has led to 
the potential for even greater challenges in new product portfolio management. More in-depth descriptions 144 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
of each of these processes are presented in Chapter 4. If you are unfamiliar with these processes, you may 
wish to read the relevant sections of Chapter 4 before reading the following section on the impact of Agile 
on portfolio management.
Since its inception in the early 1980s, Stage-Gate® has become one of, if not the most popular meth￾ods for managing the product innovation process. The structure of the Stage-gate process is designed to 
break the product innovation process down into a series of stages with defined decision points, or gates, 
between stages. These gates allow decisions to be made on whether to continue as planned, change 
direction, or stop a project. The results of these decisions can be fed into the portfolio management pro￾cess to ensure the ongoing management of projects in the portfolio and consequent resource allocation.
The Agile process was developed, initially for the software industry, to promote rapid responses to 
change, including constant customer collaboration and feedback.
Over recent years, many organizations have recognized the value of combining the advantages of the 
Stage-Gate® and Agile processes into a hybrid system, Agile-Stage-Gate. In such hybrid processes, each 
stage in the Stage-Gate® process comprises a series of time-specific iterations called sprints. Each suc￾cessive sprint is planned in real-time in response to the outcomes of the previous sprint. At the end of 
each sprint the project team produces a tangible outcome such as a concept, design drawings, or a pro￾totype that can be shown to stakeholders or management. Retrospective team meetings at the end of 
each sprint assess the outcomes and team performance.
Whereas the Stage-Gate® process is typically linear, with the project team moving from task to task 
and stage to stage according to a strict timeline with limited customer interaction or iteration within stages, 
the Agile-Stage-Gate model encourages experimentation and iteration throughout. This process of con￾stant iteration and refreshing of information through inputs from a range of stakeholders helps address the 
portfolio management challenges discussed above.
The importance of the front-end analysis remains – market, competition, customer needs leading to 
the business case and product concept definition. But the application of short sprints with defined out￾comes provides the opportunity for more regular reviews than offered by the traditional stage-gate 
process. These regular reviews demand increasingly more reliable estimates of customer acceptance, pro￾jected sales, and product pricing. As development proceeds through successive iterations of the product, 
from proof of concept through early-stage design and prototyping, increasingly more reliable information is 
gathered on the overall costs and feasibility of manufacturing and marketing the final product. This whole 
process is designed to gather more and increasingly reliable data on which to base the viability of the new 
product and the regular Go/Kill decisions.
3.6.3 Addressing the Challenges of Agile Portfolio Management
The Agile-Stage-Gate hybrid helps address some of the challenges of portfolio management, but it also 
creates new challenges (Cooper & Sommer, 2016). The flexibility and dynamic nature of Agile, with ever￾changing plans and product designs that are evolving over time, makes deriving accurate estimates of 
manufacturing costs, selling price, and sales, extremely challenging.
Another key challenge highlighted by Cooper and Sommer (2016) is in the area of portfolio metrics. In 
the traditional Stage-Gate® model, many organizations assess a project’s progress and continued value by 
whether it meets defined milestones and is on budget. If these two criteria are achieved, the default deci￾sion is to continue the project. But meeting these criteria, although important, does not necessarily lead to 
a successful product. Also, a project that goes off budget may do so for a very good reason, for example, 
additional research on a component part that could add significant value to the product.
Different tools and metrics are needed to support decision-making within the fluidity and uncertainty of 
a purely Agile or hybrid Agile-Stage-Gate model. Three useful metrics proposed by Cooper and Sommer 
(2016) are the burndown chart, the productivity index (PI), and the expected commercial value (ECV).PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO 145
A Burndown Chart
A standard Agile tool, a burndown chart, is a graphical representation of work left to do versus time. The 
outstanding work (or backlog) is often on the vertical axis, with time along the horizontal. Burndown charts 
are a run chart of outstanding work. It is useful for predicting when all of the work will be completed. Refer 
to Figure 3.12.
The Productivity Index (PI)
The PI gauges the economic well-being of a project in real-time (Matheson et al., 1994). An example of 
the formula for the productivity index is:
PI N= PV/Money remaining to be spent
or
PI N= PV/Number of work days left to be done
The PI can be plotted over time. If the project is proceeding well, the PI should increase and its curve 
should asymptotically approach infinity just before product launch.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
1/3 1/20 2/6 2/23 3/12 3/29
Milestone
Hours remaining
Actual
Estimated
Ideal
FIGURE 3.12 A burndown chart146 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
3.7 PORTFOLIO GOVERNANCE
Governing the portfolio is a complex political process. It is not a simple decision made by the portfolio 
manager about one project at a time that everyone else supports.
Markham (2023) provides levels of decision-making authority in portfolio management. It involves all 
levels in the organization agreeing to what decisions they make and what decisions other levels make – 
and not crossing the lines. It establishes accountability for providing inputs and executing decisions. 
Central to any governance model is defining the decision rights, or who makes what decision. Markham 
(2023) suggests that, at a minimum, governance specifies the proposer and the disposer at each level and 
phase of portfolio. The proposer is the individual or group who put forward a project proposal and the dis￾poser is the individual or group who decide if resources will be made available. The disposer must make 
good on timely delivery of resources and must also set criteria and performance expectations. The pro￾poser must make good use of the resources and agree to the criteria and expectations.
Figure 3.13 presents Markham’s five-level Portfolio Management Framework Governance Structured 
describing the levels of decision-making in a typical development organization. The figure identifies each 
level of decision-makers, what they require as inputs and what they deliver. Markham suggests (2023) that, 
in many instances a simple two-level structure of a proposer and disposer is best.
Level 1. The Corporate Governance level of decision-makers requires the Corporate Strategy to ensure 
that enough investment goes to the right places to achieve the corporate objectives.
Level 2. The Portfolio Board (PB) is a standing interdisciplinary group, often department heads with direct 
interests in the portfolio such as sales, marketing, production, and development. The Board makes portfo￾lio investment decisions based on optimization of revenue, resources, competition, new opportunities, and 
internal capacity.
FIGURE 3.13 Portfolio Management Framework Governance Structure. 
Source: Markham, 2023 / John Wiley & Sons.PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO 147
Level 3. The Portfolio and Lifecycle Management Team (PLMT) is also a standing interdisciplinary group, 
usually representatives of the department heads. To fulfil the portfolio strategy put forward by the Portfolio 
Board and approved by the Governance body, the PLMT proposes individual projects to the Board. The 
PLMT needs strategic analyses, a transparent opportunity pipeline, and technology roadmaps.
Level 4. The Program Management Team (PMT) is another standing interdisciplinary group created to 
meet the development needs of the portfolio. The PMT creates and manages the actual work done by the 
Execution Teams. The PMT ensures resources are assigned to projects that deliver results to the PLMT, 
the Board and the Governance body.
Level 5. The Execution Team does the actual work of development. In this chapter it is portrayed as a 
technical development team, but it could just as easily be a services development team or a maintenance 
program team, an internal process team or another type of team.
Markham (2023) further suggests that “in smaller programs or smaller organizations there may only be 
two levels – the proposer and the disposer. Their level in the organization does not matter. The important 
point is there is a person that makes decisions separate from the person that carries out the decision. 
For example, there may only be a single director of product development and one product development 
team.”148 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
3.8 PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT BENEFITS
The PDMA 2021 Best Practices Study (Bsteiler & Noble, 2023) found the best innovating companies rank 
the use of portfolio management higher than other companies. Further, incorporating a formal portfolio 
management process was consistently aligned with the best innovators.
As seen in Figure 3.14, the best innovating companies are more likely to use portfolio management to:
• Align projects with business strategy
• Make kill decisions to focus on the most important projects
• Prioritize projects based on the portfolio structure
• Only commit to projects they can properly resource
• Apply a repeatable decision analyses approach
• Consider all projects and how they relate to each other
• Evaluate portfolio investments along with other types of investments
Strongly
Agree
Strongly
Disagree
Portfolio reects
BU strategy
We make kill
decisions
Prioritization
focuses us on the
best projects
All differences p < .01
Number of
projects matches
our capacity
Best Rest
We have
repeatable
decision analyses
We consider the
portfolio in its
entirety
Portfolio
investments are
justi­ed vis-à-vis
other investments
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Vertical (Value) Axis Major Gridlines
FIGURE 3.14 Portfolio Management findings from the PDMA Best Practices Study (2021)PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO 149
3.9 IN SUMMARY
• “A portfolio is a collection of programs, projects, and/or operations managed as a group. The com￾ponents of a portfolio may not necessarily be interdependent or even related – but they are managed 
together as a group to achieve strategic objectives” (Project Management Institute, 2021).
• A product portfolio is defined as a set of projects or products that an organization is investing in and 
making strategic trade-offs against.
• The four key goals of portfolio management are:
1. Value maximization: Allocation of resources to maximize the value of the portfolio (the sum of the 
commercial worth of the individual projects).
2. Business strategic alignment: Ensure that the overall portfolio continues to reflect the business 
strategy and the organization’s innovation strategy. Ensure that the investment across the portfolio 
aligns with the organization’s strategic priorities.
3. Balance: Achieve the right balance of the right projects in terms of some pre-determined criteria 
such as long vs. short term, high vs. low risk, specific product, or market categories.
4. Right number of projects: Most companies have too many projects underway for the limited 
resources available.
• The overall organization strategy and, in turn, the innovation strategy provides the criteria for product 
portfolio selection.
• Projects included in the portfolio can be from different business units, including new to the organiza￾tion products, product improvements, and cost reductions. They can be at different stages of the 
new product pipeline and product life cycle.
• Typically, organizations will work toward a balanced product innovation portfolio based on criteria 
including risk vs. reward; new to the organization vs. line extensions; new vs. existing markets, etc. It 
is critical that these criteria are clearly aligned with strategy.
• Alignment of strategy with individual project selection and a balanced portfolio can be achieved 
through a “top-down” or “bottom-up” approach (or a combination of both).
• Resource allocation is a critical element of portfolio management. Many organizations are plagued by 
too many projects – resulting in poor execution, delayed launches, and commercial failures. Capabil￾ity planning, embedded within the innovation strategy, provides a sound basis for resource planning 
as part of the portfolio management process.
• To avoid becoming overwhelmed when setting up a portfolio management system, start with a sim￾ple process and build upon it over time.
• Portfolio performance metrics can be used to help measure and maintain portfolio balance over time 
and to assess how well the portfolio changes in response to changes in strategy. Portfolio perfor￾mance metrics are often created by combining the portfolio assessment criteria.
• The application of Agile and hybrid Agile-Stage-Gate product innovation processes over recent years 
has helped to address some of the traditional challenges of portfolio management, including over￾loaded pipelines and lack of reliable data on which to base portfolio decisions. But, at the same time, 
the new Agile-based processes have presented new challenges mainly related to the dynamic and 
iterative nature of these processes and the need to employ different approaches to project metrics 
and financial evaluation for decision-making.150 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
3.A PORTFOLIO PRACTICE QUESTIONS
1. A weakness of the net present value (NPV) method for assessing projects in portfolio management is that:
A. Projects cannot be rank ordered.
B. NPV doesn’t allow for resource allocation.
C. Tools for calculating NPV are not readily available.
D. It is difficult to determine accurate cash flow data for projects, especially early in the development 
process.
2. Allocating resources across a set of projects to optimize performance is known as:
A. Value maximization.
B. Profit-seeking.
C. Rationalization.
D. Pruning.
3. “Top-down” and “bottom-up” are ways to think about:
A. Forecasting.
B. Leadership.
C. Connecting customers with the organization.
D. Linking strategy and the product portfolio.
4. You are the CEO of company A. Your company has grown organically through lots of acquisitions and you 
now have a wide range of products that have been launched into a variety of markets, and your product 
teams have ideas to develop new products. You need to optimize the investment across all these existing 
and new products. What would you do?
A. Tell the teams not to develop any new products.
B. Give each team the same amount of money and ask them to proceed with development.
C. Establish a portfolio management process.
D. Approve projects that only cost less than $500K to develop.
5. In evaluating product opportunities, which of the following is a financial method for evaluation?
A. Strategic alignment.
B. Return on investment.
C. Technical feasibility.
D. Time to market.
6. In evaluating product opportunities, which of the following is a non-financial method for evaluation?
A. Level of risk.
B. Net present value.
C. Payback period.
D. Internal rate of return.
7. Company A has recently implemented a range of new product development practices. As a first stage, 
it has used a range of ideation tools to generate several potential new product ideas. It is now seeking 
to evaluate and prioritize the 150 product ideas for further evaluation and development. What technique 
would you recommend for the first stage of evaluating the 150 new product ideas?
A. Pass/fail evaluation.
B. Financial analysis.
C. Ask the boss to do it.
D. Detailed scoring of each idea against strategic criteria.PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO 151
8. Mary is a product manager for ACE Electronics. She has been asked by the senior management execu￾tive to prepare a list of criteria as a basis for the evaluation of new opportunities to be included in the new 
products portfolio. She presents the following list: (1) Potential market share, (2) Potential contribution to 
company profitability, and (3) Availability of product development resources. Mary has omitted the most 
important criterion from her list. What is it?
A. Support from the chief executive.
B. Alignment with the company’s strategy.
C. Sufficient marketing budget.
D. Sufficient manufacturing capability.
9. You need to estimate the sales potential of a new product to determine its overall financial feasibility. 
Your sales manager estimates there is a 40% chance of achieving sales of 500,000 units and a 60% 
chance of selling 1,000,000 units. What sales potential would you use in your feasibility analysis?
A. 600,000 units.
B. 700,000 units.
C. 800,000 units.
D. 900,000 units.
10. Jane has been evaluating the state of the innovation portfolio at ACME Bricks and Construction. Sev￾eral simultaneous projects use the same set of product development experts. Moreover, many of these 
projects are being delayed and compete with other business priorities. What critical aspect of portfolio 
management should Jane look at to address these issues?
A. Resource allocation.
B. Project flow.
C. Agile project development.
D. Strategy execution.
Answers to practice questions: Portfolio management
1. D
2. A
3. D
4. C
5. B
6. A
7. A
8. B
9. C
10. A152 PRODUCT INNOVATION PORTFOLIO
REFERENCES
Belludi, N. (2021). Creativity-it takes a village: A case study of the 3m post-it note. Right Attitudes. https://www.rightattitudes
.com/2021/04/15/creativity-case-study-post-it-note/
Bsteiler, L. and Noble, C.H. (2023). PDMA handbook of innovation and new product development, 4e. John Wiley and Sons.
Cooper, R. G. (2019). Determining the value of ambiguous agile projects with multiple iterations using ECV. Bob Cooper. http://
www.bobcooper.ca/ECV-Article.pdf
Cooper, R.G. and Sommer, A.F. (2016). The agile-stage-gate hybrid model: A promising new approach and a new research oppor￾tunity. Journal of Product Innovation Management 33 (5): 513–526. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12314.
Cooper, R.G. and Sommer, A.F. (2020). New-product portfolio management with agile. Research-Technology Management 63 (1): 
29–38. https://doi.org/10.1080/08956308.2020.1686291.
Cooper, R.G., Edgett, S.J., and Kleinschmidt, E.J. (2001). Portfolio management of new product, 2e. Perseus Book Groups.
Cooper, R.G., Edgett, S.J., and Kleinschmidt, E.J. (2002). Portfolio management: Fundamental to new product success. In: The 
PDMA toolbook for new product innovation (ed. P. Belliveau, A. Griffin, and S. Somermeyer), 331–347. John Wiley and Sons.
Cooper, R.G., Edgett, S.J., and Kleinschmidt, E.J. (2004). Benchmarking best NPD practices 2: Strategy, resources and portfolio 
management practices. Research-Technology Management 47 (3): 50–60. https://doi.org/10.1080/08956308.2004.11671630.
Cooper, R. G., Edgett, S. J., & Kleinschmidt, E. J. (2015). Portfolio management: Fundamentals for new product success. Stage￾Gate. http://www.stage-gate.net/downloads/wp/wp_12.pdf
Crawford, M. and DiBenedetto, A. (2011). New products management, 11e. McGraw Hill.
Dam, R. F., & Siang, T. Y. (2021). Introduction to the essential ideation techniques which are the heart of design thinking. Interaction 
Design Foundation. https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/article/introduction-to-the-essential-ideation-techniques-which-are￾the-heart-of-design-thinking
Kahn, K.B., Evans Kay, S., Slotegraaf, R.J., and Uban, S. (ed.) (2013). The PDMA handbook of new product development, 3e. 
John Wiley & Sons https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118466421.
Knudsen, M.P., von Zedtwitz, M., Griffin, A., and Barczak, G. (2023). Best practices in new product development and innovation: 
Results from PDMA’s 2021 global survey. Journal of Product Innovation Management 40 (3): 257–275. https://doi.org/10.1111/
jpim.12663.
Markham, S.K. (2013). The impact of front-end of innovation activities on product performance. Journal of Product Innovation 
Management 30 (S1): 7–92. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12065.
Markham, S.K. (2023). An innovation management framework: A model for managers who want to grow their business. In: The 
PDMA handbook of innovation and new product development, 4e (ed. L. Bsteiler and C.H. Noble), 45–58. John Wiley and Sons.
Markham, S.K. and Lee, H. (2012). Product development and management association’s 2012 comparative performance assess￾ment study. Journal of Product Innovation Management 30 (3): 408–429. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12025.
Matheson, D., Matheson, J.E., and Menke, M.M. (1994). Making excellent R&D decisions. Research-Technology Management 37
(6): 251–269. https://doi.org/10.1080/08956308.1994.11671006.
Pisano, P., Pironti, M., and Rieple, A. (2015). Identify innovative business models: can innovative business models enable play￾ers to react to ongoing or unpredictable trends? Entrepreneurship Research Journal 5 (3): 181–199. https://doi.org/10.1515/
erj-2014-0032.
Project Management Institute (2021). A guide to the project management body of knowledge (pmbok guide), 7e. Project 
Management Institute.
Sommer, A. (2018). Determining the value of ambiguous projects with multiple iterations using expected commercial value. 
Sommer Systems. https://www.sommersystems.com/ECV
Zikopoulos, C. and Tagaras, G. (2015). Reverse supply chains: Effects of collection network and returns classification on profitabil￾ity. European Journal of Operational Research 246 (2): 435–449. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2015.04.051.Product Development and Management Body of Knowledge: A Guidebook for Product Innovation Training and Certification,Third Edition. 
Allan Anderson, Chad McAllister, and Ernie Harris.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Product
Innovation 
Process
Provides an approach, which is commonly 
understood and accepted by the whole 
organization, for successfully and sustainably 
developing new products or making 
improvements to existing products
4154 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS CHAPTER
A structured and disciplined product innovation process is recognized as a critical factor in achieving 
repeatable, successful outcomes. This chapter introduces several processes and ideologies for sustain￾able product innovation. A summary of each process/ideology is presented, together with discussions of 
their benefits and limitations.
You are encouraged to select the best process, or combination of processes, that align with your spe￾cific organizational and product strategies.PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 155
THE CHAPTER ROADMAP
Product innovation as a “risk vs. reward” process.
How to minimize risk and maximize reward?
The importance of the early stages of the product
innovation process – “the front end.”
What is a Product Innovation Charter? How does this
guide and direct a product innovation project
What are the commonly used product innovation
processes?
The benefits and limitations of each process:
• Stage-Gate®
• Waterfall
• Concurrent Engineering
• Integrated Product Development
• Agile
• Agile Stage-Gate
• Systems engineering
• Design Thinking
• Lean
• Jobs to be Done.
Comparing the various processes and
what process or processes to use.156 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
4.1 INTRODUCTION TO PRODUCT INNOVATION
This section presents several foundational concepts about product innovation to help set the stage for the 
innovation processes later explained in Section 4.3.
By combining the input of the ideation process with the structured activities of realizing social or com￾mercial value from those ideas, you demonstrate true innovation. This definition of innovation encapsulates 
the basis of this book and its focus on the practices and processes that underpin end-to-end product 
innovation – from product idea to launch.
Products can be classified into several categories. Some processes and practices work best for one 
category but not for another. Some work for a number of different categories. For example, Fast Moving 
Consumer Goods (FMCG), like packaged food, beverages, cosmetics, etc., are defined, built, and deliv￾ered very differently than Consumer Electronics or Pharmaceuticals.
Product innovation processes are a series of multidisciplinary activities requiring sound decision￾making based on inputs from a wide range of internal and external sources to the organization. As the 
variety of products continues to expand along with the iterative nature of process improvement, an ever￾growing number of processes, ideologies, and/or models have taken shape.
Therefore, a product innovation process is defined as the activities, tools, and techniques consisting 
of strategy development, product-line planning, concept generation, concept screening, and research, to 
achieve successful outcomes in the form of products for clients (Cooper, 2017).
This definition continues to stand the test of time, as noted in the 3rd Edition of the PDMA Handbook:
“A disciplined and defined set of tasks and steps that describe the normal [and appropriate] means 
by which an organization repetitively converts embryonic ideas into salable products or services” 
(Kahn et al., 2013).
Much like physics, we constantly seek to find the single, unifying process for a standard product 
innovation process. Even then, there is room for variation. Gurtner et  al. (2018) published Leveraging 
Constraints for Innovation, which sought to explore innovation under constraint – in other words, doing 
more with less. They found that success is a function of “. . .some form of cross-functional, phased devel￾opment process. . .”. While they suggest Stage-Gate® as the core underpinning framework, it was not the 
first product innovation framework, and while it has been widely adopted and expanded into agile forms, it 
is also not the only framework.
4.1.1 Product Innovation as a “Risk vs. Reward” Process
Robert Cooper (2001) presents an interesting analogy of product innovation with the gambling process. 
Basically, the process of product innovation is one of risk management where the rules are:
• If the uncertainties are high, keep the stakes low.
• As the uncertainties decrease, the amount at stake can be increased.
Most organizations are risk-averse. An organization may have had previous products fail, creating a 
fear of trying something new. Further, as organizations grow, they typically focus on what made them suc￾cessful and resist taking risks. Hence, critical questions for most organizations are: “is it possible to reduce 
product failures?” and, if so, “how can we get better at developing products?”
This creates the impression that product innovation is just about managing risk vs. reward – the main 
objective should be developing a suitable product/solution for the market, thereby balancing risk/reward 
while delivering on (and possibly exceeding) customer expectations and requirements. Modern product 
innovation aims to enlarge the “space of possibilities” within the risk/reward balance to achieve the optimal 
“solution space.”PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 157
The 2021 PDMA Best Practices Survey (Knudsen et al., 2023), which includes responses from partici￾pants in 38 countries representing small and large businesses offering products of all categories showed, 
among other things, that product success rate was highly dependent on the quality and consistency of 
execution of product innovation practices and processes adopted by the companies:
• The best companies had success rates of 76%.
• The rest of the companies had success rates of 51%.
To put that in perspective, for every four projects, the best companies have one more product success 
than the rest of the companies. Given the size of product innovation projects, that difference is a substan￾tial portion of the resources dedicated to innovation projects.
4.1.2 Managing the Risk of New Product Failure
The cumulative costs associated with product innovation increase throughout the product innovation pro￾cess. The challenge for the product developer is to ensure that the risks related to product failure (the level 
of uncertainty) are reduced as costs increase (refer to Figures 4.1 and 4.2).
Figure 4.1 illustrates how product innovation costs increase as a product innovation project progresses 
through the development phases, e.g., due to increased resourcing, effort, and materials.
While the cumulative costs increase over time, the uncertainty element decreases (see Figure 4.2). This 
decrease is a function of better-defined product parameters and project deliverables. In other words, in 
well-run projects, the uncertainty about the product, the market, and other key factors are reduced by 
increased understanding or knowledge, which translates directly to an improved probability for success. Cumulative cost
Phase of development
Idea
generation
Prototype
development
Scale-up to
commercialization
Product
launch
FIGURE 4.1 The costs of new product innovation158 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
4.1.3 Knowledge Improves Decision-making and Reduces Uncertainty
Figure 4.3 presents a standard decision framework that is used in a wide range of professions. As the 
different product innovation process models are discussed, notice that the basic fundamentals of this 
decision framework underpin all of these models. The aim is to reduce uncertainty and increase predict￾ability. The knowledge, information, and data required to make sound decisions come from a wide range 
of sources:
• Organization records
• Organization staff
• External advisors
• Published literature
• Patents
• Competitors
• Customers
Uncertainty and cost
Idea
generation
Prototype
development
Scale-up to
commercialization
Product
launch
Cumulative cost
Aim to decrease uncertainty
FIGURE 4.2 Managing uncertainty and costs over the product innovation cycle
Identify the problem or opportunity
Gather information
Analyze the situation
Identify solution options
Evaluate options
Select preferred alternative
Act on the decision
FIGURE 4.3 A standard decision frameworkPRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 159
4.1.4 The Early Stages of Product Innovation: The Front End
Sections 4.1.2 and 4.1.3 describe how costs increase significantly as the innovation process proceeds. 
Making key decisions early in the process is critical to providing confidence in the on-going expenditure 
and minimizing the likelihood of failure. This early phase in the process is generally called the front end of 
innovation, or the fuzzy front end, because of high uncertainty and lack of clarity.
The product innovation process is frequently displayed in the form of a funnel. Figure 4.4 shows three 
basic stages of product innovation, front end, development, and commercialization. The transition through 
the funnel from many ideas or opportunities in the discovery stage diminishes as the process proceeds 
from development to commercialization.
The large number of possibilities in the early stages, or the front end of innovation, often leads to a lack 
of clarity, confusion, and even conflict. The greatest challenge in product innovation is to logically work 
through the fuzziness, to clarify future project direction, and minimize wasted expenditure and risk of fail￾ure, as shown in Figure 4.5.
Activities in the Front End of Innovation (FEI)
The basic activities usually included in descriptions of the front end of innovation are:
• Pre-work to discover opportunities. These opportunities may include line extensions, modifi￾cations to an existing product, or a totally new product. They may also include potential solutions 
to problems, for example, utilization of waste material or addressing under-capacity manufacturing 
equipment. Ideation techniques, extensively covered in Section 3.2.1.
Front end Development Commercialization
FIGURE 4.4 The product innovation funnel
Front end Development Commercialization
FIGURE 4.5 Addressing the front end of innovation, from fuzziness to clarity160 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
• Confirming the innovation problem or goal. Clarity of the goal and what is being sought to 
achieve is critical to the success of any project. This preliminary analysis allows you to figure out what 
problem you need to solve for your customers before you develop a product. For example, one big 
failure in the annals of product history is Google Glass. Google made a device without considering 
what problems they were solving for their customers. Therefore, their product was a monumental 
(and costly) failure.
• Scoping feasibility. Quick and inexpensive assessments of the feasibility of the project are made 
during scoping. This involves learning what your customers think about your goal and whether you 
have the technical and human resources to achieve it. For example, in 1985, Coca-Cola Company 
released New Coke, a revamp of their classic Coca-Cola beverage formula to win over Pepsi drink￾ers. This reformulation changed a 100-year-old recipe based on market taste research. However, 
once New Coke launched, consumer outcry was overwhelming. Within 79  days, the company 
replaced New Coke with the original Coca-Cola formula repackaged as “Classic Coca-Cola.” New 
Coke is now widely considered the biggest commercial marketing blunder of all time. Chapter 6 pre￾sents a range of techniques for gaining consumer insights, and Chapter 3 presents screening tech￾niques for early-stage evaluation of opportunities.
• Business case to analyze potential commercial viability. Chapter 3 presents a range of financial 
evaluation methods that can form the basis of early-stage business case development. As shown in 
Table 3.6, a simple spreadsheet provides an excellent starting point for early-stage financial analysis. 
Based on relatively rudimentary data, this spreadsheet can be updated with more reliable data as the 
innovation process progresses.
• Planning for development. A plan is needed to funnel these potential products into your prod￾uct development process. As described in Section 4.2, the product innovation charter provides the 
framework for this early-stage planning. It includes the estimated development schedule, project 
staffing, budget estimates, and much of the information described above.PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 161
4.2 THE PRODUCT INNOVATION CHARTER (PIC)
4.2.1 Providing Guidance and Direction for the Project
Regardless of how an organization manages the front end of innovation, key information is required for 
each product that moves forward to development. This includes:
• The market trends.
• The customer benefits and acceptance metrics.
• Product definition and specifications.
• Economic analysis of the product.
• The estimated development schedules.
• Project staffing and the budget estimates.
Generation of this information is best accomplished by a cross-functional product team and not solely 
a product and/or project manager. Cross-functional teams are described in Chapter 7.
Beyond this key information, every new product idea must meet some common success criteria including:
• Fit with the company skill sets and available resources.
• Fit the strategy of your company.
• Solve a problem for someone.
• Be something that someone will buy.
• Be scalable.
A helpful framework encompassing these criteria, by Marty Cagan, is the Four Risks of Product 
Discovery (2017):
• Value risk (whether customers will buy it, or users will choose to use it)
• Usability risk (whether users can figure out how to use it)
• Feasibility risk (whether our engineers can build what we need with the time, skills, and technology 
we have)
• Business viability risk (whether this solution also works for the various aspects of our business)
A successful product adequately addresses each of these areas. The challenge is keeping the product 
team on the same page as the product project evolves. The team needs to understand how each risk is 
addressed while sharing a clear product vision. Some product innovation projects drastically evolve from 
the original idea or insight into something that looks very different. A classic example is the Sgt. York tank, 
a massive project that lost sight of its original vision (New York Times, 1985).
So, how do you ensure you capture and convey the information the product team needs to have a 
clear vision for their work? One way is to create the Product Innovation Charter (PIC). The PIC is typically 
started and built out during the Front End of Innovation (FEI) phase and will contain assumptions about 
market preferences, customer needs, and sales and profit potential. As the project enters the execution 
phase, these assumptions are challenged through prototype development and in-market testing. While 
business needs and market conditions can and will change as the project progresses, scope creep is 
responsible for increasing project risk, which in turn, decreases the likelihood of success.
In the 2021 PDMA Best Practices Survey (Knudsen et al., 2023), we see this reflected in the cycle 
time, or time to complete projects, shown in Table 4.1. The numbers represent the average number of 
weeks spent on each type of innovation project. You will see that there has not been much change in the 
Incremental Innovation project cycle time over the past 20years. That said, better application of product 
innovation and project management processes have led to a decrease of more than 70% in the time it 
takes to complete a radical innovation project.162 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
Although many factors have led to the decrease in project time, creating an effective Product 
Innovation Charter (PIC) and then managing against the parameters of that PIC will aid significantly. A PIC 
helps keep the product team members on the same page and innovation projects on track, thereby reduc￾ing risks and time to market.
4.2.2 Content of the PIC
The PIC is normally a relatively short (1–3 pages) document. It contains four specific sections:
1. Background
2. Focus arena
3. Goals and objectives
4. Special guidelines
The content of these sections is detailed as follows:
1. The background
• Validation of the project: its purpose and relationship to the business and innovation strategy. 
Why is the organization pursuing the project?
• Scope of the project: how wide or narrow is the project’s focus?
• The role of the project team in achieving the project’s goals.
• Project constraints: resources, funding, manufacturing, marketing, etc.; anything that is likely to 
impact a successful project outcome.
• The current and future state of any key technologies.
• Environment, industry, and market analysis that shows the context for the new product, its cus￾tomers, competitors, regulations, etc.
• The desired benefits of the product innovation project.
• Aspects relating to sustainability in the current and future environment.
2. The focus arena
The term arena is mainly applied in sporting or theatrical terms – denoting where the team plays or 
the venue where the play takes place. This definition has been extended to business to denote the 
playing field for a business activity. The PIC should contain:
• The target market (where the game is being played).
• Key technology and market dimensions that underpin project success.
• The strengths and weaknesses of competitors (the other players in the arena). Their technology, 
marketing, brand, market share, manufacturing, etc.
• The approach taken to identify and incorporate all (other) project/product stakeholders impacted 
by the product, e.g., society, supply chain.
• Specific aspects of sustainability that underpin project success.
3. The goals and objectives
• Specific goals related to contribution to the business strategy key stakeholders expect, such as a 
percentage share of a new market or an increase in the current market share.
TABLE 4.1 Reduction in weeks to complete product innovation projects
2020 2012 2004 1995
Radical innovation 59 85 104 181
More innovative 50 59 62 78
Incremental innovation 35 34 29 33PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 163
• Additional business operation goals include profit, sales volume, cost reduction, increased through￾put, and sustainability goals. Sustainability goals extend beyond the market customer segment 
and consider greater socio-economic impacts. Examples include decreasing negative impacts on 
planet and people, such as a plan for the use/reuse of materials.
• Project-related objectives including financial, budget, time to launch, benefits tracking and reali￾zation, and effective stakeholder expectations management.
• Note that each goal or objective should have specific and measurable success criteria. These are 
referred to as performance metrics (refer to Chapter 1 for a more detailed discussion).
4. The special guidelines
• Working relationships of the project team – how and when meetings are held, collaboration tech￾nology used, etc.
• Project reporting – frequency, format, specific stakeholders.
• Budget expenditure responsibilities.
• Involvement of external agencies, e.g., regulatory bodies.
• Specific aspects relating to time of launch or product quality.
• Project governance and leadership.164 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
4.3 SPECIFIC PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESSES
4.3.1 Evolution of the Product Innovation Process
Over the past 50years, there has been a dramatic increase in the research into, and application of, prod￾uct innovation processes. This has resulted in a wide range of processes – many designed for specific 
industry, product, or market contexts.
It must be emphasized that the new product process is not a uniformly defined process that can be 
applied in the same way to all organizations or products. It should be designed to meet the specific needs 
of the organization and its customers, products, or services.
Further, there appears to be a preference for different product innovation models according to the geo￾graphical region; for example, Integrated Product Development is popular in the Asia-Pacific region, while 
agile-stage-gate is common in North America. Some regions utilize systems engineering.
Historically, defined processes for product innovation can be traced to an eight-phase process for 
developing chemical products in the 1940s. In the 1960s, NASA practiced the concept of phased devel￾opment, the phase review process, which divided the development project into phases with reviews fol￾lowing each phase.
In the mid-1960s, Booz, Allen, and Hamilton (1982) designed a process that was divided into six basic 
stages, which laid the foundation for many of the processes developed more recently. These stages are:
1. Exploration
2. Screening
3. Business evaluation
4. Development
5. Testing
6. Commercialization
Perhaps the most defining step in the formalization of the product innovation process and its applica￾tion across a wide range of industries came in the mid-1980s with the Stage-Gate® process (Cooper & 
Kleinschmidt 1986).
Over the past three decades, the evolution of a number of processes, designed to meet the needs 
of specific organizations with different product and market contexts, is evidenced. The remainder of this 
chapter describes a selection of these modern product processes and outlines their advantages and dis￾advantages in applications within specific contexts. These processes include but are not limited to:
• Stage-Gate®
• Agile
• Integrated Product Development (IPD)
• Lean Product Innovation
• Lean startup
• Systems engineering
• Design thinking
• Jobs to be done
We have chosen to use the term “process” in this book, although it may well be argued that Agile, 
Lean, Design Thinking, and IPD might best be described as ideologies, philosophies, or a set of principles.PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 165
4.3.2 The Stage-Gate® Process
The Stage-Gate® was first developed by Robert Cooper in the mid-1980s and has been continuously 
updated over the years in response to changing industry needs. A generalized view of Stage-Gate® pro￾cess is shown in Figure 4.6, consisting of stages and gates.
What is a stage?
Basically, a stage is a defined work section of the overall product development process, including:
Activities: The work the product team must do according to the project plan.
Integrated analysis: The project leader’s and team’s integrated analysis of the results of all the 
functional activities, derived through cross-functional interaction.
Deliverables: The presentation of the results of the integrated analysis, which must be completed 
by the team for submission at the gate.
What is a gate?
Basically, gates are where key decisions are made on the future of the project, including:
Deliverables: Inputs into the gate review. These are defined in advance and are the results of 
actions from the preceding stage. A standard menu of deliverables is specified for each gate.
Criteria: What the project is judged against to make the go/kill and prioritization decisions. These 
criteria are usually organized into a scoreboard and include both financial and qualitative criteria.
Outputs: Results of the gate review. Gates must have clearly articulated outputs, including a deci￾sion (go/kill/hold/recycle) and a path forward (approved project plan, date, and deliverables for the 
next gate agreed on).
Following is a brief description of the main stages for Stage-Gate®.
• Discovery: looking for new opportunities and new product ideas.
• Scoping: examining the market opportunity, technical requirements, and capabilities available.
• Business case: a critical stage that builds on the scoping stage with a more in-depth technical, 
marketing, and business feasibility analysis.
• Development: the product design, prototyping, design for manufacture (if applicable), preparation of 
manufacturing and launch plans.
• Testing and validation: testing all aspects of the product and its commercialization plans to vali￾date all assumptions and conclusions.
• Launch: full commercialization of the product, including full-scale manufacturing and commercial 
launch into the market.
Stage Gate Review of
process
(N = 3–7)
FIGURE 4.6 Generalized view of the stage gate process166 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
Figure 4.7 shows what Cooper describes as a full 5-stage process. The number of stages is not fixed 
and should be adapted according to the specific context and will depend on:
• The urgency for new product launch. Greater urgency leading to a more compressed process 
with fewer stages.
• The current knowledge about the technology and market related to the new product. The greater 
the basis of knowledge, the lower the risk resulting in fewer stages required.
• The level of uncertainty. Higher levels of uncertainty demand greater information to mitigate risk, 
leading to a longer process.
Figure 4.8 shows adaptations to the 5-stage process based on these criteria.
Evolution and Application of the Stage-Gate® Process
The Stage-Gate® process, at least in its early iterations, appeared quite linear and sequential. This has never 
been the intention of its originators (Cooper, 2014). Further information on the history of Stage-Gate® and 
its current status is provided by Stage-Gate® International (stage-gate.com). Over recent years, Cooper 
(2014) has written a number of articles demonstrating new evolutions of the Stage-Gate® process and 
Stage 1
Gate
2 Stage 3
Gate
St 4 age 2
Gate
3 Stage 4
Gate
5
Stage 5
Discovery
Gate
1
Post
launch
review
Scoping Testing &
validation
Business Development case
Launch
2nd screen
Idea screen
Go to
develop
Go to
test
Go to
launch
FIGURE 4.7 The 5-stage process
Discovery Gate
1
Stage
1&2
Gate
3 Stages
3&4
Gate
5 Stage 5
Stage 1 Gate
2 Stage 3 Gate Stag 4 e 2 Gate
3 Stage 4 Gate
5 Stage 5 Post
launch
review
Post
launch
review
Stages
1&2
Gate
3
Stage
3,4 & 5
Post
launch
review
Stage-gate full
for major high
risk projects
Stage-gate lite
for moderate
risk projects
Stage-gate XPress
for minor, low risk
projects
FIGURE 4.8 Three levels of the Stage-Gate® processPRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 167
its adaptation to different product development contexts and organizational requirements. Cooper (2014) 
emphasizes that, although the basic principles of the process may remain the same, its application should 
be modified to be fit for specific situations. Specific adaptations of the Stage-Gate® process include:
• Parallel processing: The traditional Stage-Gate® activities are “compressed” into parallel (concur￾rent) streams of activities (as opposed to linear and sequential), with the aim of expediting the activi￾ties within each stage. They then converge at strategic decision gates to allow for progression. The 
parallel processing requires the organization to allocate more resources to activities in the same time 
period.
• Circular design and product management: Here, the focus is on sustainability. This involves 
incorporating the customer and product users early in the product innovation design stage, with the 
aim of reusing materials, designs, reducing waste in the product’s development and life, and the abil￾ity to recycle the product at the end of its use.
• Fast Stage-Gate: Also known as Agile-Stage-Gate (Cooper & Sommer, 2016), the aim is to incor￾porate principles of Agile approaches (e.g., sprints, standups, backlogs) into the product manufac￾turing environments. It required modifications to Scrum, the most common Agile approach, to cater 
to the differences in the manufacturing environments. This hybrid approach aims to foster innovation, 
minimize risk, speed up decision-making, and speed up product innovation and launch to market. It 
is further described in Section 4.3.7.
Benefits and Limitations of the Stage-Gate® Process
Table 4.2 presents the benefits and limitations of the standard Stage-Gate® process.
Hypothetical Examples of How the Stage-Gate® Process can be Adapted to Specific 
Situations
The development of a simple line extension for a novelty ice cream where the company has a long 
history in the market, sound technical expertise, and existing manufacturing capability. In this case, the 
development complexity is very low, with a relatively high certainty of success and low risks associated 
with failure. A short process focusing on an initial business case followed by iterative formulation (or 
design) stages, informed by product testing, leading to final product launch, is probably all that is required. 
The time-to-market could be expected to be from one to three months.
The development of a model car that can be driven off-road by 10- to 12-year-old children, where 
the company has some experience with the target market but has limited expertise with the technol￾ogy involved. There is also significant uncertainty surrounding the product features desired by the target 
market and the potential demand. In this case, there is a high level of uncertainty associated with not 
only the product concept and design specifications but also with the potential complexity in design and 
TABLE 4.2 Benefits and limitations of Stage-Gate®
Benefits Limitations
• Adds discipline and constraints into product 
innovation.
• Contributes to limiting and managing risk.
• Places an emphasis on quality decision-making.
• Is transparent to all involved.
• Can be adapted to a wide range of organizations.
• Has the potential to become overly bureaucratic.
• Where it is not fully understood, it can be seen as too 
rigid and costly.
• The discipline and constraints can be perceived as 
stifling creativity.
• While the process is intended to decrease time-to￾market, difficulty scheduling gate reviews results has 
resulted in increasing time-to-market.168 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
manufacture. Here, one would expect more stages in the process with a greater emphasis on gates to 
ensure informed decision-making and reduce uncertainty. Specific focus should be placed on the FEI 
stages of concept development and initial business analysis. More activity at the end of the process 
(focusing on design for manufacture, market testing, final feasibility analysis, and scale-up for launch) could 
be expected. The time-to-market could be expected to be from six months to two years.
An example of how a company adapted the Stage-Gate® process.
Figure 4.9 shows an example of how General Electric (GE) adapted the Stage-Gate® process to its unique 
requirements. The GE process is based on 4 stages comprising 10 activities across these stages.
GE’s choice of this Stage-Gate® process and its 10 activities drove a cross-functional focus on early 
market needs prior to full market production. Additionally, it instilled discipline in the company’s project 
management techniques (Phillips et al., 1999, p. 292).
4.3.3 The Waterfall Method
The first development of the waterfall process is generally attributed to Winston Royce (1970). During the 
early 2000s, it was widely applied within the software industry. The five phases of the classical waterfall 
process are shown in Figure 4.10 and include:
1. Requirements gathering: Understanding what is required to design the product: function, pur￾pose, user needs, etc.
2. Design: The attributes and features of the product are designed to meet customer needs. It also 
includes planning and feasibility assessments.
3. Implementation: The product’s design plan is enacted and mainly entails development or produc￾tion activities.
4. Verification: Ensuring that the product is meeting customer expectations.
5. Maintenance: Use of the customer to identify shortfalls or mistakes in the product design that 
require change.
In recent times, the waterfall method has been frowned upon for being “too slow” or inflexible for a 
product/project’s completion. Some organizations have applied a hybridized approach to the overall 
framework. This provides the basis of an overall structure while providing an iterative approach with greater 
flexibility, which speeds up development. The teams performing these projects would typically be smaller 
and are normally co-located.
STAGE 1 STAGE 2 STAGE 3
Preliminary concept
development
STAGE 4
Design and
development
Validation In-service product
and support
• Customer needs
• Concept
development
• Initial feasibility
• Preliminary design
• Final design
• Critical productivity
• Market/field test
• Manufacturing
feasibility
• Market readiness
• Market introduction
follow-up
FIGURE 4.9 Example of Stage-Gate® process adaptation.
Source: Phillips et al. (1999).PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 169
TABLE 4.3 Benefits and limitations of the waterfall method
Benefits Limitations
• Needs each phase to be completed before moving 
to the next.
• Is suited well for smaller, well-defined projects with 
well understood and complete requirements.
• Needs minimum client intervention.
• Is not suitable for large, complex projects that have 
frequent requirement changes.
• Has testing of the product in later phases, 
increasing risk.
• Requires detailed documentation which may be time 
consuming.
Regardless, the waterfall method continues to be used, especially when the requirements are well 
understood and not expected to change. The benefits and limitations of the waterfall method are shown in 
Table 4.3.
4.3.4 Concurrent Engineering
Concurrent engineering was seen as a replacement for the more traditional sequential waterfall model. 
“Concurrent engineering is a systematic approach to the integrated, concurrent design of products and 
their related processes, including manufacturing and support. This approach is intended to cause the 
developers from the very outset to consider all elements of the product life cycle, from conception to dis￾posal, including quality, cost, schedule, and user requirements” (Winner et al., 1991). The concurrent engi￾neering model is shown in Figure 4.11.
The basic premise for concurrent engineering is founded on two concepts. The first is the idea that all 
elements of a product’s life cycle, from functionality, producibility, assembly, testability, maintenance issues, 
environmental impact, and finally, disposal and recycling, should be taken into careful consideration in the 
early design phases. The second concept is that the preceding design activities should all be occurring 
at the same time, i.e., concurrently. The idea is that the concurrent nature of these processes significantly 
Maintenance
Verification
Implementation
Design
Requirements gathering Understanding what is required to design the product: function,
purpose, user needs, etc.
The attributes and features of the product are designed to meet
customer needs in the execution stage. It also includes planning
and feasibility assessments.
The product’s design plan is enacted and mainly entails
production activities.
Ensuring that the product is meeting customer expectations.
Use of the customer to identify shortfalls or mistakes in the
product design that require change.
FIGURE 4.10 The waterfall method170 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
increases productivity and product quality. This way, errors and redesigns can be discovered early in the 
design process when the project is still flexible. By locating and fixing these issues early, the design team 
can avoid what often become costly errors as the project moves to more complicated computational mod￾els and eventually into the actual manufacturing of hardware.
4.3.5 Integrated Product Development (IPD)
Integrated product development has evolved from concurrent engineering. It is defined as “a philosophy 
that systematically employs an integrated team effort from multifunctional disciplines to [effectively and effi￾ciently] develop. . . new products that satisfy customer needs” (Kahn et al., 2013).
Over recent years, some organizations have focused on a stepwise approach to improving the overall 
product innovation system, centered on IPD principles. The aim was to progress from a focus on the appli￾cation of basic tools for product innovation through to the application of project management, voice of the 
customer, linkage to strategy, and, at the highest level, a learning culture founded on knowledge capture 
and management, as illustrated in Figure 4.12. This shows IPD more as a framework for evolutionary and 
capability maturity improvement in product innovation rather than simply a specific model or process. This 
Step 1:
Basic Tools
Step 2: Projects
& Teams
• Project mgmt.
• Cross-functional
teams
• Design for
manufacturability
Step 3: Customer
Focus
• Voice of the
customer
• Design against
customer needs
Step 4: Strategy
& Portfolio
• Product strategy
• Project selection
process
• Performance metrics
Step 5: Knowledge,
Skills, & Innovation
• Knowledge capture
and management
• Capability
development
• Development of
innovation culture
FIGURE 4.12 Levels of organizational practice based on the IPD System
Requirements Analysis & design
Implementation Planning
Evaluation Testing
Deployment
Initial
planning
FIGURE 4.11 Concurrent engineering modelPRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 171
TABLE 4.4 The benefits and limitations of integrated product development
Benefits Limitations
• As the organization develops its capabilities and 
matures through the IPD steps, product innovation 
and delivery should become more efficient.
• Increased efficiencies translate into improved cost 
management and increased profitability.
• Due to the strong emphasis on design principles in 
the FEI stages (in relation to defining the product/ 
project goals), and thus clearer product definition, the 
risks are managed sooner in the product innovation 
life cycle.
• Quality, proactive risk management, and a focus 
on customer requirements ensure precise deliv￾ery of value.
• Multifunctional teams (internal and external) that 
effectively collaborate in a product innovation pro￾ject can pool their skills and capabilities toward 
common goals.
• In the context of sustainability and the circular econ￾omy, IPD offers t multi-stakeholder engagement to 
encourage sustainability objectives.
• Customer requirements must be clear early on in the 
development cycle so as to meaningfully contribute to 
the downstream creation and achievement of value. 
This requires active stakeholder engagement.
• The latest tools and methods are needed.
• IPD requires the right competencies (people and 
skills) to be deployed in the process.
• Multi-stakeholder collaboration can be problematic 
and complex if the teams are unable to effectively 
collaborate and co-create. This is especially true 
of organizations that have used linear work phases 
instead of a cross-functional product team approach.
• The appropriate balance of FEI and design con￾trols is paramount to project success, otherwise 
inefficiencies will ultimately delay product delivery 
(Naveh, 2004).
framework captures many of the fundamental principles underpinning the most commonly used product 
innovation processes, emphasizing understanding the customer, learning, and continuous improvement.
The benefits and limitations of IPD are summarized in Table 4.4.
IPD and sustainability integration – an example
An example of a company that successfully implemented IPD with a focus on integrating sustainability is 
Nestlé. Espinoza-Orias et al. (2018) describe how Nestlé, “Guided by values rooted in respect, [it] works 
alongside partners and stakeholders to create shared value (CSV) across all the activities of the company, 
which contribute to society while ensuring the long-term success of our business.” Its commitments go so 
far as to continually align with the SDGs (sustainable development goals) in terms of scope and timelines.
4.3.6 Agile Product Innovation
Agile is neither a methodology nor a framework. Instead, it is a set of principles and values. Agile methods 
don’t attempt to prescribe a specific magic solution that works for every team. Instead, they focus on help￾ing a team to think clearly, creatively, and collaboratively to achieve the best solution for that team.
The philosophy was first constructed from experiences with software product development and has 
since been applied across industries and product categories.
Manifesto for Agile Software Development
In February 2001, 17 software developers met in Utah to discuss lightweight development methods. They 
published the Manifesto for Agile Software Development. The manifesto states (Agile Manifesto, 2001):
“[They] are uncovering better ways of developing software by doing it and helping others do it. 
Through this work, [they] have come to value:172 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
• Individuals and interactions over processes and tools,
• Working software [or product] over comprehensive documentation,
• Customer collaboration over contract negotiation,
• Responding to change over following a plan.
That is, while there is value in the items on the right, [they] value the items on the left more.”
This means that while processes, tools, documentation, contracts, and plans are important, Agile 
practitioners prioritize the interactions of individuals, a working product, customer collaboration and active 
inputs, and the ability to adjust to moving plans (change) as the guiding principles by which product 
design, development, and its launch are realized.
Agile methodologies are iterative approaches that can be incorporated into product innovation that 
self-organizing teams perform in a collaborative environment. It helps teams respond to unpredictability 
through incremental, iterative work cadences. The most common agile methodology is Scrum. Scrum 
has overwhelmingly been accepted in the software industry but has also been included in a hybridized 
Agile-Stage-Gate approach (discussed further in Section  4.3.7) for the manufacturing of tangible prod￾ucts. Unlike hardware, software is continuously and infinitely changeable. Recommended further reading 
on Agile in product innovation includes Pichler (2013) and Cooper and Sommer (2016).
Key Principles of Agile Product Innovation
Following is a summary of the key principles of Agile product innovation (from http://agilemanifesto.org/
principles.html)
1. [Their] highest priority is to satisfy the customer through early and continuous delivery of valua￾ble software.
2. Welcome changing requirements, even late in development. Agile processes harness change for the 
customer’s competitive advantage.
3. Deliver working software frequently, from a couple of weeks to a couple of months, with a preference 
for the shorter timescale.
4. Businesspeople and developers must work together daily throughout the project.
5. Build projects around motivated individuals. Give them the environment and support they need and 
trust them to get the job done.
6. The most efficient and effective method of conveying information to and within a development team 
is face-to-face conversation.
7. Working software is the primary measure of progress.
8. Agile processes promote sustainable development. The sponsors, developers, and users should be 
able to maintain a constant pace indefinitely.
9. Continuous attention to technical excellence and good design enhances agility.
10. Simplicity – the art of maximizing the amount of work not done – is essential.
11. The best architectures, requirements, and designs emerge from self-organizing teams.
12. At regular intervals, the team reflects on how to become more effective, then tunes and adjusts its 
behavior accordingly.
Key Elements of Most Agile Product Innovation Processes
Although the application of Agile product innovation may vary across organizations and contexts beyond 
just software development, the basic elements usually remain the same, incorporating Scrum elements 
into the product innovation process, as shown in Figure 4.13.PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 173
The product
backlog The scrum The product
owner role
The scrum
master role
The scrum
team role The sprint The demo The retrospective
meeting
FIGURE 4.13 Basic elements of agile product innovation
Scrum
The scrum is a process created by Jeff Sutherland in 1993 based on an analogy with the “scrum” forma￾tion used by rugby teams (Sutherland, 2014). With Scrum, the product is built in a series of fixed-length 
iterations (sprints), giving teams a framework for shipping product on a regular cadence.
Product backlog
The product backlog contains the requirements for a system, expressed as a prioritized list of product 
backlog items. These include both functional and non-functional customer requirements, as well as tech￾nical team-generated requirements. While there are multiple inputs to the product backlog, it is the sole 
responsibility of the product owner (arguably, the role of the product manager as it is the product man￾ager’s responsibility to understand the prioritized needs of customers) to prioritize the product backlog. A 
product backlog item is a unit of work small enough to be completed by the team in one sprint iteration.
Sprint
The sprint is a set period of time, typically two to four weeks, during which specific work has to be com￾pleted and made ready for review.
Demo
At the completion of each sprint, the product (in incremental state) and/or new features that were devel￾oped in the previous sprint(s) are reviewed by project stakeholders, such as the customer or the compa￾ny’s management. This entails demonstrating the “product” up to this point in time. The aim is to achieve 
validation and to continue with the next sprint.
Retrospective meeting
The retrospective meeting aims to identify and record “lessons learned” from the previous sprint(s) and 
takes place at the end of every sprint. The team evaluates its performance to continuously improve.
Typically, they would discuss aspects such as:
• What went well and why (to keep doing what worked and/or identify new items to incorporate into 
the working practices).
• What did not go well and why.
• How to address the items that did not go well, which provides a basis for sprint planning.174 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
Figure 4.14 illustrates the events, roles, and outcomes that are expected during and after a sprint plan￾ning session. Inputs into the meeting and hence the planning outcomes include:
• Product backlog,
• Team capabilities,
• Business conditions,
• Technology,
• Current product.
Ultimately, the team will want to establish and agree on the next sprint’s goals and the sprint backlog is 
addressed and/or updated.
Each sprint starts with a planning meeting, during which the product owner (the person requesting 
the work) and the development team agree on what will be accomplished during the sprint. The duration of 
the sprint is determined by the scrum master. After the sprint begins, the product owner steps back to 
allow the team to do its work. At the end of the sprint, the team presents its completed work to the prod￾uct owner, who uses the criteria established in the sprint meeting to accept or reject the work.
Product owner
The product owner is the single person who must have final authority representing the customer’s inter￾ests in backlog prioritization and requirements questions. This person must be available to the team at any 
time, especially during the sprint planning meeting. The product owner should not manage the team and 
should resist the temptation to change the work required after the sprint has started. A key responsibility of 
the product owner is to balance the interests of competing stakeholders.
Sprint planning
meeting
Sprint goal
Sprint backlog
• Product backlog
• Team capabilities
• Business conditions
• Technology
• Current product
• Product owner
• Scrum team
• Customers
• Management
FIGURE 4.14 Sprint planning meetingPRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 175
Scrum master
The scrum master is the facilitator for the team and product owner. Rather than manage the team, the 
scrum master works to assist both the team and the product owner through:
• Removing barriers between the team and the product owner.
• Facilitating creativity and empowerment in the team.
• Improving team productivity.
• Improving engineering tools and practices.
• Ensuring that information on team progress is up to date and visible to all parties.
Scrum team
The scrum team usually comprises seven, plus or minus two, members. The team usually includes a mix 
of functions or disciplines required to successfully complete the sprint goals (cross-functional team). In 
software development projects, the team could comprise software engineers, architects, programmers, 
analysts, quality experts, testers, UI designers, etc. During the sprint, the team self-organizes to meet the 
sprint goals. The team has the autonomy to choose how best to meet these goals and is held responsible 
for them. Figure 4.15 illustrates the cycle that the scrum team applies in order to meet product and sprint 
backlogs. Scrum teams meet as often as daily (or as appropriate but often starting the day with a physical 
or virtual 15-minute standup meeting), with the aim of consolidating information and agreeing on:
• What was achieved,
• What was not achieved,
• What is needed to progress.
Sprint events typically have durations of no more than 30  days, and in the process, the product 
and the sprint backlogs are continually addressed to the point whereby incremental development, or 
enhancements, are achieved to the product. Typically, a working version of the product is achieved, often 
referred to as the minimum viable product (MVP). It is a functional product but may not have all the prod￾uct features included yet; hence the product backlog serves as the record for future development to be 
performed.
The benefits and limitations of agile product innovation are summarized in Table 4.5.
Product
backlog
Sprint
backlog
Sprint Working increment of
software
FIGURE 4.15 How scrum works176 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
4.3.7 Agile-Stage-Gate
Agile-Stage-Gate combines the structure (stages and gates) of the classic Stage-Gate with the self￾organized teams and short cycle iterations of Agile methodologies, as shown in Figure 4.16.
In practice, the project’s stages, for example, the Development stage, are broken into short time-boxed 
increments called sprints, each about one to four weeks long (the small circles in the diagram below).
Gate
1 Stage 1 Gate
2 Stage 2 Gate
3 Stage 3 Gate
4 Stage 4 Gate
5 Stage 5
Discovery Scoping Build business
case
Development Testing &
validation
Launch Post launch
review
Idea screen Second screen Go to
development
Go to testing Go to launch
The customer or user
For less complex and smaller development projects, use an abbreviated version: 2-3 gates
FIGURE 4.16 Model of Agile-Stage-Gate process
TABLE 4.5 The benefits and limitations of Agile product innovation
Benefits Limitations
• Scrum methodology enables projects where the 
business requirements are initially less clear or 
uncertain but will emerge during the project.
• Fast-moving, cutting-edge developments can be 
quickly coded and tested using this method, as a 
mistake can be easily rectified.
• It is a lightly controlled method that insists on frequent 
updating of the progress through time-boxed 
work. Thus, there is clear visibility of the project’s 
development and progress. Also, it is iterative in 
nature, continuously involving feedback from the user.
• Due to short sprints and constant feedback, it 
becomes easier to cope with the changes.
• Daily meetings make it possible to measure individual 
productivity. This leads to improvement in the 
productivity of each of the team members.
• Issues are before becoming larger problems 
through the daily meetings and hence can be 
resolved speedily.
• Scrum has been successfully applied to software, 
hardware, and mixed products. The overhead cost in 
terms of process and management is minimal, thus 
leading to a quicker, less expensive results.
• Scrum is prone to scope creep if not managed well, 
unless there is a definite end date, the customer 
stakeholders will be tempted to keep demanding new 
functionality.
• Items in the backlog must be well defined before 
they are worked on during a sprint and the customer 
must be available to respond to questions and 
provide input.
• If the team members are not committed, the project 
will either never be completed or will fail.
• Scrum works best with small teams. Consequently, it 
is best suited for small, fast-moving projects.
• This methodology expects the Scrum team consists 
of experienced team members who have worked 
together and remain intact for the duration of the 
project. If the team consists of people who are 
novices, the project may not be completed in time.
• Scrum works well for project management when the 
scrum master trusts the team being managed. If they 
practice too strict control over the team members, 
it can be extremely frustrating, leading to lack of 
motivation.
• If any of the team members leave during a 
development, it can have a huge adverse effect on 
the project development.
• Project quality management is hard to implement 
and quantify unless the test team is able to conduct 
regression testing after each sprint.PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 177
These short time-boxed iterations focus on delivering a working product (though a working product does 
not necessarily mean a product ready to be released to the public). This allows the team to seek feedback from 
customers and users much more frequently and quickly than with a traditional Stage-Gate process, which in 
turn allows the organization to focus on what really matters to them and adapt quickly to changes in the market.
Throughout this book, we have emphasized the need for organizations to apply processes and tech￾niques to fit their own specific context and needs. All processes have their specific benefits and limitations. 
Recognizing these benefits and limitations and adapting to your organization’s environment and needs are 
all part of being a learning organization.
Subsequently, Cooper and Sommer (2018) proposed that the company that wants to implement Agile￾Stage-Gate processes do so cautiously and with much thought. Every organizational environment and 
project will be different, so a “one-size-fits-all” expectation will not work. They suggest that initially, a small 
task force is constituted to streamline current processes and identify and manage the challenges along the 
journey. Recognizing that this concept is still new will require all practitioners to assess, experiment, and 
continually improve on its possibilities.
The Benefits and Limitations of the Agile-Stage-Gate Model:
The benefits and limitations relate to how manufacturing companies have adopted Agile principles (that 
are typically applied in software development companies) and the outcomes this has delivered. Hence, 
the Agile-Stage-Gate approach leverages the strengths of both methods by “[linking] focus, structure, and 
control [of Stage-Gate], with the benefits of an Agile approach and mindset, namely speed, agility, and 
productivity” (Cooper & Sommer, 2016, p. 17). The benefits and limitations were extracted from research 
published by Cooper and Sommer (2018), shown in Table 4.6.
4.3.8 Systems Engineering
Systems engineering (SE) principles combine the concepts of systems thinking and SE process models 
to take a problem through a systematic and integrated process of design and project management tools 
and methods into a solution. All systems comprise parts/elements (building blocks) that have properties/
functions, and the elements are linked to each other through relations. Multiple systems (that is, multiple 
elements in a boundary of one system that relate to another system) can also be called a system or envi￾ronment. Systems complexity is determined by structure, dynamics in the system/sub-systems(s), change￾ability, variety, multiplicity, and size.
TABLE 4.6 The benefits and limitations of the Agile-Stage-Gate
Benefits Limitations
• Flexibility of product design.
• Quicker time to market of the manufactured product.
• Increased productivity.
• Improved ability to respond to market changes.
• Improved ability to proactively respond to 
customer needs.
• Improved team morale due to better communication 
and coordination.
• Increased project outcomes due to intentional and 
intensified focus.
• Management’s skepticism because they do not 
understand Agile and/or the required mindsets that 
it demands.
• Resource assignments and participation intensity 
increase (note: this can be positive and negative).
• Managing fluid product definitions and or designs 
(“ambiguity”) can be difficult.
• Managing ever-changing development plans.
• Agile teams tend to be become insular, thus 
disconnected from the rest of the organization.
• Clashes with bureaucratic organizational processes 
and/or performance reward systems, e.g., the degree 
to which the organization fosters and allows for 
experimentation and failure, or the drive for absolute 
quality perfection. Another example relates to 
short-term vs. long-term planning.178 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
Hence, systems engineering overlaps and integrates numerous technical and human-centered disci￾plines. The aim is to combine and integrate elements of industrial, mechanical, manufacturing, control, 
software, electrical, and civil engineering, as well as cybernetics, organizational studies, and project man￾agement into a systems life cycle. The system’s user requirements are encapsulated and delivered by 
means of technical and management processes.
Systems engineering focuses on all the pieces of a product to enhance the entire hole. It can be 
applied to apparently simple and complex products, such as a toaster, refrigerator, automobile, and the 
Falcon Heavy spacecraft. It also applies to services, such as examining and improving how a coffee shop 
delights customers.
Figure  4.17 shows the steps in the systems engineering design framework (extracted from Pahl 
et al., 2007):
Various methods are applied to each step, such as selection methods, trend studies, tests and meas￾urements, brainstorming, design catalogs, quality assurance, and costing methods.
Features of systems engineering include:
• Upfront, intentional, and intensive design thinking
• Framing a “problem” from a broad general perspective to detail through analyses
• Being interdisciplinary
• Complexity management
• Cost reductions
• Risk reduction
• Shorter project scheduling
• Optimizations
• Product quality improvement
Systems engineering ensures that all likely aspects of a project or system are considered and inte￾grated into a whole.
The systems engineering process is a discovery process that is quite unlike a manufacturing process. 
A manufacturing process is focused on repetitive activities that achieve high-quality outputs with minimum 
cost and time. The systems engineering process begins by discovering the real problems that need to be 
resolved and identifying the most probable or highest impact failures that can occur – systems engineering 
involves finding solutions to these problems.
Benefits and limitations of systems engineering are shown in Table 4.7.
STEP TWO STEP THREE
Product planning
and task selection
STEP FIVE
Clarifying the task(s)
and compiling a
requirements list
Abstracting to
identify essential
problems to solve
Exploring and
adopting working
principles
STEP SIX STEP SEVEN STEP EIGHT
Selecting suitable
combinations
Firming up into
principle solutions Evaluating principle
solutions
STEP ONE STEP FOUR
Establishing
functional
structures
FIGURE 4.17 Systems engineering stepsPRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 179
Haberfellner et al. (1986) offer the following useful advice to behaviorally manage some of the limitations:
1. Beware of super-integrated solutions that are too large and take several years to carry out, espe￾cially when they are located within a dynamic environment and are subject to uncertain conditions. In 
case of doubt, it is preferable to lean toward smaller solutions that facilitate a quicker benefit.
2. Implement flexibility in overall concepts, pursue Agile systems. Keep options open regarding later 
adaptations, expansions, dismantling, etc. Plan for modular building blocks that can later be replaced 
with better or more efficient ones. Be open to or plan for opportunities for expansion or reduction.
3. Consciously plan for flexibility or possibilities of multiple use, even though this may require some￾what increased investment.
4. Consciously make partial introductions to provide interim benefits.
5. Dispense with optimizing unproductive details.
6. Postpone decisions based on uncertain premises for as long as possible – as long as this is 
compatible with the logical process.
An important aspect relating to items 2 and 3 above is designing for changeability (DFC), a set of prin￾ciples that enable changes in systems throughout their life cycle. This has especially become relevant in the 
product platforming environment related to the automobile manufacturing industry (Fricke & Schulz, 2005).
4.3.9 Design Thinking
Design thinking is a human-centered problem-solving methodology that borrows from the process that 
designers follow when designing solutions for people, whether that be graphical user interfaces, physical 
products, services, buildings, or any other form of product offering.
The term “design thinking” was popularized, initially in North America, by the design firm IDEO and the 
Stanford School of Design, or d.school, in the early 2000s. Around the same time, a discipline called ‘ser￾vice design’ was growing in popularity in the business world in Europe.
While service design is intended to focus solely on the design of services, in practice, it takes the same 
holistic approach to problem-solving as design thinking. These two terms – design thinking and service 
design – are often used interchangeably. Both are human-centered methodologies that share many char￾acteristics. This chapter will use the term design thinking to refer to both.
TABLE 4.7 Benefits and limitations of systems engineering
Benefits Limitations
• The benefit of multiple systems’ strengths become 
evident and useable.
• Design-related decisions are fairly detailed and made 
upfront due to intense customer involvement.
• Learning opportunities (increased know-how as the 
project progresses) start early on in the project and 
are conveyable to all parties.
• Impending changes are easily identified and 
managed.
• Over-analyses of the problem and too much detail 
upfront may cause the risk of delay and a focus on 
the incorrect elements for solutioning.
• As the project progresses over time, the initial 
requirements may become outdated because they 
were based on knowledge that was generated at 
a historical point in time, and may no longer be 
appropriate or relevant as more knowledge is gained
• The same applies to the planning elements, as 
prolonged planning and or development risk makes 
the solution irrelevant.
• Exerting influence and the ability to effect change 
become increasingly difficult as the product innovation 
progresses toward the final phases due to “operational 
and resource commitments” to the project.180 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
The Evolution of Design Thinking
The term design thinking is derived from research conducted in the 1950s and 60s to identify the common 
approaches that different types of designers use as they go about their trade. Its adoption into the busi￾ness world started with the question, “What can design bring to the world of business?” As principles of 
design were applied in the business environment, it proved to have enormous value, particularly for guiding 
team-based collaboration and as an innovation method to get to the root of problems using empathy.
In the mid-1960s, design thinking came into the world of business when Rittel and Webber (1973) coined 
the term “Wicked Problems” to denote issues with multiple layers of complexity. His work focused on how 
businesses could easily adopt design thinking to work through these “Wicked Problems” in a systematic way.
In the 1970s, Herbert A. Simon, a cognitive scientist and Nobel Prize laureate for economics, intro￾duced core concepts that are now regarded as principles of design thinking. His book, The Sciences of 
the Artificial) focused on the power of the visual in problem-solving (McKim, 1972).
In the 1980s, Cross (1982) compared designers’ ways of problem-solving to the problem-solving 
methods of other disciplines, such as architecture. He demonstrated that scientists were problem-focused 
solvers: they systematically explored every possible combination to formulate a hypothesis. The designers 
tended to create multiple arrangements of potential solutions and then test each one against the problem 
to determine if it solved its requirements. They would discard any “solutions” that did not work.
From the 1990s, organizations including IDEO and d.school at Stanford University brought design 
thinking into mainstream use with the development of user-friendly terminology and application tool kits.
The Human-Centered Mindset
The term design thinking is useful because it refers to how designers solve problems – or, rather, how they seek 
solutions to complex challenges. It is also useful because it refers to a specific way of thinking and looking at 
a problem space. It is not that designers have some special talent or biological wiring in their heads. It is more 
about the methodology they use to approach problem-solving and how various design disciplines are taught.
Tim Brown (2008), in his seminal introduction to design thinking, Change by Design, introduced the 
idea that truly innovative solutions are found at the intersection of feasibility (is it technically possible), viabil￾ity (is it financially sustainable), and desirability (is it something that people want or need). The relationships 
are shown in Figure 4.18.
Business thinkers tend to start by looking at a potential solution’s viability: whether the solution can 
make money. Technical thinkers tend to think about whether the solution is feasible: can we make this 
work technically? Design thinkers, instead, start the problem-solving process by exploring the human 
aspects of the problem to determine what the needs and desires are of the key stakeholders (humans) at 
the center of the design problem space.
HUMAN-CENTERED
DESIGN
STARTS HERE
WHAT do people
want or need?
SHOULD we do it? CAN we do it? .................................
....................................
..........................
START WITH DESIRABILITY
DESIRABILITY
VIABILITY FEASIBILITY
FIGURE 4.18 Design thinking starts by looking for human needsPRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 181
Designers seek to understand people’s needs based on methodical research, probing the context, environ￾ment, actors and other factors to gain a deep understanding of the problem space, or design challenge. One of 
the key skills required in this research is the ability to empathize with the people at the center of the design chal￾lenge. Although generally not taught in technical or business fields, empathy is at the core of design thinking.
Empathy is the secret sauce of human-centered design.
So, the easiest way to understand design thinking is to think of it as a specific mindset – that of putting 
people at the center of the process of problem-solving. The key hypothesis is that if people do not need or 
want the solution you are proposing, it really doesn’t matter whether it is feasible or viable. The mindset of 
being human-centered throughout the design process is the most important part of design thinking.
Methodology and Frameworks
The methodology of design thinking consists of a few core principles. Two of the most popular frameworks 
representing the different phases of the design thinking process are the Stanford d.school’s Five Hexagon 
model, shown in Figure 4.19, and the UK Design Council’s Double Diamond model, shown in Figure 4.20.
Empathize
Define
Ideate
Prototype
Test
FIGURE 4.19 The Stanford d.school’s Five Hexagon Framework
Discover
insight into the problem
Define
the area to focus upon
Develop
potential solutions
Deliver
solutions that work
Proble
m
Proble
m
Definition
Design
Brief
Solution
FIGURE 4.20 The UK Design Council’s Double Diamond Framework182 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
Fortunately, most frameworks used to describe design thinking share the same core phases or stages 
of work, just depicted visually in different ways. Those phases are as follows:
• Start with research: To find innovative approaches to problems, you need to generate insights (new 
knowledge based on deep understanding) that can serve as the starting point for problem-solving. 
Research often comprises surveys, interviews, small focus groups, and other specialized design 
research techniques such as cultural probes, contextual inquiry, and observational research.
• Make sense of the data: The more research you do, the more data you generate and the more 
that data requires analysis. Instead of spreadsheets and algorithms, however, design thinkers use 
“tools,” templates, and collaborative activities to “make sense” of the (mostly qualitative) data, look￾ing for patterns, stories, insights, touchpoints, stakeholders and deep understanding of people at the 
center of the problem. This is where true empathy is established between problem-solvers (design￾ers) and those they are serving.
• Reframing the problem: A critical point in the process of design thinking is when the design team 
restates or reframes the problem based on the research and sensemaking activities. This step 
requires creativity and skill to ensure that the newly stated problem is neither too broad (“trying to boil 
the ocean”) nor too narrow (for example, where the solution is embedded in the new problem state￾ment) and allows ample room for creative solutions to emerge.
• Generate lots of ideas: Ideation is where the team generates many varied ideas, often only par￾tially formed, to solve the new challenge. This is a form of brainstorming but is more structured and 
is actually based on theories of creative problem-solving. In this stage, the possible solutions are not 
being judged and eliminated; rather, the objective is to generate large quantities of ideas, knowing 
that with more ideas, the seeds of a truly innovative solution are more likely to emerge.
• Build prototypes: After ideation, the team selects an idea or collection of ideas to move into the 
prototyping stage. This type of prototyping is conceptual and nothing like an engineering or manu￾facturing prototype. It is all about rapidly modeling the solution concept with the least amount of 
effort and detail needed to (1) align the team on what the solution must include and (2) be able to 
present the solution(s) to customers in the next phase.
• Test and iterate: In an interactive cycle, prototypes are tested by presenting them to target users 
or customers (and also other key stakeholders like funders, decision-makers, and implementers). As 
the prototypes become more and more detailed through iteration, solutions become solidified, and 
the risk of implementation and customer non-acceptance goes down. Liedtka and Ogilvie (2011) 
articulated in their book Designing for Growth, the final test of any solution is asking your target users 
or customers to part with their time and money in exchange for the solution. So, the testing phase 
should include (to the extent possible) validating key aspects of the business model and value propo￾sition (ideally, including any financial exchanges).
You can see how the design thinking phases described above also fit the double diamond framework 
developed by DesignThinkers Group. The phases are overlaid on the double diamond in Figure 4.21. The 
advantage of this framework is that it captures the different stages and includes the notions of convergent 
and divergent thinking, as well as the problem space (first diamond) and solution space (second diamond).PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 183
Design
Challenge
Plan
Diverge
Diverge
Converge
Converge
Empathize Reframe Ideate Prototype Test
FIGURE 4.21 The Six-Stage Double Diamond by Design Thinkers Group
Design Thinking as a Social Technology
Liedtka (2020) refers to design thinking as a “social technology.” This is a very powerful way of referring to 
design thinking to people who are not directly involved in applying the method but have some stake in its 
successful application in an organization.
Practitioners are better able to build support for design thinking by communicating that it is built 
around collaboration and teamwork (the “social” part) and that there is a proven structure and process 
to how it works in practice (the “technology” part). Indeed, like any other new initiative, one of the biggest 
challenges in applying design thinking is gaining organizational support for the different way of working that 
it represents.
Following are some ways that design thinking works as a social technology:
Based on empathy: As previously mentioned, tapping into the power of empathy helps the 
design team move past their own biases and see the world through the eyes of the people they 
are designing for. Developed through qualitative research, empathy helps to set the stage for more 
creative solutions by providing a foundation of data from which the team can draw insights and base 
decisions.
Highly collaborative: Design thinking is not something you can do in isolation. The true power of 
the process and structure comes from going through that process with a team that has diverse per￾spectives and expertise. Funders, decision-makers, and implementers are key stakeholders involved 
in the design process. The collaboration gets to its highest when the design team collaborates 
directly with the end users or customers, they are designing for in a process called co-creation.
Iterative in nature: A large dose of humility helps form a mindset that initial ideas are only partially 
formed and need to be tested. The potential solutions have hypotheses embedded in them, and as 
those hypotheses are tested, the ideas are modified or added to in an iterative process. Prototypes 
are ways to ask questions and test hypotheses so the team can adjust, learn, and redesign until a 
refined solution is found.
A structured process: Finding and developing innovative solutions to problems in a human-centric 
way requires most organizations to change certain deeply embedded ways of working. The struc￾ture and process in design thinking provide guidance and boundaries for the design process so that 
design teams don’t get stuck in “analysis paralysis” or skip important steps in a rush to solve the 
wrong problem.
These aspects of design thinking help teams to collaborate more effectively. They are also qualities that 
become integral parts of the way each team member starts to think and approach problems. That is, they 
are key characteristics of the all-important mindset of the human-centered designer.184 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
Examples of Design Thinking in Action
Design Thinking has proven its effectiveness in a variety of industries over the years. A few select cases 
below illustrate this.
Bank of America
The Keep the Change program was started in 2004 as a result of a joint effort between IDEO and the Bank 
of America to find new ways to get more people to open up bank accounts. The IDEO team conducted 
research to understand customer behavior. The key insight was that “savers were intentionally round￾ing up when writing checks.” By observing people’s natural relationship with money, they were able to 
home in on existing customer behavior to achieve their goal. Learn more about this case study at https://
www.invisionapp.com/inside-design/applied-design-thinking/.
Slack
Slack co-created their product updates with their customers by gathering their feedback using their very 
own software. By working with a variety of stakeholders and observing their behavior, the team at Slack 
was able to understand a few key insights: people will find the things they really want, communication is 
critical, and to always learn from beginners. Learn more about this case study at https://slack.com/blog/
collaboration/designing-the-future-of-slack-with-customers.
GE
The Pediatric Adventure Series from GE Healthcare was an exercise in using reframing to make a differ￾ence in the user’s experience. Doug Dietz was involved in designing MRI machines. At the time of installa￾tion of one of the devices at a children’s hospital, Doug noticed children were scared to undergo the test 
and learned they were often sedated. Through the use of design thinking and co-creation came the idea to 
create a story with the child as the star. By creating storylines such as fighting off a dragon or going on a 
submarine expedition, children were more relaxed. This resulted in a dramatic decrease of children needing 
to be sedated, and more patients could get scanned each day. To learn more about this case study, see 
https://www.ideou.com/blogs/inspiration/from-design-thinking-to-creative-confidence.
Quick Start Guide: Implementing Design Thinking
It takes time to learn and think the design thinking way. Although it takes time, it is best to learn by doing 
and start practicing wherever possible. This is actually a key tenet of design thinking, learning by doing. 
This helps to solidify the design principles and build a culture of innovation within your team and organiza￾tion. Some quick ways you can start implementing design thinking include:
• Hold a design thinking foundations workshop. Lasting typically for one to two days online or in per￾son, you can introduce your team to the concepts and work through a challenge together.
• Run a design thinking sprint, developed by Google Ventures (Knapp et al., 2016). In a week or less, 
this allows your team to rapidly develop solutions to a customer’s problem and learn by doing.
• Always ask, “What is the problem” and “Who is the user experiencing this problem?” This helps keep 
the two most important questions front and center in the work you do.
When to Use Design Thinking
• When facing a human-centered challenge. This can mean any problem that has to do with people 
and requires a deep understanding of the groups of people involved. Examples include improving PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 185
employee experience, designing for a particular use case of a product understanding why a new fea￾ture is not working in a product, and many more:
• When facing complex challenges. Complex problems are challenges where only parts of the problem 
are definable; the problem area is not fully understood, and there is unpredictability in the problem 
landscape. Design thinking is great at exploring complex problems as it allows the information to flow 
and has the natural iterative process built in to adjust as the problem unfolds.
When Not to Use Design Thinking
• When the problem is not open-ended. If you already know the outcome or the specific solution 
needed to solve the problem, then it is best not to use design thinking
• When the problem is actually a puzzle with a known solution that an expert can determine.
• When another problem-solving method is proven to work. For problems where there is a known and 
effective approach that works, design thinking may not add any value. For example, a manufactur￾ing quality problem can be effectively solved using lean six sigma and is not appropriate for design 
thinking.
4.3.10 Lean Product Innovation
Lean product innovation is founded on the fundamental Lean methodology initially developed by Toyota 
(Toyota Production System, or TPS). TPS is based on the Japanese term Muda, meaning “futility”  – 
uselessness, idleness, waste. Fundamentally, TPS was designed to remove Muda or waste from processes, 
including manufacturing. These principles have been incorporated into various product innovation 
processes.
The core concepts/principles of Lean product innovation consist of removing waste, gathering as 
much information and knowledge upfront, but importantly, requiring constant (and relentless) learning, 
and seeking opportunities for improvements along the entire life cycle of the product’s development (see 
Figure 4.22). Key components of lean development thus relate to gathering and increasing product knowl￾edge and having the team fully engaged early in the product innovation process.
Lean practice governance
Product knowledge
Process flow
People engaged
Manage, improve,
continuously learn
Knowledge growth Lean flow
FIGURE 4.22 The concepts of Lean development186 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
Lean product innovation as a contributor to organizational “productivity” endeavors (Mascitelli, 2011), is 
measured as:
• Profit generated per hour (or unit) of time.
• Efficient utilization of designers/developers.
• Faster time to market.
• More projects completed per unit of time.
• More customers satisfied more of the time.
• Fewer wasteful activities.
Potential sources of waste include:
• Chaotic work environment.
• Lack of available resources.
• Lack of clear prioritization.
• Poor communication across functional barriers.
• Poorly defined product requirements.
• Lack of early consideration of manufacturability.
• Over-designing.
• Too many unproductive meetings.
• Email overload.
An Example of the Application of Lean Product Innovation
Toyota is well-recognized for its application of Lean principles. James M. Morgan and Jeffrey K. Liker 
(2006) provide a summary of Toyota’s lean innovation principles in their book, The Toyota Product 
Innovation System, Integrating People, Process and Technology, summarized below.
Toyota Product Innovation Guidelines
Process Sub-System
1. Establish customer-defined value to separate value-added from waste.
Separate value-add from waste. Two key wastes to focus on:
• Poor engineering, leading to underperforming products and/or process performance.
• Poor product development processes, resulting in wasted time and resources.
2. Front-load the product innovation process to explore thoroughly alternative solutions while there is 
maximum design space.
Toyota has developed processes through disciplines like Kentou (study phase) and Mizen Boushi
(proactive problem prevention) to significantly reduce the chaos of the FEI.
3. Create a level product innovation process flow.
Many innovation development processes are common across products/solutions. Toyota’s TPS 
system uses adaptive tools with repetitive processes to not only eliminate waste (muda) but also 
eliminate “unevenness” (mura) and “overburden” (muri).
4. Utilize rigorous standardization to reduce variation and create flexibility and predictable outcomes.
Innovation management or product development is always working to balance creativity with 
reproducibility. Toyota accomplishes this by creating high-level system flexibility balanced with 
standardized lower-level tasks. They employ three levels of standardizations:
i. Design standardization: a common architecture comprised of reusable modules and shared 
components.PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 187
ii. Process standardization: a templated product and building system based on standard manu￾facturing processes.
iii. Engineering skill set standardization: designed to deliver flexibility in program planning 
and staffing.
People Sub-System
5. Appoint a chief engineer to integrate development from start to finish.
Also called a program manager, most companies assign project management responsibilities to 
this role. Toyota differs in that they have a functional, skilled chief engineer who is solely responsible 
for managing the entire development process from start to finish. They are accountable and responsi￾ble for things like:
• Determining which engineering or manufacturing solution the effort will use in the event of an 
impasse on the team.
6. Organize to balance functional expertise and cross-functional integration.
Toyota achieves through the chief engineer role along with modular engineering team and the use 
of the “obeya” (big room) to enhance cross-functional engagement and focus.
7. Develop towering competence in all engineers.
Engineering by definition is a deeply technical profession. Many organizations attempt to train 
engineers to understand business concepts and, in the process, potentially dilute their depth of tech￾nical ability. Toyota encourages engineers to deepen and not broaden their skills and aligning their 
activities through a chief engineer or program manager.
8. Build in learning and continuous improvement.
Company’s leaders emphasize the importance of organizational learning and continuous improvement.
Tools & Technology Sub-System
9. Build a culture to support excellence and relentless improvement.
• Culture in general is big part of Toyota’s product strategy. Beyond learning and continuous 
improvement, their entire commitment to quality and excellence is actively passed down from 
leaders from one generation to the next and celebrated company-wide regularly.
10. Adapt technologies to fit the organization’s people and processes.
• Using technology to solve a problem without first understanding the scope of the problem leads 
to even poorer performance.
11. Align the organization through simple visual communication.
• While culture and standardization are key elements of Toyota’s success, without clear and con￾cise ways to communicate, it is difficult to keep an organization aligned. Toyota relies on Hoshin 
Kanri (Policy Deployment) to ensure that the company’s strategic goals continue to progress at 
all levels. The 7 Steps of Hoshin Kanri Planning
1. Establish the Vision and Assess the Current State. . . .
2. Develop Breakthrough Objectives. . . .
3. Define Annual Objectives. . . .
4. Cascade Goals Throughout the Organization. . . .
5. Execute Annual Objectives. . . .
6. Monthly Reviews. . . .
7. Annual Review.
12. Use powerful tools for standardization and organizational learning.
• Finally, without tools to manage learnings and standards across programs and time it is difficult 
to sustain innovation. This type of continuous improvement is one of the core tenets of Kaizen
(good change or improvement), Toyota, through an evolutionary process, has developed power￾ful tools to capture, distill and communicate learnings and standards from program to program at 
all levels and through time.188 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
The benefits and limitations of lean product innovation are shown in Table 4.8.
4.3.11 Lean Startup
Lean startup is an approach to building new businesses based on the belief that entrepreneurs must 
investigate, experiment, test, and iterate as they develop products. The concept of Lean startup originated 
in the early 2000s and evolved into a methodology around 2010. It was developed by Silicon Valley entre￾preneurs Blank (2010) and Ries (2011).
Proponents of the methodology say Lean startup principles ensure that entrepreneurs develop prod￾ucts that customers actually want, rather than attempting to build businesses based on untested ideas. 
Proponents also describe this mentality as “fail fast, fail cheap” because the Lean startup process is 
designed to limit the time and money invested in product ideas when entrepreneurs test and prove their 
potential value.
The Lean startup methodology calls for entrepreneurs to start their business ventures by searching 
for a business model and then testing their ideas. Feedback from potential customers is then used to 
adjust their ideas as they move forward. The Lean startup methodology also advocates for entrepreneurs 
to continually engage in this activity loop – exploring and developing hypotheses that they then test among 
customers to elicit feedback, something known as validated learning. Entrepreneurs use that customer 
feedback to re-engineer their products.
There are six critical elements for the proper execution of the Lean startup methodology:
1. Build-measure-learn: As described by Ries (2011), and shown in Figure 4.23, “the lean startup 
process can be summarized in three words: Build, Measure, Learn. Simply put, you need to build 
a prototype to measure what works and learn what your customers want. Repeat This process as 
many times and as fast as you can. And hopefully from this you will build a sustainable business.”
2. The Business Model Canvas: The Business Model Canvas (BMC), first developed by Osterwalder 
et al. (2010), is a simple yet effective visual strategy tool that organizations, big and small, use for 
business model innovation. The BMC is an important tool used by Lean startup businesses with its 
emphasis on entrepreneur-focused business planning.
TABLE 4.8 The benefits and limitations of lean product innovation
Benefits Limitations
• Focus of process is on transformation of information, 
not on heavy-handed governance.
• An even-driven approach simplifies collaboration and 
enables design optimization.
• Emphasis on proactively managing risks to schedule 
cost, performance, and quality.
• Can be scaled to any size project.
• Simple, often visual tools are used to capture learning, 
track progress, set priorities, and solve problems.
• Requires dedicated and experienced workers, both 
to suggest system improvements and to positively 
respond to system changes.
• Requires a change in organizational structure and 
culture. A unified and committed project culture 
is necessary with an appropriate and supporting 
organizational structure.
• Requires strong supplier management. The focus 
of Lean product innovation or “just in time” delivery 
requires good communication and coordination of 
suppliers.
• Requires a willingness and ability across the 
organization to accept changes in project goals and 
direction.PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 189
The importance of the organization’s business model in the context of strategy and innovation is 
very key. Business models, if incorrectly defined and/or do not support the innovation strategy and 
management, the technology strategy, and the product strategy, will not achieve the goal of value 
creation – which is ultimately what it’s all about for profit-making firms. The growth of the Internet, the 
ease of accessibility, and globalization, among others, have created the impetus for firms to incor￾porate innovation into every facet where value can be captured and translated into profit. Refer to 
chapter 2.4.4, for more detail on the Business Model Canvas.
3. Learning plans: One turn of the crank: As Ries (2011), the author of The Lean Startup, wrote, “Vali￾dated learning is the process of demonstrating empirically that a team has discovered valuable truths 
about a startup’s present and future business prospects.” A learning plan describes how key hypoth￾eses are to be tested. Completing a learning plan is “one turn of the crank,” shown in Figure 4.24. The 
plan is categorized by these four quadrants:
• Market – patient, consumer.
• Organization – staffing, budgeting, structure.
• Commercial – investment, profitability.
• Technology – technical, innovations/platforms.
All quadrants are not required for each learning plan. Only cover those areas that are critical to pro￾ject success or failure. Some attributes of a good learning plan are:
• Good plans fail fast/learn quickly; probability should generally rise as phases progress.
• Are there ways to bring proof forward? Can you learn about low-probability events earlier?
• Design periodic proof or pivot points on problematic issues.
Learn Measure
Build
Product
Data
Ideas
FIGURE 4.23 The build-measure-learn cycle. 
Source: Adapted from Ries (2011).190 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
4. Three stages of a startup: Problem/solution fit, product/market/fit & scale.
Stage 1: Problem/solution fit. Is there a clear pain (or gain) worth solving for a customer? It is 
fundamental that there be a real “pain or gain” for the target customer. Too many early-stage ideas 
fail because the project team or leadership are enamored with a new technology or the elegance of 
the solution.
Stage 2: Product/market fit. Does the product meet the market need? Not only is this stage criti￾cal to validating the product features and how attractive it will be in the market, but it is also important 
to decide on the business model used in the go-to-market.
Stage 3: Scale. Accelerating growth to achieve economies of scale. Are the right production, sales, 
service, and support structures in place? Is the business model becoming profitable?
5. Minimum viable product: A minimum viable product (MVP) has just enough features to satisfy early 
customers and provide feedback for future product development. “The lesson of the MVP is that 
any additional work beyond what was required to start learning is waste, no matter how important it 
might have seemed at the time” (Ries, 2011).
Gathering insights from an MVP is less expensive and faster than developing a product with more 
features, which increases costs and risk if the product fails – for example, due to incorrect assump￾tions. The term was coined and defined by Frank Robinson in 2001 and then popularized by Steve 
Blank (Blank & Dorf, 2012; Blank 2016).
6. Pivoting. Entrepreneurs have found that the extreme uncertainty of a new product or service usually 
requires many course corrections, or “pivots,” to find a successful formula. Eric Ries suggests 10 
forms of pivoting:
• Zoom-in pivot. In this case, what previously was considered a single feature in a product 
becomes the whole product. This highlights the value of both focus and an MVP, delivered quickly 
and efficiently.
• Zoom-out pivot. In the reverse situation, sometimes a single feature is insufficient to support a 
customer set. In this pivot, what was considered the whole product becomes a single feature of 
a much larger product.
• Customer segment pivot. Your product may attract real customers, but not the ones in the 
original vision. In other words, it solves a real problem but needs to be positioned for a more 
appreciative segment.
Organization
Commercial
Market
Technology
FIGURE 4.24 The learning plan – “one turn of the crank.” 
Source: Ries (2011).PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 191
• Customer need pivot. Early customer feedback indicates that the problem solved is not very 
important or money isn’t available to buy. This requires repositioning, or a completely new prod￾uct, to find a problem worth solving.
• Platform pivot. This refers to a change from an application to a platform or vice versa. Many 
founders envision their solution as a platform for future products but don’t have a single killer 
application just yet.
• Business architecture pivot. Many years ago, Geoffrey Moore observed two major business 
architectures: high margin/low volume or low margin/high volume. You can’t do both at the 
same time.
• Value capture pivot. Changes in how a startup captures value can have far-reaching con￾sequences for business, product, and marketing strategies. The “free” model doesn’t capture 
much value.
• Engine of growth pivot. Most startups these days use one of three primary growth engines: the 
viral, sticky, and paid growth models. Picking the right model can dramatically affect the speed 
and profitability of growth.
• Channel pivot. The mechanism by which a company delivers its product to customers is called 
the sales or distribution channel. Channel pivots usually require unique pricing, feature, and com￾petitive positioning adjustments.
• Technology pivot. Using a completely different technology to solve the problem. This is most 
relevant if the new technology can provide superior pricing and/or performance to improve.
A case study of the application of Lean startup is presented in Appendix B, Case 2.
4.3.12 Jobs To Be Done (JTBD)
Some would say JTBD is an innovation process or framework, yet others would classify it as a demand￾generation tool. This is in large part because of two separate but overlapping origins of JTBD theory. One 
originates with Christensen and Raynor (2003), who viewed the value of JTBD as understanding why 
customers make buying decisions. This is the demand generation perspective. The other originates with 
Ulwick (2016), who views the reason people buy products as to get a job done, and you study that job, 
and make it the unit of analysis. This approach uses a more rigorous process that leads to clearly defining 
the product customers want to get a job done. In both approaches, JTBD is widely practiced and there￾fore is included as a valuable innovation practice.
As an example of demand generation, Efosa Ojomo (2021) wrote a blog post entitled, The Power and 
Simplicity of Jobs to Be Done Theory. In this post, he shared an anecdote that illustrates that while most 
all frameworks or processes focus on the functional aspects of product innovation, you can use JTBD to 
also focus on the social and emotional aspects.
Developed by the late Professor Clayton Christensen and his longtime collaborator Bob Moesta, the 
Theory of Jobs to Be Done (or Jobs Theory) is a useful framework that helps innovators better understand 
consumer behavior. It highlights the fact that people don’t simply buy products or services; they hire them 
to make progress in specific circumstances (what we call their Job to Be Done, or for short, “job”).
Jobs Theory goes beyond superficial categories to expose the functional, social, and emotional dimen￾sions that explain why consumers make their choices. The functional dimension is simple: the product or 
service must function in a way that helps the consumer overcome a struggle. The job’s social dimension 
is about how others view the consumer using the product or service. And the emotional component of 
the job is about how the product or service makes the consumer feel. To perfectly nail the job, innovators 
should focus on understanding the job’s functional, social, and emotional dimensions.
For example, several years ago, Godrej, an Indian conglomerate, developed chotuKool, a new refrig￾eration product to bring cooling to the hundreds of millions of Indians who lived without refrigeration. After 
extensive research, Godrej learned that most people it would target with this new product didn’t have 192 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
access to electricity, couldn’t afford to purchase food in bulk, and couldn’t afford most refrigerators on the 
market. chotuKool was designed specifically for this market.
chotuKool is a small thermoelectric refrigerator powered by a rechargeable battery, a laptop-like power 
supply. The product weighs around 16 pounds, has a capacity of 35 liters, and can maintain a temperature 
of 10 degrees Celsius (50 degrees Fahrenheit). It consumes only half the electrical power a conventional 
refrigerator uses and consists of only 20 components and no moving parts (depending on the size, con￾ventional refrigerators could contain more than 200 components). Finally, at roughly $60, chotuKool costs 
a fraction of the least expensive refrigerator on the market. From all indications, this product should have 
been a slam dunk. But socially and emotionally, chotuKool struggled to nail the job. Before long, chotuKool 
was seen as the refrigerator you purchased if you couldn’t afford conventional refrigerators. In fact, upon 
further research, Godrej learned that many people purchased conventional electricity-based refrigerators 
and left them unplugged due to erratic electricity supply. For them, the fact that they owned a refrigerator, 
even though it wasn’t often plugged in, was a status symbol. It made them feel good and elevated them 
socially. Though it did not solve the functional component of the job, it nailed the social and emotional 
ones.
Ultimately Godrej learned from its rocky beginning and went on to develop a refrigerator that satisfied 
each component of its customer’s Job to Be Done. Other innovators should similarly take note: by under￾standing the functional, social, and emotional components of their customers’ jobs and nailing each, they’ll 
increase their odds of success tremendously.
So how does JTBD actually work? Zbignev Grecis (2015) posted the image depicted in Figure 4.25 
and the associated descriptions.
There are two different types of jobs:
1. Main jobs to be done describe the task customers want to achieve.
2. Related jobs to be done, which customers want to accomplish in conjunction with the main jobs 
to be done.
Within these two types of jobs, there are:
• Functional job aspects: the practical and objective customer requirements.
• Emotional job aspects: the subjective customer requirements related to feelings and perception. 
These can be further broken down into personal dimensions, how the customer feels about the 
solution, and social dimensions, how the customer believes they are perceived by others while 
using the solution.
Main jobs
to be done
Emotional
aspects
Functional
aspects
Personal
dimension
Social
dimension
Related
jobs to be
done
Emotional
aspects Functional
aspects
Personal
dimension
Social
dimension
FIGURE 4.25 The two types of jobsPRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 193
To help illustrate JTBD further, let us work with the following example, modification of an off-road vehi￾cle, shown in Figure 4.26.
One JTBD is to modify your off-road vehicle, in this case, a Jeep, to perform better while off-road but 
maintain on-road drivability. We’ll narrow this very broad JTBD further by focusing on upgrading the tires.
Most stock base-model Jeeps come with P245/70R17 tires, which translates to approximately a 31″
by 10″ tire on a 17″ wheel for those more familiar with standard units. Tire manufacturers who focus on 
tire performance only often do not capture the anticipated market share because they focus heavily, if not 
solely, on the performance of their tires – how durable they are and how well they perform in the target 
environment (paved road, dirt, mud, rock, etc.).
Size, Durability, and Performance are the functional aspects of a tire. If you spend most of your time 
using your Jeep in muddy or wet environments, your functional tire class would be M/T or Mud Terrain. In 
this example, we want to maintain drivability on the road, so we would probably focus more on the MTX or 
Mud/All-Terrain class of tire. But what about the emotional aspects of tire selection?
In a recent poll of nearly 2300 Jeep enthusiasts in the United States, 68% of respondents indicated 
that Durability and Performance were their primary decision factors, followed by 21% who cited Price. Only 
8% indicated that they were most influenced by how “cool” the tires would look on their Jeep. These data, 
collected through a survey, would seem to indicate that durability and performance are by far the market 
force to be addressed. However, does that represent customer decision-making accurately?
The cool factor is often more important for some Jeep enthusiasts because they focus heavily on 
both how the tire appearance makes them feel about their Jeep and how others perceive their Jeep. How 
would you determine this from the data shared previously? This factor comes to light with a quick view of 
actual purchase data. An off-road tire store in the same area as the surveyed Jeep enthusiasts was pre￾sented with the survey data and responded, "It always comes down to looks.” Their sales history proved 
out that more than 80% of the time, when presented with either two options where one is measurably 
more expensive or one is measurably lower in quality/performance, the high-cost or lower-performing tire 
is selected if it rates higher in appeal.
FIGURE 4.26 Modification of an off-road vehicle194 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
4.4 COMPARING PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS MODELS
An increase in the understanding of what underpins successful product innovation has led organizations 
to evolve and adapt process methods to meet the needs of specific organizational contexts and product 
categories. Researchers and practitioners have recognized that the “one-size-fits-all” approach to product 
innovation processes does not work. In the preceding sections, we have overviewed a number of the key 
models that have been developed and applied over recent years. Each model has specific benefits and 
limitations. Although an application of one of these models in its purest form may be appropriate in some 
situations, in most cases, a blend of elements from a number of models is most appropriate. The following 
is a comparison of selected processes.
4.4.1 Agile vs. Lean
The difference between Agile and Lean is simple to understand, but most people feel they are somehow 
equivalent. They are not.
Lean is designed to reduce waste and improve operational efficiency, especially related to repetitive 
tasks, as often seen in manufacturing. The value of the Lean approach to product innovation is its focus 
on a core set of principles or guidelines underpinning the process of developing new products. It is not 
a defined process focused on the activities and tasks required to develop a new product successfully. 
Section 4.3.10 summarizes the 12 guidelines for Lean product innovation, as initially applied by Toyota.
Agile, specifically in the form of Scrum, is designed to execute tasks over a short time frame, with fre￾quent customer involvement, and to be able to make changes quickly. The structure, process, and roles 
are all well defined as they are applied to the development of a product or product component. In a nut￾shell, Agile is a time-focused, iterative philosophy to build a product step by step (incrementally), delivering 
it in smaller pieces. One of its main benefits is adapting and changing at any step (depending on feedback, 
market conditions, corporate obstacles, etc.) and supplying only relevant products to the market.
As can be noted, they have nothing to do with each other per se – you do not need to innovate new 
products to be Lean, and you don’t have to be operationally efficient to be Agile. Further, they are not 
exclusive of each other. They can be used together in the same organization.
4.4.2 Agile vs. Stage-Gate®
Stage-Gate® is not a project management or micro-planning model. Rather, it is a comprehensive and 
holistic idea-to-launch system and a macro-planning process. It is cross-functional (i.e., it involves tech￾nical product developers, as well as marketing, sales, and operations). It places significant emphasis on 
“gates” that form the basis of an investment decision model, asking key questions: (1) is the organization 
doing the right project, and (2) is the project being done right?
By contrast, Agile (Scrum) was originally designed to rapidly develop working software. In practice, 
the development stage consists of a number of sprints, where each sprint or iteration produces a working 
product (executable code or software that works) that can be demonstrated to stakeholders (i.e., custom￾ers). An iteration may not add enough functionality to warrant a market release, but the goal is to have a 
demonstratable product at each iteration’s end. Multiple iterations are usually required to release a prod￾uct. A sprint typically takes two to four weeks.
Robert Cooper has provided a good explanation of the features of both Stage-Gate® and Agile (refer to 
Table 4.9). He refers to the commonly held belief that Stage-Gate® is appropriate for “hardware” products 
while Agile is appropriate for software, concluding that the two methods are mutually exclusive. Cooper 
asserts, “Agile and Stage-Gate® are not substitutes for each other. Rather, Agile is a useful micro-planning 
tool or project management tool that can be used within the Stage-Gate® process to accelerate certain 
stages – probably stages 3 and 4” (Cooper, 2015).PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 195
4.4.3 Integrated Product Development (IPD) vs. Other Process Models
IPD, as the name implies, provides a framework designed to emphasize the integration of functions, roles, 
and activities involved in product innovation. It has been defined as “a philosophy that systematically employs 
an integrated team effort from multifunctional disciplines to [effectively and efficiently] develop . . .new prod￾ucts that satisfy customer needs” (Kahn et al., 2013). One of the features that has evolved into the IPD model 
is “learning and continuous improvement.”
Logically, the macro-planning features and decision-making basis of the Stage-Gate® model; the 
micro-planning and flexibility of the Agile model; the focus on reduction in wasted time and effort associ￾ated with Lean; and the overall integration of product innovation as a learning company are potentially 
complementary and not mutually exclusive. Merging elements of each model into a true fit-for-purpose 
product innovation process model, with an overall focus on learning and continuous improvement, is a 
sign of advanced product innovation practice.
4.4.4 The Key Question: Which Process to Use?
The answer is: there is no clear-cut answer.
• Most of the processes discussed in this chapter have common elements:
• They seek to add structure to product innovation projects.
• They emphasize the value of the cross-functional team.
• They focus on the importance of the voice of the customer.
In one sentence, each process has its specific point of emphasis:
• Stage-Gate® strongly emphasizes a structured and disciplined approach.
• Agile promotes flexibility and speed of delivery.
• Lean focuses on the importance of removing waste (resources, time).
• Integrated product development focuses on the integration of functions, role, and activities.
• Design thinking is based on human-centered problem-solving.
• Jobs to be done focuses on underlying customer needs.
TABLE 4.9 Stage-Gate vs. Agile
Characteristic Stage-Gate Agile
Type of model Macro-planning Macro-planning, project management
Scope Idea to launch, end to end Development and testing stages only
Organizational breadth Cross-functional – technical, 
marketing, manufacturing
Technical (software code writers, 
engineers, IT staff)
End points A launched new product in the 
market-place
Developed and tested software 
product
Decision model Investment model: go/kill model 
involves senior management 
governance
Largely tactical: actions needed for 
the next sprint196 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
So, which process should you use? While there is no clear-cut answer, here are some general tips:
1) Consider your organization’s culture, resources, and skill sets. Organizations with a rigid structure 
and lack of flexibility will probably find difficulty in applying an agile approach and may be better 
suited to the discipline of Stage-Gate®.
2) High risk and new to the company products. These may have the potential for high returns, but bal￾anced against high risk, are more suited to a Stage-Gate® process. This is particularly the case in the 
pharmaceutical industry. As discussed earlier, the number of gates can be adjusted according to the 
level of risk and need for speed to market.
3) Iterative development and modifications. Where iterative development based on previous products 
is required, Agile is often the preferred process. This is particularly the case in the IT and soft￾ware industry.
4) A range of products in your portfolio. Where the product innovation portfolio contains a range of 
products from low to high risk, new to the company to iterative development, current technology to 
requirement for new technologies, etc., selection of the most appropriate process for each type of 
product is vitally important. DO NOT force fit all projects into the same process.
So, is there a RIGHT or BEST process?
The answer is clearly NO.
The best organizations will choose the process that suits their specific needs. They modify the process 
as required and will use a combination of processes. Why not a Stage-Gate® foundation with an Agile 
approach within certain stages, underpinned with Jobs to be Done for identification of customer needs, 
Design Thinking to provide human-centered problem solving, and underpinned with Lean principles?
And, above all, a LEARNING ORGANIZATION that is focused on continuous improvement.PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 197
4.5 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS CONTROL AND MANAGEMENT
Each product innovation process discussed in this chapter has significant strengths in basic structure and 
underlying principles. However, organizations can implement them poorly, with a frequently seen problem 
of the process taking precedence over outcomes – the process takes on a life of its own. For example, 
delivery teams will often produce required artifacts, such as requirements documents or architecture docu￾ments, solely to pass through the process gate.
A well-defined control and management (governance) responsibility vested in a senior manager, or a 
management team is an excellent vehicle for ensuring the overall effectiveness of the product innovation 
process. That is, the right amount of process, efficiently and effectively focused on delivering the right out￾comes. The product is the focus of a product innovation process, not the process itself.
4.5.1 What is Product Innovation Governance
The Project Management Institute (PMI) defines governance as applied to program management as 
(emphasis and applicability to product innovation in bold):
“[that which] covers the systems and methods by which a program and its strategy are defined, 
authorized, monitored, and supported by its sponsoring organization. Program Governance 
refers to the practices and processes conducted by a sponsoring organization to ensure that 
its programs are managed effectively and consistently (to the extent feasible). Program 
Governance is achieved through the actions of a review and decision-making body that 
is charged with endorsing or approving recommendations made regarding a program under its 
authority.” (PMI Standard for Program Management 3rd Edition, 2013:51)
From a product innovation governance perspective, the following questions need to be adequately 
answered:
• Is the product innovation process tailored to the specific needs of the organization and its products or 
services? Is the process well communicated, understood, and accepted across the whole organization?
• Have measurable targets for new product or service outcomes been determined and agreed upon? 
Are these communicated and commonly understood by all people involved in the product innovation 
process?
• Are there specific metrics designed for each stage in the product innovation process (for example, 
actual spend vs. budget, milestones on time, overall development cycle time)? Are these used as a 
basis for learning and continuous improvement?
• Is the appropriate balance of management authority and individual responsibility defined and in place?
• Do the decision protocols and processes enable effective and timely decision-making? Do any sig￾nificant and unnecessary “roadblocks” exist that add to frustration and delays?
• Is the product innovation process reviewed regularly, based on inputs from a cross-section of the 
organization and from the output and process metrics?
• Are specific processes and instances in place to resolve potential disagreements among team mem￾bers, especially when cross-functional teams participate in the same projects?
4.5.2 The Role of the Board of Directors and Senior Management
McNaughton (2023) discusses the importance of supportive and robust governance in fostering inno￾vation. He emphasizes the importance of the Board and senior executives in “setting expectations and 
policies, organizing the firm, delegating decision-making and hiring the right people to support innova￾tion. In Table 4.10, McNaughton provides a summary of how the Board and senior executives influence 
innovation.198 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
TABLE 4.10 How do the board and CEO influence innovation
The Board The CEO and other C-suite executives
• Receives instruction from owners about investment 
objectives.
• Sets parameters for risk tolerance and monitors risk.
• Participates in strategy setting including the portfolio 
of innovation.
• With management chooses how innovation will be 
organized.
• Monitors and audits performance.
• Oversees compliance.
• Appoints CEO and monitors performance.
• Delegates decision rights.
• Nominates board members.
• Sets up sub-committees or advisory boards 
(e.g., on innovation, or digital transformation).
• Sets a vision for innovation.
• Defines how the company will capture value from 
innovation.
• Chooses how innovation will be organized.
• Chooses innovation processes/methods.
• Defines roles and assigns responsibility.
• Fosters an innovation culture.
• Champions and models innovative behavior.
• Sets policies and incentives and establishes 
management practices that support innovation.
• Allocates resources and sets budgets.
• Identifies and overcomes obstacles and resistance to 
innovation.
• Defines how to measure innovation, sets targets, and 
monitors performance.
Source: McNaughton, 2023 / John Wiley & Sons.PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 199
4.6 IN SUMMARY
• This chapter has described a range of new product models. Each has its strengths and is generally 
more applicable at certain stages of the full product innovation process. The Stage-Gate® provides 
an idea-to-launch process, while most other models focus on specific stages throughout this overall 
process.
• Using a well-developed product innovation process(es), the best companies have significantly higher 
product success rates on average (76%) compared to the rest of the companies’ success rate (51%).
• Product innovation is a risk vs. reward process. The application of disciplined processes and prac￾tices is designed to reduce the level of uncertainty and improve the likelihood of product success.
• Costs associated with new product innovation generally increase dramatically throughout the prod￾uct innovation process – especially during final design, prototyping, and scale-up to commercializa￾tion. It is vitally important to put significant effort into the early stages of product innovation (FEI, front 
end of innovation) to ensure that an informed decision is made about the project’s likelihood of suc￾cess before costs increase.
• Stage-Gate®, IPD, waterfall, Agile, Lean, concurrent engineering, systems engineering, jobs to be 
done, and design thinking all have merits in application to specific organization and product situa￾tions. It is important to fully understand the principles of each model and apply the most appropriate 
model to the specific organizational context. This often requires a blend of two or more models.
• All process models have the following principles in common:
○ A focus on strategic alignment.
○ Knowledge-based decision-making to reduce the risk of product failure.
○ An emphasis on stakeholder input to design decisions.
○ The use of cross-functional teams.
○ A structured framework, understood and applied across the organization.
• Organizations that are truly successful in product innovation understand the fundamental principles of 
new product success. They learn from others and are constantly striving for continuous improvement.
• Fundamental to the successful implementation of product innovation is clarity of definition around the 
intent of the innovation strategy and of specific product innovation projects. This clarity of definition is 
provided in what is called the product innovation charter (PIC).
• A business sustainability strategy and principles need to be built into every product innovation pro￾ject. These factors relate to reducing waste, recycling where/when possible, and reusing materials. 
Furthermore, it includes operating within the widely accepted triple constraint of people, planet, and 
profit.200 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
4.A PROCESS PRACTICE QUESTIONS
1. Mary works as a product development engineer at an automotive parts supplier. Her boss has been 
complaining about the long lead time in getting new products to market. He believes that the iterative 
changes, inherent in most of the new products, could be carried out much more efficiently. What type 
of product development process would you suggest that Mary recommend to her boss to reduce time 
to market?
A. Waterfall
B. Integrated
C. Agile
D. Stage-Gate
2. In the early stages of the new products process there is a lot of uncertainty. These stages are often 
referred to as
A. Concept generation.
B. Front end of innovation.
C. Business case development.
D. Concept evaluation.
3. The sign of a mature product development process within an organization is the ability of the organ￾ization to:
A. Include and integrate stakeholders and senior management throughout the development process.
B. Use iterative and risk-limiting steps to facilitate effective and efficient new product development.
C. Continuously fill the pipeline with new products.
D. Develop its own best practices from the various models and experiences.
4. The first step in the classic waterfall process is requirements. The last step is known as:
A. Development.
B. Maintenance.
C. Verification.
D. Implementation.
5. Key elements of Agile new product process include the scrum, the scrum master, the scrum team, the 
sprint, the product backlog, and:
A. Stakeholders.
B. Project manager.
C. Product owner.
D. Product champion.
6. A company is developing a product that is basically a relatively simple line extension of existing products. 
It knows the market well and the risks associated with product failure are low. What type of Stage-Gate 
process would be most likely appropriate for this development?
A. A 5-stage process with heavy emphasis on initial business analysis.
B. A 5-stage process with significant market research built into the decision-making.
C. A relatively short 3-stage process focusing on speed to market.
D. A 3-stage process with a strong emphasis on pre-launch test marketing.
7. In the Jobs-to-be-done (JTBD) framework there are two types of jobs that are defined: Main Jobs and 
Related Jobs. Both types of jobs have multiple aspects. Which of the following is not an aspect of either 
a Main or Related job-type:
A. Emotional.
B. Financial.
C. Functional.
D. Developmental.PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 201
8. Gates are defined as decision points based on deliverables, criteria, and outputs. Outputs include:
A. Financial statements.
B. Yes or no decisions.
C. The highs and lows of impact and probability.
D. Go, kill, hold, recycle decisions.
9. Lean processes are focused primarily on:
A. Putting more discipline into processes.
B. Making processes more Agile.
C. Removing waste.
D. Encouraging cross-functional integration.
10. The framework, functions, and processes that guide activities in project, program, and portfolio man￾agement and provide guidance, decision-making, and oversight is called. . .
A. Governance.
B. Project management.
C. Team leadership.
D. General management.
Answers to practice questions: Product innovation process
1. C
2. B
3. D
4. B
5. C
6. C
7. B
8. D
9. C
10. A202 PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS
REFERENCES
Agile Manifesto. (2001). Agile manifesto for software development. https://agilemanifesto.org/
Blank, S. (2010). Not all those who wander are lost. Cafepress.
Blank, S. (2016). SyncDev methodology. Sync.Dev. http://www.syncdev.com/minimum-viable-product/.
Blank, S. and Dorf, B. (2012). The startup owner’s manual: The step-by-step guide for building a great company. K&S Ranch.
Booz, Allen, and Hamilton (1982). New products management for the 1980s. Indiana University.
Brown, T. (2008). Change by design: How design thinking transforms organizations and inspires innovation. Harper Collins.
Cagan, M. (2017). Inspired, 2e. Silicon Valley Product Group.
Christensen, C.M. and Raynor, M.E. (2003). The innovator’s solution. Harvard Business School Press.
Cooper, R.G. and Kleinschmidt, E. (1986). An investigation into the new product process: Steps, deficiencies, and impact. Journal 
of Product Innovation Management 3 (2): 71–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/0737-6782(86)90030-5.
Cooper, R.G. (2001). Winning at new products. 3e. Basic Books.
Cooper, R.G. (2014). What’s next after stage-Gate®. Research-Technology Management 57 (1): 20–31. https://doi.org/10.5437/
08956308X5606963.
Cooper, R. G. (2015). Stage-Gate® and agile development: Debunking the myths. http://www.stage-gate.com/resources_stage￾gate_agile.php
Cooper, R.G. and Sommer, A.F. (2016). Agile-stage-gate: New idea-to-launch method for manufactured new products is faster, 
more responsive. Industrial Marketing Management 59: 167–180. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2016.10.006.
Cooper, R.G. (2017). Winning at new products, 5e. Basic Books.
Cooper, R.G. and Sommer, A.F. (2018). Agile-stage-gate for manufacturers. Research-Technology Management 61 (2): 17–26. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/08956308.2018.1421380.
Cross, N. (1982). Designerly ways of knowing. Design Studies 3: 221–227. https://doi.org/10.1016/0142-694X(82)90040-0.
Espinoza-Orias, N., Cooper, K., and Lariani, S. (2018). Integrated product innovation at Nestlé. In: Designing sustainable tech￾nologies, products and policies (ed. E. Benetto, K. Gericke, and M. Guiton), 89–103. Springer https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
66981-6_50.
Fricke, E., & Schulz, A. P. (2005). Design for changeability (DfC): Principles to enable changes in systems throughout their entire life 
cycle. Systems Engineering, 8(9). https://doi.org/10.1002/sys.20039
Grecis, Z. (2015). 8 things to use in "jobs-to-be-done" framework for product development. UX Collective https://uxdesign.cc/8-
things-to-use-in-jobs-to-be-done-framework-for-product-development-4ae7c6f3c30b.
Gurtner, S., Spanjol, J., and Griffin, A. (2018). Leveraging constraints for innovation. Wiley https://doi.org/10.1002/
9781119390299.
Knapp, J., Zeratsky, J., and Kowitz, B. (2016). Sprint: How to solve big problems and test new ideas in just five days. Bantam 
Press (GB).
Knudsen, M.P., von Zedtwitz, M., Griffin, A., and Barczak, G. (2023). Best practices in new product development and innovation: 
Results from PDMA’s 2021 global survey. Journal of Product Innovation Management 40 (3): 257–275. https://doi.org/10.1111/
jpim.12663.
Haberfellner, R., De Weck, O., Fricke, E., & Vössner, S. (1986). Systems engineering: Fundamentals and applications. Birkhäuser.
Kahn, K.B., Evans Kay, S., and Slotegraaf, R.J. (2013). & Uban. In: The PDMA handbook of new product development, 3e (ed. S.). 
John Wiley & Sons https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118466421.
Liedtka, J. (2020). Putting technology in its place: Design thinking’s social technology at work. California Management Review 62
(2): 53–83. https://doi.org/10.1177/0008125619897391.
Liedtka, J. and Ogilvie, T. (2011). Designing for growth: A design thinking tool kit for managers. Columbia Business School 
Publishing.PRODUCT INNOVATION PROCESS 203
Mascitelli, R. (2011). Mastering lean product innovation: A practical, event-driven process for maximizing speed, profits and qual￾ity. Technology Perspectives.
McKim, R.H. (1972). Experiences in visual thinking. Brooks/Cole Publishing Co.
McNaughton. (2023). Innovation governance. In: The PDMA handbook of innovation and new product development, 4e (ed. L. 
Bsteiler and C.H. Noble), 121–136. John Wiley and Sons.
Morgan, J.M. and Liker, J.K. (2006). The Toyota product innovation system, integrating people, process and technology. 
Productivity Press.
Naveh, E. (2004). The effect of integrated product innovation on efficiency and innovation. International Journal of Production 
Research 43 (13): 2789–2808. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207540500031873.
New York Times. (1985, December 2). Demise of the Sgt. York: Model turns to dud. https://www.nytimes.com/1985/12/02/us/
demise-of-the-sgt-york-model-turns-to-dud.html
Ojomo, E. (2021). The power and simplicity of jobs to be done theory. https://www.christenseninstitute.org/blog/the-power-and￾simplicity-of-job-to-be-done-theory/
Osterwalder, A., Pigneur, Y., and Smith, A. (2010). Business model generation: A handbook for visionaries, game changers, and 
challengers. Wiley.
Pahl, G., Beitz, W., Feldhusen, J., and Grote, K.H. (2007). Engineering design: A systematic approach, 3e. Springer https://doi
.org/10.1007/978-1-84628-319-2.
Phillips, R., Neailey, K., and Broughton, T. (1999). A comparative study of six Stage-Gate approaches to product innovation. 
Integrated Manufacturing Systems 10 (5): 289–297. https://doi.org/10.1108/09576069910371106.
Pichler, R. (2013). Agile product innovation with scrum: Creating products that customers love. Addison-Wesley Signature 
Series (Cohn).
Ries, E. (2011). The lean startup: How today’s entrepreneurs use continuous innovation to create radically successful businesses. 
Crown Business.
Rittel, H. and Webber, M. (1973). Dilemmas in general theory of planning. Policy Sciences 4 (2): 155–169. http://www.jstor.org/
stable/4531523.
Royce, W.W. (1970). Managing the development of large software systems. In: Proceedings of IEEE WESCON, vol. 26, 328–
388. IEEE.
Sutherland, J. (2014). Scrum: The art of doing twice the work in half the time. Currency.
Ulwick, A.W. (2016). Jobs to be done: Theory to practice. Ideation Press.
Winner, R. I., Pennell, J. P., Bertrand, H. E., & Slusarczuk, M. M. G. (1991). The role of concurrent engineering in weapons system 
acquisition. Institute for Defense snalyses Report R-338.Product Development and Management Body of Knowledge: A Guidebook for Product Innovation Training and Certification,Third Edition. 
Allan Anderson, Chad McAllister, and Ernie Harris.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
5
Product
Innovation
Design & 
Development
Required to facilitate efficient and effective 
evolution of a product from initial idea 
through to a developed, manufacture and 
“market-ready” form.206 Product Innovation Design & Development
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS CHAPTER
Product innovation makes use of a wide range of methodologies, concepts, and techniques, which we 
often simply refer to as tools. Tools are used as products move through the different phases of the product 
innovation process, evolving an idea into a product concept that then moves through deeper design and 
development, resulting in a product to launch to markets. Some tools are specific to certain phases of the 
product innovation process, while others are applied in many areas.
In this chapter, we focus on tools that are more specifically applied to the design and development 
phases of the product innovation process. Each of these phases benefits significantly from applying tools 
to reduce uncertainty and ambiguity and to assure conformance with the design’s customer requirements 
and technical specifications. The most commonly used tools are described, their advantages, and where 
they can be applied at the various phases of product design and development.
PDMA’s 2021 Best Practices Study shows that the “best companies” are more likely to use design and 
development tools than the “rest” of the companies (Knudsen et al., 2023).Product Innovation Design & Development 207
THE CHAPTER ROADMAP
This chapter is organized into two main parts: (1) Design and (2) Development. The first part describes 
design tools for constructing and refining a product concept. These tools are useful for moving from an 
initial idea or innovation insight to a clarified and validated product concept. The design tools are organized 
into primary categories: Ideation, Concept Design, and Embodiment. The customer’s needs are increas￾ingly understood during the progression from Ideation to Embodiment, and the product elements that cre￾ate value for the customer are identified. This results in a detailed description of a product concept and 
early prototypes.
The second part describes development tools, organized by initial design specifications, detailed 
design specifications, and fabrication and assembly. Moving from the initial design specifications to fab￾rication and assembly adds specificity to the detailed product concept, enabling the product to be devel￾oped, implemented, or manufactured. Also, related tools are addressed for Usability testing, Performance 
testing, Quality Assurance, Manufacturing, and Sustainability.
The level of detail needed at any stage of the design and development process depends on several 
factors, including the industry, product form (e.g., software, physical manufacturing, and services), prod￾uct complexity, newness to company, etc. For your product work, depending on such factors, you will 
find some of the tools applicable and others that are not. Further, organizations will vary on what activities 
they consider design versus the activities they consider part of development. The line between design and 
development is not absolute. The categories discussed in this chapter provide a means of organizing the 
tools.
Ideation: the importance of a good pool of
ideas from which to select for further design
and development
Descriptions of ideation techniques are
provided in Chapter 3.
Concept engineering; Kano method;
morphological analysis; TRIZ method.
Conjoint analysis; function analysis; FAST
diagram; reverse engineering.
Design for functionality; design for assembly;
design for recycling.
QFD; House of Quality; Taguchi methods;
LCA; Kansei engineering; neural networks;
reaction cards; emergent emotions.
Prototyping; design for Six Sigma; design
for sustainability; design for production.
Concept design: what tools can be used to
further develop the initial product idea into a
more detailed concept description?
Embodiment: what tools can be used to
provide greater detail to the concept in
terms of aesthetics, form, and functionality?
Initial design specications: what tools can
be used to add quantitative specications
to the qualitative design concept?
Detailed design specications: what tools
can be used to add further detail to the
initial design specications?
Fabrication and assembly: what tools can
be used to add quantitative specications to
the qualitative design concept?
Part 2: Part 1: Design208 Product Innovation Design & Development
5.1 DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT PROCESS STEPS
Following is a list of activities included in most product design and development processes:
i. Idea generation or Ideation
As discussed in Chapter 3, idea generation forms the basis for new products to be included 
in the new products portfolio. Idea selection is based on a range of well-defined criteria, including 
strategic fit, competition, resource availability, sustainability, and return on investment. These new 
product ideas may be totally new to the organization or modifications to existing products.
ii. Basic concept description
To create a product concept description, ideas are expanded on with greater detail related to a 
defined target market and its specific requirements for the key design components:
• Aesthetics
• Functionality
• Quality
iii. Embodiment
The basic product concept is further refined, and detail is added using Embodiment tools. 
This involves the preparation of visual and functional representations of the concept in the form of 
sketches, wireframes, models, and prototypes.
iv. Quality assurance
Quality Assurance is a planned and systematic set of actions necessary to provide adequate 
confidence that the product optimally fulfils customers’ expectations. A quality assurance plan 
should be developed in parallel with design specifications.
v. Design for manufacturing
For manufactured products, design for manufacturing involves optimizing the product’s design 
for its manufacturing and assembly process, merging the product’s design requirements with its 
production method.
vi. Design specifications
The previous activities move from idea to detailed product concept. The product concept is 
generally descriptive and mostly qualitative. It is necessary but insufficient for developing the prod￾uct. Design specifications add specificity using quantitative measures. Note that the term “design 
specifications” is not used in all organizations or industries. The PDMA BoK uses this term for the 
activity that enables product development to occur based on a product concept description.
vii. Usability testing
On-going user input is an essential element of the product design process, providing feedback 
and suggestions for improvement in design features. The use of visual and physical representations 
of the product concept can add significantly to the quality and value of user feedback. User testing 
is conducted to gain this feedback.
viii. Performance and endurance testing
Performance and endurance testing is a type of testing that determines a product’s perfor￾mance, such as durability, speed, scalability, handling, and stability. The testing process includes 
manual and automated tests designed to reveal faults and ensure your product is fit for the market.
As shown in the chapter roadmap, we have organized the design and development tools into two parts: 
(1) Design and (2) Development. Part 1 describes the tools that lead to a detailed design of a product con￾cept and early prototypes. The design tools are organized into primary categories: Ideation, Concept Design, 
and Embodiment. Part 2 describes development tools, organized by initial specifications, detailed spec￾ifications, and fabrication and assembly. Moving from the initial specifications to fabrication and assembly 
adds specificity to the detailed product concept, enabling the product to be developed, implemented, or 
manufactured.Product Innovation Design & Development 209
PART 1: DESIGN
5.2 INTRODUCTION TO DESIGN
For the purposes of this book, we are defining the design process as the earlier activities of product inno￾vation that focus on the evolution of a product from initial insight or idea to a well-defined and understood 
product concept. Consequently, the output of design is a product concept with sufficient detail for a devel￾opment team to begin their work (addressed below in Part 2: Development).
This evolutionary process requires consideration of a range of factors, including:
• Consumer needs and wants.
• Aesthetics.
• Functionality.
• Quality.
• Material and component availability.
• Cost vs. what price the consumer is willing or able to pay.
• Capital cost and return on investment.
• Competition.
• Manufacturability.
• Environmental impact.
Information on these factors enables the design process to progress through the application of appro￾priate design tools. Complementing these design tools are ideation tools described in Section 3.2.1. Also, 
Chapter 5, Marketing Research, describes consumer and market research tools that contribute to product 
design and development.
5.2.1 Ideation
A successful product starts with a good idea. The greater the pool of quality ideas, the greater the likeli￾hood of developing successful products. Although these new ideas can happen by accident, a structured 
process using sound ideation tools will likely lead to a sustained source of good ideas.
A selection of ideation tools was discussed in Section  3.2.1 as the foundation of the new product 
portfolio. Several contexts for new product idea generation exists. They include improvement to an exist￾ing product, a line extension, a new to-the-organization product, or even a new-to-the-world product. 
Although most ideation tools can be applied to each of these contexts, some are better suited to specific 
areas of focus. A few examples are presented below.
Product improvements and line extensions would benefit from:
• SCAMPER, where participants focus on specific action verbs to help them think differently about a 
product and avoid making assumptions limiting their past thinking – Substitute, Put to another use, 
Eliminate, etc.
• Mind-mapping, where participants graphically outline ideas for product improvement from a defined 
starting point of product aesthetics, functionality, and quality properties, and encourage mapping 
ideas from this starting point.
• Story boarding asks participants to develop a story about the customer’s use of a product to better 
understand areas where the product could be improved.
• Crowdsourcing utilizes the power of social media to engage with users and potential users to submit 
ideas for product improvements and line extensions.210 Product Innovation Design & Development
New to the organization product would benefit from:
• Brainstorming, where a large pool of ideas is generated and subsequently evaluated against 
portfolio-specific screening criteria, as discussed in Chapter 3.
• Brainwriting, where participants write down their ideas and share these with others in a group for fur￾ther discussion and evolution of these ideas.
• Crowd sourcing is also useful here to generate new product ideas that an organization has not yet 
pursued.
New to-the-world products would benefit from ideation approaches that seek to gain a better 
understanding of trends and unarticulated customer needs. These include:
• Scenario building involves the development of future-focused scenarios and then asking what new 
product would create customer value in these scenarios.
• Delphi utilizes expert input to predict future trends for markets, technologies, or products.
• Ethnography seeks to better understand users or potential users in their normal environment, lead￾ing to the identification of needs through direct observation that users are either unwilling or unable to 
articulate. These needs then lay the foundation for the new product idea.
• Big data is becoming more widely used to understand current product usage and potential future 
trends. As discussed in Section 3.2.1, the challenge is “mining the nuggets” of truly valuable informa￾tion from the mass of available data.
The ideation stage usually results in a relatively brief description of the product idea with very little detail 
on its form, function, benefits, features, etc.
“Anyone can dream up great ideas, but an idea is nothing until it is realized, be it as a website, a physi￾cal product, an app, or a user interface” – Jens Martin Skibsted, Danish designer.
5.2.2 Concept Design
Ideation often provides a very simple description for a new product opportunity. To enable greater focus 
and clarity of direction for those involved in the further development of the product, more detail, substanti￾ated by customer input, is required.
The next stage in the product design process involves the development of a more detailed concept 
description. This provides greater detail about the new product idea enabling:
• Clarity and alignment for all members of the product team and those associated with the project.
• A vital means of explaining the proposed product to potential customers and other stakeholders, 
both to seek their views on product benefits and features, and their advice on possible changes or 
improvements before incurring additional development expenses.
• A more detailed basis for feasibility analysis.
In Section 2.7.1, we described the three levels of a product: (1) core, (2) tangible, and (3) augmented, 
refer to Figure 5.1.
1. Core product: The benefits the target market will derive from the product.
2. Tangible product: The physical and aesthetic design features that give the product its appearance 
and functionality.
3. Augmented product: These are benefits that may be provided as an addition to the product, either 
free of charge or for a higher price.Product Innovation Design & Development 211
The three levels of the product provide a useful framework for evolving the concept description. A wide 
range of tools is available for this. A number of these tools are described in Chapter 6, Market Research. 
These include focus groups, ethnography, customer site visits, social media, and a range of multivariate 
techniques. Following is a selection of other commonly used tools applied to creating and refining a prod￾uct concept.
Concept Engineering
The Concept Engineering (CE) method, developed in collaboration between the Center for Quality Management 
(CQM), CQM member companies, and MIT, provides a stepwise, customer-centered process for developing 
product concepts, Burchill and Walden (1994). The method determines the customer’s key requirements to be 
Concept Example
IDEO, the global design company, is recognized for its human-centered product design. A classic 
example of a concept description, IDEO created is for a new shopping cart, considering factors such 
as maneuverability, shopping behavior, child safety, maintenance cost, and replacement cost.
“The nestable steel frame lacks sides and a bottom to deter theft, and holds removable plastic 
baskets to increase shopper flexibility, help protect goods, and provide a method to promote 
brand awareness. A dual child seat uses a swing-up tray for a play surface, and a hole provides a 
secure spot for a cup of coffee or a bunch of carnations. . . . One of the unique—and potentially 
patentable—features of the cart is the design of its steerable back wheels. Normally fixed straight for 
stability and familiarity, an easy sideways effort allows the wheels to turn left or right. Pushing the cart 
forward puts the wheels straight again.”
CORE BENEFIT
OR SERVICE 
STYLING
FEATURES
QUALITY
PACKAGING
BRAND
INSTALLATION
DELIVERY
& CREDIT
WARRANTY
AFTER SALES
SERVICE 
FIGURE 5.1 The three levels of a product212 Product Innovation Design & Development
included in the design, and proposes several alternative product concepts that satisfy these requirements. The 
method involves five stages of work.
Stage I: Understanding of the customer’s environment
This involves understanding the scope of the project and developing a roadmap that will guide 
the exploration activities, the method of collecting the voice of the customer, and the development of 
a common image of the customer environment and use of the product. It requires being immersed 
into the customer’s use context through customer visits and the application of contextual inquiry. The 
voices collected from the customers will be translated into requirements that identify the expected 
features to be included in the product design. This stage requires a triangulation of perspectives in 
the design team, resulting in a common understanding of the customer’s environment.
Stage II: Converting understanding into customer requirements
This stage converts the customers’ voices into requirement statements. The method of priority 
marking is used to identify the most critical requirements. Generally, a set of 24 customer require￾ments is collected, from which eight are selected based on customer priority for further development 
in the next stage. Also, all requirements are clustered around “themes” to guide the creative inquiry.
Stage III: Operationalizing what you have learned
This stage involves the development of a quality chart and operational definitions for the customer 
requirements selected in stage II. A House of Quality-like chart shows the relationship matrix between 
customer and technical requirements (metrics). The requirements are prioritized using any of the follow￾ing methods: The Kano questionnaire, self-stated importance questionnaire, or the critical requirements 
questionnaire. Both the Kano methods and the House of Quality are discussed later in this chapter.
In addition, this stage involves the creation of general metrics for the requirements. An attempt to 
minimize the number of metrics per requirement is usually made with two metrics per requirement. 
The reason is that if a metric correlates with many requirements (e.g., four), it suggests that it is too 
abstract and, thus, difficult to interpret. Validity and easiness of use of the metric are the two main 
criteria to evaluate.
Stage IV: Generating concepts
This stage transitions from requirements to the solution space. First, it is desirable to generate as 
many diverse concepts as possible. For this, decomposing the design problem into sub-problems 
is helpful, as this facilitates considering solutions to specific components of the product or system. 
There are several methods for decomposition – such as functional analysis, Fast diagrams, process 
flows, and metrics tree diagrams. This stage ends with clear concept descriptions for the concepts 
carried to the next stage.
Stage V: Selecting the final concept
This stage selects a final concept using numerical analysis and scoring of the most viable con￾cepts already envisioned. Concepts are systematically reviewed, using a scoring process to screen 
the concepts. They are evaluated against customer requirements and organizational and business 
constraints. This leads to selecting the best concept that creates the most value for the customer 
and the organization.
Similar to a Retrospective from an Agile project, the final step of Concept Engineering is to increase 
learning by reflecting on the overall process and identifying opportunities for improvements.
User Experience (UX) and User Interface (UI) Design
“No product is an island. A product is more than the product. It is a cohesive, integrated set of experi￾ences. Think through all of the stages of a product or service – from initial intentions through final reflec￾tions, from first usage to help, service, and maintenance. Make them all work together seamlessly.”
—Don Norman, inventor of the term “User Experience”Product Innovation Design & Development 213
User experience (UX) refers to any interaction a user has with a product or service. UX design consid￾ers each and every element that shapes this experience, how it makes the user feel, and how easy it is for 
the user to accomplish their desired tasks. A UX designer’s primary goal is for each user to interact posi￾tively with a product or service. Whether the interaction solves a problem, provides entertainment, or helps 
the user find critical information, the experience should satisfy the user.
User Interface (UI), on the other hand, refers to the interfaces users engage with. The UI design pro￾cess may include buttons or widgets, text, images, sliders, and other interactive elements. UI designers 
ensure that every visual element, transition, and animation included within a product or service sets the 
stage for a cohesive, positive experience. Refer to Table 5.1 for a comparison of UX and UI design applied 
to software and electronic products.
Consideration of both UX and UI, and the tools used to generate their understanding, are essential 
during all stages of product innovation, starting with the detailed concept description. Detailed design fea￾tures should evolve as more knowledge of the desired UX and UI is gained.
Following is a selection of commonly used tools that are used to assist the development of the product 
concept and, in turn, the overall UX design of the product.
Kano Method
Widely used by experienced product managers and innovators, the Kano method has proved useful for 
identifying customer needs and latent demands, determining functional requirements, developing concepts 
as candidates for further product definition, and analyzing competitive products or services within a prod￾uct category.
The Kano method classifies the product requirements into three broad categories: Basic requirements, 
performance requirements, and excitement requirements.
• Basic requirements fulfill basic functions in each product in the category; these are essential  – 
without them, there is user dissatisfaction.
• Performance requirements provide real benefits and enhance the utility of the product. These 
reflect functional performance attributes and are needed for differentiation.
• Excitement requirements (generally referred to as the WoW! effect) are generally unexpected. They 
delight the customer and provide superior satisfaction. Their presence increases the overall experi￾ence and they do not provide dissatisfaction if not present.
The Kano method is operationalized by identifying the set of user requirements, known as customer 
requirements (CRs), that users look for in products or services. In addition to the above categories, Kano 
describes four types of elements of a product:
1. Attractive quality elements: Customers are satisfied when present but do not feel dissatisfied 
when these requirements are absent.
TABLE 5.1 UX vs. UI design for software and electronic products
UX design UI design
Feel
The feel of the overall experience within the product.
Look
How the product’s interfaces look and function.
Prototyping
Creates wireframes and testable prototypes that form 
the basis of a website or service’s user experience.
Design
Finalizes the products and designs for actual user 
engagement.
High-level
Takes a high-level view of the product, ensuring the 
collective user flow is fully realized and consistent.
Details
Works on individual pages, buttons, and interactions, 
making sure they are well-done and functional.214 Product Innovation Design & Development
2. One-dimension quality elements: These elements show a proportional relationship between 
functionality and satisfaction. More functionality implies higher levels of satisfaction.
3. Must-be quality elements: These are the elements that the user expects at a minimum. They do 
not lead to satisfaction when fulfilled. However, they cause dissatisfaction when not fulfilled.
4. Indifferent quality elements: These elements provide neither satisfaction nor dissatisfaction 
regardless if they are fulfilled.
Succinctly, the Kano method is used to narrow the set of requirements that will make the product 
competitive in the market within a specific product category. Applying it involves a customer survey and 
analyzing the results to classify customer requirements as attractive, one-dimension, must-be, or indiffer￾ent. Further analysis can prioritize the requirements to include in the release of a product, accounting for 
development time and cost, support of product vision, technical feasibility, etc. Further details are available 
at Kano method websites, such as www.kanosurveys.com.
Concept Scenarios
This technique generates scenarios as a way to learn how product concepts would work in real-life situ￾ations. Product design teams collect sketches, illustrations, photos, and descriptions of activities to help 
develop a customer journey. Scenarios detail the actual actor, describe the context and the actor’s goal, 
and describe how the actor achieves the goal. The technique aims to explore how the product concept 
can meet customers’ expectations.
Every concept scenario implies the following steps:
1. Identify possible concepts generally developed with other methods, such as the Kano or morpho￾logical analysis.
2. Create and identify a scenario around each possible concept: actor, context, and process to achieve 
customers’ goals.
3. Evaluate and reformulate the product concept as you go through the scenario.
4. Illustrate the scenarios by reflecting on all activities, users, and other participants involved in real-life 
situations where the concept is being used.
5. Discuss the added value of the concept within the imagined situations and user context.
This approach streamlines product design by reducing the time to identify critical customer require￾ments, describe the product functionality within the user experience in mind, communicates new product 
features, and provides guidance for concept testing.
Courtyard by Marriott
An example of the application of concept scenarios is the design for the Courtyard by Marriott. This 
mid-priced hotel was designed for business travelers. The concept scenario included specific work￾ing desk spaces, couches, and small gathering places for business interviews, business centers, 
restful beds, and green views from the bedroom windows to the exterior. This concept was tested by 
assessing the perception of the target markets, recommendations were provided to enhance design 
(e.g., addition of closets), and later a conjoint analysis technique was applied to evaluate the relative 
weight that each hotel component had on potential customer satisfaction.Product Innovation Design & Development 215
Morphological Analysis
This technique is useful when the designer attempts to build possible concepts with the information gath￾ered through previous exploration. The approach generates a system-level solution that meets the needs 
and expectations of potential users. It aims to identify possible elements common to several possible solu￾tions known as design parameters.
A typical morphological analysis has the following steps:
1. Identify user-centered categories or dimensions critical to the product design.
2. Use these categories to organize possible concept ideas. These ideas are branched from each 
category.
3. Create a morphological chart with categories/dimensions on the horizontal, and below each cat￾egory, a series of concept ideas (see Figure 5.2).
4. Combine possible ideas from each category into potential solutions to enter the product design stage.
5. Identify specific criteria to allow for a comparison of the adequacy of the solutions found.
6. Discuss the possible solutions among the product innovation team for final assessment.
Figure 5.2 presents an example showing the application of a morphological analysis in the creation of 
concepts for a hotel using five critical design dimensions of hotel design: Adaptability (ability to adapt to 
changing conditions), Community (providing a sense of sharing), Technology (current, available technol￾ogy), Engagement (understanding and meeting customer needs), and Well-being (comfortable, happy, and 
safe environment). Each bulb represents a possible idea within the design dimensions (adaptability, com￾munity, etc.). The links between bulbs represent possible conceptual connections leading to four possible 
solutions or combinations of ideas that satisfy all critical design dimensions.
TRIZ Method
TRIZ is a problem-solving method based on logic and data, not intuition, which accelerates the project team’s 
ability to solve problems creatively. TRIZ also provides repeatability, predictability, and reliability due to its structure, 
Related ideas
Solution 1
Adaptability Community Technology Engagement Well-being
Solution 2
Solution 3
Solution 4
FIGURE 5.2 Example of morphological analysis216 Product Innovation Design & Development
algorithmic approach, and database of solutions to known problems. TRIZ is the Russian acronym for the 
“Theory of Inventive Problem Solving” (TIPS). G.S. Altshuller and his colleagues in the former U.S.S.R. developed 
the method between 1946 and 1985 by examining patents. Their work concluded that:
• in excess of 95 percent of all patents used only seven inventive tools,
• less than 5 percent come from breakthroughs in science and brand-new ideas,
• many of the exceptional patents improved performance by resolving contradictory requirements,
• if patents were categorized by what they did functionally rather than by industry, the same problem 
was solved many times with a small number of techniques.
This primary research lays the foundation for the fundamental principles of TRIZ:
• Problems and solutions are repeated across industries and sciences. By classifying the “contradic￾tions” in each problem, you can predict good creative solutions to a problem.
• Patterns of technical evolution tend to be repeated across industries and sciences.
• Creative innovations often use scientific effects outside the field where they were developed.
TRIZ contains four paradigm shifts, which can be used with creative right-brained thinking and analyti￾cal left-brained thinking to create a new system. These are:
• Functionality: The system possesses a Main Useful Function (MUF), and any components that 
don’t contribute toward the MUF are ultimately harmful.
• Resources: Identify anything in the system not being used for maximum potential.
• Ideality: Invision the final ideal solution where all functions are achieved without causing harm or problems.
• Contradictions: Recognize and eliminate design contradictions instead of making trade-offs.
The application of TRIZ
Much of the practice of TRIZ consists of learning the repeating patterns of problems-solutions. These 
general TRIZ patterns can then be applied to the specific situation. The TRIZ problem-solving method is 
shown in Figure 5.3.
Tools used in TRIZ
Altshuller (1984) defined inventive problems as those which contain conflicting requirements, which he 
called contradictions. Further, he found that the same fundamental solutions were used repeatedly, often 
TRIZ general problem TRIZ general solution
Your specific problem Your specific solution
FIGURE 5.3 TRIZ problem-solving methodProduct Innovation Design & Development 217
separated by many years. He reasoned that their task would have been simpler if later inventors knew 
of earlier solutions. He, therefore, set about extracting, compiling, and organizing such knowledge. He 
defined 39 basic properties (refer to Table 5.2) and 40 principles (refer to Table 5.3) for solving problems 
containing contradictions in any two-of-39 properties. This he gave in the form of a contradiction table of 
size 39×39 with each cell giving up to four principles (and examples from patent database) that may be 
used to eliminate the contradiction.
TRIZ has now evolved into an international science that is widely applied across a range of disciplines and 
industries. The complexities of TRIZ preclude a detailed explanation of its application in this publication.
An excellent overview of TRIZ theory, together with examples of application, is provided by Ladewig 
(2007), along with publications from Haines-Gadd (2016) and Gadd (2011).
TRIZ applied to product innovation
Although many people may find TRIZ too complex in its finest detail, a rudimentary application using 
Altshuller’s 40 principles can be extremely useful in the idea generation stage and early concept develop￾ment, both for new products and for product improvements. See examples in Table 5.4.
TABLE 5.2 TRIZ 39 engineering parameters
1. Weight of moving object
2. Weight of stationary object
3. Length of moving object
4. Length of stationary object
5. Area of moving object
6. Area of stationary object
7. Volume of moving object
8. Volume of stationary object
9. Speed
10. Force
11. Stress or pressure
12. Shape
13. Stability of the object’s 
composition
14. Strength
15. Duration of action by a moving 
object
16. Duration of action by a stationary 
object
17. Temperature
18. Illumination intensity
19. Use of energy by moving object
20. Use of energy by stationary object
21. Power
22. Loss of Energy
23. Loss of substance
24. Loss of Information
25. Loss of Time
26. Quantity of substance/the matter
27. Reliability
28. Measurement accuracy
29. Manufacturing precision
30. External harm affects the object
31. Object-generated harmful factors
32. Ease of manufacture
33. Ease of operation
34. Ease of repair
35. Adaptability or versatility
36. Device complexity
37. Difficulty of detecting and 
measuring
38. Extent of automation
39. Productivity
TABLE 5.3 Altshuller’s 40 principles
1. Segmentation
2. Taking out
3. Local quality
4. Asymmetry
5. Merging
6. Universality
7. “Nested doll”
8. Anti-weight
9. Preliminary 
anti-action
10. Preliminary 
action
11. Beforehand 
cushioning
12. Equipotentiality
13. ‘The other way round’
14. Spheroidality – 
Curvature
15. Dynamics
16. Partial or excessive 
actions
17. Another dimension
18. Mechanical vibration
19. Periodic action
20. Continuity of useful 
action
21. Skipping
22. ‘Blessing in disguise’ or 
‘Turn Lemons into Lemonade’
23. Feedback
24. ‘Intermediary’
25. Self-service
26. Copying
27. Cheap short-living objects
28. Mechanics substitution
29. Pneumatics and hydraulics
30. Flexible shells and thin films
31. Porous materials
32. Color changes
33. Homogeneity
34. Discarding and 
recovering
35. Parameter changes
36. Phase transitions
37. Thermal expansion
38. Strong oxidants
39. Inert atmosphere
40. Composite materials218 Product Innovation Design & Development
Home
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet
Julius Ipsum
RECENTLY VIEWED
EXPLORE
ROOMS
REVIEWS
Som viverra
Double room
€500 Lorem hotel
Feb 10 - 15 You liked Loram hotel
4.1/5
4.1/5
4.1/5
Ipsum hotel
Feb 10 - 15
Semviv hotel
Feb 10 - 15
Double room
€500
Double room
€500
Som viverra
View All
dolor sit
dolor sit
dolor sit amet sem
123 Beach St., Sretch
300m from site
sem viv
4.5 / 5 3 / 5
Lorem Ipsum
Sem viverra
Trips
Dolor
Pro le
Hotel Detail
4.5 / 5
Dolor
Jun 10 - 15
julius@email.com
HOTELS
LATEST ACTIVITY
Value Value Value Value
Lorem Viverra M
Trips Prole
× ×
×
×
×
×
× ×
× × × ×
×
#### #### #### ####
× × ×
× × ×
FIGURE 5.4. Simple example of a wireframe for a travel app. 
Image source: https://www.sketch.com/blog/wireframe-examples/. Used with permission.
5.2.3 Embodiment Design
The embodiment design stage builds on the basic concept description based on additional user input, 
manufacturing criteria, and economic constraints. It extends the design, often in the form of one or more 
types of prototypes, providing additional meaning to stakeholders. This can lead to more meaningful feed￾back for further design enhancements. A few examples are below.
A sketch is a freehand drawing. It is very cheap and fast and often done during brainstorming ses￾sions. Its main goal is to illustrate the product or aspects of the product.
A mock-up is a model of what your final product will look like. Product mock-ups are frequently 
used to present a final product in a real-life context.
A wireframe is a detailed black-and-white layout of the product. They provide specifics about how 
the product is laid out or constructed. Wireframes are commonly used for software products and 
websites. You plan the layout of elements (images, buttons, and text) at this stage. A simple example 
of is presented in Figure 5.4.
TABLE 5.4 Examples of application of Altshuller’s 40 principles to product creation, sourced 
from The Triz Journal
Principle Solution
Segmentation (divide and object into 
independent parts)
Individually wrapped cheese slices
Local quality (provide different packaging for 
different uses)
“Adult” editions of Harry Potter books
Universality (make an object perform multiple 
functions)
Chocolate spread sold in glasses (with a lid) that can be used for 
drinking afterward
Nested doll (nest one object inside another) Store within a store (coffee shops in a bookstore)
Another dimension (tilt or re-orient object) Squeezable ketchup bottles that sit on their lidsProduct Innovation Design & Development 219
A Prototype
Prototyping is a design method that builds a representation of a product concept. Its main purpose is to 
assess how well the product features satisfy user expectations. As such, prototyping is an example of a 
problem-solving approach to design. A prototype approximates the form of a design idea that allows the 
product development team to verify the product operations and functions, its components, layout, func￾tionality, appearance, and behavior. Prototypes range from concept sketches to fully functional artifacts.
Prototyping fidelity is the degree to which the design allows for a reasonable understanding of the 
product in use. If the design team is in the initial stages of product conceptualization, low-fidelity proto￾types are suitable. In the latest stages, high-fidelity prototypes are needed. In addition, medium fidelity pro￾totypes allow for evaluating the interactive aspect of consumer experience, exposing possible flaws before 
finalizing the product release.
There are several types of prototypes based on the level of comprehensiveness or learning needed, as 
well as the stage of the product innovation process (see Figure 5.5).
Prototypes can be classified based on two dimensions: physical-analytical and focused-comprehensive. 
A clay mock-up is a physical prototype, while a simulation model is analytical in essence. Focused proto￾types allow for the evaluation of few attributes (e.g., paper prototypes), while comprehensive ones allow for 
greater scrutiny and analysis of several variables simultaneously (e.g., automobile prototype).
Prototypes are valuable throughout the design process, as the product evolves to its final form. 
Specific purposes and applications of prototypes are described below.
Paper prototyping: This is the most common basic form to represent concepts and ideas. This 
prototype does not represent the technical characteristics of the design. Mainly, it is used to explore 
idea generation and brainstorm possible solutions using sketching to depict the ideas. Storyboards 
are one form of a paper prototype that can represent the customer interface through a series of sto￾ryboard frames.
Functional prototyping: The purpose of these prototypes is to test how the product works and 
delivers the expected functions. Usability testing allows the identification of possible design errors 
at early stages when all functions have not yet been finalized. This method favors identifying spe￾cific tasks for the user, completion of the task by the user, identifying areas for improvement, and 
Alpha beta
System integration
Usability testing
Heuristic mechanisms
Fine interface design
Task centered
Basic interface
Appearance and aesthetics
Brainstorm and bodystorming
Early stages
of design 
Late stages
of design High-fidelity
prototypes
Works-like
Medium-fidelity
prototypes
Looks-like
Low-fidelity
Prototypes
FIGURE 5.5 Testing objectives and types of prototypes according to the design process. 
Source: Rodriguez (2017) / Createspace Independent Pub.220 Product Innovation Design & Development
modifying the prototype as needed. Overall, experimentation allows for evaluating user-centered 
design requirements, including ergonomic and cognitive considerations and the user’s experience.
Experience prototyping: This type of prototyping applies to the design of product or service 
experiences. The method requires a description in a structural manner of the different stages of 
product/service delivery and the critical interactions between the prototype and the user. In the ser￾vice industry, service maps or blueprints are used to identify the “critical moments” or moments of 
truth that may create an imbalance or misspecification of the value delivery. In the case of products, 
this method studies the dynamic relationship between the user and the usage setting that gener￾ates functional and emotional concerns. Experience prototyping allows users, designers, and others 
involved in the innovation process to be active participants within the “experiential setting” and social 
context as they discover and generate rich interpretations.
Alpha prototype: This prototype may not be entirely functional and is used for testing purposes. 
Typically, the organization uses these prototypes internally in a controlled environment to support 
them. During testing, features, functions, and subsystems are scrutinized, and the product’s per￾formance is assessed. The design is close to the production version, and simplified production pro￾cesses are used (e.g., machine instead of molding).
Beta prototype: Beta prototypes represent a fully functional version of the product and are evalu￾ated before the preproduction stage. This prototype is used to test the product in its actual usage 
environment with customers, assemblers, parts manufacturers, and component suppliers. The main 
purpose is to assess reliability, and products are made using actual production manufacturing facili￾ties. This prototype allows an analysis of the requirements and adjustments needed before the prod￾uct is finalized.
Pre-production prototype: This prototype is the final type of physical model that specifies all the 
elements of the design in addition to specifications of part production and components before enter￾ing the manufacturing phase of the design process. A particular interest is in confirming the neces￾sary technical requirements and specifications of the design. Design for assembly and manufacturing 
is validated at this stage with careful attention to production processes, assembly times, parts inte￾gration and outsourcing, balance lines, and other manufacturing adjustments.
Virtual prototyping: This method combines the virtual environment with engineering design, allow￾ing the designer to assess design sensitivity and optimization process. Before the final product is 
built, virtual objects provide the ability to test “what-if” scenarios. Thus, it reduces development 
time and time to deliver products to markets. Virtual prototyping involves the creation of 3D CAD 
(computer-assisted design) models. These models allow for the analysis of the form and shape, how 
parts and components fit, rendering, and assembly. In addition, this method requires input devices 
to sense user interaction and motion, output devices to replace users’ sensory input with computer￾generated input, and software to handle real-time processing, rendering capabilities, and simulation 
tests. Virtual prototyping is mainly used by industrial designers as they aim to visualize their con￾cepts.
Rapid prototyping: For physical products, rapid prototyping (RP) has become critical in reducing 
product development cycles and time to market without compromising quality. Rapid prototyping is 
the physical modeling of a design using machine technology in an additive and/or subtractive manu￾facturing process. 3D printing is an example of an additive process where the prototype is built layer 
by layer. A wide range of materials (such as ABS filament, liquid plastics, resins, and metals) can be 
used in additive manufacturing. Milling is an example of subtractive manufacturing, which removes 
material using a high-speed cutting head. Computer Numerical Control (CNC) is commonly used 
to control subtractive manufacturing equipment. Both additive and subtractive manufacturing pro￾cesses for rapid prototyping rely on CAD software to construct a virtual model of the object before it 
is physically formed.
Figure 5.6 shows the application of a number of prototypes throughout the development of a model 
car for 8- to 10-year-old children. Each technique evolves greater detail into the final design.Product Innovation Design & Development 221
5.2.4 Tools to Assist Embodiment Design
The embodiment design stage is both iterative and evolutionary. A wide range of tools can be used to 
add greater detail to the product concept and its design. Following are some tools useful for embodiment 
design.
Consumer Research Tools
Consumer research tools that can be applied to product concept development and refinement are sum￾marized in Chapter 6, Market Research. They provide insights for creating, refining, and evolving an initial 
product concept. These include:
• Focus groups
• Consumer panels
• Sensory panels
• Surveys
• Multivariate techniques – multidimensional scaling, factor analysis, conjoint analysis.
Functional Analysis
Functional analysis is the foundational method when applying value analysis methodology. The central objective 
of value analysis is to provide performance at the lowest cost. Functional analysis considers that a product is rep￾resented by a system composed of several functions interrelated under an operational logic. Functional analysis 
divides a system into smaller parts called functional elements. It is used to create and examine the functions of a 
product concept. There are different ways to record and display the functions which make up a system design. 
A Functional Flow Block Diagram is a popular graphical method. It uses a rectangular box to represent each 
function (see Figure  5.7). Arrows represent flows or states of any type to and from the function. The flows 
A sketch
Basic foam model
More detailed foam model Final mock-up model
A color drawing
FIGURE 5.6 Embodiment techniques throughout a design process. 
Source: Used with permission Elizabeth Irwin, Massey University.222 Product Innovation Design & Development
connect to other functions or to outside the system. By convention, inputs are shown on the left, and outputs 
are shown on the right. The function box itself transforms the inputs to the outputs. Mechanisms are the entities 
which perform the function but which are not themselves transformed. They are normally shown by arrows at the 
bottom and typically represent the use of a device. Controls are inputs that command, limit, or direct the opera￾tion of the function and are normally shown at the top.
A function is defined as a relation verb–noun, i.e., stack plates. The active verb “stack” has an “action” 
over the noun “plates.” The assumption behind functional analysis is that the customer purchases a prod￾uct because of the functions it performs.
According to functional analysis, functions can be classified as basic and secondary, intrinsic or extrin￾sic, and use or aesthetic, described in relation to a television:
A basic function answers “no” to the following question: If I didn’t have to perform this function, 
would I still have to perform any of the other functions listed? Once the basic function has been iden￾tified, all other functions become secondary. Being a secondary function does not imply being irrel￾evant. On the contrary, secondary functions support the basic function so the product can achieve 
its purpose.
Intrinsic functions are those that happened inside the boundaries of the product, while extrinsic 
functions refer to those that occur while the user interacts with the product, for example:
• User pushes channel change button: extrinsic function.
• As a result, several operations occur within the television set: intrinsic functions.
Use functions refer to something that needs to be accomplished for the product to perform: user 
presses start button on TV remote.
Aesthetic functions are accomplished through any of the five senses: sight, smell, taste, touch, 
and sound. For example:
• Surround sound.
• Sharp color contrast.
Fast (Function Analysis System Technique)
FAST is a technique that builds on the results of a functional analysis. It aids in thinking about a problem 
objectively and in identifying the scope of the project or product by showing the logical relationships between 
functions. Organizing the functions into a function-logic, FAST diagram enables participants to identify all the 
required functions. The FAST diagram can be used to verify if, and illustrate how, a proposed solution achieves 
Output Input
Control
Mechanism
Function name
FIGURE 5.7 Functional flow block diagramProduct Innovation Design & Development 223
the project or product’s needs and identify unnecessary, duplicated, or missing functions. Developing a FAST 
diagram is a creative thought process supporting communication between team members.
The development of a FAST diagram helps teams to:
• Develop a shared understanding of the project.
• Identify missing functions.
• Define, simplify, and clarify the problem.
• Organize and understand the relationships between functions.
• Identify the basic function of the project, process, or product.
• Improve communication and consensus.
• Stimulate creativity.
The diagram is built following How-Why logic, as shown in Figure 5.8. This logic requires functions to 
be ordered from left to right. From left to right, we answer the question: How is this function carried out? 
The response is by several functions. When the analysis is done from right to left, we answer the question: 
Why do we need this function? The approach from both ends – left to right (How) and right to left (Why) – 
allows for a robust diagram and configuration of functions, enhancing posterior analysis and opportunities 
for redesign and product improvement.
Consider a mouse trap as an example, shown in Figure 5.9. Functions are ordered from left to right, 
starting on the left side. The highest order function, which is the main job the customer wants the prod￾uct for, starts on the left. A mouse trap’s function is to “eliminate mice.” Then answer the question: How 
is this function carried out? The response is by several functions that work together. When the analysis is 
done from right to left, we answer the question: Why do we need this function? The approach from both 
ends – left to right (How) and right to left (Why) – allows for a robust examination of product functions, 
creating a thorough analysis that enhances opportunities for product improvement.
Function* Function* Function*
Function*
System boundaries
Higher Order
Function 
Lower Order
Function 
Why do you…?
How do you…?
Upper Scope Lower Scope
How?
Why?
When?
When you do this you also…?
*Where Function = Active verb + Measurable noun
FIGURE 5.8 How-Why logic of a FAST diagram224 Product Innovation Design & Development
Reverse Engineering
Reverse Engineering (RE) is the implementation of value analysis (VA) tear-down processes to formulate 
ideas for product improvement. This method is based on dissembling products, systems, components, 
and data to identify the functions embedded that allow for comparison of competitors’ products and pro￾duction processes.
In the context of product concept refinement, reverse engineering aims to stimulate the creative pro￾cess by focusing on identifying the functions, starting with identifying the components of a system and 
their understanding at a deep level. New conceptualizations are possible, approaching RE as imitation￾type thinking where parts and components are copied with few variations to accomplish the expected 
performance. Another RE approach is the research-type thinking used to identify the language through 
“signals” (creativity clues) that the embodiment emits and regroup these signals into new abstractions or 
components, resulting in a more valuable configuration of the product.
Emotional Design
Consumers build mental representations of products as soon as they start interacting with them. The sen￾sory information that consumers perceive allows the identification of the product’s functions which con￾tribute to the creation of meaning and an affective connection with the design in the consumer’s mind. 
Designers rely on emotional design to elicit moods and feelings that create positive emotional associations 
and a feeling of trust in the product, thus improving its usability.
For example, consider the first time you or a friend received an iPhone. Apple recognized that your 
emotional connection with the iPhone starts with the unboxing of the product. The designers worked hard 
to create packaging and an unboxing experience like receiving a much-anticipated gift. This included a 
precise amount of friction designed into the box so that when the top of the box is removed, you have a 
pleasing sensory experience. In this example, the emotional connection begins even before interacting with 
the actual product.
Emotions can be classified according to the level at which users process them. The levels of infor￾mation processing are: visceral, behavioral, and reflective. The visceral level describes a low processing 
and basic motor reaction associated with the user’s physical senses, i.e., aesthetics, color, or smell. The 
behavioral level is a midlevel processing that involves memory and learning associated with product usage, 
i.e., functionality and usability. The reflective level entails feeling, emotions, and cognition that determine 
understanding, interpretation, and reasoning. At this level, the product connects with the sense of self and 
identity.
Several methods have been developed to help designers assess the impact of emotional design on 
the user’s preference and intention to purchase. A brief description of the more commonly encountered 
methods follows:
Kansei engineering: This method identifies the relevant design elements (color, size, and 
shape) embedded in a product as determined by user preferences. It aims at the development or 
Eliminate
mice
Kill
mice
Swing
striker
Trigger
striker
Attract
mouse
Hold
bait
Release
spring
Upper scope Lower scope
How?
When?
Why?
FIGURE 5.9 Mouse trap example of FASTProduct Innovation Design & Development 225
improvement of products and services by translating the customer’s psychological feelings and 
needs into the domain of product design. The method requires the identification of Kansei words, 
generally adjectives to present users’ emotions and feelings. Developing product concepts for a 
“sporty” car, a “flashy” smartwatch, and an “exotic” travel experience are examples where Kansei 
engineering applies.
Sentiment analysis: This technique is used to classify and understand people’s opinions in product 
review blogs or social networks. It allows for the identification of opinion polarities (positive, neutral, 
or negative) expressed on product features through automated processing. In the past, the method 
made use of Naive Bayes probabilistic classifier, but today, it is more common to see Artificial Intel￾ligence approaches used to infer sentiment.
Neural networks: This approach creates non-linear models to examine the complex relationship 
between input variables (product features) and output variables (user perceptions). They are con￾structed using a deep learning algorithm and trained using known preference combinations. For 
example, if a company has previous research showing user preference for different sizes of bottles as 
well as user preference for a different color of bottles, along with other factors, a neural network can 
be constructed to reveal the best combination of factors with the highest preference.
Microsoft reaction card: This method assesses the emotional response and desirability (visual 
appeal) of a design or product. Participants describe a design based on 118 product-reaction words 
by selecting cards that are relevant to the product or design. The method concludes with an expla￾nation of why the card is attached to the design. The method uses cluster and frequency analysis 
and word cloud processing.
Emergent emotions: This method considers that emotions are dynamic, ongoing, and part of 
a recursive process. The user’s pattern of response to a design is driven by the appraisal results. 
These include emotional responses and the desirability of product features resulting from emotional 
impact and differentiation. The method uses neural network and other non-linear dynamic modeling 
within the context of artificial intelligence to explain consumers’ emotional processes, as illustrated in 
the Geneva Expert System on Emotions (GENESE).226 Product Innovation Design & Development
PART 2: DEVELOPMENT
5.3 INTRODUCTION TO DEVELOPMENT
The division between where design stops and development begins is arbitrary and varies by organization. 
The structure of this chapter was chosen to emphasize that in the more successful organizations, a well￾understood and sufficiently accurate product concept is designed before more expensive development 
activities begin. Some organizations view the distinction between design and development as moving from 
the customer space to the engineering/developer space.
• Customer: The product concept is created and articulated based on an understanding of the cus￾tomer’s problem or desired objective. The design of the product concept is largely expressed in 
terms that the customer understands and appreciates. It reflects the customer’s language about their 
needs and describes the solution to their problem or how what they want will be accomplished.
• Engineering/developer: For the tangible product or intangible service to become a reality, speci￾fications and requirements must be created, components designed and made, software written, 
assembly conducted, etc. The engineers and developers need to know what must be made for the 
product concept to become real and later made available to customers.
The tools and concepts presented below in Part 2: Development section are those that engineers and 
developers can use to transform the previously designed product concept into the specifications, draw￾ings, requirements, etc., they need to develop the product through to commercialization.
The distinction between designing the product concept and designing and developing the product is 
specific to each organization, and you may see different ways to categorize the tools and the process 
itself. Further, many of the tools summarized below as Development concepts traditionally have design in 
their name, such as Design for functionality. We have retained the traditional name instead of changing it; 
so we don’t use Develop for functionality.
We want you to remember that a product concept should first be designed before additional, and 
more expensive engineering and developer resources are engaged to develop the product.
5.3.1 Initial Specifications
Where the concept description provides a description (qualitative presentation) of the product concept’s 
benefits and features, the product design specifications provide the quantitative requirements. So, for 
example, where the concept description may describe the size of a new product as being able to fit into a 
coat pocket, the product design specifications would specify the actual physical dimensions required.
Product design specifications are intended to clarify the product design and to provide quantification 
and objectivity. They enable the communication of the product design requirements to other design team 
members and to progress the product’s development from design through to manufacture. Following are 
specific areas of focus for design specifications.
An example of the development of a product concept and design specifications is presented in 
Appendix B, Case 3.
Design for Functionality (DFF)
Functionality determines the final performance of a product. Does the product do what it was intended 
to do, or more importantly, what the user wants it to do? Functional design is the process of responding 
to the needs or desires of the people who will be using the product in a way that allows those needs and 
desires to be met.Product Innovation Design & Development 227
Design for Manufacturing and Assembly (DFMA)
DFMA focuses on reducing time to market and production costs by prioritizing both the ease of manufac￾turing the product and the simplified assembly of its parts into the final product. It is important that this is 
carried out early in the design and development process, and involves a cross-functional team with requi￾site knowledge of manufacturing and assembly. Further discussed in Section 5.3.7.
Design for Maintenance (DFM)
Maintenance of a product implies monitoring its actual condition, maintaining it, and allowing for recov￾ery of the system as changes occur (such as wear and tear, corrosion, useful life deterioration, and other 
changes over its operating lifetime). Inadequate maintenance affects the functionality of the product, the 
economy, and the safety of the entire system. Overall, DFM focuses on safety, ergonomics, and assembly 
of the product.
Products should be designed to be maintained, repaired, and/or replaced with parts or components. 
Decisions regarding the selection of materials, assemblies, parts, devices, and components determine the 
maintainability or the capacity of the system to be inspected, restored, and serviced when components fail 
as they reach their operational life expectancy.
Design for Recycling (DFR)
The notion of DFR is an aspect of design for sustainability (addressed later in Section 5.3.8). DFR implies 
the use of materials that allow for reusing or reprocessing production waste, products, and parts compos￾ing products. The methods for DFR center on reusing and reprocessing products. Several guidelines are 
followed during DFR, such as ease of disassembly, material compatibility, material separation, and oppor￾tunities to reprocess parts and components. Consequently, synergies should be sought when applying 
DFR, DFM, and DFMA.
Design for Usability (DFU)
Usability is a measure of how well a specific user in a specific context can use a product to achieve a 
defined goal effectively, efficiently, and satisfactorily. A design’s usability depends on how well its features 
accommodate users’ needs and contexts.
Design for usability encompasses a product’s functionality, serviceability, maintainability, ease of opera￾tion, reliability, safety, aesthetics, operating context and environment, and customizability.
Design for Serviceability (DFS)
Design for serviceability focuses on the ability to diagnose, remove, or replace any part, component, 
assembly, or subassembly of a product while performing service repairs and troubleshooting. Serviceability 
facilitates manipulation and operation while bringing the product to its original working specifications, put￾ting it in operation quickly, and avoiding downtime.
Nowadays, many products are designed with instrumentation that alerts when service is required in 
advance of possible system failures. Intelligent capabilities alert users of possible failures and even have 
self-corrective mechanisms to maintain operation as the user waits for the unit to be serviced.
5.3.2 Quality Function Deployment (QFD)
Quality Function Deployment (QFD) is a technique for deriving product specifications from customer needs. 
It tends to be used in complicated manufacturing environments, such as the design of an automobile. 
However, regardless of your product environment and if you use QFD formally or not, you will find it useful 
to understand the principles of QFD. All product projects must somehow bridge or translate customers’ 228 Product Innovation Design & Development
needs and wants to the information designers/engineers/developers need to create the product. While this 
is an obvious aspect of creating a product, it is also where priorities are easily confused, and misunder￾standings occur. QFD contains the principles to make the bridging from customer to development explicit. 
This leads to clarity and improved communications among the project team.
QFD is a structured method employing matrix analysis for linking “what the market requires” to “how it 
will be accomplished in the development effort” (Hauser & Clausing, 1988). This method is most valuable 
during the stages of development where a cross-functional team is used to focus on how customer needs 
translate into product specifications and features that will address these needs. The most commonly used 
example of QFD is the House of Quality, shown in Figure 5.10.
The basic steps in building the House of Quality:
1. Identify customer needs and wants and rate these needs and wants on a defined scale.
2. Identify product design attributes and define the direction for improvement in the design attributes.
3. Relate the customer attributes to the design attributes.
4. Determine the importance of each product design attribute.
5. Analyze the interrelationships between the product design attributes.
6. Conduct an evaluation of competing products.
7. Identify customer attributes for further improvement and target values for design attributes.
Let’s use the example of the design of a mobile phone to demonstrate the application of the House of 
Quality. This example, shown in Figure 5.10, is purely hypothetical and is not based on any real product 
example. It is intended to demonstrate the basic use of the House of Quality. Greater levels of complexity 
can be added, depending on the specific focus of its application.
1
Durability
Quality photos
Fast access
Easy to use
Battery life
Stylish
Quality screen
Processo
House of r
 quality
Mobile phone 
example
Wants
Minimize or maximize
Competitor
assessment
A
Hows
Camera
Display
Access time
Storage
Power usage
Color range
Thickness
1 2
5
3
2
4 6 7 8 1 2 3 4
1
6
7
5
5
3
4
2
5
5
3
5
4
1.8 GHz
4000 mAh
5 colour
0.4 inch
s
6.5 inch
Rated 8/10
16 Megapixel
B C
A
A
64–128 GB
A
A
A
A B
B
B
B
B
B
C
C
C
C
C
C
5
Legend
A
B
C
Strong relationship (5)
Medium relationship (3)
Weak relationship (1)
+ Positive correlation
– Negative correlation
+
42 25 45 40 25 30 15 30 252
10 18 6 100%
Competitor product
Competitor product
Own product
16 16 10 12 12
Importance
–
Importance %
FIGURE 5.10 House of quality exampleProduct Innovation Design & Development 229
Step 1. Identify customer needs and wants
• Known as the whats, these are product requirements in the customer’s terms, using market 
research, such as interviews, surveys, or focus groups. They provide answers to the questions:
• “What does the customer expect from the product?”
• “Why does the customer buy the product?”
• Salespeople and technicians are also important sources of information – both in terms of these two 
questions and in terms of product failure and repair.
• Often these are expanded into secondary and tertiary needs/requirements.
• After identifying the needs, they are rated according to priority/importance to the customer.
For our mobile phone example, the following key customer needs and wants have been identified:
• Durability: How resistant to damage is the phone in various situations?
• High-quality photos: Can high-quality photos be produced in a range of conditions?
• Fast access: How quickly can various functions be accessed?
• Easy to use: How easy is it to navigate the various functions?
• Long battery life: How long does the battery last under normal operating conditions?
• High-quality screen: How clearly are images defined under various conditions?
• Stylish design: Is the design “on-trend” with its look, feel, and functionality?
The customers’ wants, with their associated importance rating, are included on the left side of the House 
of Quality in Figure 5.10. Durability is rated 2, quality photos 5, and so on, where a higher rating demon￾strates greater desirability.
Step 2. Identify design attributes/requirements and the direction for improvement
Known as the hows, design attributes are expressed in the language of the designer/engineer and repre￾sent the technical characteristics (attributes) that must be deployed throughout the design, manufacturing, 
and service processes. These must be measurable because the output will be controlled and compared to 
objective targets.
In our mobile phone example, the design attributes, or “hows,” are included in the central part of the 
House of Quality: Processor, Camera, Display, Access time, Storage, Power usage, Color range, and 
Thickness. The direction for improvement in the design attributes is shown by solid arrows above each col￾umn. So, for example, the upward pointing arrow for the “processor” indicates a desire for an increase in 
this attribute, while a downward arrow for “thickness” indicates a desire to reduce thickness.
The roof of the House of Quality shows, symbolically, the interrelationships between design attributes. 
It can show areas where there are conflicting targets of attributes, requiring compromise. For example, in 
Figure 5.10, there is a positive relationship between the camera and storage, indicating that as the qual￾ity of the camera increases, the storage requirement will also increase. There is a negative relationship 
between display and power usage.
Step 3. Relate the customer attributes to the design attributes
• Symbolically we determine whether there is no relationship, a weak one, a moderate one, or a strong 
relationship between each customer attribute and each design attribute.
• The purpose is to determine whether the final design attributes adequately cover customer attributes.
• The lack of a strong relationship between a customer attribute and any design attribute shows that 
the customer attribute is not adequately addressed or that the final product will have difficulty in 
meeting the expressed customer need.
• Similarly, if a design attribute does not affect any customer need, then it may be redundant, unneces￾sary, or the designers may have missed some important customer need.
• Consequently, the relationship analysis can prevent the product from being overbuilt (more than cus￾tomers want) or underbuilt (less than customers want).230 Product Innovation Design & Development
For example, in Figure 5.10, we see that for quality of photos there is a medium relationship with pro￾cessor, a strong relationship with camera, a medium relationship with display, and a weak relationship with 
battery capacity.
Step 4. Determine the importance of each product design attribute.
The importance of each design attribute (the “hows”) is calculated by adding the product of design rat￾ing and the rating for each of the “wants.” In Figure 5.10, the “Processor” importance is (5×3)+(3×5)+
(4×3) = 42. The relative importance of each design attribute is calculated as a percentage of the sum of 
the importance scores. For “Processor” this is 42/252 or 16%.
Step 5. Analyze the interrelationships between the product design attributes
As shown in Figure 5.10, there is a strong relationship between the “processor” and “fast access” and a 
moderate relationship between “display” and “easy to use.” There is no relationship between “access time” 
and “durability.”
Step 6. Conduct an evaluation of competing products
• This step includes identifying importance ratings for each customer attribute and evaluating existing 
products/services for each of the attributes.
• Customer importance ratings represent the areas of greatest interest and highest expectations as 
expressed by the customer.
• Competitive evaluation helps to highlight the absolute strengths and weaknesses of competing products.
The right side of Figure 5.10 shows a comparison of two competitor products against the “own product” 
based on the customer “wants.” Although the “own product” is relatively strong on “screen quality,” “bat￾tery life,” “fast access,” and “durability,” it is relatively weak on “ease of use” and “quality of photos.” This 
points to a focus on the camera and displays design attributes for further improvement.
Step 7. Identify design attributes for improvement and develop targets
• This is usually accomplished through in-house testing and then translated into measurable terms.
• The evaluations are compared with the competitive evaluation of customer attributes to determine 
the inconsistency between customer evaluations and technical evaluations.
• For example, if a competing product is found to better satisfy a customer attribute, but the evaluation 
of the related design attribute indicates otherwise, then either the measures used are faulty, or the 
product has an image difference that is affecting customer perceptions.
• On the basis of customer importance ratings and comparison with competitor products, targets and 
directions for each design attribute are set.
So, for our mobile phone example in Figure 5.10, we have already noted that the current design is 
weak in its ease of use. Referring to House of Quality, we see that Display and Access Time are key design 
attributes influencing ease of use. Both of these design attributes have relatively high levels of importance 
across all customer attributes (18% and 16%, respectively). Based on technical design input, specific tar￾gets are set with a specific focus on key design attributes (6.5 inches for the display and a panel rating of 
at least 8/10 for access time).
Benefits and Limitations of QFD
Benefits include:
• It involves a team approach, bringing designers and engineers/developers together, leading to con￾sensus, and promoting cross-functional discussion.
• As organizations grow, it is common for product designers/engineers/developers to lose customer 
focus. QFD focuses the product innovation team on customer requirements.Product Innovation Design & Development 231
• It provides a structured basis for defining product design specifications and engineering design 
requirements from customer requirements.
• As development unfolds and changes in the design are suggested, given appropriate feedback from 
market testing, QFD prevents losing sight of the original product concept, customer requirements, 
and priorities.
Limitations include:
• It can be cumbersome (large numbers of whats and hows create large tables) and slow to go through 
the complete QFD process.
• It can feel tedious, and people may lose sight of what they are seeking to achieve in the product design.
• As consumer needs evolve swiftly, effort must be focused on identification of the correct design specifi￾cations. This is critical when new technologies appear to support the product category where the prod￾uct is competing.
5.3.3 Design of Experiments (DOE)
Design of experiments (DOE) is used to find cause-and-effect relationships. It is a systematic method to 
determine the relationship between factors affecting a process and the output of that process. DOE can 
be applied to both a product and its manufacturing process. It provides the basis for fully understanding 
the product or process.
• Which variables have the greatest effect?
• How can I expect the product or process to change if one of the input variables is altered?
• Are there any interactions among the variables?
• What are the optimal variable conditions?
Experimental design can be an extremely complex subject to fully understand, requiring a sound knowl￾edge of statistics. Figure  5.11 shows the major levels of experimental design, related to the popular 
Taguchi method. The Taguchi method is used to design efficient and reliable products at the level of qual￾ity customers expect. The advantage of the Taguchi method is that it requires relatively basic statistics to 
apply experimental design compared to other approaches.
Experimental design
Fractional factorial
Screening designs
Taguchi
method
Full
factorial
FIGURE 5.11 Experimental design232 Product Innovation Design & Development
Let’s examine the simple process of making bread to understand the basics of experimental design. In 
bread making, the proofing process is the final rise of the dough before baking. Three variables, time, tem￾perature, and yeast weight, affect the volume of the loaf of bread during the proofing process.
A traditional and straightforward way of determining the effects of each variable would be to change 
the variable levels, one at a time, and observe the impact on loaf volume. This will certainly provide some 
useful information but misses one valuable consideration – the interaction among the variables. For exam￾ple, both temperature and time have an impact on yeast activity; they are interdependent. The application 
of experimental design addresses this issue.
Table 5.5 shows how a full factorial design might be applied to the bread proofing example. In setting 
up this design, the following steps would be taken:
1. The input variables were specified – time, temperature, and yeast weight.
2. High and low levels were defined for each input variable.
3. A number of “experimental runs” were defined (all combinations of the three variables at the high and 
low levels). This requires eight runs.
4. All eight experimental runs are carried out. That is, eight different loaves of bread. The volume of each 
loaf is measured, and the results are analyzed.
Although eight experimental runs may not be a problem, as the number of variables increases, 
the number of experimental runs for a full factorial may be prohibitive. The number of experimental runs = 2n
, 
where n is the number of variables. So, 4 variables would require 16 runs, 5 would require 32 runs, and so on.
The number of runs can be reduced by using fractional factorial design, resulting in less information 
regarding the interaction among variables. The Taguchi method is a screening design, which is a type of 
fractional factorial. The advantage of Taguchi screening designs is that they provide a taste of the subject 
without requiring a university degree in statistics.
For further experimental design details, refer to Schmidt and Laundy (2005) and Roy (2001).
5.3.4 Usability Testing
Usability testing is critically important to inform the design process from the end user’s perspective. Several 
usability testing techniques are available. Following is a selection of some of the most commonly applied 
techniques. Before selecting the technique to use, you should answer the following questions, most of 
which will have already been addressed in the earlier concept development stage:
• Who is your target?
• What specific information do you need to aid in the further design process?
TABLE 5.5 Factorial design to study the effect of proofing time and proofing temperature on 
specific volume of bread
Run number Proof time (min) Proof temp (°C) Yeast weight (g)
1 60 30 1
2 120 30 1
3 60 50 1
4 120 50 1
5 60 30 2
6 120 30 2
7 60 50 2
8 120 50 2Product Innovation Design & Development 233
• How critical is it to get the best information? Is “close enough” good enough?
• How much money can you afford to spend?
• How much time can you afford to get the results?
Guerrilla Testing
Guerrilla testing is the simplest form of usability testing. Basically, guerrilla testing means going into a public 
place such as a supermarket or a park to ask people about a product prototype. They are asked to per￾form a quick usability test. It is a low-cost and relatively simple testing that enables real user feedback.
When to use: Guerrilla testing works best in the early stages of the product development process when 
you have a tangible design (wireframes or basic prototypes) and want to know if you are heading in the 
right direction with the design. Guerrilla testing is also good for collecting personal opinions and emotional 
impressions about ideas and concepts. But Guerrilla testing, by definition, might not represent your prod￾uct’s target audience. Consequently, it may not be right to test niche products.
Laboratory (lab) Usability Testing
As the name suggests, lab usability testing is testing run in special environments (laboratories) and super￾vised by a moderator. A moderator is a professional who is looking to obtain feedback from live users. 
During a moderated test, moderators facilitate test participants through tasks, answering their questions, 
and replying to their feedback in real-time.
When to use: Lab usability testing works best when you need to have in-depth information on how real 
users interact with your product and what issues they face. It will help you investigate the reasoning behind 
user behavior. The fact that this testing is moderated versus unmoderated enables you to collect more 
qualitative information. At the same time, lab testing can be expensive to organize and run because you 
need to secure an environment, attract test participants, and hire a trained moderator who is skilled in 
facilitating (not leading) responses and in observing, interpreting, and reporting on participant reactions.
Unmoderated Remote Usability Testing
Unmoderated remote usability testing occurs remotely without a moderator. It offers quick, robust, and 
inexpensive user testing results to guide product design. Test participants are asked to complete tasks in 
their own environment using their own devices and without a moderator present, which leads to the prod￾uct being used naturally. The cost of unmoderated testing is lower; however, this type of testing offers less 
detailed testing results.
When to use: Unmoderated remote usability testing works best when you need to obtain a large sample 
to prove critical findings from your initial moderated research. In other words, you have a particular hypoth￾esis that you want to validate on a large segment of your users. Unmoderated remote usability testing will 
help you test a particular question or observe user behavior patterns.
Contextual Inquiry
Contextual inquiry is an interview and observation method for general customer research that provides 
insights into their wants and needs as well as usability insights. Test participants (real users) are first asked 
a set of questions about their experience with a product and then observed and questioned while they 
work in their own environments. This provides the design team with information about the user experience 
from real users.234 Product Innovation Design & Development
When to use: Contextual inquiry is useful for getting rich information about users in their workspace, per￾sonal preferences, and habits. It is particularly useful at the beginning of the design process, during the 
development and refining of the concept description. It helps the product team design a well-tailored expe￾rience or improve the experience for existing products.
Online Testing
Online concept testing is the process of evaluating product concepts and providing feedback on design 
features. It can include both quantitative and qualitative research via surveys and online communities. 
The main quantitative technique is an online concept survey. You can reach thousands of targeted and 
engaged respondents through online surveys, providing rich and robust data for analysis. In the survey, 
the concept test would involve consumers reviewing a text description or a visual representation of the 
concept. Then, the audience would be prompted to answer questions or to discuss their impressions of 
your idea. Qualitative techniques can either use an online community – a carefully curated space to engage 
respondents in a group setting, as well as one-to-one tasks – or run a series of in-depth interviews over 
video chat, in which you have the ability to share concepts on the screen.
When to use: Online testing is a way to collect feedback from test participants scattered around different 
parts of the globe at a lower cost compared to other usability testing. It allows you to reach several thou￾sand users to obtain general feedback on ideas or concepts or to engage with specific communities of 
users to obtain rich information from targeted users. These communities can continue to provide input as 
the product concept evolves in detail and future versions are launched.
Alpha, Beta, and Gamma Testing
Alpha testing is an internal check done by the in-house development or QA team. It is commonly 
used for software products to discover software bugs before external users test the software in beta test￾ing. Software behavior is assessed and verified in controlled conditions, often using automated and man￾ual tests.
Beta testing has also been called pre-release testing or field testing. It is conducted by a limited num￾ber of users external to the organization, called Beta-Testers, before the official product delivery. The main 
purpose of beta testing is to verify software compatibility with actual user environments (different software 
and hardware configurations, types of network connection, etc.) and to get the users’ feedback on soft￾ware usability and functionality. This is testing in an uncontrolled environment to understand how the prod￾uct responds under real-world conditions.
Gamma testing is the final stage of the testing process conducted before software release. It makes 
sure that the product is ready for market release according to all the specified requirements. Gamma test￾ing focuses on software security and functionality. During gamma testing, the software does not undergo 
any modifications unless the detected bug is of high priority and severity. Only a limited number of exter￾nal users perform gamma testing. The checking includes the verification of certain specifications, not the 
whole product. Feedback received after gamma testing is considered as updates for upcoming software 
versions. In place of gamma testing, some organizations perform alpha testing again after a beta test and 
then launch the product.
5.3.5 Performance and Endurance Testing
Performance and endurance testing is a type of testing that determines a product’s performance, such as 
durability, speed, scalability, handling, and stability. The testing process includes manual and mechanical 
endurance tests designed to reveal faults and ensure your product is fit for market. Ongoing application 
of performance and endurance testing throughout the design process, with cross-functional team involve￾ment, is critical to minimizing the costs of product failure when it reaches the market.Product Innovation Design & Development 235
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA)
Failure modes and effects analysis (FMEA) is a step-by-step approach for identifying possible failures in a 
design, a manufacturing or assembly process, or a product. Failure modes means the ways, or modes, in 
which something might fail. Failures are any errors or defects, especially ones that affect the customer and 
can be potential or actual. Effects analysis refers to studying the consequences of those failures.
FMEA can be applied to a range of products and services, including automobiles, pharmaceuticals, 
healthcare, banking, and many others:
• When an existing process or product is being applied in a new way
• Before developing control plans for a new or modified process
• When improvement goals are planned for an existing process or product
• When analyzing failures of an existing process or product
Basic steps to complete an FMEA:
1. Compile a list of failures that could happen in each step of the process.
2. Measure the impact of every failure by asking: What happens when this failure occurs?
3. Determine how severe the failure is by rating it on a ten-point scale. A 1 is a defect the customer 
doesn’t even notice; a 10 is a catastrophe.
4. Rate the likelihood of failure using a ten-point scale. 1 indicates no chance; 10 is guaranteed failure.
5. Establish the probability of discovering the error before the customer does, using a 10-point scale. If 
a failure is easy to discover, it is rated a 1. Undetectable failures are assigned a 10.
Sometimes FMEA is extended to FMECA (failure mode, effects, and criticality analysis) although today, 
criticality is included in most definitions of standard FMEA.
Endurance Testing
Performance and endurance testing is a type of testing that determines a product’s performance, such as 
durability, speed, scalability, handling, and stability. The testing process includes manual and mechanical 
endurance tests designed to reveal faults and ensure your product is fit for market.
Mechanical endurance testing: Electronics, automotive parts, and other heavy-use items endure 
extreme stress levels daily through repeated and prolonged use. When a product is subjected to this 
repeated stress, it can be prone to failure even if it never reached its static stress limitations. As an exam￾ple, the number of times a car door can be opened and closed before failing is determined with mechani￾cal endurance testing. Although calculating static mechanical stress limits is useful, it fails to evaluate a 
product’s performance over its expected lifetime, as it can’t account for damage stemming from prolonged 
use in different environmental conditions. Mechanical endurance testing is thus needed to measure this 
damage over a product’s lifespan.
Many types of mechanical endurance testing can be performed to emulate the entire life cycle of a 
product, depending on industry standards and unique product needs. Some of the most common types of 
testing include fatigue, push-pull-press, and open-close testing:
• Fatigue testing: Experts assert that fatigue causes between 50 and 90 percent of all mechanical 
failures. While sources vary on the exact percentage, fatigue analysis of engineering material is vital 
to ensuring a finished product’s longevity. In fatigue testing, engineers determine localized and pro￾gressive structural damage caused when a material experiences cyclic loading. Tests measure the 
product’s resistance to cyclic stress over several stress levels.
• Push-pull-press testing: Also known as tensile, compression, and impact testing, push-pull-press 
tests calculate a material’s resistance to heavy impact from tension or compression. Tests measure 236 Product Innovation Design & Development
the force required to pull, push or press an object to its breaking point, which determines the maxi￾mum amount of tensile stress a material can undergo before failure. These tests are particularly use￾ful in industries such as mechanical and structural engineering.
• Open-close testing: Hinges on doors, windows, flip phones, garage door openers, and many other 
products need to be tested extensively to ensure durability over many years. Open-close automation 
testing machinery quickly simulates years’ worth of use.
Software endurance testing: Sometimes referred to as long duration or SOAK testing, determines 
whether a system can sustain a continuous expected load. Endurance tests can last anywhere between a 
few hours or a few weeks, depending on typical application usage patterns. The following are some exam￾ples of software endurance testing:
• Test memory leakage: Checks are done to verify if there is any memory leakage in the application, 
which can cause the crashing of the software or operating system over time.
• Test connection closure between the layer of the system: If the connection between the layers 
of the system is not closed successfully, it may stall some or all modules of the system.
• Test database connection close successfully: If the database connection is not closed success￾fully, it may result in a system crash.
• Test response time: The system is tested for the response time of the system as the application 
becomes less efficient as a result of the prolonged use of the system.
5.3.6 Quality Assurance
Quality assurance is a program for systematically monitoring and evaluating the various aspects of a pro￾ject, service, or facility to ensure that standards of quality are being met. Quality assurance creates clear 
expectations for everyone. A quality assurance process sets clear expectations and standards from the 
start of the project. There’s less room for error or misunderstandings when people know what the expecta￾tions are early in the project.
Six Sigma
Six Sigma aims to reduce variations in a business and manufacturing process via dedicated improve￾ments in the various processes. This requires a sustained commitment from all members of the team. 
Applications of Six Sigma that focus on the design or redesign of products and their enabling processes to 
meet customer needs and expectations are known as Design for Six Sigma (DFSS). The phases or steps 
of DFSS are not universally recognized or defined – companies and Six Sigma training organizations have 
defined DFSS differently. Many times a company will implement DFSS to suit their business, industry, and 
culture; other times, they will implement the version of DFSS used by the consulting company assisting in 
deploying Six Sigma. Because of this, DFSS is more of an approach than a defined methodology.
Design methodologies for six sigma
Several methodologies exist for six sigma design applications. Following is a brief description of four meth￾odologies, which are also summarized in Table 5.6. The differences between these methodologies are dif￾ficult to appreciate fully. For further information, the American Association of Quality has helpful resources 
(https://asq.org).
DMAIC
DMAIC is a data-driven quality strategy used to improve processes. It is an integral part of a Six Sigma 
initiative, but in general, it can be implemented as a standalone quality improvement procedure or as part 
of other process improvement initiatives such as Lean. The DMAIC methodology should be used when Product Innovation Design & Development 237
a product or process is in existence at your company but is not meeting customer requirements or is not 
performing adequately. DMAIC is an acronym for the five phases that make up the process:
• Define the problem, improvement activity, opportunity for improvement, project goals, and customer 
(internal and external) requirements.
• Measure process performance.
• Analyze the process to determine the root causes of variation and poor performance (defects).
• Improve process performance by addressing and eliminating the root causes.
• Control the improved process and future process performance.
DMADV
DAMDV is focused on the process of designing a new product, service, or process.
The five phases of DMADV are:
• Define the project goals and customer (internal and external) requirements.
• Measure and determine customer needs and specifications; benchmark competitors and industry.
• Analyze the process options to meet customer needs.
• Design the detailed process to meet customer needs.
• Verify the design performance and ability to meet customer needs.
IDOV
IDOV is a specific methodology for designing new products and services to meet Six Sigma standards. Its 
main difference from DMADV is a focus on meeting the financial goals of an organization. IDOV is a four￾phase process:
• Identify customer needs and strategic intent.
• Design the detailed design by evaluating various design alternatives.
• Optimize the design from a productivity (business requirements) and quality point of view (customer 
requirements) and realize it.
• Validate by piloting the design, updating as needed, and preparing to launch the new design.
DMEDI
DMEDI is a creative approach to designing new robust processes, products, and services. It is focused on 
obtaining significant competitive advantages, or quantum leaps over current environments. DMEDI projects 
typically require more time and resources to complete. Its five-stage process is:
• Define: The problem, improvement activity, opportunity for improvement, project goals, and cus￾tomer (internal and external) requirements are defined and understood.
• Measure: The measure phase in DMEDI requires more examination than in DMAIC because there is 
little, if any, existing process definition. To meet the need for clearly defined customer requirements, 
a quality function deployment (QFD) or house of quality is used in multiple iterations and phases to 
properly define a product or service that the customer truly desires.
• Explore: The Explore phase is focused on delivering a conceptual design for a new process. By 
contrast, the Analyze phase of the DMAIC process looks to break down data for an existing process 
to identify defect root causes. The DMEDI phase is conceptual; the DMAIC phase is tangible.
• Develop: DMEDI develops an optimal design based largely on meeting customer desires. In con￾trast, DMAIC delivers a rational future-state design based on statistical or mathematical proof.
• Implement: This phase validates the capability of the proposed process to meet or exceed project 
objectives and identify problems. This is done through a permanent, full-scale pilot deployment rather 
than the temporary pilot, small-scale of the DMAIC methodology.238 Product Innovation Design & Development
5.3.7 Design for Manufacturing and Assembly (DfMA)
Following is an overview of the key elements of the Design for Manufacturing and Assembly process. 
Readers are referred to Ulrich and Eppinger (2016) for more extensive coverage.
Design for Manufacturing and Assembly (DfMA) is an amalgam of two processes, design for manu￾facturing (DfM) and design for assembly (DfA).
Design for Manufacturing (DfM) is a design method to reduce the complexity of manufacturing opera￾tions and the overall cost of production, including the cost of raw materials.
Design for Assembly (DfA) is a design method to facilitate or reduce the assembly operations of parts or 
components of a product.
Designing for Manufacturing and Assembly (DfMA) is a critical part of the product development cycle. 
It involves optimizing the design of a product’s manufacturing and assembly process and merging the 
design requirements of the product with its production method. Employing DfMA reduces the cost and dif￾ficulty of producing a product while maintaining its quality.
Overview of the DfMA Process
Ulrich and Eppinger (2016) suggest a five-step process:
1. Estimate the manufacturing costs
2. Reduce the costs of components
3. Reduce the cost of assembly
4. Reduce the costs of supporting production
5. Consider the impact of DFM decisions on other factors.
Basics of Effective DfMA
Standardization: Standardization cuts costs by reducing inventory and scale-up impacts. Here are some 
ways to think about part standardization:
• Design parts that can be reused within a product or shared between product lines.
• Standardize hardware within a product and across products to reduce inventory needs.
• Make design modular to simplify product changes or redesigns.
• Use standard components instead of custom-made ones, where possible.
• Consider the future availability of parts over the expected life of the product in the market.
TABLE 5.6 Design for Six Sigma methodologies
DFSS Methodologies
DMAIC DMADV DMEDI IDOV
Define Define Define Identify
Measure Measure Measure Design
Analyze Analyze Explore Optimize
Improve Design Develop Validate
Control Verify ImplementProduct Innovation Design & Development 239
Design simplicity: Simplifying the design cuts down on time, inventory, and cost to manufacture the 
product:
• Minimize assembly steps and inventory by making multifunctional parts.
• Use designed-in alignment or quick securing methods like snap fits. Fastening techniques like bolting 
or gluing take longer to secure and require more inventory.
• Test the design with working prototypes, for example, using 3D printed prototypes.
Alignment and compliance: Errors in alignment can damage parts or equipment, reducing yield or even 
causing line shutdown.
• Resolve assembly issues by analyzing how tolerances will impact assembly.
• Design integrated part features to help alignment during assembly.
• Add tapers or chamfers to guide components during assembly insertion steps.
Set-up time reduction: Reduce set-up time by reducing the number of operations required per part or 
assembly.
• Reduce the number of setups or rotations required per part or assembly,
• Assess where the manufacturing line could be upgraded with improved tools or workstations.
DfMA Performed Throughout the Product Innovation Process
DfMA should form an integral part of the product innovation process. The importance of cross-functional 
involvement in product innovation has been emphasized throughout this book. Too often, manufacturing 
input is left until too late in the product innovation process. Effective DfMA requires manufacturing input 
from an early stage and throughout the process:
• In concept development to ensure manufacturing capability and capacity is available.
• In financial feasibility to contribute to manufacturing cost estimates.
• In detailed design specifications to provide advice on design detail that will ensure optimal product 
quality and minimal costs in manufacturing.
• In scale-up to manufacture through intimate knowledge of the product’s design and commitment to 
its success.
5.3.8 Design for Sustainability
The concept of design for sustainability applies a combination of environmental, social, and economic pri￾orities and considerations during design and development, and over the life of a product. Product concep￾tualization and creation, the first step in the design process, has a major role in defining how sustainability 
is incorporated in contrast to the final stages of the product development process. Design for sustain￾ability is design with the intention of achieving sustainable outputs of the product or service and requires 
a holistic view and systems perspective. The three pillars of sustainability – known as the triple bottom 
line (TBL) – stand for: people (social equity), profit (economy), and planet (environment) (see Section 2.9). 
Sustainability occurs when organizations are committed to designing products based on the notion that a 
profitable organization depends on a healthy society and both are sustained in a healthy environment.240 Product Innovation Design & Development
The Principles of Sustainable Product Design
The principles of sustainable product design are:
• Use non-toxic, sustainably produced, or recycled materials with low environmental impact.
• Use manufacturing processes to produce products that are energy efficient.
• Build longer-lasting and better-functioning products.
• Design products for reuse, easy disassembly, and recycling.
• Use life cycle analysis tools to design more sustainable products.
• Shift the consumption mode from personal ownership of products to the provision of services that 
provide similar functions. Some examples are Interface Carpets (carpet tiles do not require much 
trimming during installation and create less waste), Xerox (copier leasing rather than purchase), and 
Zipcar (car sharing).
• Materials should come from sustainably managed renewable sources that can be composted when 
their usefulness is exhausted.
Sustainability Guidelines
Sustainability guidelines are specific listings of specific issues to take into account during the development 
process. They suggest aspects to take into account and are considered a checklist that ensures aware￾ness of sustainability issues in the development process. Some of these guidelines are:
SPSD framework
SPSD stands for sustainable product and service development. The approach implements sustainable 
product and service development throughout a product’s life. It focuses on transforming the offering of 
products into services to reduce manufacturing.
ARPI framework
ARPI stands for analysis, report, prioritize, and improve. The approach ensures the implementation of eco 
designs and includes an assessment of the environment, reporting on these, ranking the considerations, 
and suggesting actions for improvement. An example of ARPI application in the electrical and electronics 
industry is provided by Simon et al. (2000).
MDE framework
This framework is a guide to material, design, and ecology (MDE). It emphasizes the selection of materi￾als and their impact on product methods, function design, market requirements, price, and environmental 
impact.
Product sustainability index (ProdSI)
The ProdSI represents the level of sustainability built into a product using the TBL. Each cluster includes 
several factors assessed through specific metrics. A possible list of clusters and factors is shown in 
Table 5.7. Clusters are given a weight (from 0 to 100), and factors within each cluster are evaluated on a 
scale of 1–10, where numerals closer to 10 represent a higher level of compliance with the criteria.Product Innovation Design & Development 241
Analytical Tools for Sustainability
Life cycle assessment (LCA)
This method has been used for eco-design for more than 30 years. LCA provides quantitative data on the 
product’s environmental impact from cradle (extraction of materials) to grave (end of life). The method has 
four phases:
1. Determination of goals and scope of the LCA,
2. Inventory of energy and material inputs across all stages of the product’s life,
3. Evaluation of the environmental impact associated with inputs and outputs during the life cycle, and
4. Interpretation of results to reach corrective decisions.
Additional details of the LCA process are shown in Figure 5.12.
TABLE 5.7 Clusters and factors to calculate Product Sustainability Index (PSI)
Clusters Factors
Product’s Environmental Impact Life cycle (useful life span)
Environmental effect (toxicity, 
emissions)
Residues
Ecological balance and efficiency
Regional and global impact (CO2
, 
ozone depletion)
Product’s Social Impact • Operational safety
• Health and wellness effects
• Ethical responsibility
• Social well-being (quality of life, 
peace of mind, life satisfaction)
• Employee safety and health
• Education
Product’s Functionality • Service life - durability
• Modularity
• Ease of use
• Maintainability/serviceability
• Upgradability
• Ergonomics
• Reliability
• Safety
• Functional effectiveness
Resource Utilization • Energy efficiency and power 
consumption
• Use of renewable source of energy
• Material utilization and efficiency 
(content and hazardous material)
• Water use and efficiency
• Installation and training costs
• Operational cost (labor cost, 
energy, capital, etc.)
Product’s Manufacturability • Manufacturing methods
• Assembly
• Packaging
• Transportation
• Storage
Product’s Recyclability/
Manufacturability
• Disassembly
• Recyclability and recovery
• Disposability
• Remanufacturing/reusability
Source: Jawahir et al. (2015) / John Wiley & Sons.242 Product Innovation Design & Development
Simplified life cycle assessment (SLCA)
This method is a simplification of the LCA. Specific information and parameters during the evaluation of the 
environmental impact phase (i.e., inventory data) are not examined in order to reduce the amount of data 
gathered.
Life cycle costing (LCC)
This method involves the analysis of all the costs associated to produce a product, including the activi￾ties created by all the actors throughout the product’s life (supplier, manufacturer, and consumer). External 
costs and end-of-cycle costs are neglected in the conventional LCC method. As such, the method is a 
cradle-to-grave cost analysis. All costs are used to estimate the net present value (NPV) through a dis￾counted cash flow. Furthermore, the annual cost of owning, operating, and maintaining assets over their 
entire life known as Equivalent Annual Cost (EAC) is calculated.
Quality function deployment for environment (QFDE) 
This method integrates QFD, benchmarking, and LCA to conduct environmental impact studies of prod￾ucts and their components. The QFDE follows the logic of axiomatic design, which considers that every 
design should follow four domains in sequence:
1. Customer domain,
2. Functional domain,
3. Physical domain, and
4. Process domain.
Goal and Scope Definition
Life Cycle Inventory
Life Cycle Impact Assessment
• Define functional unit (product, kg of material, etc.)
• Set system boundaries (cradle to gate, cradle to cradle, input to system)
• Allocation methods (weight, economical value)
• Flow scheme of all inputs of water, raw materials, energy and release to air, water, and land
• Land use
Interpretation
• Selection of impact categories (carbon footprint, water footprint)
• Impact measurement
• Identification of significant issues
• Conclusions
• Peer review
FIGURE 5.12 Outline of the process for life cycle assessment (LCA)Product Innovation Design & Development 243
The QFDE method starts by connecting the typical customer requirements of the QFD with sustainable 
requirements to identify functional requirements. Later, these functional requirements assist in identifying 
key design parameters. Typically, the method has four phases:
1. Association of customer requirements (CRs) to engineering metrics (EM), known as technical or 
functional requirements,
2. Relationship of EMs to the product components,
3. Estimation of design changes in components or subsystems after the benchmarking process, and
4. Evaluation of the impact of changes in EMs on environmental quality requirements.
The framework for sustainable design using QFDE is shown in Figure 5.13.
Benchmarking House of Quality
(HoQ) 
Design matrix (based
on axiomatic design) 
Decision matrix
Identify the best components
and design details using LCA 
Detail design or improvement
Bill of materials
Sustainable product
Sustainable and
customer requirements 
Functional
requirements Design parameters
FIGURE 5.13 Framework for sustainable design using QFDE. 
Source: Hosseinpour et al. (2015) / Emerald Publishing Limited.244 Product Innovation Design & Development
5.4 IN SUMMARY
• Using appropriate design and development methodologies and tools is key to product innova￾tion success. This chapter focused on methodologies applied during the design and development 
phases of product innovation. The design and development phases evolve the product from ini￾tial idea through to final design specification, ready for implementation or manufacture and launch. 
Market research tools, which also contribute to constructing a product concept, are discussed in 
Chapter 6.
• Idea generation (ideation) lays the platform for successful new products. Several techniques were 
discussed – from mind-mapping, storyboarding, personas, and ethnographic methods, to a day in 
the life of the customer. All these techniques allow for deep-dives into the consumption experience. 
Further ideation tools are discussed in Chapter 3 as the foundation of the new product portfolio.
• The application of product-specific design tools such as conjoint analysis, functional analysis, 
reverse engineering, CAD, prototyping, simulation, modeling, and experimental design are essential 
resources in the product development toolbox.
• Development of sound and well-defined product design specifications from the initial product con￾cept is essential to ensuring that the new product remains on target throughout the development 
process to implementation or manufacture and final product launch. Design specifications are pre￾sented through the House of Quality and Taguchi methodology.
• Several considerations influence the design process. Design for production, design for functionality, 
and design for service, assembly, and maintenance provide the product designer with critical per￾spectives that support cost minimization, product robustness, reliability, and reaching quality targets.
• The increasing emphasis on sustainability considerations in product design necessitates the applica￾tion of tools and methodologies, including life cycle assessment, QFD for environment, and life cycle 
costing.Product Innovation Design & Development 245
5.A DESIGN & DEVELOPMENT PRACTICE QUESTIONS
1. Product design specifications are primarily intended to:
A. Translate qualitative design features into quantitative parameters.
B. Identify the core benefits of a product.
C. Identify customer needs.
D. List the tangible features of a product.
2. The House of Quality relates the voice of the customer to the voice of:
A. Marketing.
B. Advertising.
C. Engineering.
D. Manufacturing.
3. Which ideation tool used in new product development generates a graphical output linking various pieces 
of information, ideas, and thoughts?
A. Mind-mapping.
B. Brainstorming.
C. Brainwriting.
D. Delphi technique.
4. Which diagrams are constructed using How-Why logic?
A. FAST.
B. Functional Analysis.
C. Conjoint.
D. Bubble Charts.
5. Target product design specifications must use a set of metrics to ensure they are met during the design 
work. Suppose you are designing a new automobile. Which of the following is an acceptable product 
design metric?
A. The seats are comfortable.
B. The car accelerates from 0 to 60 miles per hour in less than 6 seconds.
C. The towing capacity is adequate for most people to use a boat trailer.
D. There are a wide range of colors and fabrics available for the interior.
6. DFF, DFP DFA, DFM, DFU are approaches to determine. . .
A. Concept definition.
B. Product design specifications.
C. Manufacturability.
D. Embodiment design.
7. The product concept description should include which three elements?
A. Customer needs, environmental factors, customer use reports.
B. Qualitative description, quantitative parameters, and technical deliverables.
C. Core benefits, tangible attributes, and augmented features.
D. Competitive benchmarks, concept description, qualitative measures
8. What is the pattern in TRIZ problem-solving matrix?
A. Identify the specific problem first, then the general problem, and identify a general solution before a 
specific solution.
B. Identify the specific problem first, test a solution with a targeted customer group, generate more pro￾totypes, select specific solution.
C. First use a general problem with general solution, then select the specific problem to solve.
D. Identify a cross-functional team that can test various product solutions with customers and select the 
highest rated solution.246 Product Innovation Design & Development
9. Jack is a consultant to a manufacturing company. He has been asked to evaluate the components 
and parts of the product as well as the whole design (system view) and the method of assembly used 
(manual, automatic, fixed automation, and robotic assembly) to reduce the number of parts used. What 
specific design tool should Jack use?
A. Design for manufacturing.
B. Design for assembly.
C. Design for functionality.
D. Design for life.
10. What specific design tool uses the following methods: Think-aloud laddering, Quantification Theory I 
(QTI), PLS analysis, and Genetic and Fuzzy logic?
A. Taguchi.
B. Six Sigma.
C. Kansei.
D. TRIZ.
Answers to practice questions: Product design and development
1. A
2. C
3. A
4. A
5. B
6. B
7. C
8. A
9. B
10. CProduct Innovation Design & Development 247
REFERENCES
Altshuller, G. (1984). Creativity as an exact science. Gordon & Breach. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781466593442
Burchill, G. and Walden, D. (1994). Mutual learning: Industry/academia collaboration for improved product development. Center for 
Quality Management Journal 3 (2): 23–39.
Gadd, K. (2011). TRIZ for engineers: Enabling inventive problem solving. John Wiley and Sons, Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1002/
9780470684320.
Haines-Gadd, L. (2016). TRIZ for dummies. Amazon.
Hauser, J.R. and Clausing, D. (1988). The house of quality. Harvard Business Review 66 (3): 63–73.
Hosseinpour, A., Peng, Q., and Gu, P. (2015). A benchmark-based method for sustainable product design. Benchmarking: An 
International Journal 22 (4): 643–664. https://doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-09-2014-0092.
Jawahir, I.S., Wanigarathne, P.C., and Wang, X. (2015). Product design and manufacturing processes for sustainability. In: 
Mechanical engineers’ handbook (ed. M. Kutz), 414–443. John Wiley & Sons https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118985960.meh207.
Knudsen, M.P., von Zedtwitz, M., Griffin, A., and Barczak, G. (2023). Best practices in new product development and innovation: Results 
from PDMA’s 2021 global survey. Journal of Product Innovation Management 40 (3): 257–275. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12663.
Ladewig, G.R. (2007). TRIZ: The theory of inventive problem solving. In: The PDMA toolbook 3 for new product innovation (ed. A. 
Griffin and S. Somermeyer), 3–40. John Wiley and Sons https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470209943.ch1.
Rodriguez, C.M. (2017). Product design and innovation: Analytics for decision making. Createspace Publishers.
Roy, R.K. (2001). Design of experiments using the Taguchi approach: 16 steps to product and process improvement. John Wiley 
& Sons Inc.
Schmidt, S.R. and Launsby, R.G. (2005). Understanding industrial designed experiments, 4e. Air Academy Press.
Simon, M., Pool, S., Sweatman, A. et al. (2000). Environmental priorities in strategic product development. Business Strategy and 
the Environment 9 (6): 367–377. https://doi.org/10.1002/1099-0836(200011/12)9:6<367::AID-BSE262>3.0.CO;2-D.
Ulrich, K.T. and Eppinger, S.D. (2016). Product design and development, 6e. McGraw-Hill Education.Product Development and Management Body of Knowledge: A Guidebook for Product Innovation Training and Certification,Third Edition. 
Allan Anderson, Chad McAllister, and Ernie Harris.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
6
Product
Innovation
Market 
Research
Required to provide market-related informa
-
tion and data to underpin decision-making 
in all aspects of strategy development, port
-
folio management, the product innovation 
process, and life cycle management250 Product Innovation Market Research
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS CHAPTER
Market research is critical to informed decision-making at all levels of product innovation management. 
This chapter presents a range of market research methods that can assist decision-making at various 
stages of product innovation. The strengths and weaknesses of each technique are discussed, together 
with how each contributes to specific innovation management decisions.Product Innovation Market Research 251
THE CHAPTER ROADMAP
What is market research in the context
of product innovation management?
What is the difference between primary and
secondary market research? How does
each contribute to product innovation?
What are the critical steps in applying
marketing research to product innovation?
What denes the quality of market research data as 
applied to product innovation? What is the difference 
between qualitative and quantitative research and 
their value to product innovation?
How to select the best market research for specic 
product innovation applications?
Description of selected
tools for market testing
and test marketing;
their advantages and
disadvantages
Description of selected
multivariate tools and their 
advantages and
disadvantages: Factor
analysis, cluster analysis,
multidimensional scaling,
conjoint analysis, multiple
regression
Description of selected
market research methods
and their advantages and
disadvantages for
product innovation.
Focus groups, in-depth
interviews, ethnography,
customer site visits,
social media, surveys,
trained panels, concept
tests, biometrics, big
data, crowd sourcing.
What is the difference
between primary and
secondary market
research? How does
each contribute to
product innovation?
What market research methods are best suited for
different types of product innovation and at different
stages of product innovation?
What key performance indicators are used in market research?252 Product Innovation Market Research
6.1 HOW MARKET RESEARCH CONTRIBUTES TO PRODUCT INNOVATION
Understanding and addressing the needs of stakeholders, typically with a focus on customer needs, is 
essential to developing successful new products and improving existing products. A wide range of market 
research techniques is available to inform decision-making throughout the product innovation process.
This book emphasizes product innovation as a risk vs. reward decision process founded on sound 
information, data, and knowledge. Market research provides information for making the right decisions 
and, in turn, reduces uncertainty and minimizes risk. Specifically:
• What opportunities are out there – now and in the future?
• What do customers want or need – articulated vs. unarticulated needs?
• What drives customers to purchase and re-purchase a product?
• What value proposition is needed to create a competitive advantage?
• What refinements are needed to make the product a more acceptable and desirable solution?
• Will the customer buy the product, how often, where, and at what price?
• Are there other product solutions that already exist in the market?
• What is the advantage of our product solution?
• Can the product solution be protected and advantage be secured by establishing intellectual prop￾erty rights?
• Is the product solution sustainable?
6.1.1 Voice of the Customer
One of, if not the most important area of research for product innovation, is voice of the customer (VoC), 
a market research term applied to the range of techniques used to capture the requirements and/or feed￾back of the customer (internal or external). VoC is defined as “a process for eliciting needs from consum￾ers that uses structured in-depth interviews to lead interviewees through a series of situations in which 
they have experienced and found solutions to the set of problems being investigated. Needs are obtained 
through indirect questioning by coming to understand how the consumers found ways to meet their 
needs, and, more important, why they chose the particular solutions they found” (Belliveau et al., 2002, 
Chapter 11).
Many of the methods described in this chapter can be categorized as VoC techniques. For a review of 
VoC techniques as a source of new product ideas, see Cooper and Dreher (2015). In addition to research￾ing the final customer or consumer, when developing a new product or service, it is also essential to 
consider other key stakeholders in the final purchase decision. For example, most food products have tra￾ditionally been sold through supermarkets. Supermarkets are not the final consumers of the products, but 
they play an extremely important role in determining if the product is made available to consumers. Their 
views are as important as the final consumers’. In the case of medical devices for personal use, it has gen￾erally been a medical professional who advises the end-user on what device to use. They are critical stake￾holders in the purchase decision, and their views should be sought and included throughout the product 
innovation process.
VoC research is not only used in the development stage of the new product innovation process but is 
often used to develop customer or market segmentation schemes using demographic, psychographic, 
behavioral, and lifestyle data to create customer personas for launch and marketing communications. 
Further, VoC research may be revisited, and additional insights sought or confirmation of previous insights 
at any stage of product development.
6.1.2 Six Critical Steps of Market Research
VoC and market research, in general, is a process. Naresh (2009) provides a list of six steps that underpin 
most market research processes, see Figure 6.1.Product Innovation Market Research 253
Define the problem
Define the level of accuracy for results
Collect the data
Analyze and interpret the data
Reach a conclusion
Implement
Write a clear statement of what information is being sought and what questions need
answers. 
Define the level of general reliability or specific statistical confidence and experimental error 
that is acceptable.
Select and apply a suitable methodology for collecting the results that address the problem 
with the required level of accuracy.
Apply an analysis, appropriate to the methodology used, to provide a summary of the results 
in such a way as to address the stated problem.
Relate the interpretation of results to draw specific conclusions.
Apply the findings and conclusions to the defined problem.
FIGURE 6.1 Six steps that underpin market research processes254 Product Innovation Market Research
6.2 SELECTING THE RIGHT MARKET RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
The three critical questions to answer in selecting the right market research methodology are:
1. What information is required, or what specific questions need to be answered?
2. Who is/are the target market or important stakeholder group(s)?
3. What level of confidence in the accuracy of the data is required? This will normally relate to the 
risks involved.
The selection of a market research methodology will almost always be impacted by specific 
constraints:
• Budget: how much can we afford to spend?
• Time: how soon are the results required?
• Resources: what resources are required, and are these available within the budget and time con￾straints?
Table 6.1 provides examples for each of these questions.
A high-level process leading to the selection of an appropriate market research methodology is shown 
in Figure 6.2.
TABLE 6.1 Examples of market research for a range of product innovation
What information is 
required?
Who is the target 
market?
What level of accuracy?
What is the best design for a 
new gymnasium website?
Customers and potential 
customers of the gymnasium.
Risks are low. Feedback with reasonable accuracy 
is sufficient.
What is the potential market 
for a new yogurt flavor to be 
included in an existing, widely 
marketed brand?
Household shoppers and 
yogurt consumers
Although risks are relatively low due to current 
production and market knowledge, significant 
launch and inventory cost are involved. A high level 
of accuracy is required.
Does a newly designed can 
opener meet the needs for 
people with arthritis?
People who are afflicted with 
hand arthritis or similar issues 
that limit hand strength and 
flexibility.
A new product to the company, there are significant 
risks due to lack of specific product and market 
experience. A high level of accuracy is required.
What improvements can be 
made to a new robotic pool 
cleaner?
Swimming pool owners both 
home and commercial.
Low level of risk at the early stage of development 
due to existing product experience. Low to 
moderate accuracy required.
Is there a market for a radically 
new 3D interface for home 
televisions?
Television users. Most likely 
those users who are 
technically competent and 
inclined to try new products.
Low risk at this early stage of concept development 
and testing. But risk will almost certainly increase 
through development. Low accuracy is required 
initially leading to high accuracy as investment 
increases.
Does a prototype for a new 
medical device to reduce sleep 
apnea meet market needs?
Sleep apnea patients, medical 
practitioners.
High risk due to the need for government regulatory 
approval. High level of accuracy from all key 
stakeholders.Product Innovation Market Research 255
The remainder of this chapter describes specific market research methods and their appropriateness 
at different stages of the product innovation process in terms of:
• The information they can provide.
• How suitable they are for specific stakeholder groups.
• The level of accuracy and statistical reliability.
• Time required to use the method.
• The resources and overall cost involved.
What information is required?
How best to reach the stakeholders?
What level of accuracy is required? Who is the target market?
Who are the key stakeholders?
What sample size is required?
Low accuracy
What specific sampling method?
High accuracy
Selection of market research methodology? Dependent on time and 
financial constraints
FIGURE 6.2 High-level process for market research methodology selection256 Product Innovation Market Research
6.3 PRIMARY VS. SECONDARY MARKET RESEARCH
At the highest level, market research can be classified as either primary or secondary.
6.3.1 Primary Research
Primary research involves the collection of information directly from the target market segment and specifi￾cally for an organization’s own needs. This may involve focus groups, surveys, personal interviews, obser￾vation, etc. Collecting information directly can be time-consuming and costly but should yield more specific 
and useful data, which in turn often results in better outcomes.
Primary market research methods fall into two broad categories, qualitative and quantitative, based on 
the nature of the underlying data. This is further discussed in Section 6.4.1.
To a large degree, the level of statistical reliability determines the appropriateness of a market research 
technique at specific stages of the new product innovation process. As discussed in earlier sections of 
this book, the cumulative costs and associated risk of product failure increase significantly as the prod￾uct innovation process progresses. The need for well-informed and reliable decision-making becomes 
increasingly important. Further discussion of the suitability of specific market research tools is presented in 
Section 6.10 and summarized in Table 6.18.
6.3.2 Secondary Research
Secondary research relies on the collection of information from studies previously performed and published 
by other individuals, groups, or agencies. This method is significantly less costly and can be performed 
more rapidly, provided the research sources are readily available. Finding appropriate research data is often 
the most time-consuming part of secondary research.
Secondary market research involves searching for sources of existing data that were previously col￾lected by someone else and can include:
• Government statistics.
• Syndicated data.
• Industry or trade publications.
• Trade fairs and conferences.
• Newspapers and magazines.
• Organization annual reports.
• Research publications.
• Scientific journals.
• Scholarly articles.
• Patent and trademark (intellectual property) databases.
• Open-source databases, wikis.
• Internet websites, white papers, blogs, and discussion forums.
A comparison of primary and secondary market research is presented in Table 6.2.Product Innovation Market Research 257
TABLE 6.2 Comparison of primary and secondary market research
Comparison Secondary market research Primary market research
Cost Usually inexpensive. Often free but 
sometimes requires payment for 
specific information.
Can range low to high cost depending on the scope and 
method used.
Focus and 
quality of 
information
Mainly generic. But still offers a 
general overview and trending as 
a basis for more targeted primary 
research.
Allows for specific focus on the information required and 
the accuracy of that information.
Currency of 
information
Often dated if drawn from public 
sources. More up-to-date information 
may be sourced at a cost from 
specific providers.
As current as the completion of the primary research and 
its analysis.
Timeframe Relatively fast, especially in the age of 
online databases targeted at specific 
topics.
Varies according to the scope and quality of information 
required and the method employed.
Resources 
required
Any person with some level of online 
search training and familiarity with the 
information domain.
Requires in-house or outsourced expertise, especially 
where more complex methods are employed.
Risk 
minimization
In general, not sufficiently reliable as a 
basis for high-risk decision-making.
Dependent on the market research method employed 
to provide a level of confidence in the information for 
decision-making, particularly during the later stages of the 
product innovation process.258 Product Innovation Market Research
6.4 THE QUALITY OF MARKET RESEARCH DATA
Market research can be categorized according to the type of data that is gathered, either quantitative or 
qualitative, and the extent to which the data are representative of the target market.
6.4.1 Qualitative vs. Quantitative
Qualitative and quantitative market research are defined as follows:
Qualitative Market Research: Research conducted with a small number of respondents, either in 
groups or individually, to gain an impression of their beliefs, motivations, perceptions, and opinions. 
Frequently used to gather initial consumer needs and obtain initial reactions to ideas and concepts. 
Results are not representative of the market in general or projectable to that market.
Quantitative Market Research: Consumer research, often surveys, is conducted with a large 
enough sample of consumers to produce statistically reliable results that can be used to project 
outcomes to the general consumer population. Used to determine importance levels of different 
customer needs, performance ratings of and satisfaction with current products, probability of trial, re￾purchase rate, and product preferences. These techniques are used to reduce the uncertainty asso￾ciated with many other aspects of product innovation.
Ottum (2004) provides a summary of the differences between quantitative and qualitative market 
research, as shown in Table 6.3.
6.4.2 Qualitative and Quantitative at Different Stages of the Product Innovation Process
Both qualitative and quantitative methods can add value to decision-making throughout the product inno￾vation process. But it is always important to remember that quantitative methods, particularly those using 
statistical sampling, are better where high-risk decisions need to be made.
Qualitative techniques remain extremely valuable in:
• Providing context and direction at the start of the process where costs and risks are low – qualitative 
research can provide insights about customers’ problems that quantitative research cannot,
• Providing context or hypotheses for quantitative studies,
• Following quantitative methods to help give context to results, quantitative techniques should be 
applied, where possible, as project costs and risks increase.
6.4.3 Target Market Representation
When the market research data are to be used to draw statistically reliable conclusions representing an 
entire population or target market, appropriate sample selection must be employed. Sampling methods 
TABLE 6.3 Comparison of qualitative and quantitative market research
Qualitative market research Quantitative market research
Words and images Numbers
“Soft” data “Hard” data
More exploratory More confirmatory
Great for understanding unmet needs Great for optimizing the new product’s appeal
Analyzed by looking for themes and deeper meaning Analyzed using statisticsProduct Innovation Market Research 259
are mainly divided into two categories: probability sampling and non-probability sampling. In the first case, 
each member has a fixed, known opportunity to belong to the sample, whereas in the second case, there 
is no specific probability of an individual being a part of the sample. A comparison of the two sampling 
methods is shown in Table 6.4.
6.4.4 Sampling Methods
Random Sampling: The simplest method of sampling for quantitative market research is random sam￾pling. A random sample is defined as a subset of a statistical population in which each member of the 
subset has an equal probability of being chosen. A simple random sample is meant to be an unbiased rep￾resentation of a group. However, while simple, it is often not practical to use.
Advantages of random sampling include representation of the target population and elimination of 
sampling bias.
Disadvantages include extreme difficulty to achieve in practice, and the cost and time involved.
In order to overcome some of the disadvantages of pure random sampling, a number of other sam￾pling methods can be applied to maintain a high level of precision but at significantly reduced time and 
cost. These include systemic, stratified, and cluster sampling.
Systemic Sampling: Samples are chosen at regular intervals depending on the size of the population and 
how large a sample is needed. Be sure there isn’t a pattern in the original population that creates a bias in 
the sample selection.
Stratified Sampling: The population is divided into strata according to some variables that are thought 
to be related to the variables of interest. A sample is taken from each stratum. This is intended to reduce 
sampling error because if the strata really are related to the variables of interest, then each stratum is more 
homogeneous, and it has less variation in the target variables.
Cluster Sampling: The population is divided into clusters, and a sample of clusters is taken. This tends 
to increase sampling error because clusters tend to be similar; if they were identical, there would be no 
point in taking more than one observation within the cluster because they would all be identical. The loss 
of precision is related to the variability within the clusters, which is only known after the sample is taken. 
In single-stage cluster sampling, the whole cluster is the sample. In multistage cluster sampling, random 
sampling is done within the cluster in one or more stages.
TABLE 6.4 Comparison of probability and non-probability sampling
Comparison Probability sampling Non-probability sampling
Definition A sampling technique in which the subjects 
of the population get an equal opportunity 
to be selected in a representative sample.
A method of sampling where each member of the 
population does not have an equal opportunity to 
be selected in the sample.
Also known as Random sampling Non-random sampling
Basis of selection Strictly random Arbitrary, convenience, or purposeful
Results Unbiased Biased
Method Objective Subjective
Inferences Statistical Analytical
Hypothesis Tested Generated260 Product Innovation Market Research
6.4.5 Sample Size and the Statistical Basis of Probability Sampling
Statistical formulas, tables, or easy-to-use online calculators are used to determine a sample size sufficient 
to establish the statistical reliability of research results.
The following information is needed for sample size calculation:
• Margin of error (confidence interval): What range around the calculated survey result can be tol￾erated, e.g., survey result ±5%.
• Confidence level: What is the confidence that the actual results fall within the confidence interval 
required?
• Variance: What variance is expected in the results? This is often estimated from population statistics 
or past studies.
General sample size relationships:
• The lower the required confidence interval (margin of error), the larger the sample size required.
• The higher the required level of confidence, the larger the sample size required.
• The higher the variance in the population with regard to what is being surveyed, the larger the 
sample size required.
• Selecting a sample size that is too small will lead to lower accuracy and confidence in the results.Product Innovation Market Research 261
6.5 MARKET RESEARCH METHODS
6.5.1 Focus Groups
A focus group is a qualitative market research technique where 8–12  market participants are gathered 
in a physical or virtual room for a discussion under the leadership of a trained moderator. The discussion 
focuses on a consumer problem, product, or potential solution to a problem.
Typical characteristics of a focus group:
• Screening questions are used to select 8–12 participants.
• It is often conducted in a specialized facility with a trained moderator.
• Specialized facilities are set up with a table and chairs, a one-way mirror, and the capacity to audio 
and video record the group.
• Observers can view proceedings from an adjacent room through a one-way mirror.
Considerations in applying focus groups:
• Avoid conducting a single focus group. Three or more is best; though not statistically reliable, multi￾ple groups do provide greater confidence in the findings.
• Ensure the moderator has the necessary background and training to handle the topic.
• First, use proper planning and preparation – avoid bringing a random group of people together for an 
unstructured chat.
Screen out focus group veterans – people who regularly participate in focus groups.
• Avoid conducting a single focus group. Three or more is best; though not statistically reliable, multi￾ple groups do provide greater confidence in the findings.
• Ensure the moderator has the necessary background and training to handle the topic.
• First, use proper planning and preparation – avoid bringing a random group of people together for an 
unstructured chat.
• Screen out focus group veterans – people who regularly participate in focus groups.
• A focus group is not a quantitative technique – statistical conclusions cannot be made.
The strengths and weaknesses of focus groups are summarized in Table 6.5.
The value of focus groups in product innovation decision-making is that when run well, they can pro￾vide great insights throughout the new product innovation process:
TABLE 6.5 Strengths and weaknesses of focus groups
Focus group strengths Focus group weakness
• Interaction among participants provokes 
discussion and can provide fresh insights and 
in-depth understanding.
• Comments come directly from representatives of 
the market — unfiltered through questionnaires 
or analysis.
• Questions can be changed quickly in response to 
participants’ comments.
• Behavior of participants can be observed, especially 
in usage studies.
• Group dynamics can suppress some individuals’ 
contributions or lead to dominance by others.
• Comments by participants can be open to 
interpretation.
• Conclusions do not apply directly to people outside of 
focus group — findings may not represent the larger 
market segment.
• Quality of results is heavily influenced by the skill of the 
moderator.
• Conducting groups is limited to participant availability 
at a set time and place.262 Product Innovation Market Research
• What opportunities are out there, and what are customers’ ideas on gaps in the market?
• What do customers want or need? Focus groups are not as good at identifying needs that the cus￾tomer has yet to recognize or cannot articulate. Results are likely to be within the current product or 
market paradigm.
• What value proposition should be built into the new product? Focus groups are used to better 
understand the features that drive value and should be built into the product.
• What refinements should be made to make the product more acceptable? Focus groups are used 
on an ongoing basis to provide direction for product refinement. Lead user groups or customer pan￾els, comprising customers who have an active interest in the product category and who lead the 
market in purchasing, are particularly useful (Thomke & Von Hippel, 2002).
6.5.2 In-depth Interviews
This qualitative research method involves conducting longer intensive interviews probing and exploring a 
specific topic, one on one, with individual participants. The research gathers detailed insights, perspec￾tives, attitudes, thoughts, behaviors, and viewpoints on a problem, idea, program, situation, etc.
The strengths and weaknesses of in-depth interviews are summarized in Table 6.6.
The value of in-depth interviews in product innovation is that they can provide great insights throughout 
the new product innovation process:
• What opportunities are out there, and what are customers’ ideas on gaps in the market? In-depth 
interviews generally provide a more relaxed environment that facilitates probing questions to dig 
deeper into respondents’ ideas.
• What do customers want or need, especially unarticulated needs? The more relaxed environment 
and opportunity to develop a closer relationship with respondents can provide a better understand￾ing of unarticulated needs.
• What is the value proposition to be built into the new product? An in-depth interview provides the 
opportunity to build on new ideas and further develop the value proposition.
• What refinements should be made to make the product more acceptable? In-depth interviews can 
be used, either with the same respondents or different respondents to provide direction for on-going 
product refinement.
TABLE 6.6 Strengths and weaknesses of in-depth interviews
In-depth interview strengths In-depth interview weaknesses
• Provides more detail, context, language, emotions, and 
relationships for each area explored.
• Designed to be more open-ended, provide emergent 
information and insight, reveal hidden relationships, connections, 
complexity, and help explain quantitative findings.
• Can be a more relaxed, personal, private, safe, and 
individual-based conversation that provides richer, 
deeper insight.
• Valuable prior to quantitative studies to provide initial 
framework for the quantitative research purpose and 
questions. It also provides richer, authentic language for 
use in quantitative studies.
• Valuable when investigating or exploring the reasons behind 
quantitative research results.
• Time-consuming and costly.
• Subject to participant availability at a set 
time and place.
• Must be conducted by a professional trained 
in interviewing techniques.
• Can be biased and subject to interpretation.
• Findings may not represent the larger 
market segment.
• Typically conducted with a smaller number of 
participants than other types of research due 
to increased time, effort, and expense.Product Innovation Market Research 263
• They work especially well in business-to-business (B2B) research where individuals with specific 
knowledge or experts are needed, or in business-to-consumer (B2C) when the scenario is sensitive 
or private. If appropriate to the study design, conducting phone or video conference interviews can 
offer flexibility and lower costs.
6.5.3 Ethnography
Ethnography is defined as a descriptive, qualitative market research methodology for studying the cus￾tomer in relation to their environment. Ethnographic market research (EMR) refers to a type of research that 
helps organizations understand the customer in terms of cultural trends, lifestyle factors, attitudes, and 
how social context influences product selection and usage. Researchers spend time in the field observing 
customers and their environment to acquire a deep understanding of their lifestyles and cultures as a basis 
for better understanding their needs and problems.
In contrast to focus groups, ethnography utilizes a variety of techniques and forums to present a complete 
picture of consumers and how products and services fit into their daily lives. Further reference and explanation 
of the application of EMR to product innovation are provided by Miller et al. (2004) and Katz (2010).
Ethnographic market research can be applied on-site or in-home. On-site EMR takes place wherever the 
consumer is utilizing the product or service; for example, in a restaurant, store, office, or even the car. Conducting 
place-based research allows the researcher to interview and observe as the behavior is carried out and provides 
an opportunity for follow-up questions as needed. Immersion tours of markets can be conducted on location to 
research entire markets vs. individual consumers. This is especially helpful in geographic expansion.
In-home EMR is similar to on-site and is conducted in the participant’s home environment. The research 
can include one or multiple family members and can last for several hours or longer. The researcher is 
immersed in the home environment and observes, asks questions, and listens to obtain insight into con￾sumer trends, reactions, and problems. Consumers go about solving those product or service-based issues. 
In-home sessions provide insight into customers’ unmet needs, how to improve products, what new items 
are needed, and how changing needs affect usage.
The strengths and weaknesses of ethnography are summarized in Table 6.7.
The value of ethnographic market research to product innovation decision-making is derived from its 
usefulness in understanding customer needs and product usage.
• What opportunities are out there, particularly new product opportunities? Ethnographic research 
seeks to get the researchers to walk in the customers’ shoes — to really understand the issues and 
problems that get to needs that new products can satisfy. It is a high-empathy method.
• What do customers want or need? Ethnography is an excellent technique for getting to know the 
customer and getting to the heart of their needs, which they may be unable or unwilling to articulate.
TABLE 6.7 Strengths and weaknesses of ethnography
Ethnography strengths Ethnography weaknesses
• Provides a unique opportunity to identify attributes, situations, 
and states that are truly valued by customers and reveal 
unidentified dissatisfiers or hidden problems.
• Can be a very useful means of identifying unarticulated needs 
that participants may be unwilling or unable to identify during a 
traditional interview, focus group, or survey, especially if the new 
product is unfamiliar, the situation private, or sensitive.
• Can facilitate the discovery of unarticulated needs can form the 
basis for radically new products.
• It can take a long time to carry out, 
especially if the researcher is seeking a 
broad representation of the target market.
• More resources are often needed 
compared to other methods.
• It relies on the researcher’s interpretation 
of what is observed.
• It has no basis in statistical reliability.264 Product Innovation Market Research
• What refinements should be made to make the product more acceptable? Ethnographic research 
can be used to test a product prototype, observe customer reaction to it, and watch the applica￾tion of the prototype. For example, it can examine if the product is used in the intended way and to 
discover what problems the customer has in using the product. Ethnography can also be used with 
products already launched in the market for new and improved versions or line extensions.
6.5.4 Customer Site Visits
Customer site visits are defined as “a qualitative market research technique for uncovering customer 
needs. The method involves going to a customer’s work site, watching as a person performs functions 
associated with the customer needs a firm wants to solve, and then debriefing that person about what 
they did, why they did those things, the problems encountered as they were trying to perform the function, 
and what worked well” (Kahn et al., 2004, Chapters 15–16).
Similar to in-depth interviews, customer site visits are one of the market research methods used most 
commonly by business-to-business (B2B) organizations. It involves one or more associates from a vendor 
directly interviewing, observing, and interacting with one or more customers (or potential customers) of that 
vendor at the site of product use.
The strengths and weaknesses of customer site visits are summarized in Table 6.8.
Considerations in Applying Customer Site Visits
• Be sure to inform sales representatives of the visit and enlist their support.
• Ensure the customer representatives who host the visit are decision-makers or influencers with the 
requisite knowledge to provide the information sought.
• Build in a tour beyond the meeting room to see first-hand where and how the product will be used, if 
possible.
• Ask customers to identify problems. If they suggest solutions, listen, acknowledge, and accept their input.
• Take samples, visual aids, and anything that can enable a clearer understanding.
The value of customer site visits to product innovation decision-making is the ability to gather in-depth 
market and technical information:
TABLE 6.8 Strengths and weaknesses of customer site visits
Customer site visit strengths Customer site visit weaknesses
• Face-to-face communication on customer premises 
can provide a large amount of contextual information.
• Site visits often provide the opportunity to see the 
product in use, observe first-hand its strengths and 
weaknesses and discuss directly with the user what 
improvements might be made or desired.
• Visits are useful for technical staff involved in product 
innovation to better understand the customer’s needs 
and how these can best be translated into product 
design specifications.
• Visits by product innovation team members promote 
better communication and understanding of require￾ments leading to greater team cohesion.
• Conducting site visits also often help build stronger 
customer relationships.
• Site visits can be expensive and time-consuming, 
especially if travel is involved.
• Where the organization is supplying a number of 
customers, comments and suggestions from one 
or two of these may not represent the views of the 
majority. Sample size is important to get a more 
reliable view.
• The quality of the information gathered is highly 
dependent on asking the right questions of the right 
people. So, for example, an interview with a market￾ing representative of the customer organization may 
provide limited, or unreliable, technical information.
• Sending an unqualified representative from the organ￾ization with limited product knowledge and interview 
skills can have a detrimental impact on customer rela￾tionships and lead to unreliable information.Product Innovation Market Research 265
• What opportunities are out there? Particularly with B2B companies, where there may be levels of 
buyers, users, and influencers in the customer organization who can provide insights into new tech￾nologies or competitors’ products.
• What do customers want or need? Site visits often focus on current needs, problems, and required 
improvements. These are specific issues that the customer is best placed to articulate. Visits can 
also reveal unidentified needs that the customer is either unable or unwilling to articulate and requires 
lines of questioning and observation to identify the customer’s needs beyond the current product(s).
• What refinements should be made to make the product? The outcome is often to make the product 
more acceptable, especially where detailed concepts or prototypes form the basis for the refinement 
discussion.
6.5.5 Social Media
Social media has matured and has opened up new ways of interacting with and sourcing information from 
the marketplace. Media such as Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Pinterest, Instagram, WhatsApp, LinkedIn, 
Snapchat, Reddit, blogs, and various discussion forums all offer a medium for engaging with and listening 
to customers. In 2022, Facebook alone reported nearly 3 billion users worldwide. Social media market￾ing usage rate for marketing purposes among US companies has risen from 86 in 2013 to 92% in 2022 
(Statista,  2022). In addition to these more global social media platforms, a number of other country or 
region-specific platforms exist. For example, Vkontakte in Russia, Viadeo in France, Line in Japan, Kaokao 
Talk in South Korea and in China, with a range of “home-grown” platforms and networks like WeChat and 
Weibo. When using social media for marketing communication and research, it is vitally important to select 
the most appropriate platform for the target market.
Social media is regularly used for co-creation in the ideation and design phases and for driving aware￾ness and promotion in the commercialization and launch phases of product innovation. Social listening is 
a type of VoC market research that monitors digital conversations and analyzes what customers are say￾ing about specific topics. A well-reported example of how social media listening supports the new product 
innovation process is how, after analyzing social media conversations, McDonald’s began offering its all￾day breakfast menu in key markets.
Clorox brand Brita reports using social listening to learn that millennials regularly complained about a 
roommate or partner who drank the last of the Brita water and did not refill the pitcher. They launched a 
new product, Brita Stream, targeted at millennials. It filters as it pours, eliminating waiting for the water to 
filter when the user finds it empty.
TABLE 6.9 Strengths and weaknesses of social media
Social media strengths Social media weaknesses
• It can provide direct and immediate 
contact with current and potential 
customers.
• If selected carefully, specific social 
media allows targeting to a very 
narrow audience.
• It provides the opportunity to engage 
with a loyal following of supporters or 
lead users, either as a basis for 
ongoing idea generation or for input 
during the product design process 
(refer to crowdsourcing later in 
this chapter).
• It can be subject to a high degree of bias based on the composition of 
people using a specific social medium and those who actively engage 
in this medium.
• It is difficult to maintain control and achieve a clear focus on the 
problem or question.
• Although it may be possible to receive a large response to a 
survey through social media, true statistical confidence still may 
not be assigned to the results as the sample may not accurately 
reflect the population.
• Social media reciprocity (the practice of automatically liking and 
sharing within a network of friends and followers) and customer 
turbulence, creating rapid changes in attention such as the viral effect, 
may bias or cloud results266 Product Innovation Market Research
In addition to social listening, companies worldwide apply integrated social media programs to their 
marketing and product management. Nike, for example, uses Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, and Pinterest 
along with its own platforms. Nike created Nike+ to be a virtual training club. As of 2022, its primary plat￾form was the Nike SNKRS App, which is positioned as “Your Ultimate Sneaker Source.”
Strength and weaknesses of social media are presented in Table 6.9.
The value of social media in product innovation decision-making is its facility to reach large numbers of 
targeted customers quickly and easily. This makes it an excellent market research tool for product innovation:
• What opportunities are out there? Social media provides an excellent source of information on what 
people are doing and thinking, both individuals and organizations, in real time. This can lead to new 
opportunities directly or by inference.
• What do customers want or need? Social provides the product developer with a broad canvas of 
information related to the general market – and in some cases, even to specific market segments. 
Note that social media is largely unstructured and needs caution in interpretation.
• What refinements should be made to make the product more acceptable? Specific and targeted 
social media groups form an excellent basis for online lead users to provide ongoing testing and 
input to a product’s design and use.
There are multiple opportunities for innovation using social media analytics. Social media can serve as 
a source of consumer insights, complementing traditional market research methods. The speed with which 
social media data are generated and analyzed offers opportunities to be proactive in leveraging the data 
(Moe & Schweidel, 2017).
Examples of Social Media Applied to Product Innovation
Non-profit Compassion International seeks donors to fulfill its mission of caring for children in poverty. It used 
social media metrics to identify social causes receiving the most attention and charitable donations. At the 
top of the list was sustainable water projects. Compassion went on to co-develop a water filter for villages 
that only had access to dirty water supplies. This resulted in new donors joining Compassion’s mission.
OBO, a New Zealand-based manufacturer of special field hockey equipment, has used a suite of social 
media tools to inform its design process for new and improved products. It focuses on user groups; both 
lead users at the high-performing international level and general users at the club level. More detail on 
OBO’s use of social media is presented in Appendix B, case 4.
6.5.6 Surveys
Surveys can be broadly defined as the polling of customers or stakeholders to identify their level of sat￾isfaction with an existing product or to discover needs for new products or services. Surveys are a basic 
building block and foundational to market research in product innovation. Surveys are ubiquitous. They 
can be, and very often are, used in combination with other market research techniques.
A survey consists of:
• A fixed set of questions asked of a sample of respondents.
• A sample that is large enough for the study intent and selected to consist of certain characteristics.
Is a survey a qualitative or quantitative research approach?
This depends on both the sample selection and the questionnaire design.
Sample size selection
Probability sampling, as described in Section 6.4.3, provides the basis for statistical analysis providing a 
level of confidence in the results. Non-probability sampling generally provides for a cheaper and more rapid 
survey, albeit without the benefits of statistical confidence.Product Innovation Market Research 267
Questionnaire design
Questions used in surveys are many and varied. There are a number of ways of classifying questions. For example:
• Open-ended questions: These cannot be answered with a simple yes or no answer or a selection 
from a multiple-choice answer list. The respondent is asked to elaborate on their response.
• Closed-ended questions: Provide a number of optional answers to a question, a yes or no, or a 
rating, for example, “like a lot to dislike a lot.”
• Nominal questions: Answers are required in defined categories. For example, religious affiliation, 
sex, city where you live, etc.
• Likert scale questions: Respondents are presented with a statement and asked to indicate their 
agreement with the statement on a defined scale, usually 5, 7, or 9 points. For example:
○ Very satisfied
○ Moderately satisfied
○ Neither satisfied nor dissatisfied
○ Moderately dissatisfied
○ Very dissatisfied
• Ranking scale (or ordinal) questions: Respondents rank items or choose from an ordered set. 
For example, respondents could be shown five product benefits and asked to rank them 1 to 5 in 
order of importance, with 1 being the most important benefit.
It is important to note that the question style significantly impacts its suitability for statistical analysis. 
The critical consideration is the nature of the scale used for the responses, mainly whether the intervals 
between the individual points on the scale can be considered equidistant and whether the data is normally 
distributed. If the answer is “yes” to these two criteria, then parametric statistical analysis can be applied. 
This simply means that basic descriptive statistics, such as the sample’s mean, mode, and standard devia￾tion, can be extended to the larger population. If the answer to the two criteria is “no,” then the parametric 
analysis is unsuitable, and non-parametric statistical analyses should be applied, for example, rank order 
correlation or chi-square. The important point is to be aware of the pitfalls of using inappropriate data for 
statistical analysis of survey data. If in doubt, consult a qualified statistician.
TABLE 6.10 Strengths and weaknesses of surveys
Survey strengths Survey weaknesses
• Relatively easy to administer, depending 
on scope.
• Cost-effective, but cost depends on 
survey mode.
• Can be administered remotely via online, 
mobile devices, mail, email, kiosk, or 
telephone.
• Conducted remotely can reduce or prevent 
geographical dependence
• Capable of collecting data from a large 
number of respondents.
• Numerous questions can be asked about 
a subject, giving extensive flexibility in 
data analysis.
• With survey software, advanced statistical 
techniques can be utilized to analyze survey 
data to determine validity, reliability, and 
statistical significance, including the ability 
to analyze multiple variables.
• Respondents may need to be incentivized to participate 
in a survey.
• Respondents may not feel encouraged to provide accurate, 
honest answers.
• Respondents may not feel comfortable providing answers that 
present themselves in an unfavorable manner.
• Respondents may not be fully aware of their reasons for any 
given answer because of lack of memory on the subject, or 
even boredom.
• Surveys with closed-ended questions may have a lower 
validity rate than other question types.
• Data errors due to question non-responses may exist. The 
respondents who choose to respond to a survey question may be 
different from those who chose not to respond, thus creating bias.
• Survey question answer options could lead to unclear data 
because certain answer options may be interpreted differently 
by respondents. For example, the answer option “somewhat 
agree” may represent different things to different participants 
and have its own meaning to each individual respondent.268 Product Innovation Market Research
Surveys are a valuable market research tool for product innovation decision-making. They are fre￾quently used as the data collection tool for other more specific research approaches, such as Conjoint or 
Kano analysis. Surveys can be used to provide insights, directly or indirectly, into any of the following:
• What do customers want or need?
• What refinements should be made to make the product more acceptable?
• What drives customers to purchase and re-purchase a product?
• What value proposition should be built into our new product?
• Will the customer buy the product: how often, where, and at what price?
The strengths and weaknesses of surveys are presented in Table 6.10.
6.5.7 Consumer Panels
Consumer panels are defined as groups of consumers in specific sectors or segments, typically recruited 
by professional research companies and agencies. The panel participants are used as respondents to 
answer specific research questions relating to product testing, taste testing, or other sensory testing; con￾cept testing; concept sorting, and many other areas. Often, they are a specialist panel that may take part 
in numerous projects in a category. Consumer panels are particularly useful for short, quick surveys, where 
the emphasis is on a sample of those with specialized knowledge or selection criteria rather than a repre￾sentative sample of the general population. Consumer panels fall into two broad categories:
• Untrained panels representing the attitudes, beliefs, perceptions, and behaviors of the target market. 
Although not necessarily statistically representative of the target market, these panels can at least pro￾vide valuable input to evaluating and designing desired features and functionality of a new product.
• Trained panels comprise individuals who are trained to assess, generally in some quantitative way, 
the specific attributes of a product. The application of trained panels to sensory testing is further dis￾cussed in the following section.
Strengths and weaknesses of consumer panels are summarized in Table 6.11.
6.5.8 Sensory Testing
Sensory testing is widely used in consumer products. It can be used throughout the product innovation 
process to explore concepts in the early phases through to testing prototypes or validating product perfor￾mance prior to launch.
Sensory testing methods are divided into two broad classes: affective and analytical methods. Affective 
methods use consumer panels, described in the previous section.
TABLE 6.11 Strengths and weaknesses of consumer panels
Consumer panel strengths Consumer panel weaknesses
• Untrained panels provide valuable insights into consumer 
preferences and suggestions for product improvement. But 
should not necessarily be considered representative of the 
entire market.
• Trained panels are invaluable in some industries, such as 
food and cosmetics, where instrumental measurements 
are either unavailable or unable to provide the required 
information.
• Consumer panels can be quickly formed, especially with the 
assistance of a research firm that specializes in panels.
• Untrained panels, although useful as 
indicators of consumer preference and 
attitudes, may not be statistically 
representative of the target market.
• The use of trained panels to provide 
preference data should be avoided. Their 
training ceases to make them representative 
of the target market.Product Innovation Market Research 269
The most common analytical methods of sensory testing are discrimination (or difference) and descrip￾tive methods. Discrimination tests can be used to determine if products are different or if one product has 
more of a selected characteristic than another. Descriptive methods are used to provide more comprehen￾sive profiles of a product by asking panelists to identify the different characteristics within the product and 
quantify characteristics. Trained panelists must be used for descriptive methods. Trained panelists are rec￾ommended for both discrimination and descriptive methods.
Some of the more commonly used analytical tests include:
• Triangle: The triangle test uses three samples to determine if an overall difference exists between 
two products. The three samples include two that are identical and one that is different. The panelist 
is asked to identify the odd sample.
• Duo trio: In a Duo trio test, panelists are presented with a reference sample and two other sam￾ples. Panelists are asked to identify the sample that is the same as the reference.
• Paired comparison: In a paired comparison test, two different samples are presented, and one 
asks which of the two samples has most of the sensory property of interest, e.g., which of the two 
products has the sweetest taste.
The most commonly used descriptive method is Quantitative Descriptive Analysis (QDA®). The QDA®
methodology requires trained panelists to assess the product against defined sensory descriptors on line 
scales. Statistical analyses can be performed to determine product differences. Results can also be pre￾sented graphically in the form of a “spider web,” as shown in the comparison of two wines in Figure 6.3.
6.5.9 Trained Panels
As discussed in sensory methodologies above, trained panels are often required to provide quantitative 
and statistically reliable data. Trained panels are especially used in formulated products, such as food and 
cosmetics, where instrumental measurement of sensory characteristics is sometimes difficult or unavail￾able. In such cases, trained panels can be invaluable for objectively evaluating changes to product char￾acteristics (for example, taste or texture) resulting from formulation or process changes. Panel training is 
not an insignificant exercise, involving considerable time and expertise in trainers. Training increases the 
Medicinal
Tanic
Jammy
Herbaceous
Musty
Acidic
Buttery
Fruity
Tanic
Herbaceo Acidic
Fruity
FIGURE 6.3 QDA® spider web of two wines270 Product Innovation Market Research
sensory acuity of panelists and provides them with a rudimentary knowledge of procedures used in sen￾sory evaluation. Training also develops the ability of panel members to detect, recognize and describe sen￾sory stimuli. Basically, the training process involves:
• Selection of panel members based on their ability to recognize the sensory property or properties 
under investigation.
• Training the selected panelists in the use of appropriate descriptors consistent across the entire 
panel.
• Training the selected panel members to quantify the level of the property using reference samples at 
defined levels.
The American Society for Testing and Material (1981) provides greater detail on the guidelines for 
selecting and training sensory panel members.
6.5.10 Concept Tests and Concept Sorts
Concept tests and concept sorts are quantitative research surveys that evaluate customer acceptance of 
a new product or service idea (referred to as a concept). These tests are used in the early phases of the 
new product innovation process prior to the development phase. Concept sorts help identify and rank 
which product concepts are strongest when a variety of options for development exist. Technology has 
made concept testing easy for participants and more convenient. Participants can complete concept test 
surveys online, with flexible scheduling, anywhere around the world. Testing and sorting concepts prior 
to development is more cost-effective at reducing risk and expense prior to incurring increasingly larger 
development costs as the process progresses. Proof of concept can be the result of concept testing.
6.5.11 Biometrics-based Methods and Eye Tracking, Virtual and Augmented Reality
Biometrics is an emerging market research technique. It relies on specialized tools, biometric technologies, 
and applications to study biological, cognitive, and emotional responses toward various products and ser￾vices without actually asking questions or interfering with the experience. Biometric data collection can be 
obtained using a number of methods, including eye tracking, virtual reality, and augmented reality. Specific 
tools such as functional magnetic resonance imaging, measuring changes to the blood flow in the brain, 
are used to test a range of products and services in a variety of media formats. Basically, the biometrics 
process is as follows:
• A sample is recruited and brought to a focus group facility or market research setting.
• Each participant may be asked to don galvanic skin response sensors on one hand.
• They are then asked to observe a representation of a product, the product itself, or an aspect of the 
product, for example, the onboarding process for a SaaS product.
• Depending on the technology employed, they will either have face sensors attached for their 
responses and eye tracking will be captured through video equipment.
• The equipment tracks and reports where participants look first, second, third, etc., and provides a 
visual scan overlaid on an image of the product being tested. It is used to answer questions on con￾sumers’ reactions to various stimuli, online products, and services, websites, apps, images of prod￾ucts, packaging, and messaging. It is widely used in software, retail product packaging, marketing, 
and advertising.
Eye tracking and biometrics are typically used with high-fidelity prototypes or a live website, focusing on 
a user’s attention and engagement with a particular set of design features. The resulting data adds another 
layer of understanding to the broader user experience with the product.
Examples of companies using Biometrics market research include Expedia, in learning what excites 
potential customers as they plan a holiday online. Also, Walmart filed a patent application in 2018 for Product Innovation Market Research 271
a system and method for a biometric feedback shopping cart handle, collecting biometric feedback from 
sensors on shopping cart handles for monitoring consumer biometrics like pulse, temperature, and stress, 
and comparing against a baseline.
Virtual reality (VR) testing is a growing segment of the market research field and is conducted using spe￾cialized equipment, including a headset and/or gloves with tracking sensors that create three-dimensional 
(3D) simulations and enable participants to interact in a realistic environment. VR is used in conjunction 
with tools already used in market research, such as eye tracking, consumer behavior analysis, and market 
environment simulations. VR allows companies to perform product use testing without developing actual 
prototypes, using VR simulations instead. As a result, financial risks can be minimized. It also enables 
researchers to observe and examine consumer behavior without costly trials in the marketplace.
Augmented reality (AR) is similar to VR. Whereas VR replaces the participant’s real world with an entirely 
separate reality, AR overlays elements of a new reality into the participant’s present environment. AR is 
sometimes referred to as mixed reality and has the added convenience that it can be viewed and inter￾acted with on device screens such as computers, displays, tablets, phones, and watches.
VR and AR platforms are already currently used by companies like Coca-Cola, Heineken, and Nike in 
their social channels and networks and in the broadcasting of large commercial sporting and entertain￾ment events, promoting immersive experiences. These are the same platforms that allow researchers and 
developers to gain in-depth insight by offering an immersive experience with a high level of interaction, key 
elements for market research.
6.5.12 Big Data
Big data is described as “a collection of large and complex data from different instruments at all stages of the 
process which go from acquisition, storage, and sharing, to analysis and visualization” (Pisano et al., 2015). 
“The main driver of the interest in big data is the potential usefulness of it for informing marketing decisions, 
including those across consumer areas such as problem recognition, consumer search, purchase behavior, 
consumption, post-purchase evaluation, and post-purchase engagement.” (Hofacker et al., 2016).
Big data and the big data analytics industry have matured significantly. The act of gathering and storing 
large amounts of information for analysis has been widely used, growing as storage technology improved. 
The big data concept gained momentum in the early 2000s when industry analyst Doug Laney articulated 
the now-mainstream definition of big data as the three Vs (Laney, 2001):
1. Volume: Organizations collect data from a variety of sources, including business transactions, social 
media, and information from sensor or machine-to-machine data. In the past, storing it would have 
been a problem – but new technologies (including cloud-based services) have eased the burden.
2. Velocity: Data stream in at unprecedented speeds and must be dealt with in a timely manner. RFID 
tags, sensors, and smart metering are driving the need to deal with torrents of data in near-real time.
3. Variety: Data come in all types of formats, from structured, numeric data in traditional databases to 
unstructured text documents, email, video, audio, stock ticker data, and financial transactions.
Zikopoulos et al. (2015) provide a useful analogy with gold mining to explain the meaning and potential 
of big data:
“In the old days miners could readily spot nuggets or veins (high value per byte data) because 
they were visible to the naked eye. But there was more gold out there that wasn’t readily visible. 
Trying to find it would have required the mobilization of millions of people. Today miners work dif￾ferently. Gold mining leverages new generation equipment that can process millions of tons of dirt 
(low value per byte data) to find ’nearly-invisible to the naked eye’ strands of gold. And with mod￾ern equipment those small strands can be extracted from the mass of dirt and processed into gold 272 Product Innovation Market Research
bars (high value data). Today there is a mass of data, residing in different forms in a range of dif￾ferent locations. The challenge for the future is to locate this data and process it into a form that is 
useful for a specific purpose.”
The strengths and weaknesses of Big Data are presented in Table 6.12.
6.5.13 Crowdsourcing
Crowdsourcing is a means of collecting information, goods, services, ideas, funding, or other input into a 
specific task or project from a large and relatively open group of people, either paid or unpaid, most com￾monly via technology platforms, social media channels, or the Internet. Many companies and organizations 
also use their own websites as a means of crowdsourcing new product ideas and improvements to exist￾ing products.
LEGO has a dedicated website and online community for fans and customers to contribute their own 
product ideas. LEGO uses the platform to co-develop with customers. The platform has rapidly grown 
and has more than 1.5 million users at the time of this writing. The platform is named LEGO Ideas. It is 
designed to motivate and incentivize participation by allowing users to submit LEGO build ideas, vote for 
their favorite ideas, state how much they would pay for it, and explain why they like it so much. If more 
than 10,000 people support the idea, then it goes to the official Lego review board, which decides whether 
or not to put it into production. If the idea is commercialized, the creator even receives name recognition 
on the product package and a 1 percent royalty on worldwide sales. LEGO Ideas can be found at ideas
.lego.com.
Anheuser-Busch, in 2012, ran a crowdsourcing project to create a new beer. It varied slightly from 
the typical consumer-led crowdsourcing projects as the initial recipes were created during a competi￾tion involving the brewmasters at Budweiser’s 12 breweries. However, more than 25,000 consumers 
were involved in the subsequent taste tests to decide the winning brew, so the wisdom of the crowd was 
involved during the development process. The winning recipe, Black Crown, went on sale in 2013.
The strengths and weaknesses of crowdsourcing are presented in Table 6.13.
TABLE 6.12 Strengths and weaknesses of Big Data
Big data strengths Big data weaknesses
• Big data is cost-effective as many organizations 
already have big data analytics in place.
• It improves indirect customer involvement.
• Big data enables managers to capture 
customers’ explicit and implicit knowledge.
• It can be applied to any phase of product 
innovation.
• Data capture is in real time and can be 
generated much faster than traditional studies.
• It can refocus attention away from internal 
product-focused innovation and turns attention 
to innovation around the customer experience.
• It is real customer behavior, versus what 
consumers say they will do in an interview 
or survey.
• Role of big data in the product innovation process is 
directly affected by how data-driven the organization 
is overall.
• To organize and manage big data successfully, 
organizations need to have established innovation 
ecosystems and build data alliances with stakeholders, 
including partners, suppliers, and other entities with 
common interests.
• Data scientists need to be available to be part of 
product projects.
• Stimulating and mining customer interaction via public 
software platforms may generate data that can also be 
mined by competition.Product Innovation Market Research 273
TABLE 6.13 Strengths and weaknesses of Crowdsourcing
Crowdsourcing strengths Crowdsourcing weaknesses
• Crowdsourcing brings together communities 
around a common project or cause.
• It is an efficient way of solving time-intensive 
problems.
• It creates deeper engagement by communities, 
who resonate and build loyalty to the product 
or solution.
• A wider view can often lead a different 
perspective.
• The numbers involved can come close to full 
market representation, providing some level of 
statistical confidence in the results. (But care 
should be exercised in to prevent over-reliance 
on crowdsourced data. It is important to use 
other inputs in addition to crowdsourcing to 
validate and successfully incorporate the crowd￾sourcing input into the new product process.)
• Results can be easily skewed based on the crowd 
being sourced.
• Lack of confidentiality or ownership on an idea. Potential 
for plagiarism. (However, some organizations use NDAs to 
protect against this.)
• It has the risk to miss the best ideas, talent, or direction and 
fall short of the goal or purpose.
• Reciprocal voting can occur and that may distort value of 
research results.274 Product Innovation Market Research
6.6 MULTIVARIATE RESEARCH METHODS
Multivariate research, testing, and analysis are used in product innovation and management to explore the 
relationship that exists between the numerous variables that impact new product success.
In this type of research, a dependent variable is examined in association with one or more predictor or 
independent variables. Multivariate methods provide a more accurate view of the interactions, correlations, 
and trade-offs that play out when looking at the possible ranges of product and market attributes and 
characteristics. It can point out which variables, attributes, and characteristics are highly correlated and 
can detect potential problems and risks to the product value proposition when decisions around choices 
need to be made.
A wide range of multivariate techniques can be applied to product innovation. Most of these require 
an understanding of statistics and the support of an expert. While they involve more complex design and 
analysis, they provide the potential to gain deeper and more valuable customer insights.
Several multivariate techniques used in product innovation management are briefly outlined below.
6.6.1 Principal Components and Factor Analysis
Deriving Information from Data
Data is an indispensable variable in our life. The train timetable, the text message you received today, and 
the supermarket item’s price are all data. These data do not have any meaning in themselves without a 
context attached to them. This context is what transforms data into information. In other words, informa￾tion is structured data, having logical reasoning that makes it coherent and can drive decisions.
In today’s world, where we make decisions based on this structured data, there is a potential dan￾ger of having too much information and even the risk of losing some important information. The phenom￾enon of having too much information is often referred to as the curse of dimensionality. Two techniques 
that address this issue, through what is referred to as dimensionality reduction, are Principal Component 
Analysis (PCA) and Factor Analysis. These techniques help us overcome the curse of dimensionality while 
minimizing the loss of information.
The main focus of principal components and factor analysis is to summarize the information in a large 
number of variables into a smaller number of factors.
PCA identifies the smallest number of factors or components necessary to explain as much (or all) of 
the variance, in a dataset, as possible. It reduces the unnecessary features present in the data by creating 
or deriving new dimensions (also called components). These components are a linear combination of the 
original variables. This way, PCA converts a larger number of correlated variables (i.e., breaks down the 
data) into a smaller set of uncorrelated variables.
Factor analysis is also used to decrease the larger number of attributes into a smaller set of factors. 
When analyzing data with many predictors, some of the features may have a common theme amongst them￾selves. The features that have similar meaning underneath could be influencing the target. A factor is, there￾fore, a common or underlying element with which several other variables are correlated. Also, these latent 
variables are not directly observable and hence are not measurable by themselves with a single variable.
There are two types of factor analysis, exploratory and confirmatory:
Exploratory factor analysis identifies the underlying factors in a set of variables where the researcher 
does not have a hypothesis.
Confirmatory factor analysis is used to confirm the effects and correlation among a set of variables, 
to test a pre-determined hypothesis relating to the relationship among the variables.
A Simple Example of Factor Analysis
In surveying patient experience at a doctor’s surgery, three responses, “spends time with me,” “answers 
my questions,” and “looked me in the eye,” were shown by factor analysis to be highly related and could Product Innovation Market Research 275
be summarized by the factor or key theme, “cares about me.” This theme can then be used in the pro￾motion of the surgery as it captures the key elements that patients value.
The Difference between Principal Components Analysis and Factor Analysis
Despite the obvious similarities between the two techniques, factor analysis differs from principal compo￾nents analysis in its approach to factor extraction. Factor analysis analyzes the covariance among vari￾ables to produce either correlated or uncorrelated factors, and principal components analysis analyzes 
the variance of the variables to produce only uncorrelated components. In principal components analysis, 
extracted components are linear combinations of the raw data, and in factor analysis, extracted factors are 
an explanation of the raw data and the relationships within them.
6.6.2 Multidimensional Scaling
Multidimensional scaling (MDS) provides a means of visualizing, or mapping, the level of similarity of indi￾vidual cases of a dataset. It is particularly useful in visually representing products that are perceived as sim￾ilar by consumers. The distribution of products in a multidimensional space can provide an indication as 
to the product dimensions considered important by consumers. It also provides an indication as to where 
gaps exist in the current product offering.
The basic MDS process is as follows:
1. Select the objects to be researched. An example is products within a specific product category, with 
a view to developing and launching a new product in this category.
2. Make a list of all possible paired combinations of the existing products. Techniques are available, 
such as factor analysis, to reduce the number of pairs if the list becomes too long.
3. Ask a sample of the target market to rate the similarity or substitutability of products in each pair. A 
sample size of 30–50 is common.
4. Analyze the paired comparison scores using MDS software to generate a visual map representing 
the relationships among the products.
The dimensions of this visual map represent the bundles of key attributes that are important to con￾sumers in their decision on similarity or substitutability. Usually, the number of dimensions is kept to two or 
three for simplicity of communication. See Figure 6.4.
6.6.3 Conjoint Analysis
Conjoint analysis is a multivariate statistical technique used in product innovation to determine how peo￾ple value different attributes (features, functions, benefits) that make up an individual product or service. 
FIGURE 6.4 Multidimensional scaling example276 Product Innovation Market Research
A conjoint survey captures the relationship between different attributes of a product and how preferable 
they are both comparatively and when combined.
One of the primary purposes for using conjoint analysis is to gain strategic insights and making better 
business decisions relating to product pricing, product feature development, branding, package design, 
and marketing messaging validation.
Conjoint surveys don’t let respondents say that everything is important. It systematically varies product 
attribute levels to create competing, realistic product profiles, and then records what people choose. The 
objective of conjoint analysis is to determine what combination of a limited number of attributes is most 
influential on respondent choice or decision-making.
The basic conjoint analysis process is as follows:
1. Potential attributes of the new product are defined with different levels or features of these attributes 
(e.g., battery life of 1 day, 5 days, 10 days).
2. The different levels or ranges of attributes are set randomly into combinations.
3. A sample of consumers (usually 30–150) is asked to rate the different combinations of attributes.
4. Results are analyzed to identify the most influential attributes in consumer decision-making.
Conjoint Analysis Example
Table 6.14 presents a simple example based on the evaluation of the “right” combination of vehicle attrib￾utes to assist in new vehicle design. When searching for the “right” vehicle, the consumer typically con￾siders a multitude of variables: type, year, mileage, price, color, accessories packages, fuel type, fuel 
consumption, etc. Given a large number of variables and potential options for each variable, the con￾sumer faces a complicated decision. The perfect choice, based on the ideal variable and options, is almost 
always impossible. Trade-offs have to be made. Conjoint analysis doesn’t let respondents say that eve￾rything is important. It systematically varies product attribute levels to create competing, realistic product 
profiles and then records what people choose.
Even in this simple vehicle example with three options for six different attributes, the complete num￾ber of possible combinations is very large. Statistical design processes are used to reduce this number of 
combinations to make the process more manageable for respondents. Conjoint surveys present samples 
of possible combinations, called choice sets, for respondents to rate, as shown in Table 6.14. Using survey 
results, it is possible to calculate a numerical value that measures how much each attribute and level influ￾enced the respondent’s choices. Each of these values is called a preference or utility score.
Preference scores can be used to develop simulation models which help to identify the specific fea￾tures and pricing that balance value to the customer with cost to the organization and forecast potential 
demand in a competitive market situation.
TABLE 6.14 Conjoint survey: simple example
Cost <$30,000 $30–40,000 >$60,000
Color Red Black White
Fuel Petrol Diesel Electric
Seating 2 4 6
Type SUV Sedan Hatch
Engine 2l 3l 4l
Accessories Full Moderate MinimalProduct Innovation Market Research 277
6.6.4 Multiple Regression Analysis
Multiple regression analysis is often used in product innovation to analyze survey-based data. It provides 
detailed insight that can be applied to new products or improve products or services when there are fac￾tors, key drivers, and product attributes that can impact the product’s perceived value proposition. It is 
used more often than simple linear regression in product innovation due to the number of factors that can 
impact new product success. It can be used to identify which variables have an impact on the topic of 
interest and is used to predict the value of a variable based on the known value of two or more other vari￾ables (predictors).
In the analysis, the results are often plotted on an axis that displays the relationship between the data￾sets. Multiple regression analysis is widely used to predict, optimize, support, or validate decisions, avoid 
risk or prevent mistakes, and provide new insight into unarticulated relationships in the product variables 
being studied.
6.6.5 Multivariate Analysis Strengths and Weaknesses
The strengths and weaknesses of multivariate techniques are summarized in Table 6.15.
TABLE 6.15 Strengths and weakness of multivariate techniques
Multivariate technique strengths Multivariate technique weaknesses
• Provide insights into the interrelationships among 
variables which does not exist with univariate 
techniques.
• Techniques including multidimensional scaling and 
factor analysis can be powerful tools to uncover 
unarticulated needs and identify gaps in current product 
offerings.
• Complex both in terms of design and analysis 
requiring a high level of statistical understanding.
• Require specific programs, which required 
specialized expertise, for analysis.
• For the data to be meaningful, large sample sizes 
are required.278 Product Innovation Market Research
6.7 PRODUCT USE TESTING
Product use testing measures the performance of a product under specific conditions replicating actual 
consumption, operation, manipulation, or handling. It is also referred to as field testing or user testing. 
Product use testing focuses on the product meeting consumer needs and requirements prior to launching 
the product in the market.
Product use testing should not be confused with test marketing or market testing which are discussed 
in Section 6.8.
6.7.1 In-home Use Test vs. Central Location Tests
In-home use test (IHUT) is where a product is utilized or consumed and tested in the participant’s home 
setting. An IHUT is especially useful when the product is used frequently, two or more times per week, or if 
the product is a food, beverage, or beauty product and can be consumed during different use occasions. 
It is also useful if the usage is a sensitive or private situation. The product is shipped to participants, who 
log their usage experiences and responses into online software. Real-life product use in the home or other 
intended use environment is important to the reliability of research results.
Central location test (CLT) is where testing is carried out in a specially designed testing location. 
Individual participants or a group of participants meet in a central location where the product is tested 
under simulated use conditions.
A summary of how to choose between IHUT and CLT is presented in Table 6.16.
6.7.2 Alpha, Beta, and Gamma Testing
Alpha, beta, and gamma testing is a form of market research primarily used in the software or technology 
industry to test a new product during development and just prior to launch. This form of market research 
may not be strictly quantitative, in the sense of providing a specific level of statistical confidence, due to 
the lack of statistically based sample selection. It does, however, provide the level of detailed feedback that 
only comes from the use of the product in its final, or near-to-final, form and functionality.
TABLE 6.16 Choosing between IHUT and CLT
Factor IHUT vs. CLT
Time available CLT delivers quicker results.
Market representation IHUT provides for deeper insights into realistic product usage.
Natural setting IHUT has a significant advantage over CLT in that it is carried out in a real-life setting.
Broader audience Where you are looking for responses from a broader audience, for example a food product 
that would be consumed by a whole family, then IHUT is preferred over CLT.
Attracting participants 
to a central location
Some target consumers may find it difficult to get to a central location, for example the 
elderly, people caring for small children, low income etc. IHUT would be preferred.
Control over product 
usage
Where product use and testing requires significant instruction and supervision, CLT is 
preferred.
Confidentiality CLT allows for greater confidentiality, possibly through use of no-disclosure agreements.Product Innovation Market Research 279
Alpha Testing
Alpha testing is initial usability testing, which is normally done by in-house testers, such as a quality control 
group. On rare occasions, alpha testing is done by the client or an outsider. Once the alpha testing version 
is released, it’s then called the Alpha release.
Beta Testing
Beta testing is done by end users before product delivery. The users give feedback or report defects. Change 
requests are made and fixed prior to full product launch. The version released after beta testing is called Beta 
release. Beta testing can be considered pre-release testing. Beta test versions of software are now distributed to 
a wide audience partly to give the product a real-world test and partly to provide a preview of the next release. 
The main objective behind beta testing is to get feedback from different customer groups and check the prod￾uct’s compatibility with different kinds of networks and hardware.
Gamma Testing
Gamma testing (or a gamma check) is performed when the application is in its final state and ready for release to 
customers. The gamma test is the last opportunity to identify critical errors in the product. Security, performance, 
and usability are generally the focus of gamma testing. No feature development or enhancement of the soft￾ware is planned or undertaken as a result of this test, and only tightly scoped bug fixes are written at this stage. 
Gamma testing is less common now, as greater pressure has been imposed on speed to market and automated 
testing tools have improved.280 Product Innovation Market Research
6.8 MARKET TESTING AND TEST MARKETING
6.8.1 The Difference Between Market Testing and Test Marketing
These terms can be confusing. Both tests are designed to provide customer feedback from specific tar￾get markets at later stages of product development. The difference is that market testing focuses on an 
existing product in a new market or market segment, while test marketing focuses on a new product in a 
market.
Market Testing
This testing is carried out to determine the market potential for an existing product in a specific area where 
the product did not exist earlier. This includes testing new market segments, considering target users, 
geographies, demographics, or any new market attribute that was not a target in the initial product launch. 
The test is done to ascertain whether the product will be successful or not in the new market and to ana￾lyze its sales potential.
Test Marketing
Test marketing is carried out by companies who are planning to launch a new product. The test is carried 
out on a small scale to determine the response of their customers to the new product, frequently collect￾ing data on all four aspects of the marketing mix (product, price, promotion, place). This test is conducted 
before the product is launched. It provides valuable customer feedback on areas for product improvement 
as well as the overall sales potential.
The strengths and weaknesses of market testing and test marketing are shown in Table 6.17.
6.8.2 Specific Methods of Test Marketing and Market Testing
Simulated Test
Customers are selected and surveyed on their brand familiarity and preferences in a specific product cat￾egory. These customers are exposed to promotional material and other marketing mix variables related to 
the product in a staged or artificial marketplace. Researchers expose customers to advertising and other 
marketing mix variables to gauge their purchase intent.
TABLE 6.17 Strengths and weaknesses of market testing and test marketing
Strengths of test marketing 
and market testing
Weaknesses of test marketing 
and market testing
• Provides information that significantly increases 
the probability of making the correct decision.
• Significantly reduces the probability of wasted 
capital and other expenditures on an unsuccessful 
market launch or expansion.
• All elements of the distribution and marketing plan 
can be tested and validated.
• Data can be used to improve sales forecasting for 
full launch.
• Can be time-consuming and expensive.
• May lead to delays in full expansion launches.
• Could provide competitors with an early insight into 
potential market plans and allows them more time to 
launch a competitive response.Product Innovation Market Research 281
Controlled Test
A panel of stores is selected to stock the new product under real market conditions. Shelf position and 
number of product facings are controlled, and sales are measured at checkout. A sample of customers is 
later interviewed or surveyed to give feedback on the product.
Sales Wave Research
Used to test consumer reaction to new products prior to full-scale commercialization; new products are 
placed in consumer homes to determine the reaction to them, and the rate at which the products are 
re-purchased is tracked.282 Product Innovation Market Research
6.9 MARKET RESEARCH AND VOICE OF THE CUSTOMER: INTEGRAL TO
PRODUCT INNOVATION
Cooper (2023) claims that “in general, marketing activities are the most poorly executed activities of the entire 
new product process, rated far below corresponding technical (engineering, design, R&D) activities. Moreover, 
relatively few resources are spent on marketing actions (except for the launch), accounting for less than 
20 percent of total projects. A market focus is relevant throughout the entire new product project,” as shown in 
Figure 6.5.
Cooper (2023) goes further to point to a high degree of customer participation at the prototype devel￾opment stage (feedback, testing, opinions, and comments), is much more likely to result in market suc￾cess. He claims that “smart project teams build in a series of deliberate iterative steps whereby successive 
versions of the product are shown to the customer to seek feedback and verification, as shown as the 
curved arrows in Figure 6.6. Not only do iterations reduce market uncertainties, they also can be used to 
reduce technical uncertainties by seeking technical solutions in an experimental, iterative fashion.”
Broadening the base of customers—
beyond the lead user
Market research—not just confirmation—
but as an input to the product’s design
Market research—not just confirmation—
but as an input to the product’s design
Discovery: Idea
generation Stage 1: Scoping Stage 2: Build
business case Stage 3: Development Stage 4:
Testing and validation
Stage 5:
Full launch
Ensuring that the customer/user is involved
very early in the process 
Rapid prototype-and-tests during the
development phase—iterative validation
spirals
Executing a proficient launch—well
planned, properly resourced
Gate 1
Idea screen
Gate 2
2nd screen
Gate 3
Go to dev
Gate 4
Go to test
Gate 5
Go to launch
PLR
Post-launch
review
FIGURE 6.5 A strong customer focus includes key actions from beginning to end in the innovation 
process. From What separates the winners from the losers and what drives success.
Source: Cooper, (2023) / Stage-Gate International. Product Innovation Market Research 283
Gate 2 Gate 3 Gate 4
Stage 4:
Testing and
validation
Stage 3:
Development
Stage 2:
Build business case
Field trial, beta test,
user test 
Next
prototype
and test 
1st
Prototype
and test
Rapid
prototype
(protocept)
and test 
Full
proposition
concept test 
Voice-of￾customer user
needs and
wants study
FIGURE 6.6 Iterative or spiral development – a series of “build-test-feedback-revise” iterations 
with customers – gets the product right. From What separates the winners from the losers and 
what drives success. 
Source: Cooper, (2023) / Stage-Gate International.284 Product Innovation Market Research
6.10 MARKET RESEARCH AT SPECIFIC STAGES OF PRODUCT INNOVATION
Market research is an essential contributor to decision-making at all stages of product innovation. Each 
method discussed in this chapter has its advantages for specific stages and required decision-making. 
No one tool or method is able to answer all questions. It is also important to understand which methods 
explore and discover insights and which methods confirm and validate or narrow possibilities and eliminate 
options.
Throughout this book, we have emphasized the general principle that the risks and costs associated 
with product failure increase as the product innovation process progresses. This implies that the qual￾ity and reliability of the information on which critical decisions are made needs to increase as the product 
innovation process progresses. Although this may be a sound general principle to apply in the selection of 
a market research method, every case is different, and it is important to answer the three critical questions 
addressed in Section 6.2:
• What information is required, or what specific questions need to be answered?
• Who is the target market or important stakeholder group(s)?
• What level of confidence in the accuracy of the data is required? This will normally relate to the risks 
involved.
The following is a guide to some of the methods best suited to each phase of product innovation.
6.10.1 Product Innovation Strategy
This phase generally requires forward-looking research. What are the trends? Where are the new potential 
markets? Which markets are likely to grow and which to decline? What customers do we already have 
relationships with? What customer problems do we understand well?
The use of a range of methods is important in strategy development. Comparing and cross-referencing 
various sources lays the foundation for sound decision-making during this phase. Secondary research 
sources can provide a good source of information, particularly where relevant trend analysis is provided. 
SWOT, PESTLE, and Delphi methods, as described in Chapter 2 Strategy, provide the most appropriate 
methods for targeted primary research.
6.10.2 Identifying Opportunities
This phase is often called the front end of innovation or the discovery phase. Opportunities may come in 
the form of totally new products, modifications, or improvements to existing products, or line extensions 
to existing product lines or platforms. The primary focus is identifying these opportunities and early-stage 
evaluation of their potential. Various forms of primary and secondary qualitative market research methods 
are well suited.
Secondary methods can be good sources of new ideas, including Internet searches, trade fairs, trade 
journals, patents, suppliers, social media channels, and government and trade statistics.
Primary qualitative methods are particularly useful for identifying opportunities, especially insights com￾petitors have missed. Methods include:
• A range of ideation techniques, crowdsourcing, and big data analysis.
• Focus groups involving customers or other stakeholders, distribution channel members, sales force 
representatives, and organization staff.
• Social media sites, both general social media sites, specific discussion forums, and blogs.
• Customer site visits, particularly for B2B product innovation.
• Ethnography for identifying unarticulated needs that can lead to product ideas.
• Multivariate analyses identify gaps in the current market offerings or the underlying attributes valued 
by customers and which can be formed into the new product concept.Product Innovation Market Research 285
6.10.3 Evaluating Ideas and Early-stage Business Analysis
The selection of opportunities for inclusion in the product portfolio is discussed in Chapter  3, Portfolio 
Management. The focus during this phase is the collection and analysis of key market information required 
relating to market size and sales potential, competitor and competitor products, target market characteris￾tics, and the price the customer is likely to pay. This information provides the basis for early-stage financial 
analysis and for ongoing refinement of the financial analysis.
Secondary research can provide some general information on aspects of the target market, sales 
potential, and competitive landscape.
Primary research methods include:
• Interviews
• Focus groups
• Surveys
• Concept sorts
6.10.4 Concept Development and Testing
During this stage, a more detailed concept description is sought, leading to product design specifications 
(refer to Chapter 5.3). Customer and other stakeholder input are required to identify the key benefits, attrib￾utes, and functionality desired in the product.
Primary options for research methods include focus groups, lead-user groups, online discussion 
forums, customer site visits, surveys, concept testing and concept sorts, sensory testing, recipe formation 
and testing, and specific multivariate techniques such as conjoint analysis.
Secondary research into competitive solutions includes various online sources and intellectual property 
databases for existing patents and trademarks. More detailed and robust secondary research on market 
potential and the business case is important to justify the increased cost of development in the next stage.
6.10.5 Prototype Development and Product Use Testing
During this stage, the concept takes physical form with possible functionality. Project costs start to rise 
significantly, and it is increasingly important to make the right decisions regarding product benefits, form, 
and function. The availability of samples or prototypes that display form and possibly function provides a 
far better basis for seeking customer feedback than the concept description (words and images) used to 
describe the product in the previous stage. Demonstration of the prototype during research will certainly 
add significantly to customer understanding of the product and, in turn, result in more valuable and reliable 
feedback.
At this stage, the accuracy and reliability of information become more and more important. Consideration 
should be given to primary quantitative research, including surveys, and alpha testing, with qualitative tools (inter￾views, focus groups, and customer site visits) to help explain the quantitative results. Virtual reality, 3D prototype 
models or visuals, images, and video are useful as stimuli for research when building iterative physical prototypes 
is cost-prohibitive.
6.10.6 Pre-launch Product and Test Marketing
At this stage, the product is developed and manufactured to its final commercial form and functionality. 
Next comes the decision on whether to proceed with full product launch. Although obtaining the most reli￾able information to avoid product failure is a critical consideration, this often has to be balanced against the 
need for speed to market and the cost of testing. If speed to market is an absolute priority, or the risk of 
product failure is relatively low, then a beta test or full launch may be appropriate. Where there is significant 
potential for damage to a brand or financial loss, then a test market may be justified.286 Product Innovation Market Research
6.10.7 Post-launch Product Testing and Market Research
Once the product is launched, and throughout its life cycle, market research often plays an important role 
in determining its performance and success. Market research provides information for decision-making 
around line extensions, market expansion, and understanding competitive response. Some examples 
include the use of customer panels or lead user groups that provide answers to specific time-sensitive 
questions or longitudinal studies over a product’s lifetime, competitive benchmarking and tear-down analy￾sis, B2B customer satisfaction surveys, etc. Many companies purchase syndicated industry data, scan￾track data, or participate in industry studies to learn more about their customers, markets, and market 
share over time.
A summary of appropriate market research methods in each phase of the product innovation process 
is provided in Table 6.18. This is intended to provide a guide to the most appropriate methods based on 
the information required and the risks involved in decision-making in each phase. The final selection of 
market research methodology will depend on a range of factors:
• Is the product new to the organization, a line extension, or an improvement?
• How familiar is the organization with the product and market? What level of prior knowledge resides 
in the organization?
• How much new capital expenditure will be required on plant and equipment?
• What level of new human resource commitment is required?
• What existing brand value could be impacted by the success or failure of the new product?
• What is the likelihood and timeframe for competition?
So, for example, a company planning to enter the electric vehicle market may have limited relevant 
prior knowledge currently within the company. Significant financial commitment will be required for R&D, 
and specialized human resources in the early phases of product innovation. Large capital expenditures will 
be required for prototyping and for final manufacture. There will almost certainly be significant risks related 
to brand equity. Also, costs associated with launch, market support, and after-sales service will be high, 
relative to the current product range. This all adds up to significant risks throughout the product innovation 
process, demanding high-quality and reliable market information. This points to the need for quantitative 
research methods that provide statistically reliable information from the specific target market.
On the other hand, a food manufacturing company specializing in fermented milk products is plan￾ning to develop a line extension to its existing yogurt range. The company has significant knowledge of, 
and experience in, the yogurt market. Very little new capital equipment expenditure is likely to be required. 
Product launch and after-sales maintenance of the market can be handled with existing resources. And 
there is unlikely to be a negative reaction to the extent that it would negatively impact the brand. All point￾ing to the need for qualitative market research, providing input to the new product’s sensory profile and 
functionality. Although statistically reliable market data may be helpful, the costs of this type of research are 
probably not justified, given the low risks involved.Product Innovation Market Research 287
TABLE 6.18 Market research at different phases of product innovation
Product 
innovation 
phase
Information required Level of risk Appropriate research 
methods
Strategy 
development
Future trends in products and 
markets.
Relatively high. Strategic 
decisions can lead to 
significant investments in 
R&D, equipment, and human 
resources.
Although largely qualitative, it 
important to cross-compare 
information from a range of 
sources leading to objective 
analysis. Methods include:
• Secondary research, 
Surveys, SWOT, 
Delphi, PESTLE
Opportunity 
identification
Ideas for new products or product 
improvement.
Information on a target market – 
who is the customer, 
demographics, psychographics? 
What are their needs and desired 
benefits?
Relatively low. Initial project 
costs are generally low and 
no commitment to capital at 
this stage. Proceeding to the 
next stage of concept 
evaluation should not be 
costly with limited commitment 
to resource and project 
continuation.
Mainly qualitative:
• Secondary research, 
Social media, Focus 
groups, Customer 
site visits, Lead user 
groups, Ethnography, 
Multivariate tools
Opportunity 
evaluation
Who is the target market and how 
large is the market? What is the 
economic potential? How well 
does the product fit within the new 
product portfolio?
Relatively low, but at this stage 
you are heading down the road 
to project commitment where 
costs and project risks can rise 
rapidly.
Qualitative with some 
attempt to quantify:
• Secondary research, 
Focus groups, Social 
media: lead users, 
Customer site 
visits, Surveys
Concept 
development
What features, functionality, and 
aesthetics does the customer 
want or need in the product? This 
information provides the basis for 
concept development and product 
design, leading to product design 
specifications.
Low to medium. But a 
commitment at this stage leads 
to much higher financial 
commitment in more expensive 
design and prototyping.
Mainly qualitative:
• Focus groups, Social 
Media, Lead users, 
Online discussion forums, 
Customer site visits
Prototyping 
and testing
Is the product design heading in 
the right direction? Now that the 
customer can start to see the 
tangible product, is it meeting 
their expectations – their needs 
and wants? What changes are 
required? Customer feedback at 
this stage can provide more 
confidence in the financial analysis 
and the business case for 
commercialization.
Very much dependent on the 
project. Risk may be regarded 
as high where a commitment at 
this stage is leading to potential 
capital investment and high 
costs of commercialization. 
Further business analysis may 
be carried out to confirm earlier 
evaluations.
Mainly qualitative. But 
with a focus on quantitative, 
particularly where risks 
associated with 
commercialization are high:
• Secondary research, 
Focus groups, Customer 
site visits, Surveys, 
Conjoint analysis
(Continued)288 Product Innovation Market Research
TABLE 6.18 (Continued)
Product 
innovation 
phase
Information required Level of risk Appropriate research 
methods
Pre-launch 
testing
Information is required from the 
target market on product 
acceptance (possibly relative to 
competitors), sales potential, 
pricing. All required to firm up 
on the business case for 
commercialization.
Dependent on the project.
High risk, where significant 
expenditure will be required for 
commercialization. The trade-off 
between uncertainty leading to 
product failure and the pressure 
for speed to market must be 
considered.
Low risk where commercialization 
costs are low and product/market 
knowledge is high.
Qualitative:
• Beta testing, Market 
testing, Test marketing, 
Probability sampling 
could be applied to Test 
Marketing to increase 
the statistical reliability of 
the data. Thus, providing 
greater confidence in the 
business case analysis.
Post-launch 
and life cycle 
management
Information determining product 
success and measuring 
distribution, sales, market share, 
demand, competitive response, 
customer user satisfaction are 
required.
Data on potential for line 
extensions, improvement, or 
enhancements, market or 
distribution expansion may be 
required, and research methods 
are similar to the opportunity 
identification step.
High. Commitment of ongoing 
human and operational 
resources are required to launch 
and maintain products in market. 
Firms risk long-term financial 
sustainability by ignoring 
changing consumer needs, 
demand and the competitive 
landscape.
Quantitative:
• Primary sales, distribution 
data, Syndication data
Qualitative:
• Longitudinal and 
satisfaction surveys, 
Secondary research, 
Industry data, Economic 
and consumer trends, 
Competitive analysis, 
Social media analysisProduct Innovation Market Research 289
6.11 MARKET RESEARCH METRICS AND KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
While primary research is designed to help answer unique and specific questions that guide product inno￾vation and management decisions, there are also many common metrics used in market research for 
product innovation, development, and product life cycle management that measure, monitor, analyze, and 
present results in a comparable and efficient way to track product success. These common measures are 
ubiquitous across industries and categories and provide a core set of transferable measurements across 
businesses.
The following are common product innovation and management research metrics with a brief and 
basic description of what is measured:
• Acquisition effort: The extent to which your product or service is accessible to your customer.
• Awareness: Product and brand: the extent to which customers are familiar with your product or 
brand.
• Brand development index: Sales of your brand compared with its average performance in all mar￾kets.
• Brand image: How customers think and feel about your product and brand.
• Convenience: The extent to which your product or service makes your customer’s life easier, saves 
time or effort, etc.
• Customer attitudes: The extent to which your customers have a favorable or unfavorable attitude 
toward your product or service.
• Distribution: The extent to which your product is available in the market.
• Ease of use: The extent to which your product or service is simple to operate, consume, engage, or 
interact with.
• Engagement: The extent to which your customers interact in a relationship with your company, 
brand, product, or service.
• Installed base: The number of units that are actually in use over a particular time frame.
• Market penetration: The percentage of your target market that you have reached at least once in a 
specific period of time.
• Market share: The percentage of the total market held by your company, brand, product, etc.
• Market size: A measure of the total market potential (in terms of sales, profit, number of potential 
buyers, units sold, volume, etc.) for a company, product, or service.
• Net promoter score: The likelihood someone would recommend your product or service to a 
friend.
• Percent of all commodity volume (%ACV): The percentage of the total annual sales volume 
aggregated from all retailers where your product can be sold.
• Pride (to own, to serve): The extent to which your product or service contributes to a positive 
sense of self for your customer.
• Satisfaction: The extent to which your product or service meets the needs of your customer; how 
happy customers are with a company’s products, services, and capabilities.
• Usage and purchase intent: The extent to which someone says they will use or purchase your 
product or service.
• Willingness to pay: The highest price at which a customer says they will definitely buy your product 
or service.
As a specific example of the application of market research metrics, Table 6.19 presents four of the 
most important SaaS (Software as a Service) sector metrics (Bernazzani, 2022).290 Product Innovation Market Research
TABLE 6.19 Four of the most important market metrics for the SaaS sector
Metric Description
Customer 
churn rate
Measures how much business you’ve lost within a certain time period. It is one of the most 
important metrics in tracking the day-to-day vitality of your business, and can help you better 
understand customer retention across specific date or time periods.
Revenue churn Reveals how much revenue was lost in a given period. For subscription-based companies.
Choose a specific period of time – one year, one month, all time, etc. – and be consistent in 
entering the metrics from that time for accuracy.
Customer lifetime 
value (CLV)
The average amount of money that your customers pay during their engagement with your 
company.
Find your customer lifetime rate by dividing the number 1 by your customer churn rate. For 
example, if your monthly churn rate is 1%, your customer lifetime rate would be 100 
(1/0.01 = 100).
Customer 
acquisition 
cost (CAC)
Shows exactly how much it costs to acquire new customers and how much value they bring to 
your business.
To calculate CAC, divide your total sales and marketing spend (including personnel) by the total 
number of new customers you add during a given time.Product Innovation Market Research 291
6.12 IN SUMMARY
• Market research includes a range of techniques that are essential to product innovation to enable 
informed decision-making throughout the new product innovation process and management of the 
product life cycle.
• The two basic categories of market research are primary and secondary. Primary research is original 
research conducted by an organization specifically to meet its objectives. Secondary research relies 
on the collection of information from studies previously performed and published by other individuals, 
groups, or agencies.
• Market research techniques can be further classified as either qualitative or quantitative. In general, 
quantitative techniques provide a greater level of statistical confidence in the research. Qualitative 
techniques can provide context and deeper insights into customers’ problems and unmet needs.
• In selecting which market research technique to use, it is important to recognize the costs and risks 
associated with a specific decision. Qualitative techniques, although valuable throughout product 
innovation, are particularly helpful in the early stages of idea generation and concept development. In 
the later stages of product innovation, costs and risks will generally increase, thus requiring greater 
confidence in the market research and justifying the additional costs of quantitative research.
• Ongoing application of market research throughout the new product innovation process significantly 
increases the chances of product success. Specific techniques are more appropriate at different 
stages of the process. No single technique is perfect, and the use of a range of techniques and 
cross-referencing the results is the best approach.
• Crowd sourcing and Big Data has gained prominence as a key source of market research for 
product innovation. They provide large volumes of data that can often compensate for the lack of 
statistical reliability, although care should be taken in over-reliance on their statistical accuracy.292 Product Innovation Market Research
A. MARKET RESEARCH PRACTICE QUESTIONS
1. A product manager reviewed technical publications, electronic databases, and websites prior to design￾ing a research project that directly contacts prospective customers. This review of already-published 
materials is an example of:
A. Market testing.
B. Voice of the customer.
C. Portfolio management.
D. Secondary market research.
2. During new product development, companies often use to measure end user satisfaction with a product 
and to determine whether the company can deliver the total quality product as promised.
A. Lead user research.
B. Product use testing.
C. Secondary research.
D. Quality function deployment.
3. You are responsible for validating the value proposition of adding a number of new features to your cur￾rent product line. A way to explore the association between adding one or more new features and the 
perceived value to the user would be to:
A. Color code the feature sets so that they are easily identified by the user.
B. Add fake sets of features to see if respondents identify the actual product features.
C. Run a volumetric study of the most profitable product prototype to forecast sales.
D. Conduct a conjoint study varying feature sets and price points to optimize the new feature set and 
product price.
4. Factor analysis, multidimensional scaling, conjoint analysis, and multiple regression analysis are 
examples of:
A. Qualitative research techniques.
B. Multivariate research techniques.
C. Voice of customer techniques.
D. Ethnographic research techniques.
5. Qualitative market research techniques should be considered when?
A. Context and direction are needed.
B. Deep customer insights are sought.
C. Customers’ unmet needs have yet to be discovered.
D. All of the above.
6. A software company is developing an update to a specific app for online shopping. The company has 
extensive experience with its target market through previous product launches. Even if there are minor 
faults with the app, these can be quickly remedied after launch without significant negative customer 
response. Speed to market is critical. The company is seeking customer reaction to the improved fea￾tures and functionality of the new app. What market research approach would you recommend?
A. Focus groups.
B. In-house alpha testing followed by beta testing.
C. Test marketing.
D. Factor analysis.
7. Research that involves collecting information specifically tailored to your needs (such as focus groups or 
surveys) is known as____.
A. Primary research.
B. Secondary research.Product Innovation Market Research 293
C. Qualitative research.
D. Quantitative research.
8. A disadvantage of focus groups in marketing research is ____.
A. Their high cost to implement focus groups.
B. The long process of recruiting participants, conducting the focus groups, and providing analysis.
C. The complexities of executing focus groups.
D. They are not good at identifying needs customers have yet to recognize.
9. A toy manufacturing company is developing a “powered vehicle” for 10–12-year-old children. The com￾pany has extensive experience in the toy market, but mainly with under 5-year-olds. The main risks asso￾ciated with the project relate to a lack of previous engagement with the 10–12-year group along with 
meeting their specific requirements. Getting the product right is more important than speed to market. 
What market research technique would you recommend?
A. Consumer panels selected from the target age group.
B. Alpha testing.
C. Lead users.
D. Crowdsourcing.
10. Social media is particularly good for reaching ____.
A. Potential new customers.
B. Lead users.
C. Customers in foreign markets.
D. Those needing customer service.
Answers to practice questions
1. D 6. B
2. B 7. A
3. D 8. D
4. B 9. A
5. D 10. B294 Product Innovation Market Research
REFERENCES
American Society for Testing and Material (1981). Guidelines for the selection and training of sensory panel members (ASTM￾STP 758). ASTM.
Belliveau, P., Griffin, A., and Somermeyer, S. (ed.) (2002). The PDMA toolbook 1 for new product development, Vol. 2. John 
Wiley & Sons.
Bernazzani, S. (2022). 15  metrics every SAAS company should care about. HubSpot Blog https://blog.hubspot.com/service/
saas-metrics.
Cooper, R.G. (2023). What separates the winners from the losers and what drives success. In: The PDMA handbook of innovation 
and new product development, 4e (ed. K.B. Kahn), 3–44. John Wiley and Sons.
Cooper, R.G. and Dreher, A. (2015). Voice of the customer methods: What is the best source of new product ideas? Stage￾Gate International https://www.stage-gate.com/new-product-development-process/voice-of-customer-methods-what-is-the-best￾source-of-new-product-ideas/.
Hofacker, C., Malthouse, E.C., and Sultan, F. (2016). Big data and consumer behavior: Imminent opportunities. Journal of 
Consumer Marketing 33 (2): 89–97. https://doi.org/10.1108/JCM-04-2015-1399.
Kahn, K.B., Castellion, G., and Griffin, A. (ed.) (2004). The PDMA handbook of new product development, 2e. John Wiley and 
Sons.
Katz, G. (2010). Rethinking the product development funnel. Massey University. http://stream.massey.ac.nz/mod/url/view.php?id=
1423336.
Laney, D. (2001). 3D data management: controlling data, velocity, volume and variety. Gartner.
Miller, C., Perry, B., and Woodland, C.L. (2004). Ethnographic market research. In: The PDMA toolbook 2 for new product innova￾tion (ed. P. Belliveau, A. Griffin, and S. Somermeyer), 297–330. John Wiley and Sons.
Moe, W. and Schweidel, D. (2017). Opportunities for innovation in social media analytics. Journal of Innovation Management 34
(5): 697–702. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12405.
Naresh, K.M. (2009). Marketing research: An applied orientation. Prentice Hall.
Ottum, B. (2004). Quantitative market research. In: The PDMA handbook of innovation and new product development, 2e (ed. 
K.B. Kahn, G. Castellion, and A. Griffin), 279–301. John Wiley and Sons.
Pisano, G., Verganti, R., and Deschamps, E. (2015). A study on the impacts of business model design and innovation on firm per￾formance. Entrepreneurship Research Journal 5 (3): 181–199. https://doi.org/10.1352/2326-6988-3.3.199.
Statista. (2022). Social media marketing usage rate in the United States from 2013 to 2022. https://www.statista.com/statistics/
203513/usage-trands-of-social-media-platforms-in-marketing/
Thomke, S. and Von Hippel, E. (2002). Customers as innovators: A new way to create value. Harvard Business Review 80
(4): 74–81.
Zikopoulos, P., Eaton, C., DeRoos, D. et al. (2015). Big data beyond the hype: A guide to conversations for today’s data center. 
Paul McGraw-Hill.Product Development and Management Body of Knowledge: A Guidebook for Product Innovation Training and Certification,Third Edition. 
Allan Anderson, Chad McAllister, and Ernie Harris.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
7
Product
Innovation
Culture and 
Teams
Essential to forming and maintaining an 
innovative environment that enables, 
encourages, and rewards product innovation 
processes and practices.296 Product Innovation Culture and Teams
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS CHAPTER
While strategies, processes, and tools are important for product innovation success, ultimately, it is people 
that really matter – the culture, teams, and leaders. In this chapter, we discuss the importance of develop￾ing the right culture of innovation; the roles and responsibilities of management; what is required to achieve 
a high-performing team, team development, and team leadership; and what team structures are appropri￾ate in specific situations.Product Innovation Culture and Teams 297
CHAPTER ROADMAP
What is organizational culture and climate, and how 
does this impact product innovation?
What are the advantages and
disadvantages of these team structures?
Where are they best applied?
What types of team structures can be
used for product innovation —
functional, lightweight, heavyweight,
autonomous?
What are the leadership roles
and responsibilities? What are the characteristics
of a good leader?
What are the characteristics of a high￾performing team? How can a high-performing team
be developed?
How can the principles of good team formation, 
development, function, and leadership be applied
in a virtual environment?298 Product Innovation Culture and Teams
7.1 PRODUCT INNOVATION CULTURE AND CLIMATE
“Culture eats strategy for breakfast.” This quote was attributed to the management guru Peter Drucker in 
2006 and made famous by Mark Fields, who later became chief executive of Ford Motor Company.
Put simply, this means that no matter how strong your strategic plan is, its implementation will be 
seriously hindered if your organization does not have the right culture supported and shared by everyone 
across the organization.
While strategy and process are essential to product development and product management, this alone 
will not lead to the organization’s sustained success. People are ultimately what make an organization suc￾cessful. The culture and climate ultimately provides the framework within which the strategy and process 
can be positively and successfully implemented.
7.1.1 What are Organization Culture and Climate?
Culture is defined as the shared beliefs, core values, assumptions, and expectations of people in the 
organization. Culture:
• Reflects the organization’s values.
• Is observable in customs, rites, ceremonies, stories, heroes, and patterns.
• Infers how work is accomplished.
• Expresses survivability: what we do naturally to survive.
Climate is defined as the set of properties of the work environment, perceived directly or indirectly by 
employees, that has a major effect on employee behavior:
• Quality of leadership
• Communication
• Responsibility
• Trust
• Fair recognition and rewards
• Opportunity
• Employee involvement and participation
7.1.2 The Importance of Innovation Culture and Climate
The importance of an innovation culture is strongly advocated across most leading organizations. 
Following are quotes from senior executives of a selection of organizations that lead in product innovation:
“Organizations whose strategic goals are clear, and whose cultures strongly support those 
goals, possess a huge advantage.” Booz & Company (2011)
“Innovation is so deeply embedded in Apple’s culture. The boldness, ambition, belief there aren’t 
limits, a desire to make the very best products in the world. It’s the strongest ever. It’s in the DNA of 
the organization.” Tim Cook, CEO of Apple.
“I encourage our employees to go down blind alleys and experiment. We’ve tried to create tools 
to reduce the cost of doing experiments so that we can do more of them. If you can increase the 
number of experiments you try from a hundred to a thousand, you dramatically increase the num￾ber of innovations you produce.” Jeff Bezos, Amazon Founder.Product Innovation Culture and Teams 299
“What does it take to create this kind of innovative impact? It starts with great hiring. . .ensuring a 
‘culture fit’ is critical. . .sharing Airbnb’s core values, and comfortable with risk and enjoy adven￾ture. . .environmental elements that support the innovative culture include:
• Collaborative workspaces, fun spaces encouraging people working across disciplines.
• Think globally, act locally.
• A flat organization where risk-taking is encouraged. Ask for forgiveness rather than permission.” 
Katie Dill, Airbnb.
“I came to see, in my time at IBM, that culture isn’t just one aspect of the game—it is the game. In 
the end, an organization is nothing more than the collective capacity of its people to create value. 
Vision, strategy, marketing, financial management—any management system, in fact—can set you 
on the right path and carry you for a while. But no enterprise—whether in business, government, 
education, health care, or any area of human endeavor—will succeed over the long haul if those 
elements aren’t part of its DNA.” Lou Gerstner, former CEO of IBM.
Although the Toyota production system (TPS) is largely credited for the organization’s success, Toyota 
views employees not just as pairs of hands but as knowledge workers who accumulate chie – the wisdom 
of experience – on the organization’s front lines. Toyota, therefore, invests heavily in people and organiza￾tional capabilities, and it garners ideas from everyone and everywhere.
Venture capitalist Ben Horowitz wrote in, “What you do is who you are,” that a great culture alone does 
not get you a great company (Horowitz, 2019). The point he’s making is that if the market doesn’t want 
what you’re selling, culture isn’t going to get you to success. That said, culture is to business as nutrition is 
to an athlete. If you’re a talented athlete, you may be successful, even with poor nutrition. However, if you 
also have a solid nutritional regimen, you are much more likely to be a world-class athlete.
Going beyond Horowitz’s nutrition analogy, a strong cultural identity breeds strong intellectual and 
emotional alignment. When people are aligned in mission, vision, and values, much more is possible. 
Organizations with award-winning cultures demonstrate this alignment, such as Google, Adobe, HubSpot, 
Zoom, and many others (Peart, 2020).
The critical importance of culture to product innovation success is also strongly supported by the 
results of the PDMA’s CPAS survey carried out in 2012 (Markham & Lee, 2013). Although it is universally 
accepted that culture plays a very important role in product innovation success, there is no “magic bul￾let” for creating a culture of innovation. The “right” culture is very much personal to the organization. What 
works well in one organization may be completely wrong for another.
One factor contributing to this is employee engagement. Gallup has researched aspects of workplace 
engagement for decades (Harter, 2022). They define employee engagement as the involvement and enthu￾siasm of employees in their work and workplace. Employee engagement in the US has varied from 28 to 
36% since 2001, meaning that only about a third of the workforce, on average, feels engaged at work. 
Engaged employees are needed to support an innovation culture.
As an example, a study of 150 American companies demonstrated widespread gaps between 
employee views of their work environment and engaging, creative, innovation team climates 
(Denning, 2015).
• Only 5% of survey respondents felt highly motivated to innovate,
• More than 75% reported their ideas were poorly reviewed and analyzed,
• One in seven (16%) did not believe intellectual property was viewed as a critical business function, 
and
• Nearly half (49%) felt they would not receive any recognition or benefit for developing successful 
ideas.300 Product Innovation Culture and Teams
There are several factors and initiatives that feature in most successful innovation cultures:
• Organizational values with a clear focus on product innovation.
• A business strategy that clearly emphasizes the role and importance of product innovation.
• A clear sense of goals and direction within the business strategy is communicated, understood, and 
shared across the organization.
• Trying and failing is better than not trying at all. “Ask for forgiveness, not permission.”
• Individual performance objectives are clearly related to overall organization innovation objectives, and 
good performance is recognized in appropriate ways.
• Fit with the innovation culture is a key recruitment criterion.
• Effective communication should be encouraged internally and externally.
• Constructive conflict is encouraged. A vigorous debate is better than passive agreement.
• As far as possible, make work enjoyable and rewarding – not just financially, but personally.
• Work is engaging, and leaders encourage both professional and personal growth.
• Constructive conflict is encouraged to support idea generation and problem-solving.Product Innovation Culture and Teams 301
7.2 MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES
In this section, the roles of management are discussed with respect to several areas crucial to successful 
new product innovation. These include:
• Strategy,
• Product innovation processes,
• Organization and teams, and
• The product itself.
As you explore culture and team organizational structures across companies, you will find that roles, 
responsibilities, and titles vary greatly. For example, a program manager, portfolio manager, and senior 
product manager may all perform the same duties in different companies. The structure and titles of an 
innovation team are often heavily influenced by the pedigree of the leadership team itself. If the team is 
heavily sales-based, titles will tend to be more market-facing such as Director of Innovation. If the leaders 
are more operational in their background, titles such as Program Manager or Portfolio Manager will seem 
more tactical.
7.2.1 Product Innovation Strategy Roles
As discussed in Chapter 2, corporate strategy is built on the foundation of mission, vision, and values. 
Further, all other strategies, including innovation strategy, are derived from corporate strategy, as shown 
in Figure 7.1. Corporate strategy is determined by a corporate executive team. A typical executive team 
includes senior representatives from key corporate functions, such as finance, marketing, sales, manufac￾turing or development, and technology. A company’s board of directors may be directly or indirectly asso￾ciated with the executive team, with the CEO (chief executive officer) linking the two groups.
Titles and specific roles and responsibilities will again vary significantly from organization to organization 
based on the size, industry, geography, and more.
Technology,
marketing, intellectual property 
Mission,
vision,
values 
Corporate
strategy
Business strategy
NPD portfolio strategy
NPD project strategy
Other functional strategies
Innovation strategy
FIGURE 7.1 Hierarchy of strategies302 Product Innovation Culture and Teams
Business Strategies are typically defined by senior leadership team members, or in the case of com￾panies with multiple business units, leaders of those respective units. Some typical titles involved in the 
creation of a Business Strategy include but are not limited to:
• President
• Executive Vice President, Senior Vice President, or Vice President
• Director
Innovation Strategies expand upon the questions answered in the Business Strategy and are often 
developed by a cross-functional team. As with all strategies, alignment is key, and it is typically the senior 
leadership team that ensures that alignment. The objective is for innovation to be integrated consistently 
across organizational objectives.
Functional Strategies, including development/engineering, marketing, sales, manufacturing, procure￾ment, and finance, are developed by the functional leader and a senior team from the specific functional 
area. Normally, goals are implemented by these functional leaders to support the implementation of higher￾level strategies and to achieve tactical objectives.
Product Strategies will normally be developed by the product team led by a senior product person, 
such as the VP of Product, who coordinates with the senior leadership team to ensure alignment. Whereas 
the overall business and innovation strategies may change very little on an annual basis, product strategies 
reflect changing trends and market opportunities. The product strategy includes life cycle management 
and product or brand management of individual products and platforms. These concepts are discussed in 
Chapter 1, Product Innovation Management.
7.2.2 Product Innovation Process Roles
Organizations that successfully launch repeatable innovations typically include several specific manage￾ment roles. In some cases, these innovation leaders have designated titles, while in many organizations, 
these roles are filled by business or functional leaders. Smaller organizations may have one person fulfill 
many roles. Titles and designations vary depending on the project management methodology (e.g., Stage￾Gate®, waterfall, Agile, or hybrid approaches, as discussed in Chapter 4).
First, the process champion is a senior executive responsible for establishing the new product inno￾vation process. A process champion works to ensure the quality and consistency of the implementation of 
product innovation processes. Training of new staff members and talent development to support innova￾tion also fall within the responsibility of the process champion. Note that the facilitation of product innova￾tion processes and training may be delegated to the process owner or other functional managers.
The process owner is typically a senior manager responsible for the strategic results of the organiza￾tion’s innovation programs. This includes innovation strategy alignment activities, product innovation pro￾cess throughput, quality of process outputs, and active participation by all levels of employees across the 
organization.
A process manager is necessary to successfully implement any product innovation process. Usually, 
process managers are functional leaders responsible for ensuring that product portfolio decisions are 
implemented in an orderly manner. In addition to ensuring the adequacy of approved schedules, budgets, 
and resources, the process manager often facilitates innovation training, brainstorming, ideation, and post￾launch reviews. The process manager will gather and analyze data to support the metrics of the organiza￾tion’s innovation system.
Project managers are responsible for the execution of individual product innovation projects. They 
follow the accepted methodology for project management and ensure that project milestones are delivered 
on time and on budget. Depending on the product innovation scale and scope of work, project managers 
may serve only in a supervisory role or work on the project’s technical or marketing aspects.Product Innovation Culture and Teams 303
7.3 PRODUCT INNOVATION TEAM STRUCTURES
7.3.1 Team Membership
Individual team members are responsible for implementing the work of an innovation project. Team mem￾bers should be trained in both product innovation process implementation and demonstrate functional 
knowledge and expertise to accomplish the project’s work. The most successful innovation compa￾nies use cross-functional teams throughout the product innovation life cycle.
Team Diversity
Research into the impact of diversity on financial performance dates back several decades or more. 
Harvard Business Review reported in the article, “How and Where Diversity Drives Financial Performance,”
that companies which were above average in total diversity (measured as the average of six dimensions: 
migration, industry, career path, gender, education, and age) were 19% points higher in innovation revenue 
and 9% points higher in EBIT (Lorenzo and Reeves, 2018).
Abbie Griffin has made many contributions to the innovation discipline and researched serial innova￾tion teams in organizations. Some of her research is shared in the book she co-authored titled, “Serial 
Innovators: How Individuals Create and Deliver Breakthrough Innovations in Mature Firms” (Griffin 
et al., 2012). The authors identified eight types of thinkers who are beneficial to innovation teams: linear, 
spatial, connection, holistic, critical, concrete, divergent, and convergent. Consequently, diversity in think￾ing styles also improves innovation performance.
While more diverse teams tend to deliver better financial results, diversity alone is not sufficient. 
Diversity without sound organizational and managerial processes is not enough. Rather it is the addition of 
diversity to sound leadership practices that appears to deliver an added benefit.
Multi-disciplinary and Cross-functional Teams
High-performing, multi-disciplinary teams improve the quality of the product and decrease project devel￾opment times. Cross-functional communication brings issues to light sooner and facilitates collaboration. 
Hand-offs between functional teams at milestones reduce knowledge transfer and should be minimized. 
Successful innovations are delivered by product innovation teams that combine R&D, engineering, opera￾tions, and marketing skills throughout the development project. An ideal cross-functional team shares the 
following group characteristics:
• Includes all necessary functional representatives,
• Ensures team member assignments are continuous from project initiation to market launch,
• Provides appropriate communication tools,
• Establishes clear project and team objectives with expected performance outcomes, and
• Indicates functional, project, and career alignments.
7.3.2 Project Team Structures
Typical project team structures used in innovation range from a model with deep, functional expertise to 
autonomous teams tasked with designing and developing new-to-the-world products. Wheelwright and 
Clark (1992) first identified four common product innovation team models:
• Functional team,
• Lightweight team,
• Heavyweight team, and
• Autonomous team.
Each team model is described below.304 Product Innovation Culture and Teams
Functional Teams
Functional teams are typically built from an organizational hierarchy. As indicated in Figure 7.2, product 
innovation team members are drawn from individual functions, such as engineering, manufacturing, and 
marketing. Each team member is responsible for a portion of the product innovation project that corre￾sponds to their functional expertise. One or more functional managers very loosely coordinate team mem￾bers’ work, and the work often involves hand-offs among the functions.
A functional team can be used successfully in product innovation under the following situations:
• In developing fundamental research for deployment across a broad set of product lines, and in which 
deep functional expertise and knowledge are critical to development,
• In entrepreneurial and small businesses, where there are few resources and few projects worked 
simultaneously, and,
• In organizations that seek incremental product improvements as part of a defender strategy so that 
functional competency outweighs the need for multi-disciplinary activities.
Team member performance and tasks are generally maintained by the functional manager. Functional 
teams are also used for very low-risk product improvements, especially in slow-moving industries.
Organizations emphasizing production efficiency over innovation are more likely to use functional 
teams.
Engineering Manufacturing Marketing
Working level
Functional
manager 
Functional
manager 
Functional
manager 
FIGURE 7.2 Functional team structureProduct Innovation Culture and Teams 305
Lightweight Teams
As illustrated in Figure 7.3, and as compared to a functional team, a lightweight team adds a degree of 
coordination for the new product innovation project. Functional liaisons are identified, and a project man￾ager is named. The project manager may also be a significant independent contributor to the project work 
in a lightweight team. Team members continue to report to their own functional manager with the added 
responsibility of the innovation project. The project manager does not have authority over the team mem￾bers and serves primarily as a communication liaison for project information.
Lightweight teams are often used for minor product improvements in which the development work 
requires coordination among functions. Functional team members have deep expertise regarding the prod￾uct and features but may not be able to participate in the project throughout the full design and develop￾ment life cycle.
Heavyweight Teams
In contrast to the lightweight team, a heavyweight team has a greater focus on the project than on func￾tional alliances. A key driver for project work comes from the market as the product innovation team con￾verts a concept into a commercially viable product or service. As shown in Figure 7.4, a cross-functional 
core team is assembled with members from every discipline necessary to accomplish the product innova￾tion work. The project manager/leader, in contrast to lightweight teams, does have authority while also 
providing coordination and communication, both internally and externally. The project manager tends to be 
a more senior leader in the organization.
Because the role of the project manager is clearly delineated and the innovation work is more complex, 
the project manager formally directs the work of individual team members. In the heavyweight team model, 
the project manager has responsibility over the work of staff members, but the functional managers retain 
career management and ultimate authority for their performance.
While communication, coordination, and collaboration are highly focused on the product innovation 
project in a heavyweight team, this organizational structure is not right for every project. The heavyweight 
Engineering Manufacturing Marketing
Functional
manager 
Functional
manager
Functional
manager
Liaison Liaison Liaison
Project/
program
manager
FIGURE 7.3 Lightweight team306 Product Innovation Culture and Teams
team structure should be used when the technical or marketing development is complex, involving new 
applications, customers, and markets. Teams can be large, with each core team member supervising 
another sub-team within their function. Heavyweight teams are more resource intensive than functional 
workgroups and lightweight teams, requiring skilled leadership that can focus and energize team members 
across a broad spectrum of functions and disciplines. In many cases, the heavyweight team members are 
dispersed geographically, and the team leader will deploy additional tools and techniques to manage the 
virtual team (see Section 7.6).
Autonomous Teams
The word autonomous means independent and self-governing. Thus, autonomous teams are used in new 
product innovation for major, long-term ventures. Such teams are sometimes called tiger teams or known 
as skunk works projects, which was coined at Lockheed Aircraft Corp. They aim to model the structure of 
an entrepreneurial startup firm within corporate boundaries. Clayton Christensen recommended the auton￾omous team structure for radical, disruptive innovation (Christensen & Raynor, 2003).
Autonomous teams, as shown in Figure 7.5, are led by a senior executive as the project manager and 
remove team members from their home function to form the stand-alone project venture. The project leader 
has full and complete authority and responsibility for the team and the success of the new product innovation 
effort. Often the venture team is housed in a separate location, away from the organization’s headquarters or 
operational facilities, to yield higher independence and autonomy for the development team.
A key advantage of autonomous teams is the laser-like focus on the purpose and mission of the pro￾ject. Often these teams work on new-to-the-world products with disruptive technologies entering (or creat￾ing) brand-new markets. This type of work is typically energizing to team members, and they often remain 
assigned to the maintenance and growth of the new product line over its subsequent life cycle, including 
the development of next-generation products and services.
Engineering Manufacturing Marketing
Functional
manager 
Functional
manager 
Functional
manager
Core team members
Project/
program
manager
FIGURE 7.4 Heavyweight teamProduct Innovation Culture and Teams 307
Team Structure Comparison
Each organizational structure for new product innovation projects has strengths and weaknesses (see 
Figure 7.6). The correct team structure should be chosen for the needs of the innovation project. However, 
this is less common than it should be, as many organizations use the same team structure for a wide vari￾ety of project types. Instead, senior leaders should work with the portfolio management team, the product 
innovation process owner, and the product innovation process manager to identify the appropriate team 
structure for each innovation project.
In general, projects requiring depth of knowledge and expertise with little customer interaction are bet￾ter suited to execution by a functional work team or a lightweight team. As uncertainty and the complexity 
of technology and business development increase, team structures such as the heavyweight and autono￾mous teams become more valuable.
Strengths of one team structure can be weaknesses of others. For example, having a deep knowledge 
of a single product technology is a strength for the work of a functional team, but a heavyweight or auton￾omous team needs to have open, customer-focused perspectives to yield broadly applied and creative 
solutions. Career congruency is well-established for lightweight teams but may be less certain for individu￾als working on a complex product innovation project under a new venture.
Engineering Manufacturing Marketing
Functional
manager
Functional 
manager
Functional
manager
Senior
leader/
project
manager
Core team
memeber 
Core team
memeber 
Core team
memeber 
FIGURE 7.5 Autonomous team308 Product Innovation Culture and Teams
Type of development team Strengths Weaknesses
Functional
• Optimal use of resources, expertise,
depth, scale economies 
• Control accountability
• Career path congruence
• Lack of breadth
• Rigid and bureaucratic
• Task not project oriented
• Slow and disjointed
• Turf expertise driven
Lightweight
• Improved communications and
coordination 
• Less idle time between tasks
• Weak project leader and project focus 
• Frustrating to individuals
Heavyweight
• Strong project focus, commitment, and
accountability 
• Integrated solution
• Difficult to staff
• Requires depth
• Must break down into functional barriers
Autonomous
• Focus on results
• Own business objectives
• Innovative
• Independent, not integrated with rest of
organization 
• Team members may lose connection to
functional group 
FIGURE 7.6 Team structure comparisonProduct Innovation Culture and Teams 309
7.4 TEAM DEVELOPMENT
7.4.1 Defining a High-performing Team?
Katzenbach and Smith (1993) defined a team as “a small number of people with complementary skills 
who are committed to a common purpose, set of performance goals, and approach for which they hold 
themselves mutually accountable.” High-performing teams typically grow and develop through several 
well-known stages and processes. Team leaders work with the product innovation process champion 
and product innovation process owner to ensure that innovation team members have the right skills and 
that the team structure is appropriate for the scale and scope of the project work. Innovation teams are 
successful when the team climate assures strategic alignment, engagement, and empowerment as key 
arenas.
Strategic alignment: Team members need to understand how the project is connected to, and 
driven by, business objectives. The common purpose of the project is aligned with and contributes to 
the overall goals of the organization.
Engagement: Motivated team members feel a sense of pride in their work and camaraderie with 
their fellow teammates. Rewards and recognition for both individual and team contributions drive 
improved performance.
Empowerment: Empowered team members are more creative and make decisions that lead to 
better product designs. Open dialogue is encouraged, and team members’ views are considered in 
decision-making for innovation projects. The team itself is empowered to do the work in the best way 
possible.
As illustrated in Figure 7.7, team success factors of strategic alignment, engagement, and empower￾ment are supported by additional elements. For example, strong leadership is required for an innovative 
team climate, as are interaction and involvement in which all team members have an equal voice in team 
decisions.
Self-esteem, one of the values in Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, is reinforced by management and 
leadership for team members and is shared through rewards and recognition. Open communication is 
extremely important for innovation teams so that the team members can speak freely to share ideas and 
concepts.
In addition to empowerment at the team level (shown in the central core of Figure  7.7), individual 
empowerment means that each person is treated equally and that the team climate is mutually sup￾portive of each team member, promoting psychological safety. Effective processes are also important for 
successful innovation teams. These processes include standards for knowledge sharing and meetings, as 
described in Section 7.6 on virtual teams. Trust and diversity are both key characteristics to building an 
engaged and empowered team because creativity will flourish when team members share trusting relation￾ships and when different experiences contribute to unique solutions. Productive conflict management (see 
Section 7.4.4) is a common characteristic among high-performing innovation teams since some conflict 
can drive creativity, with task-based conflict resulting in better outcomes, but unhealthy conflict can hinder 
the accomplishments of a team.
Finally, as indicated with strategic alignment, a successful innovation team requires a project goal that 
is clear and succinct. Common goals unite team members and are especially important when working with 
team members in functional groups or who are dispersed as in a virtual team.310 Product Innovation Culture and Teams
7.4.2 Team Formation
Psychologist Bruce Tuckman (2001) developed a model of the growth stages of high-performing teams in 
the 1960s. His research indicates that teams naturally advance sequentially through a series of activities 
and emotions to reach their highest collaborative working potential. A team that is disrupted by changes 
in membership, for example, will backtrack to the initial stage and again advance sequentially through the 
team formation phases. These stages are forming, storming, norming, performing, and adjourning (refer to 
Figure 7.8). Note that if the team is ongoing, as in manufacturing or marketing, the stage of reforming is 
substituted for adjourning. Because product innovation teams are typically project-oriented, the adjourning 
stage is most common. However, as the model suggests, allowing teams to remain intact has significant 
performance advantages over teams that are rebuilt for each project.
Forming: In this stage, most team members are positive and courteous to one another. Some are anx￾ious, as they may not fully understand what the team will do. Others are excited about the task ahead. The 
leader plays a dominant role at this stage because team member roles and responsibilities are generally 
not defined. Typically, this stage is not lengthy because as people start to work together, they try to get to 
know their new colleagues. In many instances, team members are appointed to innovation teams based 
on skills or product expertise and may assume a set of expectations for their role on the team, which can, 
in part, lead to storming.
Storming: The storming stage is characterized by conflict, and it is the primary responsibility of the team 
leader to manage these disruptions in a healthy way. People assigned to the team may be frustrated with 
the pace of development on the team or confused by the apparent duplication of roles. Often the problem 
statement is not clearly defined, and the storming stage is used to clarify the team’s purpose and goals. 
Many teams, especially with weak or inexperienced leadership, can get stuck in the storming stage.
Norming: Gradually, the team moves into the norming stage. This is when people start to resolve their dif￾ferences, appreciate colleagues’ strengths, and respect the leader’s authority. During the norming stage, 
team members establish their own ways of working together and agree upon standard practices. One way 
in which teams can reach an agreement is to have a clear vision for the project, project goals, and team 
processes documented in a team charter.
Common goals
Leadership
Interaction
involvement Self esteem
Open
communication
Effective process Mutual trust Diversity
Strategic alignment, engagement, and empowerment
Conflict
management 
Creative tension is
allowed, and conflict
addressed in a
healthy way 
Team leader encourages
people involvement,
coordinates the team,
has strong people and
communication skills
and encourages shared
leadership roles 
Involving everyone on
the team 
Draw contributions
from whole team; value
and acknowledge all
contributions
Team members feel
they can speak freely,
give relevant feedback
and build effectively
relationships 
Empowerment
Power within the team
to make decisions and
work through issues
they have power to
resolve 
Effective team process
and work planning
roles and
responsibilities clearly
defined 
Treating each other
with respect and
integrity 
Respect for differences
in the team membership
and ability to disagree
Clearly defined
common goals, focus
on a single purpose
FIGURE 7.7 Framework for a high-performing teamProduct Innovation Culture and Teams 311
Performing: The team reaches the performing stage when hard work leads, without interpersonal friction, 
to the achievement of the team’s goals. The team structures and processes established by the team are 
working well. The leader delegates more work to individual team members and concentrates on develop￾ing individual team members and skills for the overall group. Team members feel comfortable with each 
other and enjoy being part of the team. Project work is completed at a rapid pace, and learning is at a high 
level.
Adjourning: As indicated, in all temporary teams, the stage of adjourning arrives as the team’s work on 
the project is complete. In product innovation projects, the product is launched and turned over to stand￾ard business operations. Team members are free to be assigned to other projects or are returned to their 
home organizations. In some cases, team members are reformed into new business divisions for ongoing 
support of the new product.
7.4.3 Work Styles
As a team is formed and develops, personal and professional work style preferences can impact the 
team’s effectiveness. Work styles are especially important for team members to understand and respect 
in cross-functional, multi-disciplinary teams (Gallup,  2023). Individual bias can hinder trust and increase 
conflict if team members fail to recognize and value diversity within the team. For example, a classic point 
of conflict arises in innovation teams between engineering and marketing representatives. Engineers and 
marketers typically use their own jargon and are assumed to approach problems from very different per￾spectives. Engineers may assume marketers make only qualitative decisions, while marketers may assume 
the engineers are too slow and plodding in their analysis. Other business discipline representatives face 
similar stereotyping based on personality assumptions.
Using a work style assessment during the forming stage of a project team can help team members 
to overcome bias and assumptions. Work style assessments, like DiSC®, provide a tool and common 
vocabulary for team members to improve communication and collaboration. In particular, DiSC® creates a 
team profile index that allows team members to discuss problems, motivators, and stressors while guiding 
enhanced dialogue for creativity (Scullard & Baum, 2015).
• Conflict, frustrated
with pace of
development, or
confusion with roles
• Leader manages
these disruptions in
a healthy way 
• Team establish their
own ways of working
together and agree
upon standard
practices, resolve
differences, appreciate
colleagues’ strengths
• Leader’s authority is
respected 
• Team members are
free to be assigned
to other projects or
are returned to
their home
organizations 
Forming Storming Norming Performing Adjourning
• Appropriate team
members join 
• May be a chaotic
state as people find
their roles
• Team is positive and
courteous to one
another; some are
anxious, and others
are excited 
• Leader plays a
dominant role
• Team structures and
processes are
established and
working well, team
feels comfortable
with each other and
work rapidly 
• Leader delegates work
to individuals and
develops team
members and skills
FIGURE 7.8 Stages of team formation312 Product Innovation Culture and Teams
The DiSC® work assessment tool describes everyone’s preferred working style. Unlike other assess￾ment tools (such as the Myers-Briggs or Big Five Personality Traits), DiSC® focuses on a team member in 
a professional setting. The four primary categories of work styles, refer to Figure 7.9, include the following:
D-Dominance: Individuals with a “D” work style tend to prefer a fast pace of work. They are quick 
to make decisions and may be perceived as overly demanding. These team members are action￾oriented.
I-Influence: Team members with an “I” work style are highly energetic and talkative. They will build 
social relationships easily and seek new people to engage with. Some team members may view 
those with the “I” style as “all talk, no action”; however, these team members add enthusiasm to the 
work.
S-Steady: Innovation team members with the “S” work style are considered even-tempered and 
calm, valuable traits when the new product innovation work is chaotic or unstructured. These team 
members are more accommodating than many other people and will easily show empathy for others. 
While other team members may view their work pace as moderate, these individuals help to stabilize 
uncertain project activities.
C-Conscientious: The final category of DiSC® work styles are analytical and reserved. These team 
members need to have a complete dataset to evaluate before making a rational decision. They are 
often perceived as unemotional but pride themselves on accurate, detailed work. Others may view 
their attention to detail as a hindrance to project work.
Regardless of the tool used, it is important to understand the skillsets present on your team and how 
those skills will be most likely employed through personality and behavioral lenses. In most cases, product 
innovation project work is best accomplished with a balance of team member work styles. Both a diversity 
of product experience and a diversity of work styles can lead to increased creativity that yields more novel 
product solutions.
D I
C S
Dominance
• Direct
• Results-oriented
• Firm
• Strong-willed
• Forceful
Influence
• Outgoing
• Enthusiastic
• Optimistic
• High-spirited
• Lively
Conscientiousness
• Analytical
• Reserved
• Precise
• Private
• Systematic
Steadiness
• Patient
• Even-tempered
• Accommodating
• Tactful
• Humble
Moderate-paced
Task People
FIGURE 7.9 DiSC® work style assessmentsProduct Innovation Culture and Teams 313
7.4.4 Conflict Management
While dialogue and problem-solving are usually considered healthy conflict, disruptions to teamwork 
and the ability of group members to collaborate can hinder effective and productive project accomplish￾ments. Conflict that is not addressed directly or dismissed as unimportant can fester, arising later to dis￾rupt relationships and the team’s productivity. Potential causes of conflict on an innovation team include 
(Kerzner, 2013):
• Resources, both people and financial,
• Equipment and facilities,
• Capital investment,
• Budget and costs.
• Technical opinions and trade-offs,
• Functional priorities,
• Organizational procedures and policies,
• Regulatory limitations,
• Scheduling,
• Project and functional responsibilities,
• Project constraints and boundaries, and
• Work style differences.
It is important to recognize that conflicts are a characteristic of high-performing teams. In these teams, 
the conflicts are associated with tasks and disagreements about the best way to accomplish a task or 
objective. Such disagreements, in teams that are also characterized as having high mutual accountability 
and a focus on delivering the expected results, lead to better decisions and outcomes.
A traditional approach to conflict management is known as the Thomas-Kilmann model (Kilmann & 
Thomas,  1978). The two dimensions, shown in Figure  7.10, are cooperativeness and assertiveness. 
Cooperation is viewed as a concern for others and is characterized by behaviors to encourage acceptance 
of views from other team members. Assertiveness is also known as concern for self and focuses on get￾ting one’s own views accepted by others. By combining various levels (low, medium, high) of cooperative￾ness and assertiveness, several conflict management styles are evident.
Compromising
Many people believe that
compromising is an effective solution,
yet compromise is often viewed as a
lose-lose solution because no one
gained the view for which they had
negotiated, frequently difficult to
implement compromise solutions
because splitting the difference fails
to garner across-the-team buy-in
Cooperativeness
Assertiveness
High level of cooperation but low
level of assertiveness, team
member may yield to the conflict
to others in order maintain
harmony
Low concerns for others, low
concern for self (assertiveness),
leaves problem unresolved,
person considers the problem is
not theirs 
Often considered a directive way
of resolving conflict, can be useful
when decisions are simple or
binary, preferred method of
conflict resolution when safety
or regulatory requirements are
debated
Considered most effective
method of conflict resolution,
high degree of concern for others
and self, requires dialogue among
team members, might be time
consuming and unnecessary 
Competing
Avoiding Accommodating
Collaborating
FIGURE 7.10 Thomas–Kilmann conflict model314 Product Innovation Culture and Teams
Avoiding: Avoiding is characterized by low concern for others (cooperativeness) and a low concern for 
self (assertiveness). In many cases, the avoiding style leaves the problem unresolved. In other situations, a 
person may assume they are not part of the problem and leave the situation for others (who are closer to 
the problem) to engage in generating a solution.
Accommodating: In conflict resolution, the accommodating style is characterized by a high level of coop￾eration but a low level of assertiveness. In this situation, a team member may yield the conflict to others to 
maintain harmony in the team.
Compromising: At an intermediate level of cooperativeness and assertiveness is compromising. In typi￾cal interactions, many people believe that compromising is an effective solution, yet compromise is often 
viewed as a lose-lose solution because no one gained the view for which they had negotiated. It is fre￾quently difficult to implement compromise solutions because splitting the difference fails to garner across￾the-team buy-in.
Competing: With a high level of assertiveness and a low level of cooperativeness, competing is often 
considered a directive way of resolving conflict. Using the competing style to resolve team conflicts can be 
useful when decisions are simple or binary. It is also the preferred method of conflict resolution when safety 
or regulatory requirements are debated.
Collaborating: Many people believe that collaborating is the most effective method of conflict resolution 
because it involves high degrees of concern for others and concern for self. Collaboration requires dia￾logue among all team members so that each can express their own view of the situation. A drawback of 
collaboration for conflict resolution is that it is time-consuming and may not be necessary for every discus￾sion item.
Managing conflict in project teams requires effective communication and negotiation. The team char￾ter documents the process for escalation of conflicts, especially regarding decisions of resourcing and 
funding.Product Innovation Culture and Teams 315
7.5 TEAM LEADERSHIP
As previously discussed, executives in senior management provide and set the direction for innovation 
through strategy and portfolio decisions. The product innovation process champion, process owner, and 
process manager also provide direct leadership for innovation teams. Innovation team leaders manage 
both the human resources of a project and the logistical goals of the project, such as scope, schedule, 
and budget. Effective leaders are emotionally intelligent and support the team as servant leaders rather 
than task dictators.
7.5.1 Roles and Responsibilities
The team leader provides direction, guidance, and support to a group of individuals working toward a 
specific goal. Effective leaders know the team members’ strengths, weaknesses, and motivations. Team 
leader roles include:
• Providing purpose (what the team should achieve),
• Building a star team, not a team of stars,
• Establishing shared ownership for the results,
• Developing team members to their fullest potential,
• Making work interesting and engaging,
• Motivating and inspiring team members,
• Leading and facilitating constructive communication,
• Monitoring progress without micromanaging.
7.5.2 Communication
Team selection, its development, and ongoing operation are significantly impacted by a range of factors, 
both internal and external. Effective communication plays a significant role in the performance of the team 
and the interactions with the team leader.
Team performance is influenced by clear communication of the following:
1. Culture and environment of the organization; it’s the values and behaviors that are encouraged for 
high performance.
2. Structure of the organization, including the roles and expected relationships among various functions.
3. Processes in place to promote and enhance team performance, such as the utilization of a team 
charter document to outline team member expectations.
4. The skills and capabilities represented in the team and how these can work together to achieve 
desired project outcomes.
5. Appropriate rewards with recognition that drive both individual and team motivation.
6. Leadership at all levels, including senior management, and how these are engaged and provide 
direction and support.
7. Collaboration and cooperation within the core team and how this extends, where necessary, to other 
functions and sub-teams, as indicated in Figure 7.11.316 Product Innovation Culture and Teams
7.5.3 Emotional intelligence
Leaders high in emotional intelligence (EI) are twice as effective as leaders low in emotional intelligence. 
As Goleman (1998) has noted, technical competency and IQ are necessary but insufficient qualities for 
strong leadership performance. Emotional intelligence is comprised of self-management components and 
elements directed toward managing relationships (see Figure 7.12).
Self-awareness is the first self-management component in EI. Leaders with a high degree of 
self-awareness are typically self-confident, having a deep understanding of their own emotions, strengths, 
weaknesses, and needs. Their decisions mesh with their value systems, and they can debate and discuss 
with a balance of candor and realism.
Core or
key team
members
(6-10)
Support functions
and sub-teams
Functional
managers and
organization
resources 
Senior management
and supporters 
FIGURE 7.11 Team communication network structure
Emotional intelligence
Self-awareness Self-regulation Motivation Empathy Social skills
• Exhibit valuable social
skills, such as an ability
to motivate and direct
teams 
• Can rely upon a broad
network to gain success 
• Exhibit the highest levels
of self-management 
• Typically self-confident,
having a deep
understanding of their
own emotions, strengths,
weaknesses, and needs
• Their decisions mesh
with their value systems,
and they can debate
and discuss with a
balance of candor and
realism
• Ability to control
emotional impulses and
to channel bad moods
into positive energy 
• Better able to cope with
change and create team
climates with trust, 
respect, and fairness 
• Practice reflection and
thoughtfulness to
enhance their own
personal integrity 
• Seek creative challenges,
love to learn, and take
pride in accomplishments 
• Keep score in order to
raise the performance
of the organization 
• Viewed as optimistic
• Recognize and respect
others’ feelings,
understanding how and
when to provide feedback 
• Respond to unspoken
body language as well as
to spoken words to create
relational bonds
• Use coaching and
mentoring to increase
empathy with team
members, which in turn
improves job satisfaction,
improves performance,
and decreases turnover 
FIGURE 7.12 Elements of emotional intelligence for innovation leadersProduct Innovation Culture and Teams 317
Self-regulation is another trait of a leader with high EI. Self-regulation is the ability to control emo￾tional impulses and to channel bad moods into positive energy. Leaders with self-regulation are better able 
to cope with change and create team climates with trust, respect, and fairness. Such leaders practice 
reflection and thoughtfulness to enhance their own personal integrity.
Motivation is a characteristic of self-management leading to high EI. Motivated leaders seek creative 
challenges, love to learn, and take pride in their accomplishments. Leaders with high self-motivation also 
keep score to raise the performance of the organization and are typically viewed as optimistic.
Empathy and social skills are the two elements of EI that are supported by the traits of self-management 
yet are reflected in effective relationships. Leaders with empathy recognize and respect others’ feelings, 
understanding how and when to provide feedback. An empathetic leader will respond to unspoken body 
language as well as to spoken words to create relational bonds. Innovation leaders use coaching and 
mentoring to increase empathy with team members, which in turn improves job satisfaction and perfor￾mance while decreasing turnover.
Social skills may not traditionally be valued as leadership competencies. However, leaders with high 
EI exhibit valuable social skills, such as an ability to motivate and direct teams. In building rapport with 
various functions, team members, suppliers, distributors, and customers, leaders with high social skills can 
rely upon a broad network to gain success. Individuals who exhibit the highest levels of self-management 
are usually also adept at social skills.318 Product Innovation Culture and Teams
7.6 VIRTUAL TEAMS
So far we have covered culture, leadership, and team structures but with an underlying assumption of geo￾graphic proximity. In other words, traditional team theory implies co-location. In this section, we will explore how 
Virtual Teams (sometimes referred to as remote or distributed teams) impact the concepts discussed thus far.
Remote work in the United States has been growing steadily for many years now. Figure 7.13 shows 
that even prior to the global COVID pandemic which began in 2020, remote work has been growing rap￾idly (Strap, 2020).
What’s even more interesting is the rapid growth in remote work, with a 417% increase projected by 
2025 compared to prepandemic levels (Ryan, 2023).
While it is beneficial to co-locate product innovation teams, it is often impractical and/or infeasible to 
house a team in one central location. As we’ve already seen, remote work is on the rise, and the devel￾opment of effective online collaboration tools has been accelerated by the COVID pandemic to the point 
where even product innovation jobs, once thought to be an in-person role exclusively, are now increasingly 
available as remote or virtual positions.
Much has been written on the topic of virtual vs. co-located teams. It is important to focus on the 
aspects of team leadership that are most important relative to the context of the team. Simply stated, all 
teams have the same challenges, but some are more prevalent in the virtual context. Specifically, commu￾nication and team cohesion need more attention in virtual teams.
One of the most cited downsides to virtual teams involves cultural, ethnic, or language barriers related 
to communication (Hardenbrook & Jurgens-Kowal,  2018). To help mitigate these challenges, the Virtual 
Team Model (VTM) provides five elements and 16 operational practices to bridge communication gaps in a 
virtual team (see Figure 7.14).
7.6.1 Initiation and Structure
Virtual teams will go through the same development stages as discussed in Section 7.4.2. Some of the 
requirements that differ for virtual teams revolve around team cohesiveness and commitment to a shared 
vision. Most leaders today have experience in, and are skilled at, leading and motivating a team which 
they have physical access to. In-person teams need to be functionally capable, committed to success, 
and aligned on vision. The most common practice is to have a team-building exercise where the team is 
required to interact physically, meet each other, building shared experiences – this is most often not an 
option for a virtual team. Therefore, some of the initiation and structural components of team building differ 
slightly. Some of the more important virtual team model initiation and structure components include:
• Hiring for purpose: For a virtual team, it is important to select team members who share the mis￾sion and vision of the project statement. Because these individuals are often working independently, 
44% =
91% =
159% =
Growth in remote work
over the last 5 years 
Growth in remote work
over the last 10 years
Growth in remote work
over the last 12 years
FIGURE 7.13 Pre-COVID trends through 2017Product Innovation Culture and Teams 319
hiring for purpose assures their alignment with strategic objectives so that decisions are naturally 
coordinated with the project and organizational goals.
• Individual leadership: Dispersed team members may not interact with their leader daily. They need 
self-motivation to schedule and complete project tasks. Virtual team members represent the project 
to their local management in local markets and thus require both generalist and specialist knowl￾edge. Such team members can work on in-depth problems within their field of expertise but also 
need broad education and experience to represent the project, the product, and the brand locally.
• Team formation: As indicated in Section 7.4.2, teams usually advance through stages of forming, 
storming, norming, performing, and adjourning. Phases such as storming and norming can be more 
difficult without face-to-face dialogue. For larger projects or complex innovation work, a face-to-face 
kickoff meeting can facilitate the necessary conversations to build trust among team members. If a 
face-to-face kickoff meeting is impossible, frequent video conferencing accompanied by social team￾building activities serves as a secondary substitute. Building trust is an important outcome of the 
team formation phases.
• Training in online tools: As the use of online tools for virtual meetings increased, so has the capa￾bility of these tools, including many interactive features. Training in the use of these tools can signifi￾cantly enhance the value of virtual meetings.
• Shared goals: Team members working from a common office or lab space receive frequent feed￾back on their progress. However, dispersed team members often work alone in isolated spaces. 
Rather than relying on natural conversations and interactions of a co-located team, virtual teams are 
successful by focusing on the common goal. The hallway conversations can be replaced with video 
and chat collaboration tools like Slack. Individuals accustomed to virtual work often perform better in 
an asynchronous communications modal. Team leaders should reiterate the shared purpose at every 
opportunity, regardless of whether they’re leading in-person or virtual teams.
7.6.2 Communication Practices
Usually, face-to-face communication is the richest form of discussion because body language, facial 
expressions, and gestures make up as much as 80% of communication. Even with the high-quality video 
conferencing available today, many components of face-to-face communication are lost among dispersed 
Initiation &
structure 
Communication Meetings Knowledge
management Leadership
• Hiring for
purpose 
• Individual
leadership 
• Team formation
• Shared goals
• Use appropriate
communication
methods 
• Languages &
customs
• Celebrate
diversity
• Meeting format
• Rigorous
planning 
• Quality standards
• System
engineering 
• Collaboration
tools 
• Lessons learned
• Task oriented
• Site visits
• 80/20 listening
Virtual teams
FIGURE 7.14 Virtual Team Model320 Product Innovation Culture and Teams
team members. Five operational practices within the Virtual Team Model can improve the outcomes of dis￾persed project work teams:
• Video: Prior to the pandemic of 2020, distributed teams relied heavily on voice and asynchronous 
communications solutions. As the pandemic drove more than 50% of the global workforce remote, 
companies like Zoom, Google, and Microsoft quickly filled the need to meet remotely but with high￾definition video capabilities. Today, cameras on is a popular meeting tenant and provides access to 
non-verbal communication content but also appears to be bringing people closer together through 
shared experience.
• Chat: Communications tools from companies like Slack, Microsoft, and Facebook provide an analog 
for hallway conversations but with the added benefit of logging. Some, like Slack, are complete com￾munications ecosystems that integrate deeply into process platforms, development life cycle man￾agement tools, and even customer engagement solutions.
• Email: While email was the de-facto asynchronous communication method, it is both technologi￾cally and culturally becoming a thing of the past. Email is often used to communicate large quantities 
of information, nuanced concepts, or as a record-keeping tool for official communications. It is by 
no means obsolete, but it is rapidly being replaced by other, lighter-weight forms of communication, 
such as WhatsApp and WeChat.
• Language and customs: While English is often chosen as the primary language for a dispersed 
team, individual skills, comfort, and competency may vary. Team members who share a different pri￾mary language may feel uncomfortable speaking during team meetings. The team leader sets the 
tone for acceptance and patience if team members use awkward phrasing or poor grammar. Com￾municating via chat often relieves social and emotional pressure brought on by hesitation to “find the 
right word” or accents.
• Celebrate diversity: Teams need internal trust to succeed. Intellectual trust is sufficient for co￾located teams demonstrating their educational background and experience (Rosenfeld et al., 2011). 
However, when the innovation challenge involves more risk, emotional trust surpasses cognitive 
capability as a measure of success. Dispersed teams establish emotional trust by building shared 
goals and celebrating their diversity. Virtual teams can inspire deeper respect and trust for one 
another by telling stories of their local cultures, such as special holidays or sporting events. Personal 
relationships lead to increased trust and team cohesiveness. Here too, technology is meeting the 
demand. Google’s calendaring tool, for example, provides pre-defined events that can be added to 
individual or team calendars with the click of a mouse for cultural, religious, sports, and more.
7.6.3 Virtual Meetings
In many projects, meetings are used for one-way communication to inform the project leader of status. 
Meetings in a virtual team also serve as a primary exchange for ideas, concepts, and planning future work. 
Four operational practices associated with meetings yield significant performance improvements for glob￾ally dispersed teams:
• Medium format: To keep team members interested and engaged in meetings, the format of the 
meeting varies. For teams spread across many time zones, consider rotating the meeting time. It 
should remain predictable in its rotation but can also accommodate a variety of start times. For 
example, for weekly meetings, perhaps the first Monday of each month is at 3pm GMT −5, whereas 
the second Monday of each month is at 3pm GMT −8.
• Video: Most participants of virtual meetings have wondered at some point if other participants were 
paying attention in the meeting and fully engaged in the discussion and decision-making. Conferenc￾ing can be used to ensure team members are engaged and able to communicate effectively. Asking 
team members to turn on and leave their webcams on during virtual meetings results in several ben￾efits. Participants tend to give more attention to meetings when webcams are used. It is also easier Product Innovation Culture and Teams 321
to gauge it team members are engaged in the meeting or distracted. A well-timed question can help 
bring distracted members back to the topic of the meeting. Also, research shows that when web￾cams are required to be used in newly forming virtual teams, trust, rapport, and cohesion develop 
faster (Olson et al., 2014).
• Purposeful planning: Traditional face-to-face meetings for co-located teams can be spur-of-the￾moment sessions. However, preplanning is a best practice for all meetings, regardless of geography. 
Virtual teams require preplanning. For periodic meetings, the agenda is distributed in advance. The 
project shared goals are discussed at each meeting, reinforcing the team structure. Minutes of the 
meeting, verifying follow-up actions and responsibilities, are distributed within a couple of days of the 
meeting. If the video conference is recorded, a link to the meeting is provided with the meeting min￾utes. Most collaboration tools available today provide pre-defined containers to facilitate and store 
meeting artifacts, including the agenda, minutes, and other items relevant to the project meeting.
• Quality standards: Because virtual teams most often work asynchronously, individual work prod￾uct quality is even more important. In-person teams can often compensate for defects with ad-hoc 
meetings or tightly coordinated work efforts. These are also available to the virtual team but are 
sometimes harder to facilitate, so increasing the emphasis on initial quality, describing, and discuss￾ing what a job or deliverable looks like is the key to sustained success in a virtual team environment.
If not organized well and run efficiently, virtual meetings can be extremely boring and unrewarding. 
Some simple tips to make these meetings more productive include:
• Go into the meeting with a plan and key objectives to be addressed.
• Keep meetings short.
• Strike a balance between talking and listening.
• Add participatory elements.
• Use visual aids.
• Make time to socialize.
• Use virtual icebreakers for new team members.
7.6.4 Knowledge Management
An important element of innovation work is to transfer lessons learned to both operational and next￾generation R&D teams. Knowledge management is the element within the Virtual Team Model framework 
that describes what and how to document innovation learnings from dispersed teams. Effective use of 
knowledge management speeds next-generation product innovation and creates a data repository to drive 
product innovation process in portfolio analysis. Three operational practices make up the knowledge man￾agement element of the Virtual Team Model:
• Systems engineering: Systems engineering rigorously documents project work to minimize errors 
in hand-offs and to ensure customer requirements are fully incorporated in the design. Systems engi￾neering is especially useful for virtual teams because version control is maintained across project 
work that might be completed anywhere in the world.
• Collaboration tools: Innovation work is most successful when the team members collaborate with 
each other, with customers, and with suppliers and vendors. Crowdsourcing tools are an example of 
collaboration software used with customers. Cloud communication and project management tools 
aid the virtual team in knowledge transfer and project progress updates, including project scope, 
schedule, and budget. Software and collaboration tools are continually being updated, with some 
updates being compulsory. As with all tools and processes, change management is required to 
ensure consistent use and efficient execution.
• Lessons learned: Agile project teams conduct a retrospective at the conclusion of each sprint to 
improve their work together before moving to the next sprint. This practice has expanded beyond 322 Product Innovation Culture and Teams
traditional agile methodologies and is now considered a best practice for all frameworks. A simple 
framework for a lessons-learned discussion/retrospective is to ask what the team should continue 
doing, what should be stopped, and what should be added.
7.6.5 Leadership of Virtual Teams
While leadership skills are universal, some special abilities are necessary to manage a virtual team. 
Individual leadership and motivation are necessary skills for team members, a part of initiation and struc￾ture in the Virtual Team Model. Additional operational practices within the leadership element include focus 
on the project work, visiting team member locations, peer visits, and deep listening.
• Task-oriented: Leadership in a face-to-face team involves motivation and monitoring. Management 
in a co-located team environment is often indirect and personal relationships are easily established. 
Virtual team members are normally more self-motivated, and they are driven by the challenge of the 
work itself. They are used to working autonomously, so the leader’s role in a virtual team involves 
more coordination of work, but it does not remove the need for motivation and monitoring. Perfor￾mance measurements focus on task completion, timing and integration of piece work, and overall 
project goal alignment. Recall that a large part of the leader’s responsibility on a virtual team is to 
ensure and reiterate sharing of the project goals and vision.
• Site visits: In some scenarios, site visits are possible, and in others, they are not economically fea￾sible. Take, for example, an organization that simply works from home, but most of the employees 
are within driving distance of one another. This practice is increasingly common in the United States. 
Conversely, there are many startups that have only one employee in each country, which may make 
the prospect of site visits less likely. Regardless, anytime leaders and team members can meet in 
person, personal relationship values increase, and this is reflected in the efficiency and effectiveness 
of team efforts.
• 80/20  listening: Finally, leadership is most effective when leaders spend more time listening rather 
than talking. Especially for virtual teams, where team members are technically skilled, self-motivated, 
and work autonomously, a project leader serves the team best with deep listening. Pareto’s law 
of getting 80% of the benefit by addressing the highest impact 20% of issues is at the heart of 
80/20 listening. Team leaders need to clearly understand the challenges faced by remote team mem￾bers and assist as quickly as possible. Many one-way, directive communications from the leader to 
the team can be handled by email or chat tools, thus preserving meeting time for active listening and 
problem-solving.Product Innovation Culture and Teams 323
7.7 INCENTIVIZING PRODUCT INNOVATION
7.7.1 Individual or Team Performance Metrics
Chapter 1.10 focused on organizational metrics for product innovation and their application to continuous 
improvement. While organizational metrics can provide the foundation for individuals and teams involved 
in product innovation, they need to be tailored to the behaviors that lead to successful product innova￾tion and continuous improvement. Metrics for individual and innovation team performance should not be 
focused on outcomes alone. Punishment for lack of success can inhibit risk-taking. That is not to say that 
ongoing failure should be tolerated. Understanding the reasons for failure and taking remedial action is far 
more valuable to the individual, the team, and the organization. Failure is an expectation when develop￾ing new products and services. Markets and technologies change, especially during long development 
cycles. Feedback from customers and potential end-users can influence significant change in a product 
design during the development process as well. Therefore, failed experiments are anticipated. The product 
innovation process (see Chapter 4) is designed to link the company culture with a systematic approach to 
innovation such that early-stage exploration is less costly and that the business case is developed in paral￾lel with experimentation that reduces overall financial risk. In addition to the product innovation process, 
leaders encourage innovation teams to take calculated risks for development. This means that mistakes 
and errors are not only tolerated but experiments designed for learning that fail are accepted as part of the 
overall innovation process.
Clarity of both team and individual criteria, as part of performance reviews, is essential to building and 
maintaining a positive culture.
Examples of team criteria include:
• Contribution to organization’s financial health.
• Project milestones on time.
• Project on budget.
• Communications within the team.
• Communications outside the team.
• Individual feedback on team performance.
Examples of individual criteria include:
• Percent of team meetings attended.
• Communication with team members.
• Individuals’ tasks on time and within budget.
• Contribution to team climate and culture.
• 360-degree feedback on performance from managers, team members, and other stakeholders.
7.7.2 Incentives for Innovation
Incentives are used to motivate employees to improve performance and increase productivity. Typical pay￾for-performance incentive programs focus on short-term financial results and may include disincentives for 
failures, such as lower compensation and possible termination. While research shows that such pay-for￾performance systems boost productivity in routine work, studies also indicate that open-ended, creative 
tasks call for different incentive systems (Manso, 2017). Staff must be encouraged to explore and exploit 
novel and unique opportunities with tolerance for, and perhaps expectation for, early failure.
Incentives should be chosen to be meaningful to the team or individual. These include:
For the team:
• Team financial bonus.
• Celebratory outing, dinner, etc.324 Product Innovation Culture and Teams
• Recognition on honors board.
• High-performance team award.
For an individual team member:
• Financial bonus.
• Stock options.
• Promotion.
• Flight upgrades for a conference.
• Dinner for the family.
• All-expense paid holiday.Product Innovation Culture and Teams 325
7.8 IN SUMMARY
• While strategy and process are essential to product development and product management, these 
alone will not lead to the sustained success of the organization. People are ultimately what makes an 
organization successful. It is culture and climate that provide the context within which strategy and 
process can be positively and successfully implemented.
• Every organization has a unique culture. However, there are key elements that underpin the innova￾tion culture of most successful organizations:
○	 A clear sense of goals and direction that are communicated, understood, and shared across the 
organization.
○	 Experimentation is encouraged and tolerated.
○	 Performance metrics for innovation teams are tied to strategic objectives, and team metrics out￾weigh individual performance metrics.
○	 Hiring criteria includes the candidate’s fit with the organization’s innovation culture.
○	 Constructive conflict and debate of ideas are encouraged.
○	 Innovation work is designed in such a way that rewards reflect team, individual, professional, and 
personal accomplishments.
○	 Ongoing training is integrated to build and support teams and leadership in the innovation journey.
• Cross-functional representation is the most effective model for product innovation teams. Specific 
team structures are selected based on the scope, scale, and complexity of the specific project and 
include:
○	 Functional teams,
○	 Lightweight teams,
○	 Heavyweight teams, and
○	 Autonomous teams.
• Teams grow and develop through a variety of processes. Understanding different work styles 
enhances the effectiveness of team communications and everyone’s preferred way of working. Work 
style assessments are used in kickoff meetings and throughout the innovation project work to build a 
common vocabulary for team communications.
• A typical innovation project life cycle follows phases of idea creation, gaining support for the concept, 
planning the new product development project, and executing the work. Different team members 
have strengths and competencies that will enhance their capabilities during these life cycle phases. 
When the team lacks a specific skill set that is best suited for a specific phase of the innovation life 
cycle, the other team members must set aside their own preferred working styles to complete the 
project work.
• Conflict occurs on all projects due to different approaches to the technology or marketing of the new 
product as well as challenges in scope, schedule, and budget. Healthy conflict supports new ideas 
and problem-solving. The Thomas–Kilmann conflict model offers five categories of conflict manage￾ment based on the level of assertiveness and cooperativeness. The ideal conflict management solu￾tion for each situation is different depending on the circumstances, especially the risk of the decision 
resulting from the various perspectives driving the conflict.
• Leaders and team members engage in communication within the team and with stakeholders exter￾nal to the team. Communications include those with the functional organizations, such as legal and 
logistics, as well as the customer and senior management who fund the project. In all cases, the 
core team should provide a consistent message regarding the product innovation project.
• The best leaders score high on emotional intelligence (EQ), which involves factors of self-awareness, 
self-regulation, motivation, empathy, and social skills.
• Many organizations today use virtual or dispersed teams for innovation work. The benefits of a virtual 
team include access to specifically skilled team members, different cultural perspectives and insights 
into local markets.326 Product Innovation Culture and Teams
• The VTM includes five elements and 16 practices to overcome the natural barriers of communication 
when the normal means of communicating are electronic rather than face-to-face. The five elements 
include:
○	 Structure and initiation,
○	 Communication modes and methods,
○	 Meetings,
○	 Knowledge management, and
○	 Leadership practices.
• Individual and team performance metrics, together with appropriate recognition and rewards, are 
essential to the development and sustaining of a high-performing team.Product Innovation Culture and Teams 327
A. CULTURE AND TEAMS PRACTICE QUESTIONS
1. Ensuring that the right team principles are in place to promote high performance is an aspect of a man￾agement role and is called?
A. Team motivation.
B. Team development.
C. Project management.
D. Senior leadership.
2. The role responsible for establishing the product innovation process and for ensuring its quality and con￾sistency and on-going training in its application is called:
A. Process manager.
B. Process champion.
C. Process owner.
D. Process developer.
3. You are hired as a new product development consultant by an established company that is having chal￾lenges with its new product development innovation initiatives. Upon observing the work practices across 
the company, you note an emphasis on individuals working alone, very little social interaction either at or 
outside of work, limited recognition of staff performance, and frequent criticism of failure. What specific 
area would you recommend as the primary focus for the company to improve its product innovation?
A. Better tools to assist in all aspects of product innovation.
B. An improved product innovation process, used by all staff.
C. Developing a culture of innovation.
D. Encouraging senior managers to get more involved in product innovation.
4. The set of properties of the work environment, perceived directly or indirectly by employees to have a 
major effect on employee behavior, is termed:
A. Culture.
B. Environment.
C. Climate.
D. Organizational structure.
5. Ensuring, over time, that a product (or group of products) or services meets the needs of customers by 
continuously monitoring and modifying elements of the marketing mix is generally the role of a. . .
A. Product manager.
B. Project manager.
C. General manager.
D. Marketing manager.
6. Which of the following best describes a team?
A. A group of individuals who meet regularly.
B. People who enjoy doing the same things.
C. A group of people with a common purpose for which they hold themselves mutually accountable.
D. A group of people appointed to complete a specific task.
7. Tuckman identified five stages of team development. What does the forming stage involve?
A. Deciding on team direction.
B. Bringing the team together and getting to know each other.
C. Appointing a team leader.
D. Resolving differences among team members.328 Product Innovation Culture and Teams
8. A functional team is best suited for which type of project.
A. Highly complex, requiring strong cross-disciplinary collaboration.
B. Product development that is totally new to the company.
C. A project that demands total commitment from team members.
D. Relatively simple product line extensions or improvements.
9. In a professional setting, what type of assessment helps a team achieve increased communication dur￾ing the work of the project?
A. Personality assessment, like the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator.
B. Work style assessment, like DiSC.
C. Functional resource assessment as used in creating the project budget.
D. Project portfolio management assessment.
10. A company has decided to embark on a high-risk project that is focused on the development of a prod￾uct outside the traditional boundaries of company operation. What type of team structure would be most 
suitable for this type of project?
A. Autonomous.
B. Lightweight.
C. Functional.
D. Agile.
Answers to practice questions
1. B 6. C
2. B 7. B
3. C 8. D
4. C 9. B
5. A 10. AProduct Innovation Culture and Teams 329
REFERENCES
Booz & Company. (2011). The global innovation 1000: Why culture is key. https://www.strategy-business.com/article/11404
Christensen, C.M. and Raynor, M.E. (2003). The innovator’s solution: Creating and sustaining successful growth. Harvard 
Business School Press.
Denning, S. (2015). Why U.S. firms are dying: Failure to innovate. Forbes.
Gallup. (2023). The 34 Clifton strengths themes explain your talent DNA. https://www.gallup.com/cliftonstrengths/en/253715/34-
cliftonstrengths-themes.aspx
Goleman, D. (1998). Working with emotional intelligence. Bloomsbury.
Griffin, A., Price, R., and Vojak, B. (2012). Serial innovators: How individuals create and deliver breakthrough innovations in mature 
firms. Stanford Business Books.
Hardenbrook, D. and Jurgens-Kowal, T. (2018). Bridging communication gaps in virtual teams. In: Leveraging constraints for 
innovation, vol. 3 (ed. S. Gurtner, J. Spanjol, and A. Griffin), 95–117. Wiley https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119390299.ch6.
Harter, J. (2022). U.S. employee engagement slump continues. Gallup https://www.gallup.com/workplace/391922/employee￾engagement-slump-continues.aspx.
Horowitz, B. (2019). What you do is who you are: How to create your business culture. HarperCollins.
Katzenbach, J.R. and Smith, D.K. (1993). The discipline of teams. Harvard Business Review 71 (2): 111–120.
Kerzner, H.R. (2013). Project management: A systems approach to planning, scheduling, and controlling, 11e. Wiley.
Kilmann, R.H. and Thomas, K.W. (1978). Four perspectives on conflict management: An attributional framework for organizing 
descriptive and normative theory. The Academy of Management Review 3 (1): 59–68. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.1978.4296368.
Lorenzo, R. and Reeves, M. (2018). How and where diversity drives financial performance. Harvard Business Review.
Manso, G. (2017). Creating incentives for innovation. California Management Review 60 (1): 18–32. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0008125617725287.
Markham, S.K. and Lee, H. (2013). Product development and management association’s 2012 comparative performance assess￾ment study. Journal of Product Innovation Management 30 (3): 408–429. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpim.12025.
Olson, J.D., Appunn, F.D., McAllister, C.A. et  al. (2014). Webcams and virtual teams: An impact model. Team Performance 
Management 20 (3/4): 148–177. https://doi.org/10.1108/TPM-05-2013-0013.
Peart, N. (2020). Meet the best company workplace culture awards 2020. Forbes https://www.forbes.com/sites/
nataliapeart/2020/12/14/best-company-workplace-culture-awards-2020.
Rosenfeld, R.B., Wilhelmi, G.J., and Harrison, A. (2011). The invisible element. Idea Connection Systems.
Ryan, R. (2023). Here’s what’s happening to remote work in 2023. Forbes https://www.forbes.com/sites/robinryan/2023/01/10/
heres-whats-happening-to-remote-work-in-2023.
Scullard, M. and Baum, D. (2015). Everything DiSC manual. Wiley.
Strap, (2020). https://strapaccounting.com/blog/f/remote-work-statistics-shifting-norms-and-expectations.
Tuckman, B.W. (2001). Developmental sequence in small groups (reprint). Group Facilitation: A Research and Applications 
Journal 3: 66–81.
Wheelwright, S.C. and Clark, K.B. (1992). Revolutionizing product development: Quantum leaps in speed, efficiency, and quality. 
The Free Press.A/B testing: A form of multivariate research designed to test and compare two samples or variables. 
Other forms of multivariate testing, such as conjoint analysis, involve two or more variations and variables.
Agile product development: An iterative approach to product development that is performed in a col￾laborative environment by self-organizing teams.
Agile Stage-Gate: Combines the structure (stages and gates) of the classic Stage-Gate with the self￾organized teams and short cycle iterations of Agile methodologies.
Alliance: Formal arrangement with a separate organization for purposes of development, and involving 
exchange of information, hardware, intellectual property, or enabling technology. Alliances involve shared 
risk and reward (e.g., co-development projects).
Alpha test: Pre-production product testing to find and eliminate the most obvious design defects or 
deficiencies, usually in a laboratory setting or in some part of the developing organization’s regular opera￾tions, although in some cases it may be done in controlled settings with lead customers. See also beta 
test and gamma test.
Analyzer: An organization that follows an imitative innovation strategy, where the goal is to get to mar￾ket with an equivalent or slightly better product very quickly once someone else opens up the market, 
rather than to be first to market with new products or technologies. Sometimes called an imitator or a “fast 
follower.”
Applications development: The iterative process through which software is designed and written to meet 
the needs and requirements of the user base, or the process of enhancing or developing new products.
Acquisition effort: The extent to which your product or service is accessible to your customer.
Adjourning: The stage of a project team’s work on the project is complete. In product innovation pro￾jects, the product is launched and turned over to standard business operations.
Architectural innovation: Combines technological and business disruptions. A well-quoted example is 
digital photography, which caused significant disruption for companies such as Kodak and Polaroid.
Architecture: See product architecture.
ATAR (Awareness-Trial-Availability-Repeat): A forecasting tool that attempts to mathematically model 
the diffusion of an innovation or new product.
Attribute testing: A quantitative market research technique in which respondents are asked to rate a 
detailed list of product or category attributes on one or more types of scales (such as relative importance, 
current performance, and current satisfaction with a particular product or service) for the purpose of ascer￾taining customer preferences for some attributes over others, to help guide the design and development 
process.
Appendix A: 
Glossary of Terms
Product Development and Management Body of Knowledge: A Guidebook for Product Innovation Training and Certification,Third Edition. 
Allan Anderson, Chad McAllister, and Ernie Harris.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.332 Appendix A: Glossary of Terms
Audit: When applied to new product development, an audit is an appraisal of the effectiveness of the 
processes by which the new product was developed and brought to market.
Augmented product: The core product, plus all other sources of product benefits, such as service, 
warranty, and image.
Augmented reality (AR): Similar to VR, whereas VR replaces the participant’s real world with an entirely 
separate reality, AR overlays elements of a new reality into the participant’s present environment.
Autonomous team: A completely self-sufficient project team with very little, if any, link to the funding 
organization. Frequently used as an organizational model to bring a radical innovation to the marketplace. 
Sometimes called a tiger team.
Awareness: A measure of the percent of target customers who are aware that the new product exists. 
Awareness is variously defined, including recall of brand, recognition of brand, recall of key features or 
positioning.
Balanced portfolio: A collection of projects where the proportion of projects in specific categories is 
selected according to strategic priorities.
Balanced Scorecard: A strategic management performance metric used to identify and improve vari￾ous internal business functions and their resulting external outcomes.
Bass model: A tool used to forecast sales of an innovation, new technology, or a durable good.
Benchmarking: A process of collecting process performance data, generally in a confidential, blinded 
fashion, from a number of organizations to allow them to assess their performance individually and as a 
whole.
Benefit: A product attribute expressed in terms of what the user gets from the product rather than its 
physical characteristics or features. Benefits are often paired with specific features, but they need not be.
Best practice: Methods, tools, or techniques that are associated with improved performance. In new 
product development, no one tool, or technique assures success; however, a number of them are associ￾ated with higher probabilities of achieving success. Best practices likely are at least somewhat context 
specific. Sometimes called effective practice.
Best practice study: A process of studying successful organizations and selecting the best of their 
actions or processes for emulation. In new product development, it means finding the best process prac￾tices, adapting them, and adopting them for internal use.
Bang for the buck: Used in financial analysis. An idiom meaning the worth of one’s money or exertion. 
The phrase originated from the slang usage of the words bang which means excitement and buck which 
means money.
Beta test: A more extensive test than the alpha test, performed by real users and customers. The pur￾pose of beta testing is to determine how the product performs in an actual user environment.
Big data: A collection of large and complex data from different instruments at all stages of the process 
which go from acquisition, storage, and sharing, to analysis and visualization.
Biometrics: Relies on specialized tools, biometric technologies, and applications to study biological, 
cognitive, and emotional responses toward various products and services without actually asking ques￾tions or interfering with the experience.
Bottom-up portfolio selection: Starts first with a list of individual projects, and through a process of 
strict project evaluation and screening, ends up with a portfolio of strategically aligned projects.
Brainstorming: A group method of creative problem-solving frequently used in product concept genera￾tion. There are many modifications in format, each variation with its own name. The basis of all of these Appendix A: Glossary of Terms 333
methods uses a group of people to creatively generate a list of ideas related to a particular topic. As many 
ideas as possible are listed before any critical evaluation is performed.
Brain writing: Participants are asked to write down ideas pertaining to a specific problem or question. 
Each participant then passes their ideas over to someone else. This person then adds to the list, and so 
the process continues.
Brand: A name, term, design, symbol, or any other feature that identifies one seller’s good or service as 
distinct from those of other sellers. The legal term for brand is trademark. A brand may identify one item, a 
family of items, or all items of that seller.
Brand development index: Sales of your brand compared with its average performance in all markets.
Break-even point: The point in the commercial life of a product when cumulative development costs 
are recovered through accrued profits from sales.
Breakthrough projects: These projects strive to bring a new product to the market with new technolo￾gies, depart significantly from existing organizational practices, and have a high level of risk.
Bubble diagram: Visual representation of a product portfolio. Typically, a bubble diagram shows pro￾jects on a two-dimensional X–Y plot. The X and Y dimensions relate to specific criteria of interest (for 
example, risk and reward).
Burndown chart: A graphical representation of work left to do vs. time. The outstanding work (or back￾log) is often on the vertical axis, with time along the horizontal. Burndown charts are a run chart of out￾standing work. It is useful for predicting when all of the work will be completed.
Business analysis: An analysis of the business situation surrounding a proposed project. Usually includes 
financial forecasts in terms of discounted cash flows, net present values, or internal rates of returns.
Business case: The results of the market, technical, and financial analyses, or up-front homework. 
Ideally defined just prior to the “go to development” decision (gate), the case defines the product and pro￾ject, including the project justification and the action or business plan.
Business Model Canvas (BMC): A strategic management and Lean startup template for developing 
new or documenting existing business models. It is a visual chart with elements describing an organiza￾tion’s or product’s value proposition, infrastructure, customers, and finances.
Business-to-business: Transactions with non-consumer purchasers such as manufacturers, resellers 
(distributors, wholesalers, jobbers, and retailers, for example), institutional, professional, and governmental 
organizations. Frequently referred to as industrial businesses in the past.
Buyer: The purchaser of a product, whether or not they will be the ultimate user. Especially in business￾to-business markets, a purchasing agent may contract for the actual purchase of a good or service, yet 
never benefit from the function(s) purchased.
Cannibalization: That portion of the demand for a new product that comes from the erosion of the 
demand for (sales of) a current product the organization markets.
Capacity planning: A forward-looking activity that monitors the skill sets and effective resource capacity 
of the organization. For product development, the objective is to manage the flow of projects through devel￾opment such that none of the functions (skill sets) creates a bottleneck to timely completion. Necessary in 
optimizing the project portfolio.
Cash cows: Products that have a high share of a market and low overall growth.
Centers of excellence: A geographic or organizational group with an acknowledged technical, business, 
or competitive competency.334 Appendix A: Glossary of Terms
Certification: A process for formally acknowledging that someone has mastered a body of knowledge 
on a subject. In new product development, the PDMA has created and manages a certification process to 
become a New Product Development Professional (NPDP).
Champion: A person who takes a passionate interest in seeing that a particular process or product is 
fully developed and marketed. This informal role varies from situations calling for little more than stimulat￾ing awareness of the opportunity to extreme cases where the champion tries to force a project past the 
strongly entrenched internal resistance of organization policy or that of objecting parties.
Charter: A project team document defining the context, specific details, and plans of a project.
It includes the initial business case, problem and goal statements, constraints and assumptions, and pre￾liminary plan and scope. Periodic reviews with the sponsor ensure alignment with business strategies. See 
also Product Innovation Charter.
Chasm: A critical part of the product life cycle occurs near the beginning – after introduction, but before 
growth has fully kicked in.
Checklist: A list of items used to remind an analyst to think of all relevant aspects. It finds frequent use 
as a tool of creativity in concept generation, as a factor consideration list in concept screening, and to 
ensure that all appropriate tasks have been completed in any stage of the product development process.
Circular economy: An economy that is restorative and regenerative by design, and which aims to keep 
products, components, and materials at their highest utility and value at all times, distinguishing between 
technical and biological cycles.
Climate: The set of properties of the work environment, perceived directly or indirectly by employees, 
that has a major effect on employee behavior.
Cluster sampling: The population is divided into clusters and a sample of clusters is taken.
Collaborative product development: When two organizations work together to develop and commer￾cialize a specialized product.
Co-location: Physically locating project personnel in one area, enabling more rapid and frequent 
decision-making and communication among them.
Commercialization: The process of taking a new product from development to market. It generally 
includes production launch and ramp-up, marketing materials and program development, supply chain devel￾opment, sales channel development, training development, training, and service and support development.
Competitive intelligence: Methods and activities for transforming disaggregated public competitor 
information into relevant and strategic knowledge about competitors’ position, size, efforts, and trends. 
The term refers to the broad practice of collecting, analyzing, and communicating the best available infor￾mation on competitive trends occurring outside one’s own organization.
Concept: A clearly written and possibly visual description of a new product idea that includes its primary 
features and consumer benefits, combined with a broad understanding of the technology needed.
Concept generation: The processes by which new concepts, or product ideas, are generated. Sometimes 
also called idea generation or ideation.
Concept screening: The evaluation of potential new product concepts during the discovery phase of a 
product development project. Potential concepts.
Concept statement: A verbal or pictorial statement of a concept that is prepared for presentation to 
consumers to get their reaction prior to development.
Concept engineering: A customer-centered process that clarifies the “fuzzy front end” of the prod￾uct development process with the purpose of developing product concepts. The method determines the Appendix A: Glossary of Terms 335
customer’s key requirements to be included in the design and proposes several alternative product con￾cepts that satisfy these requirements.
Concept scenarios: Scenarios developed as a way to learn how product concepts would work in real￾life situations.
Concept testing: The process by which a concept statement is presented to consumers for their reac￾tions. These reactions can either be used to permit the developer to estimate the sales value of the con￾cept or to make changes to the concept to enhance its potential sales value.
Concurrent engineering (CE): When product design and manufacturing process development occur 
concurrently in an integrated fashion, using a cross-functional team, rather than sequentially by separate 
functions. CE is intended to cause the development team to consider all elements of the product life cycle 
from conception through disposal, including quality, cost, and maintenance, from the project’s outset. Also 
called simultaneous engineering.
Conjoint analysis: A market research technique in which respondents are systematically presented with 
a rotating set of product descriptions, each containing a rotating set of attributes and levels of those attrib￾utes. By asking respondents to choose their preferred product and/or to indicate their degree of prefer￾ence from within each set of options, conjoint analysis can determine the relative contribution to overall 
preference of each variable and each level.
C-Conscientious: Team members who need to have a complete dataset to evaluate before making a 
rational decision. They are often perceived as unemotional but pride themselves on accurate, detailed work. 
Others may view their attention to detail as a hindrance to project work. (DiSC work assessment tool).
Consumer: The most generic and all-encompassing term for an organization’s targets. The term is used 
in either the business-to-business or household context and may refer to the organization’s current cus￾tomers, competitors’ customers, or current non-purchasers with similar needs or demographic charac￾teristics. The term does not differentiate between whether the person is a buyer or a user target. Only a 
fraction of consumers will become customers.
Consumer market: The purchasing of goods and services by individuals and for household use (rather 
than for use in business settings). Consumer purchases are generally made by individual decision-makers, 
either for themselves or others in the family.
Consumer need: A problem the consumer would like to have solved. What a consumer would like a 
product to do for them.
Consumer panels: Groups of consumers in specific sectors, recruited by research companies and 
agencies, who are used as respondents to answer specific research questions relating to product testing, 
taste testing, or other areas. Most often, they are a specialist panel who take part in numerous projects. 
Consumer panels are particularly useful for short, quick surveys, where the emphasis is on a sample of 
those with specialist knowledge rather than a representative sample of the general population.
Contingency plan: A plan to cope with events whose occurrence, timing, and severity cannot be predicted.
Continuous improvement: The review, analysis, and rework directed at incrementally improving prac￾tices and processes. Also called Kaizen.
Continuous innovation: A product alteration that allows improved performance and benefits without 
changing either consumption patterns or behavior. The product’s general appearance and basic perfor￾mance do not functionally change. Examples include fluoride toothpaste and higher computer speeds.
Convergent thinking: Associated with analysis, judgement, and decision-making. It is the process.
Cooperation (team cooperation): The extent to which team members actively work together in reach￾ing team level objectives.336 Appendix A: Glossary of Terms
Copyright: The exclusive and assignable legal right, given to the originator for a fixed number of years, 
to print, publish, perform, film, or record literary, artistic, or musical material.
Core Benefit Proposition (CBP): The central benefit or purpose for which a consumer buys a product. 
The CBP may come either from the physical good or service, or from augmented dimensions of the prod￾uct. See also value proposition.
Core competence: That capability at which an organization does better than other organizations, which 
provides them with a distinctive competitive advantage and contributes to acquiring and retaining custom￾ers. Something that an organization does better than other organizations. The purest definition adds, “and 
is also the lowest cost provider.”
Core product: The benefits that the target market will derive from the product.
Corporate culture: The “feel” of an organization. Culture arises from the belief system through which an 
organization operates. Corporate cultures are variously described as being authoritative, bureaucratic, and 
entrepreneurial. The organization’s culture frequently impacts the organizational appropriateness for getting 
things done.
Corporate strategy: The overarching strategy of a diversified organization. It answers the questions of 
“in which businesses should we compete?” and “how does bringing in these businesses create synergy 
and/or add to the competitive advantage of the organization as a whole?”
Creativity: Creativity is defined as the tendency to generate or recognize ideas, alternatives, or possibili￾ties that may be useful in solving problems.
Criteria: Statements of standards used by decision-makers at decision gates. The dimensions of perfor￾mance necessary to achieve or surpass for product development projects to continue in development. In 
the aggregate, these criteria reflect a business unit’s new product strategy.
Critical path: The set of interrelated activities that must be completed for the project to be finished suc￾cessfully can be mapped into a chart showing how long each task takes, and which tasks cannot be 
started before which other tasks are completed. The critical path is the set of linkages through the chart 
that is the longest. It determines how long a project will take.
Critical path scheduling: A project management technique, frequently incorporated into various soft￾ware programs, which puts all important steps of a given new product project into a sequential network 
based on task interdependencies.
Critical success factors: Those critical few factors that are necessary for, but don’t guarantee, com￾mercial success.
Cross-functional team: A team consisting of representatives from the various functions involved in 
product development, usually including members from all key functions required to deliver a successful 
product, typically including marketing, engineering, manufacturing/operations, finance, purchasing, cus￾tomer support, and quality. The team is empowered by the departments to represent each function’s per￾spective in the development process.
Crossing the chasm: Making the transition to a mainstream market from an early market dominated 
by a few visionary customers (sometimes also called innovators or lead adopters). This concept typically 
applies to the adoption of new, market-creating, technology-based products and services.
Crowdsourcing: The practice and use of a collection of tools for obtaining information, goods, services, 
ideas, funding, or other input into a specific task or project from a large and relatively open group of peo￾ple, either paid or unpaid, most commonly via technology platforms, social media channels, or the Internet.
Culture: The shared beliefs, core values, assumptions, and expectations of people in the organization.
Customer: One who purchases or uses an organization’s products or services.Appendix A: Glossary of Terms 337
Customer adoption model: Five distinct categories based on the degree of risk that customers are 
willing to take: innovators, early adopters, early majority, late majority, and laggards.
Customer needs: Problems to be solved. These needs, either expressed or yet to be articulated, pro￾vide new product development opportunities for the organization.
Customer site visits: A qualitative market research technique for uncovering customer needs. The 
method involves going to a customer’s work site, watching as a person performs functions associated with 
the customer needs your organization wants to solve, and then debriefing that person about what they 
did, why they did those things, the problems encountered as they were trying to perform the function, and 
what worked well.
Cycle time: The length of time for any operation, from start to completion. In the new product develop￾ment sense, it is the length of time to develop a new product from an early initial idea for a new product to 
initial market sales. Precise definitions of the start and end point vary from one organization to another and 
may vary from one project to another within the organization.
D-Dominance: Individuals with a “D” work style tend to prefer a fast pace of work. They are quick to 
make decisions and may be perceived as overly demanding. These team members are action-oriented. 
(DiSC work assessment tool).
Dashboard: A typically color-coded graphical presentation of a project’s status or a portfolio’s status 
by project resembling a vehicle’s dashboard. Typically, red is used to flag urgent problems, yellow to flag 
impending problems, and green to signal projects on track.
Data: Measurements taken at the source of a business process.
Database: An electronic gathering of information organized in some way to make it easy to search, dis￾cover, analyze, and manipulate.
Decision tree: A diagram used for making decisions in business or computer programming. The 
“branches” of the tree diagram represent choices with associated risks, costs, results, and outcome prob￾abilities. By calculating outcomes (profits) for each of the branches, the best decision for the organization 
can be determined.
Decline stage: The fourth and last stage of the product life cycle. Entry into this stage is generally 
caused by technology advancements, consumer or user preference changes, global competition, or envi￾ronmental or regulatory changes.
Defenders: Organizations that stake out a product turf and protect it by whatever means, not necessar￾ily through developing new products.
Deliverable: The output (such as test reports, regulatory approvals, working prototypes, or marketing 
research reports) that shows a project has achieved a result. Deliverables may be specified for the com￾mercial launch of the product or at the end of a development stage.
Delphi: A technique that uses iterative rounds of consensus development across a group of experts to 
arrive at a forecast of the most probable outcome for some future state.
Demographic: The statistical description of a human population. Characteristics included in the descrip￾tion may include gender, age, education level, and marital status, as well as various behavioral and psy￾chological characteristics.
Derivative projects: Spin-offs from other existing products or platforms. They may fill a gap in an exist￾ing product line, offer more cost-competitive manufacturing, or offer enhancements and features based on 
core organization technology. Generally, they are relatively low risk.
Design for assembly (DFA): Simplifies the product design to reduce the cost of assembly in the manufac￾turing process. An assembly is defined as a combination of parts and components needed to manufacture a 
product. This view includes all the working activities during and after production.338 Appendix A: Glossary of Terms
Design for the Environment (DFE): The systematic consideration of environmental safety and health 
issues over the product’s projected life cycle in the design and development process.
Design for Excellence (DFX): The systematic consideration of all relevant life cycle factors, such as 
manufacturability, reliability, maintainability, affordability, and testability, in the design and development pro￾cess. It allows for the intended behavior of the elements of design or their combination. DFF implies con￾siderations such as design for safety (coffeemakers), design for simplicity (platform design), and design for 
redesign (product variants or derivatives).
Design for functionality: Functional design is the process of responding to the needs or desires of the 
people who will be using the product in a way that allows those needs and desires to be met.
Design for maintenance (DFM): Design decisions regarding the selection of materials, assemblies, 
parts, devices, and components determine the maintainability or the capacity of the system to be inspected, 
restored, and serviced when components fail as they reach their operational life. During the design stages, 
design for maintenance should facilitate executing corrective and preventive maintenance.
Design for manufacturing and assembly (DfMA): Design for Manufacturing and Assembly (DfMA) is 
an amalgam of two processes, design for manufacturing (DfM) and design for assembly (DfA). DfM is a 
design method to reduce the complexity of manufacturing operations and the overall cost of production, 
including the cost of raw materials. DfA is a design method to facilitate or reduce the assembly operations 
of parts or components of a product.
Design for production: Aims to minimize product costs and manufacture times while maintaining spec￾ified quality standards. A successful manufacturing process.
Design for recycling (DFR): DFR accounts for the use of materials that allow for reusing or reprocess￾ing production waste, products, and parts of products. The methods for DFR center on reusing products 
and reprocessing products.
Design for Six Sigma (DFSS): The aim of DFSS is to create designs that are resource efficient, capable 
of exceptionally high yields, and are robust to process variations.
Design specifications: Where the concept statement provides a qualitative presentation of the product 
concept’s benefits and features, the product design specifications provide the quantitative basis for further 
design and manufacture.
Design thinking: A creative solving approach  –  or more completely, a systematic and collaborative 
approach to identify and creatively solve problems.
Design for usability: Evaluates the functionality, serviceability, maintainability, ease of operation, relia￾bility, safety, aesthetics, operating context and environment, and customizability of the concept system. 
Overall, DFU should be intrinsically connected to the product and manufacture design process.
Design for serviceability: Focuses on the ability to diagnose, remove, or replace any part, component, 
assembly, or subassembly of a product while performing service repairs and troubleshooting.
Design of experiments (DOE): Used to find cause-and-effect relationships. It is a systematic method to 
determine the relationship between factors affecting a process and the output of that process. DOE can 
be applied to both a product and its manufacturing process.
Design validation: Product tests to ensure that the product or service conforms to defined user needs 
and requirements. These may be performed on working prototypes or using computer simulations of the 
finished product.
Development: The functional part of the organization responsible for converting product requirements 
into a working product. Also, a phase in the overall concept-to-market cycle where the new product or 
service is developed for the first time.Appendix A: Glossary of Terms 339
Development teams: Teams formed to take one or more new products from concept through develop￾ment, testing, and launch.
Digitization: Refers to creating a digital representation of physical objects or attributes. The goal of digi￾tization is to make information more easily accessible, storable, maintained, and shared.
Digitalization: Refers to enabling or improving processes by leveraging digital technologies and digi￾tized data. The purpose of digitalization is to enable, improve, and transform business operations through 
the use of digitized data and technologies in order to transform how organizations conduct business and 
improve productivity.
Digital Transformation. The Institute for Digital Transformation defines digital transformation as “The inte￾gration of digital technologies into a business resulting in the reshaping of an organization that reorients it 
around the customer experience, business value, and constant change.”
Discontinuous innovation: Previously unknown products that establish new consumption patterns and 
behavior changes. Examples include microwave ovens and cellular phones.
Discounted Cash-Flow (DCF) analysis: One method for providing an estimate of the current value 
of future incomes and expenses projected for a project. Future cash flows for a number of years are esti￾mated for the project, and then discounted back to the present using forecast interest rates.
Dispersed teams: Product development teams that have members working at different locations, 
across time zones, and perhaps even in different countries.
Disruptive innovation: Requires a new business model but not necessarily new technology. So, for 
example, Google’s Android operating system potentially disrupts companies like Apple.
Distribution (physical and channels): The method and partners used to get the product (or service) 
from where it is produced to where the end user can buy it.
Divergent thinking: The process of coming up with new ideas and possibilities without judgement, 
without analysis, and without discussion. It is the type of thinking that allows for free-association, “stretch￾ing the boundaries,” and thinking of new ways to solve difficult challenges that have no single, right, or 
known answer.
DMAIC: An acronym for the 5 phases that make up the process: Define, Measure, Analyze, Improve, 
Control.
DMASV: Is focused on the process of designing a new product, service, or process. The five phases of 
DMADV are: Define, Measure, Analyze, Design, Verify.
DMEDI: A creative approach to designing new robust processes, products, and services. Its 5 stages 
are: Define, Measure, Explore, Develop, Implement.
Double diamond framework: Used in Design Thinking, capturing the different stages and includes the 
notions of convergent and divergent thinking, as well as the problem space.
Early adopters: The second group of people to try a new product after the innovators. They are often 
opinion leaders in their field and are typically more risk-averse than innovators.
Early majority: The third group of people to try a new product. They are typically more risk-averse than 
early adopters and only adopt a new product once it has been validated by their peers.
Embodiment design: The stage of the design process that starts from the concept definition and con￾tinues to develop the design based on technical and economic criteria to reach the detail design stage, 
which leads to manufacturability.
Emergent emotions: Uses neural network and other non-linear dynamic modeling within the context of 
artificial intelligence to explain consumers’ emotional processes.340 Appendix A: Glossary of Terms
Emotional design: Is based on eliciting the moods and feelings of consumers that allow for designing 
positive emotional associations and a feeling of trust in the product, and thus improve its usability.
Emotional intelligence: Comprised of self-management components and of elements directed toward 
managing relationships.
Empathy analysis: Involves the capacity to connect with and understand customers deeply and have a 
direct emotional connection with them.
Endurance testing: Is a type of testing that determines a product’s performance, such as durability, 
speed, scalability, handling, and stability. The testing process includes manual and mechanical endurance 
tests designed to reveal faults and ensure your product is fit for market.
Enhanced new product: A form of derivative product. Enhanced products include additional features 
not previously found on the base platform, which provide increased value to consumers.
Entrepreneur: A person who initiates, organizes, operates, assumes the risk, and reaps the potential 
reward for a new business venture.
Ethnography: Observing customers and their environment to acquire a deep understanding of the life￾styles or cultures as a basis for better understanding their needs and problems.
Expected Commercial Value (ECV): A financial evaluation method which seeks to maximize the 
expected commercial value, or worth, of a project.
Externalities: The effects of a product on people or the environment that are not reflected in the market 
price of the product.
Eye tracking: A specialized form of sensory testing that uses specialized tools, including connected 
headsets or goggles, measuring where people look and for how long. The equipment tracks and reports 
where participants look first, second, third, etc., and provides a visual scan overlaid on an image of the 
object tested. It is used to answer questions on consumers’ reactions to various stimuli, online products 
and services, websites, apps, images of products, packaging, and messaging.
Factor analysis: A process in which the values of observed data are expressed as functions of a num￾ber of possible causes in order to find which are the most important.
Factory cost: The cost of producing the product in the production location including materials, labor, 
and overhead.
Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA): A step-by-step approach for identifying possible failures in 
a design, a manufacturing or assembly process, or a product. Failure modes means the ways, or modes, 
in which something might fail.
Failure rate: The percentage of an organization’s new products that make it to full market commerciali￾zation, but which fail to achieve the objectives set for them.
Feasibility analysis: The process of analyzing the likely success of a project or a new product.
Feature: The solution to a consumer need or problem. Features provide benefits to consumers. A han￾dle (feature) allows a laptop computer to be carried easily (benefit). Usually, any one of several different 
features will be chosen to meet a customer need. For example, a carrying case with shoulder straps is 
another feature that allows a laptop computer to be carried easily.
Feature creep: The tendency for designers or engineers to add more capability, functions, and features 
to a product as development proceeds than were originally intended. These additions frequently cause 
schedule slip, development cost increases, and product cost increases.Appendix A: Glossary of Terms 341
Feature roadmap: The evolution over time of the performance attributes associated with a prod￾uct. Defines the specific features associated with each iteration/generation of a product over its lifetime, 
grouped into releases (sets of features that are commercialized).
Field testing: Product use testing with users from the target market in the actual context in which the 
product will be used.
Financial success: The extent to which a new product meets its profit, margin, and return on invest￾ment goals.
First-to-market: The first product to create a new product category or a substantial subdivision of a 
category.
Five hexagon model: A methodology commonly used in Design Thinking.
Focus groups: A qualitative market research technique where 8–12 market participants are gathered in 
one room for a discussion under the leadership of a trained moderator. Discussion focuses on a consumer 
problem, product, or potential solution to a problem. The results of these discussions are not projectable 
to the general market.
Forecast: A prediction, over some defined time, of the success or failure of implementing a business 
plan’s decisions derived from an existing strategy.
Front end of innovation: The starting point of the innovation process where opportunities are identified, 
and concepts are developed prior to entering the formal product development process. Often referred to 
as the fuzzy from end.
Forming: The first stage in team formation, where most team members are positive and polite. Some 
are anxious, as they haven’t fully understood what the team will do.
Function: (1) An abstracted description of work that a product must perform to meet customer needs. 
A function is something the product or service must do. (2) Term describing an internal group within which 
resides a basic business capability such as engineering.
Function Analysis System Technique: (FAST) is a technique that builds on the results of a functional 
analysis. The purpose of FAST is to illustrate and provide insights on how the product system works in 
order to identify malfunctions, incoherence in the sequencing of operations, or operational flaws. The tech￾nique allows visualization of the cause–effect relationship among the functions in a product to enhance 
understanding of how it works.
Functional team: The project is divided into functional components with each component assigned 
to its own appropriate functional manager. Coordination is either handled by the functional manager or 
by senior management. Preceding the more formal product development process, it generally consists of 
three tasks: strategic planning, concept generation, and, especially, pre-technical evaluation.
Gamma test: A product use test in which the developers measure the extent to which the item meets 
the needs of the target customers, solves the problem(s) targeted during development, and leaves the 
customer satisfied.
Gantt chart: A horizontal bar chart used in project scheduling and management that shows the start 
date, end date, and duration of tasks within the project.
Gap analysis: Carried out in product development to determine the difference between expected and 
desired revenues or profits from currently planned new products if the corporation is to meet its objectives.
Gate: The point at which a management decision is made to allow the product development project to 
proceed to the next stage, to recycle back into the current stage to better complete some of the tasks, or 
to terminate. The number of gates varies by organization.342 Appendix A: Glossary of Terms
Gatekeepers: The group of managers who serve as advisors, decision-makers, and investors in a Stage￾Gate® process. Using established business criteria, this multifunctional group reviews new product opportu￾nities and project progress and allocates resources accordingly at each gate. This group is also commonly 
called a product approval committee or portfolio management team.
Greenwashing: When an organization or organization spends more time and money claiming to be 
“green” through advertising and marketing than actually implementing business practices that minimize 
environmental impact.
Growth stage: The second stage of the product life cycle, marked by a rapid surge in sales and market 
acceptance for the good or service. Products that reach the growth stage have successfully “crossed the 
chasm.”
Guerrilla testing: Guerrilla testing is the simplest form of usability testing. Basically, guerrilla testing 
means going into a public place such as a supermarket or a park to ask people about a product proto￾type. They are asked to perform a quick usability test.
Heavyweight team: An empowered project team with adequate resourcing to complete the project. 
Personnel report to the team leader and are co-located as practical.
Hurdle rate: The minimum return on investment or internal rate of return percentage a new product 
must meet or exceed as it goes through development.
Idea: The most embryonic form of a new product or service. It often consists of a high-level view of the 
envisioned solution needed to solve the problem identified by a person, team, or organization.
Idea generation (ideation): All of those activities and processes that lead to creating broad sets of 
solutions to consumer problems. These techniques may be used in the early stages of product devel￾opment to generate initial product concepts, in the intermediate stages for overcoming implementation 
issues, in the later stages for planning launch, and in the post-mortem stage to better understand success 
and failure in the marketplace.
IDOV: A specific methodology for designing new products and services to meet Six Sigma standards. It 
has 4 stages: Identify, Design, Optimize, Validate.
Implementation team: A team that converts the concepts and good intentions of the “should-be” pro￾cess into practical reality.
Implicit product requirement: What the customer expects in a product, but does not ask for, and may 
not even be able to articulate.
Incremental improvement: A small change made to an existing product that serves to keep the 
product fresh in the eyes of customers. The research gathers detailed insights, perspectives, attitudes, 
thoughts, behaviors, and viewpoints on a problem, idea, program, situation, etc.
In-depth interview: Involves conducting longer intensive interviews probing and exploring a specific topic, 
one on one, with individual participants.
I-Influence: Team members who build social relationships easily and seek new people to engage with 
and add enthusiasm to the work. (DiSC work assessment tool).
Information: Knowledge and insight, often gained by examining data.
Initial screening: The first decision to spend resources (time or money) on a project. The project is born 
at this point. Sometimes called idea screening.
In-licensed: The acquisition from external sources of novel product concepts or technologies for inclusion 
in the aggregate NPD portfolio.Appendix A: Glossary of Terms 343
Innovation: A new idea, method, or device. The act of creating a new product or process. The act 
includes invention as well as the work required to bring an idea or concept into final form.
Innovation landscape map: A map of types of innovation divided into four quadrants – routine, disruptive, 
radical, and architectural.
Innovators: The first group of people to try a new product. They are typically early adopters who are 
willing to take risks.
Innovation-based culture: A corporate culture where senior management teams and employees work 
habitually to reinforce best practices that systematically and continuously churn out valued new products 
to customers.
Innovation steering committee: The senior management team or a subset of it responsible for gaining 
alignment on the strategic and financial goals for new product development, as well as setting expecta￾tions for portfolio and development teams.
Innovation strategy: Provides the goals, direction, and framework for innovation across the organiza￾tion. Individual business units and functions may have their own strategies to achieve specific innovation 
goals, but it is imperative that these individual strategies are tightly connected with the overarching organi￾zational innovation strategy.
Integrated Product Development (IPD): A philosophy that systematically employs an integrated team 
effort from multiple functional disciplines to effectively and efficiently develop new products that satisfy cus￾tomer needs.
Intellectual property (IP): Information, including proprietary knowledge, technical competencies, and 
design information, which provides commercially exploitable competitive benefit to an organization.
Internal rate of return (IRR): The discount rate at which the present value of the future cash flows of 
an investment equals the cost of the investment. The discount rate with a net present value of 0.
Internet of Things (IoT): The interconnection via the Internet of computing devices embedded in every￾day objects, enabling them to send and receive data.
Intrapreneur: The large-organization equivalent of an entrepreneur. Someone who develops new enter￾prises within the confines of a large corporation.
Introduction stage: The first stage of a product’s commercial launch and the product life cycle. This 
stage is generally seen as the point of market entry, user trial, and product adoption.
ISO 9000: A set of five auditable standards of the International Organization for Standardization that 
establishes the role of a quality system in an organization and which is used to assess whether the organi￾zation can be certified as compliant to the standards. ISO 9001 deals specifically with new products.
Jobs to be done (JTBD): Provides a framework for categorizing, defining, capturing, and organizing the 
inputs that are required to support innovation.
Journal of Product Innovation Management: The premier academic journal in the field of innovation, 
new product development, and management of technology. The journal, which is owned by the PDMA, is 
dedicated to the advancement of management practice in all of the functions involved in the total process 
of product innovation.
Journey maps: A representation as a flowchart of all the actions and behaviors consumers take when 
interacting with the product or service.
Kaizen: A Japanese term meaning “change for the better” or “continuous improvement.” It is a Japanese 
business philosophy regarding the processes that continuously improve operations and involve all 
employees.344 Appendix A: Glossary of Terms
Kanban: (English: signboard) started as a visual scheduling system and is best known as part of the 
Toyota production system. The Kanban board has become one of the most useful Agile project manage￾ment tools, used widely by Agile teams and often referred to as Agile task boards.
Kano method: Used to identify customer needs and latent demands, determining functional require￾ments, developing concepts as candidates for further product definition, and analyzing competitive prod￾uct or services within a product category.
Kansei engineering: Used to identify the relevant design elements (color, size, and shape) embedded in 
a product as determinant of user preference.
Laggards: The last group of people to try a new product. They are typically the most risk-averse and 
only adopt a new product out of absolute need with no other choices.
Late majority: The fourth group of people to try a new product. They are more risk-averse than the early 
majority and only adopt a new product once it is widely accepted.
Lead users: Users for whom finding a solution to one of their consumer needs is so important that they 
have modified a current product or invented a new product to solve the need themselves because they 
have not found a supplier who can solve it for them. When these consumers’ needs are portents of needs 
that the center of the market will have in the future, their solutions are new product opportunities.
Lean product innovation: The Lean approach to meet the challenges of product innovation. Lean 
product innovation is founded on the fundamental Lean methodology initially developed by Toyota (the 
Toyota Production System, or TPS).
Lean startup: An approach to building new businesses based on the belief that entrepreneurs must 
investigate, experiment, test, and iterate as they develop products.
Learning organization: An organization that continuously tests and updates the experience of those 
in the organization and transforms that experience into improved work processes and knowledge that is 
accessible to the whole organization and relevant to its core purpose.
Life cycle assessment: A scientific method for analysis of environmental impacts (CO2
 footprint, Water 
footprint, etc.).
Lightweight team: New product team charged with successfully developing a product concept and 
delivering to the marketplace. Resources are, for the most part, not dedicated, and the team depends on 
the technical functions for resources necessary to get the work accomplished.
Line extension: A form of derivative product that adds or modifies features without significantly chang￾ing the product functionality.
Manufacturability: The extent to which a new product can be easily and effectively manufactured at 
minimum cost and with maximum reliability.
Manufacturing design: The process of determining the manufacturing process that will be used to 
make a new product.
Manufacturing test specification and procedure: Documents prepared by development and manu￾facturing personnel that describe the performance specifications of a component, subassembly, or system 
that will be met during the manufacturing process, and that describe the procedure by which the specifica￾tions will be assessed.
Market penetration: The percentage of your target market that you have reached at least once in a 
specific period of time.
Market research: Information about the organization’s customers, competitors, or markets. Information 
may be from secondary sources (already published and publicly available) or primary sources (from customers Appendix A: Glossary of Terms 345
themselves). Market research may be qualitative in nature, or quantitative. See entries for these two types of 
market research.
Market segmentation: Market segmentation is defined as a framework by which to subdivide a larger 
heterogeneous market into smaller, more homogeneous parts. These segments can be defined in many 
ways: demographic (men vs. women, young vs. old, or richer vs. poorer), behavioral (those who buy on 
the phone vs. the Internet vs. retail, or those who pay with cash vs. credit cards), or attitudinal (those who 
believe that store brands are just as good as national brands vs. those who don’t).
Market share: An organization’s sales in a product area as a percent of the total market sales in that 
area. Sales may be for the organization, a brand, a product, etc.
Market testing: Focuses on an existing product in a new market or market segment to provide cus￾tomer feedback from specific target markets at later stages of product development. (Refer test marketing)
Marketing mix: Comprises the basic tools that are available to market a product. The market mix is 
often referred to as the 4 Ps – Product, Price, Promotion, and Place.
Marketing strategy: A process or model to allow an organization to focus limited resources on the best 
opportunities to increase sales and thereby achieve a unique competitive advantage.
Maturity stage: The third stage of the product life cycle, where sales begin to level off due to market 
saturation. It is a time when heavy competition, alternative product options, and (possibly) changing buyer 
or user preferences start to make it difficult to achieve profitability.
Metrics: A set of measurements to track product development and allow an organization to measure 
the impact of process improvements over time. These measures generally vary by organization but may 
include measures characterizing both aspects of the process, such as time to market and duration of par￾ticular process stages, as well as outcomes from product development such as the number of products 
commercialized per year and percentage of sales due to new products.
Mind-mapping: A graphical technique for imagining connections between various pieces of information 
or ideas. The participant starts with a key phrase or word in the middle of a page, then works out from this 
point to connect to new ideas in multiple directions – building a web of relationships.
Mission: The statement of an organization’s creed, philosophy, purpose, business principles, and corpo￾rate beliefs. The purpose of the mission is to focus the energy and resources of the organization.
Mock-up: A model of what your final product will look like. Product mock-ups are frequently used to 
present a final product in a real-life context.
Morphological analysis: The approach generates a system-level solution that meets the needs and 
expectations of potential users. It aims to identify possible “elements” common to several possible “solu￾tions” known as design parameters.
Multidimensional scaling (MDS): A means of visualizing the level of similarity of individual cases of a 
dataset (for example, products or markets).
Multifunctional team: A group of individuals brought together from the different functional areas of a 
business to work on a problem or process that requires the knowledge, training, and capabilities across 
the areas to successfully complete the work. See also cross-functional team.
Multiple regression analysis: Often used in product innovation to analyze survey-based data. It pro￾vides detailed insight that can be applied to new products or improve products or services when there are 
any number of factors, key drivers, and product attributes that can impact the product’s value proposition 
from the customer’s point of view. It can be used to identify which variables have an impact on the topic 
of interest and is used to predict the value of a variable based on the known value of two or more other 
variables (predictors).346 Appendix A: Glossary of Terms
Multivariate analysis: Explores the association between one outcome variable (referred to as the 
dependent variable) and one or more predictor variables (referred to as independent variables).
Needs statement: Summary of consumer needs and wants, described in customer terms, to be addressed 
by a new product.
Net present value (NPV): The difference between the present value of cash inflows and the present 
value of cash outflows. NPV is used in capital budgeting to analyze the profitability of a projected invest￾ment or project.
Net promoter score: The likelihood someone would recommend your product or service to a friend.
Network diagram: A graphical diagram with boxes connected by lines that shows the sequence of 
development activities and the interrelationship of each task with another. Often used in conjunction with a 
Gantt chart.
Neural networks: This approach creates non-linear models to examine the complex relationship between 
input variables (product features) and output variables (user perceptions).
New product: A term of many opinions and practices, but most generally defined as a product (either a 
good or service) new to the organization marketing it. Excludes products that are only changed in promotion.
New Product Development (NPD): The overall process of strategy, organization, concept generation, 
product and marketing plan creation and evaluation, and commercialization of a new product. Also fre￾quently referred to as product development.
New product introduction (NPI): The launch or commercialization of a new product into the market￾place. Takes place at the end of a successful product development project.
New Product Development Professional (NPDP): A New Product Development Professional is certi￾fied by the PDMA as having mastered the body of knowledge in new product development, as proven by 
performance on the certification test. To qualify for the NPDP certification examination, a candidate must 
hold a bachelor’s or higher university degree (or an equivalent degree) from an accredited institution and 
have spent a minimum of two years working in the new product development field.
New-to-the-world product: A good or service that has never before been available to either consum￾ers or producers. The automobile was new-to-the-world when it was introduced, as were microwave 
ovens and pet rocks.
Non-product advantage: Elements of the marketing mix that create competitive advantage other than 
the product itself. These elements can include marketing communications, distribution, organization repu￾tation, technical support, and associated services.
Norming: The third stage of team formation, when people start to resolve their differences, appreciate 
colleagues’ strengths, and respect the leader’s authority.
Open Innovation (OI): The strategy adopted by an organization whereby it actively seeks knowledge 
from external sources, through alliances, partnerships, and contractual arrangements, to complement and 
enhance its internal capability in pursuit of improved innovation outcomes. These innovation outcomes may 
be commercialized internally, through new business entities, or through external licensing arrangements.
Operations: A term that includes manufacturing but is much broader, usually including procurement, 
physical distribution, and, for services, management of the offices or other areas where the services are 
provided.
Opportunity: A business or technology gap that an organization or individual realizes, by design or accident, 
exists between the current situation and an envisioned future in order to capture competitive advantage, 
respond to a threat, solve a problem, or ameliorate a difficulty.Appendix A: Glossary of Terms 347
Option pricing theory: Estimates a value of an options contract by assigning a price, known as a pre￾mium, based on the calculated probability that the contract will be successful.
Organizational identity: Fundamental to the long-term success of an organization is a clear definition 
and understanding of what the organization stands for, why it exists.
Outsourcing: The process of procuring a good or service from someone else, rather than the organiza￾tion producing it themselves.
Outstanding Corporate Innovator Award: An annual PDMA award given to organizations acknowl￾edged through a formal vetting process as being outstanding innovators. The basic requirements for 
receiving this award are: (1) Sustained success in launching new products over a five-year time frame; 
(2) Significant organization growth from new product success; (3) A defined new product development pro￾cess, that can be described to others; (4) Distinctive innovative characteristics and intangibles.
Patent: A government authority or license conferring a right or title for a set period, especially the sole 
right to exclude others from making, or selling an invention.
Payback: The time, usually in years, from some point in the development process until the commercial￾ized product or service has recovered its costs of development and marketing. While some organizations 
take the point of full-scale market introduction of a new product as the starting point, others begin the 
clock at the start of development expense.
Perceptual mapping: A quantitative market research tool used to understand how customers think of 
current and future products. Perceptual maps are visual representations of the positions that sets of prod￾ucts hold in consumers’ minds.
Performance measurement system: The system that enables an organization to monitor the relevant 
performance indicators of new products in the appropriate time frame.
Performance metrics: A set of measurements to track product development and to allow an organiza￾tion to measure the impact of process improvement over time.
Performing: The fourth stage of team formation when hard work leads, without friction, to the achieve￾ment of the team’s goals. The team structures and processes, established by the leader, are working well.
Personas: Fictional characters built based on objective and direct observations of groups of users. 
These characters become “typical” users or archetypes, enabling developers to envision specific attitudes 
and behaviors toward product features.
PERT (Program Evaluation and Review Technique): An event-oriented network analysis technique 
used to estimate project duration when there is a high degree of uncertainty in estimates of duration times 
for individual activities.
PESTLE: A structured tool based on the analysis of Political, Economic, Social, Technological, Legal, 
and Environmental factors. It is particularly useful as a strategic framework for seeking a better under￾standing of trends in factors that will directly influence the future of an organization – such as demograph￾ics, political barriers, disruptive technologies, and competitive pressures.
Phase review process: A staged product development process in which first one function completes 
a set of tasks, then passes the information generated sequentially to another function, which in turn com￾pletes the next set of tasks, and then passes everything along to the next function.
Pipeline (product pipeline): The scheduled stream of products in development for release to the market.
Pipeline management: A process that integrates product strategy, project management, and functional 
management to continually optimize the cross-project management of all development-related activities.
Plant variety rights: An exclusive right to produce for sale and sell propagating material of a plant variety.348 Appendix A: Glossary of Terms
Platform product: The design and components that are shared by a set of products in a product family. 
From this platform, numerous derivative products can be designed. See also product platform.
Portfolio: Commonly referred to as a set of projects or products that an organization is investing in and 
making strategic trade-offs against. See also project portfolio and product portfolio.
Portfolio criteria: The set of criteria against which the business judges both proposed and currently 
active product development projects to create a balanced and diverse mix of ongoing efforts.
Portfolio management: A business process by which a business unit decides on the mix of active pro￾jects, staffing, and dollar budget allocated to each project currently being undertaken. See also pipeline 
management.
Portfolio management team: See gatekeeper.
Portfolio rollout scenarios: Hypothetical illustrations of the number and magnitude of new products 
that would need to be launched over a certain time frame to reach the desired financial goals; accounts for 
success/failure rates and considers organization and competitive benchmarks.
Primary market research: Original research conducted by you (or someone you hire) to collect data 
specifically for your current objective. They are also responsible for the ongoing training, innovation input, 
and continuous improvement of the process.
Principal components analysis (PCA): Identifies the smallest number of factors or components nec￾essary to explain as much (or all) of the variance, in a data set, as possible. It reduces the unnecessary 
features present in the data by creating or deriving new dimensions (or also called components).
Process managers: The operational managers responsible for ensuring the orderly and timely flow of 
ideas and projects through the process.
Process champion: A senior executive responsible for establishing the new product innovation pro￾cess. Works to ensure the quality and consistency of the implementation of product innovation processes.
Process owner: The executive manager responsible for the strategic results of the NPD process. This 
includes process throughput, quality of output, and participation within the organization.
Product: All goods, services, or knowledge sold. Products are bundles of attributes (features, functions, 
benefits, and uses) and can be tangible, as in the case of physical goods, intangible, as in the case of 
those associated with service benefits; or can be a combination of the two.
Product and process performance success: The extent to which a new product meets its technical 
performance and product development process performance criteria.
Product approval committee: See gatekeeper.
Product architecture: The way in which functional elements are assigned to the physical chunks of a 
product and the way in which those physical chunks interact to perform the overall function of the product.
Product backlog: A basis of Agile product development. The requirements for a system, expressed 
as a prioritized list of product backlog items. These include both functional and non-functional customer 
requirements, as well as technical team-generated requirements.
Product definition: Defines the product, including the target market, product concept, benefits to be 
delivered, positioning strategy, price point, and even product requirements and design specifications.
Product design specifications: All necessary drawings, dimensions, environmental factors, ergo￾nomic factors, aesthetic factors, cost, maintenance that will be needed, quality, safety, documentation, and 
description. It also gives specific examples of how the design of the project should be executed, helping 
others work properly.Appendix A: Glossary of Terms 349
Product development: The overall process of strategy, organization, concept generation, product and 
marketing plan creation and evaluation, and commercialization of a new product.
Product Development & Management Association (PDMA): A not-for-profit professional organiza￾tion whose purpose is to seek out, develop, organize, and disseminate leading-edge information on the 
theory and practice of product development and product development processes. Website: www.pdma
.org.
Product development portfolio: The collection of new product concepts and projects that are within 
the organization’s ability to develop, are most attractive to the organization’s customers, and deliver short￾and long-term corporate objectives, spreading risk and diversifying investments.
Product development process: A disciplined and defined set of tasks, steps, and phases that describe 
the normal means by which an organization repetitively converts embryonic ideas into salable products or 
services.
Product development team: That group of persons who participate in a product development project. 
Together they represent the full set of capabilities needed to complete the project.
Product discontinuation: A product or service that is withdrawn or removed from the market because 
it no longer provides an economic, strategic, or competitive advantage in the organization’s portfolio of 
offerings.
Product failure: A product that does not meet the objective of its charter or marketplace.
Product family: The set of products that have been derived from a common product platform. Members 
of a product family normally have many common parts and assemblies.
Product innovation: The creation and subsequent introduction of a good or service that is new or an 
improved version of previous goods or services.
Product Innovation Charter (PIC): A critical strategic document, the Product Innovation Charter (PIC), 
is the heart of any organized effort to commercialize a new product. It contains the reasons the project has 
been started, the goals, objectives, guidelines, and boundaries of the project.
Product life cycle: The six stages that a new product is thought to go through from birth to death: devel￾opment, introduction, growth, maturity, decline, and retirement. This is often reduced to four stages with 
deletion of development and retirement. Controversy surrounds whether products go through this cycle in 
any predictable way.
Product life cycle management: Changing the features and benefits of the product, elements of the 
marketing mix, and manufacturing operations, over time to maximize the profits obtainable from the prod￾uct over its life cycle.
Product line: A group of products marketed by an organization to one general market. The products 
have some characteristics, customers, and uses in common and may also share technologies, distribution 
channels, prices, services, and other elements of the marketing mix.
Product management: Ensuring over time that a product or service profitably meets the needs of cus￾tomers by continually monitoring and modifying the elements of the marketing mix, including: the product 
and its features, the communications strategy, distribution channels, and price.
Product manager: The person assigned responsibility for overseeing all of the various activities that con￾cern a particular product. Sometimes called a brand manager in consumer-packaged goods organizations.350 Appendix A: Glossary of Terms
Product owner: Commonly used in Agile product development. The product owner is the single person 
who must have final authority representing the customer’s interests in backlog prioritization and require￾ments questions.
Product platform: Underlying structures or basic architectures that are common across a group of 
products or that will be the basis of a series of products commercialized over a number of years.
Product portfolio: The set of products and product lines the organization has placed in the market.
Product positioning: How a product will be marketed to customers. Product positioning refers to the 
set of features and benefits that are valued by (and therefore defined by) the target customer audience, 
relative to competing products.
Product rejuvenation: The process by which a mature or declining product is altered, updated, repack￾aged, or redesigned to lengthen the product life cycle and in turn extend sales demand through testing).
Product roadmap: Illustrates high-level product strategy and demonstrates how a product will evolve 
over time. It is essential to organizational alignment.
Product superiority: Differentiation of an organization’s products from those of competitors, achieved 
by providing consumers with greater benefits and value. This is one of the critical success factors in com￾mercializing new products.
Productivity index: Gauges the economic well-being of a project in real-time. For example, by dividing 
the Ney Present Value by the money remaining to be spent.
Program manager: The organizational leader charged with responsibility of executing a portfolio of NPD 
projects.
Project: A temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or result (PMI-PMBOK 
Guide).
Project decision-making & reviews: A series of Go/No-Go decisions about the viability of a project 
that ensure the completion of the project provides a product that meets the marketing and financial objec￾tives of the organization. Includes a systematic review of the viability of a project as it moves through the 
various phase Stage-Gates in the development process. These periodic checks validate that the project is 
still close enough to the original plan to deliver against the business case.
Project leader: The person responsible for managing an individual new product development project 
through to completion. They are responsible for ensuring that milestones and deliverables are achieved 
and that resources are utilized effectively. See also team leader.
Project management: The set of people, tools, techniques, and processes used to define the project’s 
goal, plan all the work necessary to reach that goal, lead the project and support teams, monitor progress, 
and ensure that the project is completed in a satisfactory way.
Project pipeline management: Fine-tuning resource deployment smoothly for projects during ramp￾up, ramp-down, and mid-course adjustments.
Project plan: A formal, approved document used to guide both project execution and control. Documents 
planning assumptions and decisions, facilitates communication among stakeholders, and documents 
approved scope, cost, and schedule deadlines.
Project portfolio: The set of projects in development at any point in time. These will vary in the extent of 
newness or innovativeness.
Project resource estimation: This activity provides one of the major contributions to the project cost 
calculation. Turning functional requirements into a realistic cost estimate is a key factor in the success of a 
product delivering against the business plan.Appendix A: Glossary of Terms 351
Project sponsor: The authorization and funding source of the project. The person who defines the pro￾ject goals and to whom the final results are presented. Typically, a senior manager.
Project strategy: The goals and objectives for an individual product development project. It includes 
how that project fits into the organization’s product portfolio, who the target market is, and what problems 
the product will solve for those customers.
Project team: A multifunctional group of individuals chartered to plan and execute a new product devel￾opment project.
Prospectors: Organizations that lead in technology, product and market development, and commercial￾ization, even though an individual product may not lead to profits. Their general goal is to be first to market 
with any particular innovation.
Prototype: A physical model of the new product concept. Depending upon the purpose, prototypes 
may be non-working, functionally working, or both functionally and aesthetically complete.
Psychographics: Characteristics of consumers that, rather than being purely demographic, measure 
their attitudes, interests, opinions, and lifestyles. Frequently used to gather initial consumer needs and 
obtain initial reactions to ideas and concepts. Results are not representative of the market in general nor 
projectable. Qualitative marketing research is used to show why people buy a particular product, whereas 
quantitative marketing research reveals how many people buy it.
Qualitative Market Research: Research conducted with a very small number of respondents, either 
in groups or individually, to gain an impression of their beliefs, motivations, perceptions, and opinions. 
Frequently used to gather initial consumer needs and obtain initial reactions to ideas and concepts. 
Results are not representative of the market in general or projectable to that market.
Quality: The collection of attributes, which when present in a product, means a product has conformed 
to or exceeded customer expectations.
Quality assurance/compliance: Function responsible for monitoring and evaluating development poli￾cies and practices, to ensure they meet organization and applicable regulatory standards.
Quality-by-design: The process used to design quality into the product, service, or process from the 
inception of product development.
Quality control specification and procedure: Documents that describe the specifications and the 
procedures by which they will be measured which a finished subassembly or system must meet before 
judged ready for shipment.
Quality Function Deployment (QFD): A structured method employing matrix analysis for linking what 
the market requires to how it will be accomplished in the development effort. This method is most frequently 
used during the stage of development when a multifunctional team agrees on how customer needs relate 
to product specifications and the features that deliver those needs. By explicitly linking these aspects of 
product design, QFD minimizes the possibility of omitting important design characteristics or interactions 
across design characteristics. QFD is also an important mechanism in promoting multifunctional teamwork. 
Developed and introduced by Japanese auto manufacturers, QFD is widely used in the automotive industry.
Promotion: A entire set of activities, which communicate the product, brand, or service to the user.
Quantitative market research: Consumer research, often surveys, conducted with a large enough 
sample of consumers to produce statistically reliable results that can be used to project outcomes to the 
general consumer population. Used to determine importance levels of different customer needs, perfor￾mance ratings of and satisfaction with current products, probability of trial, repurchase rate, and product 
preferences. These techniques are used to reduce the uncertainty associated with many other aspects of 
product development.352 Appendix A: Glossary of Terms
Quartz Open Framework: A framework for managing product innovation based on six key elements – 
connect, discover, commit, describe, create, and deliver.
Radical innovation: A new product, generally containing new technologies, that significantly changes 
behaviors and consumption patterns in the marketplace.
Random sample: A subset of a statistical population in which each member of the subset has an equal 
probability of being chosen, e.g., 3D printing.
Rapid prototyping: The physical modeling of a design using machine technology in an additive and/or 
subtractive manufacturing process.
Reactors: Organizations that have no coherent innovation strategy. They only develop new products 
when absolutely forced to by the competitive situation.
Release plan: A tactical document designed to capture and track the features planned for an upcoming 
release. A release plan usually spans only a few months and is typically an internal working document for 
product and development teams.
Reposition: To change the position of the product in the minds of customers, either on failure of the 
original positioning or to react to changes in the marketplace. Most frequently accomplished through 
changing the marketing mix rather than redeveloping the product.
Resource matrix: An array that shows the percentage of each non-managerial person’s time that is to 
be devoted to each of the current projects in the organization’s portfolio.
Resource plan: Detailed summary of all forms of resources required to complete a product develop￾ment project, including personnel, equipment, time, and finances.
Return on investment (ROI): A standard measure of project profitability, this is the discounted profits 
over the life of the project expressed as a percentage of initial investment.
Reverse engineering: The implementation of value analysis (VA) tear-down processes to formulate 
ideas for product improvement.
Risk: An event or condition that may or may not occur, but if it does occur will impact the ability to 
achieve a project’s objectives. In new product development, risks may take the form of market.
Risk acceptance: An uncertain event or condition for which the project team has decided not to 
change the project plan. A team may be forced to accept an identified risk when they are unable to identify 
any other suitable response to the risk.
Risk avoidance: Changing the project plan to eliminate a risk or to protect the project objectives from 
any potential impact due to the risk.
Risk management: The process of identifying, measuring, and mitigating the business risk in a product 
development project.
Risk mitigation: Actions taken to reduce the probability and/or impact of a risk to below some thresh￾old of acceptability.
Risk tolerance: The level of risk that a project stakeholder is willing to accept. Tolerance levels are con￾text specific. That is, stakeholders may be willing to accept different levels of risk for different types of risk, 
such as risks of project delay, price realization, and technical potential.
Risk transference: Actions taken to shift the impact of a risk and the ownership of the risk response 
actions to a third party.
Road-mapping: A graphical multistep process to forecast future market and/or technology changes, 
and then plan the products to address these changes.Appendix A: Glossary of Terms 353
Routine innovation: Builds on an organization’s existing technological competencies and fits with its 
existing business models. Innovation is focused on feature improvement and new versions or models.
S-Curve (Technology S-Curve): Technology performance improvements tend to progress over time in 
the form of an “S” curve. When first invented, technology performance improves slowly and incrementally. 
Then, as experience with a new technology accrues, the rate of performance increase grows and technol￾ogy performance increases by leaps and bounds. Finally, some of the performance limits of a new technol￾ogy start to be reached and performance growth slows.
Sales forecasting: Predicting the sales potential for a new product using techniques such as the ATAR 
(Awareness-Trial-Availability-Repeat) model.
Sales wave research: Customers who are initially offered the product at no cost are re-offered it, or a 
competitor’s product, at slightly reduced prices. The offer may be made as many as five times. The num￾ber of customers continuing to select the product and their level of satisfaction is recorded.
Scamper: An ideation tool that utilizes actions verbs as stimuli. S – Substitute; C – Combine; A – Adapt; 
M – Modify; P – Put to another use; E – Eliminate; R – Reverse.
Scenario analysis: A tool for envisioning alternate futures so that a strategy can be formulated to 
respond to future opportunities and challenges.
Screening: The process of evaluating and selecting new ideas or concepts to put into the project port￾folio. Most organizations now use a formal screening process with evaluation criteria that span customer, 
strategy, market, profitability, and feasibility dimensions.
Scrum: A term used in Agile product development. Arguably it is the most popular framework for imple￾menting Agile. With scrum, the product is built in a series of fixed-length iterations, giving teams a frame￾work for shipping software on a regular cadence.
Scrum-master: Commonly used in Agile product development. The facilitator for the team and product 
owner. Rather than manage the team, the scrum-master works to assist both the team and the product 
owner.
Scrum team: Commonly used in Agile product development. Usually made up of seven, plus or minus 
two team members. The team usually comprises a mix of functions or disciplines required to successfully 
complete the sprint goals (cross-functional team).
Secondary market research: Research that involves searching for existing data originally collected by 
someone else.
Segmentation: The process of dividing a large and heterogeneous market into more homogeneous sub￾groups. Each subgroup, or segment, holds similar views about the product, and values, purchases, and 
uses the product in similar ways.
Senior management: That level of executive or operational management above the product develop￾ment team that has approval authority or controls resources important to the development effort.
Sensitivity analysis: A calculation of the impact that an uncertainty might have on the new product 
business case. It is conducted by setting upper and lower ranges on the assumptions involved and calcu￾lating the expected outcomes.
Sensory testing: A quantitative research method that evaluates products in terms of the human sensory 
response (sight, taste, smell, touch, hearing) to the products tested.
Sentiment analysis: Used to classify and understand people’s opinions in product review blogs or 
social networks.354 Appendix A: Glossary of Terms
Services: Products, such as an airline flight or insurance policy, which are intangible or at least substan￾tially so. If totally intangible, they are exchanged directly from producer to user, cannot be transported or 
stored, and are instantly perishable. Service delivery usually involves customer participation in some impor￾tant way. Services cannot be sold in the sense of ownership transfer, and they have no title of ownership.
Simulated test market: A form of quantitative market research and pre-test marketing in which con￾sumers are exposed to new products and to their claims in a staged advertising and purchase situation. 
Output of the test is an early forecast of expected sales or market share, based on mathematical forecast￾ing models, management assumptions, and input of specific measurements from the simulation.
Six Sigma: A level of process performance that produces only 3.4 defects for every one million 
operations.
Six thinking hats: A tool developed by Edward de Bono which encourages team members to separate 
thinking into six clear functions and roles. Each role is identified with a color-symbolic “thinking hat.”
Sketch: A freehand drawing. It is very cheap and fast and often done during brainstorming sessions. Its 
main goal is to illustrate the product or aspects of the product.
Social media: Computer-mediated tools that allow people, companies, and other organizations to cre￾ate, share, or exchange information, ideas, and pictures/videos in virtual communities and networks.
Specification: A detailed description of the features and performance characteristics of a product. For 
example, a laptop computer’s specification may read as a 90-megahertz Pentium, with 16 megabytes of 
RAM and 720 megabytes of hard disk space, 3.5 hours of battery life, weight of 4.5 pounds, with an active 
matrix 256 color screen.
Sponsor: An informal role in a product development project, usually performed by a higher-ranking per￾son in the organization who is not directly involved in the project, but who is ready to extend a helping 
hand if needed or provide a barrier to interference by others.
Sprint: A term used in Agile product development. A set period of time during which specific work has 
to be completed and made ready for review.
Stage: One group of concurrently accomplished tasks, with specified outcomes and deliverables, of the 
overall product development process.
Stage-Gate® process: A widely employed product development process that divides the effort into 
distinct time-sequenced stages separated by management decision gates. Multifunctional teams must 
successfully complete a prescribed set of related cross-functional tasks in each stage prior to obtaining 
management approval to proceed to the next stage of product development. The framework of the Stage￾Gate® process includes work-flow and decision-flow paths and defines the supporting systems and prac￾tices necessary to ensure the process’s ongoing smooth operation.
Staged product development activity: The set of product development tasks commencing when it is 
believed there are no major unknowns and that result in initial production of salable product, carried out in 
stages.
Standard cost: See factory cost.
Star products: Products that command a significant market share in a growing overall market.
Storming: The stage in team formation where people start to push against the boundaries established. 
This is where many teams fail. Storming often starts where there is a conflict between team members’ 
natural working styles.
Storyboarding: Focuses on the development of a story, possibly about a consumer’s use of a product, 
to better understand the problems or issues that may lead to specific product design attributes.Appendix A: Glossary of Terms 355
S-Steady: Team members who are considered even-tempered and calm, valuable traits when the new 
product innovation work is chaotic or unstructured. These team members are more accommodating than 
many other people and will easily show empathy for others (DiSC work assessment tool).
Strategic balance: Balancing the portfolio of development projects along one or more of many dimen￾sions such as focus vs. diversification, short vs. long term, high vs. low risk, extending platforms vs. devel￾opment of new platforms.
Strategic fit: Ensures projects are consistent with the articulated strategy. For example, if certain tech￾nologies or markets are specified as areas of strategic focus, do the projects fit into these areas?
Strategic partnering: An alliance or partnership between two organizations (frequently one large corpo￾ration and one smaller, entrepreneurial organization) to create a specialized new product. Typically, the large 
organization supplies capital and the necessary product development, marketing, manufacturing, and distri￾bution capabilities, while the small organization supplies specialized technical or creative expertise.
Strategic priorities: Ensures the investment across the portfolio reflects the strategic priorities. For 
example, if the organization is seeking technology leadership, then the balance of projects in the portfolio 
should reflect this focus.
Strategy: The organization’s vision, mission, and values. One subset of the organization’s overall strat￾egy is its innovation strategy.
Stratified sampling: The population is divided into strata according to some variables that are thought 
to be related to the variables that we are interested in. A sample is taken from each stratum.
Support projects: Can be incremental improvements in existing products or improvements in manufac￾turing efficiency of an existing product. Generally they are low risk.
Sustainable development: Development which meets the needs of current generations without com￾promising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.
Sustainable innovation: The process in which new products or services are developed and brought 
to commercialization and in which the characteristics of sustainable development are respected from the 
economic, environmental, and social angle, in the sourcing, production, use, and end-of-service stages of 
the product life cycle.
Sustaining innovation: Does not create new markets or value networks but only develops existing 
ones with better value, allowing companies to compete against each other’s sustaining improvements.
SWOT Analysis: Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats Analysis. A SWOT analysis eval￾uates an organization in terms of its advantages and disadvantages vs. competitors, customer require￾ments, and market/economic environmental conditions.
Systems engineering (SE): Combine the concepts of systems thinking and SE process models to 
take a problem through a systematic and integrated process of design and project management tools and 
methods into a solution.
Tangible product: The physical and aesthetic design features that give the product its appearance and 
functionality.
Target market: The group of consumers or potential customers selected for marketing. This market seg￾ment is most likely to buy the products within a given category. These are sometimes called prime prospects.
Task: The smallest describable unit of accomplishment in completing a deliverable.
Target market: A particular group of consumers at which a product or service is aimed.356 Appendix A: Glossary of Terms
Team leader: The person leading the new product team. Responsible for ensuring that milestones and 
deliverables are achieved but may not have any authority over project participants.
Technology-driven: A new product or new product strategy based on the strength of a technical capa￾bility. Sometimes called solutions in search of problems.
Technology foresighting: A process for looking into the future to predict technology trends and the 
potential impact on an organization.
Technology roadmap: A graphic representation of technology evolution or technology plans mapped 
against time. It is used to guide new technology development or technology selection in developing new 
products.
Technology S-curve: The life cycle that applies to most technologies — embryonic, growth, and maturity 
stage.
Technology strategy: A plan for the maintenance and development of technologies that supports the 
future growth of the organization and aids the achievement of its strategic goals.
Technology transfer: The process of converting scientific findings from research laboratories into use￾ful products by the commercial sector. May also be referred to as the process of transferring technology 
between alliance partners.
Test marketing: Focuses on a new product in a market to provide customer feedback from specific tar￾get markets at later stages of product development.
Time to market: The length of time it takes to develop a new product from an early initial idea for a new 
product to initial market sales. Precise definitions of the start and end point vary from one organization to 
another and may vary from one project to another within the organization. (Also called Speed to Market).
Top-down portfolio selection: Also known as the strategic bucket method, relies on starting with strat￾egy and placing significant emphasis on project selection according to this strategy.
Total Quality Management (TQM): A business improvement philosophy that comprehensively and 
continuously involves all of an organization’s functions in improvement activities.
Trade secrets: Information related to IP that is retained confidentially within an organization.
Trademark: A symbol, word, or words legally registered or established by use as representing an organ￾ization or product.
Triple constraint: The combination of the three most significant restrictions on any project: scope, 
schedule, and cost. The triple constraint is sometimes referred to as the project management triangle or the 
iron triangle.
Triple bottom line: Reports an organization’s performance against three dimensions: Financial, social, 
environmental.
TRIZ: The acronym for the Theory of Inventive Problem Solving, which is a Russian systematic method 
of solving problems and creating multiple-alternative solutions. It is based on an analysis and codification 
of technology solutions from millions of patents. The method enhances creativity by getting individuals to 
think beyond their own experience and to reach across disciplines to solve problems using solutions from 
other areas of science.
Unarticulated customer needs: Those needs that a customer is either unwilling or unable to explain.
Usage and purchase intent: The extent to which someone says they will use or purchase your product 
or service.Appendix A: Glossary of Terms 357
User: Any person who uses a product or service to solve a problem or obtain a benefit, whether or not 
they purchase it.
User experience (UX): In current vernacular, UX is often associated with interface design, human fac￾tor design, etc., and while those are definitely a part of the user experience, UX ultimately comes down to 
understanding the customer.
User interface (UI): Refers to the interfaces with which users engage.
Value: Any principle to which a person or organization adheres with some degree of emotion. It is one of 
the elements that enter into formulating a strategy.
Value-added: The act or process by which tangible product features or intangible service attributes are 
bundled, combined, or packaged with other features and attributes to create a competitive advantage, 
reposition a product, or increase sales.
Value proposition: A short, clear, and simple statement of how and on what dimensions a product 
concept will deliver value to prospective customers. The essence of “value” is embedded in the trade-off 
between the benefits a customer receives from a new product and the price a customer pays for it.
Virtual reality (VR) testing: A growing segment of the market research field, conducted using special￾ized equipment including a headset and/or gloves with tracking sensors that create three-dimensional (3D) 
simulations and enable participants to interact in a realistic environment.
Virtual team: Dispersed teams that communicate and work primarily electronically may be called virtual 
teams.
Vision: An act of imagining, guided by both foresight and informed discernment, that reveals the possi￾bilities as well as the practical limits in new product development. It depicts the most desirable future state 
of a product or organization.
Vitality index: The sales of new products as defined by the business divided by the sales of all products 
for a given product line or department during a designated period.
Voice of the Customer (VOC): A process for eliciting needs from consumers that uses structured in￾depth interviews to lead interviewees through a series of situations in which they have experienced and 
found solutions to the set of problems being investigated. Needs are obtained through indirect questioning 
by coming to understand how the consumers found ways to meet their needs, and, more important, why 
they chose the particular solutions they found.
Waste: Any activity that utilizes equipment, materials, parts, space, employee time, or other corporate 
resource beyond minimum amount required for value-added operations to ensure manufacturability. These 
activities could include waiting, accumulating semi-processed parts, reloading, passing materials from one 
hand to the other, and other non-productive processes. The seven basic categories of waste that a busi￾ness should strive to eliminate are overproduction, waiting for machines, transportation time, process time, 
excess inventory, excess motion, and defects.
Waterfall method: Widely applied within the software industry. The five phases of the classical waterfall 
process are requirement gathering, design, implementation, verification, and maintenance.
Whole product: A product definition concept that emphasizes delivering all aspects of a product which 
are required for it to deliver its full value. This would include training materials, support systems, cables, 
how-to recipes, additional hardware/software, standards and procedures, implementation, applications 
consulting – any constitutive elements necessary to assure the customer will have a successful experience 
and achieve at least minimum required value from the product.
Willingness to pay: The highest price a customer says they will definitely buy your product or service.358 Appendix A: Glossary of Terms
Wireframe: A detailed black-and-white layout of the product. They provide specifics about how the 
product is laid out or constructed. Wireframes are commonly used for software products and websites.
Workplan: Detailed plan for executing the project, identifying each phase of the project, the major steps 
associated with them, and the specific tasks to be performed along the way. Best practice workplans identify 
the specific functional resources assigned to each task, the planned task duration, and the dependencies 
between tasks. See also Gantt chart.Following is a collection of cases demonstrating application of various aspects of PDMA’s BoK.
B.1 CASE 1
Global DairyCo (not the actual name of the company).
B.1.1 Purpose
This case study provides an overview of how a large multinational food company used its business goals 
to provide a direction for its product innovation strategy and application of its R&D resources. It demon￾strates the importance of the linkage between corporate and innovation strategies.
B.1.2 Corporate Strategy
The role of corporate strategy in product innovation is to provide the context, goals, and direction for prod￾uct innovation portfolio development, prioritization of projects, and management of individual projects.
B.1.3 Company Background
Global DairyCo is a multinational dairy product manufacturing and marketing company, with a wide port￾folio of products across commodity, ingredients, and consumer categories, in 120 countries worldwide. 
Characteristics of the company include:
• One of the largest dairy R&D capabilities in the world with extensive research, development, and pilot 
plant facilities
• Connections with over 100 research institutions worldwide
• R&D investment of over $100m annually
• Established customer base with several large infant formula and sports food manufacturers
B.1.4 The Challenge
Global DairyCo recognized the need for a clearer vision and strategy on which to base its future growth. 
It was concerned that the return on its R&D investment was not being maximized, mainly due to a lack 
of clear focus, based on the overall company direction and goals. Significant resources and expendi￾tures were devoted to projects that lacked any apparent link to the company’s current or projected future 
business.
Appendix B: The BoK 
in Practice Cases
Product Development and Management Body of Knowledge: A Guidebook for Product Innovation Training and Certification,Third Edition. 
Allan Anderson, Chad McAllister, and Ernie Harris.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.360 Appendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases
B.1.5 The Approach
A cross-functional team comprising global representatives of marketing, R&D, manufacturing, and finance 
was established with the objective “to define the key business areas for R&D focus, thus providing criteria 
for R&D resource allocation and expenditure.”
B.1.6 The Process
1. Define the key themes (areas of strategic focus) that will provide the basis for further company 
sustenance and growth.
Seven key strategic themes were identified (see Figure B.1):
i. Lowest cost commodity supplier
ii. Leading price and inventory manager
iii. Developer of dairy ingredients partnerships
iv. Specialty milk components innovator
v. Leading nutritional milks marketer
vi. Leading dairy marketer to food-service
vii. Integrated regional strategies
Themes 1 and 2: Aim to protect two of the current competitive advantages – maintaining the 
company’s leading position as a low-cost commodity product supplier and through global inventory 
control, thus providing the potential to significantly control prices.
Theme 3, 4, 5, and 6: Aim to underpin the “growth engines” for higher profit margins from value￾added businesses (products and services).
Theme 7: Aims to reinforce the importance of cross-regional cooperation and integration in 
achieving optimal leverage from the strategic efforts.
FIGURE B.1 Seven strategic themesAppendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases  361
2. Identify which of the 7 strategic themes have the greatest potential for company growth from 
R&D investment – where should the R&D funding and resources be focused?
Four of the strategic themes were prioritized as having the greatest potential from R&D investment. 
Following were specific initiatives to address each theme:
i. Developer of dairy ingredient partnerships
Global DairyCo already had several partnerships with well-established international brands 
(Figure B.2). A key to future growth was seen through further leveraging these partnerships and 
developing new partnerships focused on R&D and product innovation. Specific actions included:
• Improving communications with all major partners through the regular exchange of staff and 
information.
• Identifying and working closely with key lead customers to develop new products based on 
their specific needs. Specifically, getting closer to lead customers, understanding what they 
want, and working with them to meet their requirements, often requiring Global Dairy R&D and 
partner companies to work collaboratively at each others’ facilities for extended periods.
• Improving intellectual property practices to ensure maximum return from product innovation 
through direct product sales, licensing, or sale of IP.
ii. Specialty milk components innovator
Global DairyCo had, for several years, carried out research into the separation, manufacture, 
and application of “minor milk components”, many of which had far higher market value than 
traditional products. However, specialized capabilities were lacking within the company. Specific 
actions included (Figure B.3):
• Identification of core capability to be developed within the company and capability that was 
better outsourced – either through individual contracts or partnerships.
• A joint venture with a high-profile university with world-leading expertise in biomedical research 
and clinical testing. The joint venture focused on milk bioactives discovery leading to IP value 
capture.
• Refocusing on bioactive ingredients that could form a platform across a range of ingredient 
and consumer products.
Global DairyCo University with world leading biomedical
and clinical expertise
Joint venture R&D company focusing on
IP capture from milk-bioactives discovery
FIGURE B.2 Global Ingredients partnerships362 Appendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases
iii. Leading consumer milks marketer
Global DairyCo had over 118 active consumer products – mainly focused on the Asian region. 
Although relatively strong, Global DairyCo brands were a distant 3rd behind two other major inter￾national consumer dairy companies. Specific actions included:
• Revitalization of existing products, line extensions, and new products.
• Ensuring a close working relationship between the scientists working on the bioactives 
research program to ensure the exchange of ideas and speed up the commercialization of 
new bioactive-based products.
iv. Leading dairy marketer to food service
Global DairyCo had developed a strong food service business based on its well-established 
cheese technology platform. Specific actions included:
• Maintaining and building on the good reputation with existing customers.
• Extending the food service offerings into other product categories.
• Leveraging of the bioactives research program and “platform ingredients” that might add value 
to food service customers.
B.1.7 The Outcomes
In the two years after the initiation of this process, the following outcomes were achieved:
• A key outcome from the process was the ongoing impact of forming the cross-functional team. Col￾laboration across the company functions was enhanced, resulting in strong cooperation across the 
company on product innovation and other company initiatives.
• An annual product innovation exhibition was hosted by the R&D center, sharing research and new 
products in the pipeline with marketing colleagues from around the world. This, in turn, promoted 
greater collaboration between R&D and marketing functions and a greater understanding of each 
other’s roles.
Discovery
Identification and
characterization of milk
and colostrum fractions
Screening and validation of components/fractions through appropriate assays
IP management and commercial analysis
Bone GIT disorders Asthma Infection Inflammation
Commercialization of ingredients
applications through Fonterra
ingredients
Commercialization of pharmaceutical
applications through out-licensing
FIGURE B.3 Milk component innovationAppendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases  363
• The bioactives research program received significantly more funding with a defined portfolio of research 
projects forming a platform of applications across a targeted range of consumer and ingredient 
products.
• R&D partnerships at various levels were established with over 100 institutions globally.
• Small cross-functional teams were established to focus on servicing key customers – working closely 
with lead customers to develop new products with well-founded customer requirements.
• The increase in returns from the launch of value-added consumer and ingredient products, together 
with forward projections of significant growth, resulted in a 20% increase in R&D funding.
Case Questions
1. What was the fundamental first step required by the company to provide the direction for product 
innovation?
2. What are the important features of the 7 strategic themes identified by Global DairyCo?
3. Would you describe the Global DairyCo strategy as a business or a corporate strategy?
4. How would you define Global DairyCo’s strategy in terms of the Porter Framework?
5. What have you identified as the key areas of focus for product innovation in response to the com￾pany strategy?
Answers to Case Questions
1. What was the fundamental first step required by the company to provide the direction for product 
innovation? What would you expect the company to have done to take this first step?
The first step was to identify the key business areas for the company to focus on to enable future 
growth. Although not explicitly explained in the case study, Global DairyCo had:
• Carried out extensive study of its current businesses – products and markets.
• Sought market research on future trends and growth opportunities.
• Analyzed current capability – internally and externally with respect to technology and marketing.
• Identified growth targets across a balanced portfolio of businesses to minimize risk.
2. What are the important features of the 7 strategic themes identified by Global DairyCo?
• They are based on current business operations and capability.
• They provide a balanced portfolio of business – some quite traditional and low risk, while others 
rely on a high level of research with significant risk.
3. Would you describe the Global DairyCo strategy as a business or a corporate strategy?
The range of themes and the description of Global DairyCo implies that this is more a corporate 
than a business strategy. In fact, it could be described as an integration of several business strate￾gies with interlinking components. For example, the potential for research from the “milk components 
innovator” theme provides development opportunities in food service or consumer products. In fact, 
this would almost certainly provide the basis for a platform strategy.
4. How would you define Global DairyCo’s strategy in terms of the Porter Framework?
• Lowest cost commodity supplier – cost leadership.
• Leading price and inventory manager – cost leadership.
• Developer of dairy ingredients partnerships – segmentation.
• Specialty milk components innovator – differentiation.
• Leading nutritional milks marketer – potentially segmentation or differentiation.
• Leading dairy marketer to food-service – segmentation.
• Integrated regional strategies – cost leadership.
Overall, we can see from this case study that a company does not have to focus on what specific 
type of strategy. Different strategy types can be applied to different business or product offerings.364 Appendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases
5. What have you identified as the key areas of focus for product innovation in response to the com￾pany strategy?
Some of the key areas identified by the company were:
• Get closer to our customers.
• Get better at prioritizing and directing our R&D efforts.
• Get better integration across R&D, manufacturing, and marketing.
• Get better at accessing external IP.
• Get more efficient in capturing value from our internal IP.
• Develop and leverage off science and technology platforms, e.g., bioactives from milk and 
cheese technology.Appendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases  365
B.2 CASE 2
LeanMed, Medical Technology Start-up
B.2.1 Purpose
This case provides an overview of how LeanMed, a medical technology start-up applied Lean start-up 
principles in their innovation process. It demonstrates the importance of using a structured methodology in 
innovation strategy and process, particularly as applied in start-up situations. The case study is provided 
with the permission of LeanMed founder Mark Adkins.
B.2.2 Company Background
LeanMed is a medical technology company founded in 2018. It is dedicated to bringing essential medical 
treatment to underserved regions of the world through innovative technologies.
B.2.3 Lean Start-Up Methodology
This case study highlights the application of lean start-up methodology based on the following elements:
1. A 3-stage process.
2. The business model canvas (BMC).
3. The build/measure/learn cycle.
4. The minimum valuable product (MVP).
In establishing the company and identifying its first product, LeanMed followed the three-stage process 
shown in Figure B.4
Problem/Solution t
(Customer development)
• Finding a problem worth
 solving
• “Discover” a viable solution
• Customer Interviews
• The most important stage • Focus on growth only after you
 have validated your product
Pre-product/Market
Product/
Mkt Fit
Conversion
Optimization
1st Driver
2nd Driver
• Pass this stage and you would
 have validated your product
 and business
• Demo page
• MVB (minimum viable
 business)
Product/Market t
(Customer validation)
Scale
(Customer creation)
FIGURE B.4 LeanMed’s 3-stage start-up process366 Appendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases
B.2.4 Applying the 3-Stage Process
1. Identifying a problem: Finding a problem worth solving and discovering a viable solution.
Pediatric pneumonia is the #1 killer of children in the world, averaging 800,000 deaths per year. 99% of 
these deaths occur in developing countries.
Oxygen is required to treat children with pneumonia yet it is in short supply in the developing world where 
poor infrastructure, environmental, and financial challenges limit their ability to access life-saving O2
.
LeanMed’s solution
LeanMed’s first product, the O2
 Cube, delivers vital medical oxygen to the 1.2 billion patients of rural hospi￾tals and health clinics that lack grid electricity, as shown in Figure B.5.
2. Product/market fit: validating the product solves the problem and is a fit for the market.
LeanMed entered various design and development competitions in the early stages of concept develop￾ment, prototyping, and preliminary market research, as shown in Figure B.6. Success in these competi￾tions and positive indications from early market research provided the confidence to continue development 
to a minimum viable product (MVP).
Symptoms identified
Village Rural health center Inpatient center
Travel Diagnosis
START O2
Transit
Once symptoms are indetified, patient
travels from home to RHC, often on foot.
Patient is diognosed, and stared on
oxygen immediately. If further treatment
is needed, transporation is arranged.
Empty tanks are returned to RHCs
with routine supply deliveries.
The patient arrives at a hospital,
while receiving O2
.
Medical care
Hospitals also use
cylinders for backup
FIGURE B.5 LeanMed’s solutionAppendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases  367
The Business Model Canvas (BMC)
LeanMed’s BMC is shown in Figure B.7. The BMC was used to create alignment in nine areas that contrib￾ute to business success.
FIGURE B.6 Product/market fit validation process
Key Partnerships
Philips, NGO’s like
Colab, UNICEF,
WHO and the Gates
Foundation
Execution of
CoLab Program
Daedalus and CMC
(Design, Build &
Test)
50% Product Margins,
Asset Light Business
Structure
Reliable Production
That Enables Access
to Affordable
Medical Oxygen
O2aaS–Trusted
Technology Provider
O2aaS Service
Providers
O2aaS Service
Providers
O2 Cube
Sales
Rural Hospitals/MoH’s
-Recognized as Trusted
Technology Provider
Rural
Hospitals with
Unstable Grid
Electricity Medical
Equipment
Distributors
Cloud-Based
Data
Collection
Services
Cloud Based
Data Collection
Providing
Operational Data
Recruitment of Med
Equipment Distributors
Fundraising
Key Activities Value Propositions Customer Relationships
Key Resources Channels
Cost Structure Revenue Streams
Customer Segments
FIGURE B.7 LeanMed’s business model canvas368 Appendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases
The key hypotheses and risks are shown in Figures B.8 and B.9.
LeanMed
Capable of
Providing Cloud
Services? 
Key
Partners
Key
Activities
Supply
Agreement with
Philips Provides
Low Cost
UltraFills?
Design, Build,
Test, and Ship
On Time?
Value
Proposition
Oxygen
Production
Significantly
Lower Than
Existing Systems?
Customer
Relationships
O2aaS Service
Providers
Technically
Sound?
Customer 
Segments
Market Price
for Oxygen
Too Low?
Health
Workers Will
Prescribe/Use
Oxygen
Key
Resources
Daedalus
Stays on Time
and on
Budget?
Channels
Medical
Equipment
Distributors
Em brace the
O2 Cube?
Cost
Structure
BOM Costs
Too High?
Revenue
Streams
FIGURE B.8 LeanMed’s key hypotheses
LeanMed
Capable of
Providing Cloud
Services?
Key
Partners
Key
Activities
Supply
Agreement with
Philips Provides
Low Cost
UltraFills?
Design, Build,
Test, and Ship
On Time?
Value
Proposition
Oxygen
Production
Significantly
Lower Than
Existing Systems?
Customer
Relationships
O2aaS Service
Providers
Technically
Sound?
Customer 
Segments
Market Price
for Oxygen
Too Low?
Health
Workers Will
Prescribe/Use
Oxygen
Key
Resources
Daedalus
Stays on Time
and on
Budget?
Channels
Medical
Equipment
Distributors
Embrace the
O2 Cube?
Cost
Structure
BOM Costs
Too High?
Revenue
Streams
FIGURE B.9 Identifying and prioritizing the risks.Appendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases  369
Fast track as an MVP
A minimum viable product (MVP) is a version of a product with just enough features to be valuable to early 
customers who can then provide feedback for future product development.
Using the MVP
A pilot program was initiated to better understand the delivery of oxygen and learn how versatile the O2
 Cube 
is by implementing variations of the product in multiple locations with different needs. The Fast Track O2
 Cube 
is the minimum viable product version of the O2
 Cube that uses already FDA-approved components donated 
by various organizations, including Philips, Goal Zero, and Masimo.
The MVP was tested in a 26 Bed Pediatric Ward Ota in Nigeria. Feedback was used to learn what 
improvements can be made to the product to enable greater usability and market acceptance. Results are 
shown in Figure B.10.
3. Scale up to commercialization and future business growth.
LeanMed’s commercialization and growth strategy is shown in Figure B.11.
FIGURE B.10 Results from MVP market test370 Appendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases
Case Questions
1. What are the key elements in lean start-up methodology used by LeanMed?
2. What are the basic components of a Business Model Canvas (BMC)?
3. How does a BMC help in strategic planning?
4. What ways can be used to validate a product concept for further development?
5. Why is product concept validation so important?
6. What is a minimum viable product, and why is it such an important part of the product innova￾tion process?
Answers to Case Questions
1. The key elements of the lean start-up methodology used by LeanMed are:
a. Problem/solution fit (customer development)
b. Product/market fit (customer validation)
c. Scale (customer creation)
2. The basic components of the BMC are:
a. Key partners
b. Key activities
c. Value proposition
d. Customer relationships
e. Customer segments
f. Key resources
g. Channels
h. Cost structure
i. Revenue streams
Gen 1 Commercial O2 Cube
Gen 2 20LPM O2 Cube Design Manufacturing Expansion to South
Asia & LATAM
Scale
4,400 Units Shipped
African Build, Test & Ship
550 Units Shipped
Global Network of O2aaS and
Medical Equipment Distributors US-Based Manufacturing
50 Units Shipped
Philips Sourced Ultra Fills
• 200 New UltraFills
• Manufacturing Partner In Place
• Full Local Manufacturing
• BOM Cost Reduction
• Full Local Sourcing
• Quality Management System active
• Complete local sourcing except
 compressor
African Sourcing & Manufacturing
Mfg. Expansion to South Asia and LATAM
• 50 Units
• In-country Sourcing of Solar Panels
 & Lithium Batteries
• Procure, Asembly & Test
 performed in Pittsburgh
H1
2023
H2
2023
H1
2024
H1
2025
H1
2026
H2
2027
H1
2027
H2
2026
H2
2025
H2
2024
Installed Base of
5,000 O2 Cubes
FIGURE B.11 LeanMed’s business growth planAppendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases  371
3. The Business Model Canvas provides a clear structure and specific issues that need to be 
addressed in strategic planning. It is also an excellent tool for communication and discussion.
4. There are several ways of validating a concept for further development. These include:
a. Stakeholder research focused on the target market, either the end-user or specific stakehold￾ers in the distribution channels, for example, medical practitioners or distributors.
b. Experts in the product and/or market, for example, commercialization partners or academics.
c. In-market testing of a prototype, for example, a minimum viable product (MVP) version of a 
product with just enough features, provides end-users and other stakeholders a good appre￾ciation of what the final product could offer.
5. Throughout this Body of Knowledge, we have emphasized how cost and risk increase significantly 
as product innovation progresses. It is critically important to ensure that the decisions to continue 
with further development are based on sound information. Validating the product concept using a 
clear concept description or, preferably, a well-developed prototype, can provide critical informa￾tion for decision-making, either for modifying the product or “killing” the project.
6. The minimum viable product is a prototype of the final product with features and functionality that 
provide the user with a good appreciation of how the final product will perform.372 Appendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases
B.3 CASE 3
Stingray. Firefighter’s Communication Device
This case study was prepared by students at the School of Engineering and Advanced Technology, 
Massey University, New Zealand: Jessica Braddon-Parsons, Errol Chrystal, Afnan Kayed, and Jacob 
Patrick.
B.3.1 Purpose
To provide an example of a product concept and design specifications based on the development of 
a product called the Stingray. The purpose was to address a number of the current problems faced by 
emergency services workers (specifically firefighters). It comprises an earpiece (or Bluetooth receiver to 
work with firefighters’ headsets) and a main radio unit, which can be repositioned on uniforms for optimal 
accessibility.
B.3.2 The Core Product
The Stingray enables firefighters to communicate with other emergency services over large distances with 
clarity, ease, and reliability. This communication will be secure, safe, and reliable. The movement of the 
user will not be impeded, nor will the radio pose a safety risk.
B.3.3 The Tangible Product
The Stingray has two pieces: the main radio unit and the earpiece. Descriptions of design requirements for 
each follows along with augmented product capabilities.
The radio
• The radio is housed in a smaller and more compact unit than the older models. A curved profile helps 
mold the unit to the wearer and a lower, flatter design will stop any twisting motion on the hip while 
moving.
• A clip on the back of the radio unit allows the radio to be attached directly to a belt. This clip can be 
removed so the radio can be placed in the pockets of uniforms.
• The upgrade to a digital network will ensure improved audio quality.
• The case will be constructed from a high-strength plastic polymer, polyether ether ketone (PEEK). 
This helps protect internal componentry from damage due to rough treatment, heat, or water. 
The corners will also be surrounded by a soft rubber edge that helps prevent damage if the unit is 
dropped.
• A GPS will provide real-time tracking of personnel.
• The gyroscope and accelerometer can detect if an officer has fallen and is no longer moving. If this 
happens, the radio will send an emergency signal with their name or ID and geographic position.
• A sheet of copper wire will be placed in the officers’ vests to act as an aerial. For emergency person￾nel who do not wear these vests, a smaller aerial will be provided to plug into the unit, like the current 
screw-in aerials. These plug into the coaxial connector on top of the radio.
• An encrypted Bluetooth signal will connect the radio with the wireless earpiece. The volume and 
channel control dials located at the top of the radio will be kept the same as on previous radios. This 
was a feature that the emergency services requested as it is easy to use in all situations. However, 
the dials now have an added lock-in feature to prevent accidental changes, which can be activated 
by pressing down on the top of either dial.Appendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases  373
• A speaker and microphone are built into the radio unit for use if the earpiece fails to work for any rea￾son. The speaker is activated when the Bluetooth connection to the earpiece is lost. The microphone 
can be activated by pressing the large “talk button” on the top of the radio.
• An emergency panic button is located on the side of the unit. If this button is pressed, the location 
and name or ID of the user will be sent to the operator at the base station, and emergency proce￾dures will be followed.
• A chip (SD memory card) will have to be inserted into the radio to make it operational. This is an 
added security feature, and the chip will also retain information about the user to be sent out with 
GPS locations so operators know which person is using the radio unit. It will also store voice com￾mands to activate or disable audio transmission through the earpiece.
• A removable lithium ion (Li-ion) battery will be used in place of the old nickel metal hydride battery. 
This decreases weight and increases battery life.
• The radio can be docked and charged through a mini-USB port located on the bottom of the unit. 
This port can also be used to program the unit (such as setting the channels) with a provided USB 
cable.
The earpiece
• Using a wireless earpiece replaces the old, wired speaker that was a large hindrance to firefighting 
personnel.
• A power button is used to turn the earpiece on or off.
• The earpiece will connect to the main radio unit via an encrypted Bluetooth signal.
• The ear grip will be removable so everyone can attach a fitted ear grip. This will ensure a snug fit on 
each user to prevent the earpiece falling off.
• A large “talk button” is located on the side of the earpiece to activate the microphone. Voice activa￾tion will also be available to the user for situations where both hands are occupied.
• An extended microphone comes down the side of the user’s face to get the best possible audio 
quality through proximity to their mouth.
• Audio quality is improved by placing the audio source close to the ear, and by using a small surface 
transducer.
• A large battery indicator around the edge of the “talk button” will indicate how much battery life is left.
• The earpiece can be charged via a mini-USB connection on the underside. A USB cable is provided 
with every earpiece for this purpose. This connection can also be used to update the earpiece’s 
firmware.
Augmented product capabilities
• A deployment service including technical training provided to users.
• Ongoing support services including a 24/7 service desk and online service portal.
• A USB cable.
• A pocket to hold the SD memory card (which can then be kept in a personal storage space such as 
a locker).
• A 10-port docking station that charges up to 10 units.
B.3.4 The Design Specifications
The translation of the concept description to design specifications is outlined in Tables B.1 and B.2.
Step 1: Define the user needs and their relative importance. This was derived from user research including 
focus groups and observational studies. The list of user needs is shown in Table B.1.374 Appendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases
Step 2: Translate the consumer needs into engineering design specifications with specific units and target 
values. These target values were derived from a combination of user research and competitor benchmark￾ing and are shown in Table B.2. Further examples of design specifications and their development are pro￾vided in Ulrich and Eppinger (2016).
Case Questions
1. What is the core product and why is this so important in defining product specifications?
2. What is the tangible product and how does its definition aid in the development of design 
specifications?
3. What are the two basic steps in defining product specifications?
TABLE B.1 The user needs and priorities
# Needs Importance
1 Case Must be strong 5
2 Case Must be waterproof, shockproof and heat resistant 5
3 Volume and channel knobs Needs to be lockable 2
4 Earpiece Must have a personally fitted ear grip 4
5 Radio Must be lightweight and small 4
6 Radio Needs to have a longer battery life 3
7 Radio Needs to be digital 5
8 Radio Must display battery levels for both parts 3
9 Radio Must be personalized to identify the user 1
10 Radio Must have GPS 3
11 Radio Must have a kinetic energy charger 1
12 Radio Needs an emergency microphone and speaker 4
13 Radio Transmission range greater than current product 5
TABLE B.2 The design metrics, units, and targets
Metric # Needs # Metric Importance Units Target value
1 1,2,6 High strength polymer casing 5 Nm2
 or Pascal >1000
2 6 Total mass 4 G <700
3 7,12 Battery life 3 mAh >2500
4 13 Effective transmission range 5 Km >1.5
5 3,4 Easy to use buttons 4 Subjective >3 (on a 1–5 scale)
6 6 Size of radio unit 4 Cm3 <400
7 2 Water resistance 5 X-bar >5
8 2,3 Effective life of unit 5 Years >6Appendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases  375
Answers to Case Questions
1. The core product defines the key benefits the target market will derive from the product. These are 
critical elements that must be included in the design specifications.
2. The tangible product is the physical and aesthetic design features that give the product its appear￾ance and functionality. Clear definition of these features provides the basis for the product design 
specifications and for translation of these specifications into a physical product.
3. The two basic steps in defining product specifications are:
a. Define the user needs and their relative importance. This requires user research including focus 
groups and observational studies.
b. Translate the consumer needs into engineering design specifications with specific units and tar￾get values.
REFERENCE
Ulrich, K.T. and Eppinger, S.D. (2016). Product design and development, 6e. McGraw-Hill Education.376 Appendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases
B.4 CASE 4
OBO. Field Hockey Equipment
Presented with permission from Simon Barnett, Chief Executive, OBO, Field Hockey Equipment, New 
Zealand.
B.4.1 Purpose
To demonstrate the application of market research in product innovation. This case describes the use of 
social media as a market research tool to inform new product innovation and product improvement.
B.4.2 Company Background
OBO is a New Zealand-based company that design and manufacture field hockey equipment for goal￾keepers. They hold around 65% of this niche market globally, exporting products to 62 countries. The 
company is an active product innovator, continually seeking improvement to existing products and the 
addition of new products to its range.
Field hockey is played globally and is an Olympic sport. A team comprises 11 players,10 field play￾ers, and a goalie. The game is played with a hard plastic ball which can reach speeds of up to 100 mph 
presenting significant danger to all players, especially the goalie. OBO markets a range of hockey equip￾ment, specializing in equipment required by goalies. It’s designed not only to enable goalkeepers to move 
freely, perform at their best, and look good but also to provide optimal protection for all parts of the body: 
head, throat, chest, hands, legs, and feet. See Figure B.12.
Over recent years, OBO has embraced social media as a key tool for communication with its custom￾ers and for underpinning its product innovation. Recognizing the need for a clear strategy to optimize the 
value of its social media effort, OBO developed social media guidelines, and the specific use of four key 
social media tools: (1) the company website, (2) Facebook, (3) YouTube, and (4) Instagram.
B.4.3 OBO Social Media Guidelines (from OBO website)
“As times are changing, we all need to keep up with them. Social media is still ever evolving, and you are 
all evolving with it. Locally based OBO pages are becoming more and more common, so these guidelines 
are designed to provide insight into how we in New Zealand utilize Social Media and how your own pages 
can work with OBO HQ content and augment each other.”
“If executed well our social media channels will not only highlight our products but help build brand 
love and trust. Goalkeepers are our hero’s and goalkeepers are unique. They deserve somewhere to go 
that they can own and totally relate to. Our Social Media channels are designed to make the goalkeeper 
the hero while still having a product/sales presence. It is designed to bring us closer to the goalkeeper 
and the goalkeeper closer to us. Social Media enables us to have two-way conversations about products, 
training drills, news and communicate brand.
FIGURE B.12 A sample of OBO’s product rangeAppendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases  377
• Everything needs to be well executed and exactly on brand and through the goalkeepers eyes
• We would rather do fewer things but do them really well
• Everything needs to have a why and overall goal for each different media. This ensures we are doing 
it for the right reason
We have found that having different goals/activities for each media tool means people are more likely 
to engage in all our medias as opposed to just one. It also means that our work is more planned and 
targeted.”
B.4.4 OBO’S Four Key Media and Their Goals
1. Website: Product Education and enhancing choosing experience. 70% choosing experience/30% 
brand experience.
2. Facebook: Big focus on two-way communication between brand and goalkeepers. Builds commu￾nity and is designed to bring the goalkeeper closer to the brand.
3. Instagram: Highlighting the world of OBO (products, goalkeeper, and brand) through photos. 70% 
brand/30% choosing experience and product education.
4. YouTube: Use of videos to allow OBO to add extra detail that OBO can’t communicate as easily 
in writing.
The key focus is on product information tips and tricks and training videos.
Things that are important to OBO
• Goalkeepers
• Language – positive, fun, genuine/real, humor, no bullshit
• Engagement – two-way conversations
• Content – useful and beneficial
• Brand – feel and execution
• Original – messaging, content, and executions
• Details matter
• Feedback
OBO content feel. . .
• All about the goalkeeper
• Fun
• Serious
• Color
• Feedback, input
• Random, crazy, unexpected
How OBO uses the various social media tools is shown in Figure B.13.378 Appendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases
Facebook is the primary social media platform used for player product research as it enables more 
in-depth and nuanced two-way conversations with keepers. OBO uses Facebook to understand, identify, 
and quantify consumer needs through questions, discussions, and polls.
B.4.5 A Product Innovation Example: The Left-hand Protector
Field hockey goalkeepers use their left-hand protector not only to protect their vulnerable hands, but to 
defend the goal and deflect the ball away from attacking players. While OBO had a successful range of 
left-hand protectors for various skill levels, player feedback from international players was that an evolving 
game presented new opportunities to utilize the left hand, and a new product would be required to achieve 
this. When Facebook members were asked about their needs, OBO received similar comments.
While international goalkeepers were intimately involved in the detailed development of the new prod￾uct, social media was used to verify and quantify needs and features.
The design brief for the left-hand protector contains:
Qualifiers
• Comfort = At least the same.
• Protection = At least the same.
• Rebound = Increase.
• Weight = Similar would be ideal but can afford to be slightly heavier.
Differentiators
• Improve/Aid left-hand side diving.
• Improve stability and control of hand protector through more purposeful thumb and pinky placement.
• Increase rebound/clearance predictability – flatter/squarer/:
○ Front saving face.
○ Side Edges.
• Align with other Plus Range styling.
• Increase overall saving area size and usefulness of saving area:
○ Within International Hockey Federation rules.
○ Hand placement.
• Improve security on hand while still ensuring comfort and wrist movement.
FIGURE B.13 The application and emphasis of the 4 social media toolsAppendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases  379
Figure B.14 shows the design stages through to production and the interactions with goalkeepers at 
each stage. The final product, as described in social media promotion, is shown in Figure B.15.
A LEFT HAND PROTECTOR
DESIGNED BY THE WORLD
MASS
GOALKEEPERS
NATIONAL
GOALKEEPERS
BLUE SKY THINKING
- Let imaginations run wild
- Communication through
social media
- Yes/No & Short Answer
Questions
- Designed for engagement
and conrmation of what
national players said
- Share small teasers to
keep people interested but
with very tittle actual
design detail
- Make adjustments to
prototype as needed based
on feedback until perfect
- National/Selected
players to test prototype
- Provide Feedback
- Share concepts and
details of the design
- Discuss/Debate
functional features
- Discuss and question
more specic design
details
- Specic & Detailed
Questionnaire
- Communication through
direct email
INTO THE NITTY GRITTY
DELVING DEEPER
OBO DESIGNER AND KEY GOALKEEPERS DEVELOP
OVERALL DESIGN CONCEPTS FROM ABOVE FEEDBACK
OBO DESIGNER DEVELOPS PLAYABLE PROTOTYPES FOR
FIELD TESTING
PRODUCE MOULDS, PRODUCTIONISE, BUILD STOCK
SPECIFICS
SHARING IS CARING SHARING IS CARING
TESTING
RINSE & REPEAT
STAGE 1
20th April -
1st May
STAGE 2
1st May -
15th May
STAGE 3
18th May -
5th June
STAGE 4
8th June -
26th June
STAGE 5
1st August -
21st September
STAGE 6
21st September
- 31st October 
STAGE 7
1st November -
30th November 
STAGE 8
1st December -
31st March
FIGURE B.14 Left hand protector design stages.380 Appendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases
Case Questions
1. Where can social media contribute to product innovation?
2. Why is social media such a valuable market research tool in product innovation?
3. Lead users are important to many categories of product innovation. How has social media increased 
the value of lead user groups to product innovation?
Answers to Case Questions
1. Social media can contribute at various stages of the product innovation process:
a. In the early stages of idea generation – either for new products or for product improvement.
b. In concept development and product design specifications through contribution of specific user 
needs and iterative response to design improvements.
c. Feedback on near-to-market-ready prototypes in real-use situations.
2. Social media is valuable to product innovation in several ways:
a. Relatively quick and easy access to the target market.
b. Engaging potential consumers throughout the innovation process.
c. Identifying and engaging individuals who may become early adopters and influencers in pur￾chase of the new product. For example, international goalies in the field hockey case.
3. A lead user is a type of consumer or user who recognize product challenges and who has a high level 
of expertise and experience in a specific field or market. Lead users often anticipate future trends 
and demands and create solutions that can benefit not only themselves but also other users and 
potential customers. In certain targets, for example, the field hockey case, lead users form on-line 
communities to share their ideas and experiences. These communities provide an excellent forum 
for insights and direction through product innovation.
FIGURE B.15 Left hand protector final product descriptionAppendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases  381
B.5 CASE 5
Developing a Culture of Innovation: Adobe Kickbox and rready®
B.5.1 Purpose
This case study provides an overview of how a large multinational software company developed and 
implemented a program to kickstart its innovation culture. Further, as they opensourced their approach, 
examples from other companies are addressed as well. The examples also show impacts to management 
of innovation portfolios and processes.
B.5.2 Body of Knowledge Areas
This case study primarily relates to Culture & Teams and secondarily addresses Process as well as Portfolio.
B.5.3 The Challenge
Adobe is well known for its software products used and loved by companies and individual creatives for 
photo and video editing, drawing, stock imagery, and more. Photoshop, Illustrator, Premiere Pro, and the 
Creative Cloud are among their flagship products. Since its beginning in 1982, innovation has been a char￾acteristic of the organization and remains one of its four core values today. With nearly 30,000 employees, 
the scale of Adobe provides resources and abilities to tackle many types of opportunities. However, with 
such scale, innovation can slow as well. At Adobe, slowing innovation was reflected in its stock price. 
Like many stocks after the financial collapse in 2008, Adobe lost half of its market value. By 2012, the 
price was recovering, but at a slow pace. Adobe’s approach to innovation was limiting growth. Using a 
top-down approach, they would identify a few projects each year and, through a business case process, 
fund a handful that appeared most promising. It’s a standard approach but not one that makes innovation 
accessible to many employees. Adobe was potentially missing out on creative ideas as only a few employ￾ees shared ideas that received funding.
Adobe was not alone, as most organizations don’t make it easy for innovation to occur. While CEOs 
and other senior leaders share the importance of innovation, few of the same leaders say they have effec￾tive innovation practices in their organizations. The Center for Creative Leadership puts the gap at about 
80%, with 94% of senior leaders expressing that innovation is a key driver of success, but only 14% are 
confident in their organization’s ability to drive innovation effectively (Horth and Vehar,  2015). There are 
many challenges that help explain the gap, including:
• Resistance to change: Innovation often requires breaking away from the status quo, which can be 
met with resistance from employees, managers, and even the organizational culture itself.
• Risk aversion: Organizations that prioritize stability and predictability may be hesitant to take risks 
associated with new ideas or approaches. Fear of failure and the potential negative consequences 
can stifle innovation.
• Lack of resources: Innovation requires dedicated resources such as time, funding, and people. 
Other operational priorities and short-term goals may take precedence, leaving little room for innova￾tion.
• Siloed mentality: In organizations with departmental silos, collaboration and cross-functional com￾munication can be hindered. If there is a lack of collaboration and information sharing, it becomes 
difficult to generate and implement innovative ideas.
• Lack of a supportive culture: A culture that discourages risk-taking, punishes failure, or empha￾sizes strict adherence to rules and procedures can stifle innovation. In such a culture, employees 
may hesitate to propose new ideas or take risks.382 Appendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases
• Short-term focus: Organizations that prioritize short-term results and immediate financial returns 
may struggle to invest in long-term innovation projects. Balancing short-term goals with long-term 
innovation can be challenging.
• Leadership and management practices: An organization’s leadership and management style can 
greatly influence its ability to innovate. Leaders who are resistant to change, fail to provide clear vision 
and support for innovation, or stifle creativity through excessive control can hinder the organization’s 
innovative potential.
Overcoming these challenges requires a commitment to fostering a culture of innovation, providing 
resources and support for innovation initiatives, promoting collaboration and cross-functional communi￾cation, and cultivating leadership that encourages and empowers employees to think creatively and take 
risks. Making these changes is an overwhelming responsibility, yet that is exactly what organizations need 
to be innovative and what innovation leaders are responsible for accomplishing.
B.5.4 The Approach
In 2012, Mark Randall, their Vice President of Creativity, had started applying Lean Start-up-type practices. 
He was seeing success pursuing ideas using experimentation, iteration, and small amounts of funding. 
Randall’s work attracted the attention of the head of Adobe’s largest business unit, who wanted to expand 
Randall’s approach to innovation (Dann, 2023).
Randall surveyed employees to gain insights about what led them to not share ideas. The most fre￾quent response was “convincing management” (Burkus, 2015). Instead of needing to convince manage￾ment to pursue an idea, Randall wanted to empower employees to begin innovating without the need for 
approval. After all, it was likely that many of the most creative people at Adobe were uninterested in deal￾ing with the bureaucratic structure to pitch an idea. Randall thought instead of Adobe funding a $1 million 
project, he could fund 1000 projects at $1000 each. If only one of those 1000 projects became a new 
growth engine, it would pay for the innovation cost.
Randall assembled the innovation resources he had collected into a training approach, and coupled 
with a few other items, he created a physical box titled RedBox. The innovation program was named 
Kickbox, since it was intended to kickstart the Adobe innovation culture. The Kickbox process is intended 
to be time-bound and follow a simple process constructed around answering four questions:
1. Problem: Is the problem worth solving? (2 weeks)
2. Solution: Does the solution create value for customers? (4 weeks)
3. Concept: Do I have a concept for the next phase? (1 week)
4. Convince: Can I convince others of my idea? (1 week)
Thankfully, we don’t have to provide the details of Kickbox and the fascinating contents of the RedBox 
(which includes chocolate and coffee) in this case study as Adobe open-sourced the RedBox program. 
This also means that 1000s of other organizations have deployed Kickbox to foster innovation culture. Find 
the open-sourced material at www.Kickbox.org.
Further, a small team at Swisscom, the leading Swiss IT- and Telco-Company, was one of the compa￾nies that implemented Kickbox based on the open-sourced material. After several successes and years 
of optimizing and enriching the program within Swisscom, the team decided to spin-off and make the 
program available to any organization that would like to create a culture of bottom-up innovation using the 
360 approach of their KICKBOX program. The spin-off is the company rready®, which has helped numer￾ous organizations successfully implement Kickbox and related software solutions to get even greater value 
from Kickbox. rready® is accelerating the learning that comes from the numerous organizations using 
Kickbox and rolling those lessons into improvements to the open-sourced materials as well as the services 
they provide organizations. Below are a few examples of organizations, based on information provided by 
rready® (2023), that have seen Kickbox used to overcome the challenges this case study started with.Appendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases  383
B.5.5 How Organizations Created Innovation using Kickbox
After open-sourcing Kickbox, it has spread to over 1000 companies, including US-based tech companies, 
large enterprises such as 3M, Caterpillar, MasterCard, and P&G, and unique organizations like US Peace 
Corps, the Gates Foundation, and DARPA. Highlights of how innovation culture has changed at non￾US-based companies ZF, Swisscom, Implenia, and CSS are shared below, based on rready® case studies 
and used with permission (rready®, 2023).
ZF
ZF is an automotive systems business with more than 100 years of experience. Most of ZF’s customers 
are big manufacturers, but innovation leader Manuel Leichtle expects that customer base to become more 
distributed in the future. “We are a tier 1 supplier, and we are very familiar with receiving orders from the 
original equipment manufacturer (OEM). And, from my point of view, that will change in the near future. It 
will not be exclusively the big customer who will continue to pay for our products,” he says. “And this also 
requires the engineers to change. In the past, it was common to receive a technical specification, and 
based on that, we develop a product. And in my opinion, this won’t happen anymore.”
This shift in the design process means that engineers will have to adopt a broader view of product 
requirements to ensure they understand and address the customer’s problem. Manuel says that “In the 
future, you’ll need to discover more about your customer—and I mean the end customer, the one who 
really uses [the product]. I think whoever manages this best in the future will survive. And Kickbox is part of 
it because it trains you to take a different look at your potential customer.” Kickbox played a major role in 
educating ZF employees on customer-centricity in an experiential learning environment. Another strength 
of using the Kickbox approach to influence innovation culture is that employees practice methodologies 
like Human Centered Design, Lean Start-up, and Design Thinking without even realizing it because the 
program is simple, gamified, and fun.
While the cultural changes have been welcomed, the Kickbox method has led to even more positive 
impacts at ZF than Manuel expected. In particular, the innovation ecosystem has been a valuable resource 
for cultivating ideas, allowing project leaders to find the external support they need easily. Additionally, by 
working with innovators in other industries, ZF has been able to leverage their experiences and learnings to 
improve the likelihood of success of its own innovation projects. “We didn’t need to make the same errors 
again,” Manuel says. “You’re talking to someone who had the same challenges.”
Swisscom
Swisscom is Switzerland’s number-one telecommunications firm. They generate the largest part of their 
revenue with products that did not exist a few years ago. This trend is expected to accelerate, requiring 
Swisscom to foster an innovation culture at all levels of the organization. They compete in a fast-changing 
and highly dynamic market. At the same time, Switzerland is one of the leading innovation countries, 
with universities producing top talent and attractive employers such as Google, Apple, Microsoft, and 
Facebook gobbling them up. How can Swisscom keep attracting talent to stay ahead in the market and 
continue to innovate at an ever-quickening pace?
Upon hearing a keynote presentation by Mark Randall about the organizational benefits Kickbox cre￾ates, Dave Hengartner, Swisscom’s Innovation Lab Manager, sought to adopt Kickbox. After rolling out 
Kickbox to a few volunteer employees, Hengartner was energized. He had found a way to build an innova￾tion culture and increase the speed of innovation. He shared, “I’ve discovered an approach that I believe 
will bring entrepreneurial ownership into a big organization.” Over time, as Kickbox reached more employ￾ees at Swisscom, Hengartner found ways to simplify the Kickbox implementation and improve participants’ 
experience. Swisscom created a software platform and a services marketplace to accompany their use 
of Kickbox. Today, Kickbox is the leading entrepreneurship program at Swisscom, shaping the culture for 
innovation.384 Appendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases
Implenia
Implenia is a leading multinational integrated construction and real estate services company. In addition to 
building construction and civil engineering, Implenia is a key player in the infrastructure sectors of its home 
markets and a successful real estate developer.
In 2019, the company officially made innovation one of the four key pillars of its business strategy. As 
part of this, Implenia formed the Innovation Hub, a team dedicated to accelerating innovation internally and 
working with external partners to make Implenia fit for the future.
The Innovation Hub was looking for a structured and centralized solution to foster innovation and intra￾preneurship that is accessible to the entire workforce. While the primary aim was to encourage ideation for 
new, innovative business models, the Innovation Hub also sought to promote a cultural shift from solution￾based thinking to a stronger focus on desirability. The specific challenge faced by Implenia was mobilizing 
the entire employee base across all functions and sites – from accountants to project managers to con￾struction workers. This required an approach to promoting innovation that was accessible to all employees.
Implenia rolled out Kickbox to all employees regardless of their job title or location. By providing a 
standardized structure, Kickbox gave employees an accessible entry point to express their ideas and the 
tools to structure and develop new exciting concepts that translate to viable business models. In addition, 
the Innovation Hub recognized the importance of removing any obstacles to participation – organizational 
or cultural – so they got top management involved for a big launch event and promoted Kickbox during 
site visits where they could answer questions directly. The culture across the organization has evolved to 
support innovation and use it to deliver on Implenia’s business strategy.
CSS
CSS is one of Switzerland’s leading health insurance companies. Innovation is a core value, both to dif￾ferentiate themselves from the competition as well as to ensure they provide their customers with the most 
convenient, quality care possible. They’re continuously investing in innovative new offerings and using 
Kickbox to drive innovation throughout the company.
As with many industries, insurance is undergoing a digital transformation. Self-service options like 
online services and apps allow customers to manage their healthcare without reaching out to their insurers 
or providers directly. This digital transformation is making health insurance services more convenient and 
accessible. It’s also helping to contain rising healthcare costs.
“One of the reasons why we focus on automating services is to stem those rising costs,” says Daniel 
Alzer, Innovation Manager. It’s not a simple process, though. Insurance companies like CSS rely on a lot of 
legacy systems, and it’s not easy to just add new features to these systems. “It’s not like updating Office on 
your PC,” Daniel explains. “All the company’s core processes are based on that system.” That means creat￾ing a new digital offering is a long-term project, which can be hard to get through the pipeline when other 
projects with more immediate value take priority. As Daniel explains, “You have to convince the stakeholders 
the idea is really worth investing in. Kickbox makes you validate the idea from the beginning by talking to 
real people in the market. If you can show that customers are interested in it, that makes it much easier to 
convince them.”
Daniel also had the objective of decentralizing innovation. “We had a central innovation team and an 
innovation board, but we thought it would be great to include all the employees as well—because every 
employee has great ideas.” Most importantly, decentralizing innovation by using Kickbox has helped CSS 
streamline its innovation process by putting employees in the driver’s seats of their own projects from the 
beginning. “Before Kickbox, you’d need to create a project approval document, form a team, and make a 
budget. . .now, individuals can start working on projects themselves.”
While Daniel believes in the importance of innovation, in his experience, it can be hard to get people 
engaged with innovation programs. “They have to leave their comfort zone, and not everyone is able or 
wants to do that,” he explains. When he first introduced Kickbox to CSS, Daniel wanted to foster a culture 
of innovation that would empower all employees to be a part of the innovation process and allow them 
to work on their own ideas. His colleagues see that occurring, with Kickbox impacting the culture at CSS Appendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases  385
and helping their people grow personally and professionally. Daniel recalls that one manager came to him 
with glowing feedback after seeing the effects on one member of his team. This individual, who had led a 
Kickbox project involving an online pharmacy platform, was so motivated to bring his idea to life that he 
took it upon himself to teach himself new programming skills—opening up new opportunities both for him￾self and for his team.
B.5.6 Summary
The best innovating companies recognize the importance of senior leader support for innovation (Knudsen 
et al., 2023). They often form an innovation group or lab to be responsible for innovation. This model, while 
helpful, is also restricted on the number of projects they can start and manage at any one time. This can lead 
to bureaucratic systems for pitching and selecting ideas for innovation projects. While innovation is occurring, 
some employees with the most creative and valuable ideas are not being involved in innovation. A bottom￾up approach is needed to involve all employees in innovation; to democratize innovation in an organization. 
Doing so impacts the culture in several meaningful ways, mitigating factors that limit innovation:
• Fostering a culture of innovation
• Providing resources and support for innovative initiatives
• Promoting collaboration and cross-functional communication
• Cultivating leadership that encourages and empowers employees to think creatively and take risks.
Kickbox is a free, open-source system to create bottom-up innovation. Over 1000 organizations have 
adopted it and have seen their innovation culture change and become much more inclusive.
Case Questions
1. What are some factors that limit innovation effectiveness in organizations?
2. What initiatives mitigate factors that limit innovation effectiveness?
3. Why is a top-down approach to innovation insufficient?
4. How does Kickbox provide a bottom-up approach to innovation?
Answers to Case Questions
1. What are some factors that limit innovation effectiveness in organizations?
Factors have been introduced throughout the BoK. The ones highlighted in this case are resist￾ance to change, risk aversion, lack of resources, siloed mentality, lack of a supportive culture, short￾term focus, and misaligned leadership and management practices.
2. What initiatives mitigate factors that limit innovation effectiveness?
The BoK highlights many practices common to organizations that innovate well. The examples 
shared in this case address fostering a culture of innovation, providing resources and support for 
innovative initiatives, promoting collaboration and cross-functional communication, and cultivating 
leadership that encourages and empowers employees to think creatively and take risks.
3. Why is a top-down approach to innovation insufficient?
A top-down approach to innovation implies that senior leaders are involved in selecting and fund￾ing a few innovation projects each year. As seen in the Portfolio chapter, selecting innovation projects 
is essentially placing bets where to commit resources. A top-down approach favors safer bets on 
opportunities that are better understood and contain fewer unknowns. These projects are identified 
and promoted throughout the organization by only a few employees. Consequently, the experience, 
insights, and creativity of most employees is not leveraged for innovation.
4. How does Kickbox provide a bottom-up approach to innovation?
Kickbox equips any employee for innovation. They are provided instructions, motivation, and 
resources to pursue an idea, test the importance of the idea, consider solutions, and validate 386 Appendix B: The BoK in Practice Cases
solutions with customers. They learn to conduct fast inexpensive experiments to explore the problem/
opportunity and test their assumptions. For the cost of one traditional top-down innovation project, 
numerous innovation projects can be pursued. In Adobe’s case, instead of one top-down project, 
they could fund a 1000 Kickbox projects. Only one needs to become a growth leader to pay for the 
cost of operating the Kickbox bottom-up innovation program.
REFERENCES
Burkus, D. (2015). Inside adobe’s innovation kit. Harvard Business Review. https://hbr.org/2015/02/inside-adobes-innovation-kit.
Dann, J.B. (2023). “Kickboxing” around the world: An intrapreneurship revolution? USC-Marshall/Lloyd Greif Center for Entrepreneur￾ial Studies.
Horth, D.M. and Vehar, J. (2015). Innovation: How leadership makes the difference. Center for Creative Leadership.
Knudsen, M.P., Zedtwitz, M., Griffin, A., and Barczak, G. (2023). Best practices in new product development and innovation: Results 
from PDMA’s 2021 global survey. Journal of Product Innovation Management 40 (3): 257–275.
rready® (2023). Corporate innovation success stories. rready® Case Studies https://www.rready.com/case-studies.C.1 BACKGROUND TO THE OCI AWARDS
The OCI Award is the only global innovation award that recognizes sustained and quantifiable innovation 
success AND the practices which have contributed to that success.
Criteria include:
• Sustained record of success launching new products/services over a 5-year period.
• Significant and quantifiable business results delivered by new products/services.
• Consistent use of a set of new product development practices from which others can learn.
PDMA employs a rigorous selection process for the OCI Award which is managed by volunteers with 
extensive and diverse innovation backgrounds.
Since 1987, winners have shared their specific practices at the PDMA Annual Conference providing 
a unique “behind the scenes” look at successful corporate innovators and providing lessons learned for 
attendees. OCI Winners reflect diversity in industry, size, and global location.
Appendix C: Examples 
of Product Innovation 
Best Practice from 
PDMA’s Outstanding 
Corporate Innovators’ 
(OCI) Awards
Product Development and Management Body of Knowledge: A Guidebook for Product Innovation Training and Certification,Third Edition. 
Allan Anderson, Chad McAllister, and Ernie Harris.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.388 APPENDIX C: EXAMPLES OF PRODUCT INNOVATION BEST PRACTICE
C.2 ANALYSES AND LEARNINGS FROM OCI WINNERS
Throughout the history of OCI, PDMA has conducted analyses of the practices of all the winners. Key 
takeaways from those analyses are:
• Common practices have contributed to the innovation success of the winners within each timeframe 
despite the diversity of industry, size, and geography.
• Evolution of the practices which have contributed to the winners’ success over time.
• Increasing complexity of the practices for achieving innovation success.
A summary of those practices, common to most winners over recent years is shown in Figure C.1.
OCI
2014-2022
Innovation
strategy
Corporate
commitment
Front end
Portfolio
optimization
Lean/agile Metrics
Culture
Open
innovation
FIGURE C.1 Summary of learnings from OCI awardsAPPENDIX C: EXAMPLES OF PRODUCT INNOVATION BEST PRACTICE 389
Following are insights that PDMA gained about these practices as well as specific examples how 
some of the Winners executed against these practices.
Corporate Commitment: For the winners in recent years, innovation has become a corporate strate￾gic core value which is reflected in senior management involvement and support, a dedicated innovation 
function, and the resources needed to consistently deliver significant innovations to the market.
An example of that commitment is a quote during an economic downturn from the VP of Seating for 
Faurecia, a global automotive equipment supplier headquartered in France---“A crisis is a terrible thing to 
waste; I will double your innovation budget for next year.”
Innovation Strategy: Recent OCI winners have shown that having a well-defined innovation strategy is 
critical to success. The strategy clearly defines for the organization the key factors for achieving innovation 
success. The innovation strategy provides focus and internal alignment and drives resource allocation.
Corning, a leading global innovator in materials science, calls its innovation strategy its Innovation 
Recipe, which is depicted in Figure C.2.
Uniqueness
intellectual property
specialized capital investment
Corning's innovation recipe
Deep understanding of
a specic technology
Identication of customers’
difficult systems problems
Demanding requirements
Material Process
Unique keystone component:
A component that is a
system enabler
FIGURE C.2 Corning “innovation recipe”390 APPENDIX C: EXAMPLES OF PRODUCT INNOVATION BEST PRACTICE
Focus on the Front End: Recent OCI winners all conduct extensive market and customer discovery at 
the front end of the innovation process to identify, screen, and validate potential new opportunities before 
they start the development process. The example of a front-end process in Figure C.3 comes from Church 
& Dwight.
Figures C.4 and C.5 depict how UnitedHealth Group systematizes the front end to identify unarticu￾lated needs and develop unique solutions.
Within our drill sites, we leverage inspiration from multiple areas to
generate big ideas
Voice of
customer
Conferences NHAC
Competitive
landscape
Innovation
consultants
Trendspotting
Consumer
reviews
Global
trends
Ingredient
suppliers
Syndicated
research
Stage gate
development team
Social
listening
Consumer
insights
PHASE I
Ideation and
creation of
funnel
Validation and
prioritization
Feasibility
DEVELOPMENT (Q1’19)
PHASE II PHASE II
(Q2’19) (Q3’19)
FIGURE C.3 Church and Dwight front-end of innovation processAPPENDIX C: EXAMPLES OF PRODUCT INNOVATION BEST PRACTICE 391
• Thinking of UHG as a portfolio of skills and assets rather
 than a provider of products and services
Systematizing the “Front End”
Exploration
Concept
Development
phase1
UNITEDHEALTH GROUP 
Understanding unarticulated needs
• Empathize with the customer and identify unmet needs
Harnessing discontinuities
• Spot trends and patterns that could change the rules of
 the game
Challenging convention
Leveraging competencies and assets
• Question deeply held dogmas inside the company and
 industry about what drives success
FIGURE C.4 United-Health front-end of innovation system
FIGURE C.5 United-Health application of design thinking392 APPENDIX C: EXAMPLES OF PRODUCT INNOVATION BEST PRACTICE
Crowdsourcing Process and Outcome
Our pilot study created a high level of excitement and trust
Screen
Team
Share & discuss
ideas on-line
3 Teams pitch to Mgt
Example:
108 active users
5 maturation teams
– all cross-site!
621 comments
Mature
5 ideas
2 NL
>> 223 ideas
Mature to
New Lead
project
Proposal
(8 weeks)
- 2 weeks - - - 4 weeks - 2 weeks -
FIGURE C.6 Novozymes application of crowdsourcing
Recent winners are also developing new ways to generate ideas for potential new products/services. 
An example of this is provided by Novozymes, a global biotechnology company headquartered in Denmark, 
with their internally developed crowdsourcing process depicted in Figure C.6.
Portfolio Optimization: For recent OCI winners, achieving innovation success involves working on the 
right projects the right way at the right time and solving the right problems. It also means achieving a bal￾ance of incremental, adjacent, and disruptive opportunities in the portfolio. For some of the winners, it 
involves leveraging technology platforms across business units and across the globe. Frequently, portfolio 
optimization may involve looking outside the company’s current markets and even looking at new business 
models. All these activities are done using a disciplined process, as shown in Figure C.7 from BD (Becton, 
Dickinson & Co.), a global medical technology company.APPENDIX C: EXAMPLES OF PRODUCT INNOVATION BEST PRACTICE 393
Open Innovation: For all the recent OCI winners, open innovation/collaborative development has become 
a key corporate strategy. As depicted in Figure C.8 from DSM, a global leader in health and nutrition head￾quartered in The Netherlands, open innovation is used throughout the innovation process. Like DSM, 
many of the OCI Winners have also created their own venture funds to invest in university research and in 
startups.
Asking and answering the key questions
How do we execute
on the selected
opportunities?
Create an
enterprise
operational
model for
funding &
resourcing
How do we select which
OTHC opportunities to
pursue?
Articulate the
strategy &
dene the
“Hunting
Grounds”
How much do we spend
For OTHC vs. Core engine?
Create
dedicated
innovation
resources
and focus
Dene a
mechanism &
process for
opportunity
analysis
How do we generate new
opportunities to pursue
our strategy?
1
2
3
4
FIGURE C.7 Becton, Dickson Co. process for portfolio optimization394 APPENDIX C: EXAMPLES OF PRODUCT INNOVATION BEST PRACTICE
Steering the Innovation Pipeline
Intellectual asset management
Joint business
developments Venturing
Licensing -In Spinning -In
Acquisitions
Interaction /
synthesis
Well dened
strategic objectives
Fuzzy front end
Licensing -Out Spinning -Out
Divestments
R&D For non-DSM
companies
FIGURE C.8 DSM application of open innovation
Culture: Culture creates the foundation for successful corporate innovation. Senior management creates 
a culture which values and respects the diversity of all employees and supports an environment where 
people are not afraid to take risks, think boldly or even to fail. Other key elements of culture which are 
important to achieving and sustaining innovation success are creating a collaborative environment and one 
where leaders are committed to team success by building innovation with them.
Lean and Agile: In recent years with rapidly changing market dynamics and customer needs in order to 
succeed, companies have had to employ lean and agile processes. Past winners agree that these prac￾tices have helped to improve transparency and alignment on innovation activities within the company. One 
of the benefits of an agile test and learn approach is to get quicker feedback from customers on new 
products and services. Also, agile practices allow companies to adapt more quickly to market disrupters 
by applying MVP’s, pivots, and fast learning cycles to the innovation process. Figure C.9 shows an agile 
process used by Porex, a global leader in porous polymer solutions.APPENDIX C: EXAMPLES OF PRODUCT INNOVATION BEST PRACTICE 395
Metrics: In order to sustain innovation success, OCI winners look not at just financial measures of 
success such as sales from new products, vitality index, and profit margins but also measure the efficiency 
and effectiveness of their innovation process. They track metrics on a number of ideas generated and eval￾uated, milestone achievements, and time to market. They also capture lessons learned from each project 
and make certain these are reflected in process improvements.
Scrum
Data driven agile execution
Strategic
planning
process
Real time
dashboards
Develop
corporate
objectives
Framework to link
objectives (WIGs) and
track execution with Lag
and Lead measures
Dashboards used
real time to track
pipeline progress
Agile methodology
used to drive
executional details on a
daily and weekly basis
Innovation success is systematic and
 driven through a framework that is
 dynamic and responsive
Framework links strategy to
 execution
Closed loop feedback
 system built in to allow
 for continuous
 monitoring and
 adjustment of
 key tactics
4DX
FIGURE C.9 Porex Agile ProcessProduct Development and Management Body of Knowledge: A Guidebook for Product Innovation Training and Certification,Third Edition. 
Allan Anderson, Chad McAllister, and Ernie Harris.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
A
Accommodating style, 314
Adjourning stage, 311
Adobe, 299
Adobe Kickbox, 381–385
Aesthetic functions, 222
Agile, 130
application, 149
vs. Lean, 194, 394
methodology, 172
new product portfolio management, 143–144
product innovation, 171–176
project management tools, 31
vs. Stage-Gate®, 194–195
task boards, 31
Alpha prototype, 220
Alpha testing, 234, 279
Altshuller, G.S., 216, 217
AR. See Augmented reality (AR)
Architectural innovation, 82, 88
ARPI framework, 240
ATAR model. See Awareness-Trial-Availability￾Repeat (ATAR) model
Augmented product, 85, 210
Augmented reality (AR), 271
Autonomous teams, 306–307
Awareness-Trial-Availability-Repeat (ATAR) 
model, 133, 134
B
Balanced Scorecard, 39
perspectives of, 40
for product innovation, 44
Bang for buck index, 129
Bass model, 132–133
BCG. See Boston Consulting Group (BCG)
Behavioral competencies, 91
Behavioral level, 224
Benchmarking, 44–45, 47
Beta prototypes, 220
Beta release, 279
Beta testing, 234, 279
Bezos, Jeff, 298
Big data, 118–119, 271–272
Big Five Personality Traits, 312
Biometrics, 270–271
BMC. See Business model canvas (BMC)
Board of Directors, 197–198
Bottom-up method, 136
Brainstorming, 117, 210
Brainwriting, 117, 210
Bubble diagram, 137–138
Budget, 36
Build-measure-learn cycle, 188, 189
“Build-test-feedback-revise” iterations, 283
Burndown chart, 145
Business goals, 83
Business model, 70–71
Business model canvas (BMC), 70–71, 
73, 188–189
LeanMed, 367
Business process
product management, 11
resource allocation as, 140
Business strategy, 60, 65, 113, 136
Business Model Canvas (BMC), 70–71
Delphi technique, 70
integrating innovation with, 76
PESTLE analysis, 68–69
Porter’s five forces, 72
preparation, 68–73
SWOT analysis, 69
techniques for business analysis, 72–73
Business sustainability strategy, 199
Business viability risk, 161
C
Cagan, Marty, 11, 161
Capabilities, 92
Capability strategy, 92–93
Index398 Index
Capital costs, 132
Cases
Adobe Kickbox, 381–385
Global DairyCo, 359–364
LeanMed, 365–367
OBO, 376–380
OCI Award, 387–395
Stingray, 372–375
Cash flow, PLC stages on, 16
CE method. See Concept engineering (CE) method
Central location test (CLT), 278
Chain ratio method, 134
Channels, 71
Chasm, in product life cycle (PLC), 23–29
crossing, 23–24
“go-to-market” processes, 24–29
Christensen, Clayton, 80, 191
Church & Dwight, 390
Circular design, 167
Circular economy, 103–104
Clay mock-up, 219
Climate, 298
innovation, 298–300
Closed-ended questions, 266
Closed innovators, 98
Cloud communication, 321
CLT. See Central location test (CLT)
Cluster sampling, 259
Collaboration tools, 321
Combination method, 136
Communication, 315–316
practices, 319–320
Comparative Performance Assessment Studies 
(CPAS), 41
Competencies, 92
Competitive advantage, 121
Concept engineering (CE) method, 211
Concept tests and concept sorts, 270
Concurrent engineering model, 169–170
Confidence level, 260
Confirmatory factor analysis, 274
Conflict management, 313–314
Conjoint analysis, 275–276
Consistency, product innovation, 24
Consumer panels, 268
Consumer research, 258
tools, 221
Contextual inquiry, 233–234
Continuous improvement, 44–45
reporting vs., 40
Controlled test, 281
Convergent thinking, 116, 182
Cook, Tim, 298
Cooper, R. G., 144, 156, 165–167, 172, 
177, 194, 282
Core competencies, 92
Core product, 85, 210
Corporate Governance, 146
Corporate strategy, 13, 60, 65–67, 113
Cost
leadership strategy, 77–78
of product innovation, 157–158
structure, 65
Cost determination, 131–132
Cost-driven organization, 71
CPAS. See Comparative Performance Assessment 
Studies (CPAS)
CPM. See Critical path method (CPM)
CQM. See Center for Quality Management 
(CQM)
Crawford, M., 133
Creativity, 4
Critical path method (CPM), 35
Cross-functional teams, 303
Crossing the Chasm (Moore), 23
Crowdsourcing, 209, 210, 321
market research methods, 272–273
Novozymes application of, 392
Portfolio, 117
CRs. See Customer requirements (CRs)
Culture, 14, 298, 394
innovation, 298–300
management responsibilities, 301–302
practice questions, 327–328
and team. See Team
Culture of innovation, 381–385
Cumulative costs, 157
Current knowledge, 164
Current product portfolio, 86
Customer factors, 28
Customer relationships, 71
Customer requirements (CRs), 213
Customer segments, 71
Customer site visits, 264–265
Customs, 320
D
‘Day in the Life’ method, 118
Decision-making process, 158
Decision tree, 38
Decline stage, product life cycle, 15, 16, 22
Deep learning algorithm, 225Index 399
De-facto asynchronous communication 
method, 320
Delphi technique, 70, 72, 118
Demo, 173
Descriptive methods, 268
Design for assembly (DfA), 238
Design for functionality (DFF), 226
Design for maintenance (DFM), 227
Design for manufacturing (DfM), 238
Design for manufacturing and assembly (DFMA), 
227, 238–239
Design for recycling (DFR), 227
Design for serviceability (DFS), 227
Design for Six Sigma (DFSS), 236
Design for usability (DFU), 227
Designing for changeability (DFC), 179
Design of experiments (DOE), 231–232
Design parameters, 215
Design process, 209–225
concept, 210–218
and development tools, 14
embodiment, 218–221
ideation, 209–210
practice questions, 245–246
steps, 208
for sustainability, 239–243
tools to assist embodiment, 221–225
consumer research tools, 221
emotional design, 224–225
FAST technique, 222–224
functional analysis, 221–222
reverse engineering, 224
Design specifications, 208, 373–374
Design Thinkers Group, 182
Six-Stage Double Diamond by, 183
Design thinking process, 179–185
in action, 184
evolution, 180
frameworks, 182
human-centered mindset, 180–183
implementation, 184–185
methodology, 181
as social technology, 183
Development process
design for manufacturing and assembly 
(DfMA), 238–239
design for sustainability, 239–243
design of experiments, 231–232
initial specifications, 226–227
performance and endurance testing, 234–236
practice questions, 245–244
quality assurance, 236–238
quality function deployment, 227–231
steps, 208
usability testing, 232–234
Development stage, product life cycle, 15, 16
DfA. See Design for assembly (DfA)
DFC. See Designing for changeability (DFC)
DFF. See Design for functionality (DFF)
DFM. See Design for maintenance (DFM)
DfM. See Design for manufacturing (DfM)
DFMA. See Design for manufacturing and 
assembly (DFMA)
DFR. See Design for recycling (DFR)
DFS. See Design for serviceability (DFS)
DFSS. See Design for Six Sigma (DFSS)
DFU. See Design for usability (DFU)
DiBenedetto, A., 133
Differentiation strategy, 78
Diffusion of innovation, 46
Diffusion of Technology, 23
Diffusion speed, 132
Digital age, 95
Digital cameras, 81
Digital communications, 93
Digitalization, 94, 96
Digital platforms, 95
Digital strategy, 93–96
Digital transformation strategy, 93–96
Digitization, 94
Director of Innovation, 301
Discrimination tests, 268
DiSC® work assessment tool, 311–312
Disruptive product innovation, sustaining vs., 80–81
Distribution, 19
Divergent thinking, 116, 182
Diversity
celebrate, 320
in product range, 10
team, 303
DMADV methodology, 237, 238
DMAIC methodology, 236–238
DMEDI methodology, 237, 238
DOE. See Design of experiments (DOE)
Drivers of success, 7
Duo trio test, 269
E
EAC. See Equivalent Annual Cost (EAC)
ECV method. See Expected commercial value 
(ECV) method
EI. See Emotional intelligence (EI)400 Index
80/20 listening, 322
Email communications, 320
Embodiment design, 218–221
consumer research tools, 221
emotional design, 224–225
FAST technique, 222–224
functional analysis, 221–222
reverse engineering, 224
throughout a design process, 221
Emergent emotions, 225
Emotional design, 224–225
Emotional intelligence (EI), 316–317
Empathy, 181, 183, 317
analysis, 118
Employee engagement, 299
Empowered team, 309
End of life, 15
Endurance testing, 234–236
Engagement team, 309
Eppinger, S.D., 238
Equivalent Annual Cost (EAC), 242
Eriksson, Martin, 11
Ethnographic approaches, 118
Ethnographic market research (EMR), 263
Execution Team, 147
Ex-factory price, 132
Expected commercial value (ECV) 
method, 130
Experience prototyping, 220
Experimental design, 231–232
Exploratory factor analysis, 274
External benchmarking, 45
Externalities, 103
External players, 4
External stakeholders, 120
Extrinsic functions, 222
Eye tracking, 270
F
Face-to-face communication, 319
Factor analysis, 274–275
Failure, 323
Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA), 235
FAST. See Function analysis system 
technique (FAST)
Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG), 156
Fast Stage-Gate, 167
Fatigue testing, 235
Feasibility risk, 161
Feedback, 118, 323
FEI. See Front end of innovation (FEI)
Financial analysis
data input for, 131–132
framework for, 124–125
Financial sensitivity analysis, 128–129
Fit-for-purpose strategies, 46, 67
Fixed costs, 131
FMCG. See Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG)
FMEA. See Failure mode and effects 
analysis (FMEA)
Focus groups, 261–262
Forecasting method, 118
Forming stage, 310
Four Ps (product, price, promotion, and place), 84
Front end of innovation (FEI), 159–161, 
284, 390–391
Functional analysis, 221–222
Functional flow block diagram, 221, 222
Functional prototyping, 219–220
Functional requirements, 243
Functional teams, 304
Function analysis system technique 
(FAST), 222–224
Funnel process, 122, 159
G
Gamma testing, 234, 279
Gantt chart, 35
Gates, definition of, 165
GENESE. See Geneva Expert System on 
Emotions (GENESE)
Geneva Expert System on Emotions 
(GENESE), 225
Geographic spread, 10
Gerstner, Lou, 299
Goals and objectives sections, of PIC, 162–163
Goleman, D., 316
Good innovation strategy, 74–75
“Go-to-market” processes, 24–29
Governance, portfolio, 146–147
Governance, product innovation, 197
Grecis, Zbignev, 192
Griffin, Abbie, 303
Growth stage, product life cycle, 15, 16, 22
Guerrilla testing, 233
H
Heavyweight team, 305–306
High-performing team, 309–310
Horowitz, Ben, 299
House of Quality, 228–229
Human-centered design, 180–183Index 401
Hybrid Agile-Stage-Gate model, 144, 164, 167, 
176–177. See also Agile
model, 176
new-product portfolio management, 143–144
product innovation processes, 149
I
Idea management software, 120
Ideation, 116, 209–210
big data, 118–119
brainstorming, 117
brainwriting, 117
crowdsourcing, 119
‘day in the life’ method, 118
Delphi technique, 118
empathy analysis, 118
ethnographic approaches, 118
idea generation, 116
journey map, 118
mind-mapping, 117
personas, 118
qualitative evaluation, 121–124
quantitative evaluation, 124–134
SCAMPER, 117
storyboarding, 117
“thinking hats,” 117–118
IDOV methodology, 237, 238
IHUT. See In-home use test (IHUT)
Inbound open innovators, 97
Incentives, for innovation, 323–324
In-depth interviews, 234, 262
In-home use test (IHUT), 278
Innovation, 4. See also Product innovation
culture, 5
front end of, 5–6
maturity model, 102
space, 75
Innovation Hub, 384
Innovation strategy, 65, 66, 70, 73–76, 105, 139
crucial insights to, 75
frameworks, 77–82
Miles and Snow strategic framework, 79–80
Porter’s strategic framework, 77–79
sustaining vs. disruptive product 
innovation, 80–81
good, 74–75
information-advantaged strategy, 75–76
landscape map, 81–82
overarching, 74
quadrants of, 82
relationship, 76
support, 83–96
capability strategy, 92–93
digital strategy, 93–96
intellectual property strategy, 90–91
marketing strategy, 83–86
product platform strategy, 89–90
technology strategy, 86–89
sustainable, 100–104
Innovators, 17–18
Intangible product, 226
Integrated collaborators, 98
Integrated product development (IPD), 170–171
vs. other process models, 195
Integrating sustainability, 171
Intellectual property (IP) strategy, 90–91
Intellectual resources, 71
Internal players, 4
Internal rate of return (IRR), 127–128
Internet of Things, 94
Intrinsic functions, 222
Introduction stage, product life cycle, 15, 16, 
21–22
IPD. See Integrated product development (IPD)
IP strategy. See Intellectual property (IP) strategy
IRR. See Internal rate of return (IRR)
J
Jobs Theory. See Jobs To Be Done (JTBD)
Jobs To Be Done (JTBD), 191–193
Journey map, 118
K
Kanban boards, 31
Kano methods, 212–214
Kansei engineering, 224
Kaplan, R.S., 39
Key partners, 71
Key performance indicators (KPI), 39–45
market research, 289–290
Knowledge management, 321–322
Known risks, 37
Know Your Farm, 96
Kodak, 80
KPI. See Key performance indicators (KPI)
L
Laboratory (lab) usability testing, 233
Laggards, 18
Laney, Doug, 271
LCA. See Life cycle assessment (LCA)
LCC. See Life cycle costing (LCC)402 Index
Leadership, 14
team, 315–317
of virtual teams, 322
Lean
Agile vs., 194, 394
development, concepts of, 185
product innovation, 185–188
startup methodology, 188–191
Learning, 44
Learning plan, 189–190
Level of uncertainty, 166
Liedtka, J., 182, 183
LifeBike positioning statement, 29
Life cycle assessment (LCA), 241–242
Life cycle costing (LCC), 242
Lightweight teams, 305, 307
Liker, Jeffrey K., 186
Likert scale questions, 267
Long duration testing, 236
M
Macro-planning process, 194
Management, product innovation
Balanced Scorecard for, 44
benchmarking, 44–45
continuous improvement, 44–45
core principles of, 5
critical element of, 9
“doing the right things,” 43, 51
“doing things right,” 43, 52
key performance indicators, 39–45
metrics, 39–45, 54
practice questions, 48–49
product life cycle. See Product life cycle (PLC)
product manager, 11–14
project management, 34–36
Quartz Open Framework for, 9
responsibilities, 301–302
responsibility, 11
risk management, 37–38
roadmaps used in, 3
role, 10
structures for, 10
Manifesto for Agile Software Development, 171–172
Manufacturing, design for, 208
Margin of error (confidence interval), 260
Market, definition of, 26
Marketing mix, 84–85
Marketing strategy, 83–86
Market research, 14, 249
critical steps of, 252–253
market testing and test marketing, 280–281
methods, 254–255, 261–273
big data, 271–272
biometrics, 270–271
concept tests and concept sorts, 270
consumer panels, 268
crowdsourcing, 272–273
customer site visits, 264–265
ethnography, 263
focus group, 261–262
in-depth interviews, 262
sensory testing, 268–269
social media, 265–266
surveys, 266–267
trained panels, 269–270
metrics and key performance indicators, 289–290
multivariate research methods, 274–277
primary research, 256–257
product innovation, 252–253
product use testing, 278–279
quality, 258–260
secondary research, 256–257
stages of product innovation, 284–288
voice of the customer (VoC), 252
Market segment, 26–27
Market segmentation schemes, 252
Market testing, 280–281
Markham, S.K., 146–147
M&A strategy. See Mergers and acquisitions 
(M&A) strategy
Material, design, and ecology (MDE) 
framework, 240
Maturity stage, product life cycle, 15, 16, 22
MDE framework. See Material, design, and ecology 
(MDE) framework
MDS. See Multidimensional scaling (MDS)
Mechanical endurance testing, 235–236
Mergers and acquisitions (M&A) strategy, 66
Micro-planning model, 194
Miles strategic framework, 79–80
Mind-mapping, 117, 209
Minimum viable product (MVP), 190, 369–371
Mission statement, 60, 61, 63
Mock-up, 218
Moore, Geoffrey, 23, 191
Morgan, James M., 186
Morphological analysis, 215
Motivation, 317
Multidimensional scaling (MDS), 275
Multi-disciplinary teams, 303
Multiple regression analysis, 277Index 403
Multivariate research methods, 274–277
conjoint analysis, 275–276
factor analysis, 274–275
multidimensional scaling, 275
multiple regression analysis, 277
principal component analysis (PCA), 
274–275
strengths and weaknesses, 277
MVP. See Minimum viable product (MVP)
N
Naive Bayes probabilistic classifier, 225
Natural environment, 118
Net present value (NPV), 125–126
calculation, 127
Neural networks, 225
New Coke, 160
New products
goals, 139–140
innovation process, 261–262
portfolio management, 143–145
Agile-Stage-Gate process, 143–144
challenges, 143
Stage-Gate process, 143–144
and services, development of, 94–95
New-to-the-company (NTC) products, 21
New-to-the world (NTW) products, 21
Nominal questions, 266
Non-probability sampling, 266
Norming stage, 310
Norton, D.P., 39
NPV. See Net present value (NPV)
NTC products. See New-to-the-company 
(NTC) products
NTW products. See New-to-the world 
(NTW) products
O
OCI Award, 387–395
Ogilvie, T., 182
OI. See Open innovation (OI)
Ojomo, Efosa, 191
“One-size-fits-all” approach, 194
Online concept testing, 234
Online tools, for virtual meetings, 319
Open-close testing, 236
Open-ended questions, 266
Open innovation (OI), 97–99, 393–394
benefits and challenges, 97
foundations, 97
mechanisms for participation in, 99
model types, 97–99
success factors and management styles for, 98
OPT. See Option pricing theory (OPT)
Option pricing theory (OPT), 130–131
Ordinal questions, 267
Organization
business model, 70
culture and climate, 298
current product portfolio, 86
identity, 62, 64
mission, 63
personality, 64
technology strategy, 87
values, 63
vision, 62–63
Organizational strategy, 60
success factors, 8, 28
P
Paired comparison test, 269
Panel training, 269–270
Paper prototyping, 219
Parallel processing, 167
Pass/fail technique, 122–124
Payback period, 125
PB. See Portfolio Board (PB)
PCA. See Principal component analysis (PCA)
PDMA. See Product Development and 
Management Association (PDMA)
Penetration pricing, 19
People and environment, success factors, 8
Performance and endurance testing, 208, 234–236
Performance metrics, 39–40, 45, 54
individual/team, 323
portfolio, 149
Performing stage, 311
Personality, 64
Personas, 118
PESTLE analysis, 68–69, 72
Pharmaceutical drug development, 131
Pharmaceutical firm, 72
PI. See Productivity index (PI)
PIC. See Product innovation charter (PIC)
Pichler, R., 172
Pilot program, 369
Pivoting, 190–191
Platform roadmaps, 32–33
PLC. See Product life cycle (PLC)
PLMT. See Portfolio and Lifecycle Management 
Team (PLMT)
PMI. See Project Management Institute (PMI)404 Index
PMT. See Program Management Team (PMT)
Porter, M.E., 65, 72, 77–79
Porter’s five forces, 72
Portfolio, 112. See also Portfolio management
alignment with strategy, 135–136
bottom-up method, 136
combination method, 136
top-down method, 135–136
balancing, 137–138
bubble diagram, 137–138
governance, 146–147
optimization, 392, 393
performance metrics, 149
practice questions, 150–151
resource allocation. See Resource allocation
right number of projects, 139–142
value maximization, 116–134
visual representations, 137–138
Portfolio and Lifecycle Management Team 
(PLMT), 147
Portfolio Board (PB), 146
Portfolio management, 5, 112, 114
activities, 114
Agile, 144–145
benefits, 148
goals of, 115, 149
key characteristics, 114
new product, 143–145
types of projects in, 115
Preference scores, 276
Pre-production prototype, 220
Present value (PV), 126
discount factors, 126–127
Price factors, 28
Pricing, 19, 21
Primary market research, 256–257
Primary qualitative methods, 284
Primary research methods, 285
Principal component analysis (PCA), 274–275
Priority marking, 212
Probability sampling, 266
Process, of product innovation, 7, 14, 152
Agile product innovation, 171–176
Agile-Stage-Gate model, 176–177
comparing models, 194–196
concurrent engineering model, 169–170
control and management, 197–198
design thinking, 179–185
evolution of, 164
integrated product development, 170–171
lean product innovation, 185–188
practice questions, 200–201
Stage-Gate® Process, 165–168. See also Stage￾Gate® Process
systems engineering process, 177–179
waterfall method, 168–169
Product
for circular economy, 103–104
definition of, 13
levels of, 85, 210–211
marketing mix for, 84
type of, 21
Product backlog, 173
Product-based risks, 38
Product concept, 226
Product design specifications, 226
Product Development and Management 
Association (PDMA), 60
benchmarking studies, 5
Best Practices Study (2021), 120, 148, 
157, 161, 206
Outstanding Corporate Innovation (OCI), 99
Product innovation, 46, 199
agile, 171–176
Balanced Scorecard for, 44
benchmarking, 44–45
context for, 68
continuous improvement, 44–45
contributing metrics for, 41
costs, 157–158
critical factors for, 5–7
culture. See Culture
definition, 4
design & development. See Design process; 
Development process
early stages of, 159–160
factors for, 41
funnel, 122, 159
governance, 197
implementation, 65
incentivizing, 323–324
industries and product sectors, 4
integral to, 282–283
introduction, 156–160
managing. See Management, product innovation
market research. See Market research
methodologies, 7
model, 50
organization, 43, 53
organizational and strategic factors, 7Index 405
organizational identity and, 64
overview, 2
phases of, 287–288
portfolio management. See Portfolio management
process. See Process, of product innovation
process models, 158
projects, 37–38
as “risk vs. reward” process, 156–157
strategy. See Strategy
success factors, 8
team. See Team
team structures, 303–308
TRIZ applied to, 217–218
Product innovation charter (PIC), 161–163
Product innovation management, 9–10, 14, 46
Productivity index (PI), 145
Product life cycle (PLC), 15–18, 46
chasm in, 23–29
customer adoption of new products, 17–18
length and shape of, 16–17
management, 19–22
product improvements to, 17
product manager’s role in, 21–22
product portfolio, 20
shortening, 17
stages, 15
on cash flow, 16
Product manager/management, 11–14
business, 11
definition, 12
role, 11
to PDMA’s BoK, 13–14
in product life cycle, 21–22
skill set, 12
vs. project manager, 13
Product marketing, 11
Product owner, 174
Product planning, 11
Product platform strategy, 89–90
Product portfolio management, 14
Product portfolio model, 137
Product range, 10
Product roadmap, 30–31, 86
vs. release plan, 31
Product scope, 35
Product sustainability index (ProdSI), 240, 241
Product use testing, 278–279, 285
alpha testing, 279
beta testing, 279
central location test (CLT), 278
gamma testing, 279
in-home use test (IHUT), 278
Program Governance, 197
Program Management Team (PMT), 147
Program manager, 187, 301
Project-based risks, 38
Project, definition of, 13
Project level, success factors, 8
Project Management Institute (PMI), 197
Project manager/management, 13, 34–36, 305
budget, 36
in context of product innovation, 34
critical path method (CPM), 35
definition of, 13
product manager vs., 13
project and product scope, 35
schedule, 35
Triple Constraint, 34–35
Project resource demand, 139–140
Project scope, 35
Project selection methods, 135
Project team structures, 303–308
autonomous teams, 306–307
comparison, 307–308
functional teams, 304
heavyweight team, 305–306
lightweight teams, 305
Promotion, 19
Prototyping, 182, 219–221
development, 285
Purchase intention methods, 133–134
Purposeful planning, 321
Push-pull-press testing, 235–236
PV. See Present value (PV)
Q
QDA®. See Quantitative Descriptive Analysis 
(QDA®)
QFD. See Quality function deployment (QFD)
QFDE. See Quality function deployment for 
environment (QFDE)
Qualitative evaluation, portfolio 
management, 121–124
criteria, 121–122
pass/fail technique, 122–124
Qualitative market research, 258
Qualitative risk analysis, 37
Qualitative techniques, 234
Quality assurance, 208, 236–238
Quality function deployment (QFD), 227–231406 Index
Quality function deployment for environment 
(QFDE), 242–243
Quality standards, 321
Quantitative Descriptive Analysis (QDA®), 269
Quantitative evaluation, portfolio 
management, 124–134
bang for buck index, 129
expected commercial value, 130
financial analysis, framework for, 124–125
financial sensitivity analysis, 128–129
internal rate of return (IRR), 127–128
net present value (NPV), 125–126
option pricing theory (OPT), 130–131
payback period, 125
Quantitative market research, 258
Quantitative risk analysis, 37
Quantitative technique, 234
Quartz Open Framework, 9
Questionnaire design, 266
R
Radical innovation, 82
Randall, Mark, 382
Random sampling, 259
Ranking scale, 267
Rapid prototyping (RP), 220
R&D investment, 131
RE. See Reverse engineering (RE)
Reaction card, 225
Realization, 4
Referability, product innovation, 24
Reflective level, 224
Release plan, product roadmap vs., 31
Reporting vs. continuous improvement, 40
Resource allocation, 139, 149
as business process, 140
methods for, 139–140
roles and responsibilities for, 140
tools to support, 141–142
typical process, 140
Resources, 71, 92
Retirement stage, product life cycle, 15, 16
Retrospective meeting, 173
Revenue streams, 71
Reverse engineering (RE), 224
Ries, Eric, 188
Risk identification, 37
Risk management, 37–38, 156
decision tree, 38
of new product failure, 157–158
planning for, 37
in product innovation projects, 37–38
steps, 37
Risk response planning, 37
“Risk vs. reward” process, 156–157
Rittel, H., 180
Roadmaps, in product innovation, 30–33
best practices for using, 33
Kanban boards, 31
platform, 32–33
product, 30–31
technology, 32
Routine innovation, 82
Royce, Winston, 168
RP. See Rapid prototyping (RP)
S
SaaS. See Software as a Service (SaaS)
SaaS product managers, 40
Sales wave research, 281
Sample size calculation, 260
Sampling methods, 259
SCAMPER, 117, 209
Schedule, 35
compression, 36
Scoring methods, 121–123
Scrum, 172, 173, 194
master, 175
team, 175
works, 175
Secondary functions, 222
Secondary market research, 256–257
Secondary qualitative methods, 284
Segmentation strategy, 78–79
Self-awareness, 316
Self-evaluation questionnaire, 50
Self-regulation, 317
Senior management, 197–198
Sensory testing, 268–269
Sentiment analysis, 225
Service design, 179
Set-up time reduction, 239
Shannon, Claude, 93–96
Shortening, of product life cycle, 17
Simon, Herbert A., 180
Simplicity, product innovation, 24
Simplified life cycle assessment (SLCA), 242
Simulated test, 280
Site visits, 322
Six Sigma, 236
Six-Stage Double Diamond, 183
Sketch, 218Index 407
Skim pricing, 19
Skunk works projects, 306
SLCA. See Simplified life cycle assessment 
(SLCA)
Small to medium-sized companies, 10
Smart devices, 94
Snow strategic framework, 79–80
SOAK testing, 236
Social media, 265–266
Social skills, 317
Social technology, design thinking as, 183
Software as a Service (SaaS), 40, 289–290
Software endurance testing, 236
Software environment, 90
Solution space, 212
Sommer, A.F., 144, 172, 177
Sorting concepts, 270
Special guidelines sections, of PIC, 163
Specialized collaborators, 98
Sprints, 144, 173, 176
SPSD. See Sustainable product and service 
development (SPSD)
Stage, definition of, 165
Stage-Gate® process, 34, 38
adaptation, 165, 168
Agile vs., 194–195
benefits and limitations, 167
evolution and application, 166–167
5-stage process, 165–166
hypothetical examples, 167–168
levels of, 166
new product portfolio management, 
143–144
product innovation process, 166–168
stages for, 166
Stakeholders, 119–120
Standardization, 238
Stanford d.school’s Five Hexagon framework, 181
Storming stage, 310
Storyboarding, 117, 209, 219
Strategic alignment, 309
Strategic buckets, 135, 136
Strategic framework (Porter), 77–79
Strategy, 60–61
business. See Business strategy
corporate, 13, 60, 65–67
decision hierarchy, 61
definition, 60
hierarchy, 60–61
importance, 60
innovation. See Innovation strategy
market research, 284
open innovation, 97–99
organizational identity, 62
portfolio alignment with, 135–136
practice questions, 106–107
process roles, 302
roles, 301–302
sustainable innovation, 100–104
technology, 86–89
Stratified sampling, 259
Structured product innovation process, 34
Success drivers, of individual new-product 
projects, 6
Surveys, 266–267
Sustainability, 122
analytical tools for, 241–243
business strategy, 101–102
craft, 101–102
design for, 239–243
integration, 171
Sustainable product and service development 
(SPSD), 240
Sustainable product design, principles of, 240
Sustainable product innovation, 100–104
Sustaining vs. disruptive product innovation, 
80–81
SWOT analysis, 69, 73, 93
Systemic sampling, 259
Systems engineering, 177–179, 321
T
Tagaras, G., 119
Taguchi method, 231, 232
Tangible product, 85, 210, 226
Target market, 26–28
representation, 258–259
TBL. See Triple bottom line (TBL)
Team, 14
conflict management, 313–314
development, 309–314
diversity, 303
formation, 310–311, 319
knowledge management, 321–322
leadership, 315–317
communication, 315–316
emotional intelligence, 316–317
roles and responsibilities, 315
membership, 303
structures, 303–308
cross-functional teams, 303
multi-disciplinary teams, 303408 Index
project, 303–308
team diversity, 303
virtual teams, 318–322
work styles, 311–312
Team performance metrics, 323
Technical competencies, 92
Technical requirements, 243
Technical thinkers, 180
Technology, 11
adoption cycle, 23
foresighting, 87
roadmaps, 32, 88–89
S-Curve, 88
strategy, 86–89
Testing concepts, 270
Test marketing, 280–281
post-launch product testing and, 286
pre-launch product and, 285
Theory of Inventive Problem Solving (TIPS), 216
Thinking hats, 117–118
Thinking processes, 116
Thomas–Kilmann conflict model, 313
3D printing, 81
Three Ps, of triple bottom line, 101
Tiger teams, 306
TIPS. See Theory of Inventive Problem 
Solving (TIPS)
Top-down method, 135–136
Touch points, 118
Toyota product innovation guidelines, 186–187
Toyota production system (TPS), 31, 185–186, 299
TPS. See Toyota production system (TPS)
Traditional accounting software application, 72
Trained panels, 268–270
Tregoe, B., 65
Trialability, product innovation, 24
Triangle test, 268
Triple bottom line (TBL), 100–101, 239
Triple Constraint, 34–35
TRIZ method, 215–218
Tuckman, Bruce, 310
U
UI design. See User interface (UI) design
UK Design Council’s Double Diamond model, 181
Ulrich, K.T., 238
United-Health front-end of innovation system, 391
Unknown risks, 37
Unmoderated remote usability testing, 233
Untrained panels, 268
Usability risk, 161
Usability testing, 208, 219, 232–234
User experience (UX), 11, 213
User interface (UI) design, 213
Utility score, 276
UX. See User experience (UX)
V
Validated learning process, 189
Value-driven company, 71
Value maximization, in portfolio, 116–134
Value proposition, 25, 71, 85, 262
Value risk, 161
Values, in organizations, 63
Variable costs, 131
Variance, 260
Video communications, 320
Virtual meetings, 320–321
Virtual prototyping, 220
Virtual reality (VR), 270–271
Virtual Team Model, 319, 322
Virtual teams, 318–322
Visceral level, 224
Vision statement, 62–63
Visual representations, of portfolio, 137–138
VoC. See Voice of the customer (VoC)
Voice of the customer (VoC), 252
market research and, 282–283
VR. See Virtual reality (VR)
W
Waterfall method, 168–169
Webber, M., 180
“Wicked Problems,” 180
Wireframes, 218
Working capital, 132
Work styles, 311–312
Z
Zikopoulos, C., 119
Zimmerman, J., 65
Team (Continued)WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.
