Product DevelopmentProduct Development
An Engineer’s Guide to Business Considerations, 
Real-World Product Testing, and Launch
David V. Tennant
Windward Consulting Group, Virginia, USAThis edition first published 2022
© 2022 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or 
otherwise, except as permitted by law. Advice on how to obtain permission to reuse material from 
this title is available at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
The right of David V. Tennant to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in 
accordance with law.
Registered Office
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
Editorial Office
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
For details of our global editorial offices, customer services, and more information about Wiley 
products visit us at www.wiley.com.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some 
content that appears in standard print versions of this book may not be available in other formats.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty
While the publisher and authors have used their best efforts in preparing this work, they make no 
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this 
work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any implied warranties 
of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by 
sales representatives, written sales materials or promotional statements for this work. The fact that 
an organization, website, or product is referred to in this work as a citation and/or potential source 
of further information does not mean that the publisher and authors endorse the information or 
services the organization, website, or product may provide or recommendations it may make. This 
work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional 
services. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You 
should consult with a specialist where appropriate. Further, readers should be aware that websites 
listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and 
when it is read. Neither the publisher nor authors shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other 
commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other 
damages.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
Hardback ISBN: 9781119780137; ePDF ISBN: 9781119780175; ePub ISBN: 9781119780182; 
oBook ISBN: 9781119780205
Cover image: © TUMBARTSEV/Shutterstock
Cover design: Wiley
Set in 9.5/12.5pt STIXTwo Text by Integra Software Services Pvt. Ltd, Pondicherry, Indiav
Table of Contents
Acknowledgments viii
About the Author ix
1 Introduction to Product Development 1
Project Management and Product Development 2
What Is Product Development? 3
How This Book Is Organized 3
2 The Role of Marketing in Product Development 7
Corporate Strategy – Strategic Planning 7
Marketing, Sales, and the Four Ps 10
The 1st P – Product 11
Example of Product Displacement 13
The 2nd P – Promotion 15
The 3rd P – Pricing 16
The 4th P – Placement 17
The Business Case 18
The Roles of Marketing and Engineering in Product Development 19
Marketing Services 21
New Product Development and Market Economics: 
The Future of Electric Trucks vs Costs and Public Policy 21
3 The Role of the Engineering Group in Product Development 35
Driving Products – the Engineering Perspective 35
Engineering Disciplines 37
The Engineering Process 39
Ergonomics (Human Factors Engineering) 45
Additional Design Considerations – Product Liability 48
Government Oversight – Consumer Protection in the United States 50
Discussion Case 3.1 – Lawsuit over Hot Coffee 52
Design Challenges – Product Misuse 53
Problems with Product Development 55vi Table of Contents
4 The Core Team and Teamwork in Product Development 61
The Executive’s Role in Product Development 61
Working Within the Strategic Plan 61
Project Management Processes 62
Who Should Be Involved in Product Development? 63
Constraint on Product Development: A Note about 
Sarbanes-Oxley and Publicly Held Companies 66
Essentials of Teamwork and Communications across 
Functional Lines 67
Project/Product Communication 68
Budgets, Schedules, and Miscellaneous Small Tasks 70
Leadership in Product Development 73
How Do Leaders Go Wrong? 76
The Roles of Accounting and Finance 77
Decision Points and Net Present Value (NPV) 81
The Bigger Picture 84
Driving Product Development 85
Working in Silos and with Stakeholders 86
Identifying Stakeholders 87
5 Getting Started – Project Approved: Product/Project 
Management and Engineering 95
Taking the Business Case from Concept to Reality 95
Basic Research 96
Applied Research 97
Project Management in Product Development 98
Why Do Projects Fail? 99
Traditional and Agile Project Management 101
Sample Project Plan – Detailed Table of Contents 103
A True Case Study - Company Dysfunction and a Lack of 
Project Management 105
Developing and Controlling Scope – Using a Work 
Breakdown Structure (WBS) 107
Developing a Budget and Cash Flows 108
Agile PM 112
The Vision Statement 113
Agile Hybrid in Action – Marketing Natural Gas in the 
Southeastern United States: Gas South, A True Story 115
Discussion Case 5.1 – A True Story: Product Development 
Without Project Management 117
6 Product Development for Small Firms and Entrepreneurs 125
Funding for Your Start-Up: A Necessary Ingredient 125
Loans from the Bank and Small Business Administration (SBA) 126
Funding from Venture Capitalists 127
Funding by Issuing Shares of Stock 128
Funding with Angel Investors 128Table of Contents vii
Other Sources of Business and Financial Assistance 129
Summary on Product Development and Sources of Funding 130
Small Firm Challenges 131
Lack of Structured Planning 132
Marketing Message Not Strong or Clear 133
Legal and Regulatory Obstacles 133
Use of a Product Roadmap 134
Innovation 135
When (Or If) to Patent 137
7 Manufacturing the New Product 147
The State of Manufacturing 150
New Manufacturing Advances 156
8 Engineering Product Design and Testing 163
Managing the Approved Scope and Budget – Why Is This 
Important? 163
The Project Lifecycle 164
A True Story: Ignoring the Warning Signs 166
Preventing Failure and Surprises: Performing a Risk Review 167
Two Types of Risk Review: Qualitative and Quantitative 168
Design and Status Reviews 171
Modeling – Speeding Product Development 173
Integrating Supply Chain and Manufacturing 174
The Role of Supply Chain in Product Development 176
Proposals, Pricing, Statements of Work (SOWs) 180
New Technologies – Identification and Adaptation 182
Alignment with Business Strategy 185
Using SWOT 186
Gates and Stakeholders 187
9 Successful Product Launch and Post Review 193
Pricing 194
Integrated Marketing 196
Product Development – Post Review 198
10 Summary – Connecting the Dots 205
A Logical Process Flow 206
Index 213viii
Acknowledgments
No one person can succeed on their own. There are always people that help along the 
way. Consequently, I have had the pleasure of meeting and speaking with a number of 
exceptional and knowledgeable people during the creation of this book.
First of all, kudos and thanks to Gary Elliott, President, International Applied 
Engineering. Over the years, Gary has provided significant insight into alternative 
energy systems, along with engineering and business perspectives in what was, a few 
years ago, a niche energy market. Gary continues to provide his expertise in clean 
energy power generation.
Thanks also to Tim Jarrell, Vice President of Power Supply, Rates and Distributed 
Generation at Cobb Electric Membership Corporation, for his thoughts on electric ser￾vice and the future of electric trucks and cars relative to costs and meeting electric 
demand.
Along those same lines, David Jaskolski, Advanced Technology Vehicle Sales, Peach 
State Truck Centers, provided a wealth of information about large electric trucks, their 
applications, use, and future technology. David is truly a technical expert in this arena 
as well as understanding the commercial and economic issues in electric truck 
operations.
David Malone, Vice President of Marketing at Gas South, provided strategies for 
obtaining customer preferences and the use of digital marketing. Further strategy in 
this energy market was also provided by Kevin Greiner, CEO of Gas South.
Steven Lustig, Vice President of Global Supply Chain at East–West Manufacturing, 
was instrumental in discussing manufacturing techniques, remote teams, logistics, 
and global purchasing.
Roy Sequeira, Computer Systems Consultant, provided his perspective in develop￾ing and launching computer systems and products. His knowledge on planning and 
avoiding problems was most helpful; especially his observations on why launches 
sometimes fail.
Gerard Hill (retired), former Vice President of Consulting at ESI International and 
later an independent consultant. Gerard, over the years, has mentored and assisted me 
in project management techniques, methodologies, and practical applications.
Finally, to my wife and family who persevered through my absence while working 
on this book. Thank you for your patience and understanding.
I want to express my sincere thanks and admiration to each of the above partici￾pants. All of today’s knowledge is built on the experience and knowledge of previous 
pioneers. These gentlemen represent the leaders in today’s new thinking and product 
development.ix
About the Author
David V. Tennant has directed over $3.5 billion in projects, programs, and resources. 
His expertise is in energy, utilities, telecom, manufacturing, and consulting. He has 
had engagements worldwide and currently resides in the Atlanta area.
His 30 plus years of functional experience spans engineering, operations, marketing, 
executive management, consulting, and he currently serves on two corporate boards.
He has a B.S. in Mechanical Engineering from Florida Atlantic University, a M.S. in 
Technology and Science Policy from the Georgia Institute of Technology, and an 
EMBA from Kennesaw State University. He is a registered professional engineer (PE) 
and a certified project management professional (PMP).
His LinkedIn profile can be found at: www.linkedin.com/in/david-tennant-57075.1
Product Development: An Engineer’s Guide to Business Considerations, Real-World Product Testing, and 
Launch, First Edition. David V. Tennant. 
© 2022 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2022 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
1
Introduction to Product Development
My formal academic training began as a student of mechanical engineering. 
Simultaneously, I worked part-time as a designer to pay for my education. In this case, 
my work allowed me to see how products were developed to the lower level where I 
was doing the technical drawing. And my engineering education helped me learn the 
limits of materials, think about product technical features, and how to apply mathe￾matical formulas to solve technical problems.
However, nowhere did I learn about how products are really developed. What drives 
a company to success? How do companies know which products will be accepted in 
the marketplace? What is a marketplace or a market segment? As a result, my educa￾tion and early work experience taught me a lot about applying engineering principles, 
but I had no knowledge of marketing, sales, business finance, C-level executive 
support, or how R&D (research and development) and the other areas are supposed to 
all work together. I simply (and naively) believed that new products were developed 
and launched by the engineering department. The product that had the better design 
would always be preferred by consumers.
Since those days in college, and my early career in engineering, I have come a long 
way to understanding that product development is a multi-faceted effort involving 
many diverse groups and talents. It is so much more than R&D or engineering.
Similarly, I have noticed that other disciplines – marketing, sales, etc. – do not 
always understand the engineering or R&D process in product development, which 
can be equally frustrating for those on the business side of a company.
The underlying purpose of this book is to serve as a bridge between the various 
groups that are responsible for developing and launching new products and services. 
It will assist engineering students, marketing professionals, R&D scientists, and prod￾uct developers in how to effectively plan and launch new products.
This does not mean your future projects will all be successful: the market deter￾mines who survives and who doesn’t. However, the techniques, methods, and studies 
in this book can help you determine which projects should go forward and how to best 
plan and execute a flawless development and launch. And which projects should be 
scrapped early in the development process. Half of the key is knowing which projects 
have a greater chance of success vs. those that don’t. To illustrate important points, 
case studies will be provided that illustrate real-life failures and successes that 2 Introduction to Product Development
reinforce the principles in this book. This book is very practical and does not dwell on 
theory or untested ideas.
Figure 1.1, Core Team in Product Development, illustrates some of the various func￾tional areas and their interaction in product development. This figure is dynamic, so 
the participants will change depending on the type of product, its complexity, and it’s 
corporate visibility or priority.
It should also be noted that product development will require market research, data 
analytics, realistic objectives, project management, and leadership.
Project Management and Product Development
A part of this book will introduce the reader to key concepts of project management 
which can be useful in bringing a product to market in a timely and efficient manner. 
Of course, the project manager, or leader, plays a key role in planning how the work 
will be accomplished, how it will be executed, and by whom. Further, this book will 
provide insights and processes in developing new products. It is not a book about pro￾ject management; however, because project management (PM) is such a core skill 
needed to successfully launch new products, the reader will find key PM concepts 
detailed throughout the book. This will offer a good grasp on how to manage a project 
using these techniques and the reader is encouraged to pursue further reading on the 
topic of project management. It will be apparent that “product management” and 
“project management” are used interchangeably.
It should be noted that product development requires a multi-discipline approach, 
with each participating department understanding their role and responsibility. Many 
times, people have described PM as similar to herding cats. Product development will 
have similar challenges.
Extended
Team
Marketing
R&D
Engineering
Quality Production
Executive
Sponsor
New Product
Development
Sales
Suppliers
Accounting
Legal
HR
Figure 1.1 Core Team – Product Development.How This Book Is Organized 3
Through research, my own experience, and discussions with product development 
professionals, it is clear that project management plays a strong role in staying focused 
on the scope, budget, and schedule for the new product’s development. Successful 
companies have recognized over the last 20 years that project management processes 
are a huge competitive advantage. It has always been the author’s perspective that suc￾cessful product launches require two ingredients: technical excellence and managerial 
excellence.
In recent years, there has been a drive to embrace an agile project management phi￾losophy. This is much more suited to software and IT projects and certainly has its 
place in that industry. The primary differences between traditional and agile project 
management will be presented in Chapter 5.
What Is Product Development?
We first need to ask ourselves, what is a product? A product is simply an item or ser￾vice that brings value to the customer in exchange for a price. You may find it odd that 
a “service” can be considered a product, but it is. A service can be a utility providing 
electricity to its customers. It can be an insurance policy that you purchase for your 
car, or the lawn service that keeps your company’s green spaces looking nice. Services 
can also be developed and sold similar to “hard” products. While services can be con￾sidered a product, marketing services is different from marketing a hard product. 
Further, think about apps that are developed for your smartphone. Are these a product 
or a service? Sometimes the line can be blurry.
It is appropriate to consider that products can originate from a variety of sources. 
Perhaps your R&D group has developed a new smart widget. It is most likely now the 
engineering department’s mission to determine how to commercialize it and manu￾facture it in a cost-effective manner.
The marketing group will need to determine the channels necessary to distribute the 
widget, how to develop a sales and marketing strategy, and determine estimates for 
pricing, profit, breakeven point, etc. Essentially, there are many moving parts to suc￾cessfully launching a product. Where do products come from? Figure 1.2 shows some 
(but not all) of the points whereby ideas for new products are generated.
How This Book Is Organized
It is suggested the reader go through each chapter in sequence. This is because each 
chapter builds on concepts presented in the previous chapters. Also, developing prod￾ucts should have a structured approach and this book provides this in the correct 
order.
In many chapters, there are “Tabletop Discussion” questions. These are provided for 
group discussions and should have about a 30-minute time frame. These should encour￾age students or product teams thinking about key topics and how to address them.
Case studies are included to reinforce the concepts presented in each chapter. While 
there are one or two “hypothetical” cases, most of the cases presented are real-world 4 Introduction to Product Development
examples. The author has had significant experience in rescuing projects (or product 
developments) that were in deep trouble. In these instances, it would be in poor taste 
to name companies or individuals. Many of these cases challenge the reader with 
questions pertaining to how they would have addressed, prevented, or rescued these 
difficult issues.
Key points are summarized at the end of each chapter, followed by questions for 
students or readers to answer.
The answers to both the case studies and questions are also provided.
Subsequent chapters include:
Chapter 2 – The Role of Marketing
This provides an overall perspective on the basics of marketing, how it is different 
from sales, and how pricing, product, promotion, and place are part of a strategy. 
Marketing many times drives new products; indeed, a marketing professional 
may be placed in charge of a product’s development. Marketing also performs 
competitor analysis, obtains customer feedback (e.g., focus groups), and devel￾ops sophisticated models – usually an Excel spreadsheet – to evaluate pricing 
sensitivity.
Chapter 3 – The Role of Engineering
Engineers play a key role in the development of products. And there are many disci￾plines in this field. Listed in Chapter 3 are the types of engineering – mechanical, 
electrical, instrumentation, etc. – and how they work together to develop a project. 
There is a controlled approach to defining and solving engineering problems. Also, 
computer modeling can reduce development time and reduce the number of proto￾types that are produced.
In addition to the technical challenges, engineers often have to design a product 
with the potential to be misused, either accidentally or intentionally. This brings into 
The
Marketplace
Corporate
Strategy
(Response) Product
Development
Projects
(Strategy
Implementation)
Product 1
Product 2
Product n
Products
Competitors
Regulations
Standards
Customer Preferences
Technology Changes
Figure 1.2 Where Do Products Come From?How This Book Is Organized 5
focus the need to consider ergonomics (human factors engineering) and product lia￾bility issues.
Chapter 4 – Core Team and Teamwork
Which groups and who should be involved in the product’s development? What is the 
role of executive management in the process? These questions are evaluated from the 
perspective that a team is required. How do teams work together to be most effective? 
The use of matrixed teams – so common in many large companies – can be positive or 
detrimental depending on the organization. Teamwork and leadership relative to 
product development will be explored.
This chapter will also look at the role of the accounting, finance, and supply chain 
(procurement) departments. Having a product that continuously goes over budget will 
affect its profitability and have the potential for product cancellation, if left unchecked. 
This chapter is important as it clearly defines the roles of these functional areas and 
their contribution to a product’s development.
Chapter 5 – Getting Started
Once a product/project has been approved by senior management, how do we get 
started? The reader will learn how the business case, typically a marketing function or 
feasibility study, is the springboard to developing an action plan. Also, the differences 
between basic and applied research will be presented. How does R&D (research and 
development) participate in a product’s development?
The concepts of formal project management (and several case studies) will be offered 
along with the top reasons that projects, or product developments, fail. Both agile and 
traditional project management theories will be presented and understanding when to 
use them.
Chapter 6 – Product Development for Small Firms and Entrepreneurs
Small firms have a set of challenges that are unique. Many times, obtaining credit, busi￾ness loans, or investors is a challenge. This is not something a larger, well-established 
firm is concerned with. However, this chapter delves into sources of funding (venture 
capital, angel investors, etc.) and where to find local incubators, which are set up to assist 
small companies and inventors with skills, training, and business contacts.
Many times, small firms or inventors do not have access to talent such as engineer￾ing or manufacturing companies. These are discussed along with product roadmaps 
and when or if to obtain a patent.
Chapter 7 – Manufacturing the New Product
A history of Japan’s focus on quality and manufacturing is explored along with a his￾tory of America’s car companies from the 1960s. Technology, government policies, 
foreign competition, and other factors can impact design and manufacturing. Just-in￾time and lean manufacturing are presented with the benefits and drawbacks to each.
A review of small vs. large manufacturers and domestic vs. offshore will be offered. 
Further, an overview of current manufacturing techniques will be offered as well as a 
discussion on what manufacturing will look like in the future: 5 G, artificial intelli￾gence, the Internet of Things, and robotics.6 Introduction to Product Development
Chapter 8 – Engineering Product Design and Testing
The project lifecycle is introduced along with methods to perform risk reviews. A risk 
is simply a potential, future problem that can ruin your project. A risk review can 
assist in identifying problems and developing mitigation strategies.
A discussion and an example of engineering modeling is presented. This illustrates 
how modeling saves time and can be very reliable. Supply chain is equally important 
as it must work closely with engineering in issuing RFPs and technical specifications. 
The chapter closes with a review of new technologies and the importance of identify￾ing stakeholders.
Chapter 9 – Successful Product Launch and Post Review
A review of failed products is presented along with commentary about their demise. 
This chapter also complements Chapter 2 (Marketing) as launching a product has sig￾nificant implications for strategy, pricing, sales partners, and positioning.
A post review is a useful exercise to determine what went right in a product’s design, 
production, and launch for future product development teams. Equally important in 
the review is what could have been done better? Both sides offer opportunities for 
continuous improvement and avoidance of repeating mistakes.
Chapter 10 – Summary
All of the previous chapters have dealt with specific topics and are somewhat siloed. 
However, this chapter will connect all of the dots so that a structured approach to 
product development can occur. A process flow diagram will demonstrate the activi￾ties that occur from beginning to end.
Takeaways from this book.
● Product development has substantial costs and risks, but also high potential.
● Both managerial and technical excellence are required for success.
● Successful product development requires the use of project management 
techniques.
● The world does not revolve around engineering, science, marketing, or IT, it revolves 
around profitability.
● Product development is a team effort generally requiring talent from different func￾tional areas.
● Product development is often led by a senior-level marketing person. Other times, it 
may be someone from R&D or engineering.
● Bringing a product to launch within schedule and budget is very important. If late, 
competitors may be first to market or have a better product. If costs spiral out of 
control, it may take years to recover the investment costs and the product may never 
be profitable.
● Engineering modeling can significantly reduce product development time and mini￾mize the need for prototypes.
● As a product goes through development, ergonomics (human engineering) should 
be a design factor.
● Products should be designed assuming they will be misused – either by accident or 
intentionally – so that possible product liability can be minimized.7
Product Development: An Engineer’s Guide to Business Considerations, Real-World Product Testing, and 
Launch, First Edition. David V. Tennant. 
© 2022 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2022 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
2
The Role of Marketing in Product Development
Corporate Strategy – Strategic Planning
What is strategic planning? This can mean different things to different people. While 
strategy can be used to guide a company to the next level of performance or change the 
corporate culture, in product development, strategy can help bring focus. Even corpo￾rations get operational plans (short-term focus) mixed up with strategic plans (long￾term focus). Essentially, the strategic plan is performed at the highest levels of 
corporate leadership and may even involve the firm’s Board of Directors.
A strategic plan (corporate strategy) should focus on long-term actions to move the 
company in a new direction. For years, Coca-Cola was primarily distributing its iconic 
soft drinks through distributors all over the world. However, as people became more 
concerned about sugar and corn syrup content in soft drinks, Coke, and other drink 
makers, decided as a strategic decision to augment their portfolio of products. This 
now includes Dasani® bottled water, Minute Maid® fruit juices, as well as several tea 
and coffee products. A conscious decision (or strategy) was made to diversify Coke’s 
product mix to better serve their customers’ tastes. Their largest competitor, namely 
PepsiCo, has followed the same strategy and offers not only a variety of beverages, but 
also various food lines, including Frito-Lay® and Quaker Oats®.
For technology companies, there is a similar approach to offer a continuous stream 
of new products. If we look at Apple, their initial offering was their innovative comput￾ers and operating system. But the firm has evolved to offer a plethora of new and dif￾ferent products. At one point, Apple was bringing in more revenue with iTunes than 
with their computer business. Added to the mix are the iPhone and iPad. Clearly, their 
corporate strategy has included diversification and innovation, and is driving the firm 
to develop new products and services. It is important to note that corporate strategy 
will drive innovation and provide the funding for R&D, which also includes funding 
for new products.
Figure 2.1 Where Do Ideas Come From? suggests that companies have many ave￾nues to generate ideas, both internal and external. Usually, anyone within a corpora￾tion can offer suggestions and ideas. At some point, the ideas will percolate to senior 
management, who will decide the merits of each suggestion and whether to direct 
company resources (people and dollars) in this direction.8 The Role of Marketing in Product Development
This is related to innovation. How do we define innovation? Here is a concise 
definition:
Innovation is a process by which a domain, a product, or service is renewed and 
brought up to date by applying new processes, introducing new techniques, or 
establishing successful ideas to create new value.1
Innovation is what drives new products. How do we innovate? Innovation implies 
that your firm has a creative spark, or the founder has an idea that no one has yet 
thought of. Innovation is not something you can learn in school or from a co-worker. 
Innovation comes from creative people.
Many times, innovation comes from someone being aware of a market direction or 
trend. Others may think about how technology changes can be incorporated into a 
new product or software application. Also, new regulatory rulings can fuel a market 
need for compliance. True innovators are rare (think Nikola Tesla, Elon Musk, or 
Richard Branson – they all started from scratch) but working together with a partner 
or team of people can create synergies that, combined, can develop interesting new 
ideas or even an advancement of an existing idea.
All companies need to exhibit some form of innovation to survive. This is sometimes 
driven by the company founder, who generates ideas non-stop that have not been 
thought of before. We can also think of innovation as a form of creativity or imagina￾tion, but this is not something we can learn in school or by taking a course. Some 
people are just more creative than others.
It must be noted that innovation and new products are the future profits and liveli￾hood of the corporation. A company cannot sit on its laurels, it must continue to gen￾erate new products. If one looks at a list of the top US companies (Forbes or similar) 40 
years ago and compare this list with today’s top companies, you will find the list is very 
dynamic and different. Table 2.1 shows the Fortune 500 list of companies for 1980 and 
2020. They are listed by revenue; however, column three is listed by profitability, 
which is different.
Company Z
(Marketing Group)
Company Z
Functional Areas
External
• Competitors
• Regulations – Federal & State
• Standards – business & professional
 societies
• Customer preferences – feedback, focus
 groups, surveys
• Technology changes – trade shows,
 conferences, media, marketplace
Internal
• Reverse engineering competitor products
• Ideas from employees:people reading,
 surfing the internet & thinking
• Imagination, creativity, curiosity
• Ideas from friends & family
Idea Screening Ideas Selected
For Development
Figure 2.1 Where Do Ideas Come From? Figure by David TennantCorporate Strategy – Strategic Planning 9
Note that some of the companies that were on the list in 1980 are now absent. This 
is especially notable for the oil companies, and this will continue as the shift from 
petroleum (gasoline) to electric and alternative-fueled vehicles continues.
New firms in the form of big tech, Facebook, Google, etc. have been displacing more 
“traditional” companies. By the 2060s we may find a whole new set of innovative com￾panies on the list.
At the turn of the last century (1900) the horse and carriage gave way to the automo￾bile. There were most likely excellent buggy whips for sale, but no matter how excel￾lent your product may be, innovation will ultimately replace it.
If we consider Kodak, which had the lion’s share of the film market, this was com￾pletely made irrelevant by digital photography. The major camera producers: Canon, 
Nikon, Olympus, and others developed highly successful digital cameras which took 
excellent pictures and no longer required film. Apple’s iPhone further hastened the 
decline of film in that anyone could take very good pictures with their phone’s camera 
(including Android phones).
Discussion Case 2.1 – The Eastman Kodak Company Based on5
The Eastman Kodak Company, founded by George Eastman, devised and marketed 
the first simple camera in 1888. As time went on, Eastman incorporated the name 
Kodak as part of his product line, which included various film products (Kodachrome, 
Ektachrome, etc.). Later, his company turned out 35 mm format slides, 8 mm and 
16 mm movie film, and a variety of projectors and cameras, for both professional and 
personal use.
Continuing with innovative and interesting products, Kodak also produced slide 
projectors, the Browning personal movie camera, and film-processing machines. 
Many Hollywood movie studios used Kodak film in their movies. By 1976, Kodak had 
90% of the US camera film market. The peak revenue year for Kodak was 1996, with 
Table 2.1 Largesr US Companies 1980 vs. 2020 Revenue.1
Rank
Company2
1980
1980
Revenue
Company3
2020
2020
Revenue
Most Profitable4
2020
1 Exxon-Mobil $ 79.1 Wal-Mart $ 524.0 Apple
2 Gen. Motors $ 66.3 Amazon $ 281.0 Microsoft
3 Mobil $ 44.7 Exxon-Mobil $ 265.0 Berkshire Hathaway
4 Ford $ 43.5 Apple $ 260.0 Alphabet (Google)
5 Texaco $ 38.4 CVS Health $ 257.0 Intel
6 Chevron-Texaco $ 29.9 Berkshire Hathaway $ 255.0 Facebook
7 Gulf Oil $ 23.9 United Healthcare $ 242.0 Johnson and 
Johnson
8 IBM $ 22.8 McKesson $ 214.0 Verizon
9 Gen. Electric $ 22.4 AT&T $ 181.0 Pfizer
10 Amoco $ 18.6 Amerisource Bergen $ 180.0 Wal-Mart
Table Developed by David Tennant.
Numbers in billions of dollars10 The Role of Marketing in Product Development
revenue of $16 billion. The company was traded on the stock exchange with a share 
price of $90. At that time, Kodak had two-thirds of the global film market. Employees 
peaked in 1988 with over 145,000 employees worldwide.
Kodak continued in their attempts to be innovative with digital cameras and the CD 
format for pictures, but each camera sold lost $60. In 2004, it was ejected from the Dow 
Jones stock exchange. As a side note, the Dow Jones Industrial Average is a stock index 
of the top 30 US corporations. On this note, Kodak closed many manufacturing plants 
and cut thousands of jobs.
Kodak worked to restructure its business, acquired several companies, and provided 
licensing which brought in much-needed revenue. In 2010, Kodak sued Apple over its 
iPhone technology, claiming a patent infringement, but did not prevail. By this point, 
employment was down to 18,000 employees. In 2012, the company filed for bank￾ruptcy and sold its online photo business to Shutterfly.
Kodak was somewhat reluctant to move into digital photography as it did not involve 
the use of film. The company today provides traditional and digital printing, hardware, 
and software services to the print, packaging, publishing, manufacturing, entertain￾ment, and film industries. The company’s four primary segments include advanced 
materials and chemicals.
At the time of writing (August 2021) Kodak’s stock price is $6.86 and the company 
has earnings of negative $400 million on revenue of $1.1 billion.6
Case 2.1 Discussion Questions
1. As a large, successful US company, Kodak was once a “dogs of the Dow” firm listed 
on this stock exchange. It could be argued that Kodak’s management was unwilling 
to change or consider new ideas to displace or augment its line of film products. 
What does this tell us about the role of innovation in a company?
2. With the advantage of twenty-twenty hindsight, it is easy to criticize Kodak’s 
lack of foresight or imagination. However, it is likely that past success blinded 
Kodak to the future of film. This might be categorized as a resistance to change, 
which is found in most large corporations; it becomes part of the corporate 
culture.
If you are in a senior level position – at any company – how would you work to 
change the corporate culture?
3. What role should the marketing department have played in this long-term decline?
4. From a managerial standpoint, what are the challenges when a company is in 
decline?
Marketing, Sales, and the Four Ps
A common misunderstanding is “marketing is the same as sales.” They both are con￾cerned with increasing the company’s sales. Both need to be knowledgeable about 
who their competitors are and their products. Both need to understand their current 
and potential customers’ needs. But there is a difference. Let’s first consider the sales 
team.The 1 11 st P – Product
The sales group is first and foremost responsible for bringing in revenue. A second 
objective is to establish relationships with customers. It is always easier to sell to an 
existing customer than to find a new one. However, to increase sales, a sales repre￾sentative must also be able to meet potential new customers. This can be done in a 
variety of ways. The traditional methods include attending trade shows, cold-calling 
(i.e., working the phone), attending local business meetings (city business chapters, 
chambers of commerce, etc.), and attending regional or local professional trade asso￾ciations; for example, engineering chapters such as ASME (American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers), IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers), and 
other similar organizations. Beside technical groups, there are organized chapters of 
venture capitalists, human resources management, etc. Any professional group will be 
a source of potential customers.
In today’s environment, where pandemics can disrupt traditional sales prospecting, 
most companies have a strong online presence. This is in addition to your company’s 
website, and may include sites such as LinkedIn, Twitter, Reddit, Facebook, and a host 
of other platforms. However, an online sales presence starts to encroach into the 
domain of Marketing.
As noted earlier, the fundamental aim of sales is to sell products and obtain con￾tracts: ultimately, to turn potential customers into current customers. Note that sales 
reps generally have goals to meet on a quarterly or yearly basis. This is typically a 
financial goal; for example, “Jill must bring in $400,000 dollars in revenue each quar￾ter.” While the sales rep is concerned about meeting his or her sales goal, it is also 
important that products and services should have enough profit (also called “margin”) 
so the company makes enough money to stay in business – and ideally to grow.
The marketing group, while concerned with sales and profits, plays a very different, 
but complementary role to sales. Marketing is integral to the financial health of a com￾pany and must support the sales team. Pick up any book on marketing, and you will 
learn about the four Ps:
● Product
● Promotion
● Pricing
● Placement.
These are the marketing fundamentals, but true marketing can be very analytical, with 
spreadsheets, detailed market analyses, and estimated demand for the product. But 
first, let’s focus on the 4 Ps.
The 1st P – Product
It is not unusual for a Marketing Manager (sometimes called a Product Manager) to 
have the leadership role in the development of products and services. This will become 
apparent as our discussion unfolds.
Obviously, to have sales a company needs to have a product that has demand in the 
marketplace. The market is constantly churning with established products being 
bumped by newer products. Perhaps the newer product is cheaper, has better features, 12 The Role of Marketing in Product Development
or has captured the imagination of the buying public. History is littered with products 
that were successful but ultimately replaced by a competitor.
All products exhibit a lifecycle. Figure 2.2 shows a typical product lifecycle. Notes 
about the product lifecycle:
Development stage –
● Product/project is funded, and design of prototype starts
● Prototype put through testing, and data collection
● Review of data; evaluation of results
● Changes in design and more testing
● Final product handed over to manufacturing or external group for production
Introduction stage –
● The product is new to the market and demand will increase with time
● The cost per unit (or customer) is high
● Few if any competitors
● Sales are low and the product may be a money loser during the introductory stage
Growth stage –
● Sales and revenue increase; the product is taking off in the marketplace
● Competitors are becoming aware of your activity and may start to develop a compet￾ing product
● Cost per unit (or customer) begins to decline
● Profit margins increase
Maturity stage –
● Sales, revenues, and profits peak
● Cost per unit (or customer) is at the lowest point
● Competitors are now actively nipping at your heels
Decline stage –
● Sales and revenue decline, leading to a decline in profit margin
INTRODUCTION GROWTH MATURITY DECLINE
TIME
PROFITS
SALES
SALES/PROFITS ($)
PRODUCT
DEVELOPMENT
0
Figure 2.2 Product Lifecycle. Lumen Learning, viewed 15 February 2021. https://courses.
lumenlearning.com/clinton-marketing/chapter/reading-stages-of-the-product-life-cycle/.Example of Product Displacement 13
● Cost per unit (or customer) is still low, but may rise with fewer units sold
● Competitors start to fall away. A few will remain, but with a reduced market there 
are less sales and therefore profits to share. The product may become stable with 
steady sales but will not see the heavy growth or revenues seen in the growth stage.
Example of Product Displacement
In the late 1990s, Nokia produced cell phones that were widely used by the public – 
worldwide. Nokia, headquartered in Helsinki, Finland appeared to have a dominant 
position in the market. The Nokia 3210 (Figure 2.3) was compact, had many features, 
was very rugged and ergonomically comfortable to hold and operate. As a result, 
around 150-million units were sold. But, based on the previous discussion, we know 
that dominance in the marketplace can be upset by newer technology or lower-priced 
models with the same features. Along came the Apple 2G (Figure 2.4), which gained 
Figure 2.3 Nokia Phone. Isaac Smith / Unsplash
Figure 2.4 Apple iPhone. Michal Weidemann / Unsplash14 The Role of Marketing in Product Development
immediate acceptance by the public. The iPhone 2G had numerous apps, used a color 
touchscreen, and could connect with the internet in addition to all the things that the 
Nokia did (texting, photos, etc.).
Some general characteristics of products include:
Features – nice displays (computer screens), user friendly operation (electric vehi￾cles), the wow factor (new and innovative, nobody does this – Wow!), and a variety 
of models to fit various budgets (low, middle, and high-end). The Apple iPhone defi￾nitely had the “wow” factor. Thirty years later, there are now competitors to the 
Apple iPhone.
Specifications – a technical description or requirement of what the product can do. 
For example, if our new product is an electric motor for electric vehicles: the materials 
used to make the product (steel, stainless steel, etc.); the number of motor brushes and 
material; outputs –horsepower, torque; the range of temperatures for optimum opera￾tion, etc. If you pick up any standard-powered car brochure, specifications usually 
include items such as horsepower, torque, engine displacement, fuel requirements, 
etc. Specifications may sometimes be spelled out by the customer for special orders or 
custom applications.
Warranties and guarantees – will your company stand behind its new product?
Service Centers – what if I need service for my new scanner/printer? Where do I go? 
Is there a center nearby? Note: a service center can generate additional after-sale prof￾its: think of automobile dealers and their service center networks.
What Marketing Cannot Do
The marketing group cannot guarantee that your product will be successful. Nor can 
marketing predict how many customers will buy your product, nor say with confi￾dence how much revenue or profits will be gained. But spreadsheet models will be 
created that have various projections and sensitivity analysis. Marketing in today’s 
world is very dependent on data analytics which helps clarify the target market and 
product acceptance. Table 2.2 shows an example of price, margin, and volume 
sensitivity analysis.
Table 2.2 Price and Margin Sensitivity for Solar Power Device.
Sale Price
10% of 16.9 million Price Sensitivity TTL Revenue Margin Margin %
1,960,000 $ 50.00 $ 98,000,000.00 $ 24,500,000.00 25%
1,960,000 $ 45.00 $ 88,200,000.00 $ 19,404,000.00 22%
1,960,000 $ 40.00 $ 78,400,000.00 $ 15,680,000.00 20%
1,960,000 $ 35.00 $ 68,600,000.00 $ 11,662,000.00 17%
Table by David TennantThe 2 15 nd P – Promotion
Discussion Case 2.2 (Refer to Table 2.2)
Your marketing team has performed the following analysis. The new product is a port￾able external battery device that can power your laptop computer for up to one full 
day. The unit can be charged using regular home electric current or using the sun 
(solar power) in about one hour. This device is smaller than competing devices (a little 
larger than a flash drive) and more versatile. The target market is college students, 
nationwide. The new product has been designed to be trendy, easy to use, and reason￾ably priced. There are approximately 19.6 million college students in the USA.
We will assume that 10% of the total number of students will purchase the product 
and that the average cost will be $50. Note that the margin (profit) declines per unit as 
price declines. Discussion questions for Case 2.1:
1. What are the advantages and disadvantages of this kind of modeling?
2. Why do you think margins per unit decline as the price drops?
3. Looking at the sale prices compared to margins (%), is $50 the best price? How do 
you know students will pay this amount for your product?
4. If 10% of students purchase your product the best-case scenario shows $98 million 
in revenue and profits of $24.5 million. The worst case is a profit margin of $11.662 
million. In your opinion, are these numbers realistic?
5. Do you think you will have competitors prior to reaching the maturity stage?
6. Is this type of analysis realistic?
7. What role would the engineering or R&D group play in this evaluation?
8. The chart above shows gross revenues and net profits. There is no mention of the 
cost of the product. What are some of the costs that would be involved? Can you 
determine from the chart above the total “costs” of the product?
The 2nd P – Promotion
The promotion of your new product is critical. And this is where marketing generally 
gets confused with sales. Promotion deals with how to get your product and its mes￾sage out to the public, ideally in front of your competitors. Promotion is where market￾ing creates value to customers, or even the perception of value.
In promoting your new product, you must think about segmentation. For example, 
in the previous discussion topic, it was determined that the initial target market was 
college students. This is an example of segmentation, which is one of marketing’s pri￾mary concerns. To whom will we direct our promotional efforts? Do you think the 
above device is attractive to more than college students (high school students, working 
professionals)?
Segmentation can assist tremendously with the promotion of your product. 
Segmentation allows one to identify groups of potential users of your product. Here 
are several ways we can segment the market (and there are probably more):
Geographic: different areas of the country may have different tastes. Heavy winter 
clothing in February is fine in the Northeastern United States, but buyers in Florida 
will not have much use for it, even in February. If a firm does business overseas, then 
preferences will be different in color, texture, and marketing. For example, certain 16 The Role of Marketing in Product Development
colors in North America symbolize happiness or purity; those same colors in other 
countries have the opposite meaning. Doing business overseas means one must be 
familiar with that country’s culture, history, ethnicity, and general preferences.
Demographic – Your target market may be grouped by gender, age, income, race, 
and other factors. For example, Ferrari considers high (very high)-income people their 
primary target. Tickets to professional sports venues can appeal to a variety of income 
groups. Box seats, or those closest to the home plate, will charge a premium. Lower 
cost seats will be in the upper reaches of a stadium, further away from the home plate. 
Everyone is going to the ball game, but where you wish to sit determines your cost.
Behavioral – Some groups of people will consider a product in a variety of perspec￾tives. Some of these approaches will be similar. For example, everyone uses milk, but 
people have different perspectives. Those who are diet conscious may prefer to buy 2% 
(less fat); children might prefer chocolate milk, those who are vegan will prefer soy 
milk. Your target market can be divided into multiple subsets.
The 3rd P – Pricing
In most companies, it is the marketing group that determines pricing and margins 
using spreadsheets, pro forma models, market analyses, and other techniques. In 
many instances, new product development costs may involve significant capital spend￾ing. Capital spending usually involves depreciating the costs over time and detailed 
models projecting costs and revenues over time are common.
Several techniques that can assist in determining price can also include competitor 
analysis and focus groups. If you know what your competitor’s charge for a similar 
product, you have a starting point. Can you charge less and still be profitable? Will 
your product be so innovative as to pass your competitor allowing you to charge more?
Customer focus groups can provide insight as to what people are willing to pay for 
your product. Generally, a focus group will consist of a dozen potential customers, 
selected by your company, that will be introduced to advance notice of your new prod￾uct. A few typical questions for your firm to ask includes:
● What features would you want in this product?
● Does this product fit your budget at $ ______.?
● What are your initial impressions?
● Do you like this more than the product you use now?
● If adding more features, what would you be willing to pay?
While a focus group can uncover many customers’ likes and dislikes, pricing is clearly 
one of those attributes. Further, a series of focus groups, usually four or five, will help 
present a clear picture of market acceptance, pricing, general appeal, etc. Similar to 
market segmentation, focus groups can also be segmented with different groups 
according to income, age, etc.
In product development, there will always be costs to recover. Table 2.3 provides a 
listing of costs expended during development. Note that this is a general guide and is 
not an all-inclusive list.
All of the above costs must be recovered and reflected in the price of your product 
over time. It is important that a company recovers its development costs plus a margin; The 4 17 th P – Placement
otherwise, your product is not profitable. It is likely that cost and pricing sensitivity 
analysis will determine the maximum amount of dollars that can be expended and 
remain profitable in a competitive marketplace.
Figure 2.5 shows a typical break-even graph for a product. Break-even is the point at 
which sales revenue equals all the costs expended; and additional sales will generate a 
profit going forward.
The 4th P – Placement
Placement is concerned with how and where your product will be positioned in the 
marketplace. As an example, Microsoft Office® is popular software used by individuals 
and corporations. Twenty years ago, one could purchase this product at any office 
Table 2.3 Typical Costs Expended in Product Development.
● Quality – QAQC
● Testing services or lab time
● Travel expenses
● Regulatory compliance
● Legal
● Permitting
● Raw materials
● Marketing and advertising
● Corporate overhead 
● Labor
● Capital equipment
● Testing equipment
● Engineering
● R&D
● Equipment rentals
● Expendables
● Training
Table by David Tennant
Figure 2.5 Breakeven Point. Source: Corporate Finance Institute (2021) / with permission 
from CFI Education Inc.18 The Role of Marketing in Product Development
supply store (Office Max, Staples, online, etc.) and many of the major retailers such as 
BestBuy, Sam’s, and Costco. The product was a CD which downloaded the software 
onto your computer. Today, this product can be downloaded over the internet directly 
from Microsoft, BestBuy, Amazon, and other sites. Indeed, CDs have become techni￾cally obsolete as even music is now streamed or downloaded.
Another example is product placement in grocery stores. This is as much a science 
as an art. Grocery stores have significant research on customer buying habits and place 
products accordingly. For example, impulse buys such as candy, cold drinks, and gen￾eral interest magazines are located in the checkout lines near the cashier. Wandering 
along the soft drink aisle, the major drinks are placed primarily at eye level to catch 
shoppers’ attention. Some companies will pay for key product placement areas in the 
store. Finally, end-of-aisle displays are another location that customers always notice. 
Placement is important.
For software or services, how will this “product” be placed on the internet? This is 
where search engines can be useful. Google, Facebook and others have extensive mar￾ket research from tracking internet users. This is how they make their money: selling 
market research, commonly known as data analytics. They can provide data on how 
many people visit key websites, perform searches for products, and can segment this 
data for companies willing to pay for it. When placing your product or service on the 
web, they can also help your firm target your demographic or geographic 
preferences.
Placement is key to getting your potential customers to notice your new product, 
whether a hard product of software based. The internet can help your new product get 
“placed” and increase your chances of success, assuming your product has appeal 
(demand).
The Business Case
The purpose of the business case (sometimes called a business plan) is to assist the 
executive team and Board of Directors make an informed decision. A business case is 
a detailed analysis of a new plan of action: proposing a merger or acquisition, develop￾ing a new product, or adding a new business unit to the company. It is generally a 
collaborative effort between several functional areas of the company, i.e., accounting, 
marketing, engineering, etc. In the technical or engineering world, it may be called a 
feasibility study, but the concepts are the same.
What is contained in a business case and why do we need one? Before a company 
invests millions of dollars into a product, merger, etc., it needs assurance that the ven￾ture will be profitable, makes sense from a strategic “fit” standpoint, and will enhance 
a company’s competitive position. Table 2.4 summarizes key topics usually included in 
(but not limited to) a business case.
A note of caution: business cases usually have best case timelines and cost esti￾mates. Many times, budgets, and schedules are assigned based on these estimates. 
However, these sometimes turn out to be unrealistic. Budgets and schedules should 
be refined with greater detail after formal approval during the project planning 
phase.The Roles of Marketing and Engineering in Product Development 19
It is appropriate to note that investors and shareholders are generally risk averse. 
The business case is intended to provide a comfort level to decision makers; and to 
show that significant thought and research has been conducted to ensure the venture 
will be profitable. Companies that do not perform a business case for new ventures are 
taking unnecessary risks.
The Roles of Marketing and Engineering in Product 
Development
Someone from either department may serve as the project leader. However, the two 
groups generally have differing perspectives on priorities and timing which can lead to 
conflict.
Beyond the product, the marketing team is concerned with revenue, profitability, 
placement, and all of the previous topics discussed in this chapter. As a result, the 
marketing leader will be schedule-driven and concerned about containing costs. 
Remember, all of the costs of product development must be recaptured in the prod￾uct’s pricing. Therefore, this can translate into a perception of impatience by other 
departments.
Engineering on the other hand, is focused on designing, testing, and delivering a 
product that is error free (a definition of “quality” by the way). By training and educa￾tion, technical professionals have a tendency to downplay fast-tracked schedules and 
to a lesser extent, budget adherence. To the engineering leader, having a flawless (or 
“perfect”) design and manufacturing process is more important.
Consequently, the groups have differing perspectives and accountabilities, but are 
charged with coordinating their efforts to deliver a new product. Table 2.5 shows these 
differing priorities.
Regardless of which team is leading the development effort, a certain amount of ten￾sion can be beneficial in forward progress. There will always be “give and take” in the 
design process. Figure 2.6, Product Development Process Flow, shows a sample pro￾cess flow in the development of new products. This can vary between companies, but 
it provides a general sense that the development of new products is not a random 
series of actions, but rather, has well-defined steps with checks and balances along 
the way.
Table 2.4 Business Case Contents.
● Summary and Introduction
● Objectives
● Description of new product/project
● Why should the company do this (what is driving this 
effort)?
● Cost-benefit analysis (ROI, NPV) 
● Legal and regulatory issues
● Estimate costs and timeline
● Resources needed
● Social implications
● Alternatives considered
● Recommendations 
Table developed by David Tennant20 The Role of Marketing in Product Development
The role of the product manager is to provide leadership to the project. This includes:
● Ensuring the team has the tools, training, and support needed to be successful
● Resolving conflict and building team morale
● Coordinating the efforts of various departments working on the project
● Serving as a conduit of information between groups
● Serving as a direct link between the project team, executive leadership and external 
suppliers
● Ensuring trust and a good working relationship between team members
● Being cognizant of project quality, budgets and schedules
● Ensuring all stakeholders are identified and key stakeholders are kept informed.
Table 2.5 Marketing vs. Engineering Focus in New Product Development.
Marketing Engineering
● Cost conscious in meeting budgets, ROI 
(Return on investment)
● Schedule compression
● Developing advertising campaign
● Freezing design
● Changes saved for next release (V2.0)
● Anxious to beat competitors to market 
(first to market gets market share) 
● Desire to do it right the first time
● Changes to improve product are necessary for 
success
● Schedule slips are acceptable with justification
● Budget is important, but having a quality 
product is more important
● Testing and Quality Control are paramount
● Scope changes are part of the process 
Table developed by David Tennant
Product Design
Confirm 
concept and 
objectives
Engineering
• Technology
• Modeling
• Materials specs
• Prototype design
• Ergonomics
• Design for costs, 
quality, function and
manufacturability
Detailed Design
• Drawings
• Support
• Quality 
Interface with:
• Quality (QA)
• Manufacturing
• Legal
Prototype
& Testing
Yes
No
Redesign
Manufacturing
Continuous
Improvement
Figure 2.6 PD Process Flow. Credits: Diagram by David TennantNew Product Development and Market Economics: The Future of Electric Trucks vs Costs and Public Policy 21
A product manager must be an active project participant and cannot ignore conflict, 
warning signs of failure, or the desires of key stakeholders. The role, whether from 
engineering or marketing (or any other department), is focused on managerial and 
leadership skills more than technical skills.
Marketing Services
Although services can be thought of as a product, they must be marketed differently. 
When you buy a new computer or smart phone, you can look at it, feel if, and hold it; 
perhaps even try it out to see how you like it. If you purchase the product and don’t like 
it, you can usually return it for a refund or exchange.
Services are different. For example, if you provide accounting services to clients, it’s 
an intangible service. You cannot feel, smell, see, taste, or try it out. You may or may 
not get a refund if you’re unhappy with the result.
Like any product, one must obtain user input. What would a customer like to see in 
the way of customer service? Would guarantees of satisfaction make the product more 
desirable? What is the outcome if your client purchases the service (Benefit)?
Also, the use of data analytics can be useful. What are data analytics? Data analytics 
is a process to analyze raw data so that conclusions may be drawn from that informa￾tion. In today’s technical world, a lot of the data can be analyzed using automation and 
algorithms. Data analytics can help manufacturing identify and remove roadblocks. It 
can help firms become more efficient in their business processes.
However, for services, it can also help a business understand their customers, and 
therefore improve their marketing campaigns, personalizing of their services and 
improve their products. This data can be collected from historical records or from 
customers directly. For example, a utility can pull up data from their customers 
showing electric use patterns, payment options used, and time of day peaks in elec￾tric use. This data can be segmented. From this data, new rates (a service) can be 
derived and offered to their customers. Other sources of data include companies in 
the marketplace that collect and sell data. Think about your web browser capturing 
you internet trail. They know when you’re most active (time of day), the types of 
sites you typically visit and what kinds of purchases you make online. For example, 
data analytics may be able to track and tell what music sites you visit, what topics 
you watch on YouTube (history videos for example), and what types of car accesso￾ries you like to purchase.
Services must have a different marketing strategy and data analytics can help a busi￾ness hone their message, offer new services, help segment their market, and determine 
which online platforms would be most effective.
New Product Development and Market Economics: The 
Future of Electric Trucks vs Costs and Public Policy
In the United States, electric vehicles (EVs), account for 2% of new car sales (2021). 
However, that number is expected to rise to 30% or more in the next 10 years. It is com￾monly known that cars are evolving from the internal combustion engine (IC) to electric 22 The Role of Marketing in Product Development
motors. EVs are slowly seeing greater acceptance in the marketplace. Along those same 
lines, large trucks are also moving in this direction, but the outlook isn’t as clear.
This shift in transportation offers opportunity, rewards, and risks for companies 
looking to profit from this disruptive technology. This section will focus on EV trucks 
as a viable market opportunity.
Public Policy
A number of countries have mandated that the IC engine will no longer be sold in new 
vehicles by the year 2030. This includes several European and Asian countries. The 
United States, in comparison, has not mandated a ban on ICs, but has public policies 
that push the USA in this direction. For example, there are significant tax credits (sav￾ings) for individuals and corporations who purchase alternative fuel vehicles. At the 
same time, taxes on existing fuels (gasoline and diesel) have been rising (increasing 
operating costs).
Consequently, the market is steadily moving from traditional fossil fuels to cleaner, 
alternative-fueled vehicles. For large-rig Semi trucks, the waters are a little murkier. 
For instance, the long haulers would need a range of 400 miles and a network of charg￾ing stations along the way. However, how long will it take to charge an 18-wheeler? If 
more than 30 minutes, this could be a barrier to entry. Also, the trucking industry has 
also been looking at natural gas-powered vehicles and hydrogen powered vehicles.
From a new product development standpoint, the market seems to be a moving tar￾get. In the United States, there are eight basic classifications of trucks as follows:7
Classes 1 through 3: light, non-commercial trucks such as pickups, SUVs, and 
minivans
Classes 4 through 6: medium-sized commercial trucks.
● Class 4 – Gross vehicle weight is between 14,001 lb. to 16,000 lb. Super duty pickups 
and walk-in box trucks fit this description.
● Class 5 – Gross vehicle weight is between 16,001 lb. to 19,500 lb. This class includes 
larger commercial walk-in trucks, delivery trucks and bucket trucks.
● Class 6 – Gross vehicle weight is between 19,501 lb. to 26,000 lb. School buses, 
weighing will generally fit into this category. Class 6 is also where a Commercial 
Driver’s License requirement appears. This also includes delivery trucks (UPS, Fed 
Ex, etc.).
Classes 7 and 8 are generally the big rig trucks, as follows:
● Class 7 – Gross vehicle weight is 26,001 lb. to 33,000 lb. These trucks are city street 
sweepers, garbage trucks, large buses, furniture trucks and smaller semi-trucks.
● Class 8 – generally “severe duty” trucks such as dump trucks, cement trucks and the 
large semis such as Peterbilt’s, Freightliner’s, and Kenworth’s. Many of these trucks 
have three axles (or more) and weigh over 33,001 lb. Some of the larger rigs can 
weigh up to 80,000 lb.
All the above classes of vehicles have prototype or production models using batteries 
and electric motors in place of IC engines or diesel motors – even the large Freightliner 
trucks. However, the adoption and use of truck EVs is far from certain and economics 
plays a huge role in its future.New Product Development and Market Economics: The Future of Electric Trucks vs Costs and Public Policy 23
For instance, small trucks, pickups etc. are now available to the public in EV con￾figuration. The Ford F-150 truck, one of the most popular trucks on the U.S. market, is 
now available using electric motors in place of the IC engine.
The determination of electric motors will be driven by vehicle usage combined with 
the initial cost and operational costs.
For example, Categories 1 through 3 and 4 through 6 trucks will be suitable for use 
during the day and charging at night. This is most likely a strong market for truck EV 
sales.
Delivery trucks such as those used by UPS and Fed Ex are good candidates as they 
are delivering during the day and parked (for re-charging) over night. School buses 
would be similar as they pick up and discharge children in the morning and late after￾noon; then are parked overnight. The initial cost of electric vehicles is higher than 
traditional IC engines, so usage will play a large part. Table 2.6 show data on average 
annual miles driven.
If we consider the United States Postal Service (USPS), their full fleet of delivery 
trucks uses 85 million gallons of fuel per year.3
 The current average price for gasoline 
(July 2021) is $3.22, so annual fuel costs for the whole USPS delivery fleet would be:
85 million gallons × $3.22 per gal = $273.7 million dollars annual fuel costs.
One EV USPS delivery truck electricity cost: 
212,000 trucks × $408 = $86,496,000. This means, operationally, USPS could save 
about $187 million per year in fuel costs by switching to EVs. Of course, this does not 
consider the following:
Additional Costs
● Capital costs to install electric charging stations
● The initial higher cost of EV trucks
Cost Savings
● Federal tax credits for switching to EVs
● Significantly lower maintenance costs (primarily tires and brakes).
There are approximately 212,000 vehicles in the delivery fleet. The USPS fleet would 
be an optimal target for EV sales as they are out for delivery during the day and back 
to the fleet station to charge overnight.
5,100 × 1 × = $408 / yr. mi
Yr
$ 0.08
kWh
kWh
mi
Table 2.6 Truck Category Average Annual Miles.2
Category Average Annual Miles Driven
Delivery truck (e.g., UPS) 12,500
School bus 11,000
City transit bus 42,000
Class 8 semi-truck 63,000
Postal Service (USPS) long-life trucks 5,10024 The Role of Marketing in Product Development
There are many opportunities for companies looking to affiliate with the coming EV 
market. Table 2.7, on New EV Opportunities, outlines a few of them.
Note that disruptive technologies can provide opportunities for new business creations 
in the areas of new products, product support, spin-off businesses, and jobs. Federal, state, 
and local areas consider subsidies as a positive feature for the following reasons:
● Subsidies are used to move the economy from one form of business to another. In 
the case of EVs, from a polluting energy fuel to a cleaner fuel source.
● It creates jobs, and therefore economic activity and a tax base.
● New technologies keep industry competitive at home and abroad.
The above table lists just a few of the opportunities that EV vehicles will offer to 
large companies and entrepreneurs alike. There will be many spin-off companies as a 
resulting shift in transportation focus.
Other Marketing Considerations
It must be emphasized that numbers on paper always look optimistic and tough ques￾tions should be asked in our market evaluation for both cars and trucks. Consider the 
following:
With both cars and trucks growing in popularity, this means the utility electric system, 
the “grid,” will see additional loads. In the United States, the grid system is not entirely 
consistent. In the Southeast, there is ample excess power, so straining the system is not 
considered an issue for the short term. Longer term planning will certainly be needed.
Table 2.7 Potential New EV Opportunities.
Opportunity Companies or Industries
Charging station 
manufacturers and installers
Siemens, General Electric, Tesla, and many others.
Truck stops and gas 
(charging) stations
All along highways and secondary roads, a new, extensive 
network of charging stations will be required. Current gas 
stations, malls, and restaurants are likely users.
Utilities EV charging may represent large electric sales in off-peak 
(overnight) hours. This may increase the need for new (but 
cleaner), power plants.
Manufacturers and dealers All car and truck manufacturers and their dealer networks will 
be on the forefront of EV technology implementation.
Battery manufacturers Those firms that will supply auto/truck makers with new 
lithium or similar batteries.
Battery recycling With more and larger batteries on the road, at some point there 
will be a need to recycle or safely dispose of car/truck batteries.
Rare mineral extraction 
companies (i.e., lithium)
Most EV car batteries use lithium as a core component. Lithium 
is not common in all countries and there are a limited number 
of companies in this specific mining extraction business.
Home builders and 
electrical contractors
EV will require car charging stations in both existing homes 
and new homes. This represents a lucrative business 
opportunity.
Table developed by David Tennant.Table 2.8 Utility Model EV costs.
Fleet 
Type
Number 
of 
Vehicles
Daily 
Miles 
Driven
Miles 
Driven 
per 
Month
Daily 
kWh 
Used
Monthly 
kWh 
Used
Electric 
Range 
(miles) 
Charger 
Type
Battery 
Size 
(kWh)
Acceptance 
Rate of 
(kW)
Charging 
Time 
Frame
Number 
of 
Charging 
Hours 
(Empty 
to Full 
Charge)
Energy 
Consumption 
Rates (kWh/
mile)
Average 
Power 
Demand 
(kW/
hour)
Fleet’s 
Cost-$/
kWh
Fleet’s 
Electric 
Cost 
per 
Month
Gas 
Cost $/
Gallon
Miles/
Gallon
Fuel 
Cost 
per 
Month
Light 
(Up to 
8,500 
lbs. 
GVW)
1 50 1500 20 600 338 Level 2 135 15 Overnight 9.0 0.4 2.22 $0.08 $48 $3.50 17.00 $309
Medium 
(8,501-
26,000 
lbs. 
GVW)
1 100 3000 100 3000 200 DC Fast 
Charger
200 120 Overnight 4.0 1 25.00 $0.08 $240 $3.50 10.00 $1,050
Heavy 
(Over 
26,000 
lbs. 
GVW) 
1 125 3750 250 7500 300 DC fast 
Charger
600 100 Overnight, 
Mid-route
4.0 2 62.5 $0.08 $600 $3.50 8.00 $1,641
Spreadsheet courtesy of Cobb EMC.26 The Role of Marketing in Product Development
Some areas of the country, primarily on the West Coast, utilities may struggle to 
meet this new demand without building new power plant capacity. How does this 
impact your marketing targets for EVs of any kind? Further, California has designated 
that only zero emission cars can be sold beginning in 2035. How will this impact the 
electrical system? How will this impact utilities, car dealers, and most of all, the resi￾dents of California? What does this mean if you are a car dealer in California? If you’re 
an entrepreneur, does this open an opportunity?
Many utilities have been shifting from coal to cleaner forms of energy, primarily 
natural gas, solar and wind power. If the price of natural gas increases (while the price 
of gasoline might decrease), what are the implications? As a marketing professional, 
does this make you rethink the opportunities or do alternative opportunities arise?
Most likely, a marketing group would develop several models (that is, an Excel 
spreadsheet) that consider the implications for various increases or decreases in the 
price of gasoline vs. the price of electricity. To some extent, the regulatory issues are 
out of your control, but one would expect the impacted parties: utilities, car dealers, 
and the public would offer opinions to their elected officials.
In the Southeast, a number of utilities are employing various modeling techniques 
based on anticipated adoption of EVs (refer to Table 2.8). Some of the questions to 
consider include:
● Current EV use is 2% of the total car market. What strain, if any, does this produce 
on the electric system if that use rapidly accelerates to 10%? 20%? 30%?
● How much additional power would be needed in the next 10 to 20 years?
● If new electric generating stations are needed, what kind of fuel should be consid￾ered? Nuclear? Alternative (wind, solar), natural gas?
● It takes anywhere from two years (wind, solar), to five years (natural gas) to 14 years 
(nuclear) to build specific types of generation. When should we start planning for 
new construction?
● Where should these plants be located (usually near a water source)?
● In which direction is the regulatory wind blowing regarding fuel choice?
● What is the impact if rural areas do not adopt EVs, but large cities do?
Electric Vehicle Discussion Questions
1. As a manufacturer of new Semi trucks, where should your development efforts be 
focused? Electric? Natural gas? Hydrogen?
2. For electric trucks, this means that the national electric grid must be able to support 
millions of vehicles charging simultaneously overnight. Some areas of the country 
have plenty of power to support EVs; other areas are short and are struggling to 
provide power during normal and peak periods. How does this factor into your 
company’s products?
3. Public policy can change. With each election cycle, changes mean that public poli￾cies regarding the environment can change. Is it possible have a voice or influence 
so that alternative vehicles are more fully supported through legislation?
Chapter Key Points
● Strategic planning is important as it charts a company’s path to future profitability.
● Marketing and Sales are different disciplines. Marketing is concerned with the four 
Ps; sales is concerned with obtaining new customers and contracts.New Product Development and Market Economics: The Future of Electric Trucks vs Costs and Public Policy 27
● The four Ps include Product, Promotion, Pricing, and Profits.
● Product development includes four stages: Introduction, Growth, Maturity, Decline.
● It is common for companies to use spreadsheet models to determine costs, pricing, 
profitability, using sensitivity analysis.
● Breakeven point is where all development costs have been recovered and profitabil￾ity of the new product starts.
● A business case analyses a new product’s feasibility, potential in the marketplace, 
SWOT review, and other factors. This can also be called a business plan or feasibility 
study. Its results are used by senior management to make a decision (go or no-go).
● Marketing and Engineering sometimes have different goals and accountabilities. 
This can lead to organizational conflict.
● The role of Product Manager is a leadership position.
Discussion Questions
1. The project leader has an important role. While all of the below are important, 
which is the most important and why:
a. Communications
b. Integrity and trust
c. Conflict resolution
2. Some companies believe that a Product Development Manager must have strong 
technical skills. Is this true? Why or why not?
3. What value does the Marketing Group bring to the product development effort?
4. If the cost of each new product is $40, and our company expects margins of 25%, 
should we price our product at $50? Why or why not?
5. One of the costs that may be in our product’s development is legal costs. What 
kind of legal activities would be incurred?
6. Why is it important to know the break-even point?
7. What are methods to anticipate customer demand and pricing?
8. Projects should always exist to support the corporation’s strategy. Why?
9. Once products have reached the decline stage in the product lifecycle, they 
become a commodity. Is this true? What is a commodity?
10. All costs in a product’s development should be recovered in the first year of a 
product’s sale in the marketplace. Is this a good strategy? Why or why not?
Answers to Case 2.1 Discussion Questions – Kodak
1. As a large, successful US company, Kodak was once a “dogs of the Dow” firm listed 
on this stock exchange. It could be argued that Kodak’s management was unwilling 
to change or consider new ideas to displace or augment its line of film products. 
What does this tell us about the role of innovation in a company?
This case should reinforce the need for companies to continuously develop new prod￾ucts. This could also be an effort to update existing products.
2. With the advantage of twenty-twenty hindsight, it is easy to criticize Kodak’s lack 
of foresight or imagination. However, it is likely that past success blinded Kodak to 
the future of film. This might be categorized as a resistance to change, which is 
found in most large corporations; it becomes part of the corporate culture.
If you are in a senior level position – at any company – how would you work to 
change the corporate culture?28 The Role of Marketing in Product Development
Changing the corporate culture is extremely difficult from middle or even senior man￾agement levels within a company. Corporate culture describes “Who we are” as a com￾pany. Generally, when the Board of Directors recognize a company is stagnating, they 
usually bring in a new CEO to turn things around or go in a different direction. Even 
with new leadership, it will still be difficult to move change through the company’s 
ranks. This is why new CEOs will many times clean house at the senior levels and 
bring in people they can trust to implement change.
It is unlikely anyone below the CEO can implement change; and most executives 
with any powers of observation will see deterioration of a company’s position, and 
several will probably leave long before a new CEO takes over.
3. What role should the marketing department have played in this long-term decline?
The role of marketing is to be aware of industry trends, provide input to the corpora￾tions strategic planning, and generate new ideas and products to keep the company in 
front of its competitors.
4. From a managerial standpoint, what are the challenges when a company is in 
decline?
Once a company is on a downward spiral, it presents serious managerial issues:
● There is a rush to maintain revenues, which means more pressure on salespeople.
● R&D is pressured to devise new products for the market – and quickly. This leads to 
mistakes or the wrong products at the wrong time.
● Once the decline is noticed by employees, the best people – those who have the skills 
to land a new job fast – are the first ones out the door. The firm is then left with the 
“B Team” to perform a company turnaround.
● A publicly held company, such as Kodak, will face mounting pressure from analysts 
and shareholders to “do something.”
● Publications like the Wall Street Journal and others will start to cover the firm’s 
issues, putting more pressure on management.
● If the senior leadership of the team cannot think more creatively, the Board of 
Directors may replace the CEO (and other executives) with new leadership.
● From a marketing perspective, customer needs and wants should be determined 
quickly and action taken. It should have been noticed by the marketing team much 
earlier that film was going to become obsolete with digital cameras. Would senior 
management have listened?
Answers to Discussion Case 2.2 – Portable Battery Unit
Sale Price
10% of 16.9 million Price Sensitivity TTL Revenue Margin Margin %
1,960,000 $ 50.00 $ 98,000,000.00 $ 24,500,000.00 25%
1,960,000 $ 45.00 $ 88,200,000.00 $ 19,404,000.00 22%
1,960,000 $ 40.00 $ 78,400,000.00 $ 15,680,000.00 20%
1,960,000 $ 35.00 $ 68,600,000.00 $ 11,662,000.00 17%New Product Development and Market Economics: The Future of Electric Trucks vs Costs and Public Policy 29
1. What are the advantages and disadvantages of this kind of modeling?
It is acceptable to build models that can look at different scenarios. While the model 
above is somewhat simplistic, most companies use very sophisticated models to predict 
sales, margins, etc. The advantages include evaluating different market acceptance 
scenarios and its impact on revenues and margins.
Disadvantages include the possibility that market acceptance may be way off target, 
impacting costs and revenues. Further, the true costs of the product should be as accu￾rate as possible to obtain realistic outcomes.
2. Why do you think margins per unit decline as the price drops?
There could be several reasons for this.
● Efficiencies of production ($/unit) tend to be beneficial at higher levels of product 
manufacturing. These efficiencies typically drop as the units produced decrease.
● Most likely, suppliers of raw materials provide volume discounts, so less raw mate￾rial ordered will result in higher material costs.
● The fixed costs of production (salaries, overheads, etc.) are being absorbed by fewer 
units of production.
3. Looking at the sale prices compared to margins (%), is $50 the best price? How do 
you know students will pay this amount for your product?
In this case, we do not know that $50 is the best price. It will provide the most profita￾bility if we can sell almost two million units, but there is no guarantee for that level of 
market demand. Also, consider their target market, students, whom are very price 
sensitive. The best way to determine the selling price is to conduct focus groups with the 
target market.
4. If 10% of students purchase your product the best-case scenario shows $98 million 
in revenue and profits of $24.5 million. Worst case is profit margin of $11.662 mil￾lion. In your opinion, are these numbers realistic?
If those sales goals are obtained, the numbers are a good approximation. However, 
this cannot be considered absolute. What if we find some areas of the country will pay 
$50, but other areas only $30? This model will most likely need to be very dynamic 
with frequent updates on sales, costs, and revenues. And perhaps parsed to address 
different market acceptance across geographic areas or income levels.
5. Do you think you will have competitors prior to reaching the maturity stage?
If the product “takes off” it will only be a matter of time before competitors appear. 
This may happen prior to the maturity stage but is hard to predict. It will depend, to 
some degree, on how technically difficult the product is to copy.
6. Is this type of analysis realistic?
Model building to approximate sales and revenue is very common. However, the flaw 
in this model is the assumption that 10% of the total student population will buy the 
new product. Some considerations:
● If only 1% of the student population accepts the product, it could be a money loser
● If 20% accept, we would perceive this as a good thing. However, at 20% acceptance, 
this means manufacturing would need to produce twice as many units to meet 
demand: 4 million units instead of 2 million. Can manufacturing meet this? Can we 
get the raw materials at the price and time needed? Can we distribute that much 
product in a timely and efficient manner?30 The Role of Marketing in Product Development
This type of analysis is very common, but fraught with potential errors. As mentioned 
previously, focus groups can provide valuable insights and help prevent the above 
dilemmas. First, focus groups will provide a more realistic answer to what students 
would actually be willing to pay for the proposed product. Further, this will also pro￾vide some insights as to whether students think this is a product they really need (or 
want) and can use. Students are very price sensitive, so any product competing for 
their dollars must offer value (or the perception of value).
To make assumptions of market acceptance based on total student population and 
a blanket target rate is very risky and is probably unrealistic.
7. What role would the engineering or R&D groups play in this evaluation?
The marketing department would be the most qualified to develop pricing, distribu￾tion, and margin scenarios (remember the 4 Ps). However, based on marketing 
research and studies, the results can have a direct impact on R&D and engineering. 
Some items to consider include:
● If students are only willing to pay $30 per unit, can a cheaper model be produced? 
R&D will look for alternative technologies or develop new ones. It may also include 
reducing some of the features of the unit in order to reduce costs/price.
● Engineering will work closely with marketing and R&D. Can less expensive materi￾als be used, but still provide a quality product? Can we consider how the units are 
produced for more efficient methods? Can batch production be used rather than a 
continuous run? Can we find a supplier (or multiple suppliers) that can provide 
similar raw materials at lower cost?
8. The table above shows gross revenues and net profits. There is no mention of the 
cost of the product. What are some of the costs that would be involved? Can you 
determine from the chart above the total “costs” of the product?
The chart does not provide any indication of product costs. Some of the costs to be 
included in the product’s price include:
● Cost of raw materials
● R&D and engineering design costs
● Manufacturing costs: fixed and variable
● Overheads: salaries of employees, benefits, legal department, sales group, etc.
● Costs of distribution (transport of product to stores)
● Marketing and PR (advertising)
● Intellectual property (royalty payments?).
If these costs can be spread over a large number of units, the cost per unit will be low 
and the margin per unit will be higher. Spreading cost recovery over a longer time 
frame will also be beneficial (say three years instead of one).
Answers to Discussion Questions
1. The project leader has an important role. While all of the below are important, 
which is the most important and why:
a. Communications
b. Integrity and trust
c. Conflict resolution?New Product Development and Market Economics: The Future of Electric Trucks vs Costs and Public Policy 31
While each answer is important, the correct answer is b. A project or product man￾ager is a leadership role, and one of the principal hallmarks of leadership is trust. 
This will be of high importance in leading a product development team to 
success.
2. Some companies believe that a Product Development Manager must have strong 
technical skills. Is this true? Why or why not?
The Product Manager will need leadership and managerial expertise more that tech￾nical expertise. The PM should expect to have technical subject matter experts (SME) 
assigned to the team. The required PMs skills include vision and focus on the objec￾tives, strong communications and relationship building up and down the organiza￾tion, managerial excellence, ability to track budgets and schedules, and the ability to 
resolve conflict. There are additional skills that could be listed, but these are the 
fundamentals.
3. What value does the Marketing Group bring to the product development effort?
● Marketing may assign a Product Manager to lead the development effort
● Marketing tracks industry trends and determines the 4 Ps
● Marketing will develop pricing/margin scenario spreadsheets
● Marketing will determine the break-even point
● It is likely that marketing will work with the finance group to determine NPV and 
other financial metrics
4. If the cost of each new product is $40, and our company expects margins of 25%, 
should we price our product at $50? Why or why not?
At a cost of $40 and a selling price of $50, the required 25% margin will be realized. 
However, there is no guarantee that $50 will be accepted by the market. If the price, for 
example, must be dropped to $45 to sell, then the required margin will not be met. The 
company would then need to determine if a 20% margin is acceptable or find ways to 
cut costs so that the required profitability can be obtained.
5. One of the costs that may be in our product’s development is legal costs. What kind 
of legal activities would be in our budget?
The legal department, depending on the product, may have a very key role to play in 
product development. Some of the activities may include:
● Developing and reviewing contracts with suppliers
● Submitting patents for the new product(s)
● Determining intellectual property ownership and if royalties will be paid
● Registering trademarks or copyrights
● Outlining contracts or guidelines for product distribution rights
● Advising the product team and senior management of potential legal (product lia￾bility) or regulatory issues.
6. Why is it important to know the break-even point?
Breakeven is related to profitability and NPV (net present value). It is important to 
know the breakeven point (the point where all costs are recovered, and the new prod￾uct is profitable):
● If the breakeven point is too long (say 10 years), this may not be acceptable and 
prove to be a money-losing product.32 The Role of Marketing in Product Development
● A long breakeven point will give competitors time to catch up and almost guaran￾tee that your product will never meet margins.
● Each company is unique and will determine what is an acceptable breakeven 
based on time, NPV, costs, and price.
7. What are methods to anticipate customer demand and pricing?
● Customer focus groups.
● Brand and reputation of company
Note that brand recognition can offer the perception of quality, thereby allowing a 
higher selling price.
● Evaluating market acceptance based on similar products from competitors.
● Studying history of previously released products by your company. This may pro￾vide insight into pricing and market acceptance.
8. Projects should always exist to support the corporation’s strategy. Why?
The company develops a strategy, or long-term plan, to remain profitable. The cor￾poration issues new products that capitalize on its strengths. Consequently, all activi￾ties: projects, new product development, etc. should support the corporation’s 
strategy. If a new product is not part of the strategic plan, why should it be funded or 
supported?
9. Once products have reached the decline stage in the product lifecycle, they 
become a commodity. Is this true? What is a commodity?
In the traditional sense, commodities are defined as base or raw materials. This 
includes items such as oil, wheat, sugar, gold, etc. These are considered primary com￾modities. However, secondary commodities include products that are produced 
using primary commodities, such as gasoline and plastics from oil, cereal and bread 
from wheat, etc. Commodities, unprocessed, are placed into three categories: agricul￾ture, energy, and metals.
To a lesser degree, products once they reach their maximum potential may be 
called a commodity, but this is not in the strict definition. This basically means that 
a product in “commodity” status is simply not able to command a high price and 
must compete with many other producers.
10. All costs in a product’s development should be recovered in the first year of a 
product’s sale in the marketplace. Is this a good strategy? Why or why not?
This is an unrealistic expectation. The goal, of course, is to recover all costs and meet 
the breakeven point as quickly as possible. For more sophisticated products – e.g., 
newly developed cars (Tesla, for example), sophisticated electronics, and specialized 
applications (medical equipment) – the breakeven point will be longer. It is up to 
each company to determine an appropriate time frame to recover costs and become 
profitable.
It is safe to assume that most companies will not expect cost recovery in the first 
year.
References
1 Innolytics.AG https://innolytics-innovation.com/what-is-innovation.
2 Fortune 500, Full List 1980, https://archive.fortune.com/magazines/fortune/
fortune500_archive/full/1980.Bibliography 33
3 Fortune 500, Full List 2020, https://fortune.com/fortune500/2020/search.
4 Ty Haqqi, Yahoo Finance, 3 August 2020, https://finance.yahoo.com/news/10-most￾profitable-companies-america-215951022.html.
5 Photosecrets.com, viewed 20 August 2020; https://www.photosecrets.com/
the-rise-and-fall-of-kodak.
6 Yahoo Finance, viewed 20 August 2021, https://finance.yahoo.com/quote/
KODK?p=KODK.
7 Fullbay, Making Sense of Truck Classification, viewed 3 August 2021, https://www.
fullbay.com/blog/truck-classification.
Bibliography
Aaker, D. (1998). Strategic Marketing Management, 5th e. John Wiley and Sons.
Belz, A. (2011). Product Development. McGraw-Hill.
Cooper, R. (2011). Winning at New Products. New York: Basic Books.
Grewal, D. and Levy, M. (2018). Marketing, 6th e. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education.
Hubspot Blog post. https://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/product-life-cycle. (viewed 10 
August 2021).
Norman, D. (2013). The Design of Everyday Things. New York: Basic Books.
Patel, N. https://neilpatel.com/blog/product-life-cycle (viewed 15 August 2021).
Patterson, G. (2012). Million Dollar Blind Spots. Issaquah, WA: AudioInk Publishing. 35
Product Development: An Engineer’s Guide to Business Considerations, Real-World Product Testing, and 
Launch, First Edition. David V. Tennant. 
© 2022 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2022 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
3
The Role of the Engineering Group in Product 
Development
First, it is important to recognize what a product development engineer does. Typically, 
the product engineer must have a four-year degree in engineering. The role can encom￾pass different types of engineering. Initially, when manufacturing was a huge part of the 
economy, it would most likely be a mechanical or production engineer developing new 
products. Today, that role has expanded to include industrial engineers, computer engi￾neers, electrical engineers, and many similar technical disciplines.
Think about your everyday products such as tools, electronics such as computers, 
smart TVs, and your smartphone. Larger products include your car (and its compo￾nents: transmission, engine, body), the plane you fly in (Boeing, Airbus, Cessna, Piper, 
etc.), and common household products such as cleaning supplies, clothing, and even 
the food you eat are harvested or processed using machines designed by engineers.
Driving Products – the Engineering Perspective
In product development, there are a number of stakeholders that must be involved in 
the project. Typically, Marketing or Engineering will lead (or even co-lead) the project. 
Engineering is focused on designing, testing, and delivering a product. Engineering, by 
training, experience, and education will have a high focus on developing a high-qual￾ity product. What is quality?
There are many definitions:
Some describe it as simply meeting customer needs or expectations. Others 
describe Quality as “freedom from defects.”
The International Standards Organization (ISO) defines quality as:
The totality of characteristics of an entity that bears upon its ability to satisfy 
stated and implied needs.1
– ISO 9000
A product or service free from deficiencies.2
– American Society for Quality36 The Role of the Engineering Group in Product Development
The engineering team, as a matter of professional diligence, a “can-do” attitude, and 
pride of accomplishment, will always be concerned that the design is appropriate and 
of high quality. Engineers do not like to see their designs fail, or products that they 
have put much thought and creativity into become associated with a failed product. It 
is for this reason the engineering profession is held in high esteem by society. Science 
and engineering have been responsible for some of the greatest technical achieve￾ments in history: landing men on the moon, development of the internet, satellite 
communications, and functional infrastructure such as roads, bridges, water systems, 
the electrical grid, etc.
However, for purposes of product development, we need to think of quality as hav￾ing two distinct flavors: Product Quality and Managerial Quality. What does this 
mean? Fundamentally, a company cannot have success unless it has both technical 
and managerial excellence (quality). How good will the new product be if we have 
miscommunications, overrun the budget and schedule (moving toward financial fail￾ure), and fail to do robust testing during the product’s development? It is desired that 
the design, which is a form of technical planning, and project planning, which is a 
form of managerial planning, have high levels of quality. For managerial quality, this 
means robust teamwork, exceptional leadership, keeping stakeholders informed, etc. 
Project Managerial excellence, a key component of success, will be discussed further 
in Chapter 6, Product Initiation.
Engineering will include quality using the Quality Assurance (QA) and Quality 
Control (QC) processes. What is the difference?
QA is the overall quality program that will serve to confirm that quality processes 
and procedures are being followed. It is the overall umbrella for quality activities. This 
is the development of processes and audit procedures. QA will provide confidence that 
the product (or project) will meet relevant quality standards. This is generally consid￾ered a managerial function.
Some of the tools that can be utilized for QA include:
● Benchmarking: Compare current products with other, successful products
● Flowcharting: System flowcharts that illustrate how system elements are related
● Checklists
● Design of experiments to statistically determine the most desirable characteristics at 
a reasonable cost.
QC is a subset of QA and is the actual inspection and testing of the product during 
production. An example of this would be inspecting parts on the assembly line and 
removing those that do not meet specifications. Essentially, QC monitors the results to 
determine if they comply with relevant quality standards and identifying ways to elim￾inate causes of unsatisfactory performance, even going so far as to stop the production 
line until the root cause of the problem has been determined. QC is generally consid￾ered a technical function.
A few tools that can be used by QC include:
● Inspection
● Variable analysis
● Sampling
● Statistical probability techniques
● Control chartsEngineering Disciplines 37
There are always costs associated with a strong QA/QC program. Some of these 
include training, testing, audits, and controls (procedures and processes).
However, the costs of not having a robust QA/QC program can be much more 
expensive and may include scrapped parts, rework, warranty work (fixing defective 
products at company expense), product recalls, product liability lawsuits and damaged 
company reputation. This will lead to loss of revenue.
A control chart, such as that shown in Figure 3.1, indicates an upper and lower con￾trol limit. If the component being inspected is between these limits, it is acceptable, 
beyond these limits, it must be rejected.
It is important to note that customers will pay more for a product that is high in 
quality or even has the perception of quality. Consider, for instance, the luxury brands 
of automobiles. Some brands command very high prices for their reputation (whether 
deserved or not) of a quality product. Consequently, many companies promote their 
products in meeting quality or customer satisfaction ratings based on consumer 
research groups such as J.D. Powers™ and Consumer Reports™. Therefore, there is a 
strong link between Marketing and Quality.
In summary, quality must take a high priority in developing a successful product. 
For large or small companies, the lack of quality can lead to bankruptcy.
Engineering Disciplines
It is likely that several different engineering disciplines will be used in developing new 
products. Table 3.1 Description of Engineering Disciplines, lists the types of engineer￾ing areas that are in various fields of manufacturing, software, energy, aviation, trans￾portation, infrastructure, and product development.
Why is the distinction of engineering disciplines in the above table important? 
Primarily because on any project or new product development, there will be a variety 
of technical disciplines engaged. These disciplines will depend on the type of product 
under development.
For example, if we are developing a new wind turbine application, the following 
engineering talent would be involved:
Mechanical engineering: turbine gearing, materials of construction, fasteners, blade 
design, unit size, and location (best wind conditions).
0.25
0.188
0.125
0.0625
0
–0.0625
–0.125
–0.188
–0.25
12345678
0.0625
–0.064
–0.164
0.0938 (3/32”)
–0.0938 (3/32”)
0.061 0.064
–0.0625 (–2/32”)
(2/32”)
Lower Control Limit
Upper Control Limit
Inches
Sample Number
Dashed line = Average
0.166
0.0625
Figure 3.1 Control Chart. Figure by David Tennant38 The Role of the Engineering Group in Product Development
Table 3.1 Description of Engineering Disciplines.
Engineering Discipline Industries Served
Aeronautical 
engineering
National defense, general aviation, space programs
Industrial engineering Any environment in which production occurs; primarily concerned 
with efficiency of production, manufacturing flow, time and motion 
studies.
Computer engineering Computer engineers are focused on writing software code, testing, 
troubleshooting, developing new software, interfacing between devices 
and organizations. The last time you used your ATM card, computer 
algorithms and software ensured your card worked flawlessly.
Mechanical 
engineering
Generally involved with any type of mechanical product (engines, 
transmissions, etc.) and can be found in all industries including 
utilities, aerospace, manufacturing, biomedical, etc.
Electrical engineering Critical for the design of circuits in all products requiring electrical 
current: cars, airplanes, medical devices, computers, electronics, 
buildings, power plants and the national power grid (electrical 
transmission and distribution).
Chemical engineering Chemical engineers are focused on processes to produce chemicals, 
pharmaceuticals, biological products, food processing, alternative 
and primary fuels, adhesives, etc. It is desired to produce these 
products on an industrial scale in manufacturing facilities.
Production 
engineering
In any manufacturing facility, you will find production engineers. 
For example, in a light aircraft (or car) assembly plant, production 
engineers are concerned that the machines used to produce parts, 
seats, windshields, body panels, etc. are the correct machines, 
properly programmed, and running efficiently. They are always 
looking for ways to improve product manufacturing. For example, 
think of a soft drink can. This required set up with the proper 
machines, running at the right speed, and moving from one station 
to another without breakdowns or quality variation.
Biomedical 
engineering
Focused on using engineering principles to improved healthcare and 
associated devices (medical imaging, orthopedic implants, 
pacemakers, etc.).
Civil engineering Civil engineers focus on a broad array of applications including 
structures (supporting building columns, beams, etc.), dams, roads, 
and bridges.
Instrumentation and 
Controls engineering
I&C is a relatively new engineering specialty now recognized for its 
own applications. This includes factory automation, control of 
processes (power plants, chemical plants, water treatment, etc.), and 
building automation. Most processes are automated and computer 
controlled, which means that pumps, motors, compressors, turbines, 
and other large machinery are programmed and controlled with 
sensors and controllers from a software-based system. I&C engineers 
play a major role in specifying the computer controls and sensors 
(instrumentation) that will control the manufacturing process.
Additional engineering 
disciplines:
Nuclear, Packaging, Ocean/Marine, Petroleum, Mining, 
Agricultural, Health and Safety, and Environmental.
Table developed by David Tennant.The Engineering Process 39
Instrumentation and Controls engineering: Determines safe operating limits, how 
and when to start/stop the turbine, and interface with other turbines on the grid. This 
group will specify, procure, and program the needed instruments and software for safe 
and efficient operation.
Civil engineering: Design of foundation for wind turbine base and supporting struc￾ture. The support structure (most likely a pedestal) must be able to withstand strong 
winds exhibiting a force on the turbine in addition to the turbine movement and 
vibration.
Electrical engineering: Design of electrical components in the current generating 
part of the turbine (essentially, the electrical generator) and how the turbine will inter￾connect with the electrical grid. Also, most wind turbine “farms” may have up to 100 
wind turbines. It is important how each is interconnected to the grid and that safety 
features are designed so that one turbine failure does not trip (i.e., cause other wind 
turbines to fail) the whole wind farm off the grid. They will develop power and wiring 
diagrams.
It should be apparent that in any new product development effort, a variety of engi￾neering talent will be utilized. So, who will lead the product development effort, 
Marketing or Engineering? This will depend on the company’s organizational struc￾ture and the type of product in development. However, the engineering leader may 
lead the overall project, or just the engineering piece. Regardless, this person will be in 
a key leadership role and needs general or project management skills to be successful. 
Either discipline may lead the new product effort, engineering will play a key role in 
bringing the product to fruition. So, what exactly will the engineering team do?
The Engineering Process
Figure 3.2 Engineering Design Process is an approach engineers use to solve problems. 
A new product usually has technical challenges such as implementing new standards, 
complying with federal or state regulations, performing research, designing, and test￾ing the new product, and implementing solutions based on test results and customer 
feedback.
The engineering team will follow a common approach to identifying the product 
challenges and solving the technical problems. The common approach is illustrated in 
Figure 3.2 Engineering Design Process.
Assuming the engineering leader has been involved with the development of the 
business case and strategic planning at the senior level, it is time for he or she to begin 
the design process.
Here is a brief description of each step of Figure 3.2.
Define the Problem
The strategic planning of the firm, combined with a detailed business case should out￾line the new product’s features, requirements, target market, etc. It is now up to the 
design team to develop a product that meets those requirements. As demonstrated 
earlier, a design team will most likely have a multi-disciplined approach, using differ￾ent types of engineers and designers.40 The Role of the Engineering Group in Product Development
The new product’s development should also have a tentative timeline and cost esti￾mate. The design team must determine if the product can be developed within the 
budget and schedule provided. Some of the questions to be addressed in this stage 
include:
1. Based on the requirements, what materials are best suited (plastics, metal, compos￾ites, etc.)?
2. Which vendors should we approach for the outsourced materials?
3. Can we build the new product, with the required features, in a compact package 
weighing less than _______ pounds?
4. Can we produce this product within the budget and timeline?
5. Which stakeholders should we approach for clarification?
6. What customer preferences do we know? What is the target market(s)?
Most of the questions posed at this stage should be answered by the business case, 
the marketing team, the executive sponsor, and key stakeholders. Clearly if any end 
user preferences exist (i.e., from focus groups), this is highly desirable information.
Research Solutions
There is always the possibility that elements of the new product may have been 
researched or developed by someone in the company or an external source. 
Nonetheless, a first place to start is always internally. However, in our quest to develop 
the new product, here are several considerations for research:
● If a new technology or manufacturing process is needed, universities are always 
doing research. Reach out to the chair of the engineering department for suggestions 
and referrals.
Define the Problem
Research Solutions
(Internal & External)
Develop Options (That meet product requirements)
Brainstorming
Discussions
Customer Focus Groups
Initiate Design Computer Modeling
Design may have one or
more options
Product requirements
Discussions
Build/Test Prototypes QA/QC
Value engineering
Results
Successful?
NO
Initiate Production
YES
Figure 3.2 Engineering Design Process. Figure by David TennantThe Engineering Process 41
● If your company has an R&D group, can they assist? Have they already been 
involved?
● There are many specialists and consulting firms that have the potential to assist.
● Can you lure away key people from your competitors to join your team?
● There are many technical societies where building relationships can assist in finding 
expertise. For example, The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 
is a large technical society with a very diverse and skilled membership.
● An internet search will always reveal someone, somewhere who is working on a 
similar problem or obstacle.
This approach should give the design team an idea of what materials, circuits, robotics, 
or other requirements will be utilized. An engineering team leader will be responsible 
for coordinating the various disciplines and keeping the team focused on the primary 
objectives.
During the research phase, it is important for the engineering team to remain aware 
of the target market, price points, and meeting customer needs. These should have 
been identified early on in any market analysis. However, it is worth noting that in the 
middle of solving design issues, it is easy to forget these objectives and start designing 
a new product for ease of manufacturing instead of ease of use for the customer. This 
means the design team must understand the commercial and business issues, the tar￾get market, and functional requirements as the design progresses. It never hurts to ask 
for clarification.
Develop Options
Through the research and discovery process, it will become apparent that several 
approaches may ultimately provide the solutions to the design questions. It then 
becomes necessary to select the option that best meets the products requirements at a 
best value. Notice best price was not mentioned, but rather best value. It is easy to cut 
corners or expenses, but will it help in developing a high-quality product? Best value is 
a preferred approach: high quality for a reasonable price and also considering the 
expense of warranty work or loss of company reputation when releasing an inferior 
product.
It is appropriate at this point to confer with the manufacturing experts (production 
and industrial engineers) to determine the costs and manufacturability of each option.
● Will new capital manufacturing equipment (e.g., numerical control machines or 
robotics) be required?
● Have we considered outsourcing some of our manufacturing for this product? 
Where or who would be qualified to produce our new product. (Author’s note: There 
are a number of firms that align companies with specialized manufacturers.)
● The most promising design options should be shared with the product development 
team for a consensus decision.
● What will be the cost per unit when producing 10,000 units, 50,000 units, or 100,000 
units? That is, will economies of scale be present? (Most likely, yes).
Initiate Design
The new product’s design will require coordination between the engineering disci￾plines and manufacturing. This coordination can occur with weekly engineering 42 The Role of the Engineering Group in Product Development
design meetings, status reports, and project meetings with the leadership of the prod￾uct development team.
It is at this point those preliminary drawings are now put into motion based on the 
selected design option. This will require detailed analysis and possibly modeling to 
choose the optimum design. By optimum design, this means the new product design 
that will meet quality standards, provide customer satisfaction, is safe to operate, and 
cost effective to manufacture.
Design usually includes calculations, modeling, drawings using a computer aided 
design program (CAD), checks for accuracy, quality, etc., and issue of design drawings 
for manufacturing. It may also be necessary to build one or a few prototypes.
A prototype is an actual first-run product item produced in the factory. It is meant to 
be evaluated, tested, and subjected to stress and misuse.
The results of this testing will be used to determine if changes are needed before the 
product is manufactured in large, batch runs. It should be noted that modeling of the 
new product does not eliminate the need for a prototype(s). It will, however, refine the 
design allowing fewer prototypes to be produced; and at the same time speed up the 
design process. Figure 3.3 shows a design analysis of a wind turbine blade.
The analysis can show stress points under different operating conditions thereby 
allowing engineers to refine the design to shore up weak points or allow for material 
substitutions. In another application.
Figure 3.4 Engineering Modeling of Bicycle Frame shows the stresses on a bike 
frame based on the design shown. Several iterations of the design can be performed, 
thereby allowing the engineer to select the most valuable design. The criteria may 
include costs, strength of materials, expected lifespan of the frame, reliability of the 
product and safety. Suppose the frame is designed for a bike rider that weighs 180 lb. 
What if someone weighing 200 lb. rides it? 250 lb.? Would it fail?
The model allows engineers the opportunity to model “What if?” scenarios and pro￾vide a robust and safe design.
This means that several prototypes could be produced and tested, based on the 
model. It is easy to see how this type of modeling can save time; and improve product 
quality and safety. Further discussion on modeling is provided in Chapter 8.
Figure 3.3 Engineering Model – Wind Turbine Blade. Source: Image made using the COMSOL 
Multiphysics® software and is provided courtesy of COMSOLLThe Engineering Process 43
Build and Test Prototype
If we consider the bike frame in Figure 3.4, the model will allow the company to build 
one, two, three, or more prototypes based on the computer simulation. When assem￾bled into a fully functional bike (it is possible the wheels and shift mechanisms were 
also modeled), it can be tested with a variety of riders and ride applications: sport, 
mountain biking, casual, etc. and with riders of differing height, weight, and body 
shape. It will become apparent from test data which of the three prototypes exhibits 
the best ride characteristics: handling strength, stability, safety, costs, longevity, etc. It 
is possible the model may have to be redesigned, refined, or changed based on the test 
data, but the modeling can provide a short cut to reaching the optimum design.
Note that good engineering practice dictates that there is always an appropriate 
Safety Factor (S.F.) applied. The bike may be intended for people weighing 200 lb., but 
will be designed, for example, with a 25% safety factor, meaning it will support a weight 
of 250 pounds. A factor of safety is built into most products: ladders, elevators, speed 
ratings on auto tires, etc. This does not mean one is to push the labeled limit but is 
meant as a cushion for those who may misuse the product or unknowingly overload it.
Initiate Production
Once the final design has been tested and approved, a set of manufacturing drawings 
will be issued as “Final, Ready for Production,” meaning the manufacture of the new 
Figure 3.4 Engineering Model – Bicycle Frame. Source: Image made using the COMSOL 
Multiphysics® software and is provided courtesy of COMSOL44 The Role of the Engineering Group in Product Development
product is to begin using the approved drawings. Recall that the manufacturing plant 
built the prototype and will begin production upon drawing receipt and the “green” 
light from the new product team.
Recall Table 2.5 in Chapter 2, Marketing vs. Engineering Focus in New Product 
Development. There will usually be tension between the marketing and engineering 
groups. By nature, and training, engineers tend to be very analytical and detail-ori￾ented, with a desire to issue a high-quality product. This is a priority over schedules 
and budgets. Marketing, on the other hand, prefers to beat the competition to market 
(schedule fast track), minimize design changes, and develop at low cost. Consequently, 
there will be disagreement between these two groups. This is where modeling can 
assist in accelerating the product development schedule.
Who Is the End User?
A key part to consider is the end user or customer. It may be necessary to have a focus 
group of potential users to beta test the new product. There are instances of limited 
market testing to get customer feedback and impressions prior to manufacturing on a 
large scale. This allows the marketing and engineering groups to determine customer 
preferences and implement changes to the product’s design or manufacturing for a 
safer or more desirable product.
Functional Areas and Communications
It should be apparent that a successful product must be developed by a team of prod￾uct experts. While the engineering group will fulfill the design and testing, it takes a 
full complement of skills from many functional areas to ensure success. As stated in 
the previous chapter, the Marketing group will play a large role in the conceptual 
vision of the product and may indeed lead the project. Finance and accounting play 
equally important roles to ensure the product is profitable. Supply chain will assist 
in procuring products, services, or consulting talent necessary for the product’s 
success.
Sales will need to understand the product to obtain customer orders. Additional 
stakeholders will include company executives, department heads, and key 
suppliers.
In essence, each functional area is important to the success of the new product and, 
consequently, communications and cooperation across functional departments needs 
to be open and honest. It will take a special leader to drive the project. A number of 
these topics will be presented in subsequent chapters. Further discussion on commu￾nication techniques will be provided in Chapter 5, Moving Forward.
What Is a Project Engineer?
The terms project manager and project engineer are sometimes used interchangeably. 
However, there is a difference. A project manager generally has responsibility over the 
complete project, reporting to the executive sponsor and overseeing the efforts of all 
functional areas (marketing, engineering, R&D, production, etc.). A project engineer, 
on the other hand, will lead the engineering/design team. His or her responsibilities 
are confined to the technical issues and development of the product. While in a leader￾ship role, the position will report to the project (or product) manager.The Engineering Process 45
Ergonomics (Human Factors Engineering)
Have you ever rented a car and had trouble finding the gas hatch release? Did the 
dashboard displays initially appear confusing and hard to understand? And the num￾bers or letters on a dark background are not easily seen. Welcome to products that are 
poorly engineered from a human-user perspective.
What is ergonomics? In essence, it is the design of products that are user-friendly 
and will comfortably fit 90% of the population, both male and female. The term 
“human factors” is also commonly used, often interchangeably, with “ergonomics.”
The study of anthropometrics deals with the size of various populations. For exam￾ple, one can find data that describes the smallest female (5% of population) to the larg￾est male (95% of population) and design a product that fits those groups from 5% to 
95%. If your company manufactures restaurant dining chairs, there is enough data 
available so that your chairs will easily fit 90% of the population. Appropriate designs 
can also be provided for drivers reaching the steering wheel, or the standardization of 
buttons and symbols on your TV remote controller. Consider the following:
● Some people, especially those that are tall or of large frame, find it difficult to enter 
and exit some sports cars. This is because some of these cars are very narrow and low 
to the ground. From this, can we infer that some sports cars are made to appeal to 
younger drivers that are shorter and slim?
● A common problem is the difficulty older people have opening medicine bottles. 
This is due many times to arthritis or loss of hand strength with age. Some compa￾nies have made their products more useable with better (but still safe) packaging. 
Others have ignored this problem or not recognized their product is not 
user-friendly.
● Occasionally, when entering a store for the first time, do we pull or push to open the 
door? Unless it is clearly marked, we have only a 50% chance of being right.
If you have a TV remote control device, you may have noticed that the symbols, and 
often the button placements, are identical from one remote to another, regardless of 
brand. For example, looking at Figure 3.5 Typical TV Remote, it is easy to understand 
the keys as these same symbols are used almost universally. Can you identify the play 
and pause buttons? The power button?
How did the science of human factors begin? It was noticed during World War 2 that 
some planes were having very high accident rates due to pilot error, not combat. As 
humans, we all have capabilities and limitations, but normal operations are different 
from emergency operations. It was found that some controls and displays were confus￾ing and that pilots were manipulating the flaps when they had meant to manipulate 
the landing gear (or vice versa). Even with many hours of flight training, this was a 
problem. It was determined that control placements were fine for routine missions. 
However, once stressful or emergency conditions occurred, pilots were unable to 
relate to their controls. As a result of extensive research, airplane controls became 
standardized, much the same way cars have standard displays and controls. For exam￾ple, you will find almost all cars have the transmission shifter on the floor between the 
front seats. It would not make sense to locate the shifter on the door panel or on top of 
the dash. Similarly, your dash display is directly in front of you to enhance your ability 46 The Role of the Engineering Group in Product Development
to drive while noticing your speed with a glance. In many ways, these controls and 
displays have been standardized. How does this come about?
It is common for industries to have technical working groups that develop standards 
that all manufacturers agree to use or comply with. For example, standards are devel￾oped for the car industry by the Society of Automotive Engineers. Pressure piping and 
fasteners are developed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, etc.
Notice in Figure 3.6 Speedometer Display, that it is easy to determine the speed with 
the digits in whole numbers (10, 20, etc.). If our speedometer measures in odd units, as 
shown on the right, it is harder to tell at a quick glance our true speed.
We find our perception plays a role in our expectations … or some would say condi￾tioning. We are used to seeing whole digits and research suggest that we more easily 
“read” this type of gage. The author has had some experience with driving foreign cars 
in Europe where speedometers have different conventions than what we are used to in 
North America.
What are the implications for controls and displays in modern jet aircraft (military 
or civilian)? Controls in a spaceship? A nuclear power plant? All these examples are 
much more complicated than an automobile. Misreading a dial or gage in a jet aircraft 
could have fatal consequences. This is why aircraft displays have some commonality. 
This commonality is not by coincidence, but by design. What if our pilot suffers from 
fatigue or lack of sleep? Can we design our displays to be more easily read and under￾stood even when the pilot is sleep deprived?
Figure 3.5 Typical TV Remote. Erik-Mclean / UnsplashThe Engineering Process 47
A True Scenario
On the morning of 28 March 1979, there was an accident at TMI, the Three Mile Island 
nuclear power plant located in Harrisburg, PA. At around 4 am, cooling water started 
to escape through an open valve in one of the two reactors at the plant site. For over 
two hours plant operators failed to correctly read the symptoms and failed to close the 
valve. They also mistakenly shut off an emergency cooling system that would have 
operated satisfactorily if left in automatic mode.
In the control room, dozens of alarms were ringing, and the situation quickly spi￾raled out of control. While no major release of radioactivity occurred, the top of the 
fuel bundle was uncovered (water levels dropped during the accident) and significant 
damage to the plant reactor occurred.
Consequently, it was determined that operator error compounded the problem and 
that there were approximately 100 additional nuclear control rooms around the coun￾try with the same basic design philosophy and layout. It was further determined that 
the control room layout was not conducive to safe operations and that poor human 
factors was an issue. It wasn’t so much the error of operators, but rather the way con￾trols, panels, and displays were arranged that made a major accident a high probabil￾ity; especially in emergency or high stress scenarios.
As a result, robust operator training – for both normal and emergency conditions – 
was implemented for all plant operators in the US. And all nuclear plant control rooms 
were evaluated from a “human factor” or man-machine interface perspective. 
Corrections were made (at great costs) to ensure all power plant control rooms would 
be user-friendly and easier to use when diagnosing problems, which would lead to 
appropriate corrective actions.
The author participated in a national BWR (Boiling Water Reactor) owner’s group 
and surveyed multiple nuclear control rooms around the country. Some of the findings 
violated common perspectives or expectations:
● Some control knobs when turned to the right decreased the parameter on the dis￾play. This could be pump flow, water level in a tank, etc. An analogy might be when 
we turn the volume knob on our home stereo to the right, we expect the volume to 
increase. Having the volume decrease would violate our expectations or 
conditioning.
20
10
40
30 70
60
50
0
mph
25
15
45
35 75
65
55
0
mph
Even Digits Odd Digits
Figure 3.6 Speedometer Display. Figure by David Tennant48 The Role of the Engineering Group in Product Development
● Other problems with nuclear power plants included controls or displays that were 
too high or low on a panel. Or the units on a gage were not easily understood: there 
were instances where displays showed odd numbers rather than even (consider our 
speedometer example).
● Gage indicators that should have had a range of 0 to 30 psi might have a range that 
indicates 0 to 300 psi, which means our maximum pressure of 30 psi would barely 
register on this gage’s display. This is a case where the units displayed did not cor￾relate with the required “sensitivity” of the item being measured.
● In many instances, labeling of components was too wordy or redundant, making 
quick analysis of a situation time-consuming and challenging.
● In all nuclear plants, drills were performed to observe operator reactions. This is 
called task analysis. It was found that during normal operations, the operators easily 
manipulated controls and understood next actions. However, during emergency 
scenarios – that is, high stress events – the operators were sometimes confused, slow 
to determine the root problems and made errors in taking corrective action.
● It was found that color coding was not consistent and sometimes did not correspond 
to industry guidelines.
So, what does this have to do with new product development? Why is this true story 
important? The designers of nuclear plant control rooms, up to that time, had designed 
the plants from a logical or engineering perspective, not from an operational point of 
view: this did not help the plant operators (end users). If your company is designing 
new products, take heed of the lessons from Three Mile Island or other poorly designed 
products:
● Design the product with the end-user in mind.
● Design it for potential misuse whether intentional or accidental.
● Expect your product to be used in unexpected ways.
● Design your product to be safe whether used in normal or under high stress 
conditions.
● Do significant product testing including deliberate misuse.
● The customer/end-user should be able to reach all controls (e.g., in a car, plane, or 
boat) and see the associated displays without expending extraordinary effort.
● If the user interface is a computer screen, use industry guidelines that include stand￾ardized symbols and color coding (some people may be color blind).
● Do not violate expected user conventions (right for up, left for down, etc.).
Note that the use of appropriate human factors standards in your product design will 
help prevent accidents or misuse of your product. Human factors is a design philoso￾phy that enhances safety and efficiency. It also allows the design of products to deal 
with the psychology of people and their expectations. It can help your firm reduce the 
possibility of product liability lawsuits.
Additional Design Considerations – Product Liability
A woman ordered hot coffee from a popular fast-food chain. After leaving the drive￾through window, she stopped to add milk and sugar. The coffee spilled in her lap and 
scalded her. She sued the restaurant and won a sizeable settlement. Who was at fault? The Engineering Process 49
Could this have been prevented? This is a true story and is discussed more fully in Case 
3.1 later in this chapter.
A Fictional Scenario
At her home office, Sheila works at her desk and sits in an office chair that has swivel 
wheels; the chair can also swivel around its base by 360 degrees – in other words, a 
typical office chair that can be purchased at any office supply store. The chair allows 
her to move from her desk to a printer behind her without getting out of her chair. She 
needs to retrieve a book from the top shelf of her bookcase. Not wanting to go to the 
garage for a ladder, she wheels her office chair to the bookcase and stands on it to 
reach the book. Unfortunately, she loses her balance from the chair and falls to the 
ground hurting her back. She files a lawsuit seeking medical and punitive damages. 
Her case could be argued that, although she used the chair for a different than intended 
purpose, this should have been foreseen by the manufacturer.
The company would argue a defense of “product misuse” by the customer. However, 
consumer protection laws indicate that if the misuse was reasonably foreseeable, the 
manufacturer (and possibly the seller) may not escape liability unless measures were 
taken to prevent against harm resulting from misuse.
The above examples illustrate accidental use or misuse of a product. Could these 
incidents have been prevented? Is it the company’s responsibility to “fool proof” prod￾ucts so they cannot be misused? The answer to these questions is “Yes” based on prod￾uct liability laws. There are many other examples of manufacturers being sued for the 
misuse of their products. Therefore, other aspects that must be considered during the 
design phase of our product is:
● What is the intended purpose of the product?
● Will people be capable of misinterpreting the product’s use or purpose?
● Can we prevent people from intentionally or accidentally misusing the product?
● What is the “experience” that people will gain from the product?
● Have we considered ergonomics in our design?
● Have we done adequate consumer beta testing to ensure ease of use and safety?
● Have we considered the likelihood of product liability potential (i.e., a legal review)?
● Do we have adequate safeguards in our product?
Companies do their best to launch products that are safe and high in quality. However, 
mistakes occur, and customers can be injured using or misusing a product. There is a 
perception that many frivolous lawsuits are filed; however, these tend to be minimal in 
number. There are legitimate instances of poor product design or cheap construction, 
and the courts are the remedy used by consumers for restitution. Companies genuinely 
attempt to remedy product injuries as they do not want the risk of damaging their brand 
identity, reputation, or losing customers, all of which lead to declining revenues.
It is possible to anticipate the misuse of products. If your product is not clearly 
labeled, has unclear instructions, or does not have a safety interlock system (e.g., the 
computer control system in your car), it is likely that the product will be misunder￾stood and possibly misused.
It should also be noted that products manufactured in other countries may not follow 
US or European safety standards. Therefore, the seller or importer, should determine the 
imported product’s suitability for the market, especially for the US and EU markets.50 The Role of the Engineering Group in Product Development
Government Oversight – Consumer Protection in the 
United States
There are a number of Federal agencies in place to investigate defective products and 
provide consumer protections. Below are a few examples.
Labeling and Packaging
There are both State and Federal guidelines in product labeling and packaging. 
Essentially, product labels must be accurate and use language that is commonly 
understood by the public. This can include products such as foods (content), tobacco 
and alcohol products, fire hazards (For example, clothing, bedding, and other fabrics 
made with non-fire-resistant materials), and product use (Ladders, power equip￾ment, etc.).
Figure 3.7 Ladder Labels, shows the use of warning labels on ladders meant for per￾sonal use. Does this labeling relieve manufacturers of liability?
Figure 3.7 Ladder Warning Labels. Photo by David TennantGovernment Oversight – Consumer Protection in the United States 51
Food and Drug Administration3
The FDA is charged with protecting the public health by assuring that foods are safe, 
wholesome, sanitary, and properly labeled; ensuring that human and veterinary drugs, 
vaccines, prescription over-the-counter medicines, and medical devices intended for 
human use are safe and effective:
● Protecting the public from electronic product radiation
● Assuring cosmetics and dietary supplements are safe and properly labeled
● Regulating tobacco products
● Advancing the public health by helping to speed product innovations.
The FDA oversees medical devices (implants, hearing aids, pacemakers, etc.). Any 
manufacturer wishing to sell a medical device must first apply to the FDA for approval. 
They must present evidence that the device is reasonably safe and effective for a par￾ticular use.
Product Safety
The Consumer Product Safety Act (1972) established the Consumer Product Safety 
Commission with extensive power regarding consumer safety. The CPSC has the 
power to ban products it deems unfit or unsafe for consumers, keeps a database of 
faulty products, investigates claim by consumers of faulty products, and does testing 
on products. The agency has removed products in the past that dealt with unsafe toys, 
baby products, and items containing asbestos.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
There are both state and federal laws pertaining to environmental protection. The mis￾sion of the federal EPA is to protect human health and the environment. Should your 
manufacturing require an addition or further enhancements, it is likely the state and/
or federal EPA will be involved. Will the increase in production require more power? 
Will large amounts of water be required? Will the facility discharge water to streams or 
rivers? Will air emissions increase?
In the United States, each state has an equivalent EPA to manage state permits and 
ensure compliance with federal regulations. Each state has unique circumstances. For 
example, Florida has the Everglades to manage and protect. Each state regulates pub￾lic and private facilities for air quality, water quality, hazardous waste, water supply 
and discharge, solid waste, surface mining, underground storage tanks, and in some 
situations, state parks or coastal areas.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
It should be apparent that companies developing new products must be aware of 
the various statutes and regulations that are directly applicable, and also to any 
facility changes made to accommodate the new product’s production. An example 
is OSHA, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. While not directly 
applicable to products, it does apply to the manufacturing facilities where the new 52 The Role of the Engineering Group in Product Development
product may be produced. Essentially, OSHA is concerned with companies provid￾ing a safe workplace for production workers. Therefore, the new factory your com￾pany may build to support the new product will be subject to compliance with 
OSHA regulations.
There are other agencies that deal with deceptive advertising, internet, telemarket￾ing sales, credit protection, and environmental protection, etc.
Legally, a product liability case is where a product (or service) failed and caused 
injury to the user. Let’s consider further the case details of the woman who spilled hot 
coffee in her lap.
Discussion Case 3.1 – Lawsuit over Hot Coffee4
On February 27, 1992, a 79-year-old widow was in the passenger seat of her Ford Probe 
ordering a Meal at the drive-through window of an Albuquerque, New Mexico, 
McDonald’s. Since there were no cup holders in the Probe and the interior surfaces 
were sloped, her grandson, the driver, pulled into a parking spot after they received 
their order.
“I wanted to take the top off the coffee to put cream and sugar in,” Liebeck told a 
local news station at the time. “So, I put the cup between my knees to steady it to get 
the top off.”
The coffee spilled on Liebeck’s lap, resulting in second- and third-degree burns over 
16% of her body. She went into shock and was hospitalized for a week, undergoing 
numerous skin graft operations.
When Liebeck’s medical bills topped $10,000, she contacted McDonald’s and asked 
to be reimbursed. But McDonald’s responded with an offer of $800.
At the time, McDonald’s required its franchises to brew its coffee at 195–205 0
 and 
sell it at 180–190 0
, far warmer than the coffee made by most home coffee-brewing 
machines. McDonald’s reps suggested that the blame lay with Liebeck for holding the 
cup between her legs.
However, the trial revealed that Liebeck was not alone. McDonald’s had received 
more than 700 complaints about burns from hot beverages over the previous ten-year 
period. After seven days of testimony and four hours of deliberation, the jurors sided 
with Liebeck. They awarded her $200,000 in compensatory damages. But, because she 
had caused the spill, they reduced the amount to $160,000. The jurors then awarded 
her $2.7 million in punitive damages, which, they reasoned, was equivalent to about 
two days’ worth of McDonald’s coffee sales. The total was $2,735,000 more than 
Liebeck’s lawsuit had requested. The full award was reduced later to $500,000, but still 
much higher than the original requested compensation.
Discussion Case 3.1 Questions
1. There could be many parties at fault, including the victim. Besides the elderly 
woman and McDonald’s, who else in this scenario could be a lawsuit target?
2. Is this a legitimate lawsuit? Why or why not?
3. Was McDonald’s at fault or the widow? On what do you base your conclusion?Design Challenges – Product Misuse 53
4. Do you think this lawsuit triggered additional lawsuits against McDonald’s or simi￾lar restaurants?
5. If you oversaw quality control or product testing at McDonald’s, what would you do 
now, post-verdict?
6. Has the threat of product liability lawsuits made products (and services) safer?
7. Would more effective labeling on the cup provide liability protection?
Here are a few high-visibility product liability cases:5,6
● Monsanto has dealt with numerous legal challenges claiming their product, 
Roundup, causes cancer. Although Monsanto was later acquired by Bayer company 
(a German-based firm), Bayer not only bought the assets but is also dealing with 
Monsanto’s liabilities: in this case, product liability lawsuits.
● Dow Chemical company and Corning, Inc. reached a settlement for $3.2 billion to 
settle a class-action lawsuit by customers claiming their breast implant product 
caused bodily damage and injury. The company also agreed to pay women who 
wished to have their implants removed.
● Asbestos made by Owens-Corning was alleged to cause cancer and premature death. 
The company settled a class-action lawsuit agreeing to pay $1.2 billion. Ultimately, 
the number of claims increased to the point the company was unable to pay and 
resulted in bankruptcy.
● Johnson and Johnson Talcum Powder Product liability. In June 2020, Johnson and 
Johnson agreed to a $2.1 billion settlement to women who suffered from ovarian 
cancer due to use of this product. JNJ no longer sells talcum powder in the United 
States but does in overseas markets.
It should be apparent that intended product use and misuse must be considered in any 
new product development. Manufacturers should evaluate this potential during the 
design and “beta tests” for misuse of their products. Failure to consider legal repercus￾sions can be financially devastating.
Design Challenges – Product Misuse
People are unpredictable and some will misuse a product. The design team will need 
to explore different ways the product can be misused (even intentionally) and design 
safeguards to prevent this. Research (i.e., a beta test) can illustrate the different ways a 
customer can misuse the product. Some products have built in safeguards. For exam￾ple, a table saw has a blade guard and auto cut-off switch to prevent or minimize 
accidents.
Design the product for ease of use or for a great experience. If your product is com￾plicated to use or understand, this will increase the likelihood of misuse.
In the case of medical devices, how likely is a doctor to make a mistake when 
sleep deprived? Can we anticipate mistakes? Or a tree cutter using a power saw in a 
dangerous way to save time? Can we anticipate the mistakes or injuries that could 
occur?
Figure 3.8, Product Misuse Review, illustrates a review process for anticipating 
intentional or accidental misuse.54 The Role of the Engineering Group in Product Development
It is impossible to plan for every potential misuse of a product, but a reasonable 
effort should be made to mitigate or prevent obvious misuse. The use of a product risk 
assessment, covered in Chapter 8, can assist in this effort.
Intellectual Property is a consideration for ground-breaking technology or a new 
innovative product.
Does a patent already exist for the process or product you are developing? This 
means time and money to research patents. If none, you will need to budget time and 
money to apply for your company’s patent protection. If a patent already exists, then 
your team will need to determine how to make your new product unique to avoid a 
patent infringement lawsuit.
There is a tendency to jump on the “trends” bandwagon. While consumers indeed 
want the latest smartphone technology or computer games, do not follow the crowd. 
One will always be behind the curve with this strategy.
The author had the opportunity to work with a large, multi-national equipment com￾pany headquartered in the upper mid-west USA. The company made good products, but 
instead of innovating new equipment, they simply looked to mimic what their competi￾tors were doing. Consequently, they were not considered an industry leader.
The proper strategy is not to imitate your competitors, but leapfrog over them to 
become the industry leader. Market research and new technology can assist in accom￾plishing this objective.
Do not design products for today’s market, design for the market five years in the 
future. Both engineering and marketing need to collaborate with such a strategy.
New Product
Review
Initiate
Production
Pass
Design
Review
Pass
Misuse
Review
Pass
Cust. Beta
Test
Internal
External
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Return to Engineering
Design Group
Risk Review (Ch.8)
Appropriate F.S.
Beta Test (internal)
Legal Review
Warning/Safety Instructions
No
No
Figure 3.8 Product Misuse Review.Problems with Product Development 55
Problems with Product Development
1. Lack of market research on customer requirements, needs, and wants. It is easy to 
design to our tastes and preferences, but is this what the customer wants? As stated 
previously, there are many avenues for companies to explore customer requirements: 
focus groups, surveys, research (competitor products), and data collection (analytics).
2. Being a market follower instead of a market leader. The best companies will always 
be in front of market trends, or designing for tomorrow’s market. Being a market 
follower will always put you, at best, in second place. Design products for the future 
and leap over your competitors.
3. Staying in your core competency. It is necessary that companies must change and 
adapt to stay in business. However, the company’s strengths should be used to 
develop new products or services, not its weaknesses. This means that a car com￾pany doesn’t suddenly decide to start producing smart phones instead.
4. Tradeoffs of costs vs. quality. There will always be ways to cut costs; however, qual￾ity is a general concept with which the buying public is aware. There are countless 
stories where great ideas failed because too much emphasis was on low costs. There 
have been many times where metal gears were replaced with plastic ones to save 
money. Of course, plastic gears under heavy use will fail. A strong company brand 
and reputation are key to profitability. Poor quality will tarnish your reputation. 
And warranty work may erase any profits from your new device.
5. Inefficient manufacturing can lead to higher production costs, poor workflows, and 
ultimately a lot of scrapped parts or rework. A worst-case scenario is product recalls 
or high levels of warranty work. In today’s competitive environment, efficiency in 
manufacturing is required. This implies reliable production machinery, well￾trained machine operators, streamlined factory workflow, and a quality control 
and assurance program for continuous improvement.
6. Lack of project management skills by team leaders. To take a new product from 
inception through to launch requires leaders who know how to put together budg￾ets, schedules, motivate teams, and plan activities. Also, we can anticipate prob￾lems with risk reviews and strong communications. It takes both a special leader 
and one that has PM skills to be successful.
Chapter Key Points
● Many disciplines and functional areas are used in the development of new 
products.
● Engineers use a universal approach to solve problems and research ideas.
● The engineering team is responsible for developing a product that meets the market 
requirements.
● Engineers need to be creative and flexible in meeting market requirements.
● The customer or end user’s needs and wants must always be considered by the prod￾uct development team.
● The marketing team should share whatever customer research they have collected 
with the engineering team.
● There are many external sources to research product solutions: universities, techni￾cal societies, government labs, and consultants.56 The Role of the Engineering Group in Product Development
● Computer simulations of new products can save time and money during the design 
phase. It does not replace the need for a prototype.
● Testing of the prototype may reveal weaknesses or failure points. This will allow the 
engineers to revise the design.
● The quality of your new product must be designed into the product, not inspected. 
Quality is everyone’s business.
● Human factors engineering should be a part of your product’s review and 
development.
● To minimize the chances of product liability lawsuits, the design team must consider 
product abuse and misuse during the design and testing phases of the new product.
Discussion Questions
1. Reference Table 3.1 Description of Engineering Disciplines. Which engineering tal￾ents would be used to develop the following products:
● A high-speed, commercial bullet train to offer express service at speeds of 200 
mph between Chicago, IL and Dallas, TX?
● A new electric car?
● A new system that allows customers to order their groceries on-line?
2. What is a functional area?
3. Consider the fictional case where the user fell off her chair and hurt her back. What 
could be done to design and build a chair that prevents this action?
4. What is the role of engineering in developing new products?
5. What is the purpose of performing engineering modeling?
6. With engineering modeling available, why is a prototype needed?
7. There is always a debate about designing a product for ease of manufacturing vs. 
ease of use by the customer. List the pros and cons of each.
8. To produce a large quantity of a new product, your company will need to add capac￾ity. This includes adding a new manufacturing line, placement of new capital equip￾ment, and hiring more skilled workers. In addition, more electrical power and water 
will be required. What are some of the federal or state agencies that might be involved?
9. Both Ford and GM have announced plans to shift production away from internal 
combustion cars to electric vehicles. This has profound implications for how cars 
are designed and manufactured. Make a list of conditions or activities that each 
must consider in this transition.
Discussion Case 3.1 Questions and Answers – Lawsuit Over Hot Coffee
1. There could be many parties at fault, including the victim. Besides the elderly 
woman and McDonald’s, who else in this scenario could be a lawsuit target?
Potentially, there are other companies that could be pulled into this lawsuit:
● What about the automaker, Ford? Why would they build a car without cupholders 
when many Americans drive while drinking coffee or soft drinks?
● The cup manufacturer. We have all observed lids that were difficult to remove or 
replace from fast food eateries. Why is it so hard to have a screw-on or clip-on lid, 
for example, for convenience (and safety)?
● The maker of the coffee machine. Surely a manufacturer of commercial-grade cof￾fee makers should be aware of the safe serving temperature.Problems with Product Development 57
2. Is this a legitimate lawsuit? Why or why not?
The victim in this case did most likely what millions of drivers do every day: pulled 
over to add cream or sugar to their drink. McDonald’s had received previous com￾plaints about the hot temperature of their beverage, which indicates they were aware 
of the problem yet did little to resolve it. Therefore, the author believes this incident was 
a legitimate case.
3. Was McDonald’s at fault or the widow? On what do you base your conclusion?
If the reader does some additional research on this case, it will be apparent that the victim’s 
award of $2.7 million award was reduced. This means that the judge did recognize that 
some of the blame resided with the widow. However, the punitive damages against Mc￾Donald’s were still significant as the company had known of the problem and ignored it.
4. Do you think this lawsuit triggered similar lawsuits against other McDonald’s fran￾chises or fast-food restaurants?
Similar lawsuits for overly hot beverages were also filed against Burger King, Star￾bucks, and Continental Airlines.
5. If you oversaw engineering or product testing at McDonald’s, what would you do 
now, post-verdict?
There are several actions that can be taken because of this lawsuit:
● Develop procedures or guidelines pertaining to all hot drinks (i.e., tea, coffee, hot 
chocolate, etc.) and hot foods to ensure they are served at an appropriate 
temperature.
● Set up a hotline or customer complaint resolution partnership with each 
McDonald’s franchisee. This will bring trends or problems to the attention of the 
company’s headquarters.
● Be cognizant of customer complaints and potential lawsuits so that amends or set￾tlements can be made before going to court (assuming legitimate events).
● Have the Quality department (QA/QC) take a more active role. If a quality group 
does not exist, then this expertise should be developed.
6. Has the threat of product liability lawsuits made products (and services) safer?
Yes, products have had a larger focus on safety and prevention of misuse. While cost￾ing companies more money in design and manufacture, the costs of lawsuits can be 
much greater.
Some companies have moved offshore to avoid US product liability laws; however, 
this does not relieve them of responsibility. The loss of company reputation, whether 
foreign or domestic, can have significant financial repercussions.
7. Would more effective labeling on the cup provide liability protection?
Most coffee cups at fast-food chains have had “Caution, hot liquid” warnings on their 
cups for many years. Is it enough? Is it easily visible? It is likely that more warnings or 
visibility may shield a company from liability but would have to be resolved in a court 
challenge.
Discussion Questions
1. Reference Table 3.1 Description of Engineering Disciplines. Which engineering tal￾ents would be used to develop the following products:
● A high-speed, commercial bullet train to offer express service at speeds of 200 
mph between Chicago, IL and Dallas, TX.58 The Role of the Engineering Group in Product Development
– Mechanical (train design, cabin design, modeling for stress and heavy 
loading)
– Electrical (electrical systems on the train)
– Instrumentation and controls (ensure safe switching between tracks, signal coor￾dination in traveling through towns, ability to track train progress, obstacle 
avoidance, etc.), and controlling the train’s speed and direction.
– Civil (design track routing, design of support structures or bridges train must 
cross over, water drainage).
● A new electric car.
– Mechanical engineers – body, transmission, wheels/axles, brake systems
– Electrical engineers – design of car electrical systems, battery
– Materials engineers – material selection, development
– Instrumentation – Design of car instruments and driver feedback systems
– Manufacturing and Industrial engineers – ensure efficient factory workflow, 
order, and install capital equipment for manufacturing.
● A new system that allows customers to order their groceries online.
– Software engineers and programmers to develop computer code.
2. What is a functional area?
● A functional area is an area of expertise that resides as a department or silo in a 
company; for example, marketing, sales, engineering, accounting, etc.
3. Consider the fictional case where the end user fell off her chair and hurt her back. 
What could be done to design and build a chair that prevents this action?
● Place clear labels on the chair (not very aesthetic)
● Warnings and instructions in the user manual on how to safely use the chair
● Design a locking mechanism so that the chair can be changed from rocking and 
turning mode to a stable, locked mode.
4. What is the role of engineering in developing new products?
Engineering is charged with the design of a new product:
● Using recognized engineering practices for a safe, effective design
● Developing product specifications
● Testing the new product along with test data collection
● Preparing “Approved for Production” drawings
● Troubleshooting and revising product specifications or design
● Providing design continuous improvement
● Work closely with Manufacturing to resolve production issues.
5. What is the purpose of performing engineering modeling?
Engineering modeling allows the engineer to perform “What if?” scenarios with 
material stresses, heat transfer, electromagnetic flow, or other parameters. The model 
will ultimately allow the engineer to design the optimal product. Modeling is useful in 
speeding up the design process.
6. With engineering modeling available, why is a prototype needed?
Modeling allows engineers to create an optimal design. However, a prototype is 
necessary to confirm the design through testing and data collection. Based on the 
tests’ results, the design will be confirmed as optimal, or may be changed. It may be 
necessary to have more than one prototype.Notes 59
7. There is always a debate when designing a product about ease of manufacturing vs. 
ease of use by the customer. List the pros and cons of each.
Ease of Manufacturing Pros: cheaper, easy for workers to build, many parts “off the 
shelf” from suppliers, quicker to market. Ease of manufacturing may not mean ease 
of use for the customer.
Ease of Manufacturing Cons: cheaper may lead to product recalls and warranty 
work. Easily made means competitors can easily duplicate; poor quality may result in 
damage to the brand and the company’s reputation.
Ease of customer use Pros: builds customer loyalty, can market as user friendly and 
high quality for a higher price. May provide a competitive advantage, may reduce 
product misuse and thereby liability.
Ease of customer use Cons: May cost more to design, test, and produce. Will require 
more thought and testing along with design changes (adding to costs and schedule). 
May delay product’s early introduction to the market.
8. To produce a large quantity of a new product, your company will need to add additional 
capacity. This includes adding a new manufacturing line, placement of new capital equip￾ment, and hiring more skilled workers. In addition, more electrical power and water will 
be required. What are some of the federal or state agencies that might be involved?
New building addition will require compliance with building codes, national electric 
and fire codes, the Americans with Disabilities Act, OSHA (Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration), and, if there are discharges from the plant, possible state and 
federal environmental regulations (EPA). If the facility already has permits for water 
and/or air discharges, it may simply require revising existing permits.
The company’s insurance carrier may also have safety and operational standards 
or guidelines.
9. Both Ford and GM have announced plans to shift production away from internal 
combustion engine cars to electric vehicles. This has implications for how cars are 
designed and manufactured. Make a list of conditions or activities that each com￾pany must consider in this transition.
● Much of the existing capital equipment will not be needed. New production equip￾ment may need to take its place. Disposal or reuse of the existing equipment should 
be considered.
● The workflow will be revised. Raw materials will go through a different process. 
A new, efficient workflow will be required.
● New materials will be needed, and suppliers must be secured.
● Since electric cars have different characteristics to IC (internal combustion) cars, 
design will need to focus on transitioning customers to new controls, gages and dis￾plays (ergonomics).
● The transmission will require redesign.
● The power source, a battery, will need to be placed into the car and connected to the 
motor, transmission, and axles. The design will optimize placement and performance.
Notes
1 ISO9000 Made Easy. https://iso9001madeeasy.wordpress.com/2018/09/15/
what-is-quality-according-to-iso.
2 American Society for Quality. https://asq.org/quality-resources/quality-glossary/q.60 The Role of the Engineering Group in Product Development
3 Food and Drug Administration, What Does the FDA Do? https://www.fda.gov/
about-fda/fda-basics/what-does-fda-do.
4 Andy Simmons, Reader’s Digest, 23 February 2021, “Remember the Hot Coffee 
Lawsuit? It Changed the Way McDonald’s Heats Coffee Forever.” https://www.rd.com/
article/hot-coffee-lawsuit.
5 Staff Author, The Five Largest Product Liability Cases, 26 April 2021, https://www.
investopedia.com/the-5-largest-u-s-product-liability-cases-4773418.
6 Cooper & Friedman, PLLC, 8 December 2020, “Top Product Liability Cases in 2020,” 
https://www.cooperandfriedman.com/top-product-liability-cases-in-2020.
Bibliography
Brickley, J., Smith, C., and Zimmerman, J. (1997). Managerial Economics and 
Organizational Architecture. McGraw-Hill.
Lawrence, A. and Weber, J. (2008). Business & Society: Stakeholders, Ethics, Public Policy, 
12th e. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.61
Product Development: An Engineer’s Guide to Business Considerations, Real-World Product Testing, and 
Launch, First Edition. David V. Tennant. 
© 2022 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2022 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
4
The Core Team and Teamwork in Product Development
The Executive’s Role in Product Development
It has been the author’s experience that executives take their participation in product 
development or other projects very seriously. After all, they are financially accounta￾ble for the ultimate success (or failure) of the new venture, product, or project. But 
what exactly should their role be? At what point are they over controlling? Or, not 
engaged enough?
What exactly is an executive sponsor or project executive? In large organizations, an 
executive is typically understood to mean someone at the Director or Vice President 
level. It might also extend to the C-level executive, such as the CFO (Chief Financial 
Officer), the COO (Chief Operating Officer) or other C-level executive. In small and 
medium-sized companies, an executive might be someone at Senior Manager or 
General Manager level.
The fundamental point, however, is that senior management is held accountable for 
results, including new product development, launch, and profitability.
Working Within the Strategic Plan
As noted, every company has (or should have) a strategic plan. This can be a long-term 
roadmap to develop new products or services, a scenario to change the corporate cul￾ture, or a strategy to enter new markets or partnerships. The role of the executive in 
each of these scenarios is:
● Provide funding and support – In addition to funding, the correct resources, in the 
form of people, hardware, office space, software, and other tools, must be provided 
by the supporting executive. Projects cannot be successful without provision of the 
right people, at the right time, and for the correct duration. Since executives assign 
resources, this is also one way to prioritize products (projects). Products/projects 
that receive full funding and the best people, will be those that have the highest level 
of immediate support (i.e., the highest priority).
● Serve as a link between the product development team and the senior management 
team – The product development team needs the executive sponsor to support their 62 The Core Team and Teamwork in Product Development
requirements at the executive level of the corporation. The sponsoring executive 
serves in this role and transmits information from C-level decision makers to the 
product team.
● Participates in the Gate Review process – On a regular basis, the current product’s 
development should have a gate review. There is no formal defining point when this 
should occur but it should be decided by the executive and product team in advance 
as to when reviews will occur. It is conceivable that six, eight, or ten gates could 
occur during a product’s development cycle. The purpose of a Gate Review is:
– Determine if the product’s development is on schedule and within budget.
– Does it still fit within the company’s strategic vision?
– Is the product still relevant in the marketplace?
– Does the proposed product still meet the financial objectives?
– Have there been any significant changes or risks identified since the product’s 
development began or since the previous gate review?
– Are the initial drivers or market forces still present?
– Can the Product Development Manager provide a convincing story that the prod￾uct is worthy of continued support (justification)?
– Provide funding to reach the next gate or cancel the development effort, if necessary.
● Ensure the team has the right tools, training, funding, and people to be successful.
● Provide “firepower” to resolve conflicts that the product team cannot resolve on 
their own. There will be times that executive support will be needed to resolve a 
conflict or remove an obstacle that the product team is unable to resolve. Primarily, 
it is possible the product leader is not at a high enough position to have influence 
with higher level managers, or they are having issues with a key supplier. It is in 
circumstances like these where the executive can assist in resolving the conflict.
However, note that the team should exhaust all avenues to resolve an issue before 
escalating to an executive. Part of the PM’s role is to manage and direct the product’s 
development. When help is needed, the appropriate executive should be contacted.
If you need senior management support to resolve an issue, always provide pos￾sible solutions. It is never a good idea to just drop a problem in the executive’s lap. 
By presenting the executive with options, you allow him or her to choose one of 
your solutions or develop an alternative. If you present the problem without any 
potential solutions, you will be seen as simply a manager and not a leader; you will 
be perceived as lacking creativity, the ability to discern issues, or organizational 
awareness. One source of potential solutions is your product/project team – talk to 
them. It is always useful to offer several potential solutions.
● Confirm that new products and projects support the corporation’s mission and stra￾tegic plan.
Project Management Processes
Generally, PM processes or procedures will not be implemented and followed without 
executive support. This means the executive team must deliver a strong commitment – 
perhaps even going so far as to mandate those processes must be followed. This can 
also be combined with compliance in all PMs annual reviews. This subscribes to the 
view that “What gets measured, gets done.”Who Should Be Involved in Product Development? 63
It is generally not difficult to obtain executive support: the executive team is respon￾sible for implementing products/projects that support and achieve the company’s stra￾tegic business objectives. Some companies have found that managing many projects 
simultaneously can be a challenge. The author is aware of one large Fortune 50 com￾pany that has upwards of 800 projects ongoing simultaneously at any time. One way 
that companies have addressed this complexity is to implement a PMO (Project 
Management Office). This is not suitable for all companies as it depends on the organi￾zation’s size and the complexity of projects. Fundamentally, a PMO is put together to 
support or manage a company’s projects. The PMO has several potential roles:
● To develop the managerial processes needed for product or project management.
● To provide support (e.g., by developing or tracking budgets and schedules).
● To bring consistency to product/project management across the company.
● To coordinate communications across projects and departments.
● To perform project reviews to determine if PM processes are being used.
● To develop best practices.
● To provide continuous improvement to PM processes.
● To directly manage products and projects as appropriate.
It is outside the scope of this book to discuss PMO development and implementation, 
but the reader should recognize the value a PMO can provide. If your company has 
one, the product development team should utilize its resources and practices in reach￾ing its objectives.
Project management processes essentially offer structure and support to enable the 
product or project team to function efficiently. For example, how will scope changes be 
managed? It should be noted that changes in scope are common to many projects, but 
how these are managed is critical. Most companies will have a scope change request
form that can be used to evaluate the value of the change. An example of a Scope 
Change Request (SCR) form is at the end of this chapter. Other useful tools may 
include:
● A standard format for status reports
● An action item log
● A stakeholder identification table
● A roles and responsibilities chart
● Risk review processes
● Flow charts for engineering design, supply chain, communications, etc.
Who Should Be Involved in Product Development?
Recall from Chapter 1, Figure 4.1 Core Team Product Development, in which a diverse 
range of groups can be involved with product development.
This is a reasonable model for a typical development team for the development of a 
product. However, we could easily add more stakeholders if needed. This is, after all, 
a model.
How do we, as product development leaders, determine who should be on our pri￾mary team and our extended team?64 The Core Team and Teamwork in Product Development
The answer is: “It depends.” It depends on the complexity of the product under 
development, the extent to which each functional area is involved (including suppli￾ers), and which executive sponsor is supporting your efforts.
The answer to this question will become more apparent as we drive through subse￾quent chapters. However, for our purposes here, it is appropriate to note that a core team 
will need to be in place to drive development. Let’s consider a hypothetical product:
Hypothetical Product: A New Portable Printer
While there are many portable printers in the marketplace, your firm feels the time is 
right for a new generation of portable printer that is a new leap in front of its competi￾tors. A feasibility study and focus groups have confirmed this proposition. Based on 
this research, and other factors, you have been charged with developing a new ground￾breaking printer. Here are the product’s requirements:
● Must be lightweight.
● A new type of battery should be used that will provide up to four hours’ continuous 
operation.
● Rechargeable using a standard 120 v wall plug.
● Small enough to fit into a suitcase or computer bag (may be broken down into parts 
which can be quickly assembled with ease).
● Target market is business travelers and students.
● Bluetooth compatible with smart phones, tablets, or computers (PC or Mac).
● Laser printer B&W or color capable (different price points).
● Price target: under $150.
Based on what we currently know, we can create a list of potential participants in our 
new product’s development (Table 4.1).
Extended
Team
Marketing
R&D
Engineering
Quality Production
Executive
Sponsor
New Product
Development
Sales
Suppliers
Accounting
Legal
HR
Figure 4.1 Core Team – Product Development. Figure by David TennantWho Should Be Involved in Product Development? 65
Table 4.1 Product Development Participants.
Research and 
Development
Develop lightweight materials for casing and new, revolutionary print 
cartridge
Engineering ● Electrical – develop circuits and power supply drawings
● Mechanical – design gearing, paper feed, and other components 
(moving and static). Determine best way to miniaturize 
components and how to integrate into workable product
● Design packaging
Suppliers ● Battery technology
● Small components, such as gears, sprockets, washers, springs, etc.
● Key technology parts; e.g., Bluetooth hardware
Marketing (covered 
in detail in Chapter 2)
Confirm markets, arrange distribution network, determine product 
price, marketing collateral, packaging, product promotion
Procurement (i.e., 
Supply Chain)
Procurement of key items, confirmation of delivery, contracts. This 
may also involve warehousing regarding the storing of raw materials 
coming in and storage or finished products ready to go out.
Accounting and 
Finance
● Accounting will confirm delivery of purchased items matches with 
invoice, payment of invoices.
● Finance will be continuously monitoring the product’s finances to 
confirm that it is profitable (or not) and will meet margin targets.
Legal This may be a part of the Supply Chain group, if concerned with 
procurement contracts, standard terms and conditions, etc.
If work involved is a joint venture (JV) or acquisition of a company, it 
is likely the corporate attorneys will be engaged. This is generally 
different from the legal team in Supply Chain.
Sales The sales team generally have a good sense of what customers 
desire in products and services. Sales members can offer significant 
insight as to product plans and target customers (similar to target 
market).
Quality Group The new product’s prototypes will require testing and quality 
standards if it is to be optimally designed for the target market. 
Once input by Marketing to engineering has been completed, the 
Quality Department will develop new testing procedures and data 
collection so that a quality product can be developed. QA (Quality 
Assurance) consists of developing the overall program and 
standards. QC (Quality Control) is the actual testing performed on 
the product.
Production 
(manufacturing)
Production will be enlisted to determine best approach to efficiently 
produce the new product. Minimal waste or scrap will be considered, 
with manufacturing tolerances, tooling, materials, etc.
Table developed by David Tennant.
For new products, or developing the next generation or current products, this can 
involve several functional areas or departments. Again, a functional area is a special￾ized group, such as Accounting, Engineering, Marketing, etc.66 The Core Team and Teamwork in Product Development
Constraint on Product Development: A Note about 
Sarbanes-Oxley and Publicly Held Companies
Due to accounting and financial irregularities by several large companies in the 
1990s – notably Enron, Tyco, and WorldCom – Congress passed Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX), 
which required stronger transparency and accuracy in financial statements at publicly 
held companies. That is, those companies traded on stock exchanges with shares held 
by the public at large. As a result, this has had an impact on how accounting and pro￾curement work at investor-owned companies. The implications for product develop￾ment may be somewhat subtle. For example, if one is purchasing testing equipment 
for the new product, it may be necessary to follow a restrictive purchasing process and 
should be accounted for in the schedule. This is not to frustrate product managers, but 
rather to comply with Federal SOX laws.
Based on the above cases, a number of C-level executives went to prison for lengthy 
jail sentences. These were based on fraud, tax evasion, destroying evidence (in this case, 
Enron’s accounting firm shredding documents), falsifying documents, and misleading 
investors. Several TV documentaries, books, and a movie were produced based on the 
Enron case (An entrepreneur figured out how to profit from scandal and misfortune ….).
Figure 4.2, Procurement Process, shows a typical procedure for how procurement is 
managed with publicly held companies.
Previously, one could write a purchase order (P.O.), sign off on the approval, check-in 
the supplier’s materials at the warehouse (approving receipt), and then approve the 
supplier’s invoice for payment – all by the same person. Since SOX became law, one 
will now find three different people signing off during the ordering, receipt, and invoice 
Engineering Mfg. Site
(warehouse) Purchasing
Suppliers
P.O.
Approved
• Statement of Work
• Specifications
• Change requests
• Requisitions
Accounting
(compares 
docs)
No
Yes
Copy of
Apvd.
PO’s
Suppliers
Deliver mat’l.,
Equip or Svcs. Issue.
POs
Copy of
PO’s
• Review Proposals
• Issue RFPs
• Contracts
• Issue POs
Supplier
Invoices
Warehouse Receiving Report
(Should match PO)
Revise PO as needed
Invoices
Paid
Figure 4.2 Procurement Process. Figure by David TennantEssentials of Teamwork and Communications across Functional Lines 67
Corporate
Sales Marketing Engineering Operations Accounting Process
Figure 4.3 Functional Corporate Organization. Figure by David Tennant
approval process. Note that privately held companies (i.e., with no shareholders and 
not listed on any stock exchange) are exempt from SOX. This is because the owners 
would be committing fraud against themselves, not external shareholders.
Essentials of Teamwork and Communications across 
Functional Lines
Many companies, whether large or small, direct products or projects using a matrixed￾based organization. The larger the company, the more dependent they are on the 
matrix. Figure 4.3 shows a typical functional organization.
During product development, the product team will “borrow” people for their team 
from various functional areas. This is very typical for matrixed companies. Referring 
to our hypothetical case (the new portable printer) we might find a product team 
organized as shown in Figure 4.4, Matrixed Product Team. What kind of potential 
conflict does this provide?
For this product team, key skilled team members were brought in from three of the 
firm’s functional areas: Engineering, Supply Chain, and Production.
Sr. 
Engineer
Procure
Specialist
R&D QA/QC
Mfg.
Product
Manager
(Mktg)
Key
Supplier
Legal
Engineering Supply
Chain Production
Figure 4.4 Matrixed Product Team. Figure by David Tennant68 The Core Team and Teamwork in Product Development
The project/product leader is from Marketing (Mktg.), another functional area. Let’s 
consider potential issues related to this structure.
Problems with the Matrixed Team Structure
It should be noted that the team members do not report, functionally, to the Marketing 
Product Manager; they still report to their functional managers in Engineering, Supply 
Chain, and Production. If any one of the functional managers wants to pull their 
employee from this team, the Product Manager does not have much influence.
Similarly, if one of the team members is not performing well, the Product Manager 
does not have much influence other than to go to that person’s functional manager.
It is with these types of issues that the supporting executive plays a crucial role. Since 
the Product Manager may not have the influence necessary to solve organizational 
issues, this is where the supporting executive can quickly resolve this type of conflict.
The matrix team structure is very common in putting project teams together. Beyond 
the matrix, teamwork and leadership by the product manager play a key role in team 
success. Some matrixed organizations have learned very well how to coordinate shared 
resources and motivate their product teams. But, many times the PM will find matrixed 
organizations are overly siloed, in which case relationships across these functional 
areas is a requirement. The PM will need to use these relationships to solve problems, 
resolve conflict, communicate status, and coordinate all the moving parts. A very tall 
order and not for the faint of heart.
Teamwork Essentials
Teamwork involves more than just putting a group of people in a room to implement 
a series of objectives. A high performing team requires excellent leadership, open com￾munications, and shared responsibility. Successful teams exhibit the following:
● Strong sense of identity
● Shared accountability
● Trust between team members and team leader
● Enjoyment of the work
● Expressing ideas freely
● Minimal intervention by senior management
● Staying focused on end results
The team leader, or product manager, is ultimately responsible for the success of the 
product, and consequently must hold people on the team accountable. A large part of 
the PM’s role is communication.
Project/Product Communication
One of the most important components of product development or project management 
is communication. How do we do this? What kinds of communication? What tools can I 
use? There are a number of techniques that can be employed. But first, it is important to 
point out that a high visibility project or new product will usually have an experienced Project/Product Communication 69
leader who has a successful track record. Less senior PMs may be assigned to assist as 
they are being groomed to advance into product development. However, the following is 
a discussion of communications relative to new product development or projects.
Individual Exercise (five minutes)
List five skills that are needed for effective communication:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
(Answers further below)
The Product/Project Kickoff Meeting
If there is one meeting that is critical and you should prepare for, it is the kickoff meet￾ing. Why is this important? The kickoff meeting is to accomplish the following:
● Rapport among team members
● Project/product objectives are established and confirmed
● Assign team and individual roles and responsibilities
● Begin preliminary planning (review business case, proposed scope, action items, 
approved budget, or schedule, etc.)
● Achieve team buy-in and team building
● Address concerns, risks, or issues the team may have
● It may be useful to have executive sponsor address team at end of session
● The kickoff meeting will set expectations
There may be additional objectives with the kickoff meeting; however, as the product 
leader, you only get one chance to correctly lead this important meeting. If you stum￾ble, or are not prepared, this will set a bad tone for the meeting, and it will take you a 
long time to recover. In other words, you will have lost the initiative and the opportu￾nity to make a good impression. You will have set low expectations. So, always be 
prepared for meetings, but especially for the kickoff meeting, which may last a full day 
or two, depending on the project size and complexity.
Skills needed for listening (see individual exercise above) include:
● Listening
● Questioning
● Summarizing
● Negotiating 
● Focusing on speaker
● Informing
● Persuading
● Comprehending
One method the author has used to ensure everyone is clear on their role is to write 
on a white board (or flip chart) what each person believes is their role and responsibil￾ity. Each person in the room will describe what they will be doing on the engagement. 
Invariably, it becomes clear that some conflict will occur: two people may be doing (or 70 The Core Team and Teamwork in Product Development
think they are doing) the same tasks, others may try to shift work to others, etc. It is the 
job of the product leader to facilitate this discussion and ensure everyone is clear on 
their roles at the end of the day.
Table 4.2, Roles and Responsibilities, illustrates how these can be captured for the 
team. This sample shows only three people; however, each member of the team should 
have an assignment. It is expected that a full team R&R chart would contain 10 to 12 
people.
Budgets, Schedules, and Miscellaneous Small Tasks
It is worth noting that budgets and schedules in a business case do not mean much. It 
is, at that point, simply an educated guess. It is likely that supplier quotes have not 
been obtained and the scope (breadth) of the work has not been developed in any 
detail. The REAL scope, budget, and schedule will be determined by the product team, 
with input from a variety of sources, including external suppliers.
Budgets and cash flows will be discussed further in this chapter and schedules are 
discussed further in this book. However, there will be many day-to-day activities that 
are important – we don’t want them to fall through the cracks – but they may not be 
significant enough to place into a product schedule.
One mechanism to track all the ongoing small items is to use an Excel spreadsheet 
to create an Action Item Log. This is an extremely useful tool whether used by a small 
three-person firm or a large Fortune 100 company. Table 4.3 Action Item Log is a 
Table 4.2 Roles and Responsibilities: Sample Assignments.
Name/Role
Phone
Ext. Responsibility and Role
John Nordin:
lead IT member
X-3322 Primary technical lead and decision maker for all technical 
aspects of project:
● Responsible for analyzing suppliers and technical solutions.
● In charge of design team.
● Develops standards and testing criteria.
● Ensures technical solutions meet requirements. 
Marie Santello: 
Procurement
X-4117 Liaison between project team and procurement department:
● Works with project team to procure needed hardware.
● Ensures that company purchasing policies are followed.
● Expedites at-risk material deliveries.
● Develops procurement schedule.
● Assist with RFP and bid-award process. 
Jose Perez: 
project manager
X-5434 Overall responsibility and authority for project 
implementation:
● Directs and manages the project team.
● Serves as link between manufacturing, the project team, 
and executive management.
● Develops and manages scope, budget, schedule. 
Table by David TennantTable 4.3 Action Item Log Sample.
Item Description
Assigned 
To: Date Status
Expected 
Resolution Date Notes Priority
1 Approved supplier list needs to be revised. New 
suppliers need to be added. Engineering 
requests this ASAP
MS/RB 29/11/20 Open 03/01/21 One supplier has been slow to respond. Need to 
agressively follow up, need equipment list with 
updated delivery dates. 
H
2 ABC to provide a complete list of supporting 
equipment and identify those that include a 
factory acceptance test. AC pointed out that the 
factory acceptance test is part of the new facility 
commissioning process.
LR 13/12/20 Open 07/01/21 M
3 Review of casing materials and screening of 
suppliers needs to occur in the next 30 to 45 
days.
KB 21/01/21 Open 15/02/21 Meet with POC to explore this. End users do not 
require stainless steel material. Alternate pricing 
required from Vendors for variety of appropriate 
materials for harsh environment, including 
rugged plastics.
H
4 Sub supplier owes Form 1 of QC program. BB 15/03/21 Closed 01/04/21 Follow up needed. L
5 F.P. working on sketch for conduit routing. Beta 
client requests 7ʹ-10” headroom; but current 
best est. is 7ʹ-3.”
FP/RB 01/04/21 In progress 10/04/21 Follow up with Ken. Sketches received. Meet with 
Engr to discuss.
M
6 Obtain all supplier invoices showing sales taxes 
paid
RB/MS 30/03/21 Hold Hold Waiting for direction from Acctg. They will check 
with State for documentation requirements. 
M
7 Catwalk issues at test site ….. adequate strength 
for installation equipment?
AC 25/03/21 In progress 10/04/21 See memo 1/30/21 ABC to provide updated 
schedule for catwalks. Alternate methods may 
become necessary. Earliest start is June 15, 2021.
H
8 All sketches to be confirmed and turned over to 
Engr.
RB/MS 05/03/21 In progress 07/03/21 Most sketches received. See R.T. on this item H
9 Prototype test equipment needed at client beta site. RB/NJ 01/07/21 In progress 10/07/21 QA/QC lab to coordinate with field techs. H
Table developed by David Tennant72 The Core Team and Teamwork in Product Development
spreadsheet example. This tool can be discussed during status meetings: What’s been 
completed? What’s still open? Which new items need to be added? Those activities that 
have been completed can be moved to a second spreadsheet labeled “Closed.”
At the end of the project, you will have a complete listing of all “action items,” when 
they were completed, by whom, status, and any notes. This can also be used to docu￾ment key decisions.
Note in the above table that we can also assign a Priority: H, M, L (High, Medium, 
Low).
Status Reporting
Most projects have a weekly status meeting. This is the opportunity to discuss issues 
and walk through the Action Item list. This should be a quick overview. A monthly 
status report should be issued that covers:
● Events over the past 30 days
● Current challenges
● Tasks to be tackled over the next 30 days
● Brief discussion of budget and schedule
Note, if a project is only a few months in duration, it may be useful to have more fre￾quent meetings and status reports. The author has seen status reports up to 50 pages in 
length. These are for large dollar projects or programs (usually $50 million and up). 
However, who will read a 50-page report? These specific reports had full budgets and 
schedules embedded, along with project photos, and other documentation – all of 
which is unnecessary.
The above bullet points should be covered in around two pages maximum. It is 
acknowledged that some clients will want more detail. However, keep the report lim￾ited to two pages and provide further documentation as an attachment or appendix. 
NO ONE will read a 50-page status report.
Presentations
It has been stated that most people would rather have a root canal treatment than give 
a presentation. However, it will be important for you as a product manager to be com￾fortable giving presentations. This is true regardless of the size your organization: 
Fortune 100 company, single entrepreneur, or small business. You may be asked to 
give a presentation for the following:
● Status – The senior management of your company want a quarterly presentation of 
the project’s status. This may even include your firm’s Board of Directors.
● Investor Groups, Incubators, or Banks – Should you need funding or seek an incu￾bator for assistance, you will need to clearly pitch what your company, product, or 
idea is about. Note, investor groups and incubators are discussed at length in 
Chapter 6.
● Civic or Community Groups – This might be presentations on your new product to 
Rotary Clubs, Chambers of Commerce, business associations, etc.Project/Product Communication 73
● Mass Media – Should your new product or idea catch the attention of the media, you 
may be asked to do an interview. Think of Elon Musk, Richard Branson, and other 
high visibility people.
● Conferences – To promote your new product, presentations at conferences and trade 
shows may be appropriate.
Do the above forums make you nervous? Would you be capable of putting together 
an impactful presentation and deliver smoothly?
Everyone has varying degrees of comfort or experience in giving presentations. 
Unfortunately, the only way to get better at presentations, is to do them. Regardless of 
your current skill level, it is highly suggested that, in leadership positions, you will be 
expected to make presentations. If this is one of your weak points, there are many 
companies that offer courses in public speaking and many chapters of ToastmastersTM
are available nationwide. Toastmaster’s InternationalTM website offers the opportunity 
to look up local chapters.
https://www.toastmasters.org
This book does not cover the art of putting together presentations or how to utilize 
Microsoft PowerPointTM. But there are many tools, excellent books, and YouTube vid￾eos on putting together presentations. As a product manager, or in any role, giving 
effective presentations should be one of the tools in your toolbox.
Leadership in Product Development
Leadership is a vague and broad topic. What is leadership really? Can anyone develop 
their leadership skills? How does this relate to product development or project 
management?
First of all, leadership skills are necessary to encourage, direct, and motivate teams. 
It is needed to interact with and persuade people of influence (think senior manage￾ment) and to negotiate with suppliers or other functional areas. There are many defini￾tions of leadership; a few are listed below:
A Leader takes people where they would never go on their own.1
–Hans Finzel
Leadership is influence, period.2
– John Maxwell
Key elements of leadership include vision, character, commitment, leading 
change.3
– Dave Ulrich
Pick up any book on leadership and you will find a leader defined as someone:
● Having high personal integrity (Usually #1 on the list)
● Visionary
● Focused on Results74 The Core Team and Teamwork in Product Development
● Having strong interpersonal skills
● A great communicator
● Able to motivate others
● A change agent
● Follows through on commitments
● The ability to influence others
● Getting things done through other people
● Capable and confident.
New product development means working with and leading others in a team. Can 
we improve our leaderships skills? The answer is yes. However, it is noted that some 
people are born with natural charisma; others may simply have an engaging personal￾ity style, and not everyone can develop this. However, each of us can improve our 
leadership skills. Some of this is by learned behavior, observation, and taking specific 
steps for improvement. These could include taking courses in negotiating, conflict 
resolution, public speaking, decision making, and other topics.
Books on leadership, as demonstrated above, have several recurring themes. 
However, two of these that consistently appear are integrity and trust. If your team 
feels they cannot trust you, they will not follow you. Further, senior management will 
not give you authority or responsibility if they feel you lack integrity. It is a necessary 
ingredient for leadership.
Diving a little deeper on a few of the above bullets:
Visionary. This not the easiest perspective to visualize what the end result or prod￾uct will be. And, how to communicate the “vision” to the team. Sometimes, C-level 
leaders have challenges communicating their vision or end result to the team or 
employees. Steven Covey, in his book “The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People,” 
has a chapter entitled: “Begin with the End in Mind.” He goes on:
Begin with the end in mind is based on the principle that all things are created 
twice. There’s a mental or first creation, and a physical or second creation to all 
things.4
Change Agent. A leader wants to implement change, they are never happy with the 
status quo. Is your new product or idea a disruptive technology? Will it revolutionize 
the way people look at your product or its application? Whether promoting new prod￾ucts or ways of doing things, or changing a company’s culture, leaders are always look￾ing for a better way to do things, to implement change.
Follow Through on Commitments. Have you ever assigned a task to someone, with 
a deadline, and that person missed it? Or they gave you a less than satisfactory deliver￾able? What was your view of this person? Would you trust them again with an impor￾tant assignment? If you make a commitment to your boss, your team, or others, be sure 
to fulfill your assignment. If you think you will be late or need assistance, communi￾cate this; most people are reasonable and will offer help.
Getting Things Done Through Other People. For the most part, you cannot do 
everything. That’s why there’s a team. There will be times when you need to delegate Project/Product Communication 75
key tasks or activities to others. All good leaders learn the art of delegation. The key 
is to make sure the person you delegate to has the necessary skill set and 
commitment.
Capable and Confident. Successful leaders exude an aura of confidence. Leaders 
must have confidence in their abilities and the purpose of their vision. In developing 
and promoting your new product, do you believe in it? Do you feel confident in your 
abilities to bring it to fruition?
There is also a difference in the types of work performed by a leader vs. a manager 
(Table 4.4).
In his book, “The Five Dysfunctions of Teams,” Patrick Lencioni5
 identifies the 
following:
1. Absence of Trust
2. Fear of Conflict
3. Lack of Commitment
4. Avoidance of Accountability
5. Inattention to Results.
Most of the above are self-explanatory, but further discussion is needed for a few.
Fear of Conflict. People who avoid conflict do not make good leaders. In the early 
stages of team formation, there will always be conflict. This means constructive con￾flict, such as disagreements on approach, differences on setting priorities, budgets, 
etc. A good leader allows these discussions to continue (within a reasonable time 
frame). However, when conflict starts to become acrimonious, such as name calling, 
hard feelings, disruptive behavior, etc. a leader must step in quickly to diffuse the 
situation.
Avoidance of Accountability. The people on your team should he held accountable. 
Are deadlines being met? Did that contract get issued to the supplier on time? If people 
are not performing, your team is looking for you to fix the problem. Leaders are also 
held accountable: did the product get released on time? Are there production 
problems?
Table 4.4 Approaches to Work.
Leadership Management
Planning Strategies, vision, providing resources, 
funding, support, relationships
Develop budgets and schedules, 
staffing, confirm objectives, 
direct team
Execution Motivation, resolve high-level conflict, 
funding, people relationships, 
distribute information, obtain feedback
Resolve problems, control efforts, 
report status, assign tasks
Table by David Tennant76 The Core Team and Teamwork in Product Development
How Do Leaders Go Wrong?
Is ego a bad thing? To reach the levels of influence and to push your ideas along, a 
certain amount of ego is necessary. It is when ego gets out of control that things go 
wrong. How many times has someone been put in charge for the first time, and it goes 
to their head? Below is a listing of how leaders go off track:
● Abusive and arrogant
● Dictatorship in decision making
● Egocentric manner
● Poor interpersonal skills
● Absence of praise or affirmation
● Lack of delegation
● Poor communicator
● Oblivious to the corporate culture
● Poor listener.
A few of these bear further explanation:
Dictatorship in Decision Making. This means not allowing other opinions, or dis￾sent, in making key decisions. This is the opposite of open and honest teamwork and 
defines a leader with a larger than needed ego. These leaders are convinced of their 
invincibility and that they alone hold all the keys. It is always a good idea to solicit 
other opinions for important decisions. Four or five heads working together will 
always be better than one.
Poor Interpersonal Skills. As a leader, you should understand empathy, self-aware￾ness, and emotional intelligence. Yet, the author has worked with several high-level 
people who lacked some or all of these qualities. Having empathy means you can sense 
other people’s emotions and what they may be feeling. Self-awareness is knowing your 
own abilities, limitations, and emotions and how that may influence your behavior. 
And finally, emotional intelligence allows one to recognize, understand, and respond 
to the emotions of others. These are key ingredients that are needed to be a truly suc￾cessful leader.
Absence of Praise or Affirmation. People generally like to be acknowledged for 
having done an excellent job or task. Thanks for a job well done gives people confi￾dence, encourages them to do their best, and build morale for the team. The lack of 
affirmation can obviously do the opposite by discouraging people. Always provide 
praise for those doing an excellent job; or where appropriate, recognize the team.
Oblivious to the Corporate Culture. Corporate culture is one of those items that 
is hard to define. Basically, it is how people within the corporation behave and inter￾act with each other, their management, and customers. It is an unwritten set of 
expected behaviors. For example, high tech firms, such as GoogleTM or AppleTM have 
a more relaxed culture than, for example, utilities or banks. Dress codes are different 
and employees at high tech firms may find pool tables and beer in the break room. 
These are different from traditional work environments and leaders who are brought 
into a firm need to be aware of the corporate culture. If the culture (behaviors) needs 
changing, this will not happen overnight.The Roles of Accounting and Finance 77
In summary, strong teamwork and leadership must work together to be successful. 
The implications are that new product development (a project) will be more efficient, 
open communications will allow problems to emerge more quickly (and solved ear￾lier), and the efforts of a high performing team should translate into a better product 
and profitability.
Tabletop Discussion
1. What can I do personally to improve my own leadership skills?
2. What are some of the traits I have observed in leaders that I admire?
3. What will you do to develop people around you (or who work for you)?
4. What are some actions you can take as a leader to build morale?
5. How will you hold people accountable?
One technique is to observe leaders and mimic their behavior. For example, there 
are many videos of highly influential people on the internet giving speeches and pres￾entations. This includes business leaders, military and political figures, religious and 
community leaders. Watch their body movements (hands, facial expressions, posture) 
and observe their speaking style. Do they appear nervous? Anxious? Passionate? 
Excited? How are they dressed? One can learn a lot by observation – to the point where 
you can use their techniques to your advantage.
Similarly, observe leaders in your company or community.
The Roles of Accounting and Finance
The accounting department at any company has three primary responsibilities:
● Accounts Receivable – obtaining payment from clients or customers (cash in)
● Accounts Payable – providing payment to suppliers, employees, taxes, etc. (cash out)
● Developing reports, such as an annual report, internal budgets, and cost-tracking.
Note that accounting is not responsible for tracking in detail individual project or 
product development costs. This usually falls to the product manager and creates dif￾ferent issues for the product development team.
Typically, a PM will receive accounting reports that indicate the dollar amounts 
expended and the amount of funding left in the product’s account. This is different 
from tracking a budget and schedule in detail, which is what a product/project man￾ager requires. To a large degree, the PM must develop a schedule and supporting 
budget spreadsheets to accurately track a product’s development.
A Sample Product Budget
Table 4.5 is a representation of a product budget. The development effort is scheduled 
for 8 months and will cost just under $8 million. Note that this is also a cash flow dia￾gram, shown in graphic form in Figure 4.5. This cash flow illustrates the dollars 
required on a monthly basis. It will be possible for the PM to compare monthly, how 
much funds are expended compared against the cash flow plan.
Figure 4.5 illustrates the cashflow graph for this project.Table 4.5 Sample Budget.
Month TTLs 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
New Widget Product Budget
Capital investment – New Mfg Line
Numeric control machines (4) $4,000,000 $400,000 $3,600,000
Building modifications
Electrical $696,500 $20,000 $34,500 $50,000 $147,000 $175,000 $200,000 $50,000 $20,000
Mechanical $227,000 $- $- $35,000 $55,000 $60,000 $60,000 $12,000 $5,000
Packaging $26,500 $25,000 $1,500
Purchase testing equipment $200,000 $- $- $75,000 $125,000 $- $- $- $-
Engineering – Product Dev $600,000 $50,000 $50,000 $100,000 $100,000 $75,000 $75,000 $75,000 $75,000
Elect – product circuit design $230,000 $- $- $35,000 $35,000 $40,000 $40,000 $40,000 $40,000
R&D $480,000 $60,000 $60,000 $60,000 $60,000 $60,000 $60,000 $60,000 $60,000
Project Team $480,000 $60,000 $60,000 $60,000 $60,000 $60,000 $60,000 $60,000 $60,000
Supplier raw materials $142,000 $20,000 $20,000 $20,000 $20,000 $30,000 $20,000 $12,000 $-
Prototype development $208,000 $10,000 $24,000 $24,000 $15,000 $15,000 $40,000 $40,000 $40,000
Testing and data collection $60,000 $- $- $10,000 $10,000 $10,000 $10,000 $10,000 $10,000
Technicians $80,000 $10,000 $10,000 $10,000 $10,000 $10,000 $10,000 $10,000 $10,000
Overhead $371,000 $24,000 $27,000 $52,000 $72,000 $58,000 $63,000 $40,000 $35,000
Totals $7,801,000 $254,000 $285,500 $931,000 $734,000 $593,000 $638,000 $409,000 $3,956,500
Table developed by David TennantThe Roles of Accounting and Finance 79
Pro Forma Modeling
Most companies will develop a proposed cashflow model or proforma that provides a 
visual means to determine margins and payback over a specified timeframe as shown 
in Table 4.6 which represents a new Software deployment to customers.
Note that this pro forma represents one year of costs and revenues and they are esti￾mates. In this instance we make the following assumptions:
● The company did a feasibility study
● Development and testing successfully occurred in January and February
● Marketing did adequate research and SWOT review
● Sales teams are ready to sell to customers
● Pricing has been determined through market research
● Distribution channels are in place
● An advertising campaign is ready to launch.
Note that the number of customers who are interested in and ultimately buy the prod￾uct are estimates. The costs, revenues, and profits (net income) are based on these 
estimates. Based on projections in Table 4.6, breakeven occurs in month three (going 
from a loss to a profit).
1. What would the net income look like if the revenue (i.e., customer count) is lower 
than expected? What effect would this have on costs?
2. What if the product is wildly successful? How would this impact the company if the 
number of customers was significantly higher?
If the customer count is lower, it is likely that some cost would be lower (travel, legal, 
cost of sales, etc.). However, this may infer that more money needs to be expended in 
marketing and sales efforts to boost revenue. It would also likely shift the breakeven 
point further out. Note also that this product has very high margins; $53 million 
 $0
 $500,000
 $1,000,000
 $1,500,000
 $2,000,000
 $2,500,000
 $3,000,000
 $3,500,000
 $4,000,000
 $4,500,000
1 2345678
Figure 4.5 Product Cash Flow.Table 4.6 Sample Proforma Developed by David Tennant.
Product Zed Software and Services Proforma
Item Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec TTLs
No. of New Customers 0 0 10 10 20 25 40 60 70 100 100 100
Gross Revenue
Basic Software package = $55,000 $550,000 $550,000 $1,100,000 $1,375,000 $2,200,000 $3,300,000 $3,850,000 $5,500,000 $5,500,000 $5,500,000 $29,425,000
Deployment (consulting) = $20,000 $200,000 $200,000 $400,000 $500,000 $800,000 $1,200,000 $1,400,000 $2,000,000 $2,000,000 $2,000,000 $10,700,000
Add-on Optional Modules = $15,000 $- $- $150,000 $150,000 $300,000 $375,000 $600,000 $900,000 $1,050,000 $1,500,000 $1,500,000 $1,500,000 $8,025,000
Customer Training (per cost) = $35,000 $350,000 $350,000 $700,000 $875,000 $1,400,000 $2,100,000 $2,450,000 $3,500,000 $3,500,000 $3,500,000 $18,725,000
Gross Revenue $- $- $1,250,000 $1,250,000 $2,500,000 $3,125,000 $5,000,000 $7,500,000 $8,750,000 $12,500,000 $12,500,000 $12,500,000 $66,875,000
Expenses A&G
Special test equipment $375,000 $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $375,000
Software Deployment – Subset $50,000 $68,000 $250,000 $400,000 $400,000 $400,000 $450,000 $500,000 $550,000 $650,000 $650,000 $650,000 $5,018,000
CIA/QC of new Software Testing $75,000 $125,000 $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $200,000
Internal Sales and Technician Training $20,000 $50,000 $50,000 $50,000 $50,000 $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $220,000
Customer Beta Test and Deployment $25,000 $25,000 $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $50,000
Travel Expenses $- $- $50,000 $100,000 $100,000 $150,000 $200,000 $250,000 $300,000 $450,000 $450,000 $450,000 $2,500,000
Marketing and PR $250,000 $250,000 $200,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $1,600,000
External Consultants $80,000 $100.000 $125,000 $50,000 $10,500 $- $- $- $- $- $- $- $365,500
Legal – Contracts, guidance $3,500 $3,000 $25,000 $25,000 $25,000 $25,000 $25,000 $25,000 $25,000 $25,000 $25,000 $25,000 $256,500
Trade shows, conferences, webinars $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $1,00,000
Cost of sales, delivery, etc. $125,000 $125,000 $125,000 $125,000 $125,000 $200,000 $200,000 $250,000 $250,000 $250,000 $250,000 $250,000 $2,275,000
Total Expenses $1,103,500 $846,000 $925,000 $950,000 $910,500 $975,000 $1,075,000 $1,225,000 $1,325,000 $1,575,000 $1,475,000 $1,475,000 $13,860,000
Net Income $(1,103,500) $(846,000) $325,000 $300,000 $1,589,500 $2,150,000 $3,925,000 $6,275,000 $7,425,000 $10,925,000 $11,025,000 $11,025,000 $53,015,000Decision Points and Net Present Value (NPV) 81
estimated for the first year. It would take a significant downturn in sales before this 
product would be a loser.
If the sales numbers were much higher, this could also have a negative impact. If 
sales were double the projections, would there be enough staff to support twice the 
deployments? Would the company need to quickly hire more technicians and software 
engineers to support this effort?
It is likely the company would perform sensitivity analysis to determine costs, prof￾its, and support staff needed based on both less and more customers. It should be 
apparent that both marketing and sales are necessary for product success.
Decision Points and Net Present Value (NPV)
It is important to remember that companies are in business to make a profit. If profit￾ability is missing, the company will ultimately go out of business: no employees or 
payroll, no taxes paid to local governments, and less economic activity in the business’ 
community.
Throughout the development of a new product, there will be strategic reviews or 
“gates” through which the project must pass to continue funding, as described earlier. 
One yardstick that measure a product’s viability is net present value (NPV). In NPV 
analysis, we take all the future cash flows (in and out) and discount them to today’s 
cost. This allows one to compare several projects (or potential products) and select the 
most profitable scenario.
The NPV relies on a discount rate, required company return and inflation that is 
based on the cost of the capital required to make the investment. Note that investment 
in this context could be a project, new product, company acquisition, or joint venture 
with another firm. Also, is it important to realize that any NPV analysis makes assump￾tions about the future that may be unreliable.
A few points to keep in mind:
All companies have a required rate of return. Does your company require a 20% 
return on investments (ROI)? 25%? 30%? More? Some companies may want to take 
inflation into account. 2%? 3%? 5%? And, if your company is borrowing the funds, the 
cost of capital (interest rate) would require inclusion.
Suppose a company wants to invest in one of three products/projects. Each project 
is estimated at $2 million, but your firm only has enough money to invest in one of 
them. How would we choose which product to invest in? NPV analysis can answer this 
from a purely financial perspective.
Let’s look at a potential investment and first construct a cash flow table (Table 4.7) 
based on a six-year timeframe:
The cashflows out are negative as this is money your company is spending on the 
development of a new product.
In year three, we are starting to see income (i.e., revenue) from our new product, 
which is represented by a positive number. The difference between the outflow and 
inflow for each year is the net income, which is negative for the first three years. 
However, is this product meeting our company’s required Return on Investment 
(ROI)? Assume that our company requires a 15% return on investment, and we also 
want to consider inflation over six years. How would we determine this? The answer 
is a NPV evaluation.82 The Core Team and Teamwork in Product Development
Table 4.8 takes the information in Table 4.7 and performs further analysis to deter￾mine the Net Present Value of this product’s development. That is, it is taking the 
estimated future cash flows, and bringing them back to today’s value.
Notes about Table 4.8
Our company’s required rate of return (same as ROI, in this case) is 15%. We can also 
account for inflation for an average of 2% over the next two years. The “t” equals the 
year and is an exponent.
In the formula, t = the year. This is needed to calculate the discount factor for each 
year. In this table:
Year one, t = 0
Year two, t = 1
Table 4.7 Simple Cash Flow.
New Product Cashflows
Year Outflow Inflow Net
1 $ (2,500,000) $0 $ (2,500,000)
2 $ (5,000,000) $0 $ (5,000,000)
3 $ (1,500,000) $ 400,000 $ (1,100,000)
4 $0 $ 3,500,000 $ 3,500,000
5 $0 $ 5,500,000 $ 5,500,000 
6 $0 $ 6,000,000 $ 6,000,000 
TTLs $ (9,000,000) $ 15,400,000 $ 6,400,000
Table Developed by David Tennant
Table 4.8 NPV Calculation.
Year Outflow Inflow Net Discount Factor* NPV
1 $ (2,500,000) $0 $ (2,500,000) 1.0000 $ (2,500,000)
2 $ (5,000,000) $0 $ (5,000,000) 0.8547 $ (4,273,504)
3 $ (1,500,000) $ 400,000 $ (1,100,000) 0.7305 $ (803,565)
4 $0 $ 3,500,000 $ 3,500,000 0.6244 $ 2,185,297 
5 $0 $ 5,500,000 $ 5,500,000 0.5337 $ 2,935,075 
6 $0 $ 6,000,000 $ 6,000,000 0.4561 $ 2,736,667 
TTLs $ (9,000,000) $ 15,400,000 $ 6,400,000 $ 279,970 
* discount factor = 1/(1 + k + p) exp t
k = ROI = 15%; p = inflation = 2%
Table developed by David TennantDecision Points and Net Present Value (NPV) 83
Year three, t = 2
Year four, t = 3
Year five, t = 4
Year six, t = 5
Remember from algebra that any power raised to zero = 1. So here are the first three 
years of calculated discount formulas:
1/ (1 + .15 + .02)t = 1/ (1.17)t
Year 1: 1/ (1.17)0 = 1/1 = 1
Year 2: 1/ (1.17)1 = 1/1.17 = 0.8547
Year 3: 1/ (1.17)2 = 1/1.3689 = 0.7305
Year four, five and six follow the same logic which is how we get the numbers in 
Figure 4.6. Note that the total NPV = $279,970. What does this number mean? Consider 
the following:
If the company was getting exactly 17% (15% for required return plus 2% for infla￾tion), the total NPV would equal zero (NPV = 0). Anything greater than zero means 
that the company is making more than 15%. Since $279,970 is larger than zero, this 
product will make over 15%.
If the total NPV was a negative number (i.e., NPV < 0), this would mean the com￾pany is making less that it’s required 15% return.
Some notes on Net Present Value:
The NPV is based on assumptions, which could be wrong. For example, the inflows 
might be less, (or more) depending on sales (cash inflow). Inflation might go higher, 
which could also affect the NPV.
What do we do if our total NPV is negative? A number of things: we can stretch out 
the time from six years to eight years or longer. That might help, and we can also look 
at cutting costs. But note that “Figures don’t lie, but liars do figure.” The author has 
seen instances where an analyst will play with the numbers until the “right” NPV is 
reached (zero or higher). Be aware of what assumptions are used in developing the 
NPV. Usually, companies will do a sensitivity analysis to determine what the NPV will 
be over several scenarios.
$(50,00,000)
$(40,00,000)
$(30,00,000)
$(20,00,000)
$(10,00,000)
$-
$10,00,000
$20,00,000
$30,00,000
$40,00,000
0 1 23456 7
NPV=0
Figure 4.6 NPV Graph. Figure by David Tennant84 The Core Team and Teamwork in Product Development
This NPV example was presented so the reader can understand how NPV is calculated 
and what it means. NPV can be easily calculated using Excel functions, eliminating the 
need to construct tables. Some hand-held business calculators will also do this function.
It is also important to note that NPV analysis is extremely useful in comparing mul￾tiple projects. Consider Table 4.9 New Product Selection. Our senior team has per￾formed an analysis of several potential new products. Suppose your company has $12 
million to invest in new product development projects. Based on this table which 
products should your company invest?
There are a number of factors to consider in addition to NPV in this example.
With only $12 million available, this would eliminate projects three and four. Project 
4 would be a stretch, but it is likely that an additional $725,000 could be found, or if 
necessary borrowing the funds could be arranged. However, in this case, the company 
has done a risk review to assess their chances of success. The two most expensive prod￾ucts on this list are high risks and have the longest payback times.
Therefore, for this company it would make sense to invest their dollars in projects 
one and two. Both products are low risk, have reasonably quick payback times and the 
NPVs are healthy. Both projects would come in under the $12 million threshold and 
would be profitable based on net present values. Project five, while under the invest￾ment threshold, has the lowest NPV and therefore, is eliminated.
The Bigger Picture
The previous discussions about budgets, cash flows, and NPV are extremely important 
in new product development. First and foremost, companies rely on NPV to determine 
if a product is worth pursuing or continuing. Once the project is put into motion it is 
important that the NPV analysis remain positive at all gate or review points. One way 
to keep the NPV positive is to closely monitor and control the budget. If your project 
starts to go over budget (additional cash out), this will impact the project’s NPV. Several 
points to keep in mind:
● It is important that your new product’s anticipated development costs and schedule 
are realistic. This will be determined by the scope assigned to your project and how 
deftly the PM controls the budget.
Table 4.9 New Product Selection.
Project No.
Investment 
Required
Dev. Time Frame 
(Yrs) I
Risk Rank 1 = low 
10 = high NPV
Expected 
Payback (yrs)
1 $5,000,000 1.5 2 325 4
2 $3,250,100 2 3 401 3
3 $15,000,500 3 8 130 4
4 $12,725,000 5 9 390 5.5
5 $7,565,000 4 5 121 3
Table Developed by David TennantDriving Product Development 85
● It is important that the project team develop an accurate cash flow table.
● If the project goes significantly over budget and NPV becomes negative, there is a 
good chance upper management will cancel the project.
● NPV analysis considers the time value of money.
It cannot be stated more clearly that the Product Manager must manage the budget 
and minimize product changes (i.e., be profitable), which add to the overall costs. If 
development costs are out of control, the new product will never succeed. Note that 
Agile Project Management, primarily an application for software and systems prod￾ucts, thrives on continuous change. Agile is discussed further in Chapter 5.
What are some of the circumstances under which products in development get 
canceled?
● Change in leadership at the company. A change in top leadership means that new 
priorities will be set, some projects (or products) canceled, and different new ones 
put in motion.
● A competitor beats your company to market. This should illustrate that time and 
schedules are important. Time is also money.
● The product/project goes significantly over budget with NPV showing a negative 
return.
● Technical obsolescence. Technology changes so quickly in today’s world that new prod￾ucts may be technically or functionally obsolete before development is completed.
● The regulatory environment can change. For example, environmental concerns are 
pushing public policy away from internal combustion engines (found in all cars and 
trucks) and towards clean energy fuels such as electric vehicles, natural gas or, 
potentially hydrogen. Some products live and die by regulations.
Do products/projects really get canceled? The answer is yes, more than you think.
Driving Product Development
Who is best suited to lead the product development effort? Which functional area 
should be in charge: Marketing? R&D? Engineering?
One of the three functional areas above will typically drive the development effort. Most 
commonly, marketing is the probable candidate. But, besides the functional area and mar￾ket knowledge, what other aspects are important? The author has seen numerous product 
development efforts and can identify several personal characteristics for success.
1. Experience in managing projects. The failure in products or projects is many times 
due to a lack of detailed planning and execution methodology and inexperienced 
project leaders. This is a key success factor in any project. Without this expertise, it 
is likely that budget and schedule targets will be missed, communications will be 
poor, and “firefighting” will be a common practice.
2. Trust and Integrity. No one likes to work for an overbearing dictator or micro man￾ager. Also, those with huge egos may intimidate people. These styles stifle creativ￾ity, suppress open discussion and ideas, and can drive the best people away.
The most effective product or project leaders are those who provide guidance, 
encourage trust and open communications, provide the tools or resources neces￾sary for success, and make key decisions by consensus (with input from the team). 86 The Core Team and Teamwork in Product Development
Additionally, they are knowledgeable in the core principles of project management 
(discussed in another chapter).
3. Strong communication skills. Poor communication skills can create misunderstand￾ings and conflict. Effective leaders are comfortable in writing memos and reports, 
and in presenting. Instructions should be clear, concise, and easily understood.
4. Is comfortable in building relationships. To get things done and coordinate with 
other departments or functional areas, the PM must be adept at approaching peo￾ple to ask for assistance (and this is a two-way street, offer assistance when needed), 
regardless of the level (junior manager up to the C-suite). Building relationships is 
important and a skill all leaders possess.
Tabletop Discussion
1. Think about the last time you enjoyed working on a team. What made it 
enjoyable?
2. Think about the team leader on that assignment. What attributes did he or she pos￾sess that you found attractive?
3. Does the team leader need to be a technical expert?
4. What strengths do you possess that would be good for product development and 
team leadership?
Working in Silos and with Stakeholders
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, companies are organized by functional areas. 
And, depending on the corporate culture, communications across those areas can be 
difficult. Further, some functional managers may be overly protective of their “turf.” 
In any project, and especially new product development, it is necessary that commu￾nications and operations are not impeded.
Discussion Case 4.1 – Organizational Conflict: A True Case Study
This Fortune 100 company had anywhere from 200 to 400 technical projects ongoing 
at any time. Also included were around five or six new products in development. The 
company, headquartered in the Southeast United States, has over 27,000 employees 
and has annual revenue of $20 billion. Some of the projects were small (duration: one 
to three months, under $250,000) and others, very large (duration: over four months to 
24 months and millions of dollars). The company had a large engineering organiza￾tion. Two of the managers within the engineering department disliked each other and 
each did their best to antagonize the other.
In one instance, the manager of electrical engineering accused the manager of 
instrumentation and controls (I&C) of “grabbing his work.” There was some truth to 
this, and the I&C manager was deliberately probing as he knew this would irritate the 
other manager. In some companies, I&C and electrical engineering are closely related 
and may even be within the same department discipline or design group. In this com￾pany, they are separate, distinct groups. They were both supporting a new product 
development effort and their in-fighting was taking a toll on the team as well as put￾ting the product behind schedule.Identifying Stakeholders 87
The organization was highly siloed and coordination between groups was unpre￾dictable. Assume you are the Product Management leader. Consider the following:
1. How would you handle this ongoing, organizational conflict?
2. What are your chances of getting the two managers to work with each other?
3. Since this is an organizational issue, how can we resolve this?
4. Is this a case of personality conflict?
5. What does your team expect of you, the product manager?
Poor communications aggravated by differing personality styles, can derail the best of 
intentions and new products. As the product leader, your team is looking to you for 
leadership in resolving conflict, providing inspiration, clear communications, provid￾ing supporting resources, and staying focused on results.
Working in silos refers to employees working strictly within their department with 
minimal communications or coordination outside of their department. This is clearly 
not the best scenario for the matrixed organization where teams are formed from vari￾ous functional areas. This is an organizational issue and not one that a PM can resolve 
at his or her level. However, as the project/product leader, the PM is expected to reach 
across silo barriers and coordinate the various groups. It should be one of the PMs 
fundamental competencies.
Identifying Stakeholders
What is a stakeholder? The classic definition is anyone who can impact your project 
(or product) or be impacted by your project (or product).
Developing a product or service is a project. It involves a team working toward a 
common goal, a sponsor (usually providing funding), end users, distributors, and sup￾pliers. However, it should be noted that some stakeholders are more important. For 
example, the C-suite (CFO, CEO, COO, etc.) may be very interested and engaged with 
your new product’s development. Perhaps the supply chain group, is playing a minor 
role. However, be assured that it is necessary to identify all the stakeholders that are 
involved in your development effort.
What happens if we overlook an important stakeholder? When the stakeholder (per￾haps a high-level Director or VP) finds out, he or she will want changes. “Why wasn’t 
I informed of this?” “I want to see some additional features.” This will mean changes 
to the product’s design, which will impact the overall cost and schedule – most likely 
in a negative fashion.
What can we do to identify all stakeholders? There are several techniques:
● Determine who is funding the project and ask him or her who are the key players.
● Look at the WBS (Work Breakdown Structure) to determine which functional areas 
and suppliers are involved (WBS is described in a subsequent chapter).
● Go to each functional area that you know is engaged in the product and ask 
questions
Once the stakeholders are identified, a table showing the stakeholders can be devel￾oped. Table 4.10 is a sample stakeholder listing.88 The Core Team and Teamwork in Product Development
Table 4.10 Stakeholders in Project X.
Name Title Role Influence
J. Edwards Sr. VP Marketing Sponsor High
M. Dowd Mgr. Engineering Product Design High
M. Henry VP sales Product Distribution High
B. Johnson Supplier Brochure Development Low
J. Perez Supplier Test Equipment Low
L. Cincotti Sr. Buyer Procurement Med
G. Hinson Plant Manager Manufacturing High
L. McCarty Mgr. Quality Product testing Med
J. Nelson Corp. Attorney Legal – review contracts Med
B. Walcott Mgr. Contracts Supplier – distribution High
Table developed by David Tennant
Note that those stakeholders with a high level of influence should be kept fully 
informed of product status through meetings, status reports, and other means. In other 
words, you should do a lot of “hand holding.” Those with medium to low influence are 
probably not kept informed to the same degree but recognize that their participation 
in the project is still important.
A part of your role as the Product Manager is to manage the stakeholders. Note that 
this entails a lot of relationship building. If you do not manage the stakeholders, they 
will manage you and you do not want four or five stakeholders directing your efforts. 
It is important that relationships are formed, and key stakeholders’ requirements and 
expectations are made known.
Note that requirements (technical, commercial, functional, etc.) are generally easy to 
determine. It is the expectations that are the hard part. What are expectations? It includes 
those intangible items that usually aren’t stated or obvious. For example, perhaps the 
sales team is expecting a light-weight gizmo. The engineering manager envisions a 
robust and weighty case based on expected use. The engineering and sales teams may 
have different ideas about the final product but haven’t specifically stated this. This 
could further translate to color of the product, shape, differentiation of market tastes, etc.
It is important that expectations are expressed so that these can be incorporated into 
the product’s design features. How do we determine expectations? Relationships.
Chapter Key Points
● All projects, including product development, must support the company’s strategic 
plan.
● The sponsoring executive provides funding, support, and resolves conflict that the 
team cannot resolve on its own.
● Project management principles are needed to plan, design, develop, and launch a 
new product or project.Identifying Stakeholders 89
● In developing a new product, there will be a variety of functional areas involved.
● Sarbanes-Oxley has had an influence on how accounting, finance, supply chain, and 
almost every functional area operates in a publicly held company. Ensure that extra 
time (and possibly budget) is allocated to your project.
● Teamwork is vital to product/project success.
● It is necessary that the product or project manager monitors and controls the budget 
and schedule. If the budget is overrun significantly (making the NPV negative), the 
new product or project may be canceled.
● NPV (net present value) is a measure of a project’s profitability.
● It is important that all stakeholders are identified, and relationship-building occurs 
with the highly influential ones.
● The product/project leader must keep the “big picture” in mind: coordinating budg￾ets and schedules, motivating the team, building relationships, controlling expendi￾tures, visualizing the deliverable, and staying focused on results.
● The product/project manager must possess leadership skills to be successful.
● Anyone can develop and improve their leadership skills.
● Identifying stakeholders is important. This will help clarify product features and 
desires.
Discussion Questions
1. Sometimes, executives do not know their role in projects. Some are completely 
“hands off” and feel once they provide funding, the project is in the hands of the 
project team. Others may tend to be overly involved, meaning they are microman￾aging the team. What are your thoughts on this? How would you deal with each 
of these supporting executives?
2. Why is the development of a new product considered a project?
3. When a company is “publicly held,” what does this mean?
4. Within your own company, how has Sarbanes-Oxley affected how you plan and 
execute a project? (This assumes your company is publicly held.)
5. Who should manage a new product’s development, an engineering manager, or a 
marketing manager?
6. Why is Net Present Value important?
7. Why is controlling budget and schedule important?
8. Your company has $10 million to invest in a new product. The marketing and 
finance groups have identified three strong projects, but you only have enough 
money to invest in one of them. The following NPVs have been determined. From 
a purely financial perspective, which one should your company choose?
Project 1. NPV = $23,000
Project 2. NPV = 0
Project 3. NPV = $51,000
9. As the team leader, you must motivate your team. What are some actions you can 
take to keep team morale high?
10. What are some of the techniques we can use to identify project stakeholders?
11. To be a leader, personal integrity is a necessary ingredient. However, senior exec￾utives of Enron, Tyco, and Worldcom landed in prison. How is it that leaders 
of these companies ended up in this situation? Did they lose their integrity along 
the way?Scope Change Request Form
Note: changes above $20,000 require approval by vice president or higher
Figure 4.7 Scope Change Request – Sample. Developed by David TennantIdentifying Stakeholders 91
Discussion Case 4.1 Organizational Conflict – Discussion Questions Answers
1. How would you handle this ongoing, organizational conflict?
It is a failure of senior management that this organizational conflict has been allowed 
to continue. Since this is endemic to the organization, the only solution is change at 
(or from) the top.
2. What are your chances of getting the two managers to work with each other?
It should be apparent that these two managers dislike each other and will not be 
warming up to each other anytime soon. However, both will recognize that they must 
support the project as part of their job responsibilities. It is likely they will provide the 
needed support, but you will need to manage this situation and possibly act as referee 
on occasion. It would be best for you to interact and let each provide their deliverables 
with as little interaction as possible.
3. Since this is an organizational issue, and has happened with other departments, 
how can we resolve this?
See the answer to number 1 above. Beyond that, you may need to start up the chain of 
command (starting with your immediate boss) to move things along.
4. Is this a case of personality conflict?
Most assuredly. Both managers are strong “driver” personality types.
5. What does your team expect of you, the product manager?
You are expected to lead the project. This includes motivating your team, resolving 
conflict, coordinating the various stakeholders, communicating up and down the 
organization, controlling budgets and schedules, running meetings, and knowing the 
right questions to ask.
Discussion Questions – Answers
1. Sometimes, executives do not know their role in projects. Some are completely 
“hands off” and feel once they provide funding, the project is in the hands of the 
project team. Others may tend to be overly involved, meaning they are microman￾aging the team. What are your thoughts on this? How would you deal with each of 
these supporting executives?
This can be tricky. A lot depends on the company culture and the individual personal￾ity style of the sponsoring executive. Building a relationship with the sponsor will help 
with this issue. Also, if you have a strong track record of achievement, he or she is likely 
to give you more freedom of operation. If you are not well known to the sponsor, you 
may find he or she is more demanding until there is a higher comfort level with your 
demonstrated abilities and skills. Nonetheless, relationship building and regular 
“check ins” with the sponsor will be beneficial in dealing with both types.
2. Why is the development of a new product considered a project?
New product development is a “project” in the following context:
● It will have a budget and schedule
● There will be milestones
● Most likely, you will have gate reviews
● The risks (potential problems) associated with the new product must be identified 
and mitigated
● Quality is paramount to success92 The Core Team and Teamwork in Product Development
● You will need to lead a team and be responsible for resources
● Supply chain will be involved with any purchasing activities
● The scope of the new product development must be defined and controlled.
3. When a company is “publicly held,” what does this mean?
This means your company is listed on the US Stock exchange. It issues stock to inves￾tors who are then legally owners of the company. It is one way that companies can 
raise money without borrowing the funds. The owners invest cash in the company in 
exchange for stock (ownership).
4. Within your own company, how has Sarbanes-Oxley affected how you plan and 
execute a project? (This assumes your company is publicly held.)
If your company is publicly held, it is required to conduct its financial reporting with 
more transparency and company operations have stringent controls in place. This 
affects most functional areas.
5. Who should manage a new product’s development, an engineering manager, or a 
marketing manager?
This is most likely dependent on the company culture, the type of company, and the 
type of product being developed. If it is a general merchandise or manufacturing com￾pany, it may be a marketing person leading the effort. If a highly technical firm (e.g., 
Apple, Google, etc.), it may be an engineering person leading the group. In a medical 
products company, it could be either person.
6. Why is Net Present Value important?
NPV takes future cash flows (dollars leaving and coming in) over a specific time period 
and brings the costs back to today’s value. It determines the profitability of a project 
based on the time value of money and a company’s required return on investment. It 
is very useful when comparing multiple projects.
7. Why is controlling budget and schedule important?
If the costs get out of control, it is possible that your project may be canceled as the 
profitability has disappeared. Schedule is important and this also represents money. 
If your schedule starts to slip, then the budget will most likely also slip. Further, sched￾ule delays may give your competitors time to beat you to market.
8. Your company has $10 million to invest in a new product. The marketing and 
finance groups have identified three strong projects, but you only have enough 
money to invest in one of them. The following NPVs have been determined. From 
a purely financial perspective, which one should your company choose?
Project 1. NPV = $23,000
Project 2. NPV = 0
Project 3. NPV = $51,000
Although each of the three projects above is profitable, the largest NPV offers the best 
return on investment. Therefore Project 3 should be selected.
9. As the team leader, you must motivate your team. What are some actions you can 
take to keep team morale high?
There are a number of activities the project leader can take to build morale:
● Take the team to a professional ball game
● Provide high-quality cups, plagues, tee shirts, etc. emblazoned with the company or 
project logoNotes 93
● Have the sponsoring executive honor those team members who have gone beyond 
expectations with recognition and/or a spot cash bonus
● When a major milestone is reached, celebrate with cash rewards, gift cards, etc.
10. What are some of the techniques we can use to identify project stakeholders?
● Determine who is funding the project and ask him or her who are the key players.
● Look at the WBS (Work Breakdown Structure) to determine which functional 
areas and suppliers are involved.
● Go to each functional area that you know is engaged in the product and ask 
questions.
11. To be a leader, personal integrity is a necessary ingredient. However, senior exec￾utives of Enron, Tyco, and Worldcom landed in prison. How is it that leaders of 
these companies ended up in this situation? Did they lose their integrity along 
the way?
Several perspectives can be presented for this question.
● The investigators and prosecutors in these cases felt that the senior executives were 
greedy. By falsifying the accounting reporting, they were able to keep the stock 
prices of these companies artificially high. And all were compensated on keeping 
the stock price high with stock options.
● Some would suggest that our economic system (capitalism) has an over-reliance 
on short term performance. That is, will the company make their quarterly sales 
and revenue numbers? Will they pay a stock dividend next quarter? Will they beat 
or miss Wall Street analysts expectations? These types of expectation put pressure 
on executives to meet numbers (or risk losing their jobs).
● To meet shareholder and Wall Street expectations, it is theorized that Enron cooked 
their books thinking, we’ll make up for it with next quarters sales and revenues. 
When the next quarter’s sales miss expectations, the books are cooked again and 
over time, the numbers fall further and further from reality.
● Enron’s accounting firm, Arthur Anderson, made more money in consulting to 
Enron than by auditing their financial statements. Consequently, there was a 
strong conflict-of-interest in this relationship. The accounting firm worked hard to 
“justify” the auditing that was performed, even though it was illegal. Arthur 
Anderson went bankrupt as a result of the investigation; and, Sarbanes-Oxley leg￾islation has clearly stated the required separation of consulting and auditing 
activities.
Notes
1 Finzel, H., The Top Ten Mistakes Leaders Make, David C. Cook pub, Colorado Springs, 
CO, 2007.
2 Maxwell, J., The 21 Indispensable Qualities of a Leader, Thomas Nelson, Inc., pub, 
Nashville, TN 1999.
3 Ulrich, D., Results-Based Leadership, Harvard Business School Press, 1999.
4 Steven Covey, The Seven Habits of Highly Successful People, Simon and Schuster, New 
York, NY, 1989.94 The Core Team and Teamwork in Product Development
Bibliography
Garrison, R. and Noreen, E. (1997). Managerial Accounting, 8th e. McGraw-Hill.
Jordan, B., Ross, S., and Westerfield, R. (1998). Fundamentals of Corporate Finance, 4th e. 
McGraw-Hill.
Mantel, S. and Meredith, J. (2002). Project Management, A Managerial Approach. John 
Wiley and Sons, pub.
Zenger, J. and Folkman, J. (2002). The Extraordinary Leader. McGraw-Hill.95
Product Development: An Engineer’s Guide to Business Considerations, Real-World Product Testing, and 
Launch, First Edition. David V. Tennant. 
© 2022 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2022 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
5
Getting Started – Project Approved
Product/Project Management and Engineering
Taking the Business Case from Concept to Reality
As discussed in Chapter 2, the business case is a detailed analysis or feasibility study to 
develop a new product, merge or acquire another firm, or have the company embark 
in a new direction. The business case should contain enough information and recom￾mendations that the executive team can make an informed decision. Recall the 
“typical” Table of Contents:
● Summary and Introduction
● Objectives
● Description of new product/project
● Why should the company do this 
(what is driving this effort)?
● Cost-benefit analysis (ROI, NPV) 
● Legal and regulatory issues
● Estimated costs and timeline
● Resources needed
● Social implications
● Alternatives considered
● Recommendations 
Once a decision has been made to move forward, the contents of the business 
case must come to life. How will this occur? The “project” leader will pull together 
the needed resources and bring all the business case contents to fruition. Ideally, 
the product team will have had some input during the creation of the business 
case.
However, there are a few red flags to be aware of in the transition.
A business case may go into great detail and analysis regarding scope, costs, sched￾ule, etc., but the real planning will occur once the development project is approved, 
and the team is mobilized.
The true costs, ROI, logistics and other details are difficult to quantify in the 
business case. This is because cost estimates or supplier quotes are budgetary, 
timelines are based on best guess scenarios and resources are always assumed to be 
available when needed. Consequently, the product’s development will have signifi￾cant costs and risk potential. It will take formal supplier quotes and a full cost 
analysis of each task or activity associated with the project to obtain the true costs 
of development.
Like costs, schedules are typically high level, lacking in detail. A real schedule will 
be dependent on supplier deliveries, acquiring people talent when needed, and consid￾ering risks or potential problems.96 Getting Started – Project Approved
Engineering, Research and Development: What does this mean?
Research and Development (R&D) can apply to a variety of activities. However, 
there are two types of research: Basic and Applied.
Basic Research
Basic research is focused on expanding knowledge and creating new theories (or 
modifying existing ones) simply for the sake of knowledge. Basic research strives to 
study new ideas (sometimes called pure or fundamental research), is curiosity driven 
and aims to seek new knowledge that can be universally applied. For the most part, 
it is theoretical. Most basic research is performed by government laboratories, uni￾versities, think tanks, and sometimes private industry. Examples of basic research 
include:
1. CERN is the European Organization for Nuclear Research. Literally, it is derived 
from the French CERN, an acronym for the French Conseil European pour la 
Recherche Nucléaire.1
CERN’s mission is the study of fundamental particle physics using particle accel￾erators (faster than the speed of light for less than a second). This is accomplished 
using a Large Hadron Collider. Specific knowledge is sought regarding the con￾cepts of matter vs. anti-matter, understanding the Higgs-Boson particle (mass) and 
the discovery of additional physical properties at higher energy levels. The mission 
of CERN is stated on their website:
“At CERN, our work helps to uncover what the universe is made of and how it 
works. We do this by providing a unique range of particle accelerator facilities to 
researchers, to advance the boundaries of human knowledge.2
”
CERN is primarily a European venture funded by 23 “member” European countries. 
These include France, Germany, the United Kingdom, Spain, Switzerland, and others. 
The member countries provide the capital (funding) to build, operate, and maintain 
the facility. Observer status countries (not full members) include the United States, 
Russia, and Japan. Over 600 universities and institutes participate in experiments at 
CERN.
2. The Human Genome Project (HGP), an international collaboration that success￾fully determined, stored, and rendered publicly available the sequences of almost 
all the genetic content of the chromosomes of the human organism.3
When the human genome project started, there were many contributing scientist and 
researchers from around the world in this international collaboration.
The HGP, which operated from 1990 to 2003, provided researchers with basic 
information about the sequences of the 3 billion chemical base pairs (i.e., ade￾nine, thymine, guanine, and cytosine) that make up human genomic DNA 
(deoxyribonucleic acid). The HGP was further intended to improve the tech￾nologies needed to interpret and analyze genomic sequences, to identify all the 
genes encoded in human DNA, and to address the ethical, legal, and social Applied Research 97
implications that might arise from defining the entire human genomic 
sequence.4
The use of sophisticated computers and software allowed the project to proceed 
quickly. This was directed by the US Department of Energy (DOE) and the National 
Institutes for Health (NIH).
The previous examples illustrate the type of “basic” research that is performed. The 
costs of this type of research are high with an unknown end benefit. Consequently, 
this type of research is performed with government funding or grants. However, it is 
important to note that results from basic research will many times be used by private 
companies who can commercialize the results.
Here is a summary of basic research:
● Basic research is sponsored by government agencies or organizations (universities 
for example) to further general knowledge or scientific principles.
● The results of basic research are in the public domain (no ownership). One excep￾tion would be research for national defense.
● Results are typically published in a scientific journals or conference proceedings.
● Basic research relies on the reputations of the researchers.
● Basic research produces findings and conclusions, not suggestions or applications.
Generally, private industry (and publicly held firms) must make a profit to stay in 
business. Therefore, these companies perform “applied” research or, they will find an 
application resulting from basic research.
Applied Research
Applied research strives to solve specific problems by providing new solutions to 
issues affecting a target market, group, or society. Its focus is the pragmatic applica￾tion of scientific principles to solve everyday problems. Examples of applied research 
include:
● Developing a new vaccine for a specific disease
● Improving the range and efficiency of electric vehicles using new technology
● Inventing the next generation of cloud-based computers
● Increasing crop production in a small area to feed more people
● The development and testing of a new wing design for general aviation use.
It is appropriate to note that applied research is in the domain of private industry. It is 
funded by company budgets or from client funding.
Practical applications resulting from basic research may be funded by government 
grants and private industry. A specific example is the Department of Energy funding 
clean coal technology. Several of these projects have been funded with mixed success. 
Government provides the funding and private industry, in this case electric utilities, 
attempt to find solutions relative to reducing or eliminating air pollution from coal. 
The cost of failure is very high, and this can be mitigated by government funding 98 Getting Started – Project Approved
(minimizing company financial losses), but the reward can be very high and profita￾ble, if the applied research project succeeds. There is never a guarantee that applied 
research will be successful.
However, if companies and research institutions were risk averse, basic, and applied 
research would never occur and we would still be riding in horse drawn carriages. 
Companies cannot be averse to risks: developing new products, services, or ideas. 
Companies must take risks to succeed, stay ahead of their competitors and remain 
profitable.
This means that applied R&D of new products and services is the future lifeblood 
of any company. The world does not revolve around engineering, marketing, or 
technology; it revolves around being profitable.
The only way to remain competitive is to develop new ideas into products.
Project Management in Product Development
One key failure point in product development is the lack of robust project manage￾ment. In the author’s experience, significant failures are due to poor planning, lack of 
schedule, budget, or scope control, lack of risk reviews, poor communication, etc. And 
poor scope definition (related to poor planning) is a major cause. Project management 
(PM) is the key to coordinated success and a structured process to achieve objectives. 
In discussions with numerous product development professionals, this is a common 
consensus: having a robust PM process increases the probability of product develop￾ment success.
There are numerous books and courses on the topic of project management, and 
several key concepts have been sprinkled throughout this book (for example, risk 
reviews in Chapter 8, stakeholder analysis in Chapter 3, etc.) and this chapter will 
provide more depth on the mechanics of project management. It would be impossible 
to provide all aspects of project management into this chapter and the reader is encour￾aged to do further research on this topic. Please note that all projects are temporary. 
Each project has a definite starting point and a definite ending point. Projects go off 
track with constant changes to product features (scope creep), lack of budget control, 
etc. All projects should have clearly defined objectives and a clear vision of what the 
“deliverable” will look like. Note that the author uses the terms project manager and 
product manager interchangeably.
First, let’s consider, what is the difference between a product and a project.
● Product development is – developing something of value in the marketplace through 
design, planning, testing, and manufacturing. It is also managing its modifications, 
marketing, sales, and distribution.
● Project Management is – planning, implementing, and controlling a group of activi￾ties to accomplish a desired result.Why Do Projects Fail? 99
Examples of projects include:
● Developing the next smart phone release
● Building a new hospital
● Developing the next generation of electric vehicles
● Developing a marketing plan for your company
● Researching a cure for arthritis
● Developing a new product for the marketplace.
Another definition includes that developed by the Project Management Institute®
(PMI®
). According to PMI®
, project management is defined as:
Project Management is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and tech￾niques to project activities in order to meet project requirements4
Project management includes:
● Balancing the requirements and needs of stakeholders
● Establishing clear objectives
● Monitoring and controlling the competing demands of schedule, budget, scope, and 
quality
● Managing the stakeholders and project communications
● Anticipating potential problems (risks) and developing mitigating solutions.
The definitions and activities of product and project management are very similar. 
Therefore, a new product’s development should be considered and managed as a 
project.
PM Truisms:
● Projects solve problems (developing new products, earning a return on investment, 
developing solutions to specific problems).
● The project leader/manager is ultimately responsible for the success (or failure) of 
the project. This applies equally to the Product Manager.
● The PM is generally authorized to obtain and expend company resources: money, 
people, equipment, etc.
● No two projects are identical.
● Product/project management usually requires the engagement of different func￾tional areas and outside suppliers.
● The product manager needs project management skills to be effective and 
successful.
Why Do Projects Fail?
We could easily provide a list of 20 or 30 reasons why projects fail. However, Table 5.1 
Reasons Projects Fail, is the author’s Top 10 list:100 Getting Started – Project Approved
Table 5.1 Reasons Projects Fail.
Failure Item Comments
1 Poor planning 
and Execution
Requirements not confirmed, lack of adequate cost estimating, failure 
to anticipate problems, lack of clear roles, etc. Poor planning will also 
lead to poor execution.
2 Inadequate 
resources
This is related to item 1. Resources can refer to people, equipment, 
software, dollars, etc. If the project has robust planning, this problem 
should not occur.
3 Poor 
communication
This can be a combination of a company being “siloed” and/or the 
lack of the project leader in communicating effectively with 
stakeholders. This can also lead to departmental conflict.
4 Objectives not 
clear
Failure to reach objectives by consensus will lead to conflict and 
potential failure. The objectives should be reviewed on a regular basis 
to confirm they are still valid in the marketplace.
5 Poor leadership It takes a special person, with excellent communication skills, to lead, 
motivate, and drive a project to completion.
6 Continuous 
scope changes
Commonly called “scope creep” it is the continuous growth of the 
project’s objectives and tasks without a formal review process. This 
inevitably leads to budget overruns, schedule slippage, and conflict. 
Even using Agile, some form of scope change review is needed.
7 Failure to heed 
warning signs
Projects will always give warning signs when they are heading for the 
ditch. These include budget overruns, missing schedule milestones, 
and the worst sign: people are bailing out of your project. Project 
trends develop 20% into a project. If one can pay attention to warning 
signs, you may have up to 80% of the project to take corrective action.
8 Unrealistic 
expectations
For example, the PM is sometimes given a budget and deadline to 
develop a new product before detailed planning has begun. This is 
unrealistic and unlikely to have a good outcome.
9 Lack of risk 
reviews and risk 
management
One of the biggest tools to keep projects humming along is the use of 
project risk reviews. This is a structured process to anticipate future 
problems and develop solutions to prevent or minimize their 
occurrence. This topic is covered in detail in a subsequent chapter.
10 Poorly defined 
roles and 
responsibilities
It is important that each member on the product development team 
understand his or her role and responsibility. Lack of this 
understanding many times leads to duplication of effort and 
organizational conflict.
Table by David Tennant.
The reader will note that the above problems are not technical. Technical problems 
do occur, but they can usually be solved with time and talent. However, the problems 
above are managerial which can be more difficult to resolve. Projects generally fail due 
to managerial issues more than technical issues. This raises the question: does the 
product or project manager need technical skills or managerial skills?
What should be in a project plan?
The project plan is a guiding document that is the roadmap to project success and should 
be developed by consensus. The project plan is the mechanism to translate the business 
case into an action plan. This is illustrated in Figure 5.1 From Concept to Action.Traditional and Agile Project Management 101
Traditional and Agile Project Management
Traditional project management has a project leader that directs the activities and 
resources of the company in planning and executing a project. It is focused on defining 
and controlling the scope of a project from beginning to end. Upfront planning is robust 
and documentation (status reporting, communications planning, risks, etc.) is consid￾ered necessary. This type of management is appropriate for projects such as building a 
manufacturing plant, constructing a hospital, or a road infrastructure project. And there 
are occasions when new product development is long-term. The focus is to provide a 
deliverable within schedule and budget with minimal changes (disruptions) and with 
the agreed-to quality (functionality, meeting standards and client requirements).
On the other hand, Agile project management has as a similarity in that the deliver￾able must also meet quality requirements. But the similarity ends there. Agile PM is 
focused on a “product owner” providing an overall vision and facilitating the develop￾ment team’s activities. Agile focuses on robust planning for the immediate tasks while 
leaving detailed planning for future activities, well, in the future. Documentation 
should be brief (the bare essentials) and the deliverable is developed as an iterative 
process. Planning is also iterative, developing along with the product or project. 
Changes (i.e., disruptions) are welcome and the client has input at every step of the 
product’s development. Key points in an agile project:
● It is difficult to anticipate every design or feature of a proposed product at the very 
beginning. It is much easier (and less costly) to accommodate changes as the process 
develops rather than later.
New Product Idea
Strategy, Idea, Concept
Business Case or
Feasibility Study
• Objectives
• Data collection
• Interviews
• Literature research
• Financial analysis
• Timeline
• Resources required
• Legal review
• Regulatory review
• Social review
• Options
• Recommendations
Project Plan
• Confirm objectives
• Review business case
• Determine success 
criteria
• Develop technical & 
design requirements
• Develop firm budget and 
schedule
• Detailed task list and 
resource requirements
• Determine legal and 
regulatory impacts on 
design
• Determine QA/QC testing 
needs
• Determine supplier 
materials or talent needs
• Communications plan
• Managing risks
• Project stakeholders
• Manufacturability
• Client acceptance criteria
From 
Concept to 
Action
Figure 5.1 Concept to Action. Figure by David Tennant102 Getting Started – Project Approved
● The deliverable should meet the bare minimum requirements. Future requirements 
can be added later as the product unfolds; or saved for version 2.0.
● The team is left to develop the product/project as needed. Capable people are given 
the freedom to apply their specialized skills and talents to their activities.
● The Product Manager or Project Manager will have less of an authoritative role and 
will rather serve as a facilitator: assisting the team with resources, training, supplies, 
coordination, and communications. This is a very different role from the traditional 
PM that wielded significant influence and control. Some PMs have difficulty transi￾tioning to this “new” style.
While the author uses Product Manager and Project Manager interchangeably, in 
some companies there is a distinct difference. This is especially true in IT projects. 
Some firms will consider the Product Manager as one who determines customer 
needs, provides overall guidance and communications, and interacts with the client 
on a solution or needs basis. There will also be an assigned project manager who 
focuses on the day-to-day project activities such as budgets, schedules, risks, team 
activities etc.
It should be noted that Agile project management came to fruition within the soft￾ware/IT industry. The success rate of IT projects; that is, meeting budget, schedule, 
and functional requirements was abysmal. Something better had to be devised for 
these types of products. While Agile started as an IT “system” of management, Agile 
has been transitioning to other functional areas such as engineering and manufactur￾ing. In some cases, companies have been using a hybrid model, combining the best of 
both systems where appropriate.
Because both Agile and Traditional PM are relevant, this chapter will provide infor￾mation and illustrations on each. It should also be stated that Agile is not a “one pro￾ject” only process. Companies that decide to embrace Agile must be fully supportive in 
how Agile truly functions. It is most likely a different approach from what has occurred 
in the past. Without company support for how Agile works, it will be very difficult for 
the product team to be successful.
Remember, the desired result of each project management system is the same: a suc￾cessful and profitable product. The difference is in the approach.
Traditional Project Management
The project leader shepherds the project plan’s development by coordinating with all 
stakeholders and the business case.
Below is a suggested project plan Table of Contents. Each topic is discussed in detail 
further below.
● Executive Summary
● Key Stakeholders
● Scope Statement
– Objectives
– Assumptions and Constraints
– Critical Success Factors
– Major Milestones
● Summary Tasks and Budget Discussion
● Resource RequirementsSample Project Plan – Detailed Table of Contents 103
● Risk Management
● Project Communications
● Managing Changes in Scope
● Quality Assurance and Quality Control
● Supply Chain (purchasing, expediting, and contracts)
● Project completion – recognizing success
● Appendix
– High-level Schedule and Budget
– Tools (forms, templates, etc.).
Sample Project Plan – Detailed Table of Contents
(Developed by David Tennant)
Executive Summary
This should provide a high-level review of the plan’s contents: key objectives, budget, 
timeline, and what the deliverable(s) consist of. If a business case was the basis of the 
approved project, this should be referenced. It may also be appropriate to provide a 
project organization chart.
Key Stakeholders
The major stakeholders should be listed including their role. For example
● VP Marketing – Provides funding and high-level direction
● Director Marketing – Project leadership and direction, day-to-day responsibility
● Director Engineering – Technical expert, directs engineering efforts
● Supplier XYZ – Providing critical components for new product
● Director Supply Chain – Point of contact for all procurement items and suppliers
● Superintendent Production – Lead point of contact for all manufacturing tasks.
Scope Statement
Exactly what are we striving to accomplish? The following items will layout the 
scope (i.e., breadth) of the project:
Project Justification – (From business case) Objectives
Generally, more than one objective, deliverables, dates, etc. For example:
The deliverable will be a (item description) with a target retail price of $______ and 
a projected development and manufactured cost of $______. Product will be offered to 
the public by (date). The first production run will consist of _____ (number of units).
● Assumptions and Constraints – Examples might include:
– The budget and schedule are realistic (assumption).
– Management supports this new product’s development (assumption).
– All production raw materials will arrive on time (assumption).
– Safety during product testing will be a priority (constraint).
– Funding is tight, budget must be adhered to (constraint).
– Production must start 3rd quarter of next year (constraint).
● Critical Success Factors – these represent things that must occur. Lack of these could 
be a showstopper. Examples may include:
– Production facility cannot shut down due to problems or scheduled maintenance. 
This could delay manufacture of new product (meaning late to market).104 Getting Started – Project Approved
– Supply chain must ensure timely delivery of control chips which are a (worldwide 
chip shortage?) key component in new product.
– Lead R&D Specialists (experts): we cannot afford to lose subject matter experts 
(SMEs). SMEs leaving the company could impact schedule and create a knowl￾edge gap.
● Major Milestones – Key dates in the project lifecycle. For example:
– June 1 – Engineering design starts
– August 1 – RFP Issued to potential suppliers
– September 15 – Contract award to successful bidder
– November 3 – Gate review
– December 10 – Engineering Design completed
– January 20 – Prototype testing begins
– February 25 – Gate review and test results
– March 1 – Full scale production begins
Summary Tasks and Budget Description
This section should describe the major tasks (design, prototype testing, data review, 
design or production revisions, distribution of product, etc.). The budget should 
describe the costs of major items, design or specification changes, manufacturing, and 
distribution costs. The budget should also describe the costs of all tasks (people, equip￾ment, external support such as suppliers, consultants, etc.)
Resource Requirements
The discussion should include, based on tasks and schedule events, what type of peo￾ple expertise is needed, equipment, hardware, software, training, etc. The skilled craft￾speople (fabricators, welders, programmers) should also be indicated.
Risk Management
A description of how often risk reviews will occur and type of review. A risk is a poten￾tial future problem. How will we anticipate these? Development of strategies in 
advance that will minimize or prevent risks.
Communications
This section should describe what communications each stakeholder (internal and 
external) should receive. Status reports, risk reviews, contracts, purchase orders, etc.
Note that stakeholder correspondence should be targeted. Everyone does not need 
to receive copies of all correspondence.
Managing Changes to Project Scope
How will scope changes be managed? What is the review process? Who has approval 
authority and at what level (that is, dollar amount)?
Quality Assurance and Quality Control
How will we ensure quality of design and manufacturing? What testing and data col￾lection is required? How will deficiencies be handled? How will continuous improve￾ment occur? What is an acceptable rejection or error rate?A True Case Study - Company Dysfunction and a Lack of Project Management 105
Procurement Plan
Outline the Supply Chain responsibilities. Which external suppliers are required? 
What type of contracts are appropriate? Do we have an approved supplier list? Who 
will be responsible for contract administration?
Project Closing
How will we define success? Under what criteria will the client accept the deliverable 
(product)? When should contracts and accounts be closed? Will a lessons-learned 
review be necessary?
The project plan may mean different things to different people. For example, in the 
Information Technology (IT) field, a project plan may mean a very detailed schedule.
In other disciplines, the project plan includes all the discussion points covered previ￾ously, including a detailed schedule.
For IT practitioners, a project charter is a document similar to what we have been 
describing as the project plan. It is up to the project leader to clearly communicate to 
all parties what is to be included in the project plan or charter. It also helps to have key 
stakeholders, including the client (whether internal or external) sign off on the plan. 
This would also include the executive sponsor.
As previously noted, traditional PM is suited for long-term well-defined capital 
expense projects.
A True Case Study - Company Dysfunction and a Lack of 
Project Management
Company X had a multi-functional team pulled together to support new product 
development. The team consisted of people from Engineering, Marketing, Finance, 
and Manufacturing. The Field Service group was not always involved in initial team 
activities, even though this is where the product had to be installed and troubles fixed 
during client installations.
It was found that many client start-up issues could have been prevented if the field 
services group was involved in product development in the early stages. Once a client 
implementation ran into problems, there was finger pointing and blame games between 
the product team members, field services, and corporate. Also, in the case of Company X, 
the corporate bureaucracy became an obstacle to efficiently address product introduction 
problems. For this company, multiple failures led to $300 million of scrapped materials 
and hardware. The company, a $19 billion corporation, eventually went bankrupt, in 
part, due to their inability to develop reliable products as quickly as their competitors.
Specifically, a new laser printer was developed for commercial businesses. The mar￾keting and sales group offered an inexpensive maintenance plan to their customers. It 
was found the plan was profitable for small businesses. However, large businesses 
were printing thousands of pages per day, which led to more frequent maintenance 
calls and this segment of customers was causing greater costs thereby making the 
maintenance plan unprofitable. The field services group devised a multi-level plan for 
small, medium, and large business customers, thereby restoring profitability. This 
confirms the importance of having a wide perspective on the team and to include the 
end user of the product. In addition to the product, this is also a service issue.106 Getting Started – Project Approved
Observations and Lessons Learned
It was generally a marketing person who served as the team leader or product man￾ager. The Marketing group was generally the sponsor and provided funding for new 
product development. The engineering team led the effort during design phase; then 
production would lead the effort during the production or manufacturing phase. That 
is, each member of the team would lead the project when it was their lead role for the 
product. Each department took “star billing” as needed.
There was a formal product development process whereby anyone could suggest 
changes or modifications to a proposed product’s features or scope. A business plan 
was created and sent to senior management for approval. Potential financial perfor￾mance was always high on the list of product development.
In the early stages, estimates included expected pay scales and a corporate budget 
for initial costs. A detailed cost estimate was refined as the project moved forward and 
costs become clearer. The financial model would include the costs of each group (mar￾keting, production, supply chain, etc.). A detailed proforma forced the contributing 
groups to document what they would be doing. This is in addition to a listing of roles 
and responsibilities.
The overall business plan, appropriately detailed, forced transparency in product 
development. This reduced finger pointing and blaming and instead changed to a 
search for solutions. The PM played the role of facilitator. Additionally, the PM had a 
strong relationship with the sponsor – usually a high-level executive – so that assis￾tance with issues could be obtained quickly when needed.
As with any publicly held company, there will always be pressure to increase sales and 
bring new products to market faster. The Finance group was always exerting pressure to 
meet the next quarters “numbers.” This led to new products being pushed out the door 
before they were ready. While the sales numbers looked good, the headaches and exces￾sive costs created by warranty and client issues were financially detrimental.
Eventually, a budget planning model was developed to predict service failures (and 
thereby, costs associated with failures) to improve product launching. This included 
part failure rates. This could then be translated into dollar costs.
Team meetings occurred on a monthly and sometimes weekly basis to effectively 
coordinate efforts. The marketing group performed program risk reviews.
The field services group considered Company X to be an innovative and creative 
company – far ahead of their competitors. However, the corporate bureaucracy, poor 
organization, and senior leadership led to corporate dysfunction.
The Takeaways
● Strong project management skills and knowledge are needed for successful product 
development.
● Organizational issues can derail new product development and, if severe enough, 
can bankrupt companies.
● New products should be developed from the end user’s perspective.
● The financial model needs to consider the cost of part failure rates.
● In the case of software, the training department should also be on the team (great 
end-user perspective).
● Supply chain: can offer insight into global logistics.
● Administration: can offer people/HR resources.
● Sales can add value in clarifying customer perspectives and wants.Developing and Controlling Scope – Using a Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) 107
How is a project manager different from a project engineer? There is some confusion 
in the difference between a project engineer and project manager. The roles are simi￾lar, but distinct. Table 5.2 provides the distinction between a project manager and a 
project engineer.
Developing and Controlling Scope – Using a Work 
Breakdown Structure (WBS)
Developing the Work Breakdown Structure is an integral part of Product/Project 
planning. The WBS is simply a list of all the tasks and activities that must occur for 
the project to be completed. Consequently, the WBS defines the scope of the 
project.
Figure 5.2 Air Emissions Monitor WBS, illustrates how the tasks for a project can be 
arranged in a chart form. The WBS attempts to arrange all the known tasks or activi￾ties that are required to complete the new product’s development.
Clearly, a project of this size would include many more tasks, but this figure illus￾trates the approach and how the WBS forces the product team to think through the 
process.
The WBS is a useful tool:
● For each block on the diagram, a person or group can be assigned responsibility and 
accountability.
● A cost for each block can be derived. The costs can then be summed to obtain an 
overall project cost estimate or budget.
● Each activity (block) can be placed into a project schedule.
● All the blocks together represent the full scope of the project (traditional PM).
● The WBS is developed by the team and shows functional interaction.
Table 5.2 Roles of the Project Manger Vs. Project Engineer.
Project Manager Project Engineer
● Overall project responsibility
● Coordinates functional groups
● Leads project communications
● Manages scope, budget, and 
schedule
● Serves as liaison between suppliers, 
senior management, project team 
and others
● Monitors progress and provides 
status updates
● Manages stakeholders
● Facilitates risk reviews 
● Directs the technical efforts of the engineering team
● Coordinates with Project Manager in working with 
other functional areas
● Ensures that quality is a priority
● Works with suppliers on specifications and 
technical issues
● Coordinates, when appropriate, with 
manufacturing
● Oversees design, modeling, and development of 
prototype(s)
● Interprets data from prototype testing
● Revises design as needed 
Table developed by David Tennant (author)108 Getting Started – Project Approved
Developing a Budget and Cash Flows
Chapter 4 offers further high-level discussions on budgets and cash flows. It is worthy 
to note that some development projects may span across two budget cycles. For exam￾ple, a development project starts in August and will finish in April of the next year. 
Since many companies’ budget for each fiscal year, it is important that adequate dol￾lars are apportioned over both fiscal years budgets.
Refer to Figure 5.2 which shows a WBS for a new air emissions monitoring device. If 
we determine a cost for each task or block on this diagram, we can them sum them 
together for each category as shown in Figure 5.3 Air Emissions Monitor Cost 
Summary.
As shown, the total product development cost, or budget, is $8,275,000. To rein￾force a previous point, the market will determine the selling price. Based on market 
research, competitor evaluations, and other factors, your marketing team is project￾ing that the retail price of each monitor will be $110,000. This means that approxi￾mately 75 units must be sold to break even. That is a projection, but will the market 
support that price?
Your product or marketing team can suggest a price, but all that you can really con￾trol is the cost of development and production. Also, to have a true reflection of total 
costs, it would be appropriate to include a dollar amount for potential warranty repair 
work, which would drive the overall budget, and breakeven point, upwards. The WBS 
is a strong tool that allows the team to review resource requirements and develop an 
estimated cost. From this, a cash flow diagram and profitability analysis can be 
performed.
New Emissions
Monitor
R&D
IE
Mfg. QA/QC Sales
Elect. Mech Initial
Design
Dev.
Prototype
Testing
Engineering Mktg.
Revise &
Retest
Design
Ckt.
Test
Ckt.
Revise
Design
Case
Select
Sensors
Mech.
Dwg.
Coord
w/ Mfg.
Dev.
Methods
Test
Methods
Cust.
Review
Coord
w/ Mktg.
Review
Features
Find Trial
Locations
Coord.
w/ Engr.
Dev.
Flows
Determine
Resources
Review
Process
Begin
Prod.
Coord.
w/ Mfg.
Confirm
Stds.
Determine
Testing
Std.
Compliance
Begin
Monitoring
Mkt.
Review
Pricing
Models
Review
Demand
Focus
Groups
Evaluate
Results
Figure 5.2 Air Emissions Monitor WBS. Figure by David TennantDeveloping a Budget and Cash Flows 109
Using the WBS to Derive a Schedule
Similar to budgets, each block or task on the WBS can be placed into a schedule. In 
essence, the task list in a schedule is a WBS.
Comparison of a Traditional vs Agile Project
The following is a hypothetical scenario of one development project. It is a compari￾son of an Agile vs. Traditional PM approach. Let’s consider the development of a 
new technical product: an air emissions monitor as previously discussed. An air 
monitor is used by industries to monitor air emissions from a factory or combustion 
process. For example, a paper-pulp plant uses a boiler to produce steam for use in 
making boxes, paper, and other products. To stay within compliance of environmen￾tal laws, the emissions from the boiler (usually combusting wood, or waste wood 
by-products, or other fuels) is monitored to help control emissions into the atmos￾phere. The monitor can assist the plant in controlling the combustion process so that 
it is efficient and clean.
Refer to Figure 5.2 Air Emissions Monitor WBS. This defines the scope of our prod￾uct’s development. Our first attempt to develop this product will use the traditional 
PM approach. Reference Figure 5.4 for a traditional PM approach.
Business Case
The business case is a feasibility study to provide a concept with supporting content. 
The content may include costs, ROI, benefits, preliminary timeline, budget, and 
needed resources. It usually presents several options along with a recommendation. 
The purpose of the business case is to help senior management in making a decision. 
The business case, once approved, sets in motion the beginning of our project, or 
rather, our product’s development.
Note that the business case is prior to project initiation. The project is not authorized 
and therefore does not start until the business case is approved and funds are allo￾cated. The reader will note that the phases of a project may have overlap, but not 
always. In the traditional approach, the phases are generally preferred to be separate, 
that is, sequential.
New Emissions
Monitor
R&D Engineering Mfg. QA/QC Mktg. Sales
$750,000 $6,000,000*
• Mfg. Includes first 100 unites at $60,000 each
$450,000 $125,000 $500,000 $450,000
Total Cost = $8,275,000
Figure 5.3 Air Emissions Monitor Cost Summary. Figure by David Tennant110 Getting Started – Project Approved
Initiation
Once the new product (or project) is approved, there are several activities that occur in 
initiation. Be aware that companies may have their own approach to initiation, plan￾ning, etc., but this section provides the basic concepts.
Many companies use a matrixed approach for staffing projects. For example, the 
project team may consist of people from different functional areas: engineering, 
accounting, marketing, etc. This team will most likely be assembled during the initia￾tion phase and the participants may or may not have worked with one another on past 
projects. A project leader will generally be appointed with some authority to assemble 
the team and expend company funds. Here are the key activities during the initiation 
phase:
● Project Leader/Product Leader is appointed by senior management.
● Executive sponsor assigned.
● The project team is assembled.
● The team reviews the business case and confirms the objectives.
● Key stakeholders are identified.
● A project charter is issued. Not all companies issue a charter, however, this is a rec￾ommended practice. The charter should list the objectives, indicate a rough budget 
and schedule, formally recognize the product leader, and list the executive sponsor.
Recall that the traditional PM approach incurs significant upfront planning, changes 
are considered a negative occurrence, and customer input beyond initiation is 
accepted, but limited.
Planning
Although a rough schedule and budget may have been determined in the business 
case, this must be verified through extensive planning and determining the scope of 
Initiation
Planning
Execution
Close out
Time
Cost
s
Production
Initial Mkt.
Survey
Mktg.
Sales
R&D
Eng.
Prototype
R&D
Engineering
Mfg.
QA/QC
Business
Case
Detailed Design
Engineering
Mfg.
QA/QC
Suppliers
Product
Development
Begin Test Production
Engineering
Mfg.
QA/QC
Suppliers
Official project
“start”; t = 0
Transition
To Production
Engineering
Mfg.
QA/QC
Figure 5.4 Traditional Product Development Project. Figure by David TennantDeveloping a Budget and Cash Flows 111
the product’s development. The planning phase will build upon the work done in ini￾tiation and the business case. Typical activities in planning include:
● Building a Work Breakdown Structure. This defines in detail the scope of the project. 
It also brings the team together to build the scope by consensus.
● Determine the project costs or budget (using the WBS).
● Derive the project schedule (using the WBS).
● Assign responsibilities for project activities.
● During status meetings, the finance person will provide updates on spending, 
expected margins, and product net present value. The Product/Project Manager is 
responsible for staying within budget.
● The project plan is developed by consensus and details how scope changes will be man￾aged, types of communications, roles and responsibilities of project participants, etc.
● Perform a risk review: what potential problems lie ahead and how can we prevent 
them? Note: it is customary to perform multiple risk reviews through a project.
● Develop product specifications, parts lists, and materials needed.
● Working with Supply Chain, issue RFPs and obtain quotes from qualified 
suppliers.
● Award contracts to suppliers and consultants.
● Issue purchase orders for needed materials for full manufacturing.
● Determine which suppliers should be on the core team.
● Work with production to plan factory flows, equipment needed (robotics, numeric 
control machines, etc.).
● There will be design review meetings and product status meetings throughout the 
project’s duration.
At the end of planning, it is likely that some team members, their participation com￾plete, will be released back to their functional areas or assigned to another project.
It should be apparent that significant work occurs during the planning phase. 
Depending on the type of product under development, the planning cycle could take a 
year or longer. At some point, the design will be frozen and scope changes will be 
discouraged.
Once planning is completed, the project now moves into the execution phase.
Execution
For our new monitor, this is where production of the new product begins. It may ini￾tially be a trial run of say five or ten units to confirm that manufacturing is set up cor￾rectly, specifications and quality standards are being met, and the units are functioning 
properly. Activities in this phase may include:
● Develop prototype of new monitor and put through testing. The results of testing 
data and QA/QC will determine if engineering design is adequate or needs changes.
● It is likely that one or two end-users (clients) will be selected to try the prototype 
model under realistic conditions. This is critical as the opportunity to obtain user 
input, likes, dislikes, ease of use, etc. is obtained. This provides valuable feedback to 
the design team prior to full scale production.
● Once the design is finalized and the product approved, production drawings will be 
released to manufacturing.112 Getting Started – Project Approved
● Coordinate with manufacturing to assist with new workflows, plant operations, 
troubleshooting, new assembly techniques and worker training.
● Ensure that proper materials and quantities are in warehouse.
● Plant machine operators and craft labor are trained and ready to proceed.
● QA and QC processes are in place.
● Full scale production commences.
● Finished monitors are packaged and shipped.
This assumes that the sales team has been obtaining orders and marketing is pro￾moting the product. Client acceptance in the marketplace signals that the project is 
completed.
Close Out
While product acceptance in the marketplace means our project is complete, there are 
several activities that must occur:
● The project accounts are closed (new production accounts will be set up for 
manufacturing).
● Contracts are closed.
● A “lessons learned” meeting and report may be produced.
● Remaining team members will be reassigned.
● Project documentation is filed (contracts, drawings, etc.).
● The project is formally closed.
Agile PM
Agile has found acceptance primarily in the software development industry. However, 
some aspects of Agile can be adapted to product development. The Agile Manifesto list 
four key tenets that are different from traditional PM. These are presented as listed by 
the authors:
Manifesto for Agile Software Development5
We are uncovering better ways of developing software by doing it and helping others 
do it. Through this work we have come to value:
● Individuals and interactions over processes and tools
● Working software over comprehensive documentation
● Customer collaboration over contract negotiation
● Responding to change over following a plan.
While there is value in the items on
the right, Items on the left are valued more.
The reader is encouraged to learn about the principles of Agile project management 
through the various publications that offer more depth. However, it is worth noting 
that Agile is focused on teamwork, becoming more efficient, involving customer input, The Vision Statement 113
and providing team members with the support and trust they require to be successful. 
Agile focuses on people, communications, product, and flexibility.5
We will now consider developing our air emissions product using a hybrid 
Traditional-Agile approach.
It should be noted that on products involving engineering or manufacturing, it will 
be possible to utilize only parts of the Agile concepts. This is because manufacturing 
may require retooling and training of workers on new machinery; and some product 
components may have long lead-times from time of order to delivery. Agile cannot 
necessarily speed up delivery of parts from suppliers.
And finally, clients may not want to participate in product development – that is what 
they are paying your firm to do. Figure 5.5 Agile Hybrid Product Development Project 
illustrates the use of both traditional and Agile components in product development.
The Vision Statement
The vision statement is a useful tool to begin any project whether Agile or Traditional. 
Figure 5.6, Developing the Vision Statement is a process approach to build consensus 
on this topic.
It should be as concise and specific as possible.
Air Emissions Monitor Vision Statement
The air emissions monitor is being developed for the utility, industrial, and wood-paper 
products industries. The monitor is a highly complex instrument measuring air emis￾sions to help our customers monitor their air quality and remain in compliance with 
environmental regulations. Its new technology will increase accuracy, be cost competi￾tive, reduce maintenance costs, and connect with users using wireless technology.
Initiation
Close out
Time
Business
Case
Product
Development
Official project
Phase 1
• Product team & customer(s)
• ID stakeholders
• Objectives
• Vision statement
• Define requirements
• Project discussions
• Risk review
• Communicate vision
Phase 2
• Product team & customer(s)
• Confirm objectives
• Changes?
• Review / prioritize requirements
• Project discussions & Risk review
• Review w/ stakeholders &
 end users
Phase 3
• Product team & customer(s)
• Design in progress
• Changes?
• Project functionality
• Risk review
• Review w/ stakeholders &
 End Users: how will product be used?
Phase 4
• Product team & customer(s) final review
• Prototype testing
• Changes? (minimal)
• Confirm requirements met
• Risk review
• Prepare for manufacturing
Production
Effort
Figure 5.5 Agile Hybrid Product Development Project. Figure by David Tennant114 Getting Started – Project Approved
This is a concise statement of the product team’s purpose and should assist in 
focusing their efforts. The term “purpose” has a more forceful connotation, and 
some companies may use the term “Statement of Purpose” in lieu of “Vision 
Statement.”
It should be apparent in each phase (Figure 5.5), there is review and discussion to 
incorporate any changes or ideas that may be generated by the team. In each step, 
there will be a review of functionality and to design/build a unit with basic required 
features, not gold plating. Table 5.3 highlights some of the differences between tradi￾tional and agile project management. Below are a few issues to be aware of:
● At some point, the design must be “frozen” as continuous scope or design changes 
will impact cost and launch schedule (i.e., product rollout).
● In companies where a matrixed environment is used, people may drift out of the 
project, moving on to new assignments.
● Most products are not built as modules like software, so Agile will have limited 
application.
Stakeholders
and team
develop
individual vision
statement
Resolve issues
or differences
between
statements
Combine views
into one team
statement
Vision statement
becomes part of
the project plan
Approved
by client
and sponsor
No Yes
Figure 5.6 Developing the Vision Statement. Figure developed by David Tennant
Table 5.3 Roles Differences of Traditional Vs. Agile PM..
Traditional PM Agile PM5
● PM directs team and project
● Change control through process review
● Value plans and execution of plans
● Respond to change after rigorous
● Review
● Supplier collaboration
● PM is in charge
● Deliverable is predictable at initiation
● Formal conversation is primary
● Businesspeople and developers work together daily
● Self-organizing team
● Embrace change
● Value interaction
● Respond quickly to change
● Customer collaboration
● PM is a servant leader and facilitator
● Early and continuous delivery of S/W
● Face-to-face conversation is primary
● Businesspeople and developers work 
is priority
● Team should be co-located 
Table by David TennantAgile Hybrid in Action – Marketing Natural Gas in the Southeastern United States: Gas South, A True Story 115
● Most Agile software teams are co-located and continue with the same people 
through succeeding release versions. This is advantageous as it builds up expertise 
and product familiarity. In matrixed companies, each product revision may have a 
different team thereby losing team cohesion.
● With the global economy, the team may be geographically dispersed.
Agile Hybrid in Action – Marketing Natural Gas in the 
Southeastern United States: Gas South, A True Story
Natural gas is a commodity product and unregulated in the Southeastern USA. For 
example, in Georgia residential, commercial, and industrial customers can choose 
their natural gas supplier. Natural gas is used for heating, cooking, industrial pur￾poses, and for generating electricity.
Gas marketers operate in a fiercely competitive market. Some suppliers attract cus￾tomers simply by offering low-cost service (some serve at a loss or breakeven point) to 
win market share. There will always be a segment of customers that choose based on 
price alone: the lowest cost per therm will always attract these customers.
Gas South, one of the largest gas suppliers in the Southeast, has made great strides in 
attracting and retaining customers by offering customers what they want, not simply 
low rates. How does this happen? The firm’s marketing group is keenly aware of their 
customers’ needs and challenges. Further, there is a desire to always be ahead of com￾petitors whether in strategic partnerships or offering a variety of gas service rates. The 
firm decided to use an Agile-traditional hybrid approach to developing new services.
The criteria in developing new services were based on the following:
● Develop a vision statement.
● Use a team approach to developing new services.
● Added customer value: customer preferences.
● Develop using the minimum viable product (MVP) approach.
● Minimal documentation.
● Contain a high level of customer input.
● Quick to market using limited resources.
● Desire for innovative thinking.
● Perform a business case.
The team was cross-functional with individuals who were willing to think outside of 
the box.
Obtaining Customer Input
Every customer, or potential customer, who calls the service phone number is given 
the opportunity to complete a short survey. Not everyone responds, but enough feed￾back is obtained on how well the company is performing.
Every year, a sample of customers and non-customers receive an in-depth annual 
survey. The survey covers buyer behavior, awareness, perceptions, and customer value 
drivers. Based on the results of these subsets, further details are pursued using focus 
groups. This allows the gas company to float new ideas, advertising tag lines, trial mes￾saging, green energy issues, and potential new rate scenarios.116 Getting Started – Project Approved
Further, the focus groups represent different customer segments and offers custom￾ers the opportunity to discuss what they do or do not like. One issue is that customers 
don’t always know what they want.
Customers can say what they want in focus groups or in surveys but the only way 
you really know if the solution will work is to test it in the market with real customer 
behavior. A/B Digital marketing allows you to do this quickly with low cost.
Figure 5.7 Development of Digital Marketing Program illustrates the process Gas 
South used to design a digital marketing strategy.
One focus group issue that stood out was that most customers do not pay attention 
to therm usage or pricing per therm details – it was too complicated for most people to 
understand.
As a result, a OnePrice PlanTM rate product was developed in which the customer 
did not pay based on how much they used, but rather paid the same amount each 
month. This offered a convenient way to budget their monthly gas payment and helped 
simplify the natural gas market. Initially, the plan was offered only to new prospective 
customers through the company’s call center. This allowed Gas South to test this prod￾uct without significant investment or inclusion in its web-based rate schedules. Using 
this approach (a minimum product development), it was possible to assess consumer 
interest and demand, allowing changes or adjustments before rolling out to existing 
customers. Once real-time data and feedback was obtained, it was rolled out through 
traditional channels to the whole customer base. It was justifiable to invest more funds 
in online account services.
The focus groups’ feedback resulted in trial limited-service offerings. These could be 
labeled as MVP: minimal viable product. MVP is a concept promoted by Eric Ries in 
the book “The Lean Startup.” Essentially, a prototype product is developed, typically 
software-based, with very limited features and minimum effort. These services are 
evaluated as a prototype by customers allowing one to observe their reactions, behav￾iors, likes, dislikes, etc. The MVP can be tweaked along the way before initial release. 
Therefore, the product is adapted to customer preferences during development. More 
far-reaching changes or features can be added in the next version MVP2, MVP3, etc.
Yearly
Survey
Brand 
Awareness
(Likes? 
Dislikes?)
Focus 
Groups:
Test 
Messages
Continuous
Refinement
Digital Mktg.
(Clicks,
behavior, # of
enrollments
Survey
Customer 
Preferences
Results 
tested each
year 
Repeat
Figure 5.7 Development of New Services Flowchart.Agile Hybrid in Action – Marketing Natural Gas in the Southeastern United States: Gas South, A True Story 117
As a result of this approach, the company has been able to grow market share, main￾tain high customer service ratings, roll out new rate designs quickly, and cultivate an 
excellent reputation.
Discussion Case 5.1 – A True Story: Product Development Without 
Project Management
A global telecom company was developing new products for the world market. To meet 
anticipated demand, new capital equipment would be required, and production facilities 
would be expanded. Marketing had done significant research on customer preferences, 
R&D was working to perfect the product, and the engineering group was preparing the 
facility expansion. There were several consulting engineering companies working on 
facility design and a large construction company was performing the work.
The program consisted of 12 projects and was scheduled for three years duration at 
a cost of $800 million dollars. It should be noted that the company had its team 
resources scattered geographically. R&D, Engineering, marketing, and manufacturing 
(plus consulting engineers and the construction firm) were at the production site; 
administration and supply chain in another location, and the corporate headquarters 
in a third location; all of them in different states.
There was considerable pressure to meet the product launch date. The project was 
behind schedule, and consequently the engineering and construction groups were also 
behind. The new facilities and equipment were top of the line with considerable 
redundancy (back-up production) provided.
After one year, the project was six months behind schedule and $70 million over 
budget. The CFOs office was getting concerned as well as senior management. The 
product team consisted of extremely bright people, yet the project was floundering. 
What was the root cause of the project’s problems? There were multiple problems, that 
combined, created the stage for failure.
Because the project was so far over budget, there was concern the new products 
would be unprofitable, taking years to recover the invested costs. The financials had 
truly gone into the ditch. R&D was trying to shorten development time; however, short 
cuts were creating prototype problems. The perfecting of the products had run into 
problems both technical and managerial. Because of the delays, there was blame and 
finger pointing. The facility design was dependent on final product configuration 
(which impacted plant layout), so there was a snowball effect: a delay in one area cre￾ated downstream delays in others.
There was very little project management processes or skills in place. The people 
leading the new product effort were highly technical and did not possess the requisite 
managerial or PM skills.
It has been the author’s experience that highly technical people many times (but not 
always) do not possess effective managerial skills. In fact, technically oriented people 
sometimes are attracted to engineering and science to minimize management or peo￾ple issues. Nonetheless, the wrong people were leading this product effort and failed to 
pay attention to the following:
1. Scope increases and design changes were common, adding to cost and schedule 
slippage. Some team members were looking to bail out of the project (did they see 
the iceberg on the horizon?).118 Getting Started – Project Approved
2. The new equipment and facilities were over-designed. There was significant 
redundancy and “gold-plating” which was unnecessary and added to costs.
3. Formal risk reviews were nonexistent. These would have flagged many of the 
problems earlier in the project(s).
4. The leaders in charge were not strong on communications or conflict resolution. 
As a result, poor communications led to departmental conflict.
5. While schedules and budgets were in place, there was very little attention or dili￾gence paid to them.
6. No one was held accountable for being late or over-spending.
7. More than one person was leading the effort: there were three project leaders.
8. There was not an overall written program plan to coordinate or tie together the 12 
projects.
9. Status reports were non-existent. They were provided only “on request” and were 
not effective in providing a true picture or in raising red flags.
10. The company had a weak matrix organization, i.e., talented people were “bor￾rowed” from various functional areas. This made it hard to hold team members 
accountable.
11. Roles and responsibilities were not clearly defined (leading to further conflict).
As listed, there was not any one problem that was contributing to failure, but almost a 
dozen. The reader will also notice that all the above problems are managerial. It is recog￾nized that some technical problems were delaying the project, but this was being com￾pounded by a lack of project management skills and the inability to focus on the root 
cause of the problems. This case clearly shows how product development can fail without 
strong project management processes and talent. This program was very complex where 
the focus was on technical excellence, but managerial excellence was not in the picture.
Discussion Case 5.2 - Questions
1. You are brought in as a consultant to turn around this failing program. What 
would be some of your first actions?
2. The three project leaders (Director-level employees) are firmly entrenched in this 
program. They will most likely resent your presence. How would you deal with this?
3. Would you bring in any outside talent to assist you? If so, who or what kind?
4. Once you have a clear picture of the program’s true status, what would be your 
next steps?
5. How would you propose to get back on track?
6. What are your chances of success?
7. What are some techniques you could use to improve communications?
8. How will you measure success and/or progress?
9. Trust is very important in any consulting engagement. What ideas can you imple￾ment to promote yourself as trustworthy?
10. While there are many project management (or lack of such) issues related to this 
program, there are also many organizational problems. What can you do to help 
the organization?
This case is clearly a large-scale, Fortune 100 company effort. Think about small 
firms or even a startup company. Would project management skills help a smaller 
firm? There are many Fortune 100 companies that have excellent technical and Agile Hybrid in Action – Marketing Natural Gas in the Southeastern United States: Gas South, A True Story 119
managerial talent, but any of them can fail (or even go into bankruptcy) if not diligent 
and well versed in project management.
Chapter Key Points
● The business case or feasibility study is an initial review of a potential new product 
or market. Its purpose is to provide reliable information so executives can make an 
informed decision.
● Project management skills and leadership are necessary for successful product 
development.
● Project management proficiency enables the product team to transfer the business 
case into a plan of action.
● A project management process will lead the team in planning budgets, schedules, 
communications, risk reviews, and quality assurance/quality control.
● Most companies perform applied research which looks for solutions to specific prob￾lems or issues. Basic research is typically performed by universities and government 
laboratories and is very open-ended.
● Most product/project failures are not due to technical issues, but usually managerial 
issues.
● Agile project management is more suited to the software development industry.
● It is always necessary to have customer input in developing a successful product.
● The WBS defines the scope of the project.
● A vision statement is always useful in starting a project.
Chapter Discussion Questions
1. Why is the WBS important?
2. Agile has become very popular in the software development industry. Will this 
displace traditional project management? Provide reasons to support your answer.
3. The product team can control costs. Why can’t it control the selling price?
4. What is the executive’s role in product development?
5. How can project management help product development?
6. Recall the development of a new air emissions monitor presented in this chapter. 
Why would a purely Agile approach not work for this product’s development? Are 
there instances where Agile is not the best approach?
7. There are fundamentally four phases of project management. Can you name 
them?
8. What is the difference between a business case and a project plan?
9. When is product development completed?
10. How important is the product/project manager’s leadership skills?
Discussion Case 5.1 Questions and answers
1. You are brought in as a consultant to turn around this failing new product develop￾ment program. What would be some of your first actions?
This will be a long-term engagement and will not be solved or turned around in a 
month or even several months. Remember, a program is a group of related projects. 
There are 12 individual projects in this program. First actions you might take include:120 Getting Started – Project Approved
Put all projects on hold for 30 days, until an assessment can be performed.
● Meet with CFO to determine where program is off track. Which areas are over￾spending? Which projects? are over budget
● Meet with each project team leader, individually, to assess where they are in their 
project plan and schedule. Obtain their thoughts on why they think their project is 
floundering.
● Meet with leaders of engineering consulting firms (individually) to obtain their 
thoughts and ideas to solve the problems. Many times, outside firms have a good 
idea of why things are not working.
● Meet with the head of R&D. What is holding them back? What type of assistance do 
they need to get back on track?
● Meet with the leader of construction group to obtain their input.
● Determine if scope changes are contributing to problems and why they are 
occurring.
● Discussions with individual team members should allow a picture of issues and 
problems to become clearer. It is also likely that problems in the various projects are 
impacting or exacerbating other projects. This will enable you, the consultant, to 
call a full team meeting to discuss findings and discuss development of new pro￾gram and project plans. Because the program is in the ditch, it is likely that poor 
planning is a root cause.
2. The three project leaders (director-level employees) are firmly entrenched in this 
program. They will most likely resent your presence. How would you deal with 
this?
It is important that you and your team exhibit integrity and have a heart-to-heart 
discussion with each director. It comes down to trust: how do they know they can trust 
you? Fundamentally, the director’s will be concerned that they will look bad if an ex￾ternal resource can solve their problems for them. After all, why would their company 
need them if they cannot solve the problems they are being employed to address?
Here are several techniques that can get them to become allies instead of enemies:
Indicate that you are there to help them succeed.
● Give them the tools and share your expertise. Be a mentor and coach.
● Give them a lot of the credit when success arrives.
● Gain their friendship: join the company softball team, take key people to lunch once 
a week, play golf with them, etc.
● Take an interest in them as people, not just the job description.
● Be empathetic. This requires a leader with a high emotional Quotient (EQ).
3. Would you bring in any outside talent to assist you? If so, who or what kind?
A program of this size and complexity will require a consulting team. It will be very 
important that your team has qualified and credible people to work with and mentor 
the various project leaders. A project this size would need from three to five consult￾ants.
4. Once you have a clear picture of the program’s true status, what would be your next 
steps?
Since the project is on hold for 30 days, this provides time for each project team to 
develop a new and detailed project plan. However, each team should follow the same 
“Table of Contents” (presented earlier in this chapter) so that they are all consistent. Agile Hybrid in Action – Marketing Natural Gas in the Southeastern United States: Gas South, A True Story 121
Each project plan should be signed-off by the team leader, program manager and 
product manager (if different).
A new plan will refocus the teams and reset expectations with the executive team. The 
new plan will layout a new budget and schedule.
An overall program plan should also be developed. This describes how the individual 
projects impact each other, how they will be coordinated together, and the overall 
budget and schedule (combination of all 12 projects).
5. How would you propose to get back on track?
● Once new project and program plans have been developed, track these to ensure 
that all activities are occurring on time and budget.
● Status reporting should occur monthly.
● Regular team meetings to determine roadblocks and how to remove them.
● Perform risk reviews on a regular basis.
● Set up a “war room” as a dedicated center of control.
● Ensure all project leaders understand the accountabilities and project objectives.
● Ensure that all project participants know their roles and responsibilities.
6. What are your chances of success?
Assuming the market demand for the products is still strong, there is a very good 
chance of success. The program is still in the early planning stages. Success will also 
be determined by adhering to the “new” budgets and schedules and management’s 
understanding that expectations are to be reset.
7. What are some techniques you could use to improve communications?
● Regular status reports
● Individual one-on-one meetings with team leaders as needed
● Weekly progress meetings (include suppliers and consultants)
● One-on-One communications weekly with executive sponsor.
● Have an open-door policy so team members feel comfortable in bringing problems 
to your office
8. How will you measure success and/or progress?
● Monitor the budget and schedule for variances.
● Have regular “gate” meetings where the PM must justify their progress and/or actions.
● Be cognizant of major milestone dates. Are we meeting these?
● Maintain vigilant contact with suppliers to confirm shipping dates.
9. Trust is very important in any consulting engagement. What ideas can you imple￾ment to promote yourself as trustworthy?
● Establish relationships with key client people. This will take time.
● Be interested in your client’s concerns.
● Be proactive in providing solutions to problems.
● Coach and mentor your client’s personnel.
10. While there are many project management (or lack of such) issues related to this 
program, there are also many organizational problems. What can you do to help 
the organization?
The organization has many issues which need to be addressed. As a consultant, you 
can recommend changes, but actual change must come from the top of the client com￾pany – generally the executive suite. As an outsider, you do not have the authority to 
make these types of changes. Here are a few things to recommend to the client’s CEO:122 Getting Started – Project Approved
● A program must have one person in charge. Having a critical program run by 
three people is not practical.
● People must be held accountable. Those who are not performing should be 
replaced.
● The program is split into three locations. Both Headquarters and Administration 
should have a representative located full-time at the manufacturing site. This will 
improve communications and supply chain functions between the three 
locations.
● The person appointed to lead the effort should have excellent managerial and 
leadership skills. The technical issues can be addressed by the R&D or engineering 
teams. It is more important to have managerial skillsor this particular role.
Answers to Discussion Questions
1. Why is the WBS important?
The WBS represents the total scope (or breadth) of the project.
● For each task identified, a cost can be determined, and each task cost can be summed 
to provide a total project cost.
● For each task, a person or group can be assigned responsibility.
● A project schedule can be developed by importing each task to the schedule.
2. Agile has become very popular in the software development industry. Will this dis￾place traditional project management? Provide reasons to support your answer.
Because Agile is an iterative approach, it is valid for developing software systems or 
technology applications. It involves customer and supplier input and support and de￾velops a minimal initial product at each stage of development.
Agile would not be very effective for long-term capital projects such as facilities 
improvements, developing “hard” products such as cars, infrastructure, or manufac￾tured goods. Some items cannot use an iterative approach as each change can amount 
to large cost or schedule impacts (negative). Essentially, traditional PM discourages 
changes beyond a certain point while Agile encourages changes throughout the project 
lifecycle.
3. The product team can control costs. Why can’t it control the selling price?
The product or marketing team can propose a selling price, based on research and 
customer input, and the required margin for profitability, but it will be the market that 
ultimately determines the price. If your firm releases a new product, and competitors 
can quickly compete, your price will be lower. If, on the other hand, your product is 
truly unique, with few competitors, you may be able to charge an even higher price.
4. What is the executive’s role in product development?
A key senior executive should always be appointed to support a new product or project. 
He or she should provide funding, resolve conflict at a higher level than the product 
team, serve as a guiding resource, and be a link between the product team and senior 
management.
5. How can project management help product development?
The principles of project management are fundamental to project success. It will force 
the team to do detailed project planning, monitor and control budgets and schedules, 
communicate more effectively, evaluate potential problems (risks) before they develop 
and provide a structured approach to both planning and execution.Bibliography 123
6. Recall the development of a new air emissions monitor presented in this chapter. 
Why would a purely Agile approach not work for this product’s development? Are 
there instances where Agile is not the best approach?
The air emissions monitor is a “hard” product manufactured in a production envi￾ronment (refer to Question 2). The principles of embracing change are not beneficial 
for a manufactured product, which resists change.
7. There are fundamentally four phases of project management. Can you name 
them?
Initiating, Planning, Execution, and Closing. PMI®
 would add a fifth element, moni￾toring and control across all four phases. This means monitoring and controlling 
budgets, schedules, risks, etc. from beginning to end. The business case is not con￾sidered one of the fundamental phases; it should be completed before a project is 
approved and funded, i.e., before project initiating.
8. What is the difference between a business case and a project plan?
The business case is an initial feasibility study. It is used to provide information so 
that the executive team can make a go/no-go decision. The business case also evalu￾ates several alternatives with recommendations provided. The business case may 
also offer high-level or preliminary budgets, timelines, resources, etc. However, a de￾tailed a business case cannot be at the depth or appropriate level of action compared 
to a project plan. A project plan, on the other hand, is a document that describes how 
the new product will be developed with detailed planning, logistics, execution, etc. 
The project plan takes the business case to a much higher level of detail.
9. When is product development completed?
Generally, when the product is in regular production, that meets QA/QC standards, 
and shipped to customers.
10. How important is the product/project manager’s leadership skills?
The product manager/project manager must have a number of leadership skills to 
be successful. These include communication skills, negotiating, instilling trust, re￾solving conflict, ability to make decisions, and motivating the team. These are all 
hallmarks of leadership.
Notes
1 https://angelsanddemons.web.cern.ch/faq/what-does-cern-mean.html.
2 https://home.cern/about/who-we-are/our-mission.
3 https://www.britannica.com/event/Human-Genome-Project.
4 A guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge, the Project Management 
Institute, 6th ed., Newtown Square, PA, 2017.
5 Mark C. Layton, Steven J. Ostermiller, Dean J. Kynaston, Agile Project Management, 
(2020), John Wiley & Sons.
Bibliography
Katzenbach, J. and Smith, D. (1993). The Wisdom of Teams. New York, NY: HarperCollins.
Kynaston, D., Layton, M., and Ostermiller, S. (2020). Agile Project Management, 3rd e. 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.124 Getting Started – Project Approved
Lewis, J. (1995). Project Planning, Scheduling & Control. McGraw-Hill.
Mantel, S. and Meredith, J. (2000). Project Management – A Managerial Approach, 4th e. 
New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons.
Project Management Institute (2017). Agile Practice Guide. Newtown Square, PA: Project 
Management Institute, pub.
Eric Ries, The Lean Startup, Penguin Random House, (2011), New York, NY.125
Product Development: An Engineer’s Guide to Business Considerations, Real-World Product Testing, and 
Launch, First Edition. David V. Tennant. 
© 2022 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2022 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
6
Product Development for Small Firms and 
Entrepreneurs
Much of this book has been directed towards large companies with significant finan￾cial resources and staffs of talented people. But, what if your firm has only 100 people 
and limited cash resources? Or only 50 people? Or a startup with six people? What 
would be a practical approach for product development? How can one compete with 
the big corporations with billions in annual revenue? Where can small companies go 
for help?
Funding for Your Start-Up: A Necessary Ingredient
Today’s small companies and start-ups have many options to consider in how they 
develop their products. However, it should be noted that most startup companies fail 
not to a lack of ideas or creativity, but to a lack of capital … that is, they run out of 
money. There have been several successful firms where the founders had extremely 
high drive, believed in their product, and were able to sell their ideas to a market or 
partners. Microsoft and Apple were both started in their founders’ home garage and 
today they are earning billions of dollars in revenue annually. Of course, this did not 
happen in one year.
But you must be realistic in your quest to develop your product: if will take cash to 
get started and succeed.
Start-ups basically have five options to obtain funding for their products and 
ideas:
1. Use their own personal savings; and convince friends and relatives to provide addi￾tional funding as passive investors.
2. Obtain a loan from a bank or the Small Business Administration (SBA).
3. Seek funding from venture capital groups.
4. Go public and issue shares of stock.
5. Reach out to Angel Investors.
The first one, using your personal and family savings, is the easiest to obtain. The 
remaining four have obstacles. Although, it may not be enough.126 Product Development for Small Firms and Entrepreneurs
Loans from the Bank and Small Business 
Administration (SBA)
Banks have an aversion to lending money to those with no assets to put up as collat￾eral. What are assets? This means you own a building, capital equipment, or even your 
home, that can be put up as collateral. Should your business fail, these items become 
the property of the bank to dispose of as needed to get their money back.
On the other hand, say you wish to borrow $100,000 but as a show of good faith 
you will also invest 25% of that amount, $25,000, of your own money – investing a 
total of $125,000. You now have a stake in your company succeeding. The bank 
may be impressed with your sincerity and commitment, but they will want to see 
a detailed business plan. What is the product to be offered? What is the market? 
How do you know this market exists? They will also want to know the track record 
and credentials of the company founders. Have you run a successful business 
before? What is your background and educational level? Do you understand 
business financial documents such as a Statement of Cash Flows or Income 
Statement, etc.?
Without a background in business or a track record in start-ups, it will be difficult to 
obtain financing from a bank. Not impossible, but difficult. Even if the bank decides to 
provide some funding, and even with some assurance of success, you may find your 
interest rate higher. This is how the bank will reduce its risk. An alternative to a loan 
is a line of credit. This will still have an interest rate but will provide access to capital 
on an as-needed basis.
The author is aware of entrepreneurs that put up their homes as collateral to obtain 
funding. Some were ultimately successful; others were not.
However, it is not all negative. With enough preparation, a solid business plan, and 
a great management team, there are banks that work with small businesses. And, at 
the time of this writing, interest rates are extremely low.
The Small Business Administration (SBA)
SBA loans are partially guaranteed by the Federal Government and are adminis￾tered through various financial institutions (banks). The SBA offers competitive 
rates, support in the way of education and advice, and offers different types of 
loans based on your business. Like other lenders or partners, there are qualifica￾tions that a business must meet for loan eligibility. Here are several notes regard￾ing of SBA-backed loans:
● The business is legally registered.
● It operates in the USA or its territories.
● The business owner has invested time and funds in the business.
● The business is unable to obtain funds from other lenders.
● The SBA lowers risks and provides easier access to capital.
Information about SBA can be found at:
https://www.sba.gov/funding-programs/loansFunding from Venture Capitalists 127
Funding from Venture Capitalists
First, what is a Venture Capitalist (VC)? Venture capitalist firms are in the business to 
make huge ROIs by investing in small companies or startups that are ready to com￾mercialize their product, service, or idea. They generally do not begin “out the gate” 
with startups; rather, they wish to invest in a company and provide equity (cash) in 
exchange for part ownership. Therefore, if you wish to obtain funding from a VC firm, 
you will lose some control of your company. This will depend on the terms that you 
negotiate and agreement reached with the VC (Ownership split 60/40? 50/50?). 
Typically, VCs will provide funding, but will want to cash out with a huge ROI (Return 
on Investment) at some point in the future. This could be a timeline of five or ten years. 
Both Facebook and Twitter, for example, were funded by VC money. It would be pru￾dent for you to have an exit strategy. This means you are prepared to sell your business 
at some point in the future. This is not a bad situation, especially if your firm has 
become extremely profitable. Many entrepreneurs walk away with significant funds 
and then go start another business.
The VC firm will provide advice and nurturing to have a greater chance of success. 
Because VCs invest in smaller companies, the failure rate can be quite high, but one 
big payoff can obliterate any losses incurred from other, less profitable firms.
A VC firm is generally incorporated as a Limited Partnership (LP) where the part￾ners provide funding. A VC committee meets to decide in which companies they will 
invest. The VC firm is paid for their work in the form of management fees, but the 
majority of profits will flow back to the partners; that is, investors.
Where Do VCs Get Their Funding? Who are Their Partners?
A VC firm is funded by limited partners such as large pension groups (teachers’ pen￾sion funds, for example), insurance companies, wealthy individuals, corporate pen￾sions, and foundations. Their investment cash is pooled together, and the VC firm, as 
the general partner, manages the funds and investment decisions.
Before investing, the VC firm will seek companies with a strong management team, a 
unique product that will have a huge ROI potential and few competitors. This is known 
as having a large moat. The moat, in medieval times, protected the castle from enemies. 
In the business sense, it means having a product that will take competitors years to 
duplicate and who may not have the efficiency or knowledge to compete effectively. A 
large business moat means you have advantages that protect your investment, product 
lifespan, and profitability. As stated previously, VCs are looking for firms that are ready 
to commercialize an idea or product. If your firm has not put together an effective busi￾ness case, done significant research and design, performed market research, nor built a 
prototype, it will be hard to get a VC firm interested in your company.
The bottom line is VCs provide funding for potential (i.e., risky) projects and are an 
alternative to the bank. But your company will need to already have some success or be 
further along with a great idea or product. Remember also, that a VC will want to flip the 
business at some point. They wish to obtain their profits by “flipping” your company, 
that is sell it, and invest the funds elsewhere in other startup firms with potential.128 Product Development for Small Firms and Entrepreneurs
Funding by Issuing Shares of Stock
Issuing stock for public sale – an Initial Public Offering (IPO) – carries its own risks and 
benefits. Like VC firms, you are giving up some ownership of your company. Most 
entrepreneurs will want to maintain a majority stake: 51%. Even if you decide to main￾tain 51% ownership as the primary shareholder, the other 49%, shareholders, own 
almost one half of your company and have certain rights. They have the right to vote for 
(or against) the board of directors. At some point, they will expect your company to pay 
dividends. Further, your company, the board of directors and executive management, 
will be required to abide by federal laws (Securities and Exchange Commission – SEC), 
and other requirements. Sarbanes-Oxley is one of those laws. It was passed in Congress 
in 2002 due to several highly visible firms rigging their financial statements. This duped 
investors, both big funds as well as individual investors when the firms went bankrupt. 
The first BIG firm to do so was Enron, an energy services company that, at one time, 
was worth $63 billion. Several other large publicly held firms, among them WorldCom 
($103 billion), and Tyco.
As you might expect, becoming a publicly held company is no small matter. 
Therefore, small firms generally do not have the legal or business expertise to become 
listed on the stock exchanges (NYSE or NASDAQ); and, if your company’s stock price 
slips below $1 per share, your firm will be delisted. Going public with your firm is not 
for the faint of heart, but once you have established your product, a VC firm can assist 
in taking your firm public as can any good business attorney. It is customary for entre￾preneurs that take VC money to have an exit strategy. After all, the VC will want to flip 
the firm at some point.
Funding with Angel Investors
Angel Investors are different from VCs as the partners invest their own personal 
wealth. These high net-worth individuals are interested in seeing startup companies 
succeed and do not forget, they also wish to make money for which they are passion￾ate. Some investors like to champion startups that will promote social good or solve 
some of the world’s problems. This can include the environment, healthcare, educa￾tion, etc.
Because many angel investors have been at senior levels in large companies, they 
can offer experience, advice, and facilitate key business introductions to startup found￾ers. As with VCs, angel investors look for an exceptional management team with a 
great product. Further, a startup that becomes successful will provide hundreds or 
perhaps thousands of jobs which helps fuel economic growth. Figure 6.1, Angel 
Investments in 2019, shows the most common types of investments made by Angel 
Investors during that year.
It should be noted that Angel Investors have become a large source of funding for 
startups – one source indicates that over 67,000 companies annually are funded by 
Angels.1
How does one find an Angel Investment group in your location? According to 
Hockeystick/Angel Capital Association,2
 there are approximately 14,000 Angel Other Sources of Business and Financial Assistance 129
investors belonging to 275 Angel groups. The Angel Capital Association has a nation￾wide (US) directory listed on their website. There is a high probability that several are 
near your location.
https://www.angelcapitalassociation.org/directory
Other Sources of Business and Financial Assistance
All startups should seek and apply to join a business or technology incubator. What is 
an incubator? For starters, there are over 500 incubators spread across the United 
States. An incubator is an organization that exist to offer advice, assistance, coaching, 
mentoring, expertise, education, and business connections. Many are associated with 
major universities or funded by state economic development programs.
Draper University, from their website,3
 offers this definition of their program:
Business incubators are specially designed programs to help young startups 
innovate and grow. They usually provide workspaces, mentorship, education, 
and access to investors for startups or sole entrepreneurs. These resources allow 
companies and ideas to take shape while operating at a lower cost during the 
early stages of business incubation. Incubators require an application process to 
join and usually require a commitment for a specific amount of time.
Figure 6.1 Angel Investments 2019. Source: Hockeystick/Angel Capital Association Aug 2021130 Product Development for Small Firms and Entrepreneurs
All incubators are committed to helping viable startups succeed. Some, as is the case 
with the Advanced Technology Development Center at the Georgia Institute of 
Technology (Atlanta), offers education and coaching, access to the technical resources 
within the university, and exposure to investor groups.
In general, incubators provide an exceptional service for startups. Below are a few 
elements of which to be aware:
● Some incubators specialize in a specific industry, such as technology, medicine, 
manufacturing, etc.
● Incubators can provide networking to other companies, successful entrepreneurs, 
and investors.
● Some are free of charge, while others charge a nominal fee to ensure you are serious 
about your company.
● Most will require a time commitment.
● Not everyone who applies to an incubator program is accepted.
● The company founder(s) must demonstrate a passion for their product or idea.
Joining an incubator will give you an edge and will force you to focus on your com￾pany’s purpose, product, and logistics. Many times, entrepreneurs have a general idea 
of what they’d like to develop, but the incubator will help you drill down and prepare 
you for meetings with investor groups. Below is a listing of incubator groups by state.
Incubators by State
https://www.gaebler.com/Business-Incubator-Lists-By-State.html
A few selected incubators:
University of Texas, Austin
https://ati.utexas.edu
Georgia Institute of Technology, Advanced Technology Development Center, Atlanta
https://atdc.org
University of Chicago
https://polsky.uchicago.edu/programs-events/new-venture-challenge
Angelpad, New York City
https://angelpad.com
500 Startups – Silicon Valley (San Francisco, CA)
https://500.co
California State University, Apostle Incubator, Long Beach, CA
https://www.csulb.edu/institute-for-innovation-entrepreneurship/apostle-incubator
Summary on Product Development and Sources of 
Funding
It may sound very positive that lots of money is available, just waiting for entrepreneurs 
and startups to walk in the door. However, this is not as easy as it may sound. Any invest￾ment group, regardless of type, has as its primary mission to make a huge ROI.
Consequently, a startup needs to have the following consideration in place for any 
investors to consider your firm for funding:
● A strong, experienced management team
● A well thought-out business planSmall Firm Challenges 131
● A clear, concise reason for your firm to exist
● A SWOT analysis (usually contained in the business plan, see also Chapter 2)
● A review and evaluation of competitors (if any)
● A financial model evaluating the potential costs and profitability of your product
(including the break-even point if a product or service)
● Your firm is advanced far enough that you are ready to ramp up commercialization
● An excellent sales pitch and value proposition
● Your product has a strong moat
● Your product has been tested and works.
Clearly, this is an ideal “wish list” for investor groups. It is unlikely that firms will have 
all of these criteria in place, but it is a starting point.
Even if interested, the potential investment group will cross-examine you with tough 
questions, attempt to poke holes in your business plan, and grill you on why they 
should invest in your company versus the many other equally worthwhile startups 
that are out there.
You should expect a tough grilling, but if you prepare and you have a great product 
or idea, then you will have as much opportunity as other startups. However, you can 
greatly increase your chances by working with an incubator as previously discussed. It 
is also worth noting that most investment groups want to see your product beyond the 
startup phase: that is, expansion to start making significant dollars with enough capi￾tal investment. In contrast, Angel Investors are willing to be more flexible with financ￾ing terms or percentage ownership and, in some instances, are willing to fund startups 
at the beginning stages.
Small Firm Challenges
Small companies have more challenges and obstacles to confront than big firms. For 
one, their budgets are smaller, in-house expertise may be limited, funding is con￾strained, and there is less clout in the business community. Further, some firms may 
not have the relationships – this is especially true in the global economy. Some of the 
challenges faced by small firms are barriers to entry, others are just inexperience or not 
having the required competencies. Some of these in the below list have been previ￾ously mentioned:
● Lacking internal talent for engineering, design, and testing
● Do not understand how to develop business plan or cost-benefit models
● Lack of capital
● Lack of structured planning (project management skills)
● Inability to execute on ideas
● Marketing message not strong or clear
● Legal and regulatory obstacles
● Do not understand the market or competitors.
While the above “obstacles” may seem daunting, as a small firm there are some advan￾tages that you can employ. Big corporations face the same challenges, only they have 
more bureaucracy. And, yes, big corporations have lots of resources (people, equip￾ment, money), but as a small firm, you have the advantage of nimbleness and zero 132 Product Development for Small Firms and Entrepreneurs
bureaucracy. Let’s look at each obstacle above (other than those already discussed) 
and determine how to overcome them.
Lacking Internal Talent for Engineering, Design, and Testing
First, it would make sense to perform an internal “competency” review, perhaps even 
a SWOT review. What strengths reside within your company? What are your core 
competencies? What are your firm’s weaknesses? Once you can answer these ques￾tions, you can take steps to address them.
If you do not have the technical talent in-house, there are many consulting engineer￾ing firms and further, independent manufacturing companies that also employ engi￾neering talent. It may be that you should outsource the engineering and testing to one 
of these companies. Also, there are many freelance engineers that can provide their 
expertise in the technical aspects of developing your product. Freelance engineers will 
be less costly than a full-service engineering firm.
How do you find freelance engineers? There are many technical societies, some of 
them previously listed: American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), American 
Institute of Chemical Engineers (AICHE), etc. Each of these societies have local chapters 
and monthly meetings. Joining one of these or attending their events is one way to meet 
engineers. All of these societies have annual conferences that include trade shows. Trade 
shows are a rich source to find talent or even suppliers you have not considered.
Do Not Understand How to Develop Business Plans or 
Cost-Benefit Models
Working with an Incubator would provide your firm with access to training, experi￾enced entrepreneurs, and other contacts. As previously discussed, Incubators are an 
exceptional source for practical advice and business contacts. They can assist you in 
developing a business plan; also, many MBA students may be able to assist at a very 
reasonable cost. It may be worth contacting a local university that offers an MBA pro￾gram and offers this type of service.
Lack of Structured Planning
As discussed elsewhere in this book, project management skills are strongly advised for 
any company, but especially startups. Key topics that are presented in this book include:
● Risk reviews
● Budgets and schedules
● Communications and coordination
● Quality Assurance and Quality Control
● Managing resources (people, money, equipment)
● Defining the scope or breadth of your initial product
● Teamwork and Leadership
The reader should review the pertinent sections on these topics.Legal and Regulatory Obstacles 133
Inability to Execute on Ideas
Structured and detailed planning will allow your firm to execute fully and efficiently. 
The purpose of the structured plan is to not only outline the scope, budget, and sched￾ule, but to implement them while monitoring your progress. It serves as your project 
roadmap.
For instance, the schedule should contain all the activities or tasks with start/end 
dates needed to bring your product to fruition. Milestones should also be a part of your 
schedule. If you are slipping key milestone dates, then this indicates you are falling 
behind, and that corrective action is needed to get back on track. The schedule also 
keeps your attention focused on activities and their progress.
Marketing Message Not Strong or Clear
As a startup, you may not have a marketing department. Perhaps your product is 
not ready for promotion. And, traditional marketing approaches, while still valid, 
have been somewhat displaced by visibility through online and social media 
platforms.
At some point, you will need to promote your product and marketing will become a 
key part of your efforts. Clearly, there are marketing firms that can provide marketing 
services. Yet, like engineers, there are many independent and freelance marketers that 
can assist you.
Legal and Regulatory Obstacles
There are always standards and possibly regulatory requirements for certain products. 
In the USA there are standards relative to engineering materials, pressure products 
(codes), and electrical safety (grounding for common electrical appliances or products 
such as hairdryers, computers, refrigerators, etc.). Experienced engineers will be aware 
or familiar with them. Regulatory requirements are usually federal or state laws with 
which one is required to comply. For example, our air emissions monitor would need 
to measure pollutants within federal pollution guidelines. Failure to do so would 
invalidate the purpose of the monitor.
If your product will be sold offshore, there will be a different set of standards. For 
example, most of Europe’s household electrical supply is 240 volts at 50 Hz., as opposed 
to the USA’s which is 120 volts at 60 Hz. Some Asian countries are also 240 volts. Your 
product may need to function on a different electrical standard offshore.
Another European standard is the International Organization for Standards (ISO). 
It publishes standards for Industrial, technical, and commercial organizations. As an 
international standard setting organization, you may find your potential product 
must comply. Many US companies doing business in Europe and other places (the 
standard is an “international” standard), comply with ISO standards. ISO is a group￾ing of standards organizations from several counties and is headquartered in Geneva, 
Switzerland.134 Product Development for Small Firms and Entrepreneurs
Use of a Product Roadmap
Products evolve over time. This may be due to multiple factors including advances in 
technology, competitor pressure, changes in market or customer segments, changing 
consumer tastes, and product functional and technical obsolescence. It would be unre￾alistic to think the product you launched 10 years ago is still relevant and it may not be 
supported by the manufacturer today.
A product roadmap is like a product/project schedule, but it is based on future prod￾uct revisions or iterations. Prime examples of future product changes include:
Car companies: Cars evolve over time due to several of the factors previously noted.
● Technology – car technology appears to increase exponentially with time. This 
includes driver-interface (touchscreens) and electronic modules to control 
engine dynamics and efficiency. Electric vehicles are a new departure and 
advancement from the traditional IC (internal combustion) engine, with a com￾pletely different and ground-breaking technology. EVs may be a “disruption” 
technology.
● Competition – car companies compete against one another by introducing not only 
technology, but nice “would like to have” features such as full-length sunroofs, new 
and appealing dash materials, enhanced displays, etc.
● Changing customer tastes – customers can get bored with the same look year after 
year. A car (or truck) is fundamentally a platform containing seats on four wheels. 
But each car maker has their own styling designs and market segments they appeal 
to. Every three to four years, car companies relaunch their car lines with new styl￾ing. Even if the engine, driveline, and suspension are the same, the body style must 
undergo refinement to keep the vehicles looking fresh and new.
● Market segments include luxury cars, sports cars, sport utility vehicles (SUVs), rug￾ged off-road vehicles, family cars and vans, pickup trucks, and others.
It must be noted that regulatory changes will also drive the adoption of technology. For 
example, the car industry, besides competitive issues, has been forced to comply with 
new regulations related to air quality and environmental climate change. Federal pol￾icy in the United States has been penalizing IC engine cars through higher gas taxes 
while offering generous tax incentives for those purchasing electric vehicles.
Some countries have mandated that IC engines in new cars are forbidden after the 
year 2030. It should be apparent that governmental policy can shift or stimulate new 
product development.
Other competitive industries would include smart phone manufacturers, smart TVs, 
large home appliances, apps for phones or computers, computer manufacturers, etc. 
In essence, every producer of products must continually update their products or ser￾vices to stay in business. If your company is small, you will still need to update your 
products and services over time; otherwise, your competitors (big and small) will pass 
you by. Have you thought about future revisions for your product?
So, how does a product roadmap relate? First, what is a product roadmap? A product 
roadmap outlines the strategy and planned evolution of a product. It allows the prod￾uct manager to work with the development team as to which features will be incorpo￾rated into the current product over time.Innovation 135
A product roadmap can be useful in presentations to executive management, or poten￾tial and existing customers. Documenting a planned strategy and the activities to deliver 
new features over time is useful. This approach should help you obtain senior manage￾ment consensus, continued funding, and possibly obtain advance orders from customers.
Below are items to consider as your roadmap is developed:
● What are your competitors doing? Can you leapfrog around them or stay in front? 
Will the revised product have the same target audience?
● What features and enhancements do our customers want? How will we determine 
this?
● What timeframe (i.e., how far out) do we wish to go?
● Will the same design team be available?
● Internally, how will we proceed? How will new ideas and features be communicated 
to team?
● When should draft and final plans be submitted for executive signoff?
● At what point is the revised product revealed to the public?
Figure 6.2 Product Roadmap – Our Air Emissions Monitor, shows a high-level 
example of a product roadmap that will be revised approximately every three years. 
This type of monitor will see significant technology advances over time and therefore 
requires the manufacturer to keep abreast of these advances and implications for their 
product. This would be a combination of both Marketing and Engineering 
professionals.
For highly technical products, such as the monitor, it would be beneficial for the 
company to keep the same team engaged for all future refinements. Not only will the 
team be familiar with the product, but also how it was developed, current market con￾ditions, technology leaps, and customer preferences. It is a competitive advantage to 
keep people familiar with the product on the team rather than put together a new team 
every three or four years.
Figure 6.2 is a brief timeline of an air emissions monitor’s evolving development. 
The team can be as detailed or as brief as needed. The timeline was derived using an 
excel spreadsheet. For 15 or 20 activities, this is adequate. If the team went into more 
detail and had, for example, 50 or 100 activities, it would make more sense to place the 
activities into a formal scheduling program such as Microsoft ProjectTM.
Innovation
Suggestions for Success
It must be emphasized that the following factors are necessary to be successful:
● You new product must be unique and interesting. Who wants to see another “Brand 
X” widget that is already offered by many competitors?
● Customer input (desired features) must be considered in new product development 
or refinements. Take the time to speak with potential and existing customers and 
value their feedback.
● The customer must receive (or perceive) value for the money spent.Figure 6.2 Product Roadmap. Figure by David TennantWhen (Or If) to Patent 137
● Speed to market is important: first to market usually gets market share.
● Use project management techniques to keep your new product’s development on 
track.
● You cannot do it alone. Seek partnerships, learn from others’ mistakes, join an 
incubator, and seek guidance wherever you can. Networking with business lead￾ers, finance groups, chambers of commerce, etc. is useful in making progress with 
your company. It is likely you will find contacts and expertise that are willing to 
help you.
When (Or If) to Patent
There are some who subscribe to the idea that patenting your process or product puts 
your invention “out there” in the public domain. Anyone can initiate a patent search 
and potentially find your new product. Would they copy it? Perhaps. But it would have 
to be different from what you submitted in your patent application.
Some of the questions an entrepreneur or inventor should ask:
● Do I need a patent attorney?
● Is my invention/product/process even patentable?
● Should I apply for a patent?
● What protection does an NDA (Non-disclosure Agreement) offer as opposed to a 
patent?
● What type of patent should I seek?
● When should I apply for a patent?
● How much will it cost?
● How long does it take to obtain a patent?
● How long is a patent good for (enforceable?)?
● My invention or technology is new and disruptive. Will the Patent Office be able to 
understand my patent?
● If I wish to patent my invention overseas, what is the process and costs?
● What are the benefits to having a patent?
These are all valid questions that any inventor should ask. These are addressed below.
Do I Need a Patent Attorney?
The answer is yes if you wish to make sure the application is done correctly. You may 
be able to file on your own, but history is littered with patents that were contested or 
lawsuits filed years after the original patent application. It is much more troublesome 
and expensive to fix a problem later.
Is My Invention/Product/Process Even Patentable?
A patent attorney will be able to evaluate your product and offer advice. Most patent 
attorneys also have degrees in science or engineering, so they can understand techni￾cal issues and processes.138 Product Development for Small Firms and Entrepreneurs
Should I Apply for a Patent?
Before an application is drafted or submitted, an attorney can offer advice and the 
chances of your product obtaining a patent. Part of the decision will be based on how 
close to commercialization your invention is. Has a prototype(s) been built and tested? 
How far along in the design or production process is your product?
Based on preliminary discussions, an attorney will also provide guidance on the type 
of patent you should seek.
What Protection Does an NDA Offer as Opposed to a Patent?
Many times, an entrepreneur or small company will work with outside suppliers such 
as engineering firms, materials vendors, manufacturing companies, etc. to develop a 
product or process. An NDA is useful in that it prohibits suppliers and others from 
disclosing sensitive or proprietary information. However, it is always possible that key 
information may be leaked inadvertently or on purpose. Usually, an NDA will have a 
termination period – generally within two to three years after signing. So, an NDA will 
offer short-term protection.
A patent has more legal protection and enforceability, and of course, is good for a 
much longer timeframe.
What Type of Patent Should I Seek?4
There are several different types of patents, depending on the object or item you wish 
to patent. These types are defined by the US Congress. Below is a description of each
● Utility patent. This a detailed document with the intent to educate the public how 
to use a new machine, process, product, or system. New technologies such as genetic 
engineering, internet-delivered apps or software, are pushing the boundaries and 
definitions of what kinds of inventions are eligible for a utility patent. New materials 
or compositions of materials also fall under utility patents.
● Provisional patent. US law allows inventors to file a less formal document that 
proves the inventor was in possession of the invention. Once filed, the invention is 
“patent pending.” This has a one-year deadline to file for a formal patent, otherwise, 
the provisional patent expires.
It should be noted that listing “Patent Pending” on a product or advertising mate￾rials also provides a marketing and PR advantage. This promotes your product as 
“new” and possibly more advanced than your competitors. Many people like to pur￾chase the “latest” products.
● Design patent. This patent provides protection for the appearance and design of an 
object or item. The shape of a bottle (think Coca-Cola) or the design of a shoe (e.g., 
Nike), can be protected by a design patent. In recent years, software companies have 
used design patents to protect elements of user interfaces and even the shape of 
touchscreen devices.
In the distant past (2011), Apple sued Samsung over patent infringement of its 
iPhone and iPad products. Essentially, Apple claimed that Samsung’s smart phones 
looked the same and had similar features which were originally developed by Apple When (Or If) to Patent 139
(including the shape of the phone with “rounded” corners). A jury awarded Apple 
$1 billion in damages, which is less than the $2.5 billion Apple was seeking.
● Plant patent. A plant patent protects new kinds of plants produced by cuttings or 
other nonsexual means. Plant patents generally do not cover genetically modified 
organisms and focus more on conventional horticulture.
However, genetically modified plants or seeds are completely new, lab grown plants 
can receive patent protection from UPOV – the International Union for the Protection 
of New Varieties of Plants. UPOV is an intergovernmental organization with head￾quarters in Geneva (Switzerland). Founded in 1961, A number of countries are signa￾tories including the United States, Germany, France, Russia, China, the United 
Kingdom, and many others.
UPOV’s mission is to provide and promote an effective system of plant variety 
protection, with the aim of encouraging the development of new varieties of 
plants, for the benefit of society.5
https://www.upov.int/portal/index.html.en
When Should I Apply for a Patent?
If one applies too early for a patent, then later development of the product may require 
filing again. Many times, it is worthwhile to apply when the product is ready for com￾mercialization. This may mean after a prototype has been successfully tested and full 
production is to begin. It could also mean, in the case of software, that it has been 
thoroughly beta tested (client tested) and is ready for download sale to the public.
https://www.uspto.gov
How Much Will It Cost?
The costs associated with a patent attorney will vary. First, while there are many large 
law offices that offer this service, there are also many smaller firms that do the same 
work and will be less expensive. However, regardless of the legal firm, one can expect 
the cost to be minimally several thousand dollars ($5,000 to $10,000 range). This will 
also depend on how complex the new product or process is to understand. If an attor￾ney must contract with outside expertise to evaluate a highly technical product, the 
costs of course would be more.
There is also a yearly patent fee for European patents. In the US, patent fees are due 
on a schedule of 3.5 years, 7.5 years, and 11.5 years. Failure to pay the fees will cause 
the patent to expire.
How Long Does It Take to Obtain a Patent?
A quick process from application submittal to granting a patent would be 18 months. 
Most applications take two to three years. Note, that it may take several years to 
develop your product, for example, a new vaccine. The patent would be applied for 
some time after successful trials – adding another three years.140 Product Development for Small Firms and Entrepreneurs
How Long Is a Patent Good for (Enforceable)?
For utility patents (product, machine, process), the length of time is 20 years. For 
design patents, the timeline is 15 years.
My Invention or Technology Is New and Disruptive. Will the Patent 
Office Be Able to Understand My Patent?
The patent office has many resources with which to evaluate patent application prod￾ucts. The USPTO has several technology centers with competency to evaluate highly 
technical products or systems.
If I Wish to Patent My Invention Overseas, What Is the Process and What 
Are the Costs?
If you wish to patent your invention internationally, be prepared for large costs. 
The USPTO (United States Patent and Trademark Office) issues patents that are 
only recognized in the United States and its territories. If you wish to market 
your product or invention overseas, you will need to apply for a patent in each 
country. Obviously, it would be advised to use a patent attorney in each 
country that is familiar with the legal issues and patent processes. With 
195 countries, the bureaucratic hurdles and costs could become excessive very 
quickly.
One group of countries that can assist is the EU (European Union). Like the US, 
where you do not need a patent in each state, the EU has a single patent process for the 
27 countries that comprise the European Union. The EU Patent Office accepts applica￾tions under the European Patent Convention (EPC) and the Patent Cooperation Treaty 
(PCT).
Similar to the US, there are yearly fees to keep the patent in place. Failure to pay the 
renewal fees will remove the patent.
What are the Benefits to Having a Patent?6
Advantages
● A patent allows you the right to stop others from copying, manufacturing, selling or 
importing your invention without your permission.
● You get protection for a pre-determined period, allowing you to keep competitors at 
bay. A US utility patent is good for 20 years.
● Alternatively, you can license your patent for others to use it or you can sell it. 
This can provide an important source of revenue for your business. Indeed, 
some businesses exist solely to collect the royalties from a patent they have 
licensed.
● Having a patent may give you more credibility and advantage when seeking 
investors.When (Or If) to Patent 141
Disadvantages
● Your patent application means the information about your invention is publicly 
available. It might be that keeping your invention secret may keep competitors at 
bay more effectively.
● Applying for a patent can be a very time-consuming and lengthy process. Markets 
may change or technology may overtake your invention by the time you get a 
patent.
● Cost – it will cost you money whether you are successful or not – the application, 
searches for existing patents and a patent attorney’s fees can all contribute to a rea￾sonable outlay. Note that not all patents have financial value.
● You’ll need to remember to pay your annual fee or your patent will lapse.
● You’ll need to be prepared to defend your patent. Taking action against an infringer 
can be very expensive. On the other hand, a patent can act as a deterrent
Chapter Key Points
● Small companies or sole-proprietor entrepreneurs’ biggest obstacle to stay in busi￾ness is cash flow. Companies simply run out of money.
● There are many options to finance a small business with a new product or idea. 
These include Angel investors, banks, venture capital groups, and issuing stock 
(becoming a publicly held company).
● Issuing stock or obtaining venture capital will take away some of the ownership of 
the company from the founders and to shareholders (stock) or partners in a venture 
capital firm.
● A good source of advice, education, and introduction to venture capital is through 
an incubator. These are generally funded through state economic development 
agencies or universities.
● Firms wishing to sell their products in other countries need to be aware of stand￾ards, quality guidelines, and regulatory requirements.
● A project roadmap is a timeline that will indicate enhancements or changes to your 
product over the next few years. It is meant to communicate to the team what 
changes will occur and when.
● As a product is developed, it should be released with future thinking. This can occur 
with a Product Roadmap: What features should be included in the next release? 
How often will a new revision or update be released? What is driving our updates? 
(Technology advances? Consumer tastes?).
● It is generally considered advantageous to have the same product development team 
in place throughout a product’s development and subsequent updates.
● A patent may keep competitors from stealing or copying your invention. Be pre￾pared to pay for a patent search, attorney’s fees, patent application fee and recurring 
fees to keep your patent current.
Figure 6.3 outlines the patent process in the United States. The seeking of a patent can 
be a complicated process. Figure 6.3 shows a basic approach to obtaining a patent.142 Product Development for Small Firms and Entrepreneurs
Discussion Questions
1. At what point should a small firm or entrepreneur approach external funding such 
as venture capital or angel investors?
2. Some companies like to issue stock to raise funding. What are some of the upsides 
and downsides to this approach? At what point should a firm seek to become “pub￾lic” and offer stock as an IPO?
3. You will be launching your new product in six months. How will your company 
and its product get visibility prior to launch?
4. Whether your firm is small or large, many product development teams are scat￾tered geographically. For example, headquarters may be in Chicago (engineering 
and marketing), manufacturing facilities in South Carolina, software developers in 
California, and a second manufacturing plant in Indonesia. This makes teamwork, 
coordination, and communications more difficult. What are some of your ideas to 
overcome these obstacles? How will you build a team?
5. How will we know our product is ready for launch?
6. What can a small firm do if demand for product outstrips supply?
7. How would a patent attorney help your small company?
8. Who monitors the market for patent infringement?
Discussion Question – Answers
1. At what point should a small firm or entrepreneur approach external funding such 
as venture capital or angel investors?
Initial discussion with
Patent attorney
• Is the product patentable?
• What type of patent?
• At what stage is product?
(Commercialization near?)
1 START 2 3
9
6
5
4
Patent
Search?
NO
YES
Patent 
found?
YES
NO
Relevant?
YES
NO STOP
Begin Patent
Application
Go to MKT
w/o Patent?
YES
NO
Exit Patent
Process, go
to Mkt. 7
8
Submit to
USPTO
11
United States Patent
And Trademark 
Office
Attorney/Client
Patent
Approved?
18 mo. To 36 mo.
YES
10
Pay Patent Fee
(Patent Issued)
NO
Begin Appeal
Process
Figure 6.3 US Patent Process. Figure by David TennantWhen (Or If) to Patent 143
If you believe you truly have a disruptive technology or unique product, seek those 
investors (Angels) who are willing to work early with small startups. It may be worth￾while to approach business associates for an immediate partnership. Otherwise, seek 
mainstream investor groups (or loans) when there is a track record in place for you 
product: initial customer tests have been positive and you need funding to expand 
production to meet anticipated demand. Be sure that you have a solid business plan.
2. Some companies like to issue stock to raise funding. What are some of the upsides 
and downsides to this approach? At what point should a firm seek to become “pub￾lic” and offer stock as an IPO?
Issuing stock is the same as seeking investors. However, most stock investors will not be 
interested until you have at least a short track record of success. This could include one 
year of increasing sales and notice in the marketplace (trade shows, articles, positive 
product reviews, etc.). And you need the funding to expand your capabilities to increase 
sales. This is the point at which one would seek to consider an IPO. However, note that 
issuing an IPO usually requires assistance from a legal firm that specializes in IPOs.
The upside to issuing stock:
● You are not borrowing money but are obtaining funds from investors. Investors rec￾ognize there are inherent risks in the stock market, but they are looking to your 
management team to grow the company to profitability. You will not have monthly 
loan payments, nor will you ever be required to pay it back.
The downsides to issuing stock:
● Your management team is expected to provide transparency in all public reporting 
and in judicious spending of the investors’ money. Failure to do this can result, in 
extreme cases of fraud, jail time and heavy fines.
● If you, the founder, are the CEO, you will report to a Board of Directors (BOD). The 
Board has a fiduciary responsibility in safeguarding investor funds and that the 
company’s management is trustworthy. If you lose the trust of the Board, they can 
fire you. The Board will also ask tough questions of you and your senior staff on 
operations, capital expenditures, strategic planning, and staying on track.
● Investors and business analysts (i.e., Wall Street) will expect increasing sales and 
profits each quarter. At some point, investors will seek dividends on their shares of 
stock. Dividends are quarterly cash payments paid out of company profits.
● As the founder/CEO you no longer own 100% of your company; you now co-own it 
with investors.
So, issuing stock has advantages and disadvantages. It is not for the faint of heart. But 
the funding that investors provide can put your firm on the map and ensure that your 
company does not run out of money.
3. You will be launching your new product in six months. How will your company 
and its product get visibility prior to launch?
A comprehensive marketing and launch plan are necessary for visibility. And this will 
require funding. Marketing and by extension sales, can plan for and engage in the 
following activities:
● Local press coverage for new products
● Marketing campaign in appropriate publications and on the web144 Product Development for Small Firms and Entrepreneurs
● Strong branding and visibility on social media sites such as Facebook, Twitter, 
Linked-In, etc.
● Visibility at trade shows and conferences
● Join the local Chambers of Commerce
● Special sales incentives and promotions (especially for existing customers).
4. Whether your firm is small or large, many product development teams are scat￾tered geographically. For example, headquarters may be in Chicago (engineering 
and marketing), manufacturing facilities in South Carolina, software developers in 
India and California, and a second manufacturing plant in Indonesia. This makes 
teamwork, coordination, and communications more difficult. What are some of 
your ideas to overcome these obstacles? How will you build a team?
Each company, depending on its culture and organization, will have some in place 
protocols for dealing with remote teams. However, here are a few suggestions to help 
coordinate, communicate, and build team morale:
Regular team meetings, using MS TEAMS, Zoom, or similar platform will help the 
team relate. Face-to-face is always better. To accommodate time differences, it may be 
beneficial to schedule meetings at different times so one group is not always meeting 
at midnight.
For each meeting, have one of the team members introduce themselves and provide a 
brief bio: what do they do in their spare time, how long have they been with the company, 
where are they located, what is their favorite movie, etc. Team comradery is important.
It is difficult for a PM or PD to manage a product from long distance. If possible 
(time and budget), it would be useful for the product team leader to travel to each site, 
as needed, for visibility and a personal touch.
Finally, the same rules for in-person meetings apply equally to remote team meet￾ings: prepare and stick to an agenda, be aware of time, cover only the topics needed 
(i.e., don’t get bogged on side issues or minutiae), and use your platform’s screen share 
feature so people can see your spreadsheet, presentation, or drawings.
5. How will we know our product is ready for launch?
If you belong to an incubator group or VC partnership, they will help advise you. If you 
are working on your own, these are the signs you’re ready:
● You have done market research and found a market exist for your product.
● You have beta-tested your product with potential customers (if a hardware product, 
you have built one or more prototypes).
● If a software app, you have channels available to launch your product.
● If a hardware device, you have a manufacturer lined up for production and distri￾bution channels to deliver your product.
● You have a marketing and advertising campaign ready to go.
● You have an internet prescence with payment options ready.
6. What can a small firm do if the demand for a product outstrips supply?
If you are launching a software product, it is doubtful this will be a problem as soft￾ware applications are simply downloaded.
If you have a manufactured product, it will be necessary to work with your provider 
(and in turn their suppliers) to ramp up production. If this is not adequate, a second 
manufacturer may need to be contracted. In the meantime, high demand with limited 
supply means you can raise your retail price.Bibliography 145
7. How would a patent attorney help a small company?
A patent attorney can assist an inventor navigate through the complex process of ob￾taining a patent. An attorney will perform a patent search, ensure the patent applica￾tion is complete and acceptable for filing. Note that each country has its own rules and 
process for a patent. You may need to hire an attorney in each country you wish to sell 
your invention.
8. Who monitors the market for patent infringement?
One might think the US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) monitors the market 
for patent violators, but this is not the case. It is up to the inventor to watch the mar￾ketplace for patent infringement.
Notes
1 Brian O’Connell, Benjamin Curry, Contributing Editor, Forbes, May 2021 https://
www.forbes.com/advisor/investing/what-are-angel-investors.
2 Raymond Luk, Hockystick/ACA, August 2019, https://blog.hockeystick.
co/2019-u.s.-angel-investment-statistics.
3 Draper University Website, August 2021, https://www.draperuniversity.com/blog/
what-is-a-business-incubator.
4 Runge, J., Esq. Legal Zoom, What are the Different Types of Patents, https://www.
legalzoom.com/articles/what-are-the-different-types-of-patents.
5 The International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV), https://
www.upov.int/portal/index.html.en.
6 In Business Info.co.uk, https://www.nibusinessinfo.co.uk/content/advantages￾and-disadvantages-getting-patent.
Bibliography
Cross, F. and Miller, R. (2004). West’s Legal Environment of Business, 5th e. Mason, OH: 
Thomson South-Western.
Noah, A., Patent Rebel. https://patentrebel.com/why-are-patents-important-advantages￾disadvantages-pros-cons. (accessed 27 August 2021).
Upcounsel. https://www.upcounsel.com/how-long-is-a-patent-good-for. (accessed 26 
August 2021). 147
Product Development: An Engineer’s Guide to Business Considerations, Real-World Product Testing, and 
Launch, First Edition. David V. Tennant. 
© 2022 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2022 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
7
Manufacturing the New Product
Manufacturing has seen incredible changes over the last 40 years. This is due to many 
considerations:
● Foreign competition – in both product quality, product costs, and retail pricing
● More advanced products require more advanced manufacturing processes
● Customer demand is driving efficiency and quality
● New advances in manufacturing technology.
In the 1980s and 1990s, US car manufacturers were losing market share to high-quality 
cars made in Japan. The Japanese cars also cost less. In fact, everything made in Japan 
seemed invincible: electronics such as TVs, computers, and stereo systems; heavy 
equipment corresponding to tractors, pumps, cranes, cars and trucks, turbine-genera￾tors for electric power production and many other high-dollar equipment. The United 
States seemed to be losing ground to Japan on almost all industrial fronts. Economists 
were extolling the virtues of the Japanese “system” and university professors (Peter 
Drucker among them) were writing books on Japanese management and manufactur￾ing techniques and wondering if we could “copy” their efficiency and processes. As a 
result, many factories were laying off workers or closing. Some were attempting to 
mimic the Japanese way with Kanban, Just-in-Time parts delivery, and Quality Circles. 
They were seemingly helpless to compete.
The balance of trade with Japan became so large that many Japanese firms recog￾nized they would need to build manufacturing facilities in the US. This served a num￾ber of purposes. It saved Japan the shipping costs of all the products being sent to 
North America, it averted possible trade sanctions (i.e., tariffs), and brought jobs to 
many communities in the US. This also relieved some of the political heat that US 
elected officials were feeling from their constituents regarding job losses. Further, it 
expanded the manufacturing capacity and reach of Japan’s industries.
It should also be noted that other Western countries were also trying to compete 
with Japanese quality and costs.
How did Japan, a small Asian country, command such notice and respect around 
the world? Had the US and European countries lost their competitive edge? Was inno￾vation in the West at a standstill?
The answers are numerous and somewhat complex. If we look at the history of qual￾ity in Japan, it is an interesting story. Before and during World War 2 (WW2), Japan’s 148 Manufacturing the New Product
industrial focus was on military hardware. Consumer products were far down on the 
priority list and consequently, were of low quality (except for some hand made prod￾ucts). After WW2, Japan’s industry was rebuilding and focusing on consumer goods. 
But due to a lack of quality programs, their products still suffered from poor quality 
and a reputation of shoddy workmanship. In the 1950s, Japanese cars and other prod￾ucts had a poor reputation for reliability. However, in the early 1950s, two American 
quality experts gave a series of lectures in Japan. The experts were Dr. Edwards 
Deming and Joseph Juran. Initially, their concepts of statistical quality control and 
statistical process control were not fully understood by Japanese engineers. Ultimately, 
the concepts began to take hold and many CEOs of Japanese companies started to 
embrace and implement the concepts.
Rather than find problems during inspections at the end of production, the focus 
was to find the root problem and correct these issues wherever they occur on the 
production line. Applied to whole factories, this not only produces a higher quality 
product, but eliminates time and cost throughout the production process. It also 
reduces the scrapping of parts thereby saving material costs. It took Japan 20 years 
to implement and increase their products’ quality. This is how Japan became a pow￾erhouse in quality products: it resulted in significant sales and market share leading 
to high profitability for Japan’s major corporations – at the expense of U.S. and 
European manufacturers.
Today, items “made in Japan” have a reputation for reliability and high quality 
(which brings higher prices) as opposed to their previous reputation for “shoddy 
workmanship” that existed in the past. Interestingly, many US manufacturers did 
not embrace Deming’s and Juran’s concepts. Many CEOs in the US simply rele￾gated product quality to the quality department. Many US (and European) compa￾nies were caught completely off-guard when Japan’s products started to make huge 
advances in market share in many industries. This did not happen overnight but 
was the result of 20 years of dedicated effort by Japan’s top companies. In summary, 
Deming outlined in his 1982 book “Out of the Crisis,” (Chapter 3, pp 97–98) the 
seven deadly sins of corporations that contribute to their failure’s and poor 
quality:
1. Lack of constancy of purpose
2. Emphasis on short-term profits
3. Evaluation by performance, merit rating, or annual review of performance
4. Mobility of management
5. Running a company on visible figures alone
6. Excessive medical costs
7. Excessive costs of warranty work. 
Let us also examine a partial history of costs in the US auto industry. In the 1960s, US 
car makers enjoyed an overwhelming dominance in the US market. Also, the Federal 
Government was investing heavily in the national road system. The $33 billion Federal 
Aid Highway Act of 1956 funded regional and interstate roads which enhanced the 
auto industry.
In 1966, the Big Three (GM, Ford, Chrysler) had a market share of 89.6%, which had 
decreased to 44.5% in 2014.1
 From 1966 to 1969, net imports increased at an average 
annual rate of 84%.2Manufacturing the New Product 149
Below is a quick summary of turmoil the US auto industry has weathered over the 
years:
● 1960s: stricter safety standards including seat belts, front head restraints, energy￾absorbing steering columns, ignition-key warning systems, anti-theft steering col￾umn/transmission locks, side marker lights and padded interiors.
● 1970s: extensive government regulations regarding air emissions led to 5 mph 
impact bumpers, emission controls, phasing out of leaded gasoline – which impacted 
engine performance with lower engine compression and less horsepower.
● 1970s and 1980s: The big three automakers staggered acutely during this time. There 
were many problems with engineering, manufacturing, and marketing. These 
included problems with the Ford Pinto, the Chevrolet Vega, and the AMC Gremlin. 
These were the most visible problems, but other models had issues as well. This 
period in US automotive history is commonly referred to as the malaise era of 
American auto design.3
 Significant engineering and manufacturing problems 
plagued US car makers, which led to unfavorable consumer perceptions resulting in 
poor sales and a sense that US cars were of low quality.
● Auto sales were mauled by the 1973 oil embargo by OPEC – the Organization of 
Petroleum Exporting Countries, primarily headed by Saudi Arabia. The price of 
gasoline soared and smaller fuel-efficient cars from foreign automakers became very 
popular and increased their market share of the US market. Further, the Federal 
Government implemented the Corporate Average Fuel Economy standards (effec￾tive 1978). In the 1980s, the economy was weak which affected auto sales and 
Chrysler Corporation received a federal bailout to the tune of $1.5 billion in loan 
guarantees (which was later paid back).
● The Big Three began developing joint manufacturing facilities with several of the 
Japanese automakers. Ford invested in Mazda, Chrysler bought stock in Mitsubishi 
Motors and GM invested in Suzuki and Isuzu Motors, GM also built a joint manu￾facturing facility with Toyota known as NUMMI (New United Motor Manufacturing, 
Inc.).4
Despite the economic, regulatory, political, and marketing turmoil, there were 
numerous technical innovations that helped the auto industry more easily meet 
safety and environmental regulations. These included disc brakes (instead of drum 
brakes), fuel injection (instead of carburation), and electronic ignition/engine con￾trols (instead of point distributors). Front-wheel drive became the standard drive 
train which helped improve fuel economy.
What does this have to do with product development? The above issues illustrate 
that external factors can impact a company’s, technology, market, revenues, and brand 
loyalty. Think about the inventor or entrepreneur that came up with fuel injection in 
the mid-1980s. This was a new solution (product or system) that solved a serious prob￾lem for all automakers, foreign and domestic. This also goes for electronic control 
modules. Many times, companies will seek outside experts, consultants, or manufac￾turers to solve specific problems. Even in times of turmoil, there are opportunities for 
small companies or entrepreneurs.
Also consider the foreign manufacturers who have set up manufacturing plants in 
the U.S.: Nissan is in Tennessee as is Volkswagen near Chattanooga, BMW in South 
Carolina, Mercedes in Alabama, KIA in Georgia, Honda also in Alabama and the list 150 Manufacturing the New Product
goes on. Surrounding these manufacturing facilities are supplier facilities, creating 
thousands of jobs and pumping dollars into the local economies, not to mention tax 
revenues. BMW is exporting some of their SUV models overseas from South Carolina.
Manufacturing still plays a vital role in the economies of many nations. The auto 
industry is a prime example as everyone understands the car: everyone owns or aspires 
to own one.
Similarly, there are many other highly capital-intensive industries including avia￾tion (Boeing, Airbus, Gulfstream, Bombardier, etc.), utilities (reactors, wind turbines, 
etc.) paper and boxboard (boilers, pumps, valves, etc.). Many smaller companies 
design, build and manufacture many of the components that are used by these larger 
manufacturers: tires for landing gear, avionics for cockpit instruments, cable for elec￾trical signals in the utility industry etc. These are all potential customers (and their 
suppliers) for new products and services.
Further, regulations have had a huge impact on many industries. For example, the 
utility industry has been shifting from coal to cleaner power sources such as wind and 
solar. New products have been developed to support this industry in its transition.
The State of Manufacturing
Manufacturing in the US has been declining for the past 50 years. However, it is still a 
large part of the economy providing employment for 12.8 million people with a total 
output of $2.33 trillion dollars.5
 Manufacturing accounts for approximately 48% of US 
exports.
If you wish to manufacture a product, there are over 250,000 manufacturing facili￾ties. And manufacturing is getting more efficient and cost-effective with time. Many 
years ago, numeric control machines were used to manufacture specialized parts in 
many industries. The machines were programmed (computer controlled) to mill or 
drill key parts, or to shape metals. This was a great step forward in efficiency as these 
types of actions would have taken humans much longer. Further, factory automation 
has also seen acceptance. If one considers the power industry: taking fuel in and pro￾ducing electricity out, automation has played a large role in plant efficiency. For exam￾ple, automated systems measure the amount of fuel in (say natural gas) and can adjust 
pumps, valves, and other equipment to match the demand (running at 25%, 50%, or 
100%). This same technology has been used in the paper-pulp industry, building auto￾mation, and factory automation.
However, there can be a disconnect between entrepreneurs and manufacturing. 
Many times, graduate students in science or engineering can develop new products or 
technologies from their research. They understand scientific principles, but many 
times they do not understand manufacturing, or the economics associated with pro￾duction. And just because there are 250,000 manufacturers in the country does not 
mean each of these has the expertise or the specialized facilities needed for a new 
product.
If the entrepreneur decides to start a small manufacturing company, where does one 
start? What are some of the tips for a start up facility? Where can special expertise be 
found?The State of Manufacturing 151
As mentioned in Chapter 6, incubators can assist in connecting inventors with 
appropriate contacts in industry or business. Also, most state governments have an 
Office of Economic Development which exists to help spur job growth through invest￾ments. These offices also foster trade or encourage the installation of manufacturing 
facilities. These are excellent resources to obtain the appropriate contacts. Finally, 
there are many trade associations that can also assist. 
Some of these include:
American Small Manufacturers Coalition:
http://www.smallmanufacturers.org/who-we-are
National Association of Manufacturers (NAM):
https://www.nam.org
Manufacturing Leadership Council:
https://www.manufacturingleadershipcouncil.com
IQS Directory (Industrial Quick Search Manufacturer Directory): 
https://www.iqsdirectory.com/associations/manufacturing-associations.html
IQS allows one to search by category (Automation, Forging, Material Handling, etc.) 
for dozens of industrial and manufacturing associations.
Thinking About Starting Your Own Manufacturing Company?
There are many considerations for a manufacturing startup as well as some opera￾tional issues:
● Some entrepreneurs may consider their product or process highly proprietary (or 
intellectual property, IP) and do not wish to share this information.
● If well-funded, a new facility can be established, but a consulting engineering firm 
and/or construction contractor will be needed (sharing IP information)
● It may be worthwhile to purchase a small manufacturer. The machines, and the 
people who operate them, are already trained and in place.
Inventory
Adequate supplies and materials need to be on hand, including spare parts for machine 
maintenance. However, investing in too much inventory ties up company funds and 
space in the warehouse. Consider a just-in-time system or smaller quantities of stock. 
Do you really need 60 days’ supply of nuts and bolts, or will 30 days be adequate?
Safety
There are many local and national safety requirements for manufacturing facilities. 
Generally, there are state and local fire codes, insurance requirements (Factory 
Mutual), the national electric code, and OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration). While beyond the scope of this work, safety should be a priority in 
any factory or production facility. A serious accident or death can bring lawsuits and 
temporary closings while an investigation is launched. This can also lead to fines if a 
firm is found to be in violation. However, the real reason to have a safety program is to 
ensure employees are safe and feel comfortable in their workplace. Regular safety 
meetings, safety policies, and metrics are highly advisable.152 Manufacturing the New Product
Housekeeping
Keeping your factory clean is also a safety issue. Evidence suggests that those facilities 
that keep a tidy factory floor have less accidents. It also makes the work environment 
more pleasant for employees. Dedicate the last 15 minutes of each day to cleaning up.
Note that OSHA has guidelines and requirements for good housekeeping within 
production facilities. Good housekeeping boosts employee morale, improves quality 
control, and helps maintain better control over the production process.
Factory Layout – Process
A factory takes in raw materials at one end and a finished product is shipped out at the 
other end. Some factories take in finished components and assemble them into a final 
product. These are known as assembly plants. How the factory is arranged is impor￾tant for efficiency and cost savings. It makes sense to have material and parts flow 
where the assembly process occurs sequentially from station to station. However, over 
time, new production lines can be installed, or a “custom fab” area for special orders is 
set aside – all of which means more shuttling of parts and less efficiency. Having to 
cart parts back and forth from one end of the facility to the other is not cost efficient.
If we consider our Air Emissions Monitor from previous chapters, Figure 7.1 
Manufacturing Flow, shows a hypothetical flow for production of the new air monitor 
from start to finish. Notice that some components arrive already assembled, while 
some are fabricated in place. Figure 7.1 is one possible flow scenario. There may be 
other floor arrangements that are more effective. Generally, industrial and/or manu￾facturing engineers compose various floor arrangements to arrive at the optimum 
workflow.
Figure 7.1 Manufacturing Flow. Figure developed by David TennantThe State of Manufacturing 153
Notice there are several Quality Control (QC) checks within each manufacturing 
line. This means there may be some parts that do not meet standards and may be 
rejected to a waste bin. The manufacturing and engineering team should determine 
the rejection rates and root cause of any problems. Waste parts and materials represent 
lost costs and wasted time. QC also ensures that the individual components are work￾ing, and that the assembled final product is working. This ensures customer satisfac￾tion and reduction of returns or warranty repairs.
Notice in Figure 7.1 that there are three work flows in this facility: metals (top), 
plastics (center), and electronics (bottom). These are occurring simultaneously, and 
each flow needs to have the correct number of finished parts available for final assem￾bly at the same time. Too many wiring harnesses produced, compared to the steel and 
plastic parts, will mean lost optimized time and excess wiring “waiting” for final use … 
it may begin to back up, slowing down the electronics line. This means each line must 
produce the right number of parts at the right time; otherwise, some lines will begin to 
back up for being too far ahead while others will be behind. Industrial engineers usu￾ally perform time motion studies of worker productivity and can determine with some 
accuracy how to staff each line and how long each workstation will need to produce 
their parts. Further, robots and smart factories are beginning to eliminate bottlenecks 
such as these and ensure the smooth flow of materials and tasks. More on smart facto￾ries further on.
Supply Chain Management
While details of Supply Chain have been offered in previous chapters, it is advanta￾geous for a small manufacturer to have a trusting and long-term relationship with 
suppliers for the following reasons:
● Some suppliers may be willing to stock parts or materials at their warehouse or dis￾tribution point thereby reducing the inventory held in stock by you.
● A strong relationship with your suppliers means they may be more flexible in pay￾ment terms and willing to go the extra mile when materials need to be expedited or 
obtained on an emergency basis.
It is necessary that a manufacturer qualifies suppliers. It would not be productive to 
enter into a contract with a company experiencing cash flow problems or approaching 
bankruptcy.
Small vs. Large Manufacturers
A small manufacturer offers several advantages over a larger one. For example, gener￾ally they can be set up more quickly; that is, they are nimbler in changing operations. 
This might involve changing or reprogramming numerical control (NC) machines or 
designing and fabricating tooling. They are more likely to be efficient for small batch 
runs as opposed to continuous operations.
If a large run (say 100,000 products) is needed, then most likely a larger manufac￾turer will be better suited.
Some of the advantages of small producers include:
● Closer management of the production process
● Nimbler to change when product demand changes or for custom orders154 Manufacturing the New Product
● Less capital dollars needed
● Closer supervision of workers
● Less possibility of disruption due to labor or supply issues.
Disadvantages of smaller production facilities:
● Less robotics – it may take longer to produce a product
● Less consistency or lack of quality – directly related to lack of robots. Whenever 
people are producing a product, they cannot be as precise or as quick as robots
● Generally, more waste due to rejected or substandard parts
● More susceptible to economic disruption. Can a smaller firm survive an economic 
downturn?
● Older facilities. Smaller producers generally do not have the capital to invest in new, 
high-tech machines or robots.
Just-In-Time Manufacturing (JIT)
Just-in-time means materials or components are delivered when needed and are not 
stored long-term in the warehouse. It is a workflow method focused on reducing pro￾duction flow times, and response times from suppliers. If is a “pull” approach meaning 
that production is matched to demand. Many times, companies will build a quantity 
based on expected demand, which may not be accurate. If a facility can make batch 
runs: that is, smaller units in a single run, this will allow all units to be sent to market. 
No excess units in storage or excessive inventories and parts in the warehouse.
JIT is a system and not just a method of inventory reduction. JIT has been around for 
at least 60 years and was started in Japan. At that time, factories could not find the 
necessary skills needed for production or the large capital required to compete against 
more developed countries.
As a result, JIT is a system using smaller factories, smaller batch runs, and other 
techniques. Below are some of the benefits of a JIT approach to production:
● Small batch production runs
● Skill diversification: workers that can perform multiple roles or tasks. This means 
that workers can be shifted to where critical operations are needed
● Eliminating defects – more focus on quality and wastes minimization. It is possible 
that robotics can assist in this area (minimal human error)
● Consistent plant load – less swings in production
● The efficient movement of materials from beginning to end. This includes suppliers, 
parts movement from the warehouse to the factory, and movement of materials 
between workstations
● Less inventory. Due to smaller batch runs and more frequent materials deliveries, 
there is less need for material storage or storage space
● Less space required to operate. Smaller batch runs will mean fewer machines, 
smaller facility space, and optimizing worker skills for different tasks.
JIT offers reduced production time and operating costs; and faster product to market. 
Like any system, there are inherent risks which can be devasting for a small company 
if these risks are not identified in advance and minimized. For example, if a critical 
machine breaks down during a production run, it can delay product shipment to cus￾tomers and, potentially, shut down the whole production line. This means facilities The State of Manufacturing 155
need to have a strong preventive maintenance program so that all critical machinery is 
kept in top condition.
Further, having suppliers close by is important as shipment of raw materials or com￾ponents should adjust to production schedules and quantities. If a supplier is thou￾sands of miles away, this will not be conducive to smaller, more frequent deliveries.
How is Lean Manufacturing Different From JIT?
The terms lean manufacturing and JIT manufacturing are often used interchange￾ably. However, there is a distinct difference. JIT, as noted, seeks to streamline factory 
production and the supply chain process to reduce costs.
Further, JIT is focused to deliver one item (a batch run) with minimal flaws or vari￾ations. JIT provides more flexibility, whether to produce larger or smaller product 
amounts, it will be more in tune with market demands including fluctuations. As a 
result, manufacturing equipment needs to be adaptable and easily changed to satisfy 
new or different products.
Lean manufacturing, on the other hand, is more concerned with the process outside 
of the factory and focuses on the customer. Specifically, this means determining what 
the customer wants. Collaborating with customers to determine wants and needs can 
lead to a more focused design. Therefore, functional areas, such as engineering, sales, 
and marketing may have extensive discussions or working sessions with customers. 
Recall in previous chapters, discussions on the importance of customer focus groups 
and beta testing.
Onshore vs Offshore
Manufacturing employment in the US declined by 5.8 million jobs between 2000 and 
2010.6
 A significant number of those jobs went to countries in Asia. This is because 
labor and production costs are extremely low compared to the US and other Western 
nations.
It is also known that when manufacturing is exported to other countries, the exper￾tise and future innovation usually goes with those production techniques. There are 
also issues with preserving intellectual property and patents. Therefore, an inventor in 
search of a manufacturer must balance the cost of production with protecting pro￾cesses and patents. Further, managing product quality can also be problematic from 
half a world away.
There are advantages and disadvantages for moving production offshore. It allows 
companies to utilize their core competencies. For example, a US firm may have crea￾tive and innovative people, great engineering expertise, and strong marketing prow￾ess. The foreign firm will most likely offer abundant and low-cost labor, thereby using 
its core competency. When a domestic company decides to outsource its engineering 
and innovation (downsizing to save costs), and entirely removing a key part of the 
organization, this is where issues can arise. It is difficult to control quality and supply 
chain problems on the opposite side of the planet. Companies need to carefully craft a 
business strategy for offshore production.
It is recognized that competitive issues are at play. Higher production costs will 
mean a higher retail price for a new product. Therefore, a careful review of costs and 
benefits must be considered. However, there are new and interesting advances that are 
beginning to appear in manufacturing facilities and has the potential to bring further 
competitiveness to domestic manufacturing.156 Manufacturing the New Product
New Manufacturing Advances
3D Printing
3D printing technology is becoming more accessible and offers a variety of advantages. 
First, molds are not required, therefore the costs associated with this process can be 
very competitive. Further, the output is based on CAD or STL files and product cus￾tomization can be accomplished without incurring additional manufacturing costs. 
3D printing has been around for over 30 years, but over time, it has become more 
adaptable and cost effective.
The technology can produce prototypes quickly which helps bring products to mar￾ket more quickly. Cost savings can also be realized with less waste. Only the exact 
amount of material is used, as opposed to previous manufacturing techniques requir￾ing cutting, which will always produce waste material.
Not all materials can be used. The most common materials for 3D printing include 
plastics, metals, resins, and ceramics. The printer contains a spool of plastic (or metal) 
that is produced one layer at a time until the product is completed. This provides 
design flexibility, and the machine can be left alone (no operators required) while it 
completes the tasks (usually in hours, not days).
Figure 7.2 3D Printing. NEW DATA SERVICES / UnsplashNew Manufacturing Advances 157
Disadvantages to 3D printing include high cost with high volume; economies of scale 
do not occur with 3D in comparison with CNC machines and injection molding. 
Figure 7.2 shows a small 3D manufacturing printer.
Robotics
Complex new products will require advances in manufacturing technology.
Robotics is a part of this advancement. Robots on the manufacturing line are faster 
and more precise than a human doing the same work. Further, this provides consist￾ent parts quality, which in turn saves time, minimizes waste, and reduces costs. 
Consistency in parts and products will ensure higher quality and reduce warranty 
work – saving costs and company reputations. Robots for industrial use have been 
available for some time, but they are becoming more advanced as higher precision is 
required. Early robots were not “smart” and could not function without human inter￾action. The tasks they performed were monotonous and had to be programmed.
The next generation of robots were controlled by programmable controllers making 
them smarter, autonomous, and less reliant on human manipulation. Modern robots 
can control the flow of materials and manage production tasks. As time moves for￾ward, it is likely that manufacturing facilities will employ more robots than people. 
Besides drilling or forming materials, robots also pick up completed materials from 
one machine and place into another machine for the next task (using the next robot). 
Further, robots can also perform spot welding, grinding, spray painting and polishing. 
Some of these tasks are guided by lasers and are necessary for highly complex tasks.
It is worthy to note that robots can also perform tasks that are dangerous or toxic to 
humans. For example, after the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant disaster in 2011, radia￾tion levels were too dangerous to allow humans to survey the reactor damage. Consequently, 
robots were used to inspect and provide video images of the damaged power plant.
Figure 7.3 Manufacturing Robotics. Lenny Kuhne / Unsplash158 Manufacturing the New Product
Robots today and in the future are collecting data from the “cloud” and can analyze 
sensor data in real time, allowing them to change direction of parts or material flows. 
Artificial intelligence (AI) is allowing robots to be smarter, more autonomous, and 
efficient than humans could ever be.
The use of robots in industry has been increasing significantly. The International 
Federation of Robotics (IFR) states the global average for industrial robots per 10,000 
manufacturing workers grew from 66 in 2015 to 85 in 2017.7
 Figure 7.3 shows a robot 
at an auto manufacturing plant.
Robotics and the Use of Internet of Things (IOT) and 5G
In Chapter 8, IOT is listed as a new technology from the standpoint of micro grids and 
smart cities. IOT has also found applications in manufacturing technology, especially 
robots. IOT and 5G (also in Ch. 8) will allow the integration of data, operations, people, 
and equipment in real time. Robots will be able to communicate with each other and, 
using artificial intelligence, sort through data (collected by multiple plant sensors) and 
make operational adjustments – that is, make decisions. Artificial intelligence will 
increase the use and functionality of robots. The future for robots in manufacturing is 
exceptional. Note that modern production facilities are highly automated and employ 
sensors in many locations across the plant.
Sensors in manufacturing facilities are used to measure temperatures, pres￾sures, flow rates (fluids or gases), and other media. The data from sensors can be 
utilized in turn to control fluid flows, temperatures, etc. by modulating the perfor￾mance of compressors, motors, valves, pumps, and other process equipment. Why 
not also coordinate robots so that they can communicate with the sensors and 
each other? The advantages to 5G are that higher volumes of data (throughput) at 
much faster speeds will occur and this wilI have a large impact on future factory 
automation.
It should be apparent that the joining of smart robots, factory automation, 5G, the 
cloud, and artificial intelligence will usher in a revolution in manufacturing technol￾ogy and practical applications. This will allow the production of new products faster, 
cheaper, and with higher quality and consistency. Products made in smart manufac￾turing facilities will have better quality and consistency than anything “hand-made.”
Predictive or Preventive Maintenance
Maintenance in factories has always been a challenge. Some facilities shut down for 
two weeks every year to perform plant upgrades and maintenance on highly critical 
equipment. This is known as planned maintenance or a planned outage. It can be 
costly and damaging for a critical machine, pump, etc. to break down during a produc￾tion or batch run. It is entirely possible that one machine failure can cause other 
machines, upstream or downstream, in the production process to also fail, not to men￾tion that some materials or parts may have to be scrapped. This would be character￾ized as a forced or unplanned outage.
Consequently, production facilities cannot wait for machines to fail before fixing or 
replacing them. The whole purpose of preventative maintenance is to prevent machines 
from breaking down by performing maintenance on a regular schedule. For example, 
if we know that a critical valve will function for 18 months before the packing fails, we New Manufacturing Advances 159
can schedule a work ticket every 15 months to prevent the valve from failing. This is 
also a similar approach for other equipment such as motors, pumps, etc.
However, smart factories, sensors, equipment monitors, and other data will enable the 
robotics or control system to notify plant personnel when equipment performance is 
starting to lag or act suspicious. These new technologies will have a huge impact on 
keeping plants running for longer periods and with better predictive/preventive mainte￾nance. With intelligent planning, it may be that fewer spare parts are stored in the ware￾house thereby reducing inventory, saving costs, and reducing space requirements.
Robotics in New Product Development
From a product development perspective, advanced manufacturing looks highly 
promising. However, not all factories employ sophisticated robots due to the capital 
costs involved. Most complex robotic systems are likely found in the larger, more 
advanced factories (planes, autos, etc.) in the global marketplace.
It is important to note that robots are excellent at batch runs but need to be repro￾grammed for each individual batch. This involves time for programming and several test 
runs to confirm the programming is correct. Further, does every new product need the 
sophistication of robots? Probably not. Smaller manufacturers many times employ robots 
on a limited basis (not necessarily “smart”) and this may be acceptable for many small 
company products, limited batch runs or entrepreneurs producing their first product.
Chapter Key Points
● Manufacturing has been under pressure for the last 50 years to be more competitive 
and cost effective.
● Many factors can impact manufacturing including, but not limited to: foreign com￾petition, government policies and regulations, monetary policy (i.e., interest rates), 
currency exchange rates, supplier issues, and disruptive new technologies.
● In the US, manufacturing plays a large role by employing almost 13 million people 
and helping the balance of trade by exporting almost half of the country’s manufac￾tured goods.
● Manufacturing accounts for $2.3 trillion in total output.
● For small companies looking to produce a product, it may be beneficial to seek 
smaller companies that possess the expertise or buy an existing small manufacturer.
● Key ingredients to cost effective production include inventory management, a strong 
safety program, good housekeeping, and an effective plant process layout.
● Just-in-time manufacturing is concerned with activities in the plant warehouse and 
within the manufacturing facility. Lean manufacturing is focused on customer 
needs and is external to the manufacturing facility.
● New advances in factory automation, robotics, 5G, IOT, and other technologies will 
have a huge impact on the future of manufacturing.
Discussion Questions
1. Why is housekeeping at a factory considered a safety issue?
2. Figure 7.1 shows a proposed manufacturing flow to produce an air emissions moni￾tor. Looking at this diagram, which production functions could potentially be per￾formed by robots?160 Manufacturing the New Product
3. Referring again to Figure 7.1, what advantages would robots bring to this 
facility?
4. Are there any disadvantages to just-in-time (JIT) manufacturing?
5. What are some of the advantages and disadvantages of offshore manufacturing?
6. If your company is building a new state-of-the-art factory, what are some of the 
considerations (pro and con) in determining its location?
Discussion Question Answers
1. Why is housekeeping at a factory considered a safety issue?
Good housekeeping means clean floors, tidy work areas, and minimal trash or mate￾rials laying around. Research has shown this translates into fewer accidents and sets 
the tone for the corporate culture. Further, OSHA has guidelines and requirements for 
good housekeeping within production facilities. Good housekeeping boosts employee 
morale, improves quality control, and helps maintain better control over the produc￾tion process.
2. Figure 7.1 shows a proposed manufacturing flow to produce an air emissions moni￾tor. Looking at this diagram, which production functions could potentially be per￾formed by robots?
It is likely that workstations 1A, 2A, 3A, 1B, 2B, and 1C could utilize robots for these 
functions. It would depend on whether the robots are “smart” as to how much produc￾tion could be performed by robots.
3. Referring again to Figure 7.1, what advantages would robots bring to this facility?
● Better quality and consistency of individual and assembled components
● Less scrap or wasted materials
● Less warranty work or retuned products
● Can work more precisely and faster than humans
● Cost savings based on all the above.
4. Are there any disadvantages to just-in-time (JIT) manufacturing?
JIT works very well for most production facilities. However, if suppliers run into trou￾ble (labor strike, unable to procure materials, etc.), this will have an immediate effect 
on production as JIT does not encourage storage of parts or materials in the ware￾house. JIT uses customer orders or demand to start production. Any disruption in the 
supply chain will disrupt product output and delivery.
Also, JIT requires strong coordination during the manufacturing process. This 
means that companies must make an investment in supply chain IT so that materials 
can be automatically ordered when stocks run low.
5. What are some of the advantages and disadvantages of offshore manufacturing?
Disadvantages
● Potential loss of intellectual property
● Transferring manufacturing overseas usually means that country will benefit from 
future manufacturing advances
● Some lower end jobs will be lost in domestic facilities (i.e., transferred offshore)
● More difficult to control quality and information flow
● Disruptions in supply chain harder to mitigate.Bibliography 161
Advantages
● Lower labor costs in offshore country
● Comparative advantage: for example, domestic firm has expertise in engineering, 
creativity, and marketing; offshore firm in low-cost labor. This allows both compa￾nies to utilize their core competencies.
6. If your company is building a new state-of-the-art factory, what are some of the 
considerations in determining its future location?
● How close are suppliers?
● Are there enough 5G towers nearby to implement IOT?
● Is the facility near a major port or airport?
● How good is the education system (well educated workforce)?
● Are there adequate and reliable power and water resources?
● How strong is the local infrastructure (roads, communications, etc.)?
Notes
1 Joel C., Brooks, D., Mulloy, M., Economic Policy Institute (May 6, 2015), The Decline 
and Resurgence of the US Auto Industry, accessed on August 25, 2021. https://www.
epi.org/publication/the-decline-and-resurgence-of-the-u-s-auto-industry.
2 Okubo, S., “Foreign Automobile Sales in the United States,” in Federal Reserve Bank of 
Richmond. “November 1970,” Economic Quarterly (Federal Reserve Bank of 
Richmond) (November 1970), accessed on August 25, 2021. https://fraser.stlouisfed.
org/title/960/item/37804/toc/174839.
3 Martin, M. The Truth About Cars, May 5, 2001. Accessed on August 25, 2021. https://
www.thetruthaboutcars.com/2011/05/
what-about-the-malaise-era-more-specifically-what-about-this-1979-ford-granada.
4 “In Partnership, the United States and Japan 1951-2001”, ed. by Akira Irike and Robert 
Wampler.
5 National Association of Manufacturers, accessed August 30, 2021, https://www.nam.
org/state-manufacturing-data/2020-united-states-manufacturing-facts.
6 Bonvillian, W. and Singer, P., Advanced Manufacturing, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA., 2017.
7 Atkinson, R., ITIF, Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, accessed 
September 10, 2021, https://itif.org/publications/2019/10/15/
robotics-and-future-production-and-work.
Bibliography
https://www.fingent.com/blog/top-10-technologies-that-will-transform￾manufacturing-in–2021.
https://waypointrobotics.com/blog/manufacturing-trends.
https://www.arnoldmachine.com/6-exciting-advances-manufacturing-automation.
https://www.twi-global.com/technical-knowledge/faqs/what-is-3d-printing/
pros-and-cons#Prosof3DPrinting.
https://maycointernational.com/blog/how-advanced-technology-is-changing-in-the￾manufacturing-industry.163
Product Development: An Engineer’s Guide to Business Considerations, Real-World Product Testing, and 
Launch, First Edition. David V. Tennant. 
© 2022 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2022 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
8
Engineering Product Design and Testing
The profession of engineering uses the principles of science and mathematics to solve 
technical problems. However, in any engineering engagement, this also includes crea￾tivity, vision, perseverance, and compliance with federal and state laws. For example, 
this could include environmental regulations (e.g., air and water emissions) during the 
manufacturing process.
Managing the Approved Scope and Budget – Why Is This 
Important?
Recall that the Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) defines the scope of our project. 
And, Product Development can be considered a project. It is important to recognize 
that some firms reinvest around five to seven percent of their profits back into R&D 
(i.e., new product development). The author is aware of one Fortune 100 company 
returning 11 percent of its profits to R&D. However, the budgets for new product 
development are not unlimited. This can also be more significant for publicly held 
companies. A publicly held company is one that has its stock listed on the stock 
exchange (i.e., NASDAQ, NYSE, etc.). The owners of the company are the sharehold￾ers who have invested their money in the firm. Shareholders expect the value of the 
company to go up over time; and they generally like to see some of the profits returned 
to shareholders in the form of dividends (quarterly cash payouts). This is opposite 
privately held companies that are either family owned, or employee owned. Tables 8.1 
and 8.2 indicate a few publicly and privately held companies.
Publicly held companies must follow federal guidelines and regulations related to 
accounting transparency. Privately held companies have less strict rules as the owners 
are not the public.
As noted in Chapter 2, the business case is a detailed proposal for a new project, 
product, or business. The timelines and costs in a business case are a best-case esti￾mate. Many times, these estimates will be provided as your working budget, much to 
the dismay of product teams. Note that an estimate is an educated guess as to what the 
project will cost. A budget is what you are allowed to spend. It is necessary to confirm 
that the budget is realistic by the project/product team.164 Engineering Product Design and Testing
Table 8.1 Sample of Large Publicly Held Companies.
Company (ticker) Products
Revenue 
(billions) No. Employees
Coca-Cola (KO) Beverages, non-alcoholic $ 294.1 80,300
Apple (APPL) Consumer electronics $ 267.7 147,000
Bank of America (BAC) Banking, financial services $ 74.2 213,000
Wal-Mart (WMT) Discount stores $ 559.2 2,300,000
Amazon (AMZN) Internet retail sales $ 386.1 1, 298,000
Volkswagen (VWAPY) Auto manufacturing $ 262.3 662,575
Data from finance.yahoo.com (4/5/2021)
Table 8.2 Sample of Large Privately Held Companies.
Company Products
Revenue 
(Billions) No. Employees
Koch Industries Chemicals, Consumer Products $ 115.00 100,000
Bechtel Engineering and Construction $ 21.80 55,000
Cox Enterprises Media $ 21.10 50,000
Cargill Food, Drink, Tobacco $ 114.60 155,000
Price Waterhouse Coopers Business Services $ 43.00 276,000
Fidelity Investments Financial Services $ 20.90 50,000
Source: Data from Forbes, 2020 Rankings, viewed February 27, 2021, https://www.forbes.com/
largest-private-companies/list/#tab:rank
The Project Lifecycle
All activities within a company can be considered a project. A new marketing cam￾paign, a new product, building a new hospital, etc. are all examples of projects. It is 
only in the last 20 years or so that companies have recognized having a robust pro￾cess for managing projects gives them a competitive advantage. How much better 
off financially would your company be if 90% of projects came in on budget and 
schedule? Project management is a strong tool that can help companies more effec￾tively design and develop new products and services. Note that an awareness of 
budget, schedule, risks, etc. is monitored and controlled throughout the life of the 
project.
Figure 8.1 shows a sample project lifecycle (do not confuse this with the product 
lifecycle). This is very typical, but companies may have their own approach.
Many companies have designed processes and procedures that align with the project 
lifecycle.The Project Lifecycle 165
The business case, discussed in Chapter 2, is generally developed prior to formal 
project launch. Remember, it is a feasibility study produced to help corporate execu￾tives make a go or no-go decision.
Initiation – Once the product or project is approved and funding secured, the project 
moves into the initiation phase. Primarily, this is where the project leader (or product 
leader) identifies key stakeholders, and the sponsoring executive formally launches the pro￾ject by issuing a memo or project charter. This will identify the project’s existence and the 
person who will lead the effort. It is appropriate for the team to have a kick-off meeting to go 
over the project’s objectives and confirm each team member’s role and responsibility. Some 
companies may also have preliminary schedule and budget discussions with the team.
Planning – This is where detailed design and planning will occur. Some of these 
activities include (but are not limited to) are shown in Table 8.3:
Pre-Project
Feasibility Study
ID Stakeholders
Gate Review
4
Review Business Case
Kick-off meeting
Define scope
Budget & schedule
Roles & responsibilities
Engineering Design
Gate Reviews
Close project accounts
Ideas for version 2.0
Promotion & advertising
Feedback to product
team
Test/review prototype Customer follow up
Revise Design?
Review for prod.
Liability
Final Gate Review
Risk Reviews
Full Production
Product shipped
Close. contracts
Project assessment
Disperse team
Formal project cllose
Project Plan issued
Risk Reviews
Form Team
Confirm objectives Estimate costs/benefits
Recommendations
Project Approved
BUSINESS CASE PROJECT INITIATION DETAILED PLANNING
IMPLEMENTATION MARKET ACCEPTANCE CLOSING TASKS
Approved Project
3 5
1 2
Figure 8.1 Sample Project Life Cycle. Figure developed by David Tennant
Table 8.3 Project Planning Activities.
● Develop communications 
plan
● Review company 
procurement policies 
and procedures
● Determine how/when risk 
reviews will occur
● Reaffirm product 
objectives
● Develop prototype QA/
QC testing procedures
● Meet with key stakeholders 
to obtain input, desired 
features, etc.
● Confirm budget and 
schedule are realistic
● Determine engineering 
design review 
points (Gates?)
● Review staffing 
requirements
● Meet with production: 
logistics and costs
● Scope change management ● Define project success
Table by David Tennant166 Engineering Product Design and Testing
The planning phase is critical and should have ample time scheduled for these activities. 
Many times, companies rush through the planning stage, only to realize items that were 
not fully planned show up as problems during the execution or implementation stage.
Implementation – Implementation is where and how the new product is manufac￾tured. This may include the addition of new manufacturing lines, new processes, and 
training of skilled workers to ensure product quality. During the planning phase, it 
should have been identified that new processes, equipment, etc. are needed for the 
project to succeed. The quality assurance and quality control group (QA/QC) will play 
an integral role in ensuring product quality. Production engineers will identify and 
correct manufacturing issues. Ideally, many of these issues should be identified and 
corrected during prototype testing. A prototype is a first run and test of the new 
product. There may also be iterations of prototypes before a final design is confirmed.
Continuous Review – It will be necessary to manage the schedule, budget and activities 
throughout the project’s lifecycle. If the new product goes way over budget, and by extension, 
schedule, it may make the new product uneconomical to produce or too costly in the market￾place. Remember, a company cannot stay in business unless it makes a return on its investment.
Another way to monitor the project is to perform risk reviews on a regular basis. 
New potential problems will emerge throughout the project and the project team 
needs to identify these in advance so that mitigation strategies can be developed.
Project End – The finish line is a combination of actions that signify the project is 
at an end. Some of these actions include successful production and shipment of new 
product to the marketplace; achieving all of the objectives identified in the project 
plan, closing accounts, and performing a project assessment.
All the previous activities will require exceptional management and technical talent 
to be successful. Remember that open communications are necessary with stakehold￾ers, executives, functional departments, and suppliers.
A True Story: Ignoring the Warning Signs
A large telecommunications company was investing significant dollars in one of its 
manufacturing facilities. The Marketing group had made strong projections for future 
sales of the firm’s new product – currently under development. Capital spending was 
provided to increase the number of manufacturing lines, add new material ware￾houses, increase R&D spending, and install a new clean lab.
Management had placed ambitious goals for the product’s release and the teams were 
putting in a lot of overtime to reach the deadline. As a result of the expected demand, and 
to also beat their competitors to market, there were many rushes through R&D, scope 
changes were becoming a problem, and many large purchases did not go to competitive 
bid (to save time). As a result, the program went significantly over budget and behind 
schedule. Finger pointing was occurring between different factions at the corporate and 
plant levels. There were many problems that may have been uncovered with a risk review:
● Not going out for bid meant that pricing for expensive capital equipment was high, 
absent any competitive pressures.
● R&D, Marketing, Engineering, and Production had not worked together to develop 
a timeline. The schedule was dictated by senior management based on “expected” 
moves by competitors. For this reason, the schedule was unrealistic.Preventing Failure and Surprises: Performing a Risk Review 167
Figure 8.2 R&D Lab. ThisisengineeringRAE / Unsplash
● The budget was tied to schedule milestones. Since the schedule was not valid, nei￾ther was the budget or cash flow projections.
● The initial problems in developing the new product were not taken seriously, which 
came to fruition during the prototype manufacturing stage (end of planning but 
prior to implementation phase).
● Several key people were looking to “bail out” of the project, sensing that failure may 
be on the horizon.
● It was discovered, late in planning, that several environmental issues would need to 
be addressed. This added further costs to the budget and additional schedule delays.
● Marketing and Engineering argued over changes to the original scope. Engineering 
was trying to hold to the agreed-to scope and cost. Marketing was pushing for changes 
to the product that would make it more desirable in the marketplace. Changes to the 
product meant that R&D and Engineering would have to redesign and test the newly 
revised product. These actions had serious budget and schedule implications.
A formal risk review would have uncovered many of these items earlier in the project 
thereby saving time and money. Let’s move on to the actual actions needed to perform 
a risk review. Figure 8.2 shows a typical R&D lab, where many initial problems begin.
Preventing Failure and Surprises: Performing a 
Risk Review
One of the most useful tools for anticipating problems, and thwarting them, is a risk 
review. Put simply, a risk is a potential future problem. If the product team can 
identify problems likely to occur in the future, they can devise strategies to avoid or 
minimize them.
First of all, risk reviews should be conducted throughout the project lifecycle; 
that is even starting with the business case running through the end of the project. 
This is because new problems will emerge as the project develops (and some will 
fade out).168 Engineering Product Design and Testing
Key Tenets of Risk Reviews
● Risk reviews are a team effort, led by the team leader or a facilitator. Figure 8.3 
illustrates a team risk review session.
● Risks can only happen in the future.
● Risk identification is typically done as a brain-storming session.
● Risks can be interdependent. For example, a problem triggered in Dept A may lead 
to issues downstream in Dept B.
● Performing risk reviews will make you a better manager and the team more aware 
of potential snags in the project.
● Identifying risks and developing strategies will minimize the chaos and “firefight￾ing” that sometimes occurs in projects.
● Finally, the ultimate goal is to change today’s actions to improve future results.
Two Types of Risk Review: Qualitative and Quantitative
There are two types of risk reviews. The most common approach is the qualitative 
review. Table 8.4 is an actual risk review using the qualitative method.
Notice that for each risk, we have assigned a Probability (P) and Impact (I). As a 
team, we must decide what is the probability of the risk occurring (High, Medium, or 
Low); and, if the risk occurs, what is the impact (High, Medium, or Low). This can be 
somewhat subjective but relies on the collective judgment of the team or subject mat￾ter experts (SMEs). Also, for each risk, there are several strategies that have been 
devised. One rule of risk reviews is that there should always be two or more strategies 
for each risk. Further, some of these strategies may require schedule or budget revi￾sions. This is especially important for the troublesome field instruments (item 4). If 
these are to be replaced, then this activity should be placed on the project schedule and 
additional dollars budgeted for the new hardware.
This illustrates the usefulness of a risk review. In the above example, we are antici￾pating problems and can address these in advance rather than firefighting when they 
appear in the implementation stage.
Figure 8.3 Risk Reviews are a Team Activity. Jason Goodman / UnsplashTwo Types of Risk Review: Qualitative and Quantitative 169
Table 8.4 Qualitative Risk Review of New Data Acquisition System.
Risk P I Strategies
1. Supplier may be late in 
shipping system, thereby 
slipping project schedule
M H ● Place early order for system
● Have supply chain keep on top of supplier
● Assess late penalties (liquidated damages)
● Strong communications with supplier on 
weekly basis
2. System may fail field 
tests: potential 
schedule slip
L H ● Perform factory testing prior to shipping
● Ensure regular design reviews to catch errors
● Write performance guarantees in contract
3. Key technicians may 
not be available when 
needed during startup
M M ● Make arrangements early to schedule techs
● Enlist support of executive sponsor (VP) to 
ensure that supporting techs are available
● Have external contractors available as back up
4. Some field instruments 
may be a problem, 
especially those in high 
vibration or hazardous 
areas
M M ● Ensure all field instruments (sensors, 
controllers, etc.) are inspected and tested 
prior to start up
● Replace known problem instruments prior 
to system arrival
● Double check cables and terminations in 
wiring cabinets
5. A severe winter storm 
could delay testing and 
start-up activities
M L System and site testing occurs in adverse weather 
on a regular basis. This is not considered a major 
issue. All systems are indoors.
Table developed by David V. Tennant
The second type of risk review is quantitative, which implies the use of numbers. 
This is a technique that can be used when we have a good feel for the cost of impacts. 
Let’s look at a simple, single risk using a quantitative approach:
Risk P I EMV
Supplier may be late providing key 
components in time for implementation
60% $250,000 $150,000
First, here are some definitions to be aware of:
P – Probability, expressed as a percentage or decimal. For example, 60% = 0.60
I – Impact expressed in dollars (or other currency). In this case, the expected impact 
is $250,000 if the supplier is late.
Notice that these two numbers are also subjective. What if the probability is closer to 
80% or 90%? How do we know it is 60%? How do we know the impact if this risk occurs 
is $250,000? These numbers are based on the collective judgment of the team.
Finally, know that the EMV or expected monetary value is the product of (P) × (I)=EMV.
In this case, 0.60 × $250,000 = $150,000
So, how do we use this? If this event occurs, we need $250,000. The sum of $150,000 
will not be enough. This concept is more fully illustrated in Table 8.5.170 Engineering Product Design and Testing
Table 8.5 Quantitative Risk Review.
Risk P I EMV
Supplier is late with system delivery 0.6 $ 600,000 $ 360,000
Shortage of qualified technicians during changeout 0.25 $ 300,000 $ 75,000
Support equipment not available when needed 0.7 $ 200,000 $ 140,000
Testing QA/QC is weak 0.1 $ 150,000 $ 15,000
System training is inadequate 0.2 $ 200,000 $ 40,000
Software has too many bugs prior to change 0.4 $ 300,000 $ 120,000
New facility not ready when needed 0.1 $ 75,000 $ 7,500
IT drops late 0.1 $ 30,000 $ 3,000
Rain prevents transfer of support equip 0.1 $ 25,000 $ 2,500
Snow delays arrival of out-of-town tech’s 0.15 $ 50,000 $ 7,500
New system won’t fit on elevator 0.3 $ 150,000 $ 45,000
System fails FT 0.3 $ 100,000 $ 30,000
System fails Pre-op field test 0.1 $ 50,000 $ 5,000
System documentation not ready 0.2 $ 40,000 $ 8,000
HVAC system undersized or fails 0.25 $ 65,000 $ 16,250
Unrealistic schedule milestones 0.4 $ 125,000 $ 50,000
New Mgmt. in place with company reorganization 0.8 $ 250,000 $ 200,000
Totals $ 2,710,000 $ 1,124,750
Table developed by David V. Tennant
There are several items to point out with table 8.5.
The probability of all these problems occurring is probably very low, perhaps even 
0%. The probability of half of them occurring is also low, perhaps 10–15%.
However, it is likely that some of them will occur. If we look at the total for the EMV 
column, we note that it equals $1,124,750. We can use this amount to add to our con￾tingency budget. It is likely that this amount will be adequate to address the five or six 
problems that will develop. This is just one approach. Recall that all projects, including 
product development projects, should have a contingency budget. Some companies 
arbitrarily assign a 10, 15, or 20% contingency. However, the quantitative technique is 
a more analytical approach.
To some extent, this model also is subjective. For example, the first line (supplier is 
late): how do we know the probability is 60%? Also, how do we know that the impact 
is $600,000? Do we have previous history to go on? However, note that if we have Design and Status Reviews 171
identified these problems, we can take steps to prevent them. Therefore, we may be 
able to prevent any of them from occurring.
The author has observed companies use both models (quantitative and qualitative). 
The key point is to perform risk reviews on a regular basis to identify potential prob￾lems and prevent them from occurring. As for engineering, it would make perfect 
sense for this group to perform their own internal design risk reviews.
Design and Status Reviews
Design reviews are an important and necessary step in the product development pro￾cess. In engineering, design reviews are key to designing and building a successful 
outcome. For example, if an engineering firm is designing a new bridge, it is neces￾sary to have review points to ensure the design meets specifications. Specifications 
can be stated by the client (say, for instance, a state Department of Transportation or 
Federal agency). Generally, there will always be standards and regulations; and the 
design must be in compliance with these requirements. In this case, the public may 
be harmed if the bridge fails. Design reviews should be tied to milestones in the 
schedule. Some design firms simply hold a review at the 20%, 50%, 70%, and 95% pro￾gress points.
For products in development, it makes sense to hold design reviews at points tied to 
the schedule. This can be gate reviews and other milestones such as deliverables: prior 
to prototype production, testing, data review points, etc. This can also include prelimi￾nary designs and reviews during scope change requests.
Design reviews should always compare the status of the product’s design with the 
requirements provided in the approved scope and objectives. This is important as 
scope changes along the way may change the functionality of the product. Further, 
most prototypes will undergo testing to ensure the product is robust enough (i.e., safe) 
for the market.
As an example, commercial grade aircraft go through significant testing whether a 
small light aircraft (e.g., Piper, Cessna) or major jetliner such as those built by Boeing. 
Planes will go through air tunnel test to determine how wind affects the drag or lift of 
a particular wing. Additionally, wings are also subjected to continuous stresses (bounc￾ing up and down on a shaker) for weeks to determine where the weak points for crack￾ing or material fatigue might appear. Today, there are computer program models to 
assist with predicting failure points or performance under stress conditions.
Regardless, the takeaway is that product testing is required to determine if a design 
should be revised or strengthened; or if it is on the right track. Therefore, design 
reviews are appropriate both before and after testing has occurred and the data have 
been analyzed.
Note that design changes are much easier and less costly early in the project.
Figure 8.4 shows the relationship between design costs and time. It is less costly to 
make needed changes during the early phase of a product’s development. Once a prod￾uct is in production, the cost of changes can be prohibitive.
Design reviews are focused on several factors. Some of these may include items 
shown in Table 8.6.172 Engineering Product Design and Testing Cost ($)
Time
Figure 8.4 Costs Vs. Time. Figure developed by David Tennant
Table 8.6 Design Review Criteria – Sample
Item Description
1 Product 
objectives
● What are the product objectives approved by Senior Management?
● Do the business case objectives match those approved?
● Is the design meeting those objectives?
2 Features ● What features are required by stakeholders?
● Are the technical requirements feasible?
3 Useability ● Will the design meet the intended market needs (geographic, 
income based, etc.)?
● Will the product be aesthetically pleasing?
● Is the product durable?
4 Ergonomics 
(human 
factors)
● Is the product comfortable to use? Will it fit the 90% population 
profile?
● If using a display, are the colors coded per standards and industry 
guidelines?
● Is the display concise and uncluttered?
● Is the product easy to understand and use?
● Is it possible to misuse the product (by accident or intentionally)?
5 Technical 
review
● Have appropriate safety factors been incorporated?
● Has the product been stress modeled?
● Has a prototype been developed and tested to confirm engineering 
models?
● Are the materials used in the product appropriate and long-lasting?
● Is it possible to misuse the product in a technical sense?
● Have abuse protections been built-in?
6 Constraints ● Are we staying within the budget and schedule?
● When will the design be “frozen?”
● Have stakeholders had appropriate time for input?
Table developed by David V. TennantModeling – Speeding Product Development 173
Modeling – Speeding Product Development
In the past, a new product would go through a long, extensive process to develop one 
or more prototypes. Designs points would be evaluated with calculations comparing a 
variety of materials to determine the best design. With this approach, how many pro￾totypes failed? How many times were new designs – and more prototypes – developed 
at great expense and time?
Today, there are computer models that can evaluate or predict the performance 
and longevity of a product. For example, Figure 8.5 shows the expected temperature 
stratification in a boiler that produces steam for both the manufacturing process and 
to generate electricity. Earlier trials would have seen a boiler manufactured based 
on past history and new design concepts. The new design would have to go through 
trials to determine its true performance. Boiler builders would many times offer a 
new boiler concept to a customer at no cost in order to evaluate its performance 
under real plant operating conditions. After 6 to 12 months, enough data would have 
been collected to confirm whether the design was good enough. Further develop￾ments in boiler design would be incremental and based on data collected from beta 
or test run boilers.
Figure 8.5 Boiler Temperature Distribution. Photo courtesy of Gerald 
Elliott, International Applied Engineering174 Engineering Product Design and Testing
It is known that previous designs are “over designed” for example using stronger, 
thicker materials than needed. This does not make the product necessarily safer, but 
definitely more costly. In other cases, some materials may have been misapplied, lead￾ing to product failures. The primary point is that modeling can help improve design 
and performance of products using fewer prototypes.
Advantages of Engineering Modeling
● Reduces the number of prototypes that must be constructed.
● Allows the designer to optimize materials and shapes.
● Can predict with a high degree of accuracy the material strength and failure points 
of the product.
● Can predict how the product will operate under a variety of stressful scenarios.
● Allows designer to test different materials or shapes to enhance or prevent heat 
transfer.
● Will decrease development time.
Figure 8.5 shows a model of a recovery boiler. Most paper pulp plants use a recovery 
boiler to dissolve organic residue left over from the combustion of wood. In the recov￾ery boiler, heat produces high pressure steam, which is used to generate electricity in 
a turbine. The turbine exhaust, which is a lower pressure steam, is used for process 
heating.
Combustion of black liquor in a recovery boiler needs to be controlled carefully to 
avoid high concentrations of sulfur. This can lead to the production of sulfur dioxide. 
Properly controlled emissions will lead to efficient and environmentally cleaner com￾bustion. The use of engineering models has been highly accurate in predicting not 
only the temperature distribution within the boiler but also expected air emissions. 
This is a typical application at facilities that manufacture cardboard boxes and vari￾ous grades of paper.
Modeling is also appropriate for a variety of scenarios where a prototype may not be 
possible. For example, nuclear waste from nuclear power plants and weapons produc￾tion can stay radioactive for thousands of years. By modeling different types of storage 
casks, an optimum design can be reached. It would be impossible to test a storage 
casks prototype for a thousand years; therefore, modeling can predict strength and 
integrity into the distant future.
There may also be scenarios where prototyping a product in a hazardous area may 
not be possible. Again, engineering modeling can assist in reaching the optimum 
design.
Integrating Supply Chain and Manufacturing
New product development may require new materials, equipment, software, suppli￾ers, or consultants. It will be necessary for the R&D and engineering teams to work 
closely with the supply chain group to ensure the correct components and materials 
are procured. Note that some companies may still refer to supply chain as 
“Procurement.”Integrating Supply Chain and Manufacturing 175
What is the purpose of supply chain? Simply, Supply Chain is responsible for the 
procurement of products and services external to the company. Depending on the size 
of the business initiative, this can run into hundreds of millions of dollars. Therefore, 
supply chain may play an important role in new product development, which must be 
coordinated with the engineering team and other functional areas.
As stated earlier, publicly held companies must comply with Sarbanes-Oxley financial 
reporting requirements. This has a direct impact on how Supply Chain operates within 
a company. The following is a true case in which the author has direct knowledge.
Case 8.1 Reasonable Procurement Action or Big Mistake?
The development of the firm’s new product, a specialty cable, was behind schedule 
with delays in both R&D and product testing (Quality Control). The new facility under 
construction to produce the new product was also behind schedule. Consequently, 
there was pressure from senior management to “get the job done.”
It was determined early in the project that external engineering services would be 
required to assist with environmental design, permitting, site drainage, and air emis￾sions. The engineering services had been approved in the project’s budget and the 
Product/Project Plan. The following conversation took place between the Product 
Manager and the Project Manager regarding obtaining engineering services.
project manager (pm): Hello Bill, I have several requisitions here that need 
your approval.
product manager (bill): OK, let’s see, we have five requisitions totaling about 
$300,000 dollars. Are these services in the budget?
pm: Yes.
mill: Is the scope of work acceptable and within the 
project’s scope? (As Bill begins to sign each order)
pm: Yes.
bill: Great, here you are (handing back the signed 
orders). When will the work begin?
pm: Well, the work has already been completed. I did not 
want to go through official channels as that would 
have taken more time and we’re already behind 
schedule. I gave the engineering consultant a verbal 
order over the phone. They have a good history 
working with us, so they were content to accept a 
verbal. I just need these orders approved so when 
the supplier’s invoices hit our system, we’ll have the 
necessary back-up, and they can get paid.
bill: This is unacceptable. You have violated company 
policy and could get us in trouble. This will not be 
tolerated in the future. All POs are to be signed off by 
me before you begin work next time. If this happens 
again, I will relieve you of your position. Understood?
Note: This company is publicly held; that is, its stock is traded on the US stock 
exchange.176 Engineering Product Design and Testing
Questions for this case:
1. Was the project manager justified in issuing the purchase orders verbally to save time?
2. What potential repercussions can occur from this action?
3. Is this purchase acceptable since Bill has now approved the requisitions?
4. Since this item is in the approved budget, is this action acceptable?
5. If this had been taken through the procurement process, what activities might have 
occurred?
6. Is there a risk by the engineering company accepting an order verbally without any 
paperwork?
7. What is the possible liability of both the company and the engineering firm?
8. What are the potential repercussions for both the PM and/or Bill?
9. How would your company view this situation?
The Role of Supply Chain in Product Development
It is important to note that Product Development of any kind will likely need to pur￾chase outside assistance, whether in services or products. The Supply Chain depart￾ment generally has the authority and the expertise to help the Product Manager with 
obtaining the needed items in a timely manner. The Supply Chain department usually 
has a contracts group, with attorneys specialized in this area to generate the necessary 
contracts.
For many large companies, supply chain provides a valuable service with consider￾able expertise. Depending on the size of the new product or business initiative, the 
Product Manager may have a procurement specialist assigned exclusively to support 
the program. Some of the typical activities performed by the Supply Chain organiza￾tion include:
● Maintenance of an “approved” supplier list
● Auditing of suppliers
● Issue of RFIs, NDAs, and RFPs
● Reviewing proposals
● Negotiating prices and statements of work
● Review and issue of contracts and change orders
● Expediting orders that are running late
● Working closely with technical personnel to understand project needs
● Directing and managing the business issues of procurement
● Ensuring contracts are closed at conclusion of supplier’s work
Each of these is discussed in further detail below.
Maintenance of an “Approved” Supplier List
It is fair to assume that most companies have awarded work to suppliers who were 
either not qualified or lost the capability to provide key services. Many times, it is late The Role of Supply Chain in Product Development 177
in the schedule when a supplier must be fired and/or replaced. At this point, signifi￾cant time and dollars have been expended and are not recoverable.
One way to avoid supplier problems is to have a database of approved suppliers. This 
is a common activity for many companies. If a supplier wishes to be placed on the 
approved list, they must go through a review process. This may include (but is not 
limited to):
● An audit of their finances – it is not desirable to place companies on an approved list 
if they are approaching bankruptcy or facing liquidity issues.
● A tour and review of their manufacturing facilities to determine:
– Is the facility well-run?
– Is housekeeping neat and orderly (related to safety)?
– What is the safety record of the facility?
– Does it have adequate manufacturing capacity?
– Is there a preventive maintenance program?
– How robust is their QA and QC program?
● A review of references: i.e., follow up with their clients to determine their 
satisfaction
● Do they have service centers or a dealer network nearby?
Issue of RFIs, NDAs, and RFPs
Suppose you require a very specialized expertise, say a company that does FEA mod￾eling (Finite Element Analysis) for the new product you are developing. If a company 
with this type of expertise is not on the approved supplier list, how do we find one? 
Your procurement specialist may do a search of companies (with technical input from 
you) that offer this service and then issue a Request for Information (RFI) to each one. 
This essentially gives the suppliers the opportunity to describe their expertise in this 
area. Based on their responses, this will allow the Product Team to determine which 
companies should receive an RFP.
If it is determined that these companies offer a valued service, it may be useful, but 
not required, to place them on the approved supplier list.
A Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) is used when your company desires to share 
confidential or proprietary information with a suppler (who needs the information to 
perform their work). An NDA is a signed acknowledgement that each company will 
keep key information confidential. This is a legally binding document (for both sides) 
and may even have a timeframe specified.
An NDA usually addresses protections for customer databases, proprietary and 
intellectual property, types of business or manufacturing processes in use or under 
development, and company strategies or future plans. An NDA may also have an expi￾ration date. For example: “This NDA will be binding on both parties for three years 
from the date of signature.”
As one can expect, an NDA is extremely important for a company that is developing 
a new product. Should a firm’s proprietary information be released – whether inten￾tionally or by mistake – the consequences can be very damaging.178 Engineering Product Design and Testing
Companies that have passed a review and are considered to perform the work will 
receive a Request for Proposal (RFP). The RFP is a formal document that describes the 
following:
● Work to be performed
● The timeframe
● Location
● Proposed contract
● Terms and Conditions
● Technical and commercial points of contact
● Technical specifications
● Standard proposal form (to be filled in by bidder)
● Instructions to bidders
● Deadline date the proposal must be returned to buyer.
Specifications
Specifications are detailed and graphic information that describes, defines, and “speci￾fies” the services or items that are to be provided. Specifications are generally technical 
and very detailed. There are several types of technical specifications that can be devel￾oped. These include:
● Design Specifications
● Performance Specifications
● Functional Specifications.
Design specifications are developed by the buyer and will describe the physical attrib￾utes of the deliverable. A description of its operating environment may also be included.
As an example, suppose you have a chemical testing lab and need a specialized 
pump that will operate in a hazardous location. Your firm’s engineering depart￾ment has developed a pump design and has tasked a local pump manufacturer 
with building the pump. Your design team has specified the operating condi￾tions, the size and material of the pump casing, size of pump inlet and outlet, 
the size and material of the impeller, motor size, hazardous electrical circuit 
box, wiring diagram and connections.
Upon installation, it is apparent that the pump is not working. Whose fault is 
this? First, if the pump manufacturer built the pump to your firm’s design speci￾fications, the fault will lie with your firm (buyer). Be aware that this type of 
specification scenario puts the risk on the buyer (you).
Performance Specifications are developed by you (the buyer) but the manufacturer 
(the supplier) is given the freedom and responsibility for designing, building, and 
delivering the product.
Let’s return the previous pump example. However, instead of developing a design 
specification, we will provide the supplier with a performance specification. In 
this case, the buyer will leave all design and material decisions to the supplier.The Role of Supply Chain in Product Development 179
For this example, the supplier will simply provide the operating characteristics:
Table 8.7 Sample Functional Specification No. 1.
Operating flow and temperature ● 40 gallons per minute (gpm)
● 600
 F to 800
 F
Fluid characteristics ● Liquid with a dynamic viscosity of 1.12 to 
0.80 mPas
● Ph content of 2.5 to 5.5 (very acidic)
Operating pressure ● Maximum pressure = 30 psig
Operating environment ● Clean lab with negative pressure
● Potential low concentrations of chlorine gas
● Gases in air may provide an explosive 
environment
Operating time ● Continuous for up to 40 hours.
Other requirements ● Explosion-proof wiring connections and 
junction box
● Emergency pump shut-off circuit
● 120 v, 60 Hz. power available
● Inlet and outlet pump isolation valves
Table developed by David V. Tennant
This means the supplier will design, build, and provide a pump that meets the sup￾plier’s performance requirements. Note that this shifts the risks away from you (the 
buyer) to the supplier. Table 8.7 illustrates a sample functional specification.
Functional specifications can be considered a subset of performance specifications. 
This type of specification is more commonly found in large enterprise-wide computer 
IT applications, plant control systems, robotics, and data acquisition systems. A func￾tional spec describes the function and features of the deliverable. The design and per￾formance risks are on the supplier.
Table 8.8 is a sample functional specification we might see with a manufacturing 
plant control system. Note: an actual functional spec would be very detailed and most 
likely run up to 100 pages of requirements including an instrumentation list; this is 
simply a small sample.
It is appropriate to note that the technical issues are usually discussed directly 
between the Buyer’s engineering group and the Supplier’s technical team. The busi￾ness issues are generally handled directly between the Supply Chain point of contact 
and the Supplier’s sales or contract group.
However, the buyer’s engineering and supply chain groups must work together to 
ensure the appropriate equipment or services are procured that will fill the company’s 
requirements. This requires extensive communications between these two groups. For 
example, it is likely that the engineering team will write the technical specification 
and statement of work. The supply chain group will provide business terms and condi￾tions, draft contract, and other business documents. These will be combined into an 
RFP (request for proposal) which Supply Chain will issue to one or more suppliers.180 Engineering Product Design and Testing
Table 8.8 Sample Functional Specification No. 2.
No. of operator 
interface screens, 40”
12
System inputs 150
System outputs 150
Field instruments Transmitters, controllers, positioners, etc.
Control valves
Motor controllers
Deliverable A fully functional manufacturing control systems that will 
control start-up, normal continuous operations (24/7), and 
shutdown (normal and emergency conditions) under a variety 
of operating scenarios.
The system will comply with industry standards for operations, 
human-factors (ergonomics), and safety.
For critical plant operations, two out of three signal logic will be 
provided.
The system will have an “automatic” operating feature but can 
be overridden or switched to “manual” operation, when needed.
The control system supplier will develop all control logic, 
algorithms, and computer code to safely operate the plant with 
high reliability and safety.
Table developed by David Tennant
Proposals, Pricing, Statements of Work (SOWs)
All proposals submitted by potential suppliers are returned to the supply chain group. 
It will be a joint effort by Supply Chain and Engineering to evaluate the proposals from 
both a technical and business viewpoint.
Technical considerations:
● Delivery dates
● Compliance with technical requirements and operation
● Performance of equipment (or qualification of consultants if services)
● Product technical support
● Will it meet the application we are seeking?
● Ease of operation and maintenance
● Track record of the equipment or system.
Business considerations:
● Pricing
● Terms and Conditions (pricing tied to schedule milestones?)
● Contractual issues
● Change orders
● Termination for cause or convenience
● Statement of Work
● Past history, if applicable, working with this supplier.Proposals, Pricing, Statements of Work (SOWs) 181
Supply Chain will negotiate final pricing and provide contracts for signing. Once 
both parties sign, work can begin. However, Supply Chain does not simply back out 
when the contract is in place. It is likely that Supply chain will be engaged throughout 
the life of the project/product’s development to assist with change orders, compliance 
of supplier with the contract, and closure of supplier’s work orders.
Change Orders, Expediting, and Contract Closure
It is highly likely that there will be changes in the project’s scope during the life of 
the product’s development. It is the author’s opinion that there will always be 
changes in the scope of a project. If processes are set up to manage changes, then it 
is unlikely that scope creep will get out of control. And one should not assume that 
changes in scope always increase time and costs. There are instances where a small 
change (and incremental cost) may in fact reduce the product’s development time 
and consequently cost less. An example of this might be paying an extra $50,000 for 
FEA (finite element analysis). This could easily reduce schedule time, assist in 
developing cost-effective warranty policies, and save money by reducing the need 
for prototypes.
Figure 8.6, Change Request Review Process, is a simple process to evaluate a 
requested change order.
Expediting is when supply chain gets involved to work with suppliers who antici￾pate late delivery of the products or equipment. The engineering and R&D groups are 
busy developing and designing the new product and have little time to deal with deliv￾ery issues. Supply chain, however, has a role is holding suppliers accountable. And 
being familiar with the contract allows the expediter to apply leverage. Delivery slips 
may be beyond the control of the supplier, so it may be necessary to reach an agree￾ment of new, firm delivery dates. However, the expediter will generally do everything 
he or she can to hold suppliers to the terms of their contract.
Project Plan Request for
Change
Project
Continues per
Plan
Review
Change Re Impact vise Project Plan
(re-baseline)
Be sure to
document the
request and its
action. Resources
Schedule
Quality
Change
Approved
Yes NO
Cost-Benifit
Figure 8.6 Change Request Review Process. Figure developed by David Tennant182 Engineering Product Design and Testing
Figure 8.6 Change Request Process, is a simple process to evaluate a requested 
change order. A change order can be suggested by anyone on the project (supplier 
team or buyer team), but each change request should go through a formal review 
process.
This will allow the Product Manager to control the scope of the project more effec￾tively. While change orders can be technically or commercially oriented, it is the 
Supply Chain group who issues the C.O. (Change Order) to the supplier and helps 
negotiate pricing. This is typically an ongoing activity.
Once a product has completed its development (or the project is over), there is sig￾nificant paperwork that must be completed. It is customary to notify the supplier that 
the deliverable has been accepted and the contract will be closed by a certain date. This 
is also the signal to the supplier to submit any final invoices for payment. Supply 
Chain, Engineering, and Accounts Payable should work together to confirm final pric￾ing is appropriate and within the contractual boundary.
New Products Vs. Commodities
Recall from the product life cycle, that competitors will eventually catch up and offer 
serious competition to your once-dominant product. What exactly is a commodity? In 
the traditional sense, a commodity is considered a raw material that is grown, mined, 
or produced in mass quantities. How does a company maintain its dominant 
position?
When a new product is introduced to the marketplace, it will enjoy a dominant posi￾tion for some time. If we consider new cars, they attempt to maintain their dominance 
by advancing the technology (think Apple or Android in your car), styling, features, 
and performance every three to four years. While there are many competitors in this 
space, those that are deemed to have higher quality, or the perception of higher qual￾ity, will tend to have market dominance OR command higher prices.
To a consumer, a limited number of choices means he or she will pay a higher price. 
When a product becomes a commodity, the consumer knows there are many similar 
products and the deciding factor will then be price. This is where market segmentation 
(discussed in Chapter 2) comes into play. This means adding features that appeal to a 
certain demographic group such as age, gender, location, etc., or to offer with added 
value. People will pay more if they perceive your product has higher quality, a better 
warranty, better features, or is a recognized brand.
New Technologies – Identification and Adaptation
A number of futurists have indicated that technology changes in the next 10 years 
will have a greater impact on society than the previous 100 years. Indeed, if one 
considers the evolution of technology, the impact in just than last 25 years has 
exploded. Our smart phones now contain more computing power than the Apollo 
spacecraft that landed on the moon in 1969. Our phones allow us to not only com￾municate, but take pictures, surf the net, shop, track our appointments, and dozens 
of other “apps” that can be downloaded to make everyday living more convenient 
and entertaining.New Technologies – Identification and Adaptation 183
Consider Figure 8.7 which charts the evolution of technology in civilization.
Note that very little progress was made in the first two million years of human exist￾ence. Yet advances in technology over the last 300 years have increased at an incredi￾bly fast rate.
Little wonder that as time marches forward, the advances in technical achievement 
are accelerating. As a firm concerned with product development, how do we anticipate 
how to incorporate or enhance these advances? What will customers expect?
There are a number of ways to research and become aware of new advances. 
Obviously, searching the internet for new technology trends has made it easier to find 
new tools, advances, and breakthroughs.
Almost every industry has trade groups that sponsor conferences, seminars, train￾ing, and other means to stay abreast of new applications. These new discoveries, or 
their applications, are often published in trade journals, magazines, etc.
Universities perform a significant amount of research which is funded by private 
corporations, public corporations, and government agencies. Many times, if not pro￾prietary, their results are published in scientific journals.
Finally, there are a number of futurists that have an uncanny ability to anticipate 
advances in trends or technology which can provide companies data on where to con￾centrate their efforts in new products and services.
Here are a few of advances that are still in the development stages but have huge 
potential for the future. How can entrepreneurs participate?
Electric Vehicles and Smart Cars
Currently, as of this writing, EVs comprise only 2% of the US market for new cars. 
As a result of government actions to mitigate climate concerns, a number of govern￾ments have mandated that all new cars must use a clean form of energy, such as 
Stone
Age
Stone Tools Bronze Tools Iron Tools
& Alloy
Mental
Standards
Steam power
Railways
Artificial Intelligence
IT Advances
5G technology
Electric vehicles
Cyber warfare
Clean energy
Bronze
Age
2,000,000 BC 3,300 BC
Machine Production
Phonograph
1st powered flight
Transistors
Early computers
1st jet fighters
1st commercial jet service
Atomic Weapons
Nuclear Power
Spaceflight
PC computers
MS Dos
Streaming music
1760–1840 1800–
1945 2005– 1957–
1990s
1945–
1960s 1,200 BC
Iron
Age
Industrial
Revolution
Machine
Age
Atomic &
jet age
Space
Age
Information
Age
Figure 8.7 Technology Advances in History. Diagram developed by David Tennant184 Engineering Product Design and Testing
electric batteries, hydrogen, natural gas or similar. In other words, the internal 
combustion engine – which has been in use for over 100 years – is on the way out. 
Think back to when travel by horse buggy was displaced by the automobile. We are 
now seeing a similar shift to newer and cleaner technologies. Thus far, the follow￾ing countries are on track to eliminate conventional gas- and diesel-powered cars 
within the next 20 years: Germany, Britain, India, Norway, and France. Other coun￾tries, while not outlawing combustion-engine cars, have definite sales goals for 
alternative-fueled vehicles. These include Austria, China, Denmark, Ireland, Japan, 
the Netherlands, Portugal, Korea, and Spain. While the United States does not have 
a mandate for EVs, there are tax incentives in place for their purchase and most 
major auto makers are moving in the direction of EVs. This is being encouraged 
through public policy.
This means there will be plenty of opportunity for suppliers to develop new products 
and services to support this newly developing market. Imagine how many new fast￾charging stations will be required across the USA and other countries to support a 
growing EV market.
5G Networking (5th Generation)
With the widespread use of smart phones, 5G networks will allow increased internet 
speeds and low latency. As with any new technology, there are advantages and disad￾vantages. Some of the advantages include high resolution and large bandwidth, sup￾port of huge data loads and streaming (gigabit size), consistent networking worldwide, 
and will be an integral technology to allow the use of driverless cars and promoting 
smart cities (see below).
Some of the disadvantages include high infrastructure costs. The 5G towers will 
need to be positioned closer together meaning many more cell towers (at great cost). It 
is likely that current cell phones may not be 5G compatible, meaning that some people 
will need to purchase new, expensive 5G phones. The implementation of 5G networks 
is occurring in urban and suburban areas where the costs may be spread over many 
potential customers. However, where does this leave rural areas?
The technology can assist drivers avoid accidents. For example, if cars can use GPS 
positioning with 5G, it is feasible that they can “sense” where other cars are located 
nearby and avoid collisions.
Issues that still need to be addressed for 5G include personal data privacy and cyber 
security.
Smart Cities and IoT (Internet of Things)
A smart city is connected with cloud-based applications to better run a city’s infra￾structure. This can include better city services, reduced traffic congestion, efficient 
energy distribution, and pairing the town’s residents through cell phones. This will 
very likely be the case when cars are connected and able to be routed in the most effi￾cient routing. For example, the IoT can connect and direct traffic lights to help traffic 
flow and also guide your car to the nearest parking spot close to your destination. Your 
smart phone will also contain your driver’s license. Currently, a number of phone apps 
can plot and direct you to a destination in the fastest route.Alignment with Business Strategy 185
Pair this new infrastructure with smart grid technology and the options are limitless. 
A smart grid is a planned local or national network that uses information technology 
to deliver electricity efficiently and with high reliability. This new network will allow 
the two-way flow of energy and information. There are also communities that are con￾necting using a micro-grid. A micro-grid is a small, localized electric network that can 
disconnect from the wider state or national grid and operate on its own. One advan￾tage to this is that the micro-grid can operate with its own power source, connecting 
local homes and businesses when there is a power outage or storm in an adjacent area.
The above technologies are just a few of the major “disruptive” systems that are 
gaining traction on the federal, state and local levels. Not only are governments invest￾ing in these technologies, but companies as well. Note that this is happening world￾wide, not just in Europe and North America.
For companies that have creative and visionary leadership, it is an exciting time to 
be in the business of new product development.
Alignment with Business Strategy
Strategy is concerned with the future and changes in capabilities, products, or services 
to meet anticipated market conditions. In Chapter 2, the importance of corporate stra￾tegic planning was discussed. As such, all projects, including new product develop￾ment, should support the business strategy. Think of this also as the Corporation’s 
Strategy for future profitability.
Do new product development projects get canceled? The answer is “yes,” all the 
time. What can lead to cancellation? There are many factors that can lead to project 
cancellations. These include:
● A change in company leadership. This is more common than some people might 
think. When leadership at the top of a company changes, usually, that means change 
is coming. New leadership is brought in when the previous leadership is not meeting 
results – usually financial results. As a result, the new leaders will evaluate the com￾pany from top to bottom and chart a new direction. This will depart from the old 
paradigms and culture. Many of the current projects, including new product devel￾opment will be re-evaluated; and it is likely that some of these projects will be shut 
down. On the other hand, it is also possible that other new products – that meet the 
new direction – will be initiated.
● Significant budget and schedule overruns. Recall that all products must recover 
their investment and make a return when launched in the marketplace. The mar￾keting group will typically determine the appropriate margin, competitive landscape 
and pricing for the new product. Let’s consider both budget and schedule issues:
– Budget. If the development of new products or services goes significantly over 
budget (say greater than 50%), it is likely that the costs of development along with 
a reasonable profit margin will never occur. In this case why would the company 
continue to support its development? One may ask, why not simply sell at a price 
to recover a ROI (return on investment)? The answer is simply because your com￾petitors may be significantly cheaper, and you will never make enough sales 186 Engineering Product Design and Testing
margin. Or, even if you do not have any current competitors for your new product, 
you will find competitors will eventually emerge.
The costs of new product development will be closely tracked by the finance 
department (mostly likely the CFOs direct reports). The key yardsticks that will be 
used to measure product feasibility are NPV (net present value), break-even point, 
ROI (Return on Investment) and margins. All of these are significant measures 
that must be considered together.
Note that different products will have a different timeframes to reach profitability. 
Some industries may desire to see a payback for newly launched products within three 
years. Others may find a much longer timeframe acceptable.
– Schedule. Budget and schedule are closely related as in the axiom “time is 
money.” If capital funding is being borrowed to develop the new product (for 
example, adding manufacturing capacity, or using new testing equipment or soft￾ware), then the longer a project drags on, the more costs will be incurred.
There is also the possibility that competitors will be first to market; thereby 
scoring marketing and PR visibility. Remember, first to market usually gets mar￾ket share. Therefore, it is important that your new product should meet or beat its 
scheduled market release.
• Downturn in the economy. The economy tends to be cyclable with upturns and 
downturns happening over long time periods. Further, unpredictable events, such 
as the Covid-19 pandemic of 2020–2021, are not foreseeable but can have a devas￾tating effect on company finances. When company revenues (and therefore profits) 
are strained, it is likely that some projects will be put on hold or canceled. This type 
of event is beyond the control of the product team, even if on budget and schedule.
Using SWOT
It is very common for businesses to perform a SWOT analysis in developing new prod￾ucts or even in strategic planning. SWOT stands for Strengths, Weaknesses, 
Opportunities, and Threats. This is a common business tool that can be as simple or as 
sophisticated as needed. The author has seen both types in practice with the more 
sophisticated SWOTs utilizing spreadsheet data and supporting documentation.
A SWOT analysis can be used in many different scenarios:
● Considering entrance into a new market
● Launching a new product or service
● Surveying your firm’s role in current market
● Evaluating your firm’s current position in a strategic plan (how should we change in 
getting from point A to point B?)
● Comparing your firm to your competitors (competitor analysis)
● At the beginning of a project to determine relevance
● Potential merger and acquisition activity.
If we consider a simplistic approach, the following will serve as an example.
Let’s assume that we are developing a new product – Product Zed. As part of our 
initial review, the product team has performed a simple SWOT as shown in Table 8.9.Gates and Stakeholders 187
Gates and Stakeholders
As noted earlier, a stakeholder is a person who can have a positive or negative impact 
on your project or be impacted by your project. Identifying all possible stakeholders is 
desirable, but some will be more important than others. Those stakeholders that are at 
a high level or have a predominant role in your product’s development will wield a 
great amount of influence. This can include project sponsors, company executives, 
and JV (joint venture) partners.
These key stakeholders will need to be kept informed of the product’s development, 
status of budget and schedule, and testing results (QA/QC). This can be accomplished 
by using gates as review points. Recall from Figure 8.8 that “gate” review points are 
shown in the project life cycle. These are go or no-go decision points where the execu￾tive team reviews the status of the project or product’s development; a decision is made 
whether to continue forward or not.
While there are only five gates shown in Figure 8.8 Potential Project Gate Reviews, 
it is likely that a real product development project would have many more than this. 
At each gate, an evaluation should be performed to determine if the project is still 
worth supporting, and enough funding is provided to reach the next gate.
At each gate, the following items should be evaluated:
● Budget status
● Schedule status
● Design status
● Latest risk review results
● Justification why product should still be funded
● Does project still fit with company strategy?
Table 8.9 SWOT for Product Zed.
Strengths
● Highly experienced product team
● Financial and Sr. Management support
● Company has experience in the market
● Company reputation is strong for this 
type of product
● Company is financially strong
● Company holds a leadership role in this 
space
● New efficiencies and improvement to 
manufacturing plant will lead to lower costs
Weaknesses
● Some personnel turnover on team, will need 
to find experienced replacements quickly
● Market for this product may be maturing
● Feeling pricing pressure from our customer 
base
● Current model is showing its age (market 
maturity)
● Our sales team will need to undergo 
extensive training for new, replacement 
model
Opportunities
● Still have market leadership which can be 
exploited with excellent marketing
● Creative team has great ideas to make a 
tremendous leap in product successor
● Competitors still not a large factor in 
market and do not understand our 
customer base
Threats
● Foreign competition is making minor 
inroads to our market
● Manufacturing costs of competitors is 
cheaper
● Competitors have worldwide marketing 
expertise
Table developed by David Tennant188 Engineering Product Design and Testing
● Are there any changes to product’s intended purpose or features? If so, why?
● Has SWOT been updated to account for new business conditions?
Typically, when the product team passes through a gate successfully, funding to get to 
the next gate is provided. However, each company has its own rules for gate control.
Chapter Key Points
● Developing a new product is a project.
● All projects follow a lifecycle.
● Performing risk reviews is an important activity to identifying potential problems.
● Design reviews should occur at well-defined points during product development.
● Changes in design become more costly as you go further into development.
● Engineering modeling can be used to shorten development time and it should 
reduce (not replace) the number of prototypes that are required for testing.
● Supply chain (procurement) will play a key role when purchasing large-dollar capi￾tal equipment.
● Specifications are generally developed by the engineering group and are necessary 
in providing a technical description of a product’s operation or design.
● Budgets and schedules should be closely tracked to ensure costs do not jeopardize 
your product’s continued support.
● A SWOT analysis can assist in positioning a company in launching a new product or 
service, and in comparison, with competitors and market trends.
● Stakeholders should be informed of a products status during development and 
launch.
● Gate reviews can provide clarity in determining a project’s status and informing 
stakeholders.
Figure 8.8 Gate Reviews. Figure developed by David TennantGates and Stakeholders 189
Chapter Discussion Questions
1. Why would we consider the development of a product a project?
2. What are some of the activities that occur in planning a project?
3. Risk reviews can be quantitative or qualitative. Under what conditions would we 
use a qualitative review? A quantitative review?
4. What is the purpose of a risk review?
5. What is the purpose of a design review?
6. Why is a contract important in dealing with external suppliers?
7. Under what circumstances would we see a new product’s development canceled?
8. Why is it important to track budgets and schedules?
9. What is a SWOT and how often should one be performed?
10. What is the purpose of a Gate review?
Answers to Case 8.1 Reasonable Procurement Action or Big Mistake?
1. Was the project manager justified in issuing the purchase orders verbally to save 
time?
The project manager was not justified in his actions. He violated company policies, and 
in this case, also violated Federal Law: Sarbanes-Oxley requirements.
2. What potential repercussions can occur from this action?
There are a number of repercussions that can occur:
● The SEC (Securities and Exchange Commission) could fine the company
● People could lose their jobs over this action
● The company could refuse to pay the invoices
● The supplier could take the company to court if invoices refused.
3. Is this purchase acceptable since Bill has now approved the requisitions?
No, this purchase did not go through appropriate purchasing channels. It is Bill’s job 
(as the Product Manager) to adequately supervise his team, be aware of their actions, 
and be aware of company policies. It is also his role to ensure that his team is aware of 
company policies and procedures.
4. Since this item is in the approved budget, is this procurement now acceptable?
No. It is never acceptable to violate or go around company policies. This is especially 
true for this huge dollar amount ($300,000). Company policies are in place for a 
reason.
5. If this had been taken through the procurement process, what activities might have 
occurred?
● The services may have gone out for bid in order to obtain competitive pricing. 
However, with justification, a sole-source contract can generally be approved to 
accelerate an award. Schedule sensitivity can be a legitimate justification.
● At the least, a contract would have been in place outlining the responsibilities of each 
company (buyer and supplier).
● Even if a sole source contract, it is likely that price negotiations would have occurred, 
and penalties would be in place for non-performance.190 Engineering Product Design and Testing
6. Is there a risk by the engineering company accepting an order verbally without any 
paperwork?
There are a number of risks in accepting a verbal order. The buying firm may dispute 
costs, scope of work, schedule, final quality, etc. If there is nothing agreed to in writing, 
this represents a huge risk to the supplier. If the buyer company changes its mind on 
scope, timing, features, etc., how would these changes be negotiated and paid for? 
A verbal order may encourage scope creep by the buyer and the engineering firm has 
no legal or business remedy. Note: scope creep (i.e., failure to control project scope) is a 
major factor in project failure.
7. What is the possible liability of both the company and the engineering firm?
● There may be disagreements over the quality or scope of work. This may lead to legal 
action by either side.
● What if the design does not work? Without any metrics or testing in place, it will be 
hard to prove who is at fault and may lead to litigation.
● Without a contract, there are no legal protections for either party.
8. What are the potential repercussions for both the PM and/or Bill?
The company may fire, or demote, one or both of them. This is not a stellar career moment.
9. How would your company view this situation?
The author suggest that most companies would take a very dim view of this scenario.
Answers to Chapter Discussion Questions
1. Why would we consider the development of a product a project?
The development of a product is a project as it follows the project lifecycle. Further, 
all product development projects require a budget, schedule, resources and should be 
tracked and measured. If the development of a product is not managed as a project, it 
is likely to be a chaotic situation with a high risk of failure.
2. What are some of the activities that occur in planning a project?
● Developing and confirming objectives and metrics
● Producing budgets and schedules
● Assigning resources
● Managing supply chain activities
● Performing risk reviews
● Shepherding projects through gate/status reviews
● Communicating with stakeholders and suppliers
● Ensuring QA and QC of the final deliverable.
3. Risk reviews can be quantitative or qualitative. Under what conditions would we 
use a qualitative review? A quantitative review?
A qualitative review is quicker and easier to perform. It is also easier to communicate 
results. This should be used when the confidence level of cost impacts is unknown.
A quantitative review would be appropriate when a high level of confidence in the cost 
impacts of risks can be determined. It is also useful in developing a contingency budget. 
Finally, companies that do work for the federal government are usually required to 
perform quantitative risk analyses.Gates and Stakeholders 191
4. What is the purpose of a risk review?
The purpose of a risk review is to identify potential future problems. If we can iden￾tify problems in advance, it may be possible to develop strategies to avoid or minimize 
them. This will reduce the “firefighting” that develops in so many projects.
5. What is the purpose of a design review?
A design review occurs at several points during the product’s development. It is similar 
to a gate review but is focused primarily on the technical and engineering aspects. For 
example, it may be determined that a formal design review will occur at 25%, 50%, 
75% and 90% of a product’s engineering development. It is likely that the engineering 
team will have weekly meetings, but a formal design review usually involves senior 
management, clients, and other key stakeholders – including the possibility of suppli￾ers, when needed.
The design review will confirm that the features and specifications are still relevant. 
It also provides the opportunity for the company to request changes (at least early in 
the project) such as materials, colors, texture, function, etc. It is the design team’s role to 
point out any quality issues, whether the design and manufacturability are achievable, 
and to confirm that original objectives and design basis are still in effect.
The design review also gives the engineering team the opportunity to hear feedback 
from marketing and sales groups about changing customer preferences, if any. It is an 
excellent opportunity to communicate across the organization what the ultimate prod￾uct will look like, how it will perform and to identify potential issues with the product 
or it’s development.
6. Why is a contract important in dealing with external suppliers?
A contract describes what a supplier will provide for a given price and when. It obli￾gates the supplier to provide a product or service within key technical specifications. It 
also obligates the buyer to pay for the product or service upon delivery.
A contract protects both the supplier and buyer from misunderstandings as it clearly 
spells out the expectations and obligations of each party.
7. Under what circumstances would we see a new product’s development canceled?
● When new leadership is appointed to the company.
● When the costs of development outweigh any chance of a return on investment.
● A downturn in the economy may reduce a company’s ability to fund new product 
development.
● A competitor beats you to market with a better, cheaper product.
8. Why is it important to track budgets and schedules?
If the budget and schedule are out of control, there is a possibility your new product 
will never be profitable. Why would a company continue to support development of a 
product that will be a money loser?
9. What is a SWOT and how often should one be performed?
SWOT is an acronym for Strengths – Weaknesses – Opportunities – Threats. A SWOT 
review should be performed on a regular basis (at least yearly) for companies that prac￾tice strategic planning. It is also helpful to perform a SWOT review prior to developing 
a new product, business initiative or joint venture partnership. A SWOT helps a com￾pany determine its position in the marketplace relative to its competition.192 Engineering Product Design and Testing
Finally, it is very common to see a SWOT review in a business case for the reasons 
above. A business case is a feasibility study that presents several options for considera￾tion. It will assist management in making an informed decision.
10. What is the purpose of a Gate review?
All projects should go through a gate review process for the following reasons:
● To ensure that the new product is still relevant to the company’s strategic business 
plan
● To get a gauge on the product’s status (is it on budget, schedule, etc.)
● To hold the product team accountable
● As a justification for continued support and funding by senior management
● Typically, there are multiple gate reviews during the development cycle. It serves as a 
reasonable sanity check and can also communicate status to key stakeholders.
Bibliography
Bangs, D. (2005). Business Plans Made Easy. Entrepreneur Media.
Hill, G. (2010). The Complete Project Management Methodology and Toolkit. Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press.
Levi, D. (2007). Group Dynamics for Teams, 2nd e. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Norman, D. (2013). The Design of Everyday Things. New York, NY: Basic Books.
The Project Management Body of Knowledge, 6th e (2017). Project Management Institute, 
Newtown Square, PA: The True, S. (ed. 2011) Business Acumen. Kennesaw, GA: Coles 
College of Business.193
Product Development: An Engineer’s Guide to Business Considerations, Real-World Product Testing, and 
Launch, First Edition. David V. Tennant. 
© 2022 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2022 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
9
Successful Product Launch and Post Review
The launching of a new or revised product involves elements of costs, expected 
demand, customer feedback, advertising, and marketing. While TV and radio ads, and 
print brochures all have their place, marketing today is much more sophisticated and 
involves the use of multiple channels, targeting, and social media.
As much thought needs to be concentrated on reaching your target markets as was 
done during the development of your new product. The best product on the planet will 
go nowhere without a market made aware of its existence. Indeed, the corporate land￾scape is littered with failed products that were released by smart people working at 
successful companies. Consider the following:
● Sony Betamax (1975) was released as “the” system for people to record their favorite 
TV shows, movies, etc. However, all of Sony’s competitors were issuing recording 
systems using VHS tape which was more convenient and had a minimum two-hour 
run time. Sony had to abandon their system as the industry standard became VHS. 
Of course, VHS has been supplanted by digital recording on chips. This represented 
a failure to recognize a market trend.
● It was a good strategy for Harley Davidson (HD) motorcycles to issue clothing and 
personal accessories as an extension of the brand. This included tee shirts, ban￾danas, key chains, and other fashion items. However, most fans of the brand drew 
the line at Harley Davidson Cologne (1990). The failure of this product stopped HD 
from straying too far from their core market.
● The HP Touchpad (2011) was meant to compete with Apple’s iPad®. However, the 
product did not offer anything new or different from Apple or other competitors and 
was only on the market for 49 days. This was a failure to offer a unique or better 
product.
● New Coke had won most of the taste tests that were conducted across the US in 
1985. Consequently, Coca-Cola invested $4 million in the new product, but saw 
serious backlash from its loyal customer base. Within three months of the product’s 
launch, the original formula Coke was brought back as “Classic” Coke. Regardless 
of the taste test results, Coke had failed to recognize the loyalty of customers to its 
flagship product.194 Successful Product Launch and Post Review
These are just few examples of failed product launches. One can search the internet to 
find many more examples including Colgate launching a line of lasagna food and the Bic 
pen company getting into a line of underwear. Not entirely complimentary products.
Previously in this book, the topic of focus groups and prototypes were discussed. To 
launch a product, it would be desirable to have it tested by a target group to evaluate its 
potential acceptance. This would not be a test involving thousands, but rather a small 
subset of the market; perhaps 10 to 20 people. Customer feedback can be invaluable 
prior to launch. Some of the questions to be answered during customer testing include:
● What did you like about our new product?
● Was it easy to use?
● Were the controls intuitive?
● What would you consider a reasonable price for this item?
● Is this something you would tell your friends about?
● Would you buy more than one?
● Did you encounter any difficulties or negative experiences with this product?
● Do you use a similar competing product? How does this one compare?
These are a sample of questions that can be asked of the trial group. Based on 
responses, revisions to the original design or manufacturing may be necessary. Of 
course, this also depends on the complexity of the product.
It is important that final customer feedback is addressed, changes made (if needed) 
and the product has passed extensive testing prior to launch. Moving beyond testing, 
and prior to launch, what will the price of our product be? How much is too much?
What do we mean by profit?
● Gross profit: This is the profit a company makes after deducting the costs of making, 
transporting, and selling its products.
● Operating profit: The total earnings for a given period, excluding the deduction of 
interest and taxes.
● Pre-tax profit: The profit one makes by selling a product before taxes are deducted.
● Net profit: Sometimes called profit margin, or net margin, measures how much net 
income or profit is generated as a percentage of revenue.
For this book, when a profit or margin is discussed the reader should assume gross 
profit.
Pricing
There are many considerations in determining price. Among them, what is the com￾pany’s objectives for this product? There are several different scenarios to think 
through as one contemplates a retail “price” for a product.
Competitor Positioning
This strategy presumes the product will be priced similar to competitors. This means 
you are benchmarking your firm’s product against others. As an example, the gas 
industry, which is highly competitive and selling a commodity product, has pricing Pricing 195
targeted to meeting or slightly beating competitors pricing. After all, natural gas is 
the same product regardless of where (or from whom) purchased. To survive in this 
market, not only must your “product” be competitive, but additional or superior 
customer service must be provided. Some gas providers offer a variety of rate plans 
to fit what their customers want. Another example includes the airlines. When one 
airline discounts (or increases) its fares, the competing airlines usually follow along 
by price matching.
Sales Positioning
This strategy believes that increasing sales will help in the long term and the firm is 
willing so reduce product profits. This has several perspectives. It may be that taking 
less profit with a lower sales price will discourage competitors from entering the mar￾ket. It may also drive some from the market. Further, this may simply be an entrance 
strategy to entice customers with a low price and to later raise prices as the product 
takes root and gains market acceptance.
It must always be remembered that customers are very cognizant of price. They 
must perceive a value for the product in return for their purchase.
Figure 9.1 illustrates a typical demand vs. price graph. This shows that lower price 
will generally lead to higher demand. This does not show profitability: that is, we don’t 
know the profit margin at price point P1 or P2.
The marketing group would most likely produce spreadsheet models based on price 
sensitivity, demand, and profitability.
It is entirely possible in Figure 9.1 that price 1 (P1) realizes more revenue due to 
higher sales but less profit per unit. If we think about grocery stores, their sales strat￾egy is high volume with average margins of 2.2%.1
 Grocery stores can survive on such 
a small margin due to the huge volume of sales. Some stores will see revenue of $1 
million per week. According to Yahoo Finance,2
 Kroger made $132.3 billion in reve￾nue for the past 12 months (TTM – trailing twelve months) with a profit margin of 
1.14%. This is for all 2,732 stores.
Figure 9.1 Demand Vs. Price. Figure by David Tennant196 Successful Product Launch and Post Review
With a profit of 1.14% on revenues of $132.3 billion, Kroger made $1.513 billion in 
net income. Not bad for a low margin business.
Customer Positioning
This pricing model is focused on customer value, or perceived value. For example, a 
number of luxury car brands, among them Lincoln, Cadillac, BMW, Mercedes, Volvo, 
and others, wish to produce a limited number of units and charge a higher price. 
Although these models will serve the same purpose as a lower priced car – getting 
you from point A to point B – these brands are selling luxury and exclusivity. They 
are status cars and offer a more enthralling driving experience; and many times, are 
innovators in new vehicle technology. Remember that people will pay more for qual￾ity. Going beyond status are high performance sports cars, Ferrari, Porsche, Aston 
Martin, and others. These are very limited, high-performance cars with extremely 
high price tags (anywhere from $100 thousand to several million dollars). These will 
appeal to high-wealth performance car enthusiasts, collectors, and speculators (cer￾tain car brands will increase in value over time due to low production numbers).
It should be apparent that the car market is highly segmented, and pricing can be 
positioned to match those customer segments.
Profit Positioning
In this scenario, the company has predetermined what the return (profit) should be. 
Some companies will express the requirement for a 15-, 20-, or 25-percent margin. 
How is this determined? The company will determine the costs of the product and add 
an appropriate margin on top of this cost. For example, if our new writing pen cost 
$7.90 each to produce, then a 25% margin would be $1.98. Therefore, the price set for 
this product would be $9.88.
If we found that doubling the manufacturing quantity could reduce the production 
costs by 30%, we could similarly reduce the retail price (hoping for more sales) or leave 
the retail price as originally planned and obtain a higher profit.
However, a word of caution is needed. The simple act of adding on a percentage for 
profit may or may not be realistic. It depends on the product, your competitors, and 
market perception of your product. Remember, the market will ultimately set the 
price. All that you can control as a producer are costs.
Integrated Marketing
In the distant past, traditional marketing consisted or TV and radio spots, press 
releases, direct sales (relationships), brochures, and a company website. Today, in 
addition to traditional marketing, there are significantly more channels to reach 
potential customers. This includes all forms of social media such as Twitter, Facebook, 
LinkedIn, Pinterest, Reddit, and mailing platforms such as Mailchimp. Added to this 
mix are the data analytics that popular search engines (e.g., Google and others) can 
offer regarding data on user website traffic, how many clicks per visit, time spent on 
each site, and so forth.Integrated Marketing 197
Each of these platforms can segment your target market by geography, age, likes and 
dislikes, etc. There are many platforms to get your company message across to any 
segment of potential customers. Consequently, companies should develop a strategy 
to communicate the value of their new product using these digital platforms.
It should be noted that people may perceive the same message differently. A strategy 
should be developed that offers a clear and consistent message. If your product will be 
advertised on TV, a social media campaign should pick up on the same theme or mes￾sage. Each channel should reinforce the central message. Why would you want one ad 
on TV to be different from those ads placed on Facebook or Instagram? Consistency in 
the message is key.
Placement in Movies and TV
Have you ever noticed the hero of the show sitting down to drink a beer, which is 
clearly and cleverly placed so that the label can be seen? Today this is a common 
occurrence where companies pay to have their products prominently displayed on a 
program or movie. This is a subtle but effective way to use traditional media in a new 
way.
Marketing Strategy
A strategy should consider all the topics we have discussed, especially Chapter 2 (mar￾keting). Additional steps to a marketing plan:
1. Who is our target market? Where are they?
2. What are our sales goals for the new product?
3. Which media for which demographic group should we use?
4. What is the approved advertising budget?
5. Can we present a link back to our webpage for direct sales?
6. What is our target market? Where are they?
7. How is our product or business unique?
8. How will we collect metrics?
For Small businesses, the internet has been an exceptional opportunity to get your 
brand and products into the marketplace. Small businesses can get just as much expo￾sure as large companies for very modest costs. It should be acknowledged that small 
companies do not have a budget that can compete with major corporations. Therefore, 
social media is the answer.
By far, the most visible social platform is Facebook. Your business should have a 
Facebook page to build a community and establish relationships. It also allows you to 
put a face to your brand and describe who you and your company are. It also helps to 
identify your customer base.
Facebook’s Marketplace Ads promote your page right on Facebook, and Facebook 
provides several tools to help you. Facebook’s “Guide to Facebook Ads” will shepherd 
you through the advertising stages, including planning, creating ads, and interpreting 
site statistics.
Regardless of whether you use Facebook or not, there are many internet sites to help 
you promote your product. Others include Pinterest, LinkedIn, and Twitter. There are 198 Successful Product Launch and Post Review
many others, but these are some of the most popular. It is important that you select the 
site that best matches your target market. For example, if you are promoting consult￾ing services or new tech products, LinkedIn might be the better option as it is for pro￾fessional networking.
Your firm should also have a company website that clearly communicates what 
your company does, and the products or services it offers. Websites have, to a large 
degree, replaced brochures. Your customers no longer need to collect and store bro￾chures (and many time, brochures are simply trashed), but rather they can go to 
your company’s website and learn about your firm. This also saves your company 
printing costs.
A company website will allow you the opportunity to post blogs, customer testimo￾nials, and entertaining stories or case studies. You can also collect data analytics about 
your website visits. Why should you collect data?
Data analytics will enable you to collect data about visits to your web site, which 
allows you to refine your site content to better serve your customers. The data will 
likely include the email addresses of people who visit your site. Social media platforms 
provide data if you have a business account. Google Analytics also offers data related 
to social media; and more than likely, whoever is your host for your company web 
page will have data analytics available.
Other marketing targets include local business associations, trade shows, chambers 
of commerce, and conferences. Recall from Chapter 6 the discussion on business incu￾bators. An incubator will also provide guidance on marketing your product and if con￾nected with an investor group, may also provide advertising funding.
Sales Partner
If may be useful to team with a major retailer to sell your products through the store 
network. This would include companies like Wal-Mart, Target, Big Lots, and others 
that have both “bricks and mortar stores” as well as an on-line presence. Clearly, you 
will have to have the capability to provide large quantities of your product at a dis￾count price.
Other sales partner sites include Amazon and eBay. Using these “stores” will depend 
to a large extent on whether your target audience frequents those sites and what kind 
of product you are selling. There are many retail stores that sell on these sites, but each 
will collect a sales fee and may not be the best alternative, especially if you are selling 
a groundbreaking new technology or service.
Figure 9.2 shows the process flow to develop a marketing campaign for your new 
product. Note that the campaign will need to be in line with the marketing strategy 
and objectives; and may be constrained by the approved budget.
Product Development – Post Review
The purpose of the post product review is not an audit. Audit is a word that gives peo￾ple anxiety. The purpose of the review is to compare the products market acceptance 
and profitability with the original business parameters. The review should culminate Product Development – Post Review 199
in a formal report that provides an overall evaluation. Further, the report should assist 
the company in refining how it managed product development – it is an opportunity 
to improve.
It is the responsibility of the Product Leader to organize, write, and deliver the 
report. The recipients should include the sponsoring executive and high-level stake￾holders. It is appropriate that the Product Leader meet with the product team, suppli￾ers, or other appropriate participants to obtain their input.
Topics to cover in the report may include:
● Introduction – justification
● Overview of the project/product
● Original objectives
● Engineering and Production
● Scope/budget/schedule discussion
● What went right
● What could have been done better
● Identification of outstanding commitments
● Discussion of scope changes
● Marketing strategy and metrics
● Expected competitors
● Next steps: recommendations
● Summary and conclusions.
Figure 9.2 Marketing Campaign.200 Successful Product Launch and Post Review
Introduction
This would include the fundamental reason for developing the new product. Where 
did the idea originate? What was driving its development? Has market penetration 
been achieved? Did the project meet its sales targets?
Overview of the Project/Product
Is it profitable or if not, when will it break even (that is, all its development costs are 
recovered, and going forward, sales are profitable)? How well was it received by cus￾tomers? Who were the primary participants? (Suppliers, team members, etc.)
Original Objectives
Does the product align with the company’s strategic plan? What were the original 
product objectives and were they realistic? How much did the final configuration 
(product, idea, or service) differ from the original assumptions? Did the gate 
reviews help the team stay focused? Were key stakeholders informed of gate review 
results?
Engineering and Production
What were the challenges in engineering the product? Was the technology feasible? 
How many design iterations occurred before the final drawings were issued? Was it 
necessary to purchase new design software (Finite Element Analysis, modeling, etc.)?
Did manufacturing have any issues with prototype or final design? If so, what? Have 
procedures or manufacturing corrections been required? How effective are these? 
What changes should occur for the next production run? Is the cost per unit in line 
with early estimates or those presented in the business case?
Scope/Budget/Schedule Discussion
How many scope changes were required during this product’s development? Did any 
of them decrease costs? Where did most of the change requests originate (engineering, 
customers, production)?
How close to the original, approved budget was the final costs? Will the product 
meet the required rate of return?
Did the product get released on time? Where were the primary bottlenecks in meet￾ing schedule? Did our suppliers meet their contractual responsibilities regarding 
schedule? Should we use them again for Version 2.0?
What Went Right
What methods or techniques were well done that we would want to duplicate with 
other projects? Were any new processes developed that are applicable elsewhere in the 
company?Product Development – Post Review 201
Note: This is an opportunity to take key successes and figure how to apply them to other 
products or projects. This could be budgeting, communications, working with suppliers, 
etc. to provide continuous improvement to the corporation.
What Could Have Been Done Better
What areas need improvement? How can future products be developed more quickly?
Note: This is where problems are identified, and solutions offered. This can be engineering 
problems, excessive production material wastes, or managerial issues.
Identification of Outstanding Commitments
Are there currently any open contractual commitments? Have all supplier invoices 
been received and paid? Have engineering final drawings been provided?
Discussion of Scope Changes
How many scope changes were implemented during the product’s development? Did 
any of the scope changes reduce costs? Can any improvements be made to reduce the 
number of scope changes in the future? What was the total added costs due to scope 
changes?
Marketing Strategy and Metrics
How effective was the marketing strategy? Did the channels used reach the targeted 
customers? Have any changes to marketing or advertising occurred due to data met￾rics (or data analytics)?
Was the approved marketing budget adequate?
Expected Competitors
Have any new competitors emerged with a similar product? How are existing competi￾tors responding to the product? Does this product have a moat?
Note: Moat refers to a castle stronghold that is hard to overcome. Similarly, products can 
have a moat in the sense that it will be difficult for competitors to challenge or overcome 
its strong market position.
Next Steps: Recommendations
Should the company approve and fund Version 2.0? Does the product roadmap layout 
a reasonable set of enhancements for the next model? What options or alternatives 
should be considered?
Conclusions
This section simply summarizes the key findings.202 Successful Product Launch and Post Review
Chapter Key Points
● History is littered with products that failed.
● There are several strategies regarding pricing a new product, simply adding on a 
percentage for profit does not guarantee success or profitability.
● Effective marketing must include social media platforms.
● Data analytics or metrics are important for determining the effectiveness of a mar￾keting campaign. It can provide insights to changing a strategy or customer focus.
● A post launch product review is beneficial for continuous improvement. This allows 
the company to improve how it designs and produces new products.
Discussion Questions
1. What are the primary advantages to customer input or feedback?
2. Technology problems can be a cause of product failure. However, many times, fail￾ure is caused by managerial issues. List a few managerial issues for which team 
leaders should be aware in order to prevent failure.
3. This chapter discussed different pricing strategies: Customer-focused, profit￾focused, competitor-focused, and sales-focused. For the following products, which 
of these strategies should be used:
● Laundry detergent
● A unique software product that will enhance engineering design
● Custom homebuilder
● A new electric vehicle battery that is recyclable and will last 500,000 miles.
4. Social media platforms offer companies a broad approach to reaching their target 
market. What are some of the disadvantages and advantages of these platforms?
5. A sales partner and social media can assist in bringing new products to market. For 
the previous lists (Question 3), which platforms should be used for marketing:
● Laundry detergent
● A unique software product that will enhance engineering design
● Custom homebuilder
● A new electric vehicle battery that is recyclable and will last 500,000 miles.
6. The post-review process can potentially take a lot of time and effort to produce. Are 
there any disadvantages to this “final” report?
Discussion Questions – Answers
1. What are the primary advantages to customer input or feedback?
Customer input is needed to determine if a new product has any appeal or interest. 
How can you design a product without customer input?
Customer feedback is necessary in prototype testing. Did they like the product? Was it easy 
to use? Is there potential for confusion or product misuse? Customer feedback will help 
companies determine what changes need to occur in either design or manufacturing.
2. Technology problems can be a cause of product failure. However, many times, fail￾ure is caused by managerial issues. List a few managerial issues for which team 
leaders should be aware to prevent failure.Product Development – Post Review 203
Managerial failures can occur due to: poor leadership, constant scope changes, poor 
planning, unrealistic expectations, poor communications, lack of management 
support, etc.
3. This chapter discussed different pricing strategies: Customer-focused, profit￾focused, competitor-focused, and sales-focused. For the following products, which 
of these strategies should be used:
● Laundry detergent
● A unique software product that will enhance engineering design
● Custom homebuilder
● A new electric vehicle battery that is recyclable and will last 500,000 miles.
Laundry Detergent – you may have a new and different laundry detergent, but this 
product has been around for a long time, has many competitors, and is a commodity. 
Therefore, you would want a “sales strategy” in which case small margins are accept￾able with large volume sales.
Unique software – this will take time to get market acceptance and strong relationships 
with customers will help. This could be a combination of customer-focused and sales￾focused. The initial release software is always the most expensive, but more sales will 
quickly reach the break-even point. Having good relationships with customers and an 
exciting product that will save them time and should also lead to sales.
Custom homebuilder – while homebuilding is nothing new and there are many com￾petitors, custom homebuilding implies a very customer-focused approach. These homes 
are not low cost and usually involve significant customer input.
New electric car battery – The specifications imply a new disruptive technology which 
any car maker would be pleased to use. This is an instance where a profit strategy 
may be the most effective (Add a profit percentage to the cost of the product to arrive 
at a price.).
4. Social media platforms offer companies a broad approach to reaching their target 
market. What are some of the disadvantages and advantages of these platforms?
Disadvantages: One must constantly update the web page to keep current and to entice 
customers to come back. If a sole proprietor, this will take significant time. It may be 
worthwhile to hire someone to manage the social media accounts. There will be some 
costs to maintain a business presence on social media.
Advantages: Offers multiple channels to reach many customers. Platforms can be cus￾tomized to reach market segments. Metrics are usually provided by the platform for 
business accounts. Cost is reasonable.
5. A sales partner and social media can assist in bringing new products to market. For 
the previous lists (Question 3), which platforms should be used for marketing:
● Laundry detergent – If direct sales, an online presence like Amazon would be appro￾priate. If brick and mortar, any of the major retailers (big-box stores and supermar￾kets) would be useful.
● A unique software product that will enhance engineering design. This will not have 
broad, general market appeal, but is very specialized. LinkedIn and other profes￾sional sites would be appropriate.
● Custom homebuilder – Social media platforms such as Facebook and Pinterest will 
reach a large target market.204 Successful Product Launch and Post Review
● A new electric vehicle battery that is recyclable and will last 500,000 miles. This is a 
very specialized product but must get the attention of the public as well as car com￾panies. Both general platforms such as Facebook and professional platforms will be 
appropriate.
6. The post review process can potentially take a lot of time and effort to produce. Are 
there any disadvantages to this “final” report?
Without a post review report, how will a company know what the next steps should be? 
The post review report is meant to help companies continuously improve their business 
and products.
Notes
1 Campbell, J., The Grocery Store Guy, accessed on September 1, 2021, https://thegrocery
storeguy.com/what-is-the-profit-margin-for-grocery-stores.
2 Yahoo.finance.com, accessed on September 2, 2021, https://finance.yahoo.com/quote/
KR/key-statistics?p=KR.
Bibliography
Belz, A. (2011). Product Development. McGraw-Hill.
Berkun, S. (2010). The Myths of Innovation. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media.
Cooper, R. (2011). Winning at New Products. Basic Books.
Norman, D. (2013). The Design of Everyday Things. New York, NY.205
Product Development: An Engineer’s Guide to Business Considerations, Real-World Product Testing, and 
Launch, First Edition. David V. Tennant. 
© 2022 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2022 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
10
Summary – Connecting the Dots
As stated several times in this book, product development is the future revenues and 
lifeblood of any company. This justifies the dollars expended through R&D, engineer￾ing, and testing of new products, services, and ideas. Ideas start with people and there 
is no shortage of creative people and companies.
To some extent, a company must nurture an environment where risk-taking and 
idea-generation are encouraged and rewarded. Some of the most successful companies 
have been risk-takers and rewarded handsomely for it: Apple, Google, Amazon, and 
many others. Notably, many traditional firms have also been recognized for their for￾ward thinking and innovation:1
 Ikea, Chick-fil-A, Ford, Toyota, Black & Decker, and 
John Deere to name a few.
These companies did not get this acknowledgement by luck – it takes a team approach, 
resources, focus, and a recognition of customer wants or needs. Note that developing 
new products is risky and requires funding. It would be interesting to know that for every 
successful product developed by the previously named companies, how many prior 
attempts have failed? We’ll never know the answer of course, but it is probably signifi￾cant. One highly successful (i.e., profitable) product can make up for several failed ones.
In developing new products, companies really have three choices:
● Develop a completely new, ground-breaking product that no one has tried or thought 
of before.
● Take an existing product and improve or update it.
● Mimic one of your competitor’s products by adding features and making “your” ver￾sion better, cheaper, more attractive, etc. This is poaching on your competitors’ 
ideas and customers, but this is a common practice.
All products, over time, will find competitors emerging with their own version. This 
is fundamental to the product lifecycle.
The author is aware of one company that had an interesting strategy. They engi￾neered and manufactured highly technical products, but they knew they would hold a 
competitive market advantage for at most five years. At that point, their competitors 
would have reverse-engineered or developed their own competing version. However, 
during this time, the firm is exceptionally profitable and has a monopoly status on the 
latest technology in this industry. Once the competitors catch up, the firm would 
either sell off the product (licensing) or have a new, highly technical product ready to 206 Summary – Connecting the Dots
take its place – and provide another five years of market dominance. This was a recog￾nition by executive management that significant investment in R&D was a necessary 
business expense which paid off handsomely. Did this company experience failure? 
Yes, many times. But the company’s yearly budget dedicated around 12 percent of 
their net income for R&D and generated multiple patents each year. This is a signifi￾cant commitment as many firms generally invest 5–7 percent of earnings in R&D.
A Logical Process Flow
As a summary, this section will provide a logical step-by-step approach to developing 
new products and services. It represents the culmination of this book and should con￾nect-the-dots on the philosophies and techniques presented. It should be noted that 
using this approach can be very successful but does not guarantee market acceptance 
for a new product or service. No one can predict market reaction or guarantee market 
acceptance. Also, some companies, depending on their organization and experience, 
may find it useful to modify this approach to fit how their company operates. 
Figure 10.1 Product Development Flow will illustrate visually the order of product 
development activities described in detail below.
Step 1 – Idea Generation (refer to Figure 2.1).
Before any research, development, testing, or production can occur, it is necessary to 
generate ideas. Questions to explore include:
● Do our competitors have something similar? Can we improve on it?
● What do our customers want?
● What would be the market potential?
● What is the target market?
● How and where would the product be manufactured?
● Should we initiate a business case or shelve the idea for the time being?
Assuming the idea is accepted, a business case or feasibility study would be initiated.
Step 2 – Taking the Business Case from Concept to Reality (refer to Chapter 5 and 
Figure 5.1).
The business case will take a hard look at the feasibility of pursuing the idea. It will 
attempt to determine investment costs, a timeline, suggest alternatives, profitability 
(i.e., NPV – Net Present Value), potential sales, and make a recommendation. Should 
the idea pass the necessary criteria, senior management may approve the “project.” 
A preliminary budget and schedule may be provided at this time. Assuming the poten￾tial product is approved, the following steps would occur. Additional relevant figures 
are 2.6 and 9.2; chapters two and nine, respectively.
Step 3 – Customer Research (refer to Figure 5.4)
● Marketing performs customer focus groups and seeks input from suppliers and oth￾ers (some companies may perform focus groups during the development of the busi￾ness case). The Product Manager is assigned to project.
● Begin planning for sales and marketing strategy: product, promotion, placement, etc.
● Begin developing preliminary cost and pricing models (refer to business case).A Logical Process Flow 207
● Stakeholders are identified.
● First gate review.
Step 4 – Initiation
Engineering and Marketing are performing simultaneous work on parallel paths 
and must communicate constantly. Marketing will provide customer feedback and 
focus group results so the product can meet or exceed customer expectations. 
Engineering will take this information and incorporate into the product’s design. The 
steps include:
● Assemble the project team and confirm team leader (product manager).
● Study the business case and customer feedback (from marketing group).
● Develop the vision statement (Figure 5.6).
● Assign roles and responsibilities for each team participant.
● Confirm project objectives with key stakeholders.
● Develop list of project assumptions and constraints.
● Determine preliminary list of required resources.
● Perform initial risk review. See sample risk review, Table 8.4 Qualitative Risk Review.
● Determine where product will be manufactured: domestic or offshore, in-house or 
contract?
● Second gate review.
Step 5 – Pre-Design This phase involves working with Finance and Manufacturing 
and is a full team activity.
Depending on the product/project complexity, this may take significant time. Items 
generated during this time include:
● A detailed cost estimate, cash flow, WBS (Work Breakdown Structure) and schedule. 
See sample WBS, Figure 5.2.
● Product manager works with accounting and finance to determine, based on cost 
estimate, a proforma, NPV, pricing, and breakeven point (Figure 2.5). This is an 
ongoing activity with periodic updates.
● Engineering works with manufacturing to determine process flows, assembly tech￾niques, types of production setup, etc.
● Quality group is brought on board to set up QA/QC program.
● Develop and issue formal project plan (See Chapter 5 Project Plan Table of Contents).
● Supplier delivery timelines – develop procurement plan and desired delivery 
schedule.
● Perform risk review.
● Manage scope and proposed changes. Refer to Figure 8.6 Change Request Review 
Process.
● Third gate review.
Step 6 – Detailed Planning: Design
● Begin engineering design (with R&D, if appropriate) – Figure 3.2.
● Engineering conducts multiple design review meetings (which engineering 
disciplines?).208 Summary – Connecting the Dots
● Specifications are developed and potential suppliers are identified.
● Supply chain becomes involved in the procurement process. Refer to Figure 4.2 
Procurement Process.
● Supply chain works with engineering to develop an RFP (request for proposal).
● RFP is released to potential suppliers.
● Proposals from suppliers are evaluated and contracts are awarded.
● Perform risk review.
● Fourth gate review.
● Apply for patent? (Fig 6.3)
Based on supplier quotes and the determined scope, the cost estimate or budget will 
need to be refined. As the project gets closer to production, the costs will evolve and 
become clearer.
It is entirely possible that R&D will be occurring at the same time; or, the original 
idea may have been devised in the R&D department, at which point there may already 
be some progress. If there is engineering design involved, it happens during the plan￾ning phase along with developing and testing prototypes.
Step 7 – Testing and Review: Marketing and Engineering groups communicate with 
customers to refine final design.
● Engineering develops prototype based on customer desires and use of software 
modeling.
● Continued financial review of costs, NPV, breakeven point, etc.
● Confirmation of end user requirements.
● Prototype goes through testing. This may involve customer tests and reviews.
● Design group evaluates new product from a human engineering perspective. See 
Chapter 3, Ergonomics (human factors).
● Prototype evaluation for accidental or intentional misuse. Refer to Figure 3.8 Product 
Misuse Review (legal and engineering review).
● Manage scope.
● Design review.
● Simultaneous to engineering design, the marketing group is developing promo￾tional materials and final pricing guidelines. Refer to Figure 9.2 Marketing 
Campaign.
● Perform risk review.
● Fifth gate review.
Step 8 – Execution
● Engineering, Manufacturing/Production, Marketing, and Quality groups coordinate 
to issue new product.
● Final design review.
● Prototype data and final input from marketing is used to finalize drawings.
● Risk review.
● Gate review.
● Final design drawings are issued to manufacturing facility “Approved for 
Production.”
● Supplier deliveries arrive (raw materials, components, etc.).A Logical Process Flow 209
● Manufacturing produces first small batch to test for quality and that product is 
meeting performance and quality standards.
● Full production commences.
● Marketing issues promotional activities, commercials, social media, etc.
● Product is shipped to distributors/customers.
Step 9 – Closing
● Final invoices from suppliers or contractors are paid.
● Excess materials are stored or disposed.
● Post product review (customer feedback included).
● Celebrate success.
● Team members reassigned.
● Product roadmap consulted for planning next product iteration. Refer to Figure 6.2 
Product Roadmap.
● Close contracts and project accounts.
The above discussion is a structured approach to product development, design, and 
production. A company may decide to modify this approach to suit their requirements 
or company culture. A small company or entrepreneur may have a shortened version 
of this process; however, most of these steps should proceed in this order with minimal 
shortcuts to ensure success.
Figure 10.1 Product Flow Summary illustrates visually the nine steps discussed 
above.
Idea 
Generation
Business
Case
Customer
Research Initiation
Closing
Detailed
Planning Execution Testing &
Review
• Fig 2.1 • Fig 5.1
• Fig 3.2, 4.2 
• Engineering design
• Supply Chain
• Legal review
• Patent? Fig. 6.3
• Risk review
• 4th Gate review
• Fig 3.8, 9.2
• Prototype test
• Design review
• Risk review
• 5th Gate review
Pre-design
Project
Complete
1 2 3
• Fig 2.6, 5.4, 8.6, 9.2
• Focus groups
• ID Stakeholders
• 1st Gate review
4
• Fig 5.6
• Assemble team
• Objectives
• Risk review
• 2nd Gate review
• Fig 5.2, 8.6
• QA/QC
• Manufacturing
• Risk review
• 3rd Gate review
5
6 7 8
• Final design review
• Full production
• Mktg promotions
• Product shipped
9
• Final invoices
• Close accounts
• Post review
• Close accounts
Figure 10.1 Product Flow Summary. Figure by David Tennant210 Summary – Connecting the Dots
The previous discussion and Figure 10.1 should illustrate the importance of leadership 
to the product team and strong communications between the functional areas. There are 
a number of functional areas involved in our above discussions. These are represented:
● R&D/Engineering
● Supply Chain
● Marketing
● Manufacturing
● Executive management (stakeholders)
● Suppliers
● Legal
● Warehouse (receiving supplier deliveries)
● Finance/Accounting.
Remember that projects generally fail due to managerial issues. While technical prob￾lems certainly appear, these are less common. Assigning the right person to lead a 
product development effort is critical. No less important are the team members 
assigned to the project and selected suppliers. It takes a team effort of people from a 
variety of functional areas to succeed. Remember, the product leader cannot do it all. 
Please note that the process described in this chapter is robust; however, some compa￾nies may decide that a variation of this, or a different sequence of activities, will be 
more appropriate. The product development process must complement the firm’s 
organizational structure and internal policies.
Chapter Key Points
● Product development, like project management, should use a structured approach.
● Companies have three choices in product development: new, improve, or copy.
● Risk reviews and gate reviews occur throughout a product’s development.
● Customer or end user input should be accepted throughout the product’s development.
● The costs estimate will change and evolve throughout the product’s timeline.
● There are three distinct reviews during a product’s development: risk reviews, gate 
reviews, and design reviews.
● Effective communications and leadership are essential to success.
● Before starting full production, a small subset of product should be produced, 
inspected and tested to ensure quality and functional goals are being met. Once this 
has occurred, and the tests are successful, full production can begin.
Summary Discussion Questions (Covering all chapters)
1. Why is a product roadmap useful?
2. What techniques can be employed to prevent competitors from stealing your design 
or production secrets?
3. If a proposed budget or cost estimate is contained in the business case, why do we 
want to develop another estimate during the planning phase?
4. Rather than have Supply Chain issue RFPs and evaluate proposals, why doesn’t 
engineering perform this function since most contracts will be dealing with techni￾cal issues?
5. What is the purpose of the project/product post review?A Logical Process Flow 211
6. The discussions in this chapter highlight the depth and time-consuming aspect of 
product development. Small companies may not have all of the expertise to follow 
this structure. Is there anything that small firms can do to shorten this process?
7. Since leadership is an important quality, how can I improve my leadership abilities?
8. Why is a cash flow diagram important?
9. Why is developing a vision statement so important? Can’t we just formulate objec￾tives and work from that?
10. Why are multiple risk reviews performed during a product’s development?
Summary Discussion Questions – Answers
1. Why is a product roadmap useful?
The product roadmap describes what the future features and functionality of the prod￾uct’s next revision will include. Many times, it is not feasible to build all possible fea￾tures into the initial product. The reasons may include new technology making this 
product obsolete, putting all the requested features into the initial product may take too 
long and competitors would beat you to market. The next release will incorporate 
improvements based on customer experience with Version 1.
2. What techniques can be employed to prevent competitors from stealing your design 
or production secrets?
● One can always seek a patent (but this offers no firm guarantee unless you are will￾ing to legally pursue those who steal your idea or product).
● You can do all of the development, design, and production in-house.
● Ensure that your suppliers and contract manufacturers are ethical and willing to 
sign a non-disclosure agreement.
3. If a proposed budget or cost estimate is contained in the business case, why do we 
want to develop another estimate during the planning phase?
A business case, while many times is very detailed, just does not have enough informa￾tion to make a definitive estimate. A cost estimate is developed during the detailed 
planning stage, which happens after the business case:
● Supplier quotes usually come later in the timeline. There is no way a business case 
can gather supplier quotes without a well-defined scope, which also happens in the 
planning stage.
● It will take the engineering team time to assign all known costs in a product estimate. 
How would the business case team know how much time the design effort will take 
(and therefore the costs)?
4. Rather than have Supply Chain issue RFPs and evaluate proposals, why doesn’t 
engineering perform this function since most contracts will be dealing with techni￾cal issues?
● A publicly held company (i.e., listed on the stock exchange), legally must keep pur￾chasing approvals separate from other departments. It would be illegal for the same 
person (say, an engineer) to approve a purchase order, a receiving report (ware￾house), and approve the invoice.
● While the engineering team would clearly understand the technical requirements 
more clearly, Supply Chain personnel are very good at negotiating prices, developing 212 Summary – Connecting the Dots
contracts, and performing contract administration. This takes a large burden off the 
engineering group and allows them to focus on what they do best: design.
5. What is the purpose of the product/project post-review?
● To determine what activities went well during a product’s development. It may be that 
some of the practices can assist other project teams be successful by adopting them.
6. The discussions in this chapter highlight the depth and time-consuming aspect of 
product development. Small companies may not have all the expertise to follow this 
structure. Is there anything that small firms can do to shorten this process?
● Some activities can be outsourced to consultants or contract manufacturers.
● There is a long list of structured activities in product development. It is possible, depend￾ing on the complexity of a product, that some of these activities can be downsized.
7. Since leadership is an important quality, how can I improve my leadership abilities?
● Read books and attend seminars on leadership.
● Observe how others in high level positions carry themselves.
● Never stop learning.
● Talk with leaders and see if they will mentor you.
● Honor commitments.
● Ensure that you exhibit a high level of integrity and trust.
8. Why is a cash flow diagram important?
● From a budgeting standpoint, companies like to know how their expenditures will be 
spread over the fiscal year.
● Some projects may cross over into the next year’s budget cycle. It is important to know 
how much funding your project needs this year and next.
● If you plan to perform earned value tracking on your project, cash flows are neces￾sary (Note: earned value was not discussed in this book but is a method to assess 
project progress for both budget and schedule.).
9. Why is developing a vision statement so important? Can’t we just formulate objec￾tives and work from that?
● Typically, the vision statement is the guiding overall statement.
● The objectives should support the vision statement not the other way around.
● The vision statement allows senior level people to understand at a glance what the 
project or product is about. Objectives, which tend to be more specific and at a lower 
level do not always clearly delineate the overall mission.
10. Why are multiple risk reviews performed during a product’s development?
As the project proceeds, risks identified early in the project will go away, but new ones 
will emerge as one goes through the product’s development.
For example, we may decide that contractor performance is a risk. However, once 
a reliable contractor has been placed under contract, that risk will dissipate, but new 
ones may emerge regarding weather, material shortages, or labor issues.
Reference
1 https://americaninnovationindex.com/aii-conference.213
Product Development: An Engineer’s Guide to Business Considerations, Real-World Product Testing, and 
Launch, First Edition. David V. Tennant. 
© 2022 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2022 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Index
Note: Page numbers followed by “f” denotes figure and “t” denotes table respectively.
a
absence of praise/affirmation 76
accountability, avoidance of 75
accounting 65t
pro forma modeling 79, 80t, 81
roles of 77–81
action item log 71t
aeronautical engineering 38t
agile project management 85, 101–103, 
112–113, 113f, 122
hybrid in action 115–117
roles differences of 114t
traditional project management vs.
109, 110f
AI. See artificial intelligence
AICHE. See American Institute of 
Chemical Engineers
air emissions monitor 109
cost summary 109f
timeline of 135
vision statement 113–115
work breakdown structure 108f
American Institute of Chemical Engineers 
(AICHE) 132
American Small Manufacturers 
Coalition 151
American Society of Mechanical Engineers 
(ASME) 11, 132
Angel Capital Association 129
angel investors 128–129, 129f
Apple iPhone 13–14, 13f
Apple, strategic planning 7
applied research 97–98
artificial intelligence (AI) 158
Asbestos 53
ASME. See American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers
assembly plants 152
audit 198
auto industry, United States 148, 149
b
banks 126
basic research 96–97
behavioral preferences 16
benchmarking 36
bicycle frame, engineering model 43f
biomedical engineering 38t
BMW 150
break-even point 17f, 31–32
budget 104
business case 109
development 108–112
execution 111–112
initiation 110
planning model 106, 110–111
products 77, 78t
project/product team 163–164
and schedule issues 185–186
traditional vs agile project 109214 Index
business case 18–19, 19t, 39, 95–96, 109, 
206, 211
developing 132
and project plan 123
purpose of 109
timelines and costs in 163
business financial documents 126
business plan. See business case
business strategy, alignment with 185–186
c
camera producers 9
case studies 3
cashflows 81, 82t
development 108–112
CERN 96
CFO. See Chief Financial Officer
change agent 74
change orders, supply chain 181–182
change request review process 181, 181f
chemical engineering 38t
Chief Financial Officer (CFO) 61
Chief Operating Officer (COO) 61
Chrysler Corporation 149
civic/community groups 72
civil engineering 38t, 39
C-level executive 61
Coca-Cola company, strategic planning 7
Coke 193
commodity 32
communication skills 86
communications, project/product
44, 68–75, 104
action item log 71t
budgets, schedules, and miscellaneous 
small tasks 70–72
kickoff meeting 69–70
leadership 73–75
presentations 72–73
roles and responsibilities 70
status reporting 72
teamwork and 67–68
competitor positioning 194–195
computer engineering 38t
computer modeling 4, 173
conferences 73
conflict, fear of 75
conscious decision 7
constraint, on product development 66–67
constructive conflict 75
consumer products 148
Consumer Product Safety Act (1972) 51
Consumer Product Safety Commission 
(CPSC) 51
consumer protection, in US 50–52
Environmental Protection Agency 51
Food and Drug Administration 51
labeling and packaging 50
Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration 51–52
product safety 51
Consumer Reports™ 37
consumer research groups 37
continuous review 166
contract closure, supply 
chain 181–182, 191
COO. See Chief Operating Officer
core competency 55
core team 2f, 5, 64f
bigger picture 84–85
constraint on product 
development 66–67
decision points 81–84
executive’s role 61
involved in 63–64
leaders 76–77
net present value 81–84, 82t, 83f
project management processes 62–63
strategic plan, working within 61–62
Corporate Average Fuel Economy 
standards 149
corporate culture 7, 27–28, 76–77
corporate strategy 7–10
cost-benefit models 132
costs 19
of failure 97–98
vs. quality 55
savings 156
CPSC. See Consumer Product Safety 
Commission
customer demand 32
customer feedback 194, 202
customer focus groups 16
customer positioning 196Index 215
d
Dasani® bottled water 7
data analytics 18, 21, 198
marketing strategy and 21
decision making, dictatorship in 76
decision points 81–84
decline stage, product lifecycle 12–13
delivery trucks 23
demand vs. price graph 195, 195f
demographic preferences 16
design patent 138–139
design reviews 171–172, 172t
purpose of 191
design specifications 178
development stage, product lifecycle 12
dictatorship, in decision making 76
documentation 101
Dow Chemical company and Corning, 
Inc. 53
Dow Jones Industrial Average 10
driving products:
development 85–87
engineering 35–37
e
Eastman Kodak Company 9–10
education 1
electrical engineering 38t, 39
electric motors 22, 23
electric vehicles (EVs) trucks 21–22, 23t, 
183–184
classifications of 21
vs. costs and public policy 21–26
delivery trucks 23
opportunities for companies 24t
United States Postal Service 23
utility model EV costs 25t, 26
electronics 35
emotional intelligence 76
empathy 76
end user/customer 44
engineering 65t. See also engineering 
design process
business strategy, alignment 
with 185–186
consumer protection. See consumer 
protection, in US
design 207
design reviews 171–172, 172t
disciplines 37, 38t, 39
driving products 35–37
ergonomics 45–47
execution 208
functional areas and 
communications 44
gate reviews 187–188, 188f, 192
group 117
identification and adaptation 182–185
integrating supply chain and 
manufacturing 174–176
marketing and 19–21, 20t, 30, 167, 207
modeling 6, 42f, 43f, 58, 173–174
in new products 58
perspectives 35–37
product design and testing 6
and production 166, 200
product liability 48–49
profession of 163
and R&D groups 167, 181
risk reviews. See risk reviews
role of 4–5
science and 36
services 175
stakeholders 187–188
statements of work 180–182
supply chain. See supply chain
team 36, 39, 153
team leader 41
types of 4, 35
using SWOT analysis 186–187, 187t
engineering design process 39–44, 40f
build and test prototype 43
develop options 40
end user 44
initiate design 41–43
initiate production 43–44
problem, defining 39–40
project engineer 44
research solutions 40–41
Enron 66, 128
entrepreneurs 150
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 51
EPA. See Environmental Protection Agency
EPC. See European Patent Convention216 Index
ergonomics 5, 45–47
European Patent Convention (EPC) 140
European Union (EU) 140
markets 39
execution phase, project 111–112
executive sponsor 61
executive summary 103
expediting, supply chain 181–182
f
Facebook 198
factory, manufacturing 152
FDA. See Food and Drug Administration
Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 148
federal laws 128
federal policy 134
Federal SOX laws 66
field service group 105–106
finance 65t, 77–81
financial model 106
finger pointing 166
finite element analysis (FEA) 
modeling 177, 181
firm’s marketing group 115
5G networking 158, 184
focus groups 64, 116
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 51
formal product development process 106
formal project management, concepts of 5
formal scheduling program 135
Fortune 50 company 63
four Ps, marketing 26
placement 17–18
pricing 16–17
product 11–15
promotion 15–16
Freightliner truck 22
functional areas 44, 58, 65
functional corporate organization 67f
functional specifications 179, 179t, 180t
g
gate review process 62, 187–188, 188f, 192
geographic preferences 15–16
global telecom company 117
Google Analytics 198
grocery stores 18
gross profit 194
growth stage, product lifecycle 12
guarantees 14
h
Harley Davidson (HD) motorcycles 193
HGP. See human genome project
Hockeystick/Angel Capital 
Association 128
household products 35
housekeeping 152
HP Touchpad 193
human factors 47, 48
human genome project (HGP) 96–97
i
IC. See internal combustion engine
IEEE. See Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers
IFR. See International Federation 
of Robotics
implementation phase, project/product 
team 166
incubators 198
business/technology 129–130, 132
industrial engineering 38t
Information Technology (IT) field 105
Initial Public Offering (IPO) 128
innovation 8
and new products 8
Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE) 11, 41
instrumentation and controls (I&C) 
engineering 38t, 39, 86
integrated marketing 196–198
sales partner 198
strategy 197–198
integrity 85–86
intellectual property 54
internal combustion engine (IC) 21–22, 184
International Federation of Robotics 
(IFR) 158
International Organization for Standards 
(ISO) 133
International Union for the Protection of 
New Varieties of Plants (UPOV) 139
internet 18Index 217
internet of things (IoT) 158, 184–185
introduction stage, product lifecycle 12
inventory, manufacturing 151
investment cash 127
investment group 131
investors 5
IoT. See internet of things
IPO. See Initial Public Offering
ISO. See International Organization for 
Standards
j
Japan:
car manufacturers in 147
industry 147–148
major corporations 148
J.D. Powers™ 37
JIT manufacturing. See just-in-time 
(JIT) manufacturing
Johnson and Johnson Talcum Powder 
Product liability 53
just-in-time (JIT) manufacturing 154–155, 
159, 160
k
kickoff meeting 69–70
Kodak company 9–10, 27–28
l
labeling 50
ladder warning labels 50f
large-rig Semi trucks 21
laser printer 105
lawsuit over hot coffee 52–59
leaders 76–77, 87
absence of praise/affirmation 76
corporate culture 76–77
decision making, dictatorship in 76
poor interpersonal skills 76
leadership, in product development
5, 73–75, 75t, 185, 212
avoidance of accountability 75
fear of conflict 75
lean manufacturing 155
legal and regulatory obstacles 133
Limited Partnership (LP) 127
listening, skills needed for 69
m
managerial excellence 3
managerial planning 36
managerial quality 36
manufacturing 5, 200
engineering disciplines and 41
and engineering team 153
entrepreneurs and 150
factory layout 152
5G 158
flow 152f
housekeeping 152
inefficient 55
integrating supply chain and 174–176
internet of things 158
inventory 151
Japan’s industry 147–148
just-in-time 154–155, 159
onshore vs. offshore 155
overview of 147–150
predictive or preventive 
maintenance 158–159
robotics 157–158, 157f
safety requirements 151
small vs. large manufacturers 153–154
startup 151
state of 150–155
supply chain management 153
3D printing technology 156–158, 156f
in United States 147, 150
market economics 21–26
marketing 65t, 207
business case 18–19, 19t
company’s website 11
considerations 24–26
domain of 11
and engineering 19–21, 20t, 30
EVs trucks. See electric vehicles trucks
four Ps. See four Ps
function 5
group 26, 166, 195
group cannot 14
Kodak company 9–10, 27–28
new product development and market 
economics 21–26
portable battery unit 28–30218 Index
professional group 11
role of 4
sales 10–11, 26
services 3, 21
strategic planning 7–10, 201
team 19, 122
in today’s world 14
marketing manager 11, 31
market research 54
market segmentation 16, 134
mass media 73
matrixed product team 67f, 68
maturity stage, product lifecycle 12
McDonald 52, 56–57
mechanical engineering 35, 37, 38t
micro-grid technology 185
Microsoft Office® 17–18
Microsoft ProjectÔ 135
minimal viable product (MVP) 116
Minute Maid® fruit juices 7
moat 127
modeling 173–174
Monsanto 53
multi-disciplined approach 39
n
National Institutes for Health (NIH) 97
natural gas, in Southeastern United 
States 115–119
NDA. See non-disclosure agreement
net present value (NPV) 81–84, 
82t, 83f
net profit 194
new products development 19, 21–26, 74
vs. commodities 182
engineering in 58
innovation and 8
promotion of 15
new services flowchart, development 
of 117f
NIH. See National Institutes for Health
Nokia phones 13, 13f
non-disclosure agreement 
(NDA) 177
NPV. See net present value
nuclear plant control rooms 47–48
NUMMI 149
o
Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA) 51–52, 
151, 152
Office of Economic Development 151
offshore manufacturing:
advantages and disadvantages 
of 160–161
onshore vs. 155
OnePrice Plan™ 116
onshore vs. offshore manufacturing 155
operating profit 194
operator error 47
organizational conflict 86–87, 90–93
organization, supply chain 176
OSHA. See Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration
p
packaging 50
paper-pulp industry 150
patent application 137–141
apply for 138, 139
attorney 137, 145
benefits 140
costs 139
disadvantages 141
process in United States 142f
type of 138–139
Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) 140
PepsiCo, strategic planning 7
performance specifications 178–179
placement 17–18
planned maintenance/planned 
outage 158
planning phase, project/product 110–111, 
165, 166, 190
plant patent 139
PM. See project management
portable battery unit 28–30
portable printers, new 64–65
post product review 6, 198–201
engineering and production 200
expected competitors 201
introduction 200
marketing strategy 201
objectives 200Index 219
overview of 200
purpose of 212
scope/budget/schedule discussion 200
presentations, project 72–73
pre-tax profit 194
pricing 16–17, 32
competitor positioning 194–195
customer positioning 196
profit positioning 196
sales positioning 195–196
strategies 203
privately held companies 67, 163, 164t
procurement plan 105
procurement process 65t, 66f, 189
product development (PD) 3, 6, 163
accounting and finance, roles 
of 77–81
constraint on 66–67
core team in. See core team
costs expended in 17t
driving 85–87
efforts 31, 85
engineering in. See engineering
execution phase 111–112
executive’s role in 122
functional areas 85
integrated marketing 196–198
launching of 193
leaders 63
leadership in 73–75
legal costs 31
logical process flow 206–210, 209f
marketing, role of. See marketing
multi-disciplined approach 2
new 84
participants 64–65t
planning phase 110–111
post product review 198–201
pricing 194–196
problems with 55–56
process flow 20f
project management in. See project 
management
purposes 36
research and development process 1
risk reviews 212
role of supply chain in 176–180
small firms and entrepreneurs. See small 
firms and entrepreneurs
for small firms and entrepreneurs 5
and sources of funding 130–131
speeding 173–174
teamwork in. See teamwork
work breakdown structure 107, 108f
production engineering 35, 38t
product lifecycle 12, 12f
decline stage 12–13
development stage 12
growth stage 12
introduction stage 12
maturity stage 12
product/project manager 44, 68, 77, 85, 
102, 176. See also marketing manager
leadership skills 123
role of 20–21
vs. project engineer 107t
product roadmap 134–135, 136f, 141, 211
products/projects 3, 35, 61. See also
product lifecycle
Apple iPhone 13–14, 13f
break-even graph for 17f
budget 77, 78t
cash flow 79f
comes 4f
communication. See communications, 
project/product
concept to action 101f
design challenges 53–54
displacement 13–14
engineer 44
executive 61
fail, reasons 99–101, 100t
general characteristics of 14
grocery stores 18
labeling and packaging 50
launching 6
leaders 68, 73, 87, 120, 199
liability 48–49, 52
marketing 11–15
misuse of 49, 53–54
Nokia phone 13, 13f
presentations 72–73
quality 36
safety 51220 Index
service center 14
and services 11
team 67
professional group, marketing 11
profit 194
margin 194
positioning 196
pro forma modeling 79, 80t, 81
project charter 110
project lifecycle 6
project management (PM) 2–3, 164
agile. See agile project management
concepts of 2
definitions and activities of 99
formal 5
issues 121
phases of 123
principles of 122
processes 62–63, 87
in product development 98–99, 
117–119, 122
Project Management Institute by 99
project plan 103–105
traditional 5, 101–103, 110, 110f
truisms 99
project organization chart 103
project planning 36, 100, 103–105
project/product team:
design reviews 171
implementation 166
initiation 165
leader 165
lifecycle 164–166, 165f
planning activities 165t
planning phase 165, 166, 190
scope and budget 163–164
promotion 15–16
prototype 42, 166
provisional patent 138
publicly held companies 66–67, 163, 
164t, 175, 211
public policy 22–24
q
QA. See quality assurance
QC. See quality control
qualitative risk review 168–171, 169t, 190
quality 35, 65t
control chart 37, 37f
costs vs. 55
International Standards Organization 
(ISO) defines 35
managerial quality 36
product quality 36
quality assurance (QA) 36–37, 65t, 
104, 166
quality control (QC) 36–37, 37f, 65t, 104, 
153, 166
quantitative risk review 168–171, 170t, 190
r
R&D process. See research and 
development process
reasonable procurement action 175–176, 
189–190
recovery boiler model 174
regulatory requirements 133
request for information (RFI) 177
request for proposal (RFP) 178
research:
applied 97–98
basic 96–97
types of 96
research and development (R&D) process 1, 65t
and engineering 167
investment in 206
research phase, engineering design 
process 40–41
retailers 18
return on investments (ROI) 81, 127
reviews, post product 198–201
risk reviews 6, 168f, 190, 212
key tenets of 168
performing 167–168
purpose of 191
qualitative 168–171, 169t, 190
quantitative 168–171, 170t, 190
types of 168–171
robotics 157–158, 157f
and 5G 158
next generation of 157
and use of internet of things 158
robust operator training 47
ROI. See return on investmentsIndex 221
s
safety interlock system 39
safety requirements, for 
manufacturing 151
sales 65t
sales group, marketing 10–11, 26
sales positioning 195–196
Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) 66–67, 89, 91, 128, 175
SBA. See small business administration
Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC) 128
segmentation 15
self-awareness 76
senior management team 61
sensors 158
service center, products 14
services 3
marketing 21
shareholders 163
small business administration 
(SBA) 126
small firms and entrepreneurs 5
angel investors 128–129, 129f
banks 126
business and financial assistance 129–130
challenges 131–132
innovation 135–137
issuing shares of stock, funding by 128
lack of structured planning 132–133
legal and regulatory obstacles 133
marketing message 133
necessary ingredient 125
patent application 137–141
product roadmap 134–135, 136f
small business administration 126
venture capitalist, funded by 127
small vs. large manufacturers 153–154
smart cars 183–184
smart cities 184–185
smart grid technology 185
SMEs. See subject matter experts
social media platforms 197–198, 203
Society of Automotive Engineers 46
software/services 18
solar power device, price and margin 
sensitivity for 14t
Sony Betamax 193
SOWs. See statements of work
SOX. See Sarbanes-Oxley
specifications 178–180
speedometer display 47f
stakeholders 35, 88t, 103
gates and 187–188
identifying 87–89
working in silos and 86
statements of work (SOWs) 180–182
statistical process control 148
statistical quality control 148
status reporting, project 72
stock exchanges 128
stock, issuing shares of 128, 143
strategic planning (corporate 
strategy) 7–10, 26, 39
Apple 7
Coca-Cola company 7
company ideas 7, 8f
innovation 8
PepsiCo company 7
US companies 1980 vs. 2020 revenue 9t
working within 61–62
structured planning, lack of 132–133
subject matter experts (SMEs) 168
suppliers 65t
supply chain 6, 44
department 176
group 65t, 179
integrating 174–176
management 153
new products vs. commodities 182
non-disclosure agreement (NDA) 177
organization 176
pricing 180–182
proposals 180–182
purpose of 174
request for information (RFI) 177
request for proposal (RFP) 178
role of 176–180
specifications 178–180
SWOT analysis 186–187, 187t, 191–192
t
table of contents, project plan 103–105
communications 104
executive summary 103222 Index
procurement plan 105
resource requirements 104
risk management 104
scope statement 103
stakeholders 103
tasks and budget description 104
target market 15
team leader 55, 68
engineering 41
teamwork 5
and communications 67–68
core team and. See core team
essentials 68
leaders 76–77
matrixed product team 67f, 68
product communication. See
communications, project/product
technical excellence 3
technical obsolescence 85
technical planning 36
technical specifications, types of 178
technology, evolution of 182–185, 183f
electric vehicles 183–184
5G networking 184
internet of things (IoT) 184–185
smart cars 183–184
smart cities 184–185
technology incubator 129–130
telecommunications company 166
3D printing technology 156–158, 156f
Three Mile Island (TMI) 47
TMI. See Three Mile Island
Toastmaster’s International™ website 73
traditional marketing 196
traditional methods 11
traditional project management 5, 101–103, 
110, 110f
vs. agile project management 109
roles differences of 114t
trucking industry 22
trust 85–86
turbine exhaust 174
TV remote control device 45, 46f
Tyco 66
u
United States (US):
auto industry 148, 149
car manufacturers 147
companies 1980 vs. 2020 revenue 9t
consumer protection in 50–52
federal policy in 134
manufacturing in 150
markets 39
patent application process in 142f
United States Patent and Trademark Office 
(USPTO) 140
United States Postal Service (USPS) 23
UPOV. See International Union for 
the Protection of New Varieties 
of Plants
USPS. See United States Postal Service
utility model EV costs 25t, 26
utility patents 138, 140
v
venture capitalist (VC), funded by
127, 128
visionary 74
vision statement 113–115, 114f, 212
w
warranties 14
WBS. See Work Breakdown Structure
websites 198
wind turbine blade 42f
Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) 107, 
122, 163, 207
air emissions monitor 108f
to derive a schedule 109
WorldCom 66WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.
