Praise for Project Management for the
Unofficial Project Manager
“If you are suddenly thrust into the role of project manager, this book offers
a refreshing solution. Project Management for the Unofficial Project
Manager leads the reader down a path of principles—Create Value, Lead
People, and Manage Processes—while providing practical, easy-to-use
tools. Yes, this book will give the unofficial project manager a healthy boost
of confidence . . . you got this!”
—Bill Yates, PgMP, PMP, PMI-ACP, Executive Vice
President at Velociteach
“Project Management for the Unofficial Project Manager gets to the
HEART of a challenge so many now face in the workplace—the need to
ORGANIZE projects, on the fly, without training, to lead their companies
to a new future. This is a GREAT book—Exceedingly Practical, Easy-To￾Read, Personable, and Hits the Spot—you’ll take control fast with the
knowledge in these pages.”
—Julie Morgenstern, New York Times bestselling author
of
Time Management from the Inside Out
“Project Management for the Unofficial Project Manager is the new
benchmark for real & truly effective project management. This is a must￾read . . .”
—Gerry Aquino, Organizational Development and
Learning at Össur Americas, Inc.
“Project Management for the Unofficial Project Manager is the best
business improvement book that I have ever read. This book will becomethe guide for all of our future projects. We are already seeing massive
improvements from the work sessions that Jim Wood conducted at our
company, and this book will definitely enhance those improvements. Any
person who follows the advice in this book will find a tremendous, positive
impact on their career.”
—Tim Rancourt, president of Engineering and
Manufacturing at Northern Tool + Equipment
“Finally! A project management book that acknowledges and supports the
‘people’ part of projects. Too many times we are focused on the work
without recognizing that it’s people and relationships that have the biggest
impact on project success. Practicing the Four Foundational Behaviors will
help every ‘unofficial’ project manager engage their team.”
—Deanna Carrera, director of Leadership and Learning
at First Things First
“In this age of lean corporate headcount, everyone, no matter what their
title, is required to fill the role of project manager. And the new book,
Project Management for the Unofficial Project Manager, covers the core
areas that any project professional needs to be successful. Additionally,
FranklinCovey’s work session gives you simple, straightforward, video￾driven content that is easy to understand and put into practice. The book can
also serve as a reinforcement tool to remind work session participants of
their learning. Both are invaluable resources to any organization interested
in improving efficiency and outcomes.”
—Robert Fitt, senior director of Human Resources at
Broadcom Corporation
“With Project Management for the Unofficial Project Manager,
FranklinCovey has put project management in the hands of everyday
leaders. The book provides practical solutions and a straightforward process
to craft shared vision, realistic timelines, and successful deliverables. If you
are involved with executing projects of any size, you owe it to yourself and
your team to read this book.”— Kenneth Johnson, director of Training and
Development for the State of Colorado
“Sometimes we think of projects as large capital expenditures, but often all
of our work is an ‘unofficial’ project, and too often, we find ourselves ill￾equipped to manage the process to a successful outcome. Project
Management for the Unofficial Project Manager ties together a process that
everyone can use for project work, as it is for all levels of an organization.
One great takeaway from the book is, ‘You must clarify a shared and
measurable set of expectations.’ Without this, a project has little chance of
success, because projects are really all about people and their expectations.”
—Bonnie Stone, Centralized Learning and Development
Manager for the Central Arizona Project
“In today’s environment, managers need to lead and complete difficult and
multiple projects with limited resources. Authors Kogon, Blakemore, and
Wood outline down-to-earth examples and techniques, essential to be
successful in this day and age.”
— Michael Fung, former CFO of Walmart U.S.
“In an era where collaboration is key, where everyone has a ‘real job’ to do,
in addition to the projects that they are a part of, this book may actually
save lives or certainly improve them! People are pulled in so many
directions that this book enables the project manager to be highly organized
and build authority and credibility. A well-organized project manager is a
gift to any organization and will surely deliver extraordinary results.”
— Kevin K. Cushing, former CEO of Alphagraphics Inc.Also by Author
5 Choices: The Path to Extraordinary Productivity by Kory
Kogon, Adam Merrill, Leena Rinne
Presentation Advantage by Kory Kogon, Dr. Breck England,
Julie SchmidtProject Management for the Unofficial Project Manager (Updated and Revised Edition) copyright ©
2024 by Franklin Covey Co.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever
without written permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in
critical articles or reviews.
BenBella Books, Inc.
10440 N. Central Expressway
Suite 800
Dallas, TX 75231
benbellabooks.com
Send feedback to feedback@benbellabooks.com
BenBella is a federally registered trademark.
First E-Book Edition: January 2024
Library of Congress Control Number: 2023947933
ISBN 9781637740507 (print)
ISBN 9781637745267 (electronic)
Copyediting by Jennifer Brett Greenstein Proofreading by Jenny Bridges and Michael Fedison
Indexing by WordCo Indexing Services Text design by Silver Feather Design Text composition by
Aaron Edmiston Cover design by Bradford Foltz
Author photos courtesy of FranklinCovey
Special discounts for bulk sales are available.
Please contact bulkorders@benbellabooks.com.CONTENTS
Introduction: So You’re an “Unofficial Project Manager”?
CHAPTER 1:
The Job to Be Done Now
CHAPTER 2:
Principles of Project Success
CHAPTER 3:
Scoping the Project
CHAPTER 4:
Planning the Project
CHAPTER 5:
Engaging the Team
CHAPTER 6:
Track & Adapt
CHAPTER 7:
Close
CONCLUSION:
Your Informal Authority Is Needed Now!
Glossary
Notes
IndexINTRODUCTION: SO YOU’RE AN “UNOFFICIAL
PROJECT MANAGER”?
IN 1999 NASA PROPOSED SENDING into orbit a new ultrahigh-tech telescope that
would be able to see into the past nearly to the beginning of the universe. It
would photograph stars and galaxies unimaginably distant from Earth and
more than 10 billion years old.
NASA estimated that the James Webb Space Telescope project would
take eight years to complete and cost a billion dollars.
But in the end, it took twenty-two years to complete and cost $10
billion.
Why was the project, according to the New York Times, “plagued with
enormous cost overruns and delays”?
Of course, many technical problems had to be solved. But project
management was also a problem.
The Times reports that expensive human errors caused a lot of delays.
“The telescope’s propulsion valves were damaged when engineers used the
wrong solvent to clean them. Dozens of screws that fastened the telescope’s
massive sunshield came loose during vibration tests. And faulty wiring sent
excess voltage into the observatory’s transducers.” Sounds awful, doesn’t
it?
Then there were team members who just didn’t do their jobs. Many
errors “should have been detected by the inspector, who did not inspect.”1
Ultimately, the Webb Telescope was launched, and it now sends back
images of deep space that take the breath away. But it should never have
taken so long and cost so much.
WE ARE ALL PROJECT MANAGERS NOWIt’s odd to think that loose screws and the wrong cleaning fluid could throw
such a massive project off course. But project management has never been
easy, and the size and complexity of the project make it that much harder.
We assume you aren’t in charge of a project that will cost multibillions
of dollars and take many years to complete, but you are going to manage a
project of your own now—or you wouldn’t be reading this book.
You’re not alone. “We are all project managers now,” says prominent
project expert Antonio Nieto-Rodriguez. “Soon we will no longer have job
descriptions. We will have only project descriptions.” Why? Because
people are turning more and more to project work to deliver value for their
customers. Your project does matter, or you wouldn’t be doing it. Since
your organization is investing time, money, and resources to get it done, the
project likely means a great deal. So it better be worth it.
The Project Management Institute (PMI) says, “The most important
aspect of project management is delivering business value to the
customer.”2 That might seem obvious, but many projects—in fact, most—
fail to do that. Of the millions of projects undertaken in the worlds of
business, education, and government, nearly two out of three will never
deliver value to a customer.
3
So you have reason to be apprehensive about taking on the role of a
project manager.
For one thing, you were probably never trained for that role. By far, the
majority of projects are managed by “unofficial project managers”—and
you’re likely one of them. Most knowledge workers are already managing
projects under the radar—everything from micro-projects like organizing a
luncheon to extremely large macro-projects like sending telescopes into
space. They deal with kickoff meetings, deliverables, and “milestones”
every day, whether they are called project managers or not. And they’re
doing it by the seat of their pants.
Project management is an essential professional skill for everyone. As
project management expert Joy Gumz says, “Operations keeps the lights on,
strategy provides a light at the end of the tunnel, but project management is
the train engine that moves the organization forward.”4 Adding project
management to your portfolio of skills makes you an even more valuable
professional.Although the project management profession has collected a huge body
of knowledge on the subject and devised complex computer applications for
it, you’ll find the basic elements easy to grasp. You don’t need to make the
job more complicated than it is. One project management pro explains that
if you keep the simple things straight, you’ll be okay. He says, “Most
complex projects fail because [the managers] forgot the very simple things,
not because they couldn’t deal with complexity.”5
There are literally hundreds of books about project management. Most
are written in the official, formal voice of “real” project management. They
are full of intimidating, complicated processes and specialized language.
So you pick up one of those books, read a little, then slowly become
overwhelmed. Finally, you just panic, throw the book across the room (or
delete it forever), and just continue to wing it.
But this book is different. Although it’s based on the best thinking about
project management, this book gives you the few principles and tools you
really need to succeed as an unofficial project manager.
The principles here are distilled from the Guide to the Project
Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK), seventh edition, produced by
the PMI. PMBOK runs to hundreds of pages and describes project
management in fine detail. We have narrowed down the robust principles
and processes in PMBOK to a few essentials and added our own insights
about what makes projects successful.
The apparatus of traditional project management can overwhelm a
project team, especially if the leader insists on doing projects exactly by the
book. The towering discipline of official project management can scare
people. In fact, the famous Agile Method of project management was born
in reaction to the dogmatic approach taken by some traditionalists. But
ironically, even Agile has taken on a lot of complexity.
You don’t have to become the “Project Meister” of the “only true
process” everyone must obey or lose their heads. At FranklinCovey, we’ve
distilled the best ideas from the world of project management to make them
usable and practical for all of us “regular” people who aren’t pros. To date,
we’ve taught thousands of unofficial project managers a basic method for
project success, and now we’re sharing what we’ve learned with you.A FranklinCovey client, a director in his organization’s Project
Management Office, has this to say about our program and tools: “In the
last year our organization has overspent on projects by $2.5 million. And
the reason is not the ‘Big P’ projects. The ‘Big P’ projects have plenty of
oversight and corrective action when needed. The greater challenge is the
everyday ‘Small p’ projects. While these projects are small in scope, there
are hundreds of them—and no one is paying attention. The big payoff for
conducting Franklin-Covey’s program Project Management for the
Unofficial Project Manager is not just to get project success, but to save
millions of dollars!”
WHY THIS BOOK
This book is for those of us who are paid to think, innovate, and create. It’s
for those of us who are asked to “get ’er done.” It’s neither a comprehensive
textbook nor a reference guide. It teaches you the essentials of managing
projects and provides basic tools in a real-world context. We have taken the
complex world of project management and made it simple, clear, and easy
to implement immediately. You’ll be riding the wave of the new project
economy if you learn these skills.
Interestingly, we’ve found that these methods and tools have positive
side effects. We have applied them to other things we do, even outside work
—at home, at school, at all our activities. We live in a chaotic, uber-paced,
information-saturated environment, and the ideas in this book have helped
us manage not only our projects but also our time and our lives.
WHAT TO EXPECT
This book is organized around a process that takes best practices from both
traditional and Agile project management. Each step includes various tools
that will help you scope, plan, and execute your project with excellence.
Each step includes Application Challenges so you can practice using the
tools. Remember to check your learning at the end of each chapter.Finally, this book is about going from good to great in both your
professional and personal lives. It’s about learning to do your highest￾quality work—whether you’re taking on a professional project or planning
a perfect wedding. If you consistently practice the principles in this book,
you can avoid most of the scars that project managers usually get along the
way and repeat success after success.H
CHAPTER 1
THE JOB TO BE DONE NOW
EDDA RISING GRUMBLED ALL THE way to her boss’s office that day in
June. She feared her career was about to end. Despite her best
efforts, regardless of everything she had tried to do, the
organization had lost out again, and she figured she was going to have to
take the brunt of it.
When she arrived, her boss, Tesman, and several colleagues were
hunched over a laptop screen shaking their heads and groaning softly.
“Nervling beat us this time,” Tesman said, straightening up and giving
Hedda a quick handshake. A respected pharma professional from Turkey,
Tesman knew her stuff and was frustrated at the slowness of Lettal’s
processes. “Nervling got to market first, and we will be the ‘also-ran’—if
we ever get to market at all.”
“We’ll get there,” Hedda sighed, “but there’s still a long trek ahead of
us.”
“And every month we aren’t in the market, we lose a million in
revenue.” Tesman drove the situation home.
As director of regulatory affairs at Lettal Pharmaceuticals in Oslo,
Hedda was responsible for getting the firm’s new drugs approved. Any new
medicine had to be licensed by the authorities before it went on pharmacy
shelves, and Lettal’s latest creation—a migraine reliever—was stuck
somewhere unapproved in the maze of a government agency. Stuck formonths—generating no revenue for the organization and relieving no
migraines.
Meanwhile, competitor Nervling had raced through the approvals
process with a similar migraine treatment. Being second in the market did
not bode well for Lettal.
Hedda was a scientist, not an administrator, but she had a good
relationship with the drug-approvals people in the government, so she had
been put in charge of getting those approvals.
But it wasn’t working. This was the third time the agency had delayed a
major Lettal product release. Hedda figured the third time would be the last
time—for her.
As the others floated back to work, Tesman folded her arms, sat down
on her desk, and looked hard at Hedda. “On average, the agency approves
new drugs within about seven months. With us, it’s more like twenty-two
months. Our products are as good as anyone’s, but we get left in the dust
too often.”
Hedda figured her job was in free fall.
But Tesman had a different idea. “Hedda, you can solve this. We need a
project dedicated to speeding up approvals. Could you take that on?”
“Of course,” Hedda said, swallowing awkwardly. Brief panic gave way
to mere overwhelm, and she wished she could go back to the lab, look at
tissue samples under a microscope, and eat her lunch alone. But now her
life had abruptly changed.
She was a project manager.
In the last century most people did a certain specified job that stayed more
or less the same until they moved ahead or moved on. The boss judged
them by the book. Customers waited submissively until the corporation or
the government or the school gave them not what they wanted but what
they were going to get.
Things have changed. Customers want what they want. We are seeing
more frequent organizational transformations, faster development of newproducts, quicker adoption of new technologies, and so on. This is a global
phenomenon. In other words, we must be nimbler and far more responsive
to customers than we used to be. “Doing the old job” isn’t enough anymore.
Today, to get what they want, customers just look at their phones and say,
“Give it to me now.” “Fix it now.” “Cure my headache now.” “You’re
telling me I can’t get my orange squeezer until tomorrow?”
This world isn’t patient enough to wait for you to “do your job.” The
job it wants you to do is to satisfy its needs and wants now.
And that was Hedda’s problem. Up until today, her job, according to the
official description, was to “ensure that all government and organization
regulations were met, including complying with industry regulations, both
external and internal, developing new policies, and training employees.”
Hedda was okay at doing all that. She saw herself as a cop, patrolling
around and making sure nobody broke the rules. That job was not going
away.
But now on top of that she had to make things happen (that’s what
project managers do). She had to figure out how to get a little tube of
chemicals onto a drugstore shelf in a lot less than the two years it was
taking now.
Most of us are now Heddas, or soon will be. We live in a project
economy where people want value, and they want it right away. We hear
that “by 2027, some 88 million people around the world are likely to be
working in project management, and the value of project-oriented economic
activity will have reached $20 trillion.”6
You’re probably one of those 88 million people who were never trained
to be project managers. But like Hedda, you are—or you soon will be—an
unofficial project manager.
THE “BIG WHAMMY”
So most people are doing projects now. But a Harvard study shows that
only 35 percent of the projects undertaken worldwide succeed—which
means we’re wasting a lot of time and resources.7“While project management experiences a boom,” the experts say,
“projects tend to confront, over time, a multiple ‘whammy’ of time and cost
overruns, business-case failures, stakeholder disappointments, and
sustainability shortfalls.”8
In other words, too many projects take too much time, cost too much,
turn out to be useless, frustrate everybody, and make the world worse.
That’s a “big whammy.”
So it’s natural for Hedda to be a little fearful. After all, she doesn’t
know how to manage a project. We could tell her to “chill out,” but it
wouldn’t make the big whammy any less real. She needs the skills to get the
project done on time and on budget, provide value, satisfy people, and do it
again and again.
If you’ve quietly slipped into the role of unofficial project manager, you
know you’re fighting project failure every day as you try to push through to
a deadline, save a budget, or keep people (or yourself) from messing
everything up.
WHY PROJECTS FAIL
Let’s understand why projects fail. According to the respected Project
Management Institute (PMI has a half-million members in 208 countries),
organizations without formal project management processes fail much more
often than companies that follow a process. But even those with processes
fail much of the time. Here are some common reasons for failure:
Unclear outcomes or expectations (“Why are we doing this?”)
Lack of commitment or support from leaders (“Okay, go ahead
with it, I guess . . .”)
Unrealistic timelines (“We need this yesterday!”)
Lack of or mismanaged budget (“You need how much more
money?”)
Competing priorities (“I’ve got to take care of my other job
today.”)Unrealistic resources (“What could you do with half this
budget?”)
Politics (“We can’t let Enki’s department get the better of us.”)
Lack of a big picture (“A few loose screws can’t make that
much difference, can they?”)
Poor planning (“Don’t overthink it. Let’s get started already.
We know what to do.”)
Lack of leadership (“Who’s in charge here, anyway?”)
Changing standards (“So they want this new car to go forwards
and backwards?”)
Do any of these phrases sound familiar? Everybody’s facing the same
issues. Failure is expensive—whether you’re in charge of a project costing
multimillions or just thousands.
And there are costs to you, too. People who fail are not happy. Your
morale drops, you get disengaged, and your confidence and even your job
might be on the line. But this book can give you hope. Unlike the many
books on project management that drown you in a dense sea of details, we
give you a handful of principles to live by that steer you to success.
Principles, said the late Stephen R. Covey, are “rules or laws that are
permanent, unchanging and universal in nature.”9 The principles of
successful project management will always work for you, regardless of the
process you use or the situation you’re in. One professional says, “Whether
it’s a $50,000 study or a $30 billion ‘giga’ project, the basic tenets of
project management should not change.”10
TO SUM UP
In short, projects rule. People everywhere are quietly slipping into the role of unofficial
project manager, trying by their wits to get through to a decent finish. It’s often like trying to
fly a plane without flying lessons—the likelihood of a big whammy is high. But this little
book, based on established project management principles, can guide you across the terrain of
your project to a nice finish.CHECK YOUR LEARNING
Why is it true that “we are all project managers now”?
Why do nearly two-thirds of all projects fail to meet
their goals?
“Whether it’s a $50,000 study or a $30 billion ‘giga’
project, the basic tenets of project management should
not change.” What is true about this statement?T
CHAPTER 2
PRINCIPLES OF PROJECT SUCCESS
HE THREE GOVERNING PRINCIPLES OF successful project management
are:
Create Value
Lead People
Manage Processes
These principles sound simple, but they are profound. They add up to
the success formula of any project:
CREATE VALUE
It’s a strange world, but often projects are called successful if they end on
time and stay on budget. Oddly enough, achieving an important,worthwhile, or useful outcome is rarely mentioned!
It’s as if you were to make dinner on time and on budget but serve up
lousy food nobody wants to eat. But you could still claim, “My project
succeeded!”
Obviously, timeliness and cost-effectiveness are important, but a good
project manager is going to prioritize a good outcome over everything else.
Highly skilled project teams can and do produce rubbish—in fact,
according to the Harvard study mentioned in the previous chapter, they do
so about two-thirds of the time.11
So what are they missing?
The best measure of project success is whether end users are happy.
Those people might be executive sponsors, customers, colleagues, or the
family at dinnertime. Whoever they are, your top priority is to please them
and ensure the project achieves its intended organizational outcome.
This principle may seem obvious, but based on the known project
failure rate, it gets lost somewhere in the tangled wilderness of process
management.
For many years, PMBOK attributed project success to “process
compliance;” that is, getting the process right. Eventually, however, a group
of influential experts on project management rebelled and issued the
famous “Agile Manifesto,” in which they declared: “Our highest priority is
to satisfy the customer through early and continuous delivery of value.”12
The latest edition of PMBOK (the seventh) now concedes that value is
the “fourth” basic principle of project management. To provide value, it
says, managers must “continually evaluate and adjust project alignment to
business objectives and intended benefits and value . . . defined in
quantitative and/or qualitative terms.”13
But what is “value”?
In business, quantitative value is usually defined in terms of return on
investment (ROI) and/or the net present value (NPV) of the investment in
the project. There are well-established formulas for projecting ROI and
NPV, which we won’t go into here. But you definitely need to do this kind
of analysis in the scoping phase or get experts to do it for you. Often,
quantitative value is what key stakeholders care most about.Qualitative value goes beyond the financial numbers. It’s a little harder
to measure, but no less critical. It’s often defined in less tangible terms—
increased brand awareness, market share, customer satisfaction, educational
results, market trust, and so forth.
In simple terms, as project manager you must constantly keep in the
forefront of your mind why people care about your project, how much they
care, and how your project aligns with the larger vision or purpose of the
organization. We say value is not the fourth basic principle of project
management—it’s the first. As expert project manager Elizabeth Harrin
says of PMBOK’s new list of principles, “I wish this one was higher up the
list. If projects don’t deliver value, what’s the point of them?”
“However,” she goes on to say, “we have to determine what ‘value’
means, and it’s going to look different for every project.”14
How do you do that?
We’ll show you how. The tools we provide in this book will ensure that
you create value as a project manager. If you use these tools right, we
guarantee that you won’t be doing dumb things on time and on budget.
LEAD PEOPLE
What’s been your experience with project leaders? Or leaders in general?
Stephen R. Covey was fond of saying, “Manage organizations, lead
people.” You may have worked with people who were good managers but
poor leaders. Management is “the coordination and administration of tasks
to achieve a goal.”15 But leadership is more than that, as we all know.
Your role as project leader is to inspire people to follow you and the
project management process willingly and enthusiastically. You’ve heard
the fable of the goose and the golden eggs—about the impatient farmer who
killed the goose to get all the eggs and ended up with nothing. In project
management, value is the golden egg, but the project team is the goose.
As a project leader, you’ll want to find the golden goose and keep it
happy and creative. You won’t want to abuse it, overwork it, and burn it
out.“But I’m not a leader,” you say. “I’m not even a manager.” We hear you.
A certain project manager didn’t think he was a leader, either—until he had
to become one.
When famous marketing guru Seth Godin was young, he agreed to lead
a project for the small, struggling organization he worked for. He himself
was totally committed, but he worried about the team of three people
assigned to him.
So, he recalls, he started a regular newsletter that “highlighted the work
of every person” on the team. “We highlighted their breakthroughs and
talked about the new ground we were breaking. Twice a week, I talked
about our quest. Twice a week, I chronicled the amazing work of our tiny
tribe . . . Within a month six engineers had defected to the tribe working
with me . . . Then it was twenty.”
Eventually thirty people were working around the clock on Seth’s team,
and within months they shipped products that saved the organization.
As he explains, “They switched for the journey. They wanted to be part
of something that mattered . . . Twenty years later people on that team still
talk about what we built. And I, the twenty-four-year-old with no
experience and no staff, got to go on the ride of a lifetime.”16
Why was Seth able to draw such committed people around himself?
Because he valued them. People naturally want to matter—and they want to
make a contribution that matters.
According to the research organization Standish Group, project success
is due more to the “emotional maturity” of the team than to the process it
uses—in fact, more than three times more. Emotional maturity is a measure
of “the basic behaviors of how people work together.”17
So a team can succeed with pretty much any project management
process it wants if the team members practice emotionally mature
behaviors.
Leading people means modeling those behaviors yourself. As an
unofficial project manager, you probably have only informal authority over
your team. This is especially true if your team is cross-functional—drawing
people from different areas, such as marketing, sales, finance, and product
development. You are not their boss.The only real authority you may have is informal, which is not the same
as formal authority.
INFORMAL AUTHORITY FORMAL AUTHORITY
Comes from your character and capabilities.
You’re a good listener. You’re clear about
expectations. People trust you because you’re
trustworthy. You keep your commitments and
hold other people to theirs. And you treat them
with respect.
Comes from a title. A title doesn’t
automatically make you a good leader. It may
give you the power to enforce rules or penalize
people, but titles rarely guarantee willing
followers who will give you their best effort.
Even if your title is manager or leader, you will still need “informal
authority.” You will never succeed without it.
This is especially true with younger workers, who emphasize
authenticity, ethics, and values in the companies they work for. According
to a Deloitte study, “Whereas older generations tend to respect authority
even when they don’t agree with it, younger generations are more vocal at
resisting it.”18 They won’t follow you just because you’re “in charge.”
Think about people who have had tremendous influence even without a
formal title—people like Martin Luther King Jr. and Malala Yousafzai. You
may not be leaders like these, but you will need to inspire people to want to
play on your team and give their best and finest effort.
If you practice these Five Foundational Behaviors, you will earn the
informal authority you need to lead effectively:These five behaviors are foundational because everything falls apart if
people don’t live by them. You establish your authority by practicing them.
The team must understand and practice them as well. That’s why you post
them, discuss them, review them, and hold people accountable for them.
In an early team meeting, ask members what they think about these
behaviors. “How would you define them? How will they help our team
succeed? How do we deal with each other when we fail to behave? What
should we do to keep the behaviors front and center in our work?”
The Five Foundational Behaviors are for the whole team, but you are
inescapably the model for the behaviors. You want a formula for leading
people? Here it is.
Listen First
Don’t make the mistake of thinking you have to have all the answers. The
pressure to “know it all” may tempt you to talk more than listen. Your
instinct to tell everyone what’s what may kick in out of fear. This instinct is
potentially fatal.
By “listening first,” you take the pressure off yourself to know
everything. When people come to you with ideas or complaints, let them
talk first.
When a team member tells Hedda (the scientist we met in chapter 1), “I
have an idea that will speed things up,” she has a choice. She could tellherself, I’m under deadlines; the pressure is incredible; I can’t listen to
every idea; not now, I don’t have time. Or she could stop and really try to
understand the team member’s idea. Yes, it may slow down her day, but in
the end, it may make things go faster.
Or Hedda could say to herself, This person is too junior; she can’t have
any good ideas we haven’t already thought of; I’m the one who’s supposed
to have the ideas ’cause I’m in charge here. Yes, it may ruffle Hedda’s ego
a little to listen to a subordinate, but it would also ease the pressure on her
to be the source of all wisdom.
Empathy is key. You don’t have to agree or disagree, but you need to get
into team members’ heads and understand them. When you give them the
chance to talk—without interrupting them—you’ll get new and better ideas
and they’ll feel like you respect them.
Clarify Expectations
Imagine that you couldn’t see a pair of shoes you wanted to buy online.
Instead, you would have to order them sight unseen. You could go online
and describe what you wanted—“I want nice brown shoes in size 10”—and
the next day the seller would deliver to you a pair of faux alligator high
heels with suede ribbons.
But what you had in mind was a pair of plain oxford dress shoes. You’re
very disappointed.
Who’s at fault here?
Both parties, actually. You’re at fault because you didn’t specify what
you had in mind.
But the provider failed to clear up exactly what you meant by “nice
brown shoes.” They had a totally different picture in their head than you
had. They didn’t ask what was in your head.
A famous writer once said, “The great enemy of communication is the
illusion of it”—meaning we fool ourselves if we imagine that people fully
understand what we say to them.
One reason projects fail is that people involved lack a shared picture of
what is expected. Fuzzy expectations can be fatal to the project.Suppose a team member tells Hedda, “I want to work on the budget this
week.” But without a clear idea of what “work on” means, the team
member could spend the week, say, inventing new spreadsheets or
something else that’s useless. So your task is to get a clear picture of what
the team member proposes to work on.
Hedda could ask him, “What exactly are you going to work on with the
budget?” He might say, “Well, our cost estimates are probably too low. We
ought to revisit those and get a more accurate picture.” She might disagree
and suggest a different task. Or she could respond, “Good. Can you give us
updated estimates on Friday?” Now everyone is clear on this team
member’s commitment.
The key to clarity is to ask questions: “What do you mean by (blank)?”
“Is this what you mean?” “Can I clarify one thing?” “How long do you
want me to take?” “How much should I spend?” “Who can help me?” And
so forth.
Projects succeed when people have a clear, unambiguous picture of
what they expect of themselves and others.
Extend Trust
If you avoid delegating tasks, if you don’t let team members make
decisions, if you’re always giving negative feedback, if your project drags
on forever—you have a problem trusting people.
If you trust people to keep their commitments, they will almost always
follow through. Your trust has a funny effect on them—they will typically
work harder. They will want to do their best for the project team.
“People like having trust extended to them,” says Stephen M. R. Covey,
the son of Stephen R. Covey and author of the best-selling book The Speed
of Trust. “When it is, people don’t need to be managed or supervised; they
manage themselves.”19
Of course, trust is always conditional. A few people might lose your
trust if they fail in their commitments. If, for example, a team member is
always late, you’ll need to be straight with them, but generally people feel
motivated when you trust them to do their best.Watch out, though. You counterfeit (or fake) extending trust when you
delegate a task to someone but won’t let them do it. “You asked me to
research the new Genias system, so I’m going to spend the day on that,”
says a team member. If Hedda says, “I’ve already done that,” she pulls the
rug out from under that person.
Another counterfeit of extending trust is micromanagement. Instead of
asking how things are going, you’re always telling team members what to
do and how to do it. You’re checking their emails, demanding to know
where they are all the time, or pointing out insignificant errors.
Give team members a chance to earn your trust and they’ll almost
always do it.
Practice Accountability
If you show up late two or three times to team meetings, what happens to
your ability to hold others accountable for their commitments?
As project leader, you’re the model for keeping promises. Others will
follow your lead whether you like it or not. If you’re late with a task, you
lose the informal authority to hold other people to their deadlines.
Of course, you need to hold more than just yourself accountable. You
hold the team accountable to the Five Foundational Behaviors, too. If Joren
shows up late two or three times and experiences no consequences, what do
the team members learn about your ability to hold people accountable?
They’ll think, Well, if Joren can come in late and nothing happens, maybe it
doesn’t matter if I come in late.
That’s why the Five Behaviors are the foundation of the team. You post
the behaviors, you get consensus on them, and you hold yourself and others
to them.
So what do you do if a team member doesn’t follow through?
Instead of nagging or scolding the person—or even worse, ignoring the
failure—find out why it happened.
Joren says, “Hedda, I committed to audit the lab’s documentation, but I
couldn’t get it done on time.” Hedda could assume bad faith and bully him
around, or she could act like a leader and probe for the reason. Maybe thelab director wouldn’t cooperate. Maybe the task genuinely requires more
time. Or maybe Joren got sick.
In any case, Hedda’s job is to clear the path for Joren so he can
complete his task. She can talk to the lab director. She can extend the time.
She can get someone to help Joren or substitute for him.
Practicing accountability is not about punishing people. It’s about
helping them keep their commitments.
Demonstrate Respect
This foundational behavior may be the most important of all.
For one thing, mutual respect on a project team makes things go faster
and better. When people don’t respect each other, everything slows down.
For example, picture yourself in a business meeting with people you don’t
respect—you doubt their motives, you discount what they say, you resist
their opinions. Obviously, you put on the brakes wherever you can.
Now picture a meeting with people who respect each other. Discussions
go smoothly, differences are aired, people talk straight, and agreements
come quickly. It’s a picture of emotional maturity. Respect speeds up the
project.
Respect yourself first, then you can respect others. Respect is its own
reward. If you’re honest with yourself and others, if you hold on to your
integrity, you’ve succeeded regardless of the outcome of the project.
Showing respect does not mean becoming a doormat. You show respect
by speaking the truth. You can hold people accountable respectfully by
talking straight with them. In fact, straight talk is a form of respect, if
you’re considerate about it and consistently practice it with everyone.
How do you demonstrate respect? By practicing the other four
Foundational Behaviors: listen first, clarify expectations, extend trust, and
practice accountability. If you practice them, people will want to play on
your team and win.
The Five Foundational Behaviors are not surface behaviors. If they
don’t arise from your inner character, you’re putting up a façade and people
will know it. Without the inner character of a true leader, you can know all
about project management processes and still fail. In the words of oneprofessional project manager, your project will be like a watermelon—nice
on the outside, and one big mess inside.
To sum up, as Elizabeth Harrin says, “Be a good human.”20
It will take discipline to stick to the behaviors. You might be on the
verge of missing a deadline, there’s no way to recover, you’re over budget,
you’ve got unprepared team members, executives want to change
everything, and your boss says, “I expected this to be done by now. What’s
the deal with you?”
Under this kind of pressure, you will be able to keep your head if you
practice the behaviors. Practice them until they become habits. If you don’t,
you’ll get caught up in managing the process instead of leading people, or
what’s worse, you’ll find yourself hiding from your responsibilities. Either
way, you will create little value.
Project leaders often stumble because of two opposite approaches to
leadership: abandonment and micromanagement.
Some ineffective managers abandon the team, leaving them to struggle
through on their own. Sometimes managers who mean well abandon the
team intentionally, believing that it is “tough love.” They think the way to
develop people is to leave them alone. Nothing could be less helpful.
Keeping a vigilant eye on the team and the project schedule is essential.
Once you have set clear expectations, you need to track the team’s progress
to see if they are winning or losing.
The opposite approach is micromanagement. Managers who get too
deep into the details crush the initiative of their team members. Still others
do both—they abandon the team for a while and then dive back in to play
the hero when things go wrong.
So how do you put these Foundational Behaviors into practice?
We’ll show you how. We have woven the principles of effective project
leadership into the tools we provide in this book. We have designed the
tools to encourage mature team behaviors. If you use these tools right, you
will lead your project team to success.
MANAGE THE PROCESSThe third element in our success formula is to “manage the process.”
Some people hate the word process. It sounds like the clanking
machinery of a factory, and we don’t want to see ourselves as cogs in the
assembly line. If process doesn’t inspire you, choose another word you like
better: pathway or parade or pilgrimage—any p word you like.
But you’ll still be going through a process to do your project. It could be
a complicated, burdensome process or a simple, efficient process. A good
process makes things easier—it gives you flexibility and security at the
same time. You can feel confident that you’re not wandering around
aimlessly wasting time and resources, and you can always adjust the
process if needed.
Historically, there are two general methods for managing the project
process: the Waterfall Method and the Agile Method. Some project
managers advocate one method over another; however, both methods can be
complicated and tough to install if you’re not a professional project
manager.
The Waterfall Method
This traditional project management process is a step-by-step approach
known informally as the “Waterfall Method” because the resulting project
schedule looks like a waterfall:
“The Waterfall Method”
The Waterfall Method evolved to manage projects with a well-defined
scope, clear objectives, and a deadline, like flying from Sydney to Londonor building a skyscraper. This method put people on the moon and built the
Shanghai Tower. The project’s value was determined while scoping it at the
start, with minimal changes along the way, and its value was realized (or
not) after the completion of the project.
Like everything else, though, project management is changing.
People want things done faster and want to ensure a project’s value
before they sign off on it. And speed is not the only issue. There is often a
huge cost when people follow a rigid scope, complete the project, and then
realize it isn’t even close to what’s needed. So much for value.
An impatient marketplace isn’t always willing to wait while the “water”
works its way down the orderly steps of the Waterfall Method. Industries
such as software, advertising and marketing, and banking are moving to
more nimble ways of doing projects, collectively called the Agile Method.
The Agile Method started in the world of software development, where
products undergo constant change and improvement as functions and
features are added.
People who use the Agile Method focus on fast delivery while they
constantly rethink the project’s value as they are creating it. They
collaborate closely and implement appropriate changes to “sprint” to a
finish.
Agile starts with a rough plan. Then the team conducts an “iteration,” in
which they develop a deliverable quickly, deploy and test it, and then come
together for a review. They raise issues and repeat (iterate) the cycle,
resolving the issues as they go. When all the issues are resolved, they close
the project and launch the final deliverable. Agile helps teams create value
along the way with iterations to ensure the project delivers what’s needed.
“The Agile Method”For today’s unofficial project managers, we have taken the best of both
the Waterfall and Agile worlds to provide a process that is doable and will
consistently achieve project success.
Here’s how to lead your project:
First, we SCOPE the project to define its value to the people who will
benefit from it.
Then we PLAN how to achieve it.
We ENGAGE people to give their best to the work, revisiting the plan
as necessary.
And we TRACK & ADAPT throughout to ensure we’re always heading
for value.Finally, we CLOSE the project and celebrate success and lessons
learned.
We already follow these steps without thinking about it. For example,
have you ever painted an apartment? If you have, you know how the
process goes.
First, you go to the paint store. Your project has begun. The sales
associate interviews you to clarify expectations. She asks, “What are the
walls made of? How much wall space do you want to cover? Where is it?
What color do you like? Oil or latex?” She compiles your answers into a
clear Project Scope Statement. That’s SCOPING.
Next, you and she confer with the mix operator and PLAN the type and
quantity of paint, the tools you will need, the time it will take, and so forth.
Now your project goes into the ENGAGE phase. The paint is mixed, the
team gets together (you and your partner and your best friend), you prepare
the walls, and you roll on the paint.
You TRACK & ADAPT as you go, monitoring the results, watching for
drips and missed areas, taking stock between coats, touching up—making
sure the walls look the way you want them to. Or you might want to change
something—apply a different color to the molding or stencil a design onto a
wall. Your friend suggests mauve instead of teal for the bathroom. TRACK
& ADAPT is about getting feedback and acting on it to ensure you are
providing the highest level of value—even if the new changes don’t exactly
reflect how you scoped the project in the first place. Acting on valuable
feedback creates a higher-value project.
Finally, you CLOSE. When the painting is finished, you clean up, move
the furniture back in place, and have pizza. The CLOSE phase requires a
little more than that, actually—you document lessons learned for future
projects, get key stakeholders to sign off, and you recognize and celebrate
all those who contributed to the project! (Pizza is optional.)
The rest of this book is organized around five steps adapted from both the
disciplined Waterfall Method and the swifter, more responsive AgileMethod. More to the point, if you follow the five steps, you’ll be applying
universally accepted principles of project success. And you’ll hear the
stories of people like Hedda who are leading projects and learn from them
what works and what doesn’t.
By the end of the book, you’ll be well equipped with a basic process
and tools to carry out your own projects successfully.
TO SUM UP
In short, the success of a project depends on this equation:
Your first priority is to create value for your customer. You do this by practicing the Five
Foundational Behaviors as a team leader and managing the process with excellence. There are
five steps in the Franklin-Covey project management process: You scope first, then plan the
project, engage the team (practice disciplined accountability), track & adapt to change, and
close the project with excellence.
CHECK YOUR LEARNING
What’s the difference between compliance with the
project management process and delivering value?
What is informal authority, and why is it important to
an unofficial project manager?
How do you build informal authority with people?
Which of the Five Foundational Behaviors do you
personally need to work on?
What are the five steps of the FranklinCovey project
process?T
CHAPTER 3
SCOPING THE PROJECT
The Goal: “Clarify a shared and measurable set of
expectations.”
HE SCOPE IS THE “WHAT” of the project: “What are we trying to do and
what do we need to do to get it done?”
Try an experiment: Blindfold some people, take them to a park,
and ask them to walk forward in a straight line. What happens?
They walk in circles. Invariably. Sometimes the circles are wide,
sometimes tight. The circles aren’t perfect—they’re loopy, sometimes in
one direction, sometimes another. A lot of people even backtrack.
The point is this: Blindfolded people can’t walk in a straight line.
Why? We all walk in circles when we can’t see a point of reference like
the sun, the moon, a mountain, or a road sign. Without these things to referto, we can’t move forward.
That’s why scoping is so important in project management. If we aren’t
clear on the destination, we act like we’re blindfolded. We end up “circling
around” doing re-work, second-guessing, or getting smothered by “scope
creep”—the tendency of a project to get sucked into a black hole.
According to PMBOK, the “scope” of a project is “the work that needs
to be accomplished to deliver a product, service, or result with the specified
features and functions.”21 More simply, scope defines what you’re going to
do to create value—and what you’re not going to do.
In this chapter you’ll find out how to scope a project in order to move
ahead instead of going around in circles.
SENSITIVITY TO INITIAL CONDITIONS
Scoping is the most important of the five steps of project management.
Even a little misunderstanding about scope can bring disaster down the
road. This principle is known as “sensitivity to initial conditions.”
If you start even one degree off course on a flight from Sydney to
London, you might end up in Rio instead. The same is true with a project
you’re managing. Without a clear and shared picture of the value you’re
trying to create, the project is doomed.
One experienced project manager was called in to help on a large
project that was flopping badly. When he looked into it, he found nothing
but fog. “My first job was to find out why all the stakeholders seemed to be
on different planets, let alone different pages. So I quizzed ten key
stakeholders about the purpose of the project—suffice it to say that no two
answers matched!”
The number-one reason for project failure, the experts say, is
“unrealistic expectations based on insufficient data and information.”22
You’ve got to make sure that everybody sees the same picture of your
project’s outcome. Its value must be clear and unquestionable to the people
involved.
So how do you make that happen?You start by learning what everyone expects from the project. You may
think everyone has the same thing in mind (for example, a “nice pair of
brown shoes”), but a smart project leader starts with the assumption that
nothing is clear. If you do, you won’t hear that unhappy voice down the
road that says, “This isn’t what we wanted.”
To do effective scoping, we:
Identify key stakeholders.
Interview key stakeholders.
Document the project scope.
IDENTIFY KEY STAKEHOLDERS
Let’s start by defining a stakeholder as anyone involved in the project or
positively or negatively impacted by it. They “hold a stake” in the project.
Something is “at stake” for them.
We start to scope when we identify our key stakeholders and skillfully
interview them. We want to know what value they expect from the project.
When identifying stakeholders, we cast a wide net to think of everyone
we can, so that later we don’t have the one person we forgot saying,
“Excuse me, why didn’t you check with me?”
Once we have identified all stakeholders, we identify key stakeholders.
They are the people who determine the success or failure of the project.
They are “decision makers.” They are customers, both external and internal.
They are the ones who “need the project.” They are people who can remove
roadblocks or exert influence where you can’t. They are clients, regulators,
legal advisers, political figures, community members, and activists. They
are critics, skeptics, consultants, experts, believers, and disbelievers. They
have “energy around” the project.
To identify your key stakeholders, brainstorm a list of all the people
involved in or affected by the project. Find coworkers, team members, or
just friends to help you brainstorm your list—the more people, the better.
That way you’re less likely to miss someone who should be on the list.When you brainstorm, go quickly. Go for quantity. Don’t judge ideas.
Build on each other’s ideas. You can brainstorm on a whiteboard with
sticky notes or a digital brainstorming tool like this one: TOOL:
STAKEHOLDER IDENTIFICATION
Or use a thought map like this digital example:If you brainstorm your list thoroughly, you’re less likely to get caught
unaware down the road. The more effort you spend identifying every
possible stakeholder, the smaller the chance of failure.
Let’s follow a fictional example. Hedda’s pharma organization once
spent years developing a new drug only to get laughed out of the market
because it required two doses per day. A competitive drug did pretty much
the same job on one dose per day, but the development team didn’t know
that. They had failed to involve the marketing department in the project. So
here comes the product marketing director to say, “Why didn’t you check
with us? We could have told you your two-dose drug wouldn’t sell.”
In another example, a major bank spent six months on a project to
create a new product. The team anticipated “a big hit” with customers and a
lot of new revenue. But when they went to unveil the product, the bank’s
lawyers—who had not been consulted—looked sick. “We love the idea,”they said, “but everything you’ve built is illegal.” The project was a waste
of time, and “the team was crushed.”23
By taking the time to identify everybody who might be “touched” by
your project, you will reduce the risk of this kind of mess-up.
Once you have identified the stakeholders, you can put them in
categories meaningful to you: deciders, customers, thinkers, creators,
advocates, opponents. You can categorize them by function: sales,
marketing, finance, administration, customer service, manufacturing, legal,
product development, and so forth. Group and arrange them in rows, by
color, by hierarchy—any way you want on your brainstorming board.
The most important category is key stakeholders.
These people determine whether your project succeeds or fails.
Most project leaders underestimate the importance of this step. They
talk to only one customer, one sponsor, or one manager and think they have
a clear picture of what’s expected. This is what Tesman wants, so let’s go
get it done, Hedda might think.
But in this complex world of multiple, often competing priorities, no
project has just one stakeholder. Many people might be affected—not only
the sponsor but the sponsor’s boss, the sponsor’s boss’s boss, the finance
lead (most crucially!), key clients, key department heads, and so on.
Value is in the eye of the beholder. Together, these key stakeholders
decide whether your project has value. Also, value is not the same as
relevance—what doesn’t matter much to one stakeholder might matter a
great deal to another. For example, there might be value in a project to
change all the light bulbs in an office building, but how relevant is that
project to anyone?
Your project must be valuable and relevant to your key stakeholders.
To determine which stakeholders are key, use the following thinking
tool called the Key Stakeholder DANCE: TOOL: KEY STAKEHOLDER
DANCE
Choose key stakeholders who:
DECISIONS Make decisions that control or influence the project.
AUTHORITY Grant permission to proceed or stop the project.NEED Directly benefit from or are affected by the project.
CONNECTIONS Are connected to the required people, money, or resources.
ENERGY Have positive or negative energy that could affect the project.
The D, A, and N categories are usually easy to identify. They define the
value of the project, approve it, and sign the budget. Every single one of
them needs to be identified.
But don’t overlook the C and E key stakeholders—the ones with
connections and energy that influence the project. These “influencers” often
have a lot of impact, although their authority might be informal. They might
include other departments, community activists, and even friends or family
members of the deciders.
The E stakeholders have enough positive or negative energy to
influence project success. Have you ever run across people who just breathe
an atmosphere of negativity? They bring hidden agendas and political
flimflam. You wish they would go away, but you might need their expertise
or approval. So you must “lead” them or face the big whammy.
The Five Foundational Behaviors will help you with prickly
personalities. If you listen empathically to their input, clarify their
expectations, trust them as far as you can, keep everyone accountable, and
respect their perspectives, they might be less negative. Also, key
stakeholders with positive energy or strong connections can offset some of
the negative energy. At the same time, you might find that people with
negative energy can offset groupthink and bring new and better ideas.
INTERVIEW KEY STAKEHOLDERS
Once you’ve identified the key stakeholders, you’ll want to get as much
input from them as you can, as early as you can. The principle here is
“frontloading,” which means getting as much input as possible as soon as
possible from as many key people as possible.
Many project leaders make the mistake of charging into the project
without frontloading. When we ask them why they don’t do it, their answersare always the same:
“I don’t have time for that.”
“I think I already know what they want.”
“I don’t know how to interview people.”
“I don’t have access to those key stakeholders.”
“I don’t want them to lose confidence in me. Doesn’t asking a
lot of questions make me look dumb?”
Each of these excuses will put your project in real jeopardy right from
the start. At the same time, some of them may be true—for example, “I
don’t have access to those key stakeholders.”
Of course, getting access to busy, influential people can be tough. So
here are some tips for making useful contacts with key stakeholders:
Discover the communication methods stakeholders prefer. Do they want
to be texted? Emailed? Do they want to talk in person or on the phone?
Introduce yourself and your role. If they don’t know you, make
sure they fully understand your purpose in contacting them.
For high-level stakeholders, reach out to their preferred contact.
Some prefer that you talk to some other knowledgeable person,
as given their position, they may not be up on the issues you’re
dealing with.
Capture their attention with a “hook.” Everyone, especially
people whose time is limited, needs to know WIIFM—“What’s
in it for me?” So start by hooking them with something they care
about.
“This project means a lot to your sales goals, so I need to make
sure I have all the information I need from you to make it a
great success.”
“Your input is essential. With your research expertise, we can
make this project succeed.”“I want to make sure I completely understand your
expectations so this project delivers the value you’re looking
for.”
Briefly explain what you need and why, so you don’t waste their
time. “Dr. Venda, because we’re trying to speed up our drug￾development process, we need you to share with us your
experience fast-tracking drug projects—specifically the 5-FL
project and the 6-SV project.”
Follow up. Don’t give up—call, email, chat. Don’t leave them
hanging. Keep them in the loop as the project progresses.
Balance courage with consideration to meet your needs and
theirs. Your stakeholders are not out to sabotage your project—
they’re just busy. So have the courage to step up, let them know
the value of the time you’re asking for, and be prepared to ask a
few vital questions. And have the consideration to put on a pair
of very big ears and listen deeply. And be sensitive to the
demands on their time.
Don’t assume you already know what your stakeholders want. If you’re
assigned to run a project to “speed up that process,” you need to ask, “Why,
by how much, by when, who can help, and who decides what’s fast
enough?” You might also need to ask, “What’s the expected return on
investment? What’s the net present value of the investment?” Without clear
answers, you’re heading off blindfolded in a general direction that takes you
in circles.
Your goal is to understand the unique perspectives and desired results of
each key stakeholder before you start the project.
Use the following Project Scope Statement to guide your interviews.
TOOL: PROJECT SCOPE STATEMENT
Project Name:Project Purpose Feedback Loops
Why are we doing this project? Who needs to provide feedback?
When and how?
Description People Resources
How would you describe this
project?
Who are the key team members?
Desired Results Priorities
What specific outcomes must we
achieve to be successful?
How would you prioritize these constraints? (1
= most important)
Time: Quality: Budget:
Time
When is the project due?
Quality
What does “done” look like? How will we
know?
Budget
What is the budget?
Exclusions Acceptance Criteria
What is out of the project’s scope and should
NOT be included?
Who needs to sign off on the project—and
when?
You will want to ask the questions in this tool of all your key
stakeholders.Let’s look briefly at each part of this tool, using the example of Kimani,
who leads a team of teachers in an urban school in the United States.
Project Purpose
“Why are we doing this project?”
The purpose statement should tap into the organization’s goals. For
example, Kimani’s school struggles with stagnant reading scores, so reading
improvement is its strategic priority. (Note that the tool contains a line item
for Project Purpose and another for Desired Results. What is the difference
between them? We’ll see.)
Description
“How would you describe this project?”
Here you answer the how, what, and when of the project. “What part of
the school day will be for reading instruction? What methods will we use?
What materials will be required? How will we measure individual
improvement? How will we celebrate achievements? Who can help?” And
so forth.
Desired Results
“What specific outcomes must we achieve to be successful?”
Outcomes should be described as specifically as possible and link to a
strategic priority: “A measurable increase in reading fluency and
comprehension.” How will you measure those things? When will you be
able to tell you’ve achieved the outcomes?
For example:
“Raise aggregate reading scores by three levels per term.”
“Have 60 percent of students reach grade-level competency in
reading by end of school year (currently only 47 percent).”“Increase proficiency scores by 20 percent by end of school
year.”
Exclusions
“What is out of the project’s scope and should NOT be included?”
A great way to avoid the famous “scope creep” is to decide what you
should not include in the project, at least initially. For example, Kimani’s
team chooses not to participate in certain testing schemes promoted by
outside interest groups. Knowing the exclusions saves you time, money, and
headaches over work you don’t need to do or that may not provide value.
Feedback Loops
“Who needs to provide feedback? When and how?”
Feedback loops enable you to keep moving toward creating value. Good
feedback helps you keep your initial commitments and be agile (within
reason) so you can make needed corrections or enhancements to the
project’s value along the way. This is very different from scope creep.
For example, Kimani’s stakeholders include her own team members, the
school administration, the district reading resource officer, the school’s
community council (representing parents), and a curriculum provider.
Ask stakeholders, “What do you need to know and when as the project
goes forward?” Also tell stakeholders, “Here’s what I need to know and
when.” Get clear on how to get and give feedback—email, text, phone,
videoconference, whatever. Account for time-zone differences. For
example:
“Taunee: Feedback on curriculum choices per the project
schedule. (Interface with the textbook provider on the West
Coast.)”
“Irene: Feedback on program activities and results to the
community council each week.”“Ren: Feedback on individual outliers—ongoing weekly team
meetings.”
People Resources
“Who are the key team members?”
When you have the luxury of choosing some, or all, of your team
members, think beyond the obvious—whether they have the right technical
skills. As we’ve emphasized before, you’ll make better progress with
people who practice the Five Foundational Behaviors.
If you can, choose good listeners who talk straight. Choose people you
trust to be responsible and accountable for their work. Choose people who
behave respectfully toward others. Often, these human skills count more
toward project success than technical skills.
For an organization-wide project, you might want cross-functional team
members: “Abdul from marketing, Rob from finance, Chauntel from sales.”
Obviously, you can’t always choose your team members. In Kimani’s
case, she works with the teachers who are on-site regardless of their level of
enthusiasm for the project. But remember, your own commitment to the
Five Foundational Behaviors shouldn’t change based on the makeup of your
team, whether team members were your first choice or not. You want a
team that feels included, respected, and openly invited to volunteer their
best efforts to make the project a success. You’ll be surprised how even
less-thanenthused team members perk up when they feel respected and
included.
Priorities
“How would you prioritize these constraints?”
Time: The project must start “no earlier than” and finish “no
later than.”
Quality: The degree of compliance to quality standards in two
areas: process and product. Are you following a quality project
management process? (If you stick with this book, you will!)And will your final deliverable meet stakeholders’
requirements? Will it have the benefits and features they’re
asking for? (Quality is subjective—the stakeholders decide
what it is.)
Budget: The approved estimate of costs.
Are we most concerned about finishing on time or doing the job with
quality? Or is the budget most important?
These constraints are like threads in a spider’s web. If you pull on one
thread, you shake up the whole web. If quality is most important, it will
affect the budget and time involved. If time is of the essence, you might
have to downplay quality and spend more on budget. And so forth.
If your project is to paint your apartment, you’ll inevitably face
constraints:
Time: “I’ve only got one weekend.”
Quality: “I’d like to use one color of oil paint on the walls and
another color on the molding.”
Budget: “I’ve set aside a hundred dollars for the project.”
Taken together, these constraints may or may not be reasonable. For
example, oil paint requires more careful application and more complicated
cleanup than latex. As for the budget, latex paint is generally about half as
costly as oil paint. You might not be able to afford the different kinds of oil
paint you want.
So you’ll prioritize. Given the constraints of time and budget, you might
have to settle for a little less quality—only one color of less expensive
paint. If you really want high quality, you’ll need to spend more and take
longer.
Make sure you ask key stakeholders to rank the three constraints and
explain their ranking.
One of our colleagues tells this story:
On Tuesday morning the marketing director stopped me in the hall. “I’ve been looking for you,” she
said. “I’ve got a quick project and I need your help.”I learned she wanted a new podcast ready for a product rollout that weekend. She continued,
“Here’s what I need from you: a really cool podcast script so I can record it Thursday night before
the rollout. I want to tell people about all the features on the new product. Also, a nice podcast cover
and an announcement so our customers will know it’s coming.”
I asked, “So how much do we have to spend on this project, and who in product development can
help me with the content?”
“Take it out of your discretionary budget. And you need to stay away from the product￾development people—they’re up to their necks trying to get the product ready.”
I sensed a big whammy in the air. None of this boded well for me. Before I learned project
management skills, I would have said okay, walked back to my desk, and promptly pulled my hair
out. Instead, I wouldn’t let her go until I’d talked her through the priorities.
“Which is most important? A cool, well-informed script; using only the two hundred I have left
in my budget; or getting it all done by Thursday?”
She answered like a typical executive: “All of it!”
So I asked the questions a different way. “I know it’s all important, but let’s put it this way. Is
publishing the podcast before the rollout the most important thing? Couldn’t we take the time to do it
really well and just follow the communication plan we already set up? We could put a great podcast
out next week, but Thursday is really pushing it.”
She thought for a minute. “No,” she said. “We need the impact of a podcast before Saturday.”
“Okay, so having the script ready by Thursday is the most important priority?”
“Yes.”
“Great, that’s helpful,” I continued. “With no access to the developers, I don’t know the latest
flash and sizzle about the product. Would you settle for a script that just generalizes about the product
without getting into all the details?”
“I guess that would be all right. I can add some detail myself. I just don’t want you interrupting
the developers right now.”
“Okay, I think I can make this happen. But a high-quality cover requires art and a budget bigger
than a couple of hundred. Especially if you want it overnight. I can’t promise I can deliver what you
want without the money and the help.”
“How much and who do you need?”
“I’ll let you know if you’ll give me a couple of hours,” I said.
“Okay.”
I smiled as she walked away.
Why did our colleague smile?
Because by clarifying expectations and prioritizing the list of
constraints, she was able to negotiate a bigger budget and more resources.
Instead of pulling her hair out, she has a good chance of getting the results
her boss wants and keeping her hair.
Acceptance Criteria
“Who needs to sign off on the project—and when?”For example, if the boss needs a high-quality podcast cover, somebody
in the graphics department will have to create the image. That probably
means you need sign-off from the graphics manager. You might also want
the marketing director to sign off on the podcast script—to be sure you get
the messaging right.
By now you can see why key stakeholder interviews are so important.
Remember that value is in the eye of the key stakeholder—if you don’t tie
down what that value is, you might do a bang-up job on a project that’s
worthless.
How to Ask Questions
When you’re asking questions, go from general to specific so you can get as
precise a picture as possible of the vision in the key stakeholders’ minds.
Filter your questions through a funnel like this:
Open questions get at the big picture: “How do you define
success on this project?”
Detailed questions drill down to leaner information: “Could
you tell me more about what that means to you or what it
would look like?”
Closed questions are the key to success: “So here is what I hear
you saying . . . Did I get that exactly right?”Use the funnel questions to tie down the value of your project. If you
don’t, you’ll get answers that are too general (“I need a cool podcast
script”). Ask the detailed questions to get past the over-general to the
specific (“What do you mean by a ‘cool’ script?” “How long should it be?”
“Do you want an interview format?”).
The closed questions give you a clear picture of what the stakeholder
really wants (“Okay, I heard you say it should be no more than fifteen
minutes. An interview format would be more interesting than just a talking
head. And ‘cool’ means full of flash and sizzle, like introductory music and
a couple of customer endorsements. Have I got it right?”).
Sometimes you won’t be able to interview key stakeholders individually
and you’ll meet with a group of them. Group interviews can work well. You
get a lot more input faster. You might get better insights as people hear each
other’s viewpoints and build on each other’s ideas (that’s called synergy).
But group interviews can go wrong if everyone’s trying to talk at once
and take over the agenda. So here are some tips for group interviews:
Get as many stakeholders together as you can in one room or
online.
Set a strict time limit. Promise to stop at the set time and keep
your promise.
Set a ground rule that no one can interrupt anyone else. The
purpose of the meeting is to hear each other out.
Give each person only a few minutes to answer your questions.
Don’t argue with anybody. Ask a question only if you need
clarification. Then thank the contributor and move on.
Record the meeting and distribute the results to all
stakeholders.
It might be a good idea to post the Five Foundational Behaviors as
ground rules for the meeting.
If you follow these tips, you’ll get maximum information in minimal
time.Keep in mind that projects attract controversy. Stakeholders may
disagree with each other. They’ll question the approach you’re taking, costs,
resources, timing—even the value of doing the project at all. But not in this
group interview setting.
Make sure they understand they are there to listen respectfully to
everyone. You can discuss issues later by appointment (your project
management app might feature a function for tracking those issues).
Don’t be surprised if your questions lead to a project different from the
one you had in mind. You might see the project in a new light. Stakeholders
will be grateful that you cleared things up.
Most important, you’ll glean from stakeholders what the true value of
the project is. As a result, the project will bring a good return on
investment, and your influence will grow as a contributor to organizational
success.
DOCUMENT THE PROJECT SCOPE
The outcome of your interviews should be a Project Scope Statement.
According to PMBOK, the Project Scope Statement defines the main
elements of the project, that is, “the work performed to deliver a product,
service, or result with the specified features and functions.”24 The following
sample defines the scope of Kimani’s project to improve student reading
skills: TOOL: KEY STAKEHOLDER INTERVIEWS
Project Name: Grade-Level Reading Project
Project Purpose Feedback Loops
Why are we doing this project? Who needs to provide feedback? When and
how?
Our school struggles with stagnant reading
scores. 53 percent of our students are reading
below grade level, and only 19 percent are
proficient. So reading improvement is our top
strategic priority.
Our team members, principal and vice
principal, district reading resource officer,
school’s community council (representing
parents), and our curriculum provider Reading
Ring.
Description People ResourcesHow would you describe this project?
Increase guided reading to 45 minutes/day
and independent reading to 45
minutes/day.
Use Reading Ring phonics and total
physical response method and obtain RR
materials for each student.
Use RR test materials to gauge progress.
Celebrate achievements with Rocket to
Rainbow tags.
Recruit reading volunteers from
community council.
Who are the key team members?
Kimani, project lead
Taunee, content expert on Reading Ring
curriculum
Irene, community council representative
Ren, special education
Alzo, first-grade rep
Fleur, second-grade rep
Jim, third-grade rep
Desired Results Priorities
What specific outcomes must we achieve to be
successful?
A measurable increase in reading fluency and
comprehension.
Raise aggregate reading scores by three
levels per term.
Have 60 percent of students reach grade￾level competency in reading by end of
school year (currently only 47 percent).
Increase proficiency scores by 20 percent
by end of school year.
How would you prioritize these constraints? (1
= most important)
Time: 1 Quality: 2 Budget: 3 Students are
measurably lagging in reading competency by
one year. It’s critical to reach grade level by
the end of this school year.
Time
When is the project due? End of school year.
Quality
What does “done” look like? How will we
know?
“Done” when desired results are achieved.
Budget
What is the budget? Three-year
subscription/student = $61 plus incidentals.
Total: $15,000.
Exclusions Acceptance Criteria
What is out of the project’s scope and should
NOT be included?
Omit K-3 testing option promoted by state
school office.
Who needs to sign off, on what, and when?
Teacher team to sign off on curriculum and
approach by July 20. Administrator, specialist,and community council to sign off by August
20.
Let’s look at each part of this sample Project Scope Statement. The “Not
This” column contains typical responses that are not helpful to the project
team. The “This” column features answers that are more detailed and
specific.
NOT THIS THIS
Project Purpose We are doing this
project because our
students need to read
better.
Our school struggles with stagnant reading
scores. 53 percent of our students are reading
below grade level, and only 19 percent are
proficient. So reading improvement is our top
strategic priority.
Description Spend more time on
reading and try out
new ideas.
We will increase guided and independent
reading time to 45 minutes/day each and
change our instruction approach using the
Reading Ring method and materials from
Curious Curriculum Co.
Desired Results Beat last year’s
reading numbers.
Raise aggregate reading scores by three
levels per term.
Have 60 percent of students reach grade￾level competency in reading by end of
school year (currently only 47 percent).
Increase proficiency scores by 20 percent
by end of school year.
Exclusions No outside tests. Not to include K–3 reading tests promoted by
the district.
Feedback Loops Administrators. Administrators, district reading specialist, and
community council.
People Resources Faculty members. 1st–3rd grade teachers, principal, resource
specialists, volunteer parents.
Priorities Timing. Students are measurably lagging in reading
competency by one year. It’s critical to reach
grade level by the end of this school year.Acceptance Criteria Faculty and
administrators.
Teacher team to sign off on curriculum and
approach by July 20. Administrator and
community council to sign off by August 20.
What are the advantages of documenting the project scope in this way?
The document provides a “compass” for getting where you need to go.
Stephen R. Covey said, “We are more in need of a compass than a road
map. We often don’t know what the terrain ahead will be like or what we
will need to go through it; much will depend on our judgment at the time.
But a compass will always give us direction.”25
The scope statement gives you the direction you need without binding
you to too many details. Stakeholders can see in one place the why, what,
when, and how of the project.
You might hold a project kickoff meeting where you can review the
document with key stakeholders. Their signatures on the scope statement
represent consensus. Once they sign off, you have at least some leverage for
holding them to their commitments. This leverage can be very useful to an
unofficial project manager, especially if stakeholders start to change their
minds about the project scope.
The scope statement does not necessarily tie down exactly what the
project is or is not. You will want the clearest possible Project Scope
Statement up front, but you’ll also want to be open to feedback and value￾added changes along the life of the project. Although it isn’t sacred, the
Project Scope Statement keeps people honest about the project. Up front,
people tend to be starry-eyed and impractical about what this magnificent
project can achieve. “During the magical early stages of the project,” says
Seth Godin, “we envision not just perfect execution but limitless features.
At this stage, every project needs a truth teller.”26
As project manager, you need to be the “truth teller.” The Project Scope
Statement reduces the risk that the project becomes the stakeholders’ never￾ending wish list and you become the genie who’s supposed to grant all their
wishes.
CURING A HEADACHEHedda Rising loved the brain. In high school she saw a video about brain
anatomy and was fascinated. At university she got her degree in biology
and then an advanced degree in brain science.
As an intern at the European Medicines Agency (EMA) in Amsterdam,
she learned a lot about how drugs work on the brain, and then got her job at
Lettal.
Restless after a few years of testing brain tissue samples, she applied for
a promotion. Given her experience in Amsterdam, the Lettal executives
made her assistant director of regulatory affairs and then director.
But now she would like nothing better than to disappear back into the
lab. Suddenly she had two jobs—policing the research department and this
new project. “Shorten the approval time,” Tesman demanded. And she
knew there wouldn’t be any letup on either job.
With the help of her assistant, Berta, she brainstormed a list of project
stakeholders and then narrowed it down to the key stakeholders: Tesman, of
course; the board of directors; the marketing director; a financial analyst;
the legal department; and some senior researchers. Reluctantly, she included
Dr. Brack, the crisp, no-nonsense head of research.
Hedda conducted a few one-on-one interviews but eventually had to
hold a group interview online with some who couldn’t join otherwise. After
explaining the Five Foundational Behaviors, she asked each stakeholder to
answer her questions in turn. “How do you see the problem? What is it
costing us? What’s causing the problem? What do you think we should do
about it? What is a reasonable outcome? Who should be on the project
team?”
Things went well until it was Dr. Brack’s turn. A brilliant scientist, he
was famous for speaking his mind and annoying people in the process. “I
don’t know why we are even talking about this,” he said. “Science dictates
how we develop drugs, not rules and regulations made up by some
bureaucrat. We have to keep testing the migraine compound until we’re sure
it works; that’s reality. Developing a new drug takes just as long as it takes.
You can’t ‘speed up’ science!”
Hedda sensed that the big whammy was about to get her, and she
wished she had the migraine pill right now. She’d always tried to avoid Dr.
Brack because his ego filled any room he entered. But she respected the
ground rules and merely said, “Thank you, Dr. Brack. Next?”But the issue touched off the other researchers. Taking their cue from
Dr. Brack, the others got defensive, too. One spoke up and said she was
tired of being blamed for things beyond her control, she was already
working ninety-hour weeks, and she couldn’t work any harder or faster.
Another researcher was skeptical about how much faster other drug
companies were: “I don’t trust their processes. They’re all crooks.” Eilert, a
medical writer, claimed that the organization just wanted to make more
money faster and didn’t care about the process.
Hedda could sense the big whammy hanging over her head. But she
spoke up last. “Look, I know science can’t be rushed. But if we’re always
slow to market, we soon won’t even be in the market. Tesman knows that,
and so do you all. I believe we can do better. People—suffering people—
need our help now, and if we can give it to them earlier than we have done
in the past, they’ll get better sooner, and we’ll feel better about ourselves.”
After that, the conference was quiet. Then Tesman congratulated Hedda
on her work with the key stakeholders. “Hedda has a very good point. It’s
not just a question of profits. It’s about easing pain and suffering.”
Hedda had her charter for the project. Most stakeholders hadn’t known
that their rate of approvals was slowing down. The financial analyst shared
the grim results of falling behind in the market. The researchers were
defensive, but because of the ground rules, they could get most of their
concerns off their chests without sparking a big argument.
Most important, Hedda reminded them that doing great things for
patients was their reason for being.
Hedda now had enough information to draft a scope statement. It looked
like the following: TOOL: PROJECT SCOPE STATEMENT
Project Name: Time-to-Market Improvement
Project Purpose Feedback Loops
Why are we doing this project?
Better-quality submissions can
benefit patients and the firm alike:
Launching products more quickly
can shorten waiting times for life￾Who needs to provide feedback? When and
how?
Monthly stakeholder update
meetings to ensure continued
value.enhancing therapies and generate
more days of peak sales. Each
month we are not in the market can
cost us millions.
Description People Resources
How would you describe this project?
We will create a new
comprehensive system for
submitting applications earlier and
with better quality.
Who are the key team members?
Joren, medical writer
Eilert, medical writer
Thea, legal counsel
Dr. Brack, research director
Jorge, project assistant
Desired Results Priorities
What specific outcomes must we achieve to be
successful?
Average product approval time 67
percent faster—from twenty-two
months to seven months—after two
fiscal years. 18 million in increased
revenues due to increased average
time in market.
How would you prioritize these constraints? (1
= most important)
Time: 2 Quality: 1 Budget: 3
Time
When is the project due?
Two fiscal years
Quality
What does “done” look like? How will we
know?
Approvals at least as rapid as our
key competitors’ approvals
Budget
What is the budget?
2 million
Exclusions Acceptance CriteriaWhat is out of the project’s scope and should
NOT be included?
Clinical-trial protocols must
remain the same. No changes
allowed in effectiveness and safety
standards.
Who needs to sign off on the project—and
when?
Board of directors and CFO to sign
off on project plan by April 30.
Hedda distributed the scope statement draft to all stakeholders. People
started talking, sharing ideas, and making suggestions. A few things
changed, but the scope of the project remained roughly the same. A few
days later they all signed the second draft, and even the touchy Dr. Brack
agreed that the scope was reasonable.
Imagine what would have happened if Hedda hadn’t followed the
simple steps of the scoping process. Her only authority would be a verbal
request from the CEO. She’d be getting little or no support from key people
with priorities of their own. She wouldn’t know if the project made sense
financially or how much budget she needed. She wouldn’t even know what
the goal really was or how much time she had to achieve it.
Can you see her asking the board of directors for 2 million for a project
without a clear goal?
Can you see her a few months from now trying to keep a group of busy
professionals working on a goal they didn’t know about and had no input
on?
Can you see her making no difference at all after two fiscal years?
Like a blindfolded person trying to walk a straight line, she would most
likely end up circling right back where she started.
But by following the scoping process, Hedda has the equivalent of a
compass that gives her direction. The scope statement provides clear shared
expectations for the project, and the built-in feedback loops allow for
needed adjustments along the way. There are no guarantees in project work,
but now Hedda’s chances of getting it right have gone way up. No big
whammy for her.APPLICATION CHALLENGE: KEY STAKEHOLDER
INTERVIEW
Use the following blank Key Stakeholder Interview form to interview a key
stakeholder on your project.
TOOL: KEY STAKEHOLDER INTERVIEWS
Project Name:
Project Purpose Feedback Loops
Why are we doing this project? Who needs to provide feedback?
When and how?
Description People Resources
How would you describe this
project?
Who are the key team members?
Desired Results Priorities
What specific outcomes must we achieve to be
successful?
How would you prioritize these constraints? (1
= most important)
Time: Quality: Budget:Time
When is the project due?
Quality
What does “done” look like? How will we
know?
Budget
What is the budget?
Exclusions Acceptance Criteria
What is out of the project’s scope
and should NOT be included?
Who needs to sign off, on what,
and when?
TO SUM UP
In short, the first step in project management is scoping, which means getting as much
information about the project as possible as early as possible from as many key stakeholders
as possible. By scoping, you come to a clear and shared understanding of the purpose and
priorities you are serving with your project.
To scope properly, brainstorm a list of all the stakeholders. Then use your Key
Stakeholder Interview tool and your Question Funnel to discover their priorities. Document
everything in your Project Scope Statement and get written approvals.
CHECK YOUR LEARNINGExplain the principle of frontloading. What is the value
of frontloading?
Can you define what “success” means for your project?
Describe how to conduct an effective group
stakeholder interview.
How do you use the Question Funnel to get clear on
exactly what stakeholders want?
What are the benefits of the Project Scope Statement?O
CHAPTER 4
PLANNING THE PROJECT
The Goal: “Create a clear map for smart decision-making.”
LIVIA WAS THE HUMAN RESOURCES director in a medium-sized
American company, and she had a serious problem.
The employees were leaving.
Not just a few, but a lot of them. It felt like a wave crashing on the
beach. She was pretty sure she knew why.
The priorities of her colleagues had changed. The economic turbulence
of the age had affected them. Instead of sacrificing their whole waking lives
to the firm, most of them wanted more time for their families, more time forrenewal—just more time for themselves. The old culture put the
organization first. The new culture wanted a different life.
Olivia also knew that the executive team didn’t like this new culture.
They resisted people who wanted to work from home. The suspicious C￾suite figured the employees were taking more and more advantage of them
—they wanted the employees in the office where they could keep an eye on
them. So top talent was floating toward the exits.
In Olivia’s organization, there was really no reason most people
couldn’t work at home. So long as they did good work, did it matter where
they did it? She sympathized but wasn’t sure how to solve the problem.
Meanwhile, she watched the turnover rate go up, along with the ruinous
cost of trying to replace key people.
Then she decided to try the project management approach.
Using the Key Stakeholder Interview tool, she interviewed her key
stakeholders—the executive team—individually about the problem. “At this
rate, we will have 50 percent turnover in our development group this year,”
she said. “Replacing them will cost $12 million. What do you think we
should do about this?”
“We need to do something to stop it!” the CEO said.
“Would you like me to propose a project for keeping our good people
instead of watching them leave us?”
“Absolutely!” the CEO said.
Now she had a project.
In scoping the project, Olivia identified the key stakeholders and
interviewed them carefully. She helped the CEO set his priorities and didn’t
stop interviewing until she was clear about everyone’s thinking. Then she
delivered a detailed scope statement signed by all the key stakeholders.
Basically, they decided to move to a hybrid work system where
employees would work where they could do their best work—at home, at
the office, or somewhere else. They would have a lot more flexibility to
balance work with other priorities.
Now it was time to plan the project.
Like a compass, the Project Scope Statement tells you what direction to
go. Like a road map, the project plan tells you how to get there.
Project planning mostly involves scheduling activities and assigning
resources. According to PMBOK, the plan document also “identifies thestrategies and actions required to promote productive involvement of
stakeholders in project decision-making and execution.”27 So the plan is
flexible. You take a “rolling wave” approach to planning. According to
project leadership expert Alexander Laufer, “Recognizing that firm
commitments cannot be made on the basis of volatile information, you
develop plans in waves as the project unfolds and information becomes
more reliable.”28 In other words, tests and reviews and feedback over time
might and probably will mean changing the plan.
In this chapter you’ll find out how to create a flexible project plan so
everyone knows what to do. There are two steps:
Build a risk strategy.
Create a project schedule.
BUILD A RISK STRATEGY
Are you familiar with Murphy? We all run into him from time to time,
especially when we least expect it. According to Murphy’s Law, “Anything
that can go wrong, will.” It’s much better to plan for the “what-ifs” than to
deal with the pain of “if only.” You can keep the “what-ifs” to a minimum
by creating a risk-management strategy.
There are three steps to building a risk-management strategy:
1. Identify risks.
2. Prioritize risks.
3. Plan for risks.
Identify Risks
First, identify the risks to the project and then assess their impact. Do this
before you put together your project schedule.
List all the things you think could go wrong. Here’s a sample list of
some of the things that could cause problems with Olivia’s project:People working at home might feel isolated.
Data security could be at risk.
Useful collaboration might not happen.
Keeping people safe and healthy could become a problem.
Customer relationships might suffer.
People working away from the office might slack off.
People can burn out if they don’t put boundaries on their work.
Olivia could lose her mind.
Any of these risks could affect Olivia’s success. Finance, team strength,
changing priorities, technology, disruptive innovations, political issues—all
of these are potential sources of risk to any project.
Olivia started to feel a little overwhelmed when her team brainstormed
the list of risks. How could she ever manage any of these threats? And what
if they all became real?
Of course, there’s no way she can eliminate all risks to the project. But
not all risks deserve equal thought and attention, so Olivia’s next step was
to prioritize the risks.
Prioritize Risks
Here’s the formula for assessing risks to your project:
The following Risk Strategy tool helps you determine which risks
definitely need a plan and which ones are less likely to affect the project.
Either way, with a plan you’ll feel less stress.
How serious is the impact of each risk factor? On a scale of 1–5, would
it be “worst case” (5)? Relatively important (4)? Minimal impact (2)?
How probable is the risk factor? Is it going to happen (5)? Is there a
fifty-fifty chance that it will happen (3)? Is it unlikely to happen (1)?Olivia gave each risk factor an impact and probability score. Then she
multiplied the scores for each factor.
TOOL: RISK STRATEGY
Olivia figured that customers would probably get lost in this shuffle if
their contacts at the organization were all over the place. That would create
a big mess.
Another big problem: People working remotely would be connecting
personal devices to the organization from all kinds of places. How could the
company ensure that its data would stay completely secure?
How well do people work in isolation? Working alone most of the time
can make people feel cut off from their friends at work and from theorganization. If people didn’t collaborate like they used to, what would
happen to creativity and productivity?
Plan for Risks
For the risks she rated 12 and higher, Olivia needed to plan how to TAME
them.
TAME is an acronym for the four options you have for managing risk:
Transfer: Shift the risk to a third party.
Accept: Acknowledge the risk and deal with it if it occurs.
Mitigate: Lessen the risk by reducing its probability and/or
impact.
Eliminate: Remove the risk.
For every risk scoring 12 or above, you need a strategy to handle it.
Olivia thought through her options for TAMEing the isolation risk. A
little research showed that demographics make a difference. Older
employees much preferred working from home, while those who were
younger than twenty-five wanted to be at the office. So she decided to
MITIGATE the risk by surveying employees and helping individuals plan
their work in keeping with their preferences.
She figured that the implications for data security were too complex for
her to handle. Nobody inside the IT department felt very confident about it,
either. So she decided to TRANSFER the risk by hiring a consultant to
advise the IT staff.
Finally, the company risked riling up customers or suppliers who
wouldn’t be able to find the people they wanted to talk to. They would get
lost in the “please hold” maze. To ELIMINATE the risk of exasperating
customers, Olivia recommended reconfiguring the entire customer-contact
system.
So Olivia created the following risk-management plan. She assigned
each strategy to a team member who would own it and account for it.TOOL: RISK-MANAGEMENT PLAN
Like Olivia, you won’t be able to eliminate all risk, but you can TAME
most high-level risks with a good risk-management plan. At the same time,
resolve to keep an eye on the lower-level risks to make sure they stay below
12 on the scale and don’t rise up to overwhelm you.
Communicate your risk-management plan to key stakeholders. Respect
for them means they should know what the high-scoring risks are. If the
risk of failure is great, you’re obligated to communicate it to them.
Communication about risk increases your chance of success. When all
stakeholders and team members know the plan, you can all pull together to
TAME the risks.
CREATE A PROJECT SCHEDULE
Once you’ve planned how to manage risk, you can create the project
schedule. Just as GPS (Global Positioning System) helps you navigate
accurately to a new destination, a project schedule shows you where you’regoing and how to get there, and allows you to adapt smoothly as things
change—which they will.
The purpose of creating a project schedule is to arrive at the “critical
path,” which is the longest sequence of activities that must start and end on
time and be done with quality. It is your most strategic instrument for
managing the project.
If you know the critical path, you can control the project like a captain
controls a ship—you know what needs to be done, by whom, and by when.
If anything on the critical path is late, the whole project will be late.
Anything done poorly on the critical path jeopardizes the budget and quality
of the project outcome.
When you create a project schedule, the critical path is what you build
toward. In a finished project schedule, the critical path is represented by the
dark-gray line.
TOOL: PROJECT SCHEDULEThere are many software or online programs that can automatically
create the schedule and the critical path for you, which can make your life a
lot easier and raise the probability of success. There’s an explosion of apps
out there to help you build a schedule. Some are expensive and
sophisticated, and are more suited to the professional project manager;
those would probably frustrate you and slow you down because of the long
learning curve required to use them.
Other project management apps are cheaper and less demanding.
Because that territory is constantly changing, we won’t be recommending
particular products, but project management programs should feature at
least these few basics:
A project schedule that spells out who is to do what by when.
Project tools or templates like the ones in this book.
Secure file sharing so team members and key stakeholders can
share information.
Try a couple out and sample their benefits. Once you clearly understand
the steps required to build a project schedule, you’ll gain the confidence to
give project software or an online program a try.
Here are the steps you take to create the project schedule and arrive at
the critical path:
1. Develop the Work Breakdown Structure (WBS).
2. Sequence activities.
3. Identify and assign people to each activity.
4. Estimate the duration of each activity.
5. Identify the critical path.
Project Schedule Step 1. Develop the Work Breakdown Structure
(WBS).The Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) is a list of all the things that go into
making the project a success.
Those “things” are called deliverables. What is a deliverable? It’s not a
task but a product of some kind. For example, there’s a difference between
“buy a laptop” and a “laptop.” One is a verb and the other is a noun. A
deliverable is always a noun. Once you’ve decided that a laptop is a
deliverable, you can assign someone to deliver it.
When you start the WBS, you might not know all the deliverables that
go into your project. So get together and brainstorm.
Brainstorm with the project team as well as any other stakeholders you
can get to join you. We strongly recommend including customers and
suppliers if appropriate so you can get their perspectives as well. Remember
the principle of frontloading: Get as much information from as many people
as possible as early as possible. Frontloading prevents a lot of heartburn
down the road because you cover more ground early and anticipate risks
right up front.
We like to brainstorm using a mind map. It allows you to come up with
ideas without worrying about putting them in order.
TOOL: MIND MAPSThe name of the project goes in the center. From there, you draw lines
out to the deliverables that you come up with in your brainstorm. On the
next page is Olivia’s mind map for transitioning her organization to a hybrid
workspace model. Her team must deliver research on best practices,
technology solutions, and a new plan for workspace, along with a budget
for the transition.Once you’ve thought of all your deliverables, brainstorm the
components of each deliverable. A component is a deliverable that enables
a higher-level deliverable. Let’s take one of the deliverables above: budget.
What are the components?
For example, you can break down the budget deliverable into these
components:To create the budget, you add together these typical components.
Multiply work hours for each staff member and add up their compensation.
Add the costs of equipment and services you need to purchase from outside
sources. Include travel and training costs. When you’ve summed all that up,
add 10 percent for contingencies.
Here’s a Work Breakdown Structure for Olivia’s transition-to-hybrid
project:
With your deliverables and components on the map, you are ready to
brainstorm the activities associated with each. Here is a tip: Start each
activity with a verb (create, do, develop, survey, and so on). Each activity is
an action you will take to create the deliverable. Keep brainstorming all theactions you’ll have to take to complete each deliverable. Here is an
example:
One big issue: How can the company help workers succeed off-site as
well as in the office? There are so many questions. Olivia decided on three
deliverables:
A needs analysis of all workers to define their best working
location and conditions.
A decision on how to collaborate in a hybrid environment.
A plan for repurposing the organization’s current block of
offices to save on rent and provide workspace for remaining
people and activities.
You can do mind mapping in a live meeting, or you can do it remotely.
There are dozens of digital mind-mapping programs to choose from, as wellas software that lets you brainstorm in lists or on virtual sticky notes. Many
project management apps feature mind mapping for this purpose.
The nice thing about mind maps is that your deliverables are grouped
topically. But listing and sticky-note software also lets you group and
arrange notes in categories.
No matter which method you use, make sure you follow the
brainstorming guidelines:
Go quickly.
Go for quantity.
Don’t judge ideas.
Build on the ideas of others.
APPLICATION CHALLENGE: WORK BREAKDOWN
STRUCTURE
Start a Work Breakdown Structure for your own project:
1. Brainstorm the project’s high-end deliverables.
2. Choose one deliverable and add components.
3. Choose one component and add activities.
Project Schedule Step 2. Sequence Activities.
Some activities can happen at the same time. Others are dependent on other
activities.
There are different types of dependencies. You will most often use the
Finish-to-Start dependency, where one activity must be finished before
another can start. You put those activities in the “Predecessor” column of
your WBS. For example, developing the plan must come before executing
the plan.“Start-to-Finish”
You might need to define other dependencies, such as Start-to-Start
activities that overlap. In this dependency, the start of one task triggers the
start of another. For example, one person can be doing research on
repurposing Olivia’s workspace while another is researching best practices
for collaboration in a hybrid work model.
“Start-to-Start”
Some activities can’t be finished until others are finished: This is a
Finish-to-Finish dependency. For example, a new drug trial can’t be
finished until the last patient has been visited and evaluated.
“Finish-to-Finish”Project Schedule Step 3. Identify and Assign People to Each
Activity.
Now that you know what needs to be done, who’s going to do it?
“THE GOAL DEFINES THE TEAM”
The principle here is “the goal defines the team,” not the other way around.
If you have the luxury of choosing your project team, recruit people who
can clearly contribute to your project—and since every project is unique,
your team might change from project to project.
When you do have the option to choose your team, a common mistake
is to assign whoever is available to the team instead of finding people with
the right values and skillsets. Remember to be practical, too—it doesn’t hurt
to have a few influential people on the team to give your project some
cachet in the organization.
In Hedda’s case, Lettal Pharmaceuticals abounded in talent, and she had
her pick of team members because her CEO, Tesman, was behind her. The
problem was that no one wanted to work on a goal to “speed up regulatory
approvals.” Most of Hedda’s colleagues were scientists who had no interest
in the project. Frankly, she wasn’t too thrilled about it, either.
Filling in her WBS, Hedda soon found herself at a loss. Just about
everyone she asked to join the team turned her down. Of course, her
assistant, Berta, would do anything she was asked to do and was a lifesaver.
But who else could she count on?
Tesman started throwing names at her. But Hedda realized that these
were just people who were available, not the best people for the job.She put off for a week talking to the thorny Dr. Brack. He was the best
person for the job by far, as he was the most productive and experienced
researcher in the organization—and the most respected. And although he
had objected to the whole project in the beginning, he knew it was needed.
If she could just get Dr. Brack on the team, others would follow.
She expected him to refuse, too, but to her surprise he was willing. “I
guess it is time to shake things up here,” he said. “Honestly, I didn’t realize
until our meeting that we were so far behind the market. Yes, I’ll do my best
for you.”
With Dr. Brack on board, several of his associates volunteered as well.
She recruited the firm’s two medical writers, Joren and Eilert. They had
written all the firm’s drug applications and knew the process well. They
were also full of ideas for speeding up the process. Thea, the organization’s
counsel, agreed to help with the legal issues around getting faster approvals.
Although a little shy and reserved, Thea had masterful knowledge of the
regulations. And Tesman had assigned Rina, a crack finance person, to do
the budgeting and financial analysis.
Now Hedda had her core team.
“THIS CAN’T BE GOOD”
Olivia had an even tougher time recruiting her team, but not for lack of
interest in the project.
As she filled in her WBS, Olivia found it to be a tough task because
everyone in the organization was so strapped for time.
She made a list of all her team members’ skillsets and realized she still
had a few gaps.
“I’m going to add a few people to the team,” she told the CEO as they
passed in the hall.
“You just reminded me,” the CEO said, stopping and turning around. “I
need to talk to you about your team. Can we meet for ten minutes? Bring
your list of team members and the new people you want to add.”
“Okay,” Olivia said. This can’t be good, she thought.She had her tablet open as she met with the CEO and Maria, the HR
director.
“My team members are in the first column, and the second column is
the people I want to ask for. With this group, this project can work.”
“I see a couple of problems,” said the CEO. “We’ve got two emergency
projects going with data security. I’ve had to put Toby and Viola on them
full-time. Also, Maria’s got an ongoing personnel problem to solve, so
you’re going to have less access to her.” Maria looked apologetic.
“I’ve got more bad news, Olivia,” she said. “One of your requests,
Antonio, gave his notice last night. He told me he was just burned out.”
Olivia was angry and tempted to scream and quit in a huff. Nobody was
cooperating!
But then she remembered why she was doing this project in the first
place. Everyone was overwhelmed, not just her. “I can’t believe we’re
losing Antonio.”
“That is sad news,” said the CEO, turning to Olivia. “I know this is
frustrating, Olivia, and I’m sorry to take people away, but I have no choice.
Without them, the network will go down and we’ll be out of business for a
week.” Olivia could just feel the big whammy about to fall on her.
Fortunately, Maria had a few ideas for Olivia. “Look, I know you don’t
know my assistant, Drew, very well, and he takes some getting used to. But
he’s very conscientious, he knows our people, and you can count on him.
We can look at some other possibilities, too.”
“At this point, I’m open to anything.”
Maria was firm. “Olivia, you’ve frontloaded this project superbly.
You’ve scoped things so well and worked hard at getting approvals. We’re
not going to abandon you now.”
A half hour later, Olivia had a revised team.
Back at her workstation, she laughed when she caught sight of the Five
Foundational Behaviors posted on the wall. She had felt anger, frustration,
and overwhelm, but none of these feelings had gotten the better of her. She
looked at the behaviors again: “Listen first . . . demonstrate respect.”
Maybe I’m finally getting this, she thought, as she picked up her phone
to text Drew, her new team member.
Both Hedda’s and Olivia’s cases show that putting the team together is
not always going to go smoothly. A good project scope with buy-in fromkey stakeholders puts you in a position to get the people and resources you
need.
A clear WBS enables people to take on activities that make sense for
them. It also builds your informal authority with your team: You don’t
always need to be the one “assigning” tasks. The team should review the
WBS with you and, when possible, volunteer for assignments.
In keeping with the Five Foundational Behaviors, when team members
get to participate in the scheduling, they buy in more readily and stay
engaged.
Project Schedule Step 4. Estimate the Duration of Each Activity.
Now that your Work Breakdown Structure is in place and team assignments
have been made, the next step is to estimate how long each activity will
take. Then you’ll know what budget you need and what the actual schedule
looks like.
The principle here is that “work” and “duration” are two different
things.
Work is the amount of time it takes to do the task. Duration is the
amount of time it will take.
For instance, you might estimate that it will take sixteen hours to paint
the walls in an apartment, so you block out sixteen hours for it in your
project schedule. But your sixteen-hour block might be unrealistic—do you
really have sixteen straight hours?
Will you have other appointments? Online meetings? Family to care
for? Meals? Sleep?
Duration is the time needed to get the work done, accounting for
everything else you need to do in real life. You do what’s possible. You
might schedule the painting in four-hour shifts over four days, so the
duration of the activity is four days, not sixteen hours. Now you can
accurately schedule the activity into your plan.For example, finalizing Olivia’s transition-to-hybrid plan might take
only a few hours, but the duration is over a week. Why? Because it will
take that long for key stakeholders to review and vet the plan. Remember:
Time is one of the three constraints (in addition to quality and budget).
Unreasonable deadlines can sink a project and often do. Don’t try to be a
hero and schedule tasks so tightly that there is no “flex” in the schedule.
Provide a little breathing space.
Of course, you face the pressure from key stakeholders to “get it done—
now!” It helps to answer that pressure with “duration” rather than “work,”
so they get an accurate sense of how long the project will take.
If your project has a hard-and-fast deadline, work backward from that
date to fill in the schedule. Use the duration of activities to determine if the
work can be done in the time allotted.
Don’t promise to meet a deadline you know you can’t meet. Instead,
have the “priorities” conversation with stakeholders if the schedule looks
too tight. Your integrity is on the line, and that’s more important than
anything else.
Now, watch out.
Don’t make the duration of activities too long. You might create a
culture of procrastination on the team, with folks waiting until the last
minute to get their work done. In project management, we call it
Parkinson’s Law—“work takes exactly the amount of time allotted for it.”
For example, if you think painting the apartment will take four days, but
you add another four days “to play it safe,” count on it: It will take you
eight days. And you’ll probably be painting until midnight on the eighth
day.
So find the sweet spot when estimating the duration of a task. Here are
some suggestions for estimating duration:
Draw on your experience. You’ve done projects before, and
you know something about painting. Be realistic.
Ask someone who knows. People who have painted apartments
can give you useful estimates.
Use the PERT formula to figure out how long each activity will
take. Despite its imposing name, “Program Evaluation andReview Technique,” PERT is a cool tool that helps you cope
quickly with uncertainty.
TOOL: PERT
It’s a simple formula: o is the most optimistic duration, p is the most
pessimistic, and n stands for “normal” or “most likely.” In PERT, the
number 4 balances the common tendency to make unrealistically short
estimates of duration. The formula divides by 6 because there are six data
points: an optimistic point, a pessimistic point, and four mostlikely points.
But all you need to know is the formula.
Here’s how it works: Hedda figures that Rina, a financial whiz, can do a
cost/benefit analysis on her deliverable in a day. But given her workload,
Rina says it will take her at least a week (five days) or at worst three weeks
(fifteen business days) on the outside. So Rina’s PERT looks like this:
Which adds up to 36. Divide 36 by 6 and you get 6. So the estimated
duration of Rina’s activity is six days on the project schedule.
APPLICATION CHALLENGE: ESTIMATE DURATION OF
ACTIVITIES
Referring to your WBS, estimate the duration of the activities required to
finish a major deliverable for your project. Use PERT if it would help.
Estimate the duration of all the tasks on the WBS. Now you can enter
the activities into the project schedule. This schedule is a bar chart (also
known as a Gantt chart) that shows when each activity begins and ends and
how activities depend on each other. Olivia assigned each activity to a teammember (their initials are in the “Who” column). Now her project schedule
looks like the following:
For tasks that take only hours, we usually round up to one day.
Another, perhaps simpler way to keep your project on track is to set up
“milestones” in the schedule. Like a traffic sign, a milestone is a signal that
you’ve reached an important decision point in the project. Driving down a
road, you’ll see signs that tell you stop, turn, exit, or go back. When you
reach a milestone, you have to make that kind of decision.
Without these checkpoints, you can get lost. Think of milestones as the
occasional signals your GPS gives you. It doesn’t speak to you every step of
the way, but it will indicate where and when you’re supposed to turn or
which road to take. You make indications like these when you set
milestones into your project schedule.
You set your own milestones. For example, if you feel the need to bring
key stakeholders together at an important decision point, that’s a milestone.Put it into your schedule.
For instance, Hedda set milestones to get input from key stakeholders.
One of their first steps was to build a working model of an accelerated
process to get drugs to market. It was crucial to get the best thinking from
stakeholders about this model before committing to build the real thing. So
she calendared issue-gathering meetings throughout the project schedule as
key milestones.
Ask yourself, “What are the milestones in my project schedule? Where
are the important potential ‘turning points’?”
Project Schedule Step 5. Identify the Critical Path.
All the scheduling work you’ve done now pays off—you’ve arrived at the
final goal of project scheduling—the critical path.
Remember, the critical path is the longest sequence of activities that
must start and end on time and be done with quality. Any problem on the
critical path threatens the whole project. If any activity on the critical path
is late, the whole project will be late.
By identifying the critical path, you can see in advance where
bottlenecks might occur that would jeopardize the project.
Once you start executing your project, you’ll be fighting the Bottleneck
Monster. Remember that some tasks have to be finished before others can
start. Hedda can’t set a budget before she gets a cost/benefit analysis from
Rina. Olivia can’t account for upcoming developments in the world of
hybrid workspace until Maria reports what she learned at the Future of
Work Forum.
If one critical Finish-to-Start activity isn’t done on time, you have a
bottleneck.
You have one weekend to paint your apartment. In that time, you must
buy your paint, move the furniture away from the walls, lay down drop
cloths, clean the walls, tape around windows, apply a coat of primer, and
wait for it to dry. Only then can you roll on the paint.If you add up the estimated duration of all the activities, how long will
your painting project take? Somewhere between seventeen and twenty-six
hours, depending on your method of painting.
Now, what is the critical path through your painting project? Activities
1, 2, 3, and 5 can be done before the weekend. Since only activities 4, 6, 7,
and 8 must be done in sequence on the weekend, the critical path is the
duration of those activities—somewhere between twelve and twenty-one
hours.
You might foresee a bottleneck at step 4. If you damage the walls by
sanding them, you might have to make repairs. If the old paint turns out to
be very resistant, it could take a lot longer than you thought to clean the
walls.
Another bottleneck could occur at step 7. If it rains heavily over the
weekend, the primer could need a day or so to dry.
Use these tips for avoiding bottlenecks on the critical path:
Best people. Put your most trusted, talented, reliable, and
engaged people on the critical-path activities.
Cross-training. Make sure more than one person can do
critical-path activities—this means training people to do more
than one job. Who will do activity A if the best person becomes
unavailable?
Team Accountability Sessions. Huddle regularly as a team to
ensure the critical path is on target. Huddles will help you spot
bottlenecks and minimize fires that break out along the path.
(We will talk more about team accountability later.)
Doing the work to identify an accurate critical path provides three
amazing benefits.
First, the project schedule becomes a strategic management tool. You
can identify which team members are needed when, move people around
when pressures or potential opportunities arise, and stay on target for
delivering the value you promised to deliver.
Second, you can identify activities that could be done anytime and are
not part of the critical path (these activities are called “slack” or “float”).Third, you can anticipate and plan for bottlenecks on the critical path.
Your project management program can probably calculate your critical
path instantly. It might look like this:
WHAT SCHEDULING PROGRAMS SHOULD I USE?
As we’ve said, programs and apps for scheduling projects have proliferated
in the past few years. Most project schedules are created in a bar chart (or
Gantt chart), which displays visually the project’s timeline and tasks on one
screen. You can see the start and end dates and the tasks scheduled for a
given day, culminating in a valuable critical path!
Any of the existing scheduling programs might be useful to you. New
ones get released frequently, which makes project management easy tounderstand and helps you collaborate at a glance with the rest of your team.
Our goal here is to encourage you to give scheduling programs a try. The
program will be your best friend if you apply the basic principles of project
scheduling: Identify tasks and duration, identify dependencies between
tasks, assign resources to each task, and define the critical path. Then track
your progress and adapt as needed.
TO SUM UP
In short, the second step in project management is planning. Here you calculate the cost, take
stock of the risks of failure, and create a project schedule by which you can lead the team to
success on time and on budget.
To plan properly, use your Risk Strategy and Risk-Management Plan to anticipate and
TAME problems that might derail your project. Then follow the five steps for scheduling the
project:
1. Develop the Work Breakdown Structure (WBS).
2. Sequence activities.
3. Identify and assign people to each activity.
4. Estimate the duration of each activity.
5. Identify the critical path.
The better you plan, the more likely your project will succeed. That’s just basic reality.
But don’t expect or even hope for things to go exactly according to plan. Invite feedback to
generate adaptations along the way that will enhance the value of the project.
CHECK YOUR LEARNING
How do you identify risks to your project before they
arise? How do you create a risk-management strategy?
How will you TAME the risks to your project?
How do you break a project down into manageable
activities?
What’s the difference between the time needed to do a
task and the “duration” of the task? How do youestimate the duration of an activity?
What is the “critical path”? What are some ways to
protect the critical path?N
CHAPTER 5
ENGAGING THE TEAM
The Goal: “Inspire shared accountability.”
OW THE QUESTION FOR YOU as an unofficial project manager is, how
do you get and keep a team focused on and passionately executing
your project?
According to PMBOK, effective project managers lead their project
teams to “a high level of performance.”29 That requires team members who
are not only skilled but also highly engaged. In this chapter you’ll find out
how to keep the team engaged in project success. There are two key
activities:Create a cadence of accountability.
Hold Performance Conversations.
CREATE A CADENCE OF ACCOUNTABILITY
What does it take to execute the project successfully as a team? How do
you keep the team fixed on the goal? How do you keep them alert,
absorbed, and motivated?
In a word: accountability.
Most people shrink away when they hear that word. It’s a negative
word. They see Mom or Dad sending them to bed without supper or the
boss standing ominously in the office door staring at them. As an unofficial
project manager, you likely don’t have much formal authority over your
team members. You are not Mom or Dad or the boss.
But the principle of accountability is simple: When you keep your
commitments, you become a trustworthy human being. You gain the trust of
your team members, who will be encouraged to keep their commitments as
well. You also gain the trust of your stakeholders, who will be motivated to
keep their commitments to you. You’re living the definition of informal
authority when you inspire people to choose to play on your team.
Accountability starts with you.
By keeping your own commitments regularly and consistently, you can
consistently hold people accountable for theirs. It might surprise you, but
strict accountability makes people more engaged, not less.
DEATH BY WHIRLWIND
How many great projects are launched with cheers and banners and T-shirts
and giveaway pens, and then they just fade away into memory like an old
picnic at the park? Maybe you even find the dusty old giveaway pen in your
drawer one day and you think, Whatever happened to that project?
Usually, the project died not because it was a bad idea but because
people had too much other stuff to do and weren’t being held accountablefor it. More and more often, projects are cross-functional, drawing teams
together from all over the organization. The downside of cross-functional
teams is that the team members have other jobs to do. You end up
overwhelmed with priorities coming at you from different directions—we
call it the “daily whirlwind.”
When you’re pulled all over the place by the whirlwind, it’s easy to
focus on what is right in front of you. If your commitment to the project
isn’t front and center all the time, it will slip away in a heavy breeze.
When people know they will be held accountable for their promises
regularly and often, they are much more likely to perform. But if that
doesn’t happen, they won’t think you’re serious, and they will fly off into
the whirlwind.
Ideally, team members hold each other accountable before management
does. When they realize they’ll be accounting to their team regularly and
often, they’re more likely to play. When they choose their own
commitments, they become more engaged. When they decide for
themselves how to balance the project with their whirlwind, they become
more laser focused.
You can make all that happen, but you will have to lead the way by
creating a “cadence of accountability.”
A cadence is a regular and repeated pattern of activity.
The key to engaging the team is to hold regular and frequent Team
Accountability Sessions, thus setting in place a cadence of accountability.
These meetings are totally different from the typical “project status
meetings.” In such meetings, the boss usually tells team members what their
commitments are going to be, resulting in the death of engagement.
This chart illustrates the differences:
Typical Project Status Meeting Team Accountability Session
We meet occasionally at random times. We meet regularly and often.
We chat. We sit around waiting for everybody
to show up. We complain about how busy we
are.
We focus on the project schedule. Are we
where we’re supposed to be? If not, why not?
We point fingers at others and make excuses We report on the commitments we chose tofor our lack of follow-through. make in the previous session to move the
project forward.
The project manager tells us what our
commitments are going to be.
We choose the commitments we will make to
move the project forward.
The project manager waits and watches to see
if we will keep our commitments.
The project manager commits to clear the path
so we can keep our commitments.
We call it a Team Accountability Session. You can call it a huddle or a
quick-check meeting. In the Agile Method, it’s called a Daily Standup
Meeting or “Daily Scrum,” a term taken from the game of rugby. In a
scrum, rugby players start a play by packing close together with heads
down, trying to get possession of the ball. For our purposes, a daily or
weekly “scrum” is a fast-paced meeting where incremental goals are set and
everyone commits to do something to meet the goal.
This scrum resembles the huddle in gridiron football, where the players
cluster together between plays and decide what their next objective is and
who’s going to do what to get there.
This meeting goes by fast. This is not a strategy session. It’s not the
typical “staff meeting.” It’s all about “moving the ball”—the project
schedule—forward. It’s usually incremental, with a focus on the next day’s
or the next week’s work. It’s a quick, high-focus huddle to see if we’re
winning or losing—mostly to find out if we’re on track or if anybody needs
help.
Depending on your project, you may need to hold these sessions daily,
several times a day, or every other day. But we strongly recommend that
you don’t let a week go by without a Team Accountability Session, or, like
the airplane that’s one degree off course, you’ll be heading into a storm that
won’t be pleasant.
One organization we worked with held a “micro” session twice a day
every day, at 9 a.m. and 3 p.m. They were monitoring progress on the
production of machine parts. Each part took less than a day to make, but
each was crucial to the project. So twice a day, a small subset of the core
team met to ensure the required part had been produced and that they were
ready to complete the next part on time.
So, do these four things in every session:1. Review the project schedule as a team. Treat it like a
scoreboard in a game: Is our team losing or winning? Where
are we falling behind? Why are we falling behind? If you’re
using a project program that includes a scoreboard, team
members can check it even before the meeting.
2. Report on commitments made in the previous session.
Recognize successes. If someone misses a commitment, find
out why—not to blame the person, but to figure out together
how to overcome whatever obstacle is in the path.
3. Make commitments to keep the schedule moving. Ideally,
team members make their own commitments without being
assigned. As project leader, question these commitments. See if
the team agrees on them. If the team member isn’t sure what to
do next, the team can help.
4. Clear the path. Determine who’s going to do what to clear
away any obstacles you’ve identified. Often the project leader
is the only one who can do this—finding resources, fixing
budgets, clearing up organizational issues, and so forth. But
team members might be able to clear the path for other team
members who lack a certain skill or relationship.
That’s it. Four things that you can usually do in a few minutes. Of
course, some sessions take longer if the issues warrant it, but strive for
speed and efficiency. If you can do it in twenty minutes, don’t take thirty.
What are the benefits of the Team Accountability Session?
The team members always know if they are winning or losing
the game, which is motivating in itself. The project schedule
becomes their “scoreboard,” and they will want to drive up the
score. The threat of the big whammy recedes into the distance.
Team members know that they will be accounting to the team
for their promises. A spirit of accountability naturally grows
stronger. The cadence keeps team members from feeling
isolated and reminds them that their commitments matter.Team members come up with their own commitments, thus
feeling more ownership of the project. When the team ratifies
their commitments, they feel more confident that their
contribution will be valued.
A spirit of helpfulness comes over the team as members
discuss and decide how to clear the path for each other. They
know they can get help if the “whirlwind” threatens to
overwhelm them. And they worry less about failure because
they know the others will jump in to help if they encounter
problems along the path.
The accountability session shows that you care about the project. How
often do we get asked to do something at work that nobody actually cares
that much about? When we take on assignments, accept meetings, and make
commitments, we silently ask ourselves, I wonder how much this really
matters? and then we wait for proof that it does.
Great project managers prove that every request, every commitment,
every missed deadline matters. And in doing so, they earn high levels of
respect and follow-through from the team.
The accountability session also surfaces problems quickly so you can
deal with them quickly as a team. Because lots of problems arise when
you’re carrying out a project, nobody should feel like they have to solve
them alone. Seth Godin has this insight: “As the project gets built, our
instinct is to hide. Hide our roadblocks, our mistakes, our worries. As we
hide, we keep the rest of the team in the dark. As the darkness settles in, it’s
easier than ever to keep hiding, because to unhide now is double the
trouble.”30
Projects often stumble because people stumble. They get lost, they run
into roadblocks, they get diverted. Your job as leader is not to manage them
but to help them manage themselves. That means “clearing the path” for
them, making it possible for them to keep their commitments.
The cadence of accountability is vital to project success. A team in
cadence marches together. They are going to win. Everybody knows what’s
expected when and how to achieve it. No one person is responsible; no oneperson gets the glory or takes the fall. Everybody moves forward together;
anyone who needs help gets the whole team’s support.
Your team might be in the same room with you, but more likely they’re
all over the place—probably even scattered around the world. Online
workspaces have become part of the norm and make it possible for the team
to work together as if they were in the same room. You or anyone on the
team can access all the project information. The team can see the project
schedule, add in their commitments, and tell at all times if they’re on track.
WAKING FROM A NIGHTMARE
Hedda’s project was in trouble. After a full year, she had little progress to
show for all her efforts. Nothing of substance had changed about the
product-approval process, and she had only one fiscal year left to show
results. Her boss, Tesman, noted the problem and called for a project status
meeting on a Friday afternoon.
Hedda was mortified. “This project really needs a full-time leader, and I
already have a full-time job,” she complained. “The last three months have
been a nightmare trying to deal with the agency queries about the migraine
drug. It’s taken me day and all night. I haven’t had a minute to think about
this project.”
It was the same story from the other team members. The writers were
swamped. The legal counsel had no time. As for Dr. Brack, he was buried
in the lab with dozens of bench scientists. “We’ve got ten products in the
pipeline,” he said. “Do you realize how much testing we have to do?”
Tesman stood fast. “We all committed to a goal of 67 percent faster
approval time by a year from now. If we fail, we might as well stop working
on the pipeline because we’ll be closing our doors. This project is wildly
important to the future of this firm. Now, how can we get it done?”
There was silence in the room. The only sounds were the background
noises from the videoconference.
Tesman spoke again. “Here’s what I propose we do. Every Monday
morning from now on, this team will meet. We should do four things.“First, let’s review the project schedule to see where we are. If we’re
behind, we’ll find out why and discuss what to do to get back on track.
“Second, let’s review the commitments we’ve made to move the
schedule forward. If for some reason some haven’t been able to keep their
commitments, we’ll explore why and figure out a way to help.
“Third, let’s each make specific commitments each week to move the
project forward. Ideally, each team member will know generally what needs
to be done and what else they have to do for their jobs. So everyone should
choose their own commitments.
“Fourth, if there are barriers to keeping our commitments, we will
figure out how to clear them away. If there are barriers only I can remove, I
will. But we should also commit to clear the path for each other.
“This meeting should last no more than one half hour. If we need to
discuss some issues in more depth, we’ll do it elsewhere. But Monday
mornings we’ll keep to this agenda, so it won’t be just another time￾consuming meeting.
“Is it all right with you, Hedda, if you lead the first session? Then we
can trade off if you’d like.”
Her face flushed. Feeling confused but hopeful, Hedda agreed. To
record the Monday session, she prepared the following tool.
TOOL: TEAM ACCOUNTABILITY SESSION
Date
Project Schedule Issues
Report on CommitmentsMake New Commitments
Clear the Path
With this tool, Hedda could record and follow up on all the team
commitments each week.
A TEAM ACCOUNTABILITY SESSION
“Good morning, we have half an hour to review our schedule and make
commitments to move forward. This is a short meeting because we want to
stay focused. We don’t need another unproductive meeting on our
schedule.” Hedda started out with a little shake in her voice. She hadn’t
done this before.
They were way behind on their project schedule, as they already knew.
“As you can see, so far we’ve made progress on a couple of deliverables,
but we have a long way to go to catch up. So let’s see what commitments
we can make to that end. Dr. Brack, let’s start with you.”A veteran researcher and looking like it, Dr. Brack rubbed his grizzled
chin and said, “We’ve got these ten projects in the pipeline. I’ve been
thinking about how some of them could be accelerated. I’d like to identify
them and create a revised schedule to move them along faster. And that’s
my commitment.”
Hedda was relieved. She’d half expected Dr. Brack to unsettle the
meeting somehow, but he was on board with the ground rules. A
professional all the way.
Several team members on videoconference made substantial
commitments. And Tesman, the CEO, committed to bring in a consulting
firm that specialized in their predicament. Then it was Rina’s turn. Hedda
trusted Rina’s skills.
“I’ve got a lot going on. I have to complete my part of the organization
audit this week, so I commit to doing that.”
Hedda hesitated. “Rina, I know that’s crucial work, but how does it help
us move our project forward?”
Rina was sharp. She laughed a little and said, “Of course, I see what you
mean. Well . . . I probably need to update the cost/benefit analysis that’s
nearly a year old. I think I can commit to doing that on top of the audit.”
“Thanks, Rina.” Hedda sighed. She knew how hard Rina worked.
The rest of the session went well. By reviewing the project schedule,
everyone could see what deliverables they were responsible for and renew
their commitments to deliver. Hedda was pleased that everyone was so
cooperative and that they were buying into the process—until it was the
turn of the medical writers, Joren and Eilert.
Joren began, “We committed to deliver an accelerated process for
writing submissions. We have always assumed we couldn’t start writing the
application until the drug trials were finished. I mean, we had no data until
then, so how could we start earlier?
“But I think we can start earlier. The hardest part to write is the
toxicology report—where we present the data about whether the drug will,
you know, poison the patient or not. It always takes us more time than any
of the other sections. We have to prove the drug is safe.
“Well, suppose we started writing the tox report as soon as we start
developing the drug? I mean, we’ve had a lot of experience. We can usually
anticipate what we need to put into the report, all the graphs andillustrations and so forth. Why not get a head start by creating a dummy
report and then just filling in the data as it comes? It would save boatloads
of time.”
Eilert’s face reddened. “It can’t be done. It’s ridiculous to even try. How
can we possibly guess at something like that? It’s the most important part of
the submission—it tells the regulators if we’re going to make patients sicker
or even kill them!”
Hedda looked to Tesman for help, but Tesman just looked back at
Hedda. She was the project leader, and it was her job to make it work.
She hesitated.
“Joren,” she said, “what’s your commitment here?”
Dismayed by his colleague, Joren sheepishly said, “I guess I commit to
creating a dummy tox report.”
“Let’s call it a prototype tox report, shall we?” Tesman smirked, and the
tension lifted a bit.
“No, dummy is the right word for it.” Eilert got up and walked out of the
meeting.
Hedda wound things up. The meeting left a big anxious hole inside her.
How was she going to deal with this conflict? She couldn’t lose Eilert. Deep
down she knew he was a better writer than Joren, who was more of a
plodder, although very reliable.
THE FOUNDATIONAL BEHAVIORS AND TEAM
ACCOUNTABILITY
So Hedda had a problem with a team member. What if you have such a
problem? Somebody who’s always downbeat or unhelpful? Or somebody
who doesn’t pull their weight? Or somebody who is downright destructive?
What happens to the project when team members fall apart on you?
You have lots of choices. You can sack them from the team. You can
shame them, reprimand them, or ignore them and hope they go away. But
none of these reactive choices is going to build up your informal authority.
You hold them accountable through the Five Foundational Behaviors.
When you forget to practice them, you might win a battle with somebodybut end up losing the war.
When things get hard to handle with a team member, you’re going to
feel disappointed, frustrated, or angry. If you let these emotions overwhelm
you—and you unload them on the team member—you have really lost the
war.
Have you ever hit the Send button on a text when you’re angry? It feels
great in the moment, but later you wish you could recall it? How much
damage have you just done to a relationship or even your professional life?
It’s okay to feel disappointment, frustration, and anger, but a good leader
can manage those emotions.
Remember, your job is not just to finish a project—it’s also to build a
great project team. And that means building people up, especially when
times get tough.
So how do you hold people accountable who aren’t holding themselves
accountable? You must first hold yourself accountable to the Five
Foundational Behaviors.
Suppose a team member comes to the Team Accountability Session and
says they just couldn’t keep their promise that week. First, what is the
downside of doing nothing about it? What are you teaching the team?
You’re teaching them that commitments don’t matter. You’re teaching them
that they can let their commitments slide, too. What about the people who
do keep their commitments? They start to lose respect for you.
Once you violate the Five Behaviors, you will no longer have a team
that honors the behaviors.
So the first time someone misses a commitment, use the Five Behaviors
to find out what’s getting in the way:
Listen first. Let the team member describe why the commitment
was missed. Listen carefully. “The auditors dropped a pile of
requests on me, and I ran out of time.” Respectfully restate to
make sure you understand: “So the audit occupied your entire
week.”
Clarify expectations. Restate the commitment and update the
deadline for completion. “We really need that new component.
Would Wednesday be too soon?”Extend trust. Don’t let the team member get discouraged or
disheartened. Gently express confidence. “You’re the best one for
this job. We’ll be counting on you.”
Practice accountability. Make sure the team member understands
the specific impact of their actions. “Okay, so we’ll have the
component at least by Thursday. We’re already a week behind,
and we can’t move forward without it.” Offer to clear the path if
needed.
Demonstrate respect. Acknowledge the reality of competing
demands. Be empathic about the situation. “We all know what it
means to have the auditors come on-site.”
By consistently holding people accountable in the Team Accountability
Session, you do two important things to build your team:
The team member will learn to “own” the problem. They will
understand that they let the team down, not just themselves or
you.
The rest of the team will watch this and think, I don’t want to
put myself in that position.
This is pure accountability on the team level. All team members
strengthen their resolve to bring their best efforts to the team and the
project.
APPLICATION CHALLENGE: HOLD A TEAM
ACCOUNTABILITY SESSION
Use the following Team Accountability Session tool to role play a session
on your project.TOOL: TEAM ACCOUNTABILITY SESSION
Date
Project Schedule Issues
Report on Commitments
Make New Commitments
Clear the Path
HOLD PERFORMANCE CONVERSATIONSNow, what if a team member like Eilert disrupts the project? What if a team
member is consistently negative? What if you have a chronic problem with
a team member who doesn’t keep commitments?
You will have to take the next step: a Performance Conversation. Use
this tool to prepare for a private conversation with that person.
TOOL: PERFORMANCE CONVERSATION PLANNER
With Whom When
What Is My Intent?
What Are the Facts of the Situation? What Is the Impact on the Project?
Action Items By WhomLet’s explain this tool.
What is your intent? The Performance Conversation Planner asks
you to define your intent first. Why are you asking for the
conversation? You do this for two important reasons: First, to
clarify your agenda for yourself. Second, you want to ensure that
the conversation is only about the outcomes of the project.
What are the facts? Next, think through the facts you need to share
and record them. These are observable events, not opinions.
Make sure you are prepared to provide examples or evidence of
the behavior at issue or mistakes made.
What is the impact? Be prepared to articulate the impact these facts
have on the project so the team member clearly understands the
big picture.
Now you can hold an effective conversation. Getting clear on how your
end of the conversation will go is a great way to calm down and
communicate professionally. And if you demonstrate respect throughout,
you are more likely to get the results you want.
Clearly, and in a firm but inviting tone of voice, state your intent and the
facts. This is clarifying the problem. Then pause. Give the team member
time to process the information and let it sink in. Then listen—really listen
—to their point of view on the facts.
Listen with empathy. Put yourself in the team member’s place and
understand their point of view the best you can. Sit back and be quiet. If
you listen quietly, you give the other person a chance to get their emotions
out in the open and decompress—you don’t have to agree, disagree, or
defend yourself—and you might be learning something valuable. Just
listening gives you a chance to find out why the person isn’t performing.
What are the action items? Once the person feels understood, ask
them for suggestions on how to solve the problem and clarify expectations.
Usually, they’ll know what to suggest. Then lay out in clear and specific
terms what you expect from them and what they can expect from you.
Practice accountability by agreeing on specific action items and deadlines.Set an appointment for reviewing progress on those expectations. Make
sure they know you’ll be following up on a certain date.
Extend trust by expressing confidence in them. Even if you have
misgivings about them, don’t give up on people except as a last resort.
Remember, you’re building not only a project but also a project team.
Now let’s see how Hedda handles a Performance Conversation with
Eilert, the headstrong medical writer who balks at developing an important
component of the project. First, she gets very clear on her own intent. Then
she records the facts and their impact on the project as clearly as possible.
TOOL: PERFORMANCE CONVERSATION PLANNER
With Whom Eilert Lovborg When June 1
What Is My Intent?
To find out what Eilert will commit to do in relation to the prototype submission process.
To ascertain if Eilert will recommit to keeping the ground rules we agreed on for this project.
What Are the Facts of the Situation? What Is the Impact on the Project?
In the May 28 Team Accountability Session,
Eilert spoke with great energy against a
proposed component of the submission
process. He appeared to be angry. He then left
the meeting without explanation and without
making further commitments.
When Eilert violated the ground rules, he
undermined team morale and threatened
the success of the project.
By refusing to commit to advancing the
project schedule, he threatens to delay the
project.
A HIGH-STAKES PERFORMANCE CONVERSATION
Hedda met with Eilert on the morning of June 1 in a private conference
room. She read to him her intent, the facts as she saw them, and the impact
of those facts on the project. She then invited him to respond.
Eilert fidgeted with his blond hair, sitting unsteadily in his chair. Hedda
sat back to listen.“Like I said, you can’t write a tox report until you have the tox data. It’s
totally backward. Joren doesn’t know what he’s doing, anyway. I’ve worked
with him for a couple of years now, and he never listens to reality. He just
sits there with his stone face, and nothing seems to seep in.
“How many times have I shared an idea with him and he just shuts me
down. He never says, ‘No, that won’t work’ or ‘We can’t do that’—he just
ignores me. And then he comes up with this silly notion that you can report
tox data before you have it, and everybody nods and smiles and says, ‘Go
right ahead, Joren. That sounds good, Joren.’ It makes me wonder if I’m the
only sane person in the room.” Eilert stopped talking to catch his breath.
Hedda now saw that there was a good deal more going on here than
mere disagreement over a proposal. There were personal things to deal
with.
“If I understand you, Joren has never listened to your ideas and ignores
you, so it’s ironic that an idea of his gets a hearing—an idea you consider
impossible and illogical. It’s like an upside-down world.”
“That’s exactly right.” Eilert sat up—he felt that someone had finally
heard him. “I have ideas too, lots of ideas for speeding up the writing
process. But he won’t listen to them, and since he’s the senior writer, he’s
the one who gets his ideas out there.”
“The team isn’t getting the benefit of your ideas because Joren blocks
them.” Hedda wanted to understand clearly what was going on.
“Well, I’m not sure he’s blocking them. It’s like he doesn’t even hear
them.”
“So you feel that it’s not that he deliberately blocks you—it’s that he
doesn’t listen well.”
“Yes. I mean, he has good ideas. His idea to get an early start on tox
reports isn’t bad. I suppose it could be done. It’s just that I have good ideas,
too.”
Hedda and Eilert settled on a few action items.
Action Items By Whom
Hold a Performance Conversation with Joren about his style of working with
Eilert.
HeddaCommit to collaborate with Joren on the toxicology report prototype. Eilert
Hold a special team meeting so Eilert can present his ideas for speeding up
the writing process.
Hedda will
arrange.
Recommit immediately to the Five Foundational Behaviors as ground rules
for the team.
Eilert
In this way, Hedda was able to bring Eilert back into the team as a
productive member. Many of his ideas turned out to be useful—some were
brilliant. Eilert carefully followed the ground rules from then on, with only
a few lapses now and then. He was an energetic character.
Hedda also held a Performance Conversation with Joren to get to the
root of his treatment of Eilert. It turned out that Joren didn’t realize he was
ignoring Eilert’s ideas, and he committed to demonstrate more respect and
to listen better to his colleagues.
As Joren and Eilert returned to work together, they listened respectfully
to each other. They decided to use a “rolling wave” process for writing
reports. They drafted a whole report up front, and then as data “rolled”
toward them like waves in the sea, they incorporated it into the draft. This
process saved a lot of time.
Hedda had more than a few such conversations with team members over
the next year. She brought Rina in to talk about late legal filings. She had to
speak with Dr. Brack a couple of times about his tendency to dismiss other
team members’ comments as not worth listening to. And there was one
touchy conversation about a relationship that was getting a little too close—
she invited the HR director to sit in on that one.
What would have happened if Hedda didn’t have the Performance
Conversation tool? What if there were no ground rules? We can only guess,
but the shadow of the big whammy would undoubtedly have grown darker
all the time.
You’ve seen how this method works for hard conversations, but the
Performance Conversation tool can be used to plan positive conversations,
too. You might be wondering, Why would I ever need to plan a positive
conversation?Think about the last time someone gave you positive feedback. Likely
you heard, “Good work!” or “Nice job!” You felt good but still wondered,
What part of my job was nice?
Take your informal authority up a notch by giving specific positive
feedback the right way. Declare your intent, and share the facts and impact
of the good work. When you tell people exactly what they did that was
great and how it affected the project, you build the relationship and
encourage them to replicate their good work. You’ll build momentum on
the project.
A NERVOUS MEETING
Drew sat outside the project room. He was waiting for Olivia, who had
asked to meet him there. He wasn’t sure what the meeting was about. He
was an assistant human resources manager, yet strangely enough, not much
of a people person. He took things very personally and worried that he had
done something wrong.
“Drew!” Olivia turned the corner. “Thanks for waiting. It has been a
crazy day.”
“No problem,” Drew said, shakily. “What’s up? Do you need me to do
something?”
“No,” Olivia said. “No new assignments today. In fact, I asked you here
to thank you.”
They both sat down, and Olivia pulled up her project folder on her
laptop. “Drew, you’ve been doing great work on the survey, and we’ve been
so busy I didn’t want to miss letting you know what a big impact you’ve
had on this project.”
Drew smiled weakly, but he felt a little uncomfortable. No one had ever
called him to a formal meeting just to thank him for something. He braced
himself for the real reason for this meeting—he was sure Olivia was
softening him up for bad news.
Olivia went on. “There are a couple of specific things I noticed while
you were working on the survey. First, I was so impressed with how you
engaged Val and Jack. In fact, they mentioned to me how much theyenjoyed working with you. They told me you were clear about what was
needed, you checked in with them regularly, and you stopped to help them
when they were off track. As a result, the three of you got the survey done
on time. That’s impressive feedback.”
Drew was gradually growing less tense and uncommonly happy.
“One more thing,” Olivia said. “After working so hard, I’m sure you
were exhausted. You had every reason to take a break, and I wouldn’t have
thought anything of it if you did. Instead, you came to me and asked what
we needed done now. With Maria off on sick leave, we were falling behind
on the training plan, but because you pitched in, we got it back on track.”
“It was nothing,” Drew said. “I just want to help the team.”
“You are helping. You’ve been contributing every step of the way. I just
wanted you to know your work is noticed. Thank you, Drew. I’m so glad
you’re on our team.” Olivia shook his hand and stood up. “I’m off to the
training now.”
“Thanks,” Drew said. “I know you’re busy. I really, really appreciate
this. It’s not what I expected. Thank you.”
The next time you acknowledge someone for a job well done, try using
this formula:
Intent
Facts
Impact
An earnest, face-to-face thank-you means so much more than a written
note, and the recipient will know exactly how to replicate the good job
they’ve done. The chances are high that they will.
By now you can see that engaging the project is all about engaging
people. You can have sophisticated project management programs. You can
plan like a pro and run a process like a star. But people are the project—
people with jobs, families, feelings, and personalities.
More than likely they also have bosses of their own—and if you’re an
unofficial project manager, you’re not one of them. But that doesn’t matter
if you can engage the best efforts of people in the project.And they will choose to bring their best for a leader who inspires and
encourages them and holds them accountable.
A wise project manager puts it this way: Engaging successfully
“depends on what people—those imperfect, opinionated, stubborn
biological entities—decide to do, day in and day out.” You might not be
their boss, but by following the principles in this book, your informal
authority will grow among the people on your team.
APPLICATION CHALLENGE: PLAN A PERFORMANCE
CONVERSATION
Use the following conversation planner to plan and role play a “missed
commitment” conversation.
TOOL: PERFORMANCE CONVERSATION PLANNER
With Whom When
What Is My Intent?
What Are the Facts of the Situation? What Is the Impact on the Project?Action Items By Whom
TO SUM UP
In short, the third step in project management is engaging the team. Here you determine how
you’re going to work together. You set the ground rules—the Five Foundational Behaviors.
You establish a cadence of accountability—a rhythm of regular and frequent Team
Accountability Sessions—so that team members can make and account for commitments to
move the project forward. You often meet with team members in Performance Conversations
to celebrate their contributions or to help them revise their behavior—or both.
Engage the team using these tools:
Team Accountability Session record for tracking team commitments and clearing
the path
Performance Conversation Planner for helping individual team members improve
their contribution
CHECK YOUR LEARNING
How do you make a project engaging for the team?
What is a Team Accountability Session? How is it
different from the typical staff meeting?
Why should you review the project schedule in the
Team Accountability Session? Why should you treat it
like a scoreboard in a game?
Why should you ask team members to report on their
commitments and make new commitments?What do you do if a team member misses a
commitment?
What does it mean to “clear the path” for a team
member?
How can the Performance Conversation Planner help
you build your relationship with team members while
giving effective feedback?W
CHAPTER 6
TRACK & ADAPT
The Goal: “Manage scope with agility to ensure value.”
HY DOES “TRACK & ADAPT” surround the process model?
Because we’re tracking and adapting all the way through the
process.
We’ve identified key stakeholders and scoped everything as a
baseline, ensuring the project adds the value it’s meant to add.
We’ve planned and created a risk strategy so we can adapt if
things change or go wrong. We have a project scheduleincluding feedback loops to track problems or opportunities
that arise, as well as the critical path.
We’ve created a cadence of accountability to track our progress
and inspire the team to engage consistently.
Throughout the life of the project, we keep track of our plan. We adapt
as needed to minimize problems, capitalize on opportunities, and protect the
critical path. Our engagement process includes Team Accountability
Sessions and Performance Conversations to help us adapt as needed. We’ve
already set ourselves up for success. Everything’s good. Still . . .
THE PRINCIPLE OF PROACTIVITY
Olivia couldn’t afford to miss a step in her transition-to-hybrid project.
Even though everything looked good, the project still felt shaky to her.
Many of the associates were still deciding if they wanted to work at home,
at the office—or at a different organization. Until most of them made a
choice, she couldn’t finish the project. So Olivia spent most of her time
tracking progress and adapting flexibly to the situation.
Tracking and adapting means making sure the project goes as planned—
on time and on budget—and delivers the value promised. In particular, it
means tracking the risks you’ve identified. Are you taking care of risks as
you intended? Or do you need to respond differently? Also, have new risks
come up? Are you going to need new strategies, or will you even need to
re-scope and re-plan the project?
The principle here is proactivity.
To be proactive is to anticipate problems rather than reacting to
them. That’s why we do risk planning early in the project.
But to be proactive is also to change things when they need to
be changed rather than to resist change—especially when a
change greatly enhances the project’s value.Simply put, things happen to reactive people. Proactive people make
things happen.
Even if you’re doing a great job tracking the plan you already made,
you will have to be ready to handle changes. Projects often fail because of
the world’s tendency to change. Stakeholders may demand new features.
They “amend” or “modify” or “adjust” their expectations or mess with
deadlines, driving you crazy. Or the market shifts, or technology is
suddenly transformed, or a new CEO comes in with new priorities.
As we’ve said, you can get buried by “scope creep”—the tendency of a
project to grow into an uncontrollable monster. Project professionals say
that frequent changes in the requirements (scope) and timelines of projects
are the number-one challenge they face. And it’s not just the fault of those
asking for more or different “stuff.” Scope creep might happen because the
scope wasn’t clear in the beginning. Or you may be saying yes to changes
without thinking through their implications. The project becomes a free-for￾all.
Effective project managers steadily track progress to stop their projects
from drifting into chaos. If you maintain a robust cadence of accountability,
you’ll avoid the tendency of the project to get out of control.
But even if you track progress against the plan, even if you successfully
manage your risk strategy—how do you deal with change?
Stephen R. Covey said, “Basing our happiness on our ability to control
everything is futile.”31 There are limits on what you can control even with
the best planning and tracking. The pace of change is so rapid now that we
simply don’t know what tomorrow or even the next few hours will bring.
Adapting to change means more than just grinning and bearing it. It
means getting a feel for change. It may even mean embracing change.
Changes to the project may add value to the project. In any project the
first attempt at a solution will raise lots of issues. Effective project
managers expect change. As stakeholders review the project, issues will
arise that couldn’t have surfaced any other way. As issues are resolved in
new iterations, the team adds more and more value all the time.
Imagine you are building a new electric bike for customers. Over a
weekend, you sprint through the creation of a rough version of the bike andlet them ride it on Monday. They will find all kinds of problems and
opportunities for you to work on.
By Wednesday, you’ve accounted for all that feedback in your next
iteration. Customers try it out again and raise new issues. Somebody has
trouble with the balance. Another person wants a softer seat. Another says
the gear shift is too stiff.
After your next sprint, you’ve made all those improvements. Between
sprints, the customers raise fewer and fewer issues. Soon they run out of
things to ask for and just love their new e-bikes.
To add value as you go is the essence of the Agile Method. One of the
basic Agile principles reads, “Welcome changing requirements, even late in
development. Agile processes harness change for the customer’s
competitive advantage.”32 Obviously, the bike team couldn’t plan down to
the last detail what the product would look like next week or next month.
A fact of life for project leaders: What was important yesterday might
not be as important today. You can lament that fact of life, or you can
welcome it—or at least be courteous to it.
You may find yourself changing your objectives, your process, your
environment—all based on evolving stakeholder requirements that can add
value. So getting feedback and adapting to the feedback is your work at this
phase of the project management process.
Ideally, then, you need as rich a feedback loop as you can manage with
your stakeholders. You might have trouble assembling them very often for
feedback, but you’ll find that you’ll get more value out of regular and
frequent sessions. That’s why it’s best to build feedback loops into the
project schedule from the beginning. That way stakeholders can plan on
giving feedback.
Use this status report as a means not only for keeping stakeholders in
the loop but also for getting feedback from them to ensure the project keeps
moving forward.
COMMUNICATE PROJECT STATUS
Use this tool or one like it to report project status to key stakeholders:TOOL: PROJECT STATUS REPORT
Here is how to use this tool:
Overall project health: Make sure stakeholders know whether the
project is on target to be delivered on time and on budget.Crucially, indicate if the project is at risk or in danger of going
off track entirely.
Deliverables: List the deliverables and indicate which are on target,
at risk, or in danger of the big whammy. The checkboxes act like
traffic lights, so you need to determine if each deliverable is
green, yellow, or red. (Some organizations formally label project
status as “green,” “yellow,” or “red.”) Green means full speed
ahead. Yellow means at risk. If the deliverable is in danger,
you’ve hit a red light. Stop and carefully consider what to do
next.
A red or yellow light is a signal to stakeholders that you need
their help. It means you’ve got an issue with resources, timelines,
or budget, and you want to provide options for them to clear the
path for the team. Sometimes a stakeholder can get something
done with the stroke of a pen that the project manager can’t do.
Sometimes a red or yellow light indicates an opportunity
rather than a problem—an opportunity for adding value. It means
you’re rethinking a deliverable in light of new information.
Make sure you state problems or opportunities like a news
headline, giving a quick summary of what stakeholders need to
do, if anything.
NOT THIS
Deliverables Notes
Trial designs Investment needed
Regulatory partnerships Progressing
THIS
Deliverables Notes
New “Fast Lane” drug trials are stalled. To get these trials off the ground, we’re going
to need more aggressive investment.Partnership with the medicine control agency
promises to speed up our approval process.
Agents are giving us pointers on common
pitfalls that the agency sees, and how to avoid
them.
Notes: In this section, proactively provide suggestions for fixing
problems. In a project status review meeting, record stakeholder
feedback—especially ideas that will add value or improve the
process.
Clear the path: Define what people commit to do about issues that
may affect the project.
The Project Status Report is a “talk document.” It’s not just a formality
but a chance to get the help you need to stay on track—so the status report
is a real benefit to you as project manager. An expert said, “All customers
want their jobs finished on time and on budget—or preferably faster and
cheaper. But if they can’t have that, and sometimes they can’t, what they
really want is to be kept informed along the way.”33
Who should receive a status report? How often and in what form? Go
back to your scoping document and identify which stakeholders require it
and how you can best give it to them.
The previous tool can keep stakeholders abreast of what’s happening.
It’s also a way for you to get any obstacles to your progress cleared away. It
isn’t a complicated document loaded with red tape. It should be an at-a￾glance document so key stakeholders and others can easily and quickly see
if they’re winning or losing—and how they can help.
A FRUITFUL PROJECT REVIEW
Hedda didn’t want her key stakeholders worrying about progress on the
project, so she scheduled specific milestones where important decisions
might have to be made.
One big milestone was a project status review to showcase the working
model of a speeded-up process to get drugs to market. It had taken morethan a year to get to this milestone, and now it was time to give the board of
directors a chance to raise issues about the model. In this review meeting,
they would decide whether to go ahead with the proposed model or back up
and start again.
Hedda reported that, despite delays that put the project at risk, most of
the deliverables were now on track.
Then she managed the meeting the same way she managed the Team
Accountability Sessions. The idea was to get as much input as possible as
quickly as possible without a lot of debate. Everyone had a chance to give
feedback on the model solution, and she would say, “Thank you. Next?”
The meeting was far more fruitful than she expected. One stakeholder, a
representative of a specialty drug company, suggested something new:
“We’ve been partnering with you in developing drugs for people with rare
conditions. What if we partnered with you not only in development but also
in writing the application so it exactly fits what we need?”
Dr. Brack added, “The chances of speeding up approvals would go way
up if we did that.” The partnership became an action item.
Then a stakeholder who represented the regulatory agency made a
surprising suggestion. “You’re trying to get through our process faster, but
at the same time we know our process is too sluggish. Why don’t we work
together on ways of expediting both our processes?” There was a group
intake of breath.
“Why didn’t we think of that before?” Eilert exclaimed, and even Joren
smiled big. The agency’s proposal became an action item that could
substantially clear the path to approval.
WHY HOLD PROJECT STATUS REVIEWS?
In the project status review, you should check whether the project is on
track to deliver the business value promised at the scoping stage. Are you
still in compliance with the financial plan? Do financial projections still
make sense? What are the financial implications of any proposed changes?
Project status reviews help you to identify where things might be going
off track in time to make adjustments. Put simply, in your review, watch forproblems and ask the group how to correct them.
Project Status Reports are essential to the cadence of accountability.
Even if things are going smoothly, just letting stakeholders know how
things are tracking can keep them calm and connected to the project—and
your level of informal authority will continue to rise. Update them regularly
even if you have no updates. You’ll be seen as a competent project leader,
accountable and transparent in both the good and not-so-good times.
So check in with your stakeholders often. They need to know if you’re
making progress, or, if not, what you’re doing about it and how they can
help.
Key stakeholders are not just police looking for infractions. They are
also rich sources of suggestions for improvement and opportunities for
adding value to the project. Don’t miss the chance to mine their expertise
and diversity of opinion to change the project for the better.
APPLICATION CHALLENGE: PREPARE A PROJECT
STATUS REPORT
Use the following tool to assess the status of your project. Get feedback
from your stakeholders and watch for opportunities to add value.
TOOL: PROJECT STATUS REPORTADAPT TO CHANGE
One of our consultants started to fix a leaky shower in his bathroom, but
being “an idiot at plumbing” (his words), he broke the whole thing. Fixingthe broken shower required new tile work. “While we’re at it,” said the tile
guy, “why not retile the whole bathroom?”
“Okay,” our friend said. “Why not?”
But while retiling the bathroom, the tile guy broke through the kitchen
wall.
Let’s make this story short. Six months and “heavy expenses” later, our
friend had a new bathroom and a new kitchen, which he likes very much.
But these renovations weren’t in the family financial plan, and the payments
will go on and on—and on.
What began as a simple project to fix a leaking pipe turned into a black
hole that ate our friend’s bank account. Every project can get out of control
like this and consume you. What you thought would take six months turns
into three years. What you thought would cost x turns into x times x times x!
BLACK HOLES
As mentioned earlier, you could be driven around and around in ever￾widening circles by scope creep, as the original project grows gradually out
of control. Agile practitioners call this sort of thing “a black hole.”
A black hole happens when one or more deliverables take up more time
and energy than expected, throwing the entire project off schedule. Like
black holes in outer space, a black hole in a project sucks up everyone’s
energies, stealing time from other deliverables.
What causes black holes?
Maybe you didn’t scope the project properly. Maybe you didn’t account
for the complexity of a deliverable. Maybe things just changed—
stakeholder priorities, the market, technology, available budget, and so on.
Your reputation as a project manager depends on delivering value on
time and on budget. So you’ll want to avoid letting people add a new
feature to the project whenever they feel like it.
Of course, you can’t and shouldn’t avoid all change. Anything can
change overnight, and you can’t be the cop who arrests everyone who is
trying to change anything. We live in a synergistic world, where people do
change their minds and even come up with better ideas that lead to betteroutcomes. Then again, sometimes those “better outcomes” are only
marginal. So where do you draw the line?
How do you adapt to change and avoid getting sucked into black holes?
Make only high-value changes to the scope. Obviously, you’re
going to consider changes if they will dramatically increase the
value of your project. “Good ideas” or even exciting ideas don’t
necessarily make that cut. As project leader, help the team
distinguish high-value changes from merely good ideas.
Generally speaking, a high-value change will:
Increase ROI and/or NPV significantly.
Respond to major changes in the marketplace.
Speed up results substantially.
Changes like these, if accepted by stakeholders, will of
course change your project trajectory.
Examine team behavior. Are there too many changes? Is the team
truly focused on the critical path, or are they constantly distracted
or interrupted? Are they under pressure from a whirlwind of
competing priorities? Are they mistaking “good” or “slack”
activities for “critical” activities?
Push back respectfully. Sometimes powerful stakeholders
may demand changes that are questionable. If so, live strictly by
the Five Behaviors. Use the Performance Conversation Planner
to stay neutral and gather the facts.
What is the intent of the change?
What is the impact?
What would be required to make the change happen (resources,
budget, time)?You can’t make a rational argument for or against any change
until you know the answers to these questions.
“HOLD THE PHONE!”
The one thing that will dissuade a powerful scope creeper is money.
For example, demand at ScamCatch was exploding. The surge in online
fraud was overwhelming police departments, so energetic young
entrepreneur Fen saw an opportunity to fill the gap—to catch scammers
within minutes of their crimes.
That’s how ScamCatch was born. Scammers preying on Fen’s
customers could be hiding anywhere from Central Asia to Tierra del Fuego.
Contacting his agents in remote parts of the world was slow and sometimes
impossible. So he set up a project team to find faster ways to do that. The
project team had settled on establishing a private network using standard
satellite phones.
Then one day Fen heard that a new type of smartphone was in the works
—a smartphone embedded with satellite technology that could reach
anyone anywhere.
“I want to be able to use one phone for everything,” Fen told the project
team. “I don’t want two phones.”
Lee, the team leader, researched the cost and complexity of adopting
satellite smartphones. Soon she knew the big whammy was about to fall on
her. The so-called satellite smartphone was in development but years away
from being available on the market, and to use experimental phones cost a
towering fortune.
Lee asked for a meeting with Fen. “Please help me with this project
change.” Together they went through a change-request tool to define the
change and figure out the impact it would have on project scope, budgets,
and deadlines.
Facts in hand, Lee scheduled a briefing with the key stakeholders in the
project, including ScamCatch’s chief financial officer. “Thanks for meeting
with us today,” Lee said. “We are considering a change request to replacethe private satellite network with a new kind of smartphone. Before we do,
we thought you might appreciate knowing the impact of the change.”
Everyone sat in stunned silence as Lee reviewed the change-request
form. She described a thicket of domestic and international regulations they
would have to follow. And the CFO seemed close to fainting when he heard
that the change would cost more than ten times what was budgeted. “We
can’t possibly justify that expense. And the product isn’t even available
yet!”
After weighing all the data, Fen agreed to postpone the shift to the new
smartphone technology.
With the right information and tools, the project manager was able to
have a professional and coherent conversation with the stakeholders instead
of plunging into a black hole. She was no doormat—she got the right result.
THE PROJECT CHANGE PROCESS
So how can you tell if a change makes sense or not? How do know if that
high-tech phone network is that important? You need a project change
process so when people come to you and say, “Hey, can you make it do
this?” you’ll have a system to decide if you should.
Use this Project Change Request tool to guide your decisions about
changes to the project.
TOOL: PROJECT CHANGE REQUEST
Project Name
Request By
Proposed ChangeReasons for the Change
How This Change Will Add Value
How This Change Will Affect the Constraints
Time
Quality
Budget
Key Stakeholder Approval DateFirst, circle back to your Project Scope Statement to make sure you
clarify the original expectations with the proponent of the change.
Proposed change. Define as specifically as possible what the
proponent wants to change in the project scope. Don’t settle for
vague language. A detailed description of the change helps
stakeholders judge the value and the impact of the change on the
project plan.
NOT THIS
Proposed Change
Use smartphones embedded with satellite technology instead of a private satellite network.
THIS
Proposed Change
Develop a capability to use smartphones to connect seamlessly between cellphone towers and
satellite coverage in remote parts of the world. It will require these steps:
Research benefits and disadvantages of switching to a smartphone environment.
Apply to the International Telecommunication Union for a network license.
Contract with satellite companies to provide low-frequency data transmission.
Consult with countries that do not permit interference with existing data networks or that
censor telecommunications.
Contract with smartphone providers to use experimental equipment.
Reasons for the change. Use the proponent’s actual language if
possible, so your own biases—for or against the change—don’t
come through.
NOT THIS
Reasons for the Change
The CEO wants to change to smartphone technology because it’s more convenient than heavy
satellite phones.THIS
Reasons for the Change
The CEO says, “I want to be able to use one phone for everything. I don’t want two phones.
Satellite phones are big and require heavy batteries. Smartphones are more convenient for our
agents.”
How this change will add value. Again, use the proponent’s words.
NOT THIS
How This Change Will Add Value
More connectivity, faster, easier to use.
THIS
How This Change Will Add Value
The proponent says, “Smartphones are easier to use, more convenient, and more familiar to our
agents than satellite phones. Plus, with satellite technology embedded, they can connect virtually
anywhere on the globe—same as with ordinary satellite phones.”
How this change will affect the constraints. Record your best
estimates of the amount of time it will take to make the change
and the effect on the project schedule. How will the change affect
the standard of quality key stakeholders expect for the
deliverables of this project? How will the change affect the
project budget?
How This Change Will Affect the Constraints
Time
We estimate that we will need to push back the project deadline by at least six months and
possibly a year to carry out licensing and contracting work, as well as to prove the concept. Plus,
the product is still in experimental stages.Quality
We will get the same level of global connectivity with smartphones as with dedicated satellite
phones—with greater convenience to the user.
Budget
We estimate the additional licensing, contracting, and proving of the new system will require a
1,000 percent increase in budget. Plus, providers will require at least 10× standard charges per
telephone call.
This factual presentation of the change request enables stakeholders to
weigh the value of the change to the project. They can judge better if the
change adds significant value or threatens to push the project into a black
hole.
If the stakeholders approve the change, they should sign the Project
Change Request form. If they don’t approve, you can document the reason
for the denial and keep it in your files, should the subject come up again.
TO STAY OR NOT TO STAY
It took a minute for Olivia to take in the conclusion of Drew’s latest survey
report.
It took another minute for her to text every key stakeholder and ask for
a meeting—ASAP.
“Our survey surprised us,” she announced. “It appears that 90 percent of
our associates plan to work remotely. We were thinking it would be about
30 or 40 percent, so a major deliverable of our project was the repurposing
of the office building.
“Now it looks like the building will be virtually empty. Only the C-suite
and the finance and human resources departments have indicated they want
to stay in the building, which adds up to only about thirty people. If that’s
so, we have a serious decision to make.
“Does it make sense to maintain the current building? Do we drop the
repurposing plan from the project? Should we plan to relocate those thirty
people to a different venue entirely? In other words, do we stay here or
not?”The CEO, a blustery individual, said, “I question this whole project.
How can we do business with 90 percent of our employees off-site doing
who knows what? I’ve had my doubts from the beginning about this hybrid
thing. Sure, they’re going to want to stay home. Who wouldn’t?”
This was the CEO talking. Olivia tried not to panic. She had thought all
along that Maria, the HR manager, should have led the project, not her.
Now she gave Maria a fleeting look: Help! But Maria simply returned her
look.
“Um, thank you,” Olivia responded. “What do others have to say?”
Thankfully, she had her project management discipline to fall back on. It
was not time yet to decide anything.
The room was quiet for a full minute. Then Drew, who had become her
right hand on the team, spoke up. His thin beard trembled; she knew how
nervous he was.
“Our survey was not offhand in any way. Our team sat down with every
one of nearly three hundred people and went into depth with them. We
evaluated their roles, their workstations, their schedules, and their
environment. We sketched out a work plan for each person, including how
to collaborate. I believe in the integrity of our people, and I believe them
when they say they could work remotely more effectively and efficiently.”
“Of course they would say that,” the CEO interrupted, but Olivia spoke
up firmly. “Thank you, Drew. Next?”
One of Drew’s surveyors opened her laptop and read off some employee
comments about hybrid work and how much better it would be for them and
the organization. The main issue for them was commute time—many of
them struggled each day just to get from their homes to the downtown
offices. Traffic, public transport schedules, family conflicts—it added up to
hours out of their daily lives.
Olivia had brought in a consultant from Malfolio to advise on the
project, and she invited him to share his findings. He was trimly dressed in
a suit, a yellow tie, and socks. “Ironically, your most unengaged employees
are the ones who want to come into the office,” he said.
“That doesn’t make sense.” The CEO glared at the consultant, who
sniffed back at him.
“It’s true that remote work tends to distance employees from ‘the
organization,’” the consultant replied. “Loyalty declines somewhat. Butthen you’re dealing with a young workforce unlike the last generation, who
were ‘company people.’ Today’s workers want to make a contribution, but
they don’t necessarily identify with an organization.”
Jack, the chief financial officer, went next. “I’ll tell you what doesn’t
make sense—paying rent on this building if it’s 90 percent unoccupied, or
even 50 percent. We need to get out of the lease and find smaller quarters.”
He was brief and pointed, as usual.
The CEO warmed to Jack’s comment. “We’d save a bundle, wouldn’t
we?”
Sebastian, the head of European sales, was on videoconference. “But
what happens to collaboration? I know we’ve discussed it before, but
people need to be face-to-face sometimes.”
“We seem to be able to collaborate with you just fine, Seb,” Maria broke
in, and everyone laughed. “Seriously, though, he’s right. We will continue
to need good, creative, face-to-face collaboration. I suggest that we change
the repurposing component of our plan and start looking for a convenient
location with less office space and more collaboration space.”
Even the CEO assented to this. Gratefully, Olivia put a Project Change
Request form on the electronic whiteboard, and the group filled it in
together.
SCOPE CREEP VERSUS SCOPE DISCOVERY
The Project Change Request form requires deep thinking, but don’t worry.
You don’t need to fill it out for every change, but it does give you a thinking
process to follow when somebody suggests one. A small change here and
there is one thing—you shrug it off or take it on—but the principle of
accountability means that you think through big changes using this process.
And be careful about even small changes, because you can get nibbled
to death if they start to mount. “You need to settle on a specification and be
ruthless about delivering things from the core list before allowing others to
be added in,” says one expert. “Usually, developers are good people who
will bend over backward [to accommodate new requests]. If you multiply
this out, it can lead to significant non-delivery down the track.”34In Olivia’s case, the project required a major scope change. Most project
leaders would stumble at this—they live in fear of scope creep as it is—but
this was scope gallop. Nevertheless, sometimes the whole scope of the
project has to change because of new information.
There’s a big difference between scope creep and scope discovery. As a
project unfolds, you might learn things that make the original scope
statement inadequate for the real need. The smart project manager pledges
allegiance not to the scope statement but to the outcome the project is
intended to produce.
Always, the real goal is to create value, not to stay married to a project
plan.
How can you tell if you’re standing on the edge of a black hole or a
truly worthwhile discovery? Here are some guidelines:
If the Suggested Change . . . Then You Have
Adds cost and time without adding
significant value to the customer.
Makes the project more confusing or less
focused.
Provides value that can be produced some
other way.
Is motivated by politics rather than a real
need.
Scope creep
Creates significant new value.
Leads to a substantially better way to meet
the immediate needs of the stakeholders.
Clarifies the project’s purposes.
Focuses the project more narrowly on a
manageable solution.
Scope discovery
These guidelines help, but you have to rely on your common sense. If
you’re constantly adding baggage to the project, you might be sinking
under scope creep—especially if the baggage isn’t clearly necessary.
So how do you say no to a change request, particularly if the person
who wants the change is (let’s be honest) more influential than you are?Take the change through the filter of the Project Change Request tool.
It’s your “talk document” for your conversation with the proponent.
Remember the Five Foundational Behaviors:
Listen first. Make sure you record clearly what the change is
and why the proponent wants to make it. Remember to use
your key stakeholder questions to clarify.
Clarify expectations. Use the tool to identify any added value
and impacts on time, quality, and budget.
Extend trust. Assume that the proponent is coming to you in
good faith and means well.
Practice accountability. Remember that you are responsible
for carrying out the project as agreed, so you have to justify
adding to the scope. Make sure stakeholders are absolutely
clear on what it will mean to change the scope, and make sure
they explicitly approve or deny the request.
Demonstrate respect. It doesn’t do any good to fly into a rage
or bad-mouth people who propose changes to you. Besides, you
are a respectful person.
Living by these principles makes it easier to say no when you should.
I WANT MY CANDY NOW!
The top salesman of a candy company was constantly overpromising. He
took a huge order for a product that required a special gluten-free formula,
and the customer wanted it within thirty days. Even though the project team
worked day and night to get the formula just right, the ship date was in
jeopardy.
Then came the big whammy—the salesperson rushed in and
breathlessly announced that the customers now wanted the stuff in two
weeks.The project manager suspected that the salesperson was just trying to
meet an earlier revenue goal, but she practiced the Five Behaviors. She
listened respectfully. Then together they worked through a Project Change
Request form (while he complained she was wasting his time) to clarify the
expectation. She asked for a little time to see if she could work this out. She
did not want the salesperson to think of her as “reactive” (because she
certainly felt that way), and he was itching to get back with his clients.
The project manager shut the door. This was a delicate situation. She
didn’t want to upset the company’s best revenue producer, but the whole
deal was now at serious risk because there was too little time, not enough
budget, and most important, the company might be sacrificing quality in a
big way. With a couple of team members, she brainstormed solutions, but,
as she suspected, she couldn’t guarantee to ship a quality product in such a
short time. Her integrity was at stake.
Her next thought was to ask the boss to handle it, but she had a good
relationship with the salesperson and decided to talk to him directly first.
Carefully, she explained her dilemma. She appreciated his desire to
meet his customer’s needs, but she was accountable for the quality of the
new product. The risk to the firm was enormous.
The salesperson was a little taken aback at her candor and appreciated
the respect she showed him. He agreed to go back to the customer and try to
find some wiggle room on delivery dates.
It turned out that the customer only thought “it would be nice” to get the
shipment earlier, but they would be perfectly happy if it arrived on the
original date.
The Five Behaviors saved this project manager, but even if you live by
them, you might not be able to control changes. There are times to worry,
like when the direction of the project changes radically but the deadline
doesn’t, or vice versa. Still, you get the best results possible by using the
Project Change Request tool and practicing the Five Behaviors.
When we have no control over problems, said Stephen R. Covey, “our
responsibility is to smile, to genuinely and peacefully accept these
problems, and learn to live with them, even if we don’t like them. In this
way, we do not empower problems to control us.”35APPLICATION CHALLENGE
Use the following tool to analyze a proposed change to your project. Get
feedback from your stakeholders and watch for opportunities to add value.
TOOL: PROJECT CHANGE REQUEST
Project Name
Request By
Proposed Change
Reasons for the Change
How This Change Will Add ValueHow This Change Will Affect the Constraints
Time
Quality
Budget
Key Stakeholder Approval Date
TO SUM UP
In short, the fourth “step” in project management isn’t really a step. Using your project plan,
you track progress throughout the life of the project. If the situation changes or stakeholders
request changes to the project, you adapt as needed.
It’s like driving down a road on a journey. You make corrections as you go and eliminate
or avoid obstacles. You know where you’re going, but sometimes you run into a detour. You
have side roads to choose from, but it’s best to keep on the main road—the critical path. If
you change your destination, it will be for an awfully good reason.
Your tools for tracking the project and adapting to change are the Project Status Report
and the Project Change Request.
CHECK YOUR LEARNING
What are the uses of the Project Status Report?
How do the Five Foundational Behaviors help you
cope with unexpected changes?What’s the difference between scope creep and scope
discovery?
What are the criteria for accepting a substantial change
to the project scope?H
CHAPTER 7
CLOSE
The Goal: “Celebrate and prepare for future success.”
AVE YOU EVER WORKED ON a project that never ends? Then it’s not a
project. A project has a beginning and end.
But how do you know when the project is over?
It may seem the answer is obvious (“When it’s done”), but you won’t
really know if the project is over until you do these three things:
Confirm project close.
Document lessons learned.
Celebrate!Projects are temporary things.
Different organizations have different ways of closing a project.
Sometimes it involves heavy archiving of team records. Other organizations
are less formal.
Regardless of your process, review each item on this checklist to ensure
that your project is thoroughly “done.” You might want to hold a
stakeholder meeting to review the checklist or just go through it yourself.
TOOL: PROJECT CLOSE CHECKLIST
Confirm Project Close
Confirm fulfillment of project scope.
Confirm fulfillment of approved change requests.
Obtain necessary sign-offs.
Submit final status report, including measurable value added, to key stakeholders.
Document Lessons Learned
Seek feedback from key stakeholders/team members.
Record lessons learned.
Archive project documents.
Publish success.
Celebrate!
Distribute rewards and recognition.
CONFIRM PROJECT CLOSETo “confirm fulfillment of project scope” means to walk through the scope
statement to make sure everything is finished. Do the same thing with the
approved change requests to make sure changes have been done to
specification.
It’s an inspection. Construction people call it a “punch list”; they walk
through the building at the end of the project and list the little things that
might still need attention: a light bulb is missing, a screw is loose, a section
of wall is still unpainted, and so forth. Usually, the building contract isn’t
fulfilled until every item on the list is “punched” (the builders used to punch
a little hole in the margin of the list next to a finished task).
The same is true of your project. The principle of accountability means
no loose ends. Failure to close out the punch list can mean people don’t get
paid—including you. It could mean unnecessary re-work and (worst case)
lawsuits.
If the key stakeholders don’t see the need to walk through the closing
process with you, ask them, “Do you want it done, or done done?” In any
case, it’s a good idea to have them physically sign off on the final Project
Status Report.
SUCCESS OR FAILURE?
You’d think it would be easy to say if a project has succeeded or failed, but
it’s not. Failure, like success, is sometimes a matter of definition and who’s
doing the defining. Some will love the finished project, some will be
skeptical, and some may be unhappy after all.
In closing a project, you face the “speed up–slow down syndrome.”
Imagine you’re driving a tour bus through a great city—some of the tourists
will want you to speed up, others want you to slow down, but most of them
(the great bulging middle of the normal curve) are just happy to be there.
And if you feel like you may have messed up in some respect, you’re in
good company. The U.S. Navy once launched a grand project to build an
invisible airplane. They spent billions on the project before the budget
officer calculated that finishing it would consume the entire budget of the
navy for years to come. They canceled the whole thing.36The Shanghai Tower, the world’s second-tallest building and one of the
most innovative, is universally applauded as an engineering marvel. Yet
occupancy rates seriously lagged after its opening in part because of its
innovative style—apparently, a lot of space can’t be used due to the unique
design of the windows.37
Was this project a failure? In engineering terms, it was a great success.
In business terms, time will tell.
Originally budgeted at AU$7 million, the iconic Sydney Opera House
ended up costing more than AU$100 million, or fourteen times the original
estimate. According to Danish economic geographer Bent Flyvbjerg, it’s
“the most expensive cost blowout in the history of megaprojects around the
world.” Nevertheless, it has turned into one of Australia’s most valuable
assets, adding nearly AU$800 million to the national economy each year.
38
Was the Sydney Opera House a failure or a success?
And as we’ve seen, the James Webb Telescope sends us awe-striking
photos of deep space never before imagined—but it was twenty-two years
late and overran the budget by 1,000 percent.
Was this project a failure or a success? It’s all in how you define it.
One component of a project can fail and still produce good results.
Project management methods don’t completely prevent failure, but they
help mitigate it.
Too often, project “success” is defined by two measures: time and
budget. Of course, time and budget matter, but the main measure of success
is the value delivered to stakeholders—people. Are they happy with the
quality produced and the business results you set out to achieve? If so, you
have succeeded in your most important job as a project manager.
What if you’ve done the best you can, but your project is still perceived
as a “failure”?
Remember the Foundational Behaviors.
Demonstrate respect to provide a safe and welcoming environment for
feedback. Listen first, without being defensive, to the people who think the
project failed. Then practice accountability. Follow this good advice from a
project manager: “Give some serious thought to what you could have done
better, and deliver it to people in a way that shows that some good came ofthe failure, and you’re better for it. The ‘stench of failure’ is the inability to
learn from mistakes.”39
DOCUMENT LESSONS LEARNED
A key reason for formally closing out your project is to document what
you’ve learned along the way. A good project management program will
feature a way to do this.
To do this right, you need to conduct another interview—to get
feedback from key stakeholders and your team members. It’s a good idea to
also invite anyone who has to live with the results, namely users of the
product or service you’ve created.
We call this session a “project retrospective.” It’s a practice taken from
the Agile Method. The team holds a retrospective meeting specifically to
discuss improvements to the organization’s project processes. The agenda
for the retrospective is simple:
What was done well?
What needs to be done better or differently?
What unexpected risks did we have to deal with?
How does our project management process need to change to
meet future goals?
Record the feedback for future reference.
The Foundational Behaviors come into play here as well. Look at the
positives and the negatives. Ask the team to share their thoughts candidly
but remind them to do so respectfully—no finger-pointing at others. As
project leader, you are accountable for the outcome, so any fingers should
be pointed at you.
Do a lot of listening without responding or getting defensive. Your goal
is to collect feedback, not to defend yourself. The overall objective is to do
projects better from now on, so it’s in your best interest to be quiet and hearpeople out. If they feel safe enough to raise ideas for improving the process,
they’ll more likely want to play in the next game.
Your lessons learned can help the next project produce value faster,
cheaper, and better.
When we ask people if they can find the planning documents and the
lessons learned from previous projects, the overwhelming answer is “No!”
Don’t be like the man who found a bag of gold, dug a hole, hid it, and
then forgot where it was. Your project documents are gold. Imagine the
wealth of information buried in them for the next unofficial project manager
—and it could be you. If you can’t find the nuggets of gold you earned with
such hard work, what a waste. Now you have to go back and learn those
lessons all over again.
Publish your success. Let the world know what a great team you have
and what they’ve accomplished. Encourage the higher-ups to acknowledge
them with a note. Use the proper media channels to share the team’s
achievements—organization websites, blogs, podcasts, maybe even social
media. Successful projects have great public relations value.
Even if you deem your project a “mixed success,” your lessons learned
constitute value to your organization and to yourself. It’s called intellectual
capital, and it’s often just as important as financial capital to the future of
your organization.
CELEBRATE PROJECT CLOSE
How do you show your appreciation to people who have given so much to
the project?
You’ll have your own way of celebrating, but remember a few things.
People like to be recognized. A personal note goes a long way.
A little celebration is a good idea. Bring in key stakeholders and invite
them to say a few words about the team. Have some snacks. Be ready to say
something nice about each team member. Highlight the lessons you learned.
And above all, make sure everyone understands the value they’ve
created—in measurable, concrete terms—so they will know that they’ve
made a meaningful contribution.CUTTING THE RIBBON
Olivia was nervous but happy the day they opened the doors on a new
company headquarters. With a little creative thinking from the team and the
help of the consultant with the yellow socks, she had managed to move the
headquarters group into a new suite of offices with plenty of open
workstations and high-tech meeting zones for teams. Under the new hybrid
system, work teams would still be in the office almost continually, using
these first-class facilities.
The finance department had shifted funds from the repurposing project
and even found enough money to give bonuses to employees for upgrading
their remote workstations. The cost of the new lease was far below the cost
of maintaining the old office building. Operational costs were dropping
through the floor.
So far, employees were happy with the new hybrid system. They were
spending much less time and money on commutes and fancy coffees, so
they were pleased with the boost to their bank accounts and time with their
families. Sales were already up, and product teams were getting more done.
Now, with the stakeholders in attendance at a ribbon-cutting party,
Olivia gave everyone a concise report of the value added by the project.
“Our turnover rate in the last quarter has dropped by half. More than two
hundred associates are now working remotely, which has already resulted in
savings of nearly 50 percent in operational costs. Added to this, employee
time on task has gone up by at least 10 percent and is likely to rise further.
We attribute that mostly to less commute time.
“Finally, we anticipate the next fiscal year to be radically better than last
year due to massive cuts in operational budgets and increased productivity.”
Olivia felt pride bubble up as the stakeholders applauded her. She
invited the project team to stand and be recognized.
Now it was time to cut the large red ribbon on the door of the new office
suite. “You did it,” Maria said, giving her a congratulatory pat on the
shoulder.
A MIDSUMMER CELEBRATIONIt was midsummer eve in Oslo. With the sun still blazing at near midnight,
the Lettal company party went on and on with good food, music, and
dancing around a bonfire. Hedda and her team had a unique reason to
celebrate, and they did. The highlights were recorded to be shared online
with Lettal’s remote workers.
Then Tesman, the CEO of Lettal, called for quiet to say a few words to
everyone.
“I know you were skeptical when we set a goal of cutting our approval
times by 67 percent. I too had my doubts. But there are a lot of people in the
world who depend on us to get treatments to them—lifesaving, pain￾relieving treatments—and I consider it a vastly important responsibility.
The more quickly we can do that job, the better.
“We have pressed hard on you for the last two years. We have battered
our brains to imagine new ways of doing drug trials, new testing protocols,
a new writing process.
“A few changes are in place that I couldn’t imagine before. Some of
them seem a little crazy. We are partnering with the regulators—some
would say ‘the enemy’—and they are showing us how to move things along
faster. We are fast-tracking certain drugs. And we now start writing reports
before we have data!” There was a loud laugh. “Of course, we fill in the
data later.
“These and many other changes have paid off. I am happy to report to
you tonight that our compound 7XL—a new cancer treatment—has been
approved by the control agency in a record five months!” Everybody
cheered.
“This will mean hope and relief for thousands of cancer patients around
the world.”
“It will also mean millions for Lettal Pharmaceuticals,” Eilert whispered
to Joren, who grinned.
Tesman continued, “And I want to pay tribute tonight to the people who
have been overseeing this project: Hedda Rising and her project team.
Please raise your glasses to them!” Tesman pulled Hedda to her side and
asked her to bring up her team to be recognized.
Hedda spoke up. “It’s almost midnight, so I’ll be brief. Our team has
done the impossible in record time. We were failing for nearly a year, until I
learned the importance of accountability—regular, frequent, disciplinedaccountability. And the team responded beautifully. Thankfully, I learned
how to hold myself accountable as well. Doctors, scientists, writers, legal,
finance, marketing—even test subjects—gave their best and finest effort,
being accountable to each other for their achievements and solving
problems together. You know who you are.”
Berta, Tesman, Thea, Rina, and even Dr. Brack were beaming. And
Joren and Eilert were giving each other high fives.
“We have a long way to go,” Hedda concluded. “In fact, the search for
faster and better solutions never ends. Although this project is over, next
week we start again!”
TO SUM UP
In short, the last step in the project management process is to close the project. At the close,
we evaluate the success of the project and compile “lessons learned” that we can apply to
future projects. We also celebrate the many people who helped along the way, recognizing
their contributions and showing our personal appreciation.
Use the Project Close Checklist to ensure that you have delivered the value you promised
to deliver.
CHECK YOUR LEARNING
Why go through a closing process?
What is the agenda for a “close” meeting?
How are you going to carry forward the lessons you
learn on your project?
How are you going to recognize the contributions of
your team members?A
CONCLUSION
YOUR INFORMAL AUTHORITY IS NEEDED NOW!
FEW FINAL THOUGHTS FROM ONE of our authors:
At the end of an intense project management workshop, one participant
asked for a moment of my time.
“I realized something over the past two days,” he said. “I need to do
more work.”
“In which area?” I asked, expecting him to talk about some nuance of
the project process. He was a well-educated engineer with a slew of degrees
and certifications.
Instead, he confessed, “I need to work on the Foundational Behaviors. I
realized my projects fail because I don’t communicate well. I don’t clarify
expectations, and it never occurred to me that my biggest job is to trust and
inspire my team.
“This is my biggest takeaway. I can see now how leading wrong makes
everything else go wrong, too.”
He was one smart man.The biggest job you have is to grow your informal authority. If you get
so caught up in the tactics of managing projects that you forget the
Foundational Behaviors, you will not succeed no matter how the project
turns out.
Another participant added, “I’ve been a project manager for my whole
career, working on highly successful projects and some very unsuccessful
ones. Here’s what I’ve observed.
“Successful projects are transparent. Everyone knows what’s working
well and what isn’t. Information is shared and there’s no guessing. In
unsuccessful projects, information is doled out on an as-needed basis.
People work in silos, keep their heads down, and focus on their own thing.
They’re discouraged from asking questions.”
Clearly, many project leaders still need to catch up with the demands of
today. We need you to step up with your informal authority and get things
moving!
What we conclude from our experience is that a team can succeed
regardless of the process they use if the team members behave with
emotional maturity. Character and integrity count as much as skill and
knowledge.
Of course, the basic tools and skills in this book will help you be:
Confident in your ability to manage the process.
Well equipped to handle every step of the process.
Less fearful of risk and failure.
Better able to handle change.
But unless you show principled leadership, your teams will flounder.
So, as you practice the Foundational Behaviors, you’ll always succeed
as a person. As you become more expert in the skills and tools presented
here, you’ll start to notice that your projects—and your life—are moving
more smoothly. You’ll be dodging the big whammy and skipping past the
black holes with poise and self-assurance.
And in this wild, rapidly changing world we live in, you’ll find that
unofficial project management might just be the place to be.GLOSSARY
Many of the following definitions derive from PMI’s Guide to the Project
Management Body of Knowledge, seventh edition.
Acceptance criteria: A set of conditions that must be met before
deliverables are accepted.
Activity: A distinct, scheduled portion of work, usually to contribute
to completion of a project component.
Agile Method: A method of project management characterized by
short phases of work (sprints) and frequent reassessments and
adaptations to change.
Black hole: A point at which the project team’s attention and energy
are “sucked” into an uncontrollable aspect of the project.
Brainstorming: A quick, nonjudgmental, creative data-gathering
technique you can use to identify risks, ideas, or solutions to issues.
Best practice is to get a diverse group of experts, stakeholders, and
team members to brainstorm together.
Budget: The approved estimate of the cost of the project or any Work
Breakdown Structure deliverable, component, or activity.
Cadence of accountability: A rhythmic process for ensuring team
accountability for commitments made. Sessions are regular and
frequent.
Project Change Request: A tool for proposing a modification to the
project.Close: A process for finalizing project activities, compiling lessons
learned, and recognizing team accomplishments.
Component: A key element or subset of a deliverable.
Constraints: The restrictions or limitations that affect the project,
generally in the areas of time, scope, quality, and budget.
Critical path: The longest sequence of scheduled activities that must
start and end as scheduled and determine the duration of the
project. If any activity on the critical path is late, the entire project
will be late. It is your strategic instrument for managing the project.
Daily Scrum: See Team Accountability Session.
DANCE: An acronym for decisions, authority, need, connections, and
energy, a set of criteria for identifying key stakeholders on a
project.
Deliverable: Any unique and verifiable product, result, or capability
that is required to be produced to complete the project.
Dependency: A relationship where two activities are reliant on each
other’s start or finish.
Duration: The time on the calendar between the start and finish of a
scheduled activity.
Estimate: A quantitative guess of the likely amount of costs or
resources or duration.
Finish-to-Finish: A relationship in which one activity can’t finish
until a preceding activity has finished.
Finish-to-Start: A relationship in which an activity can’t start until a
preceding activity has finished.
Five Foundational Behaviors: Leadership behaviors of an effective
project manager: listen first, clarify expectations, extend trust,
practice accountability, and demonstrate respect.FranklinCovey Project Management Process: A straightforward set
of best practices and tools from many sources—including
traditional and Agile methods—to help unofficial project managers
succeed. Based on effective principles of personal leadership and
professional behavior.
Frontloading: The practice of getting as much information as possible
from as many stakeholders as possible as early as possible to ensure
a highly successful outcome and minimal risk.
Gantt chart: A bar chart on which scheduled activities are listed
vertically and dates are listed horizontally. The Gantt chart is a
popular method for displaying the project schedule.
Informal authority: The ability to inspire team members to want to
play on your team and win, even if they do not functionally report
to you.
Iteration: A short period of time in which a unit of work is developed,
deployed, and tested—followed by review.
Key stakeholder: Any person who determines the success or failure
of the project.
Lessons learned: The knowledge gained and recorded during a project
that can be used by future project teams to improve their processes.
Milestone: A significant decision point or event in a project.
Mind mapping: A graphic brainstorming tool used to generate ideas,
deliverables, components, tasks, and risks.
PERT (Program Evaluation and Review Technique): A technique for
estimating the duration of an activity. Duration = (o + 4n + p) / 6
where o is the most optimistic duration, p is the most pessimistic,
and n stands for “normal,” or the duration you think is most likely.
The number 4 balances the common tendency to make
unrealistically short estimates of duration. The number 6 refers to
the number of standard deviations between o and p.Plan: The process of identifying risks to the project and scheduling
project activities.
Project: A temporary endeavor with a start and finish, undertaken to
create a unique product, service, or outcome.
Project manager: The person assigned to lead the team responsible
for achieving the project objectives.
Project Scope Statement: A tool for defining the project purpose,
desired results, constraints, exclusions, and stakeholder approvals.
Project team: A set of individuals who support the project manager in
achieving the project objectives.
Risk: An uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, will have a
positive or negative effect on project objectives.
Scope: The sum of the products, services, and results to be provided.
Scope creep: The tendency of a project to change and grow out of
control.
Scrum: An Agile methodology designed to guide teams in the
iterative and incremental delivery of a product.
Sequencing: The process of identifying and documenting relationships
among the project activities.
Sprint: See Iteration.
Stakeholder: A person or an organization that is actively involved in
the project or is positively or negatively affected by it.
Start-to-Start: A relationship where an activity can’t start until a
preceding activity has started.
TAME: An acronym for a thinking tool used to decide how to manage
a risk—should the risk be transferred, accepted, mitigated, or
eliminated?Team Accountability Session: A brief and motivating meeting with
four agenda items: review the project schedule to see if the team is
on track, report on commitments, commit to new actions that will
keep the project on track, and clear the path for team members who
confront obstacles.
Track & Adapt: The process of reviewing the progress of the project
and identifying any changes that need to be made to the plan.
Waterfall Method: A traditional method of project management best
suited for initiatives that have well-defined scope and clear
objectives. The Waterfall Method emphasizes nailing the scope,
doing heavy upfront planning, executing the plans, and minimizing
change requests. The method gets the name “Waterfall” because of
the cascading effect of the step-by-step processes. For example,
those processes might be identified as initiating, planning,
executing, testing, and implementing the final product.
Work: The amount of effort in minutes, hours, or days needed to
accomplish a task.
Work Breakdown Structure (WBS): A hierarchy of project
deliverables and their associated components, adding up to the
whole scope of work to be carried out to accomplish project
objectives.NOTES
1
Joey Roulette, “How NASA’s Biggest Telescope Beat Loose Screws, Loose Budgets and Loose
Clamps,” New York Times, December 23, 2001.
2 Mark A. Phillipy, “Delivering Business Value: The Most Important Aspect of Project
Management,” paper presented at PMI Global Congress 2014, Newtown Square, PA: Project
Management Institute.
3 Antonio Nieto-Rodriguez, “The Project Economy Has Arrived,” Harvard Business Review,
November–December 2021, 171.
4 Cited in Kristina Podnar, “A PM’s Guide to Digital Policy,” Project Management.com, June 20,
2019, https://www.projectmanagement.com/articles/556777/a-pm-s-guide-to-digital-policy.
5 Ray Ahern, “The Case of KISS: Keeping It Simple in a Complex Environment,” BrightHub PM,
May 29, 2013, https://www.brighthubpm.com/project-planning/123887-the-case-for-kiss-keeping-it￾simple-in-a-complex-environment/.
6
 Nieto-Rodriguez, “The Project Economy,” 172.
7
 Ibid.
8 Lavagnon A. Ika and Jeffrey K. Pinto, “The ‘Re-Meaning’ of Project Success: Updating and
Recalibrating for a Modern Project Management,” International Journal of Project Management 40,
no. 10 (August 2022): 2.
9
 Stephen R. Covey, Principle-Centered Leadership, New York: Simon & Schuster, 1992, 19.
10 Ahern, “The Case of KISS.”
11
 Nieto-Rodriguez, “The Project Economy,”172.
12 “Principle #1,” The Agile Manifesto, The Agile Alliance,
https://www.agilealliance.org/agile101/12-principles-behind-the-agile-manifesto/.
13 A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge: PMBOK Guide, 7th edition, Newtown
Square, PA: Project Management Institute, 2021, 33.
14 Elizabeth Harrin, “The 12 Principles of Project Management,” Rebel’s Guide to Project
Management, December 13, 2022, https://rebelsguidetopm.com/the-12-principles-of-project￾management/.
15 The Palgrave Handbook of Service Management, Bo Edvardsson and Bard Tronvoll, eds., Cham,
Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan, 2022, 25.
16 Seth Godin, Tribes: We Need You to Lead Us, London: Portfolio, 2008, 28–30.
17 Shane Hastie and Stéphane Wojewoda, “Standish Group 2015 Chaos Report—Q&A with Jennifer
Lynch,” October 4, 2015, InfoQ, https://www.infoq.com/articles/standish-chaos-2015/.18 Deloitte Global 2022 Gen Z and Millennial Survey, cited in Krista Lomu, “What Managers
Should Know About Generation-Z Work Ethic,” Contractbook, May 30, 2022,
https://contractbook.com/blog/what-managers-should-know-about-generation-z-work-ethic.
19 Stephen M. R. Covey, The Speed of Trust: The One Thing That Changes Everything (New York:
Simon & Schuster, 2006), 227.
20 Harrin, “The 12 Principles.”
21 PMBOK, 54.
22 Ralph Kleim, Effective Communications for Project Management (Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press,
2008), 31.
23 Jeff Gothelf, “How Project Managers Can Stay Relevant in Agile Organizations,” Harvard
Business Review, May 10, 2021, https://hbr.org/2021/05/how-project-managers-can-stay-relevant-in￾agile-organizations.
24 PMBOK, 246.
25 Stephen R. Covey, The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, New York: Simon & Schuster, 2013,
101.
26 Seth Godin, “The Three Toxic Stooges of the Project Apocalypse,” Seth’s Blog, November 19,
2013, https://seths.blog/2013/11/the-three-toxic-stooges-of-the-project-apocalypse/.
27 PMBOK, 250.
28 Alexander Laufer et al., “What Successful Project Managers Do,” MIT Sloan Management
Review, March 16, 2015, 46.
29 PMBOK, 167.
30 Godin, “The Three Toxic Stooges.”
31 Stephen R. Covey, First Things First: Live, Love, Learn, Leave a Legacy, New York: Free Press,
2003, 2.
32 “Principle #2,” The Agile Manifesto.
33 Joe Knight, Roger Thomas, and Brad Angus, “The Dirty Little Secret of Project Management,”
Harvard Business Review Blog Network, March 11, 2013, https://hbr.org/2013/03/the-dirty-little￾secret-of-pro.
34 Lawrence Baynham, cited in Sylvia Pennington, “Seven Signs Your Project Is Heading for
Disaster,” Sydney Morning Herald, July 25, 2012.
35 Covey, The 7 Habits, 93.
36 Joy Gumz, “Project Management Is Not Project Management Is Not Project Management,” paper
presented at PMI Global Congress 2010—North America, Washington, DC, October 12, 2010,
https://www.pmi.org/learning/library/project-management-industry-based-constraints-6542.
37 “Has World’s 2nd Tallest Building Failed? The Pros and Cons of Shanghai Tower’s Unique
Design,” CGTN, September 1, 2020, https://www.cgtn.com/.
38 Jessica Irvine, “Why Sydney’s Opera House Was the World’s Biggest Planning Disaster,”
Courier-Mail (Brisbane), October 22, 2013.
39 “How Do I Survive a Failed Project?,” The Workplace Stack Exchange, May 10, 2013,
http://workplace.stackexchange.com.INDEX
Index can be referenced as a list of searchable words or terms A
abandonment
acceptance, of risk
acceptance criteria
accomplishments of team members accountability. see cadence of accountability; practice
accountability (foundational behavior); team accountability action items
activists
activities
adapt. see track and adapt (phase of project) adapting to change
advertising industry
“Agile Manifesto”
Agile Method
assignment to activities
authenticity
authority
formal
informal
of stakeholders
B
banking industry
bar charts
baselines
believers
“big picture”
black holes
blocking of ideas
bottlenecks
brainstorming
brand awareness
budget(s)
as constraint
in Mind Maps
negotiation of
and project failures
in Project Scope Statements as term
business-case failuresC
cadence of accountability candy company (case study) changes to project. see project changes
changing standards
character, inner
charts. see Gantt charts; Waterfall Method clarify expectations (foundational behavior) clarifying the
problem
clearing the path
clients
close (phase of project)
celebration of
confirmation of
and documentation of lessons learned and failure vs. success as term
closed questions
commitment to project
communication
community members
“compass” for project
competing priorities
components
connections of stakeholders considerations
constraints
consultants
contacts, preferred
controversies
conversations
performance
positive
cost overruns
counterfeit trust
courage
Covey, Stephen R.
Covey, Stephen R. M.
critical paths
critics
cross-functional teams
cross-training
customers
customer satisfaction
D
daily scrum. see team accountability session Daily Standup Meeting
DANCE acronym
decisions
delays
deliverables
Deloittedemonstrate respect (foundational behavior) dependencies
desired results. see results, desired detailed questions
disbelievers
documentation, of lessons learned drug approvals process (case study) and close of project
description of problems with and duration of work
and Five Foundational Behaviors and milestones
and Performance Conversation and project review
and Project Scope Statement and stakeholders
and Team Accountability Sessions and team members
duration of activities
E
educational results
elimination, of risk
emotional maturity
empathy
energy, negative
energy of stakeholders
engage (phase of project) cadence of accountability commitment to project
performance conversations team accountability
estimates
ethics
expectations. see also clarify expectations (foundational behavior) experts
extend trust (foundational behavior) F
facts, of situation
failures, of business-case failure vs. success feedback loops
file sharing, secure
finish-to-finish dependencies finish-to-start dependencies Five Foundational Behaviors. see also
specific behaviors, e.g., listen first and lessons learned
and negativity
outline of
and personal success
and project failures
and team accountability
as term
float
follow-through
follow-up
FranklinCovey Project Management Process frontloading
funnel questions
G
Gantt charts
generational differences, of workers Godin, Seth
grade-level reading project (case study) green lights, on deliverables group interviewsGuide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) Gumz, Joy
H
Harrin, Elizabeth
Harvard University
huddles. see Team Accountability Sessions hybrid work system (case study) and closing of project
description of problems with and duration of activities and Mind Map
and positive conversations and proactivity
and project change
and team members
tracking and adaptation of I
identification, risk
impact
of project change
of risk factor
of situation
initial conditions, sensitivity to inspectors
intellectual capital
intent
of change
defining of
interviews, group
iterations
J
James Webb Space Telescope job descriptions
K
Key Stakeholder Interview tool key stakeholders
identification of
interviewing of
as term
kickoff meetings
King, Martin Luther, Jr.
knowledge workers
L
lack of commitment
Laufer, Alexander
leadership
legal advisors
lessons learnedlisten first (foundational behavior) M
management (term)
marketing industry
marketplace
market share
maturity, emotional
meetings
micromanagement
milestones
mind mapping
Mind Maps tool
mitigation, of risk
Murphy’s Law
N
NASA
needs, of stakeholders
needs of stakeholders
negative energy
net present value (NPV)
New York Times
Nieto-Rodriguez, Antonio
NPV (net present value)
O
offsite work. see hybrid work system (case study) older generations
online workspaces
open questions
opportunity tracking
organizational transformations outcomes. see also desired results overall project health
P
Parkinson’s Law
people resources
Performance Conversation Planner tool performance conversations personal success
PERT (Program Evaluation and Review Technique) pharmaceutical industry. see drug approvals
process (case study) plan (phase of project)
building of risk strategy creation of project schedule and duration of activities scheduling
programs for
and team recruitment
and work breakdown structure and work vs. duration plan (term)
PMBOK. See Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) PMI (Project
Management Institute) politicspositive conversation
practice accountability (foundational behavior) principles (term)
principles of success
people
process
value
priorities
proactivity
probability, of risk factor problem(s)
process
process compliance
process management
product development
Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) programs
project management
scheduling
progress, on schedule
progress tracking
Project Change Request tool Project Close Checklist tool project management
profession
programs
Project Management Institute (PMI) Project Management Process, FranklinCovey project
retrospectives
project(s)
changes to
commitment to
complex
description of
exclusions of
failures of
goals of
health of
leaders of
outcomes of
ownership of
purpose of
reports and reviews of
schedules
teams
templates for
as term
timelines for
Project Schedule tool
project scope
documentation of
statements
Project Scope Statement tool project status
communication ofmeetings on
reviews of
Project Status Report tool project tracking and adaptation. see track and adapt (phase of project)
prototype reports
publishing successes
Q
qualitative value
quality
quantitative value
questions, types of
R
reactivity
reading project. see grade-level reading project recruiting the team
red lights, on deliverables regulators
relevance
remote workspaces. see hybrid work system (case study) reports
resources, unrealistic
respect
results, desired
return on investment (ROI) risk and risk factors acceptance of
communication about
elimination of
identification of
mitigation of
prioritization of
probability of
strategies for
as term
transfer of
risk management
Risk Management tool
Risk Strategy tool
ROI (return on investment) “rolling wave” process
S
scheduling programs
scope (phase of project)
documentation of
identification of key stakeholders interviews with key stakeholders problems with
and sensitivity to initial conditions scope (term)
scope creepscope discovery
scope statement
scrum. see also Team Accountability Session self-respect
sensitivity to initial conditions sequencing of activities
Shanghai Tower
shared expectations
skeptics
slack
software industry
The Speed of Trust (Covey) sprints. see iterations Stakeholder Identification tool stakeholders. see
also key stakeholders authority of
communication with
connections of
energy of
expectations of
needs of
as term
working with
standards
Standish Group
start-to-finish dependencies start-to-start dependencies success, personal
success, vs. failure suppliers
sustainability shortfalls Sydney Opera House
T
TAME acronym
team
accountability of
behavior of
building of
members of
Team Accountability Sessions Team Accountability Session tool technology
thank-you meeting
thought maps
time constraints
timelines
time overruns
tools
Key Stakeholder Interview tool Mind Map tool
Performance Conversation Planner tool Project Change Request form Project Close Checklist tool
Project Schedule tool
Project Scope Statement tool Project Status Report tool Risk Management tool
Risk Strategy tool
Stakeholder Identification tool team accountability session tool Team Accountability Session tool
track and adapt (phase of project) black holes
and hybrid workproactivity
project change process
project review
project status communication scope creep
term
tracking, of opportunities transformations, organizational trust
truth
V
value
adding
creation of
qualitative vs. quantitative and relevance
values, of companies
W
Waterfall Method
WBS. see work breakdown structure “whirlwinds”
WIIFM (what’s in it for me) work
work breakdown structure (WBS) workers, generational differences of working from home. see
hybrid work system (case study) workspaces, online
work vs. duration
Y
yellow lights, on deliverables younger workers
Yousafzai, MalalaABOUT THE AUTHORS
Kory Kogon is FranklinCovey’s Vice President of Content Development, focusing her thought
leadership on key pragmatic strategices around leadership and productivity. She is one of the authors
of The 5 Choices: The Path to Extraordinary Productivity, Project Management for the Unofficial
Project Manager, and Presentation Advantage.
Kory brings more than twenty-five years of business expertise from frontline positions to being
an executive team member. Prior to FranklinCovey, Kory spent six years as the Executive Vice
President of Worldwide Operations for Alpha-Graphics, Inc, a global organization. She was
responsible for the team and projects that helped franchisees start up their business, develop staff,
and reach profitability. She led the implementation of ISO 9000 globally and managed the
installation of the first company-wide global learning system.
Kory has been honored as one of the “Top 30 Business Women to Watch” in Utah. Kory has
earned a Certificate in the Foundations of NeuroLeadership from the NeuroLeadership Institute.Suzette Blakemore is the Vice President of Sales for FranklinCovey’s Enterprise division, where she
leads 160 salespeople and is accountable for double-digit annual growth and millions in sales
revenue. Suzette is a subject matter expert for FranklinCovey’s Communication Advantage series and
is well known for her practical approach to achieving and sustaining high levels of superior
performance through a focus on productive, effective work. Suzette is also a beloved speaker on the
topics of leadership, women leaders, and project management.
Recently recognized by the Women We Admire Organization, Suzette often volunteers to work
with small business owners looking to increase sales revenue or build field selling teams. She has
served on multiple board and peer committees and enjoys networking wherever possible. Suzette has
three adult children and three grandchildren. When she isn’t spending time with them, she and her
husband John love to travel and scuba dive.
