Denis Waitley
Eighth Edition
PSYCHOLOGY 
of SUCCESS
Maximizing Fulfillment in Your Career and LifePsychology of Success
Maximizing Fulfillment in Your Career and Life
eighth edition
Denis Waitley, Ph.D.PSYCHOLOGY OF SUCCESS
Published by McGraw Hill LLC, 1325 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019. Copyright ©2024 by 
McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this publication may 
be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without 
the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC, including, but not limited to, in any network or other electronic 
storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside the 
United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 LMN 27 26 25 24 23 22
ISBN 978-1-265-03499-3
MHID 1-265-03499-0
Cover Image: vs148/Shutterstock
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the copyright page.
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a website does 
not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw Hill LLC, and McGraw Hill LLC does not guarantee the 
accuracy of the information presented at these sites.
mheducation.com/higheredBrief Contents
Introduction xii
CHAPTER 1 Psychology and Success 2
CHAPTER 2 Self-Awareness 48
CHAPTER 3 Goals and Obstacles 96
CHAPTER 4 Self-Esteem 136
CHAPTER 5 Positive Thinking 192
CHAPTER 6 Self-Discipline 236
CHAPTER 7 Self-Motivation 284
CHAPTER 8 Managing Your Resources 320
CHAPTER 9 Communication and Relationships 358
Glossary 404
Key Points 415
Further Reading 420
Index 423iv About the Author
Denis Waitley is a world-renowned expert and motivational speaker on human performance and 
potential. Best known as the author/narrator of The Psychology of Winning, he has helped millions of 
people throughout the world in their quest for personal excellence. He is the author of several 
best-selling books, including Seeds of Greatness, The Winner’s Edge, Being the Best, and Empires of the 
Mind. His newest book, The Dragon and The Eagle, compares the challenges facing both China and 
America in education and business as they attempt to survive and thrive together in a rapidly 
changing world.
Long recognized as an authority on high-level achievement, Dr. Waitley has counseled leaders in 
every field, from CEOs to Super Bowl champions. He has lent his understanding and expertise to 
American astronauts and POWs. Dr. Waitley has also served as Chairman of Psychology on the U.S. 
Olympic Committee’s Sports Medicine Council, dedicated to the performance enhancement of 
Olympic athletes.
One of the country’s most sought-after speakers, Denis Waitley was named Outstanding Platform 
Speaker of the Year by his peers and elected to the International Speakers’ Hall of Fame. He is 
a graduate of the U.S. Naval Academy at Annapolis and holds a doctorate in human behavior. 
Dr. Waitley was a founding director of the National Association for Self-Esteem and has been a 
consultant to the President’s Council on Vocational Education and the International Parenting 
Association.
About the AuthorContents
CHAPTER 1 Psychology and Success 2
Career Path Story “Moving Up the Ladder” 2
SECTION 1.1 Understanding Success 4
What Is Success? 4
Activity 1: What Success Means to You 5
Personal Journal 1.1 Ingredients of Success 9
Activity 2: Your Role Model 11
Activity 3: Self-Awareness Checklist 14
Understanding Psychology 17
Personal Journal 1.2 Your Thoughts, Feelings, and Actions 24
SECTION 1.2 Understanding Yourself 27
Your Inner Self 27
Personal Journal 1.3 How Do You See Yourself? 32
You and Your Social World 33
Activity 4: Wheel of Life 34
Activity 5: Sides of Yourself 37
Activity 6: Identity Profile 40
Chapter Review and Activities 45
Career Path Story “Moving Up the Ladder” 47
CHAPTER 2 Self-Awareness 48
Career Path Story “What Do I Really Want?” 48
SECTION 2.1 Finding Your Direction 50
Developing Self-Awareness 50
Personal Journal 2.1 How Well Do You Know Yourself? 51
Activity 7: Private Self-Awareness Checklist 53
Defining Your Dreams 54
Getting in Touch with Your Values 57
Personal Journal 2.2 What Are Your Dreams? 58
Activity 8: Values Inventory 61
SECTION 2.2 Discovering Your Strengths 64
Personality and Individuality 64
Activity 9: Personality Self-Portrait 66
Activity 10: Discover Your Multiple Intelligences 73
Exploring Your Skills and Interests 77
Activity 11: Skills Assessment 78vi Contents
Personal Journal 2.3 Exploring Your Interests 82
Putting It All Together: Self-Awareness and Career 84
Activity 12: Interest Survey 90
Chapter Review and Activities 93
Career Path Story “What Do I Really Want?” 95
CHAPTER 3 Goals and Obstacles 96
Real-Life Success Story “Where Do I Go From Here?” 96
SECTION 3.1 Setting and Achieving Goals 98
What Are Your Goals? 98
Activity 13: Setting SMART Goals 102
Activity 14: Generating Short-Term Goals 104
Personal Journal 3.1 Goal Cards 107
Overcoming Obstacles 108
Activity 15: Anticipating Obstacles 112
SECTION 3.2 Handling Stress and Anger 116
Stress and Stressors 116
Activity 16: How Stressed Are You? 119
Personal Journal 3.2 Stress Management Techniques 124
Activity 17: Personal Stressors and Relievers 125
Personal Journal 3.3 Stress Relief Reminders 127
Personal Journal 3.4 Anger Triggers 131
Chapter Review and Activities 133
Real-Life Success Story “Where Do I Go From Here?” 135
CHAPTER 4 Self-Esteem 136
Career Path Story “Do I Have What It Takes?” 136
SECTION 4.1 Understanding Self-Esteem 138
The Power of Self-Esteem 138
Activity 18: Test Your Self-Esteem 141
Activity 19: Social Support and Self-Esteem 152
Self-Expectancy and Self-Esteem 154
Personal Journal 4.1 Examine Your Self-Expectancy 156
Activity 20: Accomplishment Inventory 158
Personal Journal 4.2 Learning to Cope 161SECTION 4.2 Learning to Like Yourself 162
Self-Acceptance and Self-Esteem 162
Activity 21: Personal Inventory 165
Personal Journal 4.3 Your Ideal Self 171
Using Positive Self-Talk 172
Activity 22: Negative Self-Talk Log 174
Criticism and Self-Esteem 179
Activity 23: Handling Criticism 185
Chapter Review and Activities 188
Career Path Story “Do I Have What It Takes?” 190
CHAPTER 5 Positive Thinking 192
Real-Life Success Story “Will Things Go My Way?” 192
SECTION 5.1 Becoming a Positive Thinker 194
Positive Thinking and Optimism 194
Adopting Positive Habits 199
Activity 24: Are You a Positive Thinker? 200
Personal Journal 5.1 Focusing on the Good 202
Activity 25: Banishing Worry 206
Thinking Style and Health 208
Personal Journal 5.2 Depression Self-Check 210
Activity 26: What’s Your Health Attitude? 212
SECTION 5.2 Conquering Negative Thoughts 216
Overcoming Self-Defeating Attitudes 216
Recognizing Distorted Thoughts 218
Activity 27: Challenging Self-Defeating Attitudes 219
Personal Journal 5.3 From Irrational to Rational 226
Changing Your Negative Thoughts 226
Activity 28: Disputing Negative Thoughts 229
Chapter Review and Activities 232
Real-Life Success Story “Will Things Go My Way?” 234
CHAPTER 6 Self-Discipline 236
Real-Life Success Story “Should I Make a Change?” 236
SECTION 6.1 Taking Control of Your Life 238
What Is Self-Discipline? 238viii Contents
Personal Journal 6.1 Going Against the Odds 241
Controlling Impulses 243
Activity 29: Do You Control Your Life? 244
Embracing Change 246
Personal Journal 6.2 Thinking Long Term 247
Activity 30: Making Positive Changes 249
Conquering Bad Habits 251
Activity 31: Overcoming Resistance to Change 252
Activity 32: Getting to Know Your Bad Habits 256
Personal Journal 6.3 Habit Change Chart 259
SECTION 6.2 Disciplining Your Thinking 261
Learning to Think Critically 261
Activity 33: How Critical Is Your Thinking? 263
Becoming a Better Decision Maker 269
Activity 34: Developing Your Critical Thinking 270
Activity 35: Using the Decision-Making Process 274
Personal Journal 6.4 Pros and Cons 279
Chapter Review and Activities 281
Real-Life Success Story “Should I Make a Change?” 283
CHAPTER 7 Self-Motivation 284
Real-Life Success Story “How Can I Succeed?” 284
SECTION 7.1 Understanding Motivation 286
The Power of Motivation 286
Personal Journal 7.1 Generating Positive Motivation 288
Activity 36: What Motivates You? 290
Needs and Motivation 293
Activity 37: Are Your Needs Being Met? 299
SECTION 7.2 Recharging Your Motivation 301
Motivation and Emotion 301
Overcoming Fear of Failure 303
Overcoming Fear of Success 305
Activity 38: Expanding Your Comfort Zone 306
Visualization 309
Personal Journal 7.2 Confronting Fear of Success 310
Activity 39: Visualizing Success 314
Chapter Review and Activities 316
Real-Life Success Story “How Can I Succeed?” 318CHAPTER 8 Managing Your Resources 320
Real-Life Success Story “Will I Ever Be Able to Enjoy Some 
‘Free’ Time?” 320
SECTION 8.1 Time Management 322
Taking Control of Your Time 322
Activity 40: Time-Demand Survey 324
Personal Journal 8.1 Prioritizing Your Life 327
Activity 41: Examining Your Priorities 329
Activity 42: Time-Management Practice 332
Personal Journal 8.2 What’s Your Prime Time? 334
Tackling Procrastination 334
Activity 43: Do You Procrastinate? 336
SECTION 8.2 Money Management 339
Money Matters 339
Personal Journal 8.3 How Do You See Money? 340
Activity 44: Expense Log 343
Stretching Your Resources 347
Activity 45: Budget Worksheet 348
Personal Journal 8.4 Look Before You Leap 352
Chapter Review and Activities 355
Real-Life Success Story “Will I Ever Be Able to Enjoy Some 
‘Free’ Time?” 357
CHAPTER 9 Communication and Relationships 358
Career Path Story “How Do I Talk to My Supervisor?” 358
SECTION 9.1 Effective Communication 360
A Look at Communication 360
Activity 46: How Much Do You Know About Communication? 361
Nonverbal Communication 366
Activity 47: Analyzing Communication 367
Improving Your Communication Skills 372
Activity 48: Body Language Log 373
Personal Journal 9.1 “I” Statements 377
Activity 49: Giving Feedback 379
SECTION 9.2 Healthy Relationships 385
A Look at Relationships 385x Contents
Personal Journal 9.2 Understanding Diversity 388
Personal Journal 9.3 Circles of Yourself 390
Interpersonal Relationships 392
Activity 50: Your Close Relationships 394
Personal Journal 9.4 Dealing with Conflict 399
Chapter Review and Activities 401
Career Path Story “How Do I Talk to My Supervisor?” 403
Glossary 404
Key Points 415
Further Reading 420
Index 423
FIGURES Table of Figures
FIGURE 1.1 Positive and Negative Emotions 26
FIGURE 2.1 Feeling Words 55
FIGURE 2.2 Expanding Your Intelligences 76
FIGURE 3.1 SMART Goals 100
FIGURE 3.2 The ABC Model 116
FIGURE 4.1 Childhood Origins of Self-Esteem 150
FIGURE 4.2 You and Your Ideal 170
FIGURE 4.3 Responding to Constructive Criticism 181
FIGURE 4.4 Responding to Destructive Criticism 183
FIGURE 5.1 The Power of Positive Thoughts 196
FIGURE 5.2 Self-Defeating Attitudes: A Vicious Cycle 217
FIGURE 5.3 The ABCDE Method 228
FIGURE 6.1 Ingredients of Self-Discipline 239
FIGURE 7.1 Positive and Negative Motivation 287
FIGURE 7.2 Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs 295
FIGURE 7.3 Expanding the Comfort Zone 304
FIGURE 8.1 Where the Money Goes 345
FIGURE 9.1 Elements of Communication 363
FIGURE 9.2 Influences on Nonverbal Communication 372
FIGURE 9.3 The Johari Window 397FEATURES professional development )))
Internal and External Motivators 7
Career Fulfillment 89
Job Stress 122
Positive Image at Work/First Impressions Matter 163
Positive Thinking in Action at Work 204
Wanted: Problem Solvers 273
What Motivates Employees? 302
Time-Management Tips 338
Investing in Your Future 346
Your Cover Letter—The Competitive Edge 381
Applying Psychology
Lead by Example
*
59
Technology and Stress 117
Culture and Body Image 168
Aging with an Attitude 195
A Little Guilt Can Be Good for You 245
Six Types of Achievement Motivation 297
The “Mind” of Spending or Saving 347
Emotional Intelligence 371
internet action
Virtual Therapy 18
Online Personality Profiles 65
Scrolling the Day Away 110
Your Social Network 154
Building and Tracking Your Optimum Health Plan 215
Artificial Intelligence Versus Human Intelligence 262
Staying Motivated with E-Learning 296
Managing Your Online Identity 393xii Introduction
Introduction
Author’s Overview
This eighth edition of Psychology of Success: 
Maximizing Fulfillment in Your Career and Life
is a more comprehensive version that combines 
leading-edge scientific research with timeless 
knowledge to substantiate how important it is to 
understand how and why we behave the way we 
do in our careers and personal lives. Further, this 
edition considers how the world has changed 
since the pandemic, particularly in regard to 
behavior, technology, health, and diversity. This 
edition designed to help you adapt and thrive in 
the modern world. As the age-old adage says, “It is 
not so much what happens to us that matters 
most, but how we take it and what we make of it!”
This new edition is designed to help you identify 
what authentic success means to you and train 
your brain to make success more of a habit, just 
like Olympians, astronauts, and gifted performers 
excel as a result of knowledge, skills, and practice.
Neuroscience research continues to advance at 
an unprecedented pace. As neuroscience research￾ers work to unravel the inner workings of the brain, 
we know more than ever about the mysteries, of 
where emotions originate in the brain and the con￾nections among instinct, intelligence, and emotion. 
This work is yielding fascinating insights that we 
can use to understand how we react to situations 
and people. The brain, which is a much more 
flexible organ than previously thought, can be con￾sciously rewired to be more emotionally trainable, 
understanding, and sensitive.
Recently, the convergence of behavioral 
psychology and neuroscience has become highly 
sophisticated with major corporations hiring 
neural research companies to understand 
employee and customer behavior from a new 
perspective. Just as yesterday’s world records are 
today’s entry-level requirements, so too has a 
new tipping point been reached in understanding 
the secrets to motivating and communicating 
effectively with the emerging leaders in our 
professional and personal lives.
We live in a fast-forward world with more 
changes in one of our days than in a decade of 
our grandparents’ lives. Every five minutes a new 
scientific research study is published involving 
some new technological or biotechnology 
discovery. Unfortunately, some of our most incred￾ible technology wonders, including virtual reality, 
artificial intelligence, robotics, and social network￾ing bombard our senses 24/7. The average brain 
has around 50,000 thoughts per day and seventy 
percent of them are believed to be negative.
We learn by observation, imitation, and rep￾etition. We seize upon role models, observe their 
actions, imitate, then become what we see, hear, 
read, feel, and touch. No single realization is as 
important as this in understanding and dealing 
with our brains and minds. “Why do we do what 
we do, when we know what we know? We know 
better than to fall into the trap of substance 
abuse, internalize unhealthy habits, procrastinate, 
alienate, prevaricate, yell and lose composure 
over trifles, and, on occasion, engage in road 
rage. So why do we do what we do, when we 
know what we know? Because we don’t always 
do what we know. We do what we have learned!
Much of our learning takes place by 
unconscious modeling. Observation, Imitation, 
Repetition = Internalization. This edition of 
Psychology of Success is designed to make your 
definition of success easier to actualize in your 
own life. Our hope is that it will give you a 
clearer path as to:
• How to view your mind as your internal 
“software” program—containing attitudes, 
beliefs, and habits that can be overwritten 
to produce desired results.
• How to treat your brain and central nervous 
system as your physiological “mission control 
center” consisting of pre-programmed genetic 
data, as well as data based on past and present 
life experiences that prevent you from or 
propel you toward completing your aspirations.• Provide real-life useful daily examples and 
action steps on how to lead yourself and others 
to more effective interpersonal and intraper￾sonal communications, increased focus on 
primary priorities, a healthier, more optimistic 
view of the future, and how to handle setbacks, 
challenges, and difficult situations with 
resiliency and emotional intelligence.
—Denis Waitley
Preface
Welcome to Psychology of Success. Success is a 
lifetime of personal fulfillment that comes from 
creating a sense of meaning in all aspects of life. 
To succeed in this way, students must take an 
active role in discovering and pursuing their 
personal definition of success, and use the psycho￾logical and fundamental strategies in this course 
to achieve their goals. This book introduces you 
to the fundamental psychological principles of 
success—principles applicable to everyone 
regardless of age, background, or specialty.
Unlike many psychology books, Psychology 
of Success doesn’t take a one-size-fits-all 
approach. Instead, it asks you to take an active 
role in defining what is right for you as an indi￾vidual. Psychology of Success calls on you to use 
self-awareness and critical thinking strategies to 
examine your dreams, values, interests, skills, 
needs, identity, self-esteem, and relationships. 
This will help you set and achieve goals that are 
in harmony with your personal vision of success.
Psychology of Success presents the principles 
of success in a logical order. First you will assess 
who you are and what special qualities you pos￾sess, which will help you develop self-awareness 
and clarify your goals. Next you will learn about 
the importance of self-esteem and positive think￾ing to a satisfying life. You’ll also learn about 
self-discipline and self-motivation, which are the 
tools you’ll need to keep yourself on track toward 
your goals. Once you have mastered these psy￾chological tools, you’ll learn the fundamentals of 
time and money management, communication, 
and positive relationships.
Because each chapter refers to concepts 
introduced in previous chapters, you’ll derive 
maximum benefit from working through the 
book chapter by chapter. If your time is limited, 
however, you may choose to concentrate on the 
topics of greatest interest to you.
Features
The features of Psychology of Success are 
designed to help you understand and remember 
the psychological principles introduced in each 
chapter. They are also intended to provoke 
thought and discussion and to help you make 
the material relevant to your life.
Career Story/Real-Life Success Story
Begin each chapter by reading the Career Path/
Real-Life Success Story, a vignette about an ordi￾nary person struggling with the problems and 
challenges addressed in the chapter. Use the 
question following the story to put yourself in 
that person’s shoes and take stock of what you 
already know about the topic of the coming 
chapter. At the end of the chapter, revisit the 
Career Path/Real-Life Success Story and use 
the concepts you’ve learned to create a successful 
resolution to the character’s situation.
Chapter Introduction and Learning 
Objectives In each chapter, a short introduc￾tion previews the major topics that will be covered, 
and a list of objectives lays out the skills and infor￾mation you can expect to have mastered after read￾ing the text and completing the activities.
Opening Quote The opening quote relates to 
the ideas discussed in the chapter and serves as 
food for thought. Take a moment to think about 
what the author of the quote is trying to say. 
Do you agree with the author? Why or why not?
Key Terms Key terms appear in bold in 
the text and are defined in the margin for easy xiv Introduction
review. Key terms, along with italicized terms, 
are also defined in the Glossary.
Success Secret Important lessons presented 
in the chapter are summarized in the Success 
Secret feature. These notes can be used to pre￾view and review the chapter, as well as to remind 
yourself to apply these important principles of 
success in your daily life.
Applying Psychology This feature focuses 
on thought-provoking issues such as culture and 
body image, impulse control, the affects of social 
media, and the psychology of aging. It links one 
or more topics in the chapter to cutting-edge 
issues in psychology.
Professional Development The Profes￾sional Development feature makes chapter 
concepts relevant to the world of work, provid￾ing information on topics such as job stress, 
problem solving, and résumé writing.
Internet Action This technology feature dis￾cusses how to use computers, the Internet, social 
media, and e-mail efficiently and effectively. It 
also illustrates the link between technology and 
psychology in areas such as artificial intelligence 
and online collaborative learning.
Activities Each chapter has numerous activi￾ties that form an integral part of the material. The 
activities allow you to apply newly learned con￾cepts to your own life through self-assessment, 
real-world observation, and critical thinking.
Personal Journals Each chapter also has 
several Personal Journals, short notebook-style 
activities that let you pause to offer personal 
reflections on the material.
McGraw Hill Connect® Connect offers a 
number of powerful tools and features to make 
managing assignments easier, so faculty can 
spend more time teaching. With Connect, 
students can engage with their coursework any￾time and anywhere, making the learning process 
more accessible and efficient. From Connect, 
instructors can also access chapter-by-chapter 
notes, test bank questions, a PowerPoint presen￾tation, and additional resources. Student features 
include practice quizzes, assessment activities, 
links to related materials for research projects 
and helpful online tools, job hunting resources, 
and much more. References to specific Web site 
materials are provided throughout the text.
Getting Started
Psychology of Success is a workbook as well 
as a textbook. Take notes, highlight important 
concepts, and flag passages that you want to 
explore further. Take time to do each Activity 
and Personal Journal thoroughly before moving 
on to the next—they will help you understand the 
material on a personal level. Don’t worry, how￾ever, about finding the “right” answers—the only 
right answers are ones that are honest, true to 
yourself, and supported by reflection and critical 
thinking. When you complete Psychology of 
Success, you will have a valuable record of your 
goals and where you want the future to take you.
What’s New
Introduction
• Updated material throughout Introduction
Chapter 1
• New Career Path Story relating to Psychology 
and Success
• New material on Culture and Identity
• Updated material on What is Success?
• New and updated material on Internal and 
External Motivators
• Updated material on Who is Successful
• Updated material on Virtual Therapy
• New definition of Gender Identity• Updated examples and wording throughout 
the chapter
Chapter 2
• New Career Path Story relating to Self￾Awareness
• Updated material on Self-Awareness
• Updated material on Putting It All Together
• Updated examples and wording throughout 
the chapter
Chapter 3
• New material on Social Media (Scrolling the 
Day Away)
• Updated examples and wording throughout 
the chapter
Chapter 4
• New Career Path Story relating to Self-Esteem
• New material on The Imposter Syndrome
• Updated material on Professional Development
• Updated examples and wording throughout 
the chapter
Chapter 5
• Updated material on Aging in Today’s Society
• Updated material on Self-Esteem
• Updated examples and wording throughout 
the chapter
Chapter 6
• Updated material on Taking Responsibility
• Updated material on Behavioral Relapse 
(Relapse is Normal)
• Updated material on Job Market Skills 
(Professional Development)
• Updated examples and wording throughout 
the chapter
Chapter 7
• Updated section on E-Learning in College
• Updated material on Rethink Failure
• Updated examples and wording throughout 
the chapter
Chapter 8
• Updated material on Health and Wellness
• Updated information on Scheduling
• Updated examples and wording throughout 
the chapter
Chapter 9
• New Career Path Story relating to Communi￾cations and Relationships
• Updated material on Emotional Intelligence
• Updated material on Personal Distance
• Updated examples and wording throughout 
the chapterxvi Acknowledgments
McGraw Hill would like to offer our sincerest gratitude and deepest appreciation to our valuable 
reviewers whose feedback was instrumental in successfully compiling this text. We could not have 
done this without you! Thank you!
Acknowledgments
Nancy Donovan Tallahassee Community College
Phil Bridges Missouri State University
Krissy Leonard Daytona State College
Dr. Josh Perkins Kent State
Pamela Fulbright Highland Community College
Scott Feldman Midwestern State University
Mary Beth Mizell Northwest Florida State College
Andrea Hecht San Bernardino Valley College
Kelly Lovelace Isothermal Community College 
Melissa Woods Hinds Community College
Michele Poulos ECPI University 
Mary Anne Parker Nazareth College
Stephanie Pearcy Indiana State University
Linda Gannon College of Southern Nevada
Christine Lamb Del Mar College
Betty Z Taylor Cleveland Community College
Pamela Bilton Beard Houston Community College
Gabriel Adona San Diego Mesa College
Erika Deiters Moraine Valley Community College
Karen Smith East Carolina University
Wandra Arrington Alcorn State University
Tanya White Bluegrass Community College
Sharon George Ferris State Unversity
Gail Wilbur Century College
Cassandra Varnell Hinds Community College
J. Andrew Monahan Suffolk County Community College
Andrea Smith Florida Gateway College
Nancy Risch Caldwell Community College and Technical Institute
Marybeth Beller Marshall University
Dr. David Pyle Lone Star College
Brandon Randolph-Seng Texas A&M University-Commerce 
Raymond Elliott St. Philip's College
Ashleigh Lewis Tyler Junior College
John Rooney University of Rhode Island
Sandy Aguilar Florida Gateway College
Dr. Garry Grau Northeast State Community College
Carmen Purpus SKYCTC
Andrew Lehr University of Saint Francis
Evelyn Young Eastern Florida State College
Christopher Lau Hutchinson Community College
Blanca Campa El Paso Community College
Julia Nelson Isothermal Community College
Savannah Sanders Tyler Junior College
Lianna McGowan Valencia College 
Jose L. Saldivar University of Texas Rio Grande Valley65%
Less Time
Grading
Instructors
Student Success Starts with You
Tools to enhance your unique voice
Want to build your own course? No problem. Prefer to use an 
OLC-aligned, prebuilt course? Easy. Want to make changes throughout 
the semester? Sure. And you’ll save time with Connect’s auto-grading, too.
Solutions for 
your challenges
A product isn’t a solution. Real 
solutions are affordable, reliable, 
and come with training and ongoing 
support when you need it and how you 
want it. Visit supportateverystep.com
for videos and resources both you 
and your students can use throughout 
the term.
A unique path for each student
In Connect, instructors can assign an adaptive reading 
experience with SmartBook® 2.0. Rooted in advanced 
learning science principles, SmartBook 2.0 delivers 
each student a personalized experience, focusing 
students on their learning gaps, ensuring that the time 
they spend studying is time well-spent.
mheducation.com/highered/connect/smartbook
Affordable solutions, 
added value
Make technology work for you with 
LMS integration for single sign-on access, 
mobile access to the digital textbook, 
and reports to quickly show you how 
each of your students is doing. And with 
our Inclusive Access program, you can 
provide all these tools at the lowest 
available market price to your students. 
Ask your McGraw Hill representative for 
more information.
Laptop: Getty Images; Woman/dog: George Doyle/Getty ImagesEffective tools for efficient studying
Connect is designed to help you be more productive with simple, flexible, intuitive tools that maximize 
your study time and meet your individual learning needs. Get learning that works for you with Connect.
Everything you need in one place 
Your Connect course has everything you need—whether reading your digital eBook 
or completing assignments for class, Connect makes it easy to get your work done.
“I really liked this 
app—it made it easy 
to study when you 
don’t have your text￾book in front of you.”
- Jordan Cunningham, 
 Eastern Washington University
Study anytime, anywhere
Download the free ReadAnywhere® app and 
access your online eBook, SmartBook® 2.0, 
or Adaptive Learning Assignments when it’s 
convenient, even if you’re offline. And since 
the app automatically syncs with your Connect 
account, all of your work is available every time 
you open it. Find out more at 
mheducation.com/readanywhere 
Students
Get Learning that Fits You
Learning for everyone 
McGraw Hill works directly with Accessibility 
Services Departments and faculty to meet the 
learning needs of all students. Please contact your 
Accessibility Services Office and ask them to email 
accessibility@mheducation.com, or visit 
mheducation.com/about/accessibility
for more information.
iPhone: Getty Images2
Chaay_Tee/Shutterstock
Career 
Path Story
Elena Zhang received her B.S. in Computer Science. Her 
career goal of becoming a software engineer was off to 
a strong start when she accepted an internship at a 
technology company in Austin, TX. Following her intern￾ship, she was offered a part-time position as a software 
engineer, which later evolved into a full-time software 
engineer. She showed leadership potential and was 
admired by her peers. On her spare time, she enjoyed 
paddle boarding, hiking, and attending concerts with 
friends. Elena achieved pleasant work-life harmony.
One morning, Elena received a tap on her shoulder 
from her company’s Associate Vice President. He said 
that the executive board agreed that based on her lead￾ership skills, she would be the perfect person for the 
vacant executive director position. Elena was surprised, 
flattered, and conflicted. The new opportunity would 
almost double her salary and she liked the thought of 
no longer worrying about her personal finances. Yet, the 
new position required a substantial number of new 
hours, which would translate into very little time for her 
hobbies and friends. In addition, she would be manag￾ing the software engineers who are currently her 
peers—which could be awkward. If she didn’t accept 
the opportunity, what message would that send to the 
company? Elena faced a difficult career decision.
What Do You Think? Do you think Elena would 
be more successful if she took the executive director 
position? Would you recommend Elena accept the 
opportunity? Why or why not?
“Moving Up the Ladder”“
Psychology 
and Success 1
Chapter
learning objectives
After you complete this chapter, 
you should be able to:
• Define success.
• List several personal qualities 
that help people to be happy.
• Define psychology and cite its 
four major goals.
• Explain the relationship among 
thoughts, feelings, and actions.
• Define self, self-image, and 
identity.
• Describe the components 
of identity.
What lies behind us and what lies 
before us are small matters compared 
to what lies within us.
Ralph Waldo Emerson, Philosopher
”
introduction
The first step on the road to success is to define what 
success means to you. In Section 1.1 you’ll clarify your 
vision of success and begin to think about how you can 
make it a reality. You’ll also consider the personal quali￾ties that will help you reach success and discover how 
studying psychology can help you understand yourself 
and your world. In Section 1.2 you’ll begin thinking 
about your identity and self-image. You’ll consider how 
you see yourself and what it means to be you.4 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
SECTION 1.1 Understanding Success
WHAT IS SUCCESS?
Success in our culture and in many other industrialized nations is often 
associated with wealth and fame. Social media and mainstream media blast 
images of the wealthy, famous, and powerful. Those considered wealthy, 
famous, and powerful are often referred to as being successful. Does 
wealth, fame, or power equate success? Or, has society been seduced by 
these skin-deep characteristics and dynamics?
Success should be defined at the personal level. Consider the fact that 
about ninety-five percent of the human beings on earth are poor, and most 
likely a higher percentage of human beings are not considered famous. Yet, 
many of these human beings consider themselves successful. Why? They 
are each using a personal definition of success. Based on one’s perspective, 
success could mean pursuing education, possessing a paying job, raising 
children to adulthood, supporting loved ones, giving back to the commu￾nity, living a healthy lifestyle, and so forth. These personal definitions 
greatly vary.
The twentieth-century philosopher, Earl Nightingale, noted in his 
classic audio recording, “The Strangest Secret” that “Success is the progres￾sive realization of a worthy ideal.” It means that when we are working or 
moving toward something we want to accomplish—especially when that 
something brings us respect and dignity as members of society—we are 
succeeding. It has nothing to do with talent, IQ, age, gender, ethnicity, 
or birthright. It does not mean you have to be a celebrity, icon, influencer, 
millionaire, or entrepreneur to be successful.
So what exactly is success? In this book, success means a lifetime of 
personal fulfillment. Personal fulfillment comes from creating a sense of 
meaning in your work and life. This kind of success is not given by anyone 
else and cannot be taken away by anyone else. It requires taking risks, over￾coming challenges, and using your best resource—you—to its fullest potential.
Success is a journey, not a destination. Success is a process, not a status. 
You don’t arrive at success. You engage in living successfully on a daily 
basis. It involves looking inward, considering what you value, and navigat￾ing the life path that is most meaningful for you. Begin to think about what 
success means to you in Activity 1. As you work through this text, you may 
wish to return to this exercise to clarify your vision of success.
Ingredients of Success
Lifelong success has several important ingredients, all of which you will 
learn about in this book. These ingredients, shown in Personal Journal 1.1, 
are positive habits of thought and action that you can integrate into your 
life. The first important ingredient is self-awareness. Closely tied to 
success Lifetime 
fulfillment that comes from 
creating a sense of meaning 
in one’s work and personal 
life.
success secret
Money and fame don’t 
equal success.ACTIVITY 1: What Success Means to You
A Take at least three or four minutes to brainstorm every word or phrase that comes to mind when you 
think of “success.” Write these in the box below.
Success=
B Look at everything you wrote. What do these words or phrases tell you about your vision of success?
C Now put your definition of success down in writing.
 To me, success means
continued . . .6 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
D Does your definition of success differ from the definition of success presented in this text? If so, how?
E Do you think you will become successful according to your own definition of success? Why or why not?
F Describe two people you know who have achieved success the way you define it.self-awareness are self-direction, self-esteem, self-discipline, and self-motivation, 
which are the tools to keep you moving in the direction of your goals and 
dreams. Your attitude is an important ingredient of success, too; positive think￾ing can help you put things in perspective and make it through the tough times. 
Finally, no real success is possible without positive relationships with others. 
Let’s look at each of these key ingredients of success.
Self-Awareness Self-awareness involves identifying and appreciat￾ing your individual values, personal qualities, skills, and interests. Without 
self-awareness, it’s hard to figure out what you really want out of life. Success￾ful people use self-awareness to build confidence in themselves and find the 
courage to go after their dreams. They also use self-awareness to understand 
their thoughts, feelings, and actions and to relate better to others.
Self-Direction Successful people set themselves apart from the rest by 
developing an important trait: self-direction. Self-direction is the ability to set a 
well-defined goal and work toward it. Successful people can tell you where 
they are going, what they plan to do along the way, and who will be sharing 
their adventure with them. They have a game plan for life. They set goals and 
get what they want. They direct themselves along the road to success.
success secret
Success is a journey, 
not a destination.
self-direction The 
ability to set a well-defined 
goal and work toward it. 
professional development )))
Internal and External Motivators
It is important to draw a distinction between internal and external criteria when exploring a career or career 
change. Internal criteria include the knowledge of your attributes, traits, abilities, interests, strengths, and 
weaknesses. Evaluating these areas are essential to becoming proactive when making career decisions.
The overwhelming majority of job-hunters and career-changers react to purely external pressures and 
circumstances—above all, to money. Their ideas about what careers pay well are likely to be outdated 
because many of today’s job descriptions didn’t exist a decade ago; and even if you choose a career that 
is lucrative, but makes you miserable, you may well end up viewing “your work” as a necessary interruption 
between weekends.
Many impactful career choices are often left to other factors outside of one’s passions, interests, skills, 
and so forth. Five common factors are: (1) money: valuing the starting salary and benefits over everything, 
(2) ill-advice: receiving outdated, narrow-minded, and/or biased advice is common even if the source is well￾intentioned, (3) family or social pressure: following the expectations of those around you (e.g., parents or 
mentors expecting you to follow in their footsteps), (4) job market perception: failing to research the job 
market and simply believing the perception projected by recent advertisements or media instead of seeking 
a more reliable informational resource (e.g., the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Occupational Outlook 
Handbook: https://www.bls.gov/ooh/), and (5) luck: leaving it all to luck.
Many people get locked into an inexplicably passive attitude and simply fall into their jobs, often with 
unsatisfactory results. We all must deal with external pressures and circumstances, but starting with them 
instead of the internal factors—our own minds and hearts—is a reversal of priorities. Take the time to 
become fully engaged and honest with the exercises and assessments in this chapter. Look in the mirror 
before you walk through that office door seeking your first or next job opportunity.8 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
Self-Esteem Self-esteem, a respect for oneself as a valuable, unique 
individual, is another foundation for success. Self-esteem helps people work 
toward their dreams and goals and keep going when other people criticize 
them or get in their way. It also helps them believe that they are worthy of 
success in the first place.
Positive Thinking Everyone goes through good and bad experi￾ences. Instead of dwelling on the bad ones, successful people learn to focus 
on future possibilities. They also use setbacks as opportunities to take stock 
and try again. Not every successful person is a born optimist, but successful 
people learn to use the power of positive thinking to propel themselves 
toward their goals.
Self-Discipline Success doesn’t just happen—it requires effort. 
No matter how well you plan, you’ll need self-discipline to put your 
plans into action. Successful people take charge of their lives. They take 
responsibility when things go wrong, but they also take credit when 
things go well. They learn how to make necessary changes and break 
free of bad habits. Habits are replaced, over time, by consistent training 
and practice, requiring focused self-discipline. They also learn to think 
critically, to make good decisions, and to use these skills to manage their 
time and money.
Self-Motivation To get and stay motivated, successful people set 
goals for themselves that are both challenging and inspiring. They focus on 
goals that have personal meaning for them, rather than goals that society or 
other people say they should have. They understand their needs and wants 
and are able to keep themselves moving forward despite their fears.
Positive Relationships Healthy and diverse relationships are 
essential for a successful life. Even in a society like ours that values individual 
achievement, no one ever succeeds without the help, ideas, and emotional 
support of others. The happiest and most fulfilled people are usually those 
who make time for other people in their lives instead of focusing all their 
energy on piling up accomplishments.
Which of the ingredients of success do you already possess? Which do 
you need to develop? Record your thoughts in Personal Journal 1.1.
Who Is Successful?
Successful people get what they want out of life. They set and achieve their 
goals, which optimally benefit others as well as themselves. They do not 
rely on luck to succeed in life and ideally, their success does not come at 
the expense of others. They achieve success by utilizing the potential their 
born potential, continually learning and improving, and working toward 
success secret
Use positive thinking to 
reach your goals.
success secret
Always make time for 
relationships.a purpose that makes them feel worthwhile according to their own 
standards.
Just as it is not always obvious what success looks like, it’s not always 
obvious who the truly successful people are. Mainstream media and social 
media glamorize people who have a great deal of money, fame, and power, 
but these people are not always the most successful. In fact, many will tell 
you that large amounts of money, fame, or power can sometimes lead to a 
feeling of aimlessness.
Personal Journal 1.1
Ingredients of Success
On the lines in each oval, write one way you think this action or quality could help you become the person 
you want to be.
Self-Motivation
Self-Awareness
Self-Direction
Self-Esteem
Self-Discipline Positive Thinking
Success
Positive
Relationships10 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
Just as we have our own vision of success, we have our own ideas of 
who is successful. Take a moment to reflect on who you believe is success￾ful. Is it a prominent business leader? A famous actor or singer? A Nobel￾prize winning scientist? A caring teacher? A loving family member? 
Someone who is dedicated to their craft? To many of us, the most successful 
people are those who made the most positive impact on our lives—parents, 
relatives, teachers, or friends. Not only do we appreciate the difference they 
had made in our lives, we admire the obstacles they overcame in their lives 
to achieve their goals.
Role Models If you think back to early childhood, you may remem￾ber having a role model. A role model is a person who has the qualities you 
would like to have.
Children need role models, but adults need them too. Our role models 
often represent what we would like to become. James, a student in informa￾tion technology, takes inspiration from Michael Dell, founder and CEO of 
Dell Inc. When James learned that Dell had started his company at age 19 
with only $1,000 and a good idea, he decided to learn more. James read 
about Dell on the Internet and chose him as a role model for his ethics, 
technical and business skill, and positive attitude. Now James is working on 
starting his own computer business.
Oprah Winfrey credits Mary Tyler Moore as the role model who 
inspired her to pursue a media career, Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson credits 
his high school football coach for guiding him to the right path, and Donna 
Karan says that working as an apprentice for Anne Klein set the stage for 
her own career as a fashion designer. Role models can be well-known fig￾ures from history or little-known coaches and teachers who have been a 
positive influence. You don’t have to know someone personally for him or 
her to be your role model; the person may be from a different part of the 
world or even from a different century. Your role models may vary widely—
some may have special skills or accomplishments, while others may possess 
personal virtues such as courage, generosity, or honor. You may have one 
role model or several. Use Activity 2 to select a role model and learn more 
about that person.
Success and Happiness
An important benefit of true success is happiness. Happiness is a state of 
well-being that comes from having a positive evaluation of your life. It is 
an overall good feeling about who you are, what you are doing, and the 
relationships you have with other people. When you are interested in 
your daily activities, enthusiastic about the way things are going, and 
optimistic about your future, you are happy. How happy are you right 
now? Complete Activity 3 to find out.
role model A person 
who has the qualities one 
would like to have.
success secret
Adults need role 
models, too.
happiness A state of 
well-being that comes from 
having a positive evaluation 
of one’s life.ACTIVITY 2: Your Role Model
A Select one person whom you admire and would like to imitate in some way. Research this person’s life 
and fill out the profile below.
Role Model Profile
1. Name
2. Date and place of birth
3. Special accomplishments
4. Obstacle(s) this person overcame
5. Ways this person overcame these obstacle(s)
6. Special personal qualities
continued . . .12 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
7. Ways this person shows or showed these special qualities
8. Ways this person acquired these qualities
9. Things you and your role model have in common (personal qualities, experiences, interests, 
challenges)
10. Areas in which you would like to become more like your role modelB Of all the people you could have chosen, why did you choose this person as your role model? What do 
you think your choice says about you?
C Look at your answer to item 10 in your role model profile. What are some specific actions you could take 
to become more like your role model in these areas?
  14 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
ACTIVITY 3: Self-Awareness Checklist
A Happiness seems to be a way of viewing ourselves and the world around us in terms of being part of the 
solution, rather than part of the problem. It is being aware of the limitations we place on ourselves and 
opening ourselves up to the potential around us for positive change. To determine your own level of 
self-awareness, place a check mark in the box you think describes how often you feel this way.
ALWAYS FREQUENTLY SOMETIMES RARELY NEVER
I’m eager to learn.
My work is exciting.
I’m willing to listen with an open mind.
I have new insights.
I constantly network with people who have expertise in 
something I don’t.
I try to look at the world through the eyes of the other person.
I focus on what I can control.
When someone is talking to me, I really listen.
I’m honest with myself and others.
I’ve thought about my own strengths and weaknesses.
I continually challenge my own assumptions.
I recognize that others may think that I’m strange or odd in 
some ways.
I adapt easily to the current environment and situation.
B Hopefully, most of your check marks were in the FREQUENTLY box. It would be rare, indeed, for all 
check marks to land in the ALWAYS box. Each of us is unique, with different views about ourselves and 
the world. And no one is perfect. If some of your check marks were in the SOMETIMES box, what actions 
can you take to make your positive self-awareness more frequent in those areas?C Do you feel that happiness is the result of what happens to you in life, or more how you deal with what 
happens to you? Why?
D What actions or events in your personal and professional do you feel have the greatest influence on 
your happiness?
E Two years from now, do you think you will be happier than you are today? Why?
What Causes Happiness?
Happiness is the natural experience of winning your self-respect and the 
respect of others. Happiness should not be confused with indulging your￾self, escaping something, or seeking pleasure. You cannot inhale, drink, 16 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
or smoke happiness. You cannot buy it, wear it, drive it, swallow it, inject 
it, or travel to it. Happiness is not a result. It involves making the best out 
of whatever happens and remaining optimistic.
Did you know that outside factors, such as wealth, youth, physical 
health, marital status, physical attractiveness, educational level, and social 
status, have little effect on happiness? Corporate presidents who drive 
luxury cars are no happier, in general, than day laborers who take the bus. 
What if you woke up tomorrow looking like a movie star and with a win￾ning lottery ticket in your pocket? You would probably be happier—but 
only for a while. In a year, life might not be so different for you after all. 
Studies show that a year or so after big changes like this, your happiness 
level is likely to return to where it was the previous year. In other words, 
most people experience a fairly stable level of happiness despite life’s ups 
and downs.
Does this mean that you can’t raise your level of happiness? No. You 
can always seek out opportunities to create happiness, such as:
• creating a sense of purpose in your life
• building deep connections with others
• improving skills, learning, and being productive
• playing games and enjoying yourself
• getting to know yourself better
• striving to become more like people you admire
• actively looking forward to things in the future
• enjoying the beauty in your environment
• pursuing curiosity for its own sake
Happy people don’t sit back waiting for happiness to appear. Instead, 
they create opportunities for happiness to enter their lives.
Positive Qualities Another way to boost your happiness is to 
develop personal qualities that will help you enjoy life and cope with chal￾lenges. Psychologists who have researched success and happiness have 
found several of these qualities. Among the most important are:
• Ability to love—the ability to feel, express, and receive love, affection, 
warmth, and compassion and to act in a giving way
• Vocation—the ability to feel interest and excitement in something and to 
turn this into your life’s work
• Courage—the ability to take risks and challenge yourself
• Trust—confidence in other people and their motives
• Optimism—hope that things will turn out for the best
• Future-mindedness—a focus on the possibilities of the future, rather than 
on the mistakes or disappointments of the past
• Social skill—the ability to understand others, get along with others, and 
build fulfilling relationships
• Aesthetic sensibility—the ability to appreciate and delight in the beauty of 
art, music, and nature
success secret
Create your own opportu￾nities for happiness.• Work ethic—commitment to honoring obligations, being dependable and 
responsible, getting things done, and being productive
• Honesty—thinking, speaking, and acting in a forthright way with yourself 
and others
• Emotional awareness—the ability to experience and express a wide range 
of emotions
• Persistence—the ability to persevere in the face of setbacks and adversity, 
to keep on track toward goals, and to handle stress
• Forgiveness—generosity of spirit, and the ability to avoid grudges and 
blame
• Creative thinking—the willingness to consider new beliefs and points of 
view and to try out new ways of thinking and doing
• Spirituality—the search for a greater good, purpose, or meaning to human 
existence
• Self-esteem—a positive feeling of your own value, which includes self￾respect as well as respect for the rights, feelings, and wishes of others
• Wisdom—the ability to use your knowledge and experience to make 
sound decisions
Building these qualities will help you to be physically healthy, enjoy strong 
friendships and family relationships, derive satisfaction from a committed 
romantic relationship, be an effective and loving parent, find satisfaction in 
work, and feel good about yourself.
UNDERSTANDING PSYCHOLOGY
To have a clear vision of what you want out of life, you need to under￾stand yourself first. Who am I? What are my wants and needs? Why do 
I think, feel, and act the way I do? These questions are at the beginning 
of the journey to success. These questions are also some of the impor￾tant ones addressed by psychology. Psychology is the scientific study of 
human behavior. The word psychology comes from two Greek words: 
psyche, meaning “mind” or “self,” and logos, meaning “science” or 
“study.”
The focus of psychology is human behavior. Behavior is anything we 
think, feel, or do, including:
• acting
• reacting
• speaking
• perceiving
• sensing
• imagining
• wanting
• remembering
• sleeping
• dreaming
success secret
Try new ways of thinking 
and doing.
psychology The 
scientific study of human 
behavior.
behavior Anything that 
people think, feel, or do.18 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
Psychologists learn about people by observing their behavior. Although 
psychologists cannot directly measure what people think or how they feel, 
they can observe their actions, listen to their words, and try to understand 
their experiences.
Why Study Psychology?
Psychology tackles basic questions about what it means to be human. 
Psychologists ask questions such as:
• Why and how are people different from one another?
• What needs do all people have in common?
• Where do emotions come from? What function do they serve?
• Where do attitudes come from? How do they change?
• What is the difference between the body and the mind?
By providing insights into questions like these, psychology helps us under￾stand ourselves and others. Learning about psychologists’ discoveries 
and theories, therefore, can help you better understand yourself and your 
world.
success secret
Psychology helps you 
understand yourself and 
others.
VIRTUAL THERAPY
We live in a more virtual world. Following the COVID-19 
pandemic, psychologists are increasingly using online 
services such as two-way videoconferencing and offer￾ing consultations via e-mail, instant messaging, chat 
rooms, apps, and so forth. People can also use the 
Internet to find virtual support groups, information on 
screening and treatment, and listings of counselors and 
psychologists in their area. Virtual formats allow people 
to connect who are geographically isolated, socially 
anxious, physically disabled, or worried about catching 
a sickness. But what’s the downside to online mental 
health services? First, experts explain that online 
therapy is not the best format for people dealing with 
serious issues like suicidal thoughts or mental illness. 
Second, critics suggest that online therapy just doesn’t 
work. Successful therapy is based on a human connec￾tion. Can two people really create a deep human bond 
on a computer screen? Critics also worry that people 
will fall victim to bogus therapists and that personal 
information is unsafe online.
Think About It
What do you see as the advantages and disadvan￾tages of online therapy? Would you try it? Why or 
why not? Bring your ideas to class for a group dis￾cussion. To learn more about online psychotherapy, 
go to a search engine or go to one of the following 
websites:
http://www.psychology.info/
A site that explores aspects of online psychology and 
provides a list of resources
http://www.ismho.org
The home page of an organization that promotes the use 
of technology and the Internet in mental health treatment
http://locator.apa.org/
A Web page set up by the American Psychological 
Association to help individuals find a psychologist and 
read articles about mental health
http://www.metanoia.org/imhs/identity.htm
A Web service for checking the credentials of online 
therapists
internet actionGoals of Psychology
Psychology has four major goals: to describe, predict, explain, and (in some 
cases) change human behavior.
Because human behavior is so complex, many psychologists focus 
on just one or two of these goals. For example, some psychologists focus 
on observing how people think and act in very specific situations. They 
then use their observations to create models of human thought and 
behavior in these situations. For example, psychologists who study mari￾tal relationships might investigate the factors that influence people’s 
selection of a marriage partner or the ways marriage relationships tend 
to change over time.
Other psychologists are interested in describing how individuals and groups 
think and act in order to predict how they are likely to think and act in the 
future. For example, psychologists who study children may try to predict which 
children will be at risk for problems such as depression and low self-esteem.
Many psychologists focus on the fourth goal of psychology, changing 
human behavior. Clinical psychologists, for example, help people change 
the undesirable behaviors associated with psychological illness. A clinical 
psychologist who works with people who fear social situations might help 
these people confront their fear and take positive steps to overcome it. 
Clinical psychologists have that designation because they, like physicians, 
can aid their patients with prescription medicine.
Explaining Human Behavior
Why do people think, feel, and act the way they do? Until only a few centu￾ries ago, people believed that human behavior was controlled by external 
forces that existed outside the body. In ancient times, people believed that 
psychological problems such as stress, anxiety, and depression were caused 
by evil spirits. Because psychology is concerned with observable behavior, 
today few psychologists focus on investigating the spiritual side of exis￾tence. Instead, most psychologists begin by trying to understand the biolog￾ical basis of behavior.
Neuroscience: The New Frontier
Neuroscience is generally described as study that advances the understanding 
of human thought, emotion, and behavior. The brain is extremely complex. 
All human inventions, including the computer, spacecraft, smartphones, 
drones, self-driving vehicles, and medical devices are toys in comparison. 
Biologist Lyall Watson concisely summed it up: “If the brain were so simple 
that we could understand it, we would be so simple we couldn’t!”
We are only just beginning to discover the virtually limitless capacities 
of the brain, and we’ve learned more about how the brain functions during 
the past decade than in much of the past century. Just as our bodies react 
to our own memories—as well as images from the external world—they also 
react to our own imagined experiences or rehearsals.
neuroscience The 
science that advances the 
understanding of human 
thought, emotion, and 
behavior.20 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
American physiologist Edmund Jacobsen conducted studies showing that 
when a person imagines running, small but measurable amounts of contraction 
actually take place in the leg muscles. In the same way, when you create a vivid, 
frightening image in your mind, your body responds with a quickened pulse, 
elevated blood pressure, sweating, goosebumps, and dryness of the mouth. 
Conversely, when you hold a strong, positive, relaxing image in your mind, your 
body responds with a lowered heart rate and decreased blood pressure, and all 
your muscles tend to relax. These functions take place automatically, uncon￾sciously. You’re seldom aware of their cause. You think they “just happened.”
Until recently, we have underestimated the resilience and regenerative 
capacity in the human brain. People recovering from strokes and other 
brain injuries have demonstrated the remarkable capacity of the brain to 
regenerate. When parts of the brain have been destroyed or damaged, 
remaining parts can “come to the rescue” and learn how to take over func￾tions that were lost. For example, when an injury occurs to the left hemi￾sphere, which controls our language and speech, “mirror neurons” located 
on the right side of the brain can become involved in those functions.
Recovering patients who can’t speak, but can still hum a song, can 
learn to associate words and phrases with melodies, helping them with 
communication. Cognitive or mental rehabilitation for post-stroke patients, 
involving speech and physical therapy, as well as memory aids, assist the 
brain’s reorganization of the basic impaired functions. When a patient 
relearns to carry out basic tasks, neurogenesis occurs. The goal is to stimu￾late the brain to re-form lost pathways and circuits. While it’s true that 
brain cells can regenerate, they also can deteriorate if not being used. So, 
when it comes to using your limbs or memory, the familiar phrase applies: 
“Unless you use it, you’ll lose it.” For instance, if you don’t use your right 
arm, the corresponding part of your brain will deteriorate.1
Mental practice is the term given to rehearsing activities and movements 
in the mind, and it is known to facilitate peak performance in world class 
athletes. Recent studies have shown it can also be used, along with other 
cognitive treatments, on stroke patients and others, including our returning 
service men and women who have been severely injured in battle, using 
mental imagery to visualize motor movements that stimulates neuroplasti￾city processes, improving motor functions, especially arm movement.
Neurofeedback has progressed well beyond the biofeedback clinics of 
the past twenty years, with sophisticated readouts that display how different 
parts of the brain are reacting to video images, sounds, colors, thoughts, 
and simulations. By observing PET scans of people either watching or 
imagining various scenes, brain researchers know that the brain doesn’t 
know the difference between real, watched, or imagined experiences. 
Neuropsychology today offers definitive proof that repeated, vivid, mental 
rehearsal over time can create an infrastructure in the brain that can con￾vert virtual reality into reality. New research has proven that our brains 
1
 Elizabeth Landau, (May 5, 2011). “The Brain’s Amazing Potential for Recovery,” CNN.com.develop neural pathways from frequently used chemical-messaging patterns 
and thus build synaptic connections that support habitual trains of thought. 
Neuroscience is at the forefront in understanding how and why we act and 
react to real and perceived inputs.
Neuroscience and Psychology Recently, the melding of 
behavioral psychology and neuroscience has become highly sophisticated 
with major corporations hiring neural research companies to understand 
employee and customer behavior from a new perspective. At whatever 
point you are on your career path to maximize your fulfillment in your 
work and life, basic knowledge of how your brain responds to the 
thousands of messages it receives every day will help you sort out the 
myths from the truths, and the positive influences from the negative 
distractions.
Neuroscience has helped identify and measure brain activity related 
to consumer buying decisions and how to persuade others to buy into our 
concepts and ideas. It is being utilized by major industries, institutions, 
and organizations to help employees interact more effectively with one 
another and their customers.
We have learned what behavior patterns influence people to say “Yes” 
to what we’re trying to sell them, whether it’s a product, service, or lifestyle. 
For example, people want a good deal, which equates to the most value for 
the lowest investment. However, people think high price means more value, 
which, of course, isn’t necessarily true. But people pay more because they 
think they’re getting more. People buy into celebrity endorsements, some￾how equating star status to expertise. People respond favorably to common 
peer group endorsements, believing that “if this person can do it, so can I.” 
One of the keys to getting buy-in is to understand that most people say 
“yes” to others they know and like, especially if they deem those others to 
be trustworthy.
And, of course, there are many more obvious fixed-action behaviors: 
Scarcity and time deadlines drive decisions; reciprocity means that people 
feel obligated to repay a favor; people bargain for needs and splurge on 
wants, which is why reward motivation and inspiration are much more 
effective than fear motivation and intimidation; people don’t respond 
favorably, especially today, to coercion and “hard sell closing techniques.” 
They want to feel they are making their choices without outside pressure. 
With so much competition today, with so many distractions and so many 
options, the idea of closing a sale is obsolete, and the concept of nurturing a 
long-term relationship is the secret to a winning team, customer retention, 
and innovation. And, finally, we know that when it comes to sales, quotas, 
and goal setting, incremental steps work best because a minimum purchase 
leads to escalating commitments, just as a small success leads to increased 
confidence and risk taking.2
2
 Robert B. Cialdini, Ph.D. (2006). “Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion,” Harper Business.22 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
There are many false assumptions concerning how our brains and 
minds function. We now have a truth for nearly every myth that has been 
passed on to us. Here are just a few.
Myth: People make buy-in decisions in a rational, linear manner.
Truth: People’s decisions are first influenced by emotional triggers, and 
then by logic. Emotions dominate the decision-making process.
Myth: People can readily explain their thinking and behavior.
Truth: People have far less access to their own mental activities than perceived. 
About ninety-five percent of thinking is an unconscious, habitual process.
Myth: People’s memories accurately represent their experiences.
Truth: People’s memories are constantly changing without their awareness. 
Instead of a Facebook photo album, memory is more like a constantly 
edited music video, full of fragments, real and imagined.
As you are remembering something, your brain is in the process of “rewir￾ing” the connections between neurons, which is actually changing the structure 
of your brain. Rather than video playback, your memory is more like video 
editing. Every time you remember something you are changing, recreating, or 
re-memorizing. A memory is subject to change every time you remember it. 
Hence the term used by an aging athlete “The older I get, the better I was!” And 
the fisherman who remembers the fish being larger each time he tells the story!
Myth: People’s talents are received at conception as “natural gifts.”
Truth: Although talents are inherited, new talents and abilities can be 
learned by re-training the brain. This means that our potential for success 
in life is less limited by our inborn traits than previously thought.
Myth: We are born with a finite number (100 billion) of brain cells, and 
when one dies, a new one cannot grow. The ability to generate new neural 
pathways begins to decrease sharply around age twenty.
Truth: Neuroscientists are learning more about neural “plasticity,” which is 
the ability of the brain to generate new neural cells and reorganize to form 
new neural pathways, to adapt as needed. Neurogenesis, or the generation of 
new neurons, can continue throughout our life span, even into old age. The 
creation of new neural pathways does take focused effort over time; how￾ever, the ability to rewire your brain to generate success and health-related 
pathways is at the forefront of individual and team peak performance.
Myth: People think in words.
Truth: Two-thirds of all brain stimuli are visual. Neural activities (thoughts) 
precede their expression as words or language. Words and other senses 
can trigger thoughts, but thoughts are not “words.”
Here are the take-away concepts from the previous discussion:
We must consider the emotional triggers that motivate immediate, posi￾tive responses to communications. We must motivate without perceived 
coercion. Our communications and training should be interactive to per￾sonalize the relationship and lead to loyalty and retention. We should focus on desired outcomes, not penalties of failures. We have the ability to edit 
and reprogram our bad memories—so they don’t hold us back. We have the 
ability to edit, reprogram, splice-in, and spruce-up our good memories—so 
they propel and launch us forward.
Our brain cells are constantly “talking” to one another through chemi￾cal messaging. More than 100,000 chemical reactions take place in your 
brain every second. As we learn something new, our cells become more and 
more efficient about sending and receiving information about the task. The 
more we focus and practice, new neural connections are formed in the 
brain (synapses that don’t usually fire together, but now do), which helps us 
sharpen our new skill. Once this new neural pathway is firmly established 
and strong, we don’t need to focus our attention as much—new learning 
has become automatic, a part of us.
As we will discover in the pages that follow, we can engage in instant 
replay of positive memories, with the ability to select and magnify our posi￾tive experiences, to make us more resilient in trying times. We also can 
engage in instant pre-play of our goals and desires, and create new neural 
pathways to channel our imaginations toward successful outcomes, realiz￾ing that our brains cannot distinguish between real experience and vividly 
imagined, emotional passions, internalized through constant practice.
Humans are biological beings, with a complex nervous system that regu￾lates thoughts, feelings, and actions. The nervous system is a vast network 
of neurons (nerve cells) that carry messages to and from the brain. Neurons 
communicate with one another using chemical and electrical signals. They 
tell our glands and muscles what to do and relay signals to the brain from 
our sense organs. Millions of nerve impulses move throughout our bodies 
all the time, even when we are resting or sleeping.
Consciousness The nervous system is responsible for more than just 
monitoring our bodily functions. It is also responsible for consciousness, our 
awareness of the sensations, thoughts, and feelings we are experiencing at a 
given moment. Consciousness can take the form of extreme alertness, such as 
when we are taking a test or looking for a parking space on a crowded street. It 
can also take the form of reduced alertness, such as when we are daydreaming 
or driving a familiar route without having to think about what we are doing.
Conscious activities are controlled by the conscious mind, the part of 
the brain that controls the mental processes of which we are aware. The 
conscious mind collects information from our environment, stores it in our 
memory, and helps us make logical decisions. The conscious mind is not 
the whole story, however. We also have a subconscious mind, which stores 
the emotions and sensations that we are not quite aware of, the feelings that 
are just under the surface. Our subconscious mind also helps us solve 
problems. Have you ever tried in vain to solve a difficult problem, only to 
have the solution pop into your head later when you were thinking about 
something else? This is the power of the subconscious mind. It came up 
with the solution while your conscious mind was busy with something else.
nervous system A 
system of nerve cells that 
regulates behavior by trans￾mitting messages back and 
forth between the brain and 
the other parts of the body.
conscious mind The 
part of the brain that controls 
the mental processes of 
which one is aware.
subconscious mind
The part of the brain that 
controls the mental processes 
of which one is not actively 
aware.24 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
Thoughts, Feelings, and Actions
Do people act based on thoughts or on feelings? Do feelings cause thoughts, 
or do thoughts cause feelings? Actually, thoughts, feelings, and actions are 
all connected. Each influences the other in a continuous cycle.
Our thoughts about people, objects, events, and situations have a strong 
influence on our feelings about them. For example, if we believe that a cer￾tain event will turn out in our favor and it does not, we will probably experi￾ence a feeling of disappointment. On the other hand, if we believe that a 
certain event will not turn out in our favor and yet it does, we will probably 
experience a feeling of relief.
By the same token, our feelings about the world have a strong influence 
on our beliefs and thoughts about it. If we have positive thoughts and feel￾ings about a certain situation, we will seek out that situation again. If we 
have negative thoughts and feelings about a situation, we will avoid that 
situation in the future.
The way we act also influences our thoughts and feelings. For example, 
acting responsibly at work makes us feel good about ourselves, while acting 
irresponsibly produces the opposite result.
Use Personal Journal 1.2 to continue thinking about how your 
thoughts, feelings, and actions are related.
success secret
Thoughts, feelings, and 
actions are all connected.
Personal Journal 1.2
Your Thoughts, Feelings, and Actions
Think of a recent situation that provoked a strong emotion. In the circles below, write down how you 
thought, felt, and acted in that situation.
Situation:
Thoughts Feelings
Actions
How did your thoughts, feelings, and actions influence one another?Cognition and Emotion
What exactly are thoughts and feelings? Thought, known in psychology as 
cognition, refers to the functions of processing information. This information 
may be in the form of words, images, or sounds. We think every time we talk 
to ourselves, daydream, replay a scene from the past, hear a tune in our 
heads, or see a picture in our minds. Cognition includes activities such as:
• Perceiving—giving meaning to sensory information
• Recognizing—identifying whether you have, or have not, experienced a 
certain person, thing, idea, or situation before
• Remembering—storing and retrieving information
• Reasoning—using information to reach conclusions
• Making decisions—evaluating and choosing among various options or 
courses of action
• Solving problems—generating and evaluating ways to overcome obstacles 
that stand between you and your goals
• Forming concepts—grouping objects, events, or people based on shared 
characteristics
• Visualizing—creating detailed mental pictures of behaviors you want to 
carry out
Cognition is closely tied to emotion. Emotion refers to subjective feelings 
that are accompanied by physical and behavioral changes, such as facial expres￾sions and gestures. Although there is no such thing as a “bad” or “good” emo￾tion, some emotions are more pleasant than others. Joy, interest, and surprise, 
for example, are more pleasant than fear, anger, and guilt. In addition to being 
positive or negative, emotions can also be more or less intense, as shown in 
Figure 1.1. For example, liking is a less intense emotion than love, which is less 
intense than passion. Emotions come from countless sources—sights, sounds, 
smells, memories, ideas, or interactions with others. In fact, we are always feel￾ing something, even when we are washing the dishes or driving to work.
Positive emotions help us learn, solve problems, make decisions, relate 
to others, and relate to ourselves. Pleasant emotions include:
• Joy—a feeling of happiness following achievement of a goal
• Love—a feeling of affection, devotion, or attachment
• Interest—a state of curiosity, concern, or attention
• Pride—a positive feeling about yourself that you experience when you 
achieve a personal success
Unlike positive emotions, negative emotions encourage us to focus our 
attention on the specific thing that is troubling us. If we feel fear, for example, 
we will focus all our energy on getting away from the object of that fear. Because 
negative emotions take up so much energy, they make it hard to do productive 
things such as learning or working toward our goals. Negative emotions include:
• Embarrassment—an unpleasant feeling about yourself that you experience 
when you believe that others have found a flaw in you
cognition Mental 
processing of information 
in any form.
emotion A subjective 
feeling that is accompanied 
by physical and behavioral 
changes.
success secret
Pay attention to what is 
happening inside you 
and why.26 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
• Guilt—a negative feeling about yourself that you experience when you 
believe that your actions have harmed someone else
• Shame—a negative feeling about yourself that you experience following a 
personal failure
• Despair—an unpleasant feeling of hopelessness and defeat
• Fear—an unpleasant feeling of anxiety and anticipation of danger
• Anger—a strong feeling of displeasure, resentment, or hostility
• Disgust—a negative feeling of aversion or repulsion
• Sadness—a somber emotion of sorrow over a loss
Being aware of the range of human emotions helps you understand 
what is happening inside you and why. Learn to occasionally stop and 
observe your thoughts, feelings, and actions the way a psychologist might. 
This will help you understand your behavior, which is the first step to mak￾ing the positive changes that will lead you down the road to success.
Self Check
1. What is a role model? (p. 10)
2. What are the benefits of studying psychology? (p. 18)
3. What is the nervous system? (p. 23)
FIGURE 1.1 Positive and Negative Emotions
The Range of Emotions Emotions can be extremely negative, such as guilt 
and despair, or extremely positive, such as happiness and joy. They can also 
be more neutral, such as boredom and surprise. Describe an experience that 
provoked an intense feeling of joy.
Terror
Disgust
Shame Distaste Timidity Hostility
Dislike
Boredom
Shyness
Sadness
Guilt
Despair
Intensity
Negative Positive
Embarrassment
Interest Like Happiness
Pride
Contentment Desire
Want
Fear Contempt Anger Enthusiasm Rhapsody Love Joy
Hatred Rage Surprise Excitement Ecstasy PassionSECTION 1.2 Understanding Yourself
YOUR INNER SELF
We are not born with a sense of self. It develops—as do many of our attitudes—
over time, based on repeated inputs from our environment. The sum total 
of our past experiences—our successes and failures, our humiliations and 
triumphs, and the way we have interacted with those around us and who 
love us—gives us a subjective sense of the sort of person we are. But there 
is an important catch. All of our experiences are pieces of input that are 
colored by our perceptions, and, because our perceptions are not necessarily 
the same as reality, our sense of who we are may miss the mark by a wide 
margin. Unfortunately, once an idea becomes a belief, it becomes a “truth” 
as far as we are concerned. As Stephen R. Covey said, “We see the world, 
not as it is, but as we are—or, as we are conditioned to see it.”
Most of our understanding of the world is filtered through our under￾standing of self. We decide what is right and wrong, what is appealing and 
unappealing, what is pleasurable and painful based on the way we see 
ourselves and our relationship with the outside world. Having a firm sense 
of self helps us make plans and predictions. It gives us an emotional invest￾ment in what we are doing. It motivates us to achieve our goals and to 
improve ourselves. Having a firm sense of self also helps us build and 
maintain relationships with others.
Your Self-Image
A picture tells a thousand words. Have you ever noticed how easily infor￾mation can be conveyed in a picture or an image that would otherwise take 
pages of writing or minutes or hours of speaking? Your self-image is how 
you see yourself, which determines what you do, how you behave, how well 
you perform, and what kind of effort or attention you put into something. 
In fact, your self-image tells more than a thousand words because it sets the 
template or “thermostat” on your performance and what you do.
When you understand how your self-image works, you are able to 
address and then change it, if you want to. You can change the performance 
standards upon which you operate and your view of your abilities to perform 
at a higher level in the future. Many people are not aware of their “self-image” 
and how they see themselves in their own mind’s eye; therefore, they are not 
aware of the enormous impact a poor or limited self-image can have on who 
they think they are and their potential for peak performance.
Many Self-Images When we look in the internal mirror of our 
minds, we can see many self-images such as those that relate to ourselves as 
a daughter/son, a trusted friend, a business person, a mother/father, a part￾ner, healthy, wealthy, flexible, or humorous. We can never totally erase 
self The sense of being a 
unique, conscious being.
self-image All the 
beliefs you have about 
yourself.
success secret
A sense of self helps you 
understand the world and 
make plans and decisions.28 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
experiences from our memories. If they were negative, our self-images may 
be set at low-performance or even no-win. But we can reset our self-images. 
We can pre-program our future success more effectively by becoming 
aware, addressing and changing the self-image, or projections, of the kind 
of person we believe we can become.
Future Projections Define Boundaries The aspect of our 
self-image we want to work with is a future projection of our sense of self. It 
defines the boundaries or possibility of our identity and what we believe to 
be possible. It sets the thermostat on our range of behavior and standard 
of performance. If we set an image of ourselves that is higher than current 
performance levels, we will be motivated to gather the resources within our￾selves, and from our environment, to make our new self-image a reality and 
not just a figment of our imagination. The creation of new self-images does 
take focused effort over time; however, the ability to rewire our brain activ￾ity through visualization and repetition to create new, neural pathways is 
at the forefront of individual and team peak performance. That is why the 
more vivid and specific our dreams and goals are, the more likely we are to 
achieve them, which we will discuss in Chapter 3.
Whatever occurs within our lives is colored by our perceptions. And 
because our perceptions are not necessarily the same as reality, our sense 
of who we are may miss the mark by a wide margin. Unfortunately, once an 
idea or belief becomes a perception, it becomes a truth for our self-image. 
Each link we add to the growing chain of self-images may either expand or 
limit our lives more tightly.
The Brain’s Gatekeeper The more neuroscientists learn about 
brain function, the more we are able to influence changes in our beliefs and 
our behaviors that lead to maximizing our fulfillment in our careers and 
personal lives.
Radiating upward from your brain stem is a small network of cells, 
about four inches in length, called the reticular activating system. It is just 
about the size and shape of a quarter of an apple, and is one of the most 
important parts of your brain to understand and utilize to reach your goals. 
The reticular core of the brain dominates your behavior patterns, which 
include your eating habits, exercise habits, and the way you choose to live 
your life. It is perfectly placed to monitor all of the nerves connecting 
the brain and the body, and it “knows” what is going on better than any 
other single part of the brain. It can override activity in the spinal cord. It 
regulates the signals from the eyes, ears, and other sense organs and is 
clearly linked to the display and feeling of emotions.
The reticular activating system performs the unique function of filtering 
incoming stimuli, such as sight, sound, and touch, and deciding what infor￾mation is going to become part of your experience. It decides what is 
important information and what is to be ignored. For example, if you live 
along a busy street, the reticular activating system quickly allows you to 
tune out the sound of cars rushing by so you can sleep peacefully at night.Once you have made a decision that a certain value, thought, feeling, 
sound, or picture is significant to you, your reticular activating system is 
alerted and it immediately transmits to your consciousness any information 
it receives regarding that item. So when you buy a new car, for example, it 
is this network that suddenly causes you to notice all the cars of the same 
make—or even the same color—on the highway.
The beautiful feature about the reticular activating system is that you 
can program it to be on the alert for success-related inputs. It will wake you 
up in the morning without an alarm clock. If it knows you’re looking for￾ward to another eventful day, it will get you right out of bed. If it knows 
that you’re looking for values and qualities in other individuals, it will home 
in on those values and qualities. If you’re seeking more financial rewards, it 
will be extremely sensitive to any financially oriented data that could help 
you. The reticular activating system explains accident-prone people as it 
conversely explains success-prone people. It explains why some people 
see a problem in every solution and why others see a solution for every 
problem.
During every moment of our lives we program (or we allow others to 
program) our brains to work for us, or against us. Because the reticular acti￾vating system has no judging function, it strives to meet the attitudes and 
beliefs we set for it, regardless of whether they are positive or negative, true 
or false, right or wrong, safe or dangerous. Its only function is to follow our 
previous instructions implicitly, like a personal computer playing back what 
is stored—responding automatically. While the reticular activating system is 
a physical part of the brain, the corresponding self-image is an abstract part 
of the brain’s consciousness, a function of the mind. And your self-image is 
the “psychological thermostat” that sets the limits and the ceiling on your 
performance in your world.
Limits are physical, in that genetic and other health factors, age, and 
skills do impose certain restrictions on performance. However, these limits—
for most of us—will never be fully tested because of the limitations caused 
by our beliefs. Limitations are psychological. Over time we all learn to raise 
or lower our expectations of ourselves because of our experiences. Disap￾pointments become solid barriers. Successes give us confidence. As we get 
older, we don’t simply move past these limitations we have internalized. 
Some of them stay with us throughout our lives. Successful individuals are 
constantly seeking growth and high performance and, incrementally, keep 
raising the bar on these invisible barriers.
A former sports’ psychologist tells a true story that illustrates this point, 
which he observed when he was working with a world-class high-jumper 
preparing for the Summer Games. The athlete could clear the high-jump 
bar in practice and in competition at 7 feet, 5 inches; but no higher, regard￾less of the technique or practice. When he wasn’t paying close attention 
one day, the coach raised the bar an inch, to 7 feet, 6 inches. Thinking it 
was still at the lower setting, the athlete cleared it. When his coach told him 
what he had done, he looked at his coach in disbelief, almost agitated. “But 30 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
I can’t jump that high,” he exclaimed. “You just did,” the coach smiled. 
“You just conquered your own four-minute mile barrier, just as Roger 
Bannister did so many years ago.” Once Bannister proved that it was possi￾ble to run a mile in under four minutes, on May 6th, 1954, suddenly more 
and more track stars were able to do it—proving an important lesson: once 
you stop believing something is impossible, you’ve taken the first step for it to 
become possible.
Many individuals don’t understand and believe that they, to a large 
extent, can control their outcomes in life. They feel like thermometers, 
reflecting that they are who they are because of what’s happening to them 
in relation to the outside world. A thermometer rises or falls to meet the 
external environment. Most self-images are greatly influenced by what the 
media and our role models bombard our senses with on a daily basis. 
However, we do have control of our current thoughts. We can reset our 
self-image like an internal thermostat from average performance to peak 
performance, and expand our comfort zones over time.
Each of us has a number of comfort zones that we have developed 
throughout our lives that dictate the amount of discomfort we are willing to 
suffer before making adjustments. Reflect, for a moment, on just how many 
of your behaviors are set into motion when you move out of these comfort 
zones. “Too much” can motivate as strongly as “too little.” On the level of 
conscious thought, there are any number of examples: how much time we 
feel comfortable in spending with those around us; how much effort we feel 
comfortable in expending on our daily priorities at the office or at home; 
how much money we feel comfortable in spending on our lifestyles, as well 
as how much money we feel comfortable in earning.
The self-image can definitely be compared to a type of thermostat, keep￾ing us in a psychological comfort zone. With a low self-image many people’s 
psychological thermostats are set correspondingly low. Not believing they 
are capable of much or worth much, the low self-image individuals are 
comfortable with mediocrity and being spectators. When challenged to 
venture out on the high side or take a chance to change the status quo, they 
pull back. “I’m not capable of that; that’s beyond my meager abilities. It’s 
not worth the effort. Why bother?” goes the negative self-talk. They have 
discovered that their imaginations serve as a life-governing device—that if 
your self-image can’t possibly see yourself doing something or achieving 
something, you literally cannot do it. “It’s not what you are that holds you 
back, it’s what you think you are not.”
Our “set point” for success is arrived at over time, based on belief in 
ourselves, our abilities, and our worth practiced on a daily basis. With a 
strong and healthy belief in ourselves and what we are capable of, we can 
go out and survive the stress of day-to-day living and reaching worthy goals. 
When our self-image thermostats move into the higher ranges, we believe 
we can handle pretty much whatever is thrown at us. We become comforta￾ble with peak performance. And we become uncomfortable with lower 
performance. However, we all have good and bad days. So it becomes important for us to respond effectively to setbacks. If our efforts to win fall 
below our comfort zones, we feed back to our self-image some positive rein￾forcement and self-talk: “Next time, I’ll do better”; “I can do that.” “More 
knowledge, training, and better concentration will win me that prize.” This 
will be discussed in detail in Chapter 4, concerning how positive self-talk 
impacts our self-esteem.
Creativity is seeing, in advance, an idea that can become a solution to a 
major problem or need. And holding on to that idea until it works or until a 
better idea is implemented. Creativity is holding on to your dreams even when 
others laugh at you. Creativity comes from having mentors and coaches who 
are interested in your success; coaches who’ll listen unconditionally, who 
praise often and criticize constructively the behavior that is undesirable, 
while not directly criticizing the individual. Creativity is having curious lead￾ers who are open to new ideas and to better ways of doing things and who are 
not so set in their ways that they prejudge everything in advance. Unimagina￾tive and unproductive people say, “It may be possible, but it’s too difficult.” 
Creative individuals say, “It may be difficult, but it’s always possible.”
When we look in a mirror, there are three reflections: the child of our 
past, the person we are today, and the person we will become. With the right 
role models and the right inputs into our brain’s software program, we can 
change the perceptions that have twisted and colored our image of who we 
really are. Understanding this secret of the power of the imagined experience 
is fundamental to understanding high-performance human achievement.
What is your dominant self-image? Do you see yourself as creative, 
friendly, funny, and intelligent, or do you have a low view of yourself? 
Enter your thoughts in Personal Journal 1.3.
Building a Healthy Self-Image
A healthy self-image is positive but realistic. People with a realistic self￾image aren’t bothered by their weaknesses, however, because they know 
that their strengths outweigh them. Instead of worrying about the things 
they can’t do well, they make the very best of all the things they can do 
well. Sarah, for example, knows that she is a whiz at math and computers 
but is a pretty ordinary artist. Emmett takes pride in being a good writer 
and musician, but knows that he tends to stumble when making oral pre￾sentations. They both have healthy, realistic self-images.
People with unrealistic, negative self-images, by contrast, overestimate their 
weaknesses and suffer from low self-esteem. (You’ll learn more about the con￾nection between self-image and self-esteem in Chapter 4.) People with unrealis￾tic, positive self-images have high self-esteem, but they overestimate their 
strengths and don’t put in the effort required to succeed. They also have trouble 
getting along with other people because they usually seem hostile and arrogant.
Besides being realistic, a healthy self-image is also based on who you 
are right now. Who you are today does not limit who you will be next week, 
next month, or next year. Your potential, your interests, and your abilities 
success secret
A healthy self-image is 
positive but realistic.32 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
Personal Journal 1.3
How Do You See Yourself?
On the scales following each statement, circle one or more numbers between 1 and 10 according to how 
strongly you agree with it. The number 1 represents total disagreement, and the number 10 represents 
total agreement. You may select a single number or a range of numbers.
1. I have high intellectual ability.
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
 7. I am competent on the job.
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
2. I am good at sports.
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
 8. I am competent at school.
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
3. I am creative.
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
 9. I am romantically appealing to others.
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
4. I have good relationships with my close friends.
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
10. I am physically attractive.
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
5. I have a good sense of humor.
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
11. I am a moral person.
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
6. I am popular with others.
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
12. I have a good relationship with my parents.
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Identify the three areas to which you gave the highest ratings. What are you particularly proud of in these 
areas? Now look at the areas to which you gave low ratings. Is it possible that you are being overly criti￾cal of yourself?are developing every day and will continue to develop. You are being influ￾enced by the world around you, and you are influencing the world, too.
Complexity and Self-Image A healthy self-image is also complex. 
Having a complex self-image means having a variety of positive ways of seeing 
yourself. People who have a complex self-image are less likely to suffer from 
psychological troubles such as stress, anxiety, and depression. When they 
suffer a setback or difficulty in one area of their lives, they can fall back on 
one of the many other positive roles they play in life. Ladonna, for example, 
has a complex self-image: She sees herself as a businesswoman, a mother, 
an artist, and an environmentalist. When things get tough at work, she has 
many other positive aspects of herself to take pride in. Jared, on the other 
hand, has a rather simple self-image: He sees himself mainly as an A student. 
When he occasionally does poorly on a test, he feels like a failure.
The key to a complex self-image is to strike a balance among the vari￾ous important areas of your life, such as relationships, school, work and 
career, community, health, hobbies and leisure, and spirituality. When you 
devote time and energy to each important area of your life, you build a 
strong foundation for feeling good about yourself. How balanced is your 
life? Take a look in Activity 4.
YOU AND YOUR SOCIAL WORLD
If you wrote down a detailed description of your innermost self and then 
asked your best friend to write a description of you, how similar do you think 
the descriptions would be? What if you asked a sibling? A parent? What about 
a new acquaintance? Chances are, none of their descriptions would be very 
similar to yours. That’s because no one sees you the way you see yourself. It’s 
also because you probably act slightly differently with each of these people.
Have you noticed that people change their behavior depending on the 
social setting? Ginny, for example, is responsible and managerial at work, shy 
and quiet in the classroom, and sociable and outgoing with friends. Is she act￾ing falsely in some situations? Is she unsure of who she is? Not necessarily. 
Ginny’s behavior shows the power of social roles. A social role is a set of 
norms (standards of behavior) that define how we are supposed to behave in 
a social position or setting. Like Ginny, each of us is subject to many social 
roles: partner, friend, parent, citizen, son or daughter, student, employee.
We act according to social roles because we desire social acceptance. 
Sometimes this desire motivates us to act in ways that don’t represent our 
true selves. Altering our behavior to make a good impression on others is 
known as self-presentation. Trina, for example, acts falsely modest after 
receiving a compliment because she is afraid of seeming stuck up.
All of us use self-presentation, sometimes without being aware of it. We 
might act friendly and upbeat at a party to make a good impression, for example, 
even if we’re feeling tired and grouchy inside. How do you behave around differ￾ent people? Do you engage in self-presentation? Write your thoughts in Activity 5.
success secret
It’s healthy to find balance 
in your life.
success secret
No one sees you the way 
you see yourself.
social role A set of 
norms that defines how 
people are supposed to 
behave in a given social 
position or setting.
self-presentation
Altering one’s behavior to 
make a good impression on 
others.34 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
ACTIVITY 4: Wheel of Life
A Read each of the statements below. Decide how true each statement is for you, then write in a number 
between 1 (not at all true) and 10 (totally true).
Rating (1–10)
.1. I go to movies, restaurants, and so on, with friends.
2. 2. I spend time thinking about the meaning of life.
3 3. I exercise regularly.
4. I enjoy time with my romantic partner.
5. I have goals for earning and spending money.
6. I am satisfied with my career choice and my career progress so far.
7. I am involved in community affairs.
8. I enjoy reading books or magazines.
9. I belong to a club or social group.
10. I set time aside for meditation, prayer, worship, or other spiritual practice.
11. I eat healthful foods.
12. I write or call friends and family members from whom I am separated.
13. I earn the income I want.
14. I am involved in creative work on the job, at school, or elsewhere.
15. I belong to a community association.
16. I attend workshops or special courses to increase my knowledge or skills.
17. I like to meet new people and socialize.
18. I think about how I can make my life serve a greater purpose.
19. I try to maintain a healthy weight.
20. I have coworkers or fellow students who are also friends.
21. I have a plan for saving money.
22. I have reached some, but not all, of my professional goals.
23. I volunteer for community or charitable projects.
24. I watch or listen to educational programs.B Scoring: For each of the 24 items on the list, write the rating you gave it (1–10) on the line below.
Relationships
Item 4
Item 12
Item 20
Total
Work and Career
Item 6
Item 14
Item 22
Total
Community
Item 7
Item 15
Item 23
Total
Learning and School
Item 8
Item 16
Item 24
Total
Health and Fitness
Item 3
Item 11
Item 19
Total
Hobbies and Leisure
Item 1
Item 9
Item 17
Total
Spirituality
Item 2
Item 10
Item 18
Total
Money
Item 5
Item 13
Item 21
Total
continued . . .
C Record the total for each area on the wheel below by drawing a curved line in each section of the circle.
Relationships
Hobbies and
Leisure
Health and
Fitness
Money
Work and
Career
Community
Learning and
School
Spirituality
Wheel of Life
30
20
10
10 20 3030 20 10
10
20
3036 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
D Ideally, your completed diagram should resemble a circle. However, most of us have different priorities 
at different stages of our lives. Were you surprised by your imbalance? Explain why or why not.
E In which area(s) of your life do you want or need to spend more time? Explain.
F Name specific things you could give up in one or two areas in order to make more time for the 
neglected area(s).
G Are any of the eight life areas covered in this exercise particularly important to you? Explain.ACTIVITY 5: Sides of Yourself
A On the figure below, write five adjectives to describe how you think, feel, or act when you are with each 
of the people named.
Parent(s)
Sibling(s)
New
Acquaintance
Romantic
Interest
Close Friend
Instructor
B Are you more “yourself” with one of the individuals on the figure, or do you think, feel, and act fairly 
consistently with all of them? Explain.
C We all use self-presentation strategies from time to time. When do you use self-presentation? Explain.38 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
Identity
How we choose to define ourselves to the world makes up our identity. Our 
identity is our public self. An identity is complex and comes together, piece 
by piece, over a lifetime. Your identity can change over time as you encoun￾ter new people, places, ideas, and challenges.
Although each individual’s identity is complex, most psychologists 
agree that it is made up of three major elements: individual identity, rela￾tional identity, and collective identity. Your identity takes shape over time 
as you integrate your individual, relational, and collective identities into a 
meaningful whole.
Individual Identity Your individual identity is made up of the per￾sonal characteristics that distinguish you from other people. These charac￾teristics are both physical, such as your appearance and possessions, and 
psychological, such as your personality and talents. Important components 
of individual identity are:
• name (given name, nicknames)
• age
• sex
• physical characteristics (tall, short, fit, red-haired, etc.)
• possessions (home, car, clothing, etc.)
• ways of interacting with others (shy, outgoing, nice, etc.)
• talents and personal qualities (intelligent, creative, athletic, etc.)
• likes and preferences (food, music, hobbies, etc.)
• emotions (happy, sad, moody, stable, excitable, etc.)
• beliefs and ideologies (environmentalist, conservative, etc.)
• intellectual interests (literature, science, etc.)
• artistic activities (painting, singing, dance, etc.)
Relational Identity Relational identity refers to how we identify 
ourselves in relation to the important people in our lives, such as our par￾ents, siblings, close friends, children, and romantic partner. These signifi￾cant others are so important to our sense of self that we often take pride in 
their achievements as if they were our own. Important elements of rela￾tional identity are:
• kinship/family role (mother, father, son, daughter, etc.)
• romantic/sexual role
• professional role (boss, employee, etc.)
• friendship role (coworker, best friend, acquaintance, etc.)
Collective Identity Our collective identity is the sum of all the 
social roles we play and the social groups to which we belong. Human 
beings are social creatures, and each of us is a member of many groups, 
such as a cultural group, an ethnic group, and a religious group. Culture 
and ethnicity are particularly powerful influences on identity. Think about 
identity How a person 
chooses to define themself to 
the world.
individual identity
The physical and 
psychological characteristics 
that distinguish an individual.
relational identity
How an individual identifies 
themself in relation to 
important others.
collective identity
The sum of the social roles 
an individual plays and the 
social groups to which he/
she/they belongs.how different you would be today if you had grown up in another country 
or been born with a different ethnicity. Would you still be “you”?
Consider how the following elements of your collective identity make 
you who you are:
• race/ethnicity
• religion
• culture (European, Asian, etc.)
• social class or status (middle class, working class, etc.)
• occupation
• citizenship/territoriality (American, Californian, etc.)
• group membership (member of student orchestra, etc.)
• political affiliation (Democrat, Republican, Green, etc.)
Each of us values these aspects of identity differently. Some people, for 
example, may see their religion as a major component of who they are, 
while others may place much more importance on their profession.
What are the elements of your identity, and which ones are the most 
central to how you see yourself ? Activity 6 will help you find out.
Culture and Identity
Culture has a powerful impact on identity. Culture consists of the behaviors, 
ideas, attitudes, and traditions shared by a large social group and transmitted 
from one generation to the next. Each culture has different values, ethics, 
beliefs, lifestyles, and standards of acceptable and unacceptable behavior, 
such as ways of dressing, expressing ourselves, and relating to others. 
Culture influences all aspects of life, from education to career to family.
Western cultures, in the past, have been noted to promote individualism. 
This means that people value individual goals over group goals and define 
their identity in terms of personal rather than group attributes. In individu￾alist cultures, people place emphasis on competing with others and stand￾ing out from others around them. For that reason, people from cultures 
such as the United States and Canada have been known to value their indi￾vidual identities over their collective and relational identities. This has been 
changing in recent decades with Canada and the United States moving 
more toward a more collective identity. Other values that are important to 
people in individualist cultures include:
• independence, self-reliance, and choosing one’s own goals
• freedom of thinking and action
• creativity and imagination
• being daring, seeking adventure and risk
• a varied life filled with challenge, novelty, and change
• pleasure
Unlike Western cultures, many Eastern cultures promote collectivism. 
This means that people value group goals over individual goals and define 
their identity in terms of group identification rather than personal 
culture The behaviors, 
ideas, attitudes, and 
traditions shared by a large 
social group and transmitted 
from one generation to the 
next.40 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
ACTIVITY 6: Identity Profile
A Fill out the lines below for each aspect of your individual identity.
Individual Identity
My full name is
I am years old 
My sex is and my gender identity is . 
Physical characteristics that distinguish me from other people are
My most important possessions are 
When I am with other people, I usually act
My special traits/talents include 
I like 
I often feel the emotions of 
I strongly believe in 
I am very interested in 
Relational Identity
I am the son/daughter of
I am the close friend of
I am the spouse/partner of
I am the mother/father ofAchievements or qualities of my close friends or relations that I am proud of include
Collective Identity
My race or ethnicity is
My cultural background is
My religious beliefs are
By profession, I am (or will be) a(n)
I was born in
I live in a 
Social groups I belong to include
My political orientation is
B How well do you think the information above sums up your identity? Explain.
C If someone who had never met you before was given this list, how well do you think that person would 
know you? Explain.
continued . . .42 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
D Now consider how important each aspect of your identity is to you by filling out the following question￾naire. Assign each statement a number between 1 and 5, with 1 being not important at all to your sense 
of who you are and 5 being extremely important to your sense of who you are.
Score (1–5)
1. My dreams and goals
2. My closest friend(s)
3. My relatives and close family
4. My cognitions and emotions
5. My life partner
6. My race or ethnicity
7. My self-image
8. My occupation and economic status
9. My religion
10. My ethics and values
11. My group of friends and acquaintances
12. My sense of belonging to my community
E Scoring: To determine your individual identity score, add up the number of points you assigned to 
items 1, 4, 7, and 10. To determine your relational identity score, add up the number of points you 
assigned to items 2, 3, 5, and 11. To determine your collective identity score, add up the number of 
points you assigned to items 6, 8, 9, and 12. What are your totals?
Individual Identity Relational Identity Collective Identity 
Which component of your identity is most important to you?
F Which four or five individual aspects of your identity (from any of the three major components) do you 
value the most? Why?attributes. In collectivist Asian cultures, such as Japan, India, and China, 
for example, people value cooperation and harmonious interpersonal 
relationships more than being special or standing out from the crowd. 
Interestingly, countries that were part of the former Soviet Union, including 
Poland, Hungary, and Ukraine, have moved away from collectivism toward 
Individualism. Other values that are emphasized in collectivist cultures 
include:
• obedience, fulfilling duties, and meeting obligations
• honoring and showing respect for parents and elders
• reliance on central authority for safety and security
• politeness, courtesy, and good manners
• social order and stability in society
Because of this emphasis on group relationships and social order, people 
from collectivist cultures tend to value their group relationships and 
collective identities more than their individual identities.
Gender and Identity
One particular aspect of culture—gender—has a particularly strong impact 
on our identity. Gender is the set of characteristics used to define male and 
female. Unlike sex, which is biological, gender is cultural. As children grow 
up and develop an identity, they are powerfully affected by gender roles. A 
gender role is a set of norms that define how males and females are sup￾posed to behave. Gender roles should not be confused with gender identity,
which can be defined as how one identifies oneself (male or female, a blend 
of male and female, or neither male nor female).
Gender roles vary widely from culture to culture. In Western societies, 
men have traditionally been expected to be assertive, independent, and 
competitive, while women have traditionally been expected to be helpful, 
expressive, and gentle. Gender roles like these are reinforced by the different 
ways that boys and girls are treated in school and at home. Girls, for exam￾ple, are more likely to be punished for aggressive behavior than boys, 
because this kind of behavior is considered more appropriate for boys than 
for girls. Boys, on the other hand, are more likely to be punished for crying 
and to be told that “boys don’t cry” and to “man up.”
Gender roles are rapidly changing in the United States. More women 
graduate from high school than do men and our total workforce is nearly 
equally divided between men and women. There are more women enrolled 
in colleges than men, and women have passed men in gaining advanced 
degrees as well as bachelor’s degrees, part of a trend that is helping redefine 
who goes off to work and who stays home with the kids. About one of 
every five stay-at-home parents is a father. More than one-fourth of all busi￾nesses are owned by women and more than half of all new, small business 
are being created by women.
Unfortunately, even with great strides in our society to appreciate and 
reward competent employees whose skills, talents, and accomplishments 
gender role A set of 
norms that define how males 
and females are supposed to 
behave.44 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
meet or exceed expectations, gender bias (when someone is treated differ￾ently or unfairly due to one’s gender) has not totally been eliminated. 
Women (and even men) may face a “maternal wall” bias, which assumes 
their commitment to family outweighs their commitment to career, and 
that the latter will suffer as a result. Or women who are perceived as “too 
assertive” may falsely be labeled as “too difficult” or “too ambitious,” while 
their male counterparts may be rewarded for like behavior.
Also, most research indicates that women still earn less than men in the 
workplace, which in part can be attributed to gender bias. This is also due 
to the fact that women have often chosen lesser paying jobs within a career 
field. For example, a female math major is more likely to go into teaching, 
which has been a lower paying profession, than a male math major is. Also, 
women haven’t been encouraged to negotiate for—but rather to accept—
salaries or minimal pay increases, while men have been more inclined to 
negotiate (and be rewarded) higher rates. However, these are skills that 
anyone can learn and master.
Defining Your Role Many researchers suggest that it is healthiest 
to have a combination of both stereotypically masculine and stereotypically 
feminine qualities. People with a combination of traits can be forceful and 
logical when they need to, and emotional and sensitive when this is the best 
response. Women who possess traditionally masculine qualities such as 
logical reasoning, independence, and daring are better able to assert them￾selves in the workplace, for example, than women who are passive and 
submissive. Also, men who possess traditionally feminine qualities, such as 
gentleness, sensitivity, and compassion, are able to enjoy closer and more 
harmonious relationships than men who feel they must remain detached 
and unemotional.
We are all born with the capacity to feel and express the whole range 
of human thoughts and emotions. Viewing personal qualities as human, 
rather than as good or bad, strong or weak, or male or female, gives us the 
freedom to define our identities and our personal aspirations. As we will 
discuss later in this text, career selection should not hinge on your gender 
or cultural notions of “what is acceptable.” It will be based on a number of 
personal factors, especially your interests and values.
Self Check
1. Define self-image. (p. 27)
2. What is a social role? (p. 33)
3. List the three components of identity. (p. 38)
success secret
Don’t put limits on what 
you can become.
gender bias When 
someone is treated differently 
or unfairly due to one’s 
gender.Chapter 1 Review and Activities
success (p. 4)
self-direction (p. 7)
role model (p. 10)
happiness (p. 10)
psychology (p. 17)
behavior (p. 17)
neuroscience (p. 19)
nervous system (p. 23)
conscious mind (p. 23)
subconscious mind (p. 23)
cognition (p. 25)
emotion (p. 25)
self (p. 27)
self-image (p. 27)
social role (p. 33)
self-presentation (p. 33)
identity (p. 38)
individual identity (p. 38)
relational identity (p. 38)
collective identity (p. 38)
culture (p. 39)
gender role (p. 43)
gender bias (p. 44)
Key Terms
Summary by Learning Objectives
• Define success. Success is lifetime fulfillment that comes from creating a sense of meaning 
in your work and personal life and from feeling satisfaction with yourself and your achievements.
•List several personal qualities that help people to be happy. Personal qualities that foster a 
happy outlook on life include ability to love, vocation, courage, trust, optimism, future-mindedness, 
social skill, esthetic sensibility, work ethic, honesty, emotional awareness, persistence, forgiveness, 
creative thinking, spirituality, self-esteem, and wisdom.
• Define psychology and cite its four major goals. Psychology is the scientific study of 
human behavior. Its four major goals are to describe, predict, explain, and (in some cases) 
change human behavior.
•Explain the relationship among thoughts, feelings, and actions. Thoughts, feelings, and 
actions are all interrelated: each affects the other. Our beliefs about ourselves, for example, affect 
the way we feel about ourselves and the way we act.
• Define self, self-image, and identity. Self is an individual’s sense of being a unique, conscious 
being. Self-image is all the beliefs a person has about himself or herself. Identity is how a person 
chooses to define himself or herself to the world.
• Describe the components of identity. Identity has three components: individual identity, 
relational identity, and collective identity. Individual identity is the physical and psychological 
characteristics that distinguish an individual. Relational identity is how an individual identifies 
himself or herself in relation to important others. Collective identity is the sum of the social 
roles an individual plays and the social groups to which the individual belongs.46 Chapter 1 Psychology and Success
Review Questions
1. According to the text, what makes a person successful?
2. Explain the relationship among thoughts, feelings, and actions.
3. Why do negative emotions make it hard to learn or work toward a goal?
4. What is collectivism, and how is it different from individualism?
5. If you say, “I am Catholic,” which part of your identity are you revealing?
6. Compare social roles with gender roles.
Critical Thinking
7. Happiness Many psychologists believe that each individual has a happiness “set point,” a 
general level of happiness to which each individual usually returns. This suggests that some 
people are simply happier than others. If this is the case, do you think trying to become 
happier is worth the effort? Why or why not?
8. Identity Imagine that you had grown up in a different culture, either here or abroad. Do 
you think your identity would be the same as it is now—would you still be “you”? What if you 
had been adopted into a different family? Explain.
Application
9. Gender Roles Gender roles are reinforced through the toys given to girls and boys. Visit a 
local toy store or a local bookstore and look at the toys or books that are designed for boys 
and girls ages six through twelve. (If you are unable to visit a toy or bookstore, visit the Web 
site of a large toy or book retailer.) Compare and contrast the girls’ toys or books with the 
boys’ toys or books. What percentage of the toys or books reinforce traditional gender roles?
10. Life Balance Survey two people about the balance in their life. Explain that you would like 
to interview them about the eight areas of their life shown in the Wheel of Life: relationships, 
learning and school, work and career, community, health, hobbies and leisure, money, and 
spirituality. Administer Activity 4 to each interviewee. Add up each interviewee’s score. Are 
your interviewees’ lives in balance? Do they want more balance in their lives? Which of the 
eight areas of the Wheel of Life are most important to them? Compare and contrast their 
responses with your own.
Review and ActivitiesReview and Activities
Internet Activities
11. Perspectives on Success Go to www.incomediary.com/50-great-thoughts-on-success, 
which is a Web site that offers ten definitions, quotes, formulas, misconceptions, and principles 
concerning success. Select two from each of the ten statements (in each of the five categories). 
Write them down. Then, write a one- to two-page summary on why your selections meant the 
most to you personally.
12. Role Model Article In Activity 2 earlier in this chapter, you selected a role model who has 
had a positive impact on your life. Your instructor can provide the author’s “Role Model” 
article for you to read. Pick a role model from history who inspires you, and write a one-page 
description of why and how this individual influences you.
Look back at your response to the question in the Career Path 
Story on page 2. Think about how you would answer the question 
now that you have completed the chapter.
Complete the Story Write a paragraph continuing Elena’s story, 
showing how she can use her own definition of success to help her 
decide on the career path that makes the most sense for her.
“Moving Up the Ladder” Career 
Path Story
Chaay_Tee/Shutterstock48
Searching for Work
Farah Ayad worked as a server at her family’s 
restaurant since she was fifteen. After a few years, 
the restaurant’s business plateaued. Since her family 
did not have the funds to pay for advertising, she 
voluntarily created social media accounts for the 
restaurant and began marketing. She created videos 
of food preparation and snapped mouth-watering 
photos of plated food. People noticed her work 
and customers increased. One day, a marketing 
firm stopped by the restaurant and offered her a 
marketing specialist position.
Searching Within
While Farah’s family and friends encouraged to accept 
the position, she felt insecure about her experience, 
knowledge, and skills. “I’ve only worked as a server 
for my family’s restaurant. How could I succeed at a 
well-known marketing firm?” Further, Farah came to 
the realization that she never thought about her career 
path and what interests her. She was always con￾sumed with her day-to-day routines at the restaurant.
What Do You Think? What could Farah do to 
become more aware of her skills and interests?
“What Do I Really Want?”
Rido/Shutterstock
Career 
Path Story“
Self-Awareness 2 Chapter
learning objectives
After you complete this chapter, 
you should be able to:
• Define self-awareness and cite 
its benefits.
• Explain the factors that 
influence people’s values.
• Define personality and list the 
“big five” personality traits.
• Compare and contrast skills, 
knowledge, and interests.
• Explain how personality, skills, 
and interests relate to career 
choice.
We do not need magic to change the 
world, we carry all the power we need 
inside ourselves already; we have the 
power to imagine better.
J.K. Rowling, Author
”
introduction
Before you can get what you want out of life, you must 
know who you are and where you want to go. In this 
chapter, you’ll gain self-knowledge through the process 
of self-awareness. In Section 2.1 you’ll learn how self￾awareness helps you find your direction. You’ll look at 
your dreams for the future and define the values that 
will guide your choices. In Section 2.2 you’ll look at 
several sides of yourself—your personality, your skills 
and intelligences, and your interests. You’ll then put all 
this information together to consider the careers that 
might be right for you.50 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
SECTION 2.1 Finding Your Direction
DEVELOPING SELF-AWARENESS
Have you ever asked yourself what you want out of life? And, are you are 
heading in the right direction? An early step to answering these important 
questions is to develop self-awareness. Self-awareness is the process of 
paying attention to yourself—your thoughts, feelings, attitudes, motivations, 
and actions. Self-awareness comes from stepping back and taking a good 
honest look at yourself and how you relate to the world around you.
Self-awareness has many benefits. It helps you identify what you are 
really feeling and thinking inside. It helps you act in accordance with your 
personal values, rather than be swayed by what other people say or do. It 
helps you appreciate your unique personality, skills, and interests. When 
you are self-aware, you can make the choices that are right for you.
The Importance of Self-Honesty
Self-awareness is important, but it can sometimes be so difficult. True 
self-awareness requires self-honesty, the ability to see your strengths and 
weaknesses clearly and realistically. Self-honesty is the foundation of 
self-knowledge. In order to improve yourself, it is important to be able to 
see yourself accurately, without being too harsh or too generous. Ask 
yourself, “Am I seeing myself as I really am? Am I overconfident, or am 
I selling myself short?” “Do my actions match my core values?” “Am I 
easily influenced by peers?”
Self-honesty requires effort. It involves telling the truth about yourself, 
both to yourself and to others. Telling the truth about yourself means 
admitting that you are human and therefore imperfect. Being honest can be 
challenging because it involves admitting to thoughts and feelings that we 
might dislike and that might not fit with our self-image. Self-honesty entails 
confronting aspects of your past and present that are unpleasant or even 
painful. It might even involve confronting painful feelings such as sadness, 
grief, anger, fear, shame, or guilt.
Benefits of Self-Honesty Fortunately, the benefits of self￾honesty far outweigh the effort it requires. With self-honesty, you can see 
both what you have to offer and what you need to do to become the person 
you want to be. When you are honest with yourself, you are able to get in 
touch with your dreams, values, and interests. You are able to take pride in 
your progress because you know that you have set meaningful goals and 
invested the effort necessary to reach them. Who you are, what you think, 
and how you feel are all in harmony.
To become more self-honest, try to look at yourself like an astronomer 
viewing the universe through the lens of an orbiting telescope and discovering 
self-awareness The 
process of paying attention 
to oneself.
self-honesty The ability 
to see one’s own strengths 
and weaknesses clearly.
success secret
Self-honesty helps you get 
in touch with your dreams, 
values, and interests.a new planet or star. An astronomer doesn’t judge what he/she/they finds, but 
tries to understand it. In the same way, don’t look for what “should” be—look 
for what is. Take inventory of everything you find—the precious treasures of 
current and future potential and joy, as well as the impacts of past events in 
your life that have shaped your beliefs. Each element is a vital part of what 
makes you unique. Use Personal Journal 2.1 to start getting to know yourself.
Self-Consciousness
None of us is born self-aware; we learn to become more and more aware 
of ourselves as we grow into adolescence and adulthood. The tendency to 
Personal Journal 2.1
How Well Do You Know Yourself?
Finish each of the following statements about yourself.
The person who knows me best is
One of my dreams in life is to
Three adjectives that describe me well are
What I like most about myself is
What I like least about myself is
I am good at
I am not very good at
I enjoy
I don’t enjoy
Three careers that interest me are
My purpose in life is
Did you have trouble completing any of these statements, especially the last one? If so, you will benefit 
from taking a closer look at yourself and what you want out of life.52 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
frequently reflect on oneself is often referred to as self-consciousness.
This is exemplified as both private self-awareness and public self-awareness. 
Private self-awareness is the tendency to be aware of the private, inward 
aspects of yourself. Public self-awareness is the tendency to be aware of the 
aspects of yourself that are on display in social situations. This includes 
your body language, mannerisms, expressions, stylistic quirks, and other 
tendencies displayed when other people are around.
Private self-awareness helps us understand ourselves. Privately self￾aware people usually have a realistic and complex self-image. They tend to 
reveal the private sides of themselves in intimate relationships, which 
strengthens human bonds and alleviates feelings of loneliness. They are 
also less likely to suffer from the physical ill effects of stress. (You’ll learn 
more about stress in Chapter 3.)
Like private self-awareness, public self-awareness has benefits. It helps 
us see how our behavior affects others, and it helps us adapt to our different 
social and professional roles. A high level of public self-awareness can be 
harmful, however, if it leads to anxiety in social situations. For example, 
some people become constantly worried about how they look and what 
other people think of them. This is commonly referred to as being overly 
self-conscious by comparisons that we make of our own appearance and 
achievements with those of others and by criticisms we receive from others; 
not always constructive and not always accurate.
We all are subject to adhering to certain standards in our business and 
social lives. Cultural and ethical norms exist in virtually all of our interac￾tions with people where we work and where we live. However, many people 
don’t step back from their daily routines to take time to do some sincere 
introspection on their private, inner self-awareness. Use Activity 7 to reflect 
on how you feel internally.
Emotional Awareness
Another crucial part of self-awareness is emotional awareness. Emotional 
awareness is the process of recognizing, identifying, and accepting your 
emotions. It involves observing yourself, recognizing a feeling as it happens, 
and seeing the link among your thoughts, feelings, and actions. Being 
emotionally aware helps you handle your emotions in positive ways and 
use them to make good choices.
It is usually pretty easy to be emotionally aware when things are going well. 
If you get an A on an important exam, you will probably be aware of feeling 
happy, confident, proud, and capable. If you are enjoying a long-awaited vaca￾tion, you will probably delight in feelings of relaxation, freedom, and fulfillment.
It is much harder to be emotionally aware when things aren’t going so 
well. In these situations, we may avoid looking at our emotions. In order 
to avoid facing painful feelings, we may tell ourselves that we don’t care 
or don’t feel anything. Other times, we may be aware that we are feeling 
something, but not know exactly what.
self-consciousness
The tendency to frequently 
think about and observe 
oneself.
private self￾awareness The 
tendency to be aware of the 
private, inward aspects of 
yourself.
public self-awareness
The tendency to be aware of 
the outward, social aspects 
of yourself.
success secret
Too much self￾consciousness can 
produce anxiety.
emotional awareness
The process of recognizing, 
identifying, and accepting 
one’s emotions.
success secret
Develop the courage to 
face painful emotions.ACTIVITY 7: Private Self-Awareness Checklist
A To determine your own level of private self-awareness, read the items below and place a check mark in 
the blank that you think describes how often you feel this way.
ALWAYS OFTEN SOMETIMES RARELY NEVER
1. I’m eager to learn.
2. My work is exciting.
3. I’m willing to listen with 
an open mind.
4. I have new insights.
5. I like taking direction from 
people who know something 
I don’t.
6. I try to look at the world 
through the eyes of the other 
person.
7. I believe each person is unique.
8. When someone is talking to 
me, I really listen.
9. I’m honest with myself and 
others.
10. I’ve thought about my own 
strengths and weaknesses.
11. I continually challenge my own 
 assumptions.
12. I recognize that others may 
think that I’m strange or odd 
in some ways.
13. I adapt easily to the 
environment and situation.
B Scoring: There are no right or wrong answers. This is not a comparison exercise. Review and think 
about where you placed your check marks for each of the questions. Dedicate yourself to seeking 
authentic role models, mentors and friends, who are truly interested in your growth and success. 
Review your positive attributes more often and seek to move your responses to those questions with 
as many “often” check marks as possible.54 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
Identifying Your Emotions As a first clue to identifying what 
emotions you are experiencing, pay attention to how your body feels. 
Tense? Relaxed? Excited? Agitated? Tired? Because emotions have a physical 
as well as a psychological component, being attuned to your body’s 
reactions can help you identify your emotions.
As another clue to your emotional state, look at what occurred right 
before the emotion started. Did something happen? Did a certain thought 
go through your mind? After receiving criticism, for example, you might 
feel hurt or insulted. If you tripped and fell in front of someone you were 
trying to impress, you might feel embarrassed, silly, or inadequate. If you 
aren’t sure of what situation led to the feeling, ask yourself where your 
feeling is directed. Are you feeling an emotion toward yourself, toward 
someone else, or toward no one in particular?
It also helps to look for the precise word to express the emotion you are 
experiencing. Let’s say you are feeling “down” or “bad” but can’t figure out 
exactly how. Ask yourself what adjective best expresses your current state. 
Are you feeling discouraged? Bitter? Lonely? Rejected? Developing a large 
vocabulary of feeling words can help you get in touch with your emotions. 
Figure 2.1 lists a wide variety of feeling words that can help you pinpoint 
your emotions. Once you have found the right word, you may immediately 
feel a sense of empowerment. The simple act of naming your emotion lets 
you know what you’re up against and how you might go about handling it. 
Identifying your feelings also helps you feel at peace with them.
DEFINING YOUR DREAMS
Your dreams are a large component of who you are and what makes you 
special. A dream is an aspiration, a hope, or a vision of the future. Having 
dreams gives our lives meaning, helps us make choices, and helps us persevere 
in the face of obstacles or hardship. Living without a dream, by contrast, can 
leave us feeling adrift and unmotivated.
The most successful people are those who began with a dream. A 
dream is a powerful desire for you to hold on to and one day make a reality. 
Dreams give our lives purpose, a reason for existing. You, and only you, 
have the power to make your dream a reality. In order to make your dream 
a reality, you must have self-awareness and a strong desire to finish what 
you start.
The Importance of Purpose
Sometimes, having a purpose can mean the difference between life and 
death. Dr. Viktor Frankl was a psychiatrist in Vienna, Austria, in the 1930s 
and became a prisoner in Nazi prison camps during World War II. He 
experienced three years of horror at Dachau and Auschwitz, narrowly 
escaping the gas chamber and death several times. In his book Man’s 
Search for Meaning, Frankl used his experience and observations in the 
success secret
Look for the exact word to 
express what you feel.
dream An aspiration, 
hope, or vision of the future 
that gives one’s life direction.
success secret
Dreams give your life 
purpose.FIGURE 2.1 Feeling Words
Emotional Awareness To become more emotionally aware, practice asking 
yourself these three questions: How is my body feeling? What happened 
right before I started to experience this emotion? Can I put a specific name to 
this emotion? Why would developing a vocabulary of feeling words help you 
become more aware of your emotions?
I Feel Comfortable
admired 
adored 
amused 
appreciated 
attractive 
brave 
capable 
cheerful 
competent 
confident 
contented 
courageous 
creative 
curious 
daring
delighted 
devoted 
earnest 
ecstatic 
effective 
elated 
encouraged 
excited 
fascinated 
flattered 
graceful 
grateful 
heroic 
hopeful 
important
inquisitive 
intelligent 
interested 
joyful 
knowledgeable 
loving 
optimistic 
passionate 
pleased 
proud 
rambunctious 
resilient 
resourceful 
respected 
romantic
satisfied 
secure 
self-accepting 
self-assured 
sincere 
skillful 
tender
thrilled 
useful 
valued 
vindicated 
warm 
whole 
worthy 
zealous
I Feel Uncomfortable
afraid 
agitated 
aloof 
angry 
anxious 
ashamed 
awkward 
betrayed 
burdened 
cheated 
clumsy 
cranky 
defensive 
dejected 
deserted
devalued 
devastated 
disappointed 
discouraged 
embarrassed 
empty 
fearful 
foolish 
frightened 
guilty 
heartbroken 
helpless 
hostile 
humiliated 
ignored
incompetent 
jealous 
jittery 
lonely 
lost 
mediocre 
neglected 
nervous 
out of control 
panicky 
pessimistic 
put down 
rejected 
self-critical 
self-destructive
self-doubting 
shaken 
silly 
skeptical 
snubbed 
sorrowful 
suspicious 
tense 
terrified 
ugly 
uptight 
useless 
weary 
worried 
worthless
camps to write about human behavior under extreme conditions. Movies 
such as Schindler’s List, The Pianist, and The Book Thief remind us of this 
human suffering. Seeing himself and others stripped of everything—their 
families, jobs, clothing, possessions, health, dignity—Frankl studied the 
behavior of the captives. He wrote down the facts without letting his 56 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
emotions interfere. He noticed that the prisoners in the concentration 
camps, who faced the possibility of death every day, were able to survive 
starvation and torture if they felt they had a purpose for living. Those who 
felt they had no reason for staying alive died quickly and easily. Of the ones 
who lived through the death camps, nearly all had a fierce determination to 
see a loved one or do something important in their lives.
More than any other authority on human behavior, Frankl based his 
knowledge on firsthand experience. His observations are very different 
from Sigmund Freud’s. Freud said that people may look different, but if 
they were all deprived of food, they would all behave the same. He felt they 
would all descend to their basic animal-like instincts.
When Frankl witnessed two people faced with the identical situation in 
a concentration camp, he saw one crumble and give up while the other 
stayed strong and hopeful. He saw that people react in very different ways 
to the same situation, depending on their inner drives and motivations. 
Many prisoners told Frankl that they no longer expected anything of life. 
Frankl pointed out that they had it backward. He said, “Life was expecting 
something of them. Life asks of every individual to discover what it should 
be.” Purpose is what enables each of us to face difficult times and tragedies 
in our lives.
What Should a Dream Be?
No dream is better than any other. No dream is too big to pursue, and no 
dream is too small to count. It doesn’t matter what the contents of your 
dreams are, as long as they represent what you find meaningful and fulfill￾ing. You might have dreams for your personal life, such as to raise a family 
or travel the world. You might dream of working with animals, or children, 
or plants. You might have dreams of recognition and accomplishment, 
such as to obtain a certain job or complete a certain degree. You might 
dream of living in a cottage in the countryside, or in a condominium high 
above New York City. You may have one guiding dream, or several dreams 
that add up to a picture of life satisfaction for you.
Knowing your dreams is a part of being self-aware. When you ask your￾self what your dreams are, you are really asking: What do I want out of life?
Reclaiming Your Dreams All children have dreams. As we grow 
up, however, our dreams often get lost, buried, or set aside. We become 
busy with the business of day-to-day existence. We begin to worry about 
what other people will think. Often, parents, relatives, and other significant 
adults in our lives damage our dreams by conveying messages of disap￾proval. Some parents want their children to follow in their footsteps. Other 
parents want their children to achieve things that they did not. For many 
of us, it is easier to go along with what other people want than to figure out 
what we want for ourselves. But if you make plans to merely satisfy parents, 
partners, or peers, your success will make you feel empty—you will not be 
success secret
Life asks something of 
everyone.
success secret
A dream can be anything 
you want it to be.
success secret
Aim to satisfy yourself, not 
someone else.fulfilling your dream, but someone else’s. That’s why having and following 
your own dream is vital to achieving personal and career success.
If you are not sure what your dreams are, try thinking back to your 
early childhood, before you learned to criticize yourself or worry about 
what other people might think. What did you want to be when you grew 
up? What exciting vision did you have of the future? What subjects fasci￾nated you? What did you want to accomplish before someone told you it 
was impossible, silly, or a bad idea? To begin getting in touch with your 
dreams, complete Personal Journal 2.2.
GETTING IN TOUCH WITH YOUR VALUES
The next step in becoming more self-aware is exploring your values. Values
are the beliefs and principles you choose to live by. Values include moral 
and religious beliefs, but they cover all other areas of your life, too. Your 
values help define who you are. They shape your attitudes and help you 
identify your priorities. If you have not defined your values, you will have 
difficulty laying out goals for the future.
Values are closely intertwined with ethics, the principles you use to 
define acceptable behavior and decide what is right and wrong. However, 
there is no such thing as a “right” or “wrong” value. Your values reflect 
what matters to you as a unique individual.
Everyone has a different set of values. Author Rita Baltus tells the story 
of a missionary who had gone to a poverty-stricken nation to help people in 
need. Two tourists visiting the country saw the missionary cleaning a man 
who had leprosy, a disease that creates skin lesions. One tourist turned to 
the other and said, “I wouldn’t do that for a million dollars.” The mission￾ary looked up and replied, “Neither would I.” Clearly the missionary valued 
something other than money.
Examining Your Values Do you know which values are most 
important to you? Although everyone lives by different principles and 
beliefs, many people value at least some of the following:
• Adventure—exploring the world; seeking new experiences
• Commitment—dedicating yourself to a goal
• Community—feeling a connection to a neighborhood or group
• Compassion—having sympathy for suffering and working to reduce it
• Competition—testing yourself through rivalry and challenge
• Courage—taking risks; showing strength against fear, danger, and 
difficulty
• Creativity—experimenting; expressing yourself; trying new ideas
• Environmentalism—preserving the natural environment
• Fairness—treating others in a just and impartial way
• Financial security—being free from worries about money
• Fun—enjoying yourself and having a good time in life
values The beliefs and 
principles that one chooses 
to live by.
ethics The principles one 
uses to define acceptable 
behavior and decide what is 
right and wrong.
success secret
It’s important to determine 
your own values.58 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
Personal Journal 2.2
What Are Your Dreams?
Complete the following sentences. Write down your first thoughts without judging yourself.
I’ve always wanted to
If I were to receive an award, I would want it to be for
The things that make life worth living are
The best thing that could possibly happen to me is
If I were nearing the end of my life, I would regret not having
Look at what you wrote above. Do you see any common words, images, or subjects? Write down four 
or five dreams that you have right now. These dreams may be any size, take any amount of time, 
and belong to any area of your life, such as education, career, relationships, lifestyle, appearance, 
health, travel, or spirituality.• Generosity—treating others in a giving way
• Hard work—giving your full effort on the job and at home
• Health—feeling fit; enjoying physical and mental well-being
• Honesty—thinking, speaking, and acting in a forthright way
• Independence—making your own decisions; having options
• Integrity—doing the right thing; acting ethically
• Kindness—behaving in a caring and helpful way toward others
• Knowledge—seeking truth and understanding
• Learning—pursuing education; growing as a person
• Loyalty—remaining faithful and devoted to a person or cause
• Physical appearance—looking attractive, groomed, and healthy
• Power—having influence over people and situations
• Recognition—receiving acknowledgement for your efforts
• Relationships—enjoying affection and belonging
• Responsibility—honoring obligations; being reliable
• Security—being free from anxiety; having your needs met
• Social responsibility—contributing to the welfare of society and to the 
solution of social problems
• Solitude—enjoying time alone for rest and renewal
• Spirituality—searching for a greater good, purpose, or meaning to human 
existence
• Tolerance—accepting other people, cultures, and ideas
• Wealth—having enough money to support an affluent lifestyle
Applying Psychology
Lead by Example
When it comes to ethics on the job, management’s actions definitely speak more 
loudly than words. According to research conducted by the Ethics Resource Center, 
employees are more likely to comply with standards of ethics if their managers 
clearly set a good example, keep promises and commitments, and openly support 
those who do the same. The research showed that these actions were much more 
effective than formal company training programs. In essence, employees want to 
see their managers “walk the talk.”
According to the study, formal training of junior employees should focus on preparing them to handle 
specific situations of misconduct. Training for upper management should instruct them how to demonstrate 
to others their personal commitment to ethical standards. Obviously, these actions should be genuine—not 
phony or forced.
Most major companies have a written code of ethics that all employees are expected to adhere to (and 
in many cases must sign). These usually include the basics of employee behavior as well as specific issues 
related to the type of business (such as confidentiality).
Critical Thinking If you were running a business, what are some of the important behaviors and values 
you might write into your “code of ethics”?
Hero Images/Getty Images60 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
Before you commit to a set of values, it’s important to consider the 
factors that may influence your choice.
Like other aspects of ourselves, our values are greatly influenced by our 
family, religious beliefs, teachers, friends, and personal experiences. Our values 
are also influenced by the society in which we live. Values that are frequently 
promoted in democratic societies (such as the United States and Canada) 
include independence, freedom, responsibility, security, and tolerance. Some￾times, however, our society’s values can be confusing. Although most of us are 
taught to respect hard work and generosity, for example, we are exposed to 
some media images that glamorize the idea of instant fame and riches.
We can also become confused about our values when we adopt other 
people’s values as our own. Let’s say your parents greatly value financial 
security, but you are willing to sacrifice financial security for adventure. 
Will you adopt your parents’ values, perhaps following their career and life￾style suggestions, or will you become your own person? Deep down, you 
may feel that your values are “wrong” and that your parents’ values are 
“right.” Remember, however, that values are personal beliefs about what 
is important, not absolutes of right and wrong. If you aren’t sure whether 
or not you are really committed to a value, ask yourself:
• Did I choose this value, or did I copy it from someone else?
• Does this value make me feel good about myself?
• Will other people benefit if I act according to this value?
• Will something truly bad happen if I don’t follow this value?
• Is this value flexible enough to allow me to pursue my needs and goals?
Now it’s time to take a look at your values. Review the list of values 
above and on the previous pages, then complete Activity 8.
Your Values at Work
Values have a large influence on the choices we make in our lives. One of 
the most important of these choices is that of a career. If you value adven￾ture, you can be sure you will be happier as a police officer or a flight atten￾dant than as an accountant. If you value creativity, you will thrive in a job 
where you have the chance to express yourself and come up with new ideas. 
If you value knowledge, you might enjoy a career in teaching, research, 
science, or journalism.
Of course, no job can suit all of your values perfectly. One job might 
give you ample independence and adventure, for example, but offer little 
security. Another might reward you financially and creatively, but provide 
fewer opportunities than you would like to help others. That’s why it is 
important to find a balance between fulfillment in work and fulfillment in 
life. That’s also why it is important to decide which of your values you want 
to be foremost in your work.
Look at the ten values you identified as most important in Activity 8. 
Which of these are most crucial to you in your work? Which would you be 
success secret
Values are beliefs, not 
absolutes.
success secret
Values guide your choices 
in life.ACTIVITY 8: Values Inventory
A Choose ten values that matter the most to you. Choose from the values listed on pages 57, 59, and 60, 
or use another source if you feel that something is missing from that list. Write the name of each value in 
the left-hand column below.
Value Ranking Comments
B Now rank these values in order of their importance to you. In the ranking column, write in the numbers 1 
(lowest) through 10 (highest) to represent each value’s importance. In the Comments column at right, 
briefly explain why you rated each item as you did.
C Write down your top three values. For each one, explain why it is important to you and one way you use 
it, or plan to use it, to guide your choices in life.
#1 Value
#2 Value
#3 Value
continued…62 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
D Who or what do you think have been the greatest influences on your values? Explain.
E What values do you feel are most important for your friends and romantic partners to have? Are they the 
same as your top-ranked values? Explain.
F Think of an area of your life in which you are not following one of your values. For instance, Dave 
Ramsey explains in The Total Money Makeover, “We buy things we don’t need with money we don’t 
have to impress people we don’t like.”willing to sacrifice? For example, would you be willing to sacrifice some 
pay for a job that allows you to help others? Would you be willing to take 
a job that is high in independence even if it meant less time for family?
Also ask yourself how you could create more opportunities for yourself 
to express your values. What action could you take at work to better 
express your values? If you value solitude, could you schedule blocks of 
time when you could work alone and undisturbed? If you value learning, 
could you volunteer for a new project?
You can also create opportunities to express your values outside of 
work. If you value generosity, you might volunteer at a homeless shelter or 
deliver food to the needy. If you value relationships, you might make a start 
by reviving old friendships and strengthening your family bonds. Activities 
such as community service, independent study, artistic expression, and 
spiritual practice can all provide opportunities to express your values and 
fulfill your purpose in life. In addition to these time-based activities, stable 
work enables philanthropy. You can donate money to causes that are 
important to you.
Self Check
1. What is self-awareness? (p. 51)
2. Why is it important to have a dream? (p. 54)
3. What are values? (p. 57)
success secret
Look for opportunities to 
express your values in a 
positive way.64 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
SECTION 2.2 Discovering Your Strengths
PERSONALITY AND INDIVIDUALITY
You should now know some important information about yourself—what 
you want out of life and what you value. Now it’s time to look at the per￾sonal qualities and talents that make you unique.
There are close to eight billion people on our planet, but no two are 
alike. People are just as different from one another in their behavior, 
such as the way they react to situations or the kinds of emotions they 
tend to feel, as they are in their physical appearance (hair color, body 
shape, etc.).
To make sense of the many ways in which people differ from one 
another, psychologists use the concept of personality. In everyday language, 
the word personality usually refers to a person’s likability and popularity. In 
psychology, however, personality is the relatively stable pattern of behavior 
that distinguishes one person from all other people. In other words, a per￾sonality is an individual’s pattern of emotions (feelings), cognitions 
(thoughts), and actions.
People’s personalities can be described as collections of traits. A trait
is a disposition to behave in a certain way regardless of the situation. For 
example, if optimism is one of your traits, you are likely to be optimistic in 
most situations. If friendliness is one of your traits, you are likely to be 
friendly to most people. Traits give consistency to our behavior. They 
make it possible for us to say that John is outgoing, or Gabriela is funny, 
or Joselyn is talkative.
Are some personality traits “better” than others? No, although some 
traits may help us succeed in a particular setting or profession. A sociable, 
talkative person would do better in a sales career, for example, than some￾one who is more reserved and quiet. An inquisitive, unconventional student 
might have trouble relating to a teacher who is closed-minded. Other traits, 
such as self-discipline, persistence, and self-motivation, are useful to every￾one because they help us achieve our goals.
Where Do Traits Come From?
Our traits are shaped by our genes, but also by our upbringing and experi￾ences. Psychologists continue to debate which influence is more impor￾tant, heredity (“nature”) or environment (“nurture”). Evidence can be 
found for both sides. Identical twins, for example, tend to have similar 
personality traits whether they are raised together or apart. This suggests 
that we inherit a large portion of our personalities from our parents. Yet 
adopted children tend to share traits with their adoptive parents. This 
suggests the opposite conclusion—that the environment we grow up in has 
a decisive effect on our behavior. In short, heredity and environment both 
personality The relatively 
stable pattern of behavior 
that distinguishes one person 
from all other people.
trait A disposition to 
behave in a certain way, 
regardless of the situation.
success secret
Use your personality traits 
to help you succeed.have an influence on our personality, but neither one controls the way we 
think, feel, or act.
Have you ever considered your personality traits? What do people tell 
you about your personality? What do you feel is true about you? Use the 
adjective checklist in Activity 9 to construct a personality self-portrait.
How Many Traits Are There?
How many different personality traits are there? A hundred? A thousand? 
Nearly 150 traits are listed in Activity 9. You could probably come up with 
dozens of adjectives to describe your friends’ personalities. Honest. Smart. 
Responsible. Lighthearted. Sensitive. Psychologists who examined Webster’s 
Dictionary found 18,000 terms to describe people’s personalities!
The “Big Five” Personality Traits
Which five traits did you pick to describe yourself in Activity 9? They are 
probably different from the five traits your classmates picked to describe 
themselves. But what if everyone could be described with the same five traits? 
Sound impossible? Recent research in personality has shown that people’s 
personalities can, in fact, be fairly accurately described using only five traits. 
This model of personality uses the following “big five” personality traits:
• Openness—imaginativeness; openness to new people, ideas, and experiences
• Conscientiousness—self-discipline and desire to achieve
success secret
Find a variety of ways to 
describe yourself.
ONLINE PERSONALITY PROFILES
Do you like to spend your leisure time alone, or are you 
more at home in a crowd? Are you a risk-taker, or do 
you prefer to play it safe? Today, dozens of Web sites 
offer personality tests that can help you answer these 
questions—and more. Online tests range from highly 
researched tools, such as the Keirsey Temperament 
Sorter, to light-hearted quizzes that interpret your 
personality based on your choice of color or dog breed. 
Taking a personality test can be an eye-opening experi￾ence. Which of these tests have real value? Some 
personality tests on the Web are backed by science, 
but most are really for entertainment, not serious 
self-exploration. How do you know which is which, 
especially when many Web sites don’t make it clear? 
Trustworthy Web sites generally provide information on 
the psychological research behind their tests. You are 
really the ultimate judge. If you think the results of an 
online test don’t seem accurate, they probably aren’t!
Think About It
Use the Internet to research personality tests. What 
kinds of tests exist? How do they differ from one 
another? Try a couple of the personality tests at the 
links below.
Big Five Personality Test 
http://www.outofservice.com/bigfive/
Humanmetrics Jung Typology Test 
http://www.humanmetrics.com/cgi-win/JTypes2.asp
Keirsey Temperament Sorter 
http://keirsey.com
Three Sides of You Profiler 
http://personal.ansir.com
internet action66 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
ACTIVITY 9: Personality Self-Portrait
A Consider all the personality traits listed below. Put a check mark in the box next to each trait that you 
feel describes you most or all of the time. (If you are unsure about the meaning of any word, consult a 
dictionary.) Remember that no trait is better than any other trait.
abstract
accurate
active
adaptable
adventurous
affectionate
alert
ambitious
anxious
apprehensive
artistic
assertive
attractive
bold
broad-minded
businesslike
calm
capable
careful
caring
charming
cheerful
clear-thinking
clever
competitive
confident
conscientious
conservative
considerate
consistent
cool
cooperative
courageous
creative
curious
deferent
determined
distant
dominant
down-to-earth
eager
easygoing
efficient
emotional
energetic
enthusiastic
extroverted
fair
farsighted
firm
flexible
forceful
forgiving
forthright
friendly
generous
gentle
good-natured
grounded
healthy
helpful
hesitant
honest
hopeful
humble
humorous
imaginative
impulsive
independent
informal
inquisitive
intelligent
inventive
kind
lighthearted
likable
lively
logical
loving
loyal
mature
methodical
modest
motivated
neat
open-minded
optimistic
organized
original
outgoing
patient
perfectionisticB If you had to pick the five traits that describe you best, which would they be?
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
persevering
pleasant
polite
practical
private
quick
quiet
reactive
realistic
rebellious
relaxed
reliable
reserved
resourceful
responsible
rule-conscious
secure
self-assured
self-confident
self-disciplined
self-reliant
sensible
sensitive
sentimental
serious
shy
sincere
skeptical
sociable
spontaneous
stable
steady
strong
strong-minded
strong-willed
supportive
tactful
tenacious
tense
thoughtful
thrill-seeking
tolerant
tough
traditional
trusting
trustworthy
understanding
vigilant
warm
wary
wistful
witty
continued…68 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
C Of which one or two specific personality traits are you proudest? Why?
D How is your personality different from the personalities of your family members? How is it similar? 
Explain.• Extroversion—assertiveness, sociability, and interest in excitement and 
activity
• Agreeableness—trustworthiness, warmth, and cooperativeness
• Emotional stability—resistance to negative emotions such as anxiety, 
anger, and depression
Each person shows each of these traits to a different degree. One person, 
for example, might show a very high degree of openness, another might 
show little or no openness, and a third might fall somewhere between these 
two extremes. These five traits have been tested in various countries, from 
China to Israel to Spain, with similar results.
Natural Aptitudes (Talents), Multiple 
Intelligences
Early in the 20th-century, Johnson O’Connor, a Harvard graduate in 
philosophy, realized that happy, productive, achieving, pace-setting 
leaders, professionals, craftsmen, and artists were generally engaged in 
work for which they had natural ability. This prompted O’Connor to 
devise a battery of tests for measuring innate ability—a battery still used 
by the Johnson O’Connor Research Foundation and, in a slightly modified 
form, by the Ball Foundation, both of which are nonprofit, scientific 
research organizations in the United States. Landmark studies by 
Harvard’s Dr. Howard Gardner confirmed O’Connor’s discovery that 
intelligence is multiple and varied, not unitary and homogeneous—and 
that a variety of natural talents should be tested. Johnson O’Connor 
and his colleagues identified nineteen of these traits, and no doubt there 
are more.
The tests are broken down into categories:
Personality determines if a person is objective—best suited for working 
with others—or subjective and more suited for specialized individual work.
Graphoria identifies clerical ability and ability to deal with figures and 
symbols—abilities necessary for performing bookkeeping, editing, and 
secretarial tasks at high levels of speed and efficiency. Graphoria is 
usually also a good indicator of how well a person will do in school.
Ideaphoria measures creative imagination and the ability to express ideas, 
which is needed in fields such as sales, advertising, teaching, public 
relations, and journalism.
Structural visualization tests the ability to visualize solids and think in 
three dimensions. This aptitude, often possessed by concrete thinkers who 
do less well with abstract thinking, is critical for engineers, mechanics, 
and architects.70 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
Inductive reasoning, which helps form logical conclusions from fragmented 
facts, is important for lawyers, researchers, diagnostic physicians, writers, 
and critics—all of whom must be able to move quickly from the particular 
to the general, perceiving patterns—and the big picture—from a collection 
of details.
Analytical reasoning is necessary for writers, editors, computer programmers, 
and others who must organize concepts and ideas into classifications and/
or sequences.
Finger dexterity is needed for all forms of manual or mechanical work, 
including computing and word processing. Also important for creative 
arts such as sculpting and piano playing.
Tweezers dexterity is the skill in handling small tools with precision, which 
is vital for professions such as surgery, repairing smartphones, and assem￾bling microchips. Surprisingly, there is little correlation between this skill 
and finger dexterity.
Observation, the ability to take careful notice, is tested by showing examin￾ees a photograph of a number of objects, then asking them to identify the 
slight changes in ten more photos of the same objects. Valuable for artists 
and painters, keen powers of observation are especially useful for research￾ers and investigators of all kinds, as in the study of microscopic slides.
Design memory, the ability to remember designs of all kinds, is extremely 
helpful for everyone who works with plans or blueprints as well as in art.
Tonal memory is the ability to remember and reproduce sounds. Pitch 
discrimination differentiates musical tones. Rhythm memory measures 
rhythm timing.
Timbre discrimination measures the ability to distinguish sounds of the 
same pitch and volume.
Number memory, the ability to store many things in the mind at the same 
time, is useful in professions such as the law, medicine, and scholarship 
that require summoning quantities of facts and information on which to 
base judgments, diagnoses, or determinations.
Numerical reasoning, an aptitude for identifying relationships among sets 
of numbers, is most helpful in bookkeeping, accounting, computer pro￾gramming, and actuarial work.
Silograms measure the ability to learn unfamiliar words and languages. 
Vital for translators, this skill is also important for speech teachers, 
language teachers, and persons doing written translation work.
Foresight is the ability to keep the mind on a distant goal and visualize 
paths and obstacles. Market research analysts, sales forecasters, political scientists, diplomats, politicians, and corporate leaders are 
among the many who need foresight.
Color perception, the ability to distinguish colors, is obviously essential 
for fashion designing, multimedia graphic artists, painting, interior deco￾rating, and advertising—and for all professions and crafts involving art and 
layout functions.
Most people tested by the Johnson O’Connor and the Ball Founda￾tions have three to five strong aptitudes; few have more than seven. In 
some of his earliest tests, Johnson O’Connor found a distinct correlation 
between vocabulary and career success. O’Connor consultants now 
stress the continuing importance of vocabulary. As we become more 
dependent on texting and tweeting on mobile devices as our communication 
methods of choice, vocabulary test scores have plummeted at the 
high school and college level in recent decades. Aptitudes, skills, and 
interests point which direction a person should go, and the vocabulary 
level helps predict how far a person probably will go in his/her/their 
chosen career. Another way to say this is that limited vocabulary and a 
lesser ability to communicate keep many people with excellent abilities 
of other kinds from developing them and profiting from them. The good 
news is that vocabulary, far more than any of the basic, natural aptitudes, 
can be improved with effort and discipline. Increased reading of both 
fiction and nonfiction works can be richly rewarding. Knowledge 
is gained, imagination is stimulated, and communication skills are 
enhanced.
Although the aptitude tests have been given to children as young as 
nine, they are probably most effective at age sixteen to eighteen, when 
high school students are making college or career choices. They are also 
important to anyone considering a career or industry shift. The earlier 
you can discover your natural gifts the better—but it’s never too late. 
Identifying natural ability is also important for avoiding disappointment, 
frustration, and anger in career choices. One young son of a surgeon 
couldn’t follow in his famous father’s footsteps because he hesitated 
too much during simple surgical procedures. His father branded this as 
cowardice, while in reality, the son lacked tweezer dexterity. Another 
good prerequisite for surgeons is structural visualization, which is not 
passed on from father to son—only from mother to son. Since daughters 
can inherit structural visualization from both parents, surgeons might 
look more to their daughters to carry on the family tradition.
It would be irresponsible to suggest that aptitude tests alone should 
determine career choice. Natural abilities, intelligences, acquired skills, 
interests, imitation of role models, youthful experience—all those factors 
are involved, together, of course, with circumstance. Our major decisions 
often hinge heavily on family considerations, particularly financial realities, 
at pivotal ages. Still, it’s hard to be rational or wise about developing our 72 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
lives without taking conscious steps to discover our natural abilities—and 
as early as possible. Even if we decide to pursue our gifts as hobbies and 
diversions, that promises less futility than if we ignore them entirely. Many 
of our frustrations lie deep within us. We can’t explain them even to our 
loved ones; we can only say, “I don’t know why I feel I’m wasting my life, 
but I do.” Exhaustive testing demonstrates again and again that we all have 
talents. How much more satisfied and fulfilled we feel when we’re able to 
express them creatively and regularly!
Another useful way to understand traits and abilities is to see them 
as ways of using intelligence. What does intelligence have to do with 
developing your innate talents into skills—isn’t intelligence about having a 
high score on an IQ test? Not at all. In fact, IQ scores have almost no 
relationship to real-world intelligence. IQ tests measure verbal and 
mathematical ability, which you need to excel in traditional academic 
subjects. They don’t measure your ability to choreograph a dance, navigate 
a ship, weave a basket, observe nature, or console an upset friend. All 
of these abilities represent intelligence, too. These different kinds of 
intelligence are known as multiple intelligences.
Researchers who study multiple intelligences define intelligence as a set 
of abilities that enables you to solve certain types of real-world problems. 
They have identified eight distinct kinds of intelligence:
• Verbal/linguistic intelligence—ability to use words and language, 
memorize information, and create imaginary worlds
• Logical/mathematical intelligence—ability in complex thinking and 
reasoning, using numbers, and recognizing abstract patterns
• Visual/spatial intelligence—ability to visualize objects and spatial 
dimensions and create mental images
• Bodily/kinesthetic intelligence—ability to understand and use the body 
and to control its motion in activities such as sports, dancing, acting, 
and crafts
• Musical intelligence—ability to recognize rhythms, beats, and sounds, 
remember melodies, and distinguish background sounds
• Interpersonal intelligence—ability in person-to-person communication, 
leadership, and conflict resolution
• Intrapersonal intelligence—ability to be self-aware and self-reflective, 
pursue interests, and set goals
• Naturalistic intelligence—ability to recognize patterns and make 
connections in nature, assemble collections, and identify plants and 
animals
Each of us has all of these eight intelligences, but each of us is stronger 
in one or two particular intelligences than the others. Which intelligences 
are your greatest strengths? The self-assessment in Activity 10 will help you 
pinpoint your strongest intelligences.
intelligence A set of 
abilities that enables a 
person to solve certain types 
of real-world problems.
success secret
Pinpointing your strongest 
intelligences helps you 
discover what you do 
best.ACTIVITY 10: Discover Your Multiple Intelligences
A Put a check mark next to each statement that you feel accurately describes you. If you do not identify 
with a statement, leave it blank.
Section 1
I like writing and reading almost anything. I enjoy word games.
I enjoy public speaking. I am good at expressing myself in speech 
and writing.
Foreign languages interest me. I like to keep a journal or write letters to 
friends.
Section 2
I am quick to solve problems. I am good at finding and understanding 
patterns.
I can easily remember formulas. I am able to follow complex lines of reasoning.
Disorganized people frustrate me. I can perform quick calculations in my head.
Section 3
I like to build, design, and create things. I learn best by visualizing.
 I have a good sense of direction and 
read maps easily.
I have a vivid imagination.
Rearranging a room is fun for me. I like music videos and multimedia art.
Section 4
I can remember songs and rhymes easily. Musical instruments interest me.
I like to make up tunes and melodies. I notice rhythms and can easily pick up sounds.
I prefer musicals to dramatic plays. I have trouble studying if the television or 
radio is on.
Section 5
 I am good at sports and am physically 
coordinated.
 I tend to use a lot of body language when 
I talk.
 I like to demonstrate to others how to do 
something.
 I like to invent things, put things together, 
and take them apart.
I have trouble sitting still for a long time. I live an active lifestyle.
continued…74 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
Section 6
 I am good at listening and communicating 
with others.
 I am sensitive to the moods and feelings of 
others.
I am a good team player. I am able to figure out the motives and 
intentions of others.
I’d rather work in a group than by myself. I enjoy talk shows and interviews.
Section 7
I am very curious. I am very independent.
I am able to express my inner feelings. I like to work alone and pursue my own 
interests.
I tend to be quiet and self-reflective. I am always asking questions.
Section 8
 I learn best by identifying and categorizing 
things.
I notice patterns easily.
 I like to collect items from nature and 
study them.
I like being outdoors and observing nature.
I am good at picking up on subtleties. Environmental issues are important to me.
B Scoring: Add up the number of check marks you placed in each section.
 Section 1 total   reflects your verbal/linguistic intelligence.
 Section 2 total   reflects your logical/mathematical intelligence.
 Section 3 total   reflects your visual/spatial intelligence.
 Section 4 total   reflects your musical/rhythmic intelligence.
 Section 5 total   reflects your bodily/kinesthetic intelligence.
 Section 6 total   reflects your interpersonal intelligence.
 Section 7 total   reflects your intrapersonal intelligence.
 Section 8 total   reflects your naturalistic intelligence.
Which intelligence(s) are you strongest in?C How do you use your strongest intelligence(s) at work or school? Give examples.
D Describe a situation in which you used your strongest intelligence(s) to solve a problem or accomplish a goal.
E Which one or two intelligences would you most like to develop further? Why?76 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
Developing Your Intelligences You can strengthen your 
intelligences through learning and practice. To expand your interpersonal 
intelligence, for example, you might read a book about communication 
skills, then experiment with the strategies suggested in the book. To build 
your naturalistic intelligence, you might learn about plants and then try 
your hand at gardening. Strategies for developing all eight intelligences are 
listed in Figure 2.2.
FIGURE 2.2 Expanding Your Intelligences
Intelligence Strategies
Verbal/Linguistic • Join a book club or take a writing course. 
• Read anything and everything. 
• Use a new word in your conversation every day.
Logical/Mathematical • Work on puzzles and brain teasers. 
• Visit a science center, planetarium, or aquarium. 
• Practice calculating problems in your head.
Visual/Spatial • Work on jigsaw puzzles or visual puzzles. 
• Visit art museums and galleries. 
• Take a class in visual arts, such as photography.
Bodily/Kinesthetic • Join a gym or a sports team. 
• Learn dance, yoga, t’ai chi, or martial arts. 
• Enroll in an aerobics or weight-training class.
Musical • Attend concerts and musicals. 
• Take a class in music appreciation or performance. 
• Explore unfamiliar styles of music.
Interpersonal • Join a volunteer or service group. 
• Learn about body language and communication. 
• Introduce yourself to new people often.
Intrapersonal • Develop a meditative hobby, such as gardening. 
• Keep a journal of your thoughts and feelings. 
• Consult a counselor or therapist.
Naturalistic • Explore the flora and fauna of your region. 
• Look for patterns in nature or architecture. 
• Start a collection of objects.
Learning + Practice = Progress Exploring new activities and meeting 
new people help you build your intelligences and discover new interests. 
Select the intelligence you would most like to develop, and describe three 
specific actions you could take to do this.
success secret
You can strengthen your 
intelligences through 
learning and practice.EXPLORING YOUR SKILLS AND INTERESTS
Your personality and values are the foundation of who you are and where 
you will go in the future. They represent the core of who you are as a 
unique person. In addition to our personal qualities, however, each of us 
has a unique collection of skills that we can use to get where we want to go. 
A skill is the ability to do something specific as a result of learning and 
practice. Skills are often expressed as verbs, such as negotiating, speaking, 
memorizing, drawing, healing, photographing, or sewing.
Where do skills come from? No one is born knowing how to drive a car 
or do a crossword puzzle. Instead, skills are the result of knowledge combined 
with experience. Knowledge is an understanding of facts or principles in 
a particular subject area. For example, you might have knowledge of 
computers, coding, cryptocurrency, social media trends, cultures, Spanish, 
dogs, literature, pho recipes, history, sports, or interior design.
Knowledge alone is valuable, but it isn’t a skill until it is combined with 
real-world experience. To perform surgery, you need more than knowledge 
of anatomy. You also need hands-on practice with a scalpel. So it is with 
any skill. To write well, for example, you need knowledge of grammar, 
style, and the subject you are writing about. You also need practice in 
organizing your ideas and expressing yourself clearly.
Types of Skills
There are two basic types of skills, transferable skills and job-specific skills.
A transferable skill is an ability that you can use in a variety of tasks and 
jobs. Working with your hands, organizing information, writing, and mak￾ing decisions are all transferable skills. A job-specific skill is the ability to do 
a specific task or job. Setting a broken bone, using a table saw, and program￾ming a computer are all job-specific skills.
It’s easy to think that job-specific skills are more important than transfera￾ble skills. After all, when you hire a plumber to fix your leaky toilet, you want 
someone who knows how to fix pipes. However, transferable skills are the 
foundation of specific skills. How would the plumber be able to solve plumbing 
problems if the plumber wasn’t too good at reasoning? How would the plumber 
be able to run a business without skills in math and organizing information?
Building transferable skills helps you attain your goals, manage time and 
stress, and communicate well. From time to time, it is helpful to evaluate your 
skill strengths and weaknesses to see how far you have come and where you now 
want to go. If you aren’t sure what your skills are, ask yourself these questions:
• What do I have experience doing?
• What areas of knowledge do I have?
• What projects have I completed at home, work, or school?
• What problems have I solved? What skills did that show?
• What do I enjoy doing? What kinds of skills does this require?
Consider the skills you currently have and examine those you want to 
develop in Activity 11.
skill The ability to do 
something specific as a result 
of learning and practice.
success secret
Transferable skills are the 
foundation of job-specific 
skills.
knowledge An 
understanding of facts or 
principles in a particular 
subject area.78 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
ACTIVITY 11: Skills Assessment
A You may think you don’t have many transferable skills, but you may be surprised by how many you do 
have and exhibit every day. Think of anything and everything that you know how to do and write it down 
in 1. For example, are you good at speaking to children, friends, or groups of people? Repairing cars or 
machines, or working with tools? For help describing your skills, look at the words in 2 for examples of 
verbs. See 3 for examples of potential nouns to use.
1. My skills:
Example: editing documents
2. Verbs
advising 
analyzing 
assembling 
building 
calculating 
coaching 
counseling 
creating
deciding 
describing 
designing 
developing 
drawing 
editing 
evaluating 
expressing
finding 
handling 
helping 
identifying 
inventing 
learning 
listening (to) 
managing
motivating 
negotiating 
organizing 
performing 
persuading 
planning 
reading 
remembering
repairing 
researching 
selling 
speaking (to) 
teaching 
setting up 
using 
writing
3. Nouns
animals 
art 
books 
cars 
children 
computers 
concepts 
documents
equipment 
events 
experiments 
feelings 
files 
friends 
groups of people 
ideas
individuals 
information 
languages 
machines 
meetings 
money 
music 
needs
numbers 
objects 
organizations 
plants 
problems 
projects 
reports 
sports
tasks 
technology 
theater 
things 
time 
tools 
wordsB Look over all the skills you wrote down and select the three that you are proudest of. For each one, 
describe a situation in which you used that skill to accomplish something that mattered to you. For 
example, you may have helped someone, solved a difficult problem, or built or repaired something.
Skill #1
Skill #2
Skill #3
continued…80 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
C Now list three skills you would like to improve. For each one, think of some specific things you could do 
to improve it. (Remember that skills are a combination of knowledge and experience.)
Skill #1
Skill #2
Skill #3Discovering Your Interests
Over the last pages, you have created a portrait of your skills and intelli￾gences. Now you will complete the picture by looking at a closely related 
area—your interests. Interests are personal preferences for specific topics 
and activities. The better you know your interests, the easier it will be for 
you to plan your academic and career path.
What do you like and enjoy? If you’re not sure what your interests are, 
it’s never too late to begin your search. Get started by asking yourself the 
questions in Personal Journal 2.3.
As you consider your interests, think of all of them—don’t omit any out 
of fear that they aren’t important or special enough. It doesn’t matter how 
many or how few people share a particular interest, as long as the interest is 
genuine. If you follow your interests, you will enjoy your work and hobbies 
more. People who ignore their interests often end up in careers they don’t 
enjoy or care much about. Lynn, for example, enjoyed theater but decided 
to major in business because she thought that acting wasn’t a “real” career. 
Jaxson thought of his interest in video games as “just a hobby,” but he 
failed to realize his potential to pursue an enjoyable career as a game design 
programmer and game tester.
Skills and Interests Chances are, your interests and skills lie in 
the same areas. That’s because people are usually skilled at the things they 
are interested in, and interested in the things they are skilled at. Why is 
this? For one thing, all of us are motivated to build skills at the things we 
like to do. Imagine two students in a piano class. One is interested in music 
and enjoys practicing. The other couldn’t care less about music and does 
everything possible to avoid practicing. Which student is going to develop 
skill at playing the piano?
Another reason that skills and interests tend to go together is that having 
skill at something makes doing it more fun and interesting. If you have skill 
at playing soccer, for example, you’re likely to be much more interested in 
the sport than someone who has no ability at the game. Look back at the 
multiple intelligences you identified in Activity 10. Notice that each section 
of the questionnaire asked you not only what you are good at but also what 
you like to do. If you have a high musical intelligence, for example, you 
probably enjoy music in addition to being good at it.
When you engage in activities you enjoy and are skilled at, you are 
more likely to experience what psychologists call flow. Flow is a state of 
exhilaration and intense productivity that occurs when you are absorbed in 
an activity that makes full use of your skills.
Finding Your Passion
Of all the interests, passion offers us the deepest fulfillment in life. Passion 
can be viewed as an interest in its most intense form. Passion involves deep 
desire, intense drive, and strong feelings of enthusiasm and excitement. It 
interests Personal 
preferences for specific 
topics or activities.
success secret
Skills and interests go 
hand in hand. 82 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
Personal Journal 2.3
Exploring Your Interests
What activities make you feel energized and alive?
If you were at a library, bookstore, or newsstand, which subject area(s) would you enjoy browsing? 
What course(s) or subject(s) have you enjoyed the most in school?
What subject(s) could you talk about endlessly?
What were you enthusiastic about as a child?
Now examine your answers. Does any subject, theme, or key word appear more than once? These are 
probably your strongest interests.leads to the strongest devotion and commitment, which are crucial to 
overcome the many challenges on the way to realize a dream.
There are several differences between passion and general interests. 
First, a general interest involves only moderate emotions. They can be 
expressed as “I like it” or “I enjoy it.” But a passion is intensely emotional 
and involves strong enthusiasm, excitement, and drive. It can be expressed 
as “I love it” or “I must do it.”
Second, a general interest touches only certain aspects of our lives, but 
a passion is something fundamental to one’s fulfillment and something you 
don’t want to live without. You constantly think about it and want to do it, 
be it, and have it. Third, a general interest may change from time to time, 
but a passion lasts a long time and most likely a lifetime. Passion may lead 
to a calling that you would like to pursue for all your life.
If you are not clear about your passion, knowledge of your temperament, 
natural talents, values, goals, and preferred activities may point you to a 
unique and satisfying direction. Some of the organizations that specialize 
in temperament and aptitude research also offer tools to aid the discovery 
of interests, which you can use to further identify your passion. You may 
also start by asking yourself the following questions:
What are your temperament, natural talents, and values? See next chapter 
for more information on values.
What did you enjoy most in elementary school, middle school, high school, 
and college?
What activities excite you most after school, on weekends, and during 
vacations?
What topics do you like to talk about in conversations?
What kind of friends do you like to hang out with?
What kind of books, blogs, websites, podcasts, YouTube channels, and TV 
shows do you enjoy?
What would you like to do if you had enough time and money and did not 
have to make a living?
What are some of your peak moments in life? What are the elements that 
make your peak moments?
As a meaningful exercise in finding your passion, it is suggested that 
you dust off your childhood memories. A series of remarkable studies 
by British behavioral scientists over a twenty-eight-year period is very 
relevant here. The object of this exercise was to track childhood attitudes 
into adulthood. In the first study, released several decades ago, a collection 
of seven-year-old children were interviewed in depth about their likes 
and dislikes, their outlooks and opinions, their vision of their personal 
futures. What did they most like doing? What did they want to do as 
grown-ups? The interviews were filmed and shown on the BBC as a TV 
documentary.84 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
That first study was entitled “Seven-Up.” Seven years later, a documen￾tary of new interviews with the same children—now adolescents—was called 
“14-Up.” This was followed by “21-Up,” “28-Up,” and, later, “35-Up,” when 
the subjects were well into adulthood. This extensive study confirmed that 
what we love and do well as children continues to manifest itself as we 
become adults. Surprisingly, all the subjects eventually engaged in a 
profession or pursuit related to the interests they had when they were age 
seven to fourteen. Although most had strayed from those interests during 
adolescence and early adulthood—in some cases, going in entirely different 
directions—virtually all found their way back toward their childhood 
impulses, even if only in their hobbies, by the age of thirty-five.
An excellent exercise is to spend a weekend with family members or 
friends and dust off your childhood memories. Let yourself go. Remember 
what you really wanted to do as a child. You can enrich this process by checking 
the biographies of well-known adults whose passions began as children.
As a young child in England, Andrew Lloyd Webber spent countless 
hours creating cardboard sets and elaborate staging for the puppet shows 
and miniature stage shows he would produce to entertain his family. Later 
in life, he entertained the world with musicals including Evita, Cats, and 
Phantom of the Opera, to name a few. At a young age, Ketanji Brown 
Jackson discovered her passion of public speaking and leadership. She was 
elected “mayor” of her middle school and went on to compete in debate, 
which led a successful public law career. In 2022, she became the first 
female African American on the U.S. Supreme Court. Ever since he was 
twelve, Neil Armstrong dreamed of doing something important in aviation. 
He became the first person to walk on the moon. At seven, Lin-Manuel 
Miranda saw his first Broadway show, Les Misérables, and was hooked. 
He would later merge his passions of playwriting and hip hop to create 
Hamilton, which broke the all-time Broadway box office record.
Regardless of where each of us is in our quest for fulfillment, we should 
never let our first job determine our life from there after. Nor should we let 
our parents, teachers, colleagues, friends, or money dominate our long￾range decisions. We must take the first step toward a life strategy by being 
true to ourselves.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER: 
SELF-AWARENESS AND CAREER
We are living in a fluid, fast forward, and technology-driven world, a world 
where careers and lifestyles will be constantly redefined. Across many 
industries, robots, artificial intelligence, and other new technologies have 
been and will be changing the landscape of human careers.
Robots in manufacturing, medical, and a variety of office or home 
service fields are eliminating the need for many skilled and unskilled 
workers because of the precision, reliability, and economy offered. In Dubai, flying drone taxis already are in regular operation from the airport to 
solve the prime-time driving traffic gridlock. Also in Dubai, there are 
functioning “robocops”—robotic police officers on patrol. By 2030, 
Dubai is planning to have twenty-five percent of its police force manned 
by “robocops.”
Computers, equipped with artificial intelligence, are now capable of 
offering a wide range of sophisticated services, from translation to legal 
and medical consultation, with a higher quality and at a lower cost. In a 
test against three expert human radiologists, a technology-based medical 
diagnostic solution was fifty percent better in classifying malignant tum￾ors with a false-negative rate of zero, compared with a false-negative rate 
of seven percent for the human doctors. In sports, many Triple-A Minor 
League Baseball games are now piloting robot umpires. Umpire mistakes 
can affect the outcome of the game. And, early research suggests that an 
automated ball-strike system is more accurate than human homeplate 
umpires.
The examples are endless. The emerging industry of virtual reality, 
which creates simulated experiences for the user, continues to progress. 
The application of 3D and 4D printing, which once seemed like science 
fiction, now allows companies to rapidly produce items ranging from 
life-saving medical products to works of art. Two Oxford researchers, Carl 
Benedikt Frey and Michael A Osborn, analyzed the skills required for more 
than 700 occupations and concluded that machines are likely to take over 
forty-seven percent of today’s jobs in a few decades.1
As old careers fade and new careers are created in what seems to be 
the blink of an eye, we can no longer think of “career” or “job” as having 
one steady profession or one secure position. If you “Google” the word 
Job, you will see two definitions. The first is “a paid position of regular 
employment.” The second is “a task or piece of work, especially one that 
is paid.” Although more people still view a job as the first definition, 
mindsets are quickly transitioning toward the second definition. Accord￾ing to an article on Fortune.com, more than eighty-three percent of 
executives said that they plan on increasing their use of contingent, part￾time, or flexible workers in the next few years. Those with in-demand 
skills will be hired to accomplish one specific project, rather than given 
a full-time position.2
The COVID-19 pandemic changed our world in many ways, and it’s 
wise to look at the upside as well as the downside. As offered in a Chinese 
proverb: “In every crisis, there is opportunity.” Global change, public 
health precautions, and technologies are liberating people from repetitive, 
programmable work, and creating new, exciting career possibilities. More 
careers have become personalized with flexibility and creativity. In many 
1
 Dr. Michael A. Osberne and Dr. Carl Benedikt Frey, “The Future of Employment: How Susceptible Are Jobs to Computeri￾sation?” University of Oxford, School of Engineering (2013) 9–17.
2
 K. Willyard and B. Mistick, (February 20, 2016). “These Seven Trends Will Shape Your Professional Future.” Fortune.com.86 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
cases, these opportunities can be more fun. Work and life, office and home, 
personal time and work time are now blended. Freelancing, home-based 
businesses, and multiple sources of income are more popular than ever.
The future is about differentiation and personalization. During college 
marketing classes about ten years ago, we were talking about market seg￾mentation or how to differentiate products, services, and information to 
tailor them to the needs and interests of a segmented group. Now we talk 
about personalization or differentiating everything to a point that it is tai￾lored to the needs and interests of each individual. We are rapidly moving 
from “mass marketing” to “me marketing.”
The same trend applies to marketing or “branding” ourselves in the 
workplace. In a world where we have to compete with robots and computers, 
it is no longer enough to offer some generic, easy-to-duplicate skills. We 
need to offer a much stronger value to whomever we serve—clients, 
employers, audiences—through differentiating ourselves with our unique, 
authentic, hard-to-duplicate competencies.
Most of us will spend about 80,000 hours of our lives at work. The 
work we do, therefore, has an enormous impact on our success and happiness. 
Now that you know more about yourself, you can use this information to 
explore career fields that might be right for you. While friends, teachers, 
and family members often offer helpful suggestions for potential careers, 
you are ultimately in charge of making your own decisions. This is true 
whether you are a high school student or a longtime veteran of the working 
world. No matter where you are on your career path, you will benefit from 
considering the careers that would take full advantage of your skills and 
interests.
Why Work Matters
As a first step, it is worthwhile to stop and consider your ideas about work. 
What does work mean to you? A 9-to-5 job? A nameplate on a desk? When 
you have a positive attitude toward work, it becomes much more than this. 
Work brings many rewards, including:
• Satisfaction—We gain a sense of satisfaction and self-worth from a job 
well done. We also earn the respect and appreciation of others.
• Relationships—Work is a chance to meet and learn from other people 
who share our interests.
• Meaning—Through work, we can express our values, work toward our life 
goals, and fulfill our personal purpose in life.
With self-awareness and planning, work can help you expand your skills, 
express your values and interests, and challenge yourself to grow.
What if you find yourself in a job or career that’s not right for you? 
Less than a generation ago, workers often stayed with a single company for 
life. Today, however, job mobility is the norm. In fact, the average American 
changes jobs six times by the age of thirty. While workers have less job 
success secret
Let your skills and 
interests guide your 
career choices.security than they once did, they also have more freedom to explore 
different jobs and careers. Today it is common for people to switch jobs 
and even careers as they explore their interests and skills. If you change 
your mind, you haven’t lost out. You’ve gained greater self-awareness and 
developed valuable transferable skills.
Work Is Unpleasant or Is It?
Obviously, work has a tremendous impact on our happiness. However, 
based on global research conducted by Gallup, with national representa￾tives from more than 140 countries, only thirteen percent of people 
worldwide actually like going to work, and are “engaged” in their work. 
Sixty-three percent of people are “not engaged” or simply unmotivated. The 
remaining twenty-four percent are “actively disengaged” or truly unhappy. 
Looking at this depressing data, it’s no surprise why it is such a commonly 
held notion that “work is by nature not pleasant,” or, “I have to do things I 
don’t enjoy to make a living.”
Myths About Work Many people see work as a daily grind—just a 
way to pay the bills. Consider the following common misconceptions about 
work and careers. Do any of them ring true for you?
1. By nature, work is unpleasant.
2. If I do what I enjoy, I won’t make any money.
3. If I don’t know what I want to do for the rest of my life, there must be 
something wrong with me.
4. I’m the only one who doesn’t have a fixed occupational goal.
5. There is one, and only one, perfect career for me.
6. Somewhere, there is an expert or a test that will tell me exactly what I 
should do for the rest of my life.
7. A “real” job is 9 to 5, five days a week, working for someone else.
8. What I do at work defines who I am as a person.
9. Once I choose a career, I should stick with it no matter what.
10. You have to suffer to get ahead.
These myths spring from a negative attitude toward work. In reality, work 
can and should be something you enjoy. Your career is an important part 
of your identity, but it does not limit who you are as a person.
There are also many myths about the “right” way to pursue a career. 
In reality, each person’s career path is different. Some people have very 
specific career goals from a young age, while others need time to explore 
career possibilities. There is no such thing as the one perfect career for 
you, either. You have a wide range of skills and interests, making it 
possible for you to thrive in a variety of careers. The key is to identify 
these careers, do research, and find out which path appeals to you the 
most right now.
success secret
Work can and should be 
something you enjoy.88 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
Ideally, we all want to spend our working lives engaged in our core 
passions. There are many scientists, artists, care-givers, and musicians who 
earn their livelihood and say that other than perfecting their skills, “they 
have never worked a day in their lives.” When one high school music 
teacher was asked by her students why she decided to become a music 
teacher, her reply was simple and straightforward: “It was because I love 
children and I love music. To me, work is play. What can be happier than 
every day coming to work for play?”
While many of us will find as much joy in our family lives, personal 
activities, and hobbies as we will experience in our careers, it is important 
to note that behavioral scientists have found that independent desire for 
excellence is the most telling predictor of significant achievement. In other 
words, the success of our efforts depends less on the efforts themselves than 
on our motives. The most successful people, in almost all fields, have 
achieved their greatness out of a desire to express what they felt had to be 
expressed. Often it was a desire to use their talents and skills to the utmost to 
solve a problem. This is not to say that many of them did not also reap finan￾cial rewards. Many of them have. But far more than thoughts of profit, the 
key to their success was inspiration and the flame of passion burning within.
Personality Types and Work
We’ve seen that skills and interests are closely related to each other and to 
career choice. Personality is an important part of the mix, too. People who have 
similar personalities are often interested and good at the same kinds of activities. 
Because of this, they often tend to enjoy and excel at similar kinds of careers.
How do you know which careers might be right for you? One way is to 
see what your values, personality, talents, skills, and interests have in com￾mon. According to career researcher John Holland, people’s work person￾alities fall into six basic types. While everyone has some aspect of all the 
types, each individual tends to be strongest in one or two types. People who 
choose careers that match their dominant type are more enthusiastic about 
their work, are more comfortable in their work environment, and get along 
better with their coworkers. The six types are:
• Realistic—Realistic people are doers who prefer hands-on activities to 
activities involving words or relationships.
• Investigative—Investigative people are thinkers who like to investigate 
and solve problems.
• Artistic—Artistic people are creators who value self-expression and dislike 
structure.
• Social—Social people are helpers who value relationships more than 
intellectual or physical activity.
• Enterprising—Enterprising people are persuaders who enjoy using their 
verbal skills.
• Conventional—Conventional people are organizers who thrive in situations 
with rules and structure.
success secret
Consider your personality 
when choosing a career.Can you tell which type is most “you”? Activity 12 will help you evalu￾ate your personality traits, skills, and interests and link them to a variety of 
career fields.
Next Steps You have learned a lot about yourself in this chapter. 
Your self-awareness will continue to grow throughout your lifetime as you 
gain experience and knowledge. One way to learn more about yourself is 
simply to observe the world around you. What kinds of careers do you find 
interesting? What jobs do you want to know more about? Take every oppor￾tunity to ask questions and explore the many possibilities open to you.
Self Check
1. What are the “big five” personality traits? (p. 65)
2. What are the eight types of intelligence? (p. 72)
3. Once you have chosen a career, should you stick with it no matter 
what? (p. 86)
professional development )))
Career Fulfillment
There is an old saying, “Find a job you love and you will never work another day in your life.” Finding a 
career that is fulfilling is one of our greatest achievements and pleasures. Most people spend approximately 
twenty-five percent of their entire adult lives working. If your job does not match your talents, skills, and 
interests, you are likely to experience physical and mental stress, as well as frustration and boredom. 
If finding the right career is so important, why do so many people stay in jobs they dislike? There are many 
reasons, including financial need, fear of change or unemployment, and a lack of aptitudes and skills that 
match their interests. Finding the best career requires self-awareness and self-knowledge. It is never too 
early, or too late, to assess your values, personality traits, innate talents, skills, and interests that lead to 
a career that will bring out the best in you. There are many careers that can provide you with personal 
satisfaction as well as financial stability.
Earlier in this chapter, you learned about natural aptitudes (talents) and multiple intelligences. The non￾profit Johnson O’Connor Foundation offers hands-on tests to discover nineteen natural talents. Select four of 
those aptitudes listed that you feel describe your major talents. Write the description of each talent and what 
possible career fields match those talents to your current skills and interests. For more resources on making 
career choices, ask your instructor to give you the additional Professional Development materials for this chapter, 
or try the Princeton Review Career Quiz here: http://www.princetonreview.com/cte/quiz/career_quiz1.asp.90 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
ACTIVITY 12: Interest Survey
A In each of the following six categories, check the items that describe you.
REALISTIC
I am: I can: I enjoy:
 practical fix broken things tinkering with machines
 athletic figure out how things work working outdoors
 straightforward pitch a tent being physically active
 coordinated play a sport using my hands
 action-oriented read a blueprint building things
 honest work on cars working with animals
INVESTIGATIVE
I am: I can: I enjoy:
 inquisitive think abstractly exploring ideas
 intellectual solve math problems using computers
 scientific understand scientific theories working on my own
 observant do complex calculations performing experiments
 precise use a microscope reading scientific or technical magazines
 methodical analyze words and numbers testing theories
ARTISTIC
I am: I can: I enjoy:
 creative sketch, draw, or paint attending concerts, plays, or exhibits
 intuitive play a musical instrument reading fiction, plays, or poetry
 original write stories, poetry, or music working on crafts
 emotional design fashions or interiors taking photographs
 independent sing, act, or dance expressing myself
 individualistic solve problems creatively thinking about ideasContinue checking the items that describe you.
SOCIAL
I am: I can: I enjoy:
 friendly teach or train others working in groups
 helpful express myself clearly helping people with problems
 idealistic lead a group discussion participating in meetings
 generous mediate conflicts doing volunteer service
 trustworthy plan and supervise an activity working with young people
 understanding cooperate well with others nursing or giving first aid
ENTERPRISING
I am: I can: I enjoy:
 energetic change people’s opinions making decisions affecting others
 assertive convince people to do things my way being elected to an office
 persistent sell things winning a leadership or sales award
 persuasive give talks or speeches starting my own political campaign
 enthusiastic organize activities and events meeting important people
 ambitious lead a group being in charge
CONVENTIONAL
I am: I can: I enjoy:
 responsible work well within a system following clearly defined procedures
 accurate do a lot of paperwork in a short time using a computer or calculator
 careful keep accurate records working with numbers
 reserved use a computer typing, organizing, or filing
 organized write business letters handling details
 efficient work with numbers succeeding in business
continued…92 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
B Scoring: Add up the total number of items you checked in each of the six categories.
Realistic Investigative Artistic 
Social Enterprising Conventional 
C The following lists of career areas represent fields that people of each personality type often enjoy and 
excel in. Read the career areas that correspond to your first-, second-, and third-highest personality types.
R—construction, engineering, transportation, law enforcement, farming, mining, armed forces
I—science, medicine, dentistry, information technology, math, postsecondary education
A—music, dance, theater, design, fine art, architecture, photography, journalism, creative writing
S—education, religion, counseling, psychology, therapy, social work, child care
E—sales, management, business, law, politics, marketing, finance, urban planning, television or movie 
production, sports promotion
C—accounting, court reporting, financial analysis, banking, tax preparation, office management
Select one career area for your personality type that interests you but that you don’t know very much 
about yet. How could you figure out whether it might be a good match for you?Chapter 2 Review and Activities
Key Terms
self-awareness (p. 50)
self-honesty (p. 50)
self-consciousness (p. 52)
private self-awareness (p. 52)
public self-awareness (p. 52)
emotional awareness (p. 52)
dream (p. 54)
values (p. 57)
ethics (p. 57)
personality (p. 64)
trait (p. 64)
intelligence (p. 72)
skill (p. 77)
knowledge (p. 77)
interests (p. 81)
Summary by Learning Objectives
• Define self-awareness and cite its benefits. Self-awareness is about taking an honest look 
at yourself—your thoughts, feelings, attitudes, motivations, and actions. Self-awareness helps 
you identify what you are really feeling and thinking inside; it helps you act in accordance with 
your personal values, rather than be swayed by what other people say or do; and it helps you 
appreciate your unique personality, skills, and interests. When you are self-aware, you can make 
the choices that are right for you.
•Explain the factors that influence people’s values. Your values reflect what is most 
important to you. Your values are greatly influenced by your family, religious beliefs, teachers, 
friends, and personal experiences, as well as by the values of the society in which you live.
• Define personality and list the “big five” personality traits. Personality is the relatively 
stable pattern of behavior that distinguishes one person from another. The “big five” personality 
traits are openness, conscientiousness, extroversion, agreeableness, and emotional stability.
• Compare and contrast skills, knowledge, and interests. Skills consist of the ability to do 
something specific as a result of learning and practice. Skills are the result of knowledge com￾bined with experience. Knowledge is an understanding of facts and principles in a particular 
subject area. Interests are personal preferences for specific topics and activities. People’s skills 
and interests often overlap.
•Explain how personality, skills, and interests relate to career choice. People who have 
similar personalities are often interested and good at the same types of activities. They therefore 
tend to enjoy and excel at similar careers. It is important to consider your personality type, 
innate talents, skills, and interests as you plan your career. When you are using your natural 
talents, developing them into skills, following your interests, and expressing your personality 
at work, you feel more satisfied with your life.94 Chapter 2 Self-Awareness
Review and Activities
Review Questions
1. What is the difference between private and public self-consciousness?
2. What are three questions you can ask yourself to help identify the emotions you are 
experiencing?
3. What influences people’s choice of values?
4. How do people develop skills?
5. Compare and contrast intrapersonal intelligence and interpersonal intelligence.
6. What are the six personality types in John Holland’s career theory?
Critical Thinking
7. Self-Honesty Do you think that most people (or most people you know) are self-honest 
and self-aware? Why or why not? What do you think prevents people from becoming more 
self-honest and self-aware? Why?
8. Value Conflict What do you do when values conflict? Imagine that you value generosity 
and spend a great deal of time and energy volunteering and giving to others. However, you 
also value financial security, which means that you need to work hard to support yourself and 
save money for your future. How might these two values come into conflict? How could you 
resolve this conflict in a way that benefits others as well as yourself?
Application
9. Emotion Log Monitor your feelings by keeping a log with you for one week. Make a note 
each time you experience a moderate or strong emotion, and immediately answer these three 
questions about it: How does my body feel? What happened right before I started to experi￾ence this emotion? What specific name can I put to this emotion? At the end of the week, 
explain whether or not the log helped you to become more emotionally aware, and why.
10. Personality Collage Using a large piece of paper, create a collage of pictures to represent 
your personality. The pictures can come from any source and can represent any person, 
thing, scene, or event that you feel represents your personality in some meaningful way. 
Prepare to present your collage to the class.Review and Activities
Internet Activities
11. Personality Assessment Search online for a reputable Myers-Briggs Type Indicator and 
find an article about the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator and personality types. Your instructor 
may provide you with an article. What is your personality type? What are its characteristics? 
Take a quiz to determine your personality type, then write a page describing the personality 
type you were assigned and explaining whether or not you feel the quiz gave you accurate 
results.
12. Talent and Interest Survey Go to www.jocrf.org and www.ballfoundation.org, which are 
the Web sites for Johnson O’Connor Research Foundation and the Ball Foundation. After 
reviewing those sites, do you feel you have a better understanding of why self-awareness of 
your natural aptitudes is a first step? Are you confident that your talents, skills, and interests 
are aligned? Why or why not? You also should find a link to a Web site that lets you evaluate 
your interests and then match them to careers. Select three careers that relate to your 
interests and learn more about them. Write a brief description for each career, then rank 
the careers from most interesting to least interesting. Prepare to discuss your career selections 
in class.
Look back at your response to the question in the Career Path 
Story on page 48. Think about how you would answer the question 
now that you have completed the chapter.
Complete the Story Write a paragraph continuing Farah’s 
story, explaining some specific ways she can increase her 
self-awareness and take inventory of her skills and interests.
“What Do I Really Want?” Career 
Path Story
Rido/Shutterstock96
Jacob Lund/Shutterstock
Real-Life 
Success Story
A New Direction
Trinh Hong was twenty-five years old and had been 
working for the past seven years as an assistant at 
a small accounting firm in San Francisco. Although 
she liked her job, she didn’t see any chance for 
advancement. It seemed as if the past seven years 
had just flown by without much success. Trinh had 
never really thought about her goals for the future. 
Increasingly, however, she realized that she needed 
a direction.
New Goals, New Challenges
Trinh decided to go back to school to earn a degree 
in accounting. As she sat in her first class, though, 
she began to question her decision. How was she 
supposed to accomplish such a huge goal? Would 
she really be able to balance school and work? What 
if she didn’t finish and then had to repay student 
loans on her current salary? Her heart began to beat 
faster, and her palms got sweaty. She asked herself 
whether she was in over her head.
What Do You Think? What could Trinh do to 
make her long-term goal seem more attainable?
“Where Do I Go From Here?”“
Goals and 
Obstacles Chapter
learning objectives
After you complete this chapter, 
you should be able to:
• Explain the importance of 
setting goals.
• List the characteristics of well￾set goals.
• Distinguish between short-term 
and long-term goals.
• Cite common obstacles to 
reaching your goals.
• Recognize the causes and 
symptoms of stress.
• Describe several strategies for 
relieving stress.
• Explain ways to deal with anger 
constructively.
3
Whoever wants to reach a distant 
goal must take small steps.
Saul Bellow, Novelist
”
introduction
Setting goals is an important step toward achieving 
what you want out of life. Goals help you focus your 
effort on the things that are most important to you. 
In Section 3.1 you’ll learn how to set attainable goals 
for yourself and how to break them down into small 
steps that you can begin working on right now. You’ll 
also learn how to anticipate and overcome common 
obstacles to reaching your goals. In Section 3.2 you’ll 
explore the causes and symptoms of stress and anger. 
By developing constructive strategies to deal with life’s 
setbacks and frustrations, you’ll be able to stay on track 
toward your goals.98 Chapter 3 Goals and Obstacles
SECTION 3.1 Setting and Achieving Goals
WHAT ARE YOUR GOALS?
After completing Chapter 2, you should have a better idea of your dreams, 
values, personality traits, skills, and interests. Where do goals fit in? Goals 
are tools for translating dreams into reality. A goal represents an outcome 
that you want and toward which you direct your effort. A goal is a signpost 
to the future, telling you which way to go. It translates your dreams into 
plans, and directs your abilities in the service of what you want most.
Goals help us manage our priorities, so that we don’t waste our precious, 
finite time. We all lament the lack of enough time, even though each of has 
168 hours per week to spend. More than a time-management problem, we 
really have a focus problem. We spend too much energy worrying about the 
things we want to do but can’t, instead of concentrating on doing the things 
we can do but don’t. Dreams are the creative visions of our lives in the 
future. Dreams are what we would like our lives to become. Goals, on the 
other hand, are the specific events that we intend to make happen. Goals 
should be just beyond our present reach, but never out of sight. Think of 
your goals as previews of coming attractions of an epic, real-life movie in 
which you are the screenwriter, producer, and star performer. Goals are 
our method of concentrating energy. By defining what needs to be done 
within reasonable time limits, we have a way of measuring success.
Laser technology and effective goal achievement are based upon the 
same scientific principles. When light waves are concentrated and in step 
they produce a beam of pure light with awesome power. When goals are kept 
in focus and are approached in orderly progression, they ignite the human 
mind’s awesome creativity and powers of accomplishment. Concentrate your 
attention on where you want to go, not away from where you don’t want to be. 
You will always move in the direction of your currently dominant thoughts.
What kinds of goals are you committed to? Because we become what 
we think about most, we unconsciously move toward the achievement of 
the thoughts we have right now. Negative thoughts create negative goals; 
positive thoughts create positive goals.
You have the potential and the opportunity for success in your life. It 
can take just as much energy for an unfulfilling life as for a rewarding one. 
Many people lead unhappy, aimless lives, simply existing from day to day 
and year to year. You can set yourself free from this by actively deciding 
what to do with your life, by making goals happen.
Many people resist goal setting because they assume it leads to a formula￾driven, highly uncreative life. Actually, the exact opposite is true. People 
who passively assume that everything will somehow work out in the end 
can hardly be termed creative. They’re not creating their lives, they’re just 
hoping that something good will happen to them somehow, and they’ll 
arrive at some magical port of call on a fantasy island called “Someday I’ll.” 
goal An outcome that a 
person wants to achieve and 
toward which he/she/they 
directs focused effort.Setting worthwhile goals is a much more imaginative approach. It’s fashioning 
and molding the life of your choice.
Rather than being like a ship without a rudder, drifting until we end up 
on the rocks, we can discipline ourselves to decide where we want to go. We 
can chart a course and sail straight and far, reaching one port after another. 
We can accomplish more in just a few years than some people accomplish 
in a lifetime. We do this by setting and visualizing our goals. Think of a long 
ocean voyage halfway around the world. Even though the captain of the ship 
cannot see her destination for most of the journey, she knows what it is, 
where it is, and that she will reach it if she keeps following the right course.
Setting Goals
For a goal to be vivid, meaningful, and have any real pulling power at all, it 
must be very specific. The human mind cannot focus and act upon nebulous, 
general thoughts. The more specific the input into your mind, the 
more detailed and defined the image creating the motivational force for 
achievement. One of the most highly regarded scientists who has studied 
goal setting has been Professor Edwin Locke of the University of Maryland. 
In one study, he found that ninety-six percent of test subjects did better if 
they were given specific and challenging goals than if they were simply 
instructed to do their best. Numerous other studies have confirmed this.
It is very common today to try to motivate students and employees by 
telling them to do the best they can. The problem is that children and most 
adults really don’t know what their best is and therefore don’t have a good 
idea of what they’re aiming for. A disturbing result discovered by these studies 
was that in society today, while most people are trying to “do their best,” only 
about four percent of the population actually do perform near the top of their 
abilities. This is why it is so important to be motivated by your core passions—
out of love and belief in what you are doing—and then to arm yourself with 
knowledge gained from other achievers showing what actions to take every 
step of the way. Reaching a goal can be likened to programming the GPS device 
in your car to reach a desired address. Put in the data from your starting point 
and your ultimate destination, and your mind becomes like a global positioning 
satellite; only it would be better labeled as a “goal positioning system.”
Specific goals are much stronger because they are more thoroughly 
imagined and more tangible. Telling basketball players to concentrate on 
pulling in ten rebounds per game paints a much clearer target than telling 
them to go out on the court and do their best. The best coaches focus on 
developing and improving specific skills of their players for the special 
roles they will play as members of a winning team.
A well-set goal has five important characteristics: It is specific, 
measurable, achievable, realistic, and time-related (SMART), as shown 
in Figure 3.1. Let’s look at each of these elements.
• S—Specific Is it clear what your plan of action should be to achieve this 
goal? Or is the goal so vague that you don’t know how to get started?
success secret
Be proactive about your 
goals—only you can make 
them happen.100 Chapter 3 Goals and Obstacles
• M—Measurable How will you know whether you’ve achieved your goal? 
Does the goal give you something concrete to measure—amount of 
money to be saved, number of books to be read, total miles to be jogged?
• A—Achievable Is it doable? Can you actually succeed at this goal, or are 
you dooming yourself to failure?
• R—Realistic Is this goal possible and desirable given your values, skills, 
and interests? The way you act? Does it fit with your schedule and 
financial situation? Your personality? Your other goals?
• T—Time-Related (or Time-Based) Does the goal include a time frame for 
evaluating whether you have achieved it? Does it motivate you to get 
started right away, or is it off somewhere in the future?
Each of these SMART elements should be present for a goal to be well set. 
Let’s say, for example, that your goal is to lose weight. This goal is achievable 
and probably realistic, but it isn’t specific, measurable, or time-related. How 
much weight do you want to lose and in what amount of time? Instead try, 
“I will lose one pound a week for the next fifteen weeks by watching my 
diet and walking for a half hour every day.” This goal is specific, realistic, 
and time-related. It is certainly measurable—fifteen pounds over a fifteen￾week period—and it is achievable because a reasonable target has been set. 
It is now a well-set goal.
A common mistake is to set goals in negative terms. Even though we 
have just illustrated that losing one pound per week for fifteen weeks meets 
the criteria as a SMART goal, it is more of an example of a sub-goal. Keep 
in mind that a goal should be a desired result. The real goal is to stabilize 
your body weight at a certain target weight and maintain that, not to dwell 
on the dominant thought of being overweight and needing to continually 
“lose weight.” What is your ideal weight for a healthy body image? That’s 
the ultimate goal.
For example, whether you are trying not to be late for appointments 
or not get so upset when things go wrong, you need to stay away from 
“negative,” or “reverse” goal setting. The mind can’t focus on the reverse of 
success secret
Be specific when setting 
your goals.
FIGURE 3.1 SMART Goals
Look Before You Leap The more time and thought you invest in formulating 
your goals, the more likely you’ll be to achieve them. Why do you think that 
many experts advise putting goals down in writing?
Specific Measurable Achievable Realistic Time-Relateda concept, so the negative idea of trying to stop doing something destructive 
reinforces what’s wrong. Even though you may be trying hard “not to be 
late,” stating it in that way reminds you of the problem, not the solution. 
There will be specific examples of affirming your goals with positive self-talk 
in the next chapter.
For more practice at setting SMART goals, complete Activity 13.
Short-Term and Long-Term Goals
Now let’s look at the two main types of goals: short-term goals and long￾term goals. A short-term goal has a short time frame for accomplishment. 
Short-term goals are the things you are working on today, tomorrow, next 
week. They are usually goals that can be accomplished in a year.
A long-term goal is a goal that is further in the future. Long-term goals 
represent things you want to accomplish in one, two, or several years. 
Long-term goals are the major targets in your life. Long-term goals often 
include things like continuing your education, buying a house, raising a 
family, or changing careers. Long-term goals can require a lot of patience, 
but they are worth it in the end. Ask yourself at the end of every day what 
you have done to bring yourself closer to your long-term goals. If you find 
that your day-to-day life is not bringing you closer to your long-term goals, it 
is probably time for a change.
It is easy to think of long-term goals as more important than short-term 
goals, but short-term and long-term goals are equally important. In fact, you 
can’t achieve long-term goals without first achieving a series of short-term 
goals. For instance, let’s say your long-term goal is to complete your degree 
in fine arts. Your short-term goals for the semester might be to maintain a 
B average, sketch for at least one hour each day, and improve your skill in a 
certain medium, such as acrylics or oils. Success at each of these short-term 
goals brings you one step closer to reaching your long-term goal.
Tying Your Goals Together
How do you make sure that your short-term goals will lead you to your long￾term goals? The easiest way is to work backward in time, first formulating 
your long-term goals and then thinking of all the steps necessary to achieve 
each goal. Each step will represent a short-term goal. By always keeping your 
long-term goals in mind, you make sure that your daily, weekly, monthly, 
and yearly plans reflect the big picture in your life plan. For example, if your 
long-term goal is to become and remain healthy and physically fit, with a 
balanced diet and healthy weight, your short-term goal for the month might 
be to plan and begin a program of aerobic exercise. Your weekly plan might 
be to exercise for five days, and your daily plan might be to take a thirty￾minute walk at work or on campus. Your daily, weekly, and monthly goals 
then all relate directly to your larger life goal. Try this strategy in Activity 14, 
which is designed to help you break your goals down into doable steps.
short-term goal A goal 
with a specific plan of action 
to accomplish within the 
coming year.
long-term goal A goal 
one plans to achieve in the 
more distant future.
success secret
Short-term goals and long￾term goals are equally 
important.102 Chapter 3 Goals and Obstacles
ACTIVITY 13: Setting SMART Goals
A Are the following SMART goals? If not, what is missing? Write S (specific), M (measurable), A (achievable), 
R (realistic), and/or T (time-related) in the middle column for each missing element. Write OK if all the 
SMART factors are present.
Goal Missing Factor(s)? SMART Goal
Example
Buy a used car for under $7,000.
S,T Buy a reliable, two-door used compact car for 
under $7,000 within six months.
1. Complete my certificate 
or degree.
2. Give more time or money 
to charity.
3. Find out in next two weeks 
how to get financial aid.
4. Pay off my credit cards by 
the end of this month.
5. Eat healthfully three times 
a day.
6. Work out in gym for an 
hour three times a week.
7. Spend more time with my 
family and friends.
8. Find something to do for fun.
9. Read more.
10. Join a volunteer program.
11. Raise GPA to 3.8 by end 
of semester.
12. Set aside $10 each week in 
a savings account.
13. Get physical exam.
14. Update my résumé.
15. Spend less time on social media.
B Using the right-hand column above, rewrite any flawed goals so that they are SMART goals.C Think back to the dreams you formulated in Chapter 2. Translate each of your dreams into one or two 
SMART goals. If your dream is to travel, for example, your SMART goal might be to save $1,500 for a 
two-week trip to Europe next summer.
Goal SMART Goal
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
D Will you be able to work on all of these goals at the same time? If so, explain how. If not, how will you 
choose which goals to work on first?104 Chapter 3 Goals and Obstacles
ACTIVITY 14: Generating Short-Term Goals
A List three long-term goals you’d like to accomplish in the next five years.
Goal #1 Goal #2 Goal #3
B Now list several smaller goals that you’ll need to accomplish in order to reach these long-term goals. 
For example, if you want to buy a house, you’ll need to look at houses in your price range, save money 
for a down payment, get information on qualifying for a mortgage, estimate the monthly mortgage 
payment, and so on. Write these goals in any order.
Short-Term Goals Short-Term Goals Short-Term GoalsC Pick one of the long-term goals you listed on the previous page and examine your list of related short￾term goals. Rewrite these short-term goals in the order that you’ll need to complete them. For example, 
you’ll need to save money before you begin looking at houses. Then assign each short-term goal a 
realistic time frame—today, tomorrow, this week, this month, this year, and so on.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
D Choose one short-term goal that you could take action on immediately. Circle it. What can you do over 
the next twenty-four hours to accomplish (or begin to accomplish) this goal?
To accomplish one of my goals, I can
E Now make a promise to yourself to take this action toward your goal.
To accomplish one of my goals, I will
Signed (your name)106 Chapter 3 Goals and Obstacles
Staying on Track
Once you have set your goals, make a commitment to reach them. Write 
your goals down and dwell on them morning and night as if you had 
already achieved them. Assemble support materials—articles, blogs, books, 
YouTube audio and video clips, downloaded images—anything that can 
help you see your goals. Consider filling a collage or bulletin board with 
pictures that represent your goals. These might represent your dream 
career, satisfying relationships, or a series of landscapes that inspire you. 
Tell people in your life about your goals—it will inspire you to keep up your 
effort to achieve them. Review your goals with people who have accom￾plished what you want to and who are genuinely willing to help you. Ask 
your instructor or advisor for advice on pursuing your goals.
Put Them in Writing Commit your goals to writing, whether on 
paper, laptop, tablet, or smart phone. Attorneys know the wisdom of a 
written contract. It requires that a commitment be put in very clear, concise 
terms, with all conditions, dollar amounts, responsibilities, and time frames 
carefully detailed. Make a contract with yourself, and you will enter into a 
successful relationship with yourself. Ideally, you should keep your goal jour￾nal or wallet-size cards in front of you for daily access, so you can review 
and add to them continually. Goals are not set in concrete and should be 
flexible enough to modify as you stair-step your way to achievement.
• Set a time for achieving your goal.
• Make sure your decision about your goal is right.
• Give your goal all your effort and never stop trying.
• Be a positive thinker.
• Once you have achieved one goal, go on to the next.
In addition to keeping a paper or electronic goal journal, many goal-setting 
coaches suggest writing each of your goals on a small card and carrying all 
your goals in your wallet. Every time you think of another goal, write it 
down on a card and add it to the others in your wallet. When you achieve 
one goal, remove the card. Take the cards out periodically—at least every 
week—and read them to remind yourself of the successes you are working 
toward. A more popular method of goal reminders is to list your goals in 
the appointment calendar of your phone, and then set an alarm to review 
them at certain times throughout the day. Another good practice is to have 
a message repeat every hour or so each day: “Is what I’m doing right now 
goal achieving or tension relieving?” Your phone is an excellent tool to 
receive messages from yourself, not just others.
Try this strategy yourself in Personal Journal 3.1. Write down four of 
the short-term goals you listed in Activity 14. Set a reasonable deadline 
for accomplishing each goal. Once you have filled out your goal cards, 
review them as often as possible to keep yourself motivated and to 
remind yourself to stay focused. You can even photocopy them and keep 
them in your wallet.
success secret
Keep reminding yourself 
to stick to your goals.
success secret
Once you have achieved 
one goal, move on to the 
next.Adjusting Goals as You Go
Remember that you have the freedom to adjust your goals as you go. Look 
over your goals periodically and reassess them. If one of them no longer 
inspires you, modify it. Changing your goals is normal. Your interests will 
change; your abilities will develop; and your potential will grow. Likewise, 
changes in technology, culture, and society will open doors to new possibilities. 
Don’t be afraid to keep raising your personal stakes and keep reaching into 
the unknown.
In his autobiography, Rapper Chuck D says that when he started out as 
a college-radio disk jockey he just wanted to release a record. Soon his 
group, Public Enemy, gained prominence on the airwaves and club scene, 
and he decided to add socially conscious lyrics and messages to his music. As 
his career developed, he developed new goals, including gaining exposure to 
non–hip hop audiences. U2 singer Bono publicly supported Chuck D, saying 
that although some people would criticize Public Enemy for daring to 
change, this shouldn’t stop him from developing new and more ambitious 
Personal Journal 3.1
Goal Cards
Write down four goals that you want to achieve over the next few months. Review them as often as possible 
to keep yourself motivated and to remind yourself to stay focused. Photocopy them or cut them out and 
keep them in your wallet for reference.
Goal Card Goal Card
I will
I plan to accomplish this goal by 
(time)
I will
I plan to accomplish this goal by 
(time)
Goal Card
I will
I plan to accomplish this goal by 
(time)
Goal Card
I will
I plan to accomplish this goal by 
(time)108 Chapter 3 Goals and Obstacles
goals. It is common for people to be criticized for making changes. Change, 
even if it is positive, is usually stressful because it ushers in the unknown.
Not adjusting your goals as you gain experience and self-knowledge can 
stunt your growth. Some people know what they want out of life from the 
time they are very young, but most people need time to develop a direction. 
What you want out of life when you are eighteen is often different from 
what you want when you’re thirty. A fifty-year-old rarely has the same goals 
as a twenty-year-old.
OVERCOMING OBSTACLES
Achieving goals is rewarding, but it isn’t always smooth sailing. Obstacles 
often come along to roil the waters. An obstacle is any barrier that hinders 
us from achieving our goals. There are two main kinds of obstacles—internal 
and external. An internal obstacle is a barrier that comes from within 
ourselves or from within the goal itself—such as a goal that lacks all five 
SMART elements. An external obstacle is a barrier that a situation or 
another person puts in your path. Often, internal and external obstacles go 
hand in hand. For example, an external obstacle might be criticism or lack 
of support from people around you. This external obstacle can become an 
internal obstacle if you start to believe that your goal is wrong or stupid, or 
that you shouldn’t reach for your goals if others don’t approve.
What obstacles stand in the way of achieving your goals? Consider 
which of these common obstacles might apply to you and how you might 
overcome them.
Trying to Please Someone Else
It is sometimes easy to confuse what we want for ourselves with what other 
people want from us. It is important to remember, however, that we must 
choose our goals to please ourselves, not others. No goal set for you by others 
will ever be sought with the same passion, effort, and time commitment as one 
you have set for yourself. Ask yourself whether the goal you are working toward 
really inspires you. Are you using valuable time and energy that you could be 
applying to a more motivating goal? Are you doing something just because you 
think you “should” be doing it? Are you building up resentment by trying to 
please someone else? If you try to please everyone, you are likely to please no 
one at all, including yourself. If you feel pressured by someone important in 
your life, such as a parent or partner, to strive toward a goal that doesn’t inspire 
you, open the lines of communication. Tell the person that you respect his/her/
their opinion but have the responsibility to yourself to do what is best for you.
Not Really Wanting It
Every goal requires effort. Is the satisfaction of achieving your goal worth 
the effort you’ll need to apply? For example, let’s say that your goal is 
obstacle Any barrier that 
prevents a person from 
achieving his/her/their goals.
success secret
Choose your goals to 
please yourself, not 
others.to play competitive sports or to win a music competition. Are you 
willing to put in the intense training that will be necessary to achieve 
this end? Are you willing to give up other goals or opportunities to focus 
on this goal? More importantly, will you enjoy the process of working 
toward your goal? If not, ask yourself whether you really want this goal. 
If you don’t want it, get rid of it and begin focusing on what you really 
do want.
Being a Perfectionist
It’s easy to get discouraged and give up when your efforts don’t succeed 
immediately. If you often criticize yourself for failing to make progress, 
ask yourself whether you are a victim of perfectionism. Perfectionism
means believing that you are worthy as a person only if you do every￾thing perfectly. Perfectionists would rather give up on a goal than take 
the risk of failing to achieve it. Despite their lofty standards, perfectionists 
are usually less successful in life than nonperfectionists. Do you set 
unreasonable standards for yourself? Is your energy being drained by 
fear of failure? Do you interpret mistakes as evidence that you’re just not 
good enough? If so, work to become more aware of your self-sabotaging 
thoughts. Try to see the situation from an outside point of view—if a 
good friend were in your place, would you consider your friend a 
“failure”? Celebrate reaching smaller goals that lead to the larger ones. 
Look at setbacks as lessons, not failures.
Trying to Go It Alone
Your goals are your own, but you can’t accomplish them without moral and 
emotional support. Tell friends and loved ones about your goals and ask for 
advice and support when you need it. Seek out advisors, counselors, 
coaches, professors, and mentors who can offer tips and encouragement. 
Consider writing to someone you admire to ask for advice. Accept good-faith 
offers to assist you with your responsibilities so that you can focus on 
your goal. Enlist a friend as an exercise buddy to keep you to your exercise 
schedule. Also remember to give thanks to the people in your work and life 
who support and believe in you.
When you do ask for feedback, be sure it is from people who are truly 
interested in seeing you succeed. Don’t seek feedback from fair-weather 
friends, competitive peers, or any person who doesn’t have your best interests 
at heart. Obtain feedback from a trusted person who is on your side, but will 
still be objective and honest with you.
Pay attention to feedback only from those who have similar goals or 
who are working actively alongside you to achieve goals of their own. 
Motives and fears run deep. Study them in others. The sympathetic fair￾weather friend who supports you and comforts you when you’re down, may 
like you best when you are in just that state: down and dependent.
perfectionism The 
belief that a person is 
worthwhile only if he/she/
they is perfect.
success secret
Don’t hesitate to ask for 
support when you need it.
success secret
You will need to adapt to 
change throughout your 
life.110 Chapter 3 Goals and Obstacles
Resisting Change
Depending on how you look at it, change can be disruptive and threatening, 
or exhilarating and full of opportunity. Change is a fact of life, and resisting 
it can drain your energy. Many factors in life are outside your control. 
Separate what you can and cannot control. Focus on the big picture of 
what you can control—your long-term goal. Then, plan flexible short-term 
goals that can be refined as you go.
You must risk looking and feeling foolish in the eyes of others when 
you move out of your comfort zone. There never was a success, in any field, 
who was not also a beginner, at some point in time. When we pursue the 
unfamiliar, and begin anything new, we appear as awkward, unsure novices. 
These feelings of inadequacy and insecurity are primary reasons why so few 
people go “all in” to fulfill their highest aspirations.
Ultimately, pursuing our goals is about giving up our old reality and 
replacing it with a new reality. As exciting as it sounds, the decision doesn’t 
always come easily because the pain of giving up the old is too powerful 
compared to the pleasure of expecting a fresh, new direction that may 
result in major life fulfillment.
Every decision we make in life involves tradeoffs and risks. “Loss aversion” 
is also known as “risk aversion.” That’s why many people forever live in a 
structured life that feels safe and comfortable. The structure has a solid floor, 
which equates to a stable job, a nice house, and reliable income. However, this 
structured existence also has walls and, most importantly, a ceiling that limits 
the heights of our goals and ambitions. By seeking security and avoiding risk, 
we may toil in jobs without passion, zest, and joy. Goals are suffocated 
because the thought of losing the solid floor and walls is too painful.
SCROLLING THE DAY AWAY
When you are working toward your goals, it’s easy to 
become sidetracked by distractors such as social 
media. If you own a smartphone or similar electronic, 
you probably frequently keep the device on or near 
you. This means social media is at your fingertips. 
Social media sites and apps are designed to keep you 
scrolling through their feeds. Photos, videos, reels, 
messenger, videocalls, comments, stories, content 
sharing, and other features can send you into a mind￾less scrolling frenzy. If you find yourself spending too 
much time on social media, ask yourself:
■ Am I avoiding a more difficult or unpleasant task?
■ Am I avoiding feelings of stress, hurt, or anger?
internet action
■ Is this leading to impulse decisions such as 
engaging in arguments or making unnecessary 
purchases?
■ Does this activity lead to achieving my goals? If 
not, how do I limit this activity?
Think About It
What are some ways social media can help you reach 
your goals? How much does social media distract you? 
If it is an issue, what are some proactive steps you can 
take to limit your time on social media?The key to turning unexpected change into opportunity is to learn the 
skill of adapting. Adapting means being flexible and open to change. Even if 
you stay in one neighborhood throughout your life, you will need to adapt 
to change—new technologies, new cultural phenomena, new people, and 
new personal interests, tastes, and goals.
What obstacles might you face as you make progress toward your goals? 
Activity 15 will help you anticipate obstacles and find ways to overcome 
them before they sidetrack your efforts.
Opportunity Knocks As you gain practice setting and achieving 
your goals, remember that sometimes obstacles are really opportunities in 
disguise. If you remain flexible and try new ways of thinking and doing, 
you’ll often find that setbacks are sources of new ideas. Look at every side 
of a new situation before deciding that it really is an obstacle. This will help 
you find new ways to achieve your goals.
Five Powers of Effective Goal Setting
Here are five “powers” that will help you create more focused goals to 
achieve your dreams:
The Power of the Positive. Your goals should be framed in positive terms. 
In other words, instead of focusing on “not being late,” “not being fat,” “not 
being in debt,” or “not working three part-time jobs,” you want to concentrate 
on images of achievement, such as “I’m an on-time person,” “I am lean and 
am in great shape,” “I am pursuing a job that aligns with my career and 
financial goals.” Remember that your mind cannot concentrate on the 
reverse of an idea, so keep your goals framed in the positive. (We will cover 
how to create positive self-statements to support your goals in the Positive 
Self-Talk section of Chapter 4.)
The Power of the Present. Your character goals, such as being a good 
leader, parent, or being healthy, on-time, enthusiastic, for example, should 
be framed as images of achievement in the present tense. Your long-term 
memory stores information in real time, that is critically important to you. 
The reason your memory stores information in the present tense is obvious. 
Can you imagine what would happen if your mind had to remind your 
heart to beat tomorrow? Or what if it put the command for breathing, 
eating, or calorie burning on next month’s agenda? So any goal that 
involves your health, behavior, or self-leadership should be framed as if you 
are already that person. Some examples might include: “I spend quality 
time with my loved ones.” “I am always on time for meetings.” “I am feeling 
more healthy every day.” “I have healthy habits that add years to my life and 
life to my years.” “I am relaxed and in control.” “I encourage input and ideas 
from the employees I lead.”
The Power of the Personal. Your images of achievement must be yours. 
They should not just be your boss’s goals, your teacher’s goals, or your 
adapting Being flexible 
to change.112 Chapter 3 Goals and Obstacles
ACTIVITY 15: Anticipating Obstacles
A List three long-term goals you’d like to accomplish in the next five years. Use the goals you listed in 
Activity 14, or choose new ones.
Goal #1 Goal #2 Goal #3
B Consider what obstacles you are likely to face as you make progress toward these goals. Think of as 
many internal and external obstacles as you can to each goal. After you’re done, circle the two obsta￾cles that you believe will be the most difficult to overcome.
Possible Obstacles Possible Obstacles Possible ObstaclesC Now, working alone or with a classmate, brainstorm several ways that you could overcome these 
obstacles or keep them from getting in your way.
Obstacle #1
Obstacle #2114 Chapter 3 Goals and Obstacles
friend’s goals. No goal set for you by others will ever be sought with the 
same passion, effort, commitment, or motivation as the one you set for 
yourself. Remember, personal goals, the ones you want, are those you’ll 
be more likely to achieve. And when you do set personal, meaningful goals, 
keep them to yourself. Or share them only with others who will take the 
time to give you positive feedback and input. Remember, misery is always 
looking for a place to become company. There is little to no benefit in 
sharing a dream with someone who’s likely to rain on your parade.
The Power of Precision. Make your images of achievement specific and 
precise. Remember when you talk about goals in generalities, you will very 
rarely succeed. But when you talk about your goals with specificity, you will 
very rarely fail. A good way for you to determine if your images of achieve￾ment are focused enough is to simply ask yourself, “Can this goal be timed, 
checked, or measured?” If you cannot time, check, or measure your perfor￾mance, your goals are not specific enough. Your brain is more marvelous 
than any computer that will ever be invented. Think of your brain and central 
nervous system as the hardware, and your mind as the software program. 
The mind does not compute ideas like “doing your best,” “doing better,” 
“getting rich,” “being happy,” or “having enough.” It deals only with 
specificity, not vague ideas. What are your income needs for next year? 
What is your desired weight? What amount of cash asset do you need to 
save that will give you enough income to enjoy your life in the future, after 
taxes, without depending upon employment? At what age do you plan to be 
financially secure? The brain and mind respond to specifics, like spending 
seven-tenths of your take-home pay on current living expenses. Spending 
two-tenths of your take-home pay on reducing your debts. And putting at 
least one-tenth of your take-home pay in a mutual fund, or interest-bearing 
savings vehicle to finance your future. Make it your mission to focus on 
specific achievements.
The Power of the Possible. A formula that works well is that your goals 
should be just out of reach but not out of sight. Another way to state that is 
that your goals should be realistic, but not achievable by ordinary means. 
Your goals should also be broken down into small, incremental action 
steps. Remember the best way to eat an elephant is one bite at a time. So 
set challenging, realistic goals with small, doable action steps. It’s always 
useful to clarify long-range goals, the ones that have been stimulating future 
benefits that are worth the wait and the work. Long-range goals, however, 
don’t offer you the step-by-step reinforcement and feedback you need for 
continued motivation. So, if possible, break your long-range goals into 
many short-range ones where you can know the thrill of victory on a 
smaller scale. Then you can thrive on the many smaller wins, spaced closer 
together, which will give you a winning pattern that will strengthen you for 
the long haul toward the bigger long-range goals.
The idea is to set short-term goals that are just beyond your current 
range of skills. And when you miss one of these short-term increments, you review, revise, and retry. When you hit your incremental goal, you reinforce 
yourself with a positive reward or ceremony. Face the challenge, meet it, or 
learn from your mistakes and then move up to the next higher goal. The 
point is, we all need to win and win again to develop the winning reflex. 
Setting step-by-step goals that can be reached, revised, retried, and reinforced 
really works.
It seems to be an irrevocable part of nature that we work harder toward 
our goals as our deadlines approach. A material goal is not a goal unless it 
has a deadline. That’s why we have quotas, due dates, quarterly reports, and 
dates for exams and term papers in school. We humans work best when we 
have a target date for arrival and the best goals are in writing that we can 
review on a daily basis.
And, finally, do your goals pass the win–win test? To be truly successful 
in life we must consider the impact of reaching our goals on other people. 
Once a goal is defined as to its integrity and merit for our own success, we 
must ask ourselves the key question before we embark on an action course. 
What affect will the realization of my goal have on the others involved? 
And the answer should be: beneficial. One of the most critical aspects of 
goal setting is that we seldom succeed in isolation without the support of 
others. When our own goals match the aspirations of those with whom we 
come in frequent contact and they in turn identify with us, a chain reaction 
is formed and the whole is greater than the sum of its parts. Synergy is 
achieved when a team is striving for the same outcome.
Self Check
1. What is a goal? (p. 98)
2. What does SMART stand for? (p. 99)
3. What is one good way to make sure that your long-term and short-term 
goals are in sync? (p. 101)116 Chapter 3 Goals and Obstacles
SECTION 3.2 Handling Stress and Anger
STRESS AND STRESSORS
Focusing on your goals can at times become challenging, especially when 
you are sidetracked by obstacles. However, how you react and respond to 
life’s setbacks—both big and small—is key to achieving your goals.
Stress is a natural part of life. Stress is a person’s physical and psy￾chological reaction to the demands in his/her/their life. Stress can be pos￾itive or negative. Eustress, or good stress, is the kind of pleasant, desirable 
stress you might feel when playing a sport or going on a date. Distress, or 
bad stress, is the kind of stress you might feel during an illness or a 
drastic life change.
Psychologist Albert Ellis believes that we cause distress for ourselves 
because we hold irrational beliefs. For example, we may become stressed 
when we see people whispering at a party because we irrationally assume 
that they are making fun of us. Ellis’s ABC model, illustrated in Figure 3.2, 
shows how distress is the result of our beliefs about events rather than of 
the events themselves. An activating event (A) triggers people to form an 
irrational or negative belief (B) about it, which in turn shapes the conse￾quences (C) of the event.
Stress is in the eye of the beholder. Each person has his/her/their own 
stressors. A stressor is anything that causes stress. Have you ever noticed 
how different people can react to the same event in different ways? You may 
feel excited about going on a long trip, while your friend might feel nervous 
and tense. Dr. Hans Selye, one of the first people to study stress, divides 
people into two categories: racehorses and turtles. A racehorse loves to run 
and will die from exhaustion if it is corralled or confined in a small space. 
A turtle will die from exhaustion if it is forced to run on a treadmill, moving 
too fast for its slow nature. We each have to find our own healthy stress 
level, somewhere between that of the racehorse and the turtle.
stress A physical and 
psychological reaction to the 
demands of life.
stressor Anything that 
causes stress.
success secret
It’s normal to feel stress 
when faced with change.
FIGURE 3.2 The ABC Model
Taking Control The ABC formula demonstrates how negative, irrational 
beliefs can create stress and lead to unwanted consequences. How can 
becoming more aware of your personal stressors help you control stress?
A C
Activating
Event
any stress￾causing situation
Belief
how we evaluate
the situation
Consequences
negative
behavioral =+
outcome
BWhether you are a racehorse or a turtle, you are likely to feel stress 
when facing situations that require you to change old ways of doing or 
thinking. It is normal to experience stress when faced with:
• greater demands at school or work
• changes in family relationships
• new financial responsibilities
• changes in your social life
• exposure to new people, ideas, and situations
• uncertainty or shame about sexual identity
• internally generated demands, such as perfectionism, negative self-talk, 
or chronic worry and anxiety
Big changes usually bring on more stress than little ones, but a lot of 
small changes or challenges at one time can add up, too. It is normal to 
experience stress when faced with hassles, the small stressors of everyday life. 
Hassles include losing your car keys, getting a flat tire, and other everyday 
annoyances. Like major stressors, hassles can weaken the body’s immune 
system. The good news is that small, positive events, known as uplifts, can 
have the opposite effect, boosting your body’s defense mechanisms and 
protecting your health.
Symptoms of Stress
What happens when we experience stress? Stressors trigger a response from 
the autonomic nervous system (ANS), the part of the nervous system that 
sends impulses to the heart, muscles, and glands. The ANS controls a number 
of bodily functions, including heart and breathing rate and digestion.
success secret
Look for uplifts to offset 
the stresses of life.
autonomic nervous 
system (ANS) The part 
of the nervous system that 
monitors and controls most 
involuntary functions, including 
heartbeat and sweating.
Applying Psychology
Technology and Stress
Research from The University of Gothenburg in Switzerland has 
revealed that intensive use of mobile phones and computers can 
be linked to stress, sleep disorders, and depressive symptoms, 
especially in young people. Heavy mobile phone use is linked to 
an increase in sleeping problems in men and an increase in 
depressive symptoms in both men and women. “Regularly using a 
computer late at night is associated not only with sleep disorders, 
but also with stress and depressive symptoms,” according to lead 
researcher Sara Thomẻe. A combination of both heavy computer 
use and heavy mobile use makes the association even stronger. “This means taking breaks, taking time to 
recover after intensive use, and putting limits on your availability,” Thomẻe explains. Good advice: Don’t surf 
the Web, chat, text, and then try to sleep. Take a time-out, relax before bedtime, and don’t be tethered to 
your phone, tablet, or laptop. Are you a techno-addict or are you in control?
gahsoon/E+/Getty Images118 Chapter 3 Goals and Obstacles
Within the ANS, there are two subsystems, the sympathetic nervous 
system and the parasympathetic nervous system. In dangerous or stressful 
situations, the sympathetic nervous system speeds up your heartbeat and 
breathing rate and slows down the digestion of food. In relaxing situations, 
the parasympathetic nervous system slows your heartbeat and breathing 
rate and stimulates the digestion of food.
The ANS reacts to stressors by going through three physiological 
stages: alarm, resistance, and exhaustion. In the alarm stage, the body is 
confronted with a stressor and mobilizes to meet the threat. For example, 
suppose that you are lying in bed when you suddenly remember that you 
have a test tomorrow. Your ANS reacts with alarm.
In the resistance stage, the body works to resist the stressor, releasing 
adrenaline to give itself energy. The stressor may remain, but the symptoms 
that appeared in the alarm stage disappear. You get up, turn on the light, 
and start to make a plan of action.
In the exhaustion stage, which occurs after an extended period of stress, 
the body may not be able to resist stressors any longer. If the body reaches 
the exhaustion stage, the immune system is weakened, and the body 
becomes vulnerable to diseases, which Selye called diseases of adaptation. 
These can include ulcers, high blood pressure, coronary disease, and cancer.
How do you know if you are experiencing too much stress? People who 
are under a lot of stress become impatient, angry, and tired more quickly 
than they ordinarily would, and they experience physical symptoms, such 
as muscle tension, insomnia, and loss of appetite. To assess your own stress 
level, complete Activity 16.
Escape Responses
When faced with a stressful situation, it is tempting to indulge in an escape 
response rather than to confront the problem head-on. An escape response
is a behavior, such as a thought or an action, that helps you get your mind 
off your troubles.
Some escape responses are positive. A positive escape response might be 
to go for a walk or talk with a friend. A positive escape response makes you 
feel better for a while, in a constructive way. You act in a way that does not 
harm you or add to the problem.
A negative escape response, by contrast, is an escape response that makes 
you feel better for a while, but actually increases your stress levels. Negative 
escape responses include overeating, drinking, and avoiding responsibilities. 
Extreme responses include alcoholism and drug abuse. A common negative 
escape response is denial—a way to reduce anxiety by ridding your mind of 
painful thoughts and feelings. When your troubles seem too difficult to 
manage, it is tempting to just forget about everything. Instead of fleeing your 
feelings, however, it is healthier to get in touch with them. It is normal to react 
to an unpleasant situation with stress, sadness, or anger. If you can, share 
your feelings with a trusted family member, friend, instructor, or advisor.
success secret
Fatigue and irritability can 
be signs of stress 
overload.
escape response A 
behavior that helps you get 
your mind off your troubles.
denial Refusing to face 
painful thoughts and feelings.ACTIVITY 16: How Stressed Are You?
A For each statement, check whether it applies to you Never, Seldom, Sometimes, or Often.
Never Seldom Sometimes Often
1. I lose my appetite. Or, I still eat even though I am not hungry.
2. My decisions tend to be hasty rather than planned; I 
change my mind frequently.
3. The muscles of my neck, back, or stomach get tense.
4. Thoughts and feelings about my problems run through 
my mind.
5. I have a hard time getting to sleep; I wake up during the 
night or I feel tired in the morning.
6. I feel the urge to cry to get away from my problems.
7. I let anger build up and then explode.
8. I have nervous habits.
9. I feel tired, even when I have not been doing hard work.
10. I have physical problems, such as headaches, intestinal 
disorders, or nausea.
11. I cannot do what I or others expect because the 
expectations are unrealistic.
12. I lose interest in physical intimacy.
13. I get angry easily and quickly.
14. I have bad dreams or nightmares.
15. I worry a lot.
16. I use caffeine (energy drinks, coffee, etc.), tobacco, 
alcohol, and/or drugs.
17. I feel uneasy, without any reason that I can name.
18. When I talk, my words come out weak, fast, broken, 
or tense.
19. I am short-tempered and testy or cross with people.
20. Delays of any kind make me extremely impatient.
B Scoring: Assign yourself one point for every time you checked Never; two points for every time you 
checked Seldom; three points for every time you checked Sometimes; and four points for every time you 
checked Often.
What is your total?
20–40 Low level of stress
41–60 Moderate level of stress
61–80 High level of stress
continued…120 Chapter 3 Goals and Obstacles
C Does your score reflect the level of stress you feel? Explain.
D Change is a part of life, but it is also a cause of stress. What are some changes in your life right now that 
might be causing stress for you?Living with less stress does not mean that you will never feel anxious, 
worried, or tense. Everybody feels this way sometimes. To be successful, 
you need to balance the amount of tension in your life. Pay attention to 
your body and mind and learn to recognize your personal stressors. Once you 
know what situations cause you stress, you are one step closer to managing 
them and reacting to them with positive thoughts and actions.
Stress Management
In stressful or anger-causing situations, you have a lot more control than you 
might think. You may not have control over all the sources of your stress, 
but you can control your reaction to them. How? By developing coping skills,
behaviors that help you deal with stress and other unpleasant situations.
Stress researchers have uncovered three core characteristics of people 
who cope with stress effectively. First, these people see problems not as 
catastrophes, but as challenges. Second, they have a sense of mission or 
purpose in life that helps them put setbacks in perspective. Third, they have 
a feeling of control over their lives.
No matter what your problems are, you can work on them in a way that 
is healthy and constructive. You can choose the method that best fits your 
personality and lifestyle.
Relaxation A good way to deal with stress is through simple relaxation 
or meditation. Try sitting in a comfortable position in a quiet room. Focus 
your mind on a single calming word or phrase. Close your eyes; breathe 
deeply and slowly. “Breathe” from your stomach, not your chest. Feel your 
muscles relax. Assume this calm attitude for about 20 minutes. Make time for 
relaxation every day, and you’ll feel better both mentally and physically.
Listening to music is another good way to relax. Slow music is more 
soothing than fast music, and instrumental music is more soothing than 
vocals. If you are very stressed, you may want to start with fast, loud music 
to match your mood and then gradually shift to more mellow sounds. Pick 
the musical genre of your choice, from classical to jazz to reggae to electronic, 
or try recordings of nature. Some people relax to the sound of the ocean’s 
surf, rain or thunderstorms, or birds and insects in a meadow.
Watching nature can be even more relaxing than listening to nature. 
If you can’t make it to a park, trail, lake, or beach, try sitting in front of a 
fireplace or fish tank and losing yourself in watching the movement.
Another way to reduce tension is to practice progressive muscle relaxation,
the brief tightening and release of muscles throughout the body. Massage 
is another effective relaxation technique.
Exercise Exercise can be a powerful stress reducer. Exercise includes 
walking, running, aerobics, yoga, and any other physical activity that helps 
you release tension. Exercise increases your heart rate and improves your 
circulation. Flexing muscles creates a massage effect and helps work out 
tension. Exercise also helps to burn off adrenaline in the bloodstream. 
success secret
Learn to recognize 
situations that cause 
you stress.
coping skills Behaviors 
that help a person deal with 
stress and other unpleasant 
situations.
success secret
Make time for relaxation 
every day.
success secret
Regular exercise keeps 
your body and mind fit.122 Chapter 3 Goals and Obstacles
Ideally, participate in some kind of cardiovascular fitness activity that 
requires exertion to the point of perspiration for 20 to 30 minutes five or more 
times a week. Steady, rhythmic aerobic activity is best, such as swimming, 
walking, jogging, or cycling.
Nutrition Eat a regular, balanced diet that is high in fiber and low in 
saturated fat, and drink plenty of water daily. Take time to eat slowly and 
enjoy your meals. Minimize salt, sugar, caffeine, and alcohol intake. 
Respect your body and be cautious of fad diets, high-energy foods, and 
other quick-fix alternatives to good nutrition.
Sleep Regularly get at least seven hours of complete rest. Develop a 
ritual or regular procedure in preparing for sleep. Read or reflect on peaceful 
thoughts or interesting ideas, then take them with you into sleep. Resolve 
arguments before going to sleep so that you do not lose sleep because of 
them. Take a break after intensive mobile phone or computer use before 
bedtime.
Mental Discipline Practice a technique for developing concentra￾tion, clearing the mind of distracting or intrusive thoughts, and focusing 
your attention. These can be done in conjunction with physical relaxation 
techniques such as meditation, biofeedback, and self-hypnosis. Other tech￾niques for developing concentration include martial arts, advanced yoga, 
t’ai chi, ballet, swimming, and other rhythmic activity.
success secret
Practice a technique for 
clearing your mind of 
worries and distracting 
thoughts.
professional development )))
Job Stress
Dealing with heavy workloads, impossible deadlines, competing priorities, and workplace politics contribute 
to stress on the job. Besides maintaining a healthy work/life balance, getting enough sleep, exercise, and 
nutrients, here are some important tips for overcoming stress during your workday. Here are seven quick 
and easy activities you can incorporate on the job:
1. Breathe—Take ten deep breaths to help you relax.
2. Stretch/Move—Stretch your body or take a quick walk down the hall.
3. Healthy Snack—Avoid caffeine and sugar, which spike your stress hormones.
4. Music Break—Listen to your favorite “calming” music on a break.
5. Visual Anchor—Have a favorite photo nearby to trigger positive emotions.
6. Specific Communication Times—Set aside certain times for inbound and outbound e-mails and phone calls.
7. See the Humor in Situations—Don’t take challenges and setbacks too seriously.
What’s Your Opinion?
What are some ways to achieve a balance between work and life? For more resources on stress management, 
go to http://health.discovery.com/centers/stress/stress.html or ask your instructor for additional links.Self-Esteem Develop your self-esteem so that you can put setbacks in 
perspective. Feeling good about yourself helps you keep a positive attitude 
in the face of life’s challenges. Find ways of appreciating and rewarding 
your personal qualities and efforts. Personal compliments on a job well 
done, positive self-talk, and reflecting on your accomplishments can boost 
your self-esteem. You’ll learn more about these techniques in Chapter 4.
Relationships Establish a clear, confidential, reliable, and trustworthy 
network of people as a support network. They can provide direct, honest, 
and accurate feedback, as well as care and concern, encouragement and 
enthusiasm, and understanding and acceptance.
Time Management Based on your values and goals, set priorities 
and schedule your time to accomplish what you want and need to do. 
Build in protected time for relaxation training and meditation or reflection, 
family and social time, and slack time for unexpected events. Identify and 
reduce time wasters. Find out what events prevent you from making the 
time necessary to implement effective stress management techniques.
Mental Stimulation Keep learning! Read about and discuss ideas 
that excite you, preferably from a variety of fields. Use your creativity to view 
a problem from different perspectives, develop your intuition, and learn to 
redefine problems as opportunities. Also work on developing your environ￾mental awareness. Look for beauty around you—in a sunrise or sunset, trees 
and flowers budding in the spring, leaves turning color in the fall, or the inter￾esting curve of an arch. Take time to pay attention to the world around you.
Recreation Engage in hobbies, sports, and leisure time activities that 
provide a change of pace from your usual work. These should be refreshing 
or entertaining in themselves, not just more work. They may include pho￾tography, painting, languages, travel, gardening, inventing, woodworking, 
puzzles, music, or athletics.
Spirituality Reaffirm the values that underlie your daily living. 
Through meditation, prayer, contemplation, or reflection, consider the 
meaning of your life and work. Consider writing a journal entry at the end 
of the day to record your reflections. Read some of the great spiritual or 
philosophical literature from different cultures. Celebrate holidays and 
special events with true meaning.
Reality Check When stress hits, stop for a moment and try to step 
outside the situation. Ask yourself, “Am I overreacting?” How would you 
view the situation if it were happening to someone else? How do you think 
others might view your reaction? Ask yourself, “What is the worst thing 
that could happen?” Often you will realize that the situation isn’t as bad as 
you first thought. This new, adjusted outlook might ease both your tension 
and your stress.
success secret
Establish a support 
network.
success secret
Make time for refreshing, 
entertaining activities.124 Chapter 3 Goals and Obstacles
Laugh It Off Keep your sense of humor. Remember that no one is 
perfect and that you probably learn more from your mistakes than from 
your successes. Look for the light side of your situation. If the situation 
doesn’t seem to have a light side, read or watch something you find funny. 
Laughter affects the body in the same way that aerobic exercise does: It 
raises the blood pressure, increases heart rate, and tenses the muscles. 
Afterwards, a general relaxation takes place.
Clarity Periodically review your dreams and goals and remind yourself 
why you are doing what you are doing. Seek commitment, challenge, and 
control in school and work. Set SMART goals and create step-by-step plans 
to reach them.
Obviously, no one can practice all of these techniques perfectly. The key 
to resisting stress is to practice healthy, positive thought patterns and to select 
coping strategies that work for you. First use Personal Journal 3.2 to review 
the stress management techniques just discussed. Then turn to Activity 17 to 
begin taking action on the major stressors in your life.
Coping with Anger
Uncontrolled stress is a major obstacle to achieving our goals—and so is 
uncontrolled anger. Anger is a strong feeling of displeasure, resentment, 
or hostility that results from frustration. Anger, one of the most basic 
success secret
Remember to keep your 
sense of humor.
anger A strong feeling of 
displeasure, resentment, or 
hostility.
Personal Journal 3.2
Stress Management Techniques
The best stress management techniques for you are those that you will enjoy and be able to do consistently. 
Fill in the concept map below with the five stress relief strategies that you think would work best for you.
Stress
ManagementACTIVITY 17: Personal Stressors and Relievers
A In the left-hand column, list situations in your life right now that are stressful. In the right-hand column, 
brainstorm several ways to relieve the stress. Working alone or with a classmate, list every constructive 
strategy that comes to mind, even if a given strategy might not be practical right now.
Stressor Stress Relievers
Example Too much homework, too little time. I can get more sleep so I have more energy. 
I can do some homework on weekends. 
I can take the bus so I have more time to read. 
I can drop one of my classes. 
I can stop watching Netflix on Sunday night. 
I can do homework at the library, where it’s quiet.
Stressor Stress Relievers
I can
I can
I can
I can
continued…126 Chapter 3 Goals and Obstacles
Stressor Stress Relievers
I can
I can
I can
I can
B Draw a circle around the stressor that is bothering you most right now. Then look at the “I can” statements 
you wrote for this stressor. Write a promise to yourself:
To relieve some of my stress, by the end of this week I will
Signed (your name)
C Fill out the reminders in Personal Journal 3.3. Also remind yourself to come back to this page in a few 
days and write “I will” statements for the other stressors you listed.Personal Journal 3.3
Stress Relief Reminders
Once you’ve identified strategies to reduce stress, remind yourself often to take action on them. Fill out 
the reminders below, then photocopy them or cut them out and post them where you will see them often.
To reduce the stress caused by
I will
To reduce the stress caused by
I will
To reduce the stress caused by
I will
human emotions, is a normal response to aggravating situations. Most of 
the time, though, anger doesn’t really help us. It steals our energy and 
sidetracks us from achieving our goals. When we are angry, we feel helpless 
and even more frustrated.
You can’t control every situation that causes you to feel angry. You 
can, however, control your anger and decide how you want to respond to a 
situation. When you start to feel angry, make a conscious effort to use your 
energy to come up with solutions to the problem that caused the anger.
Remember adrenaline? Anger is a trigger for your body to release both 
adrenaline and a stress hormone called cortisol. When these two hormones 
are working together in your body, your immune system becomes weakened 
and less able to fight off disease. Redford Williams, M.D., a Duke Univer￾sity internist, says, “Every time you get angry it hurts your health.”
When your blood pressure jumps, heart rate quickens, and adrenaline 
pumps, strive to control your anger. Remember that not every annoying 
situation is a life-threatening struggle for survival. Instead of taking your 
anger out on other people, examine the source of your negative feelings and 
transform them into constructive words and actions.
success secret
Anger harms your physical 
and mental health.128 Chapter 3 Goals and Obstacles
When you feel angry or upset, you can also do something that will 
relieve your negative feelings in a healthy way, such as jogging around the 
block or listening to some soothing music. Self-awareness is an important 
part of the victory over anger. The more self-aware you are, the better you 
will be able to recognize the real causes of your anger and cope with the 
ups and downs of everyday life.
Responses to Anger
Anger is an emotion, not an action. However, people often express their 
anger through self-defeating actions: They yell, throw tantrums, even strike 
someone. After such an outburst, though, do they feel better? No. People 
who have frequent fits of rage usually feel bad about themselves. They are 
panicky and out of control, and the problems they are angry about still 
remain after they vent their rage.
People usually express anger in one of two ways. Sometimes we turn 
anger outward, and sometimes we turn it inward. Anger that we direct out￾ward is often said to be “healthy” anger because we are openly expressing 
it. It is not healthy, however, if it does physical or mental harm. Outward 
anger often manifests itself as aggression, behavior intended to harm or 
injure a person (including you, the angry person) or an object. People who 
are aggressive harm both themselves and others. Aggressive people often 
express anger through:
• yelling, name calling, or other verbal abuse
• physical abuse
• irrational demands
• controlling behavior
• criticism and judgment of others
• hostile disagreement with others
• revenge fantasies
Anger that is expressed inwardly seems safer. But is it? It can often do 
just as much long-term damage to our relationships and our physical and 
mental health. Inward anger often manifests itself as:
• sarcasm or cynicism
• avoidance or withdrawal
• the “silent treatment”
• annoyance
• pervasive distrust of others
• feelings of victimization
• jealousy or envy
• fatigue and anxiety
• depression
Anger that we keep inside can make us resent people. It can also make 
us resent ourselves, leading to guilt and depression.
aggression Behavior 
intended to harm or injure a 
person or object.Passive-Aggression Anger that is repeatedly suppressed and 
directed inside can be dangerous. This suppressed anger can lead to 
passive-aggression, a way of dealing with emotional conflict or stressors 
by indirectly and unassertively expressing aggression toward others. 
Passive-aggression is a disguised form of aggression. It is a way of 
avoiding unpleasant feelings and events, such as anger and disagreement. 
Passive-aggressive people often:
• tell people what they want to hear, even if they have to lie to do so
• refuse to acknowledge their inner feelings
• fear letting their feelings show
• complain of being misunderstood or unappreciated
• blame failures or setbacks on others
• avoid conflict at all cost by giving in to others, and then secretly manipu￾late others to get their own way
• become angry but are afraid to show their anger, so quietly take revenge 
by undermining others
• put people down in a humorous-seeming way
Passive-aggression is based on unhealthy thoughts that make people feel 
afraid and victimized, yet also angry. These thoughts include:
• “I never win, so why try?”
• “Everyone else is more powerful than I am.”
• “It’s bad to get angry.”
• “No one cares how I feel.”
• “My problems are much worse than other people’s.”
• “I’m a loser and a failure.”
• “What I feel is the opposite of what other people want me to feel.”
• “I have to make sure people like and accept me.”
• “People will never know I’m angry and that I disagree with them.”
• “I’d rather lie than get into an argument with someone.”
Most of us have felt these things at some time or another. Passive-aggressive 
people, however, think this way most or all of the time. To reduce these 
distressing and unhealthy thoughts, it is important to find the courage to 
express your emotions calmly and with reason, and to allow other people 
to do the same. Instead of seeing every situation as a win–lose situation, 
learn to accept and work toward compromises. Also work to make sure 
that your words and actions are consistent with your feelings.
Handling Anger Constructively
Instead of repressing anger, expressing it through aggression, or letting it 
emerge as passive-aggression, it is much healthier to use it to further your 
self-awareness. Dealing with anger constructively means understanding 
what causes it, staying calm, taking positive action, and using assertive 
communication to improve the situation.
passive-aggression
Indirect, disguised 
aggression toward others.
success secret
Figure out what makes 
you angry—and why.130 Chapter 3 Goals and Obstacles
Why Am I Angry? The first step to conquering anger is to figure 
out what makes you angry—and why. According to Sandy Livingstone, 
author of Dealing With Anger, anger arises when we perceive that something 
might happen to:
• frighten us
• hurt us
• threaten us
• make us feel powerless
Often, the hurt or powerlessness we fear is not physical, but emotional. 
Take Sara’s example: With a new baby, a part-time job, and night courses 
in management, Sara was having trouble keeping her stress level in 
check. Before the baby was born, she and her husband, Ethan had 
agreed to share parenting duties equally. One evening Sara returned 
home to find that Ethan had neither bathed the baby nor made any 
preparations for dinner. Sara, who often became irritable when she was 
hungry and tired, suddenly exploded. Ethan became angry as well, say￾ing that Sara was overreacting. This only made Sara angrier, because it 
made her feel emotionally powerless—Ethan was not taking her feelings 
seriously. Ethan’s anger with Sara came from a fear of acknowledging 
that there might be problems in the relationship. For both of them, the 
constructive solution to this problem was to express their feelings and 
then work out a solution together.
Just as it is important to recognize your personal stressors, it is important 
to know your personal anger triggers. Triggers are the people, situations, 
or events that provoke anger. What are your anger triggers? Enter them in 
Personal Journal 3.4.
Stay Calm When you feel yourself getting angry, focus on staying 
calm. For example, if after being put to bed, the two-year-old you are baby￾sitting comes walking out to see you while you’re studying, you might have 
several reactions. One might be to become angry and say, “That child never 
stays put!” In your anger, you might yell at the child and then remain so 
upset you can’t concentrate on your studies. Another reaction might be to 
think, “We both need to relax. I’ll take a break and read a soothing bedtime 
story so we can spend a little time together.” After you’ve put the child 
back in bed, you are still calm and in control and can go back to your 
assignment.
The way you choose to think about a situation often determines your 
feelings about it. Instead of flying off the handle when faced with a fraz￾zling situation, recognize that you are feeling angry and identify what you 
are angry about. If another person is involved, try to understand his/her/
their point of view. Also try looking at the situation from outside, as a 
neutral observer. Is there another way of seeing the situation that might 
help you reduce your anger? Many situations can be a source of anger or 
stress because you see them in an unreal or exaggerated way. When you 
success secret
Focus on staying calm.overreact to something, you are allowing yourself to be angry when anger 
isn’t really necessary.
Take Positive Action It is easy to think that other people are causing 
all of our problems. However, it is possible that the problem lies in the way 
we are looking at others. Instead of bottling up your anger and nurturing 
resentments against others, learn to express your feelings—calmly. Try to 
work out the current situation without bringing up past issues or other 
conflicts. Also ask yourself these questions:
• Am I trying to change or control others?
• Am I prejudiced against this person? Am I too judgmental?
• Am I expecting too much from other people?
• Do I want people to be more like me?
Personal Journal 3.4
Anger Triggers
Which of these situations triggers your anger? Put a check mark next to the situations that cause you 
intense annoyance or anger.
I get angry when . . .
Someone criticizes me.
Someone does something better than I do.
Someone looks better than I do.
My partner pays too much attention to someone else.
Things don’t work out the way I planned.
Someone doesn’t listen to what I’m saying.
My parents, friends, or partner tell me what to do.
Someone questions my judgment.
I have to wait in line.
Someone cuts in front of me in line or in traffic.
(Other—specify)
(Other—specify)
Think about the situations you identified. How do you think they make you feel frightened, hurt, threatened, 
or powerless? Is this fright, hurt, threat, or powerlessness physical or psychological?132 Chapter 3 Goals and Obstacles
People often get angry because they think their situation is unfair. 
Things sometimes are unfair, and looking for fairness in every situation can 
be a fruitless search. It is important that we learn to accept things we can￾not change. We can use our energy instead to change the things we can.
How can you put this idea into action? Let’s say you have to study for 
an exam on Monday and your home is always noisy on the weekend. Look 
at the situation in a realistic, practical way. If it is unlikely that you can find 
a quiet corner of your home in which to study, make plans to study at the 
library. That is much easier than getting upset over the fact that your home 
is a lively, noisy one. You can choose not to create a stressful situation for 
yourself.
Try Assertiveness Instead of resorting to aggression or passive￾aggression, strive to develop assertiveness. Assertiveness is the ability to 
express your thoughts and feelings without violating the rights of others. 
It means recognizing that your thoughts and feelings are valid and that you 
have a right to express them. To be more assertive in your dealings with 
others, try the following:
• Deal with minor irritations before they become anger-triggering 
situations.
• Ask for help when you need it.
• Say “no” to unreasonable requests.
• Speak up if you are not being treated the way you want to be treated.
• Work toward a solution that benefits everyone involved.
• Be open to positive, constructive criticism and suggestions.
• Accept compliments with a simple “thank you,” not by diminishing 
yourself.
• Use calm body language and maintain good eye contact.
• Practice active listening: showing a desire to listen, being attentive to the 
other person’s words and body language, and reflecting back their words 
to let them know you have heard what they said.
As you learn to control your responses to anger, you will also be learning 
to control the frequency of your anger. For example, sometimes we feel 
angry because people criticize us or disagree with us. As we learn to slow 
down and take an inventory of our anger, we come to see that our anger is 
not caused by others’ words—it is caused by our own silent fear that they 
may be correct. As we build a repertoire of healthy responses to anger, we 
build up our resilience and self-esteem, too.
Self Check
1. How does the body react to stress? (p. 116)
2. What is an escape response? (p. 118)
3. Define assertiveness. (p. 132)
success secret
Change what you can, 
and accept what you 
can’t.
assertiveness
Standing up for one’s rights 
without threatening the self￾esteem of the other person.
success secret
Your thoughts and feel￾ings are valid, and you 
have a right to assert 
them.goal (p. 98)
short-term goal (p. 101)
long-term goal (p. 101)
obstacle (p. 108)
perfectionism (p. 109)
adapting (p. 111)
stress (p. 116)
stressor (p. 116)
autonomic nervous system 
(ANS) (p. 117)
escape response (p. 118)
denial (p. 118)
coping skills (p. 121)
anger (p. 124)
aggression (p. 128)
passive-aggression (p. 129)
assertiveness (p. 132)
Key Terms
Summary by Learning Objectives
•Explain the importance of setting goals. Goals are tools for translating dreams into reality. 
Goals give our lives direction and channel our energy toward achieving success on our personal 
terms.
•List the characteristics of well-set goals. Well-set goals have five characteristics, known 
by the acronym SMART: They are specific, measurable, achievable, realistic, and time-related.
• Distinguish between short-term and long-term goals. Short-term goals can be accom￾plished within a year. Long-term goals can be accomplished in a longer period of time. Short￾term goals are stepping stones to long-term goals.
• Cite common obstacles to reaching your goals. Common obstacles to reaching your goals 
include striving for someone else’s goals; not being willing to put in the effort required; demand￾ing perfection; lacking support; resisting change; and giving in to stress and anger.
•Recognize the causes and symptoms of stress. Stress is caused by the demands of daily 
life, as well as by situations that require you to change old ways of doing or thinking. Symptoms 
of stress include accelerated heartbeat and breathing rate. Symptoms of prolonged stress 
include muscle aches, a weakened immune system, and disease.
• Describe several strategies for relieving stress. Powerful strategies for coping with 
stress include relaxation, exercise, a healthy diet and sleep schedule, a supportive network of 
relationships, mental exercises, hobbies, spirituality, humor, and focusing on the big picture in 
your life.
•Explain ways to deal with anger constructively. To handle anger constructively, figure out 
what makes you angry, and why. When you feel yourself getting angry, try to stay calm and view 
the situation rationally. Express your thoughts and feelings, but also try to understand the other 
person’s point of view.
Chapter 3 Review and Activities134 Chapter 3 Goals and Obstacles
Review Questions
1. Explain this statement: “Goals are dreams with deadlines.”
2. Why should goals be specific and measurable?
3. Give an example of a long-term goal and three related short-term goals.
4. When is stress positive? Give examples.
5. What is the difference between aggression and passive-aggression?
6. How can assertiveness help you cope with anger?
Critical Thinking
7. Anger Consider this statement by Buddha: “Holding on to anger is like grasping a hot coal 
with the intent of throwing it at someone else; you are the one who gets burned.” What do 
you think this statement means? Do you agree with it? Why or why not?
8. Assertiveness Review the assertiveness tips presented in the chapter, then recall a situation 
in which you had, or still have, difficulty being assertive. Describe the situation and examine 
what feelings the situation created in you. Why did you find it difficult to be assertive? What 
will you do the next time you are in a similar situation to be more assertive?
Application
9. Goal Survey Interview five friends or family members about their goals. Ask them to name 
their long-term goals and their related short-term goals. Why did they pick these goals? What 
deadline do they have for accomplishing the goals? What obstacles have they faced, and how 
have they overcome them? After you complete your interviews, write a one-page summary. 
What were your interviewees’ goals? Were they SMART goals? How much thought had the 
interviewees given to their life direction? Did you learn anything that you can apply to 
your life?
10. Stress Log Keep a “stress log” for one week. Monitor your stress level and write down the 
stressors (and hassles) in your life. Then pick a calm moment to evaluate your list. Are there 
any stressors or hassles to which you may have overreacted? How could you prepare yourself 
for these situations in the future in order to minimize your level of stress?
Review and ActivitiesInternet Activities
11. Online Goal Management Go to https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/goal￾settingquiz.htm. Take the quiz to learn how good you are at goal-setting, and receive tips for 
setting and achieving your goals.
12. Anger Management Strategies Go to the Web site www.apa.org and type “Controlling 
anger before it controls you” in the search box. Go through the strategies recommended for 
coping with anger and select those that you have used effectively to control your own anger. 
What method or methods have worked best for you? Are there others in the strategies men￾tioned that you feel can help you remain calm and even more in control? Write a one-page 
report on how you best deal with anger and how other techniques offered can help.
Review and Activities
Look back at your response to the question in the Real-Life 
Success Story on page 96. Think about how you would answer 
the question now that you have completed the chapter.
Complete the Story Write a paragraph continuing Trinh’s story, 
showing how she can use goal setting and stress management 
strategies to help her reach her goal.
“Where Do I Go From Here?” Real-Life 
Success Story
Jacob Lund/Shutterstock136
UpperCut Images/SuperStock
Career 
Path Story
A Step Forward
Christian Staut always loved being active. He was con￾stantly involved in sports and other physical activities. 
He always dreamed of being a physical therapist so he 
could help others achieve their goals after physical 
setbacks. Christian was accepted to a four-year 
college, where he could major in physical therapy.
A Step Backward
Christian started to worry that he did not have the 
intelligence to complete a physical therapy program, 
which required high levels of biology. He remembered 
the words of his older brother, “You’re not the 
brightest” and “You’re just a jock.” In addition, 
Christian would be the first in his family to attend 
college. Christian feared, “Am I going to waste all 
of this time and effort, and fail to become a 
physical therapist?”
What Do You Think? What could Christian do 
to raise his self-esteem and complete a degree in 
physical therapy?
“Do I Have What It Takes?”“
Self-Esteem Chapter
learning objectives
After you complete this chapter, 
you should be able to:
• Define self-esteem and explain 
its importance.
• Describe how childhood 
experiences affect self-esteem.
• Define self-expectancy and 
explain two ways to boost it.
• Explain why self-acceptance is 
important for high self-esteem.
• Explain how to change negative 
self-talk into positive self-talk.
• Explain how to handle criticism 
well.
4
No one can make you feel inferior 
without your consent.
”
Eleanor Roosevelt
introduction
Self-esteem allows you to make the most of your 
potential. In Section 4.1 you’ll learn what self-esteem is, 
where it comes from, and why it helps you achieve your 
goals. You’ll also explore ways to build your confidence 
in your ability to attain your goals. In Section 4.2 you’ll 
learn why self-acceptance is important to self-esteem 
and discover tactics to accept yourself and see the many 
qualities you already possess. You’ll also learn how to 
handle negative criticism effectively without letting it 
erode your self-esteem.138 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
SECTION 4.1 Understanding Self-Esteem
THE POWER OF SELF-ESTEEM
Self-esteem is one of the most important basic qualities of a successful 
human being. Self-esteem is how we feel about ourselves overall, as being 
worthy of success and fulfillment. Self-image is how we see ourselves 
in the many different roles and performance areas of our lives. Beliefs
define the rules that control and determine our actions and quality of 
life. Self-confidence is proof of our value through our actions. To esteem
someone means to appreciate his/her/their value or worth. When you 
esteem yourself, therefore, you appreciate your value or worth as a per￾son. You are confident in your ability to cope with life’s challenges, and 
you believe that you are worthy of success and happiness. You don’t 
need to be a top achiever or “Number 1” to have healthy self-esteem. 
You feel you have untapped potential and are eager to invest in and test 
that potential. This motivates you to work hard and succeed. People 
with healthy self-esteem can honestly say to themselves, “I really do like 
myself. I’m glad I’m me. I’d rather be me than anyone else living now or 
at any other time in history.”
Healthy self-esteem is a deep-down, inside belief in your own worth, 
regardless of your age, looks, ethnicity, gender, religion, background, or 
status. It encompasses the idea that you have potential for success and 
fulfillment, and that you are worth investing in, learning, gaining skills, 
and performing a valuable service to society in your own, unique way.
It allows you to feel deserving of a new, healthier environment or life￾style, instead of being a mirror or victim of your early or current circum￾stances. It is one of the most important roots in the healthy growth of every 
human being. Self-esteem gives you permission to believe you can improve 
and better yourself, and becomes your passport, allowing you the freedom 
to journey as far as you dare, to seek a destiny worthy of your highest 
aspirations. It embraces where you want to go, rather than where you are 
coming from.
Parents and children in today’s global society sometimes have a 
confused concept of self-esteem. The messages from all forms of media 
suggest that self-esteem is having a big ego and being able to assert 
ourselves as important in a celebrity-oriented, materialistic culture. 
Many people wrongly assume that self-esteem is the way we look, how 
much money we have, and how popular we are. In other words, the 
essence of self-esteem is lost and mixed up with self-indulgence and 
self-absorption. Instead of nonmaterial, inner value, the concept of 
self-esteem has become more narcissistic, more hedonistic, and more 
associated with external “lifestyle” rather than feeling worthy of 
happiness and fulfillment.
Self-esteem Confidence 
in and respect for oneself.Healthy self-esteem is not the same as egotism, arrogance, conceited￾ness, narcissism, or a sense of superiority. In fact, people who demonstrate 
these traits are sometimes trying to cover up their low self-esteem. When 
you have healthy self-esteem, you appreciate your worth and importance, 
but you also realize that no one is any more or less worthy or important 
than you are.
People with low self-esteem, on the other hand, are afraid to take risks, 
are not confident of success, and are likely to view problems and setbacks 
as failures. This leads to a cycle of reduced effort, perceived failure, and 
lowered self-esteem.
Effects of High Self-Esteem
People with high self-esteem are confident. They know they are important, 
valuable individuals. They enjoy a deep-down, inside-the-skin feeling of 
their own worth, which frees them to achieve their goals for success and 
happiness. When you have high self-esteem, you are willing to take risks, 
are confident of success, and are able to use setbacks as motivation to 
redouble your efforts. Self-esteem lets you take pride in your accomplish￾ments. This, in turn, energizes you to strive toward further successes.
High self-esteem has other benefits as well. When you enjoy high 
self-esteem, you can:
• accept your strengths and weaknesses
• express your true thoughts and feelings
• establish emotional connections to other people
• give and receive compliments
• give and receive affection
• try out new ideas and experiences
• express your creativity
• stand up for yourself
• handle stress and anger calmly
• see the future with optimism
Studies have shown that people with high self-esteem go after their 
goals. They are not roadblocked by people or circumstances. They tend to 
seek more challenging jobs that require them to work hard. They also have 
the confidence to pursue relationships with the people who interest them. 
People with high self-esteem don’t let fear of rejection prevent them from 
reaching out to others.
High self-esteem can also help you make opportunities for yourself. 
Let’s say you are interested in exploring a new career or major. Feeling 
good about yourself can encourage you to push ahead and take on the 
challenge of trying something new. Even if you decide it is not right for 
you, you are still secure in your sense of self-worth. You also know more 
about yourself and what you do like.
success secret
Self-esteem motivates 
you to work hard and 
succeed.
success secret
When you feel good about 
yourself, you have the 
confidence to try new 
things.140 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
Effects of Low Self-Esteem
Many people suffer from low self-esteem. Low self-esteem creates a feeling 
that says, “I can’t do anything.” People with low self-esteem believe that 
they are worthless, that their lives have little meaning, and that they will 
always be unhappy. They lack confidence in their skills and have trouble 
acknowledging even their greatest accomplishments. This feeling of 
inferiority can lead to depression, anxiety, or social phobia.
People with low self-esteem are easily hurt by the words and actions of 
others. In fact, people with low self-esteem value others’ opinions and 
judgments more than they value their own. When these judgments are 
negative, people with low self-esteem often become extremely hurt and 
upset. They feel undeserving, doubt their own abilities, and lower their 
opinion of themselves even further.
In addition, people with low self-esteem often:
• mistrust other people
• have difficulty developing intimate relationships
• fear mistakes and have trouble making decisions
• criticize themselves relentlessly, but have difficulty handling criticism 
from others
• anticipate problems, crises, and failure
• ignore their own needs
• give in to unreasonable requests
• dislike being the center of attention
• withhold their true thoughts and feelings from others
• live in fear of rejection and disapproval
• worry about being a burden on others
• feel they lack control of their lives
• miss out on the joy of life
People with low self-esteem expect themselves to fail; they see failure as an 
integral part of their lives. This breeds anxiety, a generalized feeling of worry 
and nervousness that does not have any specific cause. It’s normal to feel 
some anxiety when coping with difficult situations. For example, people often 
feel anxious when they are lost in an unfamiliar city or when a family member 
is ill. This anxiety keeps them alert and helps them deal with the situation.
Anxiety is harmful, however, when it persists after the problem is 
resolved. When you suffer from anxiety, it becomes difficult to complete 
the necessary tasks to reach your goals, whether that is studying for a test, 
preparing for a job interview, or making a doctor’s appointment. This low￾ers your self-esteem even further.
Now is a good time for you to measure your level of self-esteem. 
Activity 18 is designed to do just that. This exercise is not a measure of 
your value as a human being, but an indicator of how much you value 
yourself. There is no such thing as a right or wrong answer, and no score 
is better or worse than any other.
anxiety A generalized 
feeling of worry and nervous￾ness that does not have any 
specific cause.ACTIVITY 18: Test Your Self-Esteem
A For each item, circle the letter (a, b, or c) of the statement that best describes you.
1. a. I don’t care if people say bad things about me. Sometimes, I even like it when someone is 
bothered by what I do or say.
b. My feelings are hurt if someone disapproves of me or of what I do or say.
c. When someone criticizes me, it increases my caring about or understanding of that person.
2. a. I feel I’m able to control what people do or how they feel. I seem to need that control.
b. Too often, I feel out of control or powerless, or I feel manipulated.
c. I am in control of myself. No one can control me, and I don’t want to control anyone else.
3. a. I think of myself as being better than other people.
b. I think of myself as being less important than other people.
c. I’m no better or less important than anyone else.
4. a. How I look is very important to me. I always want to look my best and be in fashion.
b. I don’t care much about the way I look as long as I’m comfortable.
c. How I look is important because it shows how I feel about myself. I keep myself in good 
shape.
5. a. I don’t mind a good argument. It helps to clear the air and makes life more interesting.
b. I dislike fighting or arguing, and I’ll do whatever I possibly can to avoid it.
c. I don’t try to avoid arguments; they’re all right with me. Still, I don’t try to win them at the 
other person’s expense.
6. a. I don’t really care about helping other people. I easily turn down most requests for help.
b. It’s almost impossible for me to turn down a request for help.
c. I help others but not if it means harming myself. I may turn people down when they ask for 
help.
7. a. I believe, or others tell me, that I’m a perfectionist. I’m not likely to be satisfied until things 
are done and done well.
b. Often, I don’t care if everything gets done or how well it’s done. It just isn’t important to me.
c. Just about everything I do is done well. If not, I’m rarely bothered by it for very long.
continued…142 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
8. a. I dislike making mistakes and avoid them whenever possible.
b. Too often, my life seems to be filled with mistakes. I don’t seem to be able to avoid them for long.
c. I don’t try to make mistakes, but when I do make them, I’m not bothered much or for very long.
9. a. I try not to ask for help. I feel I should be able to do without it.
b. I don’t mind asking for help, but often I don’t get the help I really need.
c. I usually know when I need help, and I’ll ask for it until I get what I need.
10. a. I regularly criticize other people and situations. It makes me feel better to let out my 
feelings.
b. I was taught it isn’t right to criticize, so I avoid criticism as much as I can.
c. I’m rarely critical. My mind simply doesn’t work that way.
11. a. If someone disagrees with me, I think she or he has a different opinion. That’s all right 
with me.
b. If someone challenges what I believe is true, I’m likely to assume I’m wrong.
c. If someone challenges what I believe is true, I usually think she or he is wrong, and I want to 
persuade her or him to think my way.
12. a. I’m comfortable with praise, but I don’t require it to feel good about myself and what I do.
b. I need the recognition of praise for what I’ve accomplished.
c. I don’t really care if I get praised or not. In fact, praise often makes me feel uncomfortable.
13. a. I don’t usually pay attention to who does or doesn’t like me or how many friends I have.
b. Few people like me. The ones who do like me are not people I care about.
c. Maintaining friendship is very important to me.
14. a. Material wealth or professional success comes to me as a result of living my life happily.
b. I don’t much care about getting ahead in life. It would just mean having more to keep up 
with and worry about.
c. Getting ahead in life—achieving success or owning valuable things—is important to me, and 
I’m working hard for it.
15. a. I’m normally too busy enjoying or learning from what’s going on to think or talk about past 
accomplishments.
b. I don’t have much to be proud of. Even when I do, I keep it to myself because a person 
shouldn’t brag.
c. I tell others about my successes and the good things that happen to me. I’m not shy about 
singing my own praises.16. a. I’m entirely responsible for what happens in my life. Blaming other people or circumstances 
doesn’t make any more sense than feeling bad about the past.
b. Many of the bad things that happen in my life are my fault. I tend to feel guilty about or 
regret such mistakes.
c. If something goes wrong, it usually isn’t my fault. Other people or circumstances are more 
often to blame.
17. a. I have a positive sense of direction that comes more from my worth as a person than from 
the goals I set and attain.
b. My life lacks direction. I have trouble imagining my situation getting better.
c. I set goals and evaluate my progress in attaining them. When life gets tough, I think how 
good it will be someday.
18. a. I’m usually happy. When necessary, I speak up for myself without being harsh.
b. I’m usually reserved. I always try to be considerate, even if it means my needs go unmet. 
I don’t like to confront people.
c. I’m outspoken and sometimes come across to others as aggressive. I have a manner that 
could be described as blunt or brusque.
19. a. People do what is in their interest whether it’s fair or not. That’s not wrong; it’s just how people are.
b. Most people look out for themselves and do whatever they can get away with. It’s not right, 
but it’s how people are.
c. I have definite beliefs about what is and isn’t fair. I’m upset when I am or other people are 
treated unfairly.
20. a. I know that what others say will not hurt me—only what I say can hurt me.
b. I try to be careful about what I say because I might hurt someone’s feelings.
c. I try to be careful about what I say because someone else might use it to hurt me.
Source: Adapted from the Web site www.truth-for-healthy-living.org, version 2003. Copyright © 1990–2013 Richard Terry Lovelace, MSW, Ph.D. (www.truth-for-healthy-living.org). 
Reprinted by permission of the author. Originally published in SELF magazine and then by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., in Stress Master.
B Scoring: First, go back to number 11. Beginning with this item and continuing through number 20, 
change each A you circled to a C; change each C to an A. Now add up the total number of A’s, B’s, and 
C’s you selected:
A’s________________   B’s________________   C’s________________
Your number of C’s reflects your level of self-esteem.
11 or more C’s suggest that you honestly like yourself.
0–10 C’s suggest that your self-esteem may need attention.
If you have low self-esteem (0–10 C answers), your number of A’s and B’s reflects the way you deal with 
this problem.
continued…144 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
8 or more A’s: You have an aggressive behavior pattern. You tend to be pushy, critical, arrogant, hostile, 
or perfectionistic. You may not realize that you have low self-esteem.
7 or more B’s: You have a passive behavior pattern. You tend to be self-critical and to feel sad, hurt, or 
fearful. You rarely speak up for yourself.
Near equal number of A’s and B’s: You would benefit from working on your self-esteem, although 
you’re neither very aggressive nor very passive.
C What does your score say about your level of self-esteem? Is it high or low?
D If your self-esteem is low, do you show aggressive behavior, passive behavior, or a mix? Explain and 
give examples of your behavior.E Look back at the effects of high and low self-esteem described in the chapter. Which of the behaviors 
do you exhibit? Give examples.146 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
Remember that no scale or inventory can reveal all the facts. Look 
at your results as possibilities for you to consider, not as the absolute 
truth. Use the results if they make sense to you and are helpful. If they 
don’t, ignore them. Avoid making significant changes in your life based 
on your score; instead, use what you learn combined with appropriate 
professional support.
Origins of Self-Esteem
Where does self-esteem come from? Why do some people have more of it 
than others? Some people have a lot going for them from the start. An 
ancient Chinese proverb tells us, “A child’s life is like a piece of paper on 
which every passerby leaves a mark.” We cannot teach our children self￾esteem. We can only help them discover it within themselves by adding 
positive marks and strokes on their slates. All positive motivation is rooted 
in self-esteem—the development of which, just as with other skills, takes 
practice. Think of self-esteem as a four-legged chair or table.
A Sense of Belonging
The first leg of self-esteem is a sense of belonging. We all have a deep￾seated need to feel we’re part of something larger than ourselves. This need, 
which psychologists call an affiliation drive, encompasses people, places, 
and possessions. Our instinct for belonging—for being wanted, accepted, 
enjoyed, and loved by close ones—is extremely powerful. It explains the 
bond of an extended family, friends, and teammates. It also explains why 
some adolescents join gangs. They want to belong, even if it’s wrong.
Children should be proud of their family heritage in a home where they 
feel safe, loved, and welcome. Home also should be a place where children 
want to bring their friends, rather than a place they want to leave as soon 
as possible.
Self-Esteem Sense of Belonging
Sense of Individual Identity
Sense of Worthiness
Sense of Control and CompetenceA Sense of Individual Identity
The second leg, which complements the sense of belonging, is a sense of 
individual identity. No human being is exactly like another, not even an 
identical twin. We are all unique combinations of talents and traits that 
never existed before and will never exist again in quite the same package. 
(This explains why most parents believe their children came from different 
planets!)
Children should be observed as they grow and play: their learning styles, 
what they love to do in their free time, and discovery of their unique positive 
talents—so these can be nurtured into skills. Report cards don’t necessarily 
measure talents. They often are a measure only of discipline, memory, and 
attention span, as well as the presence of an effective teacher.
A Sense of Worthiness
The third leg of self-esteem is a sense of worthiness, the feeling that I’m 
glad I’m me, with my genes and background, my body, my unique thoughts. 
Without our own approval, we have little to offer. If we don’t feel worth 
loving, it’s hard to believe that others love us; instead, we tend to see others 
as appraisers or judges of our value.
This is why children, especially, need to experience unconditional love and 
to learn to carefully separate the doer from the deed, and the performer from 
the performance. The message: “I love you no matter what happens, and I’m 
always there for you” is one of most important concepts in building a feeling of 
worthiness or intrinsic value in children. After every reprimand they need to 
know parents love them. Before they go to sleep at night, they need reassurance 
that, regardless of what happened that day, they are loved unconditionally.
A healthy sense of belonging, identity, and worthiness can be rooted 
only in intrinsic core values as opposed to outer, often material, motivation. 
Without them, we depend on others constantly to fill our leaking reserves 
of self-esteem—but also tend to suspect others of ulterior motives. Unable to 
accept or reject others’ opinions for what they’re worth, we are defensive 
about criticism and paranoid about praise—and no amount of praise can 
replace the missing qualities.
A healthy sense of belonging, identity, and worthiness is also essential 
to belief in your dreams. It is most essential during difficult times, when you 
have only a dream to hang on to.
A Sense of Control and Competence
There are many reasons why few individuals currently in high school and 
college believe they were born to win. The supportive extended family—
in many cases, even the nuclear family—is disappearing. Role models are 
increasingly unhealthy. The commercial media bombards young senses ever 
more insistently with crime, violence, hedonism, and other unhealthy forms 148 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
of escape. But whatever the explanation, constructive citizens and leaders 
in society cannot emerge and develop without the creative imagination that 
serves them like fuel—which is why the apprehension, frustration, and hesi￾tation we frequently see and hear in many individuals is cause for concern. 
Without more emphasis on opportunity, rather than world problems, the 
future they imagine will help drive neither happiness nor success.
The chair’s fourth leg is a sense of control and competence, which is 
self-efficacy, a functional belief in your ability to control what happens to 
you in a changing, uncertain world. A sense of worthiness may give you the 
emotional means to venture, but you need self-efficacy, the sense of compe￾tence and control, to believe you can succeed. That’s why it is so important 
to assign responsibility for small tasks to children as early as possible so 
they can learn that their choices, efforts, and study habits result in conse￾quences and successes. The more success they experience, the stronger 
their confidence grows—and the more responsibility they want to assume.
Children growing up, regardless of parents’ income, should be given specific 
household chores and duties they can accomplish and be proud of. Each of us 
needs to learn that problems and setbacks are just temporary inconveniences 
and learning experiences. The idea that setbacks are not failures, but course 
corrections, needs to be constantly reinforced.
Armed with a view of failure as a learning experience, children can 
develop an early eagerness for new challenges and will be less afraid to try 
new skills. Although they appreciate compliments, they benefit most from 
their own belief that they are making a valuable contribution to life, accord￾ing to their own internal standards. In an increasingly competitive global 
marketplace, each new, young member of the workforce simply must 
believe that he/she/they is a team leader, a self-empowered, quality individual 
who expresses that quality in excellent production and service. With 
increasing pressures on profit and the need to do more with fewer workers 
because of e-commerce and changing technology, it is essential that parents 
and business leaders help raise the value of their children’s and employees’ 
stock in themselves.
Obviously, none of us was raised in a perfect environment. Most par￾ents rely on their own beliefs and experiences and pass those on to the next 
generation. Regardless of your early upbringing, it is important to know 
some of the fundamental roots of self-esteem, so that as you mature into 
leaders and parents, you can offer the most fertile growing ground for suc￾cess and happiness in those who look to you for guidance. Many children 
are encouraged by nurturing parents, outstanding teachers, coaches, and 
friends who gave them early feelings of self-esteem. This is probably the 
most important quality of a good parent or leader: giving positive encour￾agement to help others develop positive self-worth. Low self-esteem, on 
the other hand, is often a product of abusive or neglectful relationships, 
repeated rejection, family dysfunction, a physical or mental disability, or 
intense criticism from others. Self-esteem may also have a genetic compo￾nent. Some people who are raised in an ideal environment with much praise and love may grow into insecure adults who are unhappy with their 
lives. Others, who grow up in the worst conditions, mature and find high 
self-esteem and success.
It is often said that success leads to high self-esteem, while failure leads 
to low self-esteem. This is not always the case, however. Many talented, 
accomplished people are plagued by feelings of worthlessness. Take Joan’s 
example. Joan has an MBA and is a successful sales executive for a major 
record company. Even though she is well respected, highly accomplished, 
and highly paid, Joan feels insignificant and has low self-esteem. No matter 
what she achieves, she always falls short of her impossible standards.
While some people suffer from low self-esteem even though they seem 
to “have it all,” many people of modest accomplishments feel great about 
themselves. Ron, for example, has been an administrative assistant at a 
computer manufacturer for five years. He doesn’t have a fancy title or make 
a lot of money, but he feels great about what he contributes to his com￾pany. He enjoys his friends and family and has confidence about his future. 
Because he has healthy self-esteem, he feels good about himself and his 
accomplishments, no matter how big or small they may seem to others.
Conditional and Unconditional Regard The foundations 
of self-esteem are laid in the first three or four years of life. When we are 
young children, we need to feel accepted and valued by our parents or 
other caregivers. Parental approval is extremely important to a child—
parents represent safety and security, as well as physical and mental com￾fort to a developing mind. If our parents demonstrate love, nurturance, 
acceptance, encouragement, and support, we usually come to accept 
ourselves and develop positive self-esteem.
The way parents demonstrate love and acceptance also has an impor￾tant influence on our developing self-esteem. Children and adolescents 
need to receive unconditional positive regard—love and acceptance regard￾less of their particular behavior. Children and adolescents who receive 
unconditional positive regard usually develop healthy self-esteem, as shown 
in Figure 4.1.
In some families, children do not receive unconditional positive regard. 
Instead, they are given the message that they must act in a certain way to 
earn acceptance and love. Some parents, for example, demand that their 
children earn perfect grades in school or excel in sports. These parents are 
giving their children conditional positive regard—love and acceptance on the 
condition that they behave in a certain way. Children from such families 
generally develop low self-esteem. Instead of accepting themselves for who 
they are, they accept themselves only for what they do and how well they 
do it. They are satisfied with themselves only when they perform at a cer￾tain level. As adults, these people feel that their worth is dependent on spe￾cific achievements or outcomes, such as earning a certain salary, looking a 
certain way, or having certain possessions. If they fail to live up to their 
impossible standards, they feel bad about themselves.
success secret
Having healthy self￾esteem lets you feel good 
about your accomplish￾ments, big or small.
unconditional 
positive regard
Love and acceptance of a 
person, particularly a child, 
regardless of his/her/their 
particular behavior.
conditional positive 
regard Love and 
acceptance of a person, 
particularly a child, on the 
condition that he/she/they 
behave in a certain way.150 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
Support and Loneliness The need for acceptance and love does 
not disappear when we reach adulthood. No matter what our age, we all 
need to feel that we are noticed, appreciated, and valued in our social cir￾cle. All the words and actions from others that help us feel valued, cared 
for, and connected to a community are known as social support. Social 
support is a self-esteem boost.
Social support comes in two basic forms: emotional support and instru￾mental support. Emotional support is the giving of trust, empathy, caring, 
love, concern, and unconditional approval. Instrumental support is the 
giving of resources such as money, labor, time, advice, and information. A 
person who gives you emotional support will listen to your thoughts and 
feelings, encourage you, hug you, and remind you of your worth. A person 
who gives you instrumental support will help you out if you need advice, a 
job lead, a loan, a ride to the doctor, or another good turn.
People who don’t receive enough social support suffer from low self￾esteem and loneliness. Loneliness isn’t the same thing as simply being 
alone. Most people enjoy being alone occasionally, or even frequently. Real 
loneliness is sadness about being alone. All of us battle loneliness from time 
to time. Many adolescents and young adults face loneliness as they struggle 
to find their place in the world.
social support Words 
and actions from other 
people that help a person 
feel valued, cared for, and 
connected to a community.
loneliness Sadness 
about being alone.
FIGURE 4.1 Childhood Origins of Self-Esteem
Positive Regard Your self-esteem is developed and established early on in your life. Studies show that parents’ 
style of child-rearing during the first three or four years greatly affects children’s self-esteem. Besides parents, 
what other important adults might influence a child’s self-esteem?
Unconditional
Positive Regard Healthy
Self-Esteem
Low
Self-Esteem
=
=
Parent
Parent Child
Child
Conditional
Positive RegardShyness and Self-Esteem
Those who suffer from shyness tend to feel lonely particularly often. 
Shyness is anxiety in social situations that comes from worrying about 
what others think of us. Extreme shyness can lead to such anxiety that it 
becomes difficult just to say hello to others or make eye contact. People 
with low self-esteem often suffer from shyness. They don’t feel comfortable 
with themselves, which makes it difficult for them to feel comfortable 
around others. They may even avoid or withdraw from everyday social situ￾ations to avoid exposure or criticism. Challenging or awkward situations 
can make them feel even more misunderstood and isolated.
Both loneliness and shyness can be damaging to self-esteem. They are 
most damaging when you blame yourself for feeling lonely or socially anx￾ious. If you lack confidence in your social skills, it becomes even harder for 
you to reach out. It is important to remind yourself that there are people 
who love and appreciate you. Use Activity 19 to gauge your level of social 
support and loneliness. This will help you decide whether you need to 
expand your social support network.
Overcoming Loneliness Overcoming loneliness requires building 
and strengthening your social support network. The first step is to reach 
out—instead of waiting for others to take an interest in you, show an active 
interest in them. For example, learn more about the interests or pastimes of 
a friend, acquaintance, or family member. Ask to participate in activities 
that interest you. Take the initiative in providing social support to others. 
If a fellow student is at home sick one day, for example, give the student a 
copy of your notes.
Also consider using your time alone to explore your individual interests, 
perhaps joining a college club, community group, or volunteer project 
where you can build a sense of community. Also work on your communica￾tion and relationship skills, such as empathy and active listening; this will 
give you greater confidence in your ability to interact with others. If you 
have a large social network but still feel lonely often, examine the quality of 
your relationships. Do you maintain friendships or romantic relationships 
that do not feel nurturing? Do you still feel lonely when you are with your 
friends? If so, you may want to explore new friendships.
Raising Your Self-Esteem
We’ve seen how important positive childhood experiences are to healthy 
self-esteem, but what if you are an adult with low self-esteem—can you do 
anything about it? Yes! The good news about self-esteem is that we can get 
more of it. No matter what kind of environment we come from or what 
genetic makeup we have, we can learn to value ourselves. Not everyone 
receives the gift of self-esteem from their parents. To attain success, many 
people have to earn their own esteem. As adults, regardless of our 
success secret
Remind yourself that there 
are people who love and 
appreciate you.
success secret
Supportive, nurturing 
relationships help guard 
against loneliness and low 
self-esteem.
success secret
No matter what your age, 
you can learn to value 
yourself.152 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
ACTIVITY 19: Social Support and Self-Esteem
A For each statement, check whether it applies to you Never, Seldom, Sometimes, Often, or Always.
Never Seldom Sometimes Often Always
1. I have someone to take me to the doctor if I need it.
2. I have someone who listens to me.
3. I have someone to share my most private worries with.
4. I have someone who understands my feelings.
5. I have someone who loves me and makes me 
feel wanted.
6. I have someone to help with daily chores if I get sick.
7. I have someone to hug me.
8. I have someone to confide in.
9. I have someone to relax with.
10. I have someone to get together with for fun.
11. I have someone to give me good advice about 
my problems.
12. I have someone who understands and appreciates me.
B Scoring: Assign yourself one point for every time you checked Never; two points for every time you 
checked Seldom; three points for every time you checked Sometimes; four points for every time you 
checked Often; and five points for every time you checked Always.
What is your total?
48–60 You enjoy a healthy level of social support.
31–47 You have only a moderate level of social support and may sometimes suffer from loneliness.
12–30 You lack adequate social support and probably suffer from loneliness.
C Describe how often you feel lonely, and what situations bring on the feeling.D Create a list of your social support network. In the first column, write the name of a person whom you 
can always or almost always rely on for support. In the second column, write the name of a person 
whom you can sometimes rely on for support.
I can always rely on: I can sometimes rely on:
E Do you feel that you have emotional and instrumental support whenever you need it? If not, what could 
you do to build your social support network?154 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
childhood experiences, we have the opportunity to create the positive 
self-esteem we wish to have.
Not all successful people grew up feeling good about themselves. 
Often, they had to learn to like themselves through practice. Author 
Daylle Deanna Schwartz, for example, struggled with low self-esteem 
from childhood into her adult life. When she started an independent 
record label, she often met with resistance from her male colleagues, who 
didn’t believe a woman was suited to the competitive environment of the 
music industry. Schwartz had doubts about herself, too. Because of her 
determination to shatter industry stereotypes, however, her label became 
a great success. She began speaking at music industry seminars, and she 
launched another successful career as an author, helping people to boost 
their self-esteem. She learned to like herself by following her dreams and 
overcoming challenges.
SELF-EXPECTANCY AND SELF-ESTEEM
The way you are treated by your family, friends, and acquaintances has a 
large effect on your self-esteem. But the way you are treated by an even 
more important person—yourself—has an even greater effect. The things we 
say to ourselves have an enormous effect on our self-esteem. People with 
low self-esteem tell themselves, “I’m nobody, and I can’t do anything.” 
YOUR SOCIAL NETWORK
The Internet provides unlimited opportunities to con￾nect with people in your community and around the 
world who have similar interests. Whether you’re into 
making sushi, life hacks, researching your ancestry, 
investing in stocks, or dealing with an illness, there are 
message boards, chat rooms, and online forums for 
you to connect with others, ask for and offer advice, 
share ideas and tips, debate issues and topics, learn 
new techniques and skills, or simply share experi￾ences, stories, and friendship.
There are obviously risks to interacting on the 
Internet. It’s easy for a person to portray themself 
as someone else and prey on you emotionally, 
financially, and sexually. You can also be at risk for 
identity theft if you make public your personal 
information. Thus, never post your address, phone 
number, birthdate, birthplace, or other specific 
information.
Popular social networking sites such as Instagram, 
TikTok, Twitter, Facebook, and LinkedIn allow users 
to create and share profiles, which can be accessed by 
select members or by anyone. These sites provide 
opportunities to keep in touch with family and friends 
and connect with people you otherwise may never 
meet. However, more and more employers are using 
these sites to research information on job candidates. 
Thus, never post embarrassing or inappropriate pho￾tos or comments—even to your selected members—
as they may hurt your opportunities down the road.
Think About It
How might participating in an online chat room or forum 
help combat loneliness and build your social network?
To learn more about using the Internet safely to expand 
your social network, go to https://www.technology.pitt.edu/
security/best-practices-safe-social-networking.
internet action
success secret
It’s not what you can’t 
do that holds you back—
it’s what you think you 
can’t do.People with high self-esteem tell themselves, “I am somebody, and I can do 
whatever I put my mind to.”
This self-confidence comes from a sense of self-expectancy. Self￾expectancy is the belief that you are able to achieve what you want in life. 
It is the expectation that you will achieve your goals. Everyone tends to 
receive what he/she/they expects in the long run. You may or may not get 
what you deserve, but you will nearly always get what you expect. Whatever 
you spend the most energy thinking about is what will come to pass, 
whether it is something you fear or something you desire. People with low 
self-esteem expect to fail, be in financial peril, suffer poor health, and have 
troubled relationships; and this is usually what comes true for them. People 
with high self-esteem expect to succeed, have financial security, enjoy good 
health, and have happy relationships; and this is what usually comes true 
for them, too.
This is the power of self-expectancy. If you believe you will be success￾ful at something, you probably will. If you believe you will fail, your mind is 
likely to trick you into failing.
Self-expectancy is not the same thing as skill or ability. Instead, it is 
your belief in what you can do with the skills and abilities you already have. 
In other words, it’s not about what you really can accomplish but what you 
think you can accomplish. Our sense of self-expectancy influences which 
goals we select, how hard we try to reach these goals, and how we cope 
with obstacles along the way. If we believe we can achieve our goals, then 
we will be motivated to persevere in the face of difficulties. If, however, we 
believe that our goals are beyond our reach, we are likely to give up as soon 
as the going gets rough. Use Personal Journal 4.1 to find out if you have a 
healthy sense of self-expectancy.
Building Your Self-Expectancy
Most of us have settled on a level of expectancy much lower than our 
potential and our innermost desires. It’s as if we were waiting for someone 
to come along and confirm that we’re worthy of greater challenges, when, 
in fact, no one can do that except ourselves.
There is a true story that illustrates this point nicely. It was a stormy 
night many years ago when an elderly couple entered the hotel lobby and 
asked for a room. “I’m very sorry,” responded the night clerk. “We are com￾pletely full with a convention group. Normally, I would send you to another 
hotel that we use for our overflow in situations like this, but I couldn’t 
imagine sending you out into the storm again. Why don’t you stay in my 
room?” The young man offered this with a smile. “It may not be a luxury 
suite, but it’s clean. I can finish up some bookkeeping here in the office 
since the night auditor won’t be coming in.”
The distinguished-looking person seemed uncomfortable in inconve￾niencing the clerk, but he graciously accepted his offer. When the gentle￾man arrived to pay the bill in the morning, the clerk was still at his desk 
self-expectancy A 
person’s belief that he/she/
they is able to achieve what 
he/she/they wants in life.156 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
and said, “Oh, I live here full time so there’s no charge for the room.” The 
older man nodded and said, “You’re the kind of person that every hotel 
owner dreams about having as an employee. Maybe someday I’ll build a 
hotel for you.” The hotel clerk was flattered, but the idea sounded so outra￾geous that he was sure the old man was joking.
A few years passed, and the hotel clerk was still at the same job. 
One day he received a registered letter from the elderly man. The letter 
expressed his vivid recollections of that stormy night, along with an 
invitation and a round-trip ticket for the clerk to visit him in New York. 
Arriving a few days later in Manhattan, the clerk met the gentleman at 
the corner of Fifth Avenue and Thirty-Fourth Street, where a magnificent 
new building stood.
“That,” exclaimed the old man, “is the hotel I have built for you to run! 
The clerk was stunned. “What’s the catch? Why me? Who are you anyway?”
“My name is William Waldorf-Astor, and there is no catch. You are 
the person I want.” The hotel was the original Waldorf Astoria and the 
name of the young clerk who accepted the first managerial position was 
George C. Boldt.
Personal Journal 4.1
Examine Your Self-Expectancy
Put a check mark in the box next to the statements with which you agree.
I know I can accomplish my goals.
When something unexpected comes my way, I find resourceful ways to handle it.
I can solve almost any problem if I try hard enough.
Stress and anger aren’t a problem for me because I have good coping skills.
I can handle whatever comes my way.
If someone else can do something, then I can probably do it, too.
If I don’t succeed the first time, I try again.
I am proud of what I can accomplish.
I am capable of success.
The more statements you checked, the higher your self-expectancy. Look back at the long-term goals 
you set for yourself in Chapter 3. How confident are you that you will accomplish these particular goals? 
Explain.There’s a personal message in this true story for each of us. It’s not 
that, if we’re good people, a millionaire is going to come along and make 
all of our dreams come true, although that would be awesome. The message 
is in the form of a question: Why should a benefactor arrive to make us 
believe in our dreams? How is it that an outsider can see more potential in 
us than we can sometimes see in ourselves? By keeping a realistic eye on 
our expectations and where we are in relation to their achievement, we can 
succeed on our own without prompting from anyone else.
Self-expectancy comes from confidence in your ability to succeed and 
reach your goals. One excellent way to build this confidence is to take a 
good look at your past goals and successes. This helps remind you of how 
many skills and achievements you already have.
Are you worried that you don’t have much to be proud of? This is a 
trick of your low self-esteem. If you have low self-esteem, you probably 
find it difficult to recognize your accomplishments. An accomplishment
is anything that you have completed through effort, skill, or persistence. 
An accomplishment doesn’t have to be something that was rewarded with a 
certificate or a trophy. No one else may even know of your biggest accom￾plishments. They may be significant to you alone. For example, learning 
to use a computer, recovering from an illness, going back to school, or 
rebounding from a personal loss are all accomplishments. The point is that 
you put in effort, demonstrated skill, and persisted to complete something 
that was important to you.
Creating Successful Experiences Another excellent way 
to increase your self-expectancy is to set and accomplish a series of increas￾ingly challenging goals. This gives you the feeling that you can do whatever 
you set out to do. As you set your goals, it’s best to focus on a specific area 
where you can obtain measurable results. For example, let’s say you are 
afraid of speaking in front of groups of people. Instead of setting a vague 
goal such as “develop public speaking skills,” you might set a series of 
increasingly challenging SMART goals for yourself, such as:
1. Join in communications class discussion once per week.
2. Join in communications class discussion three times per week.
3. Join in communications class discussion daily.
4. Participate in semester-end group presentation in communications 
class.
5. Give a solo presentation at club meeting next semester.
6. Join the Toastmasters club or the debate team, or give a speech at any 
school meeting.
As you move from goal to goal, your confidence in your abilities will 
increase. Once you build self-expectancy in this one area of your life, you 
can move to another area and then another. Use Activity 20 to take an 
inventory of your accomplishments and set yourself a series of new goals.
accomplishment
Anything completed through 
effort, skill, or persistence.
success secret
To boost your self￾expectancy, work to 
accomplish a series of 
increasingly difficult goals.158 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
ACTIVITY 20: Accomplishment Inventory
A Remember the times in your life, either recently or long ago, during which you felt a sense of satisfaction 
and accomplishment. Perhaps you helped someone, learned a skill, completed a project, or accomplished 
an important goal. Select four accomplishments. Briefly describe each one in a box below and explain 
why it is meaningful to you.
Accomplishment #1 Accomplishment #2
Accomplishment #3 Accomplishment #4
B Now write down the skills (such as developing software applications or creative writing) and personal 
qualities (such as determination or generosity) that these accomplishments demonstrate. If you aren’t 
sure what to write, imagine that someone you like and admire had accomplished the same things you 
did. What skills and personal qualities would you see in that person?
Skills Personal QualitiesC Now focus on the future. What skills would you like to develop over the coming years? For example, would 
you like to learn to play a musical instrument or a sport, design a Web site, speak another language, write 
poetry? List at least five skills you would like to acquire.
How confident are you in your ability to acquire these skills? Explain.
D Pick one of the skills you listed above. Formulate a series of five or six increasingly challenging SMART 
goals that will help you acquire these skills.
Goal #1
Goal #2
Goal #3
Goal #4
Goal #5
Goal #6
E How confident are you that you can achieve the first goal on your list? What about the last goal on the 
list? Explain.160 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
Coping and Avoidance As you build confidence in yourself and 
your skills, you will gain the courage to face tougher and tougher chal￾lenges. One of the biggest of life’s challenges is coping with painful prob￾lems. Coping means facing up to threatening or uncomfortable situations. 
A threatening situation may be a problem in a relationship, a bad habit, a 
difficulty at work or school, or anything else that is unpleasant or painful. 
Any time we cope with something—regardless of the outcome—our self￾esteem rises.
The opposite of coping is avoidance. Avoidance is an unwillingness to 
face uncomfortable situations or psychological realities. Whenever we 
avoid something we need to face, our self-esteem goes down. The longer 
we avoid it, the more damage it does to our self-esteem. Common avoid￾ance behaviors include:
• self-criticism
• making jokes about the situation
• becoming obsessed with work to avoid thinking about the problem
• escaping through activities such as shopping, watching TV, or 
sleeping
• venting unpleasant feelings without taking action
• abusing alcohol or other drugs
Avoidance reduces short-term discomfort, but leaves you with the 
feeling that you are incapable of dealing with the situation. Do you ever feel 
powerless to resolve a difficult situation? Take a look at what you might be 
avoiding in Personal Journal 4.2.
Avoidance not only lowers self-esteem, but also turns small prob￾lems into big ones. Take Maia’s example. Maia was struck by terror 
every time a credit card bill arrived in the mail. She immediately stuffed 
it in a drawer and told herself not to think about it. When bill collectors 
began calling, Maia stopped answering her smartphone and ignored 
her voicemails. The more Maia avoided paying her bills, however, the 
worse she felt about herself. Why was Maia so intent on avoiding this 
problem? As is often the case, it was to avoid a bigger underlying prob￾lem: She didn’t want to face the fact that she was in debt and had out￾of-control spending habits. When she finally found the courage to admit 
there was a problem, her self-esteem went up. This, in turn, gave her 
the confidence to begin coping with the loneliness that motivated her 
spending.
As this example shows, the first step in coping with a problem is to 
admit that it exists. Once you’ve done this, you can work step by step to 
improve the situation and build your self-expectancy.
coping Facing up to 
threatening situations.
avoidance An 
unwillingness to face 
uncomfortable situations 
or psychological realities.
success secret
When you face your 
problems head-on, your 
self-esteem grows.Personal Journal 4.2
Learning to Cope
In the center below, briefly describe one specific, ongoing problem in your life that you often avoid. Close 
your eyes and relive a situation in which you avoided the problem. In the boxes on the left side of the 
diagram, write three adjectives that describe how you feel about yourself. Now close your eyes and 
picture yourself dealing confidently, fearlessly, and expertly with the problem. In the boxes on the right 
side of the diagram, write three adjectives that describe how you feel about yourself now.
Problem
When I avoid When I cope
Compare the two sets of adjectives. Did the feeling of coping with the problem make you feel better 
about yourself? What is one action you could take today to start coping with this problem?
Self Check
1. Why is self-esteem important for success? (pp. 138–139)
2. Define unconditional positive regard. (p. 149)
3. What does avoidance do to self-esteem? (p. 160)162 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
SECTION 4.2 Learning to Like Yourself
SELF-ACCEPTANCE AND SELF-ESTEEM
In the previous section, we looked at the origins of self-esteem and the role 
of self-expectancy in raising or lowering your self-esteem. Now we’ll focus 
on self-acceptance. Self-acceptance means recognizing and accepting what 
is true about yourself. Self-acceptance allows you to stop criticizing yourself 
for falling short of your or other people’s impossible standards. It allows 
you to discover and express who you really are inside. When you enjoy 
self-acceptance, you recognize that you are good enough just the way you 
are. So what if you still have areas you could improve? So what if you some￾times procrastinate or lose your temper or drive too fast? You are still 
worthy of respect, love, and success. That’s why influential psychologist 
Alfred Adler called self-acceptance “the courage to be imperfect.”
You, Flaws and All
Your self-image mirrors your level of self-acceptance. When we have a 
healthy self-image, we see and accept both our strengths and weaknesses. 
When we have an unhealthy self-image, we focus too much on our weak￾nesses and end up rejecting ourselves.
The difference between people who accept themselves and people who 
reject themselves isn’t the number of weaknesses they have, it’s the way 
they look at them. People with a positive self-image realize that they have 
many more strengths than weaknesses. They accept the weaknesses they 
do have but choose not to be bothered by them. They know that they are a 
unique gift of creation, with skills and personal qualities in a combination 
that no one else has.
How healthy is your self-image? Look back at your responses to Personal 
Journal 1.3. (If you haven’t completed this activity, now would be a good 
time to do so.) Did you give yourself mostly positive ratings or mostly nega￾tive ones? If you assigned yourself a five or less in three or more areas, you 
may have a negative self-image and low self-esteem. Also look at how wide 
a range of numbers you assigned yourself. Were you clear on your strengths 
and weaknesses, or did you circle a wide range of numbers? If you selected a 
wide range, you may need to work on your self-awareness.
How you feel about your “flaws” also has an impact on your self-esteem. 
If you feel shame or guilt about your weaknesses—even if you are proud of 
your strengths in other areas—your self-esteem will suffer. Take Devin’s 
example. Devin knows he is an excellent student and worker and that he 
is popular with his classmates. However, he is ashamed about being over￾weight. This sense of shame poisons his entire self-image. When he thinks 
about himself, he can focus only on being overweight. To him, his successes 
seem insignificant by comparison.
self-acceptance
Recognition and acceptance 
of what is true about oneself.
success secret
Your skills and personal 
qualities are unlike 
anyone else’s.Ashleigh has a similar problem. She is confident about her appear￾ance, athletic ability, and social skills but has nagging doubts about her 
intelligence. In fact, she often feels downright stupid. She lets her self￾acceptance be weakened even more by one low performance on the ACT 
standardized test and by a comment from a family member saying she’s 
“not using her brain.”
Devin and Ashleigh are having difficulty separating their feelings from 
reality. Because they feel inadequate, they assume that everyone else must 
see them that way, too.
Mending a Negative Self-Image
If you have a negative self-image, how do you change it? First, you need to 
accept that it is distorted. This isn’t always easy. Once our self-image is 
implanted in our brains, we see it as being completely true. We don’t ask 
ourselves whether it is false. Unfortunately, if you have a negative self-image, 
the truth you feel about yourself could be a figment of your imagination. 
You see yourself as far less worthy than you really are. You may also 
believe that other people see you the same way as you do. In reality, though, 
no one is as cruel to you as you are to yourself.
If a negative self-image is holding you back, it’s time to take a new 
look at yourself—objectively—and reassess your strengths and weaknesses. 
Having an accurate view of your strengths helps you set challenging goals, 
overcome obstacles, and take advantage of opportunities. Knowing your 
weaknesses helps you see that they aren’t as bad as you thought. Look at 
them objectively: Are you really “ugly,” or do you have a nose that you wish 
was a little smaller? Are you really a “slacker,” or do you just dislike doing 
housework?
success secret
For self-acceptance, you 
need an accurate view 
of your strengths and 
weaknesses.
professional development )))
Positive Image at Work/First Impressions Matter
As the popular adage says, “You never get a second chance to make a first impression.” First impressions 
are extremely important to job and career success. Your appearance, attire, grooming, and behavior impact 
how others perceive you. Every company has its own standards and policies for what is expected or consid￾ered acceptable in its employees. Studies show that job applicants who dress professionally and are well 
groomed are hired more often and perceived to be more competent.
Make sure you project a positive and professional self-image in your work environment, especially if you 
want to advance in your company and career. It’s not about wearing “designer” clothing, it’s about looking 
your best. Some companies offer mentoring programs, where “image-coaching” could be a valuable compo￾nent. Seek out a mentor, colleague, peer, or someone you trust who can provide you with honest feedback 
and suggestions on how you can improve your professional image.
To learn more about the importance of first impressions and professional image, go to the following:
www.theundercoverrecruiter.com/power-first-impressions/164 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
Another benefit to knowing your weaknesses is that it helps you to pick 
activities and situations where your weaknesses won’t be a problem. If you 
know you aren’t particularly good at math, for example, you might decide to 
major in a field where this won’t hold you back. If you are a night person who 
can’t seem to make it to morning classes on time, you can choose classes 
that meet later in the day. When you know your weaknesses, you can find 
creative ways to work around them or allow you more time to improve your 
weaknesses.
Take a Personal Inventory Get to know your strengths—and 
weaknesses—by creating a personal inventory. A personal inventory is a list of 
your plusses and minuses in the key areas of your life, such as appearance, 
intimate relationships, social skills, school performance, work performance, 
and thinking skills. By putting all your strengths and weaknesses down on 
paper, you can get a better view of your strengths, as well as a more accurate 
and compassionate view of your flaws. Use Activity 21 to create your own 
personal inventory. After completing the inventory, you should have a much 
fairer and more accurate assessment of yourself. Keep your self-inventory with 
you and go over it every day for a month, or more often if you’re feeling low. 
Sometimes reading it out loud can increase its effectiveness. It is sometimes 
difficult to overcome patterns of negative self-thought, but using this new 
inventory will help you teach your mind to accept your flaws, affirm your 
positive qualities, and move on.
Accepting Your Physical Self How did you describe your 
physical appearance in the last exercise? If you’re like most people, you were 
extremely critical of many of your physical features. Unfortunately, it’s almost 
impossible to have high self-esteem when we feel physically unattractive. In 
fact, studies have shown that how we feel about our physical appearance is the 
number-one indicator of our overall self-esteem. This is not surprising because 
most of us are constantly bombarded with social media feeds portraying physi￾cally “perfect” bodies. Trying to live up to these unrealistic images can lead 
to problems with body image, how you think and feel about your body and 
appearance. People with a poor body image see their bodies in distorted ways. 
Although they look just fine to others, they become convinced that they are 
unattractive.
Studies have shown how important appearance is in life. When people 
are well groomed and dressed in clean clothes, they are treated better by their 
classmates and teachers. They feel attractive and therefore project a better 
image. Like it or not, we leave a lasting impression with our appearance.
Obviously, we cannot choose what looks we inherit from our parents. 
We can, however, choose how we take care of our health and appearance. We 
behave according to the way we think we look rather than the way we actually 
look. If we think we look good, others are more likely to think the same. 
People who accept themselves are attractive to others. Their healthy self￾esteem comes through from the inside out.
body image How a 
person thinks and feels 
about his or her body and 
appearance.ACTIVITY 21: Personal Inventory
A In each box below, write down what you see as your good points and bad points in that area of your life. 
Include both things you like and don’t like about how you look, act, think, or feel. Examples are provided.
Appearance Romantic Relationships/Sexuality Social Skills/Popularity
“I look good in black.” 
“My nose is too big.”
“I have a great partner who 
respects my opinion.” 
“I talk too much about my ex.”
“I’m always asked first to head 
committees.” 
“I never know what to say when I 
meet someone new.”
Thinking Skills/Intelligence School Work
“Every day I create a to-do list and 
stick to it.” 
“I can never seem to balance my 
budget.”
“My history professor thinks I ask 
good questions.” 
“I can never read my notes.”
“I’m often asked to train new 
employees.” 
“I’m always five minutes late to 
work.”
continued . . .166 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
B Look over what you wrote about yourself, circling all the negative items. Rewrite each negative item 
according to the following rules:
• Be objective. Remove all negative, critical language. An entry like “ugly feet” could be 
changed to “larger feet than I would like.”
• Be accurate. Don’t exaggerate—stick to the facts. Instead of writing “terrible student,” you 
might write “2.3 GPA.”
• Be specific. Avoid extreme words like “always,” “never,” “totally.” An entry like “always 
late to everything” might be changed to “often late to morning appointments.”
• Look for strengths. Look for strengths that make up for your areas of weakness. An entry 
like “forgetful” might be changed to “often forgetful, although I have a great memory for 
faces.”
Use the boxes below to rewrite your negatives according to these guidelines.
Appearance Romantic Relationships/Sexuality Social Skills/Popularity
Thinking Skills/Intelligence School WorkC Now use your positives and rewritten negatives to write a letter or e-mail introducing and describing 
yourself to a person you have never met. You cannot enclose or attach a photograph, so you will have 
to use words to paint a picture of yourself, both physically and mentally. Write an honest description of 
yourself, but stress your strengths and be as realistic and specific as possible about your weaknesses.
Dear ,
Sincerely,168 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
Regardless of your gender, accepting yourself means seeing advertising 
images for what they are: a select few people paid to be photographed 
under the best possible conditions. Instead of being your body’s enemy, 
learn to think of yourself as its supporter. Appreciate not only how your 
body looks but also what it can do. Remind yourself that you are not just 
a body but a whole person—a spirit, soul, and mind contained in a physical 
body. Ask yourself how you want to spend your energy—pursuing the 
perfect body or enjoying family, friends, school, work, and life?
You’re Okay The better we can accept our human imperfections, the 
more we will accept and value ourselves. But what about self-improvement? 
Shouldn’t we look for ways to fix our weaknesses? Only within reason. It’s 
great to want to improve yourself, to be that special person you want to be. 
The real key to self-esteem, though, is to like and value yourself as you are 
now. You are valuable for who you are—not for what you have, how you 
look, or what you do. You can’t change your genetics or go back in time 
and grow up in a different environment. Why beat yourself up about things 
you can’t change? Accept yourself as you are at this moment with whatever 
weaknesses you have. Remember that the perfect human being has not yet 
been discovered. Accept and celebrate yourself as you are, flaws and all.
Kick the Comparing Habit
Another way to foster self-acceptance is to become aware of the way you com￾pare yourself to other people. Many of us are addicted to social comparison,
comparing our traits and accomplishments with those of other people.
success secret
Think of yourself as your 
body’s friend, not its 
enemy.
Applying Psychology
Culture and Body Image
We see beautiful people on social media, magazine covers, commercials, and bill￾boards. They are living the good life, but is this imagery realistic? In North America, 
models are much taller and thinner than the average person. The average female 
model, for example, stands 5′10″ and weighs 110 pounds, while the average woman 
is 5′4″ and weighs 140 pounds. What about in other cultures? Tall and thin may be 
the ideal in the West, but most non-Western cultures have different ideas about 
beauty. Many traditional Asian-Pacific and African cultures, for example, equate a 
rounded physique with beauty. Today, however, this is changing. With greater expo￾sure to Western media, more and more people in cultures across the world are dieting, falling victim to eating 
disorders, and striving to live up to an almost impossible ideal of beauty. Body image problems have a large 
impact on self-esteem, particularly among women. In one study, women who spent only three minutes looking 
at models in a fashion magazine felt depressed, guilty, and ashamed of their own bodies.
Critical Thinking How do you feel when you see media images portraying “perfect” people?
Lars A. Niki
social comparison
The practice of comparing 
one’s traits and 
accomplishments with 
those of others.There are two types of social comparison: downward comparison and 
upward comparison. When we use downward comparison, we compare 
ourselves to people “below” us, such as fellow students who are earning 
lower grades or coworkers who have received fewer promotions. When 
we use upward comparison, we compare ourselves to people “above” us, 
such as students who are earning higher grades or coworkers who have 
been promoted above us. People who suffer from low self-esteem often 
use downward comparison to try to make themselves feel better. They 
tell themselves, “See, I’m not doing so badly. Look at him.” Unfortu￾nately, downward comparison makes us feel better only for a short time. 
Self-esteem comes from inside, not from knowing that someone else is 
struggling.
People with low self-esteem sometimes use upward comparison to make 
themselves feel worse—to reinforce their negative ideas about themselves. 
If we look at someone who is at the top of our field, for example, we might 
tell ourselves that we are unsuccessful and our accomplishments are insig￾nificant. “Look how well she’s doing! I’ll never reach that level.” This is 
equally unhealthy because it means measuring your progress according to 
someone else’s standards.
Everyone is interested in how they measure up to others, and everyone 
uses social comparison from time to time. Comparing ourselves to others 
too often, however, can damage our self-esteem. Do you use social compari￾son to evaluate yourself?
A Distorted View of Oneself
Do you ever feel that you are not as good as others think you are? Or that 
you’re not worthy or deserving of the positive feedback or accolades that 
others give you? If so, you may be showing signs of what is known as the 
“Imposter Syndrome” which can impact nearly eighty-two percent of indi￾viduals at some point their lives. It is the internal experience of believing 
that you are not as competent as others perceive you to be. With this mind￾set, individuals are convinced that they are frauds, and have somehow 
deceived others into thinking highly of themselves. Even when external 
results and achievements are positive and prove to be successful, these 
people do not believe it, and can feel a persistent fear and anxiety of being 
“found out.”
Research shows that this form of low self-esteem can lead to self￾sabotaging behaviors that keep you from achieving both your full potential, 
both personally and professionally. For example, a recent study revealed 
that for people with the Imposter Syndrome, fifty-six percent won’t speak 
up with ideas or will keep quiet when they have the answers; thirty-five 
percent won’t go for a promotion or an award; thirty-one percent don’t 
complete important projects despite clear objectives and positive 
reinforcement; fifty percent don’t take credit for their success; and 
sixty-two percent get stuck in a cycles of negative thinking; and between 
success secret
Measure your progress 
according to your goals, 
not someone else’s.170 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
fifty-four- and sixty-two percent of people feeling like Imposters imposters 
can find themselves caught up in continual patterns of people-pleasing, 
procrastination, perfectionism, and paralysis in their work lives.
There are a number of underlying factors that contribute to the low 
self-esteem found in the imposter syndrome, many stemming from our 
childhood and early conditioning. In order to overcome it, we must first 
recognize it as a “universal experience,” and found more often in high￾achievers. It is imperative that we explore and reframe our negative thought 
patterns and limiting beliefs, and work toward developing a healthy self￾esteem, specifically our self-worth, as we describe in depth throughout this 
chapter.
Real or Ideal?
Comparing ourselves to other people and to media images can take a huge 
toll on our self-esteem. Comparing ourselves to our ideals can do the same 
thing. Each of us has an ideal self, a vision or idea of the kind of person 
we want or ought to be. Your ideal self is you without flaws—the perfect 
you. Everyone’s ideal self, of course, is a fantasy. Mitch, a struggling actor, 
dreams of hitting it big in Hollywood. His ideal self is an Oscar-winning 
movie star who pulls in $20 million per film. Diane, a college student, 
dreams of winning the Nobel Prize in chemistry.
All of us have fantasies about our perfect lives and our perfect selves. The 
difference between our real and our ideal selves motivates us to keep improv￾ing ourselves. If our real and ideal selves are very different, however, it can 
erode our self-esteem, as shown in Figure 4.2. We may start to feel guilty or 
ashamed about who we are because we aren’t who we think we ought to be.
Possible Selves Instead of focusing on a fantasy about an ideal that 
no one can ever attain, it’s healthier to think about what you really want to 
be and achieve. Think about your possible selves, the person(s) you think 
you might realistically become in the future.
ideal self The person 
one wants to be or feels he/
she/they ought to be.
FIGURE 4.2 You and Your Ideal
Striving for Perfection The further away our ideal self is from our real self, the more our self-esteem suffers. 
How can you control the gap between your real and ideal self?
Real Self
Low Self-Esteem High Self-Esteem
Ideal Self Real Self Ideal Self
possible selves The 
person or persons we might 
realistically become in the 
future.Our possible selves help guide our behavior by giving us positive images 
to inspire us. Mitch, the struggling actor, sees himself becoming a well￾respected stage actor in local productions, or perhaps a character actor in 
films. These visions of himself aren’t as glamorous as his dream of being a 
movie star, but it helps him to set specific goals. Diane, the college student, 
sees herself becoming a researcher at a pharmaceutical company. Instead 
of worrying about winning the Nobel Prize, she focuses on what she can do 
every day to get one step closer to her realistic goal.
To transform your ideal self into one or more possible selves, consider 
how many aspects of your ideal self are important to you. You might fantasize 
about being rich, for example, but do you need to be rich to be happy? Are 
you willing to put in the time and effort to make it happen? Do you really 
want this for yourself, or is this someone else’s dream (society’s, perhaps, 
or your parents’ or friends’)? Instead of wishing you had great riches, focus 
on working toward an attainable goal, such as achieving financial security.
Use Personal Journal 4.3 to consider your ideal self and your possible 
selves. Then make a resolution: You will never criticize yourself for not 
having something that you don’t really want anyway.
success secret
Remember the difference 
between fantasy and 
reality.
Personal Journal 4.3
Your Ideal Self
In the box below, write down how you would like to look, act, and feel and what you would like to be, 
achieve, and own in an ideal world. Don’t edit yourself—write everything that comes to mind when you 
think of the perfect you.
The perfect me
Now cross out every item that represents either an unrealistic fantasy or something that you don’t truly 
want or need. The remaining items make up your possible selves—the different selves that you can 
choose to become in the future.172 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
USING POSITIVE SELF-TALK
So far, so good: You’ve taken a close look at yourself and made a commit￾ment to accept yourself. This conscious commitment is important, but it’s 
not the end of the journey. You now need to convince your subconscious 
mind that you are valuable and worthwhile.
You are constantly talking—either to others or to yourself. What you say 
to yourself about yourself, silently or out loud, is known as self-talk. When 
you have negative thoughts and feelings about yourself, they often come 
across in the form of negative self-talk. You may use negative self-talk and 
not even realize it.
You can hurt your self-esteem with negative self-talk, but you can build 
your self-esteem with positive self-talk—giving yourself praise and encour￾agement. By changing the way you talk to yourself, you can change the way 
you feel about yourself, too.
Words have a powerful effect on our bodies as well as our minds. 
Thoughts can raise and lower body temperature, relax muscles and nerves, 
raise and lower pulse rate, and more. Self-talk is so powerful because it 
works on our subconscious mind, the part of our mind that stores many of 
the experiences, feelings, and thoughts that control our behavior. Many 
of the thoughts and attitudes that damage our self-esteem are subconscious 
ones. Positive self-talk works by turning these negative thoughts and atti￾tudes into more positive ones.
Negative Self-Talk: Your Inner Critic
Unfortunately, many of us spend time telling ourselves negative things: 
“I’m a loser.” “I’m so lazy.” “I blew it again.” “I can’t do math.” The critical 
voice that bombards you with constant negative self-talk is known as your 
inner critic. This inner critic might speak in your own voice or in the voice 
of someone from your past, such as a critical parent, sibling, peer, or 
teacher. To develop self-esteem, you must drown out your inner critic with 
positive self-talk. This means telling yourself over and over again that you 
are a worthwhile, valuable person.
Origin of the Critic When we were growing up, many of us were 
made to feel bad about ourselves through repeated criticism. This early crit￾icism has an extremely damaging effect. When children are given negative 
messages, they may conclude that they are fundamentally bad, or lazy, or 
ugly, or incompetent. This is especially common when parents send the 
message that the child, rather than the child’s behavior, is bad. Often, a 
parent accompanies scolding with the withdrawal of love or attention. 
This sends the message, “I don’t love you because you don’t deserve it.”
When we grow up, these internalized messages become the voice of 
our inner critic. When we berate ourselves for making a mistake, messages 
come sailing at us from the past: “I’m a screw-up. I can’t handle anything.” 
This self-critical voice can devastate our self-esteem.
self-talk What people say 
or think to themselves about 
themselves.
inner critic The critical 
voice that bombards people 
with constant negative 
self-talk.Role of the Critic Why do we allow ourselves to have these 
thoughts, even if we know they’re not in our best interest? Ironically, we 
use our inner critic to protect us against the fear of rejection and failure. By 
telling ourselves that we are failures before anyone else has a chance to do 
the same, we feel that we are prepared for any attacks that may come. We 
may even use the critic to protect us from taking any action at all. By telling 
ourselves that we will fail, we have a handy excuse for not trying.
We also use the inner critic as a kind of psychological safeguard against 
uncertainty. When things go wrong, we feel an instinctive need for comfort 
and security. People with high self-esteem respond to that need by coping 
with problems directly, by finding solutions instead of worrying. They 
achieve a feeling of security by getting rid of the thing that is threatening it. 
As we saw, however, people with low self-esteem don’t feel confident in 
their ability to cope. Instead, they rely on the inner critic. The critical self￾talk originated from our parents, with whom we once associated the same 
comfort and security.
Labels Labels are a particularly damaging form of self-talk. A label is a 
simplistic statement that we use to define who we are. As we are growing 
up, other people may give us labels such as “pretty” or “ugly,” “smart” or 
“dumb,” “popular” or “unpopular.” These labels, formed early, often stay 
with us. The problem with labels is that they can be very limiting, and 
often are not even true. Labels tend to be negative. Yet people become so 
attached to the labels they have given themselves (or other people) that 
they can’t let go of them. If you can’t let go of labels, you can’t begin to 
improve your self-esteem.
We undermine our own self-esteem by labeling ourselves and by accept￾ing the labels that other people give to us. How often have you heard yourself 
or others say things like the following:
• “I look terrible no matter what I do.”
• “I’m a lousy cook; I can’t even boil an egg.”
• “I can’t dance.”
• “I am so uncoordinated.”
• “I have no sense of humor.”
• “I have a terrible memory.”
• “I’m never on time.”
• “I have bad luck.”
• “I have no sense of style.”
The more times we tell ourselves these negative things, the worse we 
feel about ourselves. Complete Activity 22 to monitor your negative self-talk 
and convert your negative self-statements into positive ones.
Stop Those Thoughts! Try to catch yourself whenever you engage 
in negative self-talk. Get in the habit of stopping your thoughts whenever 
you hear yourself thinking negatively. You can even tell your inner critic, 
label A simplistic 
statement that people use 
to define who they are.
success secret
Your inner critic hurts your 
self-esteem by repeating 
negative messages from 
your past.174 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
ACTIVITY 22: Negative Self-Talk Log
A Monitor your self-talk throughout the course of an entire day. Try to catch at least ten negative self￾statements. Each time you hear yourself thinking something negative about yourself, note the following:
1. Time of day
2. Statement you made to yourself
3. How much of the statement was true, and how much was false
1. Time 2. Self-Statement 3. True or False
Example 
6:45 AM
“I’m late again as usual. 
Why am I so lazy?”
“I sometimes leave late for work, 
but this doesn’t mean I’m lazy.”
B Do you see a pattern to any of your negative self-talk? For example, did you criticize yourself repeatedly 
in one area, such as your appearance or intelligence? Explain.C Pick out the three most painful and damaging self-statements you recorded in your log. Analyze their 
origins. Did you receive repeated criticism in this area in the past? When? Explain.
Negative Self-Statement:
Possible Origin:
Negative Self-Statement:
Possible Origin:
Negative Self-Statement:
Possible Origin:
D Now turn each of these negative self-statements into an affirmation. (See page 178 for guidelines.)
Affirmation:
Affirmation:
Affirmation:176 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
“stop!” or “be quiet!” Some people see a specific image in their minds, such 
as a big red stop sign. Pause and really think about your attitude toward 
yourself. Are you beating up on yourself? Are you dwelling on the past? Are 
you blaming yourself for things that aren’t your fault?
You may not be able to control everything that happens to you, but you 
can control the words you say to yourself. Changing negative self-talk isn’t 
easy—it takes a conscious effort, applied over days, weeks, and even years. 
It takes discipline and dedication to boost your self-esteem from the inside 
out, but it’s worth it.
Controlling Your Internal Conversations
We’re all talking to ourselves every moment of our lives, except during 
certain portions of our sleeping cycle. It comes automatically. We’re 
seldom even aware that we’re doing it. We all have a running commentary 
going on in our heads on events and our reactions to them. Because most 
of the negative kinds of feelings, beliefs, and attitudes we have about our￾selves are stored, through habitual repetition, we need to start relaxing 
and using self-talk that is constructive and complimentary, instead of 
destructive and derogatory.
Current neurological and psychological research confirms the incred￾ible ability of the mind to drive the body to achieve the individual’s imme￾diate dominant thought by instructing the body to carry out the vivid 
images of performance as if they had been achieved before and are merely 
being repeated. With pre-play simulation (or feedforward), you can 
engrave in your mind the verbal, visual, and emotional conditions associ￾ated with high performance, good health, and long life. This process 
greatly influences your daily habit patterns and acts as a steering program 
toward your goals. With replay simulation (or feedback), you can replay your 
successes during quiet times or off days to reinforce your self-confidence in 
stressful times. The feedback also allows you to enter new, positive, correc￾tive data into your thoughts so that you can reset your aim on goals that 
were previously missed.
It’s interesting to observe that children don’t learn how to pre-play 
failure until their parents, peers, and other role models repeatedly show 
them how. And, also, it’s sad to see children and adults who have been 
taught to dwell on past mistakes instead of using them as learning experi￾ences to reinforce their blessings and accomplishments.
When your mind talks, your body listens and acts accordingly. Research 
has shown that our thoughts can raise and lower body temperature, secrete 
hormones, relax muscles and nerve endings, dilate and constrict arteries, 
and raise and lower pulse rate. With this evidence, it is obvious that we need 
to control the language we use on ourselves. Consistently successful individ￾uals rarely put themselves down in words before or after a performance: 
they use positive feedforward self-talk and positive feedback self-talk as part 
of their training programs until it becomes a force of habit.
success secret
Learn to stop the inner 
critic in its tracks.Successful people say “I can. . . . I will. . . . Next time I’ll get it right. . . . 
I’m feeling better. . . . I’m ready. . . . Thank you.” Unsuccessful people fall 
into the trap of saying: “I can’t. . . . I’m a klutz. . . . I can’t stay in shape. . . . 
I wish. . . . If only. . . . I should have. . . . Yeah, but . . .”
You are your most important critic. There is no opinion as vitally 
important to your success, fitness, and well-being as the opinion you have 
of yourself. The most important meetings, briefings, coaching sessions, and 
conversations you’ll ever have are the conversations you will have with 
yourself. As you read this you’re talking to yourself: “Let’s see if I under￾stand what they mean by that. . . . How does that compare with my own 
experiences. . . . I already knew that. . . . I think I’ll try that.”
We believe that this self-talk, this psycholinguistics or language of the 
mind, is critical to our success and can be controlled to work for us in 
achieving our goals of health, performance, and longevity. World-class 
athletes call this technique the “self-statement” or “image of achieve￾ment.” Psychologists and psychiatrists call it cognitive reconstruction, or 
the practice of reframing by internalizing positive thoughts and desired 
outcomes.
Andre Agassi, former World #1 tennis player and eight-time Grand 
Slam champion has related how mental practice before a match has helped 
him throughout his career. Tennis is one of the most solitary of all sports. 
The player is alone in his/her/their head, without the benefit of a coach, 
caddie, or corner man, for an average of three and a half hours. Agassi 
reports to using a twenty-two-minute afternoon shower to work on his self￾talk, saying things to himself, over and over, until he believes them. He 
says, “I’ve won 869 matches in my career, 5th on the all-time list and many 
of them were won during the afternoon shower!”
There are three basic types of self-statements:
1. General self-talk. These are affirmative statements that can be used 
at any time and place for a feeling of general well-being. Examples: 
“I like myself.” “I’m glad I’m me.” “I’m relaxing now. I am at peace.” 
“I’m in control of my body.” “I feel that my body is more healthy 
now.” “I give the best of me in everything.” “I am strong and full of 
energy.” “I respect and appreciate myself.” “I’m a winner.”
2. Specific self-talk. These statements are used to project and reframe, as 
well as reaffirm, our specific skills, goals, and attributes. Examples: 
“I am a team player.” “I create value in everything I do.” For some, it 
could be: “I weigh 125 pounds and feel trim in my bathing suit.” For 
others, it might be. “I feel healthy at my best weight of 175.” “I drink a 
glass of water with every meal.” “I arrive for appointments on time.” 
“I am calm and confident when I take an exam.” “I appreciate others’ 
opinions.” “I eat fish or poultry to get my lean protein.” “I speak with 
authority in front of a group.”
3. Process self-talk. These are one-word or two-word self-statements that 
can be used as “trigger” ideas at mealtime, during an exercise workout, 178 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
or during the performance of professional, sporting, or other demand￾ing skills. Examples: “Concentrate.” “Focus.” “Backhand follow￾through.” “Easy.” “Push-off.” “Relax.” “Let’s go.”
Your self-talk before a performance will pre-play a positive self-image 
about specific activities in your life. Your performance will improve 
because of your elevated self-image, and sometimes your performance 
will exceed your expectations. Your feedback self-talk will say “Good 
for me, now we’re getting somewhere.” On occasion your performance 
will fall short of your expectations. Your feedback self-talk will say 
“Next time we’ll do better. Let’s make a target correction to help get 
it right.”
One of the secrets of success is that our responses to our performances—
in words, images, and feelings—are just as important as our self-images or 
simulations of ourselves before we ever attempt to perform in the first 
place. The vicious cycle is created by negative anticipation, and a negative 
response to what happens in your daily life. The victor’s circle is created by 
positive anticipation to what is going to happen in your daily life, and a 
positive reaction no matter what happens. It’s not what happens that means 
the most. It is how you take it and what you make of it, so that next time it 
will be better.
Using Affirmations
Affirmations are positive self-statements that help you think of yourself in 
a positive, caring, and accepting way. Affirmations are a powerful tool for 
rejecting the labels we have accepted for ourselves and replacing them with 
new visions of ourselves as competent and worthy.
One way to write affirmations is to take your negative self-statements 
and turn them into positive ones. Instead of telling yourself, “I’m always 
late,” say, “I am becoming more and more organized and punctual” or 
“I have the power to be on time.” Instead of saying, “I’m fat,” say, “I am 
attractive and healthy” or “I have a strong, fit body.”
Another way to write affirmations is to portray yourself as the success￾ful person you want to be. Use language that is as specific and positive as 
possible.
• “I am a self-confident, compassionate person.”
• “I can do whatever I set out to do.”
• “I am a courageous, gentle, lovable person.”
• “I am focused and persistent.”
• “I am an attractive, loving person.”
• “I am an intelligent and powerful person capable of attaining all of 
my goals.”
• “I always do the best I can.”
• “I am honest with myself and others.”
• “I am a helpful, caring individual.”
affirmation A positive 
self-statement that helps a 
person think of a person 
think of in a positive, caring, 
and accepting way.• “I create a positive environment for myself and those around me.”
• “My vision of my future is clear and focused.”
• “I have the strength to handle any situation.”
It might take a while for you to become comfortable using affirmations. 
The more you repeat them to yourself, however, the more these positive 
statements will feel right. You’ll replace the habit of negative self-talk with a 
new habit of positive self-talk.
Focus on the Positive When learning to use positive self-talk, 
remember that the subconscious mind doesn’t react well to being told not
to think or do something. We have all seen how a child, when told not to 
do something, suddenly develops an overwhelming urge to do it. Follow 
this same logic with your self-talk. Instead of saying, “I don’t feel tired,” 
say, “I feel rested and awake.” Instead of saying, “I shouldn’t use the car 
to travel short distances,” tell yourself, “I will walk and ride my bike more.” 
Make sure to focus on what you will do, not on what you won’t do.
Concentrate on one good thought at a time. Instead of saying, “I can’t” 
or “I wish,” say:
• “I can.”
• “Next time I’ll get it right.”
• “I have to take risks to get rewards.”
• “I can learn from this mistake.”
• “I will remain positive about this.”
• “I look forward to . . .”
• “I’m feeling better about . . .”
• “Things will get better when I . . .”
These positive self-statements help us develop the coping skills we need to 
persevere and feel good about ourselves.
CRITICISM AND SELF-ESTEEM
All of us receive criticism from ourselves in the form of negative self-talk. 
From time to time, we receive criticism from others as well. Criticism is any 
remark that contains a judgment, evaluation, or statement of fault. People 
with low self-esteem are particularly vulnerable to criticism, especially when 
this criticism echoes the attacks of their inner critic.
For healthy self-esteem, we all need the love, support, and assistance of 
others. Encouragement from friends and family, instructors, coworkers, and 
fellow students can help to strengthen our self-esteem; but how do we con￾tinue to accept ourselves if we are criticized instead of loved and supported? 
We need to learn to ignore opinions that might hurt our self-esteem. For 
example, if your classmate makes a critical comment about your low test 
grade, does that make you a poor student? No! You are still the same hard￾working student you were when you walked into the room. People’s opin￾ions don’t change who you are. No matter what you do or say, or don’t do 
criticism Any remark 
that contains a judgment, 
evaluation, or statement 
of fault.
success secret
Turn your negative 
self-statements into 
positive affirmations.180 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
or don’t say, you will receive criticism at some point. Learn to respond to 
criticism effectively without allowing it to damage your self-esteem.
The key to handling criticism well is to realize that everyone sees a 
situation in his/her/their own unique way. Therefore, just because someone 
criticizes your appearance or driving or work habits doesn’t mean that 
there is anything wrong with them. It’s possible that you are dealing with a 
simple difference of opinion. It’s also possible that your critic is motivated 
by personal difficulties. Perhaps he is having trouble accepting his own 
appearance. Maybe she is struggling with the very work habits for which 
she is criticizing you. Then again, perhaps your critic is simply in a bad 
mood and snapping at the first person to come by. Whatever the case, 
simply note that something other than you is motivating the person to be 
critical. This allows you to handle the situation more objectively, without 
letting it threaten your self-esteem. Once you take your self-esteem out of the 
equation, you are more open to receiving or rejecting a critic’s message.
Destructive and Constructive Criticism
Not all criticism is created equal. Some criticism is constructive, designed 
to help us improve ourselves. Other criticism is destructive and can cripple 
our self-esteem.
What is the difference between the two kinds of criticism? Destructive 
criticism is often general, addressing your attitude or some aspect of your￾self rather than focusing on specific behavior. It is also usually entirely 
negative, without any helpful suggestion about how to do things differently. 
Consider these examples:
• “The writing in this report is garbage.”
• “You’re totally out of shape.”
• “That color doesn’t suit you at all.”
• “You really screwed up on this project.”
• “Your academic performance this term has been a real disappointment.”
Constructive criticism, by contrast, addresses specific behavior and does 
not attack you as a person. It also usually makes mention of your positive 
points and offers helpful suggestions for improvement. Compare these 
constructive criticisms with the destructive ones above:
• “You did a great job researching this report. I think it would be even 
better if you used a more concise writing style.”
• “I’m concerned about your health. What if we went speed-walking 
together a few times a week?”
• “That shirt fits well. I bet a gray one would look even better.”
• “Let’s talk about what we can do to make the next project work for 
both of us.”
• “Let’s think about how you can improve your grades next semester.”
Which criticisms would you rather receive? Destructive criticism is 
delivered without empathy or compassion. It assumes that the person has 
success secret
Criticism often stems from 
a simple difference of 
opinion.
success secret
Constructive criticism 
helps you improve 
yourself.done something wrong. Constructive criticism conveys caring and concern. 
It not only offers suggestions but also shows a willingness to help out with 
fixing the problem.
Handling Constructive Criticism
There are three major steps to handling positive, helpful criticism. First, 
listen carefully. Make sure you understand exactly what is being said. If you 
don’t, ask. It isn’t easy to listen openly to criticism—even constructive criti￾cism. However, it gets easier with practice. Second, restate the criticism. By 
summarizing the critic’s message, you show that you are interested and not 
on the defensive. Third and finally, if the critic hasn’t provided a suggestion, 
ask for suggestions on how to improve. Make a note of this information 
so you can use it to improve yourself. The three basic steps in handling 
constructive criticism are summarized in Figure 4.3.
Handling Destructive Criticism
Handling destructive criticism is more difficult. Destructive criticism can 
make us feel hurt, attacked, and defensive. There are many different ways 
of reacting to destructive criticism. Some are highly ineffective, however, 
because they invite further criticism. These faulty reaction styles are:
• Aggressive style—Aggressive reactors directly confront the critic, often 
with angry attacks similar to the ones they received.
Critic: “You painted that? It looks like a three-year-old did it.”
You: “You just can’t keep your mouth shut, can you?”
success secret
Listen to constructive 
criticism, restate it, and 
then ask for suggestions.
FIGURE 4.3 Responding to Constructive Criticism
To Your Advantage Constructive criticism is a source of valuable informa￾tion. Asking for suggestions helps you find creative solutions to the problem 
behind the criticism. If you were a manager, would you feel comfortable 
giving your employees constructive criticism? Why or why not?
Constructive Criticism
Listen carefully.
Check for understanding. 
Restate the criticism.
Ask for suggestions. 182 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
• Passive style—A passive reactor acknowledges that the criticism is true, 
then apologizes. Although this usually prevents further criticism, reacting 
passively is very damaging to your self-esteem.
Critic: “You did a terrible job on this report.”
You: “You’re right. I’m sorry I let you down.”
• Passive-aggressive style—This style combines the worst of both the pas￾sive and the aggressive styles. Passive aggressors pretend to acknowledge 
the criticism, but later consciously or unconsciously get even with the 
critic somehow.
Critic: “You look like you’ve put on weight.”
You: “I know. You’re probably embarrassed to be seen in public with 
me.” (“Accidentally” spills coffee on critic’s shirt.)
These response styles generate negative feelings and give the critic even 
more to criticize. A better way to handle destructive criticism is to acknowl￾edge it and then put a stop to it in a rational, mature way. First, find some￾thing to acknowledge in the criticism, either a fact or a feeling that is 
motivating the critic. Second, assert yourself by correcting the part of the 
criticism that you believe to be mistaken, unfair, or insulting. Figure 4.4 
shows the process of handling criticism in a useful, self-esteem–boosting way.
• Acknowledge facts. Agree with the specific part of the criticism that you 
can honestly acknowledge to be true. This puts a stop to the criticism 
and saves your self-esteem.
Critic: “You’re so lazy. You spend all weekend streaming Netflix.”
You: “You’re right, I spend a lot of time streaming Netflix on the 
weekends, but that doesn’t mean I’m lazy.”
• Acknowledge feelings. If you truly cannot find anything to agree with in 
the criticism, show the critic that you recognize the feelings that are 
motivating the criticism. This pacifies the critic and ends the criticism.
Critic: “You’re a slacker. Just look at that sink overflowing with dishes.”
You: “I know you hate to leave dirty dishes in the sink. However, I like 
to let them pile up and then do them all at once.”
By finding something—anything—to acknowledge in a piece of criticism, 
you let your critic know that he/she/they has been heard. By speaking up 
for yourself and refusing to be the victim of a personal attack, you boost 
your self-esteem.
Probing What if the destructive criticism is vague and general? What 
if someone calls you lazy or overbearing? For general criticisms, a tech￾nique known as probing often has the best results. Probing involves asking 
the critic for specifics. Probing has the dual effect of reducing the argument 
down to more reasonable specifics, and disarming the critic with the notion 
that you are taking an interest in the criticism. Conversations involving 
probing might look like this:
Critic: “I don’t know how you get through life being so lazy.”
You: “Can you give me an example of my laziness?”
probing Asking for 
specifics from a person who 
has given a general or vague 
criticism.
success secret
Acknowledge destructive 
criticism, then correct any 
errors.FIGURE 4.4 Responding to Destructive Criticism
Putting It in Perspective Criticism can be difficult to face. By focusing on the 
content of the message and using effective response techniques, however, 
you can diffuse criticism before it damages your self-esteem. Do you think that 
some criticism doesn’t deserve any response at all? Explain.
Destructive Criticism
Listen carefully.
Check for understanding.
Is the criticism specific?
Yes No
Probe
Can you honestly agree with part or all 
of the criticism?
Yes
Acknowledge facts.
Assert yourself.
Correct errors.
Acknowledge feelings.
No184 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
Critic: “For one thing, you spend all weekend watching TV.”
Critic: “You messed up all the files when you reorganized the office.”
You: “How exactly did I mess up the files?”
Critic: “Nothing is in alphabetical order anymore.”
Critic: “You’re a slacker.”
You: “What makes you think of me as a slacker?”
Critic: “Just look at that sink overflowing with dishes.”
Continue probing until you have reduced the criticism from personal 
accusations to specific examples. Then you can evaluate whether the critic 
has anything useful to say.
Practice responding to constructive and destructive criticism in 
Activity 23.
Assertiveness and Self-Esteem
Handling criticism well requires assertiveness, the ability to stand up for 
your rights without threatening the self-esteem of the other person. People 
with low self-esteem often react to criticism passively or passive-aggressively. 
They hope they will avoid confrontation if they don’t reveal their thoughts. 
They don’t stand up for themselves because they fear rejection and further 
criticism. It is true that others may dislike what you say or even dislike you. 
However, trying to achieve acceptance by withholding your real thoughts 
and feelings can damage your self-esteem. It is better to risk rejection by 
showing your real self (appropriately) than to disrespect yourself by hiding 
your thoughts and feelings.
People with low self-esteem often let the fear of criticism and rejection 
stop them from asserting themselves in everyday situations. What happened 
the last time someone cut in front of you in line? Did you stand up for 
yourself and politely point out the end of the line, or did you stay silent to 
avoid a fuss? What about when you received a wrong order at a restaurant? 
Did you calmly call attention to the mix-up, or did you pretend everything 
was fine and eat it anyway?
Assertiveness can be difficult because it involves showing your real self. 
It requires self-awareness, self-expectancy, and self-acceptance. Instead of 
silently tolerating words or actions that hurt you, you are standing up for your 
value as a human being. You are saying, “I have a right to exist and be treated 
with respect. My thoughts and feelings are just as important as everyone 
else’s, and I deserve to have my voice heard.” When you make assertiveness 
a habit, you increase others’ esteem for you and your esteem for yourself.
Self Check
1. Define self-acceptance. (p. 160)
2. What are the benefits of using positive self-talk? (p. 172)
3. Give an example of a constructive criticism and an example of a 
destructive criticism. (p. 180)
success secret
Before you respond to a 
vague criticism, probe for 
specifics.
success secret
You have the right to be 
treated with respect.ACTIVITY 23: Handling Criticism
A Practice responding to constructive criticism. Imagine that the people below are giving you accurate 
feedback. Write a response to each constructive criticism that (1) restates the criticism and (2) asks for 
specific suggestions for improvement.
Example
“Your writing is good, but you have used some terms incorrectly here.”  
Restate: Yes, vocabulary is my weak point.
Ask for suggestions: What are some ways I could work on this?
Instructor: “You always have interesting things to say in your homework. It’s disappointing that you 
don’t speak up more in class.”
Restate:
Ask for suggestions:
Roommate: “I love the color you chose for the living room walls. It might be even better if the paint 
was a little more even.”
Restate:
Ask for suggestions:
Boss: “I see how much effort you’ve put into this spreadsheet, but the small type makes it hard for 
me to read.”
Restate:
Ask for suggestions:
Parent: “You forgot Michael’s birthday last week, and his feelings were hurt. It’s important to 
remember family occasions.”
Restate:
Ask for suggestions:
continued…186 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
B Now practice responding to destructive criticism by acknowledging facts or feelings. Imagine that you 
receive criticisms similar to those on the previous page, but that they are worded in a destructive way. 
Write a response to each destructive criticism that (1) acknowledges the facts and (2) asserts yourself by 
correcting the part of the criticism that is mistaken, unfair, or insulting.
Example
“You ruined your paper by using all these terms incorrectly.”
Acknowledge: I see that I misused a few technical terms.
Assert yourself: However, I provided a lot of good information in this paper.
Instructor: “You never have anything to contribute in class.”
Acknowledge:
Assert yourself:
Roommate: “You did a terrible job painting the living room walls.”
Acknowledge:
Assert yourself:
Boss: “I practically need a microscope to read this spreadsheet. Please make it look like a profes￾sional did it.”
Acknowledge:
Assert yourself:
Parent: “You forgot Michael’s birthday again. I hope you’re proud of yourself.”
Acknowledge:
Assert yourself:C Think back to the last time you received constructive criticism. How did you respond? Were you able to 
make use of the constructive criticism? Why or why not?
D Now think back to the last time you received destructive criticism. Describe how it made you feel and 
how you responded.
E The next time you receive criticism, what can you say to yourself to keep your self-esteem from being hurt?
  188 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
self-esteem (p. 138)
anxiety (p. 140)
unconditional positive 
regard (p. 149)
conditional positive 
regard (p. 149)
social support (p. 150)
loneliness (p. 150)
self-expectancy (p. 155)
accomplishment (p. 157)
coping (p. 160)
avoidance (p. 160)
self-acceptance (p. 162)
body image (p. 164)
social comparison (p. 168)
ideal self (p. 170)
possible selves (p. 170)
self-talk (p. 172)
inner critic (p. 172)
label (p. 173)
affirmation (p. 178)
criticism (p. 179)
probing (p. 182)
Key Terms
Summary by Learning Objectives
• Define self-esteem and explain its importance. Self-esteem is having confidence in and 
respect for yourself. When you esteem yourself, you are confident in your ability to cope with 
life’s challenges, and you believe that you are worthy of success and happiness. This motivates 
you to work hard, succeed, try new things, take chances, and build positive relationships.
• Describe how childhood experiences affect self-esteem. The foundations of self-esteem 
are laid in the first three or four years of life. If our parents or other primary caregivers demon￾strate love, nurturance, acceptance, encouragement, and support, we usually come to accept 
ourselves and develop positive self-esteem.
• Define self-expectancy and explain two ways to boost it. Self-expectancy is the belief 
that you are able to achieve what you want in life. One way to build this confidence is to take 
pride in your past successes. Another way is to set and accomplish a series of increasingly 
challenging goals.
•Explain why self-acceptance is important for high self-esteem. Self-acceptance means 
recognizing and accepting what is true about yourself. It allows you to stop criticizing yourself 
for falling short of your or other people’s impossible standards. It allows you to discover and 
express who you really are inside. When you enjoy self-acceptance, you recognize that you are 
good enough just the way you are.
•Explain how to change negative self-talk into positive self-talk. To change negative 
self-talk into positive self-talk, stop your negative thoughts whenever they occur and replace 
them with affirmations.
•Explain how to handle criticism well. An effective way to handle constructive criticism is 
to restate the criticism and ask for suggestions. An effective way to handle destructive criticism 
is to acknowledge the truth of the criticism (if any) and assert yourself.
Chapter 4 Review and ActivitiesReview Questions
1. Name five effects of high self-esteem and five effects of low self-esteem.
2. How do childhood experiences affect self-esteem?
3. Explain the statement: “You may or may not get what you deserve, but you will nearly always 
get what you expect.”
4. What are some ways to change a negative self-image into a positive one?
5. Give an example of upward comparison and an example of downward comparison.
6. Explain the three steps in handling constructive criticism.
Critical Thinking
7. Self-Acceptance and Avoidance For healthy self-esteem, it’s important to know your 
weaknesses so that you can find creative ways to work around them. However, it’s also 
important to cope with your problems rather than avoid them. Is this a contradiction? 
Why or why not?
8. Criticism When someone is very critical of others, it is often said that the person has low 
self-esteem. Think of someone you know who often criticizes or makes fun of others. Do you 
think this person has low self-esteem? What do you think motivates this person to criticize 
others? What relationship do you think exists between self-acceptance and acceptance of 
others?
Application
9. Self-Esteem Journal Over the course of a week, keep a journal monitoring your level 
of self-esteem. Note the times you experience low self-esteem and high self-esteem. What 
situations make you feel good about yourself? Why? How can you create more of them? 
What situations damage your self-esteem? Why? How can you change this?
10. Accomplishment and Self-Expectancy Interview two people. Ask them to describe the 
two accomplishments of which they are proudest; explain why they are proudest of these; 
and explain how confident they were beforehand in their ability to complete these accom￾plishments. Write up your findings, comparing and contrasting the interviewees’ responses 
to the responses you gave in Activity 20. What did this experience teach you about accom￾plishment and self-expectancy?
Review and Activities190 Chapter 4 Self-Esteem
Internet Activities
11. Affirmations Your instructor may provide you with an article on “The Power of Self-Talk.” 
Read the article. Write three “I am” affirmations using the guidelines in this article.
12. Shyness and Self-Esteem Go to the following link:
http://www.shakeyourshyness.com
These will provide you with information on shyness and its relationship to self-esteem. Ask 
yourself the following questions: Are there different types of shyness? How do you think 
shyness is related to self-esteem? Does shyness have positive aspects?
Review and Activities
Look back at your response to the question in the Career Path 
Story on page 136. Think about how you would answer the 
question now that you have completed the chapter.
Complete the Story Write a paragraph continuing Christian’s 
story, describing specific techniques he uses to overcome his 
negative self-talk and respond to his sister’s destructive criticism.
“Do I Have What It Takes?” Career 
Path Story
UpperCut Images/SuperStock192
Colin Anderson/Blend Images LLC
Hopes and Worries
Jessica Jimenez dreamed of a career in hotel man￾agement. On the morning of her interview for a clerk 
job at a luxury hotel, however, she woke up feeling 
nervous and unprepared. Jessica was bilingual, had 
great people skills, and had earned top grades in 
her hospitality program. Doing well in a job interview, 
however, was another story. Jessica reminded 
herself that she never did well when she was put 
on the spot. Why would today be any different?
A Self-Defeating Attitude
When Jessica arrived at the hotel for her interview, 
she noticed a coffee stain on her blouse and began 
to panic. “This interview is going to be a disaster,” 
she thought. As she watched the hotel employees 
at work, she began to feel even more negative. 
“What’s the point of this job? I’ll never be able to 
keep up with the fast pace. The pay is underwhelming, 
and with my luck I’ll never be promoted.” By the time 
Jessica was called for the interview, she told herself 
she didn’t even want the job anymore.
What Do You Think? How was Jessica’s 
negative attitude likely to stand in the way of her 
getting the job?
“Will Things Go My Way?”
Real-Life 
Success Story“
Positive Thinking 5Chapter
learning objectives
After you complete this chapter, 
you should be able to:
• Define positive thinking and 
cite its benefits.
• List six habits that can help you 
become a more positive thinker.
• Explain the link between positive 
thinking and good health.
• Describe how self-defeating 
attitudes create a vicious cycle.
• Define cognitive distortions and 
irrational beliefs and give an 
example of each.
• Summarize the ABCDE method 
for overcoming irrational beliefs.
Whether you think you can or think 
you can’t, either way you’re right.
Henry Ford, automaker
”
introduction
In this chapter, you’ll find out how to become a more 
positive thinker. In Section 5.1 you’ll explore the habits 
associated with positive thinking and learn how your 
attitude can influence your mental and physical health. 
In Section 5.2 you’ll learn why having positive expecta￾tions for yourself makes a huge difference in getting 
what you want out of life. You’ll also investigate several 
types of negative thinking and learn techniques for 
transforming unpleasant thoughts and feelings into 
positive ones.194 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
SECTION 5.1 Becoming a Positive Thinker
POSITIVE THINKING AND OPTIMISM
We’ve all heard of positive thinking, but what is it and why does it matter? 
Positive thinking means focusing on what is good about ourselves, other 
people, and the world around us. When we think positively about ourselves, 
we have the confidence to work toward our goals and overcome obstacles. 
When we think positively about others, we have the confidence to trust 
people and ask for what we need and want.
Positive thinking goes hand in hand with optimism. Optimism is the 
tendency to expect the best possible outcome. Optimists focus their energy 
on making their goals happen, rather than on bracing for the worst. Optimists 
don’t fool themselves into thinking that the world is perfect and that 
everything always goes perfectly. That’s being naïve. Instead, optimists 
simply choose to focus on what’s going right.
Why Positive Thinking Matters
Positive thinking helps you enjoy work, school, friends, family, and free 
time. Positive thinking gives you the drive to work hard to make good things 
happen. Positive thinking does not promise success, but there is no success 
without it. To attain success, you should actively expect success in all parts of 
your life.
Feeling positive or optimistic is a trait of virtually all successful people. 
The best leaders, for example, are able to inspire positive feelings in the 
people they lead. They possess energy and a vision of the future that inspires a 
positive outlook in those around them. Think of how Martin Luther King, Jr., 
mobilized millions with his “I have a dream” speech, which painted an inspiring 
picture of a better future. His optimistic vision made him a great leader.
One of the most desirable attitudes of a prospective employee, leader, 
or manager is an ability to see challenges as opportunities and setbacks as 
temporary inconveniences. As Thomas Edison once said, “I haven’t failed, 
I have found 10,000 ways that won’t work.” This positive attitude also 
welcomes change as friendly, and is not upset by surprises, even negative 
surprises. How we approach challenges and problems is a crucial aspect of 
our decision-making process, whether in business or in our personal lives.
In the 1920s, when Ernest Hemingway was working hard to perfect his 
craft, he lost a suitcase containing all his manuscripts—many stories he’d 
laboriously polished to jewel-like perfection—which he’d been planning to 
publish as a book. The devastated Hemingway couldn’t conceive of redoing 
his work. He could think only of the months he’d devoted to his arduous 
writing—and for nothing, he was now convinced. But when he lamented his 
loss to the poet Ezra Pound, Pound called it a stroke of good luck. Pound 
assured Hemingway that when he rewrote the stories, he would forget the 
positive thinking
Focusing on what is good 
about oneself, other people, 
and the world.
optimism The tendency 
to expect the best possible 
outcome.
success secret
Positive thinking gives you 
the drive to make good 
things happen for yourself.weak parts; only the best material would reappear. Instead of framing the 
event in disappointment, Pound cast it in the light of opportunity. Hemingway 
did rewrite the stories—and the rest, as they say, is history: He became one 
of the major figures in American literature.
Cartoonist Cathy Guisewite has her mother to thank for teaching her the 
importance of positive thinking. “When my mother first suggested I submit 
some scribbles to a syndicate, I told her I knew nothing about comic strips. 
Mom said, ‘So what? You’ll learn.’ When I pointed out that I didn’t know how 
to draw, she said, ‘So what? You’ll learn.’” Without that encouragement and 
confidence, Guisewite might never have turned those scribbles into the popu￾lar comic strip Cathy, which was syndicated in more than 1,400 newspapers 
and collected into more than twenty books, along with several national TV 
specials. The comic strip endured for thirty-four years as a national favorite.
Like Guisewite, when we worry that we don’t know how or we might 
fail, we can tell ourselves, “So what? Other people have tried it before and 
made bigger fools of themselves. Other people have started out with nothing 
and built their success brick by brick. Other people have overcome bigger 
hurdles and still survived. Other people have failed, picked themselves up, 
and done it again. I can do the same thing.”
Thinking and Attitude
Positive thinking is really an attitude toward life. An attitude is a belief 
or opinion that predisposes us to act in a certain way. Attitudes have a 
attitude A belief or 
opinion that predisposes 
people to act in a certain way.
Applying Psychology
Aging with an Attitude
One hundred fifty years ago, most North Americans died by the age of forty-eight. 
Today most of us can expect to live to be about eighty. Instead of welcoming the pros￾pect of a longer life, however, more and more people are worrying about growing old. 
Aging is a natural process, so why do we fear it? In our youth-oriented culture, growing 
older is associated with social isolation, as well as physical and mental decline, rather 
than with growth, wisdom, and freedom. Antique furniture and classic cars may be all 
the rage, but people in their seventies and beyond are often seen as dependent, disabled, and unattractive. In 
an attempt to stay young, consumers spend billions of dollars every year on anti-aging weapons such as plastic 
surgery and pricey beauty creams. The real key to successful aging, however, can be attributed to a positive 
attitude. Research done by the Yale School of Public Health and the National Institute on Aging found that 
young people who had positive perceptions about aging were less likely to have a heart attack or stroke when 
they grew older. And another study confirmed that middle-aged and elderly people lived an average of seven 
years longer if they had a positive perception of aging. According to their findings, a healthy attitude toward 
aging has a more positive effect on health than exercising, lowering cholesterol, or even smoking. Positive 
thinking reduces stress on the heart and arteries and motivates people to stay mentally and physically fit.
Critical Thinking: Make a list of ten things you fear about getting older and why.
Ariel Skelley/Blend Images/
Getty Images196 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
powerful effect on the way we see the world. Although you may not realize 
it, you have attitudes about practically everything. You have attitudes 
toward particular individuals (including yourself) and toward people who 
are a certain age or do a certain job. You have attitudes toward particular 
objects, such as smartphones, music, cars, and clothing, as well as toward 
ideas about the environment, education, and careers.
Positive and Negative Attitudes Attitudes can be positive, neg￾ative, or both, combining both positive and negative elements. For example, 
depending on your experience, you might believe that doctors are intelligent 
and noble, or that they are impersonal and condescending, or that they 
show all of these features. You might believe that welfare is a good program 
because it helps needy people, or that it is unfair because it promotes depen￾dency and uses taxpayers’ money, or that it has both plusses and minuses.
There’s nothing wrong with having negative attitudes about some 
things. People who have mostly negative attitudes, however, have trouble 
feeling good or taking positive actions. People with positive attitudes 
embrace life. They make a conscious effort to think positive thoughts and 
take positive actions.
We’ve seen that the way we think influences the way we feel and act. 
Positive thoughts are the foundation of positive feelings and positive 
actions. By thinking positive thoughts, we inspire ourselves to have positive 
feelings and take positive actions, as shown in Figure 5.1.
success secret
Positive thoughts lead 
to positive feelings and 
positive actions.
FIGURE 5.1 The Power of Positive Thoughts
On Target Thoughts, feelings, and actions go hand in hand. When you have 
positive thoughts, you experience positive feelings and have the energy and 
drive to take positive actions. Do you believe that you can change your way of 
thinking by choosing to do so? Why or why not?
Success
Positive Actions
Positive Feelings
Positive ThoughtsNegative Thinking and Pessimism Now let’s contrast positive 
thinking with negative thinking. Negative thinking means focusing on the 
flaws and problems in ourselves, other people, and the world around us. 
Negative thinking dampens our mood and blocks us from taking risks, 
making changes, and expressing our real selves. Negative thinking can also 
make us unpleasant to be around. When we think negatively, we often 
spend more time complaining and blaming others than we do taking action 
to solve our problems.
Negative thinking goes hand in hand with pessimism. Pessimism is the 
tendency to expect the worst possible outcome. Pessimists find signs of 
failure and disaster everywhere they go. Pessimists are often motivated by 
intense fear of failure, loss, or rejection. They hope to protect themselves 
from disappointment by constantly preparing themselves for the worst. 
Novelist Thomas Hardy once wrote, “pessimism is the only view of life in 
which you can never be disappointed.” Pessimists expect nothing from 
themselves and nothing from others, and that’s what they usually get.
Failure Avoidance
In organizations, institutions, and environments in which criticism, pessi￾mism, cynicism, and motivation by fear prevail, a condition develops that 
we see all too often in business and the professions. Fear of failure leads to 
avoiding failure at all costs. The trouble with failure avoidance is that it’s 
simultaneously avoidance of success, which depends on taking risks. Inno￾vation and creativity are impossible when employees are afraid because 
they’re penalized for failure.
Early experience usually teaches that failure is to be avoided at all costs. 
This begins in childhood, when we encounter the first “No!” It grows like a 
weed when we are criticized by our parents and other family members, by our 
teachers, and by our peers. It leads to associating ourselves with our mistakes, 
to a self-image of clumsiness and awkwardness. Our world of put-downs does 
little to relieve this—a world in which the media magnifies problems and celeb￾rity status, but where entrepreneurial success is often viewed as the product 
of manipulative selfishness. Many people seek security from that noise by 
going along quietly with the system, not rocking the boat. Although many 
biographies, documentaries, social media reels, and other outlets showcase 
rags-to-riches success and courageous public service, most people are unable to 
imagine it for themselves. Most people develop a habit of looking back at past 
problems—which is failure reinforcement—and a habit of imagining similar 
performances in the future—which is failure forecasting. They either set their 
sights too high, reinforcing their fears and ensuring failure, or low enough to 
avoid failure with a sure thing. Their inner dialogue usually falls within the two 
extremes. “Stand by. Things are going too well, something will spoil it.” Or, 
“I knew this was too good to be true. With my luck, it was bound to go sour.”
Fear of failure can become a built-in motivation. Leaders like to 
succeed and feel good about themselves; fearful people, focused on failure 
negative thinking
Focusing on the flaws and 
problems in oneself, other 
people, and the world.
pessimism The 
tendency to expect the 
worst possible outcome.198 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
avoidance so as not to feel worse about themselves, refuse to try. External 
factors can also boost fear of failure. If, for example, half a division must be 
laid off, factory or office workers who have long performed well may be 
seized by the diminishing, damaging fear.
A large division of a well-known American company manufacturing 
integrated circuit boards in competition with the Japanese called an 
employee productivity meeting. The huge facility’s general manager 
mounted the stage and gave his two thousand workers what he thought was 
a parting motivational message. “What we must have from all of you is a 
seventeen percent increase in quality production in six months, or we’re 
faced with closing down the plant. Have a good weekend.”
His words had the predictable effect. The leaders and optimists 
increased their performance by about twenty percent. But many pessimists 
found more secure jobs and quit within weeks—and the plant did shut down 
after about six months. This was more confirmation that genuine leaders 
focus on the benefits of success, while those chiefly motivated by fear 
concentrate on failure’s painful consequences. Some bosses and managers 
argue that employees motivated by fear work as hard or even harder than 
those with positive motivations. They are deluding themselves. Fear 
motivation, though still practiced in some companies and cultures, is as 
obsolete as the concept of declaring “Firings will continue until morale 
improves.” Anxiety about failure doesn’t merely diminish performance. 
It also stifles the motivation to succeed in the first place.
Learned Helplessness
Learned helplessness is a belief that we’re at the mercy of external forces 
and no longer in control of what is happening to us. Behaviorists emphasize 
that this feeling is indeed learned. Martin Seligman, a psychologist at the 
University of Pennsylvania and author of the best-selling Learned Optimism, has 
made a very detailed study of learned helplessness—and confirms it’s a trait 
we acquire, not inherit at birth. Although we are born with specific 
personality traits, we learn to be optimists or pessimists by the way we 
handle obstacles and setbacks. There’s a saying: “It’s not what happens to 
you that counts. It’s how you take it and what you make of it.” This distinc￾tion between negative and positive attitudes is referred to by psychologists as 
“explanatory style.” More specifically, a person’s explanatory style is the way 
he/she/they understands and explains the bad things that happen in life.
Dr. Seligman found specific evidence for the practical effects of 
explanatory style in a study of collegiate swimmers. At the outset of the 
study, the athletes were given a psychological test to determine their levels 
of optimism and pessimism. Following the test, they were timed in some 
practice laps, but when the times were told to the swimmers, they were 
deliberately reported as being a second or two slower than they actually 
were. Because one second can mean the difference between winning or 
coming in last in a competition, all the athletes took the disappointing news very seriously. But they also responded in very different ways. When the 
pessimists were timed again, they were consistently slower than their usual 
performances. It was as if they somehow felt they had to confirm the negative 
results they’d received earlier. The optimistic athletes, however, either main￾tained the level of their times or in some cases got even faster. When general 
optimism about life is internalized, it leads to very tangible, positive results.
Take a moment to look at your thinking. Are you a positive or negative 
thinker? Activity 24 is designed to help you assess your thinking style and 
begin making positive improvements. As always, strive to be honest as you 
complete the exercise. Go with your first instinct; don’t be false to yourself 
in an attempt to find the “right” answer. Being a negative thinker doesn’t 
make you a bad person. Negative thinking is a habit that drains your energy 
and makes you feel bad about yourself, but like any habit it can be changed.
ADOPTING POSITIVE HABITS
No matter how positive or negative your thoughts are right now, you can 
become a more positive thinker. Sound too good to be true? It’s not. Over 
decades of study, psychologists have discovered that people can signifi￾cantly improve their lives by consciously choosing to think positively. 
Everyone can cultivate habits of thought and action that help them think 
positively. Habits are like submarines. They run silent and deep. Most of 
what we do on a daily basis is habitual. We seldom even realize we are 
engaging in subconscious reflexes. Habits are more easily replaced than 
broken. That is why it is so important to focus on practicing new positive 
thoughts and actions on a daily basis. It takes time and effort to override 
unhealthy habit patterns that have been ingrained since childhood. Six 
important positive habits of thought and action are described next.
Look for the Good
It’s easy to take the good things for granted and dwell on the bad things. It’s 
important to make an active effort to look for the good in events, situations, 
and people, including yourself. If things look 100 percent terrible, you are 
sure to have overlooked something. Sometimes you may have to look hard, 
but your search is always rewarded. Are you taking a class you find boring? 
Look for one positive thing about it. Soon you will find another and another.
Cultivate the habit of gratitude for everything you have and are working 
toward. Give yourself time each evening to look for the good in the day’s 
events. Did you accomplish a goal at work? Did someone give you a kind 
word? Did you enjoy playing with your cat?
Work alone, with a friend, or with a family member to provide mutual 
encouragement and suggestions. Make sure to use positive language and to 
focus on what went right, rather than on what didn’t go wrong. Instead of 
saying, “I didn’t get in a car accident,” for example, say, “I stayed healthy and 
safe.” Use the space in Personal Journal 5.1 to write down three things that you 
success secret
Look for things to be 
grateful for.200 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
ACTIVITY 24: Are You a Positive Thinker?
A Read each statement below. For each one, decide whether you Agree Totally, Agree Slightly, Disagree 
Slightly, or Disagree Totally.
Agree 
Totally
Agree 
Slightly
Disagree 
Slightly
Disagree 
Totally
1. People who have a positive attitude are kidding themselves.
2. You can try to change your way of thinking, but it won’t work.
3. I often worry about the same problems again and again.
4. Many of my problems are actually someone else’s fault.
5. Criticizing other people helps to keep them on their toes.
6. Let’s face it: Every opportunity has at least one hidden difficulty.
 7. I often complain about people and situations that are getting me down.
8. Before I help other people, I make sure they’re not using me.
9. My friends are mostly positive thinkers.
10. I compliment others often and express my appreciation for them.
11. Most of my comments to other people are positive.
12. I rarely criticize myself.
13. When I talk to myself, I use encouraging, helpful words.
14. Good things usually happen to me.
15. I always look for the good in people and situations.
16. I have a genuine interest in other people.
B Scoring: For statements 1 through 8, give yourself zero points for Agree Totally, one point for Agree 
Slightly, two points for Disagree Slightly, and three points for Disagree Totally.
Total for this section:
For statements 9 through 16, give yourself three points for Agree Totally, two points for Agree Slightly, 
one point for Disagree Slightly, and zero points for Disagree Totally.
Total for this section:
Add the two scores:
41–48 You think positively almost all the time; you’re on the right track.
31–40 You think positively most of the time, but you will benefit from making a more consistent 
effort to think positively.
17–30 You have a mix of positive and negative attitudes. You need to pay attention to your nega￾tive thoughts and work hard to replace them with positive ones.
0–16 You think negatively almost all of the time. You need to adopt new habits of thinking.C Are you a positive thinker or a negative thinker? Explain.
D All of us tend to think more positively about some things than about others. Which events, situations, 
people, or aspects of yourself do you think positively about? Which do you think negatively about? Why?202 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
are grateful for in your life, three good things that happened to you over the course 
of the day, and three good things that you have to look forward to in the future.
Choose Your Words
Analyze your language. How often do you use negative words such as can’t, 
won’t, impossible, or horrible? How often do you exaggerate the terrible con￾sequences of events? Our words influence our thoughts and our moods. 
Make a note of negative expressions you may overuse and train yourself to 
replace the negative words with positive ones. Also make a habit of speak￾ing positively to other people. Give thanks, appreciation, and praise to the 
people who are kind to you. Giving a compliment or a kind word generates 
goodwill and makes you feel good about yourself, too.
Personal Journal 5.1
Focusing on the Good
Develop the habit of looking for the good by taking stock of each day’s positive events. What do you feel 
good about today?
Today I’m grateful for:
1.
2.
3.
Three good things that happened to me today:
1.
2.
3.
Three good things that I have to look forward to in the future:
1.
2.
3.
success secret
Use positive words and 
choose positive friends. Surround Yourself with Positive People
The enthusiasm of optimistic people is contagious; you can “catch” a healthy 
attitude by being around someone who is upbeat. The people with whom we 
associate have a big impact on our attitude. At work and school, seek the 
company of positive-minded people who enjoy sharing ideas, helping others, 
and taking constructive action. Choose not to spend your time with people who 
make a habit of complaining, gossiping, whining, criticizing, or blaming others.
Accept, Don’t Judge
Be on the lookout for one of the most common negative habits: judgmentalism. 
Judgmentalism is the habit of condemning people or things because they 
are not the way you think they should be. Judgments are easy to make, but 
they are hurtful. Have you ever shared your feelings with someone only to 
be told, “you’re overreacting” or “you brought this on yourself ”? Have you 
ever received a harsh and critical comment for no apparent reason? If so, 
you know how painful judgmentalism can be.
When you find yourself about to make a judgmental comment, stop and 
examine what is going on inside you. Are you jumping to negative conclu￾sions without all the facts? Are you spending more time finding fault than 
looking for the good? Are you judging others to make yourself feel (falsely) 
superior? People who find fault with others usually find fault with them￾selves, too. It’s painful to be judged. Try not to do it to others or yourself. 
Instead, strive to accept the world and other people as they are without 
comparing them to an unfair ideal.
Limit Complaints
There is nothing wrong with occasional complaining. A complaint is simply 
the sharing of distress, discomfort, or worry with another person. Sharing 
feelings and frustrations can help you deepen friendships and cope with the 
stresses of everyday life. However, complaining can easily become a habit. 
Some people use the complaining habit to get sympathy and attention or to 
reinforce a “poor me” image.
There is a fine line between complaining and blaming. Are you taking 
responsibility for your situation, or are you blaming someone else for your 
feelings? When you speak poorly of others, you’re likely to feel poorly 
about yourself, too.
Remember, too, that every minute you spend complaining is a minute 
that you aren’t working on a solution. Consider keeping a “complaint log” 
in which you note every time you complain and for how long. Set a time 
limit for your complaints—perhaps three or four minutes. When the time is 
up, resolve to stop complaining and start acting.
We saw in Chapter 4 that coping actively with your problems is a big 
boost to your self-esteem. In a similar way, taking action on problems can 
boost your positive outlook on life. Instead of grumbling that no one is 
judgmentalism The 
habit of condemning people 
or things because they 
are not the way one thinks 
they should be.
complaint The sharing 
of distress, discomfort, or 
worry with another person.
success secret
Taking constructive 
action feels better than 
complaining.204 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
doing anything, for example, ask yourself, “What can I do?” Even the act 
of writing down possible solutions to difficult problems can relieve some of 
the distress that caused the complaints in the first place.
Don’t Worry
Worry is a major barrier to positive thinking. Worry is distress and anxiety 
caused by contemplating worst-case scenarios. How can you focus on the 
positive when you are always bracing for the worst?
It’s natural to have worries about serious problems such as crime, ill 
health, or paying bills. Common subjects of worry include:
• money
• health
• school
• career and job security
• relationships and children
• crime, terrorism, and war
No matter what you have to worry about, however, frequent worry harms 
your health by keeping you focused on the negative side of life.
worry Distress and anxiety 
caused by contemplating 
worst-case scenarios.
professional development )))
Positive Thinking in Action at Work
Being a positive thinker not only benefits your own productivity at work, it can also impact your work 
environment. The more positive you are, the more positive those around you will feel and then behave. 
A positive attitude is contagious! Whether you’re an employee, team member, or manager, you always 
have the ability to improve your workplace, and the responsibility starts with you!
Here are some strategies for maintaining a positive attitude at work, and creating a positive environment 
for others:
• Find enjoyment in your work, no matter how tedious, boring, or stressful it may be.
• See the value you bring to your job, and understand how your role contributes to the overall mission 
and vision of the company.
• View work problems as opportunities to challenge yourself, focusing on improvement ideas and solutions.
• Foster positive peer camaraderie by being a good team player, sharing ideas with others and offering 
praise and encouragement whenever possible.
• Learn as much as you can about your job, company, and field to stay motivated.
What’s Your Opinion?
Brainstorm a list of actions you could take to help create a more positive environment at your workplace 
or school. To explore the topic of positive thinking in the work environment further, visit http://career.
careesma.in/8-tips-to-make-a-positive-work-environment or ask your instructor for additional links.Consider these myths and realities about worry:
Myth: “Worrying helps me prepare for action.”
Reality: Worrying drains your energy.
Myth: “Worrying helps me deal with my problems.”
Reality: Worrying is a substitute for dealing with your problems.
Myth: “The more I worry about something, the less likely it is to happen.”
Reality: This is known as magical thinking. Thoughts don’t influence what 
happens—actions do.
Myth: “Worrying means I care.”
Reality: Caring and worrying are not the same.
Often, people worry because they feel they need to do something about 
a problem but aren’t sure what. You can always do something about a problem. 
Get the facts. Ask for advice or help. Brainstorm ideas with a friend. When 
faced with worry, try these strategies:
• Focus on solutions, not worst-case scenarios. This helps you feel that you 
can deal with whatever happens.
• Cope, don’t avoid. Take action! Facing the situation head-on not only 
helps make things right, but also boosts your self-esteem.
• Share your worries. Get another perspective. Research shows that worry 
gets worse when you do it alone.
• If you really can’t do anything about the situation, try to let the worry go.
Make a conscious decision not to worry. This is difficult at first but gets 
easier with practice.
• Drown out the worry with positive affirmations. Tell yourself, “I am 
capable of handling whatever comes my way” or “I accept that some 
things are out of my control.”
• Channel your nervous energy into physical activity. Try exercise, 
gardening, dance, yoga, housecleaning, hiking, or sports.
Some experts recommend writing each of your worries down on a small 
slip of paper and stashing them in a worry jar or box. This process helps 
you separate yourself from your worries. (Make your own worry slips at the 
end of Activity 25.) Take the slips out of the jar once a week and read them, 
and you will probably find that your worries don’t seem as bad as they did 
at first. Instead of putting your worry slips in a jar or box, you can shred 
them and recycle them to indicate that you are letting go of them.
Get Realistic Above all, the key to banishing worry is to stop thinking 
of worst-case scenarios and learn to think in terms of realistic outcomes. 
Imagine that you want to ask someone out on a date, but you worry that 
the person will say no. Your worries deepen even further when you imagine 
the worst possible outcome: The person rejects and humiliates you in front of 
everyone. Although this worst-case scenario is unlikely to occur, the possibil￾ity that it might happen can’t stop you from worrying about it. Unfortunately, 
success secret
Focus on finding solutions, 
not bracing for the worst.206 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
ACTIVITY 25: Banishing Worry
A Describe the biggest worry you have right now.
B Describe the worst-case scenario. What would happen if all of your worst fears came true in this situation?
C How likely is it that the worst-case scenario will come true?
D What is the most likely realistic outcome?E Write down six things you are worried about right now. When you’re done, photocopy or cut out these 
worry slips and place them in your own personal worry jar or box.
WORRY #1 WORRY #2
WORRY #3 WORRY #4
WORRY #5 WORRY #6208 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
worrying about things that might happen prevents you from taking important 
risks, making you miserable as the opportunities slip away.
Instead of being overwhelmed by worries, learn to distinguish between 
worst-case scenarios and realistic, probable outcomes. Let’s say that you 
have asked someone out on a date and are now planning your outing 
together. Immediately you find yourself bracing for the worst possible 
outcome—your date can’t stand you, everything goes wrong, and you both 
have a terrible time. Stop yourself and ask how realistic this scenario is. 
Sure, it might happen, but how probable is it? Not very. Instead, think 
about a realistic outcome. If you pick a fun activity, you will probably have 
a good time and enjoy getting to know each other, even if you decide that 
you aren’t meant to be a couple.
THINKING STYLE AND HEALTH
Because our thoughts are so powerful, they have a big influence on our 
health and well-being. Negative thinking makes us vulnerable to stress and 
illness, and it shortens our life span. Positive thinking helps us cope with 
stress, avoid illness, and live longer. Studies have even shown that adopting 
a positive attitude can add more years to your life than quitting smoking or 
practicing regular physical exercise.
We all seem to have an overall attitude about life; it’s always one kind 
or another—optimism or pessimism. Much has been written for centuries 
about the self-fulfilling prophecy. A self-fulfilling prophecy is a statement 
that is neither true nor false but that may become true if believed. For 
example, when our fears and worries turn into anxiety, we suffer distress. 
Distress activates our endocrine system, changing the production of hor￾mones and antibodies. Our immune system becomes less active; our resist￾ance levels are lowered; we become more vulnerable to bacteria, viruses, 
and other ever-present hazards. Positive thoughts and feelings stimulate 
the production of morphinelike proteins called endorphins that reduce the 
feeling of pain and cause us to feel better.
You probably are familiar with the placebo effect. (Placebo literally 
means “I shall please.”) Placebos are inert substances given to some volun￾teers in a given study while other volunteers are treated with experimental 
drugs—whose effect is tested by measuring the difference in response to the 
powerless placebo and to the drug. Some volunteers who had just had their 
wisdom teeth extracted were given morphine to alleviate their pain; the 
others swallowed a placebo they believed to be morphine. Many of the 
placebo recipients said they experienced dramatic relief from their pain. 
However, when a drug that blocks the effects of the endorphin was given 
them, the pain returned almost immediately.
The test confirmed something very important: When a patient believes 
he/she/they has been given a pain reliever, the brain releases chemicals to 
substantiate that belief. In some cases, the brain produces chemicals 
success secret
Worrying prevents you 
from taking risks. 
success secret
Thinking well can make 
you well.
placebo effect
A beneficial effect, produced 
by a placebo drug or treatment, 
that cannot be attributed to 
the properties of the placebo 
itself, and must therefore be 
due to the patient’s belief in 
that treatment.previously inhibited or impaired in individuals with certain diseases. 
Parkinson’s disease patients were given a placebo they were told was an 
anti-Parkinson’s drug. As a result, their ability to move increased. Brain 
scans revealed that their brains became activated in the areas that control 
movement and that dopamine was being produced naturally by the brain’s 
own pharmacy. Recent double-blind tests have shown that the placebo 
effect influences outcomes including knee surgery and in treating patients 
with chronic depression.
For many years, the placebo effect was considered to be no more than 
a nuisance variable that needed to be controlled in clinical trials. Only 
recently have researchers redefined it as a key to understanding the healing 
that arises from medical ritual, the context of treatment, the patient–provider 
relationship, and the power of imagination, trust, and hope. The Program 
in Placebo Studies at Harvard Medical School is the first research center to 
pursue placebo studies through interdisciplinary, translational research 
initiatives that bridge the basic, clinical, and social sciences, as well as the 
humanities.
The use of guided imagery or visualization as a process to consciously 
direct the imagination in therapeutic settings has become widespread. Its 
effectiveness has been documented as an effective intervention and adjunct 
therapy for patients dealing with chronic pain, cancer, cardiac and stroke 
recovery, immune disorders, PTSD, anxiety, and depression.
What you visualize and internalize can materialize. Research done by 
the Yale School of Public Health and the National Institute on Aging found 
that young people who had positive perceptions about aging were less likely 
to have a heart attack or stroke when they grew older. And another study 
confirmed that middle-aged and elderly people lived an average of seven years 
longer if they had a positive perception of aging. (A more comprehensive 
discussion on visualization appears in Chapter 7.)1
Another reason that positive thinkers are healthier than negative thinkers 
is that they are more likely to practice positive health behaviors. Because 
they see a bright future for themselves, they want to make sure that they are 
healthy to make the most of it. They also accept responsibility for their own 
health. When you are healthy and fit, you also feel better about yourself, 
which in turn leads to even greater feelings of optimism.
Negative Thinking and Mental Health
Positive thinking can make us mentally and physically healthy, while 
negative thinking can delay healing and cause us to neglect our health. 
But negative thinking also does more—it damages our psychological 
health by providing an invitation to depression. Depression is an illness 
characterized by profound feelings of sadness, hopelessness, and 
1
 B. R. Levy, M. D. Slade, S. R. Kunkel, and S. V. Kasi, “Longevity Increased by Positive Self Perception of Aging.” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology. 83, (2002): 261–270.
depression An illness 
characterized by profound 
feelings of sadness, hope￾lessness, and helplessness.210 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
helplessness. Depression affects twenty million people each year in the 
United States and Canada.
Although the causes of depression are complex and not fully understood, 
psychologists believe that negative thinking makes people more vulnerable 
to the disease. In studies involving college students before and after exams, 
for example, researchers found that students who had a pessimistic attitude 
and received a failing grade ended up feeling depressed. In a study of prison 
inmates, people who had the most negative attitudes became the most 
depressed about their imprisonment. Of course, no one wants to fail an 
exam or go to prison. The difference is that optimistic people are able to 
bounce back from negative experiences. They have normal feelings of 
disappointment, sadness, or frustration, but they find ways to make the best 
of the situation and make plans to improve their lives. When pessimistic 
people suffer setbacks, on the other hand, they feel like failures, lose hope 
for the future, and simply give up. To screen yourself for symptoms of 
depression, complete Personal Journal 5.2.
Personal Journal 5.2
Depression Self-Check
Negative thinking is not only a cause of depression but also one of its symptoms. Do you think negatively? 
Are you worried that this might be a symptom of depression? Put a check mark next to each statement 
that is true for you most or all of the time.
I feel low in energy, or slowed down.
I blame myself for things.
I have poor appetite, or I overeat.
I sleep too little or too much.
I feel hopeless about the future.
I feel down, or blue.
I don’t have much interest in anything.
I feel like a pretty worthless person.
I have thoughts of suicide.
I have difficulty concentrating, remembering things, or making decisions.
If you have experienced five or more of these symptoms for two weeks or more, you may be suffering 
from depression; you should contact your doctor or mental health professional immediately.Getting Healthy
An important part of positive thinking, as well as self-esteem, is caring 
enough about yourself to make healthy choices. Our bodies are machines 
whose performance depends on good health. We must each treat our body 
as our one and only transportation vehicle for life. We must care for it with 
the fuel of good nutrition, activity, and health care. We can’t trade in our 
bodies for new models.
Your attitude toward your health makes a big difference: The more 
responsibility you take for your well-being, the more motivated you will be to 
treat yourself right. Don’t try to nag yourself into changing; you’ll resent the 
inner critic and rebel. Instead, see a healthy lifestyle as something positive you 
can do for yourself. Activity 26 will help you examine your health attitude.
Eat Right A healthy diet is essential to good health. Following a 
healthy diet means not only eating nutritious foods, but also limiting foods 
that can have negative effects, particularly foods high in fat, sugar, and salt. 
The most healthful foods are whole grains, fruits, vegetables, nonfat dairy 
products, and lean protein sources, such as white meat, chicken, fish, and 
tofu. Avoid caffeine, alcohol, and other drugs, which sap your energy and 
can become addictive. Consider these tips as well:
• Don’t eat for emotional reasons. Eat when you are hungry, eat slowly, 
and stop when you are beginning to feel full.
• Take time out for meals—don’t eat while doing something else.
• Shop with a list—you’ll buy more nutritious foods. And, don’t shop while 
you’re hungry.
• Try a variety of foods to make it easier to eat healthfully.
• Learn to read and understand nutrition labels.
• Drink plenty of water.
Above all, cultivate a positive attitude toward food. Enjoy eating and make 
food choices for health and energy.
Get Moving Exercise is just as important as good eating to a healthy 
lifestyle. Even in moderate amounts, exercise gives you more energy and 
boosts your mood. Regular exercise also lowers the risk of major diseases 
such as heart disease and diabetes.
Make sure to get both types of exercise—aerobic and anaerobic exercise. 
Aerobic exercise is sustained, rhythmic physical activity that strengthens the 
heart and lungs, lowers cholesterol and blood pressure, and relieves stress. 
It includes activities such as basketball, brisk walking, and swimming. 
Anaerobic exercise is higher intensity exercise that strengthens muscles and 
involves short bursts of intense exertion. Anaerobic exercise includes push￾ups, stomach crunches, pull-ups, and weight training. Aim for a healthy 
attitude toward exercise. Try these strategies:
• Try to be physically active for at least twenty minutes each day.
• Vary your activities so you don’t get bored.
success secret
Eat for health and energy.
success secret
Look at exercise as a fun 
time for you, not as a chore.
success secret
Following a healthy 
lifestyle is one of the 
most positive things you 
can do for yourself.212 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
ACTIVITY 26: What’s Your Health Attitude?
A Read each statement below. For each one, decide whether you Agree Totally, Agree Slightly, Disagree 
Slightly, or Disagree Totally.
Agree 
Totally
Agree 
Slightly
Disagree 
Slightly
Disagree 
Totally
Section 1
1. Good health and good life habits (e.g., regular physical activity, healthy diet, 
stress management) are interrelated.
2. Committing the effort to change my habits is how I would get better from 
an illness or disease.
3. If I get sick, it’s usually because I have not maintained a healthy diet.
4. Recovering from an illness or disease is due to my efforts, not my physicians’.
5. Taking personal responsibility for my health is essential to avoiding illness.
Section 2
6. Having a competent physician is the key to improving my health and 
recovering from illness.
7. I believe that what my physician says about my health is always correct.
8. I rely on my physician to take care of me so I do not get sick.
9. The right medication is essential to improving and maintaining my health.
10. There are toxins in the air that we can’t do anything about.
Section 3
11. What happens to me in life is due to fate and luck.
12. I consider myself lucky if I avoid getting sick.
13. If I get sick, it was meant to happen.
14. If I get the flu, I must have picked it up from someone else during the day.
15. Dying from an illness is fate because no one really has control over getting sick.
Source: Modified from Phillip C. McGraw, The Self Matters Companion (New York: The Free Press, 2002).
B Scoring: Score each section separately. For each section, give yourself eight points for every statement 
you checked Agree Totally, four points for every statement you checked Agree Slightly, two points for 
every statement you checked Disagree Slightly, and one point for every statement you checked Dis￾agree Totally.
Total for Section 1:
Total for Section 2:
Total for Section 3:Section 1 measures how much you think that your health depends on your own behavior. The higher 
your score, the more responsibility you take for your own health. If you scored 33 or above, you under￾stand and act on the fact that most major health issues can be influenced by what you do or don’t do. 
You have retained power over your health choices.
Section 2 measures how much you think your health depends on external sources, such as medicine 
and the actions of doctors. The higher your score, the less active you are about managing your health. 
If you scored 22 or above on this section, you are highly dependent on powers outside yourself, 
whether they are people or things. You are probably too passive about your health management.
Section 3 measures how much you think your health is a matter of chance. The higher your score, the 
less in control you feel of your own health. If you scored 26 or above on this section, you consider your￾self at the mercy of random factors, which probably makes you very passive about the management of 
your health.
C Do you have an active, positive attitude or a passive, negative attitude toward taking care of your 
health? Explain and give examples.
D Why is it more positive to believe that you have the power to get and stay healthy than to believe that 
doctors and medicines have the power to make you healthy?
continued…214 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
E Think back to the last time you were sick. Did you “make an effort to get well”? Explain.
F List five things you can do to have a healthier lifestyle and improve your physical health.
Example
I can make time for breakfast at home instead of grabbing something from the vending machine.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.• Don’t overdo it. Take time to warm up, cool down, and stretch.
• Set SMART exercise goals for yourself. If you get off track, just 
start again.
• Motivate yourself by learning about health and fitness.
• Exercise for strength, stamina, and energy—not to look a certain way.
Choose to look at exercise as a fun time, not as a chore. Do what you like to 
do—if you hate going to the gym, for example, try dancing, yoga, hiking, or 
paddle boarding. Be creative—even housework can get your heart pumping. 
The better you feel physically, the better you’ll feel emotionally, too.
Self Check
1. Define positive thinking and negative thinking. (pp. 194–196)
2. Why is it a good idea to avoid being judgmental? (p. 203)
3. Describe the two main types of exercise. (p. 211)
BUILDING AND TRACKING YOUR OPTIMUM 
HEALTH PLAN
Because there are many Internet Web sites providing 
us with the latest information and recommendations 
on how to adopt a healthy lifestyle, there also contin￾ues to be an explosion of apps designed to ensure we 
get results! Covering the areas of fitness and strength, 
tracking and analytics, food and nutrition, weight 
management, and even the mind and brain, these 
apps can offer us the support we need to reach our 
wellness goals . . . and most of them are free!
MyFitnessPal, a popular calorie tracker, boasts 
of a substantial food database with more than three 
million foods, allowing you to keep tabs on your daily 
nutritional eating habits. Fitocracy provides its users 
with a powerful social community of fitness enthusi￾asts, including fitness coaches and nutrition experts. 
You can enter strength training and cardio and nutri￾tion challenges to gain points and track your progress 
toward your ultimate goal of optimal health. Argus is 
an app that tracks “everything,” and produces detailed 
charts with numerous bio-feedback data points to 
achieve your health goals and boost your overall 
wellbeing. You are able to uncover important personal 
health habit trends that you didn’t realize existed. The 
app, CARROT, even serves as your personal “motiva￾tional” coach, spouting out negative quips when you 
don’t reach your goals, and sharing new workout tips 
for every pound you drop.
In today’s world, there are numerous support 
tools at your fingertips. Of course, it’s still up to you 
to eat the right foods and stay physically active. 
Combined with a positive mental attitude, your 
excuses for not living a healthy lifestyle should fall 
by the wayside.
To view a more detailed description of some of the 
top Health and Fitness apps, go to http://greatist.com/
fitness/best-health-fitness-apps. Conduct your own 
Internet searches on a regular basis to ensure you are 
obtaining the most current information.
internet action216 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
SECTION 5.2 Conquering Negative Thoughts
OVERCOMING SELF-DEFEATING 
ATTITUDES
As we move through life, all of us experience ups and downs. It’s not hard 
to think positively during the ups—but what about the downs? It can be 
tough to think positively when we are facing a tough challenge or a bitter 
disappointment. However, these are the times when we need the power of 
positive thinking the most.
Negative thinkers usually have negative attitudes toward themselves. 
A negative attitude about ourselves that dooms us to failure is known as a 
self-defeating attitude. People with a negative self-image develop a self￾defeating attitude in which they see themselves failing before they even 
try. They reinforce this self-defeating attitude through negative self-talk: 
“I’ll probably flunk this test” or “I know I won’t be invited to go out with 
everyone after work.”
The Power of Attitude
Self-defeating attitudes make it hard to succeed. The student who sees 
herself as a “D” student will often receive that grade. Why should she put in 
any effort to improve? She thinks she’ll never get a better grade. Self-defeating 
attitudes can make it hard to succeed socially, too. The new employee who 
has an image of himself as unpopular may find it hard to make friends. 
Why should he try? He doesn’t think there is anything he can do to change 
his circumstances. Unfortunately, this type of negative thinking can invite 
rejection. We have all noticed people at a social gathering who look uncom￾fortable, self-conscious, or maybe a little hostile. Why would anyone want 
to approach such people? Even though they may want to attract people, 
they really are driving everyone away. Negative thinkers need to encourage 
themselves to put on friendly smiles and introduce themselves to others.
Like all types of negative thinking, self-defeating attitudes seem logical 
enough on the surface. Consider the following example. A teacher once 
conducted an experiment on the students in her class, with their parents’ 
consent. The teacher told the class that scientists had found that people 
with blue eyes have greater natural learning abilities than people with 
brown eyes. She then divided the class into two groups, those with blue 
eyes and those with brown eyes. She had them wear signs that said “blue 
eyes” or “brown eyes.” After a week, the grades of the brown-eyed students 
fell significantly, while the grades of the blue-eyed students improved. The 
teacher then made a startling announcement to the class. She had made a 
mistake: Brown-eyed students are actually smarter than blue-eyed students. 
Up went the grades of the brown-eyed students, and down went the grades 
of the blue-eyed students. The students’ performance depended less on 
self-defeating 
attitude A negative 
attitude about oneself that 
leads to failure.
success secret
Self-defeating attitudes 
trick you into believing 
you can’t succeed.their abilities than on their attitudes toward themselves. Self-defeating atti￾tudes seem logical on the surface, but they are based on negative, distorted 
perceptions of ourselves and the world.
A Vicious Cycle
How do self-defeating attitudes do their damage? Let’s say you are 
convinced that you are no good at sports. This belief leads you to avoid 
athletic activities for fear of looking incompetent. The less you practice 
sports, however, the fewer opportunities you have to improve your athletic 
skills. When you do participate in sports, you are so worried about your 
performance that you can’t concentrate on the game, fumbling and stum￾bling as you miss key plays. Finally, you give up, convinced more than ever 
that you can’t play sports. Self-defeating attitudes like this one create a 
vicious cycle, a chain of events in which one negative event causes another 
negative event. The self-defeating attitude leads to self-defeating behavior. 
The self-defeating behavior leads to a negative outcome. The negative outcome 
strengthens the self-defeating attitude. This cycle is shown in Figure 5.2.
As an example, let’s say you are assigned to coordinate a big project at 
work. You immediately adopt a self-defeating attitude, telling yourself, 
“No one will help me on this project.” This self-defeating attitude leads to 
self-defeating behavior: You don’t ask anyone for help, and you even turn 
down offers of help. What is the outcome? No one helps. This negative 
outcome reinforces your self-defeating attitude: “See, I knew I couldn’t 
count on anyone.” As another example, let’s say you want to ask a friend 
vicious cycle A chain of 
events in which one negative 
event causes another 
negative event.
success secret
Negative attitudes produce 
negative results.
FIGURE 5.2 Self-Defeating Attitudes: A Vicious Cycle
Stop the Cycle When we have negative attitudes, we tend to act in ways that 
make our negative predictions about events come true. How can you break 
this vicious cycle?
Negative
Outcome
Self-Defeating
Attitude
Self-Defeating
Behavior218 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
out on a date. Your self-defeating attitude, however, causes you to tell 
yourself, “Someone like that would never go out with me.” Self-defeating 
behavior follows: You never ask your friend to go out with you. The 
predictable outcome? Your friend never goes out with you.
Changing Your Attitude
We can overcome self-defeating attitudes in the same way that we can 
overcome the inner critic that destroys our self-esteem—through self-awareness 
and positive self-talk. The first step is to realize what our self-defeating 
attitudes are doing to us. The second step is to replace our negative attitudes 
with positive self-statements.
Consider the following example: You have agreed to go to a big 
end-of-semester party. Instead of looking forward to it, though, you tell 
yourself, “I’m going to have a terrible time.” You have what seems like 
pretty good reasons for this self-defeating attitude—you have had a terrible 
time at parties in the past because you aren’t confident in your social skills. 
However, you need to realize that your attitude is making it impossible for 
you to have fun and meet new people. If you let this self-defeating attitude 
go unchallenged, you really will have a terrible time at the party.
What should you do now? You need to make an effort to replace your 
negative self-talk with positive self-talk. Every time you hear yourself think￾ing, “I’m going to have a terrible time,” immediately say to yourself, “I’m 
going to have a great time at this party.” Make an effort to stop dwelling on 
everything that could go wrong and to start focusing on ways you could 
have a good time.
All of us have self-defeating attitudes from time to time, especially when 
facing a situation that we are afraid we won’t be able to handle well. The 
key is to recognize the self-defeating attitudes and stop them in their tracks 
before they lead to a vicious cycle. Get up close and personal with your 
own self-defeating attitudes in Activity 27.
RECOGNIZING DISTORTED THOUGHTS
We’ve seen that self-defeating attitudes undermine our expectations and 
trick us into failing and feeling bad about ourselves. Now let’s take a look at 
a variety of distorted ways of thinking, known as cognitive distortions, that 
get in the way of positive thinking. A cognitive distortion is a self-critical, 
illogical pattern of thought. Cognitive distortions are often described as 
automatic thoughts because they occur to us automatically, before we 
think a situation through. Consider the following statements that contain 
cognitive distortions:
• “I didn’t get an A on that exam. I’m a failure.”
• “Four people I invited to my party didn’t come. I feel like such a loser!”
• “My girlfriend broke up with me. Well, there goes my last chance at 
happiness.”
success secret
Learn to recognize your 
self-defeating attitudes 
and turn them around with 
positive self-talk.
cognitive distortion
A self-critical, illogical pattern 
of thought.ACTIVITY 27: Challenging Self-Defeating Attitudes
A In numbers 1 through 3 below, imagine what self-defeating behavior would likely result from the self￾defeating attitude described, and what negative outcome would result from this self-defeating behavior. 
In numbers 4 through 6, construct similar scenarios using self-defeating attitudes that you have experi￾enced in your own life.
1. Self-Defeating Attitude: “I’m no good at making friends.”
 Self-Defeating Behavior: “I don’t say hello to anyone in class because I don’t know what to say 
after that.”
 Negative Outcome: “I didn’t meet any new friends in class.”
2. Self-Defeating Attitude: “I’m going to embarrass myself at this dance class.”
 Self-Defeating Behavior:
 Negative Outcome:
3. Self-Defeating Attitude: “This date is going to be a disaster.”
 Self-Defeating Behavior:
 Negative Outcome:
4. Self-Defeating Attitude:
 Self-Defeating Behavior:
 Negative Outcome:
5. Self-Defeating Attitude:
 Self-Defeating Behavior:
 Negative Outcome:
continued…220 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
6. Self-Defeating Attitude:
 Self-Defeating Behavior:
 Negative Outcome:
B Now use positive self-talk to turn around these self-defeating attitudes. Think of three positive 
self-statements that you could use to drown out these self-defeating attitudes and replace them with 
more positive ones. Then think of the positive behaviors and outcomes that would result from the new 
positive attitudes. (For numbers 4 through 6, use the self-defeating attitudes you described previously.)
1. Self-Defeating Attitude: “I’m no good at making friends.”
 Positive Self-Talk: “I may be shy, but my instructors tell me I ask intelligent questions. I’ll think of four 
or five good questions that will help start the conversation.”
 Positive Behavior: “After class, I asked the student next to me if she works part-time too and 
what course topics she thought were difficult.”
 Positive Outcome: “I found out we both have Mondays off and we set a time to meet for coffee
and go over notes together.”
2. Self-Defeating Attitude: “I’m going to make a fool of myself at this dance class.”
 Positive Self-Talk:
 Positive Behavior:
 Positive Outcome:3. Self-Defeating Attitude: “This date is going to be a disaster.” 
 Positive Self-Talk:
 Positive Behavior:
 Positive Outcome:
4. Self-Defeating Attitude:
 Positive Self-Talk:
 Positive Behavior:
 Positive Outcome:
5. Self-Defeating Attitude:
 Positive Self-Talk:
continued…222 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
 Positive Behavior:
 Positive Outcome:
6. Self-Defeating Attitude:
 Positive Self-Talk:
 Positive Behavior:
 Positive Outcome:
C Look over the positive self-statements you wrote above and on the previous page. Pick your three 
favorite statements and copy them below in large handwriting.
1. 
2. 
3. 
Read these three statements out loud. Whenever you find yourself thinking negatively, return to this page 
and read these statements out loud again. You may even want to photocopy them or cut them out and 
carry them with you.These statements are obviously distorted and exaggerated. Where is 
it written that not getting an A makes you a failure? Why are you a loser 
because four people couldn’t make it to your party? Who says your 
happiness is controlled by a single person?
The way we look at the problems and obstacles in our lives has a power￾ful effect on our happiness and our potential for success. How do you react 
to life’s frustrations and disappointments? Do you blame yourself, blame 
other people, or decide that life is out to get you? Or do you chalk it up to 
circumstance and hope for better luck next time?
Psychologist Aaron Beck, a founder of cognitive therapy, identified 
several types of cognitive distortions that people use to make themselves 
miserable. As you read about the following types of cognitive distortions, 
consider whether any of them might apply to you.
All-or-Nothing Thinking All-or-nothing thinking causes you to view 
issues as black or white, with no shades of gray in between. For example, 
Elesha sees people as law-abiding citizens or crooks. When she discovers that a 
coworker registers her car at her mother’s address to save money on insurance, 
she views her coworker as a criminal. Elesha fails to realize that sometimes 
good people do bad things and sometimes bad people do good things.
Overgeneralizing Overgeneralizing is drawing broad negative con￾clusions based on limited evidence. If one bad thing happens, you conclude 
that only bad things will happen to you for the rest of your life. Overgener￾alizers get a lot of mileage out of the words always and never. Jason’s girl￾friend breaks up with him to date someone else. On the basis of this one 
event, Jason assumes that every woman he dates will leave him.
Filtering Filtering is a mental habit of blocking positive inputs and 
focusing on negative ones. When you filter, you focus so intensely on the 
negative that it takes over your entire field of vision. Your good qualities 
don’t count; your achievements mean nothing. Jamaal walks away 
depressed from a meeting with his instructor because of one small 
criticism, even though he received many compliments. Keiko, an A 
student, gets a D in a difficult science class. She immediately forgets 
her string of successes and tells herself she is a terrible student.
Helpless Thinking Helpless thinking is the irrational belief that 
your life is not under your own control—that someone else is pulling the 
strings. Diane leaves projects unfinished, lets bills go unpaid, and allows 
relationships to fizzle because she feels that nothing she does will make 
any difference anyway. As we discovered earlier in this chapter, helpless 
thinking is “learned,” and can be changed into “learned optimism” over time.
Self-Blame Self-blame is the habit of blaming everything on yourself, 
regardless of the real cause. Self-blamers apologize whenever something 
goes wrong. Sheila, an executive assistant, apologizes profusely when her 
success secret
Life’s setbacks and 
frustrations can’t defeat 
you, but a negative 
attitude toward them can.
overgeneralizing
Drawing broad negative 
conclusions based on limited 
evidence.
success secret
Examine your thinking 
for distortions and 
exaggerations.224 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
boss’s plane is delayed due to fog. She is convinced that she is to blame 
somehow for the bad weather.
Personalizing Personalizing is assuming that everything has to do 
with you somehow. Personalizing is sometimes known as egocentric 
(self-centered) thinking. Leslie hears a group of students laughing and 
assumes they are laughing at the way she looks. In fact, they were laugh￾ing at a harmless joke. Jahi receives a group e-mail from his boss asking 
people to limit their personal phone calls. He immediately assumes that 
his boss is angry at him personally and that the message is really 
intended just for him.
Mind Reading Mind reading means assuming that other people 
think the same way you do: When you think bad thoughts about yourself, 
you assume that everyone else is doing the same. Dwight assumes that 
his girlfriend is constantly angry with him because she often comes 
home from work in a bad mood. The fact is, his girlfriend is unhappy 
with her job.
Emotional Reasoning Emotional reasoning involves assuming 
that your negative emotions reflect the way things really are: You feel it, 
so it must be true. Jorge asks a friend out on a date, and she declines. 
Jorge feels rejected and unattractive, so he concludes that he is an 
unattractive reject.
Catastrophizing Catastrophizing means dramatically exaggerating 
the negative consequences of any minor event. Catastrophizers don’t just 
worry about real problems—they also worry about imaginary problems. 
Catastrophizers are constantly worrying, “What if . . .?” Onida’s instructor 
tells her that she can raise her grade by expanding her research paper. 
Onida immediately catastrophizes, worrying, “What if I make the paper 
worse? What if I fail the class?”
Do any of these ways of thinking sound familiar? They are closely related, 
and if you have done one of them, you have probably done the others at 
one time or another, too. They all have one important thing in common: 
a pessimistic outlook that transforms the frustrations and disappointments 
of everyday life into earth-shattering disasters.
Irrational Beliefs
Why do people think in distorted, negative ways? According to Albert Ellis, 
founder of rational emotive behavior therapy (REBT), each of us has a variety 
of underlying ideas and assumptions that interfere with our thinking. Ellis 
calls these distorted, self-destructive assumptions irrational beliefs. Irrational 
beliefs are harsh rules about how the world should work and how we and 
other people should act. Like most rules, they are rigid and absolute, 
personalizing Assuming 
that everything has to do with 
oneself somehow.
catastrophizing
Dramatically exaggerating 
the negative consequences 
of any minor event.
irrational belief A 
distorted, self-destructive 
idea or assumption that 
interferes with one’s thinking.containing words such as always, never, totally, must, and have to. Ellis 
identified several common irrational beliefs, including:
• I must succeed at everything.
• I must be loved by everyone.
• If doesn’t love me, I’m worthless.
• I should never make mistakes.
• I should be kind, generous, competent, and loving at all times.
• I should worry about every bad thing that could possibly happen.
• I should be very upset about other people’s problems.
• I should always put other people’s needs first.
• I can’t do anything about my feelings.
• I can’t do anything about my bad habits—they’re stronger than me.
• My past is the cause of all my problems.
• If I don’t get what I want, it’s terrible, and I can’t stand it.
• If people do something I don’t like, they must be punished.
• I should never feel angry, anxious, inadequate, jealous, or vulnerable.
• If I’m alone, then I have to feel miserable and unfulfilled.
• People should be the way I expect them to be.
According to Ellis, these irrational beliefs all boil down to three faulty 
assumptions:
1. I must do well. (If I don’t, I’m worthless.)
2. You must treat me well. (If you don’t, you must be punished.)
3. The world must be easy. (If it isn’t, it’s intolerable.)
These beliefs are irrational because they have no basis in fact. They are 
based on the way we think things ought to be, not the way things really 
are. Why must I always do well? Why must everyone treat me the way I 
want? Why should life be easy all the time?
Irrational beliefs get in the way of attaining our goals, and they pro￾duce conflict with others. They lead to negative thought patterns and to 
negative emotional reactions such as guilt, anger, and sadness. Take Annike’s 
example. Her husband Jaime has told her he wants a divorce. Annike is in 
emotional pain. However, she makes the situation even more painful for 
herself through irrational beliefs: “Jaime left me, so every man will leave 
me.” “Jaime doesn’t love me, so no man will ever love me.” “Jaime aban￾doned me, so I deserve to be abandoned.” “Jaime doesn’t love me, so I’m 
worthless.”
To make these irrational beliefs more rational, we need to learn to say, 
“I would like,” “It would be nice if,” or “I would rather” instead of, “I must” 
or, “I should.” For example, consider the irrational belief, “I must be loved 
by everyone.” This belief is setting you up for failure and emotional pain. It 
is healthier to tell yourself, “Sure, it would be nice to be loved by everyone, 
but that just isn’t possible or realistic. I can’t realistically expect everyone to 
love me. After all, no one can please everyone all the time.” Try rewriting 
your irrational beliefs in a similar way in Personal Journal 5.3.
success secret
Try to think in realistic 
terms, not absolutes.
success secret
Negative thoughts lead to 
unpleasant emotions and 
self-defeating actions.226 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
Personal Journal 5.3
From Irrational to Rational
Reread the list of irrational beliefs on page 225. Choose four that resonate with you, then rewrite them to 
be more realistic. Remember to remove all extreme words such as must, should, can’t, have to, never, 
and always.
Irrational Belief:
Rational Belief:
Irrational Belief:
Rational Belief:
Irrational Belief:
Rational Belief:
Irrational Belief:
Rational Belief:
CHANGING YOUR NEGATIVE THOUGHTS
As we saw in Chapter 3, much of our distress is caused by the way we 
view events, not by the events themselves. Ellis’s theory, known as the 
ABC model, describes how negative consequences such as stress, unhappiness, guilt, and anger result from a combination of an event and 
our belief about the event:
• A—activating event
• B—belief
• C—consequences
To see how the ABC model works, imagine the following situation. You 
spend two weeks preparing for a big oral report in your biology class. On the 
day of the presentation, however, nothing goes right. You’re nervous; you 
forget some of your notes; and the class isn’t paying attention. When you get 
your evaluation, you find that you’ve received a full grade lower than you 
had hoped. This is A, the activating event. Now comes B, your irrational 
belief. Deep down, you believe that you have to do everything perfectly; if 
you don’t, you’re a failure. You tell yourself, “I’m a zero. I might as well 
forget about a career in science.” What are the consequences, C? You feel 
depressed and worthless. Perhaps you even drop the class or change majors.
Learning Your ABCDEs
To keep negative consequences from getting in our way, we need to change 
our irrational beliefs. We can change our beliefs by adding two more steps, 
D and E, to the ABC model:
• D—Dispute
• E—Exchange
This revised model, known as the ABCDE method and depicted in 
Figure 5.3, describes how we can alter our irrational beliefs and produce 
better, more positive emotional and behavioral consequences for ourselves.
D stands for dispute. To dispute our irrational beliefs means to confront 
them with the facts of the situation. We must remain vigilant about nega￾tive thoughts and, when they occur, dispute them vigorously. When you 
have a negative, irrational, exaggerated thought, ask yourself:
• Why? Who says so?
• Where is it written that this is true?
• Am I jumping to conclusions?
• Am I exaggerating?
• Am I demanding the impossible?
• What evidence is there for this thought?
• Is it really as bad as it seems?
• Is there another explanation that would work as well or better?
• What if the worst happens—so what?
• What other interpretations are possible?
• Do I have all the facts?
• Am I looking at things all in extremes?
• Am I taking one example and assuming it is a pattern?
• Am I focusing on the negative and ignoring the positive?
• Am I exaggerating the negative consequences of the situation?
ABCDE method An 
approach to coping with 
negative thoughts and feelings 
by disputing irrational beliefs.
dispute To confront 
irrational beliefs with the 
reality of the situation.228 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
• Am I assuming that something is going to happen because I’m afraid 
it will?
• Am I using emotional words that trigger negative feelings?
• Is this thought producing feelings I want to have?
To be an effective disputer, try to separate your emotional reaction 
from the reality of the situation. Are you really being objective? For 
instance, in the example on page 227, when you begin having negative 
thoughts about your biology presentation, you can stop yourself and think, 
“OK, wait. I’m exaggerating. Does getting a so-so grade on one oral report 
mean I’m a total failure? No. I’m also ignoring the positive. I almost forgot 
that the instructor said she enjoyed having me in the class.” This dispute is 
based on rational thinking and evidence.
The fifth and last element of the ABCDE method is E, exchange.
Exchange stands for the new, positive outcome that you want to substitute, 
or exchange, for the negative one. In this case, E means forgiving yourself 
and focusing on the future. Now you can tell yourself, “No one’s perfect. 
I’ll make a point of being more organized next time.”
The ABCDE method is easy to use in your daily life. When you find 
yourself jumping to distorted negative conclusions, stop and consider what 
irrational beliefs might be motivating them. Dispute the negative thoughts 
and feelings with the facts of the situation. Try your hand at using the 
ABCDE method in Activity 28. After tackling some hypothetical scenarios, 
you’ll be ready to apply the method to a problem in your life.
success secret
Separate your emotional 
reaction from the reality 
of your situation.
FIGURE 5.3 The ABCDE Method
Turning Beliefs Around Once we are aware of the irrational beliefs that are 
distorting our thinking and making us unhappy, we can use effective disputes 
to create healthier, more positive outcomes for ourselves. What are some 
questions you can ask yourself to help dispute an irrational belief?
E
Dispute
challenge we
make to our
irrational belief
Exchange
positive new
behavioral =+
outcome
D
A C
Activating
Event
any stress￾causing situation
Belief
how we evaluate
the situation
Consequences
negative
behavioral ++
outcome
BACTIVITY 28: Disputing Negative Thoughts
A Consider the following situations. Given the activating events and the beliefs that follow, identify the 
likely negative consequences (thoughts, feelings, and actions).
1. Activating Event: Your boss snaps at you when you ask how he’s doing.
 Belief: “He must be unhappy with my work.”
 Consequences: “I’m sure I’m going to get a bad review next week. Instead of working late on 
this project tonight I should probably start updating my résumé.”
 Dispute: “All my reports have been thorough and on time and our sales are on target. I must 
have just walked by at a bad time.”
 Exchange: “I’ll stay focused on my work and continue with the project goals I’ve set.”
2. Activating Event: A friend throws a party, but she doesn’t invite you.
 Belief: “I guess I’m not cool enough for her.”
 Consequences:
 Dispute:
 Exchange:
3. Activating Event: You and your best friend have planned to meet for lunch, but she fails to 
show up.
 Belief: “It’s totally unfair of her to stand me up.”
 Consequences:
 Dispute:
 Exchange:
continued…230 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
4. Activating Event: You don’t get a new job you were hoping for.
 Belief: “I’m a failure.”
 Consequences:
 Dispute:
 Exchange:
5. Activating Event: You’re looking forward to a relaxing weekend, when a friend asks you to 
spend the next two days helping him move into a new apartment.
 Belief: “I should always put other people’s needs first.”
 Consequences:
 Dispute:
 Exchange:
B Use the following space to record one of your own experiences with the ABCDE method. What upsetting 
event, A, led you to have a negative, distorted thought, B, and what were the consequences, C? Fill in 
disputes, D, you made to your negative beliefs and describe the positive outcome that you exchanged, 
E, for the old one. If you didn’t think of an effective dispute at the time the event occurred, think of one 
now and describe what might have happened differently if you had used this dispute at the time.
A:
B:  
C: 
D:  
E:  
  Practice Makes Perfect Irrational beliefs, like negative self-talk, 
can be changed through practice. When you begin to use the ABCDE 
method, you will probably catch yourself thinking the same irrational 
thoughts. This is normal. After all, negative thinking can be a strong habit. 
Instead of criticizing yourself for having irrational beliefs, dispute the 
beliefs calmly and rationally. You will soon train yourself to banish negative 
thoughts and focus on positive possibilities.
Self Check
1. What are self-defeating attitudes? (p. 216)
2. According to Albert Ellis, what three faulty assumptions drive irrational 
beliefs? (p. 225)
3. What does ABCDE stand for? (p. 227)232 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
Summary by Learning Objectives
• Define positive thinking and cite its benefits. Positive thinking means focusing on what is 
good about ourselves, other people, and the world around us. Positive thinking can help you 
achieve your goals, overcome obstacles, boost your mood, improve your relationships, and 
maintain a healthy lifestyle.
•List six habits that can help you become a more positive thinker. Six positive habits that 
can help boost your positive attitude toward life are: (1) look for the good; (2) choose positive 
words; (3) surround yourself with positive people; (4) accept people and things for what they 
are; (5) limit complaints; (6) focus on realistic outcomes.
•Explain the link between positive thinking and good health. Positive thinking speeds 
healing and motivates you to eat right, exercise, and adopt a healthy lifestyle. Feeling fit and 
healthy, in turn, helps you think positively.
• Describe how self-defeating attitudes create a vicious cycle. Self-defeating attitudes 
create a vicious cycle by leading to self-defeating behaviors, which in turn lead to negative 
outcomes. These negative outcomes “prove” that the self-defeating attitude was correct, which 
causes the cycle to repeat itself again and again.
• Define cognitive distortions and irrational beliefs and give an example of each.
Cognitive distortions are self-critical, illogical patterns of thought that people use to make 
themselves miserable. One common cognitive distortion is catastrophizing, dramatically 
exaggerating the negative consequences of any minor event. Irrational beliefs are distorted, 
self-destructive assumptions such as “I should never make mistakes.”
•Summarize the ABCDE method for overcoming irrational beliefs. In the ABCDE 
method, A stands for the activating event that triggers B, an irrational belief. C stands for the 
negative consequences of the belief. D stands for dispute, which means analyzing the logic of 
the irrational belief. D leads to E, exchange, a more desirable outcome.
Key Terms
Chapter 5 Review and Activities
positive thinking (p. 194)
optimism (p. 194)
attitude (p. 195)
negative thinking (p. 197)
pessimism (p. 197)
judgmentalism (p. 203)
complaint (p. 203)
worry (p. 204)
placebo effect (p. 208)
depression (p. 209)
self-defeating attitude (p. 216)
vicious cycle (p. 217)
cognitive distortion (p. 218)
overgeneralizing (p. 223)
personalizing (p. 224)
catastrophizing (p. 224)
irrational belief (p. 224)
ABCDE method (p. 227)
dispute (p. 227)Review and Activities
Review Questions
1. Why does having positive expectations of success help you attain it?
2. What is the relationship between negative thinking and depression?
3. Name three healthy eating habits and three healthy exercise habits.
4. Give an example of a self-defeating attitude and the vicious cycle it creates.
5. Which cognitive distortion involves the false belief that you are not in control of your life?
6. Explain how to dispute irrational beliefs.
Critical Thinking
7. Worry William James, a pioneering 19th-century psychologist, once said this: “If you 
believe that feeling bad or worrying long enough will change a past or future event, you are 
residing on another planet with a different reality system.” Explain what this statement means 
and whether you agree with it. Could worrying ever change a future event? Why or why not?
8. Optimism and Academic Success A study was conducted on a large group of college 
freshmen in Pennsylvania to investigate the relationship between optimism and academic 
performance. The results? The optimistic students dramatically outperformed the pessimistic 
students. They even outperformed pessimistic students who had much higher standardized 
test scores and high school GPAs. What do the results of this study show? Why do you think 
optimism would be so closely linked to success in college?
Application
9. Negative and Positive News The majority of news programs begin their broadcast with 
the most negative stories of the day to create “shock appeal” for viewers and audience ratings 
for their sponsors. Watch thirty minutes of your daily local or national news. Note each of 
the stories covered (such as crimes, political, world, celebrity news). How many of the stories 
are negative? How many are positive? Why do you think negative stories capture viewers’ 
attention? What stories were you attracted to most, and why?
10. Spreading Positive Energy Whether you’re feeling positive or not, making an effort to 
engage others in a positive manner, if only for a brief encounter, will do wonders to boost 
your mood and, most likely, theirs. Practice this experiment for one day: Try interacting with 
everyone you meet with a positive greeting, statement, or even just a smile. Whether it’s a grocery 
store cashier or someone you pass on the street, try offering up something positive: eye con￾tact, a smile, a greeting (hello, how are you today?), a compliment (I really like your shirt), 
or just an observation (great weather today, isn’t it?). Describe what you did and how people 
responded to you. How did it make them feel? Did it boost your positive attitude?234 Chapter 5 Positive Thinking
Review and Activities
Internet Activities
11. Optimist’s Creed Read “The Optimist’s Creed” (https://www.optimist.org/Documents/
creed_poster.pdf)
1. Be so strong that nothing can disturb your peace of mind.
2. Talk health, happiness, and prosperity to everyone you meet.
3. Make your friends feel there is something good in them.
4. Look at the sunny side of everything and make your optimism come true.
5. Think only of the best, work only for the best, and expect only the best.
6. Be just as enthusiastic about the success of others as you are about your own.
7. Forget the mistakes of the past and move on to the greater achievements of the future.
8. Wear a cheerful face at all times and give everyone you meet a smile.
9. Give so much time to the improvement of yourself that you have no time to criticize others.
10. Be too large to worry, too noble for anger, too strong for fear, and too happy to look for trouble.
For each of the ten points in the creed, write down an action you could take to incorporate it into 
your life. Then write an eleventh point of your own choosing that could be added to the creed.
12. This I Believe Go to http://thisibelieve.org/ and read or listen to some of the essays. 
Write a This I Believe of your own and share it with a classmate. See below for an example.
 (personal creed of an unknown community college freshman woman, age 19) I believe in 
myself. I believe that all people have the equal right to become all they are willing and able to 
become. I believe that I am as good as anyone in the world. Although I may never be on the 
cover of Time magazine, I still have time to make a really positive difference in my life. 
I believe that although I may not be the best looking in the group, I’ll always be looking my 
best in every group. I believe in this and the next generation, and believe we’ll build a better 
nation. I believe good health means more than wealth. I believe in caring and sharing, rather 
than comparing. I believe of all the people I see, still I’d rather be me.
Review your answer to the question in the Real-Life Success 
Story on page 192. Think about how you would answer the ques￾tion now that you have completed the chapter.
Complete the Story Pretend that you are a friend of Jessica’s 
and are waiting with her for her interviewer to arrive. Write a 
dialogue between Jessica and yourself in which you explain why 
her self-defeating attitude will lead to a vicious cycle. Also, provide 
Jessica tips for using positive self-talk to help her turn her attitude 
around.
“Will Things Go My Way?” Real-Life 
Success Story
Colin Anderson/Blend Images LLC236
Real-Life 
Success Story
Westend61/Getty Images
Big Dreams, Big Fears
Jeannette Slawson, a legal secretary, found herself 
thumbing through her local university’s catalog of 
prelaw courses. She had thought many times about 
becoming a lawyer, but it always seemed like an 
impossible dream. She would have to complete 
several prelaw courses even before going to three 
years of law school—four years if she took night 
classes. She wondered if she really had the self￾discipline to see her plans through. She pictured 
herself handling the tough schedule for a year or 
two, then dropping out.
Big Changes
Deep down, Jeannette knew that no one was stopping 
her from changing but herself. For every obstacle she 
could imagine, she could think of a workable solution; 
but every time she thought about taking action, she 
became nervous. She didn’t hate her job, and she had 
a comfortable routine. It was easier to accept her life 
as it was than to force herself to make a change.
What Do You Think? Should Jeannette follow 
through on her plan to become a lawyer? Why or 
why not?
“Should I Make a Change?”6Chapter
learning objectives
After you complete this chapter, 
you should be able to:
• Define self-discipline and cite 
its benefits.
• Explain how to control impulses.
• Describe the process of 
replacing bad habits with 
good ones.
• Define critical thinking and list 
its seven standards.
• List the steps in the decision￾making process.
The most difficult thing is the decision 
to act; the rest is merely tenacity.
Amelia Earhart, American aviator
”
introduction
This chapter introduces self-discipline—what it is, why 
it’s important, and how to practice it. In Section 6.1 
you’ll explore the benefits of self-discipline and learn 
about the key concepts of self-determination and persis￾tence. You’ll also learn how to control your impulses by 
considering the long-term consequences of your actions. 
Then you’ll look at how self-discipline can help you 
make difficult changes, including changing bad habits 
into better ones. In Section 6.2 you’ll learn about self￾disciplined thinking by exploring the elements of 
critical thinking and learning how to make logical, 
step-by-step decisions.
Self-Discipline
“238 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
SECTION 6.1 Taking Control of Your Life
WHAT IS SELF-DISCIPLINE?
No matter how motivated you are, how many skills you have, and how 
self-confident you are, you will need self-discipline to achieve your goals. 
Self-discipline is the process of teaching yourself to do what is necessary to 
reach your goals, without becoming sidetracked by bad habits. Self-discipline 
can be hard, but it’s worth it. It gives you a feeling of self-expectancy and 
control over your life.
Many people have defined self-discipline as sacrificing or doing 
without. A better definition of self-discipline is doing within while 
you’re doing without. Self-discipline is taking responsibility for 
outcomes, and then having the determination and perseverance to 
take daily actions that will override current information stored in the 
subconscious memory bank. Through relentless training, trial and error, 
and adjustments the result is internalization of new, positive habits. 
Practice makes permanent.
In earlier chapters, you considered what you want out of life and how 
your goals can help you get there. To achieve your goals, you need to keep 
yourself on track and move forward. Self-discipline helps you do this by 
strengthening your ability to:
• control your destiny
• persist in the face of setbacks
• weigh the long-term consequences of your actions
• make positive changes
• replace bad habits with healthy habits
• think critically
• make effective decisions
Self-discipline helps you in countless areas of your life. You rely on 
self-discipline to stick to your study schedule when you would rather 
binge watch your favorite show, to resist the temptation of eating a 
second donut, and to get up when your smartphone alarm goes off in 
the morning.
All successful people rely on self-discipline. A time comes when the 
small daily gains that come from being disciplined add up to extraordi￾nary success. Take rock musician Suzanne Vega. She started out playing 
in coffeehouses and developing a small following. Then she made her 
own mailing list and sent out flyers to advertise her shows. She kept a 
notebook recording the details of every show: the songs she sang, what 
the audience response was, even how she did her hair. Each time she 
performed, she tried to outdo herself, to make her music better. Her 
self-discipline helped her achieve her goal of becoming an outstanding 
songwriter and performer.
self-discipline The 
process of teaching oneself 
to do what is necessary to 
reach important goals, 
without becoming 
sidetracked by bad habits.
success secret
All successful people rely 
on self-discipline.Elements of Self-Discipline
The word discipline comes from the Latin verb meaning “to teach.” To 
build strong self-discipline, we teach ourselves to act in positive ways, even 
when we are tired, bored, frustrated, or feeling down. This requires two key 
abilities, as shown in Figure 6.1:
• Persistence—Persistence allows you to put in effort, again and again, 
until you reach your goal. You need persistence to keep going instead of 
giving up.
• Self-determination—With self-determination, you are the master of your 
life. Instead of sitting back and waiting for something to happen, you 
take action.
Both of these elements are equally important. Without persistence, 
you can’t rely on yourself to see your plans through and do what it takes 
to succeed. Without self-determination, you can’t take control of your 
decisions and actions.
The Power of Persistence
The first half of self-discipline is persistence—the ability to go on despite 
opposition, setbacks, and occasional doubts. Persistence is a never-say-die 
attitude—a determination to succeed.
History is full of people who have used persistence to make it against 
all the odds. Helen Keller (1880–1968) was blind and deaf from infancy, 
yet with the help of a dedicated teacher, she learned to speak and read. 
A determined teacher in France, Louis Braille (1809–1852), blind from age 
persistence The ability 
to go on despite opposition, 
setbacks, and occasional 
doubts.
FIGURE 6.1 Ingredients of Self-Discipline
Taking Charge Self-discipline lets you control your life and make your plans and 
dreams a reality. How could practicing self-discipline raise your self-esteem?
Self￾Determination
Self￾Discipline Persistence240 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
three, invented a system in 1829 to help sightless people read. Millions of 
people still use the Braille system today.
Author James Michener once said, “Character consists of what you do 
on the third and fourth tries.” In other words, keep working toward your 
goal even if you don’t have success on the first or second try. Don’t give up.
Comedian Jay Leno didn’t succeed on his first try. Told early on that 
he had a face that would “scare children,” Leno didn’t give up on his dream 
of becoming a professional comedian. When a college admissions officer 
told Leno he wasn’t college material, Leno didn’t give up either. He sat 
outside the officer’s desk twelve hours a day until the man agreed to give 
him a chance. Later, Leno performed almost every day of the year on 
the comedy circuit to improve his act, finally landing the host’s job on 
The Tonight Show and becoming one of the most recognizable personalities 
on television. “I’m an example of success through persistence,” he says.
Another great example of persistence against all odds is J. K. Rowling, the 
wealthiest and most successful author in the world, thanks to her incredible 
Harry Potter collection. Did you know that her parents were very disappointed 
that she was born female and that most of her early years through adulthood 
were filled with fears, insecurity, failure, and depression? She wrote her first 
Harry Potter book, in longhand, in a café in Scotland, while on welfare. She 
remarked, “Failure was a stripping away of the inessential. I stopped pretend￾ing to myself that I was anything other than what I was. I began to direct all 
my energy into finishing the only work that mattered to me. It is impossible to 
live without failing at something, unless you live so cautiously that you might 
as well not have lived at all—in which case, you fail by default. I think you’re 
working and learning until you die. I can, with my hand on my heart, say I will 
never write for any reason other than I burningly wanted to write the book.” 
Imagine what persistence could do for you in Personal Journal 6.1.
Self-Determination
The second part of self-discipline is self-determination. Self-determination 
means determining the path your life travels.
Some people believe that fate, luck, or some other force outside their 
control shapes the outcome of their lives. People who feel that life is deter￾mined by chance circumstances or by being in the right place at the right 
time are more likely to doubt and fear their future than people who know 
they are in control. People who feel that they do not control what happens 
to them believe they are victims of circumstance. They simply float along 
wherever the current of life takes them.
No matter who you are, you are in charge of where you are right now 
and where you go from here. Ask yourself, “Am I steering my own ship, or 
am I a victim of fate?” Are you doing things in life because you want to do 
them or because you feel they have been forced upon you? If you allow 
yourself to be pressured into doing things that you would rather not do, you 
may be giving up control of your life to other people.
success secret
Success doesn’t always 
come on the first or 
second try.
self-determination
Determining the path one’s 
life travels.Personal Journal 6.1
Going Against the Odds
Imagine that your dream is to write and publish a novel about your life. Listed in the left-hand box below 
are some obstacles that you might face. Think of one way that you could use persistence to overcome 
each obstacle.
Obstacle To overcome this obstacle:
Not enough free time for writing
Don’t know how to start novel
Life isn’t interesting enough
Writer’s block
Accidentally delete first five chapters 
from computer
Rejected by publisher
Rejected by publisher again
Other:
How could you use persistence to overcome obstacles standing between you and your dream?
Taking Responsibility People who are in control of their lives 
display responsibility, the ability to make independent, proactive decisions 
and to accept the consequences of those choices.
We are given a set of characteristics at birth, but we make the decisions that 
determine our success in life. We have to ask ourselves who we are and how we 
got where we are. The 18th-century French writer Voltaire compared life to a 
game of cards. Each player is dealt a certain hand. This hand is the genetics and 
responsibility The 
ability to make independent, 
proactive decisions and to 
accept the consequences 
of them.242 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
environment that are given to us. We as players, however, are responsible 
for how we play that hand, what to keep and what to toss out. We make the 
decisions that determine our success in life. We decide how to shape our lives.
In his book Taking Responsibility: Self-Reliance and the Accountable Life,
Nathaniel Branden speaks of responsibility as “the practice of making 
oneself the cause of the effects one wants, as contrasted with a policy of 
hoping or demanding that someone else do something while one’s own 
contribution is to wait and suffer.” Are you waiting, perhaps without even 
realizing it, for someone to “do something”? Make that person be you!
Although many things in life are beyond anyone’s control, you do have 
a great deal of control—more than most of us are willing to acknowledge—
over many circumstances and conditions.
• You can control what you do with most of your free time. Instead of using 
social media to see how other people are living their lives, consider 
exiting from your app and start living your own life. Explore the outdoors, 
travel, interact with family and friends, eat at ethnic restaurants, read, 
attend artistic and artisan shows, or consider starting a business. Get up 
and see what the world has to offer!
• You can control how much energy you exert and effort you give to each 
task you undertake. Prioritize your projects. Balance personal and 
professional goals. Finish what you start. Learn what times of day your 
energy levels are the highest. Do important work during those peak periods.
• You can control your thoughts and imagination, and channel them. 
Target entertainment (streaming shows, podcasts, reels, etc.) with 
content that can immediately impact your personal and professional 
goals instead of content that is more or less a time killer. Read more 
inspirational biographies of people who have overcome enormous 
obstacles to become successful.
• You can control your attitude. Hang out and network with optimists on a 
regular basis.
• You can control your tongue. You can choose to remain silent or choose 
to speak. If you choose to speak, you can choose your words, body 
language, and tone of voice. When you meet someone new, ask more 
questions and don’t try to impress him/her/their with your exploits. The 
less you try to impress, the more impressive you will be. Say to yourself, 
“I’ll make them glad they talked to me.” And hope that they will be 
thinking, “I like me best when I’m with you.”
• You can control your choice of role models. The best role model is not 
necessarily a celebrity or expert. It is more likely someone you can get to 
know personally and closely—preferably someone with a background or 
career path similar to yours; someone who has been where you are now. 
For personal role models and mentors, seek those who have not only 
achieved external success but whose whole lives, including their personal 
conduct, merit emulation. Career success can rarely be separated from 
character; one facet of a person’s life invariably affects the other facets.
success secret
Don’t wait for someone 
else to do something—
take action!• You can control your commitments, the things you absolutely promise 
yourself and others that you’ll do. Don’t overcommit; it can lead to missed 
deadlines which can lead to you looking worse than just saying “no” in the 
first place. Break your commitments into stair-step priorities and goals, 
ones that are reasonably easy to hit and easy to correct if missed.
• You can control the causes to which you give your time and emotion. 
Focus more on positive programs with socially redeeming benefits. 
Instead of a protestor, become a producer and protector.
• You can control your memberships. Congregate with people having 
similar goals or those who are overcoming similar challenges with 
knowledge, attitude, skills, and habits.
• You can control your concerns and worries. Find a relaxation and 
exercise program that helps you release tension. A quiet place, a garden, 
the sea, and soft music can do wonders for the soul. So can interaction 
with wildlife, as well as interaction with domestic animals.
• You can control your response to difficult times and people. One of the 
best ways to overcome depression is to become active in helping other 
people in need.
Do you feel in control of your life? Do you see yourself as responsible 
for your success, or are you sitting on the sidelines of your life? To test your 
attitude, complete Activity 29.
CONTROLLING IMPULSES
One excellent way to increase your self-discipline is to learn and practice 
impulse control. An impulse is a sudden wish or feeling that can lead to 
unplanned and unwise actions.
We all do things on impulse. We might buy a new app, grab a bag of 
chips, or take a day trip just because we suddenly feel like it. Acting on 
impulse once in a while is relatively harmless. When impulses guide our 
behavior too often, however, we lose the ability to plan for the future. If we 
get in the habit of following our impulses, we can even do self-destructive 
things that we will regret later. Take Richard’s example. Stressed and 
overworked, Richard got annoyed with his boss one day and quit his job on 
impulse. Unfortunately, it took Richard several months to find a new job. 
He lost the good recommendation of his former employer and had to sell 
some of his belongings to make ends meet.
Even if we don’t make such big mistakes, acting on impulse can cost us. 
It can cause us to spend too much money, waste time, overeat, overreact, 
and do other things that are not good for us or others, such as:
• yelling
• making comments we wish we could take back later
• drinking alcohol or smoking
• disregarding obligations and letting people down
• driving dangerously
impulse A sudden wish 
or feeling that can lead to 
unplanned and unwise 
actions.244 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
ACTIVITY 29: Do You Control Your Life?
A Indicate with a check mark whether you Agree or Disagree with each statement below.
Agree Disagree
1. Success is a matter of hard work.
2. My life seems like a series of random events.
3. Marriage is pretty much a gamble for most people.
4. Persistence and hard work usually lead to success.
5. If I don’t get something I want, that means it’s just not meant to be.
6. Many tests are so unfair that studying is practically useless.
7. Successful leaders are the ones who work hard.
8. It’s hard to know whether anyone really likes you.
9. People either respect you or they don’t.
10. Voters are ultimately responsible for bad government.
11. Success at work is a matter of knowing the right people.
12. If I don’t succeed on a task, I tend to give up.
B Scoring: Assign yourself one point for each of the following statements that you agreed with: 2, 3, 5, 6, 
8, 9, 11, and 12. Also, assign yourself one point for each of the following statements that you disagreed
with: 1, 4, 7, and 10. The higher your score, the stronger your belief that outside forces control your life. 
The lower your score, the stronger your belief that you control your life.
What is your total? 
1–4 You feel in control of your life, and you are willing to work hard for success.
5–8 You feel that some things are under your control but not others. You will benefit from 
developing a more positive, can-do attitude toward your life.
9–12 You don’t feel in control of your life or your success, and you probably give up easily. You 
need to analyze your self-defeating attitudes and replace them with more positive ones.
C What are some specific steps you can take to feel more in control of your life?Poor impulse control contributes to major problems such as gambling, drug 
addiction, and compulsive spending.
Thinking Long Term
Acting on impulse is appealing because it offers instant gratification 
(reward). Buying that new outfit or cutting off an inconsiderate driver in 
traffic is a lot more satisfying than saving money for tuition or driving 
quietly and politely. That’s why impulses can be so hard to resist—they’re 
tempting! Unfortunately, when the credit card payment is due or when we 
find ourselves in a traffic accident, we wish we could go back in time and 
do things differently. How do we stop this from happening? Instead of 
living day to day or moment to moment, we need to examine how our 
choices will affect our long-term goals.
To do this, we need to think about consequences, the logical effects of 
our actions. Consequences can be negative or positive, short term or long 
term. Short-term consequences, the immediate results of an action, are 
consequences The 
logical effects of an action.
Applying Psychology
A Little Guilt Can Be Good for You
Considering fifty-nine percent of Americans have credit card debt, chances are impulse 
buying has played a major role. According to a survey conducted by the Consumer 
Federation of America, thirty-seven percent of respondents cited impulse buying—
making purchases that aren’t preplanned—as a major obstacle to saving money. Think 
of how many times you’ve gone into Walmart or Target for a few items—and come out 
with a full cart. And think of how many online shopping carts you’ve filled on Amazon.
com, Apple.com, or on any of the thirty million e-commerce sites.
After the “rush” you may feel from your had-to-have purchase is gone, now 
comes the credit card bill to pay for the unplanned items, and often anxiety over 
figuring out how to pay for it all. Research indicates that how you cope with a poor 
spending experience can determine how you shop in the future. According to a study conducted by the 
University of Guelph, feeling some guilt after an impulse purchase may actually cause you to take positive 
steps the next time, such as cutting back on other expenses, refraining from window shopping and mall 
trekking, and creating a shopping list before heading out or logging in. Thus, you’ve learned from your 
mistake and are taking steps to avoid doing it again.
However, those who experience shame (negative feelings related to self-worth) from impulse purchases 
may end up digging a deeper hole for themselves by hiding their purchases from others, ignoring credit card 
bills, and becoming defensive and isolated. If this is your reaction, you should seek help to determine if 
there are underlying emotional reasons for your impulse buying and how you can work to overcome them.
Critical Thinking How does one’s self-esteem play a role in impulse shopping or how one copes after an 
impulse purchase?
Purestock/SuperStock246 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
usually fairly obvious and easy to predict. Long-term consequences, the 
further off results of an action, aren’t always obvious or easy to predict, 
but they can be major. They can have a big impact on your ability to reach 
your goals.
Small Choices, Big Results It’s easy to trick yourself into 
believing that small, impulsive actions don’t have any long-term consequences. 
But over time, the small things add up. Spending those few extra minutes 
reviewing class notes before an exam or passing up that second handful of 
potato chips can make the difference between achieving and not achieving 
a goal.
Delaying gratification doesn’t mean punishing yourself. Instead, it means 
choosing a later, bigger reward over a more immediate, smaller one. Focusing 
on the bigger reward—your goal—helps you put things in perspective.
When you feel an impulse coming on, stop yourself, think, and make a 
measured decision:
1. Stop. Realize that you are about to act impulsively.
2. Think. What will I gain in the short term by acting on this impulse? 
What will I lose in the long term by acting on this impulse?
3. Decide. Given the short-term and long-term consequences, is it 
worth it?
Let’s say you are studying for a test when a friend calls with a tempting 
invitation to go to that movie you have been wanting to see. Before you say 
yes, stop and ask yourself what you are about to do. This gives you a 
moment to think. What are the short-term consequences of going out to the 
movie? You’re sure to have fun, and you haven’t seen your friend in a 
while. Maybe this movie is just the study break you need. (When you are 
really tempted to do something, it’s amazing how many good excuses you 
can think up!) Before you rush for the door, however, ask yourself about 
the long-term consequences. Because you won’t have as much time to 
study, your grade in this course may suffer. If your grade suffers, you might 
not get that scholarship you are counting on. The reality is that there just 
isn’t room in your life tonight for an outing. Looking at the long-term 
consequences of your actions helps you pick the path that is best for you.
Of course, controlling your impulses doesn’t mean eliminating fun from 
your life. Instead of a movie, a half-hour study break might give you a 
chance to relax while still being productive. Use long-term thinking to 
tackle one of your impulses in Personal Journal 6.2.
EMBRACING CHANGE
Impulse control, like any other kind of self-improvement, requires a willing￾ness to change. In fact, being open to changing negative things about 
yourself and your life circumstances is the first step toward improving 
them. Change is easier if we start small, identifying small improvements 
success secret
Self-improvement requires 
the willingness to change.
success secret
Before you act on impulse, 
stop, think, and decide.we would like to make and working on them one by one. As we prove to 
ourselves that we can make constructive plans and stick to them, we gain 
the confidence and self-discipline to make bigger and better changes.
Do You Resist Change?
Change isn’t easy, especially when it involves controlling impulses, replacing 
bad habits, taking risks, or altering our ways of thinking. Change can also be 
scary. As we saw in Chapter 3, change is a major cause of stress. Most of us 
Personal Journal 6.2
Thinking Long Term
It’s important to look at the consequences of your actions. Select one impulse, such as spending, eating, 
or cutting people off in traffic, that is a problem for you.
How can you remind yourself to use the stop-think-decide approach the next time you are facing a 
situation like this?
Impulse:
1. What are the satisfying or pleasurable short-term consequences of giving in to this impulse?
2. What are the possible negative long-term consequences for you, your goals, or the people you 
care about?
3. Do the positive short-term consequences outweigh the negative long-term consequences? Explain.248 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
fear change because of the uncertainty involved. Some people have trouble 
changing because they fear that they will make the wrong choices or expose 
themselves to failure and ridicule. They may know they have the potential to 
control their own lives, but they do not take a firm stand or risk breaking out 
of the mold. They have not persuaded themselves that they should be in 
control of their choices and decisions. People who think this way have 
difficulty setting goals, reaching their goals, and fulfilling their ambitions.
Sometimes people resist change so strongly that they literally put their 
lives in danger. Consider the following story. Members of a village were 
dying of an unknown cause. Scientists went to the village and discovered 
that an insect living inside the clay walls of the villagers’ homes was biting, 
poisoning, and killing them. The scientists told the villagers that they 
should consider killing the insects, tearing down the homes and building 
new ones, or moving to a new location. The villagers said they would not 
move; they would stay in their deadly, insect-infested homes and take their 
chances. They continued to die off one by one. The villagers were so used 
to their way of life that they preferred to die than to make a change. They 
hoped that something would come along to save them, but nothing came.
Like the villagers, most of us will put up with practically anything to 
avoid changing. Even if we aren’t satisfied with our lives, it’s easier to do 
things the old way than to take a chance on something better. Take a look 
at some changes you might make in Activity 30. By planning for change 
ahead of time rather than having it forced on you in a moment of crisis, 
you can take greater control of your life.
What’s Holding You Back?
Often, when we think of changes we’d like to make in our lives, it’s easy to 
find a reason to put them off. “I really would,” we tell ourselves, “but now 
isn’t a good time . . . I’m tired . . . I don’t have enough time . . . I don’t have 
the money.”
If you find yourself making excuses, use positive self-talk to help get 
yourself going. Remind yourself how much better you will feel once you 
take action. Think about the specific benefits of making the change. If 
you’re “too tired,” just do a little bit before you go to bed. Too busy? 
You’ll be amazed how much you can get done in only ten minutes a day. 
Overwhelmed by the whole idea? You need to take only one action to get 
started and make yourself feel better.
Hidden Resistance Sometimes what holds us back from making 
positive changes isn’t fatigue or laziness but a hidden psychological resistance 
to change. Often we are unwilling to change because we do not want to give 
up the rewards we get from staying the way we are. What hidden rewards 
could there be in not making positive changes? One reward is that you don’t 
have to face your problems or stressors and admit that they are real. Another 
reward is that you don’t have to take action, risk failure, or make an effort.
success secret
It takes courage to try 
something new.
success secret
Your self-esteem rises 
when you make positive 
changes.ACTIVITY 30: Making Positive Changes
A On the lines below, list three changes you would like to make in each area of your life. List only changes 
that you think you can really make. (Some changes may be desirable but not possible right now. Omit 
such changes from your list.) Your changes can be small or big, short term or long term.
Example
School: class attendance, commuting, study/homework, and so on.
Attend all class meetings unless a real emergency arises.
Leave for class ten minutes earlier to plan for possible traffic jams.
Set aside one extra hour a week to review my class notes.
1. School: class attendance, commuting, study/homework, and so on.
2. Household: housekeeping, shopping, meal planning and preparation, money management, 
and so on.
3. Relationships: friendships, parenting, family ties, romantic relationships, and so on.
4. Job: commuting, gaining new knowledge or skills, relating to supervisor and coworkers, 
and so on.
continued…250 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
5. Leisure: hobbies, reading, blogging, television, Internet, sporting events, concerts, and so on.
6. Personal fitness: exercise, hygiene/grooming, eating, sleeping, and so on.
7. Community: volunteer work, political campaigns, religious participation, neighborhood 
events, and so on.
B Review all your possible changes. Select the three that you believe would make the biggest difference 
in your life. Copy them below.
1.
2.
3.
C What is one specific thing you can do to get started on these important changes?
D When will you do this? Schedule a specific day and time for this week.
Day: Time: 
Signed (your name): You may also get comfort from staying the way you are. If you are stuck 
in a job you dislike, for example, it might be easier to remain in that job 
and think of yourself as a victim than to make the effort to improve your 
circumstances. What hidden rewards are you getting from not changing? 
Activity 31 is designed to help you think about your hidden resistance to 
change. Try to be honest with yourself without being self-critical.
CONQUERING BAD HABITS
Do you recognize this autobiography?
“You may know me. I’m your constant companion. I’m your greatest 
helper. I’m your heaviest burden. I’ll push you onward, or drag you down to 
failure. I’m at your command. Half the tasks you do might as well be turned 
over to me. I’m able to do them quickly, and I’m able to do them the same 
every time, if that’s what you want. I’m easily managed. All you’ve got to do 
is be firm with me. Show me exactly how you want it done, and after a few 
lessons, I’ll do it automatically. I’m the servant of all great men and women, 
and of course, the servant of all the failures, as well. I’ve made all the great 
winners who’ve ever been great, and I’ve made all the losers, too. But I work 
with all the precision of a marvelous computer with the intelligence of a 
human being. You may run me for profit, or you may run me to ruin. It makes 
no difference to me. Take me! Be easy with me, and I’ll destroy you. Be firm 
with me, and I’ll put the world at your feet. Who am I? Why, I’m Habit.”1
Self-discipline is an important tool for making any kind of important 
change. Nowhere is self-discipline more necessary than in making one of 
the hardest changes of all—changing a bad habit. A habit is a behavior that 
has become automatic through repetition. If we give in to a certain impulse 
often enough, for example, we may soon find that this behavior has become 
a habit. A habit can also be an attitude, a way of looking at things that soon 
becomes second nature. Habits start off weak but soon grow strong, so 
strong that we hardly even notice them anymore. For this reason, habits 
can be very difficult to replace.
We all first make our habits; then our habits make us. It happens so 
subtly over time, imperceptibly, quietly, beneath the notice of anyone. The 
chains of our habits are usually too small to be recognized until they’re too 
strong to be broken. When we allow unhealthy habits to be our guide and 
counsel, we give up control of our actions. Instead, like comfortable beds, 
they are easy to fall into, but hard to get out of. Habits become second 
nature like brushing our teeth or driving our cars. Advertising executives on 
Madison Avenue bet their entire careers, and their clients’ enormous 
budgets, on the fact that repeated messages cause subconscious decisions. 
They influence children in what brands of cereal they should eat, what 
kinds of shoes are stylish, and which video games, smartphones, tablets, 
software, and toys children should ask their parents to buy.
habit A behavior that has 
become automatic through 
repetition.
1
 Denis Waitley, “The Double Win,” Fleming H. Revell Company, N. J. (1985) 125.252 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
ACTIVITY 31: Overcoming Resistance to Change
A Think of one life change that you would like to make but that you have been avoiding. This change may 
be from any area of your life, such as career, education, relationships, spirituality, hobbies, health, and 
so on. What is that change?
B Why do you think you have been avoiding making this change? Think about the risks that would be 
involved in making this change. For example, would you be risking failure or rejection or making a 
wrong decision? Would you be giving up your self-image as a victim?
C Do you ever pretend to yourself that you don’t need to change and that things are just fine the way they 
are? Explain.D Now think about the drawbacks of staying the way you are and the benefits of changing.
Drawbacks of Staying the Same Benefits of Changing
Which benefit is most important to you and why?
E Describe the specific actions you would need to take to make this change. Which of them would be 
most difficult for you?254 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
Think of your brain as a complex series of highways, overpasses and 
side streets. When you drive to and from school or work, or from your 
home to the store, you take the same route over and over again. It becomes 
second nature. The recent breakthroughs in neuroscience have shown that 
you can build new freeways and short-cuts in your brain to take you to new 
destinations that you may never have considered before. The unfamiliar 
becomes familiar. The roadblocks become overpasses. The dead ends 
become freeways. New, healthy habits can override the habits. The secret 
is repetition.
Just about everything in life is a choice. You don’t have to work, go to 
school, eat, or even get up in the morning. You decide to do things because 
they are good for you. Often, we are victims of habit: We do things only 
because we have been doing them. As children, we look to adults to give 
us cues for behavior. When we mature and become adults, we must make 
decisions and be responsible for ourselves.
Habits can have negative consequences. They can make us feel bad 
about ourselves. They can hurt other people and get in the way of close 
relationships. They can even damage our physical and emotional health. 
Common habits in this category include cigarette smoking, drinking too 
much caffeine or alcohol, procrastinating, being late, overspending, overeat￾ing, and gossiping.
All of us have indulged in these behaviors at some time or another. 
Overeating at Thanksgiving isn’t a problem, overeating regularly is. Drink￾ing coffee with your morning avocado toast isn’t a problem, but drinking 
coffee all day to stay awake is.
How do you know whether bad habits are causing you problems? Ask 
yourself whether any of your habits:
• make you unhappy or feel bad about yourself
• drain your energy or stand in the way of your goals
• get you into trouble at work or school
• hurt or seriously inconvenience others
When a habit causes you to do any of these things, it’s time to change. Last￾ing change doesn’t happen overnight. Changing habits involves three major 
steps:
Step 1: Wanting to change the habit
Step 2: Understanding the habit
Step 3: Replacing the bad habit with a good habit
Let’s go through each of these steps.
Step 1: Wanting to Change
Before you can break a bad habit, you must want to change from within, 
not because of someone else’s criticism or advice. You must commit to 
changing and accept that lasting change takes time and effort.
success secret
Almost everything in life is 
a choice.
success secret
When your habits have 
negative consequences, 
it’s time to change them.By studying people who are trying to kick bad health habits, such as 
drinking or smoking, psychologists have identified three mental stages that 
people go through before they even begin to take action.
These three stages are the precontemplation stage, the contemplation 
stage, and the preparation stage. In the precontemplation stage, you still 
have no intention of changing. You may not even see a need to change 
because you may not recognize the negative effects of a behavior. In the 
contemplation stage, you begin thinking about changing a behavior. In this 
stage, you evaluate the pros and cons of a certain habit and explore the 
different ways you could make a change. In the preparation stage, you edge 
closer to making serious efforts to change. This is the stage you are in if you 
have attempted to change before but did not have all the necessary skills to 
successfully carry it through.
As you can see, it takes time and mental effort to commit to change. 
Think about the little things in your life that may be affected by your habit 
change, and resolve in advance not to beat yourself up if you relapse. Ask 
for advice from someone who has made a similar change, and talk with the 
people close to you about how they can help you.
Step 2: Understanding the Habit
Step 2 is to know your bad habit. To change any behavior, you first need to 
understand it. What reward do you get from it? When, where, and with 
whom does it occur? Why has it become a habit? Ask yourself:
• When do I give in to my bad habit?
• Where do I give in to my bad habit?
• Who is present when I give in to my bad habit?
• How do I feel just before I give in to my bad habit?
• How do I feel just after I give in to my bad habit?
The first three questions help you understand the circumstances in which 
the habit occurs. For example, you might find yourself gossiping while in 
the company of certain friends, smoking at the same time every afternoon, 
or drinking sugary sodas during a certain class.
The last two questions help you understand why you fall into your 
habit. What feelings drive you to eat that pint of rocky road ice cream? 
Stress, anger, self-doubt, or boredom? What reward do you get from having 
that cigarette? Relaxation, satisfaction, or a break from work?
It is important to pinpoint the emotions that are feeding your habit. 
We are most vulnerable to bad habits when we are troubled by painful or 
unpleasant emotions. We use our old behavior patterns to comfort us and 
take our minds off the unpleasant feeling. Take a good look at your worst 
habit in Activity 32.
success secret
It takes effort to commit to 
changing.
success secret
Before you can change 
a habit, you need to 
understand it.256 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
ACTIVITY 32: Getting to Know Your Bad Habits
A What do you see as your worst habit? In other words, what habit is interfering with your life the most 
right now?
B What negative effects is this habit having on your life? Why?
C What negative effects is this habit having on people you care about? Worry, irritation, hurt feelings? If 
you aren’t sure, ask.
D Spend a few days carefully observing the circumstances surrounding the habit you want to change. 
Then answer the following questions.
1. When does the habit most often occur (in the morning, on the weekend, etc.)? How often 
does it occur?
2. Where does the habit occur (at home, on campus, in the car, etc.)?3. When or where is it easier to not give in?
4. Who is usually present when this habit occurs (a certain acquaintance, family members, 
strangers, peers, etc.)?
5. What unpleasant feelings do you experience just before you give in to your bad habit?
6. What emotional relief or reward do you get from the bad habit?
E Look for a pattern to your habit. What times, places, people, and emotions are associated with your 
habit? How do they interact with one another?
F What are some more positive ways you could deal with the unpleasant or painful feelings that are 
behind your habit?258 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
Step 3: Replacing the Habit
Now that you know your habit and why it occurs, you can take action. 
Step 3 involves replacing the bad habit with a positive habit. Replacing a 
bad habit is easier than simply getting rid of it altogether. Habits are a natu￾ral reaction to certain situations, stressors, and emotions. Therefore, you 
need to find a new, healthy way to release the emotions and nervous energy 
that are driving your habit. Let’s say you want to break the habit of eating 
chocolate bars to keep yourself going in the late afternoon. The habit is bad 
for your health, and all that sugar and caffeine makes you dead tired by 
early evening. You’re more likely to break your habit successfully if you 
switch to a healthy snack, such as vegetables or fruit, than if you simply try 
to ignore your habit.
Once you choose a replacement for your old ways of thinking and 
acting, you’ll need to repeat the new habit many times. Because we’ve 
repeated our bad habits so many times, we have to repeat our attempts 
to break them many times, too. Your bad habits may be quite stubborn, 
but you can be more so. It’s often helpful to use a chart, as in Personal 
Journal 6.3, to record your progress. This helps you figure out when and 
where you tend to relapse. Seeing results on paper also boosts your con￾fidence by reminding you of all the times you’ve already succeeded at 
resisting the old habit.
Relapse Is Normal It’s normal to revert to a bad habit especially 
when you think you’ve almost beaten it. Suppose you try ten times to break 
a bad habit, and not until the tenth attempt do you succeed. Does that 
mean you failed nine times? Does it mean you had no self-discipline? 
No, it means that with each attempt, your goal became closer and your self￾discipline became stronger until you beat the habit. As Mark Twain once 
said, “Habit is not to be flung out of the window, but coaxed downstairs a 
step at a time.” Once you successfully replace a habit, you need to maintain 
it, working continuously to practice your new, positive behavior. You need 
to develop your new skills and prevent yourself from falling back into your 
old habit patterns. This effort can last a lifetime.
According to current research in neuroscience, it takes a minimum of 
three to six months, to a year, or even two years to develop permanent, 
positive habits. Unproductive and unhealthy habits take time to become 
automatic and the same is true with good habits. So, don’t expect an instant 
change in outcomes—your weight, your income, your behavior. There is no 
app to download on your smartphone enabling instant behavioral change. 
Look at habit change incrementally. Find a support team with similar goals 
who will reinforce you when your experience small successes and who will 
encourage you to keep stair-stepping your way with them to your ultimate 
goal when you feel discouraged. Patience and persistence will be your 
strongest allies.
success secret
Are your habits stubborn? 
Be more stubborn!Personal Journal 6.3
Habit Change Chart
Use this chart to track your progress as you substitute a good habit for a bad one.
+ Carried out new habit
0 Carried out neither old nor new habit
− Carried out old habit
SELF-DISCIPLINE CHART
Instead of . . . I will . . . M T W Th F Sa Su Description of Experience
+ + 0 − + + 0
Example
Instead of drinking 
sugary soda, I will 
drink water.
At first I felt deprived without my usual 
sugar “fix.” When I relapsed, I felt guilty 
but realized that the sugar high from the 
soda actually made me feel tired later.260 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
Use Positive Self-Talk As you work to change a habit, make 
sure to support yourself with positive self-talk. Many familiar bad habits—
procrastinating, smoking, overeating, oversleeping, and being late—can all 
be helped with positive self-talk. Positive self-talk helps you paint a new 
picture of yourself acting in a positive way, creating a new habit pattern to 
replace the old one.
As you learned in Chapter 4, self-talk has a powerful effect on your 
subconscious mind. To become more self-disciplined, you need to replace 
the information you have already stored in your subconscious mind with 
new thoughts. By constantly repeating these new thoughts through positive 
self-talk, you will cause them to take root in your subconscious. The result 
is a new, positive habit, goal, or self-image.
If you try to change something about yourself only at the conscious 
level, using willpower, the change usually will be only temporary. Let’s say 
you have been a pack-a-day smoker for many years and decide to give it up. 
You tell your conscious mind that you are quitting smoking. Then your 
subconscious mind remembers all the times you have tried to quit in the 
past and whispers to you that you will fall back into the habit one day soon.
To use self-talk to change a habit, you need to persuade your subcon￾scious mind that the change has already taken place. Instead of saying, 
“I will stop smoking,” say, “I am a nonsmoker.” Instead of saying, “I will 
stop being late,” say, “I am a punctual person.” By thinking of yourself as 
someone who is on time or a nonsmoker, you will start to see yourself this 
way. If you say that you will start being on time in the future, you are 
implying that you are still being late. As long as you see yourself in the 
present moment as having a bad habit, you will continue to act as if you do.
For habit change, positive self-talk can begin with single sentences:
• I arrive on time for all my classes.
• I am proud of myself for arriving on time.
• Being on time shows respect for the instructor and for the rest of 
the class.
• Arriving on time shows that I am a responsible person.
The more you use positive self-talk, the more your new self-image and 
new behavior will become part of you. Soon you will have really kicked the 
bad habit and replaced it with something more positive.
Ultimately, this leads to brain rewiring, which is the creation of new 
neural pathways in the brain by repetition of certain thoughts to facilitate 
healing and formation of healthy, positive habits.
Self Check
1. Define self-discipline. (p. 238)
2. Why is persistence important? (pp. 239–240)
3. What are the three steps to changing bad habits? (p. 254)
success secret
Use positive self-talk to 
create a mental image of 
the new you.
success secret
Positive self-talk helps you 
change for good.
brain rewiring The 
creation of new neural 
pathways in the brain by 
repetition of certain thoughts 
to facilitate healing and 
formation of healthy habits.LEARNING TO THINK CRITICALLY
Self-discipline helps us accomplish what we need to do in order to succeed, 
but it also helps us to do something more—to think.
Our thinking determines much of what we do. Yet few of us stop to 
consider how we think. Do we think logically, questioning the world 
around us and coming to our own conclusions? Or do we passively accept 
what parents, friends, teachers, social media influencers, politicians, 
advertisers, and “experts” tell us?
Active, self-reflective thinking is known as critical thinking. It involves 
both thinking skills and the self-discipline to consistently apply those skills. 
Critical thinking requires asking questions and searching for answers. 
Critical thinkers are able to think objectively about their own and others’ 
opinions. They can look at an issue from all sides before coming to a 
conclusion. Critical thinkers demand evidence before they believe 
something that someone else says is true. They are not satisfied with 
looking at the surface of things. Critical thinkers ask, “Is this true? How 
does this compare to other information I’ve received? Is this important? 
Is this fair?” Passive thinkers ask, “Is this going to be on the test?”
Benefits of Critical Thinking
Critical thinking is necessary for making important decisions that will 
affect your life: deciding on a major, choosing or changing a career, going 
to graduate school, getting married, having children, and planning for 
retirement. As a critical thinker, you need to understand the problem or 
issue at hand, look at all the different angles, consider the various options, 
and arrive at the best possible decision.
As a critical thinker, you are also a problem solver. This means that you 
know how to use tools to reach the best possible solution to any problem. 
In Chapter 3, you looked at how to overcome obstacles and reach your 
goals. Critical thinking is essential to overcoming obstacles. It helps you 
clarify the problem and come up with creative solutions.
In addition to helping with decision making and problem solving, criti￾cal thinking helps you develop many other skills and personal qualities that 
are central to success, including self-awareness, self-honesty, self-motivation, 
open-mindedness, and empathy.
Are You a Critical Thinker?
Critical thinking doesn’t come easily. By nature, humans are often irrational. We 
often view and react to events in a self-serving way, without bothering to think 
critical thinking
Active, self-reflective 
thinking.
success secret
Critical thinking helps 
you solve problems and 
overcome obstacles.
SECTION 6.2 Disciplining Your Thinking262 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
things through. We have a tendency to believe that our ideas, our ways of 
doing things, and the groups we belong to are better than other people’s. For 
example, many of us are raised to look down on the ways of other families or 
cultures, such as how they raise their children or their religious beliefs. Studies 
have even shown that we prefer the letter our names begin with to other letters 
of the alphabet! This kind of self-centered thinking is a major obstacle to 
critical thinking. Do you let laziness and self-centeredness get in the way of 
your thinking? Complete Activity 33 to evaluate your critical thinking skills.
Standards of Critical Thinking
Critical thinking is a learned skill; no one is born a critical thinker. The key 
to thinking critically is to hold yourself to high standards. The Foundation 
for Critical Thinking specifies seven important standards for excellent 
critical thinking:
1. Clarity
2. Precision
3. Accuracy
4. Relevance
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE VERSUS HUMAN 
INTELLIGENCE
Will there come a day when computers surpass human 
intelligence? Many believe it’s not a question of “if,” 
but “when.” With the rapid advancements in artificial 
intelligence (AI), computers are already taking over 
jobs meant for humans. Robots have replaced factory 
workers, surgeons, pilots, and astronauts, as they tend 
to work faster, don’t get easily fatigued, and have 
exceptional job-task accuracy. Oxford researchers are 
concluding that forty-five percent of U.S. occupations 
will be at risk for computerization within twenty years. 
Some experts believe that by the end of the century, 
intelligent robots may actually “overtake” humans. And, 
entrepreneur Elon Musk predicts it will be even sooner.
IBM’s super computer, “Watson,” beat out the 
world’s best contestants on the quiz show, “Jeopardy.” 
The Pentagon’s mad-science research arm, DARPA, is 
looking into humanoid robots capable of working in 
disaster areas too dangerous for humans, while Momen￾tum Machines is boasting about a robotic burger flipper.
Human beings are able to solve problems by using 
fast, intuitive judgments, can think unexpectedly when 
faced with peculiar situations, can think of original 
ideas, and can plan about the future and foresee 
potential outcomes of this plan. The psychology field 
expands human intelligence to include social and 
emotional components as well. Whether computers 
and robots can be programmed to match or exceed 
the sophistication, flexibility, and creativity of the 
human mind remains to be seen.
Think About It
In what ways will society benefit from computers that 
are able to think like humans? What are some possible 
negative repercussions? Why do you think it is 
important to continue to develop your own critical 
thinking skills? To learn more about artificial 
intelligence, go to http://www.livescience.com/29379-
intelligent-robots-will-overtake-humans.html or 
conduct your own search using the keywords “artifi￾cial intelligence.”
internet actionACTIVITY 33: How Critical Is Your Thinking?
A Read each statement below. For each one, decide whether you Disagree Totally, Disagree Slightly, 
Agree Slightly, or Agree Totally.
continued…
Disagree 
Totally
Disagree 
Slightly
Agree 
Slightly
Agree 
Totally
1. When making an important decision, I am willing to take my time.
2. I don’t feel the need to be right about everything.
3. I examine my own beliefs as critically as I examine the beliefs of 
others.
4. I am more concerned with being fair and accurate than with 
appearing to be fair and accurate.
5. I am willing to criticize a popular belief if it is the right thing to do.
6. When I don’t know something, I don’t mind admitting it.
7. I make sure that my beliefs are based on factual evidence.
8. When I learn material in school, I really try to make sense of it 
instead of just memorizing it.
9. I would say that my point of view is a combination of truth 
and error.
10. It’s more important to be fair and accurate than to be loyal to 
someone.
11. I make sure I fully understand something before I judge it.
12. Just because something is my point of view doesn’t mean it’s the 
absolute truth.
13. I see things in shades of gray rather than in black and white.
14. I give consideration to facts that contradict my beliefs.
15. When I encounter a generalization, I immediately look for 
exceptions.
16. Before I accept someone’s point of view, I evaluate how well they 
are in a position to know what they are talking about.
17. I would rather find a solution that benefits everyone than get my 
own way.
18. I demand evidence before I will believe something.
19. I’m willing to try any good idea, even if it’s unpopular.
20. I know exactly why I believe or don’t believe certain things.
21. Before I accept a fact as evidence for a certain statement, I make 
sure that the fact is relevant to the issue.
22. An idea can “feel right” but still be wrong.264 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
B Scoring: Give yourself three points for every Agree Totally, two points for every Agree Slightly, one 
point for every Disagree Slightly, and zero points for every Disagree Totally.
What is your total? _____________
57–66       You are already an accomplished critical thinker. Look back at the statements with which 
you didn’t agree fully and think about how you could integrate them into your thinking.
45–56 You have critical thinking skills, but you are probably too quick to make judgments without 
thinking things through. Slow down and take time to think systematically.
23–44 You understand some of the basics of critical thinking. You will benefit from investing more 
time and effort to analyze others’ thinking and your own.
0–22 You tend to accept things at face value without questioning. You probably don’t analyze 
your beliefs and have been more concerned with fitting in than with finding the truth.
C All the statements in the questionnaire on the previous page represent habits and attitudes of critical 
thinkers. Reread the questionnaire and pick the six habits that you believe are most important to fair, 
impartial, logical thinking. Rewrite them in the format shown below. Then, below each statement, 
describe how you can apply this habit or attitude in your life.
Example
Critical thinkers make sure they fully understand something before they judge it.
Application: Instead of criticizing every comment I hear in class, I will give all comments fair consideration.
1. Critical thinkers
 
 Application: 
2. Critical thinkers
 
 Application: 
 
3. Critical thinkers
 
 Application: 
 4. Critical thinkers
 
 Application: 
 
5. Critical thinkers
 
 Application: 
 
6. Critical thinkers
 
 Application: 
 
D Look at the different applications you wrote above. What kinds of global changes do you need to make 
to be a more critical thinker?266 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
5. Depth
6. Breadth
7. Logic
Whenever we think, speak, or write, we should try to follow each of these 
standards.
1. Clarity Clarity is the foundation of critical thinking. A thought or 
statement is clear if it is plainly worded and easily understood. When a 
thought or statement is muddled and unclear, it is impossible to know 
whether it is true or false, fact or opinion. Do you think and communicate 
clearly? Or do you use complicated language to appear more intelligent and 
sophisticated? Consider the difference between these clear and unclear 
statements:
Unclear: Students need to indicate which classes on the sign-up sheet 
they would like to take due to the fact that the December 13 deadline is 
approaching.
Why It’s Unclear: This sentence is too wordy and long-winded. It makes a 
simple statement into a complicated mess. Economize your thoughts; be 
direct.
Clear: Students need to sign up for classes before December 13.
Unclear: Many items are discounted up to fifty percent and more.
Why It’s Unclear: This statement is deliberately misleading: We don’t know 
which items are discounted, and we don’t know whether the discounts are 
less or more than fifty percent. “Many” could be 20, 200, or 2,000.
Clear: All men’s clothing is discounted twenty-five to fifty-five percent.
2. Precision Precision means exactness. Being precise is the 
opposite of being vague and general. Vague and general statements are 
sometimes true, but they usually don’t say very much. Ask yourself:
• Is this statement specific enough to be meaningful?
• Do I need more detail here?
Imprecise: Too much TV makes kids more violent.
Why It’s Imprecise: This statement does not specify what kinds of 
programs make children more violent.
Precise: Children who are exposed to gratuitous violence on TV are more 
inclined to become aggressive.
Imprecise: Smoking is harmful.
Why It’s Imprecise: This statement is true but doesn’t provide any useful 
or memorable specifics.
Precise: Smoking is the number-one preventable cause of death in the 
United States.
success secret
Think and communicate 
with a clear purpose.
precision Exactness.3. Accuracy Accuracy means factual truth. A statement is accurate if 
it is supported by facts. A statement is inaccurate if it is an error, a guess, 
or an opinion pretending to be a fact. If something is based on fact, it can 
be checked and verified. Ask yourself:
• Is this really true?
• Is it possible to check whether this is true? (If not, the statement is 
probably not accurate.)
• What is this based on?
• How reliable is the source of this information?
Inaccurate: Lupita Nyong’o and Chrissy Teigen are the two most beautiful 
people in the world.
Why It’s Inaccurate: Beauty is subjective, so it’s impossible to prove or dis￾prove this statement.
Accurate: The editors of People magazine chose Lupita Nyong’o (in 2014) 
and Chrissy Teigen (in 2021) for the cover of their “most beautiful people” 
issue.
Inaccurate: Our universe started with the “Big Bang.”
Why It’s Inaccurate: This is a theory, not a fact. It is impossible to check 
and verify the creation of the universe.
Accurate: No one is really sure how the universe began, but most scientists 
support the “Big Bang” theory.
4. Relevance A fact or idea is relevant if it has a direct connection 
to the subject being discussed. A fact or idea is irrelevant if it has nothing 
to do with the subject. Ask yourself:
• Is this connected to the issue?
• Is this being introduced to change the subject, criticize others, or shift 
the blame?
Irrelevant: Dylan is getting a divorce, so he wouldn’t be a good choice for 
vice president.
Why It’s Irrelevant: Dylan’s personal life doesn’t have anything to do with 
his work performance.
Relevant: Dylan shows a lack of focus at work, so he wouldn’t be a good 
choice for vice president.
Irrelevant: Juanita once was a vegetarian and shouldn’t be elected 
president of the local meat packers council.
Why It’s Irrelevant: Juanita’s prior eating habits have nothing to do with 
the duties she would perform as council president.
Relevant: Juanita does not have a full grasp of her responsibilities as 
council president and evades direct questions about her previous 
employment. She should not be elected to the council.
accuracy Factual truth.
success secret
Learn to distinguish facts 
from opinions.
success secret
Learn to separate the 
relevant from the 
irrelevant.268 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
5. Depth A thought has depth if it digs below the surface to consider 
the substance of the issue. A shallow argument scratches only the surface, 
while a deep argument examines all sides of the issue. Ask yourself:
• Am I just skimming over the problem?
• Am I going along with what someone else says without thinking things 
through?
• Is this issue more complex than it seems?
Shallow: Building more prisons will solve our drug problem.
Why It’s Shallow: This is a superficial solution to a difficult problem.
Deep: Building more prisons will allow more drug dealers to be imprisoned, 
but it won’t address the causes of drug addiction.
Shallow: This smartphone is the latest model, so it must be the best.
Why It’s Shallow: Just because something is the newest doesn’t mean it’s 
the best.
Deep: This new smartphone model has a lot of new features, but it doesn’t 
have better sound quality than the previous model.
6. Breadth Breadth is the degree to which a statement considers 
other arguments and points of view. To think broadly, you need to detect 
and analyze the biases that affect other people’s judgments, as well as your 
own. Ask yourself:
• Is there another way to look at this?
• How are my own experiences and values coloring my thinking?
• Am I seeing things from a narrow point of view?
• How would this look from a different point of view?
Narrow: Environmentalists think owls are more important than people.
Why It’s Narrow: This statement deliberately distorts environmentalists’ 
point of view. Job losses occur when land formerly used for logging 
becomes protected habitat for endangered species. This doesn’t mean that 
environmentalists are anti-human.
Broad: Environmentalists want to preserve wildlife habitat by reducing 
logging on public lands.
Narrow: I don’t know why people like Mike’s guitar playing—it’s terrible.
Why It’s Narrow: This statement assumes that there is only one correct 
point of view on Mike’s guitar playing.
Broad: Mike’s guitar playing appeals to jazz fans, but it doesn’t appeal to me.
7. Logic Logic is the process of reasoning correctly and drawing the 
correct conclusions from the facts. Being logical also involves providing 
valid explanations for your conclusions. Instead of taking ideas for granted, 
make sure solid evidence supports them. To determine whether your 
reasoning is logical, ask yourself:
success secret
Remember that your 
point of view is only one 
of many.
logic The process of 
reasoning correctly and 
drawing the correct 
conclusions from the facts.• Do I have evidence for this statement?
• Is there any evidence that contradicts this statement?
• Is this really true, or am I just taking it for granted?
• Is there any other possible conclusion?
• Do any of my ideas contradict one another?
Illogical: Women cry more often than men. They are obviously more 
emotional.
Why It’s Illogical: Crying doesn’t prove that women are more emotional. 
It proves that they show emotions differently.
Logical: Women cry more often than men. They display emotions 
differently than men do.
Illogical: All of our students are above average.
Why It’s Illogical: It is statistically impossible for a majority of people to 
be above average when compared to one another at the same institution.
Logical: All of our students have special talent in a certain area.
Critical thinking is important but not always easy. It is a learning process, 
requiring time and practice. Following specific guidelines, such as the seven 
standards described previously, is an excellent way to become a more effec￾tive critical thinker. Do you follow these seven standards of critical think￾ing in your thought, speech, and writing? Can you recognize when one or 
more of these standards is missing? Resolve to work hard to overcome the 
thinking pitfalls that are particularly challenging for you. Try your hand at 
correcting flawed thinking in Activity 34.
BECOMING A BETTER DECISION MAKER
Important decisions can affect your life for years to come. For this reason, 
intelligent decision making is one of the most important benefits of effec￾tive critical thinking.
A decision is a reasoned choice among several options, or possible 
courses of action. We make minor decisions all day long—what to wear, 
what to eat, what route to take to school—without thinking much about the 
process. When it comes to major decisions, however, we need to rely on a 
step-by-step decision-making process.
Why Good Decisions Matter
We all face many important decisions over the course of our lives—academic 
decisions, career decisions, relationship decisions, and other personal deci￾sions. Although it’s easy to feel like we don’t have to make a decision until 
we are faced with a problem, no positive change happens without making 
decisions. To turn our dreams into reality, we have to take concerted 
action, and this action requires making decisions.
success secret
Look at critical thinking as 
a learning process.
decision A reasoned 
choice among several 
options, or possible courses 
of action.270 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
ACTIVITY 34: Developing Your Critical Thinking
A Below are seven statements, one for each of the seven standards of critical thinking. Each statement 
fails to meet the standard in some way. Explain what is wrong with each statement, then rewrite each 
one to correct the flaw.
1. Clarity
Unclear: All are invited to partake in refreshments in the parking lot after the festivities of the foot￾ball game have reached their conclusion.
Why It’s Unclear: 
Clear: 
2. Precision
Imprecise: Internet companies are out to scam people.
Why It’s Imprecise: 
Precise: 
3. Accuracy
Inaccurate: Drug testing doesn’t work.
Why It’s Inaccurate: 
Accurate: 
4. Relevance
Irrelevant: Steve is not well liked; that’s why he’s flunking all his classes.
Why It’s Irrelevant: 
Relevant: 5. Depth
Shallow: Our government passes only good laws.
Why It’s Shallow: 
Deep: 
6. Breadth
Narrow: The painting looks like chickens ran across it. No one could like such a thing.
Why It’s Narrow: 
Broad: 
7. Logic
Illogical: Jane, who lives in a rundown neighborhood, steals from her friends. All people who live in 
rundown areas steal from others.
Why It’s Illogical: 
Logical: 
B Few people follow all seven of these critical thinking standards all the time. What flaws do you see most 
often in your thinking? In others’ thinking? Explain.
C Politicians are sometimes accused of ignoring the standards of critical thinking—especially breadth and 
depth—in their speeches and campaign statements. Why might a politician deliberately do this?272 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
Decisions are important opportunities to take control of your life. 
When you make a decision, you are intervening in the flow of your life. You 
are creating a new future for yourself. For example, let’s say that you decide 
to move to a new city instead of remaining in your hometown. By making 
this important decision, you are creating an entirely new set of circum￾stances for yourself. You are creating a future that will be entirely different 
from the future that you would otherwise have.
Handling Mistakes
When we look back at decisions we have made in the past, we can see that 
some brought us closer to our goals, while some sidetracked us. Some deci￾sions were consistent with our values, and some were not. Some boosted 
our self-esteem, and some lowered it. The more aware we become of which 
decisions were right for us and which were not, the better equipped we will 
be to make good decisions in the future.
Because no one can accurately predict the future, everyone makes 
mistakes. A mistake is anything you did in the past that you now wish you 
had done differently. At the time, given the limited information you had, 
your decision seemed like the best possible one. It is only later, after you 
live the consequences, that you label your action (or inaction) a mistake. 
Mistakes can actually be valuable tools for you to learn, and can help you 
on the path to success as long as you view them in a healthy light. People 
who fear mistakes have trouble making decisions for fear of doing the 
wrong thing. Perhaps this means staying in a dead-end job for fear of new 
responsibilities or avoiding social situations for fear of suffering rejection. 
Instead of fearing mistakes, accept them as part of being human and view 
them as learning experiences.
Steps in the Decision-Making Process
People often make important decisions on impulse or based on inaccurate 
information or wishful thinking. The best way to make important decisions, 
however, is to follow a decision-making process, a logical series of steps to 
identify and evaluate possibilities and to arrive at a good choice. A good 
decision-making process has seven logical steps:
Step 1: Define the decision you need to make.
Step 2: List all possible options.
Step 3: Gather information on the consequences of each option.
Step 4: Assess the consequences of each option relative to your values 
and goals.
Step 5: Choose one of the possible options.
Step 6: Act.
Step 7: Evaluate your progress, changing course if necessary.
mistake Anything a 
person did in the past that 
he/she/they now wishes he/
she/they had done differently.
decision-making 
process A logical series 
of steps to identify and 
evaluate options and arrive 
at a good choice.
success secret
When you make a major 
decision, you are creating 
a new future for yourself.Let’s look at each step carefully, considering how to recognize and 
overcome errors that can creep into the process. Once you have thoroughly 
explored each step, you will try your hand at making a hypothetical deci￾sion in Activity 35.
Step 1: Define the Decision The first step in the decision￾making process is to define what needs to be decided and why. This 
sounds obvious, but sometimes you need to go below the surface to find 
out exactly what question or problem you’re facing. This is a good time 
to be creative in your thinking, perhaps turning what seems to be a 
problem into an opportunity. For example, deciding how to deal with an 
increased workload may seem like a problem, but showing your boss that 
you can work under pressure could be an opportunity for a pay raise or 
a promotion.
As you define what you need to decide, be aware that the way a 
decision, question, or problem is worded biases the way you decide it. 
This psychological process is known as the framing effect. As an example, 
imagine that you have been offered a new job but aren’t sure whether you 
framing effect The 
decision-making bias that 
results from the way a 
decision, question, or 
problem is worded.
professional development )))
Wanted: Problem Solvers
As the job market becomes more competitive, particularly for college graduates, companies are looking for 
candidates with more than work experience and technical expertise. According to Forbes magazine, a 
survey by CareerBuilder identified the ten most in-demand skills for top jobs of 2013, with the following 
being at the top of the list: (1) critical thinking, (2) complex problem solving, and (3) judgment and decision 
making. In 2019, Bernard Marr of Forbes magazine predicted the top ten most important job skills for 
companies moving forward as (1) data literacy, (2) critical thinking, (3) tech savviness, (4) adaptability and 
flexibility, (5) creativity, (6) emotional intelligence, (7) cultural intelligence and diversity, (8) leadership skills, 
(9) judgment and complex decision making, and (10) collaboration. Much of what you will do on the job 
involves seeking solutions, weighting alternatives, conferring with others, evaluating your decisions, and 
determining if the same course of action makes sense the next time.
A national survey of business and nonprofit leaders conducted by the Association of American Colleges 
and Universities (AAC&U) found that nearly all employers surveyed (ninety-three percent) say that “a 
demonstrated capacity to think critically, communicate clearly, and solve complex problems is more 
important than a candidate’s undergraduate major.”
And once you’re hired, continuing to develop these skills will contribute to your advancement and 
earning potential. The majority of Fortune 500 companies include problem solving, critical thinking, and 
decision making as core competencies for leadership excellence.
What’s Your Opinion?
What are some examples you could give a potential employer of how you’ve used your problem-solving and 
decision-making skills in school and how that relates to future performance on the job?274 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
ACTIVITY 35: Using the Decision-Making Process
A Define the Decision. Consider the following scenario. You have taken a new job downtown that will 
require a lengthy commute from your apartment in the suburbs. Your car is more than ten years old and 
has been in the shop several times during the past year. Now it needs a transmission overhaul, too. 
Your new job starts this coming Monday. What do you need to decide? Write down several different 
ways of defining the decision you have to make, then put a check mark next to the one that best 
expresses the decision facing you.
B List Options. Two options immediately come to mind: buy a new car or get the old car repaired. Are 
there any other options? Generate four more.
1. Buy a new car.
2. Get the old car repaired.
3.
4.
5.
6.C Gather Information. Assemble information on each option you thought of in B. Consider all the relevant 
factors—time, money, safety, convenience, lifestyle, and so on. Consulting people with experience is a 
good way to gather information about the possible consequences of a decision. For this decision, whom 
could you consult?
D Assess. Now that you know more about each option, assess how well each one fits with your values 
and goals.
 1. PROS: Will give me sense of safety and security; promotes my value of independence
  CONS: Will sidetrack my savings goals for a few years
2.  PROS: Will help me save for future and conserve resources
  CONS: Car may require future repairs, damaging my financial security
3.  PROS:
  CONS:
4.  PROS:
  CONS:
5.  PROS:
  CONS:
6.  PROS:
  CONS:
continued…276 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
E Choose. Which option is the most attractive, given the information you have right now?
Now that you have made your decision, actively discard the other options.
Focus on the positive aspects of your decision. Sign here to indicate your commitment to your decision:
(If you feel uncomfortable with your decision, go back over steps A–E.)
F Take Action. Get started! What are three things you could do right away—today—to implement your 
decision?
 1.
2.
3.
G Evaluate. Monitor how well the decision is working for you. If you decide that the decision you made is 
not ideal, what are five things you could do to make it better?
 1.
  
2.
  
3.
  
4.
  
5.
  should accept it. Think how the following different ways of framing the 
decision might affect the choice you make:
• Should I accept this new job?
• Should I settle for this new job?
• Should I reject this new job?
• Should I continue my job search?
• Should I remain unemployed?
Sometimes we unconsciously frame a decision in a certain way because 
we already know how we really want to decide. When you are faced with a 
decision, take care to frame the decision in different ways so that you don’t 
exclude any possible options.
Step 2: List All Possible Options Step 2 is to generate options. 
Write down every idea, even if it seems silly to you. Even a silly idea might 
lead to a good option once your creative juices get flowing. Don’t be satis￾fied with one or two options; brainstorm until you have a wide range of 
possible courses of action from which to choose. Also, consult other people 
you trust—they can often suggest options you might not have thought of, 
especially if they have different experiences and points of view.
As you make your list, analyze your expectations about the situation—
they may limit your options. For example, people usually choose the very 
first option that comes to mind, even if it isn’t the best one. They also tend 
to block out information that might make them change their minds. You 
can avoid this pitfall by generating as many options as possible, seeking the 
advice of people who have ideas that are different from yours, and allowing 
yourself plenty of time to generate many options.
Step 3: Gather Information The more information you can 
gather about your decision, the easier it will be to generate options and 
then evaluate them. This is most obvious in a financial decision, such as 
buying car insurance, where you’ll need to gather information on your 
needs and options. You also need to gather information when making 
important personal decisions. For example, if you are trying to decide 
between two different majors at school, you’ll want to consider the cost, 
length, and difficulty of the two programs; the career opportunities in the 
two fields; and how well your values, interests, and abilities fit with 
each one.
The Internet can be a wonderful resource for gathering facts and 
information. Friends or coworkers who have experience in the area you 
are researching can also be a valuable resource. An informed decision will 
go a long way toward helping you accomplish your goals.
Step 4: Assess the Consequences Step 4 is to look into the 
future and try to gauge the possible outcomes of each course of action. 
What will the positive consequences of a certain option be? What will the 
negative consequences be? One good way to organize this information is to 
success secret
Consider every possible 
option.
success secret
Use your values and goals 
to guide your choices.278 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
make a list of pros and cons for each option you are considering. For 
example, let’s say you are deciding whether to return to school for a degree. 
The pros of going back to school might include intellectual stimulation and 
greater career mobility, while the cons might include less free time and 
more stress.
As you organize your pros and cons, use your values and goals as stan￾dards to judge each course of action. Does the option harmonize with your 
core values? Does it get you closer to your goals? Is it what you believe, 
deep down, you should do? Try this approach to organizing your options in 
Personal Journal 6.4. Committing this information to paper is a good way of 
safeguarding the decision-making process from interference by forgetfulness, 
old habits, and changing moods. The process of writing also helps you 
generate ideas.
As you consider the pros and cons of each option, remember that you 
will always be faced with some uncertainty. You can never fully predict all 
the consequences of every option. Uncertainty means not knowing what 
the consequences of a decision will be for yourself and others. Uncertainty 
about the future can lead to paralyzing indecision. However, uncertainty 
is an unavoidable part of decision making. Doing research can help you 
predict many of the consequences of your decisions, but you can never be 
entirely sure what the future will bring.
Step 5: Choose One Option It’s the moment of truth. You have 
acceptance letters from two colleges. Your mouse cursor is hovering over 
the send button to e-mail your decision to your boss. Feelings of hesitation 
and self-questioning are normal at a time like this. Sometimes it’s hard to 
figure out which option is the best one. In this situation, you experience 
conflict. In a decision-making context, conflict occurs when no option is 
significantly more attractive than the others. When we are in conflict, 
we might be tempted to make no decision at all, holding out for some 
imaginary solution that will have no negative consequences. We can help 
ourselves deal with the inherent conflict of decision making by focusing on 
one central value or goal.
Once you’ve made your choice, remember that you’ve done everything 
in your power to choose the right course. Whether or not the outcome is 
favorable, you can be confident that your decision was a good one.
Step 6: Act A decision has value only if you act on it. This is why a 
choice is sometimes described as a “course of action.” Without action, a 
decision is an empty gesture.
Try to avoid the pitfall of coming to a mental conclusion to solve a 
problem, then resting on the feeling of commitment rather than the act of 
commitment. Indecision creates a kind of mental tension. This tension 
begins to ease as soon as we make a choice. Taking action on that choice, 
however, is even more satisfying and will help you become a better deci￾sion maker.
uncertainty Not knowing 
what the consequences of a 
decision will be for oneself 
and others.Personal Journal 6.4
Pros and Cons
Think of a major decision you are now facing or are likely to face in the near future. Choose two possible 
courses of action and write down which goal(s) and value(s) each option would support and which it 
would go against.
PROS
Action Goal(s) it would support Value(s) it would support
Option 1.
Option 2.
CONS
Action Goal(s) it would contradict Value(s) it would contradict
Based on this information, which option would you choose?
Option 1.
Option 2.280 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
After making any kind of significant decision, it is common to feel 
regret. Regret is the feeling of wishing you had decided something 
differently. You are less likely to suffer from regret if you make decisive, 
informed choices. If you take action—even the wrong action—you will suffer 
fewer pangs of regret than if you simply do nothing at all. Don’t let fear of 
regret scare you away from making a decision.
Abraham Lincoln made this phrase famous: “Never change horses 
midstream.” In other words, once you have made a choice, commit to it. If 
you feel like going back on your decision, make sure you are acting on an 
impartial evaluation of the situation rather than on an impulse based on 
fear or regret.
Step 7: Evaluate Your Progress To make decisions effectively, 
you need to learn from experience. Therefore, evaluating your progress is 
an important part of the decision-making process. Evaluate how well the 
decision is working for you, remembering that every major decision leads 
to other decisions down the road. Keeping a journal of your progress can 
be helpful. As you monitor your results, ask yourself:
• Did I overlook any information that would be helpful in the future?
• Would another approach to the decision have worked better?
• Did I allow myself adequate time to generate options?
• What can I learn from the experience to help me make a better decision 
the next time around?
Often, decisions that seem like disasters provide the best lessons of all. 
They can help you learn more about yourself and your thinking style.
It’s Up to You Using the decision-making process helps you build 
self-determination and critical thinking skills. As you develop the ability to 
gather reliable information, to think of creative options, and to make 
choices based on your goals and values, you will feel more and more in 
control of your life. If you avoid making decisions, on the other hand, your 
life will start to pass you by. Physical and mental self-discipline will help 
you overcome indecision and do what you need to do to reach your goals.
Learning to make good decisions takes time and practice. Once you 
have mastered the ability to make decisions confidently and accept the 
consequences without self-blame, you will be well on your way to success.
Self Check
1. Define critical thinking. (p. 261)
2. What are some of the benefits of being a critical thinker? (p. 261)
3. What is regret? (p. 280)
regret The feeling of 
wishing one had decided 
something differently.
success secret
The results of your 
decisions can teach 
you a great deal.Chapter 6 Review and Activities
self-discipline (p. 238)
persistence (p. 239)
self-determination (p. 240)
responsibility (p. 241)
impulse (p. 243)
consequences (p. 245)
habit (p. 251)
brain rewiring (p. 260)
critical thinking (p. 261)
precision (p. 266)
accuracy (p. 267)
logic (p. 268)
decision (p. 269)
mistake (p. 272)
decision-making process (p. 272)
framing effect (p. 273)
uncertainty (p. 278)
regret (p. 280)
Key Terms
Summary by Learning Objectives
• Define self-discipline and cite its benefits. Self-discipline is the process of teaching 
ourselves to do what is necessary to achieve our goals. Self-discipline strengthens our ability 
to control our destiny, persist in the face of setbacks, weigh the long-term consequences of our 
actions, make positive changes, break bad habits, think critically, and make effective decisions.
•Explain how to control impulses. We can control impulses in three steps: (1) stop; (2) 
think about the pleasant short-term consequences and the unpleasant long-term consequences 
of the action; and (3) decide whether the pleasant short-term consequences are worth the 
negative long-term ones.
• Describe the process of replacing bad habits with good ones. Changing our bad habits 
involves three major steps: (1) wanting to change; (2) understanding the bad habit; and (3) 
replacing the bad habit with a new, healthy habit.
• Define critical thinking and list its seven standards. Critical thinking is active, reflective 
thinking that involves both thinking skills and the self-discipline to apply those skills. The seven 
standards for excellent critical thinking are clarity, precision, accuracy, relevance, depth, 
breadth, and logic.
•List the steps in the decision-making process. A good decision-making process follows a 
logical series of steps to identify and evaluate possibilities and make the best decision. The 
process involves seven steps: (1) defining the decision that needs to be made; (2) listing all 
possible options; (3) gathering information on the consequences of each option; (4) assessing 
the consequences of each option relative to your values and goals; (5) choosing one option; 
(6) acting on the decision; and (7) evaluating your progress.282 Chapter 6 Self-Discipline
Review Questions
1. What is the difference between persistence and self-determination?
2. Why do some people resist change?
3. What three stages do people go through before they begin to take action to break a habit?
4. How can positive self-talk help you change a bad habit?
5. Describe the framing effect and how it might affect the decision-making process.
6. Why do people sometimes regret the decisions they make?
Critical Thinking
7. Adapting to Change Imagine that you are chronically late to work, and one day your boss 
announces that employees who come late will be fired. This forces you to begin arriving on 
time. Now imagine that you are chronically late, but you decide of your own free will to begin 
arriving on time. In both cases, you need to make the same behavioral change: arriving on 
time for work. Would this change be easier for you in the first or in the second scenario? 
Why? What does this tell you about your self-discipline?
8. Self-Discipline Parents help their children develop self-discipline by setting clear, 
reasonable limits, or guidelines, for acceptable and unacceptable behavior. For example, 
parents of toddlers often set limits such as “share toys with playmates” and “do not bite.” 
Why would a child who is given no limits have difficulty developing self-discipline later in 
life? Why would a child who is given too many limits also have difficulty developing 
self-discipline?
Application
9. Habit Survey Interview three people who have changed a bad habit into a healthy habit. 
How did they achieve their success? How long did it take? Did they ever have a relapse? If 
so, what did they learn from each relapse? What behaviors from these interviews would you 
like to adopt and use in your own life?
10. Decision Making Describe one or two major decisions you have made in your life. 
How did you go about making your decision? What were your challenges? What were the 
consequences? What did you learn to help you in making future decisions?
Review and ActivitiesInternet Activities
11. Critical Thinking Quiz Visit https://www.proprofs.com/quiz-school/topic/critical-thinking 
for some fun and challenging quizzes to test your ability to think critically and creatively.
12. Habits of Mind Visit http://www.habitsofmind.org/content/managing-impulsivity to read 
an online article about habits of mind, specifically, managing impulsivity. Think about how 
some of your own impulsive behaviors have hurt you in the past. Determine steps you can take 
to develop your self-discipline, delay gratification, and more effectively manage impulsivity.
Review and Activities
Review your answer to the question in the Real-Life Success 
Story on page 236. Think about how you would answer the ques￾tion now that you have learned more about self-discipline and the 
process of change.
Complete the Story Write a note to Jeannette describing the 
factors that could be holding her back from making her desired 
change. Then give her advice on overcoming her fear of change 
and using self-discipline to reach her goal.
“Should I Make a Change?” Real-Life 
Success Story
Westend61/Getty Images284
Real-Life 
Success Story
Caiaimage/Glow Images
Running Late
Elijah Wells, a salesman, had gone back to college to 
earn his business degree and get a better paying job. 
Elijah always did the first half of his assignments, but 
he could never seem to complete them. He often felt 
too discouraged to go to class, especially on test 
days. Elijah blamed his difficulties on his instructors’ 
impossibly high standards. He was taken aback when 
his advisor suggested that his real problem was 
himself—he was making himself fail because he was 
afraid of succeeding.
Running Scared
It sounded crazy at first, but Elijah began to realize 
that his self-defeating behavior really did come from 
a fear of success. Deep down, he thought he wasn’t 
college material. How could he hold his own with the 
other, younger students? What if his friends deserted 
him once he got a degree and a promotion? Instead 
of focusing on success, he was letting fear lead him 
straight to failure.
What Do You Think? Why would someone fear 
success?
“How Can I Succeed?”7Chapter
learning objectives
After you complete this chapter, 
you should be able to:
• Contrast intrinsic motivation 
with extrinsic motivation.
• Describe how to distinguish 
needs from wants.
• Explain why needs motivate our 
behavior.
• Cite ways to overcome fear of 
failure.
• Cite ways to overcome fear of 
success.
• Describe visualization and how 
it can boost motivation.
Nothing can dim the light which 
shines from within.
”
Maya Angelou, Author
introduction
Motivation drives us to reach our goals and realize our 
full potential. In Section 7.1 you’ll explore the different 
types of motivation and learn why internal motivation is 
the most lasting form of motivation. You’ll also learn 
how your needs and wants drive your behavior. In 
Section 7.2 you’ll work on overcoming the fears that 
can drain your motivation and make you afraid to take 
risks. You’ll also learn to use visualization to boost your 
motivation and self-expectancy.
Self-Motivation
“286 Chapter 7 Self-Motivation
SECTION 7.1 Understanding Motivation
THE POWER OF MOTIVATION
Everything we do is the result of motivation. Motivation is the inner force 
that compels behavior; that moves us to action, giving us energy, direction, 
and persistence. Motivation moves us toward the goals we have set. Even in 
the face of mistakes, discouragement, and setbacks, our positive inner drive 
keeps us moving ahead.
To be successful, you must depend on yourself for motivation. Instead 
of waiting for something or someone to jump-start you into action, you 
need to actively look for ways to motivate yourself. When you are self￾motivated, you can rely on your own strength and drive to take you where 
you want to go.
High achievers have high self-motivation; the power to move them 
to action comes from inside themselves. Sometimes just a little more 
motivation than usual can lead to incredible results. Think about the 
difference between simple boiling water and powerful steam. When water 
is heated to 211 degrees Fahrenheit, it is simply boiling water. Yet when 
the temperature reaches 212 degrees, only one degree higher, the water 
becomes steam, which is powerful enough to launch a Navy jet from an 
aircraft carrier at a speed of 120 miles an hour in only five seconds.
Positive and Negative Motivation
We may be driven toward a situation or away from it, depending on how 
we feel inside. When we are driven toward success, we experience positive 
motivation. When we are driven away from failure, we experience negative 
motivation. These two forces are shown in Figure 7.1.
Positive motivation is the drive to do something we want to do 
because it will move us toward a goal or because we associate it with 
positive thoughts and feelings. We might be positively motivated to work 
hard on learning a skill or writing a term paper, for example, because it 
gives us a feeling of accomplishment or because we have a natural 
curiosity about the topic. Positive motivation boosts our feelings of 
optimism and self-esteem.
Negative motivation, by contrast, is the drive to do something we have 
to do in order to avoid punishment or other negative consequences. If we 
are negatively motivated, we might work hard on a term paper because we 
are afraid of getting a low grade or disappointing the professor.
Negative motivation isn’t necessarily bad. When our positive motivation 
is low, it can help us do the things we need to do. Let’s say you are afraid 
of being called on in a certain class. You’re tired and can’t summon the 
positive motivation to study. However, the fear of being unprepared or 
giving the wrong answer might motivate you to study extra hard.
motivation The force 
that moves a person to action.
success secret
Look for ways to motivate 
yourself.
positive motivation
The drive to do something 
because it will move you 
toward a goal.
negative motivation
The drive to do something in 
order to avoid negative 
consequences.When we are positively motivated, we engage in activities that bring us 
closer to our goals and that give us a sense of pride and accomplishment. 
When we are negatively motivated, we are driven by unpleasant thoughts 
and feelings, such as fear, worry, and self-doubt.
We’ve seen that whatever we spend the most energy thinking about is 
likely to come to pass, whether it is something we fear or something we 
desire. Positive motivation makes us feel that we are achieving success, 
rather than simply avoiding failure. If you are experiencing negative 
motivation, try to consciously switch your thoughts from what you need 
to avoid to what you want to achieve. Instead of worrying about giving the 
wrong answer in class, for example, you can choose to focus on why you 
are in school, what you are gaining from this class, and how you are 
moving closer to your goals. Work on changing negatives into positives 
in Personal Journal 7.1.
Sources of Motivation
Motivation can come from two sources: outside and inside. Motivation that 
comes from outside is known as extrinsic motivation. Extrinsic means external. 
Motivation that comes from inside is known as intrinsic motivation. Intrinsic
means internal. Intrinsic motivation is the source of all true motivation.
Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation are very different. Intrinsic motivation 
is positive motivation that fuels your interests and passions. It drives you to 
do things that you enjoy and that allow you to grow as a person, such as:
• seeking excellence and independence
• feeling good about yourself
• understanding your world
• staying true to your inner values
• planning the course of your life
success secret
Positive motivation brings 
you closer to your goals.
FIGURE 7.1 Positive and Negative Motivation
In the Right Direction Positive motivation harnesses the power of positive 
thoughts and feelings to move you closer to your goal. Why do you think 
negative motivation is associated with low self-esteem?
Positive Motivation Negative Motivation
Desire to
Succeed
Fear of
Failure
Goal
extrinsic motivation
Motivation that comes from 
outside.
intrinsic motivation
Motivation that comes from 
inside.288 Chapter 7 Self-Motivation
Personal Journal 7.1
Generating Positive Motivation
Imagine that you are searching for a full-time job in your career field. The job search involves many steps, 
including perfecting your résumé, gathering references, and contacting potential employers. Will you be 
negatively motivated or positively motivated? Transform each negative motivation listed below into a 
positive motivation.
Example
I have to get this job to avoid defaulting on my student loans.
Getting this job will be a big step toward reaching my financial goals. 
I have to work hard on my résumé, or else I won’t get any interviews.
I’m gathering references because no one will hire me without them.
I’m applying for lots of jobs because I don’t want to feel like I missed an opportunity.
I need to practice interview techniques so I don’t mess up my big interview.
I have to follow up on the interview, or else they’ll think I don’t want the job.
Extrinsic motivation, on the other hand, is more like a quick fix. You 
do things not because you really want to, but because they are a means to 
an end, such as:
• looking good
• fitting in socially
• pleasing others
success secret
Lasting motivation comes 
from inside.• earning a material reward
• feeling superior to others
• avoiding trouble or punishment
Extrinsic motivation represents positive motivation when it moves you 
toward a desired goal such as financial independence, professional achieve￾ment, or social acceptance. It represents negative motivation, however, 
when it is based on gaining status, fame, and power or when it is based on 
fear and avoidance. Extrinsic motivation can provide encouragement or 
inspiration to act, but it only lasts for a while and is a poor substitute for 
more lasting and satisfying intrinsic goals. Lasting motivation only exists 
when you feel it inside. You must really want something for yourself to be 
motivated to attain it.
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Goals People tend to have different 
goals depending on what kind of motivation they have. Those who have 
intrinsic motivation aim for intrinsic goals, such as building relationships, 
giving to others, growing as individuals, and making the most of their poten￾tial. People with extrinsic motivation, by contrast, usually aim for extrinsic 
goals, such as acquiring possessions, wealth, fame, beauty, or a glamorous 
image. It’s not wrong or bad to have extrinsic goals, but most people who 
have a strong drive for money, fame, or a glamorous image live in fear that 
these desires will never be fulfilled or that they may not last. Even people 
who do attain these goals often suffer negative symptoms such as anxiety 
and depression. No matter how much they have, it never seems like enough. 
Emphasis on intrinsic goals, such as relationships, community involvement, 
and health, on the other hand, goes hand in hand with greater well-being.
Often, people who have extrinsic goals are trying to fulfill an emotional 
need with a material object. Jerry’s need for an Italian sports car, for 
example, stems from his feelings of low self-esteem. He is hoping that a 
glamorous possession will give him a sense of self-worth.
Where does your motivation come from? What drives you to do what 
you do? What do your goals look like? Use Activity 36 to assess your 
intrinsic and extrinsic motivation.
Understanding Incentives
As we have seen, people who are extrinsically motivated are concerned 
with looking good, avoiding punishment, or earning some kind of reward. 
A reward offered in order to motivate a person to do something is known 
as an incentive. Have you ever won a contest or received an award where 
you were recognized by family, friends, teachers, or peers? If so, you have 
felt the pull and satisfaction of incentives.
Most schools and companies use incentives to motivate people. Schools 
hand out rankings, special awards, praise from instructors, and prizes and 
scholarships. Companies use benefits, bonuses, exotic travel trips, pay 
raises, and improvements to the work environment.
success secret
Aim for inner fulfillment, 
not outward 
achievements.
incentive A reward 
offered in order to motivate a 
person to do something.290 Chapter 7 Self-Motivation
ACTIVITY 36: What Motivates You?
A For each item, circle the letter (a, b, or c) of the statement that describes your most likely reaction to the 
situation described.
1. You have been offered a new position in a company where you have worked for some time. The 
first thought that likely comes to mind is:
a. I wonder if the new work will be interesting.
b. What if I can’t live up to the new responsibility?
c. Will I make more money at this position?
2. You have a school-age daughter. On parents’ night, the teacher tells you that your daughter is 
doing poorly and doesn’t seem involved in the work. You are likely to:
a. Talk it over with your daughter to understand further what the problem is.
b. Scold her and hope she does better.
c. Make sure she does the assignments because she should be working harder.
3. You had a job interview several weeks ago. You receive an e-mail stating that the position has 
been filled. It is likely that you might think: 
a. Somehow they didn’t see my qualifications as matching their needs.
b. I’m probably not good enough for the job.
c. It’s not what you know, but who you know. 
4. You are a plant supervisor and have been charged with the task of allotting coffee breaks to 
three workers who cannot all break at once. You would likely handle this by: 
a. Telling the three workers the situation and having them work with you on the schedule.
b. Finding out from someone in authority what to do, or doing what was done in the past.
c. Simply assigning times that each can break. 
5. A close friend of yours has been moody lately. On a few occasions, this person has become very 
angry with you over “nothing.” You might:
a. Share your observations with him/her/them and try to find out what is going on.
b. Ignore it because there’s not much you can do about it anyway.
c. Tell your friend that you’re willing to spend time together only if he/she/they makes more 
effort at self-control. 
6. You have just received the results of a test you took, and you have discovered that you did very 
poorly. Your initial reaction will probably be to: 
a. Feel disappointed and wonder how you did so poorly.
b. Feel sad and blame yourself for not being able to do anything right.
c. Feel angry because that stupid test doesn’t show anything. 7. You have been invited to a large party where you know very few people. As you look forward to 
the evening, you would likely expect that: 
a. You’ll try to fit in with whatever is happening in order to have a good time and not look bad.
b. You’ll probably feel somewhat isolated and unnoticed.
c. You’ll find some people to whom you can relate. 
8. You are asked to plan a brunch for yourself and your fellow employees. Your style for 
approaching this project could most likely be characterized as: 
a. Taking charge: You would make most of the major decisions yourself.
b. Following precedent: You’re not really up to the task, so you’d do it the way it’s been done 
before.
c. Seeking participation: You would get input from others before you make the final plans. 
9. Recently a position opened up at your workplace that could have meant a promotion for you. 
However, a person you work with was offered the job rather than you. In evaluating the 
situation, you’re likely to think: 
a. The other person probably “did the right things” politically to get the job.
b. You didn’t really expect the job; you frequently get passed over.
c. You should probably take a look at factors in your own performance that led you to be 
passed over. 
10. You are embarking on a new career. The most important consideration is likely to be: 
a. Whether there are good possibilities for advancement.
b. Whether you can do the work without getting in over your head.
c. How interested you are in that kind of work. 
11. A woman who works for you has generally done an adequate job. However, for the past two 
weeks her work has not been up to par, and she appears to be less actively interested in her 
work. Your reaction will probably be to: 
a. Tell her that her work is below what is expected and that she should start working harder.
b. Hesitate; it’s hard to know what to do to get her straightened out.
c. Ask her about the problem and let her know you are available to help work it out. 
12. Your company has promoted you to a position in another city. As you think about the move, you 
would probably: 
a. Feel excited about the higher status and salary that is involved.
b. Feel stressed and anxious about the upcoming changes.
c. Feel interested in the new challenge and a little nervous at the same time.
Source: Adapted from Edward L. Deci and Richard M. Ryan, “The General Causality Orientations Scale: Self-Determination in Personality,” Journal of Research in Personality
19 (1985); 109–134.
continued…292 Chapter 7 Self-Motivation
B Scoring: First, go back to number 7. Beginning with this item and continuing through number 12, change 
each A you circled to a C; change each C to an A. Now add up the total number of A’s, B’s, and C’s you 
selected, and use the information below to interpret your results.
A’s B’s C’s 
Mostly A’s: You are high in intrinsic motivation. You tend to choose situations that stimulate your internal 
motivation and provide you with opportunities to improve yourself. You probably show initiative, select 
activities that are interesting and challenging, and take responsibility for your own behavior.
Mostly B’s: You lack motivation because you believe that success and achievement are matters of luck 
or fate, not of effort on your part. You probably feel that you are unable to make a difference or cope with 
demands or changes, and you may often feel anxious and ineffective.
Mostly C’s: You are high in extrinsic motivation. You tend to be motivated by factors such as rewards, 
deadlines, structures, and the directives of others. In fact, you may be more attuned to what others 
demand than to what you want for yourself. You probably place extreme importance on wealth, fame, 
image, and other outward factors.
C According to the questionnaire, what motivates you? Do you agree or disagree? Explain.
D Why would someone who is intrinsically motivated be more likely to seek interesting and challenging 
activities than someone who is extrinsically motivated?Why Incentives Fail There is nothing inherently wrong with 
incentives. However, incentives are usually effective only if they reinforce 
motivation that comes from inside. Let’s say that your boss offers you a 
cash bonus if you improve your job performance by a certain amount. 
Initially, the offer of money might inspire you to work harder. Unless you 
are truly interested in being a better employee, however, your motivation is 
likely to fizzle out fairly quickly. The bonus will motivate you only if you 
are motivated to improve yourself.
Relying solely on extrinsic rewards as motivation can also be self-defeating 
because we can confuse the reward with the goal. For example, a child who is 
bribed into doing schoolwork by the promise of praise, gold stars, or money 
may develop the belief that these rewards, not the learning that leads to them, 
are goals in themselves. An addiction to rewards may discourage us from 
trying new things for fear of losing other people’s approval.
An even bigger problem with incentives is that they usually represent 
someone else’s attempts to control our behavior. Think about the parents 
who promised their teenage son a large allowance in exchange for earning 
better grades. This reward was really an attempt to get him to do what they 
wanted him to do. The reward did nothing to increase his interest in learning.
NEEDS AND MOTIVATION
We’ve seen that achieving extrinsic goals such as wealth, fame, or image is 
less satisfying than achieving intrinsic goals such as relationships and self￾determination. But why? According to many psychologists, it’s because 
intrinsic achievements, such as relationships and self-determination, meet 
fundamental human needs. A need represents something we must have to 
survive and thrive.
All of us have both physical and psychological needs. We need not only 
clothing and a roof over our heads, for example, but also a sense that we 
are secure and loved by others. We need not only food to sustain our body 
but also self-esteem to sustain our spirit.
Needs motivate much of our conscious behavior. We work to build 
social and romantic relationships, for example, because we need accep￾tance and love from others. We strive to reach our goals because we need 
to experience self-esteem and a sense of competence.
Needs motivate much of our unconscious behavior as well. For 
example, we all have a natural tendency to imitate the behaviors, postures, 
and mannerisms of the people around us. We do this unconsciously to 
create a climate of empathy and mutual acceptance.
Needs and Wants
How can we tell needs from wants? A need represents something we must 
have in order to function. A want, on the other hand, represents something 
we can survive and thrive without.
success secret
The motivation for self￾improvement comes 
from inside.
need Something a person 
must have in order to survive 
and thrive.
success secret
Needs motivate much of 
human behavior.
want Something a 
person can survive and 
thrive without.294 Chapter 7 Self-Motivation
Wants often take the form of material goods beyond the basics 
necessary for survival. We all need healthy food, suitable clothing, and 
secure shelter, for example, but we don’t really need gourmet coffee, 
designer labels, or a four-car garage. Wants like these are perfectly normal, 
but they are unlikely to provide long-lasting satisfaction. Material extras 
can be fun, but they don’t fulfill our needs. If you are having trouble 
deciding whether something is a want or a need, ask yourself:
• Will I be satisfied after I get this, or will I want something more?
• Am I hoping that this will boost my self-esteem?
• Am I hoping that this will take away a painful feeling, such as loneliness, 
sadness, rejection, loss, or emptiness?
If something does not truly satisfy you physically or psychologically, it 
is probably a want, not a need.
A Hierarchy of Needs
How many essential human needs are there? Two? Fifty? Three hundred? 
According to psychologist Abraham Maslow, human needs fall into five 
categories. Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, shown in Figure 7.2, is a diagram 
of these five central human needs arranged from the most basic (at the 
bottom) to the most complex (at the top). The five levels of needs are:
• physical needs
• security needs
• social needs
• esteem needs
• self-actualization needs
Maslow’s model assumes that we must meet our basic needs before we 
can turn our attention to the more complex ones. In other words, we seek 
to fulfill higher, more complex psychological needs, such as the need for 
esteem, only after our more basic survival needs have been met. Let’s look 
at each level of the hierarchy of needs.
Physical Needs
Physical needs are the basic needs that support our biological health and 
survival. Physical needs, the most basic and important of all human needs, 
include:
• fresh air
• clean water
• nutritious food
• shelter from the elements
• sanitary living conditions
• proper clothing
• basic medical care
• sexual intimacy
hierarchy of needs
A diagram of the five central 
human needs arranged from 
the most basic to the most 
complex.Think for a moment about how much of your life is devoted to satisfy￾ing your physical needs. You work to pay for food, shelter, clothing, and 
medical care. You do housework and laundry to keep your surroundings 
clean and sanitary. You go to the doctor and dentist to keep healthy. The 
more time, money, and energy you must spend to meet your physical 
needs, the less time, money, and energy you have to spend on meeting 
higher level needs, such as education or social acceptance. If you have to 
hold down two jobs to pay the bills, you will be less motivated to pursue 
an advanced education or devote yourself to serving the community.
Security Needs
Once our physical needs are met, security and safety become our next 
logical concerns. Our needs for safety and security include:
• freedom from physical harm
• a stable environment
• confidence that we can depend on others
success secret
Satisfying basic survival 
needs requires hard work.
FIGURE 7.2 Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs
Needs as Motivators Needs motivate much of our behavior. If we are 
hungry, we seek food; if we are lonely, we seek companionship; if we are 
bored, we seek stimulation. When might someone ignore a lower level need 
in order to fulfill a higher level need?
Self￾Actualization
Needs
Esteem Needs
Social Needs
Security Needs
Physical Needs296 Chapter 7 Self-Motivation
• protection from abuse
• freedom from fear, anxiety, and chaos
• structure, order, law, and limits
Before we can seek the fulfillment of higher personal needs, such as 
self-esteem and social acceptance, we must first have a basic sense of safety 
and security. Those who constantly worry about their safety will have 
trouble experiencing happiness, fulfillment, or a sense of belonging.
Social Needs
Human beings are social creatures, with an essential need for others. We 
all have a need to feel that important others in our lives acknowledge, appre￾ciate, and love us for who we truly are. We also have a need to reciprocate 
by acknowledging, appreciating, and loving others. This need for fulfilling 
relationships with others is known as belongingness. The need for 
belongingness can be satisfied through the intimacy of romance or friendship, 
the security of family ties, or the camaraderie at school or the workplace.
Without a sense of belonging, a person can fall victim to the kinds of 
feelings associated with depression and low self-esteem: loneliness, 
unwantedness, or unworthiness. No matter how secure we are physically 
and psychologically, we always need others.
Esteem Needs
To be happy and successful, people need to feel that they are valuable and 
worthwhile and that others see them as valuable and worthwhile, too. 
Esteem from others and self-esteem are closely related. We all need to feel 
important, useful, successful, and respected, and we all need for others to 
recognize our talents and potential.
success secret
We all need to feel secure 
in our environment.
belongingness
Fulfilling relationships with 
others.
success secret
Low self-esteem can crush 
motivation.
STAYING MOTIVATED WITH E-LEARNING
Over the past decade, the number of college students 
enrolled in an online course has doubled from twenty￾three percent to about fifty percent. The global 
COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated this trend, with 
social distancing and virtual classroom learning 
required at every level of formal education. As technol￾ogy options continue to grow exponentially, e-learning 
will increasingly become a more common mode of 
learning. Future high school, community college, trade 
school, and university graduates also will enter and 
continue careers in virtual offices or “home-based” 
offices, without ever working in company or institu￾tional facilities in specific geographic locations. We are 
moving from work places to work spaces. The greatest 
challenge students and job holders must deal with in 
online learning and training is motivation. Without 
physical classrooms and work places involving 
face-to-face interaction to enhance productivity, 
individuals can often feel disconnected and isolated. 
They can easily lose interest in the material and become 
distracted and unmotivated. This can lead to a lack of 
enthusiasm and commitment to successfully complete 
their assignments and perform to their highest level.
internet actionLow self-esteem can crush our motivation to achieve goals and grow as 
individuals. To be psychologically healthy, we need to be able to pat ourselves 
on the back now and then—to celebrate achievements and keep ourselves 
motivated and to offset those disappointing times when things don’t go so well.
Competence The ability to reach our goals and cope with the 
challenges of life is key to self-esteem. Because of this, we all have a deep 
need to feel a sense of competence in the important areas of our lives. 
Competence is the ability to do something well. Being competent means 
knowing how to do a job well and being able to perform it effectively. We 
take basic satisfaction in knowing that we have done something well, from 
making sushi to hosting a podcast. Once we achieve a goal or build a skill, 
we are rewarded with the good feeling of knowing that we can accomplish 
new goals and build new skills. Our self-esteem continues to grow as we set 
new goals and strive to attain them.
Self-Actualization Needs
Self-actualization is the highest level of the hierarchy of needs. Self-actualization
means reaching one’s full potential and achieving long-term personal growth. 
The need for self-actualization is the need for personal fulfillment—in other 
words, for success.
competence The ability 
to do something well.
self-actualization
Reaching one’s full potential 
and achieving long-term 
personal growth.
Applying Psychology
Six Types of Achievement Motivation
(1) The first type of achievement motivation is Status with the Experts—in other words, gaining recognition 
as a leader in your field. (2) The second type of achievement motivation is Acquisitiveness—which is the 
desire to acquire something tangible such as a fixed sum of money, a sports car, or a boat. Many people live 
for the things they love, and they also hate to lose those things. (3) The third type of achievement motivation 
is Achievement via Independence, which is the desire to achieve on your own skills and merits. This could 
involve going through demanding academic training to become a surgeon, scientist, or any other profession 
where you are sought after for your ability. (4) The fourth type of achievement motivation is Status with 
Peers. This is different from Status with the Experts because, to put it bluntly, your peers may not be the 
experts. Many of us are motivated by how we are regarded by our friends or our fellow employees at work. 
(5) The fifth type of achievement motivation is Competitiveness, something we all know about. NBC founder 
David Sarnoff said, “Competition brings out the best in products and, often, the worst in people.” How 
important is winning at all costs to you? (6) The sixth type of achievement motivation is Concern for 
Excellence. Concern for Excellence means that you are motivated every day to be the best you can possibly 
be in whatever you do. Of the six motivation types, only two—Achievement via Independence and Concern 
for Excellence—are true intrinsic motivations.
The majority of history’s greatest achievers were common people with a desire to express something 
within themselves to solve a problem. Many earned financial security and prestige, but that was only a 
by-product of their efforts, not a primary motivation. Which of the above motivate you the most? Why?298 Chapter 7 Self-Motivation
Like success, self-actualization is a journey, not a destination. At no 
point can we sit back and say to ourselves, “There! I’ve done everything 
I need to become self-actualized.” We are at our best when we’re in a state 
of constant growth—open to new ideas and quick to make use of new 
knowledge, even knowledge gained from our mistakes.
Autonomy We all need autonomy to achieve self-actualization. 
Autonomy means freedom of choice, independence, and the chance to 
exercise independent judgment. It means having control over our lives, 
choosing our own activities, and determining our own values.
Autonomy has a powerful effect on our motivation and performance. 
When we lack autonomy, we feel like powerless participants in a game 
controlled by others. Our motivation fades quickly. When we have 
autonomy, however, we are motivated to reach success at both school 
and work. Students who are free to choose their own educational path, 
for example, are much more motivated than students who are controlled 
by their parents. Employees who are given control over their own work 
are much more motivated than employees who are micromanaged by 
their supervisors. Have you ever had a job where your supervisor 
hovered over your shoulder, worried that you might make a mistake? 
Being controlled in this way robs you of your autonomy and dampens 
your motivation.
It’s time to take a look at your needs. Use Activity 37 to evaluate how 
well the three higher level needs are being satisfied in your daily life.
Meeting Your Needs Imagine that you drew up a list of the 
things you want most in your life. What would be on the list? Chances 
are, the things you want the most are the things you need. Let’s say you 
want a successful career and a nurturing relationship. The longing for 
professional success is related to the need for esteem and self-actualization. 
The desire for a loving life partner comes from the need for love, 
acceptance, and belonging. Deep down, we all essentially want and 
need the same basic things—to feel good about ourselves, have a sense 
of purpose, be physically and financially secure, grow intellectually, 
enjoy physical and emotional intimacy with others, and receive 
compassion and recognition. Think carefully about your wants and 
needs. This will help you focus on the things that will bring you true 
success and happiness.
Self Check
1. What is intrinsic motivation? (p. 289)
2. What is the difference between needs and wants? (p. 293)
3. Name the different levels of the hierarchy of needs. (p. 294)
autonomy Freedom of 
choice, independence, and 
the chance to exercise 
independent judgment.ACTIVITY 37: Are Your Needs Being Met?
A Read each statement below and indicate whether you Disagree, Disagree Slightly, Agree Slightly, 
or Agree.
Disagree Disagree 
Slightly
Agree 
Slightly Agree
1. I get along well with other people.
2. People are friendly toward me.
3. People in my life care about me.
4. I like the people I work and go to school with.
5. I have satisfying close relationships.
6. I feel a sense of achievement at school and work.
7. People I know tell me I am good at what I do.
8. At work and school, I am learning interesting new skills.
9. Most days, I feel a sense of accomplishment from what I do and 
who I am.
10. I frequently have the opportunity to show how capable I am.
11. I decide for myself how to live my life.
12. I don’t feel pressured to do, say, or think things that aren’t 
“me.”
13. I rarely am forced to do what other people tell me to do.
14. I feel free to express my ideas and opinions.
15. I feel like I can pretty much be myself.
Source: Adapted from Edward L. Deci and Richard M. Ryan, “Basic Need Satisfaction in Life Scale.” Self-Determination Theory: An Approach to Human Motivation and 
Personality, May 2002. University of Rochester.
B Scoring: Give yourself one point for every Disagree, two points for every Disagree Slightly, three points 
for every Agree Slightly, and four points for every Agree. Add up the number of points you assigned to 
statements 1–5. These statements refer to the need for belongingness. If your total is 15 or lower, this 
need is not being fully satisfied in your life.
Belongingness total: ____________________
Add up the number of points you assigned to statements 6–10. These statements refer to the need for 
competence. If your total is 15 or lower, this need is not being fully satisfied in your life.
continued…300 Chapter 7 Self-Motivation
Competence total: _______________________
Add up the number of points you assigned to statements 11–15. These statements refer to the need for 
autonomy. If your total is 15 or lower, this need is not being fully satisfied in your life.
Autonomy total: ____________________
C Which of these needs are being satisfied in your life and which are not? What circumstances in your life 
do you think account for this?SECTION 7.2 Recharging Your Motivation
MOTIVATION AND EMOTION
Motivation and emotion are closely related. In fact, both words come from 
the same Latin verb meaning to move. We move toward things that we 
associate with pleasant feelings, such as joy, love, and excitement, and we 
move away from things that we associate with unpleasant feelings, such as 
fear, sadness, and guilt.
In particular, two strong emotions that are opposites of each other 
are part of motivation: fear and desire. Fear is an unpleasant feeling of 
anxiety caused by the anticipation of danger. Fear is one of the most 
powerful emotions that can affect motivation. Fear makes you panic, often 
needlessly, and it can defeat goals.
The opposite emotion, desire, is like a strong, positive magnet. Desire is 
a conscious drive to attain a satisfying goal. It attracts and encourages plans 
and effort. Desire is the emotional state between where you are and where 
you want to be. To attain success, you need to have desire. You need to 
want to change for the better.
Fear and desire lead to opposite destinies. Fear looks to the past. 
Desire looks to the future. Fear remembers past pain, disappointment, 
failure, and unpleasantness and reminds us that these experiences can be 
repeated. Desire triggers memories of pleasure and success and excites 
the need to create new successful experiences. The fearful person says, 
“I have to,” “I can’t,” “I see risk,” and “I wish.” The person with desire says, 
“I want to,” “I can,” “I see opportunity,” and “I will.”
The Importance of Desire
Success is not only for the privileged; you don’t have to be born rich, 
talented, or strong. Success depends on desire, focus, and persistence. 
The secret of success is to make the extra effort, try another approach, 
and concentrate on the desired outcome. Out of desire comes the energy 
and will to succeed. To be effective, however, desire has to be accompanied 
by self-discipline. You might desire to fly to the moon—you might even 
imagine yourself on the moon—but in reality, you will never even get near 
the launching pad without self-discipline.
Most basketball fans will never forget the singular play of Michael 
Jordan, who led the NBA Chicago Bulls to a spectacular run of world titles. 
Many consider him to be the greatest professional basketball player who 
has ever played the game. Few younger fans today know that he was cut 
from his high school basketball team as not being talented enough. What if 
he had thrown in the towel at that early age and given up on the sport he 
loved? His early rejection motivated him to practice more and increased his 
determination to succeed. After a three-season career at the University of 
fear An unpleasant feeling 
of anxiety caused by the 
anticipation of danger.
desire A conscious drive 
to attain a satisfying goal.
success secret
Desire and self-discipline 
keep you going along the 
tough road to your goals.
Daniel Lippitt/AFP/Getty Images302 Chapter 7 Self-Motivation
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, where he was a member of the Tar Heels’ 
national championship team in 1982, Jordan joined the NBA’s Chicago 
Bulls in 1984. In 1991, he won his first NBA championship, and followed 
that achievement with titles in 1992 and 1993, securing a “three-peat.” 
After a brief try at professional baseball, Jordan rejoined the Bulls in 
1995 and led them to three additional championships in 1996, 1997, 
and 1998, as well as an NBA-record seventy-two regular-season wins in 
the 1995–1996 season.
What does Michael Jordan have to say about the early disappoint￾ment that motivated him to play in the NBA? He says: “I have missed 
more than 9,000 shots in my career. I have lost almost 300 games. On 
26 occasions I have been entrusted to take the game winning shot, and 
I missed. I have failed over and over and over again in my life. And that 
is why I succeed.”
Like Michael Jordan, Oprah Winfrey overcame rejection with self-discipline 
and perseverance to become one of the wealthiest and most powerful 
women in broadcasting and media. Here’s what Oprah has to say: “If you 
concentrate on what you don’t have, you will never, ever have enough. 
Lots of people want to ride with you in the limo, but what you want is 
someone who will take the bus with you when the limo breaks down. 
I don’t think of myself as a poor, deprived, ghetto girl who made good. 
I think of myself as somebody who from an early age knew I was 
responsible for myself, and I had to make good. I still have my feet on 
the ground, I just wear better shoes.”
professional development )))
What Motivates Employees?
According to recent Gallup surveys, seventy percent of U.S. workers are either “not engaged” or are “actively 
disengaged” in their jobs. This means managers must understand how to continually foster an environment of 
motivated and productive employees. As you learned earlier in this chapter, extrinsic rewards such as pay 
and benefits are not as powerful as intrinsic rewards. Recognition for a job well done, even a simple “thank 
you” or pat on the back, will do far more to engage employees than a pay raise or bonus.
Leaders and managers who develop a strong team environment of open communication, recognition, 
feedback, coaching, and autonomy will gain higher productivity and engagement. People want to feel 
valued by their bosses, their company, and their peers. They want to be part of something “bigger” than 
themselves. As employees are treated with respect and encouraged to share their opinions, they are 
intrinsically motivated to give more to their job and their company.
What’s Your Opinion?
Think about your current place of work or a previous job you have held. What motivates or motivated you to 
do a good job? What did your boss or company do to make you feel valued? What motivates you when you 
think about working in your ideal job or for a great company? To learn more about motivation on the job, 
conduct an online search using the keywords “employee motivation.”OVERCOMING FEAR OF FAILURE
The only limits to what you can achieve are the limits you put on yourself. 
Low self-expectancy and lack of commitment can severely limit your ability to 
achieve your goals. So can one of the most powerful fears—the fear of failure.
In some cases, fear of failure can generate a kind of negative motivation 
that works in your favor. This happens when you give your best effort to 
avoid failure. If you haven’t been studying and recently failed several tests, 
you might be anxious about passing the course; this fear could motivate you 
to get your study habits back on track. However, most of the time, fear of 
failure drains your energy and motivation. Fear of failure diminishes your 
motivation by focusing your attention on the negative possibilities in taking 
action or making a change.
Fear of failure is often based on irrational beliefs about the terrible 
consequences that will result if you do (or don’t do) certain things. For 
example, fear of failure may be based on fear of the unknown, of rejection, 
of disapproval or humiliation, or of looking stupid or awkward. Under￾neath many of these fears is often an even deeper fear: the fear of being 
inadequate.
Accept Your Fear
To overcome fear of failure, you first need to accept your fear. Realize 
that everyone fears failure. Even highly successful people fear failure. 
Successful people, however, are able to accept their fear and go on 
anyway.
Consider the following story. A famous actor once suffered a 
nervous breakdown before he went on stage. He was ordered to rest 
and repair his damaged nervous system. He was afraid and had lost all 
confidence in himself. After a while, his doctor suggested that he 
perform before a small group in his town. When the actor said he was 
terrified of failing, the doctor answered that he was using fear as an 
excuse, and fear was not a good reason to quit. He told the actor that 
successful people admit fear and go on in spite of it. The actor accepted 
his fear and went on to perform in front of the little group. His perfor￾mance was a great success, and afterward he realized that he had 
admitted his fear but had not let it stop him. After that night, he pushed 
himself to perform in front of larger audiences all over the world, 
knowing that he could overcome the fear and not let it end his acting 
career. He knew the fear might always be there, but being frightened 
would never make him give up again.
Expand Your Comfort Zone
Once you’ve accepted your fear, you can work on expanding your comfort 
zone. Your comfort zone is the place in your mind where you feel safe and 
know you can succeed.
comfort zone The 
place in the mind where a 
person feels safe and knows 
that he/she/they can 
succeed.
success secret
Fear of failure drains 
positive motivation.304 Chapter 7 Self-Motivation
Most goals require that you move a bit outside your comfort zone. To 
go after a goal is to move into new areas and to try new things, and doing 
this can be quite stressful. Because you don’t want to become so stressed 
that you give up your goal, the best course of action is to move outside your 
comfort zone bit by bit—taking slow, small steps that are challenging but 
not uncomfortable. Think of the comfort zone as a circle surrounding you, 
as in Figure 7.3. Each time you accept a new challenge, you expand the 
circle, gaining more and more freedom of movement.
Rethink Failure
Another way to overcome fear of failure is to rethink what failure 
means. Failure is simply an unwanted outcome. Failure is an event, but 
not a destiny. Thomas Edison once explained, “I have not failed. I’ve 
just found 10,000 ways that won’t work.” Failure is learning experience 
that can be used as a tool. It’s feedback that can inform you of how you 
should move forward. In other words, failure is a detour, not a dead 
end. Picture yourself in twenty years reflecting on a failure. Will you be 
proud of your response to the failure or be left wondering what might 
have been?
failure An unwanted 
outcome.
FIGURE 7.3 Expanding the Comfort Zone
Step by Step Every time you try something new, you expand your comfort 
zone. Why is it better to expand your comfort zone with small steps than with 
giant leaps?Failure Is Part of Success
Failure is a part of life. Every time we do something new, we risk failure. 
For example, when you learned to drive a car, you didn’t know if you would 
be successful until you tried. Sometimes it takes a lot of trying to achieve 
success, but when we finally do, we feel confident. We learn that we can 
succeed at something new.
Actor Jim Carrey was heckled in his first try at comedy and didn’t try 
again for two years. He says, “I have no idea what motivated me to try again. 
I just felt like giving it a shot. Failure isn’t the end unless you give up.”
Often, setbacks and hardships strengthen us. Earl Nightingale, a well￾known motivational speaker, tells the story of a trip he took to the Great 
Barrier Reef. He noticed that the coral growing on the sheltered side of the 
reef, where the sea was peaceful and quiet, looked pale and lifeless. The 
coral that was constantly beaten by the powerful waves, however, looked 
healthy and vibrant. Earl asked the guide why this was so. “It is very 
simple,” came the reply. “The coral on the lagoon side dies rapidly with 
no challenge for growth and survival, while the coral facing the open sea 
thrives and multiplies because it is challenged and tested every day.” So it 
is with all living things on Earth. If we never challenge ourselves, we never 
have the opportunity to succeed. We can choose to stay where we are, or 
we can use the failures and setbacks in our lives to strengthen ourselves and 
help us make progress toward our goals.
Strive to focus on your past successes and forget past failures. Learn 
from your mistakes, and then erase them from memory. It doesn’t matter 
how many times you have failed in the past. It only matters that you are 
willing to try again. Use Activity 38 to assess your view of failure and how 
you might expand your comfort zone.
OVERCOMING FEAR OF SUCCESS
It is not just fear of failure that can hold us back. It is also fear of success. 
Low self-esteem is the major reason we fear success and the risks involved 
in reaching success. If you cannot see your potential and what you can do, 
you are defeated from the start. You make the excuse, “It is not worth it 
to succeed.” What you are really saying is, “I am not worth the effort.” 
Successful people, however, see themselves as worthy of success. They 
know they are worth the effort to succeed. This sense of self-worth keeps 
the hope of achievement alive.
Fear of success defeats any goals you set and causes you to resist change. 
Consider Joyce’s example. Joyce wanted to go to community college to earn 
an associate degree. She set the goal and made lists of tasks to make it happen, 
but three years later, she is still “thinking about it.” Joyce wants an education, 
but deep down she’s afraid that getting it will change the way friends or 
members of her family, who have not attended college, relate to her. They 
may view a college-educated Joyce as different, maybe even conceited.
success secret
You may fail, but you are 
never a failure.
success secret
Fear of success defeats 
your goals.306 Chapter 7 Self-Motivation
ACTIVITY 38: Expanding Your Comfort Zone
A What five things would you want to do or try if you could be absolutely, positively sure there was 
no possibility of failure? (Select things that you really, truly want to do for yourself, not to impress 
someone else.)
Example
Run for president of the student council
Audition for an a capella singing group
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
B In the real world, failure—an unwanted outcome—is always a possibility. Given this fact, how likely are 
you to try these five things in your real life? Explain.
C If you tried and failed at any of these things, would you try again? Why or why not?D Imagine that you try and fail at one or more of these things and then give up. Picture yourself twenty 
years in the future. How do you feel as you look back and remember that you let the fear of failure stop 
you from pursuing what you wanted in life?
E Select one of the five things you want to do or try. Formulate a series of three increasingly challenging 
goals that could help you expand your comfort zone in this area.
Goal #1
Goal #2
Goal #3308 Chapter 7 Self-Motivation
Fighting Your Fears
To find ways around the fear of success, you need to examine the thoughts and 
feelings that might be holding you back and discover ways to overcome them.
“Even if I succeed, I still won’t be happy.” If you fear that 
success will leave you unfulfilled, it might be time to reexamine your vision 
of success. Are you hoping that money, power, or the approval of other 
people will make you a happy person? Remember that success and 
happiness come from intrinsic goals, such as close relationships, healthy 
self-esteem, and a commitment to your goals and values. Also work on 
different sides of yourself so that your happiness is not dependent on 
accomplishing a single goal.
“I won’t be able to live up to the expectations.” People 
sometimes do have unrealistic expectations of those who are successful. 
Ask yourself, however, if your unrealistic expectations of yourself might be 
undermining your motivation. Do you feel that you’ll be a failure unless 
you climb from achievement to achievement? Let other people have their 
expectations—you are responsible for doing only what matters to you.
“The minute I achieve success, I’ll probably blow it.”
Success is not an accident, nor is it a possession that can be taken away. 
Are you secretly worried that you’re not good enough and that someone 
will “find you out”? This fear can dampen your motivation and discourage 
you from taking risks. Give yourself permission to try new things, be 
creative, and make mistakes.
“Once I get what I want, I won’t be motivated to do 
anything.” Remember that success is a process, not an end in itself. 
Each achievement builds on past achievements and lays the groundwork for 
future achievements. Set several goals for yourself in several different areas 
of your life, so that you will always have something to look forward to.
“The more successful you are, the more people 
dislike you.” It’s natural to fear that people will be envious of your 
achievements. Why not turn that fear around, however, and imagine how 
your success might inspire others? There are many ways to use your success 
to the benefit of others, such as mentoring, tutoring, teaching, and writing. 
Look at your attitudes, too—many of us secretly envy people who are 
successful and therefore dislike them. Turn this envy around, giving others 
credit, recognition, and support. Then expect this treatment in return. You 
can also let their success inspire you.
“Everyone will think I’m stuck up.” It is possible that people 
will find something to criticize. Remember, however, that the person who 
is most critical of you is you. If you are worried about how the changes 
you are making will affect the important people in your life, give them 
success secret
Having unrealistic 
expectations of yourself 
can drain your motivation.
success secret
Give yourself permission 
to make mistakes.
success secret
Use your success to 
inspire others.permission to give you honest, open, candid feedback if they see you acting 
differently or deviating from your values. Build a personal support network 
of people who appreciate and love you for who you are, not what you 
accomplish.
“I don’t want to step all over people to get ahead.”
True success does not require exploiting others. You can, and should, 
succeed by acting in harmony with your values and with respect for others. 
Trust that it is possible to achieve your own dreams without robbing other 
people of the chance to achieve theirs.
When you fear success, even the biggest achievements can be sources 
of anxiety. If you are promoted at work, for example, you might start 
worrying about letting your boss down, or alienating your coworkers, or 
making a wrong decision. Even though you’ve reached an important goal, 
you can’t enjoy it. Use Personal Journal 7.2 to imagine the positive and 
negative feelings you might have in situations of success.
VISUALIZATION
We have seen how fear—both fear of failure and fear of success—can make 
us stumble on the path toward achieving our goals. Although it is helpful to 
accept our fears and rethink what failure means, we must also visualize 
ourselves being successful. When this happens, our motivation will become 
the fuel for action. Visualization is the process of creating detailed mental 
pictures of behaviors you wish to carry out. Visualization, like positive 
self-talk, harnesses the power of the subconscious mind. When you 
visualize, you see things in your mind’s eye by organizing and processing 
information through pictures and symbols. You imagine yourself behaving 
in certain ways, helping that behavior to become real.
With visualization, you focus on the image of what you want until you 
achieve what you have been visualizing. You might imagine yourself getting 
a new job, passing a test, or improving your memory and learning ability. If 
you want to get in shape, you could picture yourself enjoying life as a fit 
and healthy person. This helps motivate you to exercise and eat healthfully.
Many studies have measured the effects of visualization on athletic 
performance. In one study, one group of basketball players physically 
practiced free throws while another group “mentally” practiced free throws 
by using visualization. Both groups had the same rate of improvement. 
Combining both physical and mental practice of a sport—or any other 
skill—helps improve performance even more.
Visualization and Success
Visualization, or mental simulation, is not a new concept. We all have fan￾tasized and acted out our “life scripts”—virtual reality shows or magnificent 
epic movies—at some point in our lives. Olympians train up to 1,200 days 
visualization The 
process of creating detailed 
mental pictures of the 
behaviors one wishes to 
carry out.
success secret
Use visualization to 
harness the power of the 
subconscious mind.310 Chapter 7 Self-Motivation
Personal Journal 7.2
Confronting Fear of Success
Write down three positive feelings and three negative feelings that you might experience in each of the 
following situations.
Your instructor recognizes you in front of your classmates for outstanding work on a research project. 
You are asked to present your paper to the class on Monday.
POSITIVE FEELINGS NEGATIVE FEELINGS
You and two friends take an advanced course. You are the only student who receives an A.
POSITIVE FEELINGS NEGATIVE FEELINGS
You submit several humorous articles to a local newspaper. The editor likes your writing and offers 
you a small weekly column.
POSITIVE FEELINGS NEGATIVE FEELINGS
What could you say to yourself in these situations to reduce your negative feelings?for a few moments of competition and much of their rehearsals take place 
in their minds outside of the arenas.
According to Michael Phelps, the most decorated Olympian of all time, 
his success stems from first visualizing each race before he even steps into 
the pool. Phelps says he’s been visualizing since he was seven years old, 
watching what he calls his video of the perfect swim in his mind each night 
before going to sleep, mentally mapping out his ideal swim for the next day. 
Renowned Olympic gold medalist and World Cup skiing champion 
Lindsey Vonn says her mental practice gives her a competitive advantage 
on the course. She says, “I always visualize the run before I do it. By the 
time I get to the start gate, I’ve skied that race 100 times already in my 
head, picturing how I’ll take the turns.” Not only does Lindsey pre-play 
visual images in her mind, she also simulates the path by shifting her weight 
back and forth as if she were on her skis, while practicing the specific 
breathing patterns she’ll use during the race.
When asked about athletic skills versus mental skills, Michael Jordan, 
one of the greatest NBA basketball players of all time, said: “The mental 
part is the hardest part, and I think that’s the part that separates the good 
players from the great players.” In using mental imagery, Jordan said, 
“I visualized where I wanted to be, what kind of player I wanted to become. 
I knew exactly where I wanted to go, and I focused on getting there.” And, 
retired NFL legendary quarterback Peyton Manning put it simply this way: 
“Some guys need to see things on a grease board . . . I like when you can 
see it in your mind!”
In every sport, visualization is in the spotlight, whether it is golf 
champion Imbee Park picturing the winning shots in advance, or Carli 
Lloyd, member of the U.S. Women’s World Cup soccer championship 
team, and the first player to ever score three goals in a World Cup final, 
reflecting how she takes time before each game to visualize positive 
scenarios between herself and the soccer ball.
Visualization is not reserved only for athletes. Sales executives, scien￾tists, Navy Seals, dancers, musicians, actors, parents, teachers, and students 
do it every day. It is so powerful that doctors sometimes have their patients 
use guided imagery as part of their treatment for diseases such as cancer 
and AIDS. These patients are encouraged to imagine their bodies fighting 
the disease.
During the past decade, the techniques involved in visual imagery and 
mental rehearsal have grown from the oversimplified concepts of positive 
thinking to more scientific approaches that incorporate high-speed 
cinematography, digitized computer readouts, stop-action video replay, 
neurofeedback techniques, and simulation technology. Certain kinds of 
music, colors, images, and sensory environments can evoke different brain 
wave and emotional responses. Virtual reality technology, which many 
people associate with video games, has many beneficial applications.
Visualization works because the mind reacts automatically to the infor￾mation we feed it in the form of words, pictures, and emotions. And, as we 
success secret
Visualize yourself 
succeeding, and you 
will succeed.
virtual reality An 
artificial environment that is 
created with software and 
presented to the user in such 
a way that the user suspends 
belief and accepts it as a real 
environment.312 Chapter 7 Self-Motivation
have discussed, the brain’s neural pathways can be reshaped and redirected. 
Basically there are two types of visualization, receptive and programmed. 
Receptive visualization is used to help answer a question or find a solution 
to a problem. In this type of visualization, the question is formulated or the 
problem posed. First the issue is analyzed logically for better understanding; 
then a mental picture of a blank screen is formed, and the answer or 
solution is allowed to appear on the screen in its own time. This technique 
is especially helpful in recalling information that appears to have been 
forgotten or lost.
Programmed visualization is used to get what we want in life. We 
picture what we want repeatedly and the brain sends signals to the body 
that cause us to take action to bring about the desired results. Make sure 
you really want what you are visualizing; avoid picturing a condition or 
event you don’t want to occur.
Steps to Visualization
Here are some specific steps for visualizing successfully:
1. When you visualize yourself doing something, make it an action scene 
in which there’s movement. In sports psychology, this is referred to as 
Visual Motor Behavior Rehearsal (VMBR), and the object is to create 
a neurological pathway enabling your muscles to “remember” the 
sequence of movements that make up an action. Therefore, no still 
pictures please.
2. Visualize both the successful outcome and the steps leading up to it. 
Olympic athletes mentally run through what they want to do and how 
they want to do it well before they arrive at the arena. They imagine 
the sights, sounds, temperatures, spectators, and the other competitors—
and then they focus on their own performances. Some even include a 
clock or stopwatch in their imagery to ensure that the timing and 
pacing in their minds are exact. To your brain, a dress rehearsal is the 
opening night performance.
3. Visualize conditions and things that are consistent with your princi￾ples and moral values. If there’s a conflict, you’ll be less likely to get 
your mind and body working in concert.
4. Most importantly, when you visualize yourself, see yourself in the 
present, as if you are already accomplishing your goal. Make certain 
your visual image is as you would see it through your own eyes, not 
watching through the eyes of a spectator. If you’re a skier, your 
imagery would appear in your mind as if an invisible TV camera were 
mounted on your shoulder looking exactly where your eyes are 
focused during a ski run, and feeling the same sensations. If you need 
to give a speech, you should imagine how the audience will look 
sitting in front of you.
success secret
Visualize yourself as the 
person you want to be.To strengthen your visualization capability, start making mental notes 
about your environment. Take in as many sights, sounds, smells, textures, 
and tastes as you can. Recreate in your mind the beauty of a sunrise or sun￾set. Feel the wet sand of a beach between your toes. As you become more 
curious, observant, and in tune with your surroundings, you’ll find your 
powers of visualization improving greatly. And the more often you see the 
winner’s circle in your mind’s eye, the sooner you’ll arrive there in person. 
Be more curious about everything around you. Use visual images more in 
your everyday conversation. As you listen to someone talk, try to form a 
mental image of the situation he/she/they describes. Allow the words to 
form images, feelings, and sensations. By linking feelings and images, you 
will be able to recall both better.
When you talk to others, use words that are rich in visual imagery; word 
pictures, analogies, stories, metaphors, and similes create vivid mental 
pictures. You will enjoy a side benefit of becoming a better conversationalist 
and public speaker if you do.
Focus on the Positive Remember that self-talk has a powerful 
effect on your subconscious mind. As you visualize, notice and dispute 
negative thoughts with positive affirmations. Don’t focus on doubts; think 
about the self-image of the person that you would like to become. If you 
keep experiencing anxiety and find yourself repeatedly going back over the 
same steps, don’t be discouraged. Eventually, you will create a clear picture 
of yourself as you will be when you achieve your goal. Tell yourself over 
and over again that you are winning each personal victory now. For 
example, to achieve the positive self-image you want, visualize yourself as 
the person you want to be. It is important to do this every day. Visualize 
yourself making the changes you want to make—right now. Visualize 
yourself becoming the person you want to be—right now.
Visualization and Positive Thinking People respond to our 
thoughts, feelings, and behavior and react accordingly. If you have a 
positive outlook, you are more likely to attract positive results. You are also 
more likely to attract positive people who can help you reach your goals. 
Visualization helps you stay positive by allowing you to create a mental 
image of yourself achieving your goals. It helps you to stay motivated as 
you focus on accomplishing your objective—success. Use Activity 39 to help 
you visualize success.
Self Check
1. Why is desire important for success? (p. 301)
2. Define failure. (p. 304)
3. How does visualization work? (p. 309)
success secret
Use positive self-talk 
again and again.314 Chapter 7 Self-Motivation
ACTIVITY 39: Visualizing Success
A Describe a situation in which you found it difficult to speak up for yourself or your beliefs. Perhaps you 
didn’t voice an opinion in class, or didn’t defend yourself against a destructive criticism, or weren’t 
assertive with a salesperson.
B Now use visualization to practice speaking up for yourself. Visualize the same situation or a similar one. 
This time, however, you speak up for yourself in a polite but assertive way. On the lines below, map out 
all aspects of the scene, including the setting (time and place), the people present, the action that 
occurs (including the words spoken), and how you feel during the new, positive scene.
Setting:
People:
Action:
Feelings:
C Eyes closed, visualize this situation in full detail at least three times. Do you feel more confident in your 
ability to speak up for yourself the next time you are in a similar situation? Explain.D Now use visualization to enter the future. Picture yourself ten years from now. You have accomplished 
several of your long-term goals and become the person you want to be. How and where do you picture 
yourself?
What goals have you accomplished?
What important relationships have you nurtured?
What have you done for others that you feel most happy about?
E Does this positive vision of your future self boost your motivation to achieve your goals? Explain.316 Chapter 7 Self-Motivation
Chapter 7 Review and Activities
motivation (p. 286)
positive motivation (p. 286)
negative motivation (p. 286)
extrinsic motivation (p. 287)
intrinsic motivation (p. 287)
incentive (p. 289)
need (p. 293)
want (p. 293)
hierarchy of needs (p. 294)
belongingness (p. 296)
competence (p. 297)
self-actualization (p. 297)
autonomy (p. 298)
fear (p. 301)
desire (p. 301)
comfort zone (p. 303)
failure (p. 304)
visualization (p. 309)
virtual reality (p. 311)
Key Terms
Summary by Learning Objectives
• Contrast intrinsic motivation with extrinsic motivation. Intrinsic motivation comes from 
inside. It drives you to do things that you enjoy and feel good about. Intrinsic motivation is 
associated with goals such as building relationships, giving to others, and growing as a person. 
Extrinsic motivation comes from outside. It drives you to do things that make you look good 
to other people. Extrinsic motivation is associated with goals such as attaining wealth, fame, 
or beauty.
• Describe how to distinguish needs from wants. A need represents something we must 
have to survive and thrive, while a want represents something we can do without. If something 
does not satisfy us physically or psychologically, it is probably a want, not a need.
•Explain why needs motivate our behavior. The quest to fulfill our needs drives much of 
our conscious and unconscious behavior. For example, the need for belongingness drives us to 
spend time building family bonds, friendships, and romantic relationships. If we do not fulfill 
our basic needs, we grow ill and die. If we do not fulfill our higher needs, we fail to make the 
most of our potential.
• Cite ways to overcome fear of failure. When you fear failure, you fear making changes 
and taking risks. You therefore need to accept your fears and then take small steps to expand 
your comfort zone.
• Cite ways to overcome fear of success. Fear of success stems from low self-esteem. You 
can overcome this fear by disputing the self-destructive thoughts and feelings that are causing 
you to fear success.
• Describe visualization and how it can boost motivation. Visualization allows you to 
create detailed mental images of behaviors you want to carry out. When you see yourself 
accomplishing your goals, step by step, you become more motivated to take action and gain 
confidence in your ability to succeed.Review and Activities
Review Questions
1. Contrast positive motivation with negative motivation.
2. Why is intrinsic motivation healthier than extrinsic motivation?
3. Sketch and label the hierarchy of needs.
4. Define belongingness, competence, and autonomy.
5. Why would a person fear success?
6. Explain the benefits of visualization.
Critical Thinking
7. Extrinsic and Intrinsic Motivation Every year, hundreds of thousands of people compete 
to be selected for reality television shows such as Survivor, American Idol, America’s Got 
Talent, Top Model, Top Chef, Amazing Race, and Project Runway. In exchange for being filmed 
and performing under stressful circumstances, participants have the opportunity to win prize 
money and achieve fame. Why do you think so many people want to appear on TV shows 
like these? Do you think that reality show contestants are intrinsically motivated, extrinsi￾cally motivated, or both? Explain.
8. Confronting Fear Describe a situation in your life where fear held you back from taking a 
risk or pursuing something important to you. What caused your fear? Did you experience any 
fear of success or failure? How did you handle it then? What do you do differently now to 
overcome your fears?
Application
9. Needs Journal Review Maslow’s hierarchy of needs and create a chart for yourself 
with a row for each of the five needs. Think about the activities you do each week and 
what motivates you to satisfy your needs in each category. For example, you are 
probably motivated by physical needs to eat meals and go grocery shopping; and you 
are probably motivated by social needs to interact with friends and family. Write down 
your top motivators for each need. You may find that an important activity, like attending 
school, for example, motivates you on multiple levels, such as social, esteem, and 
self-actualization.
10. Visualization Ask a close friend or family member if there is anything that might 
be holding him/her/them back from achieving a goal. Help him/her/them identify the 
obstacles, challenges, or fears. Now ask him/her/them to visualize, in vivid detail, 
the goal being attained. Discuss the positive images, feelings, and self-talk, and map 
out a plan for action.318 Chapter 7 Self-Motivation
Review and Activities
Internet Activities
11. Self-Motivation Visit http://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newLDR_57.htm to take 
a short quiz to determine how self-motivated you are. You will receive an overall score, and 
then a separate score in four areas considered necessary to build the strongest levels of 
self-motivation.
12. Hierarchy of Needs Visit www.pammargetson.ca/quizzes_needs.asp to determine the 
status of your current need fulfillment based on all five levels of Maslow’s hierarchy.
Look back at your response to the question in the Real-Life 
Success Story on page 284. Think about how you would answer 
the question now that you have completed the chapter.
Complete the Story Complete the Story Taking the role of 
Elijah’s advisor, explain how fear of success is related to low 
self-esteem. Then give him suggestions for using positive self-talk 
to help him cope with his self-doubt.
“How Can I Succeed?” Real-Life 
Success Story
Caiaimage/Glow Images320
Corbis Super RF/Alamy Stock Photo
Joining the Crowd
Anna Costas is on the way up in her career as a sales 
rep for an Internet business. One Friday, her 
coworkers asked her to join them for a night out. 
Anna needed to prepare for a client presentation on 
Monday, but she decided to go, thinking: “I’ll just pull 
it together over the weekend. Plus, it’s Friday and I 
need a break.” She arranged for a babysitter and 
joined the group at the restaurant. The rest of the 
weekend went by in a blur of soccer games, grocery 
shopping, house cleaning, and laundry.
Working Overtime
Suddenly, it was Monday morning. Running late 
after getting the kids off to school, Anna had to 
rush straight to the conference room to deliver 
her presentation. When she got back to her office, 
she found an urgent e-mail informing her of a 
change in her company’s advertising rates. “Oh 
no! This changes everything!” she thought. Anna 
had made some major errors and gave inaccurate 
information during the presentation. Now she 
would need to schedule another meeting, putting 
her a week behind.
What Do You Think? How could better time 
management have kept Anna out of this situation?
“Will I Ever Be Able to Enjoy Some ‘Free’ Time?”
Real-Life 
Success Story“
Managing Your 
Resources 8Chapter
learning objectives
After you complete this chapter, 
you should be able to:
• Outline the three steps in time 
management and in money 
management.
• Describe the three categories 
of time and the three categories 
of expenses.
• Explain how to make a to-do list 
and a schedule.
• Define procrastination and 
explain its causes.
• Describe the criteria for 
an effective budget.
• Cite ways to reduce excess 
spending.
Many people take no care of their 
money till they come nearly to the end 
of it, and others do just the same with 
their time.”
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Author
introduction
Time and money are valuable—but limited—resources. 
In order to reach your personal goals, you need to 
manage your time and money efficiently. In Section 8.1 
you’ll examine how to make the most of your time. 
By learning to plan ahead, you’ll be able to accomplish 
more and focus on your priorities. In Section 8.2 you’ll 
learn how to make money work for you. You’ll examine 
your spending habits, learn to make a budget, and 
develop a plan to align your finances with your goals 
and values.322 Chapter 8 Managing Your Resources
SECTION 8.1 Time Management
TAKING CONTROL OF YOUR TIME
We all juggle many responsibilities—school, work, family, social life, leisure 
activities. How do we find time to do it all? The answer is time management.
Time management is the planned, effective, and efficient use of time. Time 
management isn’t just about schedules and lists; it’s about making the most 
of your life. Because time never takes a break, time management really 
means priority management in the time we have available.
Throughout this book, you have been taking a close look at the priorities 
that are important to you. Time management helps you structure your time 
and your life around those priorities. When you manage your time well, you 
can make progress on your long-term goals while still making room for relax￾ation, friendships, hobbies, and the other activities that are important to you.
Our most precious resources, time and health, usually are taken for 
granted until they are depleted. As with health, time is the raw material 
of life. Time cannot be saved for another day. We can waste and kill time, 
but we are also mortally wounding our opportunities. Time is the ultimate 
equal opportunity employer. Each human being, while alive, has exactly 
168 hours a week to spend. Think about it! Scientists can’t invent more 
minutes. Super rich people can’t buy more hours. Queen Elizabeth I of 
England—the richest, most powerful woman on Earth of her era—whispered 
these final words on her deathbed: “All of my possessions for another 
moment of time!” We worry about things we want to do but can’t, instead 
of doing the things we can do but don’t. It is not the experience of today 
that causes us the greatest stress. It is the regret for something we did or 
didn’t do yesterday, and the apprehension of what tomorrow may bring.
Steps to Time Management
How do you view time—as a never-ending series of deadlines, or as a series 
of opportunities? No matter who you are or what you do, you need to work 
toward your goals one day at a time. To use time most effectively and 
efficiently, you’ll need to look at it as a resource that allows you to achieve 
what is most important to you. A resource is something that is ready for 
your use and can be drawn upon as needed.
Basic time management doesn’t have to be complicated. Managing your 
time involves three basic steps: figuring out where your time goes, determining 
where you want it to go, and creating a plan to make that happen:
Step 1: Analyze how you use your time.
Step 2: Prioritize your activities.
Step 3: Create a plan for your time.
Let’s go step by step.
time management
The planned, efficient use 
of time.
success secret
Plan ahead to spend your 
time doing what you 
value.Step 1: Analyze How You Use Your Time
The first step in managing your time is to take a good look at how you spend 
your time. Do you know where your time really goes? When you pay attention 
to how you spend the hours of your day, you may be surprised by what you find.
We perform dozens of activities each day, from getting dressed to 
checking e-mail. One practical way to analyze your time is to assign each 
of your activities to one of three different categories of time:
• Committed time—Committed time is the time you devote to school, work, 
family, volunteering, and other activities that relate to your short-term 
and long-term goals. These activities usually take up a fixed amount of 
time in your schedule.
• Maintenance time—Maintenance time is the time you spend maintaining, 
or taking care of, yourself and your surroundings. You need to spend 
time each week sleeping, grooming, and tending to your health and fitness, 
as well as doing chores such as cleaning your home or apartment, main￾taining your car, and caring for your pets. Maintenance time is a bit more 
flexible than committed time.
• Discretionary time—Discretionary time is time that you can use to do what￾ever you wish. You might hang out with friends, pursue a hobby, surf the 
Web, or read a book during your discretionary time. Discretionary time 
is the most flexible type of time.
How much does each type of time take up in a 168-hour week? Take the 
example of Letisha, who works full-time and goes to school in the evening to 
earn her MBA. Letisha works eight hours a day Monday through Friday, 
volunteers four hours a week, and has three hours of class per week. This 
adds up to 47 hours of committed time, leaving her 121 hours to do whatever 
she wants. Or does it? Letisha takes the train to and from work and drives to 
school, which takes up another two hours a day. She also has to buy textbooks 
and supplies, do homework, and read articles that relate to her job.
This adds another thirty-eight hours to her committed time, leaving her 
with eighty-three hours. Add eight hours of sleep a night, two hours a day 
for cooking, eating, dressing, and chores, an hour to walk her dog, and 
she’s left with only six hours of discretionary time per week.
Are you like Letisha, with too much to do and not enough time to do it? 
To measure the demands on your time, complete Activity 40. To get accurate 
results, you’ll need to do this exercise over the span of a week, carefully 
monitoring how you use your time on each day. Don’t guess—make sure to 
note how you actually spend each hour of the day.
Step 2: Prioritize Your Activities
Once you’ve figured out how you actually spend your time, you are ready for 
step 2, prioritizing your activities. Time, like all resources, is limited. You 
therefore need to figure out which of your activities deserve the biggest share. You 
do this by prioritizing—arranging your tasks and activities in order of importance.
success secret
It’s important to know 
where your time goes.
success secret
Make time for activities 
that relate to your goals.324 Chapter 8 Managing Your Resources
ACTIVITY 40: Time-Demand Survey
A Use the chart below to record the length of time (rounded to the nearest quarter hour) you spend on 
each activity over the course of a week.
Committed Time Hours
1. Class attendance
2. Study (homework, library time, etc.)
3. Commuting to and from school/work
4. Job/internship
5. Volunteering/extracurricular activities
6. Family responsibilities
7. Religious activities
8. (Other—specify)
Maintenance Time Hours
9. Eating (meals and snacks)
10. Housekeeping (laundry, grocery shopping, cooking, cleaning, etc.)
11. Personal hygiene/grooming
12. Car maintenance/repair
13. Physical exercise
14. Sleep
15. Pet care
16. (Other—specify)
Discretionary Time Hours
17. Social activities (building/maintaining friendships, group activities/events, etc.)
18. Leisure activities pursued alone (hobbies, reading, television, etc.)
19. (Other—specify)
20. (Other—specify)
TotalB Add up the total number of hours on your chart. A week contains 168 hours. If your total is greater than 
168, you are overcommitted. If your total is less than 168, you are letting hours get away from you. Are 
you overcommitted or undercommitted? If so, by how much?
C Add up how many hours you spent on each time category. Then divide each total by 168. The result 
represents the percentage of your total weekly hours that you spent on that category.
Total committed time: Percent of total:
Total maintenance time: Percent of total:
Total discretionary time: Percent of total:
Sketch a pie chart of your time using the percentages you calculated above. Label each pie slice with 
the relevant category. The slices on the pie chart below represent ten percent increments.
D Are you satisfied with the way you spend your time? Explain.326 Chapter 8 Managing Your Resources
Take a look at your work, school, family, and social obligations and 
activities. Which ones are most relevant to your goals and values? Refer to 
the values you selected in Chapter 2 and the goals you set for yourself in 
Chapter 3. Is there anything you would like to spend more time doing? 
For example, do you have next to no time to keep up with current events, 
exercise, or read for pleasure? Is there anything you feel you spend too much 
time doing? If you are committed to completing your degree, for example, 
could you eliminate some of the time you spend on shopping, social media, 
or streaming your favorite shows? Generally, it is discretionary time that can 
be cut first if you have too much to do and too little time. This makes more 
time for activities that are directly relevant to your goals. However, don’t 
eliminate all fun and relaxation from your life in order to get more done. If 
you don’t allow time to recharge, your energy and enthusiasm will suffer.
Don’t Forget Sleep If you are like most people, your magic solu￾tion to getting everything done is to cut back on sleep. Unfortunately, this 
is both inefficient and unhealthful. Depriving yourself of sleep makes you 
less productive during the day, so you have to work harder and longer to 
get the same amount done. This cuts into your sleep time even more. When 
you’re tired, you just don’t make good use of time. You have trouble think￾ing creatively, making decisions, and staying motivated. You’re also likely 
to work more slowly, make mistakes, and forget information.
How do you know if you are getting enough sleep? Most researchers 
recommend at least seven to eight hours of sleep a night; some people may 
need nine or more hours to feel rested. If you tend to get drowsy after 
lunch, while reading, or while riding in a bus or car, you are probably not 
getting enough sleep.
Another cause of sleep deprivation is poor-quality sleep. Here are several 
ways to improve the quality of your sleep:
• Exercise. You’ll get to sleep faster and stay asleep better if you are 
physically tired. For best results, allow five or six hours between your 
workout time and bedtime. This allows your body temperature and 
activity level to return to normal.
• Reconsider naps. Taking short (twenty to thirty minutes) naps during the 
day can make you more alert, but it might make it harder to get to sleep 
at bedtime.
• Avoid caffeine and alcohol. Stop drinking caffeine, especially in the 
afternoon and evening. Caffeinated beverages and foods, such as cola 
and chocolate, can affect your body for up to twelve hours. Avoid 
alcohol because it is known to disrupt your sleep pattern.
• Don’t work in bed. Use your bed primarily for sleep. If you study, work, 
watch shows, or browse social media in bed, you may begin to associate 
your sleep space with alertness instead of rest.
• Choose a bedtime. Stick to the same bedtime every night, even on 
weekends (if possible). Your body’s internal clock will benefit from 
maintaining a regular schedule.
success secret
Allow yourself at least 
seven hours of sleep.• Relax. Establish a relaxing bedtime ritual to calm your nerves and tell 
your body that it’s time to head for bed. You might try a cup of caffeine￾free tea or a glass of warm milk at bedtime; milk contains an amino acid 
with a mild sedative effect.
Important or Urgent? As you prioritize, it also helps to analyze 
your activities for their urgency and importance. Something is urgent if it calls 
for immediate action, but it is important only if it relates to one or more of 
your goals. Your end-of-semester project may be your most important task, but 
because it’s not due for another two months, it’s not urgent. The ringing smart￾phone is urgent, but the call might or might not be important. Aim to spend 
most of your time on things that are both urgent and important. One conve￾nient way to separate essential activities from nonessential activities is to use a 
chart like the one in Personal Journal 8.1. This chart contains four sections 
for the four different kinds of activities: important and urgent; important but 
not urgent; urgent but not important; and not important and not urgent.
success secret
Spend most of your time 
on things that are both 
urgent and important.
Personal Journal 8.1
Prioritizing Your Life
Imagine that you want to complete the following tasks over the coming week. Decide how important and/
or urgent each of these items is to you, then enter each one in the relevant box below.
do grocery shopping • see a movie • file old papers and bills • do laundry • 
start looking for a summer job • drop off the dry cleaning • study for Friday’s exam • 
return a call from my best friend • fix a flat tire on the car • pay an overdue credit card bill 
Urgent Not Urgent
Important Not Important328 Chapter 8 Managing Your Resources
Getting More from Your Time Do you ever feel like you spend 
much of your day dealing with trivial details that don’t amount to much? If so, 
consider the 80/20 rule (the Pareto Principle). This rule states that the rela￾tionship between input and output, or effort and results, is not balanced. For 
example, most people spend 80 percent of their time on activities that produce 
20 percent of their progress, and 20 percent of their time on activities that 
produce 80 percent of their progress. In other words, we get 80 percent of our 
work done during 20 percent of our working hours. This also means that we 
spend 80 percent of our time on activities that aren’t relevant to our goals.
To avoid falling into this trap, plan to spend 80 percent of your time 
and energy on your top priorities and the remaining 20 percent on your 
lower priorities. This way, you’ll achieve more results in the same amount 
of time. Activities that should be low priority for everyone include:
• time spent with people who don’t make you feel good about yourself
• distractions, like reading every Facebook post, tweet, or instagram or 
watching every reel in your feed.
• tasks you don’t enjoy or do very well and that you could eliminate, 
delegate, or even hire someone else to do
• tasks that save a little bit of money but consume large amounts of time, such 
as washing your car yourself or clipping coupons for food you don’t buy
• activities that you feel you “should” be doing but that don’t really matter 
to you, such as certain household chores
• activities that are urgent but have no long-term importance
Think about the 80/20 rule as you complete Activity 41. Which activities 
don’t really matter to you? Which do you do only because you think you 
should? By cutting these unwelcome activities, you can make room for 
more important ones.
Step 3: Create a Plan for Your Time
Now you should have a better handle on your time and a better idea of how you 
can use it to your advantage. You’re ready for the third and most important step 
in managing time: making an overall plan for how you will use your time. The 
most efficient way to do this is to draw up a to-do list and a schedule.
Make a To-Do List A to-do list is a personal checklist of tasks and 
activities you need to complete over the course of a certain period, such as a 
week. When you group all of your activities together, you can easily see which 
are most urgent and important. You can also see which ones can be tackled at 
the same time. If you need to pay several bills, for example, handling them all 
at one sitting will help you finish them faster and reduce interruptions. Perhaps 
you could go to grocery store, laundry mat, and gym all in one trip. 
Refer to your to-do list throughout each day and make every effort to stick 
to it. As you complete each task, put a large check mark next to it. Get in the 
habit of rewarding yourself with something you enjoy when you complete a big 
task. This will be a good incentive for you to finish your projects on schedule.
success secret
Spend 80 percent of your 
time and energy on your 
top priorities.
success secret
Make a to-do list, then 
stick to it.
to-do list A personal 
checklist of tasks and 
activities that need to be 
completed over the course 
of a certain period, such as 
a week.ACTIVITY 41: Examining Your Priorities
A Review the time-demand chart you completed in Activity 40. Select two or three specific areas of your 
life on which you want to spend less time. On the lines below, write down each of these areas. Then list 
specific things in those areas that you are willing to eliminate, or changes you could make to reduce the 
amount of time you need to spend in these areas. Remember that small, achievable changes are better 
than large ones that will never happen. (It may be helpful to look back at Activity 30 on pages 249–250.)
Example
Housekeeping Put laundry away as soon as it is washed. 
Learn to live with a little more clutter.
Vacuum biweekly instead of weekly. 
1.
2.
3.
B Why did you select these specific activities to cut?
continued…330 Chapter 8 Managing Your Resources
C Now select two or three areas on which you want to spend more time. On the lines below, write down 
each of these areas. Then list specific things in those areas that you would do if you could find the time.
Example
Eating Prepare more healthful meals.
Bring lunch instead of eating fast food.
Eat with family once a week.
1.
2.
3.
D Why did you select these specific activities to add?
E Describe one or two new activities you can begin this week and one or two old activities you can elimi￾nate. Make sure that the time you cut and the time you add are about equal.There are several advantages to using to-do lists, which you will discover 
as you begin to make a habit of using them:
• Recording your tasks on paper keeps you from worrying about forgetting 
a task or getting sidetracked.
• Keeping a list helps you separate things that matter from things that 
don’t matter (remember the 80/20 rule).
• Putting your tasks down in writing motivates you to get started and 
complete your assignments on time.
• Checking off a finished task gives you a sense of productivity and 
achievement. A check mark also serves as a visual reminder that you are 
ready to go on to the next task.
To-do lists are not about “staying busy.” They are about using your time 
for things that have long-term importance to you.
Make a Schedule Once your to-do list is complete, you can create a 
schedule, a chart showing dates and times when tasks must be completed. 
Using a schedule to organize your time offers several advantages. First, by 
scheduling your time in advance, you can build in leisure time and still com￾plete the items on your to-do list. Daily, weekly, and even monthly planning 
helps you pace yourself. Second, planning helps you avoid wasted time. 
Each time you finish a task without knowing what you should be doing next, 
you lose time. Third, a schedule prevents you from setting yourself up for 
failure by trying to do more than can be done in a day or a week. Fourth, 
writing all your activities and “do-by” dates on a schedule provides a 
graphical reminder of what you have coming up over the following week.
To make an effective schedule, you’ll need a realistic idea of how long 
each task on your to-do list will take. It’s easy to underestimate how long a job 
will take, especially if it depends on the contribution of others. If you don’t 
know how long something will take, ask someone who has done it before.
Your schedule can be in any format as long as it works for you. Many 
people use their smart phones or tablets for their daily and weekly schedules, 
as well as a monthly or yearly wall calendar to keep up with their long-term 
goals. Whatever format you choose, make a point to look over your schedule 
daily to prepare for projects or events. If you have an oral presentation due 
in a few weeks, for example, record the due date on your calendar and then 
schedule research time, writing time, and so on. Don’t wait until the last 
minute. Activity 42 will help you make a to-do list and a schedule. Don’t 
worry about making it perfect; use the exercise as a way to get started.
Identify Your Prime Time As you schedule your tasks, it is 
helpful to plan your most important and demanding tasks for your prime time. 
This is your high-energy time—the hours of the day in which your mental 
and physical capacity is at its peak. Everyone functions best at a different 
time of day. Most people are at their peak in the morning hours, while a 
few people feel their best in the late evening. Personal Journal 8.2 can 
help you determine your prime time. 
success secret
Make sure you know how 
long each task will take.
schedule A chart showing 
dates and times by which 
tasks must be completed.
success secret
Look over your schedule 
daily.332 Chapter 8 Managing Your Resources
ACTIVITY 42: Time-Management Practice
A In the Task column of the to-do list below, write down all the tasks and activities you must do in the next 
week. Omit the obvious things that you do every day, such as eating, going to work, and sleeping. Do, 
however, include tasks such as grocery shopping. In the Do-By Date column, give each task or activity a 
do-by date.
To-Do List for the Week of , 20 
Task Do-By Date Importance
B Now prioritize your tasks and activities. In the Importance column above, assign a number between 1 and 3 
to each task listed, with 1 representing very important, 2 representing important, and 3 representing 
somewhat important.C Use your to-do list to make a schedule for the coming week. First schedule the tasks you rated as very 
important. Draw a star next to these. (You may wish to break up any larger tasks into smaller ones, 
assigning a separate do-by date to each.) Then schedule the tasks you rated as important and, if there is 
still time, schedule the tasks you rated as somewhat important. Use this schedule over the coming week.
Schedule for the Week of , 20 
Day Activities
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
D Did this schedule help you organize your time? Explain.
  334 Chapter 8 Managing Your Resources
Personal Journal 8.2
What’s Your Prime Time?
Answer each question by circling Yes or No.
1. Do you like to get an early start to your day, even on weekends? Yes No
2. Do you prefer to schedule your classes in the morning? Yes No
3. Do you feel sluggish in the morning until you have been up for an hour or so? Yes No
4. Do you try to schedule your classes later in the day so you can sleep in? Yes No
5. Do you have little trouble staying up past midnight? Yes No
6. Do you start to feel tired around 5 PM, but feel recharged after 8 PM? Yes No
7. Do you find it difficult to fall asleep if you go to bed before 10 PM? Yes No
8. Are you at your best around 8 or 9 AM? Yes No
9. Do you usually feel alert when you wake up in the morning? Yes No
If you answered Yes to questions 3, 4, 5, and 6, you are probably a night person. If you answered Yes to 
questions 1, 2, 7, 8, and 9, you are probably a morning person. Use this information to fine-tune your 
schedule and make yourself more productive.
TACKLING PROCRASTINATION
One of the biggest plusses of time management is that it helps you overcome 
procrastination. Procrastination is the habit of putting off tasks until the last 
minute. Procrastination can have minor consequences, such as having to pay 
a late fine for an overdue library book, or major consequences, such as failing 
a course or losing a job. It’s normal to procrastinate from time to time. When 
procrastination becomes a habit, however, it can erode your self-determination 
and self-expectancy. The more you procrastinate, the harder it is to stop.
Procrastination has an enormous effect on success. Consider the key 
difference between A students and C students. Is it intelligence? Knowledge? 
Study skills? According to researchers, the real difference between A students 
and B or C students is that A students get started early. They buy their books 
on time, come to class prepared, and get started quickly on assignments. They 
don’t procrastinate.
Why We Procrastinate
Everyone procrastinates sometimes on unpleasant tasks, but why do some 
people seem to procrastinate so often? Many people use procrastination in 
procrastination The 
habit of putting off tasks until 
the last minute.
success secret
The longer you procrasti￾nate, the larger a problem 
grows.order to avoid taking charge of their lives. They tell themselves, “I only had fifteen 
minutes to study for that test—getting a C wasn’t too bad!” This is known as 
self-handicapping—creating obstacles to your success in order to have an easy 
excuse for doing poorly. By putting obstacles in their own path, self-handicappers 
make themselves immune to failure. They can point to their “handicap”—lack 
of time, lack of sleep, forgetting to study, having a cold—as the real culprit.
Other people procrastinate because they are perfectionists. They want 
so badly to do something perfectly that they consider themselves failures if 
they do merely a good job. So they procrastinate and then fly into a panic 
at the last minute.
Still other people believe that they should wait to start a project until 
they are “in the mood.” Unfortunately, the more they procrastinate, the less 
likely they are to be in the mood. What was originally a small hassle, such 
as paying a bill, builds up until it becomes an overwhelming project—paying 
late fees, dealing with creditors, and so on. You can find out if you have the 
habit of procrastination by completing Activity 43.
Get Started! The best way to stop procrastinating is to do some￾thing—anything—toward your goal. Divide your project into small steps and 
complete just one step. For example, tell yourself that you will spend just 
fifteen minutes making an outline for that essay, or cleaning the kitchen 
counters, or choosing a layout for your résumé. When you divide a project 
into small segments, you will find that it is much less overwhelming. You 
may even find that you are enjoying the work despite yourself.
Also, get in the habit of planning ahead. Don’t delay working on a 
project; start early. You may want to start with an easy task and then work 
your way up to the harder ones, or you might prefer to jump right into the 
hard tasks in order to get them out of the way. Taking action helps keep 
you motivated and helps to prevent procrastination. Remember this simple 
truth: The sooner you begin a project, the sooner you’ll finish it. You’ll also 
have more time for other activities, which you can enjoy without the stress 
of the unfinished project hanging over you.
A System That Works To avoid procrastination and make the 
best use of your time, you’ll need to research and experiment with different 
time-management tools and strategies to find the one that best suits your 
personality. If you like to be spontaneous, for example, don’t try to make 
yourself follow a rigid schedule. Instead, create a schedule that fits you and that 
helps you stay focused on what you want and value. Set aside specific times to 
do things that make you feel good, whether that is vacuuming your bedroom or 
spending time with family. This will help you create the life you want.
Self Check
1. What are the three categories of time? (p. 323)
2. What are the benefits of making a to-do list? (p. 331)
3. What is procrastination? (p. 334)
success secret
Divide your project into 
segments, then tackle just 
one.336 Chapter 8 Managing Your Resources
ACTIVITY 43: Do You Procrastinate?
A Read the statements below and indicate the extent to which each one is true for you by making a check 
mark in the appropriate column.
Disagree 
Totally
Disagree 
Slightly
Agree 
Slightly
Agree 
Totally
1. I invent reasons to avoid acting on a problem.
2. It takes pressure to get me going on difficult projects.
3. I accumulate piles of mail, unpaid bills, broken items, or clothing 
to be mended.
4. If I don’t want to do a certain project, I put it out of sight so I won’t 
be reminded of it.
5. I sometimes hope that if I delay long enough, a problem will just 
go away by itself.
6. I start studying for tests too late to do as well as I know I could.
7. I often turn in assignments late because I need extra time to make 
them perfect.
8. I start new tasks before I finish old ones.
9. When working in groups, I try to get other people to finish what I 
don’t.
10. If I am uninterested in something, I just can’t make myself do it.
11. When I’m working or studying, I often find myself daydreaming.
12. If I have work to do but my room is a mess, I start cleaning the 
room instead of working.
B Scoring: Assign yourself one point for every Disagree Totally, two points for every Disagree Slightly, 
three points for every Agree Slightly, and four points for every Agree Totally.
What is your total? 
0–20 You are not a chronic procrastinator and probably have only an occasional problem.
21–30 You have a moderate problem with procrastination. Work on planning ahead and getting 
started before projects reach the crisis stage.
31–40 You procrastinate often and cause needless stress for yourself. You will benefit greatly from 
breaking the procrastination habit.
41–48 You are a master procrastinator. Free yourself from this habit by confronting the fears 
behind it.C Describe the tasks you tend to put off. Why do you think you procrastinate on these?
D What is one action you could take today to catch up on something you’ve been putting off?338 Chapter 8 Managing Your Resources
professional development )))
Time-Management Tips
Here is a check-off list, adapted from the teachings of Lyle Sussman while he was professor of management 
at the University of Louisville.
1. Record on your laptop, tablet, or smartphone all the people and projects you manage. Record names, 
e-mail addresses, phone numbers. Back-up this information on a separate “cloud” platform. This 
includes all your passwords as well.
2. Write down every commitment you make at the time you make it, and then transfer that commitment 
to the reminder date in your smartphone calendar.
3. Plan each week the week before, and plan each day the day before. Spend forty minutes at the begin￾ning of each week and fifteen to twenty minutes the night before or at the beginning of each day 
planning your priorities. Keep your “to do” list on the screen saver of your smart phone or tablet. Ask 
yourself, “What will I accomplish this week and this new day?”
4. Stop wasting the first hour of your workday. Those personal texts, social media posts, and socializing 
are three opening rituals that can lower productivity.
5. Although all of us must multi-task, do one thing at a time and do it well. It takes time to start and stop 
work on each activity.
6. Establish time limits for meetings in advance. Your smartphone alarm can signal when it’s time to 
bring the conversation to a close.
7. Schedule incoming and outgoing phone calls at the most opportune times for both parties.
8. Try to handle each piece of paper once—including letters, memos, and reports—and never more than 
twice. Don’t set anything aside without taking some action.
9. Don’t open unimportant junk mail or e-mails. At least twenty-five percent can be trashed, and you 
don’t want to be phished, hacked, or scammed.
10. Recognize when your peak energy occurs during the day. Allocate the most challenging projects to 
that period. Work on easy projects at low-energy times.
11. When you feel your energy level is dropping, take a break. For many people, this occurs around three 
in the afternoon. For some it is in the early morning or right after lunch.
12. Get enough rest, nutrients, and exercise. If you don’t feel well, you can’t do well.
13. Set aside personal relaxation time during the day. Don’t work during lunch. It’s neither noble nor 
nutritional to skip important energy input and stress-relieving times.
14. Take mini-vacations or “staycations” more often. The harder you work, the more you need to balance 
your exercise and leisure time.
15. Throughout the day, ask yourself, “What’s the best use of my time right now?” As the day grows short, 
focus on projects you can least afford to leave undone.
What’s Your Opinion?
How realistic is it for you to implement some, or all, of these activities into your daily or weekly routine? 
Does this list seem overwhelming? If so, prioritize key activities and tackle the easy ones first. Consider 
what obstacles might get in the way of managing your time more effectively.SECTION 8.2 Money Management
MONEY MATTERS
Managing money, like managing time, is a skill. In fact, money management 
is one of the most important skills you will ever learn. Money management is 
the intelligent use of money to achieve your goals. Learning about money will 
help you enjoy greater control over your life and increase your confidence 
about the future.
In school, we all learn English, math, history, and science, but few 
of us are taught how to function in a money-based society. Many young 
adults enter the working world with only a vague idea of how much 
money they will need to pay for the necessities of daily life. We learn as we 
spend, often gaining unhealthy spending habits and accruing credit card 
debt. If you manage your money wisely, you can avoid these financial 
setbacks and make sure that you have the financial freedom to pursue 
your dreams.
Wealth and Well-Being
So what is money exactly? Money is simply a convenient medium of exchange 
that we use to pay for goods and services. It is not a guarantee of happiness. 
In fact, once our basic needs are met, more riches can’t bring us more 
contentment. The wealthy are not necessarily happy, and the poor are not 
necessarily unhappy.
Think about the people, activities, and things that bring you pleasure 
and contentment. Do they require money? Or do you find pleasure in taking 
walks on the beach, reading a good book, spending time with your friends 
and family? Remember that although money does allow for certain luxuries, 
it does not eliminate life’s challenges.
Your Money and You
We all have feelings about money. Unfortunately, people who have strong 
feelings about money often have trouble handling it rationally. Some 
people, for example, view money as a security blanket and are afraid to 
spend a single penny. Others equate it with personal worth and devote 
themselves to acquiring expensive possessions. Still others fear money and 
do their best to avoid thinking about it at all. People who avoid thinking 
about money tend to live for today, spending their paychecks as they 
come and devoting little thought to financial plans and goals. What is your 
attitude toward money? Enter your thoughts in Personal Journal 8.3.
Early Lessons About Money Our attitudes toward money are 
strongly influenced by the example our parents set for us. How was money 
money management
The intelligent use of money 
to achieve one’s goals.
success secret
Money helps us meet our 
basic needs, but it doesn’t 
buy happiness.340 Chapter 8 Managing Your Resources
Personal Journal 8.3
How Do You See Money?
To me, money is
My financial goals are
If I had a $100 bill in my wallet, I
When I think about paying bills, I feel
One thing I don’t understand about money is
To me, planning for retirement is
I worry about having enough money for
Money helps me enjoy
I don’t need money to enjoy
used in your home when you were growing up? Was it a source of stress 
and arguments? Did your parents juggle credit cards? Were bills always 
paid late or at the last minute? Was money used as a bribe or reward for 
doing well in school? Did you understand where your family’s money came 
from and how it was saved and spent? Did you have an allowance and a 
budget of your own? You may have inherited irrational and self-defeating 
thoughts and feelings about money. If this is the case, it’s important to face 
them head-on and dispute them with the ABCDE method you learned in 
Chapter 5.Money Is a Tool The most useful attitude toward money is a 
practical one. Look at money as a tool. We need this tool to take care 
of our basic needs for food, shelter, clothing, and medical care. We also 
need it to achieve important goals. Many important steps in life—getting 
an education, buying a car, renting or owning a home, raising children, 
starting a business, traveling, retiring—all require money. In a capitalist 
society, money is also a powerful tool for expressing our values. We can 
buy products from companies that follow business practices we support, 
and we can refuse to buy products from companies that follow business 
practices we oppose. We can also support charities, such as schools, 
environmental groups, and human service organizations, that do work 
we value.
Managing Your Finances
When playing a game like Monopoly, it’s easy to manage your finances—
your monetary resources. It’s not difficult to make strategic decisions 
when your money, property, and options are spread out right there in 
front of you.
In real life, managing money is more complex. Credit cards allow you 
to spend money that you don’t have. Taxes, insurance, and other bills seem 
to arrive all at once. Debit cards that withdraw money directly from your 
bank account can be accessed at ATMs, supermarkets, gas stations, and 
other stores. Cash apps such as Venmo, Zelle, PayPal, Cash App, and 
Google Pay are widely used. And, cryptocurrency is on the rise. How can 
anyone track their money with so much activity?
While it can be difficult to track your finances down to the penny, you 
need to know how much money you have and how you want to use it, now 
and in the future. Many Americans are as little as one paycheck away from 
homelessness—even multimillion-dollar professional athletes seem to go 
into debt overnight. Having a financial strategy will help you take care of 
your needs and pursue your dreams without being sidetracked by worry. 
This does not mean that you can’t ever have fun with money, but it does 
mean that you can make sure you have enough of it to pay the bills and 
save for the future.
The basic recipe for financial fitness is simple: spend less than you earn. 
This sounds obvious enough, but it requires planning and self-discipline. 
To manage your money well, follow these three steps:
Step 1: Analyze how you use your money.
Step 2: Prioritize your expenses.
Step 3: Create a plan for your money.
Recognize these steps? They are the same ones you learned for managing 
your time: analyze, prioritize, and plan.
finances Monetary 
resources.
success secret
Financial planning helps 
you achieve peace of mind.
success secret
The basic recipe for 
financial fitness is to 
spend less than you earn.
success secret
Look at money as a tool to 
achieve your goals, not as 
a goal in itself.342 Chapter 8 Managing Your Resources
Step 1: Analyze How You Use Your Money
The first step in improving your money-management skills is to figure out 
how you handle your money. Do you know where it all goes? One practical 
way to analyze your spending is to assign each of your expenses to one of 
three different categories:
• Fixed committed expenses—Fixed committed expenses are necessary 
expenses that are the same from month to month, such as rent, subscrip￾tions, car payments, student loan payments, and minimum credit card 
payments.
• Variable committed expenses—Variable committed expenses are necessary 
expenses that vary from month to month, such as food and laundry bills, 
school tuition and books, insurance premiums, auto repairs and registra￾tion, vacation expenses, and gifts for birthdays and holidays.
• Discretionary expenses—Discretionary expenses are lifestyle expenses that 
are rewarding but not strictly necessary. Common discretionary expenses 
include entertainment, eating out, on-demand movie streaming, and snacks. 
Fixed and variable expenses are most people’s biggest obligations, but 
discretionary expenses can add up surprisingly fast. Do you eat out? Do 
you go to sports events or movies? Do you hunt for bargains, even on 
things you don’t need? There is nothing wrong with discretionary spending, 
but by the time you’re done spending money on things you want, you may 
not have enough to pay for what you need.
For this reason, one of the most important money-management skills is 
the ability to distinguish between committed expenses and discretionary 
expenses. Every time you make a purchase, ask yourself: Is this a necessary 
expense or a lifestyle expense? Food is a necessary expense, but what about 
fancy imported jam when the store brand will do? What about cappuccino 
at a café when you can make coffee at home?
The best way to get a handle on your spending is to keep a log of your 
expenses. This shows you how you deal with money on a day-by-day basis 
and reveals any negative spending habits.
Some people discover that they spend astounding amounts on small 
things. Hoyen, for example, kept an expense log and figured out that he 
spends $148.85 each month on his morning coffee break. Jenna calculated 
that she lays out $615.00 on birthday presents every year.
Making an expense log requires some diligent work, but it is the best 
way to get a handle on your money. Use Activity 44 to create an expense log.
Step 2: Prioritize Your Expenses
Step 2 is to prioritize, to figure out which expenses are important and 
which are not. Use your values and goals as standards to decide how you 
will use your money. Do you want to travel abroad? Buy a house or car? 
Contribute to a cause you find important? You may be passionately 
dedicated to world peace, but if your closet is bursting with shoes or sports 
success secret
Lifestyle expenses add 
up fast.ACTIVITY 44: Expense Log
A For one week, write down exactly how you spend your money. Carry a small notebook and record the 
date, type of expense, and amount of every purchase you make. Make sure to include small purchases, 
such as vending-machine purchases. After the week is done, transfer your information to the chart 
below and assign each expense to a category: fixed committed, variable committed, or discretionary.
Date Expense Cost Category
Example
Aug. 26 Dry cleaning $12.34 Variable committed
Aug. 26 Cappuccino $2.55 Discretionary
Date Expense Cost Category
Total
continued…344 Chapter 8 Managing Your Resources
B Add up how much you spent in each of the three categories. Then divide the expenses in each category 
by the grand total of all your expenses for the week. This is the percentage of your total that you spent 
in that category.
Total fixed committed expenses: Percent of total:
Total variable committed expenses: Percent of total:
Total discretionary expenses: Percent of total:
Sketch a pie chart of your expenses using the percentages you calculated above. Label each pie slice 
with the relevant spending category. The slices on the pie chart below represent ten percent increments.
C Are you satisfied with the way you spend your money? Explain.attire, you may be spending your money on the wrong things. You’ll need 
to do some financial planning to make sure that your spending is in line 
with your values and goals.
As you plan, also think about how much money you will need to devote to 
the basics such as housing, transportation, food, and health care. Do you want 
your own place, or would you be willing to live with a roommate? Do you need 
a car, or could you carpool or use public transportation? Are you planning to 
eat out once a week, twice a week, or every day? As shown in Figure 8.1, most 
Americans spend more than three-fourths of their income on housing, transpor￾tation, food, and health care. After paying for insurance, entertainment, and 
other expenses such as education, there is often very little left for other things.
Don’t Forget Savings
Make sure to work savings into your financial plan, too. Most Americans 
save less than a penny for every ten dollars they earn. Most financial 
experts, however, recommend saving at least ten percent of your annual 
income. Having money set aside allows you to handle unexpected expenses 
and provides you with peace of mind.
Saving money also helps you reach your goals. Before you make a 
spending plan, you need to think about how much you will need to set 
aside in order to achieve your most valued life goals. Obviously, many 
intrinsic goals, such as building relationships and contributing time to the 
community, don’t cost a cent, but some intrinsic goals do require at least 
some money. Furthering your education, for example, will probably require 
money. Raising a child will require money. Donating to charitable causes 
success secret
Don’t spend money on 
things that don’t really 
matter to you.
success secret
Aim to save ten percent 
of your income.
FIGURE 8.1 Where the Money Goes
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2006.
Spending by Category Housing and transportation are Americans’ biggest 
expenses. If you live in an area that lacks affordable housing, you may have to 
set aside forty percent of your income to pay the rent or mortgage. Why do 
you think that Americans’ transportation costs are so high?
Transportation
17.8%
Health Care 5.7%
Entertainment 5.0%
Other 10.5%
Personal
Insurance 11.0%
Housing 33.3%
Clothing 4.0%
Food 12.7%346 Chapter 8 Managing Your Resources
will require money. Try to see savings as a basic necessity, not a luxury. 
Even if you are in debt, try to set aside a small amount of money each week 
for emergencies.
Step 3: Create a Plan for Your Money
The third and final step in money management is to make a budget to ensure 
that you use every dollar with a purpose. A budget is a money-management 
plan that specifies how you will spend your money during a particular period. 
When making a budget, most people look at a month because this is how 
often credit cards, telephone services, and rent or mortgage are billed.
A budget shows both your income and your expenses. Your income is 
all the money you receive during a fixed period of time. This includes your 
salary and any other payments, such as tips, loan payments, interest, and 
even allowance. Your expenses include all your monthly committed and 
discretionary expenses.
Take time making a budget. A hastily drawn up budget can be worse 
than no budget at all—it can lure you into thinking you have far fewer 
expenses than you really do. An effective budget meets these criteria:
• It is realistic and accurate, taking into account all the expenses you will 
face over the month.
• It is balanced, with expenses equal to or less than income.
budget A money￾management plan that 
specifies how a person will 
spend his/her/their money 
during a particular period.
income All the money a 
person receives during a 
fixed period of time.
professional development )))
Investing in Your Future
As you plan for your future, it is worth the time to consider a number of factors in determining your next job, 
ideal job, or desired career path. Out of financial necessity, most people must take the first job they find in 
order to pay their bills. Rarely do they proactively map out a long-term strategy for attaining their personal, 
professional, and financial goals. Without such a plan, you may find yourself stuck in a job that is not 
rewarding or has nothing to do with why you chose to further your education. It is wise to conduct as much 
research as possible in your field to determine current and future employment options. Determine which 
areas of the country (or world) offer the most opportunities in your field. Target specific companies that hire 
for the positions in which you are interested. Research costs of living and salary ranges in various cities, and 
develop goals and an action plan that includes a projected budget. The better prepared you are in laying the 
foundation for your future, the greater your chances are for achieving success.
What’s Your Opinion?
Do you have a plan with short-term and long-term goals for what you want to do for a living, where you 
want to live, and how much you want to earn? For more information to assist you in making these decisions, 
go to one of the following sites:
http://oedb.org/ilibrarian/100_best_lifehacks_recent_college_grads/
http://swz.salary.com/costoflivingwizard/layoutscripts/coll_start.aspx
http://visual.ly/average-expenses-recent-graduates• It centers around your goals and values.
• It provides for savings.
• It can be modified if necessary.
Keep these guidelines in mind while using Activity 45 to make a practice budget.
STRETCHING YOUR RESOURCES
As we’ve seen, the basic recipe for financial fitness is to spend less than you 
earn. This is true whether you are the CEO of a Fortune 500 business or a 
starving student. If, like many people, you spend more than you earn, you 
have only three realistic possibilities: earn more, spend less, or both. It’s 
usually not easy to get a raise, find a higher paying job, or take a second 
(or third) job. Cutting costs, however, is within everyone’s reach.
When people try to reduce their expenses, they often become discour￾aged before they even start. Who wants to eat macaroni and cheese every 
night or wear the same clothes every day? Cost cutting, however, doesn’t 
have to mean sacrificing every luxury. Approach the cost-cutting task like an 
analyst examining the finances of a stranger. What areas are money drains? 
Where can cuts be made? Generate as many creative ideas as you can.
success secret
Resist the temptation to 
overspend.
Applying Psychology
The “Mind” of Spending or Saving
Why do some people find it difficult to resist the lure of advertising 
and therefore succumb to shopping sprees, while others prefer to 
build their savings accounts? Are you a frugal saver or a compulsive 
shopaholic? Common sense tells us that we probably develop our 
financial habits from our parents and early conditioning. Yet, you will 
find spenders and savers within the same family—those who grew up 
in poverty, yet created great wealth, and those who squandered their 
family fortune. Are some people actually “born to shop”?
New research is showing that brain chemistry plays a significant role in our financial habits. According to 
a study published in the Journal of Consumer Research, an area in the brain called the insula is stimulated 
when people experience unpleasant things. People with more insula activity in their brains are less likely to 
be big spenders. It could be thought of as our emotional “braking system” for our buying behavior. At the 
opposite end of the spectrum, the nucleus accumbens—identified as the reward center of the brain—“lights 
up” when people think about something pleasant and serves as the “gas pedal” for our buying behavior. 
If the nucleus accumbens drives impulse purchases, the insula is what triggers buyer’s remorse. To what 
extent consumer marketers will utilize advances in neurological scanning to find the “magic buying button” 
remains to be seen!
Critical Thinking What are your thoughts about this research? Consider and discuss the implications for 
futuristic consumer marketing technologies.
noppawan09/Shutterstock348 Chapter 8 Managing Your Resources
ACTIVITY 45: Budget Worksheet
A Use this chart to plan your income and expenses for an average month. To figure out your monthly 
variable committed expenses, calculate your annual total and then divide by 12. For example, if your car 
insurance costs $900 per year, then you need to set aside $75 per month for this expense. Record your 
projected (planned) amounts in the second column, then check your projections by recording the actual 
amounts in the third column.
INCOME
Item Projected Amount Actual Amount
Wages
Gifts/allowance
Loans
(Other—specify)
TOTAL MONTHLY INCOME
EXPENSES
Item Projected Amount Actual Amount
Savings/Emergency Fund
Emergency fund
Savings for goal (specify) 
Savings for goal (specify) 
Total Savings
Fixed Committed Expenses
Housing (rent or mortgage payment)
Car payments
Child care/child support
Credit card payments
Student loan payments
Phone
Home insurance
Car insuranceHealth insurance
(Other—specify)
(Other—specify)
Total Fixed Committed Expenses
Variable Committed Expenses
Food (groceries, lunches)
Utilities (electricity, water)
Pet expenses
Car repair
Car registration
Internet service
Dental care
Clothing
Laundry
Dry cleaning
Transportation (gas, bus fare, taxi fare)
Personal care items
Hair cut/style
Household repairs and supplies
Health care (doctor’s visits, medication)
Tuition
(Other—specify)
(Other—specify)
Total Variable Committed Expenses
Discretionary Expenses
Eating out
Entertainment (movies, plays, outings)
continued…350 Chapter 8 Managing Your Resources
Cable TV
Books and educational materials
Magazines and newspapers
Health club dues
Vacation fund
Sports
Home improvement (furniture, décor)
Gifts
Charitable contributions
(Other—specify)
(Other—specify)
Total Discretionary Expenses
TOTAL MONTHLY EXPENSES
B Are your budgeted expenses less than your income, equal to your income, or more than your income? 
If they are more than your income, how do you plan to make up the difference?
C Did you set aside money for savings? If so, how much and for what? If not, why not?
D How do the projected amounts in your budget compare to the actual amounts? Explain.Spend, Spend, Spend
Not so long ago, limiting spending was easy. You made a weekly trip to the 
bank to deposit your paycheck and withdraw enough cash for the upcoming 
week. No more cash, no more spending.
Today it is easy to spend, spend, and spend some more. Almost 
every student has access to one or more credit cards and cash apps—and 
the buying power that goes along with them. But overspending puts you 
into debt and keeps you from reaching your goals. The average American 
household has multiple credit cards and more than $8,000 in credit 
card debt. This is one reason why more and more individuals are filing 
for bankruptcy.
Drop the Shopping Habit
Many people overspend because they engage in impulse buying and 
recreational shopping. As mentioned in Chapter 6, impulse buying means 
spending money because you see something and suddenly want it, not 
because you planned to buy it beforehand. Grocery stores make impulse 
buying easy by placing appealing items, such as candy and magazines, 
right next to checkout stands. Online retailers such as Amazon.com make 
personalized suggestions for products that shoppers might like to 
impulsively add to their carts.
Recreational shopping means using shopping, whether in malls or 
online, as a form of entertainment. Recreational shopping is common in 
our society, and the easiest way to avoid or limit it is simply to stop using 
shopping as a diversion. Plan outings that are low-cost or free, such as 
hiking, playing sports, or making dinner at a friend’s house. Find creative 
and fun hobbies you can share with others.
To avoid impulse buying and recreational shopping, remind yourself 
again and again to shop only for things that you really need and have planned 
to buy. Do you really need that fireproof wallet or electronic spatula? Before 
you buy, ask yourself the following questions:
• Do I really need this item?
• Is there something else I need more?
• What other bills do I have to pay?
• Have I allowed for this item in my budget?
• Is this item worth the time I spent to earn the money to pay for it?
• Do I own something similar already?
• Can I borrow a similar item instead?
• Is there something else less expensive that would be just as good?
• Is this the best time to buy?
• Have I comparison shopped for price and quality?
• Do I want to put in the energy required to use, maintain, clean, store, 
repair, and dispose of this item?
• Am I buying this in an attempt to satisfy a psychological need?
impulse buying
Spending money on the 
spur of the moment, without 
planning.
success secret
Shopping is an expensive 
hobby.352 Chapter 8 Managing Your Resources
Stopping to ask yourself these questions before you buy can help you 
limit your spending and become more self-aware. You can also become 
more self-aware by looking at your past spending mistakes, which you can 
do in Personal Journal 8.4.
Using Credit Wisely
Another important way to take control of your finances is to use credit wisely. 
Credit is a sum of money a person can use before having to pay back the lender. 
When you use credit, you are really taking out a loan. Credit transactions can 
be as simple as using a credit card to buy gas or as complex as taking out a 
$200,000 mortgage to buy a house.
credit A sum of money a 
person can use before having 
to pay back the lender.
Personal Journal 8.4
Look Before You Leap
Think of four purchases you have made over the past year or two that you now wish you hadn’t. These 
might be products, such as clothing or housewares, or services, such as entertainment or travel. For 
ideas, look around your living space or review past credit card statements. On the chart below, describe 
each purchase, the reason for the purchase at the time, and why you think you shouldn’t have spent the 
money.
What could you do the next time you are tempted to make a similar purchase?
Purchase Why You Made Purchase Why You Wish You Hadn’tCredit is useful because it allows you to receive a product or service 
now and pay for it over time. If you buy a car on credit, for example, you 
can pay a fixed installment every month until the car is paid for. This 
makes budgeting easy. Using credit cards is safer than carrying cash and 
easier than writing checks, and a credit card bill provides a useful record of 
your purchases.
The Perils of Credit Unfortunately, credit cards make it easy to 
accumulate debt. It’s easy to lose track of how much you are spending and 
to engage in impulse buying. Practically every large chain store now offers a 
credit card, and it is common for consumers to have five or even ten credit 
cards in their wallets.
It’s hard to keep track of credit card bills, especially when each bill is 
due on a different date. Late fees are steep, often running $36.00 or more. 
In addition, if you don’t pay off your credit card bill every month, you will 
owe not only the amount of your purchases, but also finance charges.
Finance charges add up amazingly quickly. Let’s say you charge a $2,000 
vacation on your credit card. If you only pay the minimum monthly payment, 
it will take you eleven years to pay off that vacation. Along the way, you’ll 
also pay nearly $2,000 in finance charges, doubling the cost of your 
vacation. Are you one of the millions who overuse credit? Ask yourself 
whether you would use credit:
• to pay overdue bills, especially on other credit cards
• to buy an item that costs $5.00 or less
• to pay for a vacation
• to pay for a large purchase you hadn’t saved for
• even if you could pay cash
If you answered yes to these questions, you are relying on credit cards 
to pay for things that you can’t really afford.
If you are already in debt, spend as little as you can and devote every 
penny (after savings) to paying off the debt. If you have multiple credit 
cards, consolidate your debt to the one with the smallest interest rate. You 
can also call your creditors or consult a consumer credit counseling service 
to work out a payment arrangement.
Your Credit Record The way you use credit affects your financial 
situation not only today, but also in the future. That’s because your credit 
situation goes into an electronic file, known as a credit record, that employers, 
landlords, and others can access at any time. A credit record is a log of the 
financial habits of a person who buys on credit.
Several corporations, known as credit bureaus, are in the business of 
selling the information on your credit record. When you apply for a new 
credit card or a loan at a bank, the bank will ask one or more of these 
companies for a report on how much you’ve borrowed, how much you’ve 
paid back, and whether you’ve had problems paying on time.
success secret
Devote every penny you 
can to paying off debt.
credit record A log 
of the financial habits of a 
person who buys on credit.354 Chapter 8 Managing Your Resources
Having a good credit record is essential if you want to buy a house, lease 
or buy a car, or rent an apartment. Some employers even check potential 
employees’ credit records. To establish good credit, pay all bills promptly, 
avoid large debts, and do not bounce checks. To improve a bad credit record, 
open a small line of credit, such as a credit account at a local store, and 
make regular payments. This shows potential lenders, employers, and 
landlords that you are trustworthy.
Keep It in Perspective
Economist John Maynard Keynes once said, “The importance of money 
flows from it being a link between the present and the future.” When you 
are in debt, you spend most of your time scrambling to make up for the 
past rather than planning for the future. If you don’t keep track of what you 
spend, you can waste a lot of money without even realizing it. You work 
hard for your money, and you should use it for the things that mean the 
most to you. Spending and saving wisely gives you the freedom to plan for 
the future.
Self Check
1. What is a budget? (p. 346)
2. What is impulse buying? (p. 351)
3. What are the pros and cons of using credit? (p. 353)
success secret
Money is a link between 
the present and the future.Chapter 8 Review and Activities
Key Terms
time management (p. 322)
to-do list (p. 328)
schedule (p. 331)
procrastination (p. 334)
money management (p. 339)
finances (p. 341)
budget (p. 346)
income (p. 346)
impulse buying (p. 351)
credit (p. 352)
credit record (p. 353)
Summary by Learning Objectives
• Outline the three steps in time management and in money management. The three steps 
in time management are: (1) analyze how you use your time; (2) prioritize your activities; and 
(3) create a plan (to-do list and schedule) for your time. The three steps in money management 
are: (1) analyze how you use your money; (2) prioritize your expenses; and (3) create a plan 
(budget) for your money.
• Describe the three categories of time and the three categories of expenses. The 
three categories of time are: (1) committed time, the time you devote to goal-related activities; 
(2) maintenance time, the time you spend taking care of yourself; and (3) discretionary time, 
the time you use to do whatever you wish. The three categories of expenses are: (1) fixed com￾mitted expenses, necessary expenses that are the same each month; (2) variable committed 
expenses, necessary expenses that vary from month to month; and (3) discretionary expenses, 
lifestyle expenses that are not strictly necessary.
•Explain how to make a to-do list and a schedule. To make a to-do list, write down all the 
tasks and activities you need to complete over the course of a certain period, such as a week. 
As you accomplish each one, check it off the list. Make a schedule by noting tasks and activities 
and do-by dates.
• Define procrastination and explain its causes. Procrastination is the habit of putting off 
tasks until the last minute. Procrastination can stem from self-handicapping, perfectionism, or 
a lack of self-motivation.
• Describe the criteria for an effective budget. An effective budget meets the following 
criteria: it is realistic and accurate, taking into account all the expenses you will face over the 
month; it is balanced, with expenses equal to or less than income; it centers around your goals 
and values; it provides for savings; and it can be modified if necessary.
• Cite ways to reduce excess spending. Ways to reduce excess spending include using 
credit wisely; checking impulse buying by stopping to analyze each purchase; and choosing 
recreational activities other than shopping.356 Chapter 8 Managing Your Resources
Review and Activities
Review Questions
1. What is the difference between committed time and discretionary time?
2. List three benefits of using a to-do list.
3. Why is it important to prioritize your tasks and activities?
4. How do emotions affect people’s relationship with money?
5. Why is it important to analyze your spending habits?
6. What are the pros and cons of credit?
Critical Thinking
7. Time Management Making to-do lists and schedules saves time, but it also takes time. Do 
you create to-do lists for yourself? If so, how are they working for you? Are they saving you 
time? If you aren’t using to-do lists for yourself, how do you get things done? Think about the 
pros and cons of using to-do lists and schedules.
8. Voluntary Simplicity Voluntary simplicity is an approach to living that focuses on frugal 
consumption, ecological awareness, and personal and relationship growth rather than on 
material wealth and showy accomplishments. People who believe in voluntary simplicity 
often change their lifestyles to work (and earn) less, want less, and spend less. Does this 
approach to life and spending appeal to you? Why or why not? In what ways would this 
lifestyle be challenging for you? What might you miss from the “material world”? What 
might you gain from living this way?
Application
9. Money-Management Mentors Identify two or three people you know who are financially 
“successful.” Set up some time to interview them on their approach to managing money. 
How closely do they track their spending? What percentage of their income do they save? 
What tips can they offer you for adhering to a budget? Summarize your findings. How might 
you be able to adopt any of their habits into your own life? Consider asking if any of these 
people would be willing to meet with you again to review your progress, and perhaps offer 
you some ongoing “money mentoring.”
10. Busting Procrastination Make a list of important tasks you’ve been putting off, or projects 
you have yet to complete. You could include tasks such as simply doing laundry, sending 
out your rèsumè, following up on a job interview, or paying a monthly bill. Choose the task 
you’re resisting the most, first. Either today or tomorrow, set aside fifteen minutes to work on 
this task. Assemble whatever materials you need and set a timer for fifteen minutes. When 
the timer goes off, stop. How much did you get done? Was the task easier than you thought? 
Are you motivated to continue working? Did you find you wanted to move on to your next 
task immediately? Continue this habit on a daily basis, perhaps extending your timer for 
thirty minutes. You will be surprised how much you actually accomplish in a week’s time!Review and Activities
Internet Activities
11. Managing College Life College life for students, no matter what age or educational pur￾suit, can be quite challenging to manage. Besides taking classes, both on-campus and online, 
students may also be working in part-time or full-time jobs while juggling social activities, 
family obligations, fitness goals, and financial management. Fortunately, there are a multitude 
of apps available to help students manage a full range of activities from organizing lecture 
notes, outlines, and projects, and keeping track of assignments to tracking spending, meeting 
savings goals, and managing social life. Go online and search “best apps for college students.” 
Then, use your smartphone’s app store to find the apps. Consider apps such as Google 
Calendar, Qulizlet, EasyBib, Canvas Student, Evernote, SplitWise, and more. Be sure to 
avoid apps that promote academic dishonesty.
12. Managing Student Loan Debt It has become increasingly difficult to keep up with the 
very loans students took out to ensure their future success. The student loan debt has 
increased by 300 percent over the past eight years, with more than 37 million Americans in 
debt because of their education. What precautions should you take when applying for, and 
repaying, student loans? How can you safeguard your future? Conduct an online search for 
current information about student loan debt, and resources to help manage it. You can start 
with the following sites:
https://businessinsider.com/how-to-pay-student-loans-faster-2014-5
https://www.debt.org/students/
Look back at your response to the question in the Real-Life 
Success Story on page 320. Think about how you would answer 
the question now that you have completed the chapter.
Complete the Story Write a short note to Anna. In it, suggest 
that she use a to-do list and schedule and explain how doing this 
could help her stay on track at work and still make time for fun.
“Will I Ever Be Able to Enjoy Some ‘Free’ Time?” Real-Life 
Success Story
Corbis Super RF/Alamy Stock Photo358
Sam Edwards/age fotostock
Career 
Path Story
Climbing the Ladder
Erik Vasquez was on track to reach his professional 
goals. After college, he accepted a full-time, entry￾level position at one of the top engineering service 
companies on the west coast. Erik was excited to 
launch his career, build his network, and earn more 
money than his previous part-time jobs.
Supervisor Challenges
Erik originally assumed that his supervisor, 
Mr. Colstonia, managed every step of his work 
because Erik was new and still learning. After his 
first year, however, Erik realized that micromanaging 
was Mr. Colstonia’s management style. This was 
taxing on Erik; he couldn’t even send one e-mail 
without Mr. Colstonia’s involvement. Erik wanted to 
say something to Mr. Colstonia, but he could find the 
best way to phrase his frustrations. And, he worried 
that his message may not be received well. As a 
result, Erik decided to quit his job.
What Do You Think? Did Erik make the right 
choice and why? If not, how do you think Erik should 
have handled this situation?
“How Do I Talk to My Supervisor?”9 Chapter
learning objectives
After you complete this chapter, 
you should be able to:
• Describe the six elements of 
communication.
• Summarize the forms and 
functions of nonverbal 
communication.
• List several skills necessary for 
effective speaking and active 
listening.
• Explain the relationship among 
stereotypes, prejudice, and 
empathy.
• Define intimacy and explain 
how to develop it in a 
relationship.
• Cite the characteristics of 
satisfying intimate relationships.
• Explain how to handle conflict 
effectively.
Truly remarkable leadership is not just 
about motivating others to follow, it’s 
about inspiring them to become 
leaders themselves and setting the 
stage for even greater opportunities 
for future generations.
”
Condoleezza Rice, 
Former United States Secretary of State
introduction
Over the course of this book you’ve looked at all sides 
of yourself and considered what you want out of life. 
In this final chapter you’ll learn about making connections 
with others. In Section 9.1 you’ll focus on interpersonal 
communication. You’ll explore the communication 
process, learn how to become an effective speaker and 
an active listener, and examine how you can use your 
communication skills to resolve conflicts with others. 
In Section 9.2 you’ll explore the nature of relationships, 
learning how they form and develop and what skills you 
can use to strengthen them.
Communication 
and Relationships
“360 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
SECTION 9.1 Effective Communication
A LOOK AT COMMUNICATION
What exactly is communication? Communication is the process of giving 
or exchanging messages. A message is an expression of thought or feeling. 
Messages can take the form of words, but they can also take the form of 
sounds, gestures, actions, or facial expressions. A raised eyebrow, a sigh, 
or a scream, for example, is a message. Messages can even be conveyed 
through music, dance, visual art, acting, or any other expressive form.
People communicate for many reasons: to convey facts and ideas, share 
feelings, give orders, persuade, entertain, and even deceive. The most 
important function of communication, however, is to create and maintain 
bonds between people. You get to know people through communication, 
whether in person, by phone, or via a number of online social media platforms. 
You also maintain your existing relationships through communication. 
When people avoid talking to each other or feel they have nothing left to 
say, it is a sure sign that their relationship is in trouble.
People with excellent communication skills enjoy the happiest relation￾ships. They have stronger friendships, romantic relationships, and family 
relationships, and they get along better with coworkers. Having excellent 
communication skills also makes you a sought-after employee. Employers 
are always searching for candidates who have excellent communication 
skills, as well as skills that depend on good communication, such as 
teamwork skills, leadership skills, and people skills.
Interpersonal Communication
There are four basic communication skills: writing, reading, speaking, and 
listening. In this chapter we’ll focus on speaking and listening, which are 
the skills most often used in interpersonal communication. Interpersonal 
communication is one-on-one, usually face-to-face communication. 
Interpersonal communication is usually spontaneous and informal. This 
makes it very different from other forms of communication such as written 
communication, public speaking, and mass (media) communication.
Every time you interact with another person, you engage in interper￾sonal communication. Even if you don’t use words, your body language 
says a great deal about what you are thinking and feeling. In fact, your 
body language sends messages even if you aren’t aware of it.
Most of us spend a large part of our day talking and hearing other 
people talk. This doesn’t mean that we are great communicators, however. 
Communicating well requires many skills—self-awareness, cultural aware￾ness, honesty, respect and compassion for others, and openness to other 
points of view. Take a moment to assess how much you know about com￾munication by completing Activity 46.
communication
The process of giving or 
exchanging messages.
success secret
Good communicators are 
self-aware.
interpersonal 
communication
One-on-one, usually 
face-to-face communication.continued…
ACTIVITY 46: How Much Do You Know About 
Communication?
A Read the following statements about communication and indicate whether each one is True or False by 
checking the appropriate box.
True False
1. Making eye contact with a speaker shows that you are interested in what he/she/they 
is saying.
2. Facial expressions can help you get your message across.\
3. Time and place have a large effect on communication.
4. Showing respect for others is part of good communication.
5. Leaning slightly toward a person who is speaking shows that you are interested in 
what he/she/they is saying.
6. Communicating well is a skill that can be learned.
7. Observing body language is part of listening.
8. It’s important to be able to disagree without getting angry or abusive.
9. Being silent is one way of encouraging someone to continue speaking.
10. If someone is telling you about a personal problem, giving advice can make him/
her/them feel that you’re not really listening.
11. A speaker’s body language can reveal whether he/she/they is lying or covering 
something up.
12. When someone is struggling for words, it’s important not to interrupt to “help.”
13. Part of good listening is trying to understand the other person’s point of view.
14. Emotional self-awareness helps prevent a breakdown in communication.
15. Listening is a psychological process.
16. The medium in which a message is conveyed influences the way it is interpreted.
17. Wordless signals such as body language can convey up to ninety percent of a message.
18. People are sometimes unaware of the message their body language is sending.
19. Each person uses body language differently.
20. Good communicators take responsibility for their own feelings.362 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
B Scoring: All of these statements about communication are true. The more times you checked True, the 
more you know about good communication. How many times did you check True? 
Are you surprised that all of these statements about communication are true? Explain.
C Why would showing respect for others be a part of good communication?
D Do you consider yourself a good communicator? Why or why not?Elements of Communication
Communication is a process, a back-and-forth exchange of thoughts and 
feelings. This process is more complex than most of us realize. Every 
exchange has six different elements: sender, message, channel, receiver, 
feedback, and context. Let’s examine each one. (See Figure 9.1.)
Sender The sender is the person who translates a thought or feeling 
into a message and then sends this message to another person. The sender 
could be a writer, a speaker, or a person who sends a nonverbal (wordless) 
message with physical movement.
Message The message is the sender’s expression of a thought or feel￾ing. It can be written, spoken, or nonverbal. Let’s say that you and a friend 
are at a party, and you’re ready to leave. You could send this message in 
several ways: by saying words such as “let’s go,” by sending a brief text on 
your smartphone, by gesturing toward the exit, or even by pushing your 
friend out the door.
Channel The channel is the medium in which a message is delivered. 
The channel has a large effect on the way the message comes across. Let’s 
say your boss leaves you a voicemail asking you to come to her office to 
channel The medium in 
which a message is 
delivered.
FIGURE 9.1 Elements of Communication
Sending and Receiving Every communication requires a sender, a message, a 
channel, a receiver, feedback, and a context. Which channels of communication
make it impossible for the receiver to provide feedback immediately?
Message
Channel
Sender
Context
Receiver
Feedback364 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
discuss a project. Think of how differently this message would come across 
if she drafted it in a formal memo or hired a singing telegram to surprise 
you with it at your home.
Context Context is the time and place of communication. Context, like 
channel, has a large effect on the communication process. Let’s say you are 
in your instructor’s office discussing a possible grade change. How would 
the conversation be different if it took place at a crowded party, at a funeral 
reception, or in class with all your fellow students listening? Would you say 
the same things? Would you get the same responses? Being aware of context 
can help you choose the right words and predict the other person’s reactions.
Communication Breakdown
The goal of communication is to have the receiver interpret the message 
the way the sender intended. This goal sounds simple enough, but it isn’t 
always easy to achieve. The communication process is complex, and misun￾derstandings can arise easily. Have you ever heard a “yes” when the other 
person was trying to say “no”? Have you ever made a harmless comment 
and had someone take it the wrong way?
Each of us has different experiences, goals, expectations, ideas, percep￾tions, feelings, and moods, and these can create barriers to good communi￾cation. Communication breaks down when physical, emotional, or cultural 
barriers get in the way of understanding.
Physical Barriers Physical barriers are the most obvious road￾blocks to good communication. Background noise or poor acoustics, for 
example, can make it difficult for you to hear a speaker. You may have 
trouble taking in what you are hearing or reading if you are physically 
uncomfortable or if the speaker is using an unpleasant tone of voice. The 
appearance of the speaker can be a physical barrier, too. Imagine how 
difficult it would be to concentrate if your teacher came to class one day 
dressed in a clown suit. Some physical barriers, such as deafening 
background noise, are impossible to overcome. Others, such as trying to 
have two conversations at once, can be changed or reduced through 
self-awareness. Analyze what is bothering you and try to correct the problem.
Emotional Barriers Communication is a psychological process as 
well as a physical one. Barriers, therefore, can be emotional as well as phys￾ical. Emotions such as sadness, excitement, boredom, or anxiety can make 
it hard to pay attention to what someone else is saying. Imagine learning 
that you have just won the lottery or lost a friend in a car accident—how 
well would you be able to concentrate during your next class?
Receiver The receiver is the person who takes in, or receives, the 
sender’s message. The way the receiver interprets the message depends 
on his/her/their personality, past experiences, interest level, emotional 
context The time and 
place of communication.
success secret
Good communication 
requires effort.
success secret
Emotional awareness 
helps you communicate 
well.state, and knowledge of the subject. The relationship between the sender 
and the receiver also affects the way the receiver interprets the message. 
For example, you probably wouldn’t think twice if your boss instructed you 
to drop what you were doing and work on her expense report. However, 
how would you react if your roommate ordered you to drop what you were 
doing and finish her math homework?
Feedback Feedback is the receiver’s response to a message. Senders 
rely on feedback to figure out how the receiver is interpreting their mes￾sage. Feedback can take many forms—agreement, disagreement, questions, 
confusion, anger, delight. It can consist of words (“I see”), expressions (“uh 
huh”), or actions (nodding, smiling, running away).
Conflicting emotions can take a toll on communication, too. Our words 
are expressions of our thoughts, so confused thoughts will produce confused 
(and confusing) messages. If you have conflicting feelings about a person, 
for example, you won’t be able to convey a clear message. You might find 
yourself stammering, hesitating, or saying something you don’t really mean.
Speakers and listeners bring their emotions to every conversation, 
which can lead to misunderstandings on both sides. If you are extremely 
angry at your best friend, for example, you may find it difficult to choose 
the right words or construct coherent sentences. You may interpret her 
words in a distorted way or engage in selective listening, choosing what you 
want to hear and ignoring the rest. People often use selective listening to 
block out the part of the message that is threatening their self-esteem.
Overcoming emotional barriers requires emotional awareness. When 
you recognize and accept what you are feeling, you become aware of how 
your emotions affect your ability to communicate.
Language and Cultural Barriers For two people to communicate, 
they should ideally speak the same language. But just because people share 
a common language doesn’t mean they share a common cultural background. 
It can be difficult to communicate with people from different cultural 
groups or geographic areas who use words and concepts that are unfamiliar 
to you. Each culture also has its own conventions about verbal and 
nonverbal communication, many of which can be baffling to outsiders. 
In Bulgaria, for example, nodding your head up and down means “no” 
and shaking your head side to side means “yes.” The thumbs-up gesture is 
positive in most of the world, but in Australia it is an insult.
Cultural taboos, or prohibitions, can make it particularly difficult to get 
a message across. Let’s say you ask your new British acquaintance what he 
does for a living in an attempt to show interest and get to know him better. 
Unfortunately, in England this question is considered rude because it is 
interpreted as a question about a person’s income. You can avoid such 
misunderstandings by developing cultural awareness, the ability to recog￾nize the ways cultures differ and how these differences affect cross-cultural 
interactions. Since we function in a global village, it is important for us to 
success secret
Everyone interprets 
messages differently.
success secret
Words are expressions of 
thoughts—to speak 
clearly, think clearly.
success secret
Cultural differences affect 
communication.366 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
learn about communication norms in countries we plan to visit, as well as 
in individuals from other cultures with whom we interact on a daily basis. 
Being culturally aware also means being aware of how your culture influ￾ences your behavior.
Now it’s time to apply what you’ve learned about communication to 
real-world situations. In Activity 47 you’ll observe the elements of commu￾nication in action.
NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION
Think of how many ways you can express how you feel without saying a 
single word. You can use gestures, facial expressions, body movements, 
even sounds. Think about the last time you were bored with a lecture. 
Did you keep glancing at your smartphone? Did you yawn? Sigh?
These wordless signals, or cues, are examples of nonverbal communica￾tion. Nonverbal communication is the process of giving or exchanging 
information without words. It is “speaking” without words. Did you know 
that you can even communicate nonverbally in a telephone conversation? 
A smile affects the tone of your voice.
Nonverbal cues can reveal more about us than the words we speak. 
They help us get an idea of the person we are talking to—who they are, what 
they think, what they feel. If someone has crossed arms, he/she/they may 
feel defensive. Hands on hips may show aggressiveness. A person who 
looks down or away from you may feel self-conscious or guilty. Eyes can 
show surprise or anger.
The most important nonverbal message is self-confidence. A smile, good 
eye contact, upright posture, and a firm handshake (or similar gesture) all 
project your self-assurance. A smile is the universal language that opens 
doors. It is the light in your window that tells others there is a caring and 
sharing person inside. When you put out your hand to shake another’s, you 
show that you value that person. This tradition began in ancient times as a 
double-handed clasp to show that a weapon was not concealed. A firm hand￾shake (not an overly tight grip, not a limp hand) conveys the impression of a 
confident person. While handshakes are still very effective, the COVID-19 
pandemic slightly changed how handshakes are received. Not everyone is 
comfortable receiving handshakes; they might prefer a fist or elbow bump 
(or even a nod or waive). Think about times you’ve received these nonverbal 
messages. Most likely, they helped you feel welcomed and valued.
Functions of Nonverbal Communication
Nonverbal communication has many functions. We use it to maintain 
human bonds, convey facts and ideas, share feelings, give orders, persuade, 
entertain, or even deceive other people. The most frequent functions of 
nonverbal communication fall into three categories: managing conversa￾tions, providing feedback, and clarifying verbal messages.
nonverbal 
communication
The process of giving or 
exchanging messages 
without words.
success secret
Nonverbal signals often 
tell more than words.ACTIVITY 47: Analyzing Communication
A Observe a conversation between two people you’ve never met. Note all six elements of communication: 
the identity or role of the sender, the content of the message, the channel of the message, the identity 
or role of the receiver, the content of the feedback, and the context of the conversation.
Sender:
Message:
Channel:
Receiver:
Feedback:
Context:
Could you figure out the relationship between the sender and the receiver? If so, how? If not, 
why not? (Consider both verbal and nonverbal information.)
Did any physical, emotional, or cultural barriers affect the conversation? Explain.
continued…368 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
B Now describe the same elements for a conversation in which you were involved.
Sender:
Message:
Channel:
Receiver:
Feedback:
Context:
What was the relationship between you and the other person, and how do you think it influenced 
the conversation? For example, how did it affect the words you chose, your tone of voice, and 
so on?
Did any physical, emotional, or cultural barriers affect the conversation? Explain.Managing Conversations Managing conversations means starting 
conversations, helping them flow smoothly, and ending them. People use 
gestures and facial expressions to signal that they have something to say or 
that they want to keep the floor. If you begin talking when someone hasn’t 
finished, for example, he/she/they might talk louder or make a hand gesture 
indicating “wait.” Nonverbal cues can end conversations, too. If you stand 
up, fidget, and look at your watch while someone is chatting with you, it’s 
obvious that you’re ready for the conversation to end.
Providing Feedback The second function of nonverbal communica￾tion is to provide feedback. Nonverbal feedback tells you a lot about what the 
other person is thinking and feeling. Let’s say you are a store manager consid￾ering two candidates, Patrick and Dayla, for a sales job. During his interview, 
Patrick smiles and leans forward attentively as you explain the specifics of the 
job. This says, “I’m really interested in what you’re saying” and “I’ve got a 
positive attitude.” Dayla, on the other hand, smirks and sits back with her 
arms folded. This sends the message, “I couldn’t care less what you’re saying” 
and “I’m too good for this job.” Which candidate would you hire?
Clarifying Messages The third function of communication is to 
clarify verbal messages. Nonverbal cues such as tone of voice and body 
language can often convey far more information than words. Let’s say your 
roommate tells you the dishes are dirty. If she says this in an apologetic 
tone with downcast eyes, you will probably figure that she is repenting for 
leaving dirty dishes in the sink again. But what if she says the same thing in 
a hostile tone, pointing an accusing finger at you? This same sentence is 
now sending an entirely different message.
Nonverbal cues can also be a dead giveaway that a speaker feels something 
different from what he/she/they is saying. Your company president might 
say that there won’t be any layoffs this year, but if he is shuffling his feet and 
avoiding eye contact, you might think he knows something he’s not saying.
Forms of Nonverbal Communication
Nonverbal communication is versatile in form as well as function. It can 
incorporate any or all of the five senses—sight, sound, touch, even smell, and 
taste. A caress can show affection, a whistle can mean “look over here!” and 
a nod can convey agreement. A person might apply cologne or perfume for 
a date in order to send the message, “I am desirable.” A used car dealer 
might spray his merchandise with new car smell to convince buyers that the 
cars are just like new. What would you think if your spouse surprised you 
with a delicious home-cooked meal? What if he/she/they poured a cup of 
salt into your coffee? All of these actions send powerful messages.
The three most common and important forms of nonverbal communication 
are voice, personal distance, and body language. Voice involves sound, 
personal distance involves sight, touch, and smell, and body language 
involves sight.
success secret
Nonverbal cues often 
suggest what a person is 
thinking and feeling.
success secret
Pay attention to nonverbal 
cues in all five senses.370 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
Voice Your voice is a powerful instrument. You can vary the sound of 
your voice by speed (fast or slow), pitch (high or low), volume (loud or quiet), 
and tone (empathetic, sarcastic, whining, etc.). Each of these factors influences 
your message. Speaking loudly, for example, can make you seem agitated or 
hostile. Speaking quickly conveys the impression of anxiety, excitement, or 
urgency. Depending on what tone of voice you use, your message can come 
across as heartfelt, ironic, angry, or in practically any other way.
Personal Distance Personal distance refers to the amount of space 
between you and the people with whom you are communicating. When 
talking with a stranger or casual acquaintance, people are more likely to 
stand four or more feet away from the other person. Contrarily, people are 
more likely to stand much closer to an intimate friend and partner. The 
amount of physical space you keep between yourself and another person, 
therefore, can say a lot about your relationship. It is also important to be 
aware of your circumstances. For instance, the expectations of distancing 
changed during the COVID-19 pandemic for health reasons. And, many 
cultures outside of North American have different distancing norms.
Body Language Body language refers to facial expressions, posture, 
and gestures. Facial expressions involve movements of the mouth, the eye￾brows and forehead, and the eyes. Facial expressions are the main nonverbal 
cues to a person’s emotions. Raised eyebrows, for example, indicate surprise 
or fear; a furrowed brow signals tension, worry, or deep thought; and a distant 
stare can suggest boredom. Facial expressions are such a basic part of human 
psychology that it takes a great deal of effort to suppress or fake them.
Gestures are movements of the arms, hands, legs, and feet. They are 
used to display emotion, illustrate a point, move a conversation in a certain 
direction, or even signify membership in a social group (think of secret 
handshakes used by certain clubs).
Posture, the way we carry ourselves when sitting or standing, also says a 
lot about who we are. An upright posture is associated with confidence and 
authority, while a lowered head and slumped shoulders indicate inferior 
status or emotional burden, as in the phrase “to shoulder a burden.” Leaning 
forward shows eagerness and interest in the other person, whereas leaning 
back can send the message that something is wrong. Changing our posture 
can make us change the way we feel about ourselves, too; sitting or standing 
up straight can give us a boost of self-confidence.
Interpreting Nonverbal Cues
Interpreting nonverbal cues is not always easy. For one thing, almost all 
nonverbal cues have multiple meanings. Depending on the context, for 
example, laughter can mean many different things. If you laugh at the 
punch line of a joke, you are probably saying, “I find that funny.” But 
laughter can also signify nervousness, sarcasm, or ridicule, and it can be 
a way to relieve stress and to boost the mood of people around you.
body language Facial 
expressions, posture, and 
gestures.
success secret
Our voices and bodies are 
powerful communication 
tools.Applying Psychology
Emotional Intelligence
In a fast-forward world, where change seems to be the only constant, it is increasingly important to pause 
and reflect on how we connect with each other on a personal level. Too often we rely on electronic impres￾sions for feedback: The number of social media friends and followers, the size of our social media database, 
tweets, text messages, Instagram posts, blogs, and virtual interactions. Our daily activities in “cyberspace” 
do create a permanent, indelible diary about ourselves that can be readily accessed by others now and in 
the future. To many individuals, however, these statistics as well as their material rewards and status are 
their primary gauges of how successful they consider themselves to be.
As the speed and ease of communications have increased exponentially, the feelings of “warmth,” 
“intimacy,” and “courtesy” can get lost in transmission. Manners that once were universal guideposts for 
decency, civility, and being considerate of others are often considered too old-fashioned and time consuming 
in an era where “urgency” rules. Our emotional impact on others is the key to developing a long-term, trust￾ing relationship. We need to internalize the often-repeated cliché, “No one cares how much you know, until 
they know how much you care.” Emotions are the primary reasons behind virtually every human transaction.
An increasingly important subject showing up in corporate leadership programs, management meetings, team 
huddles, and employee coaching sessions is “emotional intelligence.” Emotional intelligence is about our ability to 
manage and control our emotions, as well as influence the emotions of others. It requires honest self-awareness 
about our own beliefs and values, as well as our talents, personalities, and empathy in dealing with others.
Emotional intelligence is not normally a skill that we are taught. It is more often “caught” by trial and 
error on our life journeys, sometimes early in our careers; however, most of the time later on after experi￾encing many bumps, ruts, and roadblocks on our chosen paths.
Since each of us must “sell” our ideas to others every day in order to gain trust and credibility, it is impor￾tant to learn early the emotional triggers that are involved in the buyer’s decisions more than logic. Research 
has found that how your prospects and associates feel about you, and the values you represent, is fundamen￾tal to your success. From your first encounter to signing the contract, it is more about pushing the right hot 
buttons of their desires, while not pushing their built-in, defensive hot buttons. Establishing rapport, asking 
questions more than presenting, gaining trust, and expressing genuine interest in creating an ongoing 
relationship—rather than closing a deal—result in more repeat business than any scripted techniques.
Today we can video chat live globally and soon we will have our phone and text messages instantly 
translated into the recipient’s language, without the need for a human interpreter. But what can’t be trans￾mitted electronically is how others feel about our interaction with them. There is no app for being “Culture 
Smart” as we navigate a world of human diversity, where diversity is more about what people believe than 
what you can see with your eyes. While change seems to be the only constant, there are standards of 
decency, civility, and courtesy that should never change. Many of them are centuries’ old in their origins and 
apply everywhere in the world. Others are distinct to regions, countries, and cultures. These observations 
about etiquettes and manners that matter are not from a tourist’s point of view. They relate more to how 
you present your best self to others, every day, wherever you are. This is why “emotional intelligence” is so 
important in building lasting relationships based upon mutual respect and trust.
What’s Your Opinion? Why do you think emotional intelligence is so important? In what situations 
might your EQ better serve you than your IQ? How will society benefit from people developing their EQs, 
compared to their IQs? Should EQ be taught and tested in schools?372 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
Nonverbal signals are also influenced by interlocking cultural, gender, 
and individual differences, as shown in Figure 9.2.
Each culture has different rules about where, when, and with whom 
the expression of emotion is allowed. In addition, gestures, touch, personal 
distance, and other nonverbal signals are used in different ways from culture 
to culture. In Arab cultures, for example, intense and prolonged eye contact 
is much more frequent than in North American and European cultures, 
where such eye contact is regarded as intrusive. In addition, studies suggest 
that men and women tend to use nonverbal signals differently, even when 
they are from the same culture.
Individuals use nonverbal communication in unique ways, too. Remember 
the company president who talked about layoffs? You sensed he was lying 
because he shuffled his feet and avoided eye contact. But when your 
girlfriend uses the same body language when she tells you she loves you, 
you know this means she is feeling nervous and vulnerable. That’s because 
you have learned to read her unique body language.
Because of all these influences on nonverbal communication, it’s impor￾tant to interpret nonverbal cues in the light of the verbal message that goes 
along with them, the cultural background and gender of the sender, and the 
context of the communication. Perform an experiment in decoding nonver￾bal communication by completing Activity 48.
IMPROVING YOUR COMMUNICATION 
SKILLS
Communication skills, like all other skills, are developed through learning 
and practice. Now that you’ve learned more about the different aspects of 
communication, you can put this knowledge into practice to improve your 
communication skills.
FIGURE 9.2 Influences on Nonverbal Communication
Putting It in Context Nonverbal signals are used in different ways by 
different cultural groups, genders, and by individuals.
Cultural Dierences
Gender Dierences
Individual
Dierences
success secret
Nonverbal communica￾tions vary by cultural, 
gender, and individual 
differences.ACTIVITY 48: Body Language Log
A Pay attention to the gestures, facial expressions, and postures that a roommate, close friend, or family 
member often uses. For example, does this person often roll his/her/their eyes to signal irritation, or 
dance to show happiness? List a few of this person’s body language habits and describe what you think 
they mean. 
Body Language Meaning
B Review your list with the person you observed. Is he/she/they surprised by any of your observations? 
Does he/she/they agree or disagree with the meanings you wrote in the second column? Explain.
continued…374 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
C Now pay attention to the gestures, facial expressions, and postures you often use. Make a list of your 
body language habits and what they mean. Ask a family member or good friend to help you if you find it 
difficult to observe yourself objectively.
Body Language Meaning
D Did any of your observations surprise you? For example, did you become aware of any habits you didn’t 
know you had? Explain.Becoming an Effective Speaker
Picture someone who you think is a good speaker. What sets that person 
apart from others? Chances are, they do the following:
• speak clearly
• use a large and expressive vocabulary
• use positive body language
• tell the truth
• welcome feedback
• pay attention to listeners’ nonverbal signals
• show respect for other people’s feelings and points of view
Let’s examine several strategies you can use to develop these skills.
Build Your Vocabulary To speak effectively, you need to be able 
to express what you think and feel in words. English has more than 
1,000,000 words, yet the average person can use only 50,000 of them. 
Building your vocabulary helps you find the right words to express yourself. 
Because we do much of our thinking in words, expanding your vocabulary 
also means expanding your tools of thought.
Work on developing your vocabulary by reading widely on the subjects 
that interest you. Stop when you find an unfamiliar word, guess its meaning 
from the context, then look the word up on www.dictionary.com to check 
your guess.
Be Direct and Honest Effective communicators are honest and 
sincere, not phony. Being false or manipulative can undermine your cred￾ibility, your listener’s interest, and his/her/their trust in you. Honesty, by 
contrast, creates a positive communication climate. Making eye contact is 
a good way to create rapport and project honesty. Also make sure to avoid 
conflicting messages, such as saying that everything is going fine when your 
body language says otherwise. Have you ever told a white lie to spare a 
person’s feelings, only to have it snowball into a bigger and bigger lie? 
Avoid this damaging situation by being honest, but tactful, from the start.
Welcome Feedback Effective speaking also means welcoming 
feedback, not just talking to hear the sound of your voice. Try to stay open to all 
kinds of feedback, even if it isn’t what you want to hear. Pay special attention to 
nonverbal feedback, which can help you detect what the other person is feeling. 
If you see that what you are saying is creating negative feelings, you can try to 
convey your message in a different way. If you realize you have made a mistake, 
said something confusing, or hurt a person’s feelings, acknowledge the issue 
and apologize. This helps build trust and prevent conflict.
Show Respect Respecting others builds trust and goodwill, which 
are essential for good communication. Make a conscious effort to understand 
and respect other people’s points of view, even if you don’t agree with 
them. This is especially important when you interact with people from 
success secret
Look for role models who 
are effective speakers.
success secret
Stay open to feedback of 
all kinds.376 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
other backgrounds and cultures. Approach every conversation as a chance 
for open, honest communication. This will make the other person feel more 
at ease, enabling a real exchange of ideas.
Another important way to show respect for others is to take responsibil￾ity for your feelings. Do you ever find yourself saying things like, “you make 
me so mad” or “you’re driving me crazy”? Emotional messages like these 
that begin with the word “you” are known as “you” statements. They express 
a belief about the other person, often blaming him/her/them for your 
problems or negative feelings. Instead of beginning with the word “you,” 
try starting with the word “I” or the words “I feel”: “I feel angry when you 
don’t say goodbye in the morning.” “I get worried when you come home 
late without calling.” Shifting the focus from “you” to “I” shows that you 
are taking responsibility for your feelings. Adding an explanation of your 
feelings is a good idea as well, because it helps the other person understand 
your point of view: “I feel angry when you don’t say goodbye in the morning 
because I wonder if you still love me.” “I get worried when you come home 
late without calling because I start imagining that you’ve been in a car 
accident.” Practice using “I” statements in Personal Journal 9.1.
Becoming an Active Listener
Communication is a two-way street. When one person is speaking, the 
other needs to be listening—actively. Active listening means listening with 
understanding and paying close attention to what is being said. Unlike 
hearing, which is a physical process, active listening is a psychological 
process. Active listening requires three skills, which make up the acronym 
EAR—encouraging, attending, and responding.
Encouraging Encouraging others means showing a desire to listen. 
You can do this by using open questions, which allow for a broad range of 
responses. These are more effective at eliciting information than closed 
questions, which ask for a one- or two-word answer. “What careers are you 
interested in?” is an open question, while “Have you chosen a career yet?” 
is a closed question.
During a conversation, you can encourage the speaker to continue 
his/her/their thoughts in different ways, such as:
• directly asking the person to continue talking (“go on,” “you were 
saying . . . ,” “tell me more”)
• using brief words, sounds, or gestures to let the person know you are 
listening (“mmm hmm,” “really!,” “I see,” nodding, smiling)
• remaining silent to give the speaker room to continue
• using positive body language such as eye contact and a slightly leaning 
forward posture to indicate interest
Resist the urge to interrupt, finish the other person’s sentences, or 
“help” him/her/them express the message. Use questions infrequently, 
because questions shift the focus away from the listener and back to you.
success secret
Take responsibility for 
your feelings.
active listening
Listening with understanding 
and paying close attention to 
what is being said.
success secret
Resist the urge to 
interrupt.Personal Journal 9.1
“I” Statements
Change each of the following “you” statements into an “I” statement. Use the format “I feel . . . about . . . 
because . . .” or “I feel . . . when you . . . because . . . .”
How does it feel to begin these statements with the word “I”?
Example
You never do what you promise.
I feel disappointed when you don’t keep a promise because I think that you don’t value our 
relationship.
You always interrupt when I’m talking.
You just have to criticize, don’t you?
You’re late again, as usual.
You need to help out more around the house.
You get on my nerves when you act so immature.
Attending The second component of active listening is paying attention, 
or attending—being focused, alert, and open to receiving information.
Attending can be difficult, especially if you are tired or bored. To boost 
your interest in the topic of discussion, try to relate it to something in your 
own experience. Also beware of the habit of planning what you are going to 
say next while the other person is still talking. Because people think many 
times faster than they can talk, it’s easy to let your mind race ahead of the 
speaker. If you are buried in your own thoughts, however, you won’t be able 
to pay attention to anyone else. Think of how you feel when you realize that 
someone isn’t really listening to you. Have you ever had a phone conversation 
attending Being 
focused, alert, and open to 
receiving information.378 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
with someone who continually puts you on hold in order to take other calls? 
If you don’t pay attention, the other person may feel hurt or annoyed.
Responding The third component of active listening is responding, or 
giving constructive feedback. Avoid the temptation to pass judgment or give 
advice, criticize or minimize the speaker’s emotions, or try to change the 
topic to yourself. We all know what it’s like to receive an insensitive response 
such as, “What’s the big deal?” or “That reminds me of the time I. . . .”
Instead of dismissing the speaker’s concerns with comments like these, 
use the techniques of paraphrasing and reflecting. Paraphrasing is restating 
the factual content of the message. Reflecting is restating the emotional 
content of the message. Paraphrasing and reflecting show that you have 
listened and that you accept and value the other person. You can combine 
paraphrasing and reflecting in a single statement such as, “It sounds like you 
feel (emotional content of the message) because (factual content of the 
message).” Try this technique in Activity 49.
Listening and Leadership
Even the most enlightened concept of leadership can’t work without con￾structive communication—but how to achieve constructive communication? 
Not by technique alone. We must constantly ask ourselves if we are operating 
with the old win–lose approach of position power rather than the new 
win–win approach of relationship power. Is our interest in others only for what 
they can do for us? Are we in this or that relationship primarily to satisfy our
needs? Do we give as little as possible in return for a reward we envision?
The best communication techniques in the world won’t fool most people 
for very long. Still, if your understanding of the substance of relationships is 
solid, learning new techniques for management communications can make a 
very significant difference. Empowered teams require a new communication 
style. In a traditional work group, you want compliance. In an empowered 
team, you want initiative. Directional communication (announcing deci￾sions, issuing orders) inhibits team input. If the team leader or supervisor is 
still using “boss” language, the team gets the message that they’re being told 
what to do. Managers of empowered teams need to learn to ask open-ended 
questions and develop the skill of truly listening to the answers.
Listening is a lost art, which must be rediscovered. Few people really 
listen to others, usually because they’re too busy thinking about what they 
want to say next. In business transactions, clear communication is often 
colored by power plays, one-upmanship, and attempts to impress rather 
than to express. In our work, as well as our personal lives, how we listen is 
at least as important as how we talk. Genuine listening to what others want 
would allow more sales to be made, more deals to be closed, and greater 
productivity to be gained. Although it’s not always necessary or possible to 
satisfy those wants, understanding them is the glue of a relationship.
Not paying value by listening is a way of saying, “You’re not important to 
me.” The results are reduced productivity (I don’t count here, so why should I 
paraphrasing Restating 
the factual content of the 
message.
reflecting Restating the 
emotional content of the 
message.ACTIVITY 49: Giving Feedback
A Change each of the following ineffective responses to an active listening response that paraphrases and 
reflects the message.
“I’ve worked here for five years, and Mr. Havivi still hovers over me while I’m closing. It’s like he 
thinks I’m going to steal from the store. I can’t stand it anymore!”
Ineffective Response: “Don’t worry about it, he’s just like that.”
Active Listening Response: “It sounds like you feel frustrated because you think his hovering means 
he doesn’t trust you.”
“My boyfriend is driving me crazy. He spends all his time playing video games while I’m out 
working and wondering how we are going to pay the rent. I don’t know what to do!”
Ineffective Response: “Mine is worse. Sometimes you just have to take the good with the bad.”
Active Listening Response:
“I’m really upset about the grade I got on the math test. I studied all semester, but still only 
got a C.”
Ineffective Response: “At least you didn’t get a D.”
Active Listening Response:
continued…380 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
“My dog got hit by a car last night when the sitter let her out by accident. I’m so devastated; 
I don’t think I can come in to work.”
Ineffective Response: “Don’t take it so hard. It was only a dog. At least it wasn’t a person.”
Active Listening Response:
“I got this great job working for the mayor. I can’t believe they chose me when they must have 
had so many qualified applicants! I’m nervous but excited for my first day of work.”
Ineffective Response: “I’m sure you’ll be fine. Can you get me a job there, too?”
Active Listening Response:even try?), employee turnover (Who wants to work in a place where I don’t 
feel valued?), absenteeism (I’m just a cog in the wheel, only noticed when 
I make a mistake), retaliation (They listen only when the griping gets loud 
enough), lost sales (They don’t seem to understand what I need), and dangling 
deals (I can’t get through to them; it’s like talking to a brick wall). Genuine 
listening can cure a remarkable range of supposedly intractable problems.
Even if you have excellent presentation skills and have an authoritative 
and persuasive ability to speak to those you lead, make a conscious effort to 
convert your team meetings into creative dialogue where you ask open-ended 
questions and solicit feedback and input from all those present. Everyone can 
be a source of useful ideas. The people closest to the problem usually have the 
best ideas. Learning flows up as well as down in the organization. Nothing is 
sacred except the governing vision and values. The process of open dialogue 
improves performance. The more information people can access, the better.
Most importantly, don’t view any suggestion or comment from the 
group as silly or irrelevant. Appearing foolish in front of one’s peers is a 
major embarrassment and stifles any future desires to offer ideas that might 
professional development )))
Your Cover Letter—The Competitive Edge
Many job seekers wonder if it is still necessary or encouraged to include a cover letter when sending the rèsumè 
to a prospective employer. In fact, the cover letter is often treated as an afterthought or unimportant attachment 
by job seekers. This is a mistake and you could be missing out on an opportunity to cut through initial screenings 
and land an interview. Even though the modern job application process is primarily online, the importance of a 
cover letter is still significant. According to research conducted by a top consulting and search firm, ninety-one 
percent of executives polled said that cover letters are valuable when evaluating job candidates.
The cover letter is actually a personal marketing letter for yourself and provides a brief introduction 
and enticing “rationale” as to why you are the top candidate for the job. Some important tips for creating a 
successful cover letter include:
• Be brief and concise—Keep it to one, clearly written page, with a few paragraphs.
• Identify yourself—Let the reader know who you are immediately.
• Customize it—Establish reference/connection points with the job and company.
• Connect your qualifications and skills to the job requirements.
• Give examples of why you would be a great addition to the team.
• Make it personal—Create excitement about your interest in the job and company.
Cover letters also allow you to tell your story and explain additional details like why your position was 
unique or why you had gaps in years of work. Remember . . . if you don’t create and submit a cover letter, 
someone else will be taking the initiative.
What’s Your Opinion?
In what ways can the cover letter be just as effective as a rèsumè in landing you a job interview? For resources 
for creating cover letters, visit http://jobsearch.about.com/od/coverlettertips/fl/cover-letter-tips-2014.htm.382 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
be considered “off the wall.” The most common mistake in communicating 
is saying what you want to say, rather than what they need to hear and then 
listening to what they have to offer. It’s rightly been said that you can get 
more people to vote for you in twenty minutes by showing interest in them, 
than you can in twenty weeks by showing how interesting you are.
Becoming an Empowering Leader/Coach
Leaders empower others and build trusting relationships. They project their 
best selves every day in the way they look, walk, talk, listen, and react. They 
specialize in truly effective communications, taking one hundred percent of 
the responsibility not only for sending information or telling, but also for 
receiving information or listening for the real meaning from every person 
they contact. Leaders are aware that first impressions are powerful, and 
that interpersonal relationships can be won or lost in about the first four 
minutes of conversation. Successful coaches say, “I’ll make them glad they 
talked with me.” Nothing marks an effective leader so clearly as a relaxed 
smile and a warm face, who volunteers his/her/their own name, while 
extending a hand to yours, looking directly in your eyes, and showing 
interest in you by asking questions about your life that are important to you. 
Leaders know that paying value to others is the greatest communication 
skill of all.
A good way to think of leadership is the process of freeing your team 
members to do the best work they possibly can. Today’s business team 
members say they want, more than anything else, the autonomy to do their 
jobs without the boss’s interference. In this fast-forward world, it’s already 
clear that the best-run companies believe that the more power leaders have, 
the less they should use.
The key to authentic leadership is to listen to your team members, 
and then open the door for them to lead themselves. The secret is 
empowerment. The main incentive is genuine caring and recognition.
The five most important words a leader can speak are: “I am proud of you.”
The four most important are: “What is your opinion?”
The three most important are: “How are you?”
The two most important are: “Thank you.”
And the most important single word of all is: “You!”
In any of our relationships—as leaders, managers, peers, colleagues, friends, 
parents, and significant others—positive messaging will help facilitate 
greater emotional buy-in. When we give others negative feedback in a non￾positive manner, either verbally or nonverbally, we are actually reinforcing 
the negative pathways in their brains that cause negative behaviors in the 
first place.1
1
 R. Boyatzis, (2012, January). “Neuroscience and the Link Between Inspirational Leadership and Resonant Relationships.” 
Retrieved from Ivey Business Journal.When people are empowered to solve their own problems, their brains 
release a rush of neurotransmitters such as endorphins and adrenaline that 
create positive energy. So a leader who “asks” rather than “tells,” and who 
guides and supports rather than scolding and correcting, will be more 
effective. People learn best when they can go through a process of making 
their own connections and gaining their own insight. They will be more 
open to change and will welcome it if it is incremental and interactive 
over time. This is why studies show that while training programs, alone, 
may increase productivity by twenty-eight percent, adding follow-up 
coaching can increase productivity up to eighty-eight percent. Managers 
today function more as motivating coaches than they formerly did as 
supervisors and bosses.2
When you think back in your life to the people you love and respect 
most, they have been the ones who have been there for you, in person, 
day in and day out, no matter what. By actually considering your team as 
your own “performance review” scorekeepers, you will spend the time 
and effort required to earn their respect by respecting them and keeping 
them informed of both the good and bad news ahead for the organization. 
Often those lowest on the pay or hierarchy scale are closest to the 
customer and therefore most aware of problems in delivering quality 
goods and services as advertised. Having an active suggestion system 
in place that pays attention to and rewards innovation in making the 
organization more effective and efficient is crucial to success in a volatile, 
competitive economy.
David Ogilvy, founder of the giant advertising agency, Ogilvy and 
Mather, used to give each new manager a Russian doll that contained five 
progressively smaller dolls inside. David used the Russian doll analogy to 
explain that, if higher-level employees consider themselves “larger” than 
those below them, they will demoralize those lower on the organizational 
chart. But, if they empower those below them, all employees will be “large” 
and effective. Instead of a numbers game, business today is truly a “motivate 
the team” game. In a global marketplace where the playing field is anything 
but level and where there is no job security because of slimmer profit margins 
due to outsourcing of manufacturing and service functions, it is imperative 
to maximize the return on investment in the “human capital” already on 
the payroll.
Here are ten tips for empowering team members:
1. Document their accomplishments so they can’t pretend they don’t 
exist. Never allow team members to lose sight of their accomplish￾ments and their potential for success.
2. Show them how to find opportunity in adversity. Every outcome, no 
matter how negative, presents options that were not previously available.
2
 G. Olivero, K. Denise Bane, R. Kopelman, “Executive Coaching as a Transfer of Training Tool: Effects on Productivity in a 
Public Agency.” Public Personnel Management, Winter, 126, 4,(1997) 461–469. 384 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
3. Assign them tasks that will display their talents. By transferring 
important responsibility to team members, you demonstrate your 
confidence in them and give them the chance to succeed in increasingly 
challenging assignments.
4. Teach them how to get what they want from other people. Teach your 
people to be assertive rather than too aggressive or too passive.
5. Show them the awesome power of listening, an active strategy for 
achieving personal success. When your subordinates become better 
listeners and begin reaping the benefits, they will feel better about 
themselves.
6. Tell them exactly what you expect of them and find out what they 
expect of you. The reason most subordinates and team members give 
for not satisfying their management is not knowing what management 
expects.
7. Criticize performance but not people. The spirit of criticism should 
be, “I don’t like what you did in this case, but I do like you.”
8. Praise not only them but also their performance. You don’t want 
merely to keep your people happy; you want them to know what they 
did right so they can repeat it.
9. Keep them in ongoing training programs. This gives them a vote of 
confidence, and carefully chosen training will further contribute to 
their effectiveness.
10. Encouraging and complimenting team members on a daily basis seems 
to be more critical for promoting loyalty than financial incentives and 
perks.
As accomplishments mount, self-confidence and ability grow in other areas 
as well. The more we accomplish, the larger our view of our enormous 
capacity for creative growth. It has been said that there are no business 
problems that aren’t really “people” problems that impact business 
decisions and outcomes. Solicit feedback from the bottom up, rather than 
make edicts and policies from the top down. To become a giant in the eyes 
of others, and to succeed in this fast-forward global marketplace, look up 
to those beneath you! Total success is the continuing involvement in the 
pursuit of a worthy ideal that is being realized for the benefit of others, 
rather than at their expense. And success is the process of learning and 
sharing and growing.
Self Check
1. Name three barriers to good communications. (pp. 364–366)
2. What does EAR stand for? (p. 376)
3. What communication skills should a good leader have? (pp. 372–384)SECTION 9.2 Healthy Relationships
A LOOK AT RELATIONSHIPS
No one reaches success alone. No matter who you are, where you go to 
college, and what you do for a living, you will always need to deal with 
other people. The more respect and compassion you have for other 
people’s thoughts, feelings, and needs, the more they will have for yours. 
Understanding and getting along with other people, therefore, is crucial to 
your success.
For physical and psychological health, we all need relationships, mean￾ingful connections with other human beings. Healthy relationships not only 
satisfy our need for relatedness but also boost our self-esteem and provide a 
source of understanding and support. Healthy relationships don’t just 
happen—they require self-awareness, empathy, and good communication. 
In this section you’ll look at the skills you’ll need to build and maintain 
positive relationships with friends, partners, coworkers, acquaintances, 
peers, and others.
Group Relationships
Let’s look first at groups. A group is a set of people (usually three or more) 
who influence one another and share common goals. We are all members 
of at least one group, such as a family group, a school or student body, an 
ethnic group, or a religious group. People need groups for many reasons. 
Central among these are:
• Groups satisfy our basic need to belong.
• Group membership can give us prestige and recognition.
• Group members offer us support during difficult times.
• Group members provide us with companionship.
• Group members can encourage us and help us accomplish our goals.
• Group members can share knowledge, skills, feelings, and experiences.
• Membership in groups helps us shape our collective identity.
We choose some, but not all, of our groups. We may choose to join a 
club, college, or company, but we don’t choose our family, our age group, 
or our ethnic group. Some groups are also more cohesive (functional and 
united) than others. Very large groups, such as racial groups, are usually 
less cohesive than smaller groups. Groups that face a great deal of internal 
conflict, such as some political parties, can become so disunited that they 
break apart.
Group Norms All groups have norms, or standards, that guide 
the behavior of their members. These norms may be formal or informal. 
Most schools and companies have formal norms, or codes of conduct, that 
relationship
A meaningful connection 
with another human being.
group A set of people 
(usually three or more) who 
influence one another.386 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
specify things such as what kinds of clothing are and are not acceptable. 
Within an individual office or classroom, there may also be informal norms 
about things like taking breaks or raising your hand before speaking. 
Family groups have norms, too, often based on the status of each person 
in the group. Most families have norms regarding privacy, appropriate 
language in the home, and the division of household chores. Some family 
norms are related to cultural or religious tradition. For example, many 
families have rules regarding dress, social activities, and religious observances.
Conformity
People behave differently in groups than they do when they are alone or 
with one other person. One common example of this is conformity. 
Conformity is a change in behavior caused by a desire to follow the norms 
of a group. When we conform, we change some aspect of our real selves in 
order to gain group acceptance. For example, we may fail to speak up in 
class if most of our classmates have a different opinion from ours.
Conformity is not always negative. We conform every time we follow 
common social conventions such as waiting patiently in line or staying 
quiet during a movie. These social conventions help to keep order and 
create an atmosphere of fairness and mutual respect.
Unfortunately, people often conform on more important matters, 
compromising their beliefs or values in order to gain acceptance from others. 
People with low self-esteem tend to conform more quickly than people with 
high self-esteem because they are afraid that others will not like them as 
they really are. At the extreme, conformity can lead to deindividuation, a 
state of reduced inhibition and self-awareness that can lead people to do 
things they would never do alone, such as rioting or physically attacking 
another person.
Groupthink One common type of conformity is groupthink. Groupthink
is a type of simplistic thinking used by group members who are more con￾cerned with maintaining a clubby atmosphere than with thinking critically. 
Groupthink often happens when a group has to make a decision quickly or 
under pressure, or when a group is composed of similar people who don’t 
want to consider diverse points of view.
One of the most famous examples of groupthink is the poor decision to 
launch the space shuttle Challenger, which exploded just after takeoff in 
1986. Although many people at NASA warned that a critical part of the 
shuttle was unsafe, decision makers were more concerned with pushing the 
launch forward than with looking at all the information. Similar warnings 
about dangerous parts preceded the explosion of the space shuttle 
Columbia in 2003.
Groupthink doesn’t just happen when lives are at stake. Imagine that 
you’re part of a team in charge of improving career counseling at your 
school. Instead of tackling the tough problems, however, the members of 
conformity A change in 
behavior caused by a desire to 
follow the norms of a group.
success secret
When you are anxious to 
conform, you lose your 
real self.
success secret
Think about how group 
norms affect your 
behavior.the team are concerned with maintaining a pleasant social atmosphere. 
No one wants to rock the boat by suggesting a creative idea. People with 
differing opinions keep quiet and eventually change their minds to go 
along with the leader’s pet idea. In the end your team comes up with an 
impractical plan that has no chance of success.
To avoid groupthink, group members and leaders need to value diversity 
and encourage differing opinions. It’s unrealistic to expect everyone in a 
group to agree, but it is realistic to aim for consensus—agreement by most 
(but not all) members of the group.
Diversity
The flip side of conformity is diversity. Diversity means variety. It is present 
everywhere, in every group and in every aspect of humanity. Diversity 
occurs at the personal level through individual differences in areas such as 
values, religious beliefs and practices, political attitudes, sexual orientation, 
and physical and mental disabilities. Diversity occurs at the social level, 
too, through group differences in areas such as race, culture, national 
origin, and language.
Diversity is a major source of strength for any group—a company, a 
school, a sports team, a society. However, personal and social differences 
among people can cause conflict. It’s easy to get along with people who are 
similar to you, especially if they share your values and goals. It can be much 
harder to remain open-minded toward people who are different from you. 
Do you interact with people who are different from you? Take an honest 
inventory in Personal Journal 9.2.
Rejecting Stereotypes and Prejudice
How can you learn to enjoy all the different and unusual things that you 
come across in life, as well as to enjoy your own sense of being individual 
and unique? The key is to reject stereotypes and prejudices. A stereotype is 
a set of oversimplified beliefs about the attributes of a group of people. 
Stereotypes are often about different racial groups, but they can also be 
about people of a different age, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, 
religion, weight, ability, or appearance. Stereotypes very often lead to 
prejudice, a negative feeling or attitude toward a group and its members. 
We use stereotypes to make quick conclusions about other people without 
having to do a lot of thinking. Unfortunately, this prevents us from 
appreciating individual differences.
Stereotypes and prejudices are usually based on fear and misunderstand￾ing. An older person, for example, might see television news reports about 
gangs and decide that all young people are potential delinquents. A teenager 
might have a fear of growing older and therefore develop a prejudice against 
the elderly. We may also adopt the stereotypes held by our parents or 
friends, simply because we have never taken the time to examine them.
success secret
Welcome diverse 
opinions.
diversity Variety.
stereotype A set of 
oversimplified beliefs about 
the attributes of a group and 
its members.
prejudice A negative 
feeling or attitude toward a 
group that is based on 
oversimplified beliefs about 
that group.388 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
Personal Journal 9.2
Understanding Diversity
How diverse is your social world? Fill in the lines below.
People I interact with who are of a different race than mine:
People I interact with who are of a different sexual orientation than mine:
People I interact with who are of a different national origin than mine:
People I interact with who are of a different cultural heritage than mine:
People I interact with who hold religious beliefs different from mine:
People I interact with who have different physical or mental disabilities than I have:
People I interact with who have different political beliefs than mine:
Are you comfortable interacting with people who differ from you? Explain.People have an unconscious motivation to believe that the groups they 
belong to are better than other, similar groups. If we are young, or hetero￾sexual, or Christian, or brunette, we may tend to see ourselves as better 
than people who are older, or homosexual, or Muslim, or blond—no matter 
how worthy these people may be as individuals.
Discrimination is the act of treating a person or group differently based on 
a characteristic. It is the actual behavior that results from prejudice. I can 
be positive toward someone (such as hiring an employee simply because 
of his ethnic background) or against someone (not hiring someone simply 
because of his ethnic background). Both forms of prejudicial treatment are 
destructive and don’t focus on positive merits and contributions.
Positive Stereotypes What about so-called positive stereotypes,
such as “African Americans are good at sports” or “Asian Americans are 
good at math”—those can’t be harmful, can they? Yes, they can. Positive 
stereotypes like these put pressure on members of those groups to fit that 
stereotype. If they can’t or don’t want to conform, they often face criticism 
and develop low self-esteem.
Positive stereotypes may also mask negative feelings about a group. 
Consider a recent survey of American attitudes toward Chinese Americans. 
A large majority of the respondents praised Chinese Americans for their 
strong family ties, said they were honest businesspeople, and admired their 
commitment to education. However, one-quarter of the people surveyed, 
including many who had articulated very positive attitudes toward 
Chinese Americans, admitted that they didn’t approve of marriage between 
Asian Americans and Caucasian Americans and that they wouldn’t vote for 
an Asian American presidential candidate. This shows that positive attitudes 
in one area can accompany negative attitudes in another.
Stereotypes and You Stereotypes and You Stereotypes block 
critical thinking and limit our views of others. They also limit our views of 
ourselves, our identities, and our own potential. As individuals, we have the 
right to determine our own identities and challenge the stereotypes that 
some people might hold about us. What stereotypes might apply to you? 
Challenge them in Personal Journal 9.3.
Developing Empathy
We can combat stereotypes and prejudice and keep an open mind toward 
other people by developing empathy. Empathy means awareness of and 
sensitivity to the feelings, thoughts, and experiences of others. It means 
seeing life through other people’s eyes—experiencing their pain, curiosity, 
hopes, and fears. It means watching a marathon runner at the twenty-mile 
mark and feeling your own legs ache.
You can feel empathy for anyone—whether that person is of a different 
generation, a citizen of another country, or simply someone with a different 
point of view. Instead of being quick to criticize or judge others, try to see 
discrimination The act 
of treating a person or group 
differently based on a 
characteristic.
success secret
Positive stereotypes often 
mask negative feelings.
empathy Awareness of 
and sensitivity to the feelings, 
thoughts, and experiences of 
others.
success secret
Don’t assume that the 
groups you belong to are 
better than other groups.390 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
Personal Journal 9.3
Circles of Yourself
Write your name in the center circle below. Then, in each of the four surrounding circles, write the name 
of a group you identify with.
Think of stereotypes that are associated with each of these groups but that don’t represent 
who you are. For each group, write a sentence in the following format:
“I am a(n) . . . , but I am/do NOT . . . . ”
Example
I am a vegetarian, but I do NOT eat sticks and twigs.
I am a(n) , but I am/do NOT 
I am a(n) , but I am/do NOT 
I am a(n) , but I am/do NOT 
I am a(n) , but I am/do NOT 
the situation through their eyes. How do they feel? What are they afraid of? 
What concerns them most? Their answers may be surprisingly similar to 
yours. By seeing through other people’s eyes and feeling their emotions, we 
are able to modify our attitudes, responses, and actions so that we don’t 
hurt other people’s feelings.
You will have many roles in your life: student, employee, partner, parent, 
relative, friend, and so on. In each of these roles, it helps to feel empathy 
for others. For instance, suppose another student in your class isn’t learning the course material as quickly as you are. How do you respond? 
Someone without empathy might say, “Rylee’s so slow and doesn’t get 
anything. What a loser.” However, when you empathize with someone, you 
can say, “I can understand how Rylee could have felt confused by that last 
lecture. I hope he’ll ask the instructor for extra help.” If you were having 
problems, how would you want others to respond?
Empathy can help you look beyond yourself for meaning and honesty 
in your relationships with others and with the world. Concern for others is 
an essential skill when working in groups, living with a partner or roommate, 
or simply being a good friend, relative, or member of society. Every so 
often, perform an empathy checkup on yourself to see where you can 
improve. Ask yourself:
• If I were my partner, how would I feel about sharing my life with me? Would 
I think I was supportive? Independent? Interesting? Understanding? An 
equal partner?
• If I were my child, how would I feel about having a parent like me? Would I 
think I was patient? Encouraging? Positive? Supportive? Nonjudgmental?
• If I were my instructor, how would I feel about having a student like me?
Would I think I showed a lot of effort? A lot of interest? Curiosity? 
Discipline? Concern for others in class?
• If I were my boss, how would I feel about having an employee like me?
Would I think I was a good worker? Productive? Reliable? Responsible? 
Nice to work with?
• How would I feel if I were an immigrant who had just arrived in America?
Would I feel isolated? Frightened? Unsure of whom to trust? 
Challenged? Optimistic? Hopeful?
• How would the world appear to me if I were a child? Big? Confusing? 
Exciting? Scary? Hard to understand? Fun?
Empathy and Self-Awareness Empathy is founded on awareness 
of yourself and your relationship with the world. When you see yourself as 
part of a larger whole, you have respect for the people and things around 
you. Personal success is founded both on self-respect and on respect for the 
people and things that surround you. Philosopher Alan Watts, who wrote 
about ideas from India, China, and Japan, believed that we should not 
think of ourselves as separate beings trying to control the outside world. 
Instead, we should see ourselves as part of the world and the people that 
share it.
Successful people realize that they do not, and cannot, know everything 
about their world. They realize that their heredity, environment, and per￾sonality affect how they perceive the world and how they think. Have you 
ever heard someone say, “We don’t relate” or, “You wouldn’t understand”? 
This translates to, “You don’t think as I do” or, “I don’t understand why 
you think the way you do.” It is easy to see why there is so much misunder￾standing and fighting in the world, within families, and among nations. 
Everyone sees life through a different lens and marches to a different beat.
success secret
Perform an empathy 
checkup on yourself.
success secret
Be quick to empathize 
and slow to criticize.392 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
Does it trouble you that many people are different from you? Do you 
ever worry that you seem strange or different to other people? Everyone is 
different because everyone is unique. We will come across many different 
people, places, and experiences in our lifetimes. A lot of those people, 
places, and experiences will seem very strange and unfamiliar to us. 
Sometimes, we will seem strange and different to other people as well. We 
can enjoy all the different and unusual things that we come across in life 
while also enjoying our own sense of being individual and unique. With 
advances in transportation and technology, the globe is becoming smaller. 
People from all around the world are being brought together, and events on 
one continent affect those on all the others. Being conscious of the world 
around you and understanding your relationship to it will contribute to 
your overall sense of well-being.
INTERPERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS
Our group relationships are the core of our collective identity. Our interper￾sonal relationships, by contrast, are the core of our relational identity. Just 
as interpersonal communication is communication between two people, an 
interpersonal relationship is a relationship between two people. Building 
healthy interpersonal relationships is essential to a successful personal and 
professional life. People with healthy interpersonal relationships are 
happier and suffer less stress and illness than people who have destructive 
relationships or who suffer loneliness.
Intimacy
We all have a variety of interpersonal relationships—family relationships, 
romantic relationships, friendships, school and work relationships, and 
acquaintanceships. The most important of these are our intimate relation￾ships, those characterized by intimacy. Intimacy is a sense of closeness, 
caring, and mutual acceptance that comes from sharing your true inner 
self. Intimacy doesn’t always involve sexuality. Friendships can be highly 
intimate, for example, and sexual relationships can lack intimacy.
Intimate relationships differ from casual relationships in several major 
ways. In intimate relationships, people:
• know a great deal of private information about one another
• feel more affection for one another than for most other people
• influence one another’s lives often, and in a meaningful way
• think of themselves as a unit, as “us”
• trust one another
• hope and expect that the relationship will be permanent
Although we see many of the same people every day, such as coworkers, 
fellow students, neighbors, and instructors, we become intimate with very 
few. In fact, most people have only a few intimate relationships at any one 
interpersonal 
relationship
A relationship between two 
people.
intimacy A sense of 
closeness, caring, and mutual 
acceptance that comes from 
sharing one’s true inner self.
success secret
Everyone is different 
because everyone is 
unique.time. Intimacy takes time to develop. It goes beyond simply knowing the 
facts about someone’s life. We may know a great deal about someone, such 
as a roommate, but not be intimate with him/her/them. For intimacy to 
develop in a relationship, both people must be open about their thoughts 
and feelings. In healthy, intimate relationships, this openness is combined 
with mutual respect for one another’s goals and boundaries.
Breadth and Depth Another characteristic of intimate relationships 
is that they have both breadth and depth. When a relationship has breadth,
the participants talk about a wide range of topics. When a relationship has 
depth, the participants talk about topics that directly concern their inner 
self. Successful intimate relationships usually have a great deal of breadth 
and depth—people discuss many subjects and reveal many of their inner 
thoughts and feelings. Casual relationships lack depth, although they may 
have breadth. Take the relationship of coworkers Mandy and Gerardo. The 
two chat in the lunchroom most days, talking about everything from their 
weekend plans to their boss’s taste in fashion. However, their conversations 
steer away from subjects such as their romantic lives and their hopes and 
dreams for the future. Although the two spend a considerable amount of 
time together, their relationship has very little intimacy.
Looking at the breadth and depth of your relationships is a good way 
to assess their level of intimacy. Use the chart in Activity 50 to examine 
your close relationships.
success secret
Intimacy requires time, 
trust, and emotional 
openness.
MANAGING YOUR ONLINE IDENTITY
With the multitude of communication mechanisms and 
sites available at our fingertips, it is critical that we 
exercise some caution and discrimination. Our sharing 
of personal opinions and activities with “friends” may 
quickly go viral and global. There may be personal 
information about you that could cause a dent in your 
professional image, perhaps jeopardizing an important 
job or career opportunity. It is easy to be misunder￾stood or misrepresented when messaging is quick, 
sometimes emotional, and may include pictures. For 
instance, on Facebook, it can be especially challeng￾ing to control the arrival of tagged photos that you 
may or may not have sanctioned.
It is important to consider the personal image or 
“brand” we want to present to world. With hundreds 
upon hundreds of social networking sites, we should 
pick and choose which ones will be most beneficial 
and productive in enhancing our success. Joining 
specific online networking sites can certainly boost 
our exposure to potential job and career opportuni￾ties. Consider conducting periodic searches for your 
name to monitor what information and images of 
you are currently on the Internet. Familiarize 
yourself with the latest tools and techniques for 
creating a positive online identity and marketing 
yourself effectively.
Think About It
Have you thought about a personal online networking 
strategy for yourself? In what ways do you think this 
would be beneficial? Go online and research “building 
your social network.” Here are a couple of links to get 
you started:
https://topdogsocialmedia.com/11-tips-create-powerful￾personal-brand-online/
https://sproutsocial.com/insights/building-social￾media-presence/
internet action394 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
ACTIVITY 50: Your Close Relationships
A Write down the names of up to six people with whom you have close relationships, and describe their 
relationship to you (e.g., wife, father, friend). Then describe what important thoughts and feelings you 
share with one another and what important thoughts and feelings you don’t share (or haven’t yet 
shared) with one another.
Name/Relationship We Share We Don’t Share
B Are you satisfied with the level of intimacy in your relationships? Why or why not?C Would you like to share more with any of the people on your list? If so, what would you want to share 
and why? If not, why not?
D Very few people reveal everything of themselves to another person. Are there any private thoughts or 
feelings that you would never share with anyone? Explain.396 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
Self-Disclosure
How does intimacy develop in a relationship? The primary way to build 
intimacy is self-disclosure. Self-disclosure is communicating your real 
thoughts, desires, and feelings. When people say that someone is “real” 
or “genuine,” they usually mean that the person is good at self-disclosure. 
Self-disclosure means letting other people see the real you. By demonstrating 
emotional openness, you show the other person that you care about the 
relationship.
Successful people reveal their true selves to others, not just what feels 
comfortable. Often, we build a wall around us, revealing only what we think 
others should see. We are too afraid to take the risk of being vulnerable. 
However, this can prevent us from realizing our full potential, and it can 
be a barrier to fulfilling relationships. Self-disclosure becomes easier with 
practice. When you show yourself as you truly are, you gain self-respect and 
the respect of others. This encourages you to self-disclose even further.
How much do other people know about you? According to a model 
known as the Johari window, shown in Figure 9.3, all the information about 
you falls into one of four categories:
• The open self represents the things that you know about yourself and that 
you have no reason to hide from other people.
• The hidden self represents the things that you know about yourself but 
that you hide from other people.
• The blind self represents the things that other people can see about you, 
but that you cannot see about yourself.
• The unknown self represents the things that no one can see about you, 
such as your unknown talents, abilities, and attitudes, as well as forgotten 
and repressed experiences and emotions.
This communication model is especially effective in improving under￾standing among individuals within a team or group or among groups. By 
disclosing information, individuals build trust among themselves (expanding 
the open self quadrant vertically). By receiving constructive feedback, they 
can also learn more about and how to better themselves (expanding the 
open self quadrant horizontally).
It is healthy to expand your open self. You can do this by self-disclosing 
and increasing your self-awareness.
Successful Intimate Relationships
Intimate relationships are such a fundamental part of our lives that we often 
take them for granted. Yet our identities, our day-to-day lives, and our emo￾tional states are all deeply dependent on these relationships. For this reason, 
you owe it to yourself to invest time and effort in your relationships.
There is no one-size-fits-all formula for good relationships. However, to 
be emotionally rewarding, an intimate relationship needs to have all three 
of the following characteristics:
self-disclosure
Communicating one’s real 
thoughts, desires, and 
feelings.
success secret
To build intimate relation￾ships, you need to reveal 
your true self.
success secret
Self-awareness is crucial 
in relationships.• sharing
• sociability
• emotional support
Sharing means self-disclosing as well as having things in common, such 
as interests and activities. It also means providing instrumental support 
when it is needed. Being sociable means having fun together and enjoying 
one another’s company. Providing emotional support means caring about 
the other person’s thoughts and feelings, showing appreciation and affection, 
and providing encouragement. This is the emotional core of a relationship. 
To provide emotional support to a friend or partner and to increase the 
amount of support you receive in return, strive to:
• be self-aware and emotionally aware
• show, and truly feel, empathy
• practice active listening
• consider the other person’s motivations and needs
• display concern, caring, and genuine interest
• provide encouragement and emotional support
• avoid hurtful behaviors such as dishonesty, selfishness, dependency, 
attempts at control, and physical or psychological abuse
success secret
The more you invest in a 
relationship, the more you 
get back.
FIGURE 9.3 The Johari Window
To Disclose or Not to Disclose The Johari window shows how we understand 
ourselves and how we interact with others. Which of these four selves do you 
think contains the most information about you? Explain.
Source: Adapted from Joseph Luft, Group Processes: An Introduction to Group Dynamics (Palo Alto, CA: National Press, 1970).
1
Open
Self
2
Blind
Self
3
Hidden
Self
4
Unknown
Self
Tell: Self-Discipline
Information
not known to others
Information
known to others
Information
known to self
Information
unknown to self
Ask: Solicit Feedback398 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
Being a supportive friend or partner takes effort and commitment, but the 
rewards dramatically outweigh the investment.
Self-Esteem and Successful Relationships Another way 
to ensure healthy relationships with others is to work on building your 
self-esteem. Why? The more confident, happy, and comfortable you feel 
with yourself, the more you’ll be able to trust your partner or good friend, 
believe in his/her/their good intentions, and believe in your ability to 
maintain a healthy, mutually beneficial long-term relationship.
People with low self-esteem often live in terror of being rejected by the 
other person in the relationship. People who expect rejection are always 
anxious that the other person secretly wants to leave the relationship. 
Faced with such anxieties, people tend to become hostile and withdrawn or 
jealous and controlling. They can also do the opposite, letting people walk 
all over them and abuse them. All of this undermines the quality of the 
relationship, making actual rejection more likely. People who are confident 
in their ability to sustain a relationship, by contrast, enjoy their relation￾ships more—which makes them stronger.
Handling Relationship Conflict
Every relationship, no matter how harmonious, occasionally faces conflict. 
Conflict is disagreement that occurs when individuals or groups clash over 
needs, values, emotions, or power. Conflict can take the form of an argument 
with a friend, a dispute with a coworker, or a quarrel with a spouse. 
Conflict often occurs when people differ in one of the following areas:
• Needs—Each of us is constantly striving to meet our needs. Conflicts 
can arise when our attempts to meet our needs are unsuccessful, and we 
perceive that someone else is to blame. Conflict can also arise when we 
ignore or dismiss our own or others’ needs.
• Values—Serious conflicts can arise when people hold opposing values, 
especially when people confuse their individual values with absolutes 
of right and wrong.
• Emotions—Conflicts often occur when people differ on an emotionally 
charged issue such as politics, education, or religion. Conflict can also 
occur when people ignore or dismiss their own or others’ emotions.
• Power—Conflicts often happen when people try to exercise power, for 
example by demanding that other people do things their way. Conflict 
can also occur when one person or group senses that another person or 
group is trying to control them.
Irritation, frustration, and anger often accompany conflict. As unpleasant 
as these emotions can be, however, conflict is a natural and normal part of 
human interaction. In fact, conflict can actually be healthy. It can lead to 
growth, innovation, and new ways of thinking. It can provide a chance to 
discuss important thoughts and feelings. How have you handled conflict in 
the past? Record your personal experiences in Personal Journal 9.4.
conflict Disagreement 
that occurs when individuals 
or groups clash over needs, 
values, emotions, or power.
success secret
Conflict can strengthen a 
relationship.Personal Journal 9.4
Dealing with Conflict
Describe three interpersonal or group conflicts that you have been involved in over the last year: one at work, 
one at school, and one at home. What caused them, and how did you handle them—or not handle them?
Are you proud of the way you handled these conflicts? If so, why? If not, what could you do better next 
time? Remember to use the ABCDE method to work through difficult situations.
Work
Cause:
How You Handled It:
School
Cause:
How You Handled It:
Home
Cause:
How You Handled It:400 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
Resolving Conflict Effective communication is the key to resolving 
conflicts. Good communication helps you resolve conflicts in a positive way, 
while poor communication prevents conflicts from being resolved and often 
makes them worse. When faced with conflict, it is important to:
• Move away from confrontation. Accept that there is a problem, then 
focus on the facts, not on blame.
• Listen actively. Try to understand the other person’s point of view. Pay 
full attention and withhold judgment.
• State your needs. Be open about your needs and remember that you and 
the other person have an equal right to have your needs met.
• Generate options for resolving the conflict. Brainstorm possible solutions 
to the conflict, then discuss how well each one would work.
• Commit to a solution. Once you choose a solution, follow through and do 
what you promised. This shows that you respect the other person’s needs 
and are serious about resolving the conflict.
By employing these strategies with openness and mutual respect, both 
parties can “win” by having at least some of their needs met. Good conflict 
resolution can not only solve the problem at hand but can also lead to 
deeper understanding in the relationship.
Respect and Success
Good relationships, like good communication, depend on respect for 
others as well as yourself. Every human being is unique, with the right to 
fulfill his/her/their potential in life. People who are successful in sports, 
business, education, or any other activity in life accept their uniqueness. 
They feel comfortable with themselves and are willing to have others know 
and accept them just as they are. They know that skin color, religion, 
birthplace, or financial status do not determine a person’s worth. People 
who are positive and empathetic naturally attract friends and supporters. 
They seldom have to stand alone.
Self Check
1. Define conformity. (p. 386)
2. What is the difference between stereotypes and prejudice? (p. 387)
3. List four sources of conflict. (p. 398)
success secret
Focus on solutions, 
not blame.communication (p. 360)
interpersonal communication 
(p. 360)
channel (p. 363)
context (p. 364)
nonverbal communication 
(p. 366)
body language (p. 370)
active listening (p. 376)
attending (p. 377)
paraphrasing (p. 378)
reflecting (p. 378)
relationship (p. 385)
group (p. 385)
conformity (p. 386)
diversity (p. 387)
stereotype (p. 387)
prejudice (p. 387)
discrimination (p. 389)
empathy (p. 389)
interpersonal relationship 
(p. 392)
intimacy (p. 392)
self-disclosure (p. 396)
conflict (p. 398)
Key Terms
Summary by Learning Objectives
• Describe the six elements of communication. The six elements are: (1) sender, the person 
who sends a message; (2) message, a thought or feeling; (3) channel, the medium; (4) receiver, 
the person who takes in the message; (5) feedback, the receiver’s response; and (6) context, the 
time and place.
•Summarize the forms and functions of nonverbal communication. The most important 
nonverbal cues are personal distance, voice, and body language. They function to manage 
conversations, provide feedback, and clarify messages.
•List several skills necessary for effective speaking and active listening. Skills 
necessary for effective speaking include using an expressive vocabulary, being clear and honest, 
welcoming feedback, and showing respect. Skills necessary for active listening are encouraging, 
attending, and responding (EAR).
•Explain the relationship among stereotypes, prejudice, and empathy. Stereotypes, 
oversimplified beliefs about a group, often lead to prejudice, a negative feeling toward that 
group. Empathy helps us overcome stereotypes and prejudice.
• Define intimacy and explain how to develop it in a relationship. Intimacy is a sense of 
closeness, caring, and mutual acceptance that comes from sharing your true inner self. Intimacy 
is built through self-disclosure.
• Cite the characteristics of satisfying intimate relationships. The three core characteristics 
of satisfying intimate relationships are sharing, being sociable, and providing emotional 
support.
•Explain how to handle conflict effectively. To handle conflict, focus on facts, brainstorm 
possible solutions, and discuss how well each one meets both your needs. Commit to a solution 
and follow through on it.
Chapter 9 Review and Activities402 Chapter 9 Communication and Relationships
Review and Activities
Review Questions
1. How can emotions cause communication breakdown?
2. What is cultural awareness?
3. Give three examples of nonverbal communication and explain what they mean.
4. Define paraphrasing and reflecting.
5. Why are positive stereotypes harmful?
6. What is self-disclosure, and why is it important?
Critical Thinking
7. Rapport Building Rapport is about making a two-way connection with other people and is 
the foundation for any relationship. The ability to build rapport comes naturally to some 
people, while others really need to work at it. It requires having empathy, using good listening 
skills, and paying attention to body language. Think about your relationships; how easy was/
is it for you to build rapport? How did you do it? What are some ways you can become more 
effective in building rapport with new people you meet?
8. Vocabulary Building People who read extensively and have large vocabularies are generally 
considered to be more intelligent, and usually have higher career success. What do you think 
explains this? In what ways could the high-tech world of sound bites and texting have a detri￾mental impact on vocabulary building? What impact could the pervasive use of the short 
acronyms from “text language” have on our ability to think, write, and speak intelligently?
Application
9. Nonverbal Communication Take thirty minutes out of your day to observe people in a 
public place, like a mall or park. What do you notice about their nonverbal communication? 
Make a list of their different facial expressions and gestures and what you think they mean. 
Now find and watch a short video clip of a professional speaker. Notice the nonverbal 
gestures while giving a presentation. Write down your observations. How did the gestures 
enhance the communication of the message?
10. Relationship Qualities Ask six people who you consider to have different opinions than 
you to complete the following statements: “A true friend .” and “My ideal 
romantic partner .” Ask all of the respondents to explain why they completed 
the sentences the way they did. Compare your results with a classmate’s. Did you receive 
similar responses? How did they answer differently? Prepare your notes for a discussion.Review and Activities
Internet Activities
11. Multigenerational Communication At this point in time, we have four major generations 
living, working, and interacting with one another. This creates challenges not only in familial 
relationships but also in our work environments. Even our personal relationships can be 
impacted by the differences in values, beliefs, and behaviors, which make communication 
challenging. Conduct some online research to identify the various generations and obtain an 
understanding of their characteristics. What communication challenges have you experi￾enced in your own life as a result of generational differences? What strategies do you think 
would be helpful in improving communication and collaboration between the generations? 
Conduct an online search for information on generational differences. Here are some readings 
to help you get started:
http://www.fdu.edu/newspubs/magazine/05ws/generations.htm
https://www.staffmanagement.com/blog-multigenerational-workforce-communication-styles/
http://www.wmfc.org/uploads/GenerationalDifferencesChart.pdf
12. Your Communication Style and Skills Each of us is born with certain personality traits, 
many of which play a major role in the way we communicate. We are also influenced by our 
childhood upbringing and experiences, which determine certain communication behaviors. 
Each of us has developed a communication style that we may choose to enhance or change. 
As you’ve learned in this course, there are specific skills you can develop to significantly 
improve your communications. Visit the following sites to take some quizzes that will give 
you insight on your specific communication style and skills:
https://www.proprofs.com/quiz-school/topic/communication
https://www.queendom.com/tests/take_test.php?idRegTest=2288
Review your answer to the question in the Career Path Story on 
page 358. Think about how you would answer the question now 
that you have learned more about respectful communication and 
managing conflict.
Complete the Story Taking the place of a helpful coworker, 
write an e-mail to Erik explaining how he can use assertive com￾munication, “I” statements, and conflict-resolution strategies to 
improve his relationship with his boss.
“How Do I Talk to My Supervisor?” Career 
Path Story
Sam Edwards/age fotostock404 Glossary
Glossary
ABC model A model of human behavior in 
which an activating event (A) triggers an 
irrational belief (B), which then triggers negative 
behavioral consequences (C).
ABCDE method An approach to coping with 
negative thoughts and feelings by disputing 
irrational beliefs.
accomplishment Anything completed through 
effort, skill, or persistence.
accuracy Factual truth.
activating event In the ABC model, a negative 
event that triggers an irrational, self-destructive 
belief.
active listening Listening with understanding 
and paying close attention to what is being said.
adapting Being flexible to change.
aerobic exercise Sustained, rhythmic physical 
activity that causes a temporary increase in heart 
and breathing rate.
affirmation A positive self-statement that helps 
a person think of themself in a positive, caring, 
and accepting way.
aggression Behavior intended to harm or injure 
a person or object.
all-or-nothing thinking A cognitive distortion in 
which people view issues as black or white, with 
no shades of gray in between.
anaerobic exercise High-intensity exercise that 
strengthens muscles and involves short bursts of 
intense exertion.
anger A strong feeling of displeasure, 
resentment, or hostility.
antibodies Proteins produced by the immune 
system to fight disease.
anxiety A generalized feeling of worry and 
nervousness that does not have any specific 
cause.
assertiveness Standing up for one’s rights 
without threatening the self-esteem of the other 
person.
attending Being focused, alert, and open to 
receiving information.
attitude A belief or opinion that predisposes 
people to act in a certain way.
autonomic nervous system (ANS) The part of 
the nervous system that monitors and controls 
most involuntary functions, including heartbeat 
and sweating.
autonomy Freedom of choice, independence, 
and the chance to exercise independent 
judgment.
avoidance An unwillingness to face 
uncomfortable situations or psychological 
realities.
behavior Anything that people think, feel, or do.
belongingness Fulfilling relationships with 
others.
biofeedback A treatment technique that uses 
electronic instruments to measure and display 
information about a patient’s bodily processes 
(such as heartbeat) in order to help the patient 
gain greater control over them.
blind self In the Johari window, information 
that other people can see about a person, but 
that the person cannot see about themself.collective identity The sum of the social roles 
an individual plays and the social groups to 
which he/she/they belongs.
collectivism A philosophy that values group 
goals over individual goals and defines a person’s 
identity more through group identifications than 
through personal attributes.
comfort zone The place in the mind where a 
person feels safe and knows that he/she/they can 
succeed.
committed time Time devoted to school, work, 
family, volunteering, and other activities that 
relate to short-term and long-term goals.
communication The process of giving or 
exchanging messages.
competence The ability to do something well.
complaint The sharing of distress, discomfort, 
or worry with another person.
conditional positive regard Love and acceptance 
of a person, particularly a child, on the condition 
that he/she/they behave in a certain way.
conflict Disagreement that occurs when 
individuals or groups clash over needs, values, 
emotions, or power.
conformity A change in behavior caused by a 
desire to follow the norms of a group.
conscious mind The part of the brain that con￾trols the mental processes of which one is aware.
consciousness Awareness of the sensations, 
thoughts, and feelings one is experiencing at a 
given moment.
consensus Agreement by most, but not all, 
members of a group.
body image How a person thinks and feels 
about his/her/their body and appearance.
body language Facial expressions, posture, and 
gestures.
brain computer interface (BCI) The linking of 
the human brain to computers and smart devices 
to perform certain functions by thoughts.
brain rewiring The creation of new neural path￾ways in the brain by repetition of certain thoughts 
to facilitate healing and formation of healthy habits.
breadth 1. In critical thinking, the degree to 
which a statement considers other arguments 
and points of view. 2. In relationships, the num￾ber of topics one discusses with another person.
budget A money-management plan that 
specifies how a person will spend his/her/their 
money during a particular period.
catastrophizing Dramatically exaggerating the 
negative consequences of any minor event.
channel The medium in which a message is 
delivered.
clinical psychologist A psychologist who 
diagnoses and treats individuals with emotional 
disturbances.
closed question A question worded in a way 
that elicits only a one- or two-word answer.
cognition Mental processing of information in 
any form.
cognitive distortion A self-critical, illogical 
pattern of thought.
cognitive therapy A technique of psychotherapy 
based on the idea that the way we think affects 
how we feel.406 Glossary
decision A reasoned choice among several 
options, or possible courses of action.
decision-making process A logical series of 
steps to identify and evaluate options and arrive 
at a good choice.
deindividuation A state of reduced inhibition 
and self-awareness that can lead group members 
to do things they would never do alone.
denial Refusing to face painful thoughts and 
feelings.
depression An illness characterized by profound 
feelings of sadness, hopelessness, and helplessness.
depth 1. In critical thinking, the degree to 
which a statement digs below the surface to 
consider the substance of the issue. 2. In 
relationships, the importance and self-relevance 
of the topics one discusses with another person.
desire A conscious drive to attain a satisfying 
goal.
despair An unpleasant feeling of hopelessness 
and defeat.
destructive criticism Criticism that addresses a 
person’s attitude or some other aspect themself 
instead of focusing on specific behavior.
discretionary expenses Lifestyle expenses that 
are rewarding but not strictly necessary.
discretionary time Time that can be used 
however one wishes.
discrimination The act of treating a person or 
group differently based on a characteristic.
disgust A negative feeling of aversion or 
repulsion toward someone or something.
consequences The logical effects of an action.
constructive criticism Criticism that focuses on 
specific behavior and that usually mentions 
positive points and offers suggestions for 
improvement.
context The time and place of communication.
coping Facing up to threatening situations.
coping skills Behaviors that help a person deal 
with stress and other unpleasant situations.
cortisol A steroid hormone that regulates 
metabolism and blood pressure and that is 
released into the bloodstream during times 
of stress.
credit A sum of money a person can use before 
having to pay back the lender.
credit record A log of the financial habits of a 
person who buys on credit.
critical thinking Active, self-reflective 
thinking.
criticism Any remark that contains a judgment, 
evaluation, or statement of fault.
cultural awareness Ability to recognize the 
ways in which cultures differ and how these 
differences affect cross-cultural interactions.
culture The behaviors, ideas, attitudes, and 
traditions shared by a large social group and 
transmitted from one generation to the next.
debit card A plastic bank card that can be used 
both as an ATM card and as a credit card.
debt 1. Money owed to a lender. 2. The state of 
owing money to a lender.escape response A behavior that helps you get 
your mind off your troubles.
esteem 1. (v.) To appreciate the value or worth 
of a person or thing. 2. (n.) Appreciation and 
high regard.
ethics The principles one uses to define 
acceptable behavior and decide what is right and 
wrong.
eustress Stress caused by positive events that 
provides a surge of energy.
external obstacle A barrier caused by factors in 
the outside world, such as a person or an event.
extrinsic External.
extrinsic goals Goals related to looking good to 
others, earning a reward, or avoiding negative 
consequences.
extrinsic motivation Motivation that comes 
from outside.
facial expressions A type of body language 
involving movements of the mouth, the eyebrows 
and forehead, and the eyes.
failure An unwanted outcome.
fear An unpleasant feeling of anxiety caused by 
the anticipation of danger.
feedback In communication, the receiver’s 
response to the sender’s message.
filtering A cognitive distortion in which people 
block positive inputs and focus on negative ones.
finance charges Fees that are charged by 
lenders, usually based on the amount of money 
owed.
dispute To confront irrational beliefs with the 
reality of the situation.
distress Stress caused by negative events that 
produces negative physical and emotional effects.
diversity Variety.
downward comparison A type of social 
comparison that involves comparing oneself to 
people who are less successful in a certain area.
dream An aspiration, hope, or vision of the 
future that gives one’s life direction.
80/20 rule The theory that the relationship 
between input and output, or effort and results, 
is not balanced.
embarrassment An unpleasant feeling that 
occurs when a person believes that others have 
found a flaw in him/her/them.
emotion A subjective feeling that is accompanied 
by physical and behavioral changes.
emotional awareness The process of recognizing, 
identifying, and accepting one’s emotions.
emotional reasoning A cognitive distortion in 
which people believe that whatever they feel is 
true must really be true.
emotional support The giving of trust, empathy, 
care, love, concern, and unconditional approval.
empathy Awareness of and sensitivity to the 
feelings, thoughts, and experiences of others.
encouraging An active listening skill that 
involves showing a desire to listen.
endorphins Proteins in the brain that act as 
natural painkillers.408 Glossary
hassles Small, stress-causing annoyances of 
everyday life.
helpless thinking A cognitive distortion in 
which people believe that their lives are not 
under their control.
hidden self In the Johari window, information 
that a person knows about themself but that he/
she/they hides from other people.
hierarchy of needs A diagram of the five central 
human needs arranged from the most basic to 
the most complex.
“I” statement A statement about a problem 
that begins with the word I and that 
communicates feelings without blaming the 
other person for the problem.
ideal self The person one wants to be or feels 
he/she/they ought to be.
identity How a person chooses to define 
themself to the world.
important Relating to one’s personal or work 
goals.
imposter syndrome When a person is not able to 
recognize or believe that he/she/they is deserving 
of what he/she/they has achieved or received.
impulse A sudden wish or feeling that can lead 
to unplanned and unwise actions.
impulse buying Spending money on the spur of 
the moment, without planning.
incentive A reward offered in order to motivate 
a person to do something.
income All the money a person receives during 
a fixed period of time.
finances Monetary resources.
fixed committed expenses Necessary expenses 
that are the same from month to month.
framing effect The decision-making bias that 
results from the way a decision, question, or 
problem is worded.
gender The set of characteristics traditionally 
used to define male and female.
gender bias When someone is treated 
differently or unfairly due to one’s gender.
gender identity How one identifies oneself 
(male or female, a blend of male and female, or 
neither male nor female).
gender role A set of norms that define how 
males and females are supposed to behave.
gestures A type of body language involving 
movements of the arms, hands, legs, and feet.
goal An outcome that a person wants to 
achieve and toward which he/she/they directs 
focused effort.
group A set of people (usually three or more) 
who influence one another.
groupthink A type of simplistic thinking used 
by group members when they are more 
concerned with maintaining a clubby 
atmosphere than with thinking critically.
guilt A negative feeling that occurs when a 
person believes that his/her/their actions have 
harmed someone else.
habit A behavior that has become automatic 
through repetition.
happiness A state of well-being that comes 
from having a positive evaluation of one’s life.irrational belief A distorted, self-destructive 
idea or assumption that interferes with one’s 
thinking.
job-specific skill The ability to do a specific task 
or job.
Johari window A model of self-awareness and 
self-disclosure that shows the proportion of 
information about a person that he/she/they is 
aware of and that other people are aware of.
joy A feeling of happiness one experiences 
following achievement of a goal.
judgmentalism The habit of condemning 
people or things because they are not the way 
one thinks they should be.
knowledge An understanding of facts or 
principles in a particular subject area.
label A simplistic statement that people use to 
define who they are.
life coach A professional motivator who helps 
clients identify their goals and make the changes 
necessary to lead a more rewarding life.
logic The process of reasoning correctly and 
drawing the correct conclusions from the facts.
logos Science, study; one of the two Greek 
roots of the word psychology.
loneliness Sadness about being alone.
long-term consequences The distant, often 
unpredictable results of an action.
long-term goal A goal one plans to achieve in 
the more distant future.
love A feeling of affection, devotion, or 
attachment toward someone.
individual identity The physical and 
psychological characteristics that distinguish an 
individual.
individualism A philosophy that values 
individual goals over group goals and defines 
identity more through personal attributes than 
through group identifications.
inner critic The critical voice that bombards 
people with constant negative self-talk.
instrumental support The giving of resources such 
as money, labor, time, advice, and information.
intelligence A set of abilities that enables a 
person to solve certain types of real-world 
problems.
interests Personal preferences for specific 
topics or activities.
internal obstacle A barrier caused by factors 
within oneself, such as perfectionism or low 
motivation.
interpersonal communication One-on-one, 
usually face-to-face communication.
interpersonal relationship A relationship 
between two people.
intimacy A sense of closeness, caring, and 
mutual acceptance that comes from sharing 
one’s true inner self.
intrinsic Internal.
intrinsic goals Goals related to things that a 
person enjoys and that will help him/her/them 
grow as a person.
intrinsic motivation Motivation that comes 
from inside.410 Glossary
nervous system A system of nerve cells that 
regulates behavior by transmitting messages back 
and forth between the brain and the other parts 
of the body.
neurons Cells in the nervous system that trans￾mit messages via chemical and electric signals.
neuroscience The science that advances the 
understanding of human thought, emotion, and 
behavior.
nonverbal communication The process of giving 
or exchanging messages without words.
norms Standards or rules that define 
appropriate and inappropriate behavior in 
specific social positions and settings.
obstacle Any barrier that prevents a person 
from achieving his/her/their goals.
open question A question worded in a way that 
allows a broad range of responses.
open self In the Johari window, information 
that a person knows about themself and that he/
she/they has no reason to hide from other people.
optimism The tendency to expect the best 
possible outcome.
overgeneralizing Drawing broad negative 
conclusions based on limited evidence.
paraphrasing Restating the factual content of 
the message.
parasympathetic nervous system The part of the 
autonomic nervous system that calms the body 
after a stressful emergency situation.
passive-aggression Indirect, disguised 
aggression toward others.
magical thinking Believing that one’s thoughts 
control events.
maintenance time Time devoted to maintaining, 
or taking care of, oneself and one’s surroundings.
meditation The practice of calming and 
emptying the mind by focusing on one particular 
element, such as a sound, a word, an image, or 
one’s breathing.
message An expression of thought or feeling; 
the content of communication.
mind reading A cognitive distortion in which 
people think bad thoughts about themselves and 
therefore assume that everyone else is doing the 
same.
mistake Anything a person did in the past that 
he/she/they now wishes he/she/they had done 
differently.
money A convenient medium of exchange used 
to pay for goods and services.
money management The intelligent use of 
money to achieve one’s goals.
motivation The force that moves a person to 
action.
need Something a person must have in order 
to survive and thrive.
negative escape response An escape response 
that makes a person feel better temporarily but 
that eventually makes the problem worse.
negative motivation The drive to do something 
in order to avoid negative consequences.
negative thinking Focusing on the flaws and 
problems in oneself, other people, and the world.precision Exactness.
prejudice A negative feeling or attitude toward 
a group that is based on oversimplified beliefs 
about that group.
pride A positive feeling that occurs when a 
person achieves a personal success.
prioritize To arrange in order of importance.
private self-awareness The tendency to be 
aware of the private, inward aspects of yourself.
private self-consciousness The tendency to be 
aware of the private, inward aspects of oneself.
probing Asking for specifics from a person who 
has given a general or vague criticism.
procrastination The habit of putting off tasks 
until the last minute.
progressive muscle relaxation A stress-relief 
technique that involves tensing and relaxing 
muscle groups in sequence in order to reduce 
tension.
psyche Mind; one of the two Greek roots of the 
word psychology.
psychologist A person who studies human 
behavior with the goal of describing, predicting, 
explaining, and (in some cases) changing it.
psychology The scientific study of human 
behavior.
public self-awareness The tendency to be aware 
of the outward, social aspects of yourself.
public self-consciousness The tendency to be 
aware of the aspects of oneself that are on 
display in social situations.
perfectionism The belief that a person is 
worthwhile only if he/she/they is perfect.
persistence The ability to go on despite 
opposition, setbacks, and occasional doubts.
personal digital assistant (PDA) A small wire￾less electronic device that provides basic record￾keeping tools, such as a to-do list and schedule.
personality The relatively stable pattern of 
behavior that distinguishes one person from all 
other people.
personalizing Assuming that everything has to 
do with oneself somehow.
pessimism The tendency to expect the worst 
possible outcome.
placebo effect A beneficial effect, produced by 
a placebo drug or treatment, that cannot be 
attributed to the properties of the placebo itself, 
and must therefore be due to the patient’s belief 
in that treatment.
positive escape response An escape response 
that makes a person feel better and does not 
make the problem worse.
positive motivation The drive to do something 
because it will move you toward a goal.
positive stereotype Positive but oversimplified 
beliefs about the attributes of a group and its 
members.
positive thinking Focusing on what is good 
about oneself, other people, and the world.
possible selves The person or persons we might 
realistically become in the future.
posture A type of body language that involves 
the way a person carries themself when sitting or 
standing.412 Glossary
selective listening The process of choosing 
what one wants to hear and ignoring the rest.
self The sense of being a unique, conscious being.
self-acceptance Recognition and acceptance of 
what is true about oneself.
self-actualization Reaching one’s full potential 
and achieving long-term personal growth.
self-awareness The process of paying attention 
to oneself.
self-blame A cognitive distortion in which 
people blame everything on themselves, 
regardless of the real cause.
self-consciousness The tendency to frequently 
think about and observe oneself.
self-defeating attitude A negative attitude about 
oneself that leads to failure.
self-determination Determining the path one’s 
life travels.
self-direction The ability to set a well-defined 
goal and work toward it.
self-discipline The process of teaching oneself 
to do what is necessary to reach important goals, 
without becoming sidetracked by bad habits.
self-disclosure Communicating one’s real 
thoughts, desires, and feelings.
self-esteem Confidence in and respect for oneself.
self-expectancy A person’s belief that he/she/they 
is able to achieve what he/she/they wants in life.
self-handicapping Creating obstacles to one’s 
own success in order to have a handy excuse for 
doing poorly.
rational emotive behavior therapy (REBT) An 
approach to coping with problems that focuses 
on uncovering people’s irrational beliefs and 
transforming them into rational, helpful ones.
receiver In communication, the person who 
takes in, or receives, a message.
recreational shopping The use of shopping, 
especially in malls, as a form of entertainment.
reflecting Restating the emotional content 
of the message.
regret The feeling of wishing one had decided 
something differently.
relational identity How an individual identifies 
themself in relation to important others.
relationship A meaningful connection with 
another human being.
resource Something that is ready for use and 
can be drawn upon as needed.
responding An active listening skill that 
involves giving constructive feedback.
responsibility The ability to make independent, 
proactive decisions and to accept the 
consequences of them.
Reticular Activating System The RAS is the part 
of your brain that serves as a filter between your 
conscious mind and your subconscious mind.
role model A person who has the qualities one 
would like to have.
sadness A somber emotion of sorrow over a 
loss.
schedule A chart showing dates and times by 
which tasks must be completed.social support Words and actions from other 
people that help a person feel valued, cared for, 
and connected to a community.
stereotype A set of oversimplified beliefs about 
the attributes of a group and its members.
stress A physical and psychological reaction to 
the demands of life.
stressor Anything that causes stress.
subconscious mind The part of the brain that 
controls the mental processes of which one is 
not actively aware.
success Lifetime fulfillment that comes from 
creating a sense of meaning in one’s work and 
personal life.
sympathetic nervous system The part of the 
autonomic nervous system that prepares the 
body for stressful emergency situations.
t’ai chi An ancient Chinese martial art that 
increases balance and concentration through 
gentle, flowing movements and deep breathing 
exercises.
taboo A cultural prohibition on saying, 
touching, or doing a certain thing.
time management The planned, efficient use 
of time.
to-do list A personal checklist of tasks and 
activities that need to be completed over the 
course of a certain period, such as a week.
trait A disposition to behave in a certain way, 
regardless of the situation.
transferable skill An ability that can be used in 
a variety of tasks and jobs.
self-honesty The ability to see one’s own 
strengths and weaknesses clearly.
self-hypnosis The practice of entering a state 
of reduced consciousness in order to make the 
subconscious mind receptive to positive 
messages.
self-image All the beliefs a person has about 
themself.
self-presentation Altering one’s behavior to 
make a good impression on others.
self-talk What people say or think to 
themselves about themselves.
sender In communication, the person who 
translates a thought or feeling into a message 
and then sends that message to another person.
sex The biological category of male or female.
shame A negative feeling that occurs following 
a personal failure.
short-term consequences The immediate, often 
predictable results of an action.
short-term goal A goal with a specific plan of 
action to accomplish within the coming year.
shyness Anxiety in social situations that comes 
from worrying about what others will think of 
oneself.
skill The ability to do something specific as a 
result of learning and practice.
social comparison The practice of comparing one’s 
traits and accomplishments with those of others.
social role A set of norms that defines how 
people are supposed to behave in a given social 
position or setting.414 Glossary
variable committed expenses Necessary 
expenses that vary from month to month.
vicious cycle A chain of events in which one 
negative event causes another negative event.
virtual reality An artificial environment that is 
created with software and presented to the user 
in such a way that the user suspends belief and 
accepts it as a real environment.
visualization The process of creating detailed 
mental pictures of the behaviors one wishes to 
carry out.
want Something a person can survive and 
thrive without.
worry Distress and anxiety caused by 
contemplating worst-case scenarios.
yoga A spiritual and physical practice that 
involves stretches, breathing exercises, 
relaxation, and sometimes meditation.
“you” statement A statement about a problem 
that begins with the word you and accuses the 
other person of causing the problem.
trigger A person or situation that provokes 
anger.
uncertainty Not knowing what the 
consequences of a decision will be for oneself 
and others.
unconditional positive regard Love and 
acceptance of a person, particularly a child, 
regardless of his/her/their particular behavior.
unknown self In the Johari window, 
information that no one can see about a person, 
such as his/her/their unknown talents, abilities, 
and attitudes, as well as forgotten and repressed 
experiences and emotions.
uplifts Small, positive moments and activities 
of everyday life that help relieve stress.
upward comparison A type of social 
comparison that involves comparing oneself to 
people who are more successful in a certain area.
urgent Calling for immediate action.
values The beliefs and principles that one 
chooses to live by.Author’s Key Points Summary
The psychology of success means something different for each individual. The common denominator 
seems to be rooted more in positive beliefs and attitudes than in material achievements, although 
both are important. There is an old saying that is still true today: “Things turn out best for the people 
who make the best of the way things turn out.” How we cope with adversity and the roller coaster of 
daily challenges is a critical factor in our fulfillment.
What a person really needs in life is not a tension-free state, but rather the striving and struggling 
for a goal that he/she/they deem worthy. Successful individuals have learned how to concentrate on 
the desired results, rather than possible problems; and also to dwell on the rewards of success, 
instead of the penalties of failure. Making good use of our minds, skills, and talents will bring 
positive rewards in our outer lives. Assuming the personal responsibility to make the best use of our 
talents and time will result in an enormous gain in happiness, success, health, and financial security. 
This is true of everyone. The truly successful leaders, those who have achieved financial indepen￾dence, time freedom, or accomplished great deeds for society, are those who have taken personal 
responsibility to heart and to soul. In the end, we ourselves—far more than any outsider—are the 
people with the greatest ability to steal our own time, talents, and accomplishments.
Years of study and some painful personal experiences have convinced us that fear of the costs of 
success are among the reasons people resist change. For success does have its price, including:
• Taking responsibility for giving up bad habits and invalid assumptions.
• Taking responsibility for setting an example in our own lives. Distancing ourselves from a peer 
group that isn’t helping us succeed, which tends to hold us back.
• Leading ourselves and others down a new and unfamiliar path. Working more to reach a goal and 
being willing to delay gratifications along the way.
• Being willing to face criticism and jealousy from people who would like to keep us stuck in place 
with them.
These are among the perceived costs of success that prompt people to escape from the present 
by occupying their minds with past memories or future expectations. Leaders, by contrast, are not 
dismayed by the costs of success. They get started and build positive momentum. Determined to 
pursue their potential, they look forward to an endless dialogue between their talents and the 
claims of life. Just as companies must dissolve their boundaries and erase their hierarchies, so 
must you, the individual, reinvent yourself to meet the knowledge era’s changing demands. What 
this means is that you are your own chief executive officer. Start thinking of yourself as a service 
company with a single employee. Act as your own CEO who must have the vision to set your 
goals and allocate your resources. Because your primary concern is ensuring your viability in the 
marketplace, you must think strategically in every decision. This mindset of being responsible for 
your own future used to be crucial only to the self-employed, but it has become essential for us all. 
For today’s typical workers are no longer one-career people. Most will have several careers in their 
lifetimes.
Although you must become your own life’s CEO and always act as if you were a company of 
one, being a team leader is equally important for your future. It’s no longer possible to achieve 
alone in our world of accelerating change, where the new global village has become the local neigh￾borhood. Rather than become dependent on others, however, we should become interdependent,416 Key Points
treating everyone we meet as a potential customer or partner, someone with whom we may develop 
a strategic alliance in the future. Leaders empower others and build trusting relationships. They 
specialize in truly effective communications, taking one hundred percent of the responsibility not 
only for sending information or telling, but also for receiving information or listening for the real 
meaning from every person they contact. Leaders know that paying value to others is the greatest 
communication skill of all.
Although many things in life are beyond our control, you and I do have a great deal of control—
more than most of us are willing to acknowledge—over many circumstances and conditions.
To achieve emotional security, each of us must develop two critical abilities: the ability to live 
with change and uncertainty, and the ability to delay immediate gratification for the sake of long￾range goals. We can make more appropriate choices in life by practicing the simple urgings in these 
famous words from philosopher Rheinhold Niebuhr: “Please grant me the serenity to accept the 
things I cannot change, the courage to change the things I can, and the wisdom to know the differ￾ence.” This means that I Accept the Unchangeable, which is everything that has already happened. 
That is history and cannot be changed. So I harbor my pleasant memories and gain perspective from 
the problems in my past. My only control is to Change the Changeable, which is my response to what 
has happened and my decisions in this present moment in time. The more I view mistakes as simply 
learning experiences, I can control my future decisions and rewire my brain to look at failure as the 
fertilizer of future success. The more I dwell on my joyful and happy experiences, I can remain 
grateful for all my blessings during difficult times.
To succeed in life, you must continually motivate yourself toward your goals. And you must be 
willing to do this yourself. Be willing to say to yourself, “I’m on the right road. I’m doing OK. I’m 
succeeding.” We too frequently become adept at identifying our flaws and failures. Become 
equally adept at recognizing your achievements. What are you doing now that you weren’t doing 
one month ago, six months ago, a year ago? What habits have changed? Chart your progress. 
Doing well once or twice is relatively easy. Real winning is constantly moving ahead. Consistent 
success is tough, in part, because it is so easy to revert to old habits and former lifestyles. Over 
the long run, you need to give yourself regular feedback and monitor your performance. Reinforce 
yourself positively to stay on track. Don’t wait for an award ceremony, promotion, friend, or 
mentor to show appreciation for your work. Do it yourself! Do it now. Take pride in your own 
efforts on a daily basis.
Here are a few action reminders to keep the inner fires of desire burning intensely within:
• Carry this affirmative motto with you: My rewards in life will reflect my service and contribution.
• Set your own standards rather than comparing yourself to others. Successful people know they 
must compete with themselves, not with others. They run their own races.
• Let your teammates, subordinates, and children make mistakes without fear of punishment 
or rejection. Show them that mistakes are learning devices that become stepping stones to 
success.
• Break your daily and weekly routine. Get out of your comfortable rut. Avoid logging into your 
streaming services for a week. Try refraining from texts and tweets for a few days. Take a different 
route or different mode of transportation to work. Have lunch with people in totally different 
industries and read publications in totally different fields than your current one.• In your daily speech, make a conscious effort to replace “I can’t,” with “I can,” and “I’ll try,” 
with “I will!” You’ll find that “I can,” applies to about ninety-five percent of the challenges you 
encounter every day. These simple semantic changes will establish your new positive attitude, 
dwelling on things you can do and will do.
• Remember: “We become what we think about.” Focus all your attention and energy on the 
achievement of the objectives you are involved in right now.
• Forget about the consequences of failure. Failure is only a temporary change of direction to set 
you straight for your next success. The person interested in success has to learn to view failure as 
a healthy, inevitable part of the process of getting to the top.
• So make a pact with yourself. We suggest you write an agreement with yourself. Promise that you 
won’t allow a failure to be more than a learning experience that allows you to move more quickly 
to the place you want to be.
• To stay self-motivated, keep your self-talk affirmative. Whether you’re at work, at home, or on the 
tennis court, your subconscious is recording every word. Instead of “should have” say “will do.” 
Instead of “if only” say “next time.” Instead of “Yes, but” say “Why not?” Instead of “problem” 
say “opportunity.” Instead of “difficult” say “challenging.” Instead of “I’ll try” say “I will.” Instead 
of “could have” say “My goal.” Instead of “Someday” say “Today.”
• Forget perfection. Accept the flaws in yourself, and consider them challenges and learning 
experiences. They are seeds you can grow.
• Declare a moratorium on negatives—negative thoughts, negative people, negative forms of 
entertainment.
• Whatever you do, never allow your goals and their benefits get lost in the back of your subcon￾scious. Bring them out in the sunlight and shine them every day—and there’s no way you can fail. 
A fear is a goal in reverse. Dwell on the problem and it grows. Dwell on finding a solution and the 
mind moves toward that dominant thought. Your expectation is what drives your motivation. 
What you visualize and internalize, will materialize.
• Set up a dynamic daily routine. Getting into a positive routine or groove, instead of a negative rut, 
will help you become more effective. Why is the subway the most energy efficient means of trans￾portation? Because it runs on a track. Think of the order in your day, instead of the routine. Don’t 
worry about sameness, neatness, or everything exactly in its place. Order is being able to do what 
you really choose and not taking on more than you can manage. Order frees you up. Get into the 
swing of a healthy, daily routine and discover how much more control you’ll gain in your life.
No matter what you, personally, have been through; no matter how cynical the world view of 
some people you meet, based upon all the enormous problems and calamities being experienced by 
all living things on this fragile planet; no matter that bad news dominates social media feeds; rather 
than darkness, choose to see the light. Rather than dwell on what is wrong in your family, your 
neighborhood, your state, your nation, and the world, be part of the solution. Get out of the arena 
seats and step into the game. Focus your thoughts on desired results, rewards of success, and images 
of health and achievement. Think abundance, instead of scarcity. Your universe dwells between your 
left and right ear in that unlimited source of inspiration. Your brain. Your control center.
Your perceptions are your realities. Whether you are aware of it or not, your world is actually a 
virtual world based upon first- and second-hand experiences, beliefs, prejudices, misconceptions, 418 Key Points
facts, fads, fallacies, and timeless truth. Remember what neuroscience is teaching us. People’s 
decisions are first influenced by emotional triggers, and then by logic. Emotions dominate the 
decision-making process. People have far less access to their own mental activities than perceived. 
About ninety-five percent of thinking is an unconscious, habitual process. People’s memories do not 
accurately represent their experiences. People’s memories are constantly changing without their 
awareness. Instead of a social media photo album, memory is more like a constantly edited music 
video, full of fragments, real and imagined. As you are remembering something, your brain is in the 
process of “rewiring” the connections between neurons, which is actually changing the structure of 
your brain. The ability to rewire your brain to generate success and health-related pathways is at the 
forefront of individual and team peak performance.
Neuroscience and Leadership
According to the World Economic Forum, the most in-demand skills—in 2020 and beyond—will be 
complex problem solving, critical thinking, creativity, judgment and decision making, and cognitive 
flexibility. The need for individuals to develop higher levels of “learning agility”—the ability to adapt, 
adjust, learn new information, and unlearn old behaviors quickly, will be crucial for organizational 
competitiveness, progress, and survival.
The field of neuroscience is making its way into the curricula of top business schools. MIT’s 
Sloan School of Management offers a two-day Neuroscience for Leadership course, and Columbia 
Business School’s enrollment in its three-day “Neuroleadership” executive course has increased by 
fifty percent over the past two years.
University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton School of business is offering a new Executive Education 
program, “Leveraging Neuroscience for Business Impact,” covering the latest research in engagement, 
motivation, creativity, decision making, consumer preferences, leadership, and team building. 
It is grounded in the “cutting-edge work of the Wharton Neuroscience Initiative” and is based on 
Wharton’s Introduction to Brain Science for Business MBA course.
The NeuroLeadership Institute, a leading global research organization and pioneer in the neuro￾science of leadership, has been working with several organizations, including Microsoft, Cigna, and 
Eli Lilly, to help “reinvent” their performance management systems, using the latest thinking in 
neuroscience.
Neuroscience in Health and the Future
We are at the dawn of a new era in neuroscience as it applies to our health and well-being. Much 
has been discussed about the potential for virtual reality to transform the economy by revitalizing 
consumer entertainment, social media, shopping, education, and travel. As you read this message, 
thousands of scientists and professionals are securing new patents, and sifting through existing ones, 
to uncover the most innovative brain health and brain enhancement systems, likely to go mainstream 
in the next few years.
Very soon you will become aware of how virtual reality and neuroscience are making incredible 
strides in pain management, physical rehabilitation, and treatment of anxiety disorders, such as 
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and phobias, such as fear of flying, fear of spiders, fear of heights, fear of needles, fear of public speaking, and fear of small spaces. A number of companies 
are engaged in the field of real-time neuro-monitoring, developing systems to monitor brain activity 
and respond in real-time with preemptive treatments. Do you understand the potential? With a 
monitoring or a wearable device, it will become possible to anticipate a seizure, a possible stroke, 
and, at some point, a possible heart attack in advance of the event. In other words, prevention is on 
the near horizon.
And, yes, science fiction has become science fact, in the emerging field of brain computer 
interfaces (BCI’s) that link the commands of our thoughts to many electronic devices including, 
but not limited to, smartphones, home appliances, biofeedback equipment, and security systems. 
Futurists have believed that thoughts would not just create material things, such as ships, aircraft, 
spacecraft, buildings, computers, smartphones, global communications, robots, drones, and 
self-driving vehicles. They knew that thoughts would be able to guide and control our material 
inventions for the benefit of all living things.
Einstein was right. Imagination is more important than knowledge, for knowledge is limited to 
all we now know and understand, whereas imagination embraces the entire world, and all there ever 
will be to know and understand.
When imagination is focused on the creation of life-enhancing thoughts, dreams, emotions, and 
goals, it becomes The Psychology of Success.
Thank you for sharing. 
Denis Waitley420 Further Reading
Further Reading
Alder, Ronald B., and Proctor, Russell F. 
Looking Out, Looking In . 15th ed. New York: 
Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 2017.
Allen, David. Getting Things Done: The Art of 
Stress-Free Productivity. New York: Penguin, 
2015.
Altman, Kerry Paul. The Wisdom of the Five 
Messengers: Learning to Follow the Guidance of 
Feelings. Baltimore: Sidran, 2007.
Bassham, Gregory, William Irwin, and Henry 
Nardone. Critical Thinking: A Student’s Introduction.
11th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2018.
Begley, S. “The Brain: How the Brain Rewires 
Itself.” New York: Time, January 19, 2007.
Boyatzis, R. “Neuroscience and the Link 
Between Inspirational Leadership and Resonant 
Relationships.” Ivey Business Journal, January 
2012.
Branden, Nathaniel. Taking Responsibility: 
Self-Reliance and the Accountable Life. New York: 
Simon and Schuster, 1997.
Buckingham, Marcus, and Donald O. Clifton. 
Now, Discover Your Strengths. 20th Anniversary 
Ed. Tulsa, OK: Gardners, 2020.
Byrne, Rhonda. The Secret. New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 2006.
Coleman, John. “Critical Thinking is About 
Asking Better Questions.” Harvard Business 
Review, April 22, 2022.
Coleman, John. “Redefining Your Purpose in the 
Wake of the Pandemic.” Harvard Business 
Review, March 10, 2022.
Congleton, C., B. K. Holzel, and S. W. Lazar. 
“Mindfulness Can Literally Change Your Brain.” 
Boston: Harvard Business Review, January 2015.
Covey, Stephen. The Seven Habits of Highly Effective 
People. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2004.
Davis, Martha, Elizabeth Robbins Eshelman, 
and Matthew McKay. Relaxation and Stress 
Reduction Workbook. 7th ed. Oakland, CA: 
New Harbinger, 2019.
Deci, Edward. Why We Do What We Do: The 
Dynamics of Personal Autonomy. NewYork: 
Putnam’s Sons, 1995.
Dickson, Amanda. Wake Up to a Happier Life: 
Finding Joy in the Work You Do Every Day. Salt 
Lake City, UT: Shadow Mountain, 2007.
Duckworth, Angela. Grit: The Power of Passion 
and Perseverance. New York, NY: Scribner, 
2016.
Duhigg, Charles. The Power of Habit: Why We 
Do What We Do in Life and Business. New York: 
Random House Trade Paperbacks, 2014.
Ellis, Albert, and Doyle, Kristene A. How to 
Stubbornly Refuse to Make Yourself Miserable 
about Anything—Yes, Anything! Rev. ed. New 
York: Kensington, 2016.
Feldman, Robert S. Essentials of Understanding 
Psychology. 14 ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 
2020.
Fenigstein, A., M. F. Scheier, and A. H. Buss, 
“Public and Private Self-Consciousness: Assess￾ment and Theory,” Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology 43 (1975): 522–527.
Fernandez, A. “10 Neurotechnologies About 
to Transform Brain Enhancement and Brain 
Health.” SharpBrains, November 10, 2015.
Fiore, Neil. The Now Habit . Chagrin Falls, OH: 
Findaway World, 2008.
Frankl, Viktor. Man’s Search for Meaning.
Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 2006.
Freston, Kathy, and C. Oz Mehmet. Wellness: 
A Practical and Spiritual Guide to Health and 
Happiness. New York: Weinstein, 2008.Gamble, Teri Kwal, and Michael Gamble. 
Communication Works. 11th ed. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 2012.
George, B. “Mindfulness Helps You Become a Better 
Leader.” Harvard Business Review, October 2012.
Goleman, Daniel. Emotional Intelligence. 10th 
ed. New York: Bantam, 2005.
Hanna, Sharon L. Person to Person. 5th ed. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2007.
Herman, Kenneth. Secrets from the Sofa: A 
Psychologist’s Guide to Achieving Personal Peace.
Bloomington, IN: iUniverse, 2007.
Jakes, T. D., and Phil McGraw. Reposition 
Yourself: Living Life Without Limits. New York: 
Simon & Schuster, 2007.
James, G. “How to Rewire Your Brain for 
Success.” Inc. Magazine, May 19, 2014.
Jeffers, Susan J. Feel the Fear and Do It Anyway.
20th ed. New York: Random House, 2006.
Lawrence, Judy. The Budget Kit: The Common 
Cents Money Management Workbook. 6th ed. 
New York: Kaplan Publishing, 2011.
Leno, Jay. Leading With My Chin. New York: 
Harper Collins. 1996.
Levy, B. R., M. D. Slade, S. R. Kunkel, and 
S. V. Kasi, “Longevity Increased by Positive Self 
Perception of Aging.” Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology. 83, (2002): 261–270.
Marr, Bernard. “The 10+ Most Important Job 
Skills Every Company will be Looking for in 
2020.” Forbes, October 28, 2019.
Michener, James. Chesapeake. New York: 
Random House, 1978.
Miller, Dan. No More Mondays: Fire Yourself—
And Other Revolutionary Ways to Discover Your 
True Calling at Work. New York: Doubleday, 
2008.
Morgenstern, Julie. Time Management from the 
Inside Out . 2nd ed. New York: Henry Holt & 
Company, 2004.
Murray, P. N., Ph.D. “How Emotions Influence 
What We Buy.” Psychology Today, February 26, 
2013.
Orman, Suze. 9 Steps to Financial Freedom.
Rev. ed. New York: Crown, 2006.
Pausch, Randy, and Jeffrey Zaslow. The Last 
Lecture. New York: Hyperion, 2008.
Raftery, Tom. “Artificial Intelligence and the 
Future of Jobs.” Digitalist Magazine, November 
29, 2017.
Randall, K. “Neuromarketing Hope and Hype: 
5 Brands Conducting Brain Research.” Fast 
Company, September 15, 2009.
Rock, D. and J. Schwartz. “The Neuroscience of 
Leadership.” Strategy-Business, May 30, 2006.
Rominiecki, J. “Management Lesson From 
Neuroscience (Part I).” The Center for 
Association Leadership, September 2009.
Rowling, JK. “The Fringe Benefits of Failure, 
and the Importance of Imagination,” Harvard 
Magazine Inc., June 5, 2008.
Rubin, G. “Stop Expecting to Change Your 
Habits in 21 Days.” Psychology Today, October 
21, 2009.
Ryan, J. R. “What Neuroscience Can Teach 
Leaders.” Bloomberg Business, August 12, 2011.
Schweizer, K. “Marketers’ Next Trick: Reading 
Buyers’ Minds.” Bloomberg Business, July 2, 
2015.
Seligman, Martin. Learned Optimism. New York: 
Knopf, 2006.
Shriver, Maria. Just Who Will You Be? Big 
Question. Little Book. Answer Within. New York: 
Hyperion, 2008.422 Further Reading
Stevens, A. P. “Learning Rewires the Brain.” 
Science News for Students, September 2, 2014.
Tellegen, Auke. Multidimensional Personality 
Questionnaire, Minneapolis, MN: University of 
Minnesota Press, 1993.
Thaler, Richard H., and Cass R. Sunstein. Nudge: 
Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and 
Happiness. New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press, 2008.
Tolle, Eckhart. A New Earth: Awakening to Your 
Life’s Purpose. New York: Penguin, 2008.
. The Power of Now: A Guide to Spiritual 
Enlightenment. Novato, CA: New World Library, 
2004.
Waddington, Tad. Lasting Contribution: How to 
Think, Plan, and Act to Accomplish Meaningful 
Work. Beverly Hills, CA: Agate, 2007.
Waitley, Denis. Empires of the Mind. New York: 
Quill, 1996.
. The Joy of Working. Rev. ed. New York: 
Random House, 1995.
. The New Dynamics of Goal Setting.
London: Nicholas Brealey, 1997.
. The New Dynamics of Winning. New 
York: Quill, 1995.
. The Psychology of Winning. New York: 
Berkley Books, 1992.
. Seeds of Greatness. New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 1988.
. The Winner’s Edge. New York: Berkley 
Books, 1994.
Ward, Marguerite. “AI and Robots Could 
Threaten Your Career within 5 Years.” CNBC 
Online, October 5, 2017.
Willett, Walter C., and Skerrett, Patrick J. Eat, 
Drink, and Be Healthy: The Harvard Medical 
School Guide to Healthy Eating. Rev. ed. New 
York: Free Press, 2017.
Williams, R. “Management Rewired: What 
Can Brain Science Tell Us About Leadership?” 
Psychology Today, September 19, 2009.
Ziglar, Zig. Over the Top. Nashville, TN: Thomas 
Nelson, 2007.
. See You at the Top. 25th ed. New York: 
Pelican, 2000.
Ziglar, Zig, Jim Savage, Krish Dhanam and 
Bryan Flanagan. Top Performance: How to 
Develop Excellence in Yourself and Others. Grand 
Rapids, MI: Baker, 2019.A
ABC model, 116, 226–227
ABCDE method, 227–229
Ability, measurement of, 69–76
Accomplishment, 157, 158–159
Accuracy, 266–267
Achievement versus independence, 297
Acquisitiveness, 297
Actions, thoughts, feelings and, 23–24
Activating event, 116
Active listening, 376–377
Adapting, 111
Adventure, 57
Advertising, 347
Aerobic exercise, 211
Aesthetic sensibility, success and, 16
Affiliation drive, 146
Affirmations, 178–179
Aggression, 128, 181–182
Aging, 195
Agreeableness, 69
Alertness, 23
All-or-nothing thinking, 223
Anaerobic exercise, 211
Analytical reasoning, 70
Angelou, Maya, 285
Anger
control of, 127–128
coping with, 124
defined, 26, 124
handling constructively, 129–132
inward, 128
responses to, 128–129
triggers, 130, 131
Antibodies, 208
Anxiety. See also Stress
defined, 140
shyness and, 151
Aptitude tests, 69–76
Armstrong, Neil, 84
Artificial intelligence, 262
Assertiveness, 132, 184
Attending, 377
Attitude
changing, 218
culture and, 39
defined, 195
positive and negative, 196
positive thinking and, 195–197, 204, 216–218
power of, 216–217
self-defeating, 216–218, 219–222
success and, 4
tied to health, 208–215
towards aging, 195
towards money, 339–340
work and, 86–87
Autonomic nervous system (ANS), 117–118
Autonomy, 298
Avoidance, 160–161
Ayad, Farah, 48
B
Bad habits, 251, 254–260
Balance, life, 63, 122
Baltus, Rita, 57
Bane, K. Denise, 383n
Bankruptcy, 351
Beck, Aaron, 223
Behavior
categories of, 371
culture and, 39
defined, 17
gender and, 43–44
group norms and, 385–386
human, 19
motivation and, 286, 293
observable, 19
self-awareness and, 64
self-discipline and, 251, 254–255
stress and (See Stress)
Beliefs
culture and, 39
defined, 138
irrational, 224–226
self-awareness and, 57, 59–63
Bellow, Saul, 97
Belongingness, 146, 296
Bias, gender, 44
Big Five Personality Test, 65
Biofeedback, 122
Blind self, 396
Bodily/kinesthetic intelligence, 72, 76
Body image, 164, 168
Body language, 370, 373–374
Boyatzis, R., 382n
Braden, Nathaniel, 242
Braille, Louis, 239
Brain rewiring, 260
Breadth, 268, 393
Breakdown in communication, 364–366. See also Communication
Budget, 346–347, 348–350. See also Money management
C
Canada, 39, 60, 210
Career, 60, 84–92
Carrey, Jim, 305
Cash, 351
Casual relationships, 392–393
Catastrophizing, 224
Change
resistance to, 110, 247–248, 252–253
self-discipline and, 246–251
stress and, 108
Channel, 363–364
Choices, self-discipline and, 246
Chuck D., 107
Cialdini, Robert B., 21n
Clarity, 124, 266
Clinical psychologists, 19
Closed questions, 376
Coaching, 382–384
Cognition, 24–26
Cognitive distortion, 218, 223
Cognitive therapy, 223
Collective identity, 38–39
Collectivism, 39
Color perception, 71
Comfort zone, 30, 303–304, 306–307
Commitment, 57
Committed time, 323
Communication, 359–384
barriers to effective, 364–366
defined, 360
elements of, 363–364
empowerment, 382–384
Index424 Index
Communication—(Cont.
)
improving skills, 372, 375–376
interpersonal, 360
leadership and, 378–382
listening, 365, 376–378, 378–382
nonverbal, 366, 369–372
Community, 57
Comparison, social, 168–169, 170
Compassion, 57
Competence, 147–150, 297
Competition, 57
Competitiveness, 297
Complaints, 203–204
Complex self-image, 33. See also Self-image
Concepts, forming, 25
Concern for excellence, 297
Conditional positive regard, 149–150
Conflict
decision making and, 278
defined, 398
in relationships, 398–400
resolving, 400
Conformity, 386–387
Conscientiousness, 65
Conscious mind, 23
Consciousness, 23
Consensus, 387
Consequences, 116, 245–246, 247, 278
Constrictive criticism, 180–181
Constructive feedback, 378
Consumer Federation of America, 245
Context, 364
Control, 147–150
Coping, 121, 160–161
Cortisol, 127
Costas, Anna, 320, 357
Courage, 57
success and, 16
Cover letter, 381
COVID-19, 18, 85–86, 296, 366, 370
Creative thinking, 16
Creativity, 31
Credit, 352
Credit card debt, 245, 351–354
Credit record, 353–354
Critic, 172–173
Critical thinking
benefits of, 261
develop, 270–271
standards of, 262–269
Criticism, 179–187
Cultural awareness, 365
Cultural barriers, 365–366
Culture
body image and, 168
defined, 39
identity and, 39, 43 D
Dealing With Anger, 130
Debit cards, 351
Debt, 245, 351–354
Deci, Edward, 291, 299
Decision, 269
Decision-making process, 25, 269, 272–280
Deindividuation, 386
Delayed gratification, 246
Dell, Michael, 10
Dell Inc., 10
Denial, 118
Depression
anger and, 128
chronic, 209
defined, 209
human behavior and, 19
self-check, 210
Depth
of a relationship, 393
of thoughts, 267–268
Design memory, 70
Desire, 301–302
Despair, 26
Destructive criticism, 180, 181–184
Diet, 211
Directional communication, 378
Discipline, 122. See also Self-discipline
Discretionary expenses, 342
Discretionary time, 323
Discrimination, 389
Diseases of adaptation, 118
Disgust, 26
Dispute, 227–228
Distorted thoughts, 218, 223–226
Distortion, cognitive, 218, 223
Distress, 116
Diversity, 387, 388
Do-by dates, 331
Downward comparison, 169
Dreams, 54–57, 58
DuPre, Paul, 136, 190 E
EAR, 376
Earhart, Amelia, 237
Effective speaker, 375–376
80/20, 328
E-learning, 296
Ellis, Albert, 116, 224–225
Embarrassment, 25
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 3
Emotional awareness
communication and, 364, 365
defined, 52, 54
success and, 16
Emotional intelligence, 371
Emotional reasoning, 224
Emotional stability, 69
Emotional support, 150, 397
Emotions
anger and (See Anger)
cognition, 24–26
conflict and, 398
defined, 25
identifying, 54
motivation and, 301–302
negative, 25–26
positive, 25–26
self-awareness and, 52, 54
self-discipline and, 255
Empathy, 261, 389–392
Empowerment, 382–384
Encouraging, 376
Endorphins, 208
Energy, emotions and, 26
Environmentalism, 57
Escape response, to stress, 118, 121
Esteem needs, 296–297
Ethics, 57, 59Ethics Resource Center, 59
Eustress, 116
Exercise
to reduce stress, 121–122
sleep and, 326
types of, 211, 215
Expenses, 342–344
External criteria, 7
External obstacle, 108
Extrinsic goals, 289
Extrinsic motivation, 287–289
Extroversion, 69
Eye contact, 375 F
Facebook, 154, 393
Facial expressions, 25, 370
Failure
avoidance of, 197–198
defined, 304
overcoming fear of, 303–305
self-esteem and, 140
Fairness, 57
Fear
defined, 26, 301
of failure, 303–305
of success, 305, 308–309, 310
Feedback
communication and, 365, 369, 375, 379–382
goal setting and, 109
Feedforward, 176
Feelings, 23–24, 55
Filtering, 223
Finance charges, 353
Finances, 341
Financial security, 57, 339–354
Finger dexterity, 70
First impressions, 163
Fitocracy, 215
Fixed committed expenses, 342
Ford, Henry, 193
Foresight, 70–71
Forgiveness, success and, 16
Forming, 25
Foundation of Critical Thinking, 262
Framing effect, 273, 277
Frankl, Viktor, 54–56
Freud, Sigmund, 56
Frey, Carl Benedikt, 85, 85n
Fun, 57
Future-mindedness, success and, 16 G
Gardner, Howard, 69
Gender bias, 44
Gender identity, 43
Gender role, 43–44
General self-talk, 177
Generosity, 59
Gestures, 370
Goals, 96–135
adjusting, 107–108
anger and (See Anger)
defined, 98
extrinsic, 289
financial, 345–346
group, 39
individual, 39
intrinsic, 289
long-term, 101, 104–105
overcoming obstacles, 108–115
powers of effective, 111, 114–115
of psychology, 18–19
self-discipline and, 238
self-esteem and, 139, 155, 157
setting/achieving, 99–101
short-term, 101, 104–105
SMART, 99–101, 102–103, 157
staying on track, 106
stress/stressors, 116–124
tying together, 101
values and (See Values)
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 321
Good, focusing on, 199, 202
Graphoria, 69
Gratitude, habit of, 199
Group goals, 39
Group norms, 385–386
Groups, 385–386
Groupthink, 386–387
Guided imagery, 209
Guilt, 26, 128
Guisewite, Cathy, 195 H
Habits, 199–208, 251, 254–260
Handling criticism, 184–185
Happiness, 10, 14–17, 86–87
Hard work, 59
Hardy, Thomas, 197
Hassles, 117
Health, 59
positive thinking and, 208–215
Helpless thinking, 223
Helplessness, learned, 198–199
Hemingway, Ernest, 194–195
Heredity, 64
Hidden self, 396
Hierarchy of needs, 294–297
High self-esteem, 139. See also Self-esteem
Holland, John, 88
Honesty, 59
communication and, 375
self, 50–51
work ethic and, 16
Hong, Trinh, 96, 135
Human behavior, 19. See also Behavior
Humanmetrics Jung Typology Test, 65
Humor, as a stress reliever, 124
Hypnosis, 122 I
“I” statements, 377
IBM, 262
Ideal self, 169–171
Ideaphoria, 69
Ideas, culture and, 39
Identity
collective, 38–39
culture and, 39, 43
defined, 38
gender and, 43–44
individual, 38, 40–42, 147
management of, 393
relational, 38
Identity profile, 40–42426 Index
Image, self, 27–33, 138, 162–168, 260
Imposter Syndrome, 169–170
Impulse buying, 351–352
Impulses, 243–246
Incentives, used to motivate, 289–293
Income, 346. See also Money management
Independence, 59
versus achievement, 297
Individual differences, 371
Individual goals, 39
Individual identity, 38, 40–42, 147
Individualism, 39
Individuality, 64–69
Inductive reasoning, 70
Information gathering, 277
Inner critic, 172–173
Inner self, 27–33. See also Self-image
Instagram, 154
Instant gratification, 245
Instrumental support, 150
Integrity, 59
Intelligence, 69–76, 88, 262
Interests, 26, 81–82, 90–92
Internal criteria, 7
Internal obstacle, 108
Internet
e-learning, 296
identity management, 393
information gathering, 277
personality profiles, 65
social networking and, 154, 393
tracking health using, 215
wasting time using, 110
Interpersonal communication, 360. See also Communication
Interpersonal intelligence, 72, 76
Interpersonal relationships, 392–400. See also Relationships
Interpreting nonverbal cues, 370–372
Intimacy, 392–395
Intrapersonal intelligence, 72, 76
Intrinsic goals, 289
Intrinsic motivation, 287
Inward anger, 128
IQ, 371
Irrational beliefs, 224–226
J
Jackson, Ketanji Brown, 84
Jacobsen, Edmund, 19
Jimenez, Jessica, 192, 234
Job mobility, 86
Job stress, 122. See also Stress
Job-specific skills, 77
Johari window, 396–397
Jordan, Michael, 301–302, 311
Journal of Consumer Research, 347
Joy, 25
Judgmentalism, 203
K
Karan, Donna, 10
Kasi, S. V., 209n
Keirsey Temperament Sorter, 65
Keller, Helen, 239
Keynes, John Maynard, 354
Kindness, 59
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 194
Klein, Anna, 10
Knowledge, 59, 77
Kopelman, R., 383n
Kunkel, S. R., 209n
L
Labels, 173
Landau, Elizabeth, 20n
Language
barriers, 365–366
body, 370, 373–374
choice of, 202
Laughter, to reduce stress, 124
Lead by example, 59
Leadership
empowerment and, 382–384
listening and, 378–382
Learned helplessness, 198–199
Learned Optimism, 198
Learning, 59
Leno, Jay, 240
Levy, B. R., 209n
Life balance, 63, 122
LinkedIn, 154
Listening
active, 376–378
leadership and, 378–382
selective, 365
Livingstone, Sandy, 130
Lloyd, Carli, 311
Locke, Edwin, 99
Logic, 268–269
Logical/mathematical intelligence, 72, 76
Logos, 17
Loneliness, 150–151, 392
Long-term consequences, 246, 247
Long-term goals, 101, 104–105
Love, 16, 25
Low self-esteem, 140, 148–149, 296–297, 398. See also Self-esteem
Low self-image, 30
Loyalty, 59
M
Maintenance time, 323
Manning, Peyton, 311
Man’s Search for Meaning, 54–55
Maslow, Abraham, 294
Massage, stress and, 121
Meditation, 121, 122
Memory, consciousness and, 23
Men
communication and, 372
gender identity and, 43–44
Mental discipline, 122
Mental health, 209–210
Mental practice, 20
Mental simulation, 309
Mental stimulation, 123
Message, 363, 369
Michener, James, 240
Mind, 23
Mind reading, 224
Miranda, Lin-Manuel, 84
Mistakes, 272
Mistick, B., 85n
Money management, 339–354
analyze use, 342
budget, 346–347, 348–350
credit cards and, 245, 351–354
defined, 339expenses, 342–344
plan creation, 346–347
shopping habits, 351–352
stretching of resources, 347, 351–354
Mood, time management and, 335
Moore, Mary Tyler, 10
Motivation, 284–319
achievement, 297
defined, 286
e-learning and, 296
emotion, 301–302
extrinsic, 287–289
failure and, 303–305
incentives, 289–293
intrinsic, 287
needs and, 293–300
positive and negative, 286–287, 288
power of, 286–293
self, 8
sources of, 287–289
success and, 298, 305, 308–309
visualization, 25, 28, 209, 309, 311–315
Multiple intelligences, 72, 73–75, 88
Musical intelligence, 72, 76
MyFitnessPal, 215
N
National Institute on Aging, 209
Natural aptitudes, 69–76
Naturalistic intelligence, 72, 76
Nature or nurture, 64–65
Needs
conflict and, 398
defined, 293
esteem, 296–297
hierarchy of, 294–297
meeting of, 298–300
physical, 294–295
security, 295–296
self-actualization, 297–298
social, 296
versus wants, 293–294
Negative attitude, 196
Negative emotions, 25–26
Negative escape response, 118
Negative motivation, 286–287, 288
Negative self-image, 31, 163–168. See also Self-image
Negative self-talk, 172–176
Negative thinking, 196–197, 209–210, 226–231
Nervous system, 23
Network, social, 154, 393
Neurofeedback, 20
Neurons, 23
Neuroscience, 19–23
Nightengale, Earl, 4, 305
Nonverbal communication, 366, 369–372. See also Communication
forms of, 369–370
functions of, 366–369
Norms
defined, 33
group, 385–386
Number memory, 70
Numerical reasoning, 70
Nutrition, stress and, 122
O
Observable behavior, 19
Observation, 70
Obstacles. See also Stress
anticipating, 112–113
defined, 108
external, 108
internal, 108
success and, 9
O’Connor, Johnson, 69, 71
O’Connor, Sandra Day, 84
Ogilvy, David, 383
Ogilvy and Mather, 383
Olivero, G., 383n
Online identity, 393
Online therapy, 18
Open-ended questions, 378
Open self, 396
Open-mindedness, 261
Openness, 65
Opportunity, goals and, 98, 111
Optimism, 16, 194–199
Osborne, Michael A., 85, 85n
Overgeneralizing, 223
P
Paraphrasing, 378
Parasympathetic nervous system, 118
Pareto Principle, 328
Park, Imbee, 311
Passion, 81–84
Passive-aggression, 129, 181–182
Perceiving, 24
Perceptions, 27
Perfectionism, 109
Persistence, 16, 239–240
Personal distance, 370
Personal fulfillment, 4. See also Success
Personality
defined, 64
tests for, 65, 69
traits of, 64–69
types of, 88–89
Personalizing, 224
Pessimism, 196–197
Phelps, Michael, 311
Physical appearance, 59
Physical barriers to communication, 364
Physical needs, 294–295
Physical self, 164, 168
Pitch discrimination, 70
Placebo effect, 208–209
Positive attitude, 196. See also Attitude
Positive emotions, 25–26
Positive escape response, 118
Positive motivation, 286–287, 288
Positive regard, 149–150
Positive relationships, 8
Positive self-image, 31. See also Self-image
Positive self-talk, 111, 178–179, 258, 260
Positive stereotypes, 389
Positive thinking, 192–235
attitude and, 195–197, 204, 216–218
changing negative thoughts, 226–231
defined, 194
distorted thoughts and, 218, 223–226
failure avoidance, 197–198
habits and, 199–208, 251, 254–260
health and, 208–215
importance of, 8, 194–195
learned helplessness, 198–199
optimism and, 16, 194–199428 Index
Positive thinking—(Cont.)
power of, 196
visualization and, 25, 28, 209, 309, 311–315
Possible selves, 169, 171
Posture, 370
Pound, Ezra, 194–195
Power, 59
attitude and, 216–217
conflict and, 398
of effective goals, 111, 114–115
of motivation, 286–293
of positive thinking, 196
of self-esteem, 138–139
Precision, 266
power of, 114
Prejudices, 387, 389
Pride, 26
Prime time, 331, 334
Prioritization
of expenses, 342–344
of time (See Time management)
Private self-awareness, 52, 53
Probing, 182, 184
Problem solving, 25, 273. See also Decision-making process
Process self-talk, 177–178
Procrastination, 334–337. See also Time management
Programmed visualization, 312
Progressive muscle relaxation, 121
Prohibitions, 365
Psyche, 17
Psychology
defined, 17
goals of, 18–19
human behavior and, 19
neuroscience and, 19–23
reasons to study, 17–18
of spending, 347
understanding, 17–26
Public self-awareness, 52
Purpose, importance of, 54–56
Q
Questions, 376
R
Rational emotive behavior therapy 
(REBT), 224
Reading, 375
Reality check, 123
Reasoning
defined, 24
emotional, 224
inductive, 70
numerical, 70
Receiver, 364–365
Receptive visualization, 312
Recognition, 59
Recognizing, 24
Recreation, to reduce stress, 123
Recreational shopping, 351
Reflecting, 378
Regret, 280
Relational identity, 38
Relationships, 59
casual, 392–393
conflict in, 398–400
conformity, 386–387
defined, 385
diversity, 387, 388
empathy, 261, 389–392
group, 385–386
interpersonal, 392–400
intimacy, 392–395
intimate, 396–398
positive, 8
respect and, 375–376, 400
self-disclosure, 396
stereotypes/prejudices, 387, 389
stress and, 123
success of, 396–398
Relaxation, stress and, 121
Relevance, 267
Remembering, 24
Resilience, anger and, 132
Resistance, to change, 110, 247–248, 
252–253
Respect, 375–376, 400
Responding, 378
Responsibility, 59, 241–243
Resume, 381
Reticular activating system, 28–29
Rewards, used to motivate, 289–293
Rhythm memory, 70
Rice, Condoleezza, 359
Role models, 9–10, 11–13
Roosevelt, Eleanor, 137
Rowling, J. K., 49, 240
Ryan, Richard M., 291, 299
S
Sadness, 26
Sarnoff, David, 297
Savings, 345–346. See also Money management
Schedule, 331
Schwartz, Daylle Deanna, 154
Security, 59
Security needs, 295–296
Selective listening, 365
Self-acceptance, 162–171
Self-actualization needs, 297–298
Self-awareness, 48–95
benefits, 50
checklist, 14–15
defined, 7, 50
developing, 50–54
dreams and, 54–57, 58
emotional awareness, 16, 52, 54, 364, 365
empathy and, 261, 391–392
individuality and, 64–69
intelligence and, 69–76, 88, 262
passion and, 81–84
personality traits and, 64–69, 88–89
purpose and, 54–56
self-consciousness, 51–52
self-discipline and (See Self-discipline)
self-esteem and (See Self-esteem)
self-honesty and, 50–51
skills and interests, 77–84, 90–92
values and, 57, 59–63
work and, 84–92
Self-blame, 223–224
Self-confidence, 138, 366
Self-consciousness, 51–52
Self-defeating attitudes, overcoming, 216–218, 
219–222
Self-determination, 239, 240–241
Self-direction, 7Self-discipline, 237–285
bad habits, 251, 254–260
change and, 246–251
control of impulses, 243–246
critical thinking, 261–269, 270–271
decision making, 25, 269, 272–280
defined, 8, 238
desire and, 301–302
elements of, 239
goals, 238
ingredients of, 239
persistence and, 16, 239–240
self-determination and, 239, 240–241
Self-disclosure, 396
Self-efficacy, 148
Self-esteem, 136–191
assertiveness, 132, 184
children and, 146–149
control and competence, 147–150
criticism and, 179–187
defined, 7, 138
high, 139
individual identity and, 38, 40–42, 147
low, 140, 148–149, 296–297, 398
origins of, 146
raising, 151, 154
relationship success and, 398
self-acceptance and, 162–171
self-expectancy, 154–161, 238
self-image and, 27–32, 138, 162–168, 260
self-talk, 111, 172–179, 258, 260
sense of belonging, 146
shyness and, 151
social support, 150, 152–153
stress and, 123
success and, 17
and successful relationships, 398
testing of, 141–145
worthiness and, 147
Self-expectancy, 154–161, 238
Self-fulfilling prophecy, 208
Self-handicapping, 335
Self-honesty, 50–51
Self-hypnosis, 122
Self-image, 27–33, 138, 162–168, 260
Self-motivation, 8. See also Motivation
Self-presentation, 33
Self-respect, 10
Self/selves
defined, 27
ideal, 169–171
inner, 27–33
physical, 164, 168
possible, 169, 171
Self-statements, 177
Self-talk, 111, 172–179, 258, 260
Seligman, Martin, 198
Selye, Hans, 116, 118
Sender, 363
Sex, 43
Shame, 26
Sharing, 397
Shopping, 351–352
Short-term goals, 101, 104–105
Short-term consequences, 246
Shyness, self-esteem and, 151
Silograms, 70
Skills
assessment of, 78–80
defined, 77
improving communication, 372, 375–376
interests and, 77–84
job-specific, 77
transferable, 77, 86
types of, 77
Slade, M. D., 209n
Slawson, Jeanette, 236, 283
Sleep
improving quality of, 326–327
stress and, 122
SMART goals, 99–101, 102–103, 157
Sociability, 397
Social comparison, 168–169, 170
Social needs, 296
Social networking, 154, 393
Social responsibility, 59
Social role, 33
Social skill, success and, 16
Social support, 150, 152–153
Social world, 33–44
Solitude, 59
Speaking, 372, 375
Specific self-talk, 177
Spending, analysis of. See Money management
Spirituality, 59
stress and, 123
success and, 17
Status with peers, 297
Status with the experts, 297
Stereotypes, 387, 389
Stimulation, mental, 123
Stradivari, Antonio, 84
The Strangest Secret, 4
Streisand, Barbra, 84
Stress
anger and, 124, 127–132
change and, 108
defined, 116
human behavior and, 19
job, 122
management of, 121–124
responses to, 118, 121
symptoms of, 117–118
technology and, 117
test for, 119–120
Stressors, 116–124, 125–126
Structural visualization tests, 69
Subconscious mind, 23
Success
defined, 4
failure and, 305
fear of, 305, 308–309, 310
happiness and, 10, 14–17
ingredients of, 4, 7–9
inner self, 27–33
motivation and, 298, 305, 308–309
procrastination and, 334
of relationships, 396–398
respect and, 400
role models, 9–10, 11–13
social world, 33–44
work and, 86
Support, social, 150, 152–153
Sussman, Lyle, 338
Sympathetic nervous system, 118 T
Taboos, 365
Taking Responsibility: Self Reliance and the Accountable Life, 242
Talents, measurement of, 69–76430 Index
Target, 245
Technology, stress and, 117
Tests
for aptitude, 69–76
for personality, 65, 69
Therapy, cognitive, 223
Therapy, virtual, 18
Thinking style, 199
Thinking/thoughts
all-or-nothing, 223
creative, 16
critical, 261–269, 270–271
distorted, 218, 223–226
feelings, and actions, 23–24, 55
helpless, 223
negative, 196–197, 209–210, 226–231
positive (See Positive thinking)
Thomèe, Sara, 117
Three Sides of You Profiler, 65
Timbre discrimination, 70
Time management, 320–338
analysis of, 323, 324–325
defined, 322
plan creation, 328–334
procrastination, 334–337
steps to, 123, 322–334
tips for, 338
To-do list, 328, 332–333
Tolerance, 59
Tonal memory, 70
Traditions, 39
Traits, personality, 64–69
Transferable skills, 77, 86
Triggers, of anger, 130, 131
Trust, success and, 16
Twain, Mark, 258
Tweezers dexterity, 70
Twitter, 154
U
Uncertainty, 278
Unconditional positive regard, 149–150
United States, 39, 43, 60, 69, 210
Unknown self, 396
Uplifts, 117
Upward comparison, 169
U.S. Supreme Court, 84
V
Values
conflict and, 398
culture and, 39, 43
defined, 57
self-awareness and, 57, 59–63
work and, 60, 63
Variable committed expenses, 342
Vasquez, Erik, 358
Vega, Suzanne, 238
Verbal/linguistic intelligence, 72, 76
Vicious cycle, 217–218
Virtual reality, 311
Virtual therapy, 18
Visual Motor Behavior Rehearsal 
(VMBR), 312
Visualization, 25, 28, 209, 309, 311–315
Visual/spatial intelligence, 72, 76
Vocabulary building, 372, 375
Vocation, success and, 16
Voice, 370
Voltaire, 242
Vonn, Lindsey, 311
W
Waitley, Denis, 251n
Walmart, 245
Wants, 293–294
Watts, Alan, 391
Wealth, 59, 339. See also Money management
Webber, Andrew Lloyd, 84
Well-being, money and, 339
Wells, Elijah, 284, 318
Wheel of life, 34–36
Williams, Redford, 127
Willyard, K., 85n
Winfrey, Oprah, 10, 302
Wisdom, success and, 17
Women
gender identity and, 43–44
nonverbal communication and, 372
Work
happiness and, 86–87
myths about, 87–88
personality types and, 88–89
positive thinking at, 204
rewards received from, 86
self-awareness and, 84–92
stress and (See Stress)
values and, 60, 63
Work ethic, 16
Worry, 204–208
Banishing, 205–206
Worthiness, 147
Y
“You” statements, 375
Z
Zhang, Elena, 2
