Psychology 
of Eating
The Psychology of Eating is the essential multidisciplinary introduction to the psychology 
of eating, looking at the biological, genetic, developmental, and social determinants of 
how humans find and assimilate food.
Thoroughly revised and updated, this new, third edition brings multifaceted expertise 
to the topic of normal and dysfunctional food intake, juxtaposing ‘normal’ eating, eating 
in environments of food scarcity, and the phenomenon of ‘abnormal’ eating prevalent 
in many modern-day developed societies. The book includes some discussion of eating 
disorders but takes a much broader approach to the psychology of eating. Key updates in 
this edition include:
• A new discussion of food allergies.
• A fully updated chapter on eating disorders, which includes discussion of binge-eating.
• Greater focus on junk food addiction and updated information on epigenetics and 
the microbiome.
Featuring student-friendly materials such as learning objectives, talking points, glossaries, 
and self-assessment questions, this book is essential reading for students of psychology, 
eating behavior, or health sciences. It will also be useful reading for professionals in health 
psychology and anyone supporting those with eating disorders and obesity.
Emily Crews Splane is Associate Professor of Psychology in the Department of Behavioral 
Sciences at Flagler College, U.S.A. She has conducted extensive research in behavioral 
neuroscience using techniques including autoradiography, immunohistochemistry, and 
operant conditioning.
Neil E. Rowland is Professor Emeritus in the Department of Psychology at the University 
of Florida, U.S.A. His research centers around food intake and obesity, and drug abuse.
Anaya Mitra is Associate Professor of Psychology at St. Catherine University, Minnesota, 
U.S.A. Her research interests revolve around the biological, psychological, and sociocul￾tural factors which impact ingestive behaviors and the development of obesity.Psychology 
of Eating
From Biology to Culture 
to Policy
THIRD EDITION
Emily Crews Splane, Neil E. Rowland, 
and Anaya MitraDesigned cover image: © Tara Moore/Getty Images
Third edition published 2025
by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
and by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2025 Emily Crews Splane, Neil E. Rowland, and Anaya Mitra
The right of Emily Crews Splane, Neil E. Rowland, and Anaya Mitra to be identified 
as authors of this work has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 
of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised 
in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or 
hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information 
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks 
and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
First edition published by Pearson 2014
Second edition published by Routledge 2019
ISBN: 978-1-032-62138-8 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-61634-6 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-62140-1 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781032621401
Typeset in Berling
by Newgen Publishing UKWe dedicate this edition of our book to our esteemed mentor, 
colleague, and friend. -Emily and Anaya
Neil E. Rowland (1947–2024)Contents
For Instructors: Using This Book viii
Preface x
1 Eating – You, the World, and Food 1
2 Macronutrients, Micronutrients, and Metabolism 13
3 You Are What You Eat: Energy Flow 30
4 The Brain and Sensory Mechanisms of Feeding 45
5 Brain: Outputs and Integration 62
6 Genetics, Epigenetics, and Microbiome 74
7 Basic Learning Processes and Eating Behavior 87
8 The Development of Eating Behaviors 107
9 Social Influences on Eating 131
10 Mood and Food, Cravings, and Addiction 145
11 Eating Disorders and Treatment 165
12 Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity 187
13 Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating 214
Index 239For Instructors: 
Using This Book
This text is divided into 13 chapters, as described in the summary table below. Each 
chapter is to some extent stand-alone, so instructors may choose a different order or selec￾tion of materials. Further, although the authors have been using this as a one-semester 
(3-credit) elective course, covering about one chapter per week, instructors may choose 
to emphasize some aspects more than others, depending on their particular student popu￾lation. Most chapters include “food for thought” or other offset material that could be 
used to initiate discussions and/or assessments. Numerous references to primary sources 
are cited, and these or other materials could be assigned as reading beyond the text. In 
addition, there are numerous online documentaries and videos that can be used as supple￾mentary material. One of your authors (NR) has transformed this course into an entirely 
online format including such supplementary material. Assessment of student perform￾ance will depend substantially on the class size and format. We believe that the material 
encourages critical thinking and could be evaluated by essays or presentations.
Chapter Select learning objectives More key terms or 
concepts
1 Eating – You, the World, 
and Food
Scientific disciplines and 
eating; internal and external 
factors; discriminating real 
and fake facts
Motivation; hunger; 
satiety; body mass 
index; obesity; economic 
impact of obesity
2 Macronutrients, 
Micronutrients, and 
Metabolism
Specialist and generalist 
eaters; metabolism; energy 
input and expenditure; spe￾cific appetite
Energy density; basic 
structure of carbohy￾drate, protein, and fat; 
minerals and vitamins
3 You Are What You 
Eat: Energy Flow
Natural selection and 
feeding; optimal foraging 
and energy acquisition; 
portion size
Energy flow; gross 
energy gain; motiv￾ation and economics; 
meals and portion size; 
exercise
4 The Brain and Sensory 
Mechanisms of Feeding
Distinguish between mono￾genic and polygenic obesity; 
define epigenetics; role of 
microbiome
Basic genetics and 
epigenetics; genetic 
approaches to obesity; 
gut microbiota and 
energy balanceFor Instructors: Using This Book ix
Chapter Select learning objectives More key terms or 
concepts
5 Brain: Outputs and 
Integration
Biological mechanisms 
of smell and taste; 
chemosensory gut; signals 
from gut to brainstem
Odorants, tastants, 
and receptors; brain 
pathways; enteric ner￾vous system; principal 
gut hormones
6 Genetics, Epigenetics, 
and Microbiome
Brain structures and hunger; 
neurotransmitters; hedonic 
mechanisms; cortical 
integration
Arcuate nucleus; ventral 
tegmental area; leptin; 
orbitofrontal cortex; 
fMRI; hunger and satiety 
systems
7 Basic Learning 
Processes and Eating 
Behavior
Associative learning 
mechanisms in eating; food 
preferences and aversions; 
conditioned satiety
Food learning 
and postingestive 
consequences; con￾textual cues; learning 
what and how much
8 The Development of 
Eating Behaviors
Effect of pre- and early post￾natal factors; regulation of 
energy balance; external 
influences
Suckling; independent 
eating; caloric regula￾tion; parenting style; 
media/marketing and 
children
9 Social Influences on 
Eating
Traditional role of cuisine; 
direct and indirect influences 
on eating; role of food 
provider
Cultural rules; examples 
of cuisine; percep￾tion and attitudes to 
food; commensal food 
consumption
10 Mood and Food, 
Cravings and Addiction
Connection between mood 
and eating; stress; biological 
and psychological aspects of 
craving
Serotonin; chocolate; 
food addiction – descrip￾tion and neurobiology; 
opioids; reward pathway
11 Eating Disorders and 
Treatment
Definitions and symptoms 
of anorexia, bulimia ner￾vosa, and binge-eating dis￾order, believed causes, and 
treatments
Eating disorders clas￾sification; risk factors; 
biopsychosocial 
approach; treatments; 
animal models
12 Personal Weight Loss 
Strategies in Obesity
Weight management by diet 
and exercise; intermittent 
fasting and diets; therapies 
against obesity
Benefits of exercise; fad 
diets; chrononutrition; 
fitness and mobile apps; 
weight loss medications; 
bariatric surgery
13 Institutional Approaches 
to Healthful Eating
Interventions; overpopulation 
and sustainability; techno￾logical innovation; food 
waste
Industry and government 
roles; environmental 
impact of food produc￾tion; genetic modificationPreface
People are obsessed with food. If you do not have enough food, which was almost always 
the case for our distant ancestors, your thoughts and actions are directed toward obtaining 
food. Even in today’s world, in which we have plenty of “mouth ready” food available, 
people spend large amounts of time thinking about food or rituals in which food plays a 
prominent role. Huge for-profit industries have been built on these human proclivities, 
ranging from advertising and marketing, to production and competitive retailing of an 
increasing array of tasty foods, to weight management or loss and medical treatment of 
obesity-related diseases.
Have you ever stopped to ask why humans are so attracted to food, or whether that 
trait is unique to humans? This book attempts to pose these questions and to explore 
answers. We firmly believe that psychological science is the only academic discipline that 
is capable of spanning and integrating the vast range of subdisciplines that are relevant to 
the topic. In this text, we focus on “normal” eating: How did it evolve, how does it develop 
and become manifest in modern society, and what functions does it fulfill? We also address 
contemporary problems associated with eating. We have a chapter devoted to diagnosable 
eating disorders, including anorexia and bulimia nervosa; however, from a perspective of 
sheer numbers and adverse economic impact, eating too much and becoming obese is a 
much bigger problem. Thus, much of the book is focused on explanations of, and possible 
solutions to, what is often called an obesity epidemic.
The first edition (2014) of this book arose out of an undergraduate special topics 
course, “Psychology of Eating,” that we first taught over 20 years ago. Our impetus then, 
and today, is to present an integrative or capstone course for undergraduates who simply 
want to learn more about their own eating or those who may be contemplating a career 
in one of the for-profit industries mentioned earlier or in an associated medical, regula￾tory, or nonprofit activity. With 70% of the adult population in the USA, and many other 
countries, and 25% of children now classified as overweight or obese, this field will pro￾vide considerable employment opportunities for the foreseeable future! Our book may 
also serve as background material from which to launch directed discussions or writing at 
a more advanced (e.g., graduate) level. Most of the chapters include citations to primary 
or additional resources.
Most human behaviors have both biological and sociocultural determinants. Eating is 
an excellent example of this interaction of biology and culture and, in addition, revolves 
around commodities (i.e. foods) that have their own defined physical and chemical prop￾erties. In other words, you cannot understand eating without knowing something about 
nutrition, energy, genes, chemical sensing, and brain structures. This book contains essen￾tial information about each of these, although it would have been easy to fill a whole Preface xi
book with just these topics. Instead, we have tried to present them at a level that will be 
accessible to typical psychology majors. Even if your main interest is in the sociocultural 
topics, learning elements of the biological foundations will enrich your understanding. 
Conversely, we do not believe that exclusive focus on biology enables you to appreciate 
the complexity of human thought that dominates people’s actions about what, when, 
and how much to eat.
The third edition has been slightly rearranged from the second, in part based on 
our own usage of the material. Thus, most of the biological material is in the first part, 
followed by the sociocultural material and, finally, the broader impact. Newer weight-loss 
medications have been added to this edition as well as information about food allergies. 
However, insofar as possible, each chapter has been written to stand alone so that the 
material can be sequenced in different ways to suit different approaches. In the expanded 
last chapters of the book, we consider the global impact of obesity, its causes, and ways to 
mitigate the inherent unsustainability of the present trajectory. At its core, is it possible 
to cool the flames of the love affair that humans have with food?
We want to thank the editors and staff at Taylor & Francis for encouraging this third 
edition and for their help throughout the production process.
newgenprepdfDOI: 10.4324/9781032621401-1
CHAPTER 1
Eating – You, the World, 
and Food
After reading this chapter, you will be able to
• Understand the relevance of diverse scientific disciplines to the psychology of 
eating.
• Understand the derivation of body mass index and its relation to health and 
obesity.
• Recognize the personal and society-wide economic burdens that are 
associated with problematic eating, including overweight or obesity and 
anorexia nervosa.
• Recognize that both internal and environmental factors contribute to eating 
behavior.
• Understand the internal sensations that produce eating or absence of eating.
• Discriminate reliable, factual sources of information from “fake facts.”
We all engage in eating behavior, sometimes with pleasure or regret, but often just 
because it’s mealtime. At its core, eating is a transaction, or rather several classes of 
transaction. The first transaction is between you, your body and its physiology, and the 
consumable item(s) in front of you. The second type of transaction is interpersonal, 
the bonds formed between you and the people with whom you are eating. For our 
hunter-gatherer ancestors, these were perhaps the main transactions, in part because the 
quality, safety, or security of the food could not be assured. A third type of transaction 
is recent in origin, but now dominant, and that is the business aspect. In most countries 
today, food production, processing, and marketing are business propositions, and food 
preparation is often performed by unknown agent(s) such as retail sellers and restaurant 
personnel.
Commercialization of eating has brought with it a relentless tsunami of marketing 
and advertising about food products and a plethora of advice or information on what 
we should or should not eat, why we should eat a certain amount or way, and with 
what objective. As a result, eating has changed from a relatively simple act of sharing 
what the hunters or gatherers brought home on any given day, a world for which our pre￾historic physiology was adapted, to a more complex situation in which eating is a series 
of decisions made among competing media messages about food and/or the purpose 2 Eating – You, the World, and Food
or goals of that eating episode. Many of the food messages invoke underlying scientific 
(including medical) concepts, yet the public has an imperfect understanding of those 
concepts and, as a result, is unable to evaluate information objectively and is susceptible 
to believing false claims or fake facts.
This introductory chapter has three principal aims. The first aim is to advocate 
that psychological science provides the integrative approach necessary to understand 
these complex transactional aspects of eating behavior. The second aim is to intro￾duce some of the key terms or concepts related to eating and one of its consequences, 
body weight. The third aim is to start to discuss some guidelines or tools by which 
real facts might be discriminated from the fake facts that permeate mass media about 
eating.
PSYCHOLOGY: THE INTEGRATIVE SCIENCE
“You are what you eat” is a phrase that contains elements of truth and yet conceals a 
more fundamental question of why you eat, with follow-up questions of what, where, 
when, and how much. If you think about eating as a scientific problem, it quickly 
becomes apparent that many disciplines are involved, including psychology, neuro￾science, biology, nutrition, economics, and more. A well-rounded approach to eating 
behavior must include each of these elements. Psychological science is an integrative 
discipline that is uniquely well positioned to bridge the streams of scientific thought 
that are relevant to eating and its problems (Figure 1.1). This text does not assume or 
require a substantial background in any specific discipline, but it does assume or imply 
a scientific approach.
FIGURE 1.1 Psychology occupies an interdisciplinary integrative role with regard to feeding 
behavior
Several books or monographs bear the title or subtitle “Psychology of Eating,” 
including those by Capaldi (1996), Logue (2015), Ogden (2010), and our first edition Eating – You, the World, and Food 3
(Rowland & Splane, 2014), but we believe this text is the most integrative of the rele￾vant science disciplines. Many other texts or monographs deal with the limited topic of 
eating disorders such as anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa. While these are serious 
and potentially fatal disorders, their incidence is an order of magnitude less than that of 
the conditions of overweight or obesity. These latter conditions, which together occur in 
almost 40% of adults worldwide and 70% in the U.S., are seriously detrimental to health 
(Dahlgren et al., 2018; Flegal et al., 2012; NDC Risk Factor Collaboration, 2016; Ogden 
et al., 2014).
From a historical or evolutionary perspective, it can be argued that the primary pur￾pose of eating is (or was) to maintain an organism at a high level of physical strength in 
order to survive the rigors of life. This argument applies to both animals and humans and 
predicts, minimally, that eating should, over time, yield nutrients sufficient in quantity 
and quality to avoid weakness due to malnutrition and to support reproduction of the 
species. Societal advances in many domains – civilization in a broad sense – have greatly 
improved access to and quality of food. One result of that has been a much longer life 
expectancy, and this has introduced a new purpose, namely the connection(s) between 
food, health, and longevity.
You are probably familiar with the term “unhealthy food” or its converse, healthy 
food. It is used in many messages, including media of all types, about food. But what does 
it mean? From a public health perspective, this concept might describe whether a food 
is contaminated with pathogens or poisons. Instead, common usage is a future projection 
that long-term consumption of that food carries a statistically higher probability of poorer 
health and/or a shorter lifespan. That probabilistic inference also assumes abnormal or 
excessive consumption of the food. That is, “unhealthy food” is not an intrinsic prop￾erty of the food: It is the behavioral interaction with that food that is unhealthy. It’s a 
case of what psychologists call external attribution: Blame an unwanted outcome on 
outside or environmental factors. When you next read, hear, or are even tempted to 
use the adjectives “unhealthy” or “healthy” in relation to food, stop and think about the 
assumptions behind those terms! Several chapters in this book will address factors that 
influence this critical interaction between person and food.
MEASURING UNDERWEIGHT, OVERWEIGHT, AND OBESITY
Earlier, we used the terms overweight and obese, and many of us have vaguely formed 
preconceptions about what they mean. In fact, they have a very precise scientific 
meaning that is based on pragmatic and simple biometric measurements of weight and 
height. Such measures are commonly made by medical or paramedical professionals, 
but can be made with reasonable accuracy by most people. Body mass index (BMI), a 
derivative metric, is body weight in kilograms divided by the square of height in meters 
(see Box 1.1 and Table 1.1). There are many published and online BMI calculators to 
make this easy. Ranges of BMI are widely used to categorize health and health outcomes. 
In particular:
• BMI less than 18.5 = underweight.
• BMI 18.6–24.9 = normal or healthy.
• BMI 25–29.9 = overweight (also known as pre-obese).
• BMI over 30 = obese (class I = 30–34.9, class II = 35–39.9, etc.).4 Eating – You, the World, and Food
TABLE 1.1 Body mass index
Note: Obese >30; overweight 25–30; normal 18.5–25; underweight <18.5.
Source: Body-mass-index-chart.gif
After adolescence, an individual’s height does not change appreciably; thus, change in 
the BMI of an adult most often reflects changes in body composition such as fat content. 
There is strong epidemiological evidence that elevated body fat content is associated 
with diseases such as hypertension, diabetes, osteoarthritis, and cancer (Wagner & Brath, 
2012). High BMI often correlates with high body fat content, although there are notable 
exceptions or limitations. For example, athletes in strength sports typically have elevated 
muscle mass, and hence high BMI, but this does not reflect excessive fat. Further, BMI 
does not take into account potential gender, ethnic, or body frame differences. Excess 
fat in the central or abdominal region (more common in males) imparts increased risk 
of developing cardiovascular disease, whereas the same extra fat in the hips (more 
common in females) does not carry the same risk (Arsenault et al., 2012). A simple esti￾mate of distribution of body fat is waist circumference and/or the ratio of waist to hip 
circumferences.Eating – You, the World, and Food 5
BOX 1.1 HOW DID BMI BECOME A STANDARD?
In 1943, the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company published actuarial tables of 
ideal weight for height for the purposes of calculating health risk and insurance 
premiums. American physiologist Ancel Keys argued vigorously about the inad￾equacies of these tables and proposed instead the use of BMI (Keys et al., 1972). 
This index was not new at that time, but was devised in the mid-19th century by 
Belgian mathematician Adolphe Quetelet in his use of anthropometric statistics 
to define “l’homme moyen” – the average man. Quetelet’s index, now called BMI, 
is weight (strictly, mass) divided by height squared. Mass refers to substance, 
whereas weight depends on gravitational force, but, since most of us live at 1 
g, the terms are commonly used interchangeably in the field of health or nutri￾tion. The universal measurement system of science is CGS (centimeter–gram–
second), and BMI is expressed in CGS units for weight and height (viz., kg/m2
). 
Use of other units (e.g., pounds and inches) requires a multiplicative constant to 
convert to CGS-based BMI values and is incorporated into most electronic BMI 
calculators.
BOX 1.2 DO THE MATH
Imagine a 5ʹ2ʺ female starting college at 120 lbs. Over the next year she gains the 
mythical “freshman 15 (pounds).” Use an online calculator to compute BMI at the 
start and end of her first year. The next year, she gains an additional “sophomore 
15.” What is the new BMI at the end of the second year? How do these BMIs map 
to weight categories? Her friend is a 6ʹ2ʺ male weighing 160 lbs at the start of his 
freshman year, and he has the same gain of 15 lbs each year. What are his BMI 
numbers and categories? (Answers are at the end of this chapter.)
Using BMI as the index, overweight and obesity are a global problem. The World 
Health Organization (WHO) has compiled longitudinal data on BMI from over 
19 million adults in 200 countries (www.who.int/gho/ncd/risk_factors/overweight/en/
NDC; NCD Risk Factor Collaboration 2016). Figure 1.2 shows one summary result from 
that report: The average BMI, shown as an average for men and women, rose from 21.9 
to 24.3 kg/m2
 between the years 1975 and 2014. This represents an increase of almost 
3% per decade. Also shown in Figure 1.2 are BMI means for the U.S. dating from 1965, 
as published by the Centers for Disease Control (www.cdc.gov/obesity/data/prevalence￾maps.html), summarized by Zimmerman (2011) and extrapolated by us from the WHO 6 Eating – You, the World, and Food
data. Perhaps not surprisingly, the WHO and CDC data show that Americans have a 
higher average BMI than the rest of the world, but the rate of increase since 1975 has 
been similar in most world regions, and, from the U.S. data, there was a marked acceler￾ation in this rate during the late 1970s (Box 1.3).
BOX 1.3 MARKETING OR ADVERTISING?
Given the upward inflection in rate of change in BMI in the late 1970s, Zimmerman 
(2011) considered what underlying factors might have changed at about that time. 
In an affluent country such as the U.S., food availability was not a plausible answer, 
neither was a major change in dietary constituents or in physiological makeup of 
the population. He concluded instead that there was a coincident dramatic rise in 
food marketing, including:
1 Product innovation: For example, the number of items available in supermarkets 
rose from ~8,000 in 1975 to 40,000 by 2000 because of expanding variations of 
a product (e.g., cereal).
2 Price: For example, supersizing for little added cost or bundling as in meal 
packages.
3 Place: Availability in more places, such as vending machines and convenience 
outlets.
4 Promotion: For example, product placement, sponsorship, and endorsements.
Industry expenditures on marketing have grown much faster than expenditures 
on direct advertising over this time frame, testament to effectiveness at the cash 
register – and at the waistline. As we said, “unhealthy food” is not about the food per 
se but the interaction between food and the consumer: We might consider adding 
marketing as a third factor.
FIGURE 1.2 Mean body mass index (BMI) 
across time for the U.S. and for the world. 
Data are based on the WHO-NCD report 
(2016). The arrow shows the approximate 
onset of faster increase in the U.S. (data from 
Zimmerman, 2011)Eating – You, the World, and Food 7
The data presented so far are averages for approximately equal numbers of men 
and women in each cohort. However, the datasets reveal gender, regional, and socio￾economic differences. In the case of gender, women have higher incidence of over￾weight and/or obesity (BMI over 25) than men in some countries, but that difference 
is reversed in many European countries. In affluent countries with higher mean BMI, 
individuals in the lower socioeconomic categories have higher BMI than those in higher 
categories. This relation is reversed in less affluent countries, perhaps because the poor 
simply cannot obtain sufficient food and thus tend to be underweight. Regional hetero￾geneity for the U.S. is revealed in data published by the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC; www.cdc.gov/obesity/data/prevalence-maps.html), with the highest 
prevalence of obesity in Alabama, Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, and West Virginia. 
Further, the prevalence of obesity (BMI ≥ 30) was twice as high (35%) in middle-aged 
adults compared with late teens (17%), reflecting the developmental trajectory of the 
problem.
QUESTIONS TO ASK YOURSELF
These considerations give rise to several questions, including:
• Is overweight or obesity abnormal if it occurs in more than 50% of the population?
• Can’t we just raise the BMI criterion for obesity as the population gets heavier?
• Is obesity bad for you?
• If obesity is caused by eating too much, how do we know what is too much?
• Why doesn’t our biology stop us?
Talking Point 1.1
Discuss some or all of these five questions with your peers. Did you come up with any 
clear answers or agreement, or not?
Many of these questions are the topics that we will discuss and challenge you to 
think about throughout the pages of this book. The fact remains that obesity causes 
distress for many individuals and detracts from physical health. Since obesity itself is 
now considered a disease, it may be more accurate to say someone “has obesity” rather 
than “is obese.” Treatment of obesity takes an enormous fraction of the health care 
budget, regardless of whether the funds are public or private. In the U.S., some 20% 
of the annual health care budget is estimated to go toward the treatment of obesity￾related diseases (Cawley & Meyerhoefer, 2012), and the projected loss of workplace 
productivity alone will approach $500 billion per year by 2030 (Wang et al., 2011). 
Less affluent countries are not and will not be able to allocate substantial portions of 
their budget to health care in general or obesity in particular, and, especially in those 
regions, obese individuals will experience reduced quality of life or life expectancy. The 8 Eating – You, the World, and Food
foregoing focus on obesity is not intended to marginalize the very serious problems of 
anorexia and bulimia nervosa, because these also have extremely serious personal, soci￾etal, and economic impact.
In Chapter 2, we will consider in detail the energy-related aspects of eating and their 
implications for development of abnormal BMI. But, at a gross level, it is understandable 
that overweight is caused by eating more than the body needs (i.e., energy expenditure), 
and underweight is caused by eating less than energy expenditure. Body mass index 
or changes in it ultimately are founded in eating behavior, but eating behavior is sur￾prisingly hard to measure reliably over a long period. That brings us back to a previous 
question: What is the goal of eating in this 21st century?
WHAT IS THE GOAL OF EATING?
Often, people eat because they feel hungry. Hunger is a subjective sensation – it can 
only be measured by self-report. A common way of measuring hunger is using a visual 
analog linear scale, one end of which might be labeled “not hungry” and the other end 
“very hungry.” These scales have been validated as predicting subsequent food intake 
(e.g., Parker et al., 2004), although other types of questionnaire have been used. The 
most easily understood occasion for hunger is one that develops following an extended 
period without eating, or eating very little. You may have experienced a period of food 
deprivation or been on a diet. If you’re like most people, your thoughts and actions 
become progressively more dominated by food. If you are hungry right now, you might 
start sketching food in your notebook or looking up restaurants on your electronic 
device! Also, you are more likely to engage in behaviors that bring you in contact with 
food – visiting the vending machine/cafeteria or ordering food to be delivered to you. 
And maybe you become less picky about what you will eat – perhaps potato will do just 
fine instead of parfait. Without much conscious effort, all of these feelings, thoughts, and 
behaviors lead us to food.
The concept of hunger has solved the problem of mechanism, right? No, and, if it 
had, then this would be an extremely short book! Instead, it has reframed the question 
to: What is it that makes us hungry? And there’s a second question: If food is available all 
the time, do we eat only when we are hungry, or are there times we eat when we are not 
hungry? The latter is an important question because, if there are times that we eat when 
we are not hungry, or even that we start eating at different levels of hunger on different 
occasions (i.e., there is a different threshold), then there will not be a strong one-to-one 
or quantitative correspondence between hunger and behavior. Think again about the 
time when you were without food for an extended period of time. Did your sensation of 
hunger get more and more intense as time went by, or did it come and go in waves? In 
general, people rate their hunger as increasing with time since food and decreasing after 
eating (Barkeling et al., 2007). Many theories of feeding now talk about satiety or fullness 
rather than hunger. Satiety is usually defined as the absence of hunger.
All animals eat, and the study of the feeding behavior of animals can give us important 
insights into human behavior. Further, for animals that have similar feeding habits to 
our own (i.e., mammalian omnivores, such as rats), there is every reason to believe that 
some of the physiological and brain mechanisms underlying feeding are similar to our 
own. Although many aspects of feeding and the brain can be directly studied in humans, 
and many examples will be given in this book, there are some scientific procedures and Eating – You, the World, and Food 9
measures that we cannot perform in humans, and we instead turn to suitable animal 
models to address the questions. Most such research uses rats or mice, and we will occa￾sionally refer to such studies. All animal research is highly regulated and reviewed by 
both institutional and national professional entities with regard to rigorously humane 
treatment and scientific necessity. Likewise, all research with humans is regulated by 
institutional review boards and includes not only aspects of safety but also confidentiality 
of records.
BIOMEDICAL OR ENVIRONMENTAL APPROACHES?
Overeating and obesity are significant 21st-century problems for individuals and society, 
as are other eating disorders such as anorexia nervosa. How do we best address and aspire 
to solve these problems that are, as we noted earlier, essential problems of interaction or 
transaction between individuals, their food, and the food environment?
The biomedical approach advocates that these problems are best solved by direct 
manipulation or treatment of an individual, either because something internal is broken 
or malfunctioning, or because the treatment will change the way in which the indi￾vidual interacts with food. One example of this is the popular concept of taking drugs 
to suppress appetite, which will be treated further in Chapter 12. The mode of action 
of such drugs in relation to overweight or obesity is to change some aspect of the physi￾ology or brain such that food is more filling and/or less attractive. These drugs are meant 
to change the body’s internal signals related to food; evaluating this approach requires a 
background in the physiology and brain mechanisms of feeding.
The environmental approach considers that nothing is fundamentally broken within 
the majority of overweight individuals, but rather it is the environment – broadly defined –
that is causing the problems. Indeed, the obesity epidemic has been fueled by increases 
in the energy content and amount of food available, its advertising and marketing, and a 
generally low level of physical activity, factors that together form a so-called obesogenic 
environment. Are there effective ways in which this obesogenic environment can be 
“treated” and, if so, by whom? This is a difficult issue because the food environment is 
heavily influenced by economic forces that constrain behaviors of business entities ran￾ging from production to retail, behaviors that are partially shaped by consumer demand 
but also are designed in turn to influence consumer demand. One approach that has 
frequently been tried in relation to individuals combating an obesogenic environment 
is that of diets and diet programs. These are, effectively, devices to achieve cognitive 
restraint – for example, by restricting times of eating or by consuming smaller amounts 
of a smaller range of foods. Diets, dieting, and restraint are discussed later in this text.
Talking Point 1.2
In relation to human health, make one list of desirable and another list of undesir￾able types of changes in the food-related environment that have occurred during the 
past few decades. Then, compare your lists with those of your classmates. Do some 
changes occur on both lists? What could you personally and/or as a society do to 
eliminate the undesirables?10 Eating – You, the World, and Food
FAKE FACTS – HOW DO I KNOW WHAT I READ IS 
THE TRUTH?
Let’s end this chapter with our third stated objective. Increasingly, we live in a world replete 
with information and immediate access. A major emergent problem is how to recognize 
truth or credible sources. The fact is that most media, whether primarily written, spoken, or 
pictorial, are vying for the attention of would-be consumers. Science is a system for acquiring, 
storing, and communicating replicable facts and observations. Much of that communication 
occurs via scientific journals (some are now exclusively online, and most are available online 
through your library and/or through public access sites such as PubMed). Most of these 
journals require that authors submit their manuscript for criticism or review by experts in 
the field (i.e., peer review) and follow up with an adequate response to those comments in a 
revision prior to publication. Journals that require peer review thus confer a certain standard 
of scientific credibility. This generally works well, but there are rare instances in which the 
system breaks down, including improper data analysis or even data falsification. Because of 
this, several funding agencies and journals have instituted more comprehensive standards of 
data reporting, analysis, and transparency.
Strong scientific hypotheses are best tested using narrow or specific experimental 
designs, but that approach runs the risk that those results might not generalize to other 
situations. Thus, replication of a scientific finding or conclusion by other, different groups 
of investigators, potentially using somewhat different methods or designs, is the hallmark 
of an established fact. Review articles that summarize several different published studies 
on a topic, including meta-analyses which effectively assess the “consensus finding” on a 
question from all of the relevant published studies, are very useful resources for real facts.
If you step away from peer-reviewed articles, the search for the truth is more of a 
crapshoot. There are any number of for-profit organizations that disseminate free￾access “infomercials” that may contain elements of truth but ultimately are trying to 
sell you something – such as a healthy food or a guaranteed diet, neither of which are 
objectively demonstrable for a particular consumer. Many academic and non-academic 
organizations promulgate popular press releases, and these likewise should be avoided 
as a sole source: They do serve a useful function by drawing attention to a topic, but the 
journalists who write these articles are evaluated by the popularity, not by the accuracy, 
of their work. Bottom line, if you are reading or viewing a piece that seems too good to 
be true, it is! In this book, we are trying to stick to established or well-agreed-upon facts. 
Whenever we advance our opinion or a speculation, we will try to identify it as such.
ANSWER TO THE “DO THE MATH” BMI CALCULATION
Initially, the female has a BMI of about 22, normal weight category. One and two years 
later, her BMIs are 25 and 28, respectively; she has become substantially overweight.
Initially, the male has a BMI of about 21, normal weight category. One and 
two years later, despite the same weight gain in pounds, his BMIs are 22.5 and 24, 
respectively, still in the normal range. The principal reason for the smaller change 
in BMI in the male for the same weight gain is his greater height (74ʺ vs 62ʺ, a 19% 
difference).Eating – You, the World, and Food 11
GLOSSARY
Anorexia nervosa An eating disorder in which a person drops 
to a dangerously low body mass index, often 
with distorted body image, in which they refuse 
to eat sufficient quantities of food to sustain 
themselves.
Body mass index (BMI) Body weight (in kg) divided by height (in m) 
squared: Thus, the unit is kg/m2. This is the 
most commonly used clinical measure to define 
underweight (<18.5), normal body weight 
(18.5–24.9), overweight (25–29.9), obese 
class I (30–34.9), obese class II (35–39.9), 
obese class III (>40).
Bulimia nervosa An eating disorder characterized by cycles 
of out-of-control eating (bingeing) followed by 
restrictive compensatory behaviors including 
self-induced vomiting.
Fullness A subjective sensation relating one’s current 
state to the (comfortable) fullest that one could 
imagine after eating a large meal.
Hunger Internal (unpleasant) sensation that diverts our 
thoughts and actions to acquiring and eating 
food; one cause of hunger is a prolonged period 
since last eating.
Hunter-gatherer Refers to a human or lifestyle in which all or 
most food is obtained by foraging – hunting for 
wild animals and gathering naturally occurring 
plants, fruits, and so on. Only a few such 
societies are still in existence, but our distant 
ancestors all pursued this nomadic lifestyle.
Meta-analysis A review paper or article that compiles and 
summarizes data from many or all of the 
published papers on a given topic and presents 
the prevailing averages and conclusion(s).
Obese Term formally defined by body mass index 
>30 kg/m2.
Obesogenic Term used for an environment (or specific food) 
that promotes the development of obesity.
Overweight Term formally defined by body mass index 
between 25 and 30.12 Eating – You, the World, and Food
REFERENCES
Arsenault, B.J., Beaumont, E.P., Despres, J.P., & Larose, E. (2012). Mapping body fat distribution: A key 
step toward the identification of the vulnerable patient? Annals of Medicine, 44, 758–772.
Barkeling, B., King, N.A., Naslund, E., & Blundell, J.E. (2007). Characterization of obese individuals who 
claim no relationship between their eating pattern and sensations of hunger or fullness. International 
Journal of Obesity, 31, 435–439.
Capaldi, E.D. (1996). Why we eat what we eat: The psychology of eating. Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association.
Cawley, J., & Meyerhoefer, C. (2012). The medical care costs of obesity: An instrumental variables 
approach. Journal of Health Economics, 31, 219–230.
Dahlgren, C.L., Wisting, L., & Ro, O. (2018). Feeding and eating disorders in the DSM-5 era: A system￾atic review of prevalence rates in non-clinical male and female samples. Journal of Eating Disorders, 
5, 56. doi:10.1186/s40337-017-0186-7
Flegal, K.M., Carroll, M.D., Kit, B.K., & Ogden, C.L. (2012). Prevalence of obesity and trends in the 
distribution of body mass index among US adults, 1999–2010. Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 307 (5), 491–497.
Keys, A., Karvonen, N., Kimura, N., & Taylor, H.L. (1972). Indices of relative weight and obesity. Journal 
of Chronic Diseases, 25, 329–343. [Reprinted in International Journal of Epidemiology, 2014].
Logue, A.W. (2015). The psychology of eating and drinking, 4th ed. New York: Brunner-Routledge.
NCD Risk Factor Collaboration. (2016). Trends in adult body-mass index in 200 countries from 1975 
to 2014: A pooled analysis of 1698 population-based measurement surveys with 19.2 million 
participants. Lancet, 387, 1377–1396.
Ogden, C.L., Carroll, M.D., Kit, B.K., & Flegal, J.M. (2014). Prevalence of childhood and adult obesity 
in the United States, 2011–12. JAMA, 311, 806–814.
Ogden, J. (2010). The psychology of eating: From healthy to disordered behavior, 2nd ed. Malden, 
MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Parker, B.A., Sturm, K., MacIntosh, C.G., Feinle, C., Horowitz, M., & Chapman, I.M. (2004). Relation 
between food intake and visual analogue scale ratings of appetite and other sensations in healthy 
older and young subjects. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 58, 212–218.
Rowland, N., & Splane, E.C. (2014). Psychology of Eating. Harlow, UK: Pearson Education.
Wagner, K.-H., & Brath, H. (2012). A global view on the development of noncommunicable diseases. 
Preventative Medicine, 54 (suppl.), S38–S41.
Wang, Y.C., McPherson, K., Marsh, T., Gortmaker, S.L., & Brown, M. (2011). Health and economic 
burden of the projected obesity trends in the USA and the UK. Lancet, 378, 815–825.
Zimmerman, F.J. (2011). Using marketing muscle to sell fat: The rise of obesity in the modern economy. 
Annual Review of Public Health, 32, 285–306.
Peer review In the field of scientific publication, peer review 
means that an author’s manuscript is sent (by 
the editor) to one or more experts in that field 
for their comments, critiques, and assessment of 
whether the manuscript is suitable for publica￾tion in that journal. If relevant, the editor then will 
require that reviewers’ critiques be incorporated 
into a revised manuscript.
Satiety The absence of hunger. It is closely related to the 
sensation of fullness.DOI: 10.4324/9781032621401-2
CHAPTER 2
Macronutrients, Micronutrients, 
and Metabolism
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:
• Understand the concepts of bioenergetics, metabolism, energy input, and 
expenditure.
• Recognize the three macronutrients, carbohydrates, proteins, and fats.
• Understand the needs for and functions of minerals and vitamins, and specific 
appetites.
ENERGY, BIOENERGETICS, AND METABOLISM
Bioenergetics is defined as the study of the transformation of energy in living organisms. 
The term energy is used in its definition in physics: The property of matter that endows 
a capacity to perform work. Metabolism is defined as the chemical processes that occur 
within a living organism to maintain life. Thus, energy, bioenergetics, and metabolism 
are all essential components of the so-called fire of life. Quite literally, organisms exploit 
chemical energy present in food and transform it into energy as molecules that are suit￾able to sustain operation of their component cells, including those that directly allow 
behavior such as heart, muscles, and brain. Different organs within our body require 
or use energy in different amounts, and the total energy use per unit of time by an 
organism is called its metabolic rate. Metabolic rate has two principal components for 
consideration:
• Basal metabolic rate or BMR: Rate of energy use when at rest or asleep. Processes 
involved include maintaining body temperature, breathing, and blood circulation.
• Activity-related metabolism: Additional energy (e.g., muscular, heart, breathing) 
used as a result of an ongoing physical activity. The more intense the activity, the 
greater this component.
Both these types of metabolic rate are related to body size. The relationship of metabolic 
rate to body mass across adults of many species differing in size (e.g., mice, dogs, humans) 
is not linear but is closer to a power function of (body mass)2/3
. For most people, BMR 14 Macronutrients, Micronutrients, and Metabolism
accounts for 60–70% of metabolism. BMR is an inescapable or involuntary cost of living. 
In contrast, the amount of activity-related metabolism has some elective or voluntary 
component.
Metabolism is expressed in energy units. One common unit is the kilocalorie (kcal): 1 
kcal = 1,000 calories, where one (small) calorie is the amount of energy needed to heat 
1 g of water by 1o
C. Kcal is used extensively by food scientists, but the SI (international 
system of units) instead uses joules and kilojoules (kJ). A joule is 4.184-fold smaller 
than a calorie: As an approximation, you can use multipliers of 4 (kJ to kcal) or ¼ 
(kcal to kJ) to interconvert these units. For example, if you heat a 250 g cup of water 
from room temperature to boiling (a rise of about 80ºC), you would need 80 × 250 
calories = 20,000 calories = 20 kcal, or approximately 80 kJ (actually 84). This is the 
amount of energy that could be derived by complete combustion of one level teaspoon 
(5 g) of sugar in a lab calorimeter. Biological metabolic processes are not as efficient as 
a calorimeter; the energy actually derived from a particular food is known as its metab￾olizable energy.
Almost all the energy produced from food by animals comes via aerobic metabolism, 
meaning that air, and specifically oxygen, is required. Metabolism is a complex physio￾logical science, and what follows is a very simplified presentation of some essentials (see, 
for example, Wilson [2015] for more detailed discussion).
The universal chemical or molecule used to drive cellular processes is adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP). ATP is a high energy state molecule (adenosine with three attached 
phosphate groups in a chain) that acts as an energy source or donor (Figure 2.1). These 
phosphate groups can be removed sequentially by enzymatic reaction(s) to yield lower 
energy forms – adenosine diphosphate and adenosine monophosphate. The phosphate 
groups are transferred to recipient molecules which then are transformed into an active 
form to execute their specific biological function. The used or dephosphorylated ATP 
then can be regenerated by an enzyme (ATP synthase) that is powered by a proton 
gradient or pump called the chemiosmotic potential which is set up in the citric acid 
cycle (Figure 2.2). This latter is a cycle of chemical transformations fueled by aerobic 
metabolism of nutrient-derived fuels. These reactions occur in mitochondria, which are 
specialized organelles inside each cell. The most metabolically active cells usually have 
more mitochondria than less active cells.
FIGURE 2.1 Structure of ATPMacronutrients, Micronutrients, and Metabolism 15
FIGURE 2.2 Simplified schematic of aerobic metabolism 
showing a common fuel, glucose, entering the citric 
acid cycle (several chemical steps are not shown) and 
subsequent generation of ATP. The theoretical maximum 
yield is 36 molecules of ATP from 1 molecule of glucose, 
although the actual yield is usually only ~30
Macronutrients are energy-yielding molecules used in the citric acid cycle to generate 
ATP. There are three classes of macronutrient:
• Carbohydrates (net metabolizable energy approximately 4 kcal or 17 kJ per gram).
• Proteins (net metabolizable energy approximately 4 kcal or 17 kJ per gram).
• Fats, also called lipids (net metabolizable energy approximately 9 kcal or 38 kJ 
per gram).
The energy density of a food is its energy yield per unit weight of food (e.g., kJ per 
gram) and depends on the relative amounts of the three macronutrients present in that 
food. As a rule, foods with the highest energy density are high in fat content. Conversely, 
foods with the lowest energy density, such as vegetables, have high amounts of water, 
which yields no energy, or other non-metabolizable constituents such as dietary fiber. We 
will now consider each of these macronutrient classes in more detail.
Talking Point 2.1
Most foods have nutrition labels, but have you ever looked at these closely? Collect 
some labels from foods in your kitchen and compare and discuss these with your 
classmates. Are there any macronutrient contents or energy densities that you found 
surprising? Did any foods contain more than 40% fat? Were some labeled “low fat,” 
and, if so, how low is low?
BOX 2.1 DO THE MATH
1 Suppose your body expends 2,700 kcal per day – just a bit higher than the 
average person. If this energy were derived entirely from stored fat, how many 
grams of fat would you need to use per day?
2 If an individual weighs 200 lbs and has 30% body fat (probably in the overweight 
category), how many kilograms of fat does he or she carry (use the approximation 16 Macronutrients, Micronutrients, and Metabolism
that 2 lbs = 1 kg). If that person stopped eating completely, but daily energy 
expenditure remained the same, how long would it take for their fat stores to be 
completely depleted?
3 Suppose instead the person goes on a diet and consumes only half as much per 
day (i.e., 1,350 kcal). How long would their stored fat now last until depleted? If 
he or she set a more reasonable goal of losing half of their stored fat (i.e., to 15% 
of body weight), how long would it take to achieve this on the same strict diet? 
(Answers are at the end of this chapter.)
In chemical structure, the simplest naturally occurring carbohydrates are 
monosaccharides such as glucose (also known as dextrose), fructose (abundant in 
fruits), and galactose (in milk). They consist of a core ring of one oxygen atom and four 
or five carbon atoms (Figure 2.3). Monosaccharides usually have a sweet taste and are 
commonly known as sugars or simple sugars. Once eaten, these are absorbed rapidly 
from the digestive system and lead to a rapid increase in the concentration of that sugar 
in our blood stream (a “sugar rush”). These blood-borne sugars then are either used 
immediately for energy in the processes mentioned in the previous section or stored 
(see below).
FIGURE 2.3 Structures of monosaccharides glucose and fructose, and the disaccharide sucrose 
that is formed by joining these two components
The size of the spike (more technically, the integrated area under the curve of blood 
glucose versus time) in blood sugar per standard or unit weight of a food eaten is 
known as its glycemic index (Figure 2.4). By convention, the glycemic index of pure 
glucose is set at 100. High-carbohydrate foods such as rice or potatoes have glycemic 
indices of 70 or more, while beans and fruits are typically 55 or lower (Foster-Powell 
et al., 2002), meaning that the spike in blood glucose is substantially smaller. Foods 
with a high glycemic index exacerbate diabetes, and so patients with this metabolic 
disease are often advised to eat foods with a relatively low glycemic index. The gly￾cemic load of a food takes into account the actual weight of carbohydrate per serving 
and may be a more practical number to track in relation to a particular dietary regimen 
(Figure 2.4).Macronutrients, Micronutrients, and Metabolism 17
FIGURE 2.4 Diagram illustrating glycemic index (GI; left panel) and glycemic load (GL; right 
panel). GI: Changes in blood glucose level over time after consumption (starting at time 2 
and for a short duration thereafter) of the same mass of glucose, a high GI food, or a low 
GI food. GL: Changes in blood glucose level over time after consumption of large or small 
portions of the same food
The next class of sugars is disaccharides, so named because they have two core mono￾saccharide rings joined by an oxygen bridge (Figure 2.3). The most common include:
• Sucrose (common or cane sugar) = glucose joined to fructose.
• Maltose (malt sugar) = glucose joined to glucose.
• Lactose (milk sugar) = glucose joined to galactose.
When these disaccharides are eaten, they first are broken apart by digestive enzymes 
in the gut into their component monosaccharides, which are then absorbed into the 
blood stream. The globally common condition of lactose intolerance, symptoms of which 
include diarrhea and bloating, occurs because the enzyme that breaks lactose apart is not 
present after infancy. Since mother’s milk is the natural food of all infants, early-life loss 
of this enzyme would have been selected against evolutionarily. Most adults with lactose 
intolerance can consume milk products if the lactose is broken down by prior fermenta￾tion, such as in production of yogurt or kefir.
Complex carbohydrates, also known as starches or polysaccharides, consist of many 
molecules of monosaccharides joined together to form polymers. In plants, amylose (a 
head-to-tail or linear polymer) and amylopectin (a branching polymer) are common 
classes of starch, and, when these plants are eaten as a food source, they are broken down 
in the gut into the component monosaccharides before absorption. In part because this 
process takes time to get to completion, the glycemic index of complex carbohydrates 
is lower than for glucose. High fructose corn syrup (HFCS) has, for economic reasons, 
largely replaced sucrose as a sweetener in food processing. It is produced industrially 
from starch in corn first by the starch being broken down into glucose, and then some of 
that glucose being converted to fructose by an enzymatic process. HFCS 55, which is the 18 Macronutrients, Micronutrients, and Metabolism
nomenclature for 55% of the glucose so converted, has sweetness comparable to sucrose. 
HFCS is a mixture of monosaccharides and has a high glycemic index.
Talking Point 2.2
Using a table of glycemic index and load (available on many websites), estimate 
the average glycemic load of all the food you eat in a typical day. What is the 
range of these estimates in your class? How would you change your diet to reduce 
the load by 10%? How does glycemic load compare with the glycemic index of 
these items? Why are people diagnosed with diabetes recommended a low gly￾cemic diet?
Cellulose is a structural component of plants and, like amylose, is a glucose polymer. 
Because the bridging oxygen atoms are in a different position in the molecule than for 
amylose, humans have a limited physiologic ability to break it down into glucose. For 
this reason, cellulose passes through the human gastrointestinal tract in more or less 
undigested form (see also the section on microbiome in Chapter 6) and is known as 
dietary fiber. This fiber, along with water, produces distention of the gut and may feel 
filling or satiating. It should be added that some animal species, notably herbivores, are 
able to break down cellulose from the vegetation that they eat into glucose.
In animals and humans, circulating glucose that is not used immediately for ATP pro￾duction is converted into a storage form called glycogen. Glycogen is present in cells as 
globular or ball-like structures with a core molecule (glycogenin) and both branched 
and straight chains of up to about ten glucose molecules radiating out. During periods of 
fasting, glucose molecules can be cleaved from these glycogen balls to provide a source 
of glucose when none is being absorbed from the gut. Formation of glycogen from glu￾cose dissipates some energy, and so the net energy that can be derived from glycogen 
for metabolism is a little less than the dietary energy consumed. Some mechanisms of 
storage and mobilization are discussed later.
PROTEINS
Proteins are made from structural units called amino acids that are joined head-to-tail 
to form chains of various lengths. Structural proteins are often several hundred amino 
acids long, whereas many short chain proteins (e.g., <50) are mobile signaling molecules 
called peptides.
Twenty amino acids occur naturally (Table 2.1); each of these amino acids differs 
in shape, size, and physicochemical properties. (Amino acids exist in two mirror image 
forms, l- and d-, but for our purposes only the l-forms occur naturally and are of bio￾logical use.) The overall properties and function of a specific protein are determined by 
the specific sequence of amino acids. Some amino acids are hydrophilic (water-loving), 
and proteins with a high fraction of these are themselves soluble in water or neutral salt 
solution. Examples found in common foods include albumins (e.g., in milk and eggs) 
and globulins (e.g., in vegetables and nuts). Other amino acids are hydrophobic (repel 
water), and proteins with a high fraction of these are insoluble in water (e.g., casein in 
curdled milk).Macronutrients, Micronutrients, and Metabolism 19
TABLE 2.1 Dietary essential and non-essential amino acids
Essential Non-essential
Arginine Alanine
Histidine Asparagine
Isoleucine Aspartate
Leucine Cysteine
Lysine Glutamate
Methionine Glutamine
Phenylalanine Glycine
Threonine Proline
Tryptophan Serine
Valine Tyrosine
In the gut, food-derived proteins are broken down into their constituent amino acids, 
which are then absorbed and are rebuilt into specific proteins or peptides, including 
structural proteins, enzymes, and signal molecules, or they are used for energy produc￾tion. Some amino acids can be made in the body, but others cannot and must be diet￾derived: These are called essential amino acids (see Table 2.1). An imbalanced protein is 
one that is low or deficient in one or more of the essential amino acids. Eating only an 
imbalanced protein will not provide sufficient amounts of one or more of the essential 
amino acids and will lead to an inability to synthesize all or sufficient of the proteins 
essential for body function. Most proteins from animal sources are balanced or high 
quality, whereas many plant proteins are not. Vegans and vegetarians must carefully mix 
their protein sources to obtain an overall balance.
Protein-to-calorie ratio is also often used as an indication of adequacy of protein 
intake in relation to total energy consumed. Pre-adult animals, including humans, have 
the greatest need for proteins (to grow new structure). A protein-to-calorie ratio below 
about 10% is associated with growth hindrance; that is, even if adequate calories are 
consumed, malnutrition occurs if there is insufficient protein.
FATS (LIPIDS)
Fats are esters, a chemical combination of one molecule of glycerol and three molecules 
of fatty acids (Figure 2.5). Chemically, fatty acids are relatively long carbon-based chains. 
The links between adjacent carbon atoms in these chains can be single chemical bonds 
(saturated) or double bonds (unsaturated). Saturated fats are lipids in which all of the side 
chain bonds are saturated: These give the overall molecule a long profile and tend to be 
solid at room temperature (e.g., lard and other animal-derived fats). Unsaturated fats are 
lipids in which all three fatty acids contain some double bonds that give the overall mol￾ecule a ball-like profile and tend to be liquid at room temperature (e.g., olive oil and most 
other plant-derived fats). There are graded degrees of unsaturation, depending on the 
number of unsaturated bonds. Monounsaturated fats (MUFA) have one double bond per 
chain, whereas polyunsaturated fats (PUFA) have two or more. Partial hydrogenation is a 20 Macronutrients, Micronutrients, and Metabolism
food production process in which some of the unsaturated bonds of an oil are saturated, 
such as producing margarine from oil.
FIGURE 2.5 The structure of fatty acids formed from three ester bonds between glycerol and 
fatty acids. The different classes of fatty acids discussed in the text are indicated. Also shown 
is cholesterol which, although not a fatty acid, is a cardiovascular health risk
It has been claimed that eating relatively high amounts of saturated fats is detrimental 
to health, in particular cardiovascular health, because they may increase the levels of 
cholesterol in the blood. By contrast, unsaturated fats are sometimes called heart healthy, 
and many restaurants no longer fry food using saturated fats. However, the evidence for 
this distinction is not always clear-cut (e.g., Siri-Tarino et al., 2010), and a stronger argu￾ment can be made for deleterious effects of high-fat diets of any kind (Harcombe, 2018).
Some fatty acids can be made or rearranged by chemical reactions in our body; those 
that cannot be so formed are called essential fatty acids, meaning that they must be 
derived from our diet. Essential fatty acids include PUFAs known as n-3 or omega-3 and Macronutrients, Micronutrients, and Metabolism 21
n-6 or omega-6. Oily fish such as salmon, herring, and sardines have a particularly high 
content of n-3 PUFA.
Triglycerides have to be broken down into free fatty acids in the gut by enzymes called 
lipases. Free fatty acids can be used directly for energy production or can be stored in adi￾pose tissue. Humans have multiple different adipose tissue depots, and these on average 
contain 87% triglycerides by weight and very little water (fats repel water). This latter 
observation is why adipose tissue, at ~9 kcal/g, is the densest form of energy storage.
Most foods are mixtures of all three macronutrient classes. The energy density of a 
food depends not only on its relative content of fat compared with protein and carbo￾hydrate, but also on the amount of non-energetic constituents such as water or fiber 
that it contains. Table 2.2 shows the typical relative sizes of major energy stores in an 
average-weight human. It is clear that plasma carries only a tiny fraction, that adipose 
tissue triglycerides contain at least 80% of the total, that glycogen (in muscle and 
liver) is about 2%, and that metabolizable protein is a substantial but ideally little-used 
source.
TABLE 2.2 Typical distribution of energy sources in a 70-kg human
Class Source Energy content (kJ)
Carbohydrates Plasma glucose 350
Liver glycogen 2,000
Muscle glycogen 6,000
Metabolizable protein Muscle, skin, gut 85,000
Lipids Plasma triglyceride + fatty acids 150
Adipose tissue triglyceride 450,000
Talking Point 2.3
Make a list of the sources of fat that you eat in a typical day – including in fried food, 
meat, baked products, and so on. Using food labels or a web source, break this 
down as best as you can into saturated and unsaturated categories. Discuss how you 
could reduce saturated fat intake.
MICRONUTRIENTS
In addition to energy-yielding macronutrients, a relatively large number of non-energetic 
dietary components are essential constituents for the structure and function of our 
bodies. The principal categories of these are salts and vitamins. Water is a non-caloric 
necessity but, compared with food, it has a separate set of regulatory systems. In addition 
to the water in beverages that we drink, foods contain variable amounts of water; it could 
thus be argued that we also eat water. We will not pursue aspects of fluid balance or thirst 
in this text (see Rowland [2022] for a comprehensive treatment).22 Macronutrients, Micronutrients, and Metabolism
Salts
Chemically, salts are molecules that contain positively charged cations of a metallic 
element such as sodium and negatively charged anions such as chloride. Most foods 
contain a mixture of salts, some in larger amounts than others, and those salts derive 
from the soil or other substrate in which plants grow. Animals contain specific salts, 
but those are accumulated from the plants and animal products that they eat. Given 
a balanced diet, it is likely that our salt requirements are met, but salt deficiencies can 
occur in eating disorders (see Chapter 10) and in absorption problems such as after 
bowel surgery.
The most abundant ion in our body is calcium (~1,000 g for an adult), followed by 
phosphate (~750 g). Our bones are made primarily of calcium phosphate, and deficiency 
of calcium leads to bone loss and diseases such as osteoporosis. Calcium is also vital in a 
great many intracellular processes, including release of hormones and neurotransmitters. 
Other ions that are abundant in our bodies include sodium, potassium, and chloride, 
which are the principal constituents of the fluid inside and surrounding most of the cells 
in our body. Other diet-derived salts that are present in much smaller amounts in the 
body include chromium, cobalt, copper, fluoride, iodide, iron, magnesium, manganese, 
molybdenum, selenium, sulfide, and zinc.
Insufficiency or deficiency of one or more of these ions interferes with a spectrum 
of physiological processes for which these ions are essential components or catalysts, 
but most usually deficiency of any of them is associated with a common symptom of 
tiredness or lethargy. One of the most prevalent of these deficiencies is iron. Iron is an 
essential component of hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying molecule in red blood cells, and 
insufficient iron is associated with anemia and resulting low oxygen-carrying capacity. 
Excessive loss of blood, including during menstruation or with repeated blood donation, 
can result in anemia and may be resolved by taking iron or mineral supplements.
These various salts or minerals generally are present in food in trace amounts; their 
weak taste is usually masked by the food itself. Sodium chloride (table salt) occupies a 
special niche. Table salt is added to many of our foods, either at the commercial produc￾tion stage or during cooking or eating, the latter being because many of us like or prefer 
a salty taste. Indeed, we have taste mechanisms that are narrowly tuned to the taste of 
sodium ions. This will be expanded upon in later chapters, particularly Chapter 4. For 
now, it is sufficient to note that sodium is unique among the salts insofar as humans 
and many animals exhibit a taste-driven specific appetite for sodium, or salts of sodium, 
when they are deficient in sodium. This is commonly known as salt appetite. Sodium is 
lost continuously in urine and sweat, and many salt or electrolyte-containing drinks are 
available especially for athletes and people who work in hot environments.
Talking Point 2.4
You have heard that high levels of dietary salt (sodium chloride) are undesirable, espe￾cially for people with high blood pressure or certain other physiological conditions. 
The daily amount of salt that is recommended for an adult is about 2 g. Examine food 
labels to estimate how much salt you consume daily (be sure to include any salt you 
sprinkle on your food). Also, most prepared food, such as pizza, is loaded with salt, 
so be sure to count that too!Macronutrients, Micronutrients, and Metabolism 23
Vitamins
Vitamins are defined as chemicals that are essential in small amounts for life but are 
not made in the body. They are found in many natural foods and are involved in a large 
number of physiological processes in the body. As is the case for minerals, a balanced 
diet will normally provide adequate amounts of the various vitamins, but deficiency in 
one or more vitamins is associated with often diffuse symptoms that include (again) 
tiredness. Vitamins can be placed in one of two categories (Table 2.3). Water soluble 
vitamins cannot be stored in appreciable amounts in the body and require continuous 
replenishment from diet. Fat soluble vitamins require dietary fat for absorption but are 
stored to some extent in fat depots. Prophylactic vitamin supplements are particularly 
recommended for children and the elderly, as well as in certain chronic surgical or other 
medical conditions.
TABLE 2.3 Classes of vitamins or vitamin families
Fat soluble vitamins (One member of 
each family shown)
Water soluble vitamins (Together, B 
vitamins are also known as the B-complex)
A (retinol) B1 (thiamin)
D (cholecalciferol) B2 (riboflavin)
E (α-tocopherol) B3 (niacin)
K (phylloquinone) B5 (pantothenic acid)
B6 (pyridoxine)
B7 (biotin)
B9 (folate)
B12 (cobalamin)
C (ascorbic acid)
SPECIALIST AND GENERALIST EATERS
In the first chapter, we noted that our hominid ancestors were hunter-gatherers: They 
ate whatever was available and are classified as omnivores. Here are some basic classes of 
eaters found in the animal kingdom, with the implication that the foods are consumed in 
their natural forms, without preparation.
• Omnivore – an animal eating or having the capability of eating most food types or 
classes.
• Carnivore – an animal eating exclusively or predominantly meat.
• Piscivore – a carnivorous animal eating primarily fish.
• Insectivore – a carnivorous animal (or plant!) that eats primarily insects.
• Herbivore – an animal eating exclusively or predominantly green plant material.
• Frugivore – herbivore or omnivore preferentially eating fruits.
• Granivore – animal that eats predominantly seeds.24 Macronutrients, Micronutrients, and Metabolism
People who exclude animal source foods (ASF) from their diet – namely, vegans, 
fruitarians, and vegetarians – generally consume less energy, with a lower proportion from 
fat, and more fiber, potassium, and vitamin C, than do ASF-eaters. Likewise, people who 
exclude ASF often have a lower BMI and positive long-range health outcomes associated 
with lower BMI. These types of diet restrictions are personal choices, driven by ethics, 
religious, or health concerns. They differ from food likes or dislikes of an individual that 
arise from taste, flavor, and experience eating that food. These latter will be discussed in 
subsequent chapters in this book. The aspect that ties all of these various food classes 
together is that they are composed (in varying proportions) of macronutrients that 
supply our bodies with the energy to function. It is this aspect to which we now turn our 
focus. All of these types of eaters are dependent on local flora and fauna to provide their 
food. Because the availability of one or more types of foods often varies with season of 
the year (Table 2.4), some degree of dietary flexibility is essential. Further, because single 
foods rarely contain all the essential macro- or micronutrients, some degree of dietary 
variation was necessary for our ancestors to achieve adequate growth and performance.
TABLE 2.4 Irregular or unpredictable nature of food sources for terrestrial mammals
Classification Example Strategic solution Comment
Seasonal availability of spe￾cific item(s)
Fruits, berries, nuts Find alternative 
foods during 
out-of-season
Food storage 
is viable for 
non-perishables
General seasonal decline of 
food
Harsh winters or 
arid summers
Migration, hiber￾nation, prior fat 
accumulation
For coastal 
dwellers, fish may 
be available
Intermittency of food 
availability
Encounters with 
prey species
Improve probability 
by learning prey 
patterns
Intermittent fasting 
diets (Chapter 11) 
similar
In the modern food world, the goal has shifted from basic survival to performance, 
health, and longevity. Most of us have adequate food supplies, choices, and access to 
knowledge about nutrition, yet often choose to restrict the food types we eat, as in these 
examples:
• Vegan – a person or diet that excludes all meat and animal products.
• Fruitarian – allowing only plant matter that can be gathered without harming 
the plant.
• Vegetarian – a person or diet that excludes all meat and some other animal products.
• Lacto-ovo vegetarian – a person or diet that excludes meat but includes milk 
and eggs.
• Pollo-pescatarian – a person or diet that includes chicken and fish, but not red meat.
Talking Point 2.5
According to www.foodallergy.org/resources/facts-and-statistics, some 10% of 
American adults and children have a food allergy, and 200,000 require emergency Macronutrients, Micronutrients, and Metabolism 25
medical treatment each year. Teenagers and young adults are the most likely to have 
serious or fatal food-related anaphylaxis. The most persistent allergies into adulthood 
are to peanuts and tree nuts and to fish or shellfish. For people with such allergies, 
the best strategy is to avoid eating these foods, but these are also impacting people 
without allergies: for example, schools prohibit nut snacks, and airlines do not serve 
peanuts.
Survey your class, friends, or family and assess how many people report food 
allergies and to what specific food or foods. Discuss with your class how you think 
these allergies come about and to what extent it is justified to apply food restrictions 
to the >90% who do not have an allergy. If you have a food allergy, share the experi￾ence with your class.
Let’s review and apply your knowledge. Take some time to answer these chapter 
questions:
• What are the main types of dietary self-restriction found in today’s society?
• What are the subdivisions of carbohydrates? What are some sources of these?
• Describe the subdivisions of fats and what makes them different. Which are the 
most healthful, and which can be detrimental to health?
• What is essential about essential amino acids and fatty acids? How could you 
most easily ensure that your diet contains adequate amounts of these?
• What are the three main ways that energy expenditure occurs? Can these be 
influenced by factors under our control? Explain. What accounts for the majority 
of energy output?
ANSWERS TO THE “DO THE MATH” ENERGY 
CALCULATIONS
1 Three hundred grams of fat per day yield 300 × 9 = 2,700 kcal.
2 The individual carries 30% of 200 lbs = 60 lbs, or approximately 30 kg of fat. At 
300 g per day, this would last 100 days.
3 On a 50% diet, it would last twice as long – 200 days. To lose half the fat (to 15%) 
on the 50% diet would take half that time – 100 days. Reasonable weight loss 
on a strict diet takes months to achieve. Commercial dietary claims of massive 
weight loss in a short time are fake facts.26 Macronutrients, Micronutrients, and Metabolism
GLOSSARY
Activity-related metabolism The energy expenditure above basal that can be 
attributed to physical activity.
Adipose tissue Tissue aggregates or depots that are made of 
cells that store large amounts of triglycerides.
Aerobic metabolism Biochemical cycles that use oxygen in transform￾ation of food-derived fuels into cellular energy.
Amino acids Series of 20 naturally occurring molecules 
containing an organic acid (−COOH) and an 
amine (−NH2) group.
Animal source food (ASF) A food derived from animals, including meat, 
eggs, and milk products.
Basal metabolic rate The rate at which energy is expended when a 
person is at physical rest.
Cellulose A fiber made up of glucose molecules, but joined 
in such a way that they cannot be broken down 
and used for energy by humans and many other 
animals. It is one of the most common dietary 
fibers.
Chemiosmotic potential A chain of reactions inside cells that involves 
transferring protons (H+) between molecules (or 
electrons in the other direction) that eventually 
generate most of the ATP in cells.
Citric acid cycle A cyclic chain of chemical reactions that 
transforms metabolic fuels into energy.
Complex carbohydrate Also known as starch. A metabolizable mol￾ecule composed of many glucose molecules 
joined in either linear (amylose) or branched 
(amylopectin) chains. To be nutritionally useful, 
these chains must be broken down to glucose by 
enzymes in the digestive tract.
Dietary fiber Refers to large molecules derived from plants that 
are not broken down by human and some other 
animal digestive systems, and so no energy can 
be derived. These molecules pass essentially 
unchanged through our digestive tract and con￾stitute bulk or “roughage.”
Disaccharide A carbohydrate formed by chemical union of 
two monosaccharide rings. Examples include 
sucrose (glucose + fructose) and lactose (glu￾cose + galactose).Macronutrients, Micronutrients, and Metabolism 27
Energy balance The difference, over a suitable time frame, 
between energy input as food and energy 
expenditure as metabolic rate.
Energy density The metabolizable energy of a food. A given 
foodstuff is usually a mixture of the three 
macronutrients, plus non-nutritive constituents 
such as water. Foods with high water or fiber 
content have low energy density. Foods with 
high fat content have high energy density.
Enzyme A complex protein that catalyzes or facilitates 
the conversion of one or more different molecules 
into a product (or products) in an enzymatic 
reaction. Enzymes are usually highly specific, 
catalyzing only one specific reaction.
Essential amino acid Any one of 10 (of the 20) naturally occurring 
amino acids that cannot be made in the body. 
These have to be obtained by eating food 
containing adequate amounts.
Essential fatty acid A fatty acid that is required (in small amounts) 
but cannot be synthesized in the body: It must be 
derived from specific food(s).
Fatty acid A carbon-based chain ending with an organic 
acid (−COOH) group that is a component of 
dietary fat. It is usually esterified with glycerol to 
form triacylglycerol molecules.
Glycemic index The increase above basal in blood glucose 
level, integrated across time until it returns to 
baseline, following consumption of a unit weight 
of a food. By convention, pure glucose has an 
index of 100, and other foods are compared 
with this standard.
Glycemic load A similar concept to glycemic index, but in rela￾tion to a specific food item, accounting for the 
actual amount of carbohydrate in that item.
High fructose corn syrup (HFCS) Inexpensive and widely used sweetener in 
manufactured foods. Corn starch is broken 
down into glucose, and then some of the glu￾cose is enzymatically converted into fructose 
(which makes it sweeter).
Imbalanced protein A protein that is deficient in one or more essen￾tial amino acids.
Iron An element (Fe) that is essential to several bio￾logical reactions in our body. For example, iron 
is part of the hemoglobin complex that carries 
oxygen in our bloodstream.28 Macronutrients, Micronutrients, and Metabolism
Kilocalorie A common unit in which to express energy 
intake. It may be referred to as calories (as 
in your diet), but this is technically incorrect 
because one calorie is one-thousandth of a kilo￾calorie and is defined as the amount of energy 
required to raise the temperature of 1 g of water 
by 1ºC.
Kilojoule The international unit for expressing energy 
intake, used in most places outside the U.S.A. 
It is approximately 4.2 times smaller than a 
kilocalorie.
Macronutrient An energy-yielding food component of carbohy￾drate, protein, or fat classes.
Metabolic rate The rate at which energy is expended over 
a suitable period of time. It includes basal 
metabolic rate, energy cost of physical 
activity, and that used to generate excess heat 
(thermogenesis).
Metabolism Complex series of chemical reactions inside the 
body that transform nutrients into the heat and 
energy necessary to sustain life.
Metabolizable energy The actual energy yield derived from unit 
mass (most usually 1 g) of a macronutrient. 
The metabolizable energies of carbohydrates, 
proteins, and fats are approximately 4, 4, and 
9 kilocalories per gram (kcal/g) or 17, 17, and 
38 kilojoules per gram (kJ/g), respectively.
Mitochondria Energy-generating organelles inside cells.
Monosaccharide Also known as simple sugar; a carbohydrate in 
which each molecule consists of a single basic 
ring of four to five carbon atoms and one oxygen 
atom. Examples include glucose, fructose, and 
galactose.
Omnivore An animal that usually eats or is able to digest 
foods from a wide variety of sources.
Protein A protein is typically a chain of several hundred 
amino acids joined chemically. The order in 
which the amino acids are joined is specified by 
our genes, and different sequences give rise to 
different proteins that have various functions in 
our bodies, such as structural proteins or enzymes 
that catalyze specific chemical reactions.Macronutrients, Micronutrients, and Metabolism 29
REFERENCES
Foster-Powell, K., Holt, S. H. A., & Brand-Miller, J. C. (2002). International table of glycemic index and 
glycemic load values: 2002. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 76, 5–56. doi:10.1093/ajcn/
76.1.5
Harcombe, Z. (2018). US dietary guidelines: Is saturated fat a nutrient of concern? British Journal of 
Sports Medicine. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099420
Rowland, N. E. (2022). Thirst and body fluid regulation: From nephron to neuron. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press (274 pp). doi:10.1017/9781108878166
Siri-Tarino, P. W., Sun, Q., Hu, F. B., & Krauss, R. M. (2010). Meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies 
evaluating the association of saturated fat with cardiovascular disease. American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition, 91, 535–546. doi:10.3945/ajcn.2009.27725
Wilson, D. F. (2015). Programming and regulation of metabolic homeostasis. American Journal of 
Physiology, Endocrinology and Metabolism, 308, E506-17. doi:10.1152/ajpendo.00544.2014
Saturated fats Triglyceride molecules in which the three fatty 
acid chains contain only saturated (single) 
bonds in the carbon backbone.
Specific appetite for sodium Taste-guided behavior seeking sodium salts in 
the environment.
Starches Generic name for glucose polymers, most usu￾ally in plants, that can be broken down for 
usable energy.
Thermogenic Chemical or physiological reaction or series of 
reactions that generate heat.
Triglyceride An ester of glycerol and fatty acids. Fatty acids 
can be saturated or unsaturated, and the latter 
occur either as monounsaturates (MUFA) or 
polyunsaturates (PUFA, notably some fish oils).
Unsaturated fats Triglyceride molecules in which one or more of 
the three fatty acid chains contain unsaturated 
(double) bonds in the carbon backbone.
Vitamins Compounds that occur in trace amounts in 
various foods and are essential for optimal meta￾bolic and other life processes.DOI: 10.4324/9781032621401-3
CHAPTER 3
You Are What You Eat
Energy Flow
After reading this chapter, you will be able to
• Understand the process of natural selection as it applies to feeding behavior.
• Understand the concept of energy and its flow through organisms.
• Apply the concept of optimal foraging to the economics of energy acquisition.
• Interpret the relation of portion size in the modern world to these concepts.
In Chapter 2, we described the constituents of food and how these are stored in the body. 
It could be argued that the sole purpose of eating, at least in an evolutionary sense, is to 
grow or maintain those energy reserves. For many species and especially omnivores, food 
is not a constant or continuously available commodity. Indeed, in many instances, food 
acquisition must be opportunistic or dependent upon the proximity or availability of 
food item(s). We start this chapter with an evolutionary context.
HOMINID EVOLUTION
The theory of evolution attributed to Charles Darwin proposed that species evolve by a 
very slow process called natural selection. This means that a species will change, over a 
long time span, if that change allows the individuals or group to exploit or compete for 
resources better than their ancestors or competitors. These individuals are said to have 
higher biological fitness because they live to produce more offspring inheriting the fitness 
traits encoded in their genes. Most scientists are swayed by overwhelming evidence that 
humans and all living entities past and present are products of natural selection. At the 
behavioral level, choices and decision making are crucial cognitive manifestations of nat￾ural selection, enhancing survival and fitness in a particular environment.
Fossil records show that the earliest hominids appeared about 4.5 million years ago; 
they were hunter-gatherers – food acquisition was central to their survival. In the next 
4–5 million years of hominids’ existence, prior to the emergence about 200,000 years 
ago of modern humans (Homo sapiens), species of Australopithecus and Homo evolved 
only to suffer extinction. A common theme of hominid evolution is the progressive alter￾ation of body shape or size, including stature becoming more erect, altered jaw and tooth 
structure (adapting to different foods), and the development of a bigger brain. This large You Are What You Eat: Energy Flow 31
brain has allowed communication and cooperation for food resources, culture, agricul￾ture, and technology.
The human brain has some 100 billion specialized cells called neurons. Big brains 
come at a significant cost because neurons are relative energy gluttons (Table 3.1). If we 
compare ourselves with nonhuman primates of similar body size (chimpanzees), brain 
size is twofold to threefold higher in humans. At birth, the human brain weighs about 
500 g, or 15% of typical newborn body mass, and that brain may account for up to 85% 
of the total energy budget or metabolic rate. By age 2, the brain has grown to near adult 
size (modifications of brain connectivity continue at least into late adolescence), whereas 
the body is still only about 20% of adult size. This large and disproportionate early devel￾opment of the brain in humans poses uniquely large demands on energy intake by human 
infants. This is manifest prenatally as rapid fetal development through the assimilation 
of nutrients circulating in the mother’s bloodstream. Postnatally, these demands are met 
by innate behaviors and digestive systems that are optimal for obtaining and absorbing 
nutrients from milk, traditionally provided by the mother. In Chapter 8, we discuss the 
ontogeny of feeding in infants and children. Maternal milk is an animal source food 
(ASF), high in fat and energy density, that provides all of the necessary nutrients for 
growth until the infant is able to be weaned to fully independent feeding.
TABLE 3.1 Approximate sizes and energy use of brains in hominids
Brain weight (g) Brain weight as % 
body weight
Brain metabolic cost 
(% of MR)
Adult chimpanzee 500 1 10*
Human newborn 500 15 85*
Adult human 1400 2 20
* Assuming a metabolic rate per unit brain weight similar to adult humans.
ENERGY FLOW
Almost all animal and plant life on this planet exists in a thin and fragile shell, extending 
from a little below sea level to about 5 km above, and essentially the only source of new 
energy for life in that shell is electromagnetic radiation from the sun. Plants harness 
the energy from that radiation and transform it into chemical energy that is stored in 
molecules and later released as energy (notably, ATP) to drive cellular reactions and 
interactions (see Chapter 2). Animals harness that chemical energy as food, either derived 
directly from eating plants or indirectly by eating other animals and ASFs.
To understand eating, you must understand energy flow through an organism. This 
can be illustrated in oversimplified form by analogy to a bank account. This has one 
source of input, currency, be that in cash or electronic format, and is analogous to 
food we eat. Some deposits may be bigger than others and they may occur at irregular 
intervals, but they have a common currency in which they can be expressed (e.g., 
dollars). A bank account also has outputs in the form of withdrawals, some of which 
might occur on a regular basis (e.g., rent), and some of which are occasional (e.g., 
buying a birthday present). These outputs are expressed in the same currency as the 
inputs. If, over a given time period, the inputs exceed the outputs, then the balance 32 You Are What You Eat: Energy Flow
in the bank account increases. On the other hand, if outputs exceed inputs, then the 
balance in the account decreases. Returning to a living organism, when its “energy 
account” is depleted below a critical level, it cannot function and will die of starvation. 
Thus, in order to live and do the things for which our bodies have evolved, we must 
have an adequate source of food and the physiological mechanisms to both store and 
mobilize the energy in that food. Unlike each dollar in the bank account, all calories 
are not quite equal. That is because, as noted in Chapter 2, living organisms are less 
efficient at extracting energy from food than a chemical calorimeter burning it. This 
efficiency varies with the type or complexity of the food and endogenous factors such 
as genes or current stores. We use food more efficiently when we are energy depleted, 
as in starvation or chronic dieting.
Metabolic rate is a continuous albeit fluctuating energy requirement, yet food intake 
is not continuous and most usually occurs in episodes. Thus, the system(s) that regulate 
energy flow must be able to accommodate this temporal mismatch and do so by creating 
internal food buffers – mostly as stored fat and, to a lesser extent, as glycogen. We often 
refer to feeding episodes as meals, but this concept is not as simple as it may appear. You 
probably have your own concept of what constitutes a meal: Perhaps it has to do with 
how much food is consumed, the time of day, or the social milieu within which the 
eating occurs. Those are all person-centered, modern factors. But let’s go back to our own 
(and animals’) evolutionary past for a broader perspective.
The food habits of many animals were and remain source-to-mouth, in part because 
small food items often cannot be transported and/or stored conveniently. Absent trans￾portation, the pattern of eating such a food is determined by the frequency with which 
it is encountered and the amounts at each discrete encounter. Episodes of eating may be 
punctuated by rest or sleep periods, and these could be used to define boundaries. Most 
animals show a daily or circadian rhythm to their eating: They are often either nocturnal 
or diurnal feeders, with the remainder of the 24-hour cycle spent in a rest or sleep state.
Thus, for opportunistic or other reasons, the actual loading of food energy through 
the mouth is relatively brief and episodic contrasted with the continuous needs for 
energy for use in metabolism and physical activity. Once food has been swallowed to 
the stomach it is digested, in a process that involves enzymatic breakdown and passage 
(via peristalsis) along the intestine until the usable energy is absorbed across the wall of 
the intestine into the bloodstream. This process of digestion is not instantaneous, but it 
is most rapid soon after eating and slows in an approximately exponential manner until 
compete after 2–3 hours, depending mainly on the size of the meal or snack. Thus, while 
digestion somewhat smooths the energy input across time, it is still very much fluctu￾ating and/or intermittent.
Talking Point 3.1
In an average day, how long do you spend in the act of eating (don’t include thinking 
about, waiting for, or driving to food)? Survey your class or friends for their answers. 
You might find that the outcome is surprisingly small and is only a tiny fraction of 24 
hours. How is that eating distributed in time? Many people eat in two to four large 
episodes per day, which we call meals (e.g., breakfast, lunch, dinner), and several 
small episodes, which we call snacks. Again, survey your class or friends for their 
responses.You Are What You Eat: Energy Flow 33
Some animals, and in particular humans, have developed strategies to carry and hoard 
larger food items in a secure location. These individuals are called central place foragers, 
and there is either a complete or partial temporal disconnect between acquisition and 
consumption of food. Humans are highly accomplished central place foragers. With 
embellishments including social food sharing and, more recently, central production 
of food in agriculture, we have developed into occasional eaters. Because hunters and 
gatherers leave the central location during the day, feeding episodes both before and 
after the daily activities were most likely to conform to what we now consider a meal 
(e.g., breakfast and dinner). Even within the modern context of plentiful food for meals, 
humans have a wide variation in their proclivity to snack or otherwise exhibit so-called 
chaotic eating (Schüz et al., 2017; Zimmerman et al., 2018).
Talking Point 3.2
Dieticians and other people who give advice about eating often talk about “listening 
to your body signals” in relation to hunger and satiety. Based on the text, including 
the concept of opportunism, discuss whether you think there has been evolutionary 
pressure to develop satiety mechanisms that have strong control over behavior and 
especially termination of eating. If, instead, such controls are relatively weak, do you 
think strategies to “enhance satiety” are a useful approach to reducing overall food 
intake through dieting? (See also Chapter 12.)
PERIODICITY OF FOOD INTAKE
The foregoing questions about how much time eating occupies is part of a larger organ￾izing principle of timing or periodicity. There are three broad classes of rhythms:
• Ultradian, or less than a typical day (24 hours). One application to feeding is the 
timing between meals or large eating episodes. In most cultures, humans eat three 
meals spaced by about 6 hours and then have a 12-hour period without meals.
• Circadian, or daily. Under normal circumstances, these are locked or entrained to the 
light–dark cycle, although other entrainers can be effective, including access to food 
restricted to the same time every day.
• Infradian, or more than 24 hours. Seasonal changes in type or abundance of food 
are among factors that can drive these rhythms, although they are not prominent in 
modern humans and will not be mentioned further.
As mentioned before, the intermittent feeding implied by the above periodicities 
requires the ability to store energy in internal stores and to mobilize it for immediate 
energy use. In the ultradian case, a meal is eaten, and then eating stops, which corres￾ponds to what we call satiation or satiety. The absence of food intake in the following 
between-meals interval defines satiety. Satiety is thought to be strongest at the end of 
and soon after a meal, when the absorption of nutrients from the gut is maximum, and 
storage of excess energy occurs. As time since the last meal increases, so the rate of 
absorption slows, and satiety is less potent. Eventually, satiety wanes so that it no longer 34 You Are What You Eat: Energy Flow
is effective, fuel mobilization predominates, and a state of hunger occurs. Hunger then 
motivates food seeking and eating, so restarting the meal-to-meal cycle.
Superimposed on this ultradian cycle is a circadian cycle, which sets a context for 
storage or mobilization at different phases of the day–night cycle. Our human ancestors 
ate during the day, although modern humans have a number of available strategies, 
including artificial illumination, that allow more flexibility in feeding times. Human 
newborns demand food about every two hours, day and night – much to the dismay 
of the parents – but the circadian component develops over the next few months, and 
infants then sleep all night.
These various rhythms are executed or enabled by oscillations in a large number of 
hormones and transmitters (see Chapter 5). And it should be emphasized that these 
underlie probabilities of eating and are not absolute determinants. Next, we will briefly 
describe the autonomic nervous system, which is particularly involved in the storage and 
mobilization aspects of internal body stores.
AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
Some aspects of feeding, and especially food acquisition and the episodic act of eating, 
are conscious activities. For solid food, humans engage chewing (masticatory) muscles, 
and the force and frequency of chewing will depend on the physical characteristics of 
the food item such as size, hardness, and the size of each bite. Bite size is often limited by 
food processing or preparation such as cooking or packaging and/or the implements used 
to handle that food (e.g., fork, chopsticks). These were probably less important consid￾erations in our distant ancestors. Normally, adequate chewing of food into smaller parts 
is followed by reflexive swallowing, although, as noted elsewhere, there must be ejection 
mechanisms, such as for inedible husks or undesirable taste. Many of these complex acts 
involve the tongue and rapid feedback of somatosensory information such as texture and 
mouth position into motor reflexes. These details are beyond the scope of this text, but it 
is relevant to note that chew then swallow episodes typically occur in contiguous clusters 
called feeding bouts.
Most of the aspects of passage of food through the gut and its absorption, energy 
storage, and release occur automatically. One component of swallowing is peristalsis, 
starting in the esophagus, to propel each food bolus (mouthful after chewing) into the 
stomach. This is achieved by progressive unidirectional constriction of muscles to produce 
a wavelike progression. Additionally, peristalsis is a critical component of moving food 
through the gastrointestinal tract as it is digested, and region-specific radial and longitu￾dinal muscles achieve appropriate vigor of propulsion. These smooth muscle movements 
along the gut are reflexive – there is little or no voluntary control.
Another involuntary aspect of digestion, and later storage or mobilization of the 
energy in that food, is via the autonomic nervous system. This part of the peripheral 
nervous system sends executive signals from the brain to all internal organs, such as 
heart, liver, blood vessels, and adipose tissue (fat). The autonomic nervous system has 
two, usually opposing, divisions. The sympathetic division uses norepinephrine (NE) 
as its primary transmitter and dominates during activities such as hunting or gathering 
food. The parasympathetic division uses acetylcholine (ACh) as its primary transmitter 
and dominates during relaxed times such as digesting a meal. Almost all organs receive 
both sympathetic and parasympathetic inputs – an analogy is both gas pedal and brake. 
The optimal function of these systems requires sensory information from the peripheral 
organs. As will be described in Chapter 4, most of these organs contain specific receptors You Are What You Eat: Energy Flow 35
which transform or transduce a relevant variable into action potential(s) that go to the 
brain. Of specific relevance to eating, sensory receptors for energy-related molecules, 
including glucoreceptors for glucose, are found in many organs, including the liver and 
parts of the brain.
FIGURE 3.1 Schematic of the human peripheral nervous system. Spinal nerves are arranged 
as 31 sensory and motor pairs along the cord. The brain has 12 cranial nerves (although 
not all are paired; detail omitted for simplicity). Most peripheral organs receive sympathetic 
(S) and parasympathetic (P) innervation, and some of them send sensory signals to the brain
Food for Thought
We asked earlier how long you spend eating. The answer was probably less than 1 hour, 
but let’s be generous and equate this to 4% of each 24-hour period. This means that the 
remaining 96% is not spent consuming. Thus, all of our daily energy is “loaded” during 
4% of the time. The remainder is spent in early and late post-meal phases. In the early 
phase, food is being absorbed in excess of current needs, and the excess is stored, pri￾marily as glycogen and fat. This storage process is orchestrated mainly by the autonomic 
nervous system (parasympathetic division), which controls the secretion of hormones 
and other internal actions to optimize the disposition of the incoming energy. In the late 
phase, food absorption is very low and less than current metabolic requirements, and so 
an appropriate amount of stored energy has to be retrieved (mobilized). This too is pri￾marily orchestrated by the autonomic nervous system, but now the sympathetic division. 
We will not include further details, but you should know the general concept because 
various parts of this text mention sympathetic or parasympathetic effects on energy flow. 
An important point is that autonomic outflow is controlled by many regions of the brain, 
including the hypothalamus and brainstem.
OPTIMAL FORAGING
The last part of this chapter addresses aspects of food acquisition. Optimal foraging the￾ories propose that individuals of a given species adopt the best possible set of behaviors 
in a given environment, including the balance between meal-eating and grazing strategies 
discussed above. Although energy balance is at the core of foraging theory and will be 
the focus of our discussion, another consideration is that foraging is not risk-free. Injury 
or loss of life during foraging is an energy-gathering cost that affects the inclusive fitness 
of a population or species.36 You Are What You Eat: Energy Flow
From a perspective of energy balance, foraging behavior is associated with increased 
physical activity and a resultant higher metabolic rate. Thus, some fraction of the energy 
yield of food has to be repaid as the cost of obtaining that food, as in this equation:
Gross energy gain = metabolizable energy in food − energy used in foraging
Both basal metabolic rate and the cost of exertion are roughly proportional to body 
mass. Thus, a lean or light individual will have more gross energy gain from a particular 
quantity of food than a fatter or heavier individual. Weight loss is an effective way of 
reducing obligatory energy expenditure. When food is scarce or expensive and foraging 
costs high, being heavy is an energetic disadvantage. Conversely, if food is abundant and 
foraging costs are low, being heavy is not a disadvantage in the short term, and excess 
intake will be stored in the body as fat. From this theoretical perspective, obesity is the 
inevitable product of an obesogenic environment in which plentiful food is frequently 
available at low cost. Before considering some aspects of obesogenic environments, we 
next discuss exercise-related energy output.
ENERGY OUTPUT: EXERCISE
Every anti-obesity intervention, including diet, drugs, or surgery, comes along with the 
qualifier “and exercise.” Reduction of intake is necessary but is more effective in a context 
of increased energy expenditure. Every aspect of modern life is replete with devices, such 
as automobiles and elevators, that decrease personal energy expenditure. Thus, compared 
with our ancestors, whose energy expenditure was in natural foraging, we often have to 
manufacture exercise.
The energy cost of exercise increases with body weight and with the intensity and 
duration of the activity. To compensate for differences in body weight, energy output 
is most often expressed in metabolic equivalent of task (MET) units, where 1 MET is 
defined as 1 kcal/kg body weight/hour. Thus, for a 70-kg (154-lb) person, 1 MET equals 
70 kcal/hour, while, for someone twice the weight (140 kg; 308 lbs), 1 MET equals 
140 kcal/hour. Basal metabolic rate (BMR) is only slightly less than 1 MET, and so, to a 
good approximation, the MET value of an activity reflects the fold-increase above BMR. 
Table 3.2 shows the approximate MET values associated with a number of activities. 
Since BMR is about 24 METs per day, to increase that by only 10% would require at least 
1 hour of brisk walking.
TABLE 3.2 MET values associated with various physical activities
Physical activity MET range
Sleeping, watching television 0.9–1.0
Typical desk work, light housework, slow walking 1.5–2.5
Brisk walking, heavy housework, golf (walking) 3.0–5.0
Fast walking/jogging (5 mph), exercise bicycle/flat cycling, 
casual sports
5.5–7.5
High intensity or uphill exercise, heavy manual labor 8–11
Trained athlete at maximum exertion >20You Are What You Eat: Energy Flow 37
BOX 3.1 DO THE MATH
1 Suppose your BMR is 1 MET and you spend an entire 24-hour period doing 
absolutely nothing: What is your total energy expenditure in MET-hours? 
(1 MET-hour = 1 kcal/kg). Next day, you decide to get up and go for a brisk walk 
(at 4 METs) for 1 hour and collapse back on the couch for the other 23 hours. 
What is your energy expenditure? (In this and the examples below, the MET 
value of activity includes the basal rate of 1 MET.)
2 Another day, you increase the duration of your brisk walk to 2 hours: What is your 
expenditure? And another day you get up off the couch for just 1 hour and run at 
7 mph at 8 METs: What is your expenditure now?
3 Then you get a job: Routine office work (8 hours at 2 METs) and commuting by 
public transportation (1 hour at 2 METs), with the remaining 15 hours at home 
doing nothing; again, what is your expenditure? Next, you still have your job, but 
on the way home you stop at the gym for a 1-hour moderate-to-vigorous workout 
at 8 METs: What is your expenditure?
4 Last, you weigh about 150 lbs and, for simplicity, assume that 1 MET = 75 kcal/
hour. Your gym has a “juice bar” and they sell a 300-kcal, 20-ounce smoothie 
(this is a fairly typical size) that you just can’t resist. For how much extra time
would you have to do your gym workout to offset the calories in the smoothie? 
(Answers at the end of the chapter.)
Many people simply don’t have or don’t allocate sufficient time for moderate exer￾cise and/or are unwilling or unable to perform high-intensity exercise in order to 
make a very large increase in their daily energy expenditure. And, even if an individual 
exercises at a level that for most people is quite intense, one average snack or beverage 
can completely undo the energy benefit. Exercise is a good idea because it has other 
benefits besides calorie burning, but it is not a good idea to think that exercise alone can 
solve obesity. Small movements over a long period of time can have cumulative bene￾ficial effects, which is why there is interest in promoting workplace strategies such as 
stand-up desks, exercise ball chairs, or simply stretching or standing from time to time. 
Standing up and either walking or stepping in place only during the advertisements 
while watching TV almost doubled energy expenditure during an entire viewing period 
(Steeves et al., 2012).
Talking Point 3.3
Many people agree that exercise would be a good idea, but seem to be unable or 
unwilling to put that belief into action. Why is this so difficult? How many resolutions 
to walk or jog regularly are broken? How many pieces of home exercise equipment 
lie unused? How many gym memberships are allowed to lapse? Can you find any 
data on these, or cite personal experience?38 You Are What You Eat: Energy Flow
MOTIVATION AND THE ECONOMICS OF FOOD
Given these limitations to stimulating energy output, we return to the input side of the 
equation. We left off with optimal foraging theory which, in part, regards the individual 
as ready to take optimal advantage of a food resource whenever it appears. We describe 
this type of person or animal as an opportunistic eater. In an environment in which 
food is scarce, being highly opportunistic is essential to survival. In an environment in 
which food is plentiful and easily available, being an opportunistic eater promotes greatly 
increased consumption.
Optimal foraging theory places a measurable cost, usually in energy units, on acqui￾sition of food. However, for most of the urbanized and industrialized modern human 
world, food has become a commodity, and very little physical effort is expended in 
obtaining it. Instead, the effort takes the form of a token – money (and, implicitly, time 
acquiring that token) – that is exchanged for the commodity in an economic transaction.
One branch of economics is the study of consumer demand for a commodity as its 
cost or unit price changes. The relationship is called a demand function (Figure 3.2). 
One index that is commonly used is elasticity and is founded on the concept that a fixed 
amount of resource (e.g., money, energy) is available for that resource. For example, a 20% 
increase in price would decrease demand by 20%; if the actual decrease in demand were 
less than 20%, then the demand would be relatively inelastic, whereas, if the decrease in 
demand were more than 20%, the demand would be relatively elastic.
FIGURE 3.2 Left panel: Hypothetical demand curves – the change in amount (number of units) 
purchased or consumed as a function of unit price. (Note that both axes are logarithmic.) 
Shown are function for elasticity = 1, low (<1) and high (>1) elasticities, and for the case of 
complete price insensitivity (inelastic). The right panel shows the relative change in total cost 
that would result from these demand curves
A meta-analysis of demand elasticity for food derived from over 160 diverse studies 
published between 1938 and 2007 (Andreyeva et al., 2010) found that the mean price 
elasticity was less than 1.0 (i.e., all goods had relatively inelastic demand curves), with You Are What You Eat: Energy Flow 39
the lowest elasticity for staples such as eggs. However, purchase and consumption are not 
necessarily identical. Purchased food may be used in at least three ways: Food consumed 
to meet immediate energy needs, excess food that is consumed and stored as adipose 
tissue, or food stored in a cache such as a pantry.
Are the same general principles of food demand found in modern humans? In a vir￾tual snack purchase study reported by Epstein et al. (2018), subjects were asked how 
many 30-g portions of a preferred snack they would buy at each of a range of prices, 
ranging from free to prohibitively expensive. The snacks were in either a low energy 
density category (e.g., fruits, vegetables) or high energy density (e.g., cookies, chips). For 
simplicity, we have averaged these two categories, because the results were only mod￾estly different. Despite the very large differences between the conditions and prices of 
the human and mouse studies, there is impressive agreement between the results. In both 
species, demand is relatively inelastic (i.e., a tenfold increase in price produced only a 
twofold decrease in demand within these price ranges).
Most real-life studies in humans, such as potential taxation on sugar-containing drinks, 
have examined price increases of only a few percent, and, while there are short-term 
declines in demand for that item (presumably an alternative is purchased), the long-term 
effectiveness of such a strategy may not be as great because consumers become used to 
the higher price.
Talking Point 3.4
The typical price for a 30-g serving of chips or cookies from vending machines is 
about $2. Suppose you typically eat such a snack every day but, unannounced, the 
vendor increases the price by 25% to $2.50. Will you be 25% less likely to pur￾chase your snack, or will you simply accept the fact that this is the new price? By 
how much would the price need to increase in order to change your behavior? What 
implications do these results have for dietary moderation in humans if barriers such 
as restriction or taxation were to be considered? These animal experiments used a 
single food, but humans live in a more varied food world. What do you think would 
be the effect if only certain foods were so taxed?
Talking Point 3.5
Whether eating in a restaurant or purchasing food at a supermarket, actual payment 
is usually a single event, more like an appetitive cost. In many restaurants, payment is 
after eating, but you know and accept that cost before you order the food. In contrast, 
most vending machines are effectively pay as you eat. Do you think that these two 
modes of payment would have different effects on human meal size or frequency, as 
they did in the rodent studies? Why or why not?
That brings us to the question of what determines meal or portion size in modern 
humans? Table 3.3 shows the typical portion sizes and energy yield of Western-style 
foods now and 20 years ago. In most cases, the portion size and energy intake have 
doubled, which has led to an overall recalibration of what is considered a normal portion 40 You Are What You Eat: Energy Flow
or, consonantly, portion distortion. For example, a muffin today is still made of more or 
less the same ingredients as 20 years ago, but it’s more than twice the mass and energy. 
Even our beverages have changed – as shown in Table 3.3 – with a more than threefold 
increase in mean size and associated energy load of soda served or (not shown) in drinks 
such as coffee which have increased dramatically in energy content as more energy-dense 
additives such as cream are used.
TABLE 3.3 Average U.S. portion size today and 20 years ago
20 years ago Today
Food item Portion Kcal (kJ) Portion Kcal (kJ)
Bagel 3ʺ (8-cm) diam. 140 (588) 6ʺ (15-cm) diam. 350 (1,470)
Cheeseburger 1 333 (1,400) 1 590 (2,480)
Spaghetti & 
meatballs
1 cup sauce + 3 
small meatballs
500 (2,100) 2 cups sauce + 3 
large meatballs
1,020 (5,040)
Soda 6.5 oz. (192 ml) 82 (344) 20 oz. (591 ml) 250 (1,050)
Fruit muffin 1.5 oz. (42 g) 210 (882) 5 oz. (140 g) 500 (2,100)
Source: www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/educational/wecan/eat-right/distortion.htm
You might be surprised to know that the typical diameter of dinner plates has 
increased during the past 25 years from 10ʺ to 12ʺ, representing a 44% increase in area. 
In almost every example in Table 3.3, the dispensed portion size is not under the control 
of the consumer – it is determined by the food industry. The food industry is responding 
to actual or perceived consumer demand, including how to maintain that demand or 
market in the future. The cost of manufacturing or producing food today is typically 
only a small fraction of its retail price. Much of the retail cost is fixed as personnel costs, 
building rent, and insurance and is not related to food mass or energy yield. It costs 
very little more to the provider to serve a large compared with a small portion. Thus, 
increased portion size is an inexpensive way for a business to attract customers. Industry 
advocates often consider that a large dispensed portion size gives customers a choice –
that is, they may choose to eat only part of the portion. In practice, however, people 
are very poor at exercising this choice: Instead, they subscribe to the “clean plate club” 
and tend to eat everything that is served, so that an increase in served portion size does 
increase consumption.
Several studies have reported that the amount of an item self-served and/or consumed 
is influenced by the size of the bowl, container, or implement used (Wansink & Kim, 
2005). However, not all studies have found this effect when varying container or serving 
size. Rolls et al. (2007) examined the amount of macaroni and cheese lunch consumed as 
a function of plate size. One critical difference between these two sets of studies is that 
the former occurred in social eating situations, while the latter was conducted in indi￾vidual cubicles. Rolls et al. suggest that the individual eating condition in their studies 
might be the critical difference from the social eating situations used by Wansink and 
colleagues.You Are What You Eat: Energy Flow 41
The rate of eating also influences the amount consumed. This was first described by 
Dr. Horace Fletcher who, in the 19th century, advocated that food should be chewed 
exactly 32 times(!) before being swallowed. In an empirical test of the effectiveness of 
this strategy of fletcherism in young women, Andrade and colleagues (2008) presented a 
test lunch with directions to eat either quickly or slowly. Subjects were tested under both 
conditions, on different days, and in random order. The lunch was a large (600 g) portion 
of seasoned ditalini pasta (small unit size) and water, and subjects could eat as much as 
they liked. In the fast-eating condition, subjects were given a large spoon and told to con￾sume their meal as rapidly as possible with no pauses between bites; their average meal 
duration was 8.6 min. In the slow-eating condition, subjects were given a small spoon 
and were told to take small bites and chew each mouthful 20–30 times; their average 
meal duration was 29.2 min. However, despite this three-to-fourfold longer eating time, 
intake was only 11% less in the slow compared with the fast condition, giving only 
limited endorsement of fletcherism. Other studies have suggested that chewing, rather 
than simply slowing the rate at which food reaches the stomach, seems to be critical. 
An evolutionary trend in hominids has been a decrease in the size of molar teeth, indi￾cating a shift in diet from raw plant material that required extensive chewing to animal 
source food (ASF) and/or cooked food that requires less chewing (Rowley-Conwy, 2001; 
Walker, 1981).
Talking Point 3.6
Do you ever make a conscious effort to eat slowly? Many modern or pre-prepared 
foods require little or no chewing, and most of our food comes in bite (mouthful) 
sizes or is easily made into a convenient bite size using a knife and fork – rather 
than with our molars! Which food that you eat routinely do you chew the most, 
and which the least? How does that correlate with portion size and/or calories per 
serving?
QUESTIONS TO ASK YOURSELF
Let’s review and apply your knowledge. Take some time to answer these chapter 
questions.
• Explain optimal foraging theory. What factors influence energy expenditure in 
foraging?
• Describe food economics using the terms unit price and access cost.
• Discuss the impacts of increased portions and serving containers over the last 
20 years on energy intake.
• What is fletcherism? What is its involvement in food economics?42 You Are What You Eat: Energy Flow
ANSWERS TO “DO THE MATH” MET CALCULATION
1 4 hours at 1 MET is 24 METs or 24 kcal/kg body weight. The brisk walk adds 3 
for a total of 27 (the 4 METs of walking is only 3 METs above the 1 MET basal 
that would have occurred anyway).
2 The 2 hour walk adds 2 × 3 METs above baseline = 30. The 1 hour run is 1 × 7 
above baseline = 31.
3 Total of 9 hours at 2 METs (= 18) and 15 hours at 1 MET (= 15) for total of 
33. The gym stop adds 8 METs but subtracts 1 hour of home sedentary time 
(= 14): 18 + 8 + 14 = 40.
4 You would have to burn off 300/75 = 4 METs which, if your workout was a run 
at 8 METs, would take half an hour. Walking at 4 METs would take one hour.
GLOSSARY
Access cost Sometimes also called procurement or foraging 
cost: The cost, in relevant currency, of gaining 
access to a commodity (e.g., time spent trav￾eling to a restaurant).
Commodity A good that can be purchased or exchanged 
for tokens or other goods. Organized food 
collection and distribution (agriculture, business) 
has turned food into a commodity.
Consummatory cost The cost (in suitable units of measurement) of 
eating a unit such as a mouthful of food once 
the food is nearby. Example: Price at a food 
vending machine.
Demand function The relationship between consumption or 
demand for a commodity and its price, most 
usually unit price.
Elasticity A mathematical description of the curvature of 
the demand curve. If demand does not change 
with price, the demand is inelastic. If one com￾modity is more vital (say, for survival) than 
another, you would expect a higher elasticity for 
the less essential commodity.
Energy In physics, energy is a force or entity that is neces￾sary for performing mechanical work. In biology, 
the same concept of energy is embodied in spe￾cific molecules that drive biological reactions 
(including mechanical movement such as 
walking) essential for life.You Are What You Eat: Energy Flow 43
Evolution The change in inherited (genetic) traits or 
characteristics across generations in a species. 
When, over a long period, such changes have 
become large, a new species is definable.
Fletcherism Extensive chewing of each mouthful of food, 
with the goal of slowing eating rate.
Gene Segment of the genome that encodes a single 
heritable trait – the smallest functional unit.
Metabolic equivalent of A MET is defined as 1 kcal/kg body weight/
task (MET) hour. For a given person or body size, MET units 
provide a useful way of expressing intensity of 
activities.
Natural selection First proposed by Charles Darwin, the heritable 
mechanism by which new species can evolve 
by competition or biological fitness, usually with 
more surviving offspring.
Obesogenic environment An environment in which calorically dense foods 
are available at low cost, thus promoting excess 
intake and, ultimately, obesity.
Opportunistic eater Term we use to imply that an optimal strategy 
for feeding in an uncertain food environment is 
to take advantage of each and every feeding 
opportunity that comes along.
Optimal foraging theory A general theory that individuals will adopt the 
best possible set of food acquisition behaviors 
in a given environment to maximize net 
energy gain.
Unit price The cost (in relevant currency, e.g., energy, 
money, time) to acquire a unit of a commodity 
once it has been reached. Most usually applied 
to situations in which each unit is the same 
(e.g., a pellet of food or a slice of pizza), but 
could also be applied to a derived quality such 
as kcal.
REFERENCES
Andrade, A. M., Greene, G. W., & Melanson, K. J. (2008). Eating slowly led to decreases in energy 
intake within meals in healthy women. Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 108, 1186–1191.
Andreyeva, T., Long, M. W., & Brownell, K. D. (2010). The impact of food prices on consumption: A 
systematic review of research on the price elasticity of demand for food. American Journal of Public 
Health, 100, 216–222.
Epstein, L. H., Stein, J. S., Paluch, R. A., MacKillop, J., & Bickel, W. K. (2018). Binary components of 
food reinforcement: Amplitude and persistence. Appetite, 120, 67–74.44 You Are What You Eat: Energy Flow
Rolls, B. J., Roe, L. S., Halverson, K. H., & Meengs, J. S. (2007). Using a smaller plate did not reduce 
energy intake at meals. Appetite, 49, 652–660.
Rowley-Conwy, P. (2001). Time, change and the archaeology of hunter-gatherers: How original is the 
“Original Affluent Society”? In C. Panter-Brick, R. H. Layton, & P. Rowley-Conwy (eds.), Hunter￾gatherers: An interdisciplinary perspective (pp. 39–72). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Schüz, B., Revell, S., Hills, A. P., Schüz, N., & Ferguson, S. G. (2017). Higher BMI is associated with 
stronger effects of social cues on everyday snacking behaviour. Appetite, 114, 1–5.
Steeves, J. A., Thompson, D. L., & Bassett, D. R. (2012). Energy cost of stepping in place while watching 
television commercials. Medical Science and Sports Exercise, 44, 330–335.
Walker, A. (1981). Diet and teeth: Dietary hypotheses and human evolution. Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society of London, Series B, 292, 7–64.
Wansink, B., & Kim, J. (2005). Bad popcorn in big buckets: Portion size can influence intake as much as 
taste. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, 37, 242–245.
Zimmerman, A. R., Johnson, L., & Brunstrom, J. M. (2018). Assessing “chaotic eating” using self-report 
and the UK National Diet and Nutrition Survey: No association between BMI and variability in meal 
or snack timings. Physiology and Behavior, 192, 64–71.DOI: 10.4324/9781032621401-4
CHAPTER 4
The Brain and Sensory 
Mechanisms of Feeding
After reading this chapter, you will be able to
• Describe the main subdivisions of a vertebrate (including human) nervous 
system.
• Describe the principal parts of neurons and their input–output functions.
• Understand the concept of neurotransmitters and chemical phenotype.
• Describe the principal mechanisms and pathways of olfaction (smell).
• Describe the principal mechanisms and pathways of gustation (taste).
• Understand the concept of enteroendocrine signaling by the gut.
BASIC ORGANIZATION OF THE BRAIN
Over millions of years, brains have evolved from simple distributed networks of neurons 
to the complex centralized structures that we find in today’s vertebrates. The nervous 
system of vertebrates consists of central and peripheral components. The central nervous 
system comprises a spinal cord, which is a long, thin bundle of neural tissue enclosed in 
a protective bony vertebral column, and a brain, which is a prominent enlargement at 
one end of the cord. The overall and relative sizes of the brain and spinal cord vary con￾siderably from species to species. Species with large bodies tend to have larger brains, 
disproportionately so in humans and some cetaceans.
The peripheral nervous system brings sensory signals to the brain and sends out 
executive signals to our various skeletal muscles and internal organs (see Figure 4.1). The 
signals used by the central and peripheral nervous systems are electrical, primarily action 
potentials in specialized cells called neurons. While there are many sizes and shapes of 
neurons, they are characterized by an extensive information gathering zone (dendrites 
and cell body), a single and sometimes very long conduction zone called the axon, and 
an output zone of terminals which form contacts with other neuron(s) via small gaps 
called synapses. Action potentials allow rapid point-to-point communication over rela￾tively large distances within the nervous system. Most synapses use chemicals called 
neurotransmitters to send signals (i.e., information) from their output zone. Neurons are 46 The Brain and Sensory Mechanisms of Feeding
often classified by the subset of transmitter(s) that they use: For example, glutamatergic 
neurons use glutamate as their primary transmitter, and their phenotype is known as 
glutamatergic. In fact, many neurons use two or more co-transmitters.
In addition to neural connections, brains have very rich blood supplies – the human 
brain weighs about 2% of body weight and yet uses 20% of the blood pumped by the 
heart. Signaling molecules – hormones – are released by various endocrine glands into the 
bloodstream. These have the potential to provide chemical signals to the brain provided 
receptors for those hormone(s) are located at strategic locations in the brain, and the 
hormones have access to those receptors. The brain normally protects itself from such 
a barrage of chemicals via a blood–brain barrier, and the strategic locations mentioned 
above usually have a reduced barrier.
FIGURE 4.1 Diagram of spinal cord progressively enlarging to form hindbrain, midbrain, 
and forebrain divisions. All of these divisions are extensively and reciprocally connected. 
A few of the prominent structures within each division are shown. Note that odor (via olfac￾tory tract) and taste (via cranial nerves 7, 9, and 10) signals enter different divisions of 
the brain
The brain itself can be described as several regions. One simple, gross classification 
proceeds rostrally (forward) from the spinal cord – the hindbrain, midbrain, and fore￾brain, as shown diagrammatically in Figure 4.1. All vertebrates share the same basic 
pattern, although the relative sizes differ between species. In adult humans, the brain 
weighs about 1,350 g. The outermost layers of the brain form the cerebral cortex, which 
has a highly convoluted or folded structure and is among the largest of all species’. The 
brain of newborn infants is about one-third this weight, with less cortical development. 
By comparison, rats and mice are often used as laboratory models of eating and yet have 
brains weighing about 2.0 and 0.2 g (i.e., ~1,000-fold smaller than humans), respectively, 
with only small and non-convoluted cerebral cortices.
The brain is an information processing device and, like a computer, has inputs and 
outputs. Most of the inputs come from specialized receptors in and all over the body that 
convert a particular stimulus – for example, chemicals in the case of taste and smell –
into the main currency of action potentials within the nervous system. These inputs arise The Brain and Sensory Mechanisms of Feeding 47
mainly from nerves, which are bundles of axons, going into the spinal cord, brainstem, or 
higher levels of the brain. All levels of the brain are involved in complex behaviors such 
as eating; the information processing becomes more specific and/or integrated as signals 
pass from hindbrain to forebrain. The rest of this chapter examines the three principal 
sources of sensory signals related to food and eating: olfaction (smell), gustation (taste), 
and enteric (gut content).
OLFACTION
One of the important sensory inputs in relation to feeding is the sense of smell, or olfac￾tion. There are two food-relevant components. Orthonasal olfaction is basically sniffing 
the ambient environment and using this information to either approach or avoid the 
odor source, which often is not yet in view, depending on its quality. You have probably 
been attracted to the smell of fresh bread in the bakery around the corner, or a home 
dinner being prepared in the kitchen. We are naturally repelled by the smell of poten￾tially harmful substances, including rotten food. In contrast, retronasal olfaction occurs 
when we are eating or chewing food, the act of which releases volatile chemicals in the 
mouth that diffuse via the retronasal passage from the back of the oral cavity into the 
nasal cavity. When you have a cold, this passage is partly blocked, and this accounts for 
why foods are not as attractive; altered sense of smell is also a common symptom of both 
acute and long COVID-19 infection (Xydakis et al., 2021). Apart from the different 
routes by which odorants reach the nasal cavity, the sensory surface called the olfactory 
epithelium is accessed by both types.
An odorant is an air-borne or volatile molecule. The intensity of an odor depends 
on the numbers or concentration of molecules in the air reaching the nasal cavity. For 
example, how do you know you are getting closer to that bakery? This occurs by chemo￾taxis, moving from regions of low to high concentration of desirable odorants. Most odors, 
such as fresh bread and many foods, are composed of many and sometimes hundreds of 
constituent odorants. In the simplest hypothetical combination, two odorants (A and B) 
might be present in two different relative amounts. High A with low B would probably 
smell quite different than low A with high B. With many constituents, then, the possible 
number of combinations becomes very large.
ODORANTS AND RECEPTORS
How do our nose and brain make sense of the input to identify one of thousands of 
smells that we can name? The chemical analysis of odorant molecules is performed by 
some 400 chemically distinct detectors called olfactory receptors. These are embedded 
in a thin surface membrane called the olfactory epithelium which lines part of the roof 
of the nasal cavity. In humans, it measures about 3 cm × 3 cm and has several thou￾sand receptors embedded in and projecting just below the epithelium for optimal con￾tact with odorant molecules. These receptors are on the dendrites of olfactory sensory 
neurons, and the axons of these neurons terminate in glomeruli in the olfactory bulb. 
Each glomerulus (the singular of glomeruli) receives input from several receptor neurons 
that are scattered across the epithelium, but, remarkably, all these neurons express the 
same receptor type (see Figure 4.2).48 The Brain and Sensory Mechanisms of Feeding
FIGURE 4.2 Diagram of the human olfactory system, including the olfactory epithelium, olfac￾tory sensory neurons, glomeruli, and olfactory bulb
Olfactory receptors all belong to a superfamily called G-protein coupled receptors 
(GPCRs). GPCRs are chains of at least 300 amino acids that thread through the cell 
membrane seven times, forming three domains or loops outside the cell; these form 
a more or less unique three-dimensional pocket or “nest” for binding their matching 
ligands. Different GPCRs have different amino acid sequences in these loops that yield 
different-shaped pockets. Some of these receptors seem to have a high threshold for 
activation and respond to a relatively narrow range of odorant shapes, while others 
seem to have a low threshold for activation but respond to a broad range of odorant 
shapes (Yu et al., 2015). Thus, the moment-by-moment activity of each glomerulus 
reflects the degree of activation of its corresponding GPCR, integrated across the epi￾thelium. Glomeruli are relay stations: They collect incoming signals from olfactory 
nerves and transmit them to the dendrites of mitral cells that are located in the main 
olfactory bulb. Axons of mitral cells then send action potentials to the brain via the 
olfactory tract.
OLFACTORY PROJECTIONS TO THE BRAIN
The brain areas that receive the action potentials arriving in thousands of axons from 
the mitral cells have to decode these signals. Each unique profile or pattern of incoming 
signals codes a particular odorant quality, distinct from another, according to what is 
known as a combinatorial code. The intensity of the odorant is coded in part by the fre￾quency of the action potentials (i.e., number of action potentials in unit time): Many 
action potentials mean a high intensity, and vice versa. One key feature of this system is 
that, if a completely new odorant is encountered, the brain will recognize or decode it as 
new by virtue of a novel pattern of incoming action potentials.
Axons of the mitral cells form the olfactory tracts. These run caudally and enter the 
front of the brain, including parts of the telencephalon such as the cortex and amyg￾dala. The amygdala is involved in emotional processing, and olfaction may, in a direct 
way, be able to influence mood or affect. Indeed, some odors can elicit feelings of either The Brain and Sensory Mechanisms of Feeding 49
extreme pleasure or disgust. Various parts of the frontal cortex, including the insular and 
orbitofrontal divisions, are where odor memory, complex odor discrimination, and flavor 
are computed.
Odor memory is typically very good: You may not smell an odor for years but, when 
re-exposed, you recall the object or occasion of the prior exposure. Can you recall smells 
from your early childhood, such as your grandmother’s kitchen? Newborn infants with 
minimal prior olfactory experience and an undeveloped frontal cortex can make odor 
discriminations, such as distinguishing their mother from other women (Cernoch & 
Porter, 1985). However, by age 80 most humans have impaired olfactory discrimination 
(a form of what is called hyposmia) and this decline is accelerated in Alzheimer’s dis￾ease (Mesholam et al., 1998). Concussions from frontal head trauma – many related 
to sports – may be associated with either temporary or permanent anosmia – the com￾plete loss of olfaction (Van Toller, 1999; Varney et al., 2001). In the case of permanent 
anosmia, axons of the olfactory receptor neurons are severed where they pass through a 
perforated bone, the cribriform plate, due to movement of the brain relative to the skull 
during trauma. Anosmic people report that food tastes bland, and they have a range of 
other psychological symptoms including personal isolation and emotional blunting (Van 
Toller, 1999).
BOX 4.1 DO YOU SMELL WHAT I SMELL – OR WHAT YOUR 
DOG SMELLS?
Scientists often make a distinction between macrosmatic species such as dogs, 
which have a well-developed sense of smell that is vital to their existence, and 
microsmatic species such as humans, for whom olfaction is not generally as 
important as other senses such as vision. Humans often use dogs to detect very 
low concentrations of odorants, such as hunting dogs that can detect the scent of 
prey or a buried object such as a truffle, and police and rescue dogs that can find 
concealed people, drugs, or bombs. What is the basis of this difference in sensi￾tivity or acuity? There are probably several contributing factors. First, although 
the size of the olfactory bulb and number of olfactory receptor neurons are not 
always greatly different, the relative size may be; thus, a dog’s olfactory bulb is 
a larger fraction of its total brain size than a human’s is (Quignon et al., 2012). 
Second, the number of different GPCRs encoded in the genome is typically a little 
higher in macrosmatic compared with microsmatic species, but the difference in 
the fraction of those genes that encode functional receptors is greater (e.g., 80% 
in dogs versus 30% in humans), the balance being nonfunctional or pseudogenes 
(Rouquier & Giorgi, 2007). Third, the patterns of sniffing, the structure of the 
nasal cavity, and the flow patterns of air through it differ greatly between dogs 
and humans (Craven et al., 2010). In addition, macrosmatic species have a well￾developed vomeronasal organ, which functions a lot like a second, parallel olfac￾tory system.50 The Brain and Sensory Mechanisms of Feeding
Talking Point 4.1
Have you ever experienced loss of smell, or do you know someone who is anosmic? 
Were there symptoms other than loss of smell, such as those listed earlier? Can you 
be sure that the anosmia is causing these other symptoms, or instead that anosmia 
is one of several independent results from the trauma? What happens to your sense 
of smell when you have a cold? What difficulties with everyday life might anosmic 
people encounter?
GUSTATION
Taste and smell are closely interrelated; when we talk about different tastes (straw￾berry, lemon, etc.), we often mean odors in combination with taste. This combination 
is called flavor and will be discussed later. Pure taste is important for detection and 
recognition of the many food components that have little or no odor, such as salt. 
Unlike olfaction, for which there are hundreds of receptors, the number of receptor 
types involved in taste is far fewer, and they are organized into discrete classes of sen￾sation. Only some of the taste receptors belong to the GPCR superfamily; others are 
ion channels (Table 4.1).
TABLE 4.1 Six basic taste qualities, receptor types, and typical tastant or ligand
Taste quality Receptor(s) Typical tastants
Salty ENaC (ion channel, type I cell) Sodium chloride
Sweet T1R2 + T1R3 (GPCR dimer, type II cell) Sugars, artificial sweeteners
Bitter T2R (GPCR, many variants; type II cell) Quinine, caffeine
Umami T1R1 + T1R3 (GPCR dimer, type II cell) Monosodium glutamate
Sour Otop 1 (ion channel, type III cell) Citric acid, vinegar
Fat CD36 and GPR120 Linoleic acid
The five primary taste classes are sweet, salty, sour, bitter, and umami (Roper & 
Chaudhari, 2017). The recent addition of a possible sixth taste, fat, has considerable 
support, but research is ongoing (Jaime-Lara et al., 2023). A lipase (enzyme) released 
in the oral cavity seems to be required to break down triglycerides (fats) into glycerol 
free fatty acids, and the free fatty acids are what are detected by the relevant taste 
receptors.The Brain and Sensory Mechanisms of Feeding 51
FIGURE 4.3 Diagram of a taste receptor on the tongue. The bud itself is made of cells containing 
the taste receptors and other supporting cell types, as well as afferent nerve fibers
BOX 4.2 TASTE BUD TURNOVER
Some sensory cells, such as photoreceptors in your eyes and hair cells in your ears, 
are with you for life. That is, they have little or no capacity to be renewed if they 
are fatally damaged. Taste cells are almost at the other end of this spectrum –
they typically have a life of only a few weeks after which they are replaced. The 
lower part of a taste bud is enriched in genes associated with cell cycle and stem 
cells (Hevezi et al., 2009), suggesting that new taste cells are made there, then 
migrate toward the tip of the bud, but eventually die. However, the part of the 
taste neurons (dendrites) that contacts the taste bud is not renewed. Thus, taste 
nerves are continually being paired with new cells; nonetheless, our sense of taste 
does not suddenly change.
TASTE PATHWAYS AND THE BRAIN
Different populations of taste buds release transmitter(s) when stimulated, and these are 
received by the adjacent dendrites or sensory neurons. The axons of these sensory neurons 
then coalesce to form sensory nerves. Anterior regions of the tongue are served by the 
facial nerve (the seventh cranial nerve, or CN7), whereas posterior regions are served by 
the glossopharyngeal nerve (CN9). Also, a branch of the vagus nerve (CN10) innervates 
the throat regions. Other mouth sensations, including information about texture and 52 The Brain and Sensory Mechanisms of Feeding
temperature, are additionally relayed via the trigeminal nerve (CN5). Completely unlike 
the olfactory tracts that enter the front of the brain, these taste-relaying nerves enter the 
hindbrain. CN7 and 9 synapse in the front or rostral part of the nucleus of the solitary 
tract (NST). CN10 synapses in the rear or caudal part of the NST (see enteric nervous 
system, below).
Most of the afferent taste fibers, as well as cells in the NST, are broadly tuned, meaning 
that they are activated by more than one prototypical tastant. Many cells in the NST 
respond to temperature or touch rather than, or in addition to, taste, and, at least in rats, 
the timing of firing in the NST is modified by ongoing licking behavior (Roussin et al., 
2012). Cells within the NST that respond to taste stimulation of the tongue appear to 
be broadly tuned: They respond to more than one class of tastant. Thus, recognition of 
particular tastes involves recognition of patterns of responding across a large population 
of NST cells. As in many sensory systems, the taste pathways, including NST, respond 
better to a change of stimulus than to a sustained stimulus.
FIGURE 4.4 Schematic of brain pathways for taste and smell. Olfactory information enters the 
front of the brain, and taste information enters through the brainstem
CHEMICAL SENSING AND THE ENTERIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
Once you swallow something, does it become part of your body? Is your skin the largest 
sensory surface in your body? You may be surprised to learn that the answer to both 
these questions is no. It is not until nutrients are absorbed through the walls of the intes￾tine into the bloodstream that they become an integral part of the consumer. The gastro￾intestinal (GI) tract can thus be thought of as a food tube with the mouth its top end 
(Figure 4.5). The role of this food tube is to process the foods that we eat into energy￾yielding molecules that can be absorbed across the walls of the tube and to discard the 
unwanted material, ultimately as feces.The Brain and Sensory Mechanisms of Feeding 53
FIGURE 4.5 The gastrointestinal tract depicted as a food tube. Nutrients are extracted, to serve 
as energy for the cells of the body, at various points along the tract
When food is consumed, it first passes through the mouth with its complement of 
chemical receptors, then passes to the stomach where it is partly broken down. From 
there, it passes to the small, or upper, intestine where further processing and absorption 
of nutrients occur and finally to the large, or lower, intestine where the process of absorp￾tion is completed. The food tube in humans is about 6 m (20ʹ) long and is highly folded 
to fit into the abdomen. Further, the inner surface of the intestine is highly convoluted, 
with trenches and ridges such that the absorptive surface area is an astonishing 250 m2
, 
the size of a (doubles) tennis court.
The walls of the food tube are made up of several cell types and have both sympa￾thetic and parasympathetic innervation to form an enteric nervous system. Additionally, 
a subset of cells that secrete hormones are located throughout the gastrointestinal tract 
and collectively form the enteroendocrine system, which is the largest hormone-secreting 
organ in the body. One of the surprising features of these cells is that they die and are 
replaced every few days. Research on precursor or progenitor cells that mature or differ￾entiate into replacement enteroendocrine cells suggests a new organization or nomencla￾ture (Table 4.2; Engelstoft et al., 2013).54 The Brain and Sensory Mechanisms of Feeding
TABLE 4.2 Partial list of gut endocrine cells and their function
Cell type and location Hormone(s) produced Principal function(s)
Gastroendocrine (stomach) Ghrelin Stimulates hunger in the 
brain
Gastrin Causes gastric acid 
secretion
Enteroendocrine (throughout 
GI tract)
Serotonin Gut motility; fasting 
metabolism
Somatostatin Inhibits hormone secretion
Enteroendocrine
(regional specificity)
Peptide YY (PYY)
Cholecystokinin (CCK)
Glucagon-like peptide (GLP-1)
All induce satiation or 
satiety; slow gastric 
emptying; promote insulin 
secretion (incretin action)
A subset of cells, called gastroendocrine cells, are found in the lining of the stomach, 
and each secretes only one hormone: Table 4.2 shows that one type secretes ghrelin. One 
action of ghrelin takes place in the brain to stimulate hunger. Other gastroendocrine cells 
secrete gastrin, the primary function of which is to release gastric acid in the stomach, 
which in turn aids in breaking down food.
Enteroendocrine cells arise from two principal progenitors. The first type produces cells 
that are found scattered throughout the intestine and secrete just one or two hormones, 
some of which are shown in Table 4.2. One such hormone, serotonin, stimulates gastric 
motility (which propels food through the food tube) and, in fasting, it has metabolic effects 
on liver and adipose tissue. Serotonin is also a neurotransmitter in the brain: You can read 
about the distinction between hormones and transmitters in Box 4.3. The second category 
of enteroendocrine cells, found at different locations along the intestine, each typically 
express gene(s) for and secrete multiple peptides, four of which are listed. The predominant 
hormone for any given cell is determined by the location in the gut where the progenitor 
cell arose, but these hormones all share a common set of functions. They are released by the 
presence of food-associated molecules in the gut (i.e., during and after eating) and produce 
inhibition of food intake: They are satiation or satiety hormones; see Box 4.3). They also 
slow gastric emptying and stimulate secretion of insulin from the pancreas. Within a few 
minutes of onset of feeding, food-associated molecules or derived signals have also been 
shown to increase or prolong an ongoing feeding bout (Sclafani, 2013).
BOX 4.3 SIGNAL MOLECULES: NEUROTRANSMITTERS, 
MODULATORS, AND HORMONES
You’ve heard the expression that the left hand doesn’t know what the right hand is 
doing, but, in a more general sense, the body – and in particular the brain – has to 
continuously monitor what the rest of the organism (or another nearby organism) 
is doing. The simplest form of cell-to-cell signaling is via signal molecules that are 
secreted or released by one cell and are recognized by specific receptors for those 
molecules on the surface of or inside the recipient or target cell(s). Animals need The Brain and Sensory Mechanisms of Feeding 55
to have systems for transfer of these signals across potentially long distances. The 
bloodstream is one such system, with signals known as hormones released at one 
location and reaching every part of the body (although only places with relevant 
receptors will receive that signal). In the brain, neurons transmit chemical signals in 
two ways, either by specific release across very narrow gaps called synapses or over 
somewhat longer distances by releasing the substance from a non-synaptic region. 
The substance then diffuses between neurons until recognized by receptor(s), but 
its concentration declines as distance from the source increases. Thus, synaptic trans￾mission is essentially point-to-point or private communication, whereas modulators 
and hormones are more broadcast mechanisms. Further, within classical synaptic 
transmission, there are both fast (ionotropic – fractions of a second) and slower 
(metabotropic – seconds to minutes) mechanisms; most hormones and modulators 
also are in this slower class. In relation to feeding, there are clearly some contextual 
conditions such as hunger or satiety for which it is not important to have fast com￾munication, and these could be influenced by hormones, but actions such as picking 
up and eating a food do require precise and rapid sequences of movements.
Because they respond (i.e., secrete hormones) in response to food-related stimuli, 
these enteroendocrine cells must also have receptor(s) to recognize food. Many of the 
sensory mechanisms that accomplish this do so via receptors that are similar or iden￾tical to those in taste buds, except that we are not consciously aware of enteric sensing 
(Mayer, 2011). The signals to the brain are of two main types: Action potentials in sen￾sory afferents of the vagus nerve and specific hormones that are released into the blood￾stream (and thence to the brain) as a result of specific enteroendocrine cell stimulation. 
For completeness, we note there are also receptors in the food tube for stimuli such as 
toxins and physical stretching, and this information goes to the brain via spinal afferent 
neurons. Primary vagal afferents first synapse in the brain in the rostral NST. The linear 
organization of the NST from gut (back) to mouth (front) reinforces the idea that the 
sensory surface of the gut is best viewed as a continuation of the mouth.
Peptide hormones such as those secreted by enteroendocrine cells normally cannot 
access the brain because of a structural feature called the blood–brain barrier. However, 
a few tiny regions have a reduced blood–brain barrier and do allow peptides to diffuse 
from blood to brain tissue. The two such regions of relevance to feeding are the area 
postrema and the arcuate nucleus. The area postrema is situated between the left and 
right sides of the NST and, together with a motor (movement) output region, makes up 
what is known as the dorsal vagal complex. The dorsal vagal complex thus receives both 
blood-borne and neural signals about the physical and chemical status of the gastrointes￾tinal tract and the food therein (Young, 2012).
Insulin and Leptin
Before leaving the subject of peripheral hormones and signaling, we must introduce two 
other hormones. Insulin is a peptide hormone released from β-cells in the pancreas when 
blood glucose levels rise, such as during and after a meal, to reduce food intake in hungry 
animals. It is thus believed to induce satiation and/or satiety in addition to numerous 56 The Brain and Sensory Mechanisms of Feeding
peripheral effects such as facilitating glucose storage in various tissues. Walls of the β-cells 
contain glucose sensors (actually glucose transporters that move glucose across the cell 
membrane). Other chemical triggers for insulin release include cholecystokinin (CCK) 
and glucagon-like peptide (GLP-1) released from enteroendocrine cells. There is also a 
so-called cephalic phase of insulin release: It takes several minutes after the beginning 
of a meal for food to start being absorbed, and yet insulin secretion starts almost imme￾diately or even in anticipation of food. Sensations of taste and smell trigger a neural 
signal to the pancreas, whence the term cephalic – involving the brain. A functional 
role of such cephalic reflexes may be to prepare the body for the arrival of food. The 
rapid time-course of insulin release is compatible with a role in satiation, and, consistent 
with this view, injecting small amounts of insulin into rats’ brains decreases food intake 
via receptors in the brain. Another hormone released from the pancreas, glucagon, has 
almost opposite effects, but will not be discussed in this text, in part because its effects 
on behavior are less dramatic.
Leptin is a peptide hormone and is released from adipose tissue, generally in pro￾portion to fat mass. It also reduces food intake in animals and is believed to be a satiety 
agent. While there are modest fluctuations in leptin levels during and between meals, it is 
more likely that it is an average or sustained level of leptin that serves to set a contextual 
function. Leptin is one of many molecules now known to be released from adipose tissue, 
and some of the others may be involved in feeding, but the case for leptin is the most 
compelling at this time.
In the next chapter, we will describe how the brain uses these and other food-related 
signals, and in which brain regions, to organize complex food-related behaviors.
QUESTIONS TO ASK YOURSELF
Let’s review and apply your knowledge. Take time to answer these chapter questions:
• What is the basic outline of a mammalian nervous system?
• How do we “smell” different odors in our environment? Why is smell important?
• What are the six primary tastes? How are these encoded (receptors, etc.)?
• Summarize the neuroanatomy of taste. Make a sketch of the pathway for taste 
information, from receptors in the tongue to the hindbrain.
• What are the main functions of the enteroendocrine system? Name three 
peptides released from this system that inhibit food intake.
GLOSSARY
Afferent Refers to a pathway that transmits input signal(s) 
toward the region of interest.
Anosmia Inability to smell; hyposmia is impaired smell. 
These often occur in the elderly, or after concus￾sive brain trauma.The Brain and Sensory Mechanisms of Feeding 57
Arcuate nucleus Small nucleus at the base of the hypothalamus 
in the brain, situated on each side of the ventral 
part of the third ventricle. Has a weak blood–
brain barrier, and so circulating small molecules 
such as peptides can gain access to this nucleus 
and activate (or inhibit) the neurons.
Area postrema Small midline nucleus in the brainstem, located 
on the floor of the fourth cerebral ventricle. Has 
a “weak” blood–brain barrier, and so circu￾lating small molecules such as peptides can gain 
access to this nucleus and activate (or inhibit) the 
neurons.
Behavioral satiety sequence A sequence of behaviors that normally occurs 
immediately after the end of a natural meal; in 
rodents, this normally starts with grooming and 
ends with sleeping or resting.
Central nervous system The major organ, located at the top of the spinal 
cord, in which sensory inputs are decoded 
and perceived and appropriate actions are 
organized. Also called the brain, this weighs 
about 1,350 g in humans.
Chemotaxis Behavior that is moving along a concen￾tration gradient of a chemical, such as an 
odorant. Moving up the gradient toward higher 
concentrations means approaching the source 
of the odorant.
Cholecystokinin (CCK) A hormone released from cells in the upper part 
of the digestive tract in response to stimulation 
by food. Some of this released CCK contacts 
receptors on sensory nerve endings in the gut, and 
these generate neural signals to the brain (NST).
Combinatorial code An encoding scheme whereby one type of 
receptor is activated by more than one odorant 
molecule type, and any one odorant activates 
more than one receptor type. The code to 
identify the odorant thus depends on a spe￾cific pattern and relative intensity of stimulation 
across receptors.
Convoluted or convolution Refers to a surface made from an essentially 
two-dimensional sheet but folded like a fan 
to form ridges and trenches, thereby greatly 
increasing the surface area within a small three￾dimensional space.
Endocrine gland A gland that, when stimulated (usually by a chem￾ical trigger), releases one or more specialized 
hormones into the blood circulation.58 The Brain and Sensory Mechanisms of Feeding
Enteric nervous system A comprehensive network of neurons that are 
involved in the various sensory and motor 
functions of the gastrointestinal tract. It is also 
popularly known as the “gut brain,” although, 
for the most part, we are not consciously aware 
of its functions.
Enteroendocrine cells Specialized cells in the wall of the gastrointes￾tinal tract that secrete hormones in response to 
stimulation by specific nutrients.
Fatty acids Cleaved or hydrolyzed from triglycerides, fatty 
acids may function as the tastants for fat.
Flavor A property ascribed to a food resulting from the 
combination of its taste and smell qualities.
Frontal cortex The front lobe of the brain, particularly large 
in humans, that is involved in many high-level 
behaviors such as decision making and receiving 
distinct olfactory and gustatory inputs to several 
subdivisions. Flavor most likely is integrated at 
this level of the brain.
Gastroendocrine cells Specialized cells in the wall of the stomach that 
secrete hormones in response to nutrient status. 
For example, ghrelin is released during fasting.
Gastrointestinal (GI) tract Also called the food tube; it is the tube that 
connects the mouth to the anus. If straightened 
out, it would be about 20ʹ long. Because the 
walls are highly ridged or convoluted, the actual 
surface area is up to 100 times that of your 
external skin! The role of the GI tract is to detect 
and selectively absorb desired nutrients to fuel 
cells of the body.
Ghrelin A 28-amino-acid peptide, produced by specific 
cells in the wall of the stomach. Ghrelin has to 
be chemically modified (acetylated) to yield an 
active form that acts in brain and other tissues 
via growth hormone secretagogue receptors 
(GHS-R). An appetite stimulant, it is considered 
a hunger hormone.
Glomerulus (plural glomeruli) A spherical structure located in the olfactory 
bulb of the brain where synapses form between 
the terminals of olfactory receptor neurons and 
the dendrites of mitral (and other) cells that 
project to the brain. Each glomerulus is “odor 
coded”: It receives input from many receptor 
neurons, but all of these express the same spe￾cific receptor type.The Brain and Sensory Mechanisms of Feeding 59
Glucagon A peptide hormone secreted by α-cells of the 
pancreas, usually during fasting, that functions 
to raise blood glucose levels by breaking down 
stored glycogen into glucose.
G-protein coupled receptor A superfamily of receptors, including ~400 
(GPCR) olfaction-specific instances in the human olfac￾tory system, that, upon binding a ligand (e.g., 
odorant for olfaction) at the outer surface of a 
cell, initiate a cascade of G-protein-mediated 
events inside the cell.
Heterodimer A chemical moiety formed by association of two 
different moieties that together have a different 
or expanded function than either has alone.
Hormone A specific chemical, usually released into the 
bloodstream from an endocrine gland, that 
activates target cells in strategic locations of 
the body by interacting with a corresponding 
receptor.
Incretins A group of metabolic hormones that enhance 
production of insulin by the pancreas and 
thereby act to decrease blood glucose levels.
Insulin A peptide hormone secreted by β-cells of the 
pancreas, usually during and after eating, that 
serves to promote storage of absorbed nutrients 
as glycogen and triglycerides.
Leptin Peptide hormone released from adipose tissue 
cells into the bloodstream. To an approximation, 
it serves as an integrated marker of fat content 
in the body.
Ligand The ligand for a receptor is a molecule, like a 
hormone or transmitter, that binds to specific 
site(s) on that receptor and causes a temporary 
biological change, such as receptor activation 
or blockade.
Nucleus of the solitary A long, skinny nucleus of cells (one on each 
tract (NST) side of the brain) found in the brainstem. 
It is the first region in the brain contacted by 
incoming neural signals from the gut and from 
the tongue. Synonymous with the nucleus of the 
tractus solitarius (NTS), derived from the Latin 
nomenclature.
Neurons Specialized cells found in peripheral and cen￾tral nervous systems that collect, integrate, and 
transmit electrical signals via axons over rela￾tively long distances.60 The Brain and Sensory Mechanisms of Feeding
Odorant Molecules emitted from a source, dispersed in a 
carrier medium, and detected by receptors.
Olfactory bulb Front or rostral part of the brain that contains 
glomeruli and mitral cells whose output axons 
form the olfactory tracts and project rearward 
or caudally to various brain regions.
Olfactory epithelium One of four basic types of tissues found in 
animals. Epithelial tissues are composed of 
densely packed cells and line most structures in 
the body. The olfactory epithelium refers to the 
corresponding tissue (approximately 9 cm2 in 
humans) in the roof of the nasal cavity.
Olfactory receptors Protein molecules on olfactory receptor neurons. 
Their three-dimensional shape forms a binding 
site or pocket for odorant molecules that have a 
corresponding shape. As a result of this binding, 
the receptor initiates a cascade of chemical 
events inside the receptor neuron.
Olfactory receptor neuron Specialized neuron (bipolar) class whose 
dendrites express the olfactory receptors and 
whose axon projects to and synapses in a 
glomerulus in the olfactory bulb. Each neuron 
expresses only one type of olfactory receptor 
and projects to only one glomerulus.
Orthonasal olfaction Occurs when volatile molecules are inhaled 
(sniffed) into the front of the nasal cavity.
Retronasal olfaction Occurs when volatile molecules are released in 
our mouth as we chew food, and these enter 
the nasal cavity via a channel from the roof of 
the mouth.
Tastant A molecule that, by virtue of its shape and other 
characteristics, stimulates taste receptor(s) on the 
tongue and gives rise to a sensation of taste.
Taste buds Onion-shaped structures composed of many 
cells, including taste receptor cells, that are 
embedded in the tongue and shaped to allow 
tastant molecules access to the taste receptors. 
There are three main taste cell types (I, II, and 
III), with type II carrying the GCPR-linked taste 
receptors.
Umami From the Japanese for “pleasant savory taste”; it 
is a basic taste category, received or transduced 
by a specific class of taste receptors. The proto￾typical tastant is the common food additive 
monosodium glutamate (MSG).The Brain and Sensory Mechanisms of Feeding 61
Vagus nerve (CN10) A mixed nerve (both sensory afferents to the 
brain and efferent motor fibers from the brain) 
that innervates a large number of organs in the 
chest and abdomen.
REFERENCES
Cernoch, J. M., & Porter, R. H. (1985). Recognition of maternal axillary odors by infants. Child 
Development, 56, 1593–1598.
Craven, B. A., Paterson, E. G., & Settles, G. S. (2010). The fluid dynamics of canine olfaction: Unique 
nasal airflow patterns as an explanation of macrosomia. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 7, 
933–943.
Engelstoft, M. S., Egerod, K. L., Lund, M. L., & Schwartz, T. W. (2013). Enteroendocrine cell types 
revisited. Current Opinion in Pharmacology, 13, 912–921.
Hevezi, P., Moyer, B. D., Lu, M., et al. (2009). Genome-wide analysis of gene expression in primate taste 
buds reveals links to diverse processes. PLoS ONE, 4, e6395.
Jaime-Lara, R. B., Brooks, B. E., Vizioli, C., et.al. (2023). A systematic review of the biological mediators 
of fat taste and smell. Physiological Review, 103, 855–918.
Mayer, E. A. (2011). Gut feelings: The emerging biology of gut–brain communication. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 12, 453–466.
Mesholam, R. I., Moberg, P. J., Mahr, R. N., & Doty, R. L. (1998). Olfaction in neurodegenerative dis￾ease: A meta-analysis of olfactory functioning in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases. Archives of 
Neurology, 55, 84–90.
Quignon, P., Rimbault, M., Robin, S., & Galibert, F. (2012). Genetics of canine olfaction and receptor 
diversity. Mammalian Genome, 23, 132–143.
Roper, S. D., & Chaudhari, N. (2017). Taste buds: Cells, signals and synapses. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 18, 485–497.
Rouquier, S., & Giorgi, D. (2007). Olfactory receptor gene repertoires in mammals. Mutation Research, 
616, 95–102.
Roussin, A. T., D’Agostino, A. E., Fooden, A. M., Victor, J. D., & DiLorenzo, P. M. (2012). Taste coding 
in the nucleus of the solitary tract of the awake, freely licking rat. Journal of Neuroscience, 32, 
10494–10506.
Sclafani, A. (2013). Gut–brain nutrient signaling: Appetition vs satiation. Appetite, 71, 454–458.
Van Toller, S. (1999). Assessing the impact of anosmia: Review of a questionnaire’s findings. Chemical 
Senses, 24, 705–712.
Varney, N. R., Pinkston, J. B., & Wu, J. C. (2001). Quantitative PET findings in patients with post-traumatic 
anosmia. Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation, 16, 253–259.
Xydakis, M. S., Albers, M. W., & Holbrook, E. H. (2021). Post-viral effects of COVID-19 in the olfactory 
system and their implications. Lancet Neurology, 20, 753–761.
Young, A. A. (2012). Brainstem sensing of meal-related signals in energy homeostasis. Neuropharmacology, 
63, 31–45.
Yu, Y., de March, C. A., Ni, M. J., et al. (2015). Responsiveness of G-protein coupled odorant receptors 
is partially attributed to the activation mechanisms. Proceedings of the National Academy USA, 112, 
14966–14971.DOI: 10.4324/9781032621401-5
CHAPTER 5
Brain
Outputs and Integration
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:
• Name and give basic principles for studying the living brain.
• Understand the concept of motivation and its application to feeding.
• Identify signals from adipose tissue in regulation of food intake.
• Identify signals from the gut in relation to food intake.
• Describe the role of various subcortical and cortical structures in feeding.
HACKING INTO THE BRAIN
We have seen how some of the involuntary and elective aspects of digestion and feeding 
are organized in the brain. To find out which brain structures are involved in various 
components of feeding, it is essential to find effective ways in which to either observe or 
intervene in brain structure and function (i.e., hacking) in behaving organisms, be they 
human or animal. In this section, we describe contemporary types of hacking and, briefly, 
their principles of action, as well as strengths and weaknesses in relation to the goal of 
understanding the necessary and/or sufficient role of each region and its place in the 
overall sequence of brain activation.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
fMRI is a harmless or non-invasive way to measure brain activity in humans. It 
revolutionized hacking the human brain and has been used widely for over 25 years. 
Instead of measuring electrical activity such as synaptic and action potentials directly, it 
uses an indirect method that relies upon the premise that electrical activity consumes 
energy. In the brain, such activity is tightly coupled to utilization of oxygen, carried 
to the smallest blood vessels of the brain by the iron-containing protein hemoglobin. 
Oxygen is consumed by stripping oxygen molecules from oxygenated hemoglobin, 
leaving deoxygenated hemoglobin. These two molecules, oxy- and deoxyhemoglobin, 
align or spin differently when exposed to high magnetic fields. Through detection of 
that alignment (using complicated electronics, physics, and math beyond this text), the Brain: Outputs and Integration 63
relative level of oxygenation of blood in a given location can be assessed: This is often 
known as the BOLD (blood oxygenation level-dependent) signal (Figure 5.1, left panel).
FIGURE 5.1 Left panel shows schematically that, as average local firing rate and resultant oxygen 
usage increase, the ratio of oxyhemoglobin to deoxyhemoglobin in the local capillary blood 
vessels decreases. Right panel shows idealized experiment in which a control stimulus causes a 
small increase above basal in BOLD signal in given voxel(s), and a test stimulus causes a larger 
increase. The full effects of stimulus onset and offset on BOLD may take several seconds
The bloodstream pumps millions of molecules of oxygenated hemoglobin to the brain 
every second, and all parts of the brain consume some oxygen, including for purposes 
other than generating electrical potentials. Repeated measurements of the BOLD signal 
from discrete cubes of space, or voxels, which correspond to a particular part of the brain 
(no head movement, which would blur the image, can occur), allow dynamic changes 
in BOLD to be recorded. Because a substantial part of the BOLD signal is due to elec￾trical activity, when the BOLD signal changes, then a net or average change in electrical 
activity in the voxel occurs over the time frame of the measurement, which is usually a 
few seconds (Figure 5.1, right panel). By convention, an increase in the reported BOLD 
signal means increased electrical activity relative to prior or control period(s).
As an illustrative example related to feeding, subjects might be presented successively 
with two or more images, one of which is of food, or of food of a particular kind, and 
one of which is not of food. Any difference between these two conditions in BOLD for 
a given voxel is interpreted as differential processing of the food versus non-food stimuli. 
One pitfall of this method is that the imaging takes several seconds, whereas changes in 
electrical activity (and behavior, if relevant) occur much more rapidly; the BOLD signal 
is an integral across time. Another shortcoming is that each voxel contains thousands of 
neurons, axons, and synapses, and the resultant signal is the average of all of these. Thus, 
while fMRI is useful in identifying brain regions of interest, it cannot specify exactly 
which synapses are active and in what sequence. Nonetheless, it remains one of the best 
ways available to measure the working human brain.
Chemogenetics
Chemogenetics refers to methods for using genetic modification to allow chemical exci￾tation or inhibition of discrete populations of neurons. This usually involves invasive use 
of designer receptors exclusively activated by designer drugs (DREADDs; Roth, 2019). 
The human muscarinic acetylcholine receptor gene has been genetically modified so that 64 Brain: Outputs and Integration
it is either excitatory or inhibitory (the mechanism for this is via different G-coupled 
mechanisms the detail of which need not concern us here). These receptors are introduced 
into a region or regions of interest in brain, usually in rats or mice, via a harmless virus that 
acts as a Trojan horse. Once the DREADDs are incorporated and expressed as surface 
receptors on the neurons of interest, they are inactive or silent until they are engaged by 
an artificial chemical ligand, usually clozapine-N-oxide (CNO). Depending on the dose, 
a single CNO injection can provide an adequate stimulus for the DREADDs for several 
hours, thereby either increasing or decreasing the natural firing rate of the infected cells. 
When DREADDs are targeted to one phenotype of cell in a region, then the result with 
CNO allows inference about the normal effect of activation (or inhibition) of that pathway. 
That might include increasing or decreasing feeding behavior. The method has advantages 
over older methods that used chemical injection into a region of interest or electrical 
stimulation because, after the virus injection, no further brain penetration is needed. Also, 
the reversible effects of CNO last longer than most previous methods, with advantages for 
the study of feeding across more than one meal, including duration of satiety.
Optogenetics
A relatively recent and powerful tool for functional analysis of brain function is the 
method of optogenetic stimulation (or inhibition) of neural firing. This method currently 
is available only for use in mice. Many plants and algae have photosensitive pigments or 
opsins that are coupled to ion channels and transduce ambient light such as for photo￾synthesis. The genes encoding these opsins can be inserted, using transgenic methods, 
into specific brain regions and phenotypes of neurons (for more detail, see www.yout
ube.com/watch?v=55meVwea5Ss). When illuminated by an appropriate wavelength 
of light, delivered via a thin optical fiber into the brain region of interest, neurons 
expressing the opsin will generate either excitatory (usually via a sodium channel) or 
inhibitory (usually via a chloride channel) postsynaptic potentials and so become more 
or less likely to fire, respectively. When there is no light stimulus, the opsin is inactive 
and has no apparent effect on neural function (Emiliani et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2017).
One of the first opsins so introduced was channel rhodopsin 2 (ChR2), which is 
coupled to a sodium channel. Onset of the light (laser) stimulus produces sustained firing 
in the target cells, and this ceases almost immediately the laser is turned off. The rate 
(action potentials per second) of the induced firing is, in part, related to the frequency 
(in hertz) and duration of the laser pulses. The onset and offset of these effects occur 
within milliseconds, and so the method can be used to measure stimulation-dependent 
behavior. More recently, channels that are inhibitory and/or have a more prolonged effect 
have become available and have expanded the horizons of this powerful technology. In 
a food-related example (see youtube.com/watch?v=7Mmsah0v9Qc), stimulation of the 
bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST) produced rapid eating in mice that stopped 
as soon as the laser was turned off.
BRAIN REGIONS INVOLVED IN FEEDING
Many brain regions at multiple levels are involved in the conscious execution of complex 
behavior such as feeding. The brainstem is the principal input and output region – for 
example, receiving input from the cranial nerves about location, touch, texture, and taste. 
This input goes initially to the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS), which is a bilaterally Brain: Outputs and Integration 65
situated long, skinny nucleus (Figure 5.2). The posterior part receives mostly taste input, 
and the anterior region receives mostly gut-derived signals. The cranial nerves, including 
the vagus nerve from the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DMV) that innervates much 
of the gut, are the output conduits (Figure 5.2).
FIGURE 5.2 Schematic diagram of a mouse brain showing the principal structures discussed 
in the text. This original diagram, based on Figure 102 from Paxinos and Franklin (2001), 
redrawn and simplified, is a sagittal section slightly to one side of the midline, with the front 
of the brain facing left. For scale, the actual left-to-right extent shown is about 13 mm or 0.5ʺ. 
Abbreviations: ARC – arcuate nucleus; BNST – bed nucleus of stria terminalis; NAc – nucleus 
accumbens; PFC – prefrontal cortex; PVH – paraventricular nucleus of hypothalamus; PVT –
paraventricular nucleus of thalamus; NST – nucleus of the solitary tract; VTA – ventral teg￾mental area. Some areas shown are not on the midline and are shown in projection
Regions such as NST and DMV are heavily connected to more rostral levels of the 
brain, but it is also the case that they can use this sensory information to drive the motor 
outputs via local reflexive mechanisms, including the vago-vagal reflex. This conclusion 
is due to the intact nature of these reflexes in animals with transection of the brain above 
the brainstem (decerebration). Behavior in these animals is completely dependent on the 
sensory input: No organized foraging occurs. The taste reactivity test has enabled study of 
reflexive eating in rats and mice (Grill & Norgren, 1978) and is analogous to taste-related 
emotive facial expressions shown by newborn humans who have no prior experience 
with the taste (Forestell & Mennella, 2017).
In one of the first neural models of feeding, Stellar (1954) proposed that both 
internal chemical (interoceptive) signals and external sensory (exteroceptive) stimuli 
are integrated by mechanisms excitatory to feeding (i.e., producing hunger) and inhibi￾tory to feeding (i.e., producing satiety). The net outcome from these two hypothetical 
mechanisms determines when and how much feeding occurs. Contemporary evidence￾based theoretical models of feeding typically include a homeostatic or metabolic need 
component interfacing with an environmentally sensitive reward system and, in some 
models, an executive control network (Neseliler et al., 2019). Much of what we know 
about the hindbrain and reward systems has come from work with rats and mice using 
surgical, chemical, and other procedures that are not feasible in humans. Most of the 66 Brain: Outputs and Integration
information about executive control, and to some extent reward, has come from fMRI 
studies in humans.
The Hypothalamus and Feeding
Stellar’s model was built on findings that experimental damage to the ventromedial part 
of the hypothalamus (VMH) greatly increased food intake and led to extreme obesity in 
animals. This syndrome has some similarities to the voracious appetite in humans with 
Frohlich’s syndrome, in which tumors invade the VMH. Conversely, lesion of the lateral 
hypothalamus (LH) caused a syndrome of reduced or absent eating (aphagia) and dra￾matic weight loss. This led Stellar to propose that the VMH was a satiety center (i.e., 
damage to it impairs satiety), and the LH is a hunger center (i.e., damage to it impairs 
expression of hunger).
Today, the arcuate nucleus, which is a small egg-shaped region at the midline base or 
bottom of the VMH (usually damaged by the aforementioned VMH lesions), is known 
to be critical in the transduction or sensing of interoceptive, blood-borne hormones 
related to feeding. Two main types of cells, distinguished by the peptide transmitters that 
they express, are involved in this transduction. The first of these that we will examine in 
detail express agouti-related peptide (AgRP), and most if not all of these cells express 
a second transmitter, neuropeptide Y (NPY). Neurons in the second class express the 
pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) gene and produce the transmitter α-MSH that engages 
melanocortin type 4 receptors (MC4R) in some brain regions.
To get you oriented with the mouse brain, Figure 5.2 is a simplified schematic showing 
some of the structures we will mention in this section. Let’s start with the AgRP neurons in 
the arcuate nucleus. How do we know they are involved in hunger? One key finding is that 
progressively more of them are activated as the duration of fasting increases. Activation is 
often measured by the activity-dependent expression of a gene (c-fos) in the nuclei of most 
cells and subsequent production of a protein called Fos. Fos (and many other proteins) is 
commonly detected by incubating thin brain slices with an antibody that attaches with 
high selectivity to the protein of interest and, after a secondary chemical reaction, can be 
visualized under a microscope. Such immunochemical methods can be “stacked” so that, 
in this particular example, cells may be reacted sequentially with antibodies to AgRP and 
Fos, and co-localization would mean that the Fos was induced specifically in AgRP cells. 
A second key finding is that experimentally stimulating these AgRP cells in non-fasted 
mice using optogenetics induces immediate feeding, and that ceases as soon as the stimulus 
is removed. And third, these cells have receptors for leptin, ghrelin, and other metabolic 
hormones that access them from blood and modulate their activity (Belgardt et al., 2009).
And now things start to get complicated! In mice, there are about 10,000 AgRP 
neurons in the arcuate nucleus (on the left and right sides). But, they are not all doing 
the same thing, and it would be massively redundant for a small mouse brain to use this 
many neurons for the same task. Recent optogenetic findings show that AgRP neurons 
in different parts of the arcuate nucleus send axonal connections to different parts of the 
brain and have different functions (Betley et al., 2013; Padilla et al., 2016). The first such 
connection studied, which we will describe in more detail below, is to the paraventricular 
nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVH). Betley et al. (2013) estimated that about 30% of 
arcuate AgRP neurons project to the PVH, and activation of these axonal projections 
stimulates feeding in the same way as activation of arcuate cell bodies. Slightly less than 
20% of the arcuate neurons project to the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BST), and Brain: Outputs and Integration 67
they, too, support feeding behavior when stimulated. Some projections to the lateral 
hypothalamus also support feeding, but several relatively minor (<5%) projections are 
less or completely ineffective in this regard.
The AgRP arcuate cells projecting to terminals in the PVH have been studied exten￾sively. In addition to using AgRP as a transmitter, these cells co-release neuropeptide Y 
(NPY) and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) when action potential(s) arrive in the PVH. 
Tiny injections of NPY or GABA into the PVH of satiated rodents engage receptors on 
cells in the PVH and stimulate feeding. (At the level of electrical potentials, transmitters 
can have either an excitatory-depolarizing action or an inhibitory-hyperpolarizing action 
on cells. In this case, both NPY and GABA electrically inhibit PVH cells but stimulate 
feeding: Electrical potential change, not direction of change, is the key principle.) AgRP 
itself has a somewhat different function, blocking activation of MC4R receptors that 
mediate satiety (see below; that is, they play a “double negative” role vis-à-vis feeding).
Another prominent class of cells in the arcuate nucleus and projecting to the PVH 
express the proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene, and one of the protein products from 
this gene is alpha melanocyte stimulating hormone (α-MSH), which acts as a transmitter 
in the PVH. It does so by acting on the MC4R receptors, mentioned previously, to inhibit 
feeding. We have already noted that AgRP blocks the MC4Rs, meaning that it prevents 
the action of α-MSH at these receptors. These POMC neurons in the arcuate nucleus 
are modulated by circulating hormonal signals related to energy balance in a manner 
opposite to the AgRP cells, but, unexpectedly, optogenetic stimulation of POMC cells 
for up to a few hours does not inhibit food intake. Using a different (chemical) method 
for selective stimulation of these cells, Zhan et al. (2013) showed that food intake did not 
decline until the second or third day of treatment. Thus, this feeding inhibitory system 
seems to work with a delay or longer time-course.
Thus far, we have identified fast-acting hunger and slow-acting satiety mechanisms 
in the arcuate-to-PVH projections. How would short-term satiation or satiety be 
represented? To date, at least three answers have been proposed. First, an additional 
fast-acting satiety projection from arcuate nucleus to PVH has been identified, using glu￾tamate as a transmitter (Fenselau et al., 2017). Second, it has been shown that, as soon 
as the act of feeding begins, activity of the arcuate AgRP and POMC neurons is reversed 
(Chen et al., 2015). Third, in addition to the arcuate nucleus, another set of POMC cells 
is found in the NST: Chemical activation of these cells suppresses food intake in the short 
term (Zhan et al., 2013), and these authors suggest that POMC cells in the NST inhibit 
food intake via modulation of short-term mechanisms, such as gut-vagal afferents, while 
those in the arcuate nucleus mediate longer-term effects (e.g., relating to leptin).
As we stated at the start of this section, our purpose is to give you a “flavor” of the 
complexity of just one area of the hypothalamus in feeding. Other systems are known 
to be implicated, but we feel those would not add to the basic concepts about how the 
brain manages feeding.
FOOD FOR THOUGHT
Food Allergies
Food allergies are part of a more general category of adverse food reactions. 
Adverse reactions in the toxic category include digestive enzyme defects, such 
as in lactose intolerance, while those in the pharmacological category include 68 Brain: Outputs and Integration
abnormal reactions to agents such as capsaicin or ethanol. Adverse reactions in 
the non-toxic category are immune-mediated and may be classified into four 
types, mediated by various immunoglobulins (Ig) of which Type 1, mediated by 
IgE in response to food allergens, is common; food-induced IgE is often used as a 
diagnostic measure for this type of food allergy. Also common is Type IV hyper￾sensitivity, caused by T cell responses to specific antigens such as gluten and 
associated with celiac disease.
In developed countries, IgE-associated food allergy affects 3–8% of children and 
1–3% of adults. It has significant effects on an individual’s dietary habits and social 
life. Milk, eggs, wheat, peanuts, nuts, sesame, fish, fruits, and vegetables are common 
inducers of IgE-associated food allergy. Allergies to foods such as milk, egg, and 
wheat often are outgrown (patients acquire tolerance), whereas allergies to peanuts, 
tree nuts, and fish allergies often persist over a lifetime. The prevalence and severity 
of food allergies seem to be increasing. In addition to genetic factors, a number 
of environmental, cultural, and behavioral factors affect the frequency, severity, 
and type of allergic manifestations in patients. One hypothesis for this is related 
to hygiene: Decreases in family size and improvements in personal hygiene have 
contributed to the increased prevalence of IgE-mediated allergies. Another hypoth￾esis is that insufficient exposure to natural foods containing dietary and bacterial 
metabolites might have contributed to increases in inflammatory disorders. Many 
foods become allergenic because of interaction with the gastrointestinal system, but, 
with time, the allergen may directly permeate the mucosa and into the bloodstream, 
and this can also cause allergic responses due to skin contact or inhalation. Some of 
these responses, which range from eczema to anaphylactic shock, occur soon after 
exposure, while others may take hours.
There are no good treatments for food allergies, and the most common strategy 
is avoidance. In addition to avoiding direct ingestion, some food manufacturers now 
disclose that their factories or equipment may have had prior contact with allergens 
such as nuts, and some schools ban children from bring their own (unregulated) 
food items to school. Do you have a food allergy, or do you know someone who 
does? What behavioral strategies do you/they employ to reduce contact?
Hedonic Mechanisms and Feeding
When you start to consume food, there is often a short warm-up or appetition (Sclafani, 
2013) phase during which the rate of intake accelerates to a steady rate. Later, as sati￾ation approaches, eating rate often declines and, when eating stops, it is operationally 
zero. Aside from nutrient-related mechanisms of hunger and satiety that we discussed 
previously, the sensory experience of food changes over this time-course. The decrease in 
the pleasantness and ultimately the acceptability of a given food late in a meal or bout of 
ingestive behavior is known as negative alliesthesia. In fact, to functionally avoid negative 
alliesthesia, many cuisines employ both variety and a sequencing of foods that progresses 
from savory to sweet.Brain: Outputs and Integration 69
The ventral tegmental area (VTA) contains dopaminergic neurons that project rostrally 
to the nucleus accumbens and parts of the prefrontal cortex. Berridge and Kringelbach 
(2015) have conceptualized these dopaminergic systems as one of several distributed 
brain systems that are especially active during appetitive phases and linked to incentive 
salience of food or to a state of wanting. In contrast, a state of liking or pleasure is thought 
to be mediated by a smaller set of loci within these larger systems.
To demonstrate this, Castro and Berridge (2014) used previous observations that 
neurons in the nucleus accumbens have receptors for opioid peptide transmitters that 
are released either from local interneurons (consequent to dopamine stimulation) or 
input from other brain regions. Stimulation of opioid receptors in the nucleus accumbens 
by micro-injections of opioid agonist (mimicking) drugs is known to increase food intake. 
In their experiments, rats were surgically implanted with bilateral cannulas (small injec￾tion tubes) that, in different rats, were aimed at different parts of the nucleus accumbens. 
After full recovery from surgery, hedonic liking was assessed by a palatable sucrose solu￾tion being slowly infused into the rats’ mouths, with appetitive (swallowing) responses 
being recorded. On separate days, these responses were measured after injection of 
vehicle (or placebo) or after a single dose of agonists of three subtypes of opioid receptor 
(mu, kappa, delta). The principal result was that injections into an approximately 1-
mm3
 region (about 10% of the total size of the nucleus) of the medio-frontal part of 
the nucleus accumbens produced a large increase in liking responses when treated with 
any of the three agents, relative to vehicle. This region was termed a hedonic hotspot. 
Identical injections into more posterior parts of the nucleus accumbens decreased the 
liking responses, and this region was termed a hedonic cold spot.
In a subsequent but procedurally similar study examining cortical sites, Castro and 
Berridge (2017) found that micro-injections of a mu receptor agonist drug into the 
anterior orbital frontal cortex (part of the PFC, Figure 5.2) and into the posterior insula 
were consistent with hotspots, and that cortical sites in between were cold spots. Further, 
by examining patterns of activation (Fos protein) throughout the brain after micro￾injections into these cortical hotspots, they were able to demonstrate activation of a 
circuit linking hotspots in several regions, including the nucleus accumbens. Conversely, 
injections into the cortical cold spots revealed a circuit linking cold spots in other brain 
regions. Collectively, these data indicate that reward systems are not homogeneous with 
respect to liking. We do not have space to contrast the corresponding neuroanatomy of 
wanting (or food intake), but that also differs from the liking circuitry.
You might be left wondering how the need or hunger-based circuits and signals inte￾grate with the hedonic components, if at all. This is an area of intense investigation, but 
it is probably important to know that several parts of this “reward” system also contain 
receptors for hormones such as leptin, ghrelin, and insulin (Ferrario et al., 2016).
QUESTIONS TO ASK YOURSELF
Let’s review and apply your knowledge. Take some time to answer these chapter questions.
• What do you understand by the theoretical dual mechanism approach to feeding? 
Today, which signal molecule(s) best exemplify this approach?
• Describe the discovery and implications of hedonic hotspots and cold spots.70 Brain: Outputs and Integration
• Does fMRI tell us about real-time activity of single neurons? If not, what are its 
limitations?
• Describe four main regions of the cerebral cortex that have been implicated in 
feeding, and in which specific aspect(s)?
GLOSSARY
Agouti-related peptide (AgRP) A peptide hormone found in neurons 
in the hypothalamus and other brain 
regions, generally stimulating food 
intake.
Alliesthesia The change in sensory pleasure with 
continued presentation of a stimulus 
such as a specified food. Negative 
alliesthesia is the decline in pleasure/
palatability as ingestion proceeds.
Αlpha melanocyte stimulating A small peptide cleaved from its POMC 
hormone (α-MSH) parent or precursor and inhibitory to 
feeding.
Aphagia Complete absence or loss of feeding 
when it would normally occur.
Arcuate nucleus Small bilateral midline structure at the 
base of the hypothalamus that is prom￾inently involved in transducing blood￾borne signals related to feeding.
Bed nucleus of stria terminalis (BST) A loosely clustered series of neuron 
groups located around a fiber tract, the 
stria terminalis, in the limbic system of 
the brain.
Blood oxygenation The raw signal related to spin of protons 
level-dependent (BOLD) in a high magnetic field used to deter￾mine metabolic activity of a region 
in fMRI.
Dietary restraint Cognitive strategies that people may 
use to overcome more impulsive eating 
behaviors, including those relating 
to amount consumed and particular 
food types.Brain: Outputs and Integration 71
Functional magnetic resonance A method for non-invasive imaging of 
imaging (fMRI) neural activity in the human brain based 
on amount of oxygen extracted in unit 
time for metabolic use (BOLD).
Fos or c-Fos The product of a gene (fos) that is 
expressed when a neuron is highly 
activated and, in combination with 
immunochemistry, can be used to iden￾tify activated regions of the brain in thinly 
sliced tissue with single-cell resolution.
Frohlich’s syndrome A clinical syndrome including symptoms 
of voracious overeating and eventual 
obesity due to a tumor encroaching on 
the medial hypothalamus.
Hedonic hotspots and cold spots Circumscribed regions in larger areas of 
the brain that are traditionally thought 
to be involved in motivation and reward 
processing. Hotspots (or circuits) have a 
positive valence in this regard, and cold 
spots have a negative valence.
Hyperphagia A term for overeating relative to an 
established norm.
Immunochemistry A procedure by which the amount and/
or location of a chemical (e.g., a pep￾tide) can be determined, usually in 
several steps, using an antibody to rec￾ognize and bind to that chemical with 
high specificity.
Incentive salience The cognitive process that is associated 
with “wanting” a substance or com￾modity in the environment. In particular, 
it motivates appetitive behavior.
Insular cortex A division of the frontal cortex that is 
particularly involved in taste processing.
Melanocortin A member of a group of hormones, 
including α-MSH, produced from POMC.
Nucleus accumbens Also known as the ventral striatum, the 
nucleus accumbens is a region beneath, 
but contiguous with, the striatum; it is 
rich in dopamine nerve terminals and is 
involved in reward processing.
Opioid receptor One of several classes of receptor the 
natural ligands of which are endogenous 
opioids but which are potently engaged 72 Brain: Outputs and Integration
by specific drugs, including opiates such 
as morphine.
Orbital frontal cortex (OFC) The side or lateral divisions of the frontal 
lobes of the cerebral cortex, thought to 
be a key integrative area for decision 
making (e.g., in relation to eating).
Paraventricular nucleus (of the A region of the hypothalamus above
hypothalamus – PVH) or dorsal to the ventromedial region 
receiving axonal input from (among 
other regions) the arcuate nucleus.
Pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) A peptide (gene transcript) produced in 
select regions of the brain including the 
hypothalamus, subsequently cleaved to 
α-MSH, which is inhibitory to feeding.
Ventral tegmental area (VTA) A small midline region in the midbrain 
that contains dopamine-producing cells 
that project to the nucleus accumbens 
and are thought to be involved in 
reward.
Ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH) The midline and ventral (bottom) region 
of the hypothalamus; damage (lesions) 
to this area produces hyperphagia and 
results in obesity.
REFERENCES
Belgardt, B. F., Okamura, T., & Bruning, J. C. (2009). Hormone and glucose signalling in POMC and 
AgRP neurons. Journal of Physiology, 587, 5305–5314.
Berridge, K. C., & Kringelbach, M. L. (2015). Pleasure systems in the brain. Neuron, 86, 646–664.
Betley, J. N., Cao, J. F. H., Ritola, K. D., & Sternson, S. M. (2013). Parallel, redundant circuit organiza￾tion for homeostatic control of feeding behavior. Cell, 155, 1337–1350.
Castro, D. C., & Berridge, K. C. (2014). Opioid hedonic hotspot in nucleus accumbens shell: Mu, delta 
and kappa maps for enhancement of sweetness “liking” and “wanting.” Journal of Neuroscience, 34, 
4239–4250.
Castro, D. C., & Berridge, K. C. (2017). Opioid and orexin hedonic hotspots in rat orbitofrontal cortex 
and insula. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114, E9125–E9134.
Chen, Y., Lin, Y.-C., Kuo, T.-W., & Knight, Z. (2015). Sensory detection of food rapidly modulates arcuate 
feeding circuits. Cell, 160, 829–841.
Emiliani V., Entcheva E., Hedrich R., et al. (2022). Optogenetics for light control of biological systems. 
Nature Review Methods Primers, 2, 55. doi:10.1038/s43586-022-00136-4
Fenselau, H., Campbell, J. N., Verstegen, A. M. J., et al. (2017). A rapidly acting glutamatergic ARC￾PVH satiety circuit postsynaptically regulated by α-MSH. Nature Neuroscience, 20, 42–51.
Ferrario, C. R., Labouebe, G., Liu, S., et al. (2016). Homeostasis meets motivation in the battle to control 
food intake. Journal of Neuroscience, 36, 11469–11481.
Forestell, C. A., & Mennella, J. A. (2017). The relationship between infant facial expressions and food 
acceptance. Current Nutrition Reports, 6 (2), 141–147. doi:10.1007/s13668-017-0205-yBrain: Outputs and Integration 73
Grill, H. J., & Norgren, R. (1978). The taste reactivity test. II. Mimetic responses to gustatory stimuli in 
chronic thalamic and chronic decerebrate rats. Brain Research, 143 (2), 281–297. doi:10.1016/
0006-8993(78)90569-3
Jiang, J., Cui, H., & Rahmouni, K. (2017). Optogenetics and pharmacogenetics: Principles and 
applications. American Journal of Physiology Regulatory Integrative Comparative Physiology, 313, 
R633–R645.
Neseliler, S., Hu, W., Larcher, K., et al. (2019). Neurocognitive and hormonal correlates of voluntary 
weight loss in humans. Cell Metabolism, 29, 1–11.
Padilla, S. L., Qiu, J., Soden, M. E., et al. (2016). Agouti-related peptide neural circuits mediate adaptive 
behaviors in the starved state. Nature Neuroscience, 19, 734–741.
Paxinos, G., & Franklin, K. B. J. (2001). The mouse brain in stereotaxic coordinates, 2nd ed. 
San Diego: Academic Press.
Roth, B. L. (2019). How structure informs and transforms chemogenetics. Current Opinion in Structural 
Biology, 57, 9–16.
Sclafani, A. (2013). Gut–brain nutrient signaling. Appetition vs. satiation. Appetite, 71, 454–458.
Stellar, E. (1954). The physiology of motivation. Psychological Review, 61, 5–22.
Zhan, C., Zhou, J., Feng, Q., et al. (2013). Acute and long-term suppression of feeding behavior by 
POMC neurons in the brainstem and hypothalamus, respectively. Journal of Neuroscience, 33, 
3624–3632.DOI: 10.4324/9781032621401-6
CHAPTER 6
Genetics, Epigenetics, and 
Microbiome
After reading this chapter, you will be able to
• Give examples of monogenic obesity and prevalence in human obesity.
• Understand polygenic obesity and identifying genes.
• Define epigenetics and its implications for obesity.
• Appreciate the gut microbiome and its implications for obesity and other diseases.
We introduce several concepts in this chapter that are linked by what we might consider to 
be internal or intrinsic factors in relation to obesity. The first concept is genetics, the inherited 
characteristics that might make one individual more or less prone to develop obesity than 
another. The second is epigenetics, the study of how gene expression is modified as a result of 
experience. And the third concerns the genes carried by the trillions of microbiota that live 
in our gastrointestinal system and participate in utilization of nutrients.
As we go through this chapter, it will become evident that much of the research in 
the field is devoted to addressing intrinsic factors that contribute to obesity. But, as a 
widespread population phenomenon, obesity is a relatively recent condition, whereas 
corresponding genomic changes take tens or hundreds of generations to become 
entrenched and are thus unlikely to be the sole culprits in obesity. That leaves at least two 
other possibilities: (1) Intrinsic factors of shorter modification time that either change 
the expression of, or bypass, our genome; (2) an interaction between genome or spe￾cific genes and the environment, the latter having changed rapidly. Finally, it should be 
emphasized that genes in complex organisms such as mammals do not determine an 
outcome; instead, they make certain outcome(s) more or less likely given a particular 
environment (Comfort, 2018). For example, one may have gene(s) favoring fat storage, 
but lipogenesis cannot occur without adequate food availability.
GENETICS
A Short Primer
Among the most critical and unique functional components of a cell are its proteins: Included 
among these are those proteins that enable a cell to have shape (structural proteins), to 
engage in chemical reactions (enzymatic proteins), and to communicate with its outside 
milieu, including other cells (membrane channels and receptors). Proteins are chains of amino Genetics, Epigenetics, and Microbiome 75
acids (of which there are 20) linked head-to-tail. The proteins mentioned above are typic￾ally several hundred amino acids in length and are folded into complex three-dimensional 
shapes. The amino acid complement making up these proteins ultimately determines a given 
protein’s unique shape and unique function for a particular cell or cell type.
The essential instructions on how to assemble these proteins, in which cells, in what 
quantity, and when, are contained in the genome of an organism and coded in molecules 
of deoxynucleic acid (DNA). Long strands of DNA are coiled together as a double helix 
and are wrapped around proteins called histones within the nucleus of each somatic cell 
in an organism. Most organisms are called eukaryotes because their DNA is contained 
in a nucleus. DNA is constructed from molecules, called nucleotides, joined by chemical 
bonds in head-to-tail fashion within a strand. One part of each nucleotide is a nitro￾genous base of which there are four possibilities (abbreviated to A, C, G, T). These con￾stitute what is essentially a four-letter molecular alphabet, and, like written words, the 
precise nucleotide sequence imparts a specific “meaning” within the cell. The human 
genome consists of several billion nucleotides.
Probably only about 2% of the total DNA is involved in protein coding; some of the 
remaining 98% has other critical functions that we will not address. Genes are segments of 
DNA that are essential for protein coding: The human genome contains about 20,000 genes, 
and each gene encodes a specific protein. When a gene is actively making a protein, that gene 
is said to be expressed. Expression is a two-step sequence (Figure 6.1). The first, transcription, 
involves making a “working copy” which is called messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA). The 
details of this process are beyond the present text, but when, and how many, copies of mRNA 
are made depend in part on the availability of that gene to the transcription machinery (see 
the following section on Epigenetics) and the presence of transcription factors that function as 
molecular switches. Thus, the “on and off” of gene transcription is controlled by several factors 
inside the cell. Once mRNA is formed, it leaves the nucleus for a process of translation; this is 
how the sequence of mRNA nucleotides is transformed into a sequence of amino acids, which is 
like a different molecular language. The “rule” of translation is a triplet code, according to which a 
sequence of three nucleotide bases (known as a codon) specifies a particular amino acid (a good 
animation can be viewed at: www.hhmi.org/biointeractive/triplet-code). There are also start and 
stop codons. The translation machinery effectively locates “start” on the mRNA, then reads off 
three bases at a time, and so assembles the amino acids into proteins until reaching stop.
FIGURE 6.1 Sequential steps involved in gene expression, including transcription of DNA into 
RNA in the nucleus and translation of mRNA into proteins in the cytoplasm76 Genetics, Epigenetics, and Microbiome
Any given gene can have one or more variants called alleles. Different alleles encode 
slightly different proteins with usually modestly different functional properties (such 
as how efficiently an enzyme molecule performs its function). In addition to alleles, 
which are inherited variants, mistakes or errors of translation can occur, and these are 
called mutations. These mutations may arise naturally, but modern biology has given 
us tools to make intentional or directed mutations to specific genes, including so-called 
“knock-out” or “knock-in” animals – often mice – in which a specific gene is silenced or 
replaced. Mendelian genetics (so named after Gregor Mendel who, in the 19th century, 
established the fundamentals of inheritance) refers to a situation in which a particular 
trait is controlled by a single gene which exists as either dominant or non-dominant 
alleles. The trait exhibited by offspring is determined by the inherited dominant form. 
Let’s now examine what is known about the gene mutations or alleles that affect 
body composition or predispose to obesity. Before doing so, we should point out that 
a given gene may encode a protein that contributes to a physiological process – for 
example, that of storage of excess food as adipose tissue – or may influence behavioral 
processes – for example, hunting or gathering skills. Thus, linking a particular gene or 
gene variant with a state of obesity does not tell us the mechanism (i.e., physiological 
or behavioral, both of which have many dimensions) of that linkage. Other functional 
studies, such as injecting the protein product into a donor, are needed to establish 
mechanism.
Single-Gene Approach and Monogenic Obesity
The traditional approach to genes and obesity was to consider single-gene mutations 
and then multi-gene (polygenic) mutations. More recently, it has become evident 
that the single-gene examples are better considered as special cases of the polygenic 
condition. In particular, because genes encode functional proteins, there are several 
ways in which a gene could affect the efficiency of that protein and thereby increase 
or decrease its normal function. In the case of body fat, those effects could include 
storage or mobilization of fat stores, changes in the signals from fat-derived hormones, 
and other effects. Twins reared apart show that body mass index (BMI) has a strong 
(up to 80%) inherited component (Allison et al., 1996; Stunkard et al., 1986). These 
analyses are statistical correlations determined in part by pairs of twins with similar 
BMI at the low and high ends of the spectrum – that is, they include both obese and 
non-obese pairs. To move from these demographic data to determine which genes are 
involved in the general population is not a simple step. For example, is your scientific 
question about rare alleles that give rise to large effects on BMI, or is it about com￾monly occurring alleles that have a small effect on BMI but may have an additive effect 
with other small-effect alleles in an individual (Gibson, 2015; Hendricks et al., 2017; 
Speakman et al., 2018)?
One experimental strategy is to study a restricted population that has a high prob￾ability of carrying a rare allele; early studies of this type usually focused on children who 
exhibit very high BMI, on the grounds that such early onset obesity has a high prob￾ability of a genetic component. Such studies (e.g., Hendricks et al., 2017) have identified 
a handful of alleles any one of which has a high penetrance or probability of producing 
the early-onset obese phenotype. Monogenic obesity is due to a single abnormal gene. 
A short-cut way of approaching this is to screen DNA for only one or a few genes/
alleles in a so-called candidate gene approach, but this “knowing what you are looking Genetics, Epigenetics, and Microbiome 77
for” approach often requires adequate animal models, as discussed below. Over the past 
decade, enormous advances in our ability to screen entire human genomes and investi￾gate functional linkages has exploded (e.g., Loos & Yeo, 2022).
The strength of animal models is that they allow us to study one factor in relative 
isolation, an ideal that can rarely be met in a human population. A gene can be rendered 
non-functional either by a spontaneously occurring mutation or by genetic engineering, 
often using gene knock-out models. To simplify, in a knock-out organism, the function￾ality of a gene is interrupted so that it can no longer make a specific protein. In one 
spontaneously obese mutation in mice, called ob/ob, the phenotype or trait (obesity) 
was found to be the result of a recessive mutation: The obese phenotype arises owing 
to inheritance of two defective (-/-) copies of the ob gene from its parents. This occurs 
with a one-in-four chance with heterozygous parents who each carry one normal and 
one defective copy; at the same time, one in four littermates carry two normal copies (+
/+). Mice typically have litters of eight or more pups, and so, on average, each litter will 
have two offspring who will have the -/- genotype and two who will have the +/+ geno￾type. (The other pups are called heterozygotes, or +/-, but, because the mutant gene is 
recessive, heterozygotes have more or less normal weight.) Subsequent studies showed 
the phenotype is caused by a mutation at a single nucleotide base in DNA that results 
in a premature “stop” codon in translation: The encoded protein is abnormally short and 
is nonfunctional.
Jeffrey Friedman and his colleagues (Zhang et al., 1994) identified the protein, now 
called leptin from Greek leptos, meaning thin, that is the normal product of this gene. 
Hence, this genetic mutation is now designated lep-/-, and the lean littermates are lep+
/+ (and the heterozygous litter mates are lep+/-). The lep-/- mice have normal birth 
weights but start to gain weight early in life; after they are weaned from their mothers, 
their weight gain is maintained by overeating and low physical activity. These mice also 
develop type 2 diabetes. In Chapter 5, we met some of the physiological function(s) of 
leptin, which is produced in rough proportion to the amount of body fat and acts in the 
brain as a signal to reduce eating. In the absence of this molecular brake, an important 
constraining mechanism on food intake is lost.
Every chemical signal, such as leptin, requires a receptor to exert its function. Thus, 
mutations of the receptor for leptin should produce a similar phenotype to lep-/-. 
Another spontaneous mouse mutation, called db/db for diabetes, was discovered at about 
the same time as ob/ob. Subsequent investigation showed the genetic mutation was in 
one type of leptin receptor (lepRb-/-) that transports leptin into the brain. Mice with this 
mutation produce leptin, but it is not able to access the relevant brain regions, resulting 
in a phenotype comparable in obesity to the lep-/- mice.
Are there examples of leptin-related mutations and obesity found in humans? Yes, 
but they are quite rare. Montague et al. (1997) identified three very obese children who 
had undetectable blood levels of leptin; the obesity exhibited by these children was 
reversed by chronic treatment with synthetic leptin. Mutations to the leptin receptor are 
slightly more common, occurring in up to 3% of early-onset severe obesity. Individuals 
with these mutations, much like the mice, have normal birth weights but start to gain 
weight abnormally fast within the first few months of life. They show increased food 
seeking and overeating at least into adolescence (for a review, see Ramachandrappa & 
Farooqi, 2011).
A different class of genetic mutations, which are causally associated with an obese pheno￾type, involves disruption of signaling in the brain mediated by melanocortin type 4 receptors 78 Genetics, Epigenetics, and Microbiome
(MC4R). These receptors can be rendered dysfunctional in mice by gene knock-out (mc4r-/-). 
Since this melanocortin system, like leptin, normally inhibits food intake, impairment 
of function leads to a phenotype of overeating and eventual obesity. Equivalent loss￾of-function mutations in the MC4 receptor in humans are associated with overeating 
and occur in about 5% of people with early-onset obesity (Ramachandrappa & 
Farooqi, 2011).
A handful of other alleles, with acronyms such as ANGPTL6, FTO, and PACS1
(Hendricks et al., 2017; Pei et al., 2014; Wheeler et al., 2013), have been identified in 
early-onset obesity, but, unlike for leptin and MC4R, the exact functions of the encoded 
proteins have yet to be fully elucidated. Together, these monogenic defects account for 
only about 5% of severe childhood obesity – literally a thin slice out of the immense pie 
of obesity.
Multiple-Gene Approach and Polygenic Obesity
A potentially more useful but extremely demanding approach is to examine the entire 
genome for allelic variations and correlate the occurrence of the various alleles with 
BMI. This is called a genome-wide association (GWA) study and requires sample sizes of 
many thousands of humans to achieve statistically significant correlations. At the time of 
writing this chapter, more than 200 different obesity-related genes have been identified 
from several GWA studies (Speakman et al., 2018). These are most likely commonly 
occurring variants but each with small effect (Gibson, 2015), and, to achieve significant 
obesity, an individual would have to have several such allelic variants the effects of which 
either add up or interact with one another in such a way as to produce an obese pheno￾type. This is known as polygenic obesity, resulting from the additive or interactive effect 
of multiple genes.
Given the obvious complexity of this genetic information, you might be asking what 
the practical utility or significance of knowing which specific gene or genes are causing 
obesity is – other than the comfort achieved by saying “my genes made me fat”! Well, 
the hope is that the proteins encoded by the normal gene(s) will be “targetable” by 
therapeutic drugs. And, while that has been borne out insofar as administration of leptin 
reverses the lep-/- phenotype (i.e., those who are genetically incapable of producing 
leptin), other targets have as yet proven elusive for useful pharmacological interven￾tion. Further, assuming that any intervention were to be substantially effective, then, 
because drugs (or other potential types of intervention such as gene therapy) all have 
risks or side effects and monetary cost, what would be an acceptable threshold BMI for 
a decision to treat? For these reasons, it is unlikely that gene-based information will be 
applicable in the foreseeable future except to the extremely obese. In Chapter 12, we 
will discuss the many other not-genetic strategies and treatments that have been used 
for weight loss.
EPIGENETICS
Epigenetics refers to changes, sometimes heritable, in gene expression or phenotype caused 
by mechanisms other than alterations in the nucleotide sequence of DNA. Such changes 
would not show up in the genetic screens discussed so far. The two well-established epi￾genetic mechanisms are methylation and histone modification (Figure 6.2). Methylation 
occurs when a methyl group is added to a specific DNA base(s) and interferes with the Genetics, Epigenetics, and Microbiome 79
transcription of the gene. One of the apparent functions of the FTO gene (which encodes 
the fat mass and obesity associated protein) is to remove methyl groups from certain 
gene(s) and so influence the normal balance or ratio of translated proteins in the cell. 
Another epigenetic mechanism is the potential action of the vast non-coding regions of 
DNA on transcription of coding regions. One important difference between genetics and 
epigenetics is the time frame: Epigenetics plays out within the lifetime of an individual 
and is much more consistent with the time frame for the rapid, population-wide increase 
in BMI.
FIGURE 6.2 Illustration of how epigenetic events such as acetylation or methylation affect the 
unfolding of genes from histone carriers and, hence, whether the DNA in that gene can be 
expressed
One of the first demonstrations of epigenetic influence came from an examination of 
Dutch health records: Children who were born in 1940 during the severe war-related 
famine, with inferred under-nutrition, had higher incidence of overweight or obesity 
in middle age compared with children born without early-life under-nutrition (Eckel, 
2008). This observation spawned controlled animal experiments to test the hypoth￾esis that food restriction during sensitive periods early in life (prenatally and/or early 
postnatally) would predispose those offspring to be more vulnerable to becoming over￾weight or obese when food was subsequently plentiful. This concept of developmental 
programming means that, through stable epigenetic changes, early-life events perman￾ently modify gene expression and thereby lead to different phenotypes in adolescence 
or adulthood.
Many such animal models also demonstrate genetic or epigenetic interaction with 
diet. That is, the overeating and obesity only occur with particular diet(s), and these 
are almost always – you guessed it – high fat. Usually, the animals in question are fed 80 Genetics, Epigenetics, and Microbiome
a single diet – for example, high fat in experimental group(s) and low fat in control 
group(s) – although similar results are often obtained when animals are given access to 
a variety of foods of varying fat content – a so-called cafeteria diet. Of course, humans 
almost always have this latter type of diet choice and, at a population-wide level, tend 
to choose relatively high-fat diets. Thus, although diet is not a controlled factor, many 
if not most of the humans in the GWA studies mentioned above have diet-related 
obesity. Since we often impose our own lifestyles on domestic pets (i.e., dogs and cats), 
it is no surprise that these companion animals are also undergoing an obesity epidemic 
(Klimentisis et al., 2010).
In mice, there are well-known strain differences in their susceptibility to dietary 
obesity (West & York, 1998). However, within an ostensibly identical cohort of mice 
of the B6 strain, Koza et al. (2006) noted substantial individual variability in their pro￾pensity to diet-induced obesity. They reasoned that this must be because of individual 
epigenetically programmed differences and went on to show that the expression of cer￾tain genes in fat tissue and in the brain differed among individuals in proportion to their 
vulnerability to obesity. In rats, it has been shown that propensity to obesity on a high-fat 
diet is a heritable characteristic. Starting with a commonly used outbred stock strain 
(Sprague-Dawley), Levin and his colleagues (1997) noticed that some individuals gained 
more weight than others when fed a moderate-fat diet. He then bred the high-gaining 
males with high-gaining females for a few generations; most of the resulting offspring 
then showed a propensity to diet-induced obesity (obesity-prone line). Conversely, when 
low-gaining males and females were bred for several generations, most of the offspring 
did not gain much weight on the same diet and so were termed obesity resistant. The 
concept of dietary resistance provides a different perspective on genes and obesity. The 
single-gene and GWA approaches referred to earlier are almost all focused on finding 
alleles or mutations that are associated with human obesity and/or vulnerability to 
obesity. But there is an assumption that the default condition is lean. If, instead, as we 
have argued earlier in the book, obesity is a natural biological response to an obesogenic 
food environment, then it is resistance to obesity that is exceptional and worthy of our 
attention. Humans probably have additional mechanisms for cognitive resistance avail￾able, including body image and dietary restraint (see Chapter 12).
To summarize this section, epigenetic mechanisms operate to modify the expression 
of the human genome over relatively short periods of time as well as, in some cases, trans￾mission across generations (i.e., resulting in heritable traits).
MICROBIOME
We are not alone. This is not a reference to extraterrestrial life or a movie, but to the 
trillions of “old friends” that live inside each and every one of us (for a review, see Liang 
et al., 2018). Humans have been referred to as superorganisms who carry a variety of 
microorganisms, such as bacteria and fungi, which live and reproduce on our internal 
and external surfaces. We will restrict this discussion to microorganisms that live in the 
digestive tract – gut microbiota. A typical human gut contains between 300 and 3,000 
different species of commensal microbiota, each with its own genome, and it has been 
estimated that their total number is 100 trillion. Thus, both the genetic diversity and 
number of the microbiota exceed the host-specific (viz., human-specific) counterparts 
by orders of magnitude. Of course, as their name implies, they are very small and collect￾ively weigh about 1 kg. Only within the past few years have we started to appreciate and Genetics, Epigenetics, and Microbiome 81
unravel the implications of the gut microbiome for human health, including variation 
in BMI.
It should first be recognized that these gut microbiota eat, quite literally, what we eat. 
The amount of energy they consume is quite small, and they often are able to extract 
energy from ingested material that we normally cannot digest, such as dietary fiber. But, to 
some extent, which microbiota flourish and which do not depends in part on the food or 
diet that we eat. Further, the microbiota are not homogeneously distributed throughout 
our gut: In general, more and different species inhabit the lower gut or intestine than the 
upper regions. In general, the number and diversity of bacterial species decreases with 
high-fat or refined diets. Table 6.1 summarizes some principal species of microbiota and 
how they change with a high-fat diet. In rodents, some changes are evident within one 
week of switching from low- to high-fat diets, while more extended exposure to the diet 
leads to a partial breakdown of the barrier between the lumen of the gut (which is func￾tionally still outside of the human) and body tissue, with subsequent passage of bacterial 
components into the body. These are believed to precipitate a low-grade inflammatory 
response as well as decreased signaling from gut to brain via the vagus nerve (Figure 6.3; 
see also Chapter 5 and Hamilton & Raybould, 2016; Liang et al., 2018).
FIGURE 6.3 Representation of how microbiota in the gut can affect the brain via the circula￾tion or vagus nerve, especially in relation to food intake, and how food choices (and other 
influences of brain origin) affect the microbiota
TABLE 6.1 Select gut microbiota under different dietary conditions
Diet Upper intestine Lower intestine
Low fat Clostridiaceae family*
Firmicutes
Proteobacteria
Prevotella*
Bacteriodetes
High fat Lactococcus*
Firmicutes (reduced)
Bacteriodetes*
Archaea (reduced)
* Indicates the most abundant species; (reduced) indicates lower levels on a high-fat diet.
Source: Simplified from Figure 4.1 of Hamilton and Raybould (2016).82 Genetics, Epigenetics, and Microbiome
Mancabelli et al. (2017) performed a meta-analysis of gut microbiomes from individ￾uals from two remaining pre-agricultural or hunter-gatherer civilizations (in Peru and 
Tanzania) and from several developed/industrialized countries. All of the populations 
contained 22 species of microbes – the core microbiota – but, significantly, this core 
represented 82% of all microbiota in the industrialized samples but only 47% in the 
pre-agricultural samples. On the other hand, 15 “accessory microbiota” accounted for 
11% and 40% of the total, respectively. These data suggest that a greater reliance on 
germ-free food and a lesser reliance on fibrous and/or less processed food, which are 
often characteristics of urbanized/industrialized diets, is associated with attenuated gut 
microbiome diversity or number.
What are the consequences of an altered microbiome for metabolism and obesity? 
Several studies in rodents have shown a relationship between weight change and 
microbiome. One way in which this can be studied is to perform microbiota transplant￾ation, also known as fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT). This is not quite as gross 
as it sounds – the bacteria are extracted and purified first! In one such study, starting 
with germ-free mice (bred in a sterile environment to be devoid of microorganisms), 
Turnbaugh and colleagues (2006) performed FMT from either obese lep-/- or lean lep+
/+ mice, allowed the recipient mice to eat a low-fat diet for two weeks, then examined 
various physiological end points. Despite the fact that both groups ate exactly the same 
amount of food, those receiving FMT from obese donors gained twice as much body 
fat as those receiving FMT from lean donors, an increase estimated to be equivalent 
to 2% of the total energy consumed during those two weeks. The actual increase in fat 
tissue in the two groups was 1.3 g versus 0.86 g (about 5% and 3% of total body weight, 
respectively), and, while that may not sound like a lot, over this short period of time it 
is (Box 6.1).
BOX 6.1 OF MICE AND HUMANS: THE CUMULATIVE EFFECT 
OF NUDGES
An adult mouse weighs about 30 g, whereas an adult human weighs about 60 kg –
an approximately 2,000-fold difference. A mouse living in the welfare state of a 
laboratory with all-you-can-eat chow lives about 2 years; modern humans live at 
least 60 years – approximately 30 times longer. So, is a 2-week experiment showing 
change in weight of mice (see the text) the equivalent of 30 times 2 weeks (i.e., 
about a year) in humans, or something different? “Scaling” issues like this don’t have 
any great or universally accepted answers, but one fact on which we should all agree 
is that long-lived species have much more time over which to accumulate small 
changes or effects (nudges) than do short-lived species. For example, suppose that a 
mouse gains 1% body weight per year: Late in life, they would only weigh 2% more 
than they did as young adults, an insignificant change. But a 20-year-old human 
weighing 70 kg (150 lbs; BMI perhaps a lean 22 kg/m2
) and thereafter showing a 1% 
increase per year would, by age 70, weigh 105 kg (225 lbs; BMI classified as obese at 
33 kg/m2
). Given that math, do not underestimate the powerful cumulative effect 
of dietary or other nudges!Genetics, Epigenetics, and Microbiome 83
The gut microbiota have many functions, including production of small molecules that 
can either act as receptors in the gut wall or diffuse across the gut wall, thereby affecting 
the gut–brain signaling in the host. Short chain fatty acids (SCFAs, such as butyric acid) 
are one class of molecules that are produced by several species of microbiota and are 
known to affect the gut barrier and nervous and immune systems of the host. These, in 
turn, can not only affect signaling in and to the adult brain but also, importantly, have 
developmental consequences. For example, vaginal birth and/or breastfeeding introduce 
the newborn to a variety of microbiota that populate its gut and have effects on brain 
growth and maturation. In contrast, caesarean delivery and/or bottle-feeding lead to a 
markedly different microbiome (Bokulich et al., 2016) with potential effects on early 
neural development (Liang et al., 2018). FMT as a therapy for an altered or dysfunctional 
gut microbiome has been used, but prebiotic or probiotic foods sound more attractive! 
Prebiotics are foods such as dietary fiber that are designed to nourish beneficial micro￾biota. Probiotics are typically fermented foods such as yogurt designed to introduce spe￾cific microbiota to populate or repopulate the gut.
To summarize this section, the gut microbiome is vast, and it changes both develop￾mentally and as a function of diet both within a lifetime (e.g., fat content in one’s diet) 
and as a function of overall lifestyle (e.g., rural versus urban living). Although some of the 
reported changes may be small (i.e., nudges), cumulated over time they provide a genetic 
mechanism separate from the host (human genome) that can respond relatively quickly 
to environmental change.
QUESTIONS TO ASK YOURSELF
Let’s review and apply your knowledge. Take some time to answer these chapter 
questions:
• Distinguish between transcription and translation.
• Explain why, in relation to obesity, epigenetics may occur over a shorter time 
frame than genetics.
• Discuss the relative merits, and drawbacks or limitations, of the approaches that 
have been applied to the genetics of human obesity.
• Describe the potential contribution of the microbiome to eating and obesity.
• Distinguish between prebiotic and probiotic interventions.
GLOSSARY
Allele One of two or more alternative forms (sequences) 
of a gene that are found at the same place on a 
given chromosome.
Candidate gene A gene that has allelic form(s) suspected to be 
involved in expression of a specific phenotype.84 Genetics, Epigenetics, and Microbiome
Deoxynucleic acid (DNA) A self-replicating chemical material that is the 
main constituent of chromosomes. It exists as 
two strands that wind themselves into a double 
helix structure.
Developmental programming Refers to the concept that events during prenatal 
and/or early postnatal periods can have lasting 
effects on the adult phenotype, in part through 
epigenetic mechanisms.
Epigenetics The study of changes in phenotype caused by 
modification of the expression of genes, not by 
alteration of the genome or genetic code per se.
Expression (gene) Describes the production or appearance of a 
characteristic (phenotype, protein) that is due to 
the transcription and translation of a given gene.
Genetics The study of heredity and variation of 
characteristics (e.g., as inherited from parents).
Genome The complete set of genes and chromosomes 
present in a cell or organism.
Genome-wide association Describes a study, usually in very large numbers 
of subjects, in which genomic characteristic(s) 
are correlated or associated with one or more 
phenotypes.
Gut microbiota Describes the species and amounts of bacterial 
or other microorganisms that inhabit particular 
regions of the human gastrointestinal tract, 
or gut.
Histones Chemically basic proteins found in the nucleus 
of cells and around which DNA is wound.
Leptin A protein (of the class called cytokines) produced 
by fat tissue that regulates fat storage.
Melanocortins A class of hormones and/or neurotransmitter 
molecules that act via specific receptors (MCs) to 
produce a variety of effects, including inhibiting 
appetite.
Methylation A chemical modification (adding methyl group) 
that, when it occurs in DNA, modifies the 
binding of DNA to histones and thereby site￾specific gene transcription.
Microbiome Refers to the vast array of microorganisms 
that are symbiotic with the host (e.g., human 
being).
Monogenic obesity Obesity that can be attributed to mutation of a 
single gene.Genetics, Epigenetics, and Microbiome 85
Mutation In genetics refers to alteration of one or more 
base units in DNA that leads to modification in 
the functional output of a gene.
Obesity prone (or resistant) Refers to a genetic background that predisposes 
an individual to becoming obese (or resisting 
obesity) when presented with an obesogenic 
diet such as a high-fat one.
Penetrance The extent to which particular gene(s) are 
expressed in the phenotype.
Phenotype The set of observable characteristics of an indi￾vidual resulting from (lifelong) interaction of the 
genome with the environment.
Polygenic obesity Obesity that is due to the combined or summed 
effect of several genes, each with small effect.
Prebiotic In the host organism, a non-digestible food 
ingredient that promotes the growth of (usually) 
beneficial microorganisms in the gut.
Probiotic A food ingredient that introduces specific 
microorganism(s) to the gut of the host.
Short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) Organic acids, such as acetic, propionic, or 
butyric, that function as signal molecules and are 
manufactured in the intestine by gut microbiota.
Transcription The process by which a sequence of DNA 
nucleotides is copied in a template-like fashion 
into molecules of RNA.
Transcription factor An intracellular chemical that binds to DNA and 
initiates transcription.
Translation The process by which successive triplet sequences 
of mRNA are assembled into chains of amino 
acids, as dictated by the specific sequence.
Vagus nerve A mixed nerve (sensory and motor) that runs 
to and from nuclei in the brainstem to various 
organs in the thoracic cavity. Relevant to feeding, 
various chemical and mechanical sensory signals 
from the gut activate vagus nerve endings.
REFERENCES
Allison, D. B., Kaprio, J., Korkeila, M., et al. (1996). The heritability of body mass index among an 
international sample of monozygotic twins reared apart. International Journal of Obesity and Related 
Metabolic Disorders, 20, 501–506.
Bokulich, N. A., Chung, J., Battaglia, T., et al. (2016). Antibiotics, birth mode, and diet shape microbiome 
maturation during early life. Science and Translational Medicine, 8, 343.86 Genetics, Epigenetics, and Microbiome
Comfort, N. (2018). Genetic determinism rides again. Nature, 561 (7723), 461–464.
Eckel, R. H. (2008). Obesity research in the next decade. International Journal of Obesity, 32, 
S143–S151.
Gibson, G. (2015). Rare and common variants: Twenty arguments. Nature Reviews Genetics, 13, 
135–145.
Hamilton, M. K., & Raybould, H. E. (2016). Bugs, guts and brains and the regulation of food intake and 
body weight. International Journal of Obesity Supplements, 6, S8–14.
Hendricks, A. E., Bochukova, E. G., Marenne, G., et al. (2017). Rare variant analyses of human and 
rodent obesity genes in individuals with severe childhood obesity. Scientific Reports, 7, 4394.
Klimentisis, Y. C., Beasley, T. M., Lin, H. Y., et al. (2010). Canaries in the coal mine: A cross-species ana￾lysis of the plurality of obesity epidemics. Proceedings of the Royal Society Series B, 278, 1626–1632.
Koza, R. A., Nikonova, L., Hogan, J., et al. (2006). Changes in gene expression foreshadow diet￾induced obesity in genetically identical mice. PLOS Genetics, 2, e81.
Levin, B. E., Dunn-Meynell, A. A., Balkan, B., & Keesey, R. E. (1997). Selective breeding for diet-induced 
obesity and resistance in Sprague-Dawley rats. American Journal of Physiology: Regulatory, Integrative 
and Comparative Physiology, 273, R725–R730.
Liang, S., Wu, X., & Jin, F. (2018). Gut-brain psychology: Rethinking psychology from the microbiota-gut￾brain axis. Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience, 12, 33.
Loos, R. J., & Yeo, G. S. (2022). The genetics of obesity: From discovery to biology. Nature Reviews 
Genetics, 23 (2), 120–133.
Mancabelli, L., Milani, C., Lugli, G., et al. (2017). Meta-analysis of the human gut microbiome from 
urbanized and pre-agricultural populations. Environmental Microbiology, 19, 1379–1390.
Montague, C. T., Farooqi, I. S., Whitehead, J. P., et al. (1997). Congenital leptin deficiency is associated 
with severe early onset obesity in humans. Nature, 387, 903–908.
Pei, Y.-F., Zhang, L., Liu, Y., et al. (2014). Meta-analysis of genome-wide association data identifies novel 
susceptibility loci for obesity. Human Molecular Genetics, 23, 820–830.
Ramachandrappa, S., & Farooqi, I. S. (2011). Genetic approaches to understanding human obesity. 
Journal of Clinical Investigation, 121, 2080–2086.
Speakman, J. R., Loos, R. J. F., O’Rahilly, S., et al. (2018). GWAS for BMI: A treasure trove of funda￾mental insights into the genetic basis of obesity. International Journal of Obesity, 42, 1524–1531.
Stunkard, A. J., Foch, T. T., & Hrubec, Z. (1986). A twin study of human obesity. Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 256, 51–54.
Turnbaugh, P. J., Ley, R. E., Mahowald, M. A., et al. (2006). An obesity-associated gut microbiome with 
increased capacity for energy harvest. Nature, 444, 1027–1031.
West, D. B., & York, B. (1998). Dietary fat, genetic predisposition, and obesity: Lessons from animal 
models. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 67 (Suppl. 3), 505S–512S.
Wheeler, E., Huang, N., Bochukova, E., et al. (2013). Genome-wide SNP and CNV analysis identifies 
common and low frequency variants associated with severe early-onset obesity. Nature Genetics, 45, 
513–517.
Zhang, Y., Proenca, R., Maffei, M., Barone, M., Leopold, L., & Friedman, J. M. (1994). Positional cloning 
of the mouse obese gene and its human homologue. Nature, 372, 425–432.DOI: 10.4324/9781032621401-7
CHAPTER 7
Basic Learning Processes and 
Eating Behavior
After reading this chapter, you will be able to
• Understand the role of associative learning in eating behavior and its practical 
implications.
• Know how food preferences and aversions are formed.
• Appreciate that knowing when to start and stop eating is shaped by learning.
• Understand the neurobiology of food learning.
Learning can occur in many ways. Several forms of basic associative learning have been 
identified in eating behavior research as having particular relevance to the development 
of food likes and dislikes and the establishment of meal patterns (i.e., amount, timing, 
and rituals of meals and food selection). The types of learning explored in this chapter 
are rooted in classical (or Pavlovian) conditioning. This basic form of learning shapes 
many human and animal behaviors, and the effects can be long-lasting. Before we explore 
this further, take a moment and imagine going to a movie theater for the premiere of 
a movie you’ve been looking forward to seeing. What foods are you likely to want? For 
some people, it is nearly unthinkable to watch a movie in a theater without eating pop￾corn or candy. Or to watch a favorite show on Netflix without snacking. Why are these 
associations so pervasive? Associative learning, as you will see in this chapter, is quite easy 
to identify and very influential on our eating behaviors.
OVERVIEW OF CLASSICAL CONDITIONING AND ITS 
TERMINOLOGY
Classical conditioning is a type of basic associative learning in which a stimulus that 
has previously been neutral (or meaningless) to the animal or person comes to elicit 
a response that another stimulus naturally elicits. Let’s briefly review the research of 
Ivan Pavlov (Image 7.1), the Russian physiologist who won a Nobel Prize in 1904 for 
his research on digestion in dogs. Dogs naturally salivate when food – or, in the case 
of Pavlov’s studies, meat powder – reaches their mouths. This is an innate or reflexive 
response requiring no learning. Pavlov found that his dogs started salivating before the 
food was delivered to their mouths. For example, they salivated when someone entered 
the room or neared the food storage area. This salivation, Pavlov realized, was a result of 88 Basic Learning Processes and Eating Behavior
learning. The dogs learned that, when their handler neared the food storage area, food 
would soon be delivered. Pavlov conducted many carefully designed studies to more 
precisely determine the specifics around this type of learning, now known as classical or 
Pavlovian conditioning. In one well-known example, Pavlov conditioned the dogs to sali￾vate at the sound of a metronome, a clicking device used by musicians to mark rhythm. 
Metronomes are not usually associated with food, and so salivation at their clicking is 
certainly not an instinctive behavior.
In formal learning terminology, before the conditioning process begins, meat powder 
is an unconditioned stimulus (UCS), because dogs naturally salivate at it, salivation is the 
unconditioned response (UCR), and the metronome is a neutral stimulus (NS) eliciting 
no salivation (Figure 7.1). After several pairings of the sound of the metronome with 
the delivery of meat powder, the dogs salivate at the sound of the metronome. The 
metronome is now the conditioned stimulus (CS), and the salivation is the conditioned 
response (CR).
FIGURE 7.1 Schematic diagram illustrating the sequence of events in classical conditioning
IMAGE 7.1 Nobel-Prize-winning 
physiologist Ivan PavlovBasic Learning Processes and Eating Behavior 89
Classical conditioning allows animals and people to predict the occurrence of future 
events and to prepare for them physiologically, behaviorally, and/or psychologically. The 
dogs learned that food was soon to come once they heard the metronome, so they were 
prepared for it. Physiological changes occurred (hormonal, thermogenic, neurochem￾ical, etc.) so that they were ready to eat and digest the soon-to-arrive food. For many 
college students, hearing a roommate’s rustling potato chip bag triggers a sudden craving 
for potato chips that can be distracting and irresistible as their bodies, just as those of 
Pavlov’s dogs, prepare for the desired snack. This is clearly the result of a learned associ￾ation between a particular sound and food.
Marketing of food products is largely based on the principles of classical conditioning. 
What do you think of when you drive past the “Golden Arches”? Many people experi￾ence sudden and overwhelming cravings for cheeseburgers, French fries, milkshakes, 
and, more recently, McCafé lattes and frappés on seeing the golden M sign associated 
with a McDonald’s restaurant. Are you getting hungry now, too? This is classical condi￾tioning: The pairing of the NS (the golden M sign) with the UCS (tasty food) yielding 
the UCR (eating and liking), and now the M sign serves as the CS triggering a desire 
for specific foods (CR). The influences of media, society, and marketing are explored in 
other chapters, but it is important to bear in mind that, despite its simplicity, associative 
learning is extremely effective and consequential and can last for one’s lifetime.
LEARNING OF POSTINGESTIVE CONSEQUENCES: TASTE 
AVERSIONS AND PREFERENCES
Taste and Food Aversions
Most people have particular aversions to tastes or foods associated with sickness, even 
when the person knows that the food is actually safe (Schafe & Bernstein, 1996). If 
one happens to develop symptoms of the flu (nausea, vomiting) on the same evening 
that eggplant parmesan was tried for the first time, it is likely that eggplant parmesan 
will never be tried again, or at least not enthusiastically. The likelihood of an aversion is 
greater if the flavor or food meets one or more of the following conditions: It is novel, 
it is less preferred, it is distinct, it is inconsequential (not needed in one’s diet), and/or 
it is unusual (something one does not typically consume). Examples are licorice and 
root beer – they have distinct flavors and are bearable to live without. Rats are particu￾larly known to develop long-lasting aversions for flavors associated with gastrointestinal 
illness. Because rats lack the ability to regurgitate food once it has been ingested, it is 
essential for their survival that they avoid a food or flavor that previously made them 
ill (assuming they were lucky enough to survive their first negative experience). So, rats 
often exhibit one-trial learning, learning the negative association between food or flavor 
and illness with only one such pairing.
In now classic studies of taste aversion, Garcia and Koelling (1966) showed that rats 
soon learned to avoid a sweet-tasting liquid (a taste innately liked by rats) when it was 
followed by an injection of lithium chloride (LiCl) that made them ill. Interestingly, 
they did not learn to avoid the liquid when they received electric shocks afterward. The 
rats did, however, learn to avoid the electric shock when it was paired with light and 
noise (but injection of LiCl paired with light/noise failed to produce such learning). 
These results indicate that taste is more likely to be associated with visceral illness, and 
audiovisual cues are associated more with pain. Just like these rats, we (humans) are 90 Basic Learning Processes and Eating Behavior
predisposed to develop particular aversions or avoidances associated with biologically 
relevant stimuli. This insight into conditioned aversions influenced the ways in which 
behavioral studies have since been conducted.
Here is a brief overview of a taste aversion procedure:
1 Initial state: UCS (LiCl) = UCR (nausea) and at a different time NS (sweet-tasting 
liquid) = neutral/positive response (drinking).
2 Learning trials: NS + UCS = UCR (nausea).
3 Acquisition of taste aversion: CS (sweet-tasting liquid) = CR (nausea).
Practical Implications – Animals
Others later applied the newly acquired understanding of learned taste aversions to help 
ranchers humanely control wolf predation of their livestock (Gustavson et al., 1976). 
After eating a sheep carcass contaminated with LiCl, wolves no longer preyed on sheep; 
in fact, they backed away after smelling their potential victims (LiCl induces nausea and 
vomiting in wolves). Ranchers have since used this method to prevent predation (from 
wolves, coyotes, crows, etc.) on other types of livestock (e.g., cows, chickens; Nicolaus 
et al., 1983). Conditioned taste aversion is similarly used to prevent agricultural damage 
caused by blackbirds and other animals and to protect endangered species (Werner et al., 
2008). However, some debate remains around the usefulness of conditioned taste aversion 
in field conditions (i.e., without experimental controls and manipulation), because the 
associative learning typically occurs with the use of a carcass rather than live prey.
Practical Implications – Humans
When humans or animals eat a particular food before becoming ill because of a virus or 
before receiving a drug or radiation treatment that induces visceral illness, they avoid 
that food in future exposures. This is quite problematic for cancer patients undergoing 
chemotherapy, a treatment that often causes severe nausea. Many patients experience 
excessive weight loss because of newly developed food aversions, a condition referred 
to as cancer anorexia (Wisse et al., 2001; Yavuzsen et al., 2009). Unfortunately, many 
of these patients experience what is known in the learning literature as stimulus gener￾alization, developing aversions not only for the foods consumed prior to their nausea￾inducing treatment but also for foods that are similar in taste, appearance, and other 
qualities.
Efforts have been made to utilize our current understanding of taste aversion learning 
to prevent or minimize the occurrence of such learning among cancer patients. In a study 
by Broberg and Bernstein (1987), children who consumed a flavored candy (e.g., coconut 
or root beer Life Saver) prior to chemotherapy developed an aversion to that flavor but 
not to normal menu items. The flavored candy served as a “scapegoat” for the devel￾opment of food aversions following chemotherapy treatment. The flavor to which the 
patients developed an aversion was inconsequential in their usual diet (most of us can 
lead healthy, normal lives without consuming coconut or root beer). Thus, the scape￾goat aversion helped prevent the unsafe weight loss that often results from conditioned 
aversions following cancer treatments. Similar scapegoat food aversions have also been 
useful among adults undergoing chemotherapy (e.g., Andresen et al., 1990; Berteretche 
et al., 2004).Basic Learning Processes and Eating Behavior 91
LEARNING ABOUT FOOD BY EXPERIENCE: INCREASING 
PREFERENCES
Medicine Effect
Food consumed when we are hungry or deficient in some macro- or micronutrient will 
be more preferred in subsequent exposures than food consumed when we are sated. 
And the more severe the deficiency, the greater the food preference we will have. In 
a classic study by Rozin (1969), rats were fed a diet deficient in thiamine (vitamin 
B1
). After some weeks (the symptoms of deficiency in thiamine take time to develop), 
the rats started to reject this diet by eating less and by spilling or spoiling the food. 
When the deficient rats were given “novel” food that contained the needed thiamine, 
they sampled it. If more than one novel food was provided, they sampled only one 
per meal.
The rats quickly came to prefer the food enriched with thiamine. Interestingly, there 
is no evidence that this preference was guided by the taste of thiamine; instead, other 
properties of the food (e.g., overall flavor or texture) were what the animals associated 
with “recovery.” This type of learning, known as the medicine effect, is an example of 
a general food learning mechanism. First, deficient animals must become motivated to 
reject their current food and to overcome neophobia (fear of the new) and try a novel 
food. Then, they must learn the association between feeling better and the sensory 
properties that will allow them to recognize that food again in the future. Of course, 
this is almost the mirror image of the taste or flavor aversion previously discussed, in 
which animals learn to avoid food that has undesirable postingestive consequences. 
In common with that mechanism, the learning probably can occur in a single trial. 
That is, the animal need only eat the good food once to learn that it is safe, and there 
should be an allowable delay (hours) between eating and the consequence. This is why 
a strategy of discrete (one at a time) sampling of novel foods is adaptive when one is 
deficient. The biological rule seems to be something like this: Try one new food and 
wait and see if it is safe; if so, return to it; if not, try another new food. People who 
are deficient in vitamins or minerals often engage in pica – eating objects that are not 
normally considered food, such as soil, paint, or coins, which contain minerals. Some 
anthropologists believe that cannibalism may have its roots in dietary deficiency (e.g., 
de Montellano, 1978).
So, how does this feeling better or medicine effect work? It is believed that learning 
occurs by a process of reinforcement that is mediated by internal reward system(s). It 
is likely, then, that recovery from deficiencies in trace elements (and perhaps calories, 
too) uses the same systems. Research indicates that the pleasurable feeling associated 
with eating good (safe) food and recovery from a deficiency is mediated by the sig￾naling of the neurotransmitter dopamine and endorphins, among others, acting within 
the reward pathway of the brain (Berridge et al., 2010; Volkow et al., 2003). The 
neurobiology of food liking and reward is discussed in further detail in other chapters 
of this book.
Despite our innate liking of the sweet taste, heavily sweetened foods such as candy or 
sugary beverages are typically not desired when we are truly hungry, at least not to the 
exclusion of other foods. For example, you would probably not want jelly beans as your 
only food for dinner. In fact, foods that we normally find appealing, such as a chocolate 
bar, may seem unappealing or even disgusting when we are energy deficient. Rather, when 
we are deficient, we tend to seek out and prefer more savory food items. Which types 92 Basic Learning Processes and Eating Behavior
of foods do you prefer after a long day or vigorous workout? In Western culture, pre￾ferred foods include sandwiches, meat or pasta dishes, and burgers (Drewnowski, 1997; 
Drewnowski et al., 1992). In many Asian cultures, the preferred foods are fish and rice. 
Often, the food preferences shaped by the medicine effect are foods that are of greater 
nutritional value than the preferences made through other experiences when we are less 
deficient. This could indicate that the best way to acquire a liking for brussels sprouts or 
other innately less preferred foods is to consume them when you are very hungry. We’ll 
let you try it out!
IMAGE 7.2 Rats sampling food
IMAGE 7.3 Brussels sprouts to try
Mere Exposure
Preferences for particular food items or flavors increase with repeated exposure, whether 
or not the exposure is consciously known about (Bornstein & D’Agostino, 1992). This 
passive type of learning that shapes eating behavior was first termed the mere exposure
effect in 1968 by Robert Zajonc (1968). Humans and nonhuman animals are some￾what neophobic (wary of novel foods and flavors), yet paradoxically neophilic (liking 
the new). Unfamiliar foods and flavors can be either beneficial (providing nutrients and 
calories) or dangerous (containing toxins). As previously described, humans and animals 
tend to sample new foods and increase consumption with repeated exposure only if the 
postingestive consequences are positive (or at least not negative). This process results in 
increased liking and decreased neophobia: The mere exposure effect and reduction of 
neophobia necessarily co-occur.Basic Learning Processes and Eating Behavior 93
As an anecdotal example, most Americans do not consume large portions of sushi 
(containing raw fish) on their first exposure to that cuisine. Most choose menu options 
with cooked fish (e.g., the California roll) and gradually increase their liking and con￾sumption of raw sushi over time. Was that your experience?
Mere exposure to new tastes and smells actually begins in utero (Beauchamp & 
Mennella, 2009). The fetus is exposed to the flavors of foods consumed by the mother 
and is seemingly more accepting of these otherwise novel flavors when old enough to 
eat solid foods during infancy. Mennella, Johnson, and Beauchamp (2001) found that, 
when women consumed carrot juice for three weeks during their third trimester, their 
infants (six months later) were more accepting of carrot-flavored cereal compared with 
non-flavored cereal and compared with babies whose mothers did not consume carrot 
juice, demonstrating that the mere exposure effect on the shaping of food preferences 
begins prior to birth.
The number of exposures needed to increase liking of novel foods or flavors varies. 
Foods to which children or adults have been previously exposed or that are similar to 
familiar items (e.g., trying strawberry yogurt when already familiar with strawberries, 
or trying blueberry yogurt when already familiar with strawberry yogurt) require fewer 
exposures than entirely novel or innately less appealing foods (e.g., a novel, bitter-tasting 
vegetable). So, some foods may be rated as more appealing after just one exposure, 
whereas others may require many more exposures. Further, for children, mere exposure 
seems to be more effective in shaping food acceptance and liking than rewards. Wardle 
et al. (2003) found that children who were exposed to samples of sweet red pepper once 
a day for almost two weeks increased their liking and intake regardless of receiving a 
sticker reward for consuming the vegetable.
Flavor–Flavor Associative Learning
Humans have an innate liking of sweet and salty tastes. The sweet taste is associated 
with energy and nutrient-dense foods, and the salty taste is associated with foods that 
help maintain fluid and sodium balance. Humans also have an innate aversion to bitter 
and sour tastes, which are associated with toxins (Birch, 1999). However, many people 
regularly enjoy bitter or sour foods and beverages such as coffee, tea, beer, broccoli, sour 
candies, and so on, which seems to defy our innate predispositions. Why is this?
IMAGE 7.4 A boy enjoying broccoli 
flavored with butter94 Basic Learning Processes and Eating Behavior
BOX 7.1 DO FOOD PREFERENCES OF BABIES INCREASE 
WITH EXPOSURE?
Sullivan and Birch (1994) investigated the liking of novel vegetables in infants who 
were starting to eat solid foods (aged 4–6 months) and found increased acceptance 
over the course of ten exposures. Liking of the novel vegetables occurred more 
quickly in breast-milk-fed infants compared with formula-fed infants, indicating 
that breast milk “merely exposes” infants to a wider variety of flavors, increasing 
their liking of novel foods. Studies in rats have shown that the pups quickly prefer 
flavors they experience through their mother’s milk and show preferences for their 
mother’s diet when they start to consume solid food (Galef & Henderson, 1972; 
Galef & Sherry, 1973).
Pairing a new food or flavor that is not innately preferred with an already liked food 
or flavor increases the liking of that new food. This is called flavor–flavor associative 
learning (Birch, 1999). Although many adults enjoy coffee, some even preferring it black 
(without cream or sugar), most are initially exposed to coffee with cream or milk and 
sweetener. We have an innate liking of cream/milk and the sweet taste. Typically, adults 
gradually prefer less of the cream/milk and sweetener, but their initial liking of coffee 
is mediated by flavor–flavor learning. The same applies for tea, often sweetened in first 
exposures. Similarly, early experience with broccoli often includes cheese or butter sauce 
(tastes that are innately liked). Despite its bitter taste, the pairing of broccoli with already 
liked flavors increases liking of it.
It is important to note that flavor–flavor associative learning can also result in 
conditioned aversions. In other words, the learning can work in reverse. In laboratory 
experiments, rats given a liked flavor mixed with bitter-tasting quinine demonstrated 
an aversion for the previously liked flavor, avoiding it even when it was no longer paired 
with quinine (Rozin & Zellner, 1985). Theoretically, pairing broccoli with cheese, hoping 
to increase a child’s liking of broccoli, could actually create a dislike of cheese! This, how￾ever, is typically not the case, as the liking of cheese is greater than the dislike of broccoli 
for most humans.
Talking Point 7.1 Flavor–Flavor Learning
Have you experienced flavor–flavor learning that increased your preference for 
a new food? How did you initially experience the food? Do you prefer the food 
differently now (e.g., maybe less ketchup on your hamburger than you liked as a 
child)?Basic Learning Processes and Eating Behavior 95
BOX 7.2 CAN FLAVOR–FLAVOR LEARNING 
HAPPEN EASILY?
In a study conducted by Capaldi and Privitera (2008), college student volunteers 
were given vegetables (cauliflower and broccoli) in three exposure sessions. One 
vegetable was sweetened with sugar during the exposures, and the other was 
unsweetened. When subsequently tested with unsweetened vegetables, participants 
reported a greater liking of the previously sweetened vegetable. So, although the 
vegetable was no longer sweetened, its taste was preferred because of the associ￾ation with the sweet taste.
Flavor–Nutrient Associative Learning
Pairing a flavor with calories (or with other needed substances such as vitamins) 
increases preference. Flavors paired with higher calories will be preferred to those 
paired with fewer calories (Ackroff & Sclafani, 2006). This flavor–nutrient associative 
learning can result in preference maintained for long durations, even without reinforce￾ment. As with taste avoidance learning, flavor–nutrient learning can occur with a delay 
of hours between conditioned stimulus (flavor) and unconditioned stimulus (benefit). 
This type of learning is akin to the medicine effect, in which animals and people learn 
preferences for foods or flavors associated with feeling good and recovering from a def￾icit in vitamins, minerals, or calories. However, flavor–nutrient associative learning can 
occur in a non-deficient state.
Although flavor–nutrient associative learning occurs in sated rats, the results are 
more robust when the rats (or other animals, including humans) are food deprived. 
It is easy to assume that the actions of nutrients in the gastrointestinal tract are more 
reinforcing for hungry than for sated animals. The “incentive value” for a food or flavor 
consumed when in a deficient state will be higher and will result in an increased appe￾titive approach to, and intake of, that particular food or flavor (Sclafani, 2004), which 
is the medicine effect.
Flavor–nutrient learning has been demonstrated in humans. Studies show that 
flavors associated with nutrients (calories, fat, vitamins, or minerals) are preferred. 
For example, Johnson and colleagues (Johnson et al., 1991) gave preschool children 
fixed volumes of distinct flavors of pudding (pumpkin and chocolate-orange) that 
were either high or low in fat and calories (220 kcal or 110 kcal per serving; 14 g or 
<2 g fat). The low- and high-fat versions were identical in taste, smell, and appearance. 
After several exposures to the flavor–nutrient pairing, children consumed less food 
following consumption of the high-fat, high-calorie pudding (compared with the low￾fat, low-calorie pudding), even though, during the test condition, all puddings were of 
mid-level caloric and fat content. Further, children reported increased liking for the 
flavor associated with high energy density and no change in preference for the flavor 96 Basic Learning Processes and Eating Behavior
associated with low energy density. These findings suggest that such flavor–nutrient 
learning shapes food preferences and energy intake. Similar studies (e.g., Booth, 1985) 
have been conducted in humans of other ages (infants and adults) and in rats, pro￾viding evidence that portion size is adjusted based on learned associations with flavors 
and their energy yield (i.e., flavor–nutrient learning).
IMAGE 7.5 A girl consuming yogurt
BOX 7.3 DO ANIMALS LEARN ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN 
FLAVORS AND NUTRIENTS?
Anthony Sclafani has performed many studies to define the limits of flavor–calorie 
learning. In one experiment, rats had access to two flavors of Kool-Aid (e.g., grape￾or cherry-flavored water with no calories). These flavors were presented in water 
bottles fitted with contact sensors so that, when the rat licked, a signal was sent to 
a computer (Drucker et al., 1993). The rats otherwise had ad libitum (i.e., unre￾stricted) access to food and water. In the one-bottle training trials, they had one 
flavor per day. Ingestion of one flavor was accompanied by infusion (programmed 
via the computer) of a caloric solution into the stomach through a surgically 
implanted tube. Ingestion of the other flavor was accompanied by infusion of water 
only. After several days of each flavor consequence, the rats were given a two-bottle 
preference test without any infusions. They strongly preferred the flavor previously 
paired with calories. Further, when these preference tests were continued without 
infusions (this is called extinction), the preference for the flavor paired with calories 
remained for weeks. That is, established preferences can be maintained without 
continued reinforcement. Sclafani and colleagues have also demonstrated similar 
flavor–nutrient associative learning by pairing Kool-Aid flavors with intragastric 
infusions of fat (Lucas & Sclafani, 1989) or protein (Pérez et al., 1996).Basic Learning Processes and Eating Behavior 97
Talking Point 7.2 Food Preferences
What are some examples of your food preferences and eating behaviors that may 
have resulted from flavor–flavor and flavor–nutrient associative learning?
It is important to note that flavor–flavor and flavor–nutrient associative learning 
do not typically occur in exclusion of each other outside of the laboratory setting. In 
real-life situations, preferred flavors are innately liked because they are associated 
with nutrients (calories, fat, vitamins, or minerals). For example, increased liking of 
unsweetened peanut butter after pairing it with honey demonstrates both flavor–
flavor learning (honey is sweet-tasting and innately liked) and flavor–nutrient learning 
(honey provides added calories). In fact, even increased liking of coffee after repeat￾edly consuming it with cream and sugar demonstrates both flavor–flavor and flavor–
nutrient associative learning.
LEARNING OF APPROPRIATE FOOD QUANTITY: 
CONDITIONED SATIETY
Experiments conducted in the 1960s and 1970s routinely demonstrated that both 
humans and nonhuman animals fail to compensate when a previously consumed food 
is made either more or less energy dense (Stunkard, 1975). For example, after several 
exposures of a milkshake-like drink, participants in one study drank their “norm” amount 
even when the drink was diluted and, consequently, less energy dense and even though 
they could consume as much as they wanted (Jordan et al., 1966).
Influential researcher A. J. Stunkard proposed that satiety must be a conditioned reflex, 
a function of learning rather than of physiological satiety cues. Some of the findings 
regarding flavor–nutrient learning (discussed earlier in this chapter) are consistent with 
this theory. For example, Johnson and colleagues (1991) found that children consumed 
less of the flavored pudding that they had learned to associate with higher calories and 
fat even when it was no longer high in calories and fat. They liked the flavor but learned 
to regulate calories and stop eating based on flavor cues, supporting the idea that satiety 
is a conditioned reflex.
How often do you eat three-fourths of a sandwich or cookie? Typically, we completely 
consume items of defined quantity and have experience with these particular quantities. 
We can assume that, in early exposures to a sandwich, for example, consumption of 
one sandwich was followed by comfortable satiety and an adequate level of energy. We 
also tend to consume entire portions, often completely unaware of how energy dense or 
dilute they are. For example, many of us consume a “bowlful” of cereal in the morning, 
regardless of the type of cereal (high or low in calories or other nutrients). Indeed, the 
popular individual serving bowls of cereals from one commercial source vary between 
70 and 130 kcal, and the fat content of the milk you probably add will make even larger 
differences. We learn, in early experiences with particular foods, what quantities yield 
satiety, supporting Stunkard’s conditioning theory. However, we can easily be “tricked,” 
especially when eating at restaurants, because portion sizes are often larger and more fat 
and calorie dense than we expect.98 Basic Learning Processes and Eating Behavior
IMAGE 7.6 We tend to consume “norm” amounts of foods 
such as milkshakes
BOX 7.4 HOW DO RATS KNOW WHEN IT’S MEALTIME?
In a study conducted by Drazen et al. (2006), rats either received food ad libitum 
(food available all day) or for four hours only per day. The rats in the meal-restricted 
group soon (within 14 days) learned to anticipate their mealtime and consumed 
their food much more quickly and robustly. Ghrelin (a hunger-stimulating hormone) 
levels in the meal-trained rats were significantly higher prior to their anticipated 
four-hour access to food in comparison with controls as their dark cycle approached 
(the time during which rats typically consume the most food). Their findings indi￾cate that rats (and presumably humans) have learned physiological responses in 
anticipation of mealtimes.
LEARNING ABOUT WHEN TO EAT: CONDITIONED 
HUNGER
If satiety is conditioned, is hunger also conditioned? Consider the frequent long lines 
at many delis and cafeterias at lunchtime. Why do so many of us eat at similar times of 
the day, such as lunch around noon in particular? Perhaps we all have similar energy and 
nutrient needs at the same time of day. Does this seem logical, given that many of us 
wake at different times in the morning, exert varying amounts of energy early in the day, 
have different metabolic rates, and consume varied calories and nutrients (or none at all) 
for breakfast? It is more likely that our “hunger” for lunch at noon is a result of learning Basic Learning Processes and Eating Behavior 99
that this is mealtime. Because of our learned expectation of consumption of food at 
lunchtime, physiological changes occur (e.g., insulin and ghrelin levels rise; blood glucose 
drops) that intensify our hunger (see Box 7.3).
IMAGE 7.7 Pizza with friends
BOX 7.5 DO FOOD CUES TRIGGER EATING EVEN IN THE 
ABSENCE OF HUNGER?
In experiments conducted in the 1980s by Weingarten (e.g., 1984), food was 
delivered to rats following a buzzer and light stimulus. After several days of condi￾tioning, rats ate when exposed to the buzzer and light stimulus, despite the fact that 
they were not food deprived in the test condition.
When rats are placed on a meal schedule (something analogous to breakfast, lunch, 
and dinner), rather than allowed food ad libitum, they consume the most in the meal 
that precedes the longest between-meal interval (i.e., dinner). One might expect the 
opposite, that they eat the most following the longest stretch of deprivation. The fact 
that this is not the case is quite interesting, and much like with human eating patterns, 
suggesting that they have learned to anticipate the longest interval without food access 
and consume more in advance of it. It seems likely that eating behavior (ours and that 
of rats) is largely attributed to learning to anticipate and prevent future disruptions to 
physiological homeostasis (Woods, 2009).100 Basic Learning Processes and Eating Behavior
In addition to time-of-day cues, other stimuli associated with food also trigger hunger 
and eating. As mentioned, we tend to think of and crave particular food items on seeing 
certain corporate logos. After conditioning, Pavlov’s dogs salivated at the sound of a 
metronome. Animals and people quickly associate food with the stimuli surrounding the 
experience with the food (physical, visual, olfactory, and auditory cues; mood; etc.), and 
later encounters with these stimuli trigger hunger, even when there is no physiological 
need for food. Food-associated cues are increasingly ubiquitous in Western society, and 
their impact on eating (and overeating) is tremendous.
INFLUENCE OF LEARNED CONTEXTUAL CUES
Have you ever noticed feeling hungry when you enter the place in which you typically 
eat meals or snacks? People and animals tend to consume more food when they are in 
places that they have learned to associate with food. This helps explain the frequent 
“mindless” behavior of grabbing a soda out of the refrigerator or snack from the kitchen 
when passing by, even in the absence of thirst, hunger, or a planned intention to consume 
anything.
Contextual cues, such as sights, smells, and sounds, are non-food stimuli that we quickly 
learn to associate with food. This type of learning is simply classical conditioning, which, 
as mentioned earlier, is basic but effective. Birch et al. (1989) examined the impact that 
a physical setting has on a child’s eating. In this study, preschool children were exposed 
to two playrooms that were similar in appearance and had similar contents (toys, etc.), 
but in one room they received snacks regularly and in the other room they were never 
fed. On the test day, both rooms were “baited” with snacks, and half the children were 
sent to play in one room and half to the other. The group sent to the playroom in which 
they had experienced snacks before started eating/snacking sooner and ate more than 
the group sent to the room in which they had not previously experienced snacks. This 
indicates a powerful influence of social and environmental learning on readiness to eat 
and/or amount consumed, and this is established early in life.
Talking Point 7.3 Contextual Cues
Are there specific foods that you associate with particular places or other cues? How 
about the movie theater, as discussed in the opening paragraph of this chapter? 
A local bakery or coffee shop? Grandma’s house? A football or baseball game? 
Write down some of these associations and see how your list compares with your 
classmates’ lists.
Rats, too, demonstrate increased eating as a result of learning about physical or 
contextual cues. Rats eat more quickly and ingest larger amounts when placed in 
cages previously associated with food, especially if the food to which they were pre￾viously exposed was palatable (e.g., cookies; Boggiano et al., 2009). Further, rats and 
people eat more of palatable and bland food when they are exposed to contextual 
cues associated with palatable food. It seems that we (rats and humans) feel hungrier 
when exposed to food-related conditions or places. Learned contextual cues can be Basic Learning Processes and Eating Behavior 101
more influential on hunger and eating than the actual taste of food (an unconditioned 
stimulus).
In a study of college students and staff, Ferriday and Brunstrom (2008) found that 
the sight and smell of pizza were more associated with increased consumption of pizza 
and other foods than was the taste of pizza. How could this be? Exposure to contextual 
cues associated with a pleasurable experience such as consumption of palatable food 
activates the brain’s reward pathways and areas associated with wanting and motiv￾ation (Berridge et al., 2010). This powerful activation can drive the appetitive behavior 
toward the desired food. Further, physiological changes (e.g., increase in insulin, decrease 
in blood glucose) intensify hunger when we are exposed to cues associated with par￾ticular foods, explaining the difficulty many people have in resisting foods on exposure 
to those cues.
CONDITIONED IMMUNE SYSTEM ACTIVITY
Efforts have been made to utilize classical conditioning techniques to boost immune 
system functioning, particularly among clinically ill patients (Exton et al., 2000). Initially, 
researchers realized that immune system functioning weakens when patients enter the 
hospital or treatment facility where they receive chemotherapy, a consequence of asso￾ciative learning. This, however, only puts patients at greater risk for the negative physio￾logical side effects of chemotherapy and the toll it takes on the immune system and 
overall health (although the benefits of such treatment usually outweigh the risks). In 
one study, as an example of these experiments, patients consumed particular flavors of 
sherbet and afterward received an adrenaline injection (which boosts immune system 
activity and overall physical feeling). After several pairings, the patients’ immune systems 
were more active following consumption of the sherbet, even when it was no longer 
followed by the adrenaline injection (Exton et al., 2000).
NEUROBIOLOGY OF FOOD LEARNING
The neurobiology associated with conditioned taste aversions and preferences is different 
from that associated with innately disliked and liked tastes (which were mentioned in 
earlier chapters). The brain regions associated with learned taste dislikes and likes include 
those associated with memory, emotion, and reward (see Figure 7.2). It seems obvious 
that emotional memory (e.g., disgust) is important in preventing an organism from 
re-exposing itself to a dangerous food or flavor, as the lack of this recall ability could 
result in fatality. And pleasant experiences with particular foods, such as warm soup on 
a chilly night or a substantial pasta dish following an exhausting soccer game, should be 
remembered so that those positive experiences can be repeated. These types of emo￾tional memories require an intact hippocampus. Severe damage to the hippocampus 
disrupts the ability to form new explicit memories (i.e., memories that can be con￾sciously recalled). Amnesic patients with hippocampal damage will consume a second 
meal soon after eating a first meal if it is presented to them, and often a third meal as 
well, indicating that physiological satiety signals are not sufficient to regulate their food 
intake (Rozin et al., 1998). It seems, rather, that memory of food intake (type and amount 
of food) is more important in making subsequent food choices (Benoit et al., 2010).102 Basic Learning Processes and Eating Behavior
In addition to the hippocampus, other brain regions associated with emotional 
memory are important in the establishment of conditioned taste aversions and 
preferences. Establishing a learned food aversion is unpleasant (often including nausea 
and vomiting) and can be considered frightening and upsetting. The amygdala, a brain 
region associated with various motivated and emotional behaviors, including fearful and 
aggressive responses, plays an important role in the formation of learned taste aversions. 
It seems, though, that different regions within the amygdala function differentially in the 
establishment of a conditioned taste aversion compared with the avoidance response in 
future exposures (Reilly & Bornaovalova, 2005; Yamamoto, 2006). Further, regions of the 
amygdala communicate differently with the nucleus accumbens and other brain reward 
circuitry following exposure to a liked versus disliked taste, which may not be surprising 
as the neurobiology of conditioned taste preferences and conditioned taste aversions 
serve different functions. Avoiding harmful foods and flavors is important for the survival 
of any animal, and thus brainstem anatomy and physiology shared among many species, 
including reptiles and mammals, likely underlie the basic ability to form conditioned 
taste aversions. Further, conditioned taste aversions in animals under anesthesia when 
exposed to the CS–US pairing have been demonstrated (Yamamoto, 2006); this does not 
occur for conditioned preferences. Conditioned taste preferences (again, these are learned 
and shaped by experience and are not necessarily innate preferences) are influenced by 
social and cultural factors (e.g., parents, friends, local cuisine, expectations, accessibility). 
Although these are extremely important aspects of our eating behaviors, they are not 
as essential as learning to avoid what may kill us. Brain regions that have more recently 
evolved or grown in relative size (e.g., the forebrain) may be of greater importance in the 
formation of conditioned taste preferences compared with conditioned aversions. The 
involvement of the forebrain, and specifically reward circuitry, in eating behavior is of 
recent interest as it relates to the concept of excessive and problematic food liking and 
the possibility of food addiction, discussed in Chapter 10.
FIGURE 7.2 Brain regions important for the processing of taste information and the develop￾ment of conditioned taste aversions are shown in this figure of the rodent brain. (Note that this 
is similar to Figure 6.1 but with the key pathways indicated by arrows.) Key: NST – nucleus 
of the solitary tract; PBN – parabrachial nucleus; VTA – ventral tegmental area; AMY – amyg￾dala; mTH – medial thalamus; IC – insular gustatory cortex; NAc – nucleus accumbens; 
PFC – prefrontal cortexBasic Learning Processes and Eating Behavior 103
The neurobiology of feeding has been explored in other chapters, and, therefore, the 
focus of the remaining discussion in this chapter is on the neurobiology of conditioned 
taste aversions.
Within the brainstem, the nucleus of the solitary tract (NST) and the parabrachial nucleus 
(PBN) are the first and second brain relay nuclei, respectively, for taste and gastrointestinal 
information. Rats with lesions on the PBN do not acquire conditioned taste aversions despite 
their demonstrated capacity to maintain the ability to process taste and visceral information. 
And any previously learned taste aversion is abolished by a lesion in this region. The associ￾ation between taste and gastrointestinal information occurs in the PBN and not in the NST, 
an integration that is seemingly necessary for the formation of conditioned taste aversion. 
Taste and gastrointestinal information from the PBN is relayed to the medial thalamus and 
then to the gustatory insular cortex in the frontal cortex. In parallel fashion, the same infor￾mation projects from the PBN to the amygdala. Severe damage to the gustatory insular 
cortex (or gustatory cortex), the medial thalamus, or areas within the amygdala (specific￾ally, the basolateral amygdala) can prevent a human or animal from forming a conditioned 
taste aversion or from retaining the learned association. Although many other regions are 
likely involved (e.g., hypothalamic nuclei), as the brain circuitry of eating behavior is com￾plex and involves multiple pathways, the PBN, medial thalamus, basolateral amygdala, and 
gustatory insular cortex are of particular importance for the formation and maintenance of 
conditioned taste aversions (Yamamoto, 2006; Yamamoto & Ueju, 2011).
QUESTIONS TO ASK YOURSELF
Let’s review and apply your knowledge. Take some time to answer these chapter 
questions.
1 Use classical conditioning terminology (UCR, UCS, etc.) to briefly diagram and 
describe an example of how classical conditioning has shaped one of your food 
preferences or aversions.
2 What are the four ways in which food preference can be increased by experience? 
Give examples of each. Do you think that satiety is conditioned? What is the sci￾entific evidence for this? Describe some evidence in your own eating behavior that 
supports or refutes this theory.
3 What are some of the learned cues that trigger hunger? Why does this occur?
4 What brain regions are most important for learned food preferences and aversions?
GLOSSARY
Amygdala A forebrain region associated with raw emotion, 
particularly fear and aggression.
Conditioned response (CR) A learned response to a previously neutral stimulus.104 Basic Learning Processes and Eating Behavior
Conditioned stimulus (CS) A previously neutral stimulus that comes to elicit 
the response of an unconditioned stimulus.
Flavor–flavor associative Increased liking of a flavor that is associated 
learning with a flavor that is already or innately liked.
Flavor–nutrient associative Increased liking of a flavor associated with 
learning nutrients, usually calories.
Gustatory insular cortex The primary taste cortex; allows for perception 
of taste.
Hippocampus A forebrain region involved in the formation of 
memories.
Medicine effect Increased liking of a food associated with 
recovery from illness.
Mere exposure effect Increased liking of food resulting from repeated 
exposures to the food.
Neophobia Fear of the new (for the purposes of this text, 
fear of new food or flavors).
Neutral stimulus (NS) A stimulus that elicits no response.
Nucleus accumbens A forebrain region associated with pleasure and 
reinforcement.
Nucleus of the solitary A brainstem region to which taste information 
tract (NST) from the tongue projects.
Parabrachial nucleus (PBN) A brainstem region that receives taste informa￾tion from the NST.
Pica The appetite for items that are generally not 
considered food (e.g., dirt).
Stimulus generalization The response to stimuli that are similar to the 
conditioned stimulus.
Unconditioned response (UCR) An unlearned response to a stimulus.
Unconditioned stimulus (UCS) A stimulus that triggers an unlearned response.
REFERENCES
Ackroff, K., & Sclafani, A. (2006). Energy density and macronutrient composition determine flavor 
preference conditioned by intragastric infusions of mixed diets. Physiology & Behavior, 89 (2), 
250–260.
Andresen, G. V., Birch, L. L., & Johnson, P. A. (1990). The scapegoat effect on food aversions after 
chemotherapy. Cancer, 66, 1649–1653.
Beauchamp, G. K., & Mennella, J. A. (2009). Early flavor learning and its impact on later feeding 
behavior. Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, 48, S25–S30.
Benoit, S. C., Davis, J. F., & Davidson, T. L. (2010). Learned and cognitive controls of food intake. Brain 
Research, 1350, 71–76.Basic Learning Processes and Eating Behavior 105
Berridge, K. C., Ho, C. Y., Richard, J. M., & DiFeliceantonio, A. G. (2010). The tempted brain 
eats: Pleasure and desire circuits in obesity and eating disorders. Brain Research, 1350, 43–64.
Berteretche, M. V., Dalix, A. M., d’Ornano, A. C., Bellisle, F., Khayat, D., & Faurion, A. J. S. C. (2004). 
Decreased taste sensitivity in cancer patients under chemotherapy. Supportive Care in Cancer, 12, 
571–576.
Birch, L. L. (1999). Development of food preferences. Annual Review of Nutrition, 19 (1), 41–62.
Birch, L. L., McPhee, L., Sullivan, S., & Johnson, S. (1989). Conditioned meal initiation in young children. 
Appetite, 13 (2), 105–113.
Boggiano, M. M., Dorsey, J. R., Thomas, J. M., & Murdaugh, D. L. (2009). The Pavlovian power of pal￾atable food: Lessons for weight-loss adherence from a new rodent model of cue-induced overeating. 
International Journal of Obesity, 33 (6), 693–701.
Booth, D. A. (1985). Food-conditioned eating preferences and aversions with interoceptive elem￾ents: Conditioned appetites and satieties. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 443
(1), 22–41.
Bornstein, R. F., & D’Agostino, P. R. (1992). Stimulus recognition and the mere exposure effect. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 63 (4), 545–552.
Broberg, D. J., & Bernstein, I. L. (1987). Candy as a scapegoat in the prevention of food aversions in 
children receiving chemotherapy. Cancer, 60 (9), 2344–2347.
Capaldi, E. D., & Privitera, G. J. (2008). Decreasing dislike for sour and bitter in children and adults. 
Appetite, 50 (1), 139–145.
de Montellano, B. R. O. (1978). Aztec cannibalism: An ecological necessity? Science, 200 (4342), 
611–617.
Drazen, D. L., Vahl, T. P., D’Alessio, D. A., Seeley, R. J., & Woods, S. C. (2006). Effects of a fixed 
meal pattern on ghrelin secretion: Evidence for a learned response independent of nutrient status. 
Endocrinology, 147 (1), 23–30.
Drewnowski, A., Kurth, C., Holden-Wiltse, J., & Saari, J. (1992). Food preferences in human 
obesity: Carbohydrates versus fats. Appetite, 18, 207–221.
Drewnowski, A. A. (1997). Taste preferences and food intake. Annual Review of Nutrition, 17
(1), 237.
Drucker, D. B., Ackroff, K., & Sclafani, A. (1993). Flavor preference produced by intragastric 
polycose infusions in rats using a concurrent conditioning procedure. Physiology and Behavior, 
54, 351–355.
Exton, M. S., von Auer, A. K., Buske-Kirschbaum, A., Stockhorst, U., Göbel, U., & Schedlowski, M. 
(2000). Pavlovian conditioning of immune function: Animal investigation and the challenge of human 
application. Behavioural Brain Research, 110 (1), 129–141.
Ferriday, D., & Brunstrom, J. M. (2008). How does food-cue exposure lead to larger meal sizes? British 
Journal of Nutrition, 100, 1325–1332.
Galef, B. G., & Henderson, P. W. (1972). Mother’s milk: A determinant of the feeding preferences of 
weaning rat pups. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 78 (2), 213–219.
Galef, B. G., & Sherry, D. F. (1973). Mother’s milk: A medium for transmission of cues reflecting the flavor 
of mother’s diet. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 83 (3), 374.
Garcia, J., & Koelling, R. A. (1966). Relation of cue to consequence in avoidance learning. Psychonomic 
Science, 4 (3), 123–124.
Gustavson, C. R., Kelly, D. J., & Sweeney, M. (1976). Prey-lithium aversions I: Coyotes and wolves. 
Behavioral Biology, 17, 61–72.
Johnson, S. L., McPhee, L., & Birch, L. L. (1991). Conditioned preferences: Young children prefer flavors 
associated with high dietary fat. Physiology & Behavior, 50 (6), 1245–1251.
Jordan, H. A., Wieland, W. F., Zebley, S. P., Stellar, E., & Stunkard, A. J. (1966). Direct measurement 
of food intake in man: A method for the objective study of eating behavior. Psychosomatic Medicine, 
28 (6), 836–842.
Lucas, F., & Sclafani, A. (1989). Flavor preferences conditioned by intragastric fat infusions in rats. 
Physiology & Behavior, 46 (3), 403–412.106 Basic Learning Processes and Eating Behavior
Mennella, J. A., Johnson, A., & Beauchamp, G. K. (2001). Prenatal and postnatal flavor learning by 
human infants. Pediatrics, 107 (6), 88–97.
Nicolaus, L. K., Cassel, J. F., Carlson, R. B., & Gustavson, R. (1983). Taste-aversion conditioning of crows 
to control predation on eggs. Science, 220, 212–214. doi:10.1126/science.220.4593.212
Pérez, C., Ackroff, K., & Sclafani, A. (1996). Carbohydrate- and protein-conditioned flavor 
preferences: Effects of nutrient preloads. Physiology & Behavior, 59 (3), 467–474.
Reilly, S., & Bornaovalova, M. A. (2005). Conditioned taste aversion and amygdala lesions in the rat: A 
critical review. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 29, 1067–1088.
Rozin, P. (1969). Adaptive food sampling patterns in vitamin deficient rats. Journal of Comparative and 
Physiological Psychology, 69 (1), 126–132. doi:10.1037/h0027940
Rozin, P., Dow, S., Moscovitch, M., & Rajaram, S. (1998). What causes humans to begin and end a 
meal? A role for memory for what has been eaten, as evidenced by a study of multiple meal eating in 
amnesic patients. Psychological Science, 9 (5), 392–396.
Rozin, P., & Zellner, D. (1985). The role of Pavlovian conditioning in the acquisition of food likes and 
dislikes. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 443 (1), 189–202.
Schafe, G. E., & Bernstein, I. L. (1996). Taste aversion learning. In E. D. Capaldi (ed.), Why we eat 
what we eat: The psychology of eating (pp. 31–51). American Psychological Association. doi.org/
10.1037/10291-002
Sclafani, A. (2004). Oral and postoral determinants of food reward. Physiology & Behavior, 81 (5), 
773–779.
Stunkard, A. (1975). Satiety is a conditioned reflex. Psychosomatic Medicine, 37 (5), 383–387.
Sullivan, S. A., & Birch, L. L. (1994). Infant dietary experience and acceptance of solid foods. Pediatrics, 
93, 271–277.
Volkow, N. D., Wang, G. J., Maynard, L., et al. (2003). Brain dopamine is associated with eating 
behavior in humans. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 33, 136–142.
Wardle, J., Herrera, M., Cooke, L., & Gibson, E. (2003). Modifying children’s food preferences: The 
effects of exposure and reward on acceptance of an unfamiliar vegetable. European Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition, 57 (2), 341–348.
Weingarten, H. P. (1984). Meal initiation controlled by learned cues: Basic behavioral properties. 
Appetite, 5 (2), 147–158.
Werner, S. J., Kimball, B. A., & Provenza, F. D. (2008). Food color, flavor, and conditioned avoidance 
among red-winged blackbirds. Physiology & Behavior, 93 (1–2), 110–117.
Wisse, B. E., Frayo, R. S., Schwartz, M. W., & Cummings, E. (2001). Reversal of cancer anorexia by 
blockade of central melanocortin receptors in rats. Endocrinology, 142 (8), 3292–3301.
Woods, S. C. (2009). The control of food intake: Behavioral versus molecular perspectives. Cell 
Metabolism, 9 (6), 489–498.
Yamamoto, T. (2006). Brain regions responsible for the expression of conditioned taste aversions in rats. 
Chemical Senses, 32, 105–109.
Yamamoto, T., & Ueji, K. (2011). Brain mechanisms of flavor learning. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 
5, 76–85.
Yavuzsen, T., Walsh, D., Davis, M. P., Kirkova, J., Jin, T., LeGrand, S., Lagman, R., Bicanovsky, L., Estfan, B., 
Creema, B., & Haddad, A. (2009). Components of the anorexia–cachexia syndrome: Gastrointestinal 
symptom correlates of cancer anorexia. Supportive Care in Cancer, 17, 1531–1541.
Zajonc, R. B. (1968). Attitudinal effects of mere exposure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
Monographs, 9 (2p2), 1.DOI: 10.4324/9781032621401-8
CHAPTER 8
The Development of Eating 
Behaviors
After reading this chapter, you will be able to
• Understand the effects of prenatal exposure to nutrients and flavors.
• Appreciate the impact of early postnatal experience with food and the 
advantages of breastfeeding.
• Identify evidence for and against the theory that children can regulate their 
own energy and nutrient needs.
• Understand the influence of external factors (parents, media, portion sizes, 
etc.) on the eating behaviors of children.
• Provide parents, caregivers, and policy makers with ideas for instilling healthy 
eating behaviors for children.
Significant changes in eating behavior occur in the first few years of life – from suckling, 
to being spoon fed, to eating independently. New tastes and smells are encountered, 
and likes and dislikes are formed. Infants and toddlers learn what foods are socially 
acceptable, how much should be eaten, and when. Eating patterns established during 
the early years shape future eating behaviors. Because the obesity rate is increasing 
in countries around the world, it is important to understand the impact of eating 
practices established in the first few years of life so that parents, caregivers, and policy 
makers can improve the food environment of young children, better preparing them 
for lifelong healthy eating. We know that infants innately like sweet tastes and dislike 
bitter and sour tastes. This biological predisposition helps us, from birth, identify and 
consume foods associated with more calories and avoid those that could be dangerous. 
This served our ancestors well in a world with scarce food supplies, but it puts us at 
an increased risk for obesity in an environment containing an overabundance of sweet￾tasting foods with calories exceeding our needs. In this chapter, we explore biological 
predispositions that we have at birth, and even before birth, and the sociocultural 
influences (parents, friends, culture, and media) that further shape our eating behaviors 
during our early years.108 The Development of Eating Behaviors
ONTOGENY OF HUMAN FEEDING: PRENATAL 
EXPERIENCE
Fetal brain development is impacted by the food, drink, and other substances that 
the mother ingests, particularly during critical periods. Maternal malnutrition is 
correlated with low birth weight, lower intelligence, reduced motor coordination, and 
other lifelong impairments (Lechtig et al., 1975). We know that alcohol consumption 
during pregnancy can result in fetal alcohol syndrome, a condition associated with 
abnormal facial features, mental retardation, and poor motor coordination (Mattson 
& Riley, 2006). As with the effects of maternal malnutrition, fetal alcohol syndrome 
and other developmental disorders associated with a toxic uterine environment result 
in permanent alterations to neurodevelopment. Even disruptions to sodium balance 
are linked to lifelong changes, such as altered connectivity between specific brain 
regions and altered gene expression. For example, it has been shown that early-life 
sodium depletion (e.g., from mothers vomiting often during pregnancy or infants 
eating a low-salt diet) increases salt preference during adulthood (Crystal & Bernstein, 
1995; Curtis et al., 2004). Early sodium depletion increases levels of the circulating 
hormones aldosterone and angiotensin; these elevations may have permanent or so￾called organizational effects within the developing nervous system. Also, children born 
to mothers who are either over- or underweight while pregnant are at increased risk 
for being overweight, likely because of organizational changes within the developing 
brain (Black et al., 2008; Cripps et al., 2005; Herring et al., 2012). These are referred 
to as epigenetic changes, meaning that the DNA sequence (building blocks of genes) 
is unchanged, but expression of genes is altered (this and other genetic concepts are 
reviewed in Chapter 6).
BOX 8.1 WHAT’S THE EVIDENCE FOR ORGANIZATION 
EFFECTS?
Statistics from the Dutch famine during the winter of 1944–1945 (due to severe 
food rationing in the Netherlands during World War II) reveal that individuals 
exposed to prolonged famine conditions during early prenatal development were 
at increased risk for obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular problems, and other health 
issues later in life (Roseboom et al., 2006). Before and after the famine, food was 
plentiful for most people. It seems that those exposed to energy and nutrient restric￾tion during critical periods of brain organization developed heightened “starvation￾resistance” circuitry. So, when these individuals entered an environment with food 
abundance rather than scarcity, they had increased desire to eat, a reduced ability to 
regulate energy needs, and more efficient energy storage, making them more likely 
to overeat and become obese. Similar effects have been found in other human and 
rodent studies (Levin, 2006).The Development of Eating Behaviors 109
IMAGE 8.1 An expectant mom eating healthfully
You are probably familiar with the adage that expectant mothers can “eat for two,” 
but is overconsumption during pregnancy a good idea? Until recent decades, food 
and nutrient scarcity was a threat to the developing child, and so pregnant women, 
with added energy needs, were encouraged to eat heartily. In our current Western 
environment of food abundance, the advice given to women in earlier decades is 
no longer applicable. In fact, consuming beyond their energy needs puts pregnant 
women at increased risk for gestational diabetes, preeclampsia (gestational high blood 
pressure), and other medical problems that can complicate pregnancy and the health 
of the child. Further, children born to mothers who gained excessive weight during 
pregnancy have higher body fat percentages (thus, higher leptin levels) and are at 
increased risk for obesity later in life compared with children born to mothers who 
gained a healthy amount of weight during pregnancy (Cripps et al., 2005; Herring 
et al., 2012).
Results of recent studies indicate that junk food consumption (i.e., foods high in 
energy and low in nutrients) during pregnancy predisposes children for heightened 
junk food cravings, which increase the likelihood of unhealthy weight. However, in 
studies of early human development, it is difficult to distinguish prenatal and post￾natal influences. For example, children born to mothers who consume large amounts of 
junk food during pregnancy are often raised in homes where unhealthy food is eaten, 
making it difficult for researchers to determine the impact of the prenatal experience 
only. To address this issue, Bayol and colleagues (2007) conducted a study using a rat 
model, which allows for greater control over the variables. The design of their study is 
outlined in Figure 8.1.110 The Development of Eating Behaviors
FIGURE 8.1 The design 
of the “junk food” 
diet study
Source: Recreated from 
Bayol et al. (2007).
The junk food diet included doughnuts, cookies, candy bars, potato chips, cheese, and 
muffins in addition to standard rat chow. As expected, pregnant rats on the junk food 
diet consumed more energy and gained more weight compared with rats eating only 
chow. Although their consumption of sugar, fat, and salt increased, their intake of pro￾tein decreased compared with the control animals. So, the development of the fetal 
brains was impacted not only by overconsumption of energy but also by inadequate con￾sumption of protein. Further, the offspring of dams (mothers) consuming the junk food 
diet demonstrated enhanced liking and preference for the junk food diet post-weaning 
compared with controls. All newly weaned rats demonstrated a liking for the junk food 
diet, but those exposed prenatally and during lactation selectively preferred foods high in 
sugar and fat over foods containing protein or fiber. Offspring exposed to the junk food 
diet during gestation and lactation but then fed only chow after weaning did not demon￾strate overconsumption of chow. It seems that early exposure to highly palatable, energy￾dense food creates an enhanced taste preference for tasty, high-calorie, high-fat food, which 
serves as a predisposition for obesity.
BOX 8.2 CAN BABIES SMELL AND TASTE BEFORE BIRTH?
Mennella and colleagues (2001) had groups of pregnant women consume either 
water or carrot juice during three weeks of their last trimester and then water or 
carrot juice during the first two months of breastfeeding. When the babies were 
about six months and already eating some baby foods such as rice cereal, they were 
videotaped as they tried carrot-flavored cereal for the first time. Mennella’s group 
found that babies exposed to carrot juice flavors either prenatally in amniotic fluid The Development of Eating Behaviors 111
or postnatally in breast milk were more accepting of this otherwise novel food 
than were babies of mothers who consumed only water during these times. These 
findings indicate that food flavors are detected in amniotic fluid, and that this early 
exposure influences food preferences after birth. Further, flavor exposure early in 
life through breast milk also enhances liking of a wider range of foods, preparing a 
baby for the cuisine of his or her environment.
BOX 8.3 DOES EXPOSURE AFFECT INTAKE?
Sullivan and Birch (1994) studied the first acceptance of solid foods in infants age 
four–six months. This was an in-home study in which mothers fed their infants 
a novel vegetable puree on ten occasions (e.g., one per meal per day). Intake 
was measured and videotaped. Over the exposure period, infants doubled their 
intake of novel foods from 30 g to 60 g. This was likely both a mere exposure 
effect and a decline of neophobia. Interestingly, this increase across exposures was 
much greater in breastfed compared with formula-fed infants. Sullivan and Birch 
hypothesized that breastfed infants experience an array of food flavors in their 
mothers’ milk that enhances their acceptance of other novel foods, as previously 
discussed, better preparing them to accept a wider range of foods including fruits 
and vegetables.
IMAGE 8.2 This boy is choosing 
fruit for a snack
Although it is relatively easy to understand how changes in hormones or nutrients 
in a mother’s blood would be transmitted to the fetus, some questions about prenatal 
exposure to tastes and other sensory stimuli remain. We know that a fetus can hear, which 
is why some expectant mothers read stories or play music for their developing babies. 112 The Development of Eating Behaviors
The fetus is also exposed to tastes and smells, and these exposures seem to contribute 
to post-birth preferences. Fetuses show swallowing behavior at approximately three 
months, which becomes more vigorous in the following months. They are swallowing 
amniotic fluid. The fetus also has mature taste cells at this early time of gestation (~four 
weeks; Mistretta & Bradley, 1975), though it is not known when the taste pathway to the 
cortex for processing of taste information becomes functional.
Mennella and colleagues (1995) found that amniotic fluid contains food flavors. 
They asked pregnant women who were undergoing amniocentesis (sampling of amni￾otic fluid) for other reasons to consume either a garlic or placebo pill about one hour 
before the procedure. The researchers then paired up the samples (forming five pairs of 
garlic and non-garlic samples) and asked a “smell panel” to judge which one of the pair 
contained garlic. In four of the five pairs, most judges were able to correctly pick out 
the garlic sample. Smell panels in other studies have similarly detected cumin and curry. 
This indicates that flavors are transmitted into amniotic fluid and can potentially stimu￾late smell or taste receptors in the fetus. This early exposure can actually influence the 
acceptance of flavors by infants.
EARLY POSTNATAL EATING: FROM SUCKLING TO EATING 
SOLID FOODS
Infants have an innate preference for sweet tastes: Newborns will suck much more 
vigorously at a sweet-tasting artificial nipple than at a neutral-tasting nipple. This is 
even evident in premature infants, although the overall vigor of the response is less 
(Tatzer et al., 1985). This indicates that detection of and preference for sweet tastes 
are innate and mature well before birth. Newborns also respond with displeasure to 
bitter and sour tastes, indicating innate aversions to these potentially dangerous tastes 
(Birch, 1999). Are all primary taste preferences and aversions innate? Maybe not. Using 
similar artificial nipple-sucking methods, newborns were indifferent to salt compared 
with water. Instead, the preference for salt appears at approximately four months 
after birth (Beauchamp et al., 1994, 1986). Experience does not seem to play a role 
(after all, amniotic fluid is largely a salt solution). Rather, maturation of central taste 
systems underlies this effect. Thus, the chemosensory world of newborns, while rich, 
differs from that of adults presented with the same tastes. Recent findings indicate 
that chemoreceptors in the enteric nervous system provide important sensory infor￾mation for infants (see Chapters 4 and 5 and Mayer [2011] for a review of gut–brain 
communication).
A newborn is able to discriminate his or her mother’s breast and underarm odors 
from those of other mothers (measured by the time spent orienting to the mother for 
breastfeeding). Newborns, either by prenatal exposure or, more likely, by rapid postnatal 
learning, are able to learn to seek a complex olfactory stimulus that is predictive of food 
and shelter. There is evidence that, by a few weeks of age, infants are able to detect food 
flavors in their mother’s milk (Beauchamp & Mennella, 2009). Novel flavors (such as 
garlic and vanilla) produce more vigorous suckling, indicating that the novelty has been 
detected. Adult smell panels can also detect garlic and vanilla in mothers’ milk (Savage 
et al., 2007).
To address early-life taste and smell abilities, some researchers have investigated 
whether or not babies can detect alcohol in breast milk. In one study, mothers drank a 
test beverage (orange juice) that was normal on one occasion and “spiked” with a small The Development of Eating Behaviors 113
amount of alcohol on another occasion (Mennella, 2001). They breastfed their infants 
three to four hours after consuming the beverage. Infants consumed significantly less 
of their mother’s milk on the alcohol day compared with the non-alcohol day. This 
indicated that the infants not only detected the alcohol but also disliked it (alcohol has 
a bitter taste). It is important to note that this study does not unequivocally prove it is 
the taste of alcohol in the milk that resulted in a decreased consumption; the mothers’ 
breath or underarm odors could also have been affected, or the mothers’ supply of breast 
milk could have been reduced.
BREAST VERSUS BOTTLE (FORMULA) FEEDING
There is something of a debate among neonatologists (and parents) regarding the benefits 
of “natural” versus “artificial” milk for infants, and it is our hunch that their positions in 
the debate reflect complex belief systems that transcend babies and milk. Breast milk 
has immunological properties, providing some protection from early-life illnesses, and 
it is associated with a reduced risk for obesity and other health problems (Field, 2005; 
Gartner et al., 2005; Kramer & Kakuma, 2012); furthermore, breastfeeding facilitates an 
emotional bond between mother and child. The American Academy of Pediatrics cur￾rently recommends exclusive breastfeeding for approximately the first six months and 
support for breastfeeding with appropriate complementary foods for two years, as long 
as mutually desired by mother and child (Meek et al., 2022). However, recent survey 
results indicate that about 20% of babies born in the U.S. were breastfed exclusively for 
their first six months (Victora et al., 2016). Although research unequivocally suggests 
that breastfeeding is advantageous for the infant (and mother), some parents decide to 
formula feed for a number of reasons, including convenience, health problems, a desire 
or financial need to return to work, insufficient milk production, or the mother’s need 
to take medication that could be harmful to the baby. Importantly, both breast-milk-fed 
and formula-fed infants grow up fit and well, and so a parent’s choice about which type 
of feeding may ultimately come down to personal preference. Let’s review some of the 
main findings around breast versus bottle (formula) feeding.
Because breastfed infants are exposed to flavors from the mother’s diet, their 
chemosensory exposure is more varied than that of formula-fed infants, as the flavor 
of formula is unchanging. There is some evidence that this better prepares infants for 
acceptance and liking of novel foods and flavors (Forestell & Mennella, 2007; Hausner 
et al., 2009; Sullivan & Birch, 1994). As previously described in this chapter, Mennella 
and colleagues (2001) found that, when breastfeeding mothers consumed carrot juice 
(consequently exposing their infants to that flavor through breast milk), their infants 
demonstrated increased acceptance and enjoyment of carrot flavor in infant cereal. This 
is an example of the mere exposure effect, meaning that preferences for foods and flavors 
increase with repeated exposures. Breastfed infants have the opportunity to experience 
a wider variety of flavors and develop more food preferences (and reduced neophobia 
[fear of new tastes]) than formula-fed infants. And this experience is correlated with a 
higher consumption of fruits and vegetables in childhood. Breastfeeding is often done 
“on demand”; that is, the infant is fed whenever he or she fusses. The infant then suckles 
for as long (and ingests as much) as desired. This arrangement allows the infant to con￾trol both meal size and interval between meals. In these demand-fed infants, by approxi￾mately two months of age, meal size (measured by weight gain during a suckling episode) 
correlates with the length of the preceding interval since their last suckling. The first 114 The Development of Eating Behaviors
nursing episode in the morning is the largest and follows the longest episode (sleep) 
without feeding (Matheny et al., 1990). (Although infants at this age are typically not 
sleeping through the entire night, they may sleep for up to six hours, usually their longest 
bout in a 24-hour period.) In contrast, by about age six months, their meal size correlates 
with the interval that follows the breastfeeding. This correlation seems to be driven by 
the fact that the last nursing episode in the evening is the largest (and these infants do 
now typically sleep through the night). They apparently (but would not be able to tell us 
in words for another year or two!) are anticipating the period of deprivation.
IMAGE 8.3 Baby consuming formula from a bottle
In contrast, formula-fed infants are usually not fed on demand; they are fed a 
“bottleful” (i.e., a fixed maximum meal size) and may not be fed immediately when 
they start fussing. Parents and caregivers often adhere to a relatively fixed schedule when 
bottle-feeding and, thus, may attempt to delay the onset of a meal. Consequently, meal 
taking (timing and amount) is relatively more imposed by the parents and/or caregivers. 
Research reveals no correlation between the intervals before or after the meal under 
these conditions. Perhaps bottle-fed babies are not given the full opportunity to either 
learn or determine these natural or normal meal size–interval relationships.
The consumption process is more passive for bottle-fed infants (i.e., they have less 
control over the amount and timing of meals) and requires less effort compared with 
breastfeeding, leading to frequent overfeeding of infants consuming formula. These 
conditions seem to interfere with their ability to self-regulate calorie consumption 
and possibly put formula-fed infants at greater risk for obesity later in life (Savage 
et al., 2007).
Results of several studies indicate that, in general, breastfeeding is associated with a 
decreased risk of being overweight later in life, decreased blood cholesterol and blood 
pressure, and a reduced risk of developing type 2 diabetes relative to formula-fed babies 
(Arenz et al., 2004; Owen et al., 2005; Plagemann & Harder, 2005). Further, longer 
durations of breastfeeding (e.g., nine months compared with one month) are linked to 
reduced risks of unhealthy high weights later (Gillman et al., 2001; Harder et al., 2005). 
The mechanism by which breastfeeding may protect from weight-related problems could 
be its facilitation of early self-regulation of energy intake, which then could persist later 
in life. Or the mechanism(s) could be related to the nutritional properties (hormones, The Development of Eating Behaviors 115
peptides, or nutrients) of breast milk compared with formula. For example, maternal 
levels of circulating leptin, a hormone associated with satiety, correlate with levels of 
leptin in breast milk. Some evidence indicates that this early leptin exposure may con￾tribute to energy and weight regulation (Miralles et al., 2006). Additionally, formula-fed 
infants consume larger amounts of protein and generally gain weight more rapidly than 
breastfed infants, possibly “programming” them for weight-related problems later in life 
(Cripps et al., 2005; Singhal & Lanigan, 2007).
Adding Solid Foods to the Diet
Typically, solid foods are introduced to complement breast milk or formula at around 
four to six months, the age at which infants have developed the motor coordination for 
swallowing food. Rice cereal mixed with breast milk or formula is often a first “solid” food 
(food is more soggy than solid in the early exposures). Later, pureed meats, fruits, and 
vegetables are added. Babies have an innate preference for the sweet-tasting (and more 
energy-dense) fruits and veggies, such as pureed bananas, sweet potatoes, applesauce, and 
peaches, and an aversion for the bitter foods, such as pureed green beans or spinach. As 
discussed earlier in this chapter, repeated exposure to initially disliked foods effectively 
increases the liking and acceptance of those foods. Around seven to nine months, finger 
foods are added, requiring the fine motor coordination of a pincher grasp.
IMAGE 8.4 This baby is learning to eat solid 
foods. It’s a messy learning process!
Over time, the ratio of solid food to breast milk or formula increases, and often, by 
age one or two years, a child’s diet no longer includes breast milk or formula. So, in a 
relatively short period of time (from about six months in age to one year), a baby learns 
to accept a spoon, move food to the back of the mouth, and safely swallow it (in earlier 
months, babies reflexively spit food out, which often results in a mess!); then, to pick up 
foods and chew them before swallowing; and, lastly, to use a spoon independently (or, at 
least, start to). These are important developmental milestones that depend on physical 
ability and readiness, cognitive processing, and guidance from parents or caretakers. It is 
during this time that children are introduced to cultural norms and also to family norms 
regarding eating behavior, including mealtimes, foods associated with particular meals, 
meal and snack size, table manners, proper use of utensils, and so on. Certainly, these 
are not well understood or mastered at age one year, but a foundation for what will be 
considered “normal” eating behavior in a particular culture is established. Thus, a parent’s 
role in these early months and years is tremendously influential.116 The Development of Eating Behaviors
NOT NEEDING A BOTTLE BUT STILL NEEDING GUIDANCE: 
EATING IN EARLY CHILDHOOD
One important job that parents and caregivers have is ensuring that infants and young 
children are receiving proper nutrition (calories and nutrients) to grow well and main￾tain health. This is sometimes a difficult task because babies and very young children 
cannot always communicate specific desires or needs. For example, a crying toddler may 
want more juice or cereal; may be tired, sick, or hurt; or may want a particular toy that 
is out of reach. Parents are often good guessers as to the child’s needs, but clearly there 
is room for error. In our current culture, this error often is overfeeding or feeding foods 
that give comfort, usually food that is high in calories and fat, when a child cries. These 
attempts at meeting needs or soothing an upset child can establish an emotional link 
with food early in life, increasing the likelihood that, as the child grows past infancy, he 
or she will continue to eat for emotional rather than hunger needs. In the next section, 
we explore evidence that infants and children have some ability to regulate their food 
(energy) needs, but this ability is decreased as children become older and more aware of 
environmental cues.
Can Infants and Young Children Self-Regulate Energy Needs?
The question of whether or not infants and young children can innately regulate calorie 
and nutrient needs has been long debated. In the early 1900s, the philosophy among 
pediatricians was that children should be fed specific and regulated diets. It was assumed 
that, without parental guidance, children would choose unhealthy ratios of macro- and 
micronutrients. Thus, parents were advised to exercise an authoritarian approach to 
eating, leading to commonly used phrases such as “clean your plate.” A landmark study by 
pediatrician Clara Davis (1939) challenged this thinking. She studied 15 newly weaned 
infants for several months in an institutional setting. Initially, all of the solid foods were 
novel. In this institution, meals were served at fixed times, but the infants had their 
choice of what to select (10–12 choices were available at each meal) and how much of 
each to eat. Davis maintained records of food choices and amounts consumed for several 
years (up to 4.5 years for two of the children).
An important finding was that children consumed only a few food items at a meal, 
typically two or three items. Also, children went on what Davis called “food jags,” eating 
only one or two foods for several days in a row. However, over time, those preferences 
changed so that, overall, children selected a diet that contained approximately 17% of 
calories as protein, 35% as fat, and 48% as carbohydrate, healthy ratios of macronutrients 
for children. Lastly, despite large individual differences in feeding habits, all of the chil￾dren grew well and were deemed healthy. Davis interpreted her data as support for 
an “innate self-selection mechanism,” which was in striking contrast at the time to the 
leading philosophy among pediatricians. Davis advocated allowing children to self-select 
food items and amounts. Following the publication of her findings, pediatricians and 
parents began loosening controls on children’s eating with the new understanding that 
children had the innate ability to self-regulate energy and nutrient needs.
Are you surprised by Davis’s findings? Let’s examine some of the details of her study 
a bit more. The food choices for infants and toddlers in Davis’s study included beets, 
spinach, fruit, oatmeal, potatoes, milk, fish, and meat (liver, brains, beef, kidneys, lamb). The Development of Eating Behaviors 117
Do those menu options sound very appealing to you? Do you think that a typical 
American four-year-old would excitedly choose a dinner of liver and beets? Probably 
not! So, would the results of Davis’s study have been the same if she used today’s 
typical kids’ menu options? Imagine offering a child all-you-can-eat chicken nuggets, 
French fries, cookies, pizza, ice cream, and candy every day for years. It is very likely 
that the child will eat beyond his or her energy needs and not regulate vitamin and 
mineral levels. Unfortunately, this scenario is the reality in our current environment. 
We have easy access to highly palatable foods and a poor ability to self-regulate cal￾oric intake under these conditions. Perhaps if our only options were items like those in 
Davis’s study, we (children and adults) would be much better at maintaining healthy 
weights. So, despite the groundbreaking results of Davis’s study at the time, the innate 
ability to self-regulate energy seems to work well only in an environment with less 
palatable and less calorie- and fat-dense foods than those prevalent in modern Western 
society.
EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF CALORIC REGULATION IN 
CHILDREN
Some research suggests that infants and young children (~two months to three years) 
have internal controls for caloric regulation, and that these controls are less effective 
in older children. For example, Fomon et al. (1975) found that six-week-old infants 
consumed more of dilute (~5 kcal/ml) than dense (~10 kcal/ml) formula. However, 
over time, they did not achieve perfect caloric compensation. That is, the volume 
consumed of the half-strength formula was not double that of the high-strength for￾mula. Recall what you read earlier in this chapter about formula feeding (or bottle￾feeding) in general: It is an externally imposed regimen of size and time, and, although 
these are young infants, they presumably already have had a lot of prior bottle-feedings. 
Thus, these infants may already have learned about portion size and average caloric 
yield, and so their adaptation to this caloric manipulation may be compromised or 
limited by prior experience. Other findings indicate that overall energy intake remains 
constant when solid foods are added to the diets of breastfed babies, meaning that 
the infants compensate for the added calories by consuming less breast milk (Savage 
et al., 2007).
Evidence shows that preschoolers exhibit at least short-term (within-meal) caloric 
compensation. A protocol used by Birch and her colleagues in several studies for over 
20 years involved giving a calorically disguised first course (which serves as a preload) 
followed about 30 minutes later by a self-selected second course (e.g., lunch). Birch 
found that, after a low-calorie preload, the selected meal was calorically larger than after 
a high-calorie preload. This study design demonstrates short-term caloric adjustment. 
Interestingly, but perhaps not surprisingly, caloric regulation is poorer in overweight 
children (Birch & Fisher, 2000; Johnson & Birch, 1994). To quantify the precision of 
regulation, Birch’s group developed the compensation index, a measurement of the 
difference in caloric intake at the second course divided by the caloric difference in the 
preload. An index of +1 indicates perfect compensation, and an index of 0 indicates no 
effect of the preload (i.e., no compensation). They and others have used the compensa￾tion index as a mechanism for quantifying energy compensation in studies of children’s 
eating.118 The Development of Eating Behaviors
BOX 8.4 DO CHILDREN RECOGNIZE CALORIES?
Birch et al. (1990) found that children demonstrated conditioned flavor preferences 
based on caloric density. Novel drink flavors were used in these trials, and the 
drinks were either high in calories (155 kcal/150 ml) or low (less than 5 kcal/150 
ml). (A low-calorie sweetener was used to reduce calories.) The children consumed 
the beverage and were then allowed to consume additional snacks as desired (milk, 
cheese, fruit, cookies). The trials actually substituted for the children’s regularly 
scheduled morning snack, thus not interfering with normal meals or routines. 
At the end of the study, the children reported increased liking of both flavors, a 
function of the mere exposure effect. However, they had greater liking of the flavor 
associated with higher calories, both rating it higher and consuming it when given a 
choice between the flavors. Additionally, the children consumed fewer snacks after 
consumption of the flavor associated with high calories, indicating learned energy 
regulation.
Does caloric compensation occur over a longer period of time? Birch et al. (1991)
measured 24-hour intakes of children (ages two to five years) over a six-day period. The 
children received the same menus each day. Like Davis, Birch found that intake at indi￾vidual meals was highly variable. In contrast, 24-hour energy intakes were relatively con￾stant. This implies meal-to-meal adjustments of intake for longer-term caloric regulation. 
However, menu options in this study, as in Davis’s, were relatively nutritious items (e.g., 
turkey sandwiches, fruit, and yogurt) compared with the calorie-dense and nutrient-poor 
foods found in many restaurants, homes, and schools in our current Western culture.
In a subsequent study to directly manipulate this situation, children were again 
studied over several days, but, on some days, 14 g of dietary fat (~130 kcal, which is 
more than 10% of the total mean caloric intake) were substituted by a zero-calorie fat 
substitute (“fake fat” – chemically modified fat molecules that cannot be broken down 
in the gut and absorbed). For example, muffins were baked with fake fat on low-calorie/
fat days and with butter on high-calorie/fat days, but the muffins and other manipulated 
foods were otherwise as similar as possible in appearance and taste. The results again 
showed high variability between meals, but daily energy intake was constant, regardless 
of whether fake or real fat was offered (Birch et al., 1993). This shows that children are 
able to compensate for the low-fat version by eating more of other foods, even when 
they are not aware of the manipulation. What are the implications? This study not only 
demonstrated caloric regulation in children, it also helped explain the general lack of 
success that many dieters have when exchanging their regular snacks for low-fat versions. 
It is likely that adult dieters compensate for the calories and fat grams by consuming 
more of other foods.
Following a large meal, children tend to regulate calories by eating fewer food items 
in a second meal, but they do not regulate calories by reducing the amount of each item 
consumed in the next meal. Children tend to choose their preferred foods in the second 
meal and eliminate the less preferred, which are often the more nutritious foods (Birch The Development of Eating Behaviors 119
et al., 1993). And different children have different preferred foods. Fisher and Birch 
(1995) found that, when children were allowed to self-select their foods (over a six-day 
period), their percentage of calories taken from fat varied greatly among them (from 25% 
to 41% of calories from fat). Some children consistently chose a high-fat diet, and some 
a low-fat diet, despite having the same choices. Not surprisingly, the children with the 
highest preference for fat had the highest body mass index (BMI) and also the heaviest 
parents (based on BMI; Fisher & Birch, 1995; Johnson & Birch, 1994). These results 
indicate the importance of familial factors in establishing dietary intake and choice in 
children, although the findings do not discriminate between genetic and environmental 
influences.
EXTERNAL INFLUENCES ON CHILDREN’S’ EATING: 
DISRUPTIONS IN ENERGY SELF-REGULATION
Taken together, studies of caloric and nutrient regulation, from Davis’s in the 1930s to 
many conducted in recent decades, indicate that infants and young children have some 
ability to regulate energy needs, both within and across meals. However, this regulation is 
imperfect and becomes blunted with age. Self-regulation of energy need is disrupted by 
the external influences to which older children are exposed, including food attractiveness 
and palatability, eating behaviors of peers, media, and parental behaviors and attitudes. 
Thus, with age, children are more likely to eat in response to external cues rather than 
internal physiological hunger cues.
Parenting Styles, Attitudes, and Weights
Parenting styles and approaches to children’s eating have been found to impact food 
choices and calorie and fat regulation among children. Children of authoritarian parents 
(parents who are controlling, set strict rules, and expect obedience) have a reduced 
ability to regulate calorie needs (Johnson & Birch, 1994). Further, the more authoritarian 
the parents, the poorer a child’s ability to regulate. This parenting style, in contrast to per￾missive and authoritative styles, is associated with behaviors such as demanding that the 
child eat particular foods while forbidding others, without regard for the child’s needs 
or preferences. A permissive parenting style is associated with few parental regulations 
or controls. Regarding eating behavior, permissive parents tend to let children have what 
they want when they want it. These conditions require the child to make his or her own 
decisions, which typically leads to consumption of the tastiest, most easily available foods 
(as the child is limited to whatever is in the home or at school).
Authoritative parenting is the happy middle ground between authoritarian and per￾missive parenting. Authoritative parents provide structure and guidelines but explain the 
reasons for them and allow flexibility when warranted. This parenting style regarding 
eating includes behaviors such as encouraging a nutritious diet and explaining the benefits 
of a healthy lifestyle, but not forcing children to eat foods that are disliked. Rather, 
an authoritative parent is likely to offer healthy food options that children can select 
from. Children of authoritative parents have increased eating of healthy foods (fruits and 
vegetables) and reduced eating of junk foods compared with children of authoritarian 
parents (Patrick et al., 2005).
Children of parents who restrict or forbid certain foods, a behavior often associated 
with the authoritarian style, are more likely to overeat in the absence of hunger, to have 120 The Development of Eating Behaviors
higher BMI, and to suffer with body image dissatisfaction and eating disorders during ado￾lescence. This effect is most pronounced among daughters of restrictive mothers (Birch 
et al., 2003; Johnson & Birch, 1994). When foods are labeled “forbidden,” children have 
reduced ability to control their eating of those foods when given access (perhaps at a 
friend’s house). Researchers have also shown that, when food is used as a reward or bribe 
(e.g., “if you clean your room you can have a cookie”), the liking of that food increases. 
And, interestingly, promising a treat for eating a disliked food (e.g., “you can have ice 
cream if you eat your spinach”) actually increases the liking of the treat and worsens 
the aversion for the disliked food (Birch et al., 1982; Savage et al., 2007). Essentially, 
all of these examples (restricting, forbidding, using food as a reward) focus attention on 
external cues and decrease a child’s responsiveness to internal cues of hunger or satiety.
Homes of authoritative parents have more frequent availability of fruits, vegetables, 
and dairy and less availability of junk food compared with homes of authoritarian 
parents. Thus, children of authoritative parents are more frequently exposed to and 
offered healthy foods. Further, authoritative parents are more likely to model the con￾sumption of healthy foods. So, in addition to parenting style, children of authoritative 
parents are influenced by mere exposure and modeling (two learning principles) that 
further enhance their liking of healthy foods. Researchers have found that children of 
parents who eat more fruits and vegetables and drink more milk at home are more likely 
to like and consume the same foods even when they are not at home (see Savage et al. 
[2007] for a more thorough review).
IMAGE 8.5 Unhealthy kids’ meal optionsThe Development of Eating Behaviors 121
Talking Point 8.1
How would you advise parents to monitor children’s food choices? Consider both 
Davis’s findings and the rising number of overweight children in Western countries. 
Revisit this question after you complete the chapter; you may have additional ideas 
or you may consider some modifications to your initial advice.
Parents’ food choices and BMIs are also correlated with those of their children 
(Johnson & Birch, 1994). Parents who consume more junk food have high BMIs, as 
do their children. And children of parents who themselves have difficulty control￾ling their eating also have poorer ability at regulating energy needs. These effects are 
more pronounced among girls, particularly obese girls. Can you think of explanations 
for these correlations? Perhaps the effect is due to shared genes. Certainly, genes do 
predispose individuals to deposit fat in particular places in their body and to metab￾olize energy at varying rates (see Chapter 6). But do you think that shared genetics 
is the only explanation? It is probably not, given the rapid rise in the obesity rate. 
Shared environment is also a likely explanation. Parents and children in these homes 
are eating many of the same foods, often those high in fat and calories. Parents model 
eating of these types of foods, whereas eating of healthy fruits and vegetables is not 
frequent in these homes.
Obesity is seen among people of all levels of socio-economic status (SES), but the 
highest incidence is among people with low SES, including poverty conditions. What is 
interesting and paradoxical about this situation is that people in this group have both 
the highest rates of reported hunger and the highest rates of obesity. How could this be? 
Low-SES families often have reduced access to fresh fruits and vegetables but convenient 
access to junk food, which is typically high in calories and fat and low in nutritional value. 
Some low-SES communities in Western society have recently been considered to be in 
“food deserts,” areas characterized by limited accessibility to nutritional foods. Limited 
exposure to healthy foods (i.e., they are infrequently accessible, and their consumption 
is rarely modeled) increases the likelihood that children will have unhealthy diets and 
weight problems later in life.
Talking Point 8.2
Research indicates that children of authoritative parents not only have healthier eating 
habits but also tend to have higher self-esteem and greater success in life compared 
with children of permissive or authoritarian parents. So, why do you think that the 
authoritative style is not used by all parents?
SOCIAL INFLUENCES
With age, children are increasingly influenced by their peers’ behaviors, and this applies 
to eating behavior too. Children are more likely to sample a novel food when consump￾tion of that food is modeled by an adult or peer (Hendy & Raudenbush, 2000). Studies 122 The Development of Eating Behaviors
have shown that children will modify their food preference when they observe that a 
peer has a different preference (Addessi et al., 2005). As an example, Birch (1980) found 
that preschool-age children would quickly select the fruit that the other children around 
them chose, even when the fruit that they typically preferred was available.
IMAGE 8.6 Parents are early models of 
eating behavior
IMAGE 8.7 Children are influenced by 
the food preferences of others
The effects of education about food seem to be age related. In a study involving 
jelly bean flavors, some familiar and others novel (e.g., grape, kiwi, watermelon, coffee, 
and Dr. Pepper), preschool-age children (three to six years old) were told positive asso￾ciations (e.g., “Grape is Winnie the Pooh’s favorite flavor”) for some flavors and not 
others. In a second phase, children were asked to rate the hedonic value (using smiley, 
neutral, or unhappy faces) of the flavors. Exposure to positive information had an 
effect on the hedonic rating of the flavors, but only for the children older than 4.5 years 
(Lumeng & Cardinal, 2007). This supports the theory that children are more impacted 
by external cues with age. It seems that the relatively slow maturation of areas of the 
brain associated with memory (e.g., hippocampus, frontal cortex) contribute to this 
effect of age.
FOOD AVAILABILITY AND PORTION SIZES
As discussed in other chapters, the current food environment of Western culture is 
obesogenic, meaning that food is easily available, energy dense, highly palatable, and The Development of Eating Behaviors 123
heavily (or strategically) marketed. Further, portion sizes have increased progressively, 
leading to increased caloric intake. Studies have shown that children and adults eat more 
when they are served larger portions and generally do not compensate by eating less of 
other foods (Fisher et al., 2007, 2003). Significant elevations in energy intake over a 24-
hour period were found when portion sizes of entrees and snacks were doubled. Fisher and 
colleagues (2007) found that portion size and energy density have additive effects. Either 
factor alone increased overall energy intake, but together they had an enhanced impact on 
energy intake. Although this information is perhaps not surprising, it is important to have 
this type of empirical evidence, as many of the foods that we are exposed to, particularly 
in restaurants, are both in large portions and high in energy density.
Total caloric intake is also related to feeding frequency (Garcia et al., 1990a, 1990b). 
In one study, children were fed two scheduled meals per day but additionally could 
request and receive snacks. They requested food frequently and ate a mean of 13.5 times 
per day. Children who ate more snacks consumed more calories per day; that is, snacks 
did not detract from main meal size. (So much for the mother’s adage that too much 
snacking will spoil your appetite for dinner!) Of course, this implies that caloric compen￾sation is weak, contrasting with Birch’s findings. These results also indicate that frequent 
offering of food leads to increased eating. This information, paired with the results of the 
Fisher et al. (2007) study, illuminates how problematic our modern food environment 
has become for children. They are exposed to large portions of foods high in energy 
density and offered foods frequently while they are in the early process of establishing 
patterns of meal sizes and frequency.
MEDIA
Marketers in the food industry base much of their work on the central tenets of classical 
conditioning. A seminal aim in advertising is to create positive associations between a 
branded food item, a store, or restaurant, and the customers. It is estimated that more than 
$14 billion is spent on advertisements for U.S. food products (UConn Rudd Center for 
Food Policy and Health, 2017). And food and beverage advertisements account for about 
25% of advertisements aired during children’s television programming. Commercials 
depicting happy children singing and eating a particular food item lead to associations 
in the minds of children and parents between consumption of that food and positive 
experiences. As an example, McDonald’s has been one of the most successful businesses 
at associating its brand and food items with positive experiences. Its kids’ meal is the 
“Happy Meal,” the Ronald McDonald clown makes appearances at children’s birthday 
parties, and the restaurants often have indoor play areas. These are among the powerfully 
effective marketing tools used by McDonald’s (and other food businesses as well) to 
instill lifelong positive associations with their food items.
Robinson and colleagues (2007) demonstrated this effect. Preschool children were 
asked to taste familiar food items (hamburgers, chicken nuggets, and French fries from 
McDonald’s, and carrots, milk, and apple juice from a grocery store). The children 
tasted two identical samples of each food, one in McDonald’s packaging and the other 
in unmarked wrapping. The children overwhelmingly preferred the food items in the 
branded packaging, even the carrots, which are not currently offered on McDonald’s 
menu. We should add that it is not our intent to vilify any one brand or even class of 
foods, because all food companies are engaging in more or less the same behavior.124 The Development of Eating Behaviors
Another study similarly demonstrated the preference that four- to six-year-old chil￾dren have for snacks branded with popular cartoon characters (Scooby Doo, Dora the 
Explorer, or Shrek). Children both selected the cartoon-branded snacks more often and 
preferred the tastes of the branded snacks compared with the same snacks in unbranded 
packaging (Roberto et al., 2010).
Other studies have shown increased food consumption, particularly of sweet snacks, 
after viewing food advertisements compared with non-food-related advertisements on 
television (Halford et al., 2004). Because many nutrient-poor and energy-dense snacks 
(e.g., candies, fruit roll-ups, cookies, sugary cereals) are frequently marketed to children 
with popular cartoon characters, instilling preferences for healthier foods is increasingly 
difficult. A group of researchers analyzed the nutritional content of food depicted in 
television shows aimed at children aged five and younger (Radnitz et al., 2009). They 
found that unhealthy foods were shown about twice as often as healthy foods, and that 
the characters on these shows frequently endorsed consumption and overconsumption 
of unhealthy food.
Overweight children are influenced by external influences and marketing to a greater 
extent than normal-weight children. In a study by Formon et al. (2009), normal-weight 
children consumed fewer calories when a meal was branded, but overweight children 
consumed significantly more calories when the meal was branded versus non-branded. 
Their findings indicate that overweight children are more likely to recognize marketed 
food items and eat more when food is associated with marketed brands. Halford et al. 
(2004) also found that obese children were more likely than normal-weight children to 
recognize food advertisements; further, the amount of snacks consumed was correlated 
with familiarity with the advertisement. This associative learning may put overweight 
children at a greater risk for obesity and associated health problems in a media-saturated 
environment. Further, in cities and countries where food-related commercials have 
been limited or eliminated during times of television programming for children, there is 
consistent reduction in sales and, consequently, consumption of unhealthy snack foods 
(Taillie et al., 2019)
Implications for Instilling Healthy Eating Behaviors 
in Children
Prenatal and early postnatal food and flavor experiences prepare children for the variety 
of foods that they will encounter in their culture. Exposure to healthy foods during this 
early time in life enhances children’s acceptance of otherwise novel foods. This helps min￾imize “picky” eating of only heavily processed foods that are high in fat and calories and 
low in nutrients (e.g., foods often found on restaurant menus for children such as chicken 
nuggets and hot dogs). Children enter the present food environment with a better pre￾disposition for healthy living when exposed to fruits and vegetables rather than excessive 
junk food during prenatal (through amniotic fluid) and early postnatal (through breast 
milk) months. When infants begin consuming solid foods, parents should be patient with 
the process and continue to offer nutritious foods repeatedly, as acceptance and liking 
of novel foods (especially bitter-tasting vegetables) can take many exposures. Results of 
studies of children’s eating behavior revealed that the most frequently consumed vege￾table among toddlers is French fries, if they consume any vegetables at all (Fox et al., 
2004; Moding et al., 2018). Clearly, parents and caregivers too infrequently prioritize the 
need for early exposure to a healthy variety of foods.The Development of Eating Behaviors 125
As children grow, parents and caregivers should encourage them to focus on their 
internal hunger and satiety cues and minimize the focus on external cues by refraining 
from using phrases such as “you must clean your plate.” Parents should also be mindful 
of their own eating behaviors, both for their own health and as models for their children. 
Children’s consumption of healthy fruits, vegetables, and dairy is correlated with their 
parents’ consumption of the same foods. After extensive research into children’s eating 
behaviors, Birch and Fisher (2000) suggested that parents should provide children with 
a variety of balanced foods at each meal, but be nondirective about what items and how 
much are eaten. The argument (like Davis’s) is that children will come to focus on their 
own internal controls (“listen to what their bodies are telling them”), select a nutrition￾ally adequate diet, and be less prone to obesity or eating disorders as teens or adults. This 
may be especially important in girls, as the loss of internal compensation in obese girls 
(and the reason that led to their obesity) may reflect this externalization of control by an 
authoritarian parenting style regarding eating.
Finally, as a society, we need to seriously consider the impact that our current food 
environment has on the health of the current and next generations. The obesity rate 
has increased dramatically in the past 30 years and, unfortunately, continues to rise. 
Childhood obesity rates have also risen, and data from the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (2007) indicate that one in three children born in the year 2000 or more 
recently will develop type 2 diabetes (a disorder typically associated with unhealthy 
eating and weight). The economic burden of the preventable health problems associated 
with obesity is staggering. The rates of diabetes are predicted to double by 2030, and the 
associated health costs are expected to be $622 billion (Rowley et al., 2017). Further, 
obesity (or unhealthy weight) is correlated with psychological dysfunction. Overweight 
children are at a much greater risk for developing depression during adolescence and 
adulthood. These mental and physical health issues negatively impact quality of life –
and much of this can be prevented by a healthy lifestyle, which includes healthy eating.
So, whereas parents certainly share responsibility for the health of their children, our 
culture needs to change so that healthy eating is of greater importance. School lunches, 
for example, should include fresh fruits and vegetables and healthy ratios of micro- and 
macronutrients. Many children are not provided with healthy food options at home; 
thus, school may be the only environment in which some children have at least one daily 
exposure to healthy foods. This affords children the opportunity to overcome neophobia 
of novel foods and increases the likelihood that they will make healthy food choices as 
adults. Children exposed only to foods such as pizza, French fries, and chicken nuggets 
will continue to choose only those foods later in life, and this is a pattern associated with 
poor health. Certainly, the inclusion of regular exercise in physical education classes, 
playtime, and sports is another way that schools and communities can promote healthy 
living.
Talking Point 8.3
If children are more likely to eat snacks with popular cartoon characters on the pack￾aging, then don’t you think that this type of marketing could help increase consump￾tion of healthy fruits and veggies? Why do you think this tactic is not frequently used? 
(Hint: Consider costs.)
Something else for you to think about: In 2007, the Department of Health and 
Human Services (HHS) and the Ad Council teamed up with DreamWorks studios 126 The Development of Eating Behaviors
to launch a healthy eating ad campaign featuring characters from the Shrek movie 
series. Maybe you enjoyed these movies during childhood. Within months, members 
of children advocacy groups objected, some conducting letter-writing petitions in 
opposition. In the public service advertisements, Shrek characters encouraged chil￾dren to “get up and play.” However, the Ad Council also teamed up with for-profit 
companies, including Kraft Foods, General Mills, Kellogg’s, Coca-Cola, and Pepsico, 
among others. So, soon after the initiation of the campaign to combat childhood 
obesity, the Shrek character branding could be found on more than 70 food products, 
most of which were heavily processed, high in sugar, and low in nutrients, and many 
contained added green dye for effect. Some of the food products included Snicker’s 
candy bars, pop-tarts, chocolate chip cookies, M&M candies, frozen waffles and 
pancakes, Twinkies, and several types of sugary cereals. The initiative started with 
good intent, but the involvement of for-profit companies steered the efforts far from 
promoting healthy food choices for children. You may want to watch the documen￾tary Fed Up (released in 2014) for more information on ideas and failures by policy 
makers and the consequences for children’s health.
Talking Point 8.4
Do you think, both at theoretical and practical/ethical levels, that you could use the 
compensation index as a diagnostic test for children at risk for later eating disorders 
and try to reeducate them and their parents?
QUESTIONS TO ASK YOURSELF
Let’s review and apply your knowledge. Take some time to answer these chapter 
questions:
• Describe at least three pieces of evidence that demonstrate the effects of prenatal 
experience on eating behavior later in life.
• How might breastfeeding enhance healthy eating among children later in life? 
Explain.
• Describe Dr. Clara Davis’s study and her conclusions. What do you think about 
her findings in light of our current food environment?
• How do parenting styles and parents’ eating behaviors and weight influence 
children’s eating behaviors and weight? Are gender and/or socio-economic status 
contributing factors?
• What is the evidence of the impact of peer influence and media on children’s 
eating behavior? Does weight contribute to this? Explain.The Development of Eating Behaviors 127
GLOSSARY
Authoritarian parenting A style characterized by control, strict rules, and 
expectations of obedience.
Authoritative parenting A style that encourages a child’s independence 
but provides guidelines and structure.
Compensation index A measurement of the difference in caloric 
intake at the second course divided by the cal￾oric difference in the preload; an index of +1 
indicates perfect compensation, and an index 
of 0 indicates no effect of the preload (i.e., no 
compensation).
Energy density The amount of energy in a given weight of food.
External cues Stimuli in the environment (e.g., sight and smell 
of food, eating behavior of others, attractiveness 
of food).
Permissive parenting A style characterized by few rules or limits.
Portion size The amount of allotted food.
REFERENCES
Addessi, E., Galloway, A. T., Visalberghi, E., & Birch, L. L. (2005). Specific social influences on the 
acceptance of novel foods in 2–5-year-old children. Appetite, 45, 264–271.
Arenz, S., Rückerl, R., Koletzko, B., & Von Kries, R. (2004). Breast-feeding and childhood obesity – a 
systematic review. International Journal of Obesity Related Metabolic Disorders, 28, 1247–1256.
Bayol, S. A., Farrington, S. J., & Stickland, N. C. (2007). A maternal “junk food” diet in pregnancy and 
lactation promotes an exacerbated taste for “junk food” and a greater propensity for obesity in rat 
offspring. British Journal of Nutrition. doi:10.1017/S0007114507812037
Beauchamp, G. K., Cowart, B. J., Mennella, J. A., & Marsh, R. R. (1994). Infant salt taste: Developmental, 
methodological, and contextual factors. Developmental Psychobiology, 27 (6), 353–365.
Beauchamp, G. K., Cowart, B. J., & Moran, M. (1986). Developmental changes in salt acceptability in 
human infants. Developmental Psychobiology, 19, 17–25.
Beauchamp, G. K., & Mennella, J. A. (2009). Early flavor learning and its impact on later feeding 
behavior. Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, 48, S25–S30.
Birch, L. L. (1980). Effects of peer models’ food choices and eating behaviors on preschooler’s food 
preferences. Child Development, 51, 489–496.
Birch, L. L. (1999). Development of food preferences. Annual Review of Nutrition, 19 (1), 41–62.
Birch, L. L., Birch, D., Marlin, D. W., & Kramer, L. (1982). Effects of instrumental consumption on children’s 
food preference. Appetite, 3, 125–134.
Birch, L. L., & Fisher, J. O. (2000). Mothers’ child-feeding practices influence daughters’ eating and 
weight. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 71 (5), 1054–1061.
Birch, L. L., Fisher, J. O., & Davison, K. K. (2003). Learning to overeat: Maternal use of restrictive feeding 
practices promotes girls’ eating in the absence of hunger. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 78
(2), 215–220.128 The Development of Eating Behaviors
Birch, L. L., Johnson, S. L., Andresen, G., Peters, J. C., & Schulte, M. C. (1991). The variability of young 
children’s energy intake. The New England Journal of Medicine, 324 (4), 232–235.
Birch, L. L., Johnson, S. L., Jones, M. B., & Peters, J. C. (1993). Effects of a nonenergy fat substitute 
on children’s energy and macronutrient intake. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 58 (3), 
326–333.
Birch, L. L., McPhee, L., Steinberg, L., & Sullivan, S. (1990). Conditioned flavor preferences in young 
children. Physiology & Behavior, 47 (3), 501–505.
Black, B. E., Allen, L. H., Bhutta, Z. A., et al. (2008). Maternal and child undernutrition: Global and 
regional exposures and health consequences. The Lancet, 371 (9608), 243–260. doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(07)61690-0
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2007). 2007 national diabetes fact sheet. Retrieved from 
www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pubs/figuretext07.htm
Cripps, R. X., Martin-Gronert, M. X., & Ozanne, S. X. (2005). Fetal and perinatal programming of appe￾tite. Clinical Science, 109 (1), 1–12.
Crystal, S. R., & Bernstein, I. L. (1995). Morning sickness: Impact on offspring salt preference. Appetite, 
25, 231–240.
Curtis, K. S., Krause, E. G., Wong, D. L., & Contreras, R. J. (2004). Gestational and early postnatal 
dietary NaCl levels affect NaCl intake, but not stimulated water intake, by adult rats. American 
Journal of Physiology – Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative Physiology, 286, R1043–1050.
Davis, C. (1939). Results of the self-selection of diets by young children. The Canadian Medical 
Association Journal, 41, 257–261.
Field, C. J. (2005). The immunological components of human milk and their effect on immune develop￾ment in infants. The Journal of Nutrition, 135 (1), 1–4.
Fisher, J. A., & Birch, L. L. (1995). Fat preferences and fat consumption of 3- to 5-year-old children are 
related to parental adiposity. Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 95, 759–764.
Fisher, J. O., Liu, Y., Birch, L. L., & Rolls, B. J. (2007). Effects of portion size and energy density on young 
children’s intake at a meal. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 86, 174–179.
Fisher, J. O., Rolls, B. J., & Birch, L. L. (2003). Children’s bite size and intake of an entrée are greater 
with large portions than with age-appropriate or self-selected portions. American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition, 77, 1164–1170.
Fomon, S. J., Filmer, L. J., Thomas, L. N., Anderson, T. A., & Nelson, S. E. (1975). Influence of formula 
concentration on caloric intake and growth of normal infants. Acta Paediatrica Scandanavia, 64, 
172–181.
Forestell, C. A., & Mennella, J. A. (2007). Early determinants of fruit and vegetable acceptance. 
Pediatrics, 120, 1247.
Formon, J., Halford, J. C. G., Summe, H., MacDougall, M., & Keller, K. L. (2009). Food branding 
influences ad libitum intake differently in children depending on weight status. Appetite, 
53, 76–83.
Fox, M. K., Pac, S., Devaney, B., & Jankowski, L. (2004). Feeding infants and toddlers study: What foods 
are infants and toddlers eating? Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 104 (Supplement 1), 
S22–S30.
Garcia, S. E., Kaiser, L. L., & Dewey, K. G. (1990a). Self-regulation of food intake among rural Mexican 
preschool children. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 44 (5), 371–380.
Garcia, S. E., Kaiser, L. L., & Dewey, K. G. (1990b). The relationship of eating frequency and cal￾oric density to energy intake among rural Mexican preschool children. European Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition, 44 (5), 381–387.
Gartner, L. M., Morton, J., Lawrence, R. A., et al. (2005). Breastfeeding and the use of human milk. 
Pediatrics, 115 (2), 496–506.
Gillman, M. W., Rifas-Shiman, S. L., Camargo, J. C. A., et al. (2001). Risk of overweight among 
adolescents who were breastfed as infants. Journal of the American Medical Association, 285 (19), 
2461–2467.
Halford, J. C., Gillespie, J., Brown, V., Pontin, E. E., & Dovey, T. M. (2004). Effect of television 
advertisements for food on food consumption in children. Appetite, 42 (2), 221–225.The Development of Eating Behaviors 129
Harder, T., Bergmann, R., Kallischnigg, G., & Plagemann, A. (2005). Duration of breastfeeding and risk 
of overweight: A meta-analysis. American Journal of Epidemiology, 162 (5), 397–403.
Hausner, H., Nicklaus, S., Issanchou, S., Mølgaard, C., & Møller, P. (2009). Breastfeeding facilitates 
acceptance of a novel dietary flavour compound. Clinical Nutrition, 29 (1), 141–148.
Hendy, H. M., & Raudenbush, B. (2000). Effectiveness of teacher modeling to encourage food acceptance 
in preschool children. Appetite, 34 (1), 61–76.
Herring, S. J., Rose, M. Z., Skouteris, H., & Oken, E. (2012). Optimizing weight gain in pregnancy 
to prevent obesity in women and children. Diabetes, Obesity, & Metabolism, 14 (3), 195–203. 
doi:10.1111/j.1463-1326.2011.01489
Johnson, S. L., & Birch, L. L. (1994). Parents’ and children’s adiposity and eating style. Pediatrics, 95
(5), 653–661.
Kramer, M. S., & Kakuma, R. (2012). Optimal duration of exclusive breastfeeding. Cochrane Database 
of Systematic Reviews, (8), Art. No.: CD003517. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD003517.pub2
Lechtig, A., Habicht, J., Delgado, H., Klein, R. E., Yarbrough, C., & Martorell, R. (1975). Effect of food 
supplementation during pregnancy on birthweight. Pediatrics, 56 (4), 508.
Levin, B. E. (2006). Metabolic imprinting: Critical impact of the perinatal environment on the regulation 
of energy homeostasis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 361
(1471), 1107–1121.
Lumeng, J. C., & Cardinal, T. M. (2007). Providing information about a flavor to preschoolers: Effects on 
liking and memory for having tasting it. Chemical Senses, 32, 505–513.
Matheny, R. J., Birch, L. L., & Picciano, M. F. (1990). Control of intake by human-milk-fed infants: Relationships 
between feeding size and interval. Developmental Psychobiology, 23 (6), 511–518.
Mattson, S. N., & Riley, E. P. (2006). A review of the neurobehavioral deficits in children with fetal 
alcohol syndrome or prenatal exposure to alcohol. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 
22 (2), 279–294.
Mayer, E. A. (2011). Gut feelings: The emerging biology of gut-brain communication. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 12 (8), 453–466.
Meek, J. Y., Noble, L., & Section on Breastfeeding. (2022). Policy statement: Breastfeeding and the use 
of human milk. Pediatrics, 150 (1), e2022057988.
Mennella, J. A. (2001). Regulation of milk intake after exposure to alcohol in mothers’ milk. Alcoholism: 
Clinical and Experimental Research, 25 (4), 590–593.
Mennella, J. A., Jagnow, C. P., & Beauchamp, G. K. (2001). Prenatal and postnatal flavor learning by 
human infants. Pediatrics, 107, 88–94.
Mennella, J. A., Johnson, A., & Beauchamp, G. K. (1995). Garlic ingestion by pregnant women alters 
the odor of amniotic fluid. Chemical Senses, 20 (2), 207–209.
Miralles, O., Sanchez, J., Palou, A., & Pico, C. (2006). A physiological role of breast milk leptin in body 
weight control in developing infants. Obesity, 14, 1371–1377.
Mistretta, C. M., & Bradley, R. M. (1975). Taste and swallowing in utero: A discussion of fetal sensory 
function. British Medical Bulletin, 31 (1), 80–84.
Moding, K. J., Ferrante, M. J., Bellows, L. L., Bakke, A. J., Hayes, J. E., & Johnson, S. L. (2018). Variety 
and content of commercial infant and toddler vegetable products manufactured and sold in the United 
States. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 107 (4), 576–583.
Owen, C. G., Martin, R. M., Whincup, P. H., Davey Smith, G., Gillman, M. W., & Cook, D. G. (2005). The 
effect of breast-feeding on mean body mass index throughout life: A quantitative review of published 
and unpublished observational evidence. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 82, 1298–1307.
Patrick, H., Nicklas, T. A., Hughes, S. O., & Morales, M. (2005). The benefits of authoritative feeding 
style: Caregiver feeding styles and children’s food consumption patterns. Appetite, 44, 243–249.
Plagemann, A., & Harder, T. (2005). Breast feeding and the risk of obesity and related metabolic diseases 
in the child. Metabolic Syndrome and Related Disorders, 3 (3), 222–232.
Radnitz, C., Byrne, S., Goldman, R., Sparks, M., Gantshar, M., & Tung, K. (2009). Food cues in children’s 
television programs. Appetite, 52, 230–233.
Roberto, C. A., Baik, J., Harris, J. L., & Brownell, K. D. (2010). Influence of licensed characters on 
children’s taste and snack preferences. Pediatrics, 126, 88–93.130 The Development of Eating Behaviors
Robinson, T. N., Borzekowski, D. L., Matheson, D. M., & Kraemer, H. C. (2007). Effects of fast food 
branding on young children’s taste preferences. Archives of Pediatric Adolescent Medicine, 161 (8), 
792–797.
Roseboom, T., Rooij, S., & Painter, R. (2006). The Dutch famine and its long-term consequences for adult 
health. Early Human Development, 82, 485–491.
Rowley, W. R., Bezold, C., Arikan, Y., Byrne, E., & Krohe, S. (2017). Diabetes 2030: Insights from yes￾terday, today, and future trends. Population Health Management, 20 (1), 6–12.
Savage, J. S., Fisher, J. O., & Birch, L. L. (2007). Parental influence on eating behavior. Journal of Law 
and Medical Ethics, 35, 22–34.
Singhal, A. A., & Lanigan, J. J. (2007). Breastfeeding, early growth and later obesity. Obesity Reviews, 
8, 51–54.
Sullivan, S. A., & Birch, L. L. (1994). Infant dietary experience and acceptance of solid food. Pediatrics, 
93, 271–277.
Taillie, L. S., Busey, E., Stoltze, F. M., & Dillman Carpentier, F. R. (2019). Governmental policies to reduce 
unhealthy food marketing to children. Nutrition Reviews, 77 (11), 787–816.
Tatzer, E., Schubert, M. T., Timischl, W., & Simbruner, G. (1985). Discrimination of taste and preference 
for sweet in premature babies. Early Human Development, 12 (1), 23–30.
UConn Rudd Center for Food Policy and Health. (2017). Food marketing. Retrieved from http://uconnrud
dcenter.org/research/food-marketing/
Victora, C. G., Bahl, R., Barros, A. J., França, G. V., Horton, S., Krasevec, J., Murch, S., Sankar, M. J., 
Walker, N., & Rollins, N. C. (2016). Breastfeeding in the 21st century: Epidemiology, mechanisms, 
and lifelong effect. The Lancet, 387 (10017), 475–490.DOI: 10.4324/9781032621401-9
CHAPTER 9
Social Influences on Eating
After reading this chapter, you will be able to
• Understand the meaning and determinants of cuisine.
• Appreciate the influences of “food rules.”
• Distinguish indirect versus direct influences on eating.
• recognize and critically consider the direct influences of others on our eating 
behavior
• appreciate that the provider (person or company) carries meaning.
Food often plays a central role in social gatherings, such as family meals, parties, or holiday 
events. Imagine attending a friend’s birthday or graduation party, or visiting a relative for 
a holiday such as Thanksgiving, and finding that no food was being served. That would 
likely be a disappointing surprise! Not only is food associated with social gatherings, but 
specific food items are often linked with particular holidays or occasions. For example, 
most of us anticipate that cake will be served at a birthday party. What foods do you 
expect or associate with other holidays or events? Have you ever wondered why this is? 
For example, why is eggnog often consumed during winter, but not during other seasons? 
In this chapter, we will explore the broader contextual or institutional influences that 
shape our eating behavior, such as cuisine and religion, and then the more immediate 
influence of other people on eating and food choice.
CUISINE
What constitutes cuisine, and how can we distinguish one cuisine from another? Do par￾ticular foods and preparations come to mind when you think of Chinese cuisine? What 
about when you think of Indian or Mexican cuisine? With each, you probably think of 
distinctly different foods, flavors, and preparations. According to influential researcher 
and cultural historian Paul Rozin,
cuisines are defined by the basic ingredients they employ (e.g., rice, potatoes, fish), the 
characteristic flavors (flavor principles) employed (e.g., a combination of chili pepper 
with either tomato or lime for Mexico; a varied mixture of spices called ‘curry’ for 
India), and particular modes of food preparation (e.g., stir-frying for China).
(Rozin, 1996a, p. 236; Image 9.1)132 Social Influences on Eating
IMAGE 9.1 Boy enjoying cake on his first 
birthday
Additionally, cuisine is influenced by cultural rules about which foods should be 
served with what and when. For example, in many Western cultures, it is socially accept￾able and normal to have cereal with milk, toast with butter, and coffee with creamer for 
breakfast. However, the serving of this meal at dinnertime would be considered odd, as 
would pairing the foods differently (e.g., coffee with butter instead of creamer). But the 
serving of the same meal for breakfast at a home in Japan would not be considered the 
social norm; Japanese people typically eat rice and fish for breakfast.
Anthropologists regard cuisines as a reflection of adaptive (in a Darwinian evolu￾tionary sense) choices for a particular environment. According to this widely accepted 
view, if a cuisine was maladaptive in some nutritional sense, then the culture practicing 
it would have become extinct. It is not a goal of the field of psychology to assess the 
optimality of a given cuisine for the environment in which it evolved; rather, psychology 
provides an account of human behavioral mechanisms that allow learning and perpetu￾ation of adaptive eating behaviors. An example of an adaptation is the consumption of 
milk or milk products in many cultures, despite lactose intolerance among adults. Lactase 
is a digestive enzyme that is required to break down lactose, the sugar present in milk; 
although all healthy infants express this enzyme, the amount of the enzyme drops to very 
low levels after infancy in most ethnic groups of the world (e.g., those indigenous to Asia, 
Africa, the Americas). Lack of this enzyme makes adults lactose intolerant: Lactose is not 
absorbed from the stomach, and this makes people feel ill. These cultures have either 
largely rejected milk products or use fermented/cultured products (yogurt, cheese, etc.). 
The reason that fermentation works is that specific bacteria outside the body do what 
our digestive systems can no longer perform in adulthood – namely, splitting lactose into 
a digestible molecule (lactic acid). Thus, lactose-intolerant individuals are able to eat 
products containing this “processed” lactose and receive beneficial energy and nutrients. 
There are many other examples around the world of food procurement facilitated by 
human ingenuity. We recommend Rozin (1996a) for additional evidence of cuisine as a 
social adaptive mechanism of survival.Social Influences on Eating 133
DETERMINANTS OF CUISINE
What factors contribute to the determination of ingredients, flavors, and preparation 
associated with particular cuisines? The first is availability (Figure 9.1). Cuisines 
largely consist of ingredients and flavors that are accessible and relatively inexpen￾sive in terms of cost and effort to procure. This concept of behavioral economics is 
explored more thoroughly in other chapters. The mode of preparation typically also 
depends on what is available in that culture (e.g., tools and technology). Not all avail￾able foods and flavors will be adapted as part of a local cuisine; those that are most 
innately appealing (e.g., energy dense, sweet or salty tasting) are more likely to be 
incorporated into a cuisine than those that are less attractive (e.g., low in energy yield, 
bitter or bland tasting).
FIGURE 9.1 Determinants of cuisine
A second important determinant of cuisine is the nutritional completeness of the 
ingredients. Because no natural food source provides all of the nutrients needed for an 
omnivore’s adequate nutrition, combinations of foods are important. For example, served 
alone, beans, rice, and corn provide inadequate sources of protein, but, when served in 
pairs (beans and rice, beans and corn), they are complementary and provide adequate 
protein. This is why these combinations are staples in many Central and South American 
cultures where they are relatively easily grown, procured, and stored.
A third category contributing to the determination of cuisine comprises beliefs and 
attitudes, and these require social learning and the direct or indirect influence of others. 
This category includes religious beliefs and cultural attitudes, cultural food rules, percep￾tion of risk associated with particular foods, and attitudes about health. These will be 
discussed individually.
Religious Beliefs and Cultural Attitudes
The Hindu reverence for the “sacred cow” stems from the early belief in Indian cul￾ture that cows are an important self-renewing source of high-energy food (milk) and 
a symbol of life that should not be killed (Simoons, 1961). Consequently, beef is not 
eaten in Hindu cuisine. In fact, most Hindu Indians are vegetarians; none eat beef, and 
virtually all consider the taste or consumption of beef “disgusting” (Rozin & Fallon, 
1987). Anthropologist Marvin Harris theorized that the prohibition of meat eating by 
Hindus is nutritionally adaptive: Cows are more useful as a dairy resource (in fermented 134 Social Influences on Eating
products of course!) than as a meat resource. That is, a cow can provide many more 
important protein and fat calories in its lifetime from its milk than from its meat (Harris 
et al., 1966).
Harris also suggested that consumption of dog meat is taboo in Europe and North 
America because dogs are more useful as hunters or herders or are valuable as companions; 
in regions with little game and, as a consequence, no need for hunting or herding animals, 
dogs are considered acceptable as food, and in some areas are even considered delicacies 
(Harris & Ross, 1987). Regardless of the origin of these beliefs and attitudes about cows 
or dogs, they are set by the culture and not by any one individual’s experience.
IMAGE 9.2 Contagion and disgust
How likely are you to eat a sandwich that a bug just crawled across? Despite how 
unappealing insects may be to you as food (or contaminants of food), they are widely 
consumed in many non-European cultures (DeFoliart, 1999). Insects such as caterpillars, 
termites, and locusts are frequently consumed in Africa and Asia, as these contain rela￾tively high amounts of protein and other nutrients. And, importantly for inclusion in a 
local cuisine, they are easily available in the environment. So, why do we (Westerners) 
consider them disgusting as food? There is no clear-cut answer, except for the simple 
explanation that they did not become part of our cuisine.
Our cultural attitude is that insects are not food. Rozin conducted an interesting 
experiment to demonstrate the pervasiveness of this concept. He asked volunteers to 
consume juice into which a cockroach had just been dipped. (The juice had been previ￾ously consumed and liked by the volunteers.) The volunteers rejected it, despite knowing 
that the cockroach was dead and sterilized and thus could not actually contaminate the 
drink. Would you drink the juice if it were offered to you? What would be your rationale 
if you refused the drink? Rozin reported that volunteers’ explanations included “it’s a 
cockroach!” (Rozin, 1996a; Rozin et al., 1986). In other words, the idea of a roach or 
insect, despite its cleanliness following sterilization, elicits a feeling of disgust that is a 
result of social learning. (Trust us, this attitude is not innate. Just ask any parent, and you 
will be assured that one- and two-year-olds have no qualms about picking up and putting 
in their mouths nearly anything, including insects!)
Culturally Determined Food Rules
Cultural food rules dictate the time of day at which specific foods are considered appro￾priate, which foods should be served with which other foods, and how they should be Social Influences on Eating 135
eaten (e.g., with fingers, a fork, chopsticks). As previously mentioned, cereal for breakfast 
is considered normal according to American food rules, but it is generally unaccept￾able for dinner (or, at least, unexpected). We will highlight a few other cross-cultural 
comparisons of food rules. In the U.S., salad is often served as a first course for dinner, 
whereas it is usually served after the main dish, as a third course, in France. In Japan, the 
dishes, or courses, of the dinner meal are traditionally all served at once rather than in 
the sequential process that is typical in Western cultures. Americans typically consume 
French fries by picking them up with fingers. However, it is regarded as inappropriate 
to do the same with other potato preparations, such as roasted or baked potatoes. None 
of these food rules (and there are many) is inherently superior to any others, as they all 
allow for healthful eating. They are the result of social learning and not of biological 
necessity.
Perception of Risk
In the early 2000s, there was mass media concern about mad cow disease, technically 
called bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE). This is a progressive and fatal neuro￾logical disease in cattle; neurological problems can result among people who consume 
contaminated beef, particularly if it contains nervous system tissue. In the U.S., although 
no human health problems were linked to contaminated beef, consumption of beef 
declined significantly for a few months in 2003 following the first report of an infected 
cow. This occurred nationwide (not just in areas near the location of the infected cow 
in the U.S.) and was accompanied by increased consumption of other meats such as 
chicken and pork (Schlenker & Villas-Boas, 2009). In cases like this and others, when the 
perception of risk associated with a particular food is high, the incorporation of it in the 
diet of that society decreases. Of course, this often makes good sense, particularly when 
other food options exist with fewer perceived risks. In the case of beef, the perceived risk 
was short-lived, and so it was not removed from the American cuisine. However, if risk 
associated with a particular food persists, whether it’s actual or simply perceived, that 
food is eliminated from a culture’s cuisine. Presumably, this is an explanation for the 
relative absence of dairy in Asian cuisine (as a result of lactose intolerance among that 
population).
Another example of a societally inflicted risk involves medication and juice. In 
today’s world, health-promoting drugs are frequently taken, for example, to sta￾bilize mood or reduce blood pressure. Many drugs are inactivated and broken down 
in the intestine and liver by a particular enzyme (in the P450 family). Grapefruit 
juice contains compounds called furanocoumarins that can interfere with this enzyme’s 
actions. Thus, the metabolism and, hence, effectiveness of many drugs (including 
statins, antidepressants, and others) are potentially affected by grapefruit. Prescribing 
physicians routinely recommend that patients do not eat grapefruit, even though these 
drugs do not have a uniformly high risk of adverse interaction (see Bailey et al. [2012] 
for a review). The risk is sometimes that the drug would be more effective, but the 
idea of taking lower doses of the drug with grapefruit does not seem to have caught on. 
As a result of this risk that is passed down by physicians, sales of grapefruit juice have 
dropped, and grapefruit hybrids (e.g., pomelos) are being developed that have lower 
levels of furanocoumarins.136 Social Influences on Eating
IMAGE 9.3 Example of a warning label on a 
container of prescription medication
Attitudes about Health
In modern Western cultures with food abundance, concerns about personal appearance 
and, in particular thin appearance, are common. Attitudes about food and health are also 
different in these cultures compared with more traditional cultures and less Westernized 
cultures. Nonetheless, despite the obesity epidemic, Americans are more likely than 
people in European countries and Japan to rate all fats as “harmful to health,” despite 
known benefits of some fats (e.g., omega-3 fatty acids) in moderation. Americans also 
exhibit more anxiety and guilt about eating (Rozin et al., 1999). Rozin and colleagues 
have theorized that this heightened concern with healthy eating contributes to stress￾and emotion-related overeating and, thus, reduces our ability to moderate our food 
intake.
DIRECT VERSUS INDIRECT INFLUENCES
Eating behaviors, including food combinations, portion sizes, and timing of meals or 
snacks, are a culmination of a lifetime of experience. Starting in infancy, our parents and 
caregivers teach us what items are appropriate as food, how much we should eat, and 
when. Some of this teaching is direct or explicit (e.g., a parent’s directive to “clean your 
plate”), and other teaching is more incidental or passive (e.g., modeling of parents’ eating 
behaviors or exposure to flavors through breast milk). We will discuss other examples of 
the direct influence of others on our eating behavior in the next section, but first we will 
consider the combination of direct and indirect factors that shape cuisine and adherence 
to the associated food rules within a culture.
Indirect Influences
Indirect influences are those that are effective even in the absence of other people, 
although they most likely first developed in the presence of others. As a case in point, 
most of you are unlikely to consume the beverage contacted by an insect such as a 
roach previously discussed, regardless of whether or not other people are around. This 
is because you learned at an early age that roaches are not food, that they contaminate 
food and should be avoided. Likewise, as a consequence of social learning, Hindu Indians 
neither consume, nor want to consume, beef, either when alone or in the presence of 
others.Social Influences on Eating 137
What about portion sizes? How do you know how much of any particular food item 
to choose or consume when making your own selections? We typically consume food 
in amounts with which we are familiar. For example, you might have a sandwich, apple, 
and can of soda for lunch because this is a meal of which you have had prior posi￾tive experiences (e.g., no one laughed at you because this is a socially “normal” meal in 
Western culture, you felt appropriately satiated, and you didn’t get sick). The sandwich 
may be relatively low in fat and calories, the apple quite small, and the soda calorie free; 
or the sandwich could be dense in fat and calories, the apple large, and the soda more 
than 100 calories. Yet people typically consume such items in their entirety. Food and 
portion selections such as these occur with or without the presence of others, though 
earlier in life we learned of them from others (Nestle et al., 1998).
Availability, as previously discussed, is an important influence on our food selection, 
and this is largely an indirect influence. Availability of food is both a determinant and a 
consequence of cuisine. Upon being adopted as a staple in a particular cuisine, that food 
becomes much more accessible than foods that are not part of the cuisine. For instance, 
if you were to crave fish and rice for breakfast while visiting Japan, you would be in luck, 
because those are the items you are most likely to find in restaurants, markets, and per￾haps in the home in which you are a guest. You would be less fortunate, though, if you 
desired pancakes and bacon, as those items are not as frequently available. And the con￾verse would be true in the U.S.: Pancakes and bacon are often on the menus for breakfast 
at restaurants, and the ingredients are available in most grocery stores. Our desire for 
particular foods is shaped by experience, but our consumption of those foods is limited 
by our access, and this applies whether or not others are around us.
IMAGE 9.4 A AND B Typical Japanese 
and American breakfasts138 Social Influences on Eating
Direct Influences of Others
Direct influences are those that require the actual presence of others. It is known 
that people tend to eat more when in a group (De Castro, 1990). However, 
overconsumption, including binge eating, often occurs in isolation (Stice et al., 
2000). Thus, whereas social gatherings often facilitate food consumption, social 
constraints may at the same time promote healthy eating behavior. This has even 
been demonstrated in laboratory rats. Rats normally avoid novel foods but are more 
likely to consume a novel food and choose healthy ratios of macronutrients in the 
presence of a rat who is demonstrating these behaviors than rats tested alone (Galef 
et al., 1985, 1990; Galef & Wright, 1995).
As omnivores, we are able to consume an incredibly wide range of food items, and 
we need to consume a variety of foods to obtain optimal nutrition. However, our nat￾ural attraction to new foods (neophilia) juxtaposes with our fear of potential dangers 
of new foods (neophobia); this is known as the omnivore’s paradox (Fischler, 1980). 
Cultural beliefs, traditions, and rules provide guidance around which foods to eat, how 
much, and when, allowing a society to manage the omnivore’s paradox. Thus, group 
or commensal food consumption allows for the sharing of these practices and the con￾tinuance of them among generations, keeping societies safe from danger and adequately 
nourished. Evidence suggests that cultures in which meals are consumed in group (e.g., 
family) settings have lower obesity rates and longer life expectancies than cultures in 
which individuals eat alone (e.g., Veugelers & Fitzgerald, 2005).
IMAGE 9.5 Commensal eating 
contributes to healthy food 
consumption
Food sharing is associated with increased levels of oxytocin, a neurotransmitter 
associated with social bonds in humans and other mammals (Wittig et al., 2014). 
Oxytocin has also been found to enhance trust and memories of positive social situations 
(Guastella et al., 2008; Kosfeld et al., 2005), which suggests that commensal food con -
sumption and food sharing facilitate social bonds and pleasant memories. Further, oxy￾tocin reduces the consumption of palatable snacks, such as cookies, helping to promote 
healthful eating and reduce overconsumption (Ott et al., 2013).
French sociologist Claude Fischler and others have surveyed people from the U.S. and 
several Western European countries regarding attitudes to food, meals, and health (see Social Influences on Eating 139
Rozin’s [2005] review of this research). French people, compared with Americans, feel 
that the quality of the food, drink, and company of others (essentially the meal experi￾ence) is more important than the quantity of the food. Further, the French spend more 
time per day consuming their meals (two hours compared with one hour for Americans), 
consume a diet higher in fat, and have lower obesity rates. This is considered the “French 
paradox” (Drewnowski et al., 1996; Renaud & de Lorgeril, 1992). It seems that, in post -
industrial societies, such as the U.S., rules of eating are loosening, and even vanishing, 
perhaps because meals are often eaten in isolation, reducing the opportunity for the 
sharing of food rules and healthy practices. Food delivery services are more common than 
they have ever been, adding convenience to eating meals alone. Further, portion sizes are 
typically larger in countries such as the U.S.. Fischler (1980, 1988) and others (e.g., Rozin 
et al., 2003) consider this lack of proper management of the omnivore’s paradox to be a 
contributing factor to rising obesity.
It is known that we tend to copy the intake of others, closely matching the amount 
that the people around us are eating; this trend persists despite either extreme hunger or 
fullness (Herman et al., 2003, 2005). We also tend to eat more when served food in large 
containers (Marchiori et al., 2012) and we are prone to mindless eating when distracted –
for example, when watching television – and consequently underestimate our overall 
food consumption (Ogden et al., 2013).
These findings support Fischler’s (2011) belief that commensal eating helps maintain 
food consumption at, or constrain it to, appropriate levels. Eating in groups reduces the 
risk of overconsumption because of the awkwardness associated with deviation from 
social norms and may, in some cases, promote healthier food choices.
WHY DO WE EAT PREVIOUSLY DISLIKED FOODS?
Children develop many food preferences on the basis of social-affective context; for 
example, foods eaten by parents, older siblings, or peers or food items associated with 
fictional superheroes, smiling faces, and so on are often preferred. The acquired chili 
pepper preference in some cultures is an example of this socially mediated food liking. 
Spicy, “hot” foods are innately disliked because they activate pain receptors in the mouth 
(Caterina et al., 1997). However, as children are slowly introduced to chili peppers with 
adult approval and encouragement, they come to like them (this is particularly evident 
in the Mexican culture; Rozin, 1996a).
You may have had a similar experience with coffee. Can you recall your first sip 
of black coffee? It probably tasted bitter and gross. The addition of sweetener and 
creamer made it taste much more appealing. Typically, the amount of sweetener and 
creamer preferred by coffee drinkers decreases, and over time people enjoy a bitter￾tasting beverage that they previously disliked. The role of associative learning in chan￾ging this type of food or flavor preference is discussed in other chapters. However, if 
coffee tasted disgusting to you on your first exposure and you had no other positive 
associations with it, then why would you ever try coffee again? The fact is that coffee 
has many appealing associations in our culture – the smell of the kitchen on a relaxed 
morning, the vibe at popular coffee houses, the availability of Wi-Fi, studying with 
friends late into the night, and so on. Thus, we have a social motivation to overcome 
our innate dislike of the bitter taste and we are reinforced for doing so, all resulting 
from direct influences of others.140 Social Influences on Eating
FOOD ASSOCIATIONS WITH THE PROVIDER
Most of us have a fondness for foods made by familiar people (especially loved ones), 
served at particular restaurants, or associated with certain brands. Can you think of 
any examples of this that apply to your food preferences? Perhaps your grandmother’s 
apple pie is your favorite. We feel connections to the handlers, providers, or brand asso￾ciations of the food we eat. Grandma’s pie is better because it was made by grandma; 
particular cookies are better than others because they are branded in packaging with 
which we have positive associations. These associations are emotionally and psycho￾logically rooted. Rozin (1996b) and anthropologists before him refer to this as the law 
of contagion, meaning that, once two things have been in physical contact, that contact 
remains an influence, even after the physical bond is broken (to the point of nostalgia!). 
So, food prepared by people whom we like carries their “essence” and is preferred; con￾versely, food prepared by enemies or people we find unappealing will not be desired 
or enjoyed. In other cultures, such as the Hindu Indian culture, the law of contagion 
pertaining to human handlers is more evident as people are often acutely aware of the 
handler’s identity and social status. In Western culture, we are often detached from 
the original sources of our food; thus, many of our food associations are with com￾panies and logos rather than with individuals. We prefer food branded with the essence 
of companies with which we have positive associations to those with which we have 
unpleasant associations. Even at very young ages, children prefer branded over non￾branded foods (Roberto et al., 2010; Robinson et al., 2007), and this certainly persists 
into adulthood. Interestingly, our perception that certain branded foods taste better is 
associated with altered neural activity in areas of the brain associated with memory 
(McClure et al., 2004).
BOX 9.1 ARE WE NEUROLOGICALLY AFFECTED BY FOOD 
LABELS?
Coke and Pepsi sodas are chemically nearly identical; however, many soda drinkers 
have strong allegiance to, and preference for, one over the other. McClure et al. 
(2004) used fMRI technology to compare brain activity of people who consumed 
Coke and Pepsi in a blinded condition (i.e., the participants didn’t know which soda 
they were receiving) with that of people who were “brand-cued” (i.e., they were 
exposed to the familiar Coke or Pepsi labeling before consuming the beverage). 
In the blinded condition, brain activity was most intense in areas of the prefrontal 
cortex associated with decision making and reward. However, in the cued condition, 
increased activity was seen in the hippocampus (associated with memory) and part 
of the prefrontal cortex associated with bias. These results help explain why food or 
drink from liked sources (people or companies) seems to taste better; altered brain 
activity affects perception.Social Influences on Eating 141
MEDIA’S INFLUENCE
Media messages are ubiquitous, including television commercials, magazine 
advertisements, billboards, and internet messages among other forms. As discussed in 
the previous chapter, children reliably prefer foods with television or movie characters 
portrayed on the packaging. Children also prefer and consume more of foods endorsed 
by celebrities, and these are typically not fresh fruits and vegetables (Boyland et al., 
2013). Further, there is a correlation between the number of television advertisements 
viewed per hour, especially those marketing unhealthy foods, and BMI for children 
(Lake & Townshend, 2006). The food industry and lobbyists have deep pockets. As 
an example of the contrast in funding between promotion of healthy food and that of 
unhealthy processed food, for every $1 that the World Health Organization spends on 
improving health, the food industry spends over $500 promoting processed foods. And 
the processed food business is a multi-billion-dollar industry. In one year, the revenue of 
ten of the largest corporations (e.g., PepsiCo, General Mills, Coca Cola, Nestlé) is over $1 
billion dollars per day (Monteiro & Cannon, 2019). So, there is little motivation on the 
part of for-profit businesses to monitor or limit the marketing of their products to the 
widest possible audience, which includes children. The products produced by these com￾panies include baby formula, snack foods, sweetened drinks (sodas and energy drinks), 
and breakfast foods.
Adult food and beverage choices are also influenced by media. In the mid-1900s, 
carbonated beverages were infrequently consumed, especially when compared with con￾sumption of milk and water. By 2000, this trend had reversed, with frequent consump￾tion of carbonated beverages and other sugary drinks, and this change has been largely 
attributed to marketing and media (Kearney, 2010).
Several decades ago, Quebec imposed legislation that banned advertisements for toys 
and fast food aimed at children under 13 years of age in all forms of media. Years later, fast 
food consumption among households was compared between those in Quebec and those 
in different areas of Canada without the ban, and it was found that fast food consump￾tion was significantly lower in Quebec (Dhar & Baylis, 2011). Importantly, Quebec’s 
childhood obesity was lower than rates in other parts of Canada. These results demon￾strate both the strong influence media can have on our eating choices and the ability of 
regulations to blunt this influence. Several other countries in Europe and around the 
world have since adopted similar policies (Liu et al., 2020).
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Despite our largely similar, biologically predisposed taste preferences, aversions, and 
physiology, eating behaviors vary widely around the world. Cuisines and food rules, both 
of which have tremendous influence on our eating, endure within a culture only if they 
allow for the survival of its population. We learn of what is normal in our culture and 
establish our eating behaviors early in life with the guidance of parents and caregivers. 
As we age, the influence of others on our eating continues. In fact, most of our eating 
occurs in the presence of others. Research indicates that, if the food consumption of 
those around us is healthy (appropriate portions and ratios of macronutrients), our eating 142 Social Influences on Eating
is likely to be healthy as well. Conversely, when eating alone without the healthy model, 
societal food rules loosen, and we are likely to consume beyond our energy needs. The 
issues discussed in this chapter, including the role of media, are important for policy 
makers and advocates of a healthier society to consider as they illuminate some of the 
challenges in improving eating behaviors.
QUESTIONS TO ASK YOURSELF
Let’s review and apply your knowledge. Take some time to answer these chapter 
questions:
1 What is cuisine, and what factors determine it?
2 Discuss indirect influences on eating behavior.
3 Discuss direct influences on eating behavior.
4 What are the benefits of commensal eating and food sharing?
5 What influence do media have on eating behavior?
GLOSSARY
Commensal food consumption Eating in groups.
Cuisine A style of cooking usually associated with a par￾ticular culture.
Direct influence Eating behavior influenced by the presence of 
others.
French paradox The French spend more time per day consuming 
their meals, consume a diet higher in fat, and
have lower obesity rates.
Indirect influence Eating behavior influence that does not require 
the presence of others (e.g., religion, known 
food “rules”).
Lactose intolerance Too little of the enzyme needed to break down 
lactose, leading to discomfort and illness upon 
consuming dairy.
Law of contagion Contact between two people or objects results in 
a lasting connection.
Omnivore’s paradox The contradiction between omnivores’ liking of 
new food and fear of new food.Social Influences on Eating 143
REFERENCES
Bailey, D. G., Dresser, G., & Arnold, J. M. O. (2012). Grapefruit-medication interactions: Forbidden fruit 
or avoidable consequences? Canadian Medical Association Journal. doi:10.1503/cmaj.120951
Boyland, E. J., Harrold, J. A., Dovey, T. M., Allison, M., Dobson, S., Jacobs, M. C., & Halford, J. C. 
(2013). Food choice and overconsumption: Effect of a premium sports celebrity endorser. The Journal 
of Pediatrics, 163 (2), 339–343.
Caterina, M. J., Schumacher, M. A., Tominaga, M., Rosen, T. A., Levine, J. D., & Julius, D. (1997). The 
capsaicin receptor: A heat-activated ion channel in the pain pathway. Nature, 389 (6653), 816–824.
De Castro, J. M. (1990). Social facilitation of duration and size but not rate of the spontaneous meal 
intake of humans. Physiology & Behavior, 47, 1129–1135.
DeFoliart, G. R. (1999). Insects as food: Why the Western attitude is important. Annual Review of 
Entomology, 44 (1), 21–50.
Dhar, T., & Baylis, K. (2011). Fast-food consumption and the ban on advertising targeting children: The 
Quebec experience. Journal of Marketing Research, 48 (5), 799–813.
Drewnowski, A., Henderson, S. A., Shore, A. B., Fischler, C., Preziosi, P., & Hercberg, S. (1996). Diet 
quality and dietary diversity in France: Implications for the French paradox. Journal of the American 
Dietetic Association, 96 (7), 663.
Fischler, C. (1980). Food habits, social change, and the nature/culture dilemma. Social Science 
Information, 19 (6), 937–953.
Fischler, C. (1988). Food, self, and identity. Social Science Information, 27 (2), 275–292.
Fischler, C. (2011). Commensality, society and culture. Social Science Information, 50, 528–548.
Galef, B. G., Jr., Attenborough, K. S., & Whiskin, E. E. (1990). Responses of observer rats (Rattus 
norvegicus) to complex, diet-related signals emitted by demonstrator rats. Journal of Comparative 
Psychology, 104 (1), 11–19.
Galef, B. G., Jr., & Wright, T. J. (1995). Groups of naive rats learn to select nutritionally adequate foods 
faster than do isolated naive rats. Animal Behaviour, 49 (2), 403–409.
Galef, J. B., Jr., G., Kennett, D. J., & Stein, M. (1985). Demonstrator influence on observer diet pref￾erence: Effects of simple exposure and presence of a demonstrator. Animal Learning & Behavior, 
13, 25–30.
Guastella, A. J., Mitchell, P. B., & Mathews, F. (2008). Oxytocin enhances the encoding of positive social 
memories in humans. Biological Psychiatry, 64 (3), 256–258.
Harris, M., Bose, N. K., Klass, M., et al. (1966). The cultural ecology of India’s sacred cattle. Current 
Anthropology, 7(1), 51–66.
Harris, M., & Ross, E. B. (1987). Food and evolution: Toward a theory of human food habits. 
Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Herman, C. P., Koenig-Nobert, S., Peterson, J. B., & Polivy, J. (2005). Matching effects on eating: Do 
individual differences make a difference? Appetite, 45, 108–109.
Herman, C. P., Roth, D. A., & Polivy, J. (2003). Effects of the presence of others on eating: A normative 
interpretation. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 873–886.
Kearney, J. (2010). Food consumption trends and drivers. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
of London B: Biological Sciences, 365 (1554), 2793–2807.
Kosfeld, M., Heinrichs, M., Zak, P. J., Fischbacher, U., & Fehr, E. (2005). Oxytocin increases trust in 
humans. Nature, 435 (7042), 673–676.
Lake, A., & Townshend, T. (2006). Obesogenic environments: Exploring the built and food environments. 
The Journal of the Royal Society for the Promotion of Health, 126 (6), 262–267.
Liu, W., Barr, M., Pearson, A. L., Chambers, T., Pfeiffer, K. A., Smith, M., & Signal, L. (2020). Space–time 
analysis of unhealthy food advertising: New Zealand children’s exposure and health policy options. 
Health Promotion International, 35 (4), 812–820.
Marchiori, D., Corneille, O., & Klein, O. (2012). Container size influences snack food intake independ￾ently of portion size. Appetite, 58 (3), 814–817.
McClure, S. M., Li, J., Tomlin, D., Cypert, K. S., Montague, L. M., & Montague, P. R. (2004). Neural 
correlates of behavioral preference for culturally familiar drinks. Neuron, 44, 379–387.144 Social Influences on Eating
Monteiro, C. A., & Cannon, G. J. (2019). The role of the transnational ultra-processed food industry in 
the pandemic of obesity and its associated diseases: Problems and solutions. World Nutrition, 10
(1), 89–99.
Nestle, M., Wing, R., Birch, L., DiSogra, L., Drewnowski, A., Middleton, S., & Economos, C. (1998). 
Behavioral and social influences on food choice. Nutrition Reviews, 56 (5), S50–S74.
Ogden, J., Coop, N., Cousins, C., Crump, R., Field, L., Hughes, S., & Woodger, N. (2013). Distraction, 
the desire to eat and food intake. Towards an expanded model of mindless eating. Appetite, 62, 
119–126.
Ott, V., Finlayson, G., Lehnert, H., Heitmann, B., Heinrichs, M., Born, J., & Hallschmid, M. (2013). 
Oxytocin reduces reward-driven food intake in humans. Diabetes, 62 (10), 3418–3425.
Renaud, S., & de Lorgeril, M. (1992). Wine, alcohol, platelets, and the French paradox for coronary 
heart disease. The Lancet, 339 (8808), 1523–1526.
Roberto, C. A., Baik, J., Harris, J. L., & Brownell, K. D. (2010). Influence of licensed characters on 
children’s taste and snack preferences. Pediatrics, 126, 88–93.
Robinson, T. N., Borzekowski, D. L., Matheson, D. M., & Kraemer, H. C. (2007). Effects of fast food 
branding on young children’s taste preferences. Archives of Pediatric Adolescent Medicine, 161 (8), 
792–797.
Rozin, P. (1996a). Social influences on food preferences and feeding. In E. D. Capaldi (ed.), Why we 
eat what we eat: The psychology of eating (pp. 233–263). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association.
Rozin, P. (1996b). Towards a psychology of food and eating: From motivation to module to model to 
marker, morality, meaning, and metaphor. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 5 (1), 18–24.
Rozin, P. (2005). The meaning of food in our lives: A cross-cultural perspective on eating and well-being. 
Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, 37, S107–S112.
Rozin, P., & Fallon, A. E. (1987). A perspective on disgust. Psychological Review, 94 (1), 23–41.
Rozin, P., Fischler, C., Imada, S., Sarubin, A., & Wrzesniewski, A. (1999). Attitudes to food and the role 
of food in life in the U.S.A., Japan, Flemish Belgium and France: Possible implications for the diet￾health debate. Appetite, 33, 163–180.
Rozin, P., Kabnick, K., Pete, E., Fischler, C., & Shields, C. (2003). The ecology of eating smaller portion 
sizes in France than in the United States help explain the French paradox. Psychological Science, 14
(5), 450–454.
Rozin, P., Millman, L., & Nemeroff, C. (1986). Operation of the laws of sympathetic magic in disgust and 
other domains. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50 (4), 703–712.
Schlenker, W., & Villas-Boas, S. B. (2009). Consumer and market responses to mad cow disease. 
American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 91 (4), 1140–1152.
Simoons, F. J. (1961). Eat not this flesh: Food avoidances in the Old World. Madison: University of 
Wisconsin Press.
Stice, E., Telch, C. F., & Rizvi, S. L. (2000). Development and validation of the Eating Disorder Diagnostic 
Scale: A brief self-report measure of anorexia, bulimia, and binge-eating disorder. Psychological 
Assessment, 12 (2), 123–131.
Veugelers, P. J., & Fitzgerald, A. L. (2005). Prevalence of and risk factors for childhood overweight and 
obesity. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 173 (6), 607–613.
Wittig, R. M., Crockford, C., Deschner, T., Langergraber, K. E., Ziegler, T. E., & Zuberbühler, K. 
(2014). Food sharing is linked to urinary oxytocin levels and bonding in related and unrelated wild 
chimpanzees. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 281 (1778), 1–10.DOI: 10.4324/9781032621401-10
CHAPTER 10
Mood and Food, Cravings, 
and Addiction
After reading this chapter, you will be able to
• Describe the connections between mood and eating behavior.
• Understand the effect of stress on eating.
• Provide the biological and psychological explanations for food cravings.
• Appreciate and understand a basis for an addiction model of overeating.
Have you ever headed straight to the freezer for some ice cream after a particularly 
stressful day? Have you ever eaten far more chips than you intended to eat while 
nervously studying for an upcoming exam? Mood plays an interesting role in eating 
behavior, which can be problematic and associated with unhealthy eating habits. Some 
people report cravings for the foods that seem to comfort them or, at least temporarily, 
improve their mood. A craving is characterized by an intense and prolonged desire or 
yearning for a specific food item or type. Food cravings are very common (especially 
among women), but some people claim that these cravings are intrusive and are resolved 
only by the consumption, and at times overconsumption, of the craved food. The cycle 
of powerful craving followed by compulsive consumption is similar to that seen among 
drug addicts. The idea that palatable food can be addictive has received much attention 
and has also spawned debate. Perhaps, as with drug addiction, some people are more 
prone to becoming addicted to palatable food and, consequently, have a difficult time 
regulating their intake. In this chapter, we explore the mood–food connection and the 
neurobiological evidence for food addiction.
THE MOOD–FOOD CONNECTION
Which types of food do you typically prefer when you are feeling down or stressed? 
Frequently craved “comfort foods” include cookies, chips, pasta, pizza, ice cream, and 
candy (especially chocolate!). What do these foods have in common, and why are they 
among the most desired foods when we’re depressed or tense? These foods are quite 
diverse, but one common feature is that they contain a lot of carbohydrates; we often 
refer to these foods as “high carb,” although they usually also contain quite a lot of 
fat. Maybe the commonality in macronutrient composition is what makes these foods 
craved. Or, maybe these foods are just the tastiest, so of course they would be preferred. 146 Mood and Food, Cravings, and Addiction
It could instead be that these foods were our favorites during childhood, and we feel 
comforted by them when we’re having a bad day. All of these are reasonable explanations 
for our comfort food preferences associated with a depressed mood. Let’s first consider 
the explanation that relates to postingestive consequences – macronutrients – because 
that is not as intuitive as the taste or experience explanations.
Talking Point 10.1 When Do You Eat?
Do you eat differently when you’re feeling down? What foods do you tend to consume 
more or less of when your mood is low? Compare your list with your classmates’ lists.
A Biological Explanation for Carbohydrate (Sugar) Craving?
Depression is believed to be associated with reduced activity of the neurotransmitter 
serotonin (e.g., Parsey et al., 2006), although other neurotransmitters are likely also 
involved. One of the pillars of this theory of depression is that the most effective anti￾depressant medications work primarily by increasing synaptic levels of serotonin in the 
brain. Carbohydrate consumption also boosts serotonin activity in the brain, though the 
mechanism is different from that of antidepressants. Tryptophan (a diet-derived amino 
acid) is the raw material for a two-step synthesis of serotonin (5-HT) in the neuron. It is 
one of six large neutral amino acids (LNAAs; see Table 2.1 for additional information) 
that all compete for the same molecular carrier to get across the blood–brain barrier and 
into the brain. So, 5-HT synthesis in the brain ultimately depends on the ratio of trypto￾phan to all LNAAs in the blood. (If you think of the molecular carriers as boats and the 
LNAAs as potential passengers, and there being many more passengers than seats in the 
IMAGE 10.1 Carbohydrate-rich foods are 
frequent choices when our mood is lowMood and Food, Cravings, and Addiction 147
boats, then you’ll get the picture.) It turns out that insulin in the blood stream increases 
the tryptophan/LNAA ratio and so increases the net amount of tryptophan getting into 
these molecular “boats.” Because carbohydrates, especially those high in glycemic index, 
increase insulin secretion to a greater extent than proteins or fats, carbohydrate consump￾tion has the greatest impact on 5-HT synthesis relative to the other macronutrients. The 
theory is, then, that carbohydrate-dense foods elevate 5-HT and so have an antidepres￾sant or mood-elevating effect, at least among people who identify themselves as “carbo￾hydrate cravers” (this is the medicine effect; Corsica & Spring, 2008; Lieberman et al., 
1986; Wurtman & Wurtman, 1995). This association is probably learned very early in life, 
leading some people to continue to desire these types of foods when mood is low, using 
food as a form of self-medication (Wurtman & Wurtman, 1995). The effect of carbohy￾drate consumption on 5-HT activity may take hours, whereas the mood-elevating effect 
is very rapid. This evidence supports the impact of learning of the medicine effect and 
also the idea that the expectation that our mood will be enhanced actually enhances our 
mood (i.e., a placebo effect). This same effect of expectation/placebo usually occurs with 
other medications. For example, we typically feel relief from headaches soon after taking 
medication, before it has its physiological effect (Barrett et al., 2006). These examples 
are a result of learning through experience.
Stress and Eating
Most people eat differently when they are stressed (Zellner et al., 2006). Stress has 
diverse causes and descriptions, and so more precise terms have been introduced. Eustress
is stress that is associated with positive experiences, and distress is stress associated 
with negative experiences; these can be thought of as being at opposite ends of a stress 
continuum. However, despite our polar opposite reasons for feeling stressed (from 
encountering a bear in the woods, to hearing your professor announce a pop quiz, to 
walking into a surprise party), our bodily response is quite similar. When we perceive 
a situation as stressful, our hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis is activated, 
triggering an increase in blood pressure, heart rate, and breathing and also the release of 
the hormones adrenaline and cortisol that perpetuate the elevated physiological state. 
Typically, hunger is suppressed with short-term exposure to a severe stressor (such as 
the bear in the woods). However, longer-term exposure to non-life-threatening stressors 
(e.g., preparing for final exams) is more associated with increased eating.
IMAGE 10.2 Eating behavior changes with stress148 Mood and Food, Cravings, and Addiction
IMAGE 10.3 Eating behavior changes with stress
Talking Point 10.2 What Do You Eat?
Do you think that you eat more when you’re “stressed”? What types of foods do you 
typically consume more or less of in this state?
The foods that we eat more of when we are stressed are “comfort” or “junk” foods, and 
not healthy foods (Dallman et al., 2005; Zellner et al., 2006). It has been demonstrated 
that even people who feel less hungry when stressed eat more of their calories as high￾energy and high-fat comfort foods. So, for some people, overall eating may decrease, but 
the ratio of unhealthy to healthy foods consumed increases (Gibson, 2006). Further, 
most increased food consumption associated with stress is in the form of snacks rather 
than meals. Most students tend to snack on high-energy, fat-dense foods such as chips 
and candy when studying, and many adults report similar junk food preferences when 
stressed (e.g., Dallman et al., 2005; Oliver & Wardle, 1999). Cantor and colleagues (1982) 
found that people working on an information-processing (tracking) task consumed more 
snacks than when they were not performing the task. And the more difficult the task 
(presumably, the more stressful), the more snacks consumed.
IMAGE 10.4 Why is chocolate often craved?Mood and Food, Cravings, and Addiction 149
Other research indicates that women are more prone than men to this type of stress￾induced palatable-food consumption (e.g., Zellner et al., 2007). Rats and mice, like 
humans, also selectively consume more energy- and fat-dense food when experiencing 
stress (Foster et al., 2009).
When we (humans and rodents) are stressed, it seems that external factors, par￾ticularly the attractiveness and palatability of food, have an increased influence on 
our food intake. Like eating associated with a depressed mood, stress-induced eating 
may also be explained by the pleasurable and mood-enhancing activity of serotonin, 
dopamine, opioids, and other chemicals, which reinforce the eating behavior (Gibson, 
2006). Thus, people living in environments with chronic stress are more likely to 
overeat in the absence of physiological hunger, making them more likely to become 
overweight or obese.
Stress seems to impact eating for another reason. Activation of the HPA axis also 
triggers secretion of glucocorticoids, which are hormones with several associated 
functions including elevated emotional state, increase in insulin secretion, and changes 
in dopamine and serotonin activity. It seems that stress-induced glucocorticoid release 
and the cascade of other chemical changes work to additively alter eating behaviors, 
including the desire to eat, the motivation to obtain and consume food, and the pleasure 
experience of eating the food (Dallman, 2010; Dallman et al., 2005). Eating behavior 
then reduces stresses, at least temporarily, reinforcing the behavior. This can become 
a habitual pattern for some people. And, because the foods preferred when we are 
stressed are palatable high-energy junk or comfort foods rather than more healthful 
foods such as fruits and veggies, this habit is likely to lead to unhealthy weight gain 
(Dallman, 2010).
Talking Point 10.3 Stress Points
How might a downturn in the economy affect eating behaviors? Might the effects of 
feeling stuck in a bad job, dealing with a break-up, or grieving for a loved one be 
similar?
FOOD CRAVINGS
Elsewhere in this book, we have talked about specific appetites. For example, salt 
appetite is well documented and is triggered initially by a physiological need for 
sodium. However, most of the substances that we crave are not specific molecules; for 
example, it would sound odd to say, “I really need some tryptophan today.” Further, 
craved foods are rarely single macronutrients (e.g., pure sugar), but are instead spe￾cific food commodities that are mixtures of many ingredients. So, a critical question 
is whether or not cravings for specific commodities have an underlying need basis. 
Surveys indicate that most people experience cravings – about 70% of young men and 
nearly 100% of young women (Weingarten & Elston, 1991). Cravings vary in inten￾sity but are typically characterized by a strong desire for a particular food. Often, but 
certainly not always, cravings are followed by the consumption of the desired food. 
The availability or proximity of the commodity and/or an individual’s level of dietary 150 Mood and Food, Cravings, and Addiction
restraint contribute largely to whether or not the food will be consumed, but typic￾ally the craving is satisfied only by consumption of the craved food item. Physiological 
hunger is not a necessary precondition for food craving. Often, foods craved and 
consumed (or overconsumed) are high in carbohydrate and fat and are neither essen￾tial nor high in nutritional quality (e.g., chocolate is the most frequently craved food 
in Western society [Hallam et al., 2016]). In contrast, when we are physiologically 
hungry, we tend to desire more nutritious and savory-tasting foods, such as a pasta 
dish, a turkey sandwich, or steak and potatoes. And, when truly hungry, we are more 
accepting of a variety of foods.
One group of researchers (Pelchat & Schaefer, 2000) found that participants on 
a monotonous but nutritionally complete diet for several days had large increases 
in cravings. (They consumed a nutritional supplement beverage and water only.) 
This further supports that food craving and unhealthy snacking are not necessarily 
due to hunger or nutritional need. Rather, mood and desire for dietary variety have 
more documented links with cravings than with physiological hunger. Cravings are 
also influenced by age (they decrease with advanced age), culture, and hormone 
fluctuations (particularly among women; Hallam et al., 2016; Pelchat, 1997; Zellner 
et al., 1999).
Craving-related eating, particularly when it occurs frequently, increases the risk of 
binge eating, which in turn is associated with bulimia nervosa, binge eating disorder, and 
obesity. The pattern of craving, consuming, overconsuming, feeling good, then feeling 
guilty, leading to repetition of the cycle is similar to that seen among drug abusers. Drug 
and food cravings can both be powerfully triggered by exposure to associated stimuli 
(e.g., sight of drug paraphernalia or a candy bar wrapper). The shared neurobiology 
involved in food craving and drug abuse is discussed later in this chapter.
Is Chocolate Special?
Many desired and craved snacks contain chocolate, which is carbohydrate (sugar) dense 
but also contains fat and protein and some bioactive ingredients and micronutrients. In 
light of the fact that chocolate is the most craved food in Western society (Zellner et al., 
1999), two questions have arisen: Is chocolate special, and, if so, why? Some researchers 
believe that the bioactive substances in chocolate (specifically in cocoa, a major ingredient 
in chocolate) trigger a mood-enhancing release of neurotransmitters within the brain. 
Among the proposed mood-elevating, and possibly addictive, substances are caffeine (a 
stimulant), theobromine (structurally similar to caffeine but with a far lower stimulating 
effect), anandamide (binds pleasure-inducing cannabinoid receptors), phenylethylamine 
(similar to amphetamine, triggers dopamine activity within the brain reward pathway), 
and tryptophan (increases serotonin synthesis).
In a study of chocolate craving (Michener & Rozin, 1994), self-identified chocolate 
cravers were given five small sealed boxes that appeared identical but, in fact, each 
contained a different item: Milk chocolate, white chocolate (similar in texture to milk 
chocolate, but without the bioactive substances found in cocoa), cocoa capsules (these 
have the bioactive ingredients but none of the sensory aspects of chocolate), placebo 
capsules, or nothing. Participants were told to open one box at random whenever they 
craved chocolate and consume the contents. (Which box would you hope to open if 
you were a participant?) They were asked to rate perceived intensity of the chocolate 
cravings before and 90 minutes after eating the contents. The results showed that only Mood and Food, Cravings, and Addiction 151
milk chocolate consumption reduced the craving for chocolate. The finding that cocoa 
alone did not reduce craving indicates that the bioactive substances have little or no 
role in chocolate craving (i.e., no specific biological deficit caused the craving, the alle￾viation of which reduced craving). In fact, participants preferred the white chocolate to 
the cocoa capsules, indicating that the taste, smell, and additional sensory components 
of chocolate consumption are more important than bioactive ingredients. Additional 
evidence against the role of chemical-enhancement as the basis for chocolate craving or 
addiction comes from food-use studies that show that dark chocolate (which contains 
the highest amounts of cocoa and, thus, the highest levels of the bioactive substances) 
is less preferred and less consumed than either milk chocolate or chocolate-coated 
sweets that contain lesser amounts of the chemicals. (Try eating baker’s chocolate – just 
awful!) Furthermore, the amounts of the bioactive compounds mentioned previously 
that actually cross the blood–brain barrier and have any effect within the brain are likely 
very small.
IMAGE 10.5 This boy is eyeing some 
tasty food
Talking Point 10.4 Do You Crave?
Do you ever experience food cravings? Which foods do you most often crave? Do 
your cravings occur more often when you are alone or in social situations? Does time 
of day contribute? Do you typically consume the foods that you crave?
There could be other bioactive ingredients in chocolate that make it special. For 
example, chocolate contains significant amounts of riboflavin (vitamin B2
), magne￾sium, and antioxidants, all of which enhance health. Perhaps deficiencies of these 
vitamins and minerals contribute to chocolate craving. For example, women tend to 
have increased cravings for chocolate when experiencing premenstrual syndrome, 
a time associated with reduced levels of magnesium (Bruinsma & Taren, 1999). 
However, many infrequently craved foods contain much higher amounts of magne￾sium (including barley, spinach, and pumpkin seeds). And riboflavin deficiency is an 
unlikely explanation for chocolate craving because riboflavin concentrations in choc￾olate are some 20-fold lower than they are in less preferred foods such as liver. So, 
despite some possible health benefits of chocolate, these are implausible as the basis 
for chocolate craving.
Chocolate, especially milk chocolate, has an appealing taste, smell, and creamy 
texture. It seems that the pleasurable orosensory (i.e., smell and mouth feel) aspects 152 Mood and Food, Cravings, and Addiction
of chocolate and the innately reinforcing qualities of the macronutrients in choc￾olate (carbohydrate and fat), rather than any particular chemical or micronutrient, 
are the bases for chocolate craving. Exposure to the sight or smell of chocolate can 
trigger intense and difficult-to-ignore cravings, particularly among people who claim 
to be “chocolate lovers” or chocolate cravers. You have probably heard these people 
referred to as “chocoholics,” and maybe you’ve used this term to characterize your 
own affection for chocolate. The idea of chocolate addiction compares the intense 
cravings for chocolate to the cravings drug addicts have for particular substances of 
abuse. In support of this, fMRI studies have revealed that exposure to the sight and/
or taste of chocolate triggers different brain activity for chocolate cravers compared 
with non-cravers (Rolls & McCabe, 2007). Specifically, areas associated with pleasure 
and reward show enhanced activity in the chocolate cravers’ brains, much like drug 
addicts’ brains show increased activity in the same brain regions upon exposure to 
drug paraphernalia (Kühn & Gallinat, 2011; Yokum et al., 2011).
Psychological and Sociocultural Explanations for Chocolate 
Craving
Despite the fact that chocolate is the most frequently craved food, it is not the most 
consumed food. In fact, some people, despite their reported liking of chocolate, refrain 
entirely from eating it or consume it infrequently and/or in small amounts. In Western 
society, chocolate is considered an indulgence and a treat. It is often given as a gift. 
Perhaps the belief that chocolate is “nice but naughty” actually makes it more desired.
In evolutionary terms, the availability of chocolate is a recent event for most of the 
world’s population. The first record of cultivation of cacao dates from Aztec civilizations, 
and it was imported into Europe by the conquistadors (Poelmans & Swinnen, 2016). 
Cacao itself is bitter, and the word chocolate derives from the Nahuatl words for “bitter 
drink.” The addition of sugar and milk enhances the orosensory and mouth feel of choc￾olate in our contemporary culture.
Talking Point 10.5 Is It New?
Do you think that people had food cravings before the global availability of sweet 
chocolate? If so, what food cravings do you think they might have had?
CAN SOMEONE ACTUALLY BE A FOOD ADDICT?
The mood–food connection is well supported by both anecdotal and empirical evi￾dence. Perhaps, extending the idea, some people actually self-medicate using tasty food 
to improve mood and become dependent on certain foods to feel good. This is the cycle 
in which drug addicts find themselves: Intense cravings and need for the drug in order 
to function and feel normal or good. Addiction is also associated with uncontrolled con￾sumption. Is it plausible that certain foods can be addictive like cocaine, heroin, and nico￾tine can be? One problem with this line of thinking is that we all need food to survive, Mood and Food, Cravings, and Addiction 153
but we do not need recreational drugs. Another caveat is that we are all exposed to food 
(we all consume food from the day that we are born), whereas not everyone ingests rec￾reational drugs. So, if food can be problematically addictive, why doesn’t everyone suffer 
in this way? There are two ways to think about this. The first is that only some individuals 
are genetically and physiologically predisposed to become food addicts. Another way is 
to consider that we are all predisposed, but some of us have mechanisms and strategies 
to resist food; this is referred to as dietary restraint.
People with high levels of restraint can resist the temptation to consume delicious 
looking and smelling foods (e.g., freshly baked cookies) despite their liking of such food. 
Conversely, people with low restraint are unable to resist similar temptations, regardless 
of a possible desire to avoid unhealthy foods, and are more likely to consume more than 
intended (Lawson et al., 1995). Many factors contribute to the different levels of dietary 
restraint that people have, including a desire to lose weight or maintain a healthy weight, 
gender (men generally exhibit more restraint than women [Hallam et al., 2016], religion 
(e.g., fasting during the days of Ramadan or giving up a favorite food for Lent), ethics 
(e.g., many vegans and vegetarians refrain from eating meat because of a personal con￾viction that animal consumption and/or poor treatment of animals is unethical), and for 
other health-related issues (e.g., avoiding high-sodium foods in an effort to lower blood 
pressure). An individual’s personality also contributes; people with impulsive personal￾ities typically have lower levels of dietary restraint. As discussed in other chapters, low 
dietary restraint can result in overeating and obesity, as with binge eating disorder (Van 
Strien & Van de Laar, 2008); however, high restraint is often associated with the eating 
disorder anorexia nervosa (Bulik et al., 2000).
BOX 10.1
“Junk food” is generally defined as food and beverages that are:
• Highly palatable to that individual.
• Usually low in protein and nutrients and high in refined sugar, fat, and salt.
• High in overall caloric density and can be consumed rapidly.
• Sometimes consumed within meals but often as snacks; often from fast food 
providers.
• Highly processed, containing added chemicals, preservatives, and artificial 
ingredients.
• Over time, likely to induce weight gain and metabolic disorders.
• Associated with compulsion-like consumption that has some characteristics of 
substance abuse.
Sources: Johnson & Kenny (2010); Smith (2006).
Our current food environment is quite different from that of our ancestors, with pal￾atable and energy-dense foods easily available. Some evidence supports a link between 
our obesogenic environment and food addiction. People with low dietary restraint have a 154 Mood and Food, Cravings, and Addiction
more difficult time resisting the temptation of overconsuming appealing food in today’s 
food environment, but perhaps they would be able to resist bland food. To examine that 
idea using an animal study, Johnson and Kenny (2010) compared the consumption of 
nutritionally complete, but monotonous, rat chow with that of a palatable “junk food” diet 
(refer to our definition of this diet). Johnson and Kenny selected tasty, well-liked food from 
their school cafeteria, including bacon, sausage, pound cake, frosting, and cheesecake, as 
their junk food diet. Their experiment had three conditions: One group of rats was given 
rat chow ad libitum plus extended (nearly unlimited) access to the junk food diet; another 
group of rats had rat chow ad libitum with one hour of access to the junk food diet; and 
the control group had rat chow ad libitum only. After 40 days of the assigned diet, the 
rats experienced foot shock in the presence of a particular light stimulus, thus quickly 
developing a conditioned fear of the light. On test day, all rats had access to the junk food 
diet and all demonstrated interest in the food. However, the presence of the feared light 
stimulus, no longer paired with a foot shock, suppressed eating of the junk food in the 
control and one-hour-access groups but not in the extended-access group. It is interesting 
that, even in a sated (not hungry) state, the junk food-fed rats had such an apparent liking 
of highly palatable food that they were willing to risk experiencing the unpleasant foot 
shock. Drug-addicted rats similarly lever press for injections of particular drugs even in 
the presence of cues associated with punishment.
IMAGE 10.6 Rats show evidence of junk food 
addiction
Talking Point 10.6 What Lengths?
Have you ever gone to great lengths to obtain any of the types of foods in the junk 
food diet that the rats were so fond of? Perhaps a late night or early morning trip 
across town for pancakes and bacon? Maybe a special outing for ice cream? Do 
you think these behaviors support the idea that palatable foods can be addictive? 
Why or why not?Mood and Food, Cravings, and Addiction 155
The rats on the junk food diet in the Johnson and Kenny (2010) study gained twice the 
weight of the rats in the other two conditions; they apparently enjoyed our Western diet! 
They also showed behavioral and biological markers that characterize drug addiction 
(discussed later). They were willing to risk an aversive stimulus to get the junk food and 
routinely ate far more calories than the control rats when given the palatable food, but 
not when given regular chow. These findings parallel data from human studies indicating 
that obese individuals (compared with lean individuals) have more intense cravings for 
palatable high-energy foods and demonstrate reduced restraint when exposed to these 
foods (Stice et al., 2008). In the Johnson and Kenny study, rats were not “addicted” to 
the junk food diet right from the start. It was not until they had been exposed to it 
for some time that these characteristics of addiction became apparent. All rats tested 
in the extended-access group showed signs of addiction, and, although they were all 
from a similar genetic background, the evidence suggests that the addiction is a result 
of environmental exposure more than biological predisposition. Further, the abundance 
of vending machines, other commercial devices, and delivery services at workplaces and 
certainly on college campuses enables convenient impulsive and compulsive eating of 
junk food.
NEUROBIOLOGY OF FOOD ADDICTION
Interest in brain reward circuitry stems from the finding in the 1950s by Olds and 
Milner (1954) that rats will lever press for intracranial brain stimulation in lieu of 
food, water, or sleep. The mesolimbic dopamine system (Figure 10.1), including the 
ventral tegmental area (VTA), nucleus accumbens, and several cortical regions, and the 
endogenous opioid system are particularly associated with reward and pleasure (see 
also Chapter 6). Exposure to pleasurable stimuli, such as food, water, sex, drugs, roller 
coaster rides, and so on, activates brain “reward” circuitry, reinforcing our experiences 
and leading us to want to repeat them. These mechanisms presumably evolved so that 
our ancestors would enjoy food, water, and sex enough that they would seek them 
out, despite the risks and efforts required, for survival. The pathways, though, did not 
evolve so that we would enjoy, and possibly become addicted to, drugs or so that we 
would stand in line again and again to repeat the ride on a thrilling roller coaster. 
Drugs of abuse, in particular, can be considered super-stimuli, activating our reward 
pathways more powerfully than do naturally reinforcing stimuli. Recent evidence (e.g., 
Avena et al., 2012; Fletcher & Kenny, 2018; Johnson & Kenny, 2010) indicates that the 
extremely palatable food in our environment may also be a super-stimulus. This could 
explain the addiction-like behaviors and neurobiological changes of the junk food￾fed rats and, perhaps, the overconsumption of energy-dense food by many people in 
Western culture.156 Mood and Food, Cravings, and Addiction
FIGURE 10.1 The mesolimbic dopamine system
Reports of people feeling unable to resist sweet snacks or people experiencing a 
depressed mood when they are deprived of the palatable food they are accustomed 
to consuming at a particular time every day are well established. These symptoms –
compulsion to consume the palatable food and mood change or withdrawal when the 
craved food is not consumed – resemble the symptoms of drug addiction. Dr. Bart 
Hoebel of Princeton University and colleagues were among the first to formally pro￾pose the idea of sugar addiction, at least in rats. They found that rats intermittently 
fed sugar demonstrated the hallmark signs of addiction, including withdrawal, bingeing 
when receiving access, craving, and increased interest in other drugs (cross-sensitization; 
Avena et al., 2008). It has also been demonstrated that rats will lever press for sac￾charin over cocaine, suggesting that the sweet taste is a very powerful reinforcer (Lenoir 
et al., 2007). The junk food diet study by Johnson and Kenny further supports these 
claims. We recommend Koob and Volkow (2016) for a thorough review of research 
surrounding the neurobiology of obesity and drug addiction. The following is an over￾view of some key findings on the neural mechanisms that could underlie sugar or pal￾atable food addiction.
Dopamine System
Dopamine release from nerve terminals in the nucleus accumbens (NAc) upon 
exposure to sugar and other palatable foods or drugs of abuse has been well 
documented (Kenny, 2011). Each exposure to sugar or addictive drugs triggers release 
of dopamine in the NAc, and, over time, this leads to changes in the availability or 
function of dopamine receptors. With repeated exposures, drug abusers tend to need 
more of their drug for it to have its initial effect; this is referred to as tolerance. 
Tolerance is explained, in part, by the down-regulation of dopamine receptors and, 
therefore, blunted dopamine activity. Higher doses of a drug are needed in order to 
activate more of the functional dopamine receptors. Perhaps this also happens with 
sugar or palatable food addiction, so that people need to consume increasingly more 
palatable food over time to experience the good, or “comforted,” feeling they recall 
having with that food.Mood and Food, Cravings, and Addiction 157
It would be easy to assume that sugar, because it is associated with calories, is innately 
reinforcing and consequently always triggers dopamine release. However, modifications 
to the neurobiological response can be made based on postingestive consequences. For 
example, dopamine activity within the NAc increases when rats ingest a sweet-tasting 
saccharin solution (an innately liked taste) for the first time. However, in rats with a 
conditioned taste aversion to saccharin produced by pairing nausea-producing lithium 
chloride injections with saccharin ingestion, dopamine activity is reduced when they 
are given oral saccharin infusions (Mark et al., 1991). (Note that they will actively avoid 
drinking saccharin; hence, the oral infusion is used to expose them to the taste for a suf￾ficient period for the dopamine measurements. Rats with a conditioned aversion will 
actively reject – the rat equivalent of spitting out – saccharin during this test.) Further, 
dopamine release after a positive association has been made with sugar, palatable food, 
or addictive drug is actually higher on anticipation of its delivery than on the actual 
receipt of it (Pelchat et al., 2004; Volkow et al., 2003; Weltens et al., 2014). So, although 
dopamine is released initially in response to a pleasurable or rewarding stimulus, after 
conditioning, its release is shaped by learned expectations about the consequences of the 
anticipated stimulus.
The binding of dopamine to its D2 receptor subtype in the striatum, a brain region 
associated with pleasure and motivated behaviors, is elevated by palatable food con￾sumption or addictive drug use. A reduction of D2 receptors in the striatum, sometimes 
referred to as striatal dysfunction, is associated with drug abuse. Some theorists believe 
that this indicates that drug addicts have a blunted “reward” response and thus seek 
drugs as a way to boost their sluggish reward systems (Stice et al., 2010). Similarly, obese 
humans and rats have reduced D2 receptor expression in the striatum. Johnson and 
Kenny (2010) discovered that striatal D2 receptor expression in the junk food diet rats 
was inversely related to weight gain after about 1.5 months on the palatable diet. It seems 
that a decrease in D2 receptors is a response to overactivation of the reward pathway. 
This consequently leads to increased desire for activation of the pathway through pleas￾urable stimuli such as palatable food or addictive drugs.
Interestingly, despite the reduction in striatal D2 receptors, the brains of obese individ￾uals show enhanced striatal activity in response to food cues (Ferrario, 2017; Stice et al., 
2010). Some researchers believe that obese people have heightened activity associated 
with anticipated food reward, but a decreased activity in response to the actual receipt 
of food. This could underlie intense food craving and wanting, but blunted satisfaction 
on consuming the desired food, and a continued feeling of wanting more. Although 
we do not yet know if changes in the human brain precede obesity or are a result of 
obesity, the results of the study by Johnson and Kenny, among others, suggest that it is 
the latter: Overconsumption, particularly of palatable food, reduces dopamine activity 
within the striatum eliciting an increased yearning for more palatable food.
Endogenous Opioid System
Activity of the endogenous opioid system is associated with pleasurable stimuli, including 
addictive drug ingestion. Opioid drugs, including heroin, morphine, and oxycontin, work 
as direct agonists of the opioid system by binding and activating endogenous opioid 
receptors. Other drugs of abuse activate the system indirectly, but also powerfully. For 
example, drugs such as alcohol, nicotine (in cigarettes), and cocaine activate other neuro￾transmitter systems directly, but trigger indirect activity of the opioid system. We know 
this because opioid antagonist drugs can effectively reduce alcohol, cigarette, and cocaine 158 Mood and Food, Cravings, and Addiction
use by addicts, seemingly because the drugs are no longer as pleasurable when activity of 
the opioid system is blocked.
Certainly, consumption of sweet and palatable food is pleasurable, and so the opioid 
system is likely involved. Naloxone and naltrexone, two opioid receptor blockers used 
in drug addiction research and therapy, reduce the hedonic ratings of sweet and palat￾able tastes and smells and can reduce binge consumption associated with binge eating 
disorders (Drewnowski et al., 1995). Naloxone, in particular, has been shown to reduce 
sugar consumption in rats conditioned to receive sugar following a cue (Grimm et al., 
2007). The opioid blocker seems to negate the sugar craving induced by the conditioned 
stimulus. Further, injections of an opioid receptor stimulant (DAMGO) into the nucleus 
accumbens of rats have been shown to increase consumption of palatable solutions 
(water with sucrose, saccharin, or salt) but not water alone (Zhang & Kelley, 1997, 
2002). The endogenous opioid system seems to be involved in selective preferences for 
palatable tastes and, perhaps, palatable food addiction and overconsumption (Smith & 
Robbins, 2013).
BOX 10.2 DOES WEIGHT AFFECT BRAIN REACTIVITY TO 
FOOD CUES?
Stice and colleagues (2008) conducted an fMRI study to assess brain activity 
associated with anticipation compared with receipt of a palatable food by obese and 
lean adolescent girls. Particular cues preceded the delivery of a palatable chocolate 
milkshake, a tasteless solution, or nothing while the girls were in the MRI scanner. 
When anticipating and receiving the “rewarding” taste of the milkshake, obese girls 
(compared with lean girls) showed greater activation in areas of the cortex associated 
with food taste, reward, and craving, including the gustatory cortex, insular cortex, 
and anterior cingulate cortex. The researchers also found that BMI was inversely 
correlated with activity in the caudate (a part of the striatum) in response to food 
consumption. These findings support the theory that food “wanting” is enhanced 
with increased body weight, but enjoyment or satisfaction on food consumption 
is inversely correlated with weight. In another fMRI study, the activity in reward￾associated brain regions was modulated by the label of the palatable food. Brain 
activation was higher with anticipation of the regular milkshake than with anticipa￾tion of the milkshake labeled “low fat,” supporting the idea that obese individuals 
are more responsive to external food cues such as anticipated palatability (Ng et al., 
2011). Further, this enhanced activation of the reward pathway hinders the ability 
to restrain and lose weight.
Orexin System
An increasing amount of evidence indicates a role of the orexin (a peptide also known 
as hypocretin) system in drug abuse and palatable food consumption (Aston-Jones 
et al., 2010). Orexin receptors have been found in the hypothalamus (associated with 
maintaining homeostasis and motivation) and mesolimbic regions (associated with Mood and Food, Cravings, and Addiction 159
reward). Orexin signaling seems to modulate dopamine activity within the mesolimbic 
region, enhancing the reward produced by pleasurable stimuli and increasing the motiv￾ation to seek out such stimulation. However, orexin antagonists do not block food￾deprived rats’ consumption of chow, indicating that orexin activity is involved in hedonic 
food consumption and drug use but not hunger-induced food consumption (Choi 
et al., 2010).
Direct administration of orexin into rat brains triggers selective eating of palat￾able high-fat food. Findings also indicate that, when rats are conditioned to receive 
palatable food, such as chocolate, at regular intervals or on particular cues, orexin 
signaling increases when rats “expect” the treat. Additionally, orexin antagonists have 
been shown to reduce impulsivity, a problem associated with drug abuse and binge 
eating. Orexin activity, thus, seems to facilitate eating for pleasure rather than for 
physiological need, which can drive overconsumption of high-fat and high-calorie 
palatable foods.
Cannabinoids
Marijuana smoking has, for centuries, been linked with increased food consumption, par￾ticularly of snack or junk food. Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the psychoactive substance 
in marijuana, activates the cannabinoid system, stimulating hunger for and palatability of 
hedonic foods. Much of the information about marijuana and increased hunger and eating 
has been in the form of anecdotal reports from marijuana users. However, in the 1990s, 
researchers discovered that THC administration in rats and mice triggered hyperphagia, 
and that blockage of the cannabinoid system prevented the overconsumption. This 
empirical evidence of the hyperphagic effects of cannabinoid stimulation led to attempts 
to better understand its role in eating behavior and possibilities of the use of antagonist 
drugs for the treatment of obesity.
THC and other cannabinoids work by binding endogenous cannabinoid receptors 
(primarily the CB1 receptor subtype) in the brain and periphery. Cannabinoid receptors 
have been found in areas of the brain associated with eating regulation and motiv￾ation (e.g., regions of the hypothalamus), areas associated with reward or pleasure 
(e.g., nucleus accumbens), and peripheral regions involved in digestion (e.g., intestines; 
Kirkham, 2009). Researchers realized that, if endogenous receptors exist, there must 
be some natural chemicals within the body that bind to them. This awareness led to 
the discovery of endocannabinoids, the brain’s endogenous THC-like neurotransmitters. 
Endocannabinoid release is activated by pleasurable experiences, and this neural activity 
enhances their hedonic value. This system apparently works in conjunction with the 
orexin, dopamine, and opioid systems within the hypothalamic and reward pathways of 
the brain to additively enhance reward associated with palatable food consumption and 
the memories associated with such consumption. Endocannabinoids seem to play a role 
in appetite stimulation and motivation to seek out and consume food, particularly palat￾able food (Abel, 1975; Foltin et al., 1988).
Recent evidence helps explain the “munchies” (selective eating of high-energy snack 
foods) associated with marijuana use. Antagonists of this system effectively result in 
reduced eating and weight loss in humans and animals. However, cannabinoid antag￾onist drugs are currently not used as weight loss medication because they are associated 
with an increased risk for depression (Izzo & Sharkey, 2010). There is, however, current 
exploration of the effects of targeting cannabinoid receptors in the periphery (specifically 160 Mood and Food, Cravings, and Addiction
in the intestines) to facilitate weight loss without the adverse psychological effects (Behl 
et al., 2021).
CONCLUDING REMARKS
The concept of “food addiction” is supported by a growing number of studies, including 
anecdotal human reports and empirical human and animal evidence. Many overweight 
people claim that their favorite foods are too irresistible, and this issue likely underlies 
the failure of many diet or weight loss efforts. In the documentary film Super Size Me
(2004), Morgan Spurlock exclusively consumed food from fast-food restaurants for 
30 days in an effort to explore the health risks, if any, of frequent consumption of heavily 
processed foods high in carbohydrate and fat (e.g., soda, cheese-burgers, French fries, and 
milkshakes). He gained a large amount of weight (about 25 lbs) in a very short period of 
time, which is perhaps not surprising considering his significant increase in daily energy 
consumption. More surprising to Spurlock, and of interest to us, were his reported mood 
swings, depression, and lethargy while on the fast-food diet. Further, his depressed mood 
was relieved by the consumption of his palatable and energy-dense meals. His cycle of 
craving, bingeing, and having associated mood swings is consistent with that described by 
drug addicts. Anecdotal reports such as Spurlock’s support the notion that food can have 
profound effects on mood and can have addictive-like qualities.
Recent fMRI studies indicate that brain regions associated with taste and pleasure are 
more intensely activated in obese compared with lean people when they are exposed 
to food cues (e.g., Gearhardt et al., 2011). This is consistent with evidence showing 
that drug addicts have increased activity in pleasure-associated regions when exposed 
to cues such as pictures of drug paraphernalia. As previously discussed in this chapter, 
other behavioral and biological markers are similar for drug addicts and obese people 
or animals (perhaps “food addicts”). The neural mechanisms that underlie food liking 
and craving and the motivation to seek out and consume food are consistent with those 
that underlie drug abuse. It seems that the palatable high-energy foods so prevalent in 
our society overactivate reward pathways, resulting in neurophysiological and behavioral 
symptoms of addiction. Importantly, the addiction model of overeating is likely an insuf￾ficient explanation of the complex reasons for disordered or unhealthy eating behaviors 
among our diverse population; however, the parallels between addiction to drugs and 
overconsumption of palatable foods warrant consideration and continued investigation, 
particularly regarding treatment for obesity.
QUESTIONS TO ASK YOURSELF
Let’s review and apply your knowledge. Take some time to answer these chapter 
questions:
1 How may serotonin activity impact carbohydrate craving?
2 Describe the impact that stress has on eating behaviors.
3 What is the evidence that cravings are usually not need-based?
4 What are the leading explanations for chocolate cravings?Mood and Food, Cravings, and Addiction 161
5 Provide at least four pieces of evidence supporting the idea that palatable food 
can be addictive.
6 Which neurotransmitter systems seem to underlie food addiction? What is the 
supporting evidence for their involvement?
7 How does our current food environment impact cravings for comfort or junk 
foods, which can lead to binges (behaviors associated with addiction)?
GLOSSARY
Dietary restraint The extent to which food is resisted.
Dopamine A neurotransmitter associated with reward, 
motivation, and movement.
Endogenous opioid system The brain system involved with pain relief.
Glucocorticoids A class of steroid hormones produced in 
response to stress. In humans, cortisol is the prin￾cipal glucocorticoid.
Hypothalamic–pituitary– The interaction between the hypothalamus, 
adrenal (HPA) axis pituitary gland, and adrenal glands to regulate 
the body’s response to stress.
Insulin A hormone released from the pancreas that 
allows cells to absorb glucose from blood.
Mesolimbic dopamine system A brain pathway extending from the ventral teg￾mental area in the midbrain to forebrain regions 
associated with pleasure and reward.
Nucleus accumbens (NAc) A forebrain region associated with pleasure and 
reward.
Orexin A neurotransmitter involved with appetite and 
arousal.
Serotonin (5-HT) A neurotransmitter involved with mood, appe￾tite, and sleep.
Striatal dysfunction Altered activity of dopamine in the striatum.
Tolerance The reduced effect of a drug after repeated use, 
so that a higher dose is needed for it to have its 
initial effect.
Tryptophan The amino acid from which serotonin is 
synthesized.162 Mood and Food, Cravings, and Addiction
REFERENCES
Abel, E. L. (1975). Cannabis: Effects on hunger and thirst. Behavioral Biology, 15, 152–281.
Aston-Jones, G., Smith, R. J., Sartor, G. C., Moorman, D. E., Massi, L., Tahsili-Fahadan, P., & Richardson, 
K. A. (2010). Lateral hypothalamic orexin/hypocretin neurons: A role in reward-seeking and 
addiction. Brain Research, 1314, 74–90.
Avena, N. M., Gold, J. A., Kroll, C., & Gold, M. S. (2012). Further developments in the neurobiology of 
food and addiction: Update on the state of the science. Nutrition, 28 (4), 341–343.
Avena, N. M., Rada, P., & Hoebel, B. G. (2008). Evidence for sugar addiction: Behavioral and neuro￾chemical effects of intermittent, excessive sugar intake. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 
32, 20–39.
Barrett, B., Muller, D., Rakel, D., Rabago, D., Marchand, L., & Scheder, J. C. (2006). Placebo, meaning, 
and health. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 49 (2), 178–198.
Behl, T., Chadha, S., Sachdeva, M., Sehgal, A., Kumar, A., Venkatachalam, T., Hafeez, A., Aleya, 
L., Arara, S., Batiha, G. E., Nijhawan, P. & Bungau, S. (2021). Understanding the possible role of 
endocannabinoid system in obesity. Prostaglandins & Other Lipid Mediators, 152, 106520–106534.
Bruinsma, K., & Taren, D. L. (1999). Chocolate: Food or drug? Journal of the American Dietetic 
Association, 99 (10), 1249–1256.
Bulik, C. M., Sullivan, P. F., Fear, J. L., & Pickering, A. (2000). Outcome of anorexia nervosa: Eating 
attitudes, personality, and parental bonding. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 28 (2), 
139–147.
Cantor, M. B., Smith, S. E., & Bryan, B. R. (1982). Induced bad habits: Adjunctive ingestion and grooming 
in human subjects. Appetite, 3, 1–12.
Choi, D. L., Davis, J. F., Fitzgerald, M. E., & Benoit, S. C. (2010). The role of orexin-a in food motiv￾ation, reward-based feeding behavior and food-induced neuronal activation in rats. Neuroscience, 
167, 11–20.
Corsica, J. A., & Spring, B. J. (2008). Carbohydrate craving: A double-blind, placebo-controlled test of 
the self-medication hypothesis. Eating Behaviors, 9 (4), 447–454.
Dallman, M. F. (2010). Stress-induced obesity and the emotional nervous system. Trends in Endocrinology 
and Metabolism, 21 (3), 159–165.
Dallman, M. F., Pecoraro, N. C., & la Fleur, S. E. (2005). Chronic stress and comfort foods: Self￾medication and abdominal obesity. Brain, Behavior, & Immunity, 19 (4), 275–280.
Drewnowski, A., Krahn, D. D., Demitrack, M. A., Nairn, K., & Gosnell, B. A. (1995). Naloxone, an 
opiate blocker, reduces the consumption of sweet high-fat foods in obese and lean female binge 
eaters. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 61 (6), 1206–1212.
Ferrario, C. R. (2017). Food addiction and obesity. Neuropsychopharmacology, 42 (1), 360–361.
Fletcher, P. C., & Kenny, P. J. (2018). Food addiction: A valid concept? Neuropsychopharmacology, 43
(13), 2506–2513.
Foltin, R. W., Fischman, M. W., & Byrne, M. F. (1988). Effects of smoked marijuana on food intake and 
body weight of humans living in a residential laboratory. Appetite, 11, 1–14.
Foster, M. T., Warne, J. P., Ginsberg, A. B., Horneman, H. F., Pecoraro, N. C., Akana, S. F., & 
Dallman, M. F. (2009). Palatable foods, stress, and energy stores sculpt corticotropin-releasing 
factor, adrenocorticotropin, and corticosterone concentrations after restraint. Endocrinology, 150
(5), 2325–2333.
Gearhardt, A. N., Yokum, S., Orr, P. T., Stice, E., Corbin, W. R., & Brownell, K. D. (2011). Neural 
correlates of food addiction. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68 (8), 808–816.
Gibson, E. L. (2006). Emotional influences on food choice: Sensory, physiological and psychological 
pathways. Physiology and Behavior, 89, 53–61.
Grimm, J. W., Manaois, M., Osincup, D., Wells, B., & Buse, C. (2007). Naloxone attenuates incubated 
sucrose craving in rats. Psychopharmacology, 194 (4), 537–544.
Hallam, J., Boswell, R. G., DeVito, E. E., & Kober, H. (2016). Focus: Sex and gender health: Gender￾related differences in food craving and obesity. The Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine, 89 (2), 
161–173.Mood and Food, Cravings, and Addiction 163
Izzo, A. A., & Sharkey, K. A. (2010). Cannabinoids and the gut: New developments and emerging 
concepts. Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 126, 21–38.
Johnson, P. M., & Kenny, P. J. (2010). Dopamine D2 in addiction-like reward dysfunction and compulsive 
eating in obese rats. Nature Neuroscience, 13, 635–641.
Kenny, P. (2011). Common cellular and molecular mechanisms in obesity and drug addiction. Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience, 12, 6538–6651.
Kirkham, T. C. (2009). Cannabinoids and appetite: Food craving and food pleasure. International 
Review of Psychiatry, 21, 163–171.
Koob, G. F., & Volkow, N. D. (2016). Neurobiology of addiction: A neurocircuitry analysis. The Lancet 
Psychiatry, 3 (8), 760–773.
Kühn, S., & Gallinat, J. (2011). Common biology of craving across legal and illegal drugs – a quan￾titative meta-analysis of cue-reactivity brain response. European Journal of Neuroscience, 33 (7), 
1318–1326.
Lawson, O. J., Williamson, D. A., Champagne, C. M., DeLany, J. P., Brooks, E. R., Howat, P. M., & Ryan, 
D. H. (1995). The association of body weight, dietary intake, and energy expenditure with dietary 
restraint and disinhibition. Obesity Research, 3 (2), 153–161.
Lenoir, M., Serre, F., Cantin, L., & Ahmed, S. H. (2007). Intense sweetness surpasses cocaine reward. 
PLoS ONE, 2 (8), 1–10. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000698
Lieberman, H., Wurtman, J., & Chew, B. (1986). Changes in mood after carbohydrate consumption 
among obese individuals. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 45, 772–778.
Mark, G. P., Blander, D. S., & Hoebel, B. G. (1991). A conditioned stimulus decreases extracellular dopa￾mine in the nucleus accumbens after the development of a learned taste aversion. Brain Research, 
551 (1), 308–310.
Michener, W., & Rozin, P. (1994). Pharmacological versus sensory factors in the satiation of chocolate 
craving. Physiology & Behavior, 56 (3), 419–422.
Ng, J., Stice, E., Yokum, S., & Bohon, C. (2011). An fMRI study of obesity, food reward, and perceived cal￾oric density. Does a low-fat label make food less appealing? Appetite, 57 (1), 65–72. doi:10.1016/
j.appet.2011.03.017
Olds, J., & Milner, P. (1954). Positive reinforcement produced by electrical stimulation of septal 
area and other regions of rat brain. Journal of Comparative Physiological Psychology, 47 (6), 
419–427.
Oliver, G., & Wardle, J. (1999). Perceived effects of stress on food choice. Physiology & Behavior, 66
(3), 511–515.
Parsey, R. V., Oquendo, M. A., Ogden, R. T., Olvet, M., Simpson, N., Huang, Y. Y., & Mann, J. J. (2006). 
Altered serotonin 1A binding in major depression: A [carbonyl-C-11] WAY100635 positron emission 
tomography study. Biological Psychiatry, 59 (2), 106–113.
Pelchat, M. L. (1997). Food cravings in young and elderly adults. Appetite, 28 (2), 103–113.
Pelchat, M. L., Johnson, A., Chan, R., Valdez, J., & Ragland, J. D. (2004). Images of desire: Food-craving 
activation during fMRI. NeuroImage, 23, 1486–1493.
Pelchat, M. L., & Schaefer, S. (2000). Dietary monotony and food cravings in young and elderly adults. 
Physiology & Behavior, 68 (3), 353–359.
Poelmans, E., & Swinnen, J. (2016). A brief economic history of chocolate. In M. P. Squiccuarini & J. 
Swinnen (eds.), The economics of chocolate (pp. 11–42). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rolls, E. T., & McCabe, C. (2007). Enhanced affective brain representations of chocolate in cravers vs. 
non-cravers. European Journal of Neuroscience, 26 (4), 1067–1076.
Smith, A. F. (2006). Encyclopedia of junk food and fast food. Bloomsbury Academic.
Smith, D. G., & Robbins, T. W. (2013). The neurobiological underpinnings of obesity and binge eating: A 
rationale for adopting the food addiction model. Biological Psychiatry, 73 (9), 804–810.
Stice, E., Spoor, S., Bohon, C., Veldhuizen, M., & Small, D. (2008). Relation of reward from food intake 
and anticipated food intake to obesity: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 117, 924–935. doi:10.1037/a0013600
Stice, E., Yokum, S., Blum, K., & Bohon, C. (2010). Weight gain is associated with reduced striatal 
response to palatable food. The Journal of Neuroscience, 30 (39), 13105–13109.164 Mood and Food, Cravings, and Addiction
Van Strien, T., & Van de Laar, F. A. (2008). Intake of energy is best predicted by overeating tendency 
and consumption of fat is best predicted by dietary restraint: A 4-year follow-up of patients with newly 
diagnosed Type 2 diabetes. Appetite, 50 (2), 544–547.
Volkow, N. D., Wang, G. J., Maynard, L., Jayne, M., Fowler, J. S., Zhu, W., … Pappas, N. (2003). Brain 
dopamine is associated with eating behavior in humans. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 
33, 136–142.
Weingarten, H. P., & Elston, D. (1991). Food cravings in a college population. Appetite, 17 (3), 167–175.
Weltens, N., Zhao, D., & Van Oudenhove, L. (2014). Where is the comfort in comfort foods? Mechanisms 
linking fat signaling, reward, and emotion. Neurogastroenterology & Motility, 26 (3), 303–315.
Wurtman, R., & Wurtman, J. (1995). Brain serotonin, carbohydrate craving, obesity, and depression. 
Obesity Research, 3 (4), 477S–480S.
Yokum, S., Ng, J., & Stice, E. (2011). Attentional bias to food images associated with elevated weight 
and future weight gain: An fMRI study. Obesity, 19 (9), 1775–1783.
Zellner, D. A., Garriga-Trillo, A., Rohm, E., Centeno, S., & Parker, S. (1999). Food liking and craving: A 
cross-cultural approach. Appetite, 33, 61–70. doi:10.1006/appe.1999.0234
Zellner, D. A., Loaiza, S., Gonzalez, Z., Pita, J., Morales, J., Pecora, D., & Wolf, A. (2006). Food selec￾tion changes under stress. Physiology & Behavior, 87 (4), 789–793.
Zellner, D. A., Saito, S., & Gonzalez, J. (2007). The effect of stress on men’s food selection. Appetite, 
49, 696–699.
Zhang, M., & Kelley, A. E. (1997). Opiate agonists microinjected into the nucleus accumbens enhance 
sucrose drinking in rats. Psychopharmacology, 132 (4), 350–360.
Zhang, M., & Kelley, A. E. (2002). Intake of saccharin, salt, and ethanol solutions is increased by infu￾sion of a mu opioid agonist into the nucleus accumbens. Psychopharmacology, 159 (4), 415–423.DOI: 10.4324/9781032621401-11
CHAPTER 11
Eating Disorders and Treatment
After reading this chapter, you will be able to
• Understand the clinical conditions of anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and 
binge eating disorder.
• Recognize personality and behavioral differences and similarities associated 
with different eating disorders.
• Know the leading biological, psychological, and sociocultural explanations for 
eating disorders.
• Describe the most effective contemporary treatments for eating disorders and 
the issues surrounding treatment.
• Appreciate animal models of eating disorders.
Estimates indicate that between 1% and 3% of the U.S. population (roughly 8 million 
people) suffer with a diagnosed eating disorder, and many more suffer from subclinical 
(less severe) disordered eating (Galmiche et al., 2019; Watson & Bulik, 2013). In com -
parison with the percentage of the population that is overweight or obese (~70%), the 
incidence of these eating disorders may seem low; however, eating disorders are severely 
debilitating and have the highest death rate of any psychiatric illness (Galmiche et al., 
2019; Watson & Bulik, 2013). Further, the frequency of eating disorders is much higher 
among certain groups of people, including college students, actors, models, and athletes 
participating in “appearance sports” (sports with an emphasis on appearance, weight, 
speed, or diet – e.g., dance, gymnastics, swimming, running, and wrestling; Prouty 
et al., 2002; Sundgot-Borgen & Torstveit, 2004; Zucker et al., 1999). The Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual for Mental Health Disorders (5th ed.; DSM-5) provides cri￾teria for the diagnosis of anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa (American Psychiatric 
Association [APA], 2013). The diagnosis of binge eating disorder was added to the 
most recent edition of the DSM and is the most prevalent of all eating disorders 
(Goode et al., 2020).
It is important to bear in mind that the distinction between disordered eating and 
normal eating is often unclear. We all, at times, have “peculiar” eating habits and food 
preferences or aversions. Dieting and being concerned about weight are considered normal 
in our society. So, when does “normal” behavior become “abnormal?” The important 
difference with clinically disordered eating is the extreme persistence regarding ritual￾istic or restrained eating behaviors, and this is associated with particular personality types 166 Eating Disorders and Treatment
and ways of thinking. In this chapter, we discuss the symptoms associated with anorexia 
nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge eating disorder, risk factors, leading explanations for 
these disorders, and best current treatments.
ANOREXIA NERVOSA
Anorexia nervosa (AN) is characterized by extreme thinness and a desire to lose weight 
or maintain an abnormally low weight. According to the DSM-5 criteria (see Table
11.1), a diagnosis of AN can be made if an individual is considerably underweight and 
fears gaining weight; thus, the diagnosis does not apply to sufferers of metabolic disorders 
or other illnesses that cause weight loss if those individuals hope to return to a healthy 
weight. The psychology and distorted body image associated with AN are significant 
aspects of the illness and its diagnosis (APA, 2013).
TABLE 11.1 DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for anorexia nervosa
1 Restriction of food intake leading to significantly low body weight.
2 Intense fear of gaining weight.
3 Disturbed body perception and/or denial of the seriousness of the current low weight.
Source: Adapted from APA (2013).
BOX 11.1 HOW CAN BODY PERCEPTION BE MEASURED?
Several techniques have been used by different groups of researchers to assess 
perceived body size. Results of these studies consistently indicate that people 
with AN overestimate their body size and are more dissatisfied with their body 
size compared with peers without eating disorders (e.g., Farrell et al., 2005). In 
one such study, photographed images of the participants were projected in front 
of them adjacent to a full-length mirror, allowing them to simultaneously see their 
actual reflection (Shafran & Fairburn, 2002). The participants were asked to have 
the experimenters adjust the projected image until it matched what they saw in the 
mirror. The participants with eating disorders significantly overestimated their body 
size compared with those without eating disorders. This study was one of the first 
to allow the participants to actually see their own reflection as they estimated body 
size; most studies require participants to recall their size from memory.
Katie
When Katie started high school, kids occasionally teased her about being “chubby,” and 
a friend suggested that she would probably be more popular if she lost a little weight. Eating Disorders and Treatment 167
She decided to cut out desserts and candy from her diet in hopes of shedding a few 
pounds. After several months of dieting and increasing her exercise, she started receiving 
compliments from friends and family members. Her mom proudly took her out shopping 
for some cute new clothes, and the boy she had a crush on asked her out. Liking her 
success, Katie eliminated bread and meat from her diet. She also increased her exercise 
regimen from every other day to every day. Within two years, the compliments turned to 
looks of concern. Katie, 5ʹ 4ʺ in height, now weighed 95 lbs. (Weights between 110 and 
145 lbs are considered healthy for someone of her height [Division of Nutrition, Physical 
Activity, and Obesity, National Center for Chronic Disease, 2011].) She was an excel￾lent student, made straight As, and thought she looked great, although she believed she 
could look better if she lost a little more weight. Katie assumed the people questioning 
her weight and health were just jealous of her looks and ability to control her diet so 
well. Her parents became concerned about her shrinking appearance and her obsession 
with her exercise regimen, but they assumed she was going through a teenage girl “phase” 
and would soon return to normal eating habits. However, when she visited her family 
physician for an annual check-up, she was asked about her menstrual cycle. Katie hap￾pily answered that she hadn’t had a period in more than a year. Her physician realized 
that Katie’s low weight, denial of its seriousness, amenorrhea (cessation of menses), and 
refusal to gain weight were symptoms of anorexia nervosa. Her parents were consulted, 
and she spent the next three months in an inpatient facility focused on helping her 
restore weight and develop healthier eating habits and body image. We will return to 
Katie’s story a little later in this chapter.
Katie’s story is typical of how many eating disorders begin – with an effort to lose 
some weight. AN has an average age of onset between 14 and 18 years, a time of hor￾monal fluctuation and heightened social pressures (APA, 2000). Individuals with AN 
are often characterized as perfectionists and are usually competitive and high achieving. 
They view their weight loss as success and become fixated on losing more weight and 
being the “thinnest” person in their peer group. Frequently, as with Katie, their weight 
loss is initially met with praise and reinforcement. Thus, severe calorie restriction, meal 
rituals, and excessive exercise become obsessions. They hold distorted thoughts about 
their body size and appearance, usually estimating themselves to be much larger and less 
attractive than they actually are (Farrell et al., 2005).
Two patterns are associated with AN: The restricting type is characterized by severe 
and persistent calorie restraint, and the binge eating/purging type involves efforts to 
eliminate consumed food (e.g., self-induced vomiting, excessive exercise, or laxative or 
diuretic misuse). AN is considered the most severe psychological disorder, with 15–20% 
of sufferers dying within 20 years of the onset of their disorder (Arcelus et al., 2011; 
Birmingham et al., 2005; Fichter & Quadflieg, 2016). Suicide and cardiovascular problems 
are the leading causes of death among anorexics (Fichter & Quadflieg, 2016; Herzog 
et al., 2000). As discussed, people with AN are rarely sufficiently pleased with their 
weight or appearance and are severely distressed by issues surrounding food. Anorexics 
often isolate themselves socially: They avoid the unwanted comments or concerned looks 
from friends or family members. Further, people with AN are preoccupied with food 
(reading recipe books, planning and preparing food for others, learning how to disguise 
their minimal intake and food regimens, etc.). So, over time, they withdraw from others, 
which contributes to a sense of loneliness, despair, and self-loathing. Depression and 
anxiety are often co-morbid with AN (Silberg & Bulik, 2005; Swinbourne et al., 2012; 
Watson & Bulik, 2013).168 Eating Disorders and Treatment
Medical Problems Associated with AN
The medical problems associated with AN are consistent with those associated with 
starvation (Katzman, 2005). With energy intake below its needs, the body attempts to 
conserve its resources and preserve its vital functions. Medical consequences include low 
blood pressure, heart rate, and body temperature; amenorrhea (absence of the menstrual 
cycle in females of menstruation age); dry and brittle skin, hair, and nails; and lanugo (fine, 
downy hair normally present on third trimester fetuses) on the face and extremities. The 
reduced body temperature results in heightened sensitivity to cold temperatures, some￾thing anorexics often complain about (Brown et al., 2000).
FIGURE 11.1 Isabelle Caro, a French model and actress, struggled with anorexia and died in 
2010 at age 28 years as a result of medical complications associated with AN. Her picture 
was used as part of an anorexia awareness campaign in Italy and other countries
Source: Los Angeles Times.
Although not required for the diagnosis, amenorrhea is often associated with AN 
owing to a decrease in several hormones, including estrogen (Klibanski et al., 1995; Misra 
& Klibanski, 2016). Estrogen helps support bone density in females; consequently, low 
levels increase the likelihood of early-onset osteoporosis, a disorder associated with bone 
fractures and reduced height. Estrogen disturbances can also result in reproductive dif￾ficulties and infertility. People with AN have increased risks for electrolyte imbalances 
and cardiovascular problems, particularly if vomiting, diuretics, or laxatives are used as 
methods of purging. Cardiac arrest as a result of electrolyte and fluid imbalance can result 
in sudden death. Anorexics also commonly suffer sleep disturbances, perhaps because of 
an imbalance of serotonin (a neurotransmitter associated with the homeostatic regula￾tion of eating and sleep) or a persistent desire to burn calories leading to a need to busy 
themselves even during nighttime hours (Haleem, 2012).
Let’s return to Katie: In the years that followed inpatient treatment, Katie remained 
underweight and continued to use excessive exercise as a means of purging the food she Eating Disorders and Treatment 169
ate. She became increasingly rigid with her eating and exercise routines, isolating herself 
from close relationships with others. Now at age 35, Katie’s thin hair and hunched pos￾ture (a result of early-onset osteoporosis) make her appear much older than she actually 
is. Katie has realized the unfortunate consequences of her years of starving herself, but 
much of the damage is irreversible.
Generally, the more chronic the symptoms of AN, the more resistant people are to 
treatment. The rigid personality, fear of weight gain, and long-term medical consequences 
associated with AN contribute to the difficulties in treating and preventing relapse in this 
population, as with Katie. Thus, early identification and treatment of AN symptoms are 
critical for recovery.
BULIMIA NERVOSA
Bulimia nervosa (BN) is more prevalent than AN, affecting between 1% and 3% of the 
population (AN affects less than 1% of the population; Castillo & Weiselberg, 2017). BN 
is characterized by cycles of food binges and purges (getting rid of the excessive food 
consumed during a binge).
A binge is an excessive amount of food eaten within a limited amount of time (less 
than about two hours; APA, 2013). Binges cause uncomfortable fullness and feelings 
of shame and guilt; thus, purges serve as compensatory behavior. Commonly used pur￾ging methods include: Self-induced vomiting; misusing laxatives, diuretics, or enemas; 
and excessive exercising. The term excessive exercise refers to exercise performed not 
for enjoyment, and not because of participation on a sports team or training for an ath￾letic event, or even for health, but rather as a means of burning off calories recently 
consumed. This type of exercise involves a psychology that differs in key ways from 
exercise performed for enjoyment, health, or sport.
Binges usually occur when the individual is alone and are done secretly. The eating is 
beyond physiological needs, and hunger is not a necessary prerequisite for a binge – psy￾chological factors such as stress, loneliness, or depressed mood can prompt binge eating 
(Mathes et al., 2009). Foods consumed during binges are normally soft textured and require 
little or no chewing (e.g., cookie dough, ice cream, breads and sandwiches, milkshakes, 
juices and sodas, cookies, and cake), are frequently sweet tasting, high in calories and fat 
(Latner & Wilson, 2000), and are considered “forbidden.” Binges usually contain more than 
1,000 calories (often more than 4,000; Heaner & Walsh, 2013; Kaye et al., 1992). In other 
words, in a single “sitting” or bout, one may consume more than the recommended caloric 
intake for an entire day. People with BN describe their binges as numbing, pleasurable, and 
even euphoric. However, the “high” is quickly followed by a “low.” After bingeing, bulimics 
feel guilty, ashamed, and worried about weight gain and often experience self-hatred and 
depression (Hayaki et al., 2002). Bulimics are concerned about their appearance and are 
fearful of gaining weight. Purging helps alleviate the guilt and discomfort associated with 
the out-of-control bingeing and eliminates some of the food consumed, but it also causes 
guilt and shame. Further, because purging empties the stomach, hunger follows, and the 
cycle of binge eating and purging continues (Figure 11.2).
FIGURE 11.2 The cycle associated 
with BN170 Eating Disorders and Treatment
People with BN are typically within 10 lbs of the expected or healthy weight for their 
height. It is often assumed that they should be underweight because purging “undoes” the 
binge; however, purging methods do not allow 100% compensation. Vomiting, for example, 
results in the elimination of only about half of the calories consumed in a binge (Latner & 
Wilson, 2000). Further, recurrent purging disrupts the body’s ability to regulate hunger and 
satiety, leads to more frequent feelings of hunger, and alters the digestion and metabolism 
of food consumed. The diagnosis of BN requires that bingeing and purging behaviors occur 
at least once a week (see Table 11.2), but these behaviors are usually far more frequent; for 
some sufferers, episodes occur more than 30 times per week (Kaye et al., 1992).
Medical Problems Associated with BN
The medical problems associated with BN are generally related to the means of purging. 
People who use forced vomiting as a frequent purging method risk damage to their teeth, 
gums, and esophagus. Gastric acids cause erosion of tooth enamel, making teeth prone to 
cavities and decay. It is not uncommon for a dentist or dental hygienist to be among the 
first to identify symptoms of BN (DeBate et al., 2005). Acids can also cause ulceration of 
the esophagus and swallowing difficulty. Frequent forced vomiting can result in reflexive, 
unwanted vomiting (this is called reverse peristalsis). Misuse of laxatives and diuretics can 
cause kidney damage, bowel control problems, and electrolyte imbalances that can be fatal.
Andrea
Andrea, a bright and ambitious college student, had interests in opera, foreign languages, 
and human rights and a desire to “save the world.” She was fluent in Spanish, was 
studying German, and planned to tackle the Japanese language next. She was an ardent 
supporter of human rights and planned to use her degree in international business and 
politics to improve the lives of others around the world. Andrea was a loving daughter, 
sister, and friend. Unfortunately, she suffered with bulimia nervosa. Her mother beauti￾fully describes her and shares entries from her journals written during high school and 
college in the book Andrea’s Voice (Smeltzer et al., 2006). Andrea’s mood swings, self￾hatred, and frustration elevated during the months she battled bulimia. She wrote in 
her journal about her desire to “win” the battle and described her disappointment and 
resentment when she had setbacks. In one entry, she wrote that she feared she needed 
to cut back on her purging (vomiting) because she was starting to experience reflexive 
vomiting and was unable to keep food down (reverse peristalsis). Despite her tremen￾dous accomplishments in life and promising future, Andrea felt imprisoned by her 
illness, angry at her captor, and alone. Tragically, after a 13-month battle with bulimia, an 
electrolyte imbalance caused her heart to fail, and she died in her sleep at age 19 years.
TABLE 11.2 DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for bulimia nervosa
1 Recurrent episodes of binge eating
2 Recurrent inappropriate purging behavior to prevent weight gain
3 The symptoms occur, on average, at least once a week for three months
4 Inappropriate focus on shape and weight
Source: Adapted from APA (2013).Eating Disorders and Treatment 171
BINGE EATING DISORDER
Binge eating disorder (BED) is associated with large, uncontrolled, recurrent bouts of 
food consumption within two hours. BED affects about 3% of the population; women are 
diagnosed at slightly higher rates than men (Reslan & Saules, 2011). Binges are followed 
by distress and feelings of disgust and disappointment. People with BED feel that they 
cannot control their food consumption. As with BN, the foods consumed during a binge 
are often soft and can be quickly chewed and swallowed, such as breads and snack foods, 
and consumed secretly. Unlike BN, the binge is not followed by a purge; consequently, 
high weights and obesity are often co-morbid with BED (Leehr et al., 2015; Wilfley 
et al., 2016). BED also differs from BN in having a later age of onset, typically in early 
adulthood rather than adolescence.
About 33% of our adult population meets the criteria for obesity based on body 
mass index (BMI), and only about 3% of our population is diagnosed with BED. So, the 
majority of obesity is not associated with BED. And not all people with BED are obese 
(Wilfley et al., 2016). Further, obese individuals with BED have higher rates of depres￾sion and lower self-esteem than those without BED.
Medical Problems Associated with BED
Elevated body weights are often associated with BED and related health problems, which 
include type 2 diabetes, metabolic syndrome, hypertension, and sleep disturbances/sleep 
apnea. People with BED have both reduced quality of life and activity level and increased 
likelihood of earlier death compared with those without BED (Giel et al., 2022).
TABLE 11.3 DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for binge eating disorder
1 Recurrent episodes of binge eating
2 Marked distress regarding binge eating
3 The symptoms occur, on average, at least once a week for three months
4 The absence of compensatory behaviors (e.g., purging)
Source: Adapted from APA (2013).
TABLE 11.4 Other eating disorders included in DSM-5
In addition to anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge eating disorder, the DSM-5 
also includes the following disorders:
1 Avoidant restrictive food intake disorder – a disorder associated with reduced food 
intake and inability to meet nutritional needs
2 Other specified feeding and eating disorder – a diagnosis given when symptoms of 
AN, BN, or BED are subclinical and do not meet the criteria for those disorders
3 Pica – characterized by the consumption of non-foods, such as paper or dirt
4 Rumination disorder – a condition in which people repeatedly and unintentionally spit 
up undigested food
Source: APA (2013).172 Eating Disorders and Treatment
Risk Factors for AN and BN
About 80% of people with AN or BN are females, often between ages 14 and 35 years. 
Until recently, eating disorders were only considered problems in Western countries, 
reported primarily among people in North America and Western Europe. However, rates 
of eating disorders are now rising in industrialized countries around the world. In Japan, 
for example, a culture that values thinness particularly among women, eating disorders 
are among the fastest-growing psychiatric problems for females in adolescence and 
early adulthood (Nakai et al., 2021; Thomas et al., 2016). Rates of eating disorders have 
likewise risen among Hispanic and African American females and among young males, 
groups of people in our culture that, until recently, did not emphasize extreme thinness 
(Pike et al., 2014; Smink et al., 2012; Wood et al., 2010).
The average age of onset of AN and BN is during adolescence or early adulthood, most 
often between ages 15 and 21 years, with AN usually occurring at younger ages than BN 
(Hoek & Van Hoeken, 2003; Hudson et al., 2007). Depression, anxiety, and substance 
abuse are frequently co-morbid with AN and BN (Hudson et al., 2007; Kaye, 2008; 
Swinbourne et al., 2012). These may contribute to the onset of eating disorders or they 
could be consequences of them; however, evidence indicates that other factors underlie 
eating disorders and the co-morbid disorders (e.g., personality, serotonin imbalance, gen￾etics; Kaye et al., 2009; Stice et al., 2004). Stimulants (e.g., cocaine, methamphetamine, 
nicotine), which speed up metabolism and reduce feelings of hunger, are often abused 
by people with eating disorders. People with BN are more likely than people with AN to 
additionally abuse alcohol and marijuana, as these can contribute to weight gain (Root 
et al., 2010).
Different personality characteristics are associated with AN and BN. As discussed pre￾viously, anorexics are typically perfectionists, exercising high levels of self-control and 
harm avoidance, and hold themselves to idealistic standards (Kaye, 2008). Consequently, 
they tend to be very self-critical. They are paradoxically obsessed with food and eating 
rituals, yet steadfast in their restraint from eating in their pursuit of weight loss. Many 
have symptoms of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. Because they tend to iso￾late themselves so that they can pursue their eating and exercise rituals without receiving 
negative attention, they can exhibit symptoms of avoidant personality disorder (Diaz￾Marsá et al., 2000; Waller et al., 2013).
Bulimics are less controlling and restrained than anorexics. Rather, bulimics tend to 
be more impulsive and have more erratic mood swings. Some people with BN have 
symptoms of borderline personality disorder, which is characterized by emotional 
instability and impulsiveness. Bulimics tend to be highly concerned with pleasing and 
being attractive to others, whereas anorexics are more focused on meeting their own 
goals and adhering to their stringent standards. These personality traits seem to dif￾ferentially increase an individual’s risk of either AN or BN (Tyrka et al., 2002; Waller 
et al., 2013).
Risk Factors for BED
The majority of people with BED have a mental health problem in their lives. Many 
have co-morbid depression, anxiety, substance use disorder, or post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD) and are at increased risk for self-harm and suicide attempts (Keski￾Rahkonen, 2021; Wilfley et al., 2016). Rates of BED are higher among non-heterosexuals Eating Disorders and Treatment 173
than heterosexuals. War veterans are a high-risk population for the BED diagnosis, 
likely because of their increased risk for PTSD. Childhood abuse, neglect, violence, and 
restricted access to food during childhood are risk factors for the later development 
of BED-related symptoms. Further, the frequent co-morbidity with trauma and PTSD 
indicates that the binge behavior with BED may be an attempt to cope with the trauma 
(Keski-Rahkonen, 2021). As with AN, BED is often co-morbid with obsessive-convulsive 
and/or avoidant personality disorders (Farstad et al., 2016).
BIOPSYCHOSOCIAL EXPLANATIONS OF AN AND BN
Eating disorders are found primarily in industrialized societies that emphasize a thin 
appearance. Media and marketing contribute to the pervasiveness of particular attract￾iveness ideals. In the 1960s, super-thin models, such as Twiggy, were glamorized. Some 
theorists postulate that this idealization of a thin body type led people (women, in par￾ticular) to hold themselves to this standard and judge themselves harshly, resulting in 
restrained and disordered eating for some. Another poignant example of the influence of 
media occurred in Fiji. Eating disorders and body image issues were minimal among the 
Fijian population (with only one reported case of AN) prior to the 1995 introduction 
of television. Rates of body dissatisfaction and disordered eating increased significantly 
within just a few years of media exposure and had a particularly negative impact among 
adolescent girls (Becker et al., 2002).
However, it is important to consider this: Media messages idealizing the thin body 
image are pervasive; yet only between 1% and 3% of our population has a diagnosable 
eating disorder. If media or other social influences bear full responsibility for disordered 
eating, then, theoretically, everyone within that culture would suffer, and clearly that is 
not the case. Historical investigation reveals that disordered eating occurred among early 
Christians and during the Renaissance, usually for ritualistic or religious reasons (Miller 
& Pumariega, 2001). Early Christians are known to have refrained from food consump￾tion as a demonstration of selflessness and purity (the psychology behind their restraint is 
clearly different from that associated with AN, but the behaviors can appear alike). And, 
similar self-imposed food restriction occurs today in non-Western cultures (e.g., fasting 
among Buddhists as a practice of self-control).
IMAGE 11.1 Buddhist monk at a 
place of worship174 Eating Disorders and Treatment
Whereas it is quite clear that sociocultural influences contribute to distorted 
body image and eating behaviors, other factors must additionally contribute. In this 
section, we explore the biopsychosocial model to explain AN and BN. According to 
this model, biological, psychological, and sociocultural factors are separate but have 
additive or synergistic effects, increasing an individual’s risk for developing an eating 
disorder.
Biological Factors
Eating disorders occur at much higher rates within families than among the general 
population, and the closer someone is related to an individual with an eating disorder, 
the greater the risk that person has of developing an eating disorder as well, even 
when raised in a different environment (Klump et al., 2009). Studies of identical 
(monozygotic) and fraternal (dizygotic) twins indicate a 50–80% genetic contribu￾tion to the vulnerability for AN or BN (Bulick et al., 2006; Kaye, 2008; Kendler et al., 
1991, 1995; Klump et al., 2001). It seems that some people may have shared genetic 
liability for the development of eating disorders. Of particular interest to researchers 
are genes, neurotransmitters, and brain pathways associated with appetite, impulse 
control, motivation, and reward.
Serotonin
Several groups of researchers have found evidence implicating a role of the genes involved 
in the synthesis of the neurotransmitter serotonin and its receptors in eating disorders 
(Haleem, 2012; Kaye, 2008). Serotonin activity is associated with satiety, mood, and 
inhibition. People with AN or BN are at increased risk for co-morbid depression, which is 
also associated with irregular serotonin activity (Haleem, 2012). However, it seems that 
serotonin activity associated with AN differs from that associated with BN. For example, 
people with AN exercise high levels of dietary restraint and inhibition, whereas people 
with BN have impulse control difficulties, indicating that serotonin activity may be high 
in the brains of people with AN and low in those with BN. Further, symptoms of BN 
are typically reduced by antidepressant medications that increase serotonin activity, but 
these medications are unreliable in the treatment of AN (Ferguson et al., 1999; Kaye, 
2008). This further supports the theory that serotonin activity is lower than normal for 
bulimics, but higher for people with anorexia.
People with AN have reduced brain volume, particularly in chronic cases. Thus, in 
studies of brain irregularity, it is difficult, and often impossible, to determine which 
factors are causal versus consequential of the disorder (Kaye et al., 2009). With AN, a 
cycle of below normal consumption of food and weight loss drives a continued effort 
to restrict calories and lose more weight. Some evidence supports the theory that 
anorexics have higher than normal levels of serotonin activity prior to the onset of their 
symptoms, which contribute to their feelings of satiety, nervousness about food con￾sumption, and drive for thinness and perfection. Further, food consumption elevates 
the already high levels of serotonin, whereas starvation serves to reduce levels and sta￾bilize mood. So, people with AN may actually avoid food as an attempt reduce their 
anxiety. (We recommend Kaye et al. [2009] and Frank et al. [2019] for reviews of the 
neurobiology of AN.)Eating Disorders and Treatment 175
Dopamine and the Endogenous Opioid System
Individuals with AN have blunted enjoyment of palatable food (along with decreased 
enjoyment of other typically rewarding or enjoyable stimuli; Kaye et al., 2009), whereas 
people with BN frequently report euphoric-like feelings associated with binge episodes. 
These dissimilar emotional states associated with these two eating disorders indicate that 
the brain’s reward pathways may respond in different ways to food-related stimuli.
The use of fMRI technology has provided evidence of differences in brain activity in 
people with AN and BN compared with those without an eating disorder. Non-eating 
disordered people usually have elevated neural activity on seeing or consuming appe￾tizing food (e.g., brownies, pizza, candy) in areas of the brain associated with pleasure 
and reward. However, these stimuli have the converse effect on the brain activity of 
people with AN, indicating disturbances within the dopamine system, which persists after 
recovery from symptoms (Kaye et al., 1999). Dopamine dysfunction could contribute 
to the diminished reward response associated with food-related stimuli in the brains 
of people with AN and their reduced motivation to consume food (Kaye et al., 2009). 
Interestingly, people with AN have increased activity in areas of the brain associated with 
pleasure and reward in response to images of thin bodies (Frank, 2013).
Conversely, the brain activity in regions associated with reward and pleasure of people 
with BN is greater than that of non-BN people when exposed to food-related stimuli. 
This provides a biological explanation for the intense craving for food and the blunted 
ability to control the amount of food consumed in a binge. In addition to dopamine within 
the reward regions of the brain, endogenous opioids (endorphins) are also involved in 
eating behavior. One group of researchers found that naloxone, a drug that blocks opioid 
receptors in the brain, reduced palatable food consumption among people with BN (or 
with binge eating disorder) but not among normal-weight or obese non-bingeing individ￾uals (Drewnowski et al., 1995). Along with the reduced activity of serotonin, the neuro￾biological alterations of reward circuitry may help explain the impulse-control problems 
and overconsumption associated with binge eating.
Psychological Factors
People with AN and BN have distorted attitudes about eating and body weight. They 
have frequent negative thoughts about their appearance and their eating behaviors. 
From the cognitive perspective in the field of psychology, their maladaptive and negative 
thoughts lead to attempts to restrain eating and lose weight. In other words, the thoughts 
precede the behaviors. Further, the cycle of negative thinking coupled with unhealthy 
eating behaviors is reinforcing, and the person becomes more convinced of his or her 
distorted thoughts about weight and eating and is increasingly compulsive about his or 
her eating behaviors (more restraining with AN or more frequent bingeing and purging 
with BN). Body dissatisfaction and perceived pressure to be thin are among the leading 
psychological risk factors for eating disorders (Rohde et al., 2015).
Theorists from the psychodynamic perspective in psychology posit that disordered 
eating behaviors stem from misuse of food by parents during an individual’s childhood 
(Bruch, 1973; Zerbe, 2008). Parents sometimes use food as a means of soothing children. 
This can lead to a lifelong emotional association with food. Children parented in this way 
learn to seek food for comfort, rather than nutrition, which can result in binge eating 
(BN) or to food restriction as a means of self-punishment (AN) later in life. Behavioral 176 Eating Disorders and Treatment
theorists also believe that this early experience with food is influential because children 
learn to model their parents’ eating behaviors. So, parents who eat food as a means of 
comforting themselves are likely to unintentionally teach the same behavior to their 
children.
Sociocultural Factors
Historically, societies struggled with food scarcity, and low weight was due to inability 
to obtain sufficient amounts of food. In such societies, people of heavier weights were 
considered healthier, more attractive, and of higher social status than people of low 
weights. In our current society, the opposite is true. Exposure to media perpetuating 
this thin-ideal image is correlated with body dissatisfaction and disordered eating (Stice 
et al., 1994; Thompson & Stice, 2001). Sociocultural influences, including media, family, 
and peers, may have a negative impact on body satisfaction, putting genetically vul￾nerable individuals at greater risk of developing an eating disorder. Children of parents 
who exercise high levels of dietary restraint and emphasize weight loss are at increased 
risk of disordered eating (Baker et al., 2000; Birch & Fisher, 2000). Further, children of 
authoritarian parents (parents who are controlling, set strict rules, and expect obedi￾ence) have a reduced ability to regulate calorie needs (Johnson & Birch, 1994) and are 
more likely to eat in the absence of hunger (Birch & Fisher, 2000). Girls are apparently 
more affected than boys by parental behaviors, especially by the mother’s behaviors and 
attitudes. Daughters of mothers who are preoccupied with weight, restrict or limit foods, 
and/or encourage their daughters to lose weight are at a particularly increased risk for 
disordered eating (Francis & Birch, 2005). Parents who encourage healthy eating and 
explain the benefits of a healthy lifestyle, offer healthy options from which children can 
select their food, and eat together as a family have children with healthier lifelong eating 
habits (Patrick et al., 2005). It is important to note, though, that the shared disordered 
eating between mothers and daughters or within families may be attributed to environ￾ment and learning, but it also may be due to shared genetics responsible for perfection￾istic or obsessive personality types.
Biopsychosocial Explanations for BED
As with BN, people with BED have blunted impulse control. Binge eating behavior is 
linked to stress and difficulty with emotional regulation (Kessler et al., 2016).
Biological Factors
Neuroimaging studies have revealed that people with BED have greater activity in 
regions of the brain associated with reward and craving (e.g., the striatum) when exposed 
to pictures of high-calorie food than people without BED. There is also increased brain 
activity in the cortex of people with BED when exposed to food-related stimuli (Kessler 
et al., 2016). Taken together, these neurobiological differences provide insight into the 
difficulty people with BED have with impulsivity and portion control. They have a 
greater desire for food and they think about food more often than people without BED. 
Some researchers compare the compulsive binge eating and brain reactivity to food 
stimuli to similar patterns seen with drug addiction. Altered dopamine activity within 
the reward pathway of the brain is the major chemical contributor to binge eating 
behavior.Eating Disorders and Treatment 177
Psychological Factors
As discussed, BED is often associated with childhood maltreatment and/or a traumatic 
event. Binges are used to cope with the distress of the trauma. People with BED have 
a reduced ability to regulate emotions and are at increased risk for depression and self￾harm. Binge eating provides temporary improvement in mood (Leehr et al., 2015).
From the behavioral perspective, binge eating behavior can stem from parents’ misuse 
of food as a form of comforting and soothing. An adult with BED may continue to asso￾ciate food with comfort, and this can further contribute to improved mood.
Sociocultural Factors
Commensal eating (eating in groups) facilitates healthful food consumption and helps 
us learn how to eat foods that may be new (e.g., with fingers, fork, condiments, etc.). In 
recent decades, it has become increasingly normal for us to eat alone, perhaps in our car 
on the way to school or work or while watching our favorite shows in the comfort of 
our bed. Because binge eating is usually done secretly, the problematic behavior may go 
unnoticed for a long time, because food consumption in isolation raises little to no con￾cern among loved ones or roommates.
Abuse or neglect by parents during childhood is often associated with BED. Children 
may find comfort from food and continue this association into adulthood. And, with such 
convenient access to highly palatable food in developed countries, people with BED can 
easily obtain their source of comfort.
TREATMENTS
Only a small percentage of people with eating disorders receive treatment, and an even 
smaller percentage complete the recommended therapeutic phases (Halmi et al., 2005; 
Hudson et al., 2007; Noordenbos et al., 2002). People with AN are particularly resistant 
to treatment and unlikely to initiate a search for help for several reasons – an individual’s 
denial of the seriousness of the disorder, refusal to make changes in eating behaviors or gain 
weight, the expense of treatment, and under-diagnosing of disordered eating by physicians 
(Walsh et al., 2000). However, recognition of symptoms, support, and treatment are crit￾ically important for recovery from eating disorders. Leading contemporary treatments 
involve individual, group, and family therapy; nutrition counseling; and often medication, 
especially when other psychological disorders are co-morbid with the eating disorder.
The first step in treating AN is helping the individual restore weight. This process is 
more challenging than it sounds, particularly in chronic cases. Digestion is slowed for 
these individuals, resulting in discomfort when they consume meals larger than what 
they have become accustomed to eating. Further, weight gain causes distress for people 
with AN, as this has been their fear. Behavioral tactics are usually the most effective 
methods for helping people with AN gain weight (Kaye et al., 2000). Rewards, such 
as praise and computer or television time, are given when a person eats appropriately. 
This process can take place in an inpatient treatment center or at an individual’s home, 
which often involves family supervision and support. Typically, a nutritionist or other 
trained professional creates a daily meal plan with gradual caloric increases over the 
span of several weeks (usually about 100 additional calories per week until weight is 
restored). This method, in contrast with force-feeding of a high-calorie diet in the first 
few days of treatment, is more tolerable to the person with AN, both physiologically and 178 Eating Disorders and Treatment
psychologically. People with BN are able to begin psychological therapy and medication 
immediately on diagnosis as they are usually within a healthy weight range (Kaye et al., 
2000). For BED, treatment is focused on the binge eating behavior, restraint, and weight 
loss. The most frequently prescribed medications for eating disorders are selective sero￾tonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which are also antidepressants and work by elevating 
serotonin neurotransmission (Kaye, 2008; Sim et al., 2010).
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) is the leading type of psychological therapy for 
eating disorders (Bulik et al., 2007; Iacovino et al., 2012; Yager & Powers, 2007). CBT 
addresses an individual’s maladaptive thoughts about food and body weight and also 
reinforces healthy eating behavior. For BED and BN, major goals of CBT are improved 
restraint and healthier coping techniques. Exposure and response prevention therapy can 
be used to help people with BN or the binge eating–purge type of AN. With this, the 
therapist may sit with the client as they eat a meal and wait with them as food moves 
through their digestive system, while preventing compensatory behavior. It may take 
multiple exposures of eating without purging for this behavior to feel normal and to 
not cause distress. Dialectical behavior therapy, a newer form of CBT, is used to train 
people to better regulate their emotions and be more mindful of their behaviors and 
feelings. This is particularly helpful for people who are prone to binge eating for emo￾tional reasons (Bankoff et al., 2012; Telch et al., 2001).
Individual therapy is usually coupled with family and group therapy. Because family 
dynamics frequently contribute to the onset of disordered eating, it is important that 
the family members address their issues so that they can provide a supportive environ￾ment for the individual recovering from an eating disorder (Wilson et al., 2007). Group 
therapy can help sufferers realize that they are not alone. Because people with AN tend 
to isolate themselves, and binges with BN and BED are done secretly, sufferers are usually 
comforted by the realization that other people also suffer in similar ways. Additionally, 
in group therapy, people can share tactics that they have found helpful and can support 
one another through the recovery process. Unfortunately, there are two main reasons for 
concern with group therapy – the sharing of unhealthy weight loss tactics and compe￾tition among group members to be the thinnest (this is particularly problematic among 
people with AN). Therapists work to ensure that the group therapy is beneficial and not 
harmful, as effective social and family support is important for long-term recovery.
IMAGE 11.2 This is an example of a group therapy sessionEating Disorders and Treatment 179
Is Treatment Effective?
Simply stated, improvement from eating disorder symptoms is more likely with treatment 
than without it (Bulik et al., 2007; Shapiro et al., 2007). Unfortunately, people with 
eating disorders often drop out of therapy or relapse after remission of symptoms, par￾ticularly in cases of chronic AN. However, the research on the effectiveness of therapy 
and specific forms of treatment is limited because of the small sample sizes and high 
dropout rates in most of the studies (Bulik et al., 2007). And, as discussed previously, 
people with eating disorders often have co-morbid psychological disorders and issues, 
which complicate the effectiveness of therapy. Other problematic issues surrounding 
treatment are expense and accessibility. Recall Katie, discussed earlier in this chapter. 
She was in a treatment facility for three months – the length of time recommended 
by most therapists and psychiatrists. The average cost of inpatient treatment for eating 
disorders is $30,000 per month, and insurance companies usually do not cover it. Most 
people cannot afford to pay nearly $100,000 for the recommended three months of 
treatment. Taking such a long period of time away from work or school creates an add￾itional challenge for people suffering with eating disorders.
ANIMAL MODELS OF EATING DISORDERS
Given the obstacles to therapy and high rates of relapse, there is hope that drug treatment 
will be possible in the treatment of eating disorders. To test potential therapeutic agents, 
animal models have been examined. You may wonder if animals could be feasible models 
of eating disorders. With the possible exception of nonhuman primates (in whom this 
type of research is essentially impossible for well-justified animal welfare considerations), 
animals are not thought to have a developed sense of self-awareness and, in particular, of 
body image. So, the essential aspect of distorted body image, especially in AN, probably 
cannot be modeled. But other animal models have one key attribute of AN as it relates 
to eating: Forgoing food when it is available despite substantial weight loss. These models 
fall into two categories: Those that occur in nature, and those that are induced by a 
laboratory procedure.
Let’s look first at the natural models. One of the most widely known is incubation 
anorexia, which refers to the loss of appetite and weight loss (often 10–15%) observed 
in many species of birds while they have eggs in their nest (Mrosovsky, 1990), especially 
when only one sex does all the incubating. You might rightly point out that the bird is 
put into a conflict between keeping the eggs warm and protected and leaving the nest 
to forage for food. However, this anorexia occurs in these birds even in a domesticated 
environment when abundant food is placed next to the nest. This observation leads to 
the conclusion that there are physiological changes (probably hormonal) during incuba￾tion that suppress appetite and, in a natural environment, will suppress hunger and keep 
the incubating bird “on task.”
This model is not only task-related but, because birds are seasonal breeders, will be 
associated with specific day length (photoperiod) indicative of the season. If animals 
show physiological and behavioral changes in different seasons, they are said to be photo￾periodic. There are other photoperiod-related changes in food intake. Many species eat 
less in the winter when days are short and lose substantial body weight (e.g., 20%; Iverson 
& Turner, 1974), and, like the incubating birds, this occurs even in captivity when food is 
readily available. In the natural environment, food tends to be less abundant during the 180 Eating Disorders and Treatment
winter, and expending large amounts of energy in unsuccessful foraging is a poor survival 
strategy. The physiological suppression of hunger then has an adaptive function. Another 
example is in rutting deer (Yoccoz et al., 2002): The males lose 10–15% of their body 
weight during rutting season, even though there is plenty of grass around; in contrast, 
females do not lose weight.
Unfortunately for the animal model perspective, humans are not photoperiodic with 
regard to mating or breeding behavior, but one could argue that some individuals, such as 
those prone to seasonal affective disorder, may exhibit some elements of photoperiodism. 
One established laboratory model that does not involve photoperiodism is called activity￾based anorexia (ABA; Epling et al., 1983). In this protocol, animals (usually rats or mice) 
are given food for a restricted time each day – often two to four hours. Most species are 
able to adapt to this type of schedule quite well; although they don’t eat as much as 
they would with 24-hour access, they do eat more than enough to maintain a healthy 
body weight. In fact, this type of time-restricted feeding regimen is common in zoos and 
for domestic pets. In ABA, the animals are additionally provided with a running wheel. 
As they lose weight, they tend to run more and so expend more energy, but their food 
intake does not rise commensurately (and may in fact be suppressed a bit). As a result, 
they are trapped in a spiral of a progressively more negative energy balance and usually 
have to be removed from the experiment for humane reasons when weight loss exceeds 
a threshold (e.g., 15%).
Another model that does not involve ABA has been found using mice in one of the 
authors’ labs (Atalayer & Rowland, 2012). In this case, food was also restricted to 160 
minutes per day but spread out across the night in several meals or feeding opportun￾ities (we used 4, 8, or 16 opportunities of 40, 20, or 10 minutes each). Additionally, the 
food was available as small pellets (20 mg) for which the mice had to work by emitting 
a fixed number of responses. After several days, the number of responses required 
(the price) was increased. Food intake was highly influenced by the condition: At 25 
responses per pellet, the intake was <50% that at the lowest cost (2 responses), and 
the mice lost weight rapidly. You might question whether, at 25 responses per pellet 
and only 160 minutes of total access to food, the animals were simply running out of 
time to acquire more food. But analysis of when pellets were taken within an oppor￾tunity showed that, even when weight was dropping, the mice ate progressively less 
within each window of opportunity and overall ate less than half what they could have 
consumed if they had used the time fully. One key feature of this procedure might be 
that the local rate of feeding is limited because responses need to be performed between 
each mouthful or pellet. (Slowing of eating by more chewing has been advocated as an 
appetite control device in humans and is discussed in other chapters.) This, or some 
other aspect of this situation, is leading to a “voluntary” failure to increase feeding dur￾ation within an opportunity.
In the case of bulimia nervosa, many animals (rats and mice in particular) are unable 
to vomit, and so that essential aspect (along with body image) of BN is not modeled. 
However, several protocols have been developed in which animals eat a large amount 
in a short time (i.e., binge eating). In most of these protocols, using rats or mice, the 
relatively bland maintenance diet (chow) is available all the time, and preferred or pal￾atable food (e.g., cakes, hotdogs, cookies) is given occasionally. When the palatable food 
is given every day, intake tends to be quite high and constant from day to day, and it is 
compensated by a reduction in chow intake over the rest of the day, so that total caloric 
intake is not increased, and no weight gain occurs. However, if the palatable food is given 
every other day (or, in general, less predictably), the intake increases as the number of Eating Disorders and Treatment 181
exposures increases and eventually greatly exceeds the intake of the palatable food by 
the daily group (Corwin, 2004; Gearhardt et al., 2011). The behavior resembles that seen 
with binge eating disorder. We discuss this model in greater detail in Chapter 10 in our 
section on junk food addiction.
Are these useful models of eating disorders? We’ll leave you to debate and think 
about this. Regardless, the relative absence of eating disorders among animals, infants, 
and young children supports that we are biologically driven to eat and survive, and eating 
disorders defy these innate motivations.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Eating disorders are serious, life-endangering psychiatric conditions. Biological, psy￾chological, and sociocultural factors contribute to an individual’s risk for the develop￾ment and maintenance of disordered eating. Cognitive-behavioral therapy is the most 
effective and frequently used type of psychotherapy; however, access and afford￾ability are hindrances to treatment for many sufferers. Early diagnosis and treatment 
yield the most optimistic outcomes, particularly when coupled with family and social 
support.
QUESTIONS TO ASK YOURSELF
Let’s review and apply your knowledge. Take some time to answer these chapter 
questions:
• What are the criteria for the diagnosis of AN? For BN? For BED?
• Describe the personality types and behaviors most associated with AN, BN, 
and BED.
• What are the medical complications or problems associated with each eating 
disorder?
• Provide several pieces of support for a biopsychosocial explanation for eating 
disorders.
• What are the leading types of treatment? What are some of the issues surrounding 
treatment?
• Discuss research involving animal models of eating disorders. What are the 
advantages and limitations of animal models when studying eating disorders?
Talking Point 11.1
Could there be alternative explanations for the higher rates of eating disorders within 
families? Explain.182 Eating Disorders and Treatment
GLOSSARY
Activity-based anorexia (ABA) A laboratory model of weight loss involving 
exercise and reduced food intake.
Behavioral theorists Researchers and practitioners focused on the 
effects of learning on behavior.
Biopsychosocial model The theory that psychological problems are 
due to interactions of biological, psycho￾logical, and sociocultural factors.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) Psychological therapy that addresses 
maladaptive thoughts and dysfunctional 
behaviors.
Cognitive perspective A psychological model focused on the con￾tent and process of human thinking.
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) A form of cognitive-behavioral therapy that 
emphasizes emotion regulation, mindful 
awareness, and acceptance.
Dopamine (DA) A neurotransmitter associated with reward, 
motivation, and movement.
Family and group therapy Formats in which the therapist meets with 
family members or groups of individuals with 
similar psychological issues.
Psychodynamic perspective A theoretical model that attributes human 
functioning to interactions of forces and 
drives within the person, particularly in the 
unconscious mind. Childhood experiences 
are emphasized within this perspective.
Serotonin (5-HT) A neurotransmitter involved with eating, 
sleeping, and mood.
REFERENCES
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, 
4th ed., text revision. Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, 
5th ed. Washington, DC: Author.
Arcelus, J., Mitchell, A. J., Wales, J., & Nielsen, S. (2011). Mortality rates in patients with anorexia ner￾vosa and other eating disorders: A meta-analysis of 36 studies. Archives of General Psychiatry, 68
(7), 172–731.
Atalayer, D., & Rowland, N. E. (2012). Effects of meal frequency and snacking on food demand in mice. 
Appetite, 58, 117–123.
Baker, C. W., Whisman, M. A., & Brownell, K. D. (2000). Studying intergenerational transmission of 
eating attitudes and behaviors: Methodological and conceptual questions. Health Psychology, 19, 
376–381.Eating Disorders and Treatment 183
Bankoff, S. M., Karpel, M. G., Forbes, H. E., & Pantalone, D. W. (2012). A systematic review of dia￾lectical behavior therapy for the treatment of eating disorders. Eating Disorders, 20 (3), 196–215.
Becker, A. E., Burwell, R. A., Gilman, S. E., Herzog, D. B., & Hamburg, P. (2002). Eating behaviours and 
attitudes following prolonged television exposure among ethnic Fijian adolescent girls. British Journal 
of Psychiatry, 180, 509–514.
Birch, L. L., & Fisher, J. O. (2000). Mothers’ child-feeding practices influence daughters’ eating and 
weight. American Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 27, 43–57.
Birmingham, C. L., Su, J., Hlynsky, J. A., Goldner, E. M., & Gao, M. (2005). The mortality rate from anor￾exia nervosa. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 38 (2), 143–146.
Brown, J. M., Mehler, P. S., & Harris, R. H. (2000). Topics in review: Medical complications occurring in 
adolescents with anorexia nervosa. Western Journal of Medicine, 172 (3), 189–193.
Bruch, H. (1973). Eating disorders: Obesity, anorexia nervosa and the person within. 
New York: Basic Books.
Bulik, C. M., Berkman, N. D., Brownley, K. A., Sedway, J. A., & Lohr, K. N. (2007). Anorexia ner￾vosa treatment: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials. International Journal of Eating 
Disorders, 40 (4), 310–320.
Bulick, C. M, Sullivan, P. F., Tozzi, F., Furberg, H., Lichtenstein, P., & Pedersen, N. L. (2006). Prevalence, 
heritability, and prospective risk factors for anorexia nervosa. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63 (3), 
305–312.
Castillo, M., & Weiselberg, E. (2017). Bulimia nervosa/purging disorder. Current Problems in Pediatric 
and Adolescent Health Care, 47 (–), 85–94.
Corwin, R. L. (2004). Binge-type eating induced by limited access in rats does not require energy restric￾tion on the previous day. Appetite, 42, 139–142.
DeBate, R. D., Tedesco, L. A., & Kerschbaum, W. E. (2005). Knowledge of oral and physical manifestations 
of anorexia and bulimia nervosa among dentists and dental hygienists. Journal of Dental Education, 
69 (3), 346–354.
Diaz-Marsá, M., Luis, J., & Sáiz, J. (2000). A study of temperament and personality in anorexia and 
bulimia nervosa. Journal of Personality Disorders, 14 (4), 352–359.
Division of Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Obesity, National Center for Chronic Disease. (2011). 
Prevention and health promotion healthy weight – it’s not a diet, it’s a lifestyle. Retrieved from www.
cdc.gov/healthyweight/assessing/bmi/adult_bmi/english_bmi_calculator
Drewnowski, A., Krahn, D. D., Demitrack, M. A., Nairn, K., & Gosnell, B. A. (1995). Naloxone, an 
opiate blocker, reduces the consumption of sweet high-fat foods in obese and lean female binge 
eaters. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 61 (6), 1206–1212.
Epling, W. F., Pierce, W. D., & Stefan, L. (1983). A theory of activity-based anorexia. International 
Journal of Eating Disorders, 3 (1), 27–46.
Farrell, C., Lee, M., & Shafran, R. (2005). Assessment of body size estimation: A review. European Eating 
Disorders Review, 13, 75–88.
Farstad, S. M., McGeown, L. M., & von Ranson, K. M. (2016). Eating disorders and personality, 2004–
2016: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 46, 91–105.
Ferguson, C. P., La Via, M. C., Crossan, P. J., & Kaye, W. H. (1999). Are serotonin selective reuptake inhibitors 
effective in underweight anorexia nervosa? International Journal of Eating Disorders, 25 (1), 11–17.
Fichter, M. M., & Quadflieg, N. (2016). Mortality in eating disorders – results of a large prospective clin￾ical longitudinal study. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 49 (4), 391–401.
Francis, L. A., & Birch, L. L. (2005). Maternal influences on daughters’ restrained eating behavior. Health 
Psychology, 24, 548–554.
Frank, G. K. (2013). Altered brain reward circuits in eating disorders: Chicken or egg? Current Psychiatry 
Reports, 15 (10), 396–402.
Frank, G. K., Shott, M. E., & DeGuzman, M. C. (2019). Recent advances in understanding anorexia 
nervosa. F1000Research, 8, 1–7.
Galmiche, M., Dechelotte, P., Lambert, G., & Tavolacci, M. P. (2019). Prevalence of eating disorders over 
the 2000–2018 period: A systematic literature review. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 
109 (5), 1402–1413.184 Eating Disorders and Treatment
Gearhardt, A. N., White, M. A., & Potenza, M. N. (2011). Binge eating disorder and food addiction. 
Current Drug Abuse Reviews, 4 (–), 201–207.
Giel, K. E., Bulik, C. M., Fernandez-Aranda, F., Hay, P., Keski-Rahkonen, A., Schag, K., Schmidt, U., & 
Zipfel, S. (2022). Binge eating disorder. Nature Reviews Disease Primers, 8 (1), 16–63.
Goode, R. W., Cowell, M. M., Mazzeo, S. E., Cooper-Lewter, C., Forte, A., Olayia, O. I., & Bulik, C. M. 
(2020). Binge eating and binge-eating disorder in Black women: A systematic review. International 
Journal of Eating Disorders, 53 (4), 491–507.
Haleem, D. J. (2012). Serotonin neurotransmission in anorexia nervosa. Behavioural Pharmacology, 23
(5,6), 478–495.
Halmi, K. A., Argas, W. S., Crow, S., Mitchell, J., Wilson, G. T., Bryson, S. W., & Kraemer, H. C. (2005). 
Predictors of treatment acceptance and completion in anorexia nervosa: Implications for future study 
designs. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62 (7), 776–781.
Hayaki, J., Friedman, M. A., & Brownell, K. D. (2002). Shame and severity of bulimic symptoms. Eating 
Behaviors, 3 (1), 73–83.
Heaner, M. K., & Walsh, B. T. (2013). A history of the identification of the characteristic eating disturbances 
of Bulimia Nervosa, Binge Eating Disorder and Anorexia Nervosa. Appetite, 71, 445–448.
Herzog, D. B., Greenwood, D. N., Dorer, D. J., et al. (2000). Mortality in eating disorders: A descriptive 
study. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 28 (1), 20–26.
Hoek, H. W., & Van Hoeken, D. (2003). Review of the prevalence and incidence of eating disorders. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 34 (4), 383–396.
Hudson, J. I., Hiripi, E., Pope, H. G., & Kessler, R. C. (2007). The prevalence and correlates of 
eating disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Biological Psychiatry, 61 (3), 
348–358.
Iacovino, J. M., Gredysa, D. M., Altman, M., & Wilfley, D. E. (2012). Psychological treatments for binge 
eating disorder. Current Psychiatry Reports, 14, 432–446.
Iverson, S. L., & Turner, B. N. (1974). Winter weight dynamics in Microtus Pennsylvanicus. Ecology, 55, 
1030–1041.
Johnson, S. L., & Birch, L. L. (1994). Parents’ and children’s adiposity and eating style. Pediatrics, 94
(5), 653–661.
Katzman, D. K. (2005). Medical complications in adolescents with anorexia nervosa: A review of the 
literature. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 37 (S1), S52–S59.
Kaye, W. (2008). Neurobiology of anorexia and bulimia nervosa Purdue ingestive behavior research 
center symposium influences on eating and body weight over the lifespan: Children and adolescents. 
Physiology and Behavior, 94, 121–135.
Kaye, W. H., Frank, G. K., & McConaha, C. (1999). Altered dopamine activity after recovery from 
restricting-type anorexia nervosa. Neuropsychopharmacology, 21, 503–506.
Kaye, W. H., Fudge, J. L., & Paulus, M. (2009). New insights into symptoms and neurocircuit function of 
anorexia nervosa. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 10, 573–584.
Kaye, W. H., Klump, K. L., Frank, G. K. W., & Strober, M. (2000). Anorexia and bulimia nervosa. 
Annual Review of Medicine, 51 (1), 299–313.
Kaye, W. H., Weltzin, T. E., McKee, M., McConaha, C., Hansen, D., & Hsu, L. K. (1992). Laboratory 
assessment of feeding behavior in bulimia nervosa and healthy women: Methods for developing a 
human-feeding laboratory. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 55 (2), 372–380.
Kendler, K. S., MacLean, C., Neale, M., Kesler, R., Heath, A., & Eaves, L. (1991). The genetic epidemi￾ology of bulimia nervosa. American Journal of Psychiatry, 148 (12), 1627–1637.
Kendler, K. S., Walters, E. E., Neale, M. C., Kessler, R., Heath, A., & Eaves, L. (1995). The structure 
of genetic and environmental risk factors for six major psychiatric disorders in women. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 52, 374–383.
Keski-Rahkonen, A. (2021). Epidemiology of binge eating disorder: prevalence, course, comorbidity, 
and risk factors. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 34 (6), 525–531.
Kessler, R. M., Hutson, P. H., Herman, B. K., & Potenza, M. N. (2016). The neurobiological basis of 
binge-eating disorder. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 63, 223–238.Eating Disorders and Treatment 185
Klibanski, A., Biller, B. M., Schoenfeld, D. A., Herzog, D. B., & Saxe, V. C. (1995). The effects of 
estrogen administration on trabecular bone loss in young women with anorexia nervosa. Journal of 
Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism, 80 (3), 898–904.
Klump, K. L., Miller, K. B., Keel, P. K., McGue, M., & Iacono, W. G. (2001). Genetic and environmental 
influences on anorexia nervosa syndromes in a population-based sample of twins. Psychological 
Medicine, 31 (4), 737–740.
Klump, K. L., Suisman, J. L., Burt, S., McGue, M., & Iacono, W. G. (2009). Genetic and environmental 
influences on disordered eating: An adoption study. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 118 (4), 797–
805. doi:10.1037/a0017204
Latner, J. D., & Wilson, G. T. (2000). Cognitive-behavioral therapy and nutritional counseling in the 
treatment of bulimia nervosa and binge eating. Eating Behaviors, 1 (1), 3–21.
Leehr, E. J., Krohmer, K., Schag, K., Dresler, T., Zipfel, S., & Giel, K. E. (2015). Emotion regulation model 
in binge eating disorder and obesity-a systematic review. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 
49, 125–134.
Mathes, W. F., Brownley, K. A., Mo, X., & Bulik, C. M. (2009). The biology of binge eating. Appetite, 
52 (3), 545–553.
Miller, M. N., & Pumariega, A. J. (2001). Culture and eating disorders: A historical and cross-cultural 
review. Psychiatry, 64 (2), 93–110.
Misra, M., & Klibanski, A. (2016). Anorexia nervosa and its associated endocrinopathy in young people. 
Hormone Research in Paediatrics, 85 (3), 147–157.
Mrosovsky, N. (1990). Rheostasis: The physiology of change. New York: Oxford University Press.
Nakai, Y., Nin, K., & Goel, N. J. (2021). The changing profile of eating disorders and related sociocul￾tural factors in Japan between 1700 and 2020: a systematic scoping review. International Journal of 
Eating Disorders, 54 (1), 40–53.
Noordenbos, G., Oldenhave, A., Muschter, J., & Terpstra, N. (2002). Characteristics and treatment of 
patients with chronic eating disorders. Eating Disorders, 10 (1), 15–29.
Patrick, H., Nicklas, T. A., Hughes, S. O., & Morales, M. (2005). The benefits of authoritative feeding 
style: Caregiver feeding styles and children’s food consumption patterns. Appetite, 44, 243–249.
Pike, K. M., Hoek, H. W., & Dunne, P. E. (2014). Cultural trends and eating disorders. Current Opinion 
in Psychiatry, 27 (6), 436–442.
Prouty, A. M., Protinsky, H. O., & Canady, D. (2002). College women: Eating behaviors and help￾seeking preferences. Adolescence, 37, 353–363.
Reslan, S., & Saules, K. K. (2011). College students’ definitions of an eating “binge” differ as a function 
of gender and binge eating disorder status. Eating Behaviors, 12 (3), 225–227.
Rohde, P., Stice, E., & Marti, C. N. (2015). Development and predictive effects of eating disorder 
risk factors during adolescence: Implications for prevention efforts. International Journal of Eating 
Disorders, 48 (2), 187–198.
Root, T. L., Pinheiro, A. P., Thornton, L., et al. (2010). Substance use disorders in women with anorexia 
nervosa. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 43 (1), 14–21.
Shafran, R., & Fairburn, C. G. (2002). A new ecologically valid method to assess body size estimation 
and body size dissatisfaction. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 32 (4), 458–465.
Shapiro, J. R., Berkman, N. D., Brownley, K. A., Sedway, J. A., Lohr, K. N., & Bulik, C. M. (2007). 
Bulimia nervosa treatment: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials. International Journal 
of Eating Disorders, 40 (4), 321–336.
Silberg, J. L., & Bulik, C. M. (2005). The developmental association between eating disorders symptoms 
and symptoms of depression and anxiety in juvenile twin girls. Journal of Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry, 46 (12), 1317–1326.
Sim, L. A., McAlpine, D. E., Grothe, K. B., Himes, S. M., Cockerill, R. G., & Clark, M. M. (2010, August). 
Identification and treatment of eating disorders in the primary care setting. Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 
85 (8), 746–751.
Smeltzer, D., Smeltzer, A., & Costin, C. (2006). Andrea’s voice – silenced by bulimia: Her story and her 
mother’s journey through grief toward understanding. Carlsbad, CA: Gürze Books.186 Eating Disorders and Treatment
Smink, F. R., Van Hoeken, D., & Hoek, H. W. (2012). Epidemiology of eating disorders: Incidence, preva￾lence and mortality rates. Current Psychiatry Reports, 14 (4), 406–414.
Stice, E., Burton, E., & Shaw, H. (2004). Prospective relations between bulimic pathology, depression, 
and substance abuse: Unpacking comorbidity in adolescent girls. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 72 (1), 62.
Stice, E., Schupak-Neuberg, E., Shaw, H. E., & Stein, R. I. (1994). Relation of media exposure to 
eating disorder symptomatology: An examination of mediating mechanisms. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 103 (4), 836–840.
Sundgot-Borgen, J., & Torstveit, M. K. (2004). Prevalence of eating disorders in elite athletes is higher 
than in the general population. Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine, 14 (1), 25–32.
Swinbourne, J., Hunt, C., Abbott, M., Russell, J., St Clare, T., & Touyz, S. (2012). The comorbidity 
between eating disorders and anxiety disorders: Prevalence in an eating disorder sample and anxiety 
disorder sample. Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 46 (2), 118–131.
Telch, C. F., Argas, W. S., & Linehan, M. M. (2001). Dialectical behavior therapy for binge eating dis￾order. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69, 1061–1065.
Thomas, J. J., Lee, S., & Becker, A. E. (2016). Updates in the epidemiology of eating disorders in Asia 
and the Pacific. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 29 (6), 354–362.
Thompson, J. K., & Stice, E. (2001). Thin-ideal internalization: Mounting evidence for a new risk factor 
for body-image disturbance and eating pathology. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 10
(5), 181–183.
Turner, H., Bryant-Waugh, R., & Peveler, R. (2010). The clinical features of EDNOS: Relationship to 
mood, health status and general functioning. Eating Behaviors, 11 (2), 127–130.
Tyrka, A. R., Waldron, I., Graber, J. A., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (2002). Prospective predictors of the onset of 
anorexic and bulimic syndromes. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 32 (3), 282–290.
Waller, G., Ormonde, L., & Kuteyi, Y. (2013). Clusters of personality disorder cognitions in the eating 
disorders. European Eating Disorders Review, 21 (1), 28–31.
Walsh, J. M. E., Wheat, M. E., & Freund, K. (2000). Detection, evaluation, and treatment of eating 
disorders: The role of the primary care physician. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 15, 577–590.
Watson, H. J., & Bulik, C. M. (2013). Update on the treatment of anorexia nervosa: Review of clinical 
trials, practice guidelines and emerging interventions. Psychological Medicine, 43 (12), 2477–2500.
Wilfley, D. E., Citrome, L., & Herman, B. K. (2016). Characteristics of binge eating disorder in relation 
to diagnostic criteria. Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment, 2213–2223.
Wilson, G. T., Grilo, C. M., & Vitousek, K. M. (2007). Psychological treatment of eating disorders. 
American Psychologist, 62 (3), 199–216.
Wood, R., Nikel, A., & Petrie, T. A. (2010). Body dissatisfaction, ethnic identity, and disordered eating 
among African American women. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 57 (2), 141–153.
Yager, J., & Powers, P. S. (eds.). (2007). Clinical manual of eating disorders. Washington, DC: American 
Psychiatric Publishing.
Yoccoz, N. G., Mysterud, A., Langvatn, R., & Stenseth, N. C. (2002). Age- and density-dependent 
reproductive effort in male red deer. Proceedings of the Royal Society – Biological Sciences, 269, 
1523–1528.
Zerbe, K. J. (2008). Integrated treatment of eating disorders beyond the body betrayed. New York: W. 
W. Norton.
Zucker, N. L., Womble, L. G., Williamson, D. A., & Perrin, L. A. (1999). Protective factors for eating 
disorders in female college athletes. Eating Disorders, 7, 207–218.DOI: 10.4324/9781032621401-12
CHAPTER 12
Personal Weight Loss 
Strategies in Obesity
After reading this chapter, you will be able to
• Discuss the effectiveness of diet and exercise for weight loss and 
weightmanagement.
• Appreciate the benefits of exercise for overall health (beyond weight 
management).
• Understand what intermittent fasting is and why your meal times are important.
• Evaluate different types of therapies involved in weight management.
The obesity epidemic has been discussed throughout this book. Obesity is not simply a 
cosmetic problem; it is associated with decreased quality of life, psychological distress, 
and numerous health problems, including cardiovascular disease and stroke, type 2 dia￾betes, cancer, and premature death. According to Our World in Data (2019), approxi￾mately 5 million people died prematurely in 2019 as a result of being obese – this is 
about 9% of the world’s population.
Further, overweight and obesity have a devastating economic impact through direct 
(e.g., health care) and indirect (e.g., lost workdays) costs. The global economic impact 
of obesity was estimated to be approximately $2 trillion in 2014 (Dobbs et al., 2014). If 
current obesity trends continue, the World Obesity Federation (2024) predicts the global 
economic impact will surpass $4 trillion by 2035, which is nearly 3% of global GDP 
(gross domestic product); this number is estimated to be comparable to the economic 
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic that began in 2020.
In this chapter, we discuss preventative and treatment options for obesity, including 
the most common behavioral interventions to shed excess weight: Diet and exercise. We 
discuss the effects of intermittent fasting on weight loss and the effect of the time at which 
we eat. Following this is a discussion of counseling, prospective pharmacotherapies, and 
bariatric surgery as the next level of treatment options. We then discuss circadian clocks 
and their effect on body weight and food intake and conclude with a brief introduction 
to the emerging field of chrononutrition.188 Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity
ENERGY BALANCE AND WEIGHT LOSS
At any given time, millions of Americans say that they want to lose weight, and millions 
of Americans are actively dieting. However, weight loss is difficult because it requires 
tremendous mental energy to perpetually override our natural programming to conserve 
energy, to seek high-calorie foods, and to store extra food as body fat. In this section, we 
will first discuss the effects of increasing energy expenditure and then contrast it with the 
impact of limiting energy intake on body weight regulation.
While the biological basis of overnutrition is complex enough to warrant this entire 
textbook, the thermodynamic basis of weight loss is simple and intuitive: Weight loss 
will occur when energy expenditure exceeds energy intake; that is, an individual must 
be in a state of negative energy balance. Energy expenditure can be divided into the 
following four categories: Resting metabolic rate (RMR), thermic effect of food (TEF), 
spontaneous physical activity (SPA), and exercise. Some of these components have been 
discussed in detail in Chapter 3. SPA is generally considered non-goal-oriented physical 
activity (e.g., fidgeting, standing, general movement that is not goal-directed), while 
exercise (or volitional exercise) is activity pertaining to sports and fitness (Garland 
et al., 2010).
On the face of it, achieving a state of negative energy balance would appear to be 
quite straightforward: One can either decrease one’s energy intake (limit one’s eating 
and drinking), increase one’s energy expenditure (exercise), or do a combination of both. 
However, this idea assumes that the components of our energy balance are static, which 
is not the case. Upon engaging in exercise, people often compensate behaviorally by 
increasing their food intake or possibly reducing their SPA owing to fatigue; additionally, 
RMR is shown to decrease when people restrict their food intake (Donnelly & Smith, 
2005). The result is that these compensatory mechanisms conserve energy, thereby 
making it harder for an individual to lose weight. Other variables such as age, sex, body 
composition, and genetic factors further complicate the energy equation.
Before we discuss whether exercise and dieting are successful tools with which to 
bring about successful weight loss, it is valuable to discuss what is meant by “successful 
weight loss.“ Does this mean weight loss for the duration of the diet or exercise regimen? 
For most people, successful weight loss requires lasting results where once, weight is 
lost, it is not gained back, and a healthy weight is maintained for the remainder of 
their lives.
EFFICACY OF EXERCISE FOR WEIGHT LOSS
Exercise by itself has numerous benefits, including improved cardiovascular functioning, 
improved insulin sensitivity, possible improvement in cognitive functioning, improved 
sense of mental well-being, lower risk of certain cancers, lower risk of falling, and 
improved bone health, and research continues to discover new benefits of exercise. The 
effect of exercise on weight loss, however, is modest at best (Donnelly & Smith, 2005, 
Slentz et al., 2004, Westerterp et al., 1992).
Slentz and colleagues (2004) reported significant, dose-dependent decreases in body 
weight in a group of sedentary and overweight or mildly obese participants (average 
body mass index, or BMI, was 29.7 +/− 3.2), following eight months on three different 
levels of exercise (high amount of vigorous exercise, low amount of vigorous exercise, 
low amount of moderate exercise, and no exercise). It is important to note that the Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity 189
participants in the study were counseled not to make any changes in their diet. Even 
with the highest level of exercise (20 miles jogging per week at approximately 75% peak 
oxygen consumption), the weight lost was only 3.5 kg (7.7 lbs) over the course of eight 
months, which is roughly equivalent to running 83 miles to lose 1 lb. This is more than 
the typical overweight person would be willing or able to do in order to lose weight.
Most people have heard of The Biggest Loser, a reality weight loss television show 
where participants often achieve dramatic weight loss through diet and exercise. One 
study followed 14 participants in this show for six years. Predictably, after six years, all 
but one participant had regained weight, and collectively they had regained a substan￾tial portion of the lost weight. Still, participants experienced less weight gain than most 
dieters, an outcome that the authors speculatively attribute to the “external account￾ability” resulting from the extremely public nature of their weight loss. The study 
compared blood work drawn immediately after the 30-week competition to blood work 
taken six years later and found that metabolic adaptation effects from the competition 
were still present six years later. Participants with greater weight loss experienced greater 
metabolic slowing (Fothergill et al., 2016).
The second edition of the Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans (U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services, 2018) emphasizes the value of any physical activity; 
physically active people, regardless of their body weight (normal weight, overweight, or 
obese), have lower risks of all-cause mortality compared with inactive people and, cor￾respondingly, have a longer life expectancy (see Figure 12.1). Few behavioral choices we 
make can claim to be as beneficial.
FIGURE 12.1 Estimated years of life gained as a function of average weekly level of exercise 
after age 40. Data redrawn from a longitudinal study of a large cohort of individuals in the 
National Cancer Institute database (Moore et al., 2012)
Despite the fact that research does not support the notion that exercise is an effective 
treatment option to combat obesity, many people are given the erroneous advice that 
they can exercise their way out of obesity – that, if they work out hard enough, they will 
lose the weight. A survey administered to a representative sample of Americans found 
that 71% of respondents believed that exercise was a very effective way to lose weight 
(Thomas et al., 2015). Furthermore, those respondents who both reported their weight 
status as being either overweight, very overweight, or obese and reported believing that 
exercise would result in meaningful weight loss were more likely to get discouraged 190 Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity
when their weight loss was not as substantial as they had originally hoped. These results 
have implications for creating realistic expectations in people when they adopt an exer￾cise program to lose weight.
EFFICACY OF DIETING AND ENERGY RESTRICTION FOR 
WEIGHT LOSS
In 2013, high school science teacher John Cisna ate only McDonald’s food for 180 days 
and lost 60 lbs; however, he limited his intake to 2,000 calories per day. John’s highly 
publicized experiment is perhaps the best example of how any diet that reduces caloric 
intake can provide short-term weight loss. But is this “success”? Certainly, the diet was 
a success for John who became famous, published a book, and became a compensated 
“brand ambassador” for McDonald’s. Five years later, he has kept the weight off and 
released a second book. Is it possible that John (and countless celebrities) are able to 
keep the weight off because they have a significant financial motivation to do so? Can we 
expect the same results? No. Rarely does science provide such certain answers.
For many people, the word diet implies a temporary behavior modification that can 
reverse a non-temporary behavior. Implicit in the phrase “going on a diet” is the expect￾ation that the diet will someday end; however, not being “on the diet” is what necessitated 
the diet (i.e., need for weight loss) in the first place. So, when the diet ends, the result 
is weight gain. Thus, for a diet to have a chance of working, one should instead say, “I’m 
changing what I eat for the rest of my life.”
We now have decades of evidence demonstrating that diets are ineffective in helping 
us lose weight long term; in fact, some studies paradoxically suggest that dieting may also 
cause people to become more overweight! A study which followed both identical and 
fraternal twins over 25 years found that the twin who dieted more frequently was more 
likely to gain weight than the non-dieting twin (Pietiläinen et al., 2012). The authors 
concluded that intentional weight loss episodes (dieting) may cause weight gain, inde￾pendent of genetic factors. Several studies have found that attempting to lose weight 
through dieting is highly predictive of future weight gain (Kroke et al., 2002).
EXERCISE AND DIET FADS
As previously discussed, lasting weight loss requires caloric restriction. This means a com￾bination of eating less food and, probably, eating food that is less preferred. Ideally, this 
difficult dietary change should be combined with regular exercise and must be continued 
for the rest of one’s life! The severity of the overnutrition problem, combined with the 
unpalatable nature of the solution, creates an environment of hopelessness, delusion, and 
desperation – an environment where the promise of the next new diet or exercise inter￾vention thrives.
Despite it being a well-known secret that diet interventions and exercise interventions 
have both moderate and transient effects on weight loss, the fad diet and fad exercise 
industries are booming, with the U.S. weight loss market set to surpass $305.3 billion by 
2030 (Wankhade, 2023).
The diet and exercise segments of the weight loss industry create a false sense of 
hope that people can attain lasting weight loss without difficult and permanent lifestyle Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity 191
changes. These fads (be they diet or exercise) seduce by offering a shortcut to a healthy 
weight. They promise us that, if we follow instructions, join a club, drink a shake, or buy 
a gadget, then we will lose weight without having to adjust the behaviors that caused 
the condition.
Exercise fads range from expensive equipment (e.g., Peloton stationary bicycles and 
Nordic Track treadmills) to popular exercise trends (e.g., high impact interval training or 
HIIT, CrossFit, and rucking). Advertisements accompanying exercise equipment make 
promises of weight loss following minimal effort (e.g., 8 Minute Abs or toning shoes). For 
those of you too young to remember these ads, search for them on YouTube! Fad diets 
come in many forms; some don the trappings of modern science (e.g., paleodiet, ketogenic 
diet), while others are cloaked in exotic mysticism (e.g., macrobiotic diets). Some fad 
diets are peddled by charlatans and feature dramatic before-and-after photographs and 
celebrity endorsements, while other fad diets are sincerely offered and may provide some 
people with genuine help.
INTERMITTENT FASTING AND THE TIMING OF MEALS
The practice of fasting is the voluntary abstinence from consuming food (and, in some 
cases, even beverages) for an extended period of time. Many religious traditions, including 
Buddhism, Christianity, Hinduism, Islam, and Judaism, have cultural practices which 
involve fasting. Fasting or hunger strike has also been used as a form of civil disobedience 
in which people fast as a form of political protest (e.g., Mahatma Gandhi, Indian activist 
and leader of the Indian Independence Movement).
While the cultural/religious practice of fasting has been around for centuries, the 
popularity of intermittent fasting (IF) in the diet world is relatively recent, thus permit￾ting us to refer to IF as a fad diet. Intermittent fasting can be broadly divided into two 
categories: All-day fasts and time-restricted intake.
All-day fasts, as the name implies, involve fasting for the entire day, but there are 
modifications that involve significantly reduced caloric intake on the “fasting days” rather 
than absolute fasting. A popular version of the IF diet is referred to as the 5:2 diet, which 
involves five days of “regular” food intake and two days of caloric restriction during which 
dieters only consume between 500 and 600 calories per day. Time-restricted eating 
refers to limiting food consumption to specific hours of the day and then not eating (i.e., 
fasting) for the remainder of that day.
One of the major challenges of losing weight is constantly having to make the 
healthy or responsible choice when it comes to choosing what to eat. There is an 
extensive body of research which demonstrates that neurocircuitry involved with 
food choice will usually discount long-term consequences and prioritize immediate 
satiation. This is why dieting is difficult, and why most diets fail (Rangel, 2013). 
Corresponding to this challenge, the purported advantage of IF is that it reduces the 
decision-making challenges that are typically associated with dieting and weight loss. 
People are either allowed to eat ad libitum during some portion of an IF diet or they 
are fasting.
There are several studies documenting the effectiveness of IF for weight loss and 
improving cardiovascular health. However, there are also numerous studies which assert 
that, while IF in its various forms may be a viable weight loss option, it does not appear to 192 Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity
be superior or more effective than traditional caloric restriction approaches (Catenacci 
et al., 2016; Sundfør et al., 2018).
CHRONONUTRITION AND THE TIMING OF MEALS
Implicit in IF is that the timing of food intake will be altered. It is becoming increasingly 
clear that when we eat (chrononutrition) may be as important as what we eat in relation 
to energy balance. Recent studies seem to support the hypothesis that the timing of food 
intake may have an important effect on weight gain. While it is well established that 
maintaining rats or mice on a high-fat diet (HFD) leads to weight gain, the question of 
the timing of the HFD on weight gain remains less clear. Hatori and colleagues (2012) 
examined the combined effects of a high-fat diet and time-restricted feeding (tRF) on 
weight gain, caloric intake, and a variety of metabolic parameters in mice. They divided 
the mice into four groups, as shown in Table 12.1.
TABLE 12.1 Study design for Hatori et al. (2012)
Diet type
Food access regimen High-fat diet Normal chow
Time-restricted access to food * HFD, tRF Normal chow, tRF
Ad libitum access to food HFD, ad libitum Normal chow, ad libitum
* The mice in the tRF condition were given access to food for 8 hours during their active–dark 
phase of their light–dark cycle. Remember, mice are nocturnal (unlike humans). So, they 
did not have access to food for 16 hours per day. All the mice in all four groups were 
maintained on a 12-hr-light–12-hr-dark cycle.
This study showed no overall caloric difference in the four groups over 18 weeks 
of the experiment. This is an important factor, because it indicates that differences 
in overall intake were not responsible for the myriad other changes observed in circa￾dian and metabolic patterns in these mice. Despite the absence of caloric differences, 
the time-restricted mice gained less weight than the ad libitum-fed rats, and these 
differences in weight were amplified in the HFD ad libitum–fed mice. This suggests 
that the time-restricted feeding pattern may have protective effects against excessive 
weight gain (which was seen in the HFD mice that had ad libitum access to food). 
Other physiological and metabolic parameters such as adiposity, glucose intolerance, 
leptin resistance, liver pathology, and inflammation showed improvements in the time￾restricted group, and motor coordination and activity levels were found to be higher in 
the time-restricted group. An earlier study conducted in Zucker obese rats (a spontan￾eous genetic model of obesity) found a similar result whereby the ad libitum-fed rats 
(which had access to as much food as they wanted during the dark and light phases of 
the light–dark cycle) gained 23% more weight than the rats that were fed only during 
their dark–active phase. As in the previous study, this weight gain was seen despite an 
absence of overall caloric intake difference between the two groups (Mistlberger et al., 
1998). Consistent with these studies, Arble and colleagues (2009) also found greater 
weight gain in rats fed a high-fat diet during the light phase of their dark–light cycle, as 
compared with rats that were fed only during the dark phase; with free access to food, Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity 193
rats eat most of their food during the night, which is when they tend to be most active as 
well. Furthermore, there were no differences in food intake or physical activity between 
the two groups (Arble et al., 2009). Finally, time-restricted feeding was found to be 
effective in combating obesity and the development of metabolic disease when mice 
were metabolically challenged with a variety of diets, including high-fat, high-sucrose, 
and high-fructose diets (Chaix et al., 2014). This same study also found that the benefits 
of time-restricted feeding continued even if the mice were given ad libitum access to 
their respective diets for two days per week – an attempt to simulate a human condition 
where people relax their diets during the weekends.
IMAGE 12.1 When we eat may have implications for our health and well-being – this is the 
emerging field of chrononutrition, which considers the timing of food intake in relation to one’s 
circadian clock
These aforementioned rodent studies use protocols that model human eating 
behaviors, and we see the consequences as being highly similar to what we see in humans. 
One such study maintained two groups of overweight and obese women (with an average 
BMI of 32.2) on 1,400 kcal per day for 12 weeks. One group was given a high-calorie 
breakfast, while the second group was given a high-calorie dinner. Significantly greater 
weight loss was seen in the women who were given the high-calorie breakfast; this group 
also reported lower hunger levels and higher levels of satiety (Jakubowicz et al., 2013). 
Likewise, following bariatric surgery, the greatest weight loss was seen in those who had 
earlier meals (Ruiz-Lozano et al., 2016).
A human population at risk for altered eating times are shift workers. A clinical trial 
found impaired glucose tolerance in participants who engaged in nighttime eating while 
under a night-shift-work simulation protocol; importantly, the impaired glucose tol￾erance was absent in those participants who did not engage in nighttime eating des￾pite being under the same night-shift-work simulation. These findings suggest that the 
impairment in glucose metabolism is associated with the atypical times when food is 
consumed by night-shift workers, rather than the disruption of their sleep–wake cycle 
itself (Chellappa et al., 2021).194 Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity
Taken together, these studies make a compelling case that, in addition to the 
types of food we eat, the timing of food intake appears to be an important factor in 
maintaining a healthy body weight. The mechanism behind this phenomenon is pres￾ently unknown.
BEHAVIOR THERAPY
Weight loss is most likely to be successful when coupled with lifestyle and behavioral 
changes surrounding the choices we make in our diet and physical activity levels. Many 
people pursue behavior changes in lieu of medications, supplements, or surgery to avoid 
side effects and expense. Many fitness trainers, nutritionists, physicians, and other weight 
loss experts promote varied versions of diet and exercise plans, often depicting their 
own plan as the most effective. In fact, no one weight loss plan has been scientifically 
proven superior over others, and results are typically modest (Tsai & Wadden, 2005). 
Essentially, they all work by reducing calorie intake, increasing activity, and modifying 
behavior. Further, as with the problems surrounding accessibility of surgery for low-SES 
individuals, many commercial weight loss programs and fitness training sessions are not 
financially feasible for many obese individuals.
Weight loss is the primary goal of behavior therapy (BT), but other psychological 
issues may be addressed with BT (e.g., depression). The goal here is to arm subjects 
with a new set of eating habits that they use for the rest of their lives (i.e., relearn 
what and when to eat). Unfortunately, most BT programs are not tremendously 
effective in the long term. According to Wing and Phelan (2005), participants in 
behavioral weight loss programs lose an average of 7–10% of their body weight within 
six months of standard treatment but gain back almost 50% of the lost weight after 
one year. Their research indicates that approximately 20% of dieters are successful 
at maintaining long-term weight loss (which is defined as losing 10% of one’s initial 
body weight and keeping it off for one year). They also report six strategies for long￾term success:
(1) engaging in high levels of physical activity; (2) eating a diet that is low in 
calories and fat; (3) eating breakfast; (4) self-monitoring weight on a regular basis; 
(5) maintaining a consistent eating pattern; and (6) catching ‘slips’ before they turn 
into larger regains.
(p. 225S)
Jelalian et al. (2006) compared the effectiveness of cognitive-behavior therapy 
when paired with either exercise (CBT + EXER) or when paired with an Outward 
Bound® therapy called “peer-enhanced adventure therapy” (CBT + PEAT). Adventure 
therapy is designed to increase self-confidence and increase social support while also 
improving physical abilities. This study was done with adolescents and found that, at 
the end of the treatment, weight loss did not differ between the groups; however, after 
ten months, 35% of the CBT + PEAT group had maintained the weight loss in contrast 
with only 12% of the CBT + EXER group. This suggests that peer-based components 
of the intervention with the PEAT-treated group might be important for long-term 
weight management.Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity 195
To examine long-term prognosis, Perri and colleagues (2001) compared two types of 
one-year extended BT, relapse prevention training (RPT) and problem-solving therapy 
(PST), with a standard BT group that did not receive any extended therapy sessions. 
With RPT, participants are taught methods to anticipate issues that could trigger relapse 
(i.e., overeating) and to plan alternative coping mechanisms or behaviors. PST involves 
problem-solving efforts by a health care provider to help the person manage issues on 
the completion of therapy. In their study, all groups received weekly two-hour group 
sessions for five months, including self- monitoring, goal setting, a low-calorie/low-fat 
diet, and a home walking program. At the end of this, all had lost (the expected) ~9% ini￾tial weight. The standard BT-only group had no additional treatment but had follow-up 
visits at 6 and 12 months. The RPT group had biweekly sessions for the next 12 months. 
Therapy included risk identification, cognitive coping, long-term planning, and so on. 
The PST group also had group discussions of specific problems that had arisen since 
the last session and guided solutions over the 12 months. The results showed that the 
PST group had lost significantly more weight at the end of one year compared with 
the BT group. Additionally, 35% of the PST participants had lost 10% or more of their 
body weight compared with only 6% of the BT participants. There were no significant 
differences between the BT and RPT groups. The elements of peer group support and 
discussion involved in this therapy seem particularly beneficial.
MOBILE APPS AS WEIGHT LOSS TOOLS
In recent years, there has been an explosion in the mHealth (mobile health) movement 
which is evidenced by (among other health-related applications) the proliferation of 
weight loss applications. Having so many options in the market leaves both the lay￾person and health care professionals bewildered as to which apps (if any) are effective. 
Weight loss apps typically combine fitness tracking, calorie tracking, and a motiv￾ational/reward system to keep users engaged. If designed appropriately, mobile apps 
have the potential to improve health and lower costs related to health care. Patel and 
colleagues (2015) reviewed 120 weight loss applications and found that the highest 
rated were Noom (Android) and Calorie Counter and Food Diary (Apple). Note that 
the evaluations of these apps were based on users in New Zealand, and so the usability 
of food tracking features was assessed based on the New Zealand markets, thus making 
the results of this study limited in their global application. A retrospective cohort study 
examining how effective mobile apps are at assisting with weight loss found that the 
most important factor for successful weight loss was the frequency with which users 
entered data on what they ate for dinner (Chin et al., 2016). This finding is particularly 
interesting considering the work in the field of chrononutrition which is finding that 
caloric intake later in the day is associated with greater weight gain. This same study 
also reported that another important factor for successful weight loss was the frequency 
with which users entered their body weight data; this finding supports the idea that 
the effectiveness of a mobile app lies in the engagement of the user, a principle that 
one can extend to all forms of diet and exercise interventions. While Chin et al. (2016)
reported weight loss following the use of the mobile app, there are several studies which 
report that mobile app use does not result in meaningful weight loss (Laing et al., 2014; 
Semper et al., 2016).196 Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity
IMAGE 12.2 There are many applications now available that allow people to track their food 
and calorie intake
Despite their limitations, a significant advantage that apps may have over more trad￾itional weight loss programs is the omnipresent nature of our phones and, consequently, 
of the apps themselves. Apps which have (1) reminders to engage in physical activity, 
(2) prompts to record physical activity (or automatic recording of physical activity), 
(3) prompts about the importance of healthy eating, (4) reminders to enter one’s intake 
into the app, and (5) rewards/points to keep users interested may help their users adhere 
to the lifestyle changes required to lose weight. A comprehensive review examining the 
effectiveness of mobile applications with regard to weight management concluded that, 
while they may not be effective as the sole intervention or approach to weight manage￾ment, they may have utility as a supporting tool (Ghelani et al., 2020). But, as with all 
weight loss endeavors, a weight loss mobile app is only effective if one commits to the 
program, whatever that may be.
ANTI-OBESITY DRUGS
Anti-obesity drugs generally work in one of two ways: By reducing energy intake or 
by increasing energy expenditure. Anti-obesity drugs work centrally (in the brain) and 
peripherally (e.g., in the gastrointestinal tract) and have varied mechanisms of action. 
In general, drugs which work by limiting energy intake do not seem to have long-term 
efficacy and often have serious and unpleasant side effects, including nausea, the risk of 
heart attack and stroke, depression, and birth defects. Owing to these risk factors and side 
effects, they are often only prescribed to patients who are categorized as either obese or 
morbidly obese.
Until recently, the most effective medications would result in weight loss of about 
5–10% (usually 10–15 lbs more than placebo), which is helpful, but certainly not a “cure” 
for obese people, whose weight may be 50–100% over their healthy weight. Furthermore, 
these medications did not sustain long-term weight loss for a variety of reasons, including 
drug tolerance, dependance, and/or unpleasant side effects.Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity 197
There have been numerous reports in the media about the relatively new class of 
weight loss drugs – the glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1RAs); only time 
will tell if their promise of lasting weight loss will hold true or not.
Before we enter into a discussion about GLP-1RAs, we must understand more about 
the glucagon-like peptide-1, or GLP-1. GLP-1 is produced by specialized cells in the 
small intestine in response to a meal. The GLP-1 thus produced travels through the 
blood stream and binds to GLP-1 receptors on pancreatic ꞵ-cells, thereby stimulating 
them to release insulin, which then lowers blood glucose levels, thereby aiding with glu￾cose homeostasis (Cabou & Burcelin, 2011). GLP-1 also slows down the rate of gastric 
emptying and reduces gut motility in humans (Shah & Vella, 2014). Furthermore, GLP￾1 is synthesized in the brain, and GLP-1 receptors are found in the hypothalamus and 
brainstem – regions of the brain known to be associated with energy regulation (Shah & 
Vella, 2014). GLP-1 receptors are also found in the areas around the circumventricular 
organs of the brain (e.g., the area postrema); it is suggested that this may be a way per￾ipheral GLP-1 from the intestines can access the brain (Cabou & Burcelin, 2011). The 
central (brain) role of GLP-1 may be to mediate satiety. Turton and colleagues (1996) 
found that intracerebroventricular (ICV) injections of GLP-1 inhibited feeding in fasted 
rats, while ICV injections of GLP-1 receptor antagonists actually doubled food intake in 
satiated rats.
So, with the understanding that GLP-1 inhibits food intake, slows gastric emptying, 
and increases feelings of satiety, it is no surprise that GLP-1 receptor agonists were 
considered as a target for drug therapies to help combat obesity.
The first GLP-1RA that was seen on the market was Saxenda®, which is a liraglutide. 
In 2014, it was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to help 
adults with weight loss. In 2020, it was approved as a treatment option for children aged 
12 and older. The GLP-1RAs that you have most likely heard of are the semaglutides –
Ozempic® and Wegovy® – they are different doses of the same medication. Ozempic® 
was approved for the treatment of type 2 diabetes in 2017, while Wegovy® was approved 
for weight loss management in adults in 2021 (it was approved for use in children above 
12 in 2022). These medications are administered via an injection. A pill form of this 
same medication is also available (Rybelsus®) for treatment of type 2 diabetes. A phase 
3B clinical trial conducted over a period of 68 weeks demonstrated that a 2.4-mg dose 
of semaglutide administered weekly was more effective than a 3.0-mg dose of liraglutide 
administered daily, with those on the semaglutide showing an average weight change of 
approximately 16% from baseline, versus approximately 6% for the liraglutide group 
(Rubino et al., 2022).
Zepbound® – tirzepatide – was approved by the FDA in November 2023. This drug 
is a dual receptor agonist, engaging with both gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP) and GLP-1 
receptors. Like GLP-1, GIP is produced in the intestine and stimulates insulin produc￾tion (Seino et al., 2010). Azuri and colleagues (2023) examined published data to com -
pare tirzepatide with semaglutide and found that tirzepatide resulted in approximately 
18% weight loss compared with 12% weight loss in the semaglutide group. They fur￾ther compared the costs of these medications and found that tirzepatide was more cost￾effective, costing approximately $18,000 over 72 weeks, compared with semaglutide, 
which cost approximately $23,000 over 68 weeks.
As indicated above, these new drug therapies are currently very expensive, but, des￾pite this, demand for these drugs is high, given their alluring promise of easy weight 
loss. An overview of some of the older anti-obesity drugs that reduce energy intake is 
provided in Table 12.2.198 Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity
TABLE 12.2 Overview of some anti-obesity drugs that reduce energy intake
Drug Effect Neurotransmitter 
action/mechanism 
of action
FDA status
Contrave® (buproprion +
naltrexone)
Appetite suppressant Naltrexone: Opioid 
antagonist
Buproprion: Dopamine 
reuptake inhibitor
Together thought to 
facilitate activation 
of POMC neurons to 
produce anorectic 
alpha-MSH and block 
inhibition of this 
neuropeptide
Approved
Phentermine Stimulant and appetite 
suppressant
Norepinephrine 
agonist
Approved
Qsymia® (phentermine +
topiramate)
Stimulant and appetite 
suppressant
Norepinephrine 
agonist
Approved
Xenical®; low-dose OTC 
version called Alli® (orlistat)
Does not impact appe￾tite; weight loss is due 
to reduced fat absorp￾tion in the intestines
Inhibits gastric and 
pancreatic enzymes 
necessary for the 
digestion of fat
Approved
Saxenda® (liraglutide); lower￾dose version of this is called
Victoza® – for diabetes 
treatment
Appetite suppressant 
and delayed gastric 
emptying
GLP-1 receptor 
agonist
Approved
Wegovy®
(semaglutide); lower-dose 
version of this is called 
Ozempic® (injectable) and 
Rybelsus® (oral tablet) – both 
for type 2 diabetes
Appetite suppressant, 
delays gastric emptying, 
reduces cravings
GLP-1 receptor 
agonist
Approved
Zepbound® – for weight loss
Mounjaro® – for type 2 dia￾betes (both are tirzepatides)
Appetite suppressant, 
delays gastric emptying, 
reduces cravings
GIP and GLP-1 
receptor agonist
Approved
No FDA-approved weight loss medications work primarily by increasing energy expend￾iture, although drugs such as phentermine do stimulate metabolism in addition to suppressing 
appetite. However, many products sold as diet or herbal supplements are marketed with 
claims that they increase energy expenditure and result in weight loss. Substances labeled 
as supplements are not subject to either Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) regis￾tration requirements of safety and proof of efficacy (which are required of controlled 
substances) or pre-approval by the FDA. The FDA regulates the safety of a supplement 
and accuracy of its marketing after it reaches the market. So, supplements and their 
constituents often change over time. For example, the over-the-counter diet supplement 
Dexatrim today contains different ingredients than in past formulations, because the FDA 
has now banned the compounds in the original formulations.Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity 199
Most herbal weight loss remedies and dietary supplements have not been tested sci￾entifically for efficacy compared with placebo, have not been tested for safety, and are 
not regulated for the amount or quality of the main ingredients (i.e., what it says on the 
label doesn’t have to meet strict pharmaceutical standards of accuracy). Some dietary 
supplements the safety of which has not been adequately verified include white bean 
extract, garcinia cambogia, bitter orange, green coffee, guar gum, chitosan, forskolin, and 
raspberry ketone (Ríos-Hoyo & Gutiérrez-Salmeán, 2016).
CALORIE SUBSTITUTES
Calorie substitutes theoretically provide a drug- or supplement-free method of redu￾cing energy intake without reducing the quantity of food consumed. People choose 
a calorie substitute to reduce overall caloric intake, either for weight management, 
weight loss, or diabetes management purposes. However, the research on whether cal￾orie substitutes and low-calorie sweeteners helps with weight management or weight 
loss is unclear at best. There are enough studies which support their use in weight 
management efforts, and enough studies to refute the same claims, so that a clear 
picture is currently unavailable (Anderson et al., 2012). Calorie substitutes can be 
broadly divided into three categories: High-intensity sweeteners, sugar alcohols, and 
fat substitutes.
High-intensity sweeteners (or low-calorie sweeteners) are sweeteners which are 
many times sweeter than sugar but contain either no calories or very few calories. High￾intensity sweeteners which are approved by the FDA for use as food additives include 
saccharin, aspartame, acesulfame potassium, sucralose, neotame, and advantame (see the 
FDA website for information on high-intensity sweeteners – www.fda.gov/food/food￾additives-petitions/high-intensity-sweeteners). The FDA has received GRAS (generally 
recognized as safe) notices for steviol glycosides and luo han guo (or monk fruit) extracts 
and does not have additional questions regarding their GRAS status at present. This 
essentially means that the applications for the use of these sweeteners did not raise any 
red flags, but there is currently not enough data on their use to officially approve their 
use. See Table 12.3, which compares the sweetness of different sweeteners to table sugar 
(modified from U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2018).
TABLE 12.3 High-intensity sweeteners permitted for use in food in the U.S.
Sweetener Sweetness compared 
with table sugar
Examples of brand names
Acesulfame 
potassium (Ace-k)*
200 × sweeter Sweet One®, Sunett®
Advantame* 20,000 × sweeter None currently
Aspartame* 200 × sweeter Nutrasweet®, Equal®, Sugar Twin®
Neotame* 7,000–13,000 × sweeter Newtame®
Saccharin* 200–700 × sweeter Sweet’NLow®, Sweet Twin®, Necta 
Sweet®
Luo han guo/monk 
fruit extracts**
100–250 × sweeter Nectresse®, Monk Fruit in the 
Raw®, PureLo®200 Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity
Sweetener Sweetness compared 
with table sugar
Examples of brand names
Steviol glycosides (com￾monly called Stevia)**
200–400 × sweeter Truvia®, PureVia®, Enliten®
Sucralose* 600 × sweeter Splenda®
* FDA-approved; ** GRAS notice submitted; FDA has no questions
Some currently popular sweeteners include Splenda®, Truvia®, and monk fruit. 
Sucralose (marketed as Splenda®) is derived from sucrose and probably has the most 
authentic sugar flavor when compared with saccharin and aspartame (Quinlan & Jenner, 
2006). As of 2008, it was believed to be the most widely used sweetener in the U.S. 
(Sylvetsky & Rother, 2016). Steviol glycoside sweeteners (commonly called stevia) are 
a class of zero-calorie sweeteners derived from the Stevia rebaudiana plant, which is 
native to parts of South America. Luo han guo, or monk fruit, sweeteners are similarly 
plant-derived (from the Siraitia grosvenorii plant, which is native to parts of China and 
Thailand). Both stevia and monk fruit sweeteners are relatively recent arrivals on the 
U.S. market (circa 2008). The largest-by-weight ingredient of Truvia® (which is sold as 
a stevia-based “natural” sweetener) is, in fact, not stevia but the sugar alcohol erythritol 
(Truvia, 2018). Sugar alcohols, also called polyols, are an example of a nutritive sweet￾ener. While they contain some calories (ranging from 0–3 kcal/g, which is lower than 
table sugar, which comes in at 4 kcal/g), they are incompletely absorbed by humans, 
resulting in fewer calories retained following their consumption. Examples of sugar 
alcohols include xylitol, erythritol, and sorbitol. Sugar alcohols are frequently used in 
sugar-free candies and chewing gum.
Food scientists and food technologists have created a wide variety of protein, carbo￾hydrate, and even fat-based “fat substitutes.” The goal of these substitutes is to mimic 
the properties of fat in the food (in terms of taste, mouth feel, texture, visual appearance, 
etc.) while providing fewer calories per gram than fat (which is 9 kcal/g). Olestra is 
one such fat substitute. It is a fat-based fat substitute; its chemical structure is similar 
to the fat molecule but cannot be broken down and so is not absorbed. It gives food 
the satisfying “mouth feel” of fatty food and is used mainly in cooking. In a lab study 
of olestra, human participants were fed either a high-calorie breakfast made with real 
fat or an otherwise identical low-calorie breakfast made with the “fake fat” (Rolls et al., 
1992). Their food intake was then monitored for the rest of the day. The people in the 
fake-fat group reported being hungrier in the evening and ate larger dinners, resulting 
in no net difference in daily caloric intake. It seems that compensation for our “norm” 
energy levels can blunt the effectiveness of any of the calorie substitutes. This partially 
explains the difficulty of maintaining weight loss through dieting or the use of calorie 
substitutes.
SURGERY FOR OBESITY (BARIATRIC SURGERY)
Because of the limited efficacy of everything discussed so far in this chapter, some 
people have looked for surgical treatments to assist them in their weight loss endeavors. 
TABLE 12.3 (Continued)Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity 201
Bariatric, or weight loss surgery can be extremely beneficial for some people, particu￾larly those who are morbidly obese and have been unable to lose weight with diet and 
exercise. Surgery results in average loss of about 50 kg (~100 lbs) (Higa et al., 2000) and 
can eliminate symptoms of type 2 diabetes and hypertension (Sugerman et al., 2003) 
and improve quality of life (Dymek et al., 2002). However, it is important to note that 
weight regain (WR) following bariatric surgery is a reality for a large number of patients 
who choose to undergo these types of procedures (Noria et al., 2023). This is discussed 
in more detail later in this chapter.
Surgery for obesity is generally allowed only for individuals who meet specific body 
weight and health criteria. These criteria, as outlined by the National Institutes of Health 
(NIH), are as follows (NIH, 2018):
(a) Individuals with a BMI ≥40.
(b) Individuals with a BMI between 35 and 39.9 who also have a serious health problem 
because of their obesity (such as diabetes or heart disease).
(c) Individuals with a BMI between 30 and 34.9 with a serious health problem associated 
with their obesity. This third category is only recommended for the adjustable gastric 
band procedure.
In addition to these weight and health recommendations, candidates for bariatric sur￾gery undergo psychological and physical assessments to ensure that they are a good fit 
for surgery. These are discussed in some detail in the upcoming section on Factors to 
Consider Regarding Surgery.
These bariatric surgical procedures can be divided into three broad cat￾egories: (a) Restrictive, (b) malabsorptive, and (c) a combination of both restrictive 
and malabsorptive. The restrictive procedures involve limiting the amount of food 
the stomach can hold, while the malabsorptive procedures limit nutrient absorption 
thereby reducing the number of calories retained. The modifications to the stomach 
and intestines result in requiring changes to one’s lifestyle; specifically, they neces￾sitate the consumption of only small amounts of food at a time and the inclusion 
of vitamin supplements in the diet (the reduced stomach and intestinal tract inter￾fere with the absorption of vitamins, and so higher-than-normal amounts need to be 
consumed).
Based on an eighth global registry report published by IFSO (International Federation 
for the Surgery of Obesity and Metabolic Disorders) in 2023, the most frequently 
performed types of weight loss surgery were sleeve gastrectomy (~60% of recorded 
procedures), followed by Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (~30% of recorded procedures), and 
one anastomosis gastric bypass (<5% of recorded procedures). The top three procedures 
are described in Table 12.4. The remaining ~5–6% of procedures include single￾anastomosis duodeno-ileal bypass with sleeve gastrectomy (SADI-DS), biliopancreatic 
diversion (BPD), and adjustable gastric band (AGB) and endoscopic procedures. It is also 
worth noting that, as per the IFSO 2023 report, nearly 80% of the recorded operations 
were done on females (as defined by their chromosomes, hormones, and reproductive 
organs at the time of the procedures).202 Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity
TABLE 12.4 Overview of the most common bariatric surgical procedures
Surgical 
procedure
Description Advantages Disadvantages
Vertical sleeve 
gastrectomy 
(VSG) or 
laparascopic 
sleeve gastrec￾tomy (LSG)
Part of the stomach is 
removed, leaving a much 
smaller stomach; its effect￾iveness for weight loss is 
similar to RYGB
Low rates of 
complications and 
reduced surgical 
time
Better iron absorp￾tion occurs 
compared with 
RYGB; as it is a 
newer procedure, 
there are still fewer 
data available 
compared with 
RYGB
Roux-en Y gas￾tric bypass sur￾gery (RYGB)
Two surgical modifications 
are made: First, the size 
of the stomach is reduced 
and, then, it is connected 
to the middle part of the 
small intestine (the jejunum, 
or the Roux limb)
Most effective in 
terms of weight 
loss compared 
with other surgical 
interventions
Reduced iron and 
calcium absorption
Dumping 
syndrome
One anas￾tomosis gas￾tric bypass 
(OAGB) or 
Mini-gastric 
bypass (MGB)
Two surgical modifications 
are made: The size of the 
stomach is reduced, and 
then more than half of the 
small intestine is bypassed
As effective as 
RYGB in terms 
of weight loss; 
lower rates of 
complications 
compared with 
RYGB
Higher rates of 
micronutrient 
deficiencies
FIGURE 12.2 Vertical sleeve gastrectomyPersonal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity 203
FIGURE 12.3 Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass (RYGB)
ENDOSCOPIC BARIATRIC THERAPIES (EBTS)
Distinct from the metabolic and bariatric surgeries described above, there are several 
EBTs that have been recently approved by the FDA for use in adults with obesity. These 
EBTs include the use of intragastric (within stomach) balloons, a vagal stimulator, and 
a gastric aspiration device. These procedures are all adjustable and reversible, which 
may be part of their appeal. However, their utility and effectiveness remain unclear, as 
patients have tended to lose less weight with these procedures and also have reported 
higher rates of weight regain (Pratt et al., 2018).
PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF SURGERY
As noted previously, about 70% of a patient’s weight above ideal is generally lost after 
surgery. As expected, as most of this weight loss is in the form of fat, it is accompanied 
by a lowered plasma concentration of leptin, the satiety hormone released from fat cells 
(discussed in other chapters). But what about ghrelin, the appetite-enhancing peptide 
secreted by the stomach?
Studies have found reductions in plasma ghrelin levels after both LSG (Sethi et al., 
2018) and RYBG (Cummings & Schwartz, 2003). Data from mouse models indicate no 
differences in body weight between wild-type mice and mice which have either been 
genetically modified to overexpress ghrelin or have had the ghrelin gene knocked out 
so that they have a complete absence of ghrelin (Uchida et al., 2013). Consequently, 
it remains unclear as to whether or not the drop in ghrelin seen in patients following 
bariatric surgery is of functional significance in explaining the weight loss experienced 
by people following these surgical procedures.204 Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity
A significant health benefit associated with weight loss surgery is the remittance of 
symptoms of type 2 diabetes in most cases (Cummings et al., 2004). Many diabetic 
patients can discontinue their medication on leaving the hospital following surgery, 
which precedes much of the weight loss; therefore, something other than weight loss 
facilitates the improvement in glucose metabolism. As discussed elsewhere, obesity￾related type 2 diabetes is most often due to insulin resistance. Weight loss surgery seems 
to restore sensitivity to insulin, quickly allowing adequate regulation of glucose. Further, 
the post-surgical reduction in ghrelin levels facilitates the action of insulin (Cummings 
et al., 2004).
Davies and colleagues (2019) conducted a review of 14 clinical studies which 
examined changes in gut bacteria following different types of bariatric surgery. They 
report an overall increase in gut bacterial species diversity following bariatric surgery, as 
well as meaningful changes in different species of gut bacteria. These findings are signifi￾cant and warrant further examination to see whether the changes in gut microbiota are 
supportive of the weight loss seen following bariatric surgery.
With the recent advent of semaglutides (e.g., Wegovy, discussed earlier in this chapter) 
in the weight loss market, it makes sense to examine if changes in GLP-1 have been 
observed following bariatric surgery. In line with this, both human and animal models of 
VSG and RYGB bariatric surgeries have shown an increase in GLP-1 levels after surgery 
(Hutch & Sandoval, 2017). One thought is that, following gastric bypass surgery, the 
distal (ileal) gut is repositioned in such a way that it more easily comes into contact with 
partially digested food (chyme), which consequently stimulates specialized cells (L cells) 
in this region of the small intestine to secrete GLP-1 (Chambers et al., 2011). Another 
study found that those patients with higher levels of GLP-1 post-surgery had higher 
rates of weight loss (Santo et al., 2016). Weight regain (i.e., gaining back the weight lost 
soon after bariatric surgery) is a well-established phenomenon (Noria et al., 2023); in 
line with this, the elevated GLP-1 response that has been reported soon after bariatric 
surgical procedures was found to be absent four years after the surgery (Min et al., 2020). 
It is of interest to note that a study comparing the effect of weight loss following an 
RYGB surgical procedure with weight loss following caloric restriction found that GLP-1 
levels were elevated only in those who had experienced weight loss as a result of surgery 
(Laferrère et al. 2008). Taken together, these studies provide a possible explanation for 
the role of GLP-1 in:
• Why we see successful and initially sustained weight loss following bariatric 
surgery.
• Why weight regain is quite common several years after bariatric procedures.
• Why weight loss following caloric restriction tends to be less successful than weight 
loss following bariatric surgery caloric restriction protocols.
Contrary to these findings, another study found that GLP-1 receptor-deficient 
mice had similar weight loss to wild-type mice, following a murine (mouse) model 
of RYGB and VSG surgeries (Ye et al., 2014). This would suggest that the weight loss 
seen following these types of bariatric surgical procedures cannot be explained by the 
increases in GLP-1 observed in the aforementioned studies. However, it is important to 
keep in mind that, when a knock-out mouse model is created, there may be compen￾satory mechanisms that develop of which the researchers are unaware but which could 
be responsible for the comparable weight loss observed in the wild-type and GLP-1 
receptor-deficient mice.Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity 205
FACTORS TO CONSIDER REGARDING SURGERY
One of the critical factors that is now recognized is the need for intensive medical and 
psychological support for surgical patients, both before and after surgery. In particular, 
selection of patients is important: It is unethical to do such surgery on people whose pro￾file suggests they will not attempt to maintain the weight lost or be able to understand 
the limitations of their new condition. Patients must be prepared for the changes they 
must make to their eating behaviors and the psychological effects of body changes. Social 
support (family, peers, or support group) is a critical component of long-term success and 
increased quality of life after surgery. A standardized interview has been developed by 
the Medical Psychology Service of the VA Boston Healthcare System to ensure thorough 
assessment of patient readiness for surgery and to facilitate patient education about the 
procedure and behavioral changes that are needed afterward (Sogg & Mori, 2004). The 
focus is on seven areas:
1 Weight, diet, and nutritional history: Does the patient have a history of unsuccessful 
dieting?
2 Current eating behaviors: What is eaten? Is there bingeing behavior? And so on.
3 Medical history: Are there other medical conditions or recent surgeries?
4 Understanding of surgical procedures and risks: Does the patient show a “minimum 
understanding”?
5 Motivation and expectations: Does the patient understand realistic goals and is he/
she willing to work for them?
6 Relationships and social support: Is the family willing to help/deal with weight loss?
7 Psychiatric complications: Are there any mitigating mental disorders that need 
treatment?
ADOLESCENTS AND SURGERY
The number of extremely overweight teenagers has risen dramatically over the past two 
decades, and they can have all the adverse health symptoms of adults and a reduced 
quality of life and self-esteem. These issues can potentially be improved with weight loss 
surgery. As per the NIH recommendations for teen eligibility for bariatric surgery, post￾pubescent teenagers who have attained their adult height are considered eligible if they 
have either (a) a BMI ≥35 with a serious obesity-related health problem (e.g., diabetes 
or severe sleep apnea) or (b) a BMI ≥40 with a less severe health problem (e.g., high 
blood pressure or high cholesterol) (NIH, 2018). The question is what type of bariatric 
procedure should be performed on adolescents, and, if so, at what age or under what 
circumstances? There is a need to establish age guidelines and exclusionary factors such 
as drug use and the type of motivational/support factors that were discussed earlier in 
the Sogg and Mori (2004) checklist.
COST OF SURGERY
Weight loss surgery costs roughly $17,000–26,000 (Cremieux et al., 2008), and more if 
complications arise. Insurance coverage of these procedures is on the rise because, despite 
the high cost, analyses overwhelmingly indicate that the risks and expenses associated 206 Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity
with obesity outweigh those associated with surgery (Salem et al., 2008). However, 
many employers do not purchase insurance with weight loss surgery provisions, and 
most insurance companies, including Medicaid/Medicare, provide coverage only at cer￾tain facilities, typically in urban settings, and often do not cover all the medications and 
follow-up care.
Although obesity is found among all socioeconomic status (SES) groups in Western 
society, morbidly obese people are overrepresented in low-SES populations and in rural 
communities (Livingston & Ko, 2004). The expense of surgery and the scarcity of surgical 
hospitals in rural compared with urban areas make weight loss surgery inaccessible for 
many people at the highest risk for health problems associated with obesity.
A 2016 review of the number of bariatric surgeries conducted across different states 
revealed that most bariatric surgeries are conducted in the northeastern part of the U.S. 
(Delaware, New Jersey, New York, and Massachusetts), and the fewest were conducted 
in the southern part of the U.S. (which typically has the highest rates of obesity). These 
states included West Virginia, Mississippi, Alabama, Arkansas, and Louisiana. This study 
concluded that insurance coverage and the economic ranking of the state were more 
impactful in determining whether bariatric surgery might be a treatment option than the 
prevalence of obesity itself (DeMaria et al., 2018).
WEIGHT REGAIN AFTER SURGERY
Whether bariatric surgery is an effective treatment option in the long term for weight loss 
and weight management is presently unclear. Most weight loss occurs within 18 months 
following the bariatric surgery (Buchwald et al., 2007; Magro et al., 2008). However, 
some weight gain after that is quite common. Patients with extremely high BMIs (>40), 
binge-eating disorder, and/or a lack of social support seem to be at the highest risk for 
weight regain after surgery, particularly if they do not attend enough follow-up visits 
and support group meetings (Magro et al., 2008). One follow-up study found that, 
despite losing weight initially, morbidly obese (BMI <50) and super-obese (BMI ≥50) 
patients who underwent RYGB surgery continued to gain weight when assessed at five 
and ten years after they had reached their lowest weight following the surgery (Christou 
et al., 2006).
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Obesity carries many risks to physical and psychological well-being. At present, the 
leading treatments also carry risks and are quite costly. Because losing weight once it has 
been gained in excess is challenging and often unsuccessful in the long term, the best 
course is prevention. The concept of preventive care has received increased attention 
among health care professionals and insurance companies and in the political arena (as it 
relates to health care expenses). Despite the growing obesity problem in many countries 
around the world, there is no established evidence-based national obesity prevention or 
weight loss program (Swinburn et al., 2005). Does this matter? Is obesity treatment or 
prevention an issue of national or global concern? Evidence overwhelmingly supports 
that there is a need to address the problem; the health benefits (e.g., better quality of life, 
increased work productivity, reduced health expenses) outweigh the expenses of pre￾ventive or weight loss programs. However, remaining questions around such a program Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity 207
include who should fund it, who should be targeted, and what should be done. Several 
studies targeting school-age children and adolescents have found prevention programs 
successful at reducing obesity rates and cost-effective in the long term (Taylor et al., 
2007; Wang et al., 2015, 2018). We remain optimistic that heightened awareness and 
concern about obesity, coupled with empirical data supporting the effectiveness of pre￾vention programs, will yield increased proactive efforts to improve the health of current 
and future generations.
GLOSSARY
All-cause mortality All possible causes of death, some of which 
include heart disease and certain cancers.
Aspartame Non-caloric artificial sweetener.
Behavioral therapy A form of psychological therapy in which 
problematic behaviors are identified and 
improvements are learned.
Cannabinoid receptor blockers Drugs that are antagonists or blockers of action 
of cannabinoid transmitters.
Chrononutrition An emerging field of study which examines how 
circadian rhythms and timing of food intake 
might affect health and propensity for weight 
gain. The research in this field aims to answer 
the question: Is when you eat an important factor 
in battling weight gain?
Dopamine Monoamine neurotransmitter located mainly 
in nigrostriatal (movement) and mesolimbic 
(reward) pathways in the brain.
Dumping syndrome This is a complication of bariatric surgery, 
following reduction in stomach size. When food 
(especially high-sugar foods) moves too quickly 
from the stomach into the small intestine, patients 
may experience nausea, cramps, and diarrhea. 
It is also called rapid gastric emptying.
Fenfluramine Structural analog of amphetamine that was 
developed in the 1960s to have appetite 
suppressant effects without stimulant or serotonin 
transmission in the brain. Withdrawn from the 
clinical market owing to the side effect of pul￾monary hypertension.
Ghrelin Peptide released from enteroendocrine cells, pri￾marily in the stomach, during fasting. An injec￾tion of ghrelin to animals stimulates food intake.
GLP-1RAs or GLP-1 receptor A class of weight loss drugs which interact with 
agonists the glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor.208 Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity
Intermittent fasting This is a form of fasting where a person restricts 
their food intake to specific time periods of 
the day. They are only permitted to eat during 
those times and refrain from eating outside that 
window of time. Intermittent fasting may be 
within a day or across days.
Leptin Peptide released from adipose (fat) cells in 
approximate relation to their fat content. Thus, 
blood concentrations of leptin are a rough 
measure of the amount of body fat. Several cells 
in the brain involved in feeding have receptors 
for and respond to circulating leptin.
Olestra A fat substitute in which fatty acid chains are 
bonded to a sucrose molecule, with a resultant 
molecule that has the “mouth feel” of fat but 
cannot be broken down and absorbed in the 
intestine. It was originally developed as a drug 
to lower cholesterol levels but was instead 
approved as a food additive.
Orlistat An inhibitor of intestinal and pancreatic 
lipase: Blocks or attenuates the absorption of 
triglycerides from the gastrointestinal tract.
Phentermine A structural analog of amphetamine that is both 
a stimulant and an appetite suppressant.
Qsymia Newly approved combination drug treatment 
consisting of phentermine and topiramate 
that acts centrally to reduce appetite and pro￾mote weight loss and improvement of type 2 
diabetes.
Saccharin Non-caloric artificial sweetener.
Serotonin Monoamine neurotransmitter abundant in many 
regions of the brain; has 14 receptor subtypes, 
of which the 2c receptor may be the one most 
prominently involved in appetite.
Sibutramine Centrally acting appetite suppressant drug, 
structurally related to amphetamine and having 
a dual neurochemical action that increases the 
amounts of norepinephrine and serotonin in 
active synapses.
Sucralose The most recently approved (USA, 1998; EU, 
2004) artificial sweetener; a structural analog 
of sucrose, known by the additive code E955 in 
the European Union; sucralose is sweeter than 
either aspartame or saccharin and is non- cal￾oric because it is not metabolized.Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity 209
Supplement A dietary supplement is an additive to a nat￾ural food or foods; because many of these are 
regulated only loosely (if at all), it is sometimes 
difficult to assess their safety and efficacy.
REFERENCES
Anderson, G., Foreyt, J., Sigman-Grant, M., & Allison, D. (2012). The use of low-calorie sweeteners by 
adults: Impact on weight management. The Journal of Nutrition, 142 (6), 1163S–1169S.
Arble, D., Bass, J., Laposky, A., Vitaterna, M., & Turek, F. (2009). Circadian timing of food intake 
contributes to weight gain. Obesity (Silver Spring), 17 (11), 2100–2102.
Azuri, J., Hammerman, A., Aboalhasan, E., Sluckis, B., Arbel, R. (2023). Tirzepatide versus semaglutide 
for weight loss in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: A value for money analysis. Diabetes Obesity 
and Metabolism, 25 (4), 961–964.
Buchwald, H., Estok, R., Fahrbach, K., Banel, D., & Sledge, I. (2007). Trends in mortality in bariatric 
surgery: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Surgery, 142 (4), 621–635.
Cabou, C., Burcelin, R. (2011). GLP-1, the gut-brain, and brain–periphery axes. Review of Diabetic 
Studies, 8 (3), 418–431.
Catenacci, V., Pan, Z., Ostendorf, D., Brannon, S., Gozansky, W., Mattson, M., Bronwent, M., MacLean, 
P., Melanson, E., & Troy Donahoo, W. (2016). A randomized pilot study comparing zero-calorie 
alternate-day fasting to daily caloric restriction in adults with obesity. Obesity (Silver Spring), 24 (9), 
1874–1883.
Chaix, A., Zarrinpar, A., Miu, P., & Panda, S. (2014). Time-restricted feeding is a preventative and 
therapeutic intervention against diverse nutritional challenges. Cell Metabolism, 20 (6), 991–1005.
Chambers, A. P., Jessen, L., Ryan, K. K., Sisley, S., Wilson-Pérez, H. E., Stefater, M. A., Gaitonde, S. G., 
Sorrell, J. E., Toure, M., Berger, J., D’Alessio, D. A., Woods, S. C., Seeley, R. J., & Sandoval, D. A. 
(2011). Weight-independent changes in blood glucose homeostasis after gastric bypass or vertical 
sleeve gastrectomy in rats. Gastroenterology, 141 (3), 950–958.
Chellappa, S. L., Qian, J., Vujovic, N., Morris, C. J., Nedeltcheva, A., Nguyen, H., Rahman, N., Heng, 
S. W., Kelly, L., Kerlin-Monteiro, K., Srivastav, S., Wang, W., Aeschbach, D., Czeisler, C. A., Shea, 
S. A., Adler, G. K., Garaulet, M., Scheer, F. A. J. L. (2021). Daytime eating prevents internal circa￾dian misalignment and glucose intolerance in night work. Science Advances, 7 (49), eabg9910. 
doi:10.1126/sciadv.abg9910
Chin, S., Keum, C., Woo, J., Park, J., Choi, H., Woo, J., & Rhee, S. (2016). Successful weight reduction 
and maintenance by using a smartphone application in those with overweight and obesity. Scientific 
Report, 6, 34563. doi:10.1038/srep34563
Christou, N. V., Look, D., Maclean, L. D. (2006). Weight gain after short- and long-limb gastric bypass in 
patients followed for longer than 10 years. Annals of Surgery, 244 (5), 734–740.
Cremieux, P. Y., Buchwald, H., Shikora, S. A., Ghosh, A., Yang, H. E., & Buessing, M. (2008). A 
study on the economic impact of bariatric surgery. American Journal of Managed Care, 14 (9), 
589–596.
Cummings, D. E., Overduin, J., & Foster-Schubert, K. E. (2004). Gastric bypass for obesity: Mechanisms 
of weight loss and diabetes resolution. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism, 89 (6), 
2608–2615.
Cummings, D. E., & Schwartz, M. W. (2003). Genetics and pathophysiology of human obesity. Annual 
Review of Medicine, 54, 453–471.
Davies, N. K., O’Sullivan, J. M., Plank, L. D., & Murphy, R. (2019). Altered gut microbiome after bariatric 
surgery and its association with metabolic benefits: A systematic review. Surgery for Obesity and 
Related Diseases. Advanced Online Publication doi:10.1016/j.soard.2019.01.033210 Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity
DeMaria, E., English, W. J., Mattar, S. G., Brethauer, S., Hutter, M., & Morton, J. M. (2018, November). 
State variation in obesity, bariatric surgery, and economic ranks – a tale of two Americas (A198). 
Poster presented at Obesity Week, Nashville, TN. Retrieved from https://asmbs.org/articles/new￾study-finds-most-bariatric-surgeries-performed-in-northeast-and-fewest-in-south-where-obesity-rates-are￾highest-and-economies-are-weakest on December 8, 2018.
Dobbs, R., Sawers, C., Thompson, F., Manyika, J., Woetzel, J. R., Child, P., McKenna, S., & Spatharou, 
A. (2014). Overcoming obesity: An initial economic analysis. Jakarta, Indonesia: McKinsey Global 
Institute.
Donnelly, J., & Smith, B. (2005). Is exercise effective for weight loss with ad libitum diet? Energy balance, 
compensation, and gender differences. Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews, 33 (4), 169–174.
Dymek, M. P., le Grange, D., Neven, K., & Alverdy, J. (2002). Quality of life after gastric bypass sur￾gery: A cross-sectional study. Obesity Research, 10 (11), 1135–1142.
Fothergill, E., Guo, J., Howard, L., Kerns, J. C., Knuth, N. D., Brychta, R., … Hall, K. D. (2016). Persistent 
metabolic adaptation 6 years after “The Biggest Loser“ competition. Obesity (Silver Spring), 24 (8), 
1612–1619.
Garland, T., Schutz, H., Chappell, M. A., Keeney, B. K., Meek, T. H., Copes, L. E., Acosta, W., 
Drenowatz, C., Maciel, R. C., van Dijk, G., Kotz, C. M., … Eisenmann, J. C. (2010). The bio￾logical control of voluntary exercise, spontaneous physical activity and daily energy expenditure 
in relation to obesity: human and rodent perspectives. The Journal of Experimental Biology, 214
(2), 206–229.
Ghelani, D. P., Moran, L. J., Johnson, C., Mousa, A., & Naderpoor, N. (2020). Mobile apps for weight 
management: A review of the latest evidence to inform practice. Frontiers in Endocrinology, 11, 412.
Hatori, M., Vollmers, C., Zarrinpar, A., DiTacchio, L., Bushong, E., Gill, S., Leblanc, M., Chaix, A., 
Joens, M. J., Fitzpatrick, A. J., Ellisman, M. H., and Panda, S. (2012). Time-restricted feeding without 
reducing caloric intake prevents metabolic diseases in mice fed a high-fat diet. Cell Metabolism, 15
(6), 848–860.
Higa, K. D., Boone, K. B., & Ho, T. (2000). Complications of the laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric 
bypass: 1,040 patients – what have we learned? Obesity Surgery, 10, 509–513.
Hutch, C. R., & Sandoval, D. (2017). The role of GLP-1 in the metabolic success of bariatric surgery. 
Endocrinology, 158 (12), 4139–4151.
Hutter, M. M., Schirmer, B. D., Jones, D. B., Ko, C. Y., Cohen, M. E., Merkow, R. P., & Nguyen, N. T. (2011). 
First report from the American College of Surgeons Bariatric Surgery Center Network: Laparoscopic 
sleeve gastrectomy has morbidity and effectiveness positioned between the band and the bypass. 
Annals of Surgery, 254 (3), 410–420; discussion 420–422.
International Federation for the Surgery of Obesity and Metabolic Disorders (IFSO). (2023). International 
Federation for the Surgery of Obesity and Metabolic Disorders report. Retrieved from www.ifso.com/
pdf/8th-ifso-registry-report-2023.pdf on January 18, 2024.
Jakubowicz, D., Barnea, M., Wainstein, J., & Froy, O. (2013). High caloric intake at breakfast vs. dinner 
differentially influences weight loss of overweight and obese women. Obesity, 21, 2504–2512.
Jelalian, E., Mehlenbeck, R., Lloyd-Richardson, E. E., Birmaher, V., & Wing, R. R. (2006). “Adventure 
therapy” combined with cognitive-behavioral treatment for overweight adolescents. International 
Journal of Obesity, 30 (1), 31–39.
Kroke, A., Liese, A., Schulz, M., Bergmann, M., Klipstein-Grobusch, K., Hoffmann, K., & Boeing, H. 
(2002). Recent weight changes and weight cycling as predictors of subsequent two year weight 
change in a middle-aged cohort. International Journal of Obesity, 26 (3), 403–409.
Laferrère, B., Teixeira, J., McGinty, J., Tran, H., Egger, J. R., Colarusso, A., Kovack, B., Bawa, B., Koshy, 
N., Lee, H., Yapp, K., & Olivan, B. (2008). Effect of weight loss by gastric bypass surgery versus 
hypocaloric diet on glucose and incretin levels in patients with type 2 diabetes. Journal of Clinical 
Endocrinology and Metabolism, 93 (7), 2479–2485.
Laing, B. Y., Mangione, C. M., Tseng, C. H., Leng, M., Vaisberg, E., Mahida, M., Bholat, M., Glazier, 
E., Morisky, D. E., and Bell, D. S. (2014). Effectiveness of a smartphone application for weight loss 
compared with usual care in overweight primary care patients: A randomized, controlled trial. Annals 
of Internal Medicine, 161 (10 Suppl.), S5–12.Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity 211
Livingston, E. H., & Ko, C. Y. (2004). Socioeconomic characteristics of the population eligible for obesity 
surgery. Surgery, 135, 288–296.
Magro, D. O., Geloneze, B., Delfini, R., Pareja, B. C., Callejas, F., & Pareja, J. C. (2008). Long-term 
weight regain after gastric bypass: A 5-year prospective study. Obesity Surgery, 18 (6), 648–651.
Min, T., Prior, S. L., Churm, R., Dunseath, G., Barry, J. D., & Stephens, J. W. (2020). Effect of laparo￾scopic sleeve gastrectomy on static and dynamic measures of glucose homeostasis and incretin hor￾mone response 4-years post-operatively. Obesity Surgery, 30 (1), 46–55.
Mistlberger, R., Lukman, H., & Nadeau, B. (1998). Circadian rhythms in the Zucker obese rat: Assessment 
and intervention. Appetite, 30 (3), 255–267.
Moore, S. C., Patel, A. V., Matthews, C. E., Berrington de Gonzalez, A., Park, Y., Katki, H. A., Linet, M. 
S., Weiderpass, E., Visvanathan, K., Helzlsouer, K. J., Thun, M., Gapstur, S. M., Hartge, P., … Lee, 
I. M. (2012). Leisure time physical activity of moderate to vigorous intensity and mortality: A large 
pooled cohort analysis. PLoS Medicine, 9 (11), e1001335.
National Institutes of Health (NIH). (2016). Potential candidates for bariatric surgery: Who is a good 
adult candidate for bariatric surgery? Retrieved from www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/weight￾management/bariatric-surgery/potential-candidates on December 7, 2018.
Noria, S. F., Shelby, R. D., Atkins, K. D., Nguyen, N. T., & Gadde, K. M. (2023). Weight regain after 
bariatric surgery: Scope of the problem, causes, prevention, and treatment. Current Diabetes Reports, 
23 (3), 31–42.
Our World in Data. (2019). Obesity. Retrieved from https://ourworldindata.org/obesity on January 
17, 2024.
Patel, R., Sulzberger, L., Li, G., Mair, J., Morley, H., Shing, M., O’Leary, C., Prakash, A., Robilliard, N., 
Rutherford, M., Sharpe, C., Shie, C., Sritharan, L., Turnbull, J., Whyte, I., Yu, H., Cleghorn, C., Leung, 
W., & Wilson, N. (2015). Smartphone apps for weight loss and smoking cessation: Quality ranking 
of 120 apps. New Zealand Medical Journal, 128 (1421), 73–76.
Perri, M. G., Nezu, A. M., McKelvey, W. F., Shermer, R. L., Renjilian, D. A., & Viegener, B. J. (2001). 
Relapse prevention training and problem-solving therapy in the long-term management of obesity. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69 (4), 722–726.
Quinlan, M. E., & Jenner, M. F. (2006). Analysis and stability of the sweetener sucralose in beverages. 
Journal of Food Science, 55 (1), 244–246.
Pietiläinen, K., Saarni, S., Kaprio, J., & Rissanen, A. (2012). Does dieting make you fat? A twin study. 
International Journal of Obesity, 36 (3), 456–464.
Pratt, J. S. A., Browne, A., Browne, N. T., Bruzoni, M., Cohen, M., Desai, A., Inge, T., Linden, B. C., 
Mattar, S. G., Michalsky, M., Podkameni, D., Reichard, K. W., Stanford, F. C., Zeller, M. H., & 
Zitsman, J. (2018). ASMBS pediatric metabolic and bariatric surgery guidelines, 2018. Surgery for 
Obesity and Related Diseases, 14 (7), 882–901.
Rangel, A. (2013). Regulation of dietary choice by the decision-making circuitry. Nature Neuroscience, 
16 (12), 1717–1724.
Ríos-Hoyo, A., & Gutiérrez-Salmeán, G. (2016). New dietary supplements for obesity: What we currently 
know. Current Obesity Reports, 5 (2), 262–270.
Rolls, B. J., Pirraglia, P. A., Jones, M. B., & Peters, J. C. (1992). Effects of olestra, a noncaloric fat 
substitute on daily energy and fat intakes in lean men. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 
56, 84–92.
Rubino, D. M., Greenway, F. L., Khalid, U., O’Neil, P. M., Rosenstock, J., Sørrig, R., Wadden, T. A., 
Wizert, A., Garvey, W. T, & STEP 8 Investigators. (2022). Effect of weekly subcutaneous semaglutide 
vs daily liraglutide on body weight in adults with overweight or obesity without diabetes: The STEP 8 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA, 327 (2)m 138–150.
Ruiz-Lozano, T., Vidal, J., De Hollanda, A., Scheer, F., Garaulet, M., & Izquierdo-Pulido, M. (2016). 
Timing of food intake is associated with weight loss evolution in severe obese patients after bariatric 
surgery. Clinical Nutrition, 35 (6), 1308–1314.
Salem, L., Devlin, A., Sullivan, S. D., & Flum, D. R. (2008). Cost-effectiveness analysis of laparoscopic 
gastric bypass, adjustable gastric banding, and nonoperative weight loss interventions. Surgery for 
Obesity and Related Diseases, 4 (1), 26–32.212 Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity
Santo, M. A., Riccioppo, D., Pajecki, D., Kawamoto, F., de Cleva, R., Antonangelo, L., Marçal, L., 
& Cecconello, I. (2016). Weight regain after gastric bypass: Influence of gut hormones. Obesity 
Surgery, 26 (5), 919–925.
Semper, H., Povey, R., & Clark-Carter, D. (2016). A systematic review of the effectiveness of smartphone 
applications that encourage dietary self-regulatory strategies for weight loss in overweight and obese 
adults. Obesity Reviews, 17 (9), 895–906.
Sethi, P., Thillai, M., Nain, P. S., Ahuja, A., Aulakh, N., & Khurana, P. (2018). Role of hunger hormone 
“ghrelin“ in long-term weight loss following laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy. Nigerian Journal of 
Surgery, 24 (2), 121–124.
Seino, Y., Fukushima, M., & Yabe, D. (2010). GIP and GLP-1, the two incretin hormones: Similarities and 
differences. Journal of Diabetes Investigation, 1 (1–2), 8–23.
Shah, M., & Vella, A. (2014). Effects of GLP-1 on appetite and weight. Reviews in Endocrine and 
Metabolic Disorders, 15 (3), 181–187.
Slentz, C., Duscha, B., Johnson, J., Ketchum, K., Aiken, L., Samsa, G., Houmard, J., Bales, C., & Kraus, 
W. (2004). Effects of the amount of exercise on body weight, body composition, and measures of cen￾tral obesity: STRRIDE – a randomized controlled study. Archives of Internal Medicine, 164 (1), 31–39.
Sogg, S., & Mori, D. L. (2004). The Boston interview for gastric bypass: Determining the psychological 
suitability of surgical candidates. Obesity Surgery, 14 (3), 370–380.
Sugerman, H. J., Wolfe, L. G., Sica, D. A., & Clore, J. N. (2003). Diabetes and hypertension in severe 
obesity and effects of gastric bypass-induced weight loss. Annals of Surgery, 237 (6), 751–758.
Sundfør, T., Svendsen, M., & Tonstad, S. (2018). Effect of intermittent versus continuous energy restric￾tion on weight loss, maintenance and cardiometabolic risk: A randomized 1-year trial. Nutrition, 
Metabolism, and Cardiovascular Diseases, 28 (7), 698–706.
Swinburn, B. B., Gill, T. T., & Kumanyika, S. S. (2005). Obesity prevention: A proposed framework for 
translating evidence into action. Obesity Reviews, 6 (1), 23–33.
Sylvetsky, A. C., & Rother, K. I. (2016). Trends in the consumption of low-calorie sweeteners. Physiology 
& Behavior, 164 (Pt B), 446–450.
Taylor, R. W., McAuley, K. A., Barbezat, W., Strong, A., Williams, S. M., & Mann, J. I. (2007). APPLE 
Project: 2-y findings of a community-based obesity prevention program in primary school–age chil￾dren. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 86, 735–742.
Thomas, D., Kyle, T., & Stanford, F. (2015). The gap between expectations and reality of exercise￾induced weight loss is associated with discouragement. Preventive Medicine, 81, 357–360.
Truvia. (2018). Truvia FAQ: Health information and safety. Retrieved from www.truvia.com/faq#faq_8
on December 2,2018.
Tsai, A., & Wadden, T. A. (2005). Systematic review: An evaluation of major commercial weight loss 
programs in the United States. Annals of Internal Medicine, 142 (1), 56–66.
Turton, M. D., O’Shea, D., Gunn, I., Beak, S. A., Edwards, C. M., Meeran, K., Choi, S. J., Taylor, 
G. M., Heath, M. M., Lambert, P. D., Wilding, J. P., Smith, D. M., Ghatei, M. A., Herbert, J., 
Bloom, S. R. (1996). A role for glucagon-like peptide-1 in the central regulation of feeding. Nature, 
379(6560), 69–72.
Uchida, A., Zigman, J. M., & Perelló, M. (2013). Ghrelin and eating behavior: Evidence and insights 
from genetically-modified mouse models. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 7, 121.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2018). Physical activity guidelines for Americans, 2nd 
edition. Retrieved from https://health.gov/paguidelines/second-edition/pdf/Physical_Activity_Gui
delines_2nd_edition.pdf
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2018). Additional information about high intensity sweeteners per￾mitted for use in food in the United States. Retrieved from www.fda.gov/food/ingredientspackagingl
abeling/foodadditivesingredients/ucm397725.htm
Wang, Y., Cai, L., Wu, Y., Wilson, R. F., Weston, C., Fawole, O., Bleich, S. N., Cheskin, L. J., Showell, 
N. N., Lau, B. D., Chiu, D. T., Zhang, A., … Segal, J. (2015). What childhood obesity prevention 
programmes work? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Obesity Reviews, 16 (7), 547–565.
Wang, X., Zhou, G., Zeng, J., Yang, T., Chen, J., & Li, T. (2018). Effect of educational interventions on 
health in childhood: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Medicine, 97 (36), e11849.Personal Weight Loss Strategies in Obesity 213
Wankhade, Shraddha. (2023). U.S. weight loss market size, forecast, analysis & share surpass US$ 
305.30 billion by 2030, at 9.7% CAGR. Retrieved from www.linkedin.com/pulse/latest-us-weight￾loss-market-size-forecast-analysis-share-wankhade/
Westerterp, K., Meijer, G., Janssen, E., Saris, W., & Hoor, F. (1992). Long-term effect of physical activity 
on energy balance and body composition. British Journal of Nutrition, 68 (1), 21–30.
Wing, R. R., & Phelan, S. (2005). Long-term weight loss maintenance. American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition, 8, 2222S–225S.
World Obesity Federation. (2024). Economic impact of overweight and obesity to surpass $4 trillion 
by 2035. Retrieved from www.worldobesity.org/news/economic-impact-of-overweight-and-obesity-to￾surpass-4-trillion-by-2035 on January 19, 2024.
Ye, J., Hao, Z., Mumphrey, M. B., Townsend, R. L., Patterson, L. M., Stylopoulos, N., Münzberg, H., 
Morrison, C. D., Drucker, D. J., Berthoud, H. R. (2014). GLP-1 receptor signaling is not required for 
reduced body weight after RYGB in rodents. American Journal of Physiology – Regulatory, Integrative 
and Comparative Physiology, 306 (5), R352–362.DOI: 10.4324/9781032621401-13
CHAPTER 13
Institutional Approaches 
to Healthful Eating
After reading this chapter, you will
• Have a better idea about the types of interventions that could work to combat 
obesity.
• Understand the implications of overpopulation for our food and climate systems.
• Understand the importance, challenges, and need for technological innovation 
to keep food production on a par with population growth.
• Develop an understanding of how much food we waste, and how reducing this 
can help us meet our food production goals for the future.
Are individuals solely responsible for the global obesity epidemic? This chapter will 
examine the roles of industry and government in treating obesity as a public health 
problem. Also addressed are the global environmental impact of feeding 10 billion souls 
and the ways in which technological solutions such as GMOs and agrochemicals affect 
the environment. We will conclude with a discussion on the economics of food and 
food waste.
ROLE OF INDUSTRY AND GOVERNMENT IN ADDRESSING 
THE OBESITY EPIDEMIC
Historically, being overweight or obese was viewed as a personal matter. Conventional 
thinking was that a person becomes overweight or obese due to their own choices, and 
that the adverse consequences of being overweight or obese were borne by the individual 
alone. Neither of these premises is accurate: Obesity is strongly influenced by factors out￾side an individual’s control, and the costs of obesity are borne widely across society, with 
significant economic and environmental impacts. Does the recognition that individual 
choices are not solely responsible for obesity obligate society to bear some of the costs to 
the individual? Does the recognition that obesity creates costs and harms external to the 
obese individual give society a right or obligation to intervene and perhaps make choices 
on behalf of that individual? Should the government be developing policies to curtail 
individual freedoms when it comes to food selection? Or should the government be 
developing policies that curtail the sale of foods high in sugar and/or fat, products which, 
when consumed in moderation, are not detrimental to our health but, when consumed Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating 215
in excess over the course of many years, can prove to be seriously harmful to us? Is 
addressing the obesity epidemic a personal/individual responsibility or do we have a col￾lective responsibility to address it? We will now discuss the following topics: Financial 
incentives, food deserts, taxation, and incremental lifestyle and environmental changes 
and their effectiveness in promoting weight loss.
Will You Lose Weight if You Get Paid to Do It?
Several modern institutions have financial or other interests in preventing their 
constituents from becoming overweight or obese and in reversing these conditions when 
they occur. Governments, health care providers, and employers have experimented 
with preventing and reversing obesity. Financial incentives to lose weight sound like 
a great idea – lose weight, make some money – it sounds like a win–win situation. 
Unfortunately, the research suggests that these short-term financial incentives only work 
to produce behavioral change for the duration of the incentive. The behavioral change 
goes away once the incentive ends, and people tend to gain the weight back. If the incen￾tive remains in place, however, then the behavioral change appears to be maintained 
(Ananthapavan et al., 2018). This suggests that, as a society, we need to do a cost–benefit 
analysis of whether it is more cost-effective to provide long-term (ideally lifelong) finan￾cial incentives to motivate people to engage in healthy behaviors or to pay for long-term 
health care costs associated with obesity.
Food Deserts and the Built Environment
Much work has been done on the impact of food deserts and the built environment
(human-made environment) on the obesity epidemic (Drewnowski et al., 2019; Epstein 
et al., 2012; Papas et al., 2007). The term food desert does not have a single, clear def -
inition, which adds to the confusion about how to precisely identify a food desert, and 
then how to measure its impact on food choice and BMI for those living in its vicinity. 
The term food desert can be broadly defined as a region where people do not have 
access to healthy and affordable food. The built or human-made environment can create 
barriers to a healthy lifestyle and a healthy diet; these include the absence of quality gro￾cery stores, transportation-related limitations, walkability/safety issues in the neighbor￾hood, access to parks for recreation, and so on. While food deserts and limitations of the 
built environment have been reported to be associated with obesity and obesity-related 
diseases, the picture is not quite that simple. A study examining the effects of the built 
environment and neighborhood socioeconomic status on BMI found that neither factor 
completely explained BMI differences seen across different racial groups (Sharifi et al., 
2016). There is also a growing body of research that reveals that increasing access to gro￾cery stores does not produce corresponding positive changes in food selection (Cummins 
et al., 2014; Handbury et al., 2016).
Food Insecurity and the COVID-19 Pandemic
Food security, as defined by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), is when 
people have access to enough food at all times for an active, healthy life. The Food and 
Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations defines food insecurity as when 216 Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating
a person lacks regular access to enough safe and nutritious food for normal growth and 
development and an active and healthy life. Globally, population levels of food inse￾curity vary considerably from continent to continent: In 2021, Africa, ~20%; Asia, 9.1%; 
Latin America and the Caribbean, 8.6%; Oceania, 5.8%; and less than 2.5% in Northern 
America and Europe (Carvajal-Aldaz et al., 2022). Food insecurity can range from mild 
food insecurity (uncertainty in ability to secure food) to severe food insecurity (not 
having eaten any food for a day or more).
You might be surprised to know that even affluent countries, such as the U.S., have a 
national average of 10.5% of households that experience some degree of food insecurity 
(Healthy People 2030, n.d.). This is usually related to low income and is dispropor￾tionately represented in racial and ethnic minorities (Odoms-Young, 2018). Households 
with children also tend to be more vulnerable to food insecurity (Paslakis et al., 2021).
These “normal” statistics are greatly impacted by natural epidemics and disasters, such 
as the COVID-19 pandemic. For example, in the U.S., the rate of food insecurity more 
than tripled, from 11% in 2018 to 38% in 2020 (Kakaei et al., 2022). This was owing in 
part to lost income and in part to rising food prices (United Nations [UN], 2024). There 
is evidence that food insecurity can trigger eating disorders (Becker et al. 2017), which 
can last far beyond the precipitating insecurity.
If we are to “solve” the challenge of food insecurity, we must do so with a multi￾pronged solution which addresses the socioeconomic factors (poverty, unemployment, 
racial disparities, etc.), the climate-related factors (which influence food production), as 
well as sociopolitical factors (e.g., taxation policies on import and export of foods, polit￾ical instability, etc.).
Carrot or Stick? Taxing “Unhealthy” Foods or Subsidizing 
“Healthy” Foods
Tax policy is a powerful tool that governments can use to enact policy and effect change. 
Tax-subsidized retirement accounts encourage us to save for retirement (IRS, 2018), 
while “sin” taxes discourage us from smoking and drinking (W.Z., 2018). However, tax 
policy can also be used imprudently; for example, Sweden enacted an “obesity tax” levied 
on obese people in the 1920s (New York Times, 1998)! Taxing obese people is impru￾dent for many reasons; in our society, it would be a regressive tax as it would dispropor￾tionately impact low-income people, and holding an individual directly responsible for 
becoming obese ignores the multifaceted nature of this epidemic. Ideas of taxing foods 
based on their nutritional status often elicit passionate discourse by folks on either side 
of this controversial topic.
But which would be more effective when it comes to encouraging healthy food 
choices – sin taxes or subsidies? A study conducted in a simulated grocery store envir￾onment set about trying to answer this question (Epstein et al., 2010). The study 
participants consisted of 42 lean and overweight mothers (45% were obese as per BMI 
measures ≥30); approximately half had incomes below $50,000, and half above. They 
were given $22.50 per family member and were instructed to go on a two-hour gro￾cery trip to purchase food for their household for a week. Each participant went on five 
separate shopping trips; the first time, the grocery store prices were set to be the same 
as those found at real grocery stores. The next four times, however, the experimenters 
manipulated the prices either to decrease the cost of the “healthy foods” by 12.5% or 
25% or to increase the cost of the unhealthy foods by the same percentages. As one Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating 217
would expect, decreasing the cost of healthy foods resulted in increased healthy food 
purchases, but this healthy food subsidy had an unanticipated outcome – the mothers 
used the money they saved on healthy foods to buy more unhealthy foods so that overall 
caloric intake increased! However, when the unhealthy options were taxed, the mothers 
purchased fewer unhealthy foods and used that money to purchase healthier options, 
resulting in an overall reduction in caloric intake. The results of this study suggest that sin 
taxes would be more effective than health-food subsidies to reduce overall caloric intake.
In the past decade, several countries have taxed sugary drinks or fatty foods (Wikipedia, 
2019). Norway, for example, has had a “sugar tax” since the 1920s and massively increased 
that tax in 2018, so that sweets and chocolates are now taxed at $2.13 per pound (Harris, 
2018). It is of value to note that the average Norwegian consumes approximately 59 lbs 
(27 kg) of sugar per year, while the average American consumes 75 lbs (35 kg) of sugar 
annually (Harris, 2018).
In contrast to our Scandinavian neighbors, the U.S. has lagged behind; there are no 
similar taxes at the federal or state level; however, several city governments have enacted 
sugary-drink taxes; Berkeley, CA, was the first city in the U.S. to pass a soda tax in 2015 
(Barone, 2017). Since then, other cities have followed suit, including Philadelphia, 
Boulder, Seattle, and San Francisco (Wikipedia, 2019). Unlike sugary drinks, Americans 
have had trouble swallowing sugary-drink taxes. Resistance is fueled by an American 
philosophy of personal responsibility and a well-funded sugar lobby which forecasts dire 
IMAGE 13.1 A typical checkout aisle in the U.S. How might this influence our shopping 
decisions at the last minute? Consider the soda tax versus an added-sugar tax. How might this 
influence our shopping decisions?218 Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating
economic consequences while loudly reminding Americans of their dislike of govern￾ment intervention in personal matters. At the center of this controversy is the notion 
of personal choice versus public good. But we must acknowledge that, when it comes 
to diet, personal choices are not personal. Obesity causes harm past the individual, and 
society bears those costs – both financial and emotional. Ultimately, we must balance 
these two opposing viewpoints, ideally preserving a society that values individual choices 
while minimizing the negative externalities of those choices. Scholars often draw parallels 
with the decline in tobacco use – a triumph of public health (Wan, 2017). The decline in 
tobacco use followed slow change in attitudes concerning the magnitude of the harm and 
damage to others. Over time, we changed our minds about where, when, and who should 
smoke, despite the objections of the tobacco industry, which regularly tried to manipu￾late the research and cast doubt on the consequences of smoking and second-hand smoke 
(Bero, 2005). A 2016 study found that the sugar industry (specifically the Sugar Research 
Foundation) sponsored research studies in the 1960s and 1970s which would ultimately 
downplay the significant role of sugar in the development of coronary heart disease and 
instead shifted the focus to dietary fat (Kearns et al., 2016). The American Beverage 
Association, which represents the U.S. beverage industry, has spent millions of dollars 
lobbying against soda taxes (Otterbein, 2016). If our experience with tobacco is a guide, 
there will be many factors which slowly change our attitudes toward how we nourish 
our bodies, but increasing the direct financial costs through taxation will be a critical step 
toward kicking a dangerous habit.
Nudging Our Way Out of the Obesity Epidemic
So, what does this all mean? Are things so bleak that seemingly no interventions will 
effectively address the obesity epidemic we are facing today? No; it means that we need 
to think creatively about solutions. A single intervention might not be the answer; per￾haps smaller, more subtle interventions will create incremental changes in our behavior 
and help move the obesity epidemic in the right direction. This theory of small changes 
has been referred to as nudge theory, and it has been gaining a good deal of traction 
around the world. Starting in 2010, the United Kingdom created what is officially called 
the Behavioural Insights Team but is unofficially referred to as the “Nudge Unit.” A nudge 
is defined as any modification of the environment that alters people’s behavior in a pre￾dictable way without forbidding any options or significantly changing their economic 
incentives. “To count as a nudge, the intervention must be easy and cheap to avoid. 
Nudges are not mandates. Putting fruit at eye level counts as a nudge. Banning junk food 
does not” (Thaler & Sunstein, 2008, p. 6).
It is important to note that nudging alters the presentation of options for the con￾sumer but does not create any penalties (beyond those they would have already borne 
had they not been exposed to the nudge) if the consumer does not engage in the hoped￾for behavior. A dramatic example might be stocking checkout aisles with fruits and 
vegetables rather than candy bars. Perhaps, if we implement enough changes in our life￾style and our environment, the cumulative effects of these changes/nudges could benefit 
our health and weight.
When we reexamine the interventions discussed earlier in this chapter with a “nudge 
theory lens,” we might discover partial yet feasible solutions. Consider incentivized 
weight loss: The data indicate that weight loss tends to be sustained if it continues to 
be incentivized. So, health insurance companies need to experiment with long-term Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating 219
(possibly lifelong) incentives to see if that might result in sustained and improved behav￾ioral choices.
An interesting study examined the impact of changes to the built environment (Bassett 
et al., 2013). The study found that changes in the built environment that permitted 
walking/biking to school resulted in increased levels of physical activity in children.
With regard to the role of industry, the news is not all bad. In 2009, 16 major food 
conglomerates formed the Healthy Weight Commitment Foundation and committed to 
reduce the number of calories they sell by 1.5 trillion by 2015 (Binks, 2016). Adjusted 
for population increase and validated by external researchers, this caloric decrease is 
equivalent to 99 kcal/capita/day (Ng et al., 2014). A study funded by the Healthy Weight 
Commitment Foundation in 2013 found that, for the companies that are part of this 
foundation, 82% of sales growth between 2006 and 2011 was driven by low-calorie 
products (Cardello & Wolfson, 2013); this suggests that industry focus on low-calorie 
initiatives are beneficial not just from a public health standpoint but also from a business 
standpoint.
Perhaps the most likely solution to the obesity epidemic is the summative effect of 
these nudges; by themselves they are inconsequential but, taken together, they might be 
the silver bullet that we are all searching for.
HUMAN POPULATION, ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT, AND 
TECHNOLOGICAL SOLUTIONS
We will now shift gears and discuss changes in human population over the millennia, 
and the impact human overpopulation is having on our environment. Following this, we 
will discuss the technological achievements which averted mass famine in the latter part 
of the 20th century and the new technological solutions we will need to sustain future 
population growth.
Human Population, Then and Now
Modern humans first appear in the archaeological record around 200 kya (thousand 
years ago), and, for the first 95% of our time on this planet, we clung to existence in 
small nomadic groups, often following herds of prey animals while gathering wild plant 
material for food. The human population was relatively small for the vast majority of 
human history; population estimates for humans living 10 kya suggest a number some￾where at or below 1 million humans worldwide (Baird, 2011, p. 24). Then, somewhere 
between 12 and 4 kya, communities in different parts of the world began to make the 
switch to an agrarian lifestyle (Bellwood, 2005, p. 2). Rather than merely gathering wild 
plants, we domesticated them. We deliberately planted and harvested, and in doing so we 
changed the fundamental nature of the plants. Through selective breeding, a form of gen￾etic engineering, we transformed wild grains into crops that provided more harvestable 
material for our consumption. We began to engage in animal husbandry, domesticating 
wild animals to provide us with food, clothing, and a source of assistance for labor￾intensive farming practices. That this shift from a hunter-gatherer lifestyle to a settled 
agrarian lifestyle resulted in an explosion in our numbers is evidenced by the larger 
archaeological sites unearthed in the Fertile Crescent (often referred to as the cradle of 
civilization), sites that show a tenfold increase in size, moving from 0.2 hectares to 2–3 220 Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating
hectares (Pringle, 1998). The invention of agriculture and a move to a non-nomadic life￾style had such a profound and rapid effect that it is called the Neolithic Revolution and 
it occurred sometime between 10 and 12 kya.
The domestication of plants and animals brought efficiencies to the food produc￾tion process, allowing humans to delegate the production of food to only some people. 
Humans, now freed from the perpetual chore of feeding themselves, were free to settle 
down in one place and specialize their labor, and so we built cities, exchanged ideas, and 
invented new tools. The way we produced food changed the way most humans lived, and 
our population exploded from a few million to hundreds of millions. As we changed our￾selves and species of plants and animals, we also changed our environment. We cleared 
land for fields and redirected rivers to irrigate our crops. As we became more techno￾logically sophisticated, the speed and efficiency with which we could (can) modify our 
environment increased.
The human population continued to grow until the next seismic technological leap that 
accelerated our transformation of the planet and caused an explosive growth in the human 
population – the Industrial Revolution. The Industrial Revolution began in Great Britain, 
sometime in the mid-1700s. It was a turning point for humans in terms of changes in pro￾duction (machines began to replace manual labor) and farming techniques, and medical and 
scientific advancements. By the 1800s, the world population had reached 1 billion, and, by 
the 1950s, we were at 2.5 billion people (Bongaarts, 2009). Population growth continued at 
unprecedented levels through most of the 20th century, bringing us to 7.6 billion as of 2017 
(United Nations [UN], 2017). Population projections based on current growth rates (which 
are declining, but not fast enough) suggest that the global population will reach 9.7 billion 
in 2050, and 10.9 billion in 2100 (UN, 2019). These are sobering numbers.
IMAGE 13.2 Traffic jams in urban areas are a familiar sight and contribute to air pollution and 
increased emissionsInstitutional Approaches to Healthful Eating 221
Environmental Impact of Human Overpopulation
This exponential growth in the human population has placed an enormous strain on the 
environment and our planet’s limited resources; indeed, human overpopulation is at the 
center of all our environmental and sociocultural issues: Climate change, air pollution, 
ozone depletion, depletion of fresh water sources, eutrophication, habitat encroachment, 
deforestation, desertification, species extinction, overfishing, declines in biodiversity, 
poverty, sanitation, unemployment, and more.
IMAGE 13.3 Large-scale deforestation in the rainforests of Borneo to make way for palm-oil 
plantations
It is easy to look at developing regions of the world with booming populations 
(e.g., China and India) and erroneously conclude that these countries are primarily 
“responsible” for much of the environmental degradation that we are witnessing today. 
However, it is equally important to consider the disproportionate resource consump￾tion seen in developed countries (perhaps in particular the U.S.) and recognize that 
lifestyles and diets in these parts of the world are also major offenders when it comes 
to harming the environment on a global scale. Figure 13.1 compares energy consump￾tion and CO2
 emissions by a few developed and developing world countries relative 
to their populations. The U.S., which accounts for 4% of the world’s population (UN, 
2017), consumes 17% of the world’s primary energy resources (BP, 2018), while India, 
which accounts for 19% of the world’s population, consumes a mere 6% of the world’s 
primary energy resources.222 Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating
FIGURE 13.1 Comparing energy consumption, population, and CO2 emissions across two 
developing and two developed countries. Energy consumption is presented in tonnes of oil 
equivalent, or “toe.” This is a unit of energy and is defined as the amount of energy released 
by the burning of 1 tonne of crude oil (~ 42 gigajoules of energy). CO2 emissions are based 
on fuel combustion and are presented in million metric tonnes
Source: BP (2018) and UN (2017). Source: CO2 emissions: Union of Concerned Scientists (2018; based 
on data compiled in 2015 by the International Energy Agency).
Environmental Impact of Agriculture (Crops and Livestock)
Agriculture is estimated to account for nearly 80% of the world’s deforestation (Kissinger 
et al., 2012). Food production and distribution (including growing crops and live￾stock, fertilizer production, storage and transportation of food, etc.) account for some￾where between 19% and 29% of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions; direct agricultural 
practices (crops and livestock) account for 80% of this figure (Vermeulen et al., 2012). 
Agricultural practices also account for 70% of freshwater use (Aleksandrowicz et al., 
2016). Livestock production is a major emitter of GHGs. On a global scale, the livestock 
sector is estimated to be responsible for 14.5% of all anthropogenic GHG emissions 
(Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations [FAO-UN], 2013). Cattle 
production (including beef and dairy cattle, and cattle used for draft/pulling power) is 
by far the most significant contributor to GHG emissions, accounting for approximately 
65% of the livestock sector’s emissions (FAO-UN, 2013). In comparison, pork, buffalo 
milk and meat, chicken meat and eggs, and small ruminant milk and meat together 
account for 31% of the livestock sector’s emissions; the remaining 4% is accounted for 
by other poultry species and non-edible products (FAO-UN, 2013). GHG emissions 
from livestock are predominantly the result of feed production and processing (this 
includes the decrease in forests as pasture and feed crop land use increases), the natural 
digestive process of ruminants (methane is a natural byproduct of their digestive pro￾cess), and decomposition of manure (FAO-UN, 2014). These data reflect the greater 
environmental toll that results from cattle farming. To put this in starker contrast, one 
study reports that an energy equivalent quantity of beef requires 28 times more land 
and 11 times more water than dairy, poultry, pork, and eggs and produces 5 times more 
GHGs (Eshel et al., 2014).Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating 223
The impacts of increased GHG emissions are too varied to detail here, but, on a 
basic level, they include higher global temperatures and reduced rainfall; these factors 
will undoubtedly impact the landscape of agriculture and food as we know it today. As 
our population continues to grow, global agricultural systems will struggle to meet the 
nutritional needs of all the humans on the planet. Food production demands are going to 
continue to increase and, unless they can at the minimum meet (if not exceed) popula￾tion growth, the consequences of overpopulation are clear: Famine and starvation. This 
is referred to as a Malthusian catastrophe, named after the English cleric and scholar 
Thomas Robert Malthus who wrote on the dangers of overpopulation in the late 1700s 
(Malthus, 1798). Technological solutions (in the form of genetically modified organisms, 
improved agrochemicals, and sustainable farming practices) and social change (sustain￾able diets which are less reliant on meat, reduction in food waste, and reduction in energy 
consumption) are critical to our future survival.
TECHNOLOGICAL SOLUTIONS
The explosion in our population during the latter half of the 20th century is attributed to 
a combination of people living longer and lower infant mortality. However, it would not 
have been possible without food production keeping pace with population growth rates.
The end of the 1960s is now referred to as the beginning of the “Green Revolution.” 
The Green Revolution resulted in global increases in crop production and was the 
result of significant advances in agricultural production techniques, including the devel￾opment of high-yield varieties of crops which had a shorter time to maturity (Pingali, 
2012). These high-yielding varieties were developed by cross-breeding different strains 
of the same crop so that the next generation of the crop had specific desirable traits 
(e.g., rust resistance and dwarfism in wheat crops). These cross-bred strains were used 
in conjunction with higher-quality fertilizers and pesticides, better irrigation methods, 
and increased mechanization of the harvesting process (Borlaug, 1970). Had it not been 
for these agricultural innovations, the 1960s and 1970s would have been characterized 
by mass famines in many parts of the developing world. Dr. Norman Borlaug (1914–
2009) is credited as being the Father of the Green Revolution; estimates say that the 
high-yield, disease-resistant varieties of wheat and rice he was involved in creating may 
have saved more than 1 billion human lives from hunger (James, 2014). For this work, 
he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1970. Despite his scientific and humanitarian 
contributions to the world, his work was considered controversial by some as it involved 
cross-breeding to produce desirable traits in the offspring. This may be considered a pre￾cursor to the more modern (and targeted) technology of genetic modification of plants 
and animals.
Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs)
A GMO may be a plant, an animal, or even a bacterium or a fungus. The organism in 
question is “genetically modified” by the insertion of one or more genes from a different 
organism, and the now-modified organism exhibits the desired trait. Some examples 
of desirable traits include nutrition enhancement, pest resistance, herbicide tolerance, 
decreased time to maturity, and drought resistance. See Table 13.1 for some of the most 
common GMO modifications in certain crops.224 Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating
TABLE 13.1 Examples of the Most Common Genetic Modifications
Most common 
modifications
Reason for modification Benefits Crops
Herbicide 
tolerance
GM crops can be 
sprayed with herbicides 
and not be harmed 
(while weeds in the 
same region are killed)
Improved weed manage￾ment; less herbicide used; 
fuel savings due to fewer 
applications of herbicides
Corn, cotton,
canola, 
soybeans,
sugar beets,
alfalfa
Insect 
resistance
GM crops produce a 
protein which is poi￾sonous to insects
Improved pest management; 
less pesticide use; fuel savings 
due to fewer applications of 
pesticide
Corn, cotton,
brinjal
Resistance to 
environmental 
stress
GM crops can grow 
in harsh environments 
(regions with low rain￾fall, or regions prone to 
flooding)
Given global climate change 
predictions of reduced rains 
and rising water levels, these 
traits will be critical for crop 
production
Flood￾tolerant rice,
drought￾resistant 
maize*
Disease 
resistance
These crops can fight off 
specific diseases
Increase in crop yields; fewer 
applications of chemicals to 
protect the plant; fuel savings 
due to fewer applications of 
agrochemicals
Rainbow 
papaya,*
innate 
potato,*
soybeans*
Nutrition 
enhancement
These crops have either 
additional nutrients 
(e.g., vitamins) or higher 
caloric yields
Improved nutrition for people; 
this is especially important 
in regions dealing with food 
insecurity; also important to 
feed our growing population
Golden 
rice,**
sweet 
potatoes
Source: Genetic Literacy Project (2 016); * James (2014); ** Golden Rice Project (n.d.).
GM plants have been approved for use in the U.S. since the 1990s; today, more than 
90% of corn, soybean, cotton, canola, and sugar beet grown in the U.S. is GM (Genetic 
Literacy Project, 2016). But this acceptance of GM technology is not limited to the U.S. 
Between 1996 and 2013, we have seen a 100-fold increase in the global area on which 
GM crops are grown; the top five countries that plant GM crops are the U.S., Brazil, 
Argentina, India, and Canada (James, 2014). This increase in adoption of GM crop tech￾nology is indicative of the enormous economic and environmental benefits producers 
and consumers gain from GMOs.
While GM plants have been part of our food supply for nearly two decades now, 
this has not been the case for GM animals. However, in order to meet food demand, 
GM animals will likely enter our food supply in the coming years; there is already sig￾nificant research that is being done to produce virus-resistant animals (McColl et al., 
2013). In 2015, Atlantic salmon became the first genetically modified animal to have 
been approved for consumption by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (Ledford, 
2015). This salmon (known as AquaAdvantage® salmon) has been genetically modified 
so that it matures faster, reaching market size in half the time taken by conventional 
Atlantic salmon (Clifford, 2014).Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating 225
Despite their broad use and acceptance, GMOs remain the subject of social, 
political, and scientific debate. The increase in the adoption of GM technology has 
increased the public’s concern regarding the safety of GMOs, both with regard to 
their impact on the environment and how they may affect the health of the consumer. 
Some of the major concerns and/or controversies surrounding the use of GMOs are 
outlined in Table 13.2. It is of interest to point out that, despite all the controversy 
swirling around the “dangers” of GMO products in the food supply chain, diabetics 
around the world have been using insulin produced by GM bacteria since the 1980s 
(Walsh, 2005).
TABLE 13.2 Concerns and controversies surrounding GMOs
Concerns Evaluation of the concerns Interpretation
GM corn’s carcinogenic 
effects in rats (2012):
Toxicity concerns were 
raised in a 2012 publica￾tion which asserted that 
GM corn caused cancer 
in the rats (Séralini et al., 
2012)
The 2012 article was 
retracted owing to poor 
study design (e.g., rats 
were given Roundup 
to drink). The authors 
republished their results 
in a different journal 
(Séralini et al., 2014)
Studies in GM potatoes, 
sweet peppers, and 
tomatoes have found no 
differences in the health 
of animals fed the GM 
products versus the non￾GM products (Norris, 
2015)
Given the problems with the 
design of the study, it is rea￾sonable to say that the results 
are inconclusive. However, this 
does not preclude the need 
for better-designed studies 
to help shed light on this 
important issue
Of interest: The International 
Agency for Research on 
Cancer (IARC; affiliated 
with the World Health 
Organization) announced that 
glyphosate might be carcino￾genic (IARC, 2016)
GMO effects on 
our children (i.e., 
intergenerational effects)
Multigenerational 
studies in rats fed GM 
corn and GM pota￾toes: The researchers 
studied health of the 
embryos and tracked 
the health of each gen￾eration. They could find 
no differences between 
the rats fed the GM 
products versus the rats 
fed non-GM products 
(Norris, 2015)
The concern is low
Are the “modified” genes 
unstable and, after we 
consume them, can they 
change our DNA?
Research shows that 
DNA from GMOs is not 
different in its stability 
than DNA from non￾GMO plants (Norris, 
2015)
The concern is low226 Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating
Concerns Evaluation of the concerns Interpretation
Impact of GM corn pollen 
on the health of monarch 
butterfly larvae (1999): A 
study compared growth 
and mortality in monarch 
butterfly larvae which 
were fed either milkweed 
(the larvae’s natural food) 
dusted with non-GMO 
corn pollen (Control 
Group 1), or GMO corn 
pollen (Experimental 
Group 2). They reported 
that growth rates were 
lower and mortality was 
higher in Group 2 (Losey 
et al., 1999)
Lab-based study; 
concerns about the eco￾logical validity of this 
study. Factors which 
would reduce larval 
exposure to GM corn 
pollen include:
• Bt toxin* levels in 
pollen is very low.
• Rain would reduce 
pollen levels on leaves.
• Pollen shedding times 
and the larval stage 
of the monarch do not 
overlap perfectly.
(Raman, 2017; Sears 
et al., 2001)
Additional research is needed 
to examine the effects of GM 
crops on non-target insect 
species
Concerns about impact of GM 
corn pollen on monarch larvae 
are negligible
When considered in the con￾text of reduced pesticide use, 
the GM corn is the environ￾mentally superior choice
Concern: Herbicide 
drift: Application of 
herbicides such as 
Roundup (glyphosate) and 
Dicamba to herbicide￾resistant crops has resulted 
in neighboring non￾herbicide-resistant fields of 
crops being exposed and 
harmed (Charles, 2016; 
Dewey, 2017)
This is an ongoing 
problem with the devel￾opment of herbicide￾resistant GM plants. 
Weeds that these 
herbicides are designed 
to kill evolve their own 
genetic resistance, 
resulting in the need for 
more applications of the 
herbicides or the devel￾opment of new chemical 
formulations (Charles, 
2016; Dewey, 2017)
The concern is real. The 
problem arises when these 
farmers either accidentally 
or negligently apply the 
herbicides and contaminate 
their neighbors’ non-GM 
crops (Charles, 2016; Dewey, 
2017)
Concern: Big Ag (e.g., 
Monsanto, Dow Chemical, 
Syngenta, etc.) is a bully
1 Big Ag sues farmers 
for contract violations 
pertaining to GM 
seed use.
2 Big Ag sues farmers 
whose fields “accidentally” 
get contaminated by GM 
pollen.
1 The companies which 
produce GM seeds 
require that farmers 
using their GM products 
agree to not save and 
replant seeds they 
obtained from plants 
grown from purchased 
GM seeds.
2 There are no cases of 
the Big Ag companies 
suing farmers whose 
crops had been acciden￾tally contaminated
Big Ag has gone after farmers 
for using GM seeds saved 
from a previous harvest. Their 
argument is that, if the com￾panies developing this tech￾nology are not paid for their 
product, they cannot stay in 
business, and that it is unfair 
to farmers who repurchase 
seeds every year
* See the Agrochemicals section ahead for an explanation of what Bt toxin is.
TABLE 13.2 (Continued)Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating 227
BOX 13.1 A SPECIAL GMO: THE GOLDEN RICE PROJECT. 
A HUMANITARIAN EFFORT TO ADDRESS GLOBAL VITAMIN 
A DEFICIENCY AND BLINDNESS
The development of Golden Rice has been a decades-long humanitarian project to 
address the global public health problem of vitamin A deficiency (VAD).
VAD is a leading cause of reduced immunity, blindness, and death in children 
under five and pregnant women in many parts of the world; it is estimated that 
between 250,000 and 500,000 children under five become blind each year as a 
result of vitamin A deficiency, and half of them die within a year of becoming blind 
(WHO, n.d.).
Rice, which is a staple food for nearly half the world’s population (Mohanty, 
2013), is naturally low in micronutrients, including β-carotene, which is the pre￾cursor to vitamin A. Foods naturally high in β-carotene include leafy green vegetables 
and eggs, which are too expensive for people living in many of the low-income 
countries suffering from VAD.
Traditional rice was genetically modified so that it would produce and store 
β-carotene. This storage of β-carotene is what gives Golden Rice its yellow color 
(as opposed to the white/brown color of traditional rice). Upon consumption, the 
β-carotene is then either stored or converted to vitamin A (Golden Rice Project, 
n.d.). The application and spread of Golden Rice have been hampered by anti￾GMO activists and GMO-related fearmongering.
As of this writing, 141 Nobel laureates have signed a petition supporting GMOs. 
The petition specifically asks Greenpeace to abandon its campaign against Golden 
Rice (Nobel Laureates, 2016). For more information on Golden Rice, visit the 
Golden Rice Project: www.goldenrice.org/Content3-Why/why3_FAQ.php#Every
thing_about
Agrochemicals
The advent of the Green Revolution saw a dramatic increase in the use of agrochemicals 
such as fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and so on (Nair, 2014). However, the use of these 
chemicals was not (and is not) without consequences. Excessive use of fertilizers in some 
regions has contaminated surface water and groundwater and, ultimately, devastated 
marine ecosystems, resulting in dead zones (Diaz & Rosenberg, 2008). This process is 
referred to as eutrophication and involves the creation of a dead zone, which is a hypoxic 
(or low-oxygen) zone in the ocean which tends to result in the death of marine animal 
life. The low oxygen levels are the result of the action of the fertilizers which cause 
an overgrowth of marine plant life; this abundant plant life subsequently decomposes, 
and this decomposition process consumes the oxygen in the water, resulting in a hyp￾oxic zone which is incompatible with marine animal life (NOAA, 2018). Pesticides are 
chemicals designed to kill pests (i.e., insects or worms which eat or in some way damage 228 Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating
crops). Herbicides are chemicals designed to kill weeds which compete with agricultural 
crops for resources. Other agrochemicals include growth-promoting fertilizers, chemicals 
which alter the pH of the soil (i.e., how acidic or alkaline soil is) according to the needs 
of the plant, and antibiotics and chemicals applied to livestock to reduce disease and 
promote growth.
Exposure to these agrochemicals, be it acute or chronic, has sometimes resulted in 
serious adverse outcomes for humans and animals. GM technology, for the most part, has 
resulted in reductions in the need for these agrochemicals, which is seen as an advantage 
of GM technology. An example of this is a reduction in the wide-spectrum application of 
insecticides in plants such as potatoes, corn, and cotton after they were genetically modi￾fied to carry a gene from the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis. This bacterium produces 
a natural insecticide called Bt toxin which is toxic to many insects (Niederhuber, 2015). 
The GM crops (called BT crops) now produce this toxin, making them toxic to insects. 
However, in the case of the herbicide glyphosate, the reverse situation has occurred 
in some instances. Glyphosate is a herbicide, and crops which are resistant to glypho￾sate will not die when sprayed with this chemical. However, neighboring weeds will 
die, which is why glyphosate resistance was developed in crops. Some farmers growing 
glyphosate-resistant crops began to overtreat their crops with glyphosate, resulting in 
the development of weeds that are resistant to the effects of glyphosate (Brookes & 
Barfoot, 2013).
The need for agrochemicals is clear given our population explosion. But their toxicity, 
frequency of application, and specificity need both oversight and improvements, with 
further advances in agricultural and chemical technology.
CRISPR – The Future of Gene-Edited Food?
For those who continue to be uneasy about the risks associated with GMOs, and spe￾cifically the risks of mingling DNA from different organisms, CRISPR/Cas9 (clustered 
regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats/CRISPR-associated 9) is a relatively 
new technology which might put your mind at ease. This technology is derived from 
the defense system of bacteria (Li, 2018). In 2020, Emmanuelle Charpentier and 
Jennifer A. Doudna received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for their contributions 
and work on the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Interestingly, the CRISPR modification of 
a plant does not make the resulting plant a GMO (as per the current regulatory 
guidelines). This is because there is no addition of foreign genetic material to the 
target plant. Instead, CRISPR allows us to introduce a new trait by rewriting the 
plant’s genetic code (Li, 2018). This is a critical characteristic distinguishing such 
plants from GMOs, given that, in 2018, the U.S. Secretary of Agriculture announced 
that the USDA would not regulate plants produced using technologies which create 
plants that could have been developed using traditional breeding techniques (USDA, 
2018). Despite the infancy of the CRISPR technology, there are already several plant 
products that have been modified using CRISPR, ranging from mushrooms that resist 
browning to soybeans that exhibit drought-resistant and salt-resistant traits (Waltz, 
2018). Scientists around the world are exploring the many applications this disruptive 
new technology promises, ranging from crops and livestock with advantageous traits 
to curing cancer in humans.Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating 229
Balancing Issues of Population Growth with the Need to 
Produce More Food
Given the population estimates for the year 2050, reports from the United Nations 
suggest that food production will have to increase by 70% above today’s levels to keep 
pace (FAO-UN, 2009). This increase in food production will need to be done efficiently, 
sustainably, and cost-effectively. With regard to the issue of crop efficiencies (yields 
per area of crops planted), it is estimated that global crop yields increased by more 
than 370 million tonnes during 1996–2013 as a result of the adoption of GMO crops 
(Zhang et al., 2016). With regard to the issue of sustainability, it is estimated that global 
adoption of GM technologies in agriculture between 2006 and 2011 has reduced GHG 
emissions to the equivalent of removing 10.22 million cars from the roads (Brookes & 
Barfoot, 2013).
FIGURE 13.2 The three principles of sustainable development
Ultimately, our wariness toward technological innovations in our food supply needs 
to be balanced with the reality of our planet’s human population problem. We need to 
grow food that is environmentally sustainable and nutrient dense. Technologically modi￾fied food is the only solution, in the absence of effective population control measures. 
However, despite a scientist’s best intentions, a technological innovation can have unin￾tended and sometimes harmful consequences. Therefore, critical evaluation of unbiased 
research combined with fair and appropriate regulatory oversight is vital to ensure that 
the future of food is a safe one.230 Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating
ECONOMICS OF FOOD AND FOOD WASTE
The FAO-UN reports that nearly a third of global food produced is either lost or wasted 
(FAO-UN, n.d.). The industrialized world wastes considerably more food than that 
wasted in developing countries. The FAO-UN estimates that consumers in Europe and 
North America waste approximately 230 lbs of food per year (~100 kg/year), compared 
with approximately 20 lbs of food per year (~10 kg/year) in Sub-Saharan Africa and 
South and Southeast Asia (Gustavsson et al., 2011). According to the National Resources 
Defense Council, the U.S. wastes closer to 40% of all the food it produces (Gunders, 
2012). In the U.S., it is estimated that the standard family of four will throw out wasted 
food worth between $1,350 and $2,275 per year (Bloom, 2011, p. 187).
Food loss is broadly defined as the loss of edible food from parts of the supply chain 
system prior to food retailers and end consumers, while food waste refers to food 
discarded or in some way mismanaged by the retailers and end consumers (Parfitt et al., 
2010, as cited by Gustavsson et al., 2011). If these definitions seem somewhat eso￾teric, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) definition of food waste is 
perhaps more concrete: “Uneaten food and food preparation wastes from residences 
and commercial establishments such as grocery stores, restaurants, and produce stands, 
institutional cafeterias and kitchens, and industrial sources like employee lunchrooms” 
(EPA, n.d.).
We see different reasons for food loss and waste (FLW) in developed countries than 
in developing countries. In developing countries, food loss is related to pest infestations 
(prior to harvest or during storage) and, more broadly, to supply chain issues including 
inadequate infrastructure for properly storing and packing food for transportation, inad￾equate transportation options, political and social problems with delivering the food to 
markets, and so on. Food waste, which is substantially lower in the developed world, 
occurs on the supply chain side (e.g., fruits or vegetables discarded because they are not 
ideal in shape, size, or color) and is done by food retailers (e.g., discarding food close to 
or beyond the best-by date), as well as households over-purchasing and then discarding 
excess food (FAO-UN, n.d.).
FLW has obvious economic implications for producers of food, distributors of food, 
and, finally, the households which ultimately consume the food. The social dilemma of 
FLW is starkly evident when viewed through the lens of the millions of people in the 
developed and developing worlds who are experiencing food insecurity, hunger, malnu￾trition, and/or undernutrition. And, finally, the environmental implications of FLW are 
staggering: Global FLW is said to account for 4.4 gigatonnes of greenhouse gas emissions 
(FAO-UN, as cited by Hanson et al., 2015). To put this in more relatable terms, if FLW 
were its own country, it would be the third largest emitter of greenhouse gases in the 
world, surpassed only by China and the U.S. (Hanson et al., 2015).
Awareness regarding food waste is growing, as is evidenced by the increase in 
marketing campaigns run by the Ad Council and the NRDC for organizations such as 
Savethefood.com. Grocery stores such as Daily Table provide low-cost food options to 
their consumers by either accepting donations from other food producers and retailers 
and/or purchasing excess food from food distributors and selling food close to or past 
its “best-by” and “use-by” dates. In order to combat food waste due to imperfections 
in appearance, organizations such as Imperfect Produce purchase this “ugly” produce 
from farmers and then sell it at a discount to consumers willing to eat an imperfectly 
shaped vegetable (Imperfect Produce, 2019). Finally, in line with the United Nations’ Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating 231
Sustainable Development Goals (adopted in 2015), the USDA and EPA have announced 
a domestic goal of reducing U.S. food waste by half by 2030 (EPA, 2015).
CONCLUDING REMARKS
When we view the issues of obesity, food insecurity, overpopulation, GMOs, climate 
change, and food waste, it becomes clear that these issues, which at first glance may seem 
quite disparate, are intractably linked to one another, and improvements in one area 
could well have tremendous impacts on another one of these areas. If we are to combat 
the obesity epidemic, feed our growing population, combat climate change, and reduce 
food insecurity, not only will we need to amplify our food production, but it is equally 
critical that we reduce our overconsumption, reduce our food waste, and reduce our fuel 
use, as we progress into the 22nd century.
GLOSSARY
Agrochemicals Chemicals used in agriculture; these include 
chemicals to resist pests (pesticides), kill weeds 
(herbicides), kill worms (nematicides), and kill 
fungi (fungicides). They also protect crops from 
disease. Also included are fertilizers, which pro￾mote growth in plants, chemicals that alter soil 
pH to support plant growth, and antibiotics and 
hormones used for plants and animals.
Animal husbandry The agricultural practice of rearing, caring for, 
and selectively breeding animals for the pur￾pose of harvesting their fur, eggs, milk, or meat. 
This is an ancient practice which dates from 
the dawn of the Neolithic era approximately 
13,000 years ago.
β-carotene A precursor to vitamin A, which is essential 
for vision, normal development, and immune 
functioning. We cannot synthesize β-carotene 
and must derive it from our diet. It is found in 
red-orange-colored fruits and vegetables, such 
as mangoes and sweet potatoes, and in green, 
leafy vegetables, such as spinach. It is also 
found in Golden Rice.
Built environment Refers to the human-made environment in which 
we live.
CRISPR gene editing (clustered regularly interspaced short palin￾dromic repeats)
A new method of precision genomic editing.232 Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating
Cross-breeding The process of breeding two animals from 
different populations with the intention of cre￾ating a new organism that has traits of both 
parents.
Deforestation The removal of forests and trees and conversion 
of that land to non-forest use.
Desertification The conversion of an area into a desert, usually 
preceded by the death of local vegetation and 
wildlife. This may occur through natural means 
or as a result of human actions such as climate 
change or overgrazing.
Drought resistance The ability of plants to survive for extended 
periods of time without enough water. While 
some plants have naturally occurring drought 
resistance, scientists have genetically modified 
certain crops to endow them with drought resist￾ance, allowing them to grow under low-water 
conditions.
Eutrophication Occurs when a body of water becomes overly 
nourished by pollutants that contain nitrates 
and phosphates, often from detergents and 
fertilizers. The excess nutrition causes plant and 
algae blooms, which may block enough light to 
cause the plant life on the bottom to die. When 
the algae die, they, along with the dead plant 
life, decompose in a process which consumes 
much of the oxygen in the body of water, which 
renders the body of water uninhabitable for 
many organisms.
Food deserts Areas or neighborhoods that lack easy access to 
healthy foods such as fresh fruit and vegetables. 
Food deserts are often found in low-SES 
neighborhoods.
Food supply chain The process by which food from a farm even￾tually reaches our tables. This process begins 
with the production of food, followed by its 
processing, transportation, and distribution. 
It ends with the consumption and disposal 
of food.
Genetic engineering The process of adding or removing genetic 
material from an organism. Since the early 
1970s, genetic engineering has been the 
domain of biotechnology; however, humans 
have engaged in selective breeding of crops 
and domestication for thousands of years, Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating 233
which may sometimes be considered genetic 
engineering.
Glyphosate A herbicide that is used by farmers to kill weeds. 
It became an especially popular herbicide 
following the creation of glyphosate-resistant 
crops, which allowed farmers to spray their 
crops with this herbicide without harming them. 
Overuse of this herbicide has resulted in the 
development of glyphosate-resistant weeds.
Greenhouse gases (GHGs) Greenhouse gases are gases in our atmosphere 
that absorb thermal solar radiation. Carbon 
dioxide is the most commonly discussed green￾house gas, but there are many other GHGs such 
as methane, ozone, and even water in vapor 
form. GHGs are byproducts of many modern 
manufacturing and power-generation processes. 
Excess GHG production by humans is causing 
global climate change, which includes higher 
temperatures and extreme weather events.
Incentivized weight loss Weight loss due to the offering of an incentive, 
often financial. Researchers and governments 
have experimented with incentivized weight loss 
with varying degrees of success.
Methane Methane, or CH4, is a colorless, odorless gas and 
is an important contributor to global warming as it 
absorbs much more heat from the sun than carbon 
dioxide (CO2). Microorganisms inhabiting the 
digestive tracts of ruminants (e.g., cattle, sheep, 
etc.) also produce significant amounts of methane 
and thus contribute to global warming.
Nudge theory Attempts to influence behavior through indirect 
environmental stimulus. Many nudges involve 
making the desired behavior the default choice 
or the easier choice. For example, a school cafe￾teria seeking to improve nutrition might place 
fruit in a convenient display while relocating 
candy to a more obscure area.
Obesity tax Also known as “fat tax”; a tax on overweight 
individuals or on foods and beverages that cause 
obesity. The goal may be to reduce obesity and/
or to reimburse society for the negative external￾ities due to obesity.
Sustainability A philosophy where development and progress 
are managed so that we can meet both the 
needs of the present and the needs of the future. 234 Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating
Three key overlapping principles of sustainable 
development include social factors, economic 
factors, and environmental factors.
Tonne (aka metric ton) A non-SI unit of mass with slightly different 
meanings around the world. In the U.S., a ton is 
equal to 2000 lbs. Outside the U.S. a tonne or 
metric ton is equal to 2,204.6 lbs (1,000 kg).
REFERENCES
Aleksandrowicz, L., Green, R., Joy, E. J. M., Smith, P., & Haines, A. (2016). The impacts of dietary 
change on greenhouse gas emissions, land use, water use, and health: A systematic review. PLoS 
One, 11, e0165797.
Ananthapavan, J., Peterson, A., & Sacks, G. (2018). Paying people to lose weight: The effectiveness of 
financial incentives provided by health insurers for the prevention and management of overweight and 
obesity: A systematic review. Obesity Reviews, 19 (5), 605–613.
Baird, V. (2011). The no-nonsense guide to world population. Oxford: New Internationalist.
Barone, J. (2017, October 12). Why soda taxes work. Retrieved from www.berkeleywellness.com/heal
thy-community/health-care-policy/article/why-soda-taxes-work
Bassett, D. R., Fitzhugh, E. C., Heath, G. W., Erwin, P. C., Frederick, G. M., Wolff, D. L., Welch, W. 
A., & Stout, A. B. (2013). Estimated energy expenditures for school-based policies and active living. 
American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 44 (2), 108–113.
Becker, C. B., Middlemass, K., Taylor, B., Johnson, C., & Gomez, F. (2017). Food insecurity and eating 
disorder pathology. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 50 (9), 1031–1040.
Bellwood, P. (2005). First farmers: The origins of agricultural societies. Oxford: Blackwell.
Bero, L. A. (2005). Tobacco industry manipulation of research. Public Health Reports (Washington, D.C.: 
1974), 120 (2), 200–208.
Binks, M. (2016). The role of the food industry in obesity prevention. Current Obesity Reports, 5 (2), 
201–207.
Bloom, J. (2011). American wasteland: How America throws away nearly half of its food (and what we 
can do about it). Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Lifelong Books.
Bongaarts, J. (2009). Human population growth and the demographic transition. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences, 364 (1532), 2985–2990.
Borlaug, N. (1970, December 11). Norman Borlaug Nobel lecture: The green revolution, peace and 
humanity. Retrieved from www.nobelprize.org/prizes/peace/1970/borlaug/lecture/
BP. (2018). Statistical review of world energy. 67th edition. Retrieved from www.bp.com/content/dam/
bp/en/corporate/pdf/energy-economics/statistical-review/bp-stats-review-2018-full-report.pdf
Brookes, G., & Barfoot, P. (2013). Key environmental impacts of global genetically modified (GM) crop 
use 1996–2011. GM Crops & Food, 4 (2), 109–119.
Cardello, H., & Wolfson, J. (2013, May). Lower-calorie foods and beverages drive Healthy Weight 
Commitment Foundation Companies’ sales growth interim report. Retrieved from www.hudson.org/
content/researchattachments/attachment/1107/lowercalhealthyweightcommitment–may2013.pdf
Carvajal-Aldaz, D., Cucalon, G., & Ordonez, C. (2022). Food insecurity as a risk factor for obesity: A 
review. Frontiers in Nutrition, 9, 1012734.
Charles, D. (2016, August 1). How Monsanto and Scofflaw farmers hurt soybeans in Arkansas. Retrieved 
from www.npr.org/sections/thesalt/2016/08/01/487809643/crime-in-the-fields-how-monsanto￾and-scoff​law-farmers-hurt-soybeans-in-arkansas
Clifford, H. (2014). AquaAdvantage Salmon: A pioneering application of biotechnology in aquaculture. 
BMC Proceedings, 8 (Suppl. 4), O31. doi: 10.1186/1753-6561-8-S4-O31Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating 235
Cummins, S., Flint, E., & Matthews, S. (2014). New neighborhood grocery store increased awareness of 
food access but did not alter dietary habits or obesity. Health Affairs, 33 (2), 283–291.
Dewey, C. (2017, August 29). This miracle weed killer was supposed to save farms. Instead, it’s 
devastating them. Retrieved from www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/this-miracle￾weed-killer-was-supposed-to-save-farms-instead-its-devastating-them/2017/08/29/33a21a56-88e3-
11e7-961d-2f373b3977ee_story.html?noredirect=on&utm_term=.c3c040758325
Diaz, R. J., & Rosenberg, R. (2008). Spreading dead zones and consequences for marine ecosystems. 
Science, 321, 926–929.
Drewnowski, A., Arterburn, D., Zane, J., et al. (2019). The Moving to Health (M2H) approach to natural 
experiment research: A paradigm shift for studies on built environment and health. SSM - Population 
Health, 7, 100345.
Epstein, L. H., Dearing, K. K., Roba, L. G., & Finkelstein, E. (2010). The influence of taxes and subsidies 
on energy purchased in an experimental purchasing study. Psychological Science, 21 (3), 406–414.
Epstein, L. H., Raja, S., Daniel, T. O., et al. (2012). The built environment moderates effects of family￾based childhood obesity treatment over 2 years. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 44, 248–258.
Eshel, G., Shepon, A., Makov, T., & Milo, R. (2014). Land, irrigation water, greenhouse gas, and 
reactive nitrogen burdens of meat, eggs, and dairy production in the United States. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States, 111 (33), 11996.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO-UN). (n.d.). Food loss and waste. 
Retrieved from www.fao.org/food-loss-and-food-waste/en/
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO-UN). (2009, September 23). 2050: A 
third more mouths to feed. Retrieved from www.fao.org/news/story/en/item/35571/icode/
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO-UN). (2013, September 26). Major cuts 
of greenhouse gas emissions from livestock within reach; key facts and findings. Retrieved from www.
fao.org/news/story/en/item/197623/icode/
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO-UN). (2014, October 21). Tackling cli￾mate change through livestock. Retrieved January 31, 2019 from www.fao.org/ag/againfo/resour
ces/en/publications/tackling_climate_change/index.htm
Genetic Literacy Project. (2016). GMO FAQ: Which genetically engineered crops are approved in 
the U.S.? Retrieved from https://gmo.geneticliteracyproject.org/FAQ/which-genetically-engineered￾crops-are-approved-in-the-us/
Golden Rice Project. (n.d.). FAQ. Retrieved from www.goldenrice.org/Content3-Why/why3_FAQ.
php#Everything_about
Gunders, D. (2012). Wasted: How America is losing up to 40 percent of its food from farm to fork to 
landfill. National Resources Defense Council. Retrieved from www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/was
ted-food-IP.pdf
Gustavsson, J., Cederberg, C., Sonnesson, U., van Otterdijk, R., & Meybeck, A. (2011). Global food 
losses and food waste: Extent, causes and prevention. FAO-UN. Retrieved from www.fao.org/3/
a-i2697e.pdf
Handbury, J., Rahkovsky, I., & Schnell, M. (2016). Is the focus on food deserts fruitless? Retail access and 
food purchases across the socioeconomic spectrum (NBER Working Paper No. 21126). Retrieved 
January 27, 2019 at 11:00 pm from National Bureau of Economic Research website www.nber.org/
papers/w21126
Hanson, C., Lipinski, B., Friedrich, J., O’Connor, C., & James, K. (2015). What’s food loss and waste got 
to do with climate change? A lot, actually. Retrieved from www.wri.org/blog/2015/12/whats-food￾loss-and-waste-got-do-climate-change-lot-actually
Harris, B. (2018, March 14). Will a sugar tax help reduce obesity? Retrieved from www.weforum.org/
agenda/2018/03/will-a-sugar-tax-help-reduce-obesity/
Healthy People 2030. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://health.gov/healthypeople/priority-areas/social￾determinants-health/literature-summaries/food-insecurity on January 11, 2024.
Imperfect Produce. (2019). FAQ. What is imperfect, and how does it work?? Retrieved from 
https://help.imperfectproduce.com/hc/en-us/articles/115004535013-What-is-Imperf
ect-and-how-does-it-work-236 Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). (2016, January 3). Monograph on glyphosate. 
Retrieved from www.iarc.fr/featured-news/media-centre-iarc-news-glyphosate/
IRS. (2018, August 2). Retirement topics – benefits of saving now. Retrieved from www.irs.gov/retirem
ent-plans/plan-participant-employee/retirement-topics-benef​its-of-saving-now
James, C. (2014). Global status of commercialized biotech/GM crops. ISAAA Brief No. 49.
Kakaei, H., Nourmoradi, H., Bakhtiyari, S., Jalilian, M., Mirzaei, A. (2022). Effect of COVID-19 on food 
security, hunger, and food crisis. COVID-19 and the Sustainable Development Goals. 2022, 3–29.
Kearns, C. E., Schmidt, L. A., & Glantz, S. A. (2016). Sugar industry and coronary heart disease 
research: A historical analysis of internal industry documents. JAMA Internal Medicine, 176 (11), 
1680–1685.
Kissinger, G., Herold, M., & de Sy, V. (2012). Drivers of deforestation and forest degradation: A syn￾thesis report for REDD+ policymakers. Published by the governments of UK and Norway.
Nobel Laureates. (2016, June 29). Letter supporting precision agriculture (GMOs). Retrieved from http://
supportprecisionagriculture.org/nobel-laureate-gmo-letter_rjr.html
Ledford, H. (2015, November 23). News: Salmon approval heralds rethink of transgenic animals. 
Nature. Retrieved from www.nature.com/news/salmon-approval-heralds-rethink-of-transgenic-anim
als-1.18867
Li, Y. (2018, November 15). How scientists are using CRISPR to create non-GMO crops. Retrieved 
from https://geneticliteracyproject.org/2018/11/15/how-scientists-are-using-crispr-to-cre
ate-non-gmo-crops/
Losey, J., Rayor, L., & Carter, M. (1999). Transgenic pollen harms monarch larvae. Nature, 399
(6733), 214.
Malthus, T. R. (1798). An essay on the principle of population: Or, a view of its past and present effects 
on human happiness; with an inquiry into our prospects respecting the future removal or mitigation of 
the evils which it occasions, 7th ed. London: J. Johnson. Retrieved from https://books.google.co.uk/
books/about/An_Essay_on_the_Principle_of_Population.html?id=kY0VAAAAYAAJ&printsec=frontco
ver&source=kp_read_button&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q&f=false.
McColl, K., Clarke, B., & Doran, T. (2013). Role of genetically engineered animals in future food produc￾tion. Australian Veterinary Journal, 91, 113–117.
Mohanty, S. (2013). Trends in global rice consumption. Rice Today, 12, 44–45.
Nair, P. K. R. (2014). Grand challenges in agroecology and land use systems. Frontiers in Environmental 
Science, 2, 1.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce (NOAA). (2018, June 
25). What is a dead zone? Retrieved January 30, 2019 from https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/
deadzone.html
New York Times. (1998, February 9). 1923: Obesity tax: In our pages: 100, 75 and 50 years ago. 
Retrieved from www.nytimes.com/1998/02/09/opinion/IHT-1923-obesity-tax-in-our-pages100-75-
and-50-years-ago.html
Ng, S., Slining, M., & Popkin, B. (2014). The healthy weight commitment foundation pledge: Calories 
sold from U. S. consumer packaged goods, 2007–2012. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 
47 (4), 508–519.
Niederhuber, M. (2015, August). Insecticidal plants: The tech and safety of GM Bt crops. Retrieved from 
http://sitn.hms.harvard.edu/flash/2015/insecticidal-plants/
Norris, M. L. (2015, August 10). Will GMOs hurt my body? The public’s concerns and how scientists have 
addressed them. Retrieved from http://sitn.hms.harvard.edu/flash/2015/will-gmos-hurt-my-body/
Odoms-Young, A., & Bruce, M. A. (2018). Examining the impact of structural racism on food inse￾curity: Implications for addressing racial/ethnic disparities. Family and Community Health, 41
(Suppl. 2 Food Insecurity and Obesity), S3–S6.
Otterbein, H. (2016, August 2). The beverage lobby spent $10.6 million to kill the soda tax — and 
failed. Retrieved from www.phillymag.com/citif​ied/2016/08/02/soda-tax-spending-lobbying/
Papas, M., Alberg, A., Ewing, R., Helzlsouer, K., Gary, T., & Klassen, A. (2007). The built environment 
and obesity. Epidemiologic Reviews, 29, 129–143.Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating 237
Paslakis, G., Dimitropoulos, G., and Katzman, D. K. (2021). A call to action to address COVID-19-
induced global food insecurity to prevent hunger, malnutrition, and eating pathology. Nutrition 
Reviews, 79 (1), 114–116.
Pingali, P. L. (2012). Green revolution: Impacts, limits, and the path ahead. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 109 (31), 12302–12308.
Pringle, H. (1998). The slow birth of agriculture. Science, 282 (5393), 1446.
Raman, R. (2017). The impact of genetically modified (GM) crops in modern agriculture: A review. GM 
Crops & Food, 8 (4), 195–208.
Sears, M. K., Hellmich, R. L., Stanley-Horn, D. E., et al. (2001). Impact of Bt corn pollen on monarch 
butterfly populations: A risk assessment. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 98 (21), 11937–11942.
Séralini, G. E., Clair, E., Mesnage, R., et al. (2012). Long-term toxicity of a Roundup herbicide and 
a Roundup-tolerant genetically modified maize. Food and Chemical Toxicology, 50, 4221–4231. 
Retraction published in Food and Chemical Toxicology, www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0278691512005637?via%3Dihub
Séralini, G. E., Clair, E., Mesnage, R., et al. (2014). Republished study: Long-term toxicity of a Roundup 
herbicide and a Roundup-tolerant genetically modified maize. Environmental Sciences Europe, 
26, 14.
Sharifi, M., Sequist, T., Rifas-Shiman, S., et al. (2016). The role of neighborhood characteristics and the 
built environment in understanding racial/ethnic disparities in childhood obesity. Preventive Medicine, 
91, 103–109.
Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008). Nudge: Improving decisions about health, weight and happiness. 
New York: Penguin Books.
Union of Concerned Scientists. (2018, October 11). Each country’s share of CO2 emissions. Retrieved 
on January 31 at 11:50 pm from www.ucsusa.org/global-warming/science-and-impacts/science/
each-countrys-share-of-co2.html#.XFPXTFxKguU
United Nations (UN). (2017). UN World population prospects: The 2017 revision. New York: United 
Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs; Population Division.
United Nations (UN). (2019). UN World population prospects: The 2019 revision. New York: United 
Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs; Population Division.
United Nations (UN). (2024). United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals – zero hunger. Retrieved 
from www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/hunger/ on January 11, 2024.
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). (2018, March 28). Secretary Perdue issues USDA statement 
on plant breeding innovation. Retrieved from www.usda.gov/media/press-releases/2018/03/28/
secretary-perdue-issues-usda-statement-plant-breeding-innovation
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). (n.d.). Terminology services. Retrieved from https://iaspub.
epa.gov/sor_internet/registry/termreg/searchandretrieve/termsandacronyms/search.do?search=
&term=food%20waste&matchCriteria=Contains&checkedAcronym=true&checkedTerm=true&hasDefi
nitions=false
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). (2015). United States 2030 food loss and reduction goal. 
Retrieved from www.epa.gov/sustainable-management-food/united-states-2030-food-loss-and-waste￾reduction-goal
Vermeulen, S. J., Campbell, B. M., & Ingram, J. S. I. (2012). Climate change and food systems. Annual 
Review of Environment and Resources, 37 (1), 195–222.
Walsh, G. (2005). Therapeutic insulins and their large-scale manufacture. Applied Microbiology and 
Biotechnology, 67 (2), 151–159.
Waltz, E. (2018). With a free pass, CRISPR-edited plants reach market in record time. Nature 
Biotechnology, 36 (1), 6–7.
Wan, W. (2017, October 21). Cigarette taxes are the best way to cut smoking, scaring Big Tobacco. 
Retrieved from www.washingtonpost.com/national/health-science/cigarette-taxes-are-the-best-way-to￾cut-smoking-scaring-big-tobacco/2017/10/21/fbf51d04-9f05-11e7-8ea1-ed975285475e_story.
html?noredirect=on&utm_term=.5ea6bdc69bbe238 Institutional Approaches to Healthful Eating
Wikipedia. (2019, February 1). Sugary drink tax. Retrieved from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sugary_ 
drink_tax
World Health Organization (WHO). (n.d.). Micronutrient deficiencies – vitamin A deficiency. Retrieved 
from www.who.int/nutrition/topics/vad/en/
W.Z. (2018, August 10). Do “sin taxes” work? Retrieved from www. economist. com/the-economist￾explains/2018/08/10/do-sin-taxes-work
Zhang, C., Wohlhueter, R., & Zhang, H. (2016). Genetically modified foods: A critical review of their 
promise and problems. Food Science and Human Wellness, 5 (3), 116–123.Index
Action potential 45, 48
Activity: metabolism 14; metabolic equivalent of 
task (MET) 35
Addiction: drug 176; food 152, 155–156
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 14–15
Adipose tissue 21
Adolescent 205
Advertising 6, 123
Agouti-related peptide (AgRP) 66
Agriculture 222; chemical in 227–228
Allele 76
Alliesthesia 68
Amino acids 19, 48
Amygdala 48, 102
Animal models in research 9, 77, 179, 204
Animal source foods (ASF) 24, 31, 41
Anorexia nervosa 3, 166–168
Anosmia 49
Arcuate nucleus 55, 66–67
Autonomic nervous system 34–35
Bariatric surgery 200–204; gastric bypass 
201–204
Basal or resting metabolic rate 13–14, 36
Behavior therapy see therapy
Binge eating disorder 171–173
Bioenergetics 13
Biomedical approach 9
Body mass index (BMI) 3–7
Bottle feeding 113–114
Brain 31, 46, 55, 62, 66, 81, 91, 102; 
see also amygdala; arcuate; n. accumbens; 
cortex; fMRI; hypothalamus 
Breast feeding 113–114
Built environment 215
Bulimia nervosa 3, 169–170
Calorie 14; substitute 199–200; tracking 195
Cannabinoids 159
Cardiovascular disease or function 4, 187
Carbohydrates 16–17; complex 17; 
disaccharides 17; monosaccharides 16
Cellulose see fiber
Chocolate 150–152
Cholecystokinin (CCK) 56
Chrononutrition 192
Cognitive restraint 9
Comfort food 145–149
Commensal food consumption 138
Conditioning: classical 87–89; hunger 98; 
satiety 97
Contagion 140
Contextual cues 100
Cortex: orbitofrontal 49; prefrontal 
102
Cost of treatment 205; unit price 38
Craving 149–150
Cuisine 131–136
Cultural beliefs, attitudes, and religion 
133–136
Demand function 38
Deoxynucleic acid (DNA) 75
Desert: food desert 215
Development 31, 83, 108; see also bottle 
feeding; breast feeding
Developmental programming 79
Diabetes 16, 77, 125, 187
Diet 8, 190–193; dietary obesity 80; dietary 
restraint 153; fad diet 190–191
Direct social influence 138
Disgust see contagion
Dopamine 91, 156, 175
Drugs see weight loss
Eating disorder 165–174
Economics of food 38, 230
Energy 13; balance 36, 192; density 15; 
flow 31; output 36, 188
Enteric nervous system 52
Enteroendocrine 54–55
Eutrophication 227
Epigenetics 78–79
Evolution 30
Exercise 36–37, 188–190
Exposure 92–95240 Index
Fake facts 19
Fatty acids 21
Fiber 18
Flavor 49, 93–96
Fletcherism 41
Food: labeling 21, 140; supply chain 230; 
waste 230
Fos 66
Foraging 33
Fullness 8
Functional imaging (fMRI) 62, 152, 158; 
see also brain
Gastrointestinal tract 53
Genetics: transcription and translation 75
Genes and obesity 76–77; monogenic 76–78; 
polygenic 78
Genetic engineering or modification 77, 223
Genome-wide association (GWA) 78
Ghrelin 98, 203
Global obesity 5
Glucocorticoid see HPA axis
Glycemic index and load 17–18
Glycogen 18
Government 214–218
G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) 48
Grazing 35
Green revolution 223, 227
Gross energy gain 36
Gustation 50; see also taste
Healthful eating 216
Hedonic; hot and cold spots 68–69
High fructose corn syrup (HFCS) 17
Hindbrain 46, 52
Homeostasis 99
HPA axis 147, 149
Hunger: definition 8
Hunter-gatherer 1, 30, 33
Hypothalamus 66–67
Imbalanced protein 18
Immune system 101
Impulsivity 176
Incentive salience 69; and weight loss 215
Indirect social influence 136–137
Industry or corporations 40, 141, 214
Infant, infancy 31, 107–114
Innate 101, 112
Insulin 55–56, 147, 197; insulin sensitivity 188
Insular cortex 103
Intermittent fasting 191
Junk food 109–110, 148, 154
Kilojoule and kilocalorie: definition 14
Labels see food labeling
Lactose intolerance 17, 132
Learning: associative 87–97, 101, 139; 
see also conditioning
Leptin 56, 77–78, 115, 203
Life expectancy 3, 189
Macronutrient 15
Marketing 1, 6, 89, 141
Meal 32–33, 41, 99
Media 123, 141; see also advertising
Medicine effect 91
Melanocortin 66
Meta-analysis 10
Metabolism 14; see also basal or resting 
metabolic rate
Microbiome 80–83
Micronutrients 21–23
Mitochondria 14
Mobile app 195
Mood 145
Motivation 38, 159
Natural selection see evolution
Neophobia 91–92
Nucleus accumbens 69, 103, 156
Nucleus of the solitary tract 52, 55
Nudges 82, 218
Obesity: incidence 3; obesogenic 9, 122
Odorant 47
Olfaction 47–49
Omnivore 23
Ontogeny see development
Opioids 69, 157–158, 175
Opportunistic eater 38
Optimal foraging 35, 38
Optogenetics 64
Orexin 158
Organizational see developmental 
programming
Overweight: definition 3
Parenting style 119
Phenotype 76–78
Population of world 187, 216, 219–221
Portion size 39–40, 122–123
Prebiotic and probiotic 83
Prenatal 108–112
Pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) 66–67
Protein 18–19; protein-to-calorie ratio 19
Receptors: gustatory 50; olfactory 47–48
Retronasal olfaction 47
Reward 65, 155, 195
Risk 135, 172
Salt or minerals 22
Satiety: definition 8
Saturated fat 21–22
Serotonin 54, 146, 149, 174Index 241
Snack 38, 100, 118, 123–124, 147–149
Sucrose see carbohydrates (disaccharides)
Taste aversion 89–90
Taste bud 57
Taxation of food 34, 218
Technology and food 224–225; CRISPR 228
Therapy, cognitive behavioral 178, 194
Time-restricted feeding see chrononutrition
Treatments for obesity 196–198, 200–203
Tryptophan 19, 146, 150
Underweight 4, 7
Unit price see cost
Unsaturated fat 19–20
Vagus nerve 51, 55, 81
Vegan, vegetarian 24
Ventral tegmental area (VTA) 69, 155
Vitamins 23; vitamin A deficiency 227
Waist circumference 4
Weight loss 188, 196, 200, 218
