IAN BALL
WILLEM BUITER 
JOHN CROMPTON
DAG DETTER
JACOB SOLL
PUBLIC
NET WORTH
ACCOUNTING · GOVERNMENT · DEMOCRACY
Foreword by MARTIN WOLFPublic Net WorthIan Ball • Willem Buiter
John Crompton • Dag Detter • Jacob Soll
Public Net Worth
Accounting – Government - 
DemocracyISBN 978-3-031-44342-8 ISBN 978-3-031-44343-5 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5
© Te Editor(s) (if applicable) and Te Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2024
Tis work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether 
the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of 
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microflms or in any other physical way, and 
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar 
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
Te use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a specifc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
Te publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book 
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or 
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any 
errors or omissions that may have been made. Te publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional afliations.
Tis Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG.
Te registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland
Paper in this product is recyclable.
Ian Ball
Wellington, New Zealand
John Crompton
Cambridge, UK
Jacob Soll
Sherman Oaks, CA, USA
Willem Buiter
New York, NY, USA
Dag Detter
Stockholm, Swedenv
If something is to count, it must frst be counted. Tat is the lesson of this 
important book.
Tis is not true, of course, of everything that matters in human life. 
Many things lie beyond measurement: a child’s smile, a parent’s love, a 
widower’s grief. But when it comes to contemporary life, numbers are 
essential: without counting, we could not have modern science; without 
accounts, we could have neither thriving businesses nor transparent states.
No contemporary institution is more important than the state. In 
high-income democracies, governments spend up to half of gross domes￾tic product. Tey provide defence, justice, education, and health, ofer 
insurance against individual and collective risks, redistribute from rich to 
poor and across generations, fund and build infrastructure, set standards, 
and regulate almost every aspect of their people’s lives. Specialised state 
institutions perform many other functions, including control over money 
and monetary policy. Surprisingly perhaps the “neo-liberal” era dimin￾ished neither the roles states play nor their expense in any signifcant way: 
they remain omni-present.
Yet, as the authors of this book point out, virtually all democratic 
states, notably including the most important, provide grossly inadequate 
information, especially fnancial information, on their activities. Above 
all, they ignore their balance sheets, in ways that would certainly not be 
permitted for private businesses. Tey focus, instead, on their revenues, 
Forewordvi Foreword
expenditures, and market debt, with a single year’s gross domestic prod￾uct used to provide context.
Tese conventions ignore public assets and most liabilities. Tis igno￾rance, in turn, causes huge problems: it makes it hard to evaluate the 
state’s solvency; it obscures the distinction between borrowing to fnance 
consumption and to create valuable long-term assets, and it underplays 
the implications of expensive long-term spending commitments, such as 
public sector pensions. Tis ignorance makes it impossible to manage 
public sector assets efectively. As a result, opportunities to generate valu￾able resources for the state are wasted.
Te solutions, assert the authors, include the adoption of modern 
accounting standards, with full balance sheets and accrual accounting. 
Only once this is done, will it be possible to manage public assets and 
liabilities successfully.
Te implications are potentially radical. It is clear, for example, that 
long-term solvency demands huge fscal adjustments in many countries, 
notably including the US and UK. Tis is, no doubt, one of the reasons 
why governments do not want to show the level of transparency that they 
demand of the private sector.
A better justifcation for not proceeding with full accounting of the 
state’s fnancial condition might be that there are so many inescapable 
uncertainties: discount rates are uncertain, for example, as are future rates 
of economic growth and demographic developments; and even more 
uncertain are the chances and consequences of shocks, such as pandem￾ics, wars, and fnancial crises. Also signifcant are difculties in valuing 
assets, such as non-commercial property, museums, and other civic ame￾nities, or many forms of infrastructure. Important, too, is the reality that 
some assets are hard to realise or may be impossible to realise at all.
Yet these difculties, while real, are a poor excuse for not making the 
efort. Te fact that something is hard to value does not mean it can be 
ignored. Obviously, the efort must be made intelligently, with account 
duly taken of relevant distinctions, such as those between liquid and illiq￾uid assets or between fxed and adjustable commitments. Te British gov￾ernment’s eforts to calculate the output of public services are a perfect 
example of what is both difcult to do and important to attempt.Foreword vii
It is always far better to be roughly right than to be precisely wrong. 
Ignoring reality, because it is hard to take everything into account, is a big 
mistake, because it will understate both the risks and the opportunities, 
probably dramatically so. Only the truth, however difcult that may be 
to reach, can free us from such errors.
Tis book is a call for sensible change. It should be answered.
Chief Economics Commentator, Financial Times Martin Wolf 
London, UKix
Acknowledgements
We could not have completed this book without the invaluable data from 
the IMF and the work done by Vitor Gaspar and his team at the Fiscal 
Afairs Department, frst published in the Fiscal Monitor on Public 
Wealth 2018 and subsequently updated in the Public Sector Balance 
Sheet database. Also, the data on the UK economy was analysed by 
Richard Hughes and his team at the Ofce for Budget Responsibility and 
by the Ofce for National Statistics has been most valuable. We are also 
grateful to the New Zealand Treasury for allowing us to include extracts 
of their published material.
We particularly thank Rolf Strauch, Maarten Verwey and David Miles 
for their valuable contributions, thoughts and comments. Similarly, we 
are grateful to Matthew Klein, Delphine Moretti, Stephanie Friedenburg, 
William Holder and David Walker for sharing their insights, as well as 
Jacob Frenkel, Nathan Sheets, Philipp Hildebrand, Otmar Issing, Koichi 
Hamada, Peter Orzag and Urjit Patel for their comments, and Sue Anne 
Tay and Terence Ho for their perspectives on the Singapore experience.x Acknowledgements
A special thanks to Martin Wolf for the brilliant foreword and helpful 
support he has given us and this book. We also thank James Crompton 
for his work on the exhibits presented in this book.
We have been fortunate to have had helpful publishers in Palgrave 
Macmillan, particularly in the person of Stephen Partridge.
Wellington, New Zealand Ian Ball
New York, USA Willem Buiter
Cambridge, UK John Crompton
Stockholm, Sweden Dag Detter
Los Angeles, USA Jacob Sollxi
Contents
Part I Purpose and Prologue 1
1 Purpose and Prologue 3
1.1 Owning and Owing 3
1.2 Te Question at the Heart of Government 
Finance…Where Is the Balance Sheet? 4
1.3 Te Importance of History, and Historical Importance 5
1.4 Why Accounting Is Important for Democracy 6
1.5 Eighteenth Century Tools, Twenty-First Century 
Fiscal Rules 8
1.6 Credit Risk or Infation Risk? What Happens When 
Government Finances Go Wrong 10
1.7 Delivering Better Public Services, More Efciently 11
1.8 Which Balance Sheet Are We Talking About? 12
1.9 Why the G7 Focus? 13
1.10 Conclusion 14xii Contents
2 From Warfare to Welfare in Tree Generations 17
2.1 Te Evolution of Public Finances over 300 Years 18
2.2 Bismarck and the Foundations of the Welfare State 20
2.3 Te Impact of the Welfare State on Public Finances 21
2.4 Conclusion 23
Part II Accounting for Government 25
3 Accounting for Government 27
3.1 Why Government Accounting Matters 27
3.2 Governments Are Important 28
3.3 Te Direct Impact of Government Is Far Greater 
Tan Service Provision 29
3.4 Indirect Impact of Government 30
3.5 Te Scale and Complexity of Government 30
3.6 Governments Need to Be Well-Managed 32
3.7 Government Finances Are Also Large and Complex 33
3.8 Conclusion 36
4 What Does the Government’s Balance Sheet Look Like? 39
4.1 Net Worth 40
4.2 Reading the New Zealand Government’s 
Balance Sheet 40
4.3 Classifying Assets and Liabilities by Purpose 43
4.4 Managing Government Assets 45
4.5 Liabilities on the Government Balance Sheet 48
4.6 Conclusion 51
5 Why Accrual Accounting Matters 53
5.1 Financial Decision-Making in Government 53
5.2 Te Required Information Refects the Complexity 
of the Government’s Finances 55
5.3 Why Accrual Accounting Is So Important 56
5.4 Te Cash Basis for Accounting 57
5.5 Accrual Accounting Is Diferent 59Contents xiii
5.6 Te Balance Sheet Is Critical 61
5.7 Limitations of the Conventional Balance Sheet 62
5.8 Te Importance of Timely Information 66
5.9 Conclusion 69
6 Accrual Accounting – A Glimpse of How it Works in 
Practice 73
6.1 A Week in the Life of a Small Government 74
6.2 Accrual Information for Decision-Making 78
6.3 Te Need to Account for Assets 80
6.4 Decisions and Incentives 82
6.5 Accrual Information at the Heart of the Financial 
Management System 83
6.6 Conclusion 86
7 Central Banks and the Public Sector Balance Sheet 89
7.1 Central Bank Structure and Ownership 90
7.2 A Free Lunch? Money as an Irredeemable Liability, 
and “Seigniorage” 91
7.3 Central Bank Activity and Its Impact on the Public 
Sector Balance Sheet 93
7.4 Conclusion 95
8 Looking to the Future: Te Comprehensive Balance Sheet 97
8.1 Building the Comprehensive Balance Sheet 98
8.2 Comprehensive Balance Sheet: Prediction or 
Planning Tool? 100
8.3 What Does a Solvent – or Insolvent – 
Comprehensive Balance Sheet Look Like? 101
8.4 New Zealand’s Comprehensive Balance Sheet 
Approach 102
8.5 Constructing the Comprehensive Balance Sheet – 
and Why Does It Matter? 103
8.6 Orders of Magnitude: What Really Matters? 106
8.7 Conclusion 108xiv Contents
9 Comparison of Public Sector Balance Sheets 111
9.1 Te IMF: Promoting Better Public Sector 
Financial Management 112
9.2 Assets Versus Liabilities 113
9.3 What Assets Do Governments Own? 114
9.4 Debt – and Other Liabilities 116
9.5 Getting to the Bottom Line – Te Importance 
of Net Worth 118
9.6 Focus on the G7: Overview 119
9.7 G7 Public Sector Balance Sheet Comparisons 120
9.8 How Did G7 Countries Get to Tis Position? 123
9.9 Conclusion 125
10 Comparison of Comprehensive Balance Sheets 127
10.1 Evaluating the Comprehensive Balance Sheet: Te 
IMF Framework 128
10.2 Sustainability of Public Finances: What the Model 
Tells Us 133
10.3 An Alternative Source: Te UK Ofce for Budget 
Responsibility 136
10.4 A View Trough Time – Can Adjustments Be Made? 138
10.5 Who’s Got the Bill? Te Welfare State and 
Intergenerational Fairness 142
10.6 “Markets Versus Morons”: Do Financial Markets 
Take Financial Sustainability Into Account? 144
10.7 Conclusion 147
11 Fiscal Rules 151
11.1 Fiscal Rules: What Are Tey? 152
11.2 Te UK and EU Examples 153
11.3 IMF on Fiscal Rules 154
11.4 New Zealand as an Exception – Te Fiscal 
Responsibility Act 1994 155
11.5 Principles of Responsible Fiscal Management 156
11.6 Te Fiscal Outcomes 157
11.7 Conclusion 159Contents xv
Part III Managing Public Commercial Assets and Liabilities 163
12 Finding, Understanding, and Valuing Public 
Commercial Assets 165
12.1 Assets, What Assets? 166
12.2 What Are Public Commercial Assets? 167
12.3 Hidden Assets – A Missed Opportunity 168
12.4 An Alternative Source of Funding for US 
Infrastructure Investments 172
12.5 Governments Are Hiding Assets 175
12.6 Conclusion 177
13 Te Asset Map: A Shortcut to Understanding 
Property Holdings 181
13.1 Te Politics of Asset Maps and Improved 
Transparency 182
13.2 Te Mechanics of an Asset Map 185
13.3 Process 186
13.4 Conclusion 189
14 Institutionalising the Management of Public Wealth 191
14.1 Separating Wealth Management from 
Policymaking Has Historical Roots 191
14.2 Competition at the Heart of Economic Policy 192
14.3 Public Service Obligations and Other Subsidies 193
14.4 Efcient Capital Allocation 196
14.5 Why Consolidating Ownership of Public 
Commercial Assets Is Critical 197
14.6 Te Ministry of Finance Is the Natural Custodian 
of Governance 201
14.7 Transfer of Wealth to Future Generations 203
14.8 Te Mechanics of Setting Up a Holding Company 204
14.9 Conclusion 204xvi Contents
15 What Should Governments Do with Public 
Commercial Assets? 207
15.1 Te Opportunity Cost of Not Managing Public 
Commercial Assets 207
15.2 Te example of UK Water 209
15.3 State Capitalism on the Rise 213
15.4 Swedish Experiment—As If Owned by Private 
Shareholders 219
15.5 Political Will Is Key 222
15.6 Conclusion 224
16 Managing Assets Better: Te Role of Public Wealth Funds 229
16.1 Necessity Is the Mother of Invention 229
16.2 Local Government Development 230
16.3 Even Selling Assets Requires a Professional Institution 234
16.4 Principles for Governing Public, Commercial Assets 238
16.5 Recruiting the Supervisory Board 240
16.6 Setting Up the Management Team 243
16.7 Te Basics of Developing Public Commercial Assets 244
16.8 A Holding Company Is a Tool Tat Can Be Used 
for Good or Bad 245
16.9 Singapore—Improving the Net Worth for Future 
Generations 247
16.10 Conclusion 247
17 Pensions and Other Liabilities: Te Benefts of Disclosure 
and Management 251
17.1 How Pensions Appear on the Public Sector Balance 
Sheet 252
17.2 Te Magnitude of Pensions Obligations on the 
Public Sector Balance Sheet 254
17.3 Why Accounting Properly for Pensions Matters 256
17.4 Out of Sight, Out of Mind 258
17.5 Do Government Pension Commitments Represent 
Value for Money? 261Contents xvii
17.6 Should Governments Borrow to Invest? 262
17.7 Is this a “Free Lunch”? 265
17.8 Institutional Structures, Policy Implications 268
17.9 Conclusion 269
Part IV Past, Present and Future 271
18 Balance Sheets, Culture and National Achievement in 
Europe 1560–1834 273
18.1 Balancing the Books of the First Global Empire 273
18.2 Reclaiming the Land: Dutch Accounting Culture 
and the Birth of a Nation 276
18.3 Polders to Plutocrats: Dutch Accounting Culture 
and the Birth of Modern Capitalism 278
18.4 Dutch Accounting Culture: Philosophy, Politics 
and Economics 283
18.5 Accounting and Autocracy in Seventeenth 
Century France 285
18.6 Political Arithmetic in Eighteenth Century Britain 287
18.7 “Scarcely Susceptible of Melioration”: Accounting 
Systems in Post Napoleonic France and Britain 290
18.8 Conclusion 291
19 How Accounting Can Save Democracy 297
19.1 Complex, Big and Growing: Te Problem in 
Government Finances 299
19.2 Accounting, Fiscal Rules and Financial 
Management: Why Net Worth Matters 300
19.3 Intergenerational Fairness 301
19.4 History, Accounting and Democracy 303
19.5 Can We Rely on Markets to Regulate 
Government Finances? 306
19.6 Accounting and Management 308
19.7 Conclusion: Saving Democracy 309xviii Contents
20 Implementing Change 313
20.1 A Common Programme for Change 313
20.2 How Implementation Plans Will Difer 
Between Countries 316
20.3 Final Toughts 317
Glossary and Abbreviations 319
Bibliography 327
Index 337xix
Ian Ball is an adjunct professor at the Wellington School of Business 
and Government at Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand. He 
served as the Director of Financial Management Policy and Central 
Financial Controller at the New Zealand Treasury. He is credited with 
being a principal architect of the New Zealand Government’s fnancial 
management reform process, leading to the passage of the Public Finance 
Act 1989. Tis made New Zealand the frst government to introduce 
accrual accounting and integrate that with the budget and appropriation 
processes. He also initiated and lead the development of the International 
Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) while Chair of the 
International Federation of Accountant’s Public Sector Committee.
Willem Buiter is an adjunct senior fellow at the Council on Foreign 
Relations. He was the Global Chief Economist at Citigroup, Chief 
Economist at the EBRD and an original member of the Monetary Policy 
Committee of the Bank of England. He was the Juan T. Trippe Professor 
of International Economics at Yale University. He held academic appoint￾ments at the London School of Economics, Cambridge University, the 
University of Bristol, and Princeton University. He is the author of 78 
refereed articles in professional journals and seven books.
About the Authorsxx About the Authors
John Crompton began his career as a civil servant in HM Treasury in 
the mid-1980s before joining Morgan Stanley, where he worked as 
an investment banker in London, New York, and Hong Kong. In 
2005–2007 he was seconded back to HMT as its Senior Corporate 
Finance Advisor and from 2008 to 2010 was Head of Market Investments 
at UKFI, responsible for the government’s investments in Lloyds Banking 
Group and RBS (now NatWest). More recently, he worked for HSBC for 
several years and is now a non-executive director, adviser, and fntech 
investor.
Dag Detter advises private and public sector clients across the world on 
the unlocking of value from public assets. He led the comprehen￾sive restructuring of Sweden’s US$70 billion national portfolio of com￾mercial assets, the frst attempt by a European government to systematically 
address the ownership and management of government enterprises and 
real estate. Tis led to a value increase of the portfolio twice that of the 
local stock market and helped boost economic growth and fscal space. 
He is the author of Te Public Wealth of Nations—Te Economist’s and 
Financial Times’ best book of the year—and Te Public Wealth of Cities.
Jacob Soll is a university professor and Professor of Philosophy, History, 
and Accounting at the University of Southern California and has taught 
at Princeton, Rutgers, and Cambridge Universities. Te winner of many 
prestigious prizes, including a MacArthur “Genius” Grant, Soll’s work 
examines the mechanics of politics, statecraft, and economics by dissect￾ing how modern states and political systems succeed and fail. He is the 
author of several books, including his bestselling Te Reckoning: Financial 
Accountability and the Rise and Fall of Nations (2014), which presents a 
sweeping history of accounting and politics, drawing on a wealth of 
examples from over a millennium of human history to reveal how 
accounting can used to both build kingdoms, empires, and entire civilisa￾tions and to undermine them. It explains the origins of our fnancial cri￾sis as deeply rooted in a long disconnect between human beings and their 
attempts to manage fnancial numbers.xxi
Fig. 2.1 UK public sector net debt during periods of confict and 
peace. (Source: Bank of England, Ofce of Budgetary 
Responsibility) 18
Fig. 2.2 UK central government borrowing during times of confict 
and peace. (Source: Bank of England, Ofce of Budgetary 
Responsibility) 19
Fig. 2.3 German life expectancy at birth 1875–2020. 
(Source: Statista.com, UN DESA, Gapminder) 21
Fig. 2.4 UK government spending during periods of confict and 
peace (Ofce of Budgetary Responsibility: Fiscal 
sustainability report July 2022 p. 31). (Source: Bank of 
England, Ofce of Budgetary Responsibility) 22
Fig. 3.1 Te relationship between the operating balance and the 
balance sheet. (Source: Te New Zealand Treasury) 35
Fig. 4.1 Statement of fnancial position of the New Zealand 
government. (Source: Te New Zealand Treasury) 41
Fig. 4.2 Te classifcation of assets and liabilities by purpose. 
(Source: Te New Zealand Treasury) 44
Fig. 4.3 Extracts from Note 17, Property, Plant and Equipment. 
(Source: Te New Zealand Treasury) 46
Fig. 4.4 Extract from Note 28 – Financial Instruments. 
(Source: Te New Zealand Treasury) 48
List of Figuresxxii List of Figures
Fig. 5.1 Forecast Statement of Financial Position for the New 
Zealand government. (Source: Te New Zealand Treasury) 68
Fig. 5.2 Statement of Financial Performance for the seven months 
to 31 January 2023. (Source: Te New Zealand Treasury) 70
Fig. 6.1 A week in the life of a small government 75
Fig. 6.2 Levels of integration of accrual accounting in fnancial 
management systems 85
Fig. 8.1 Simplifed comprehensive balance sheet of government 
and central bank 104
Fig. 9.1 PSBS: total assets versus total liabilities, 2020/2021 
(% of GDP). (Source: IMF Data: Public Sector 
Balance Sheet) 114
Fig. 9.2 PSBS: asset composition 2020/2021 (% of GDP). 
(Source: IMF Data: Public Sector Balance Sheet) 115
Fig. 9.3 PSBS: stated holdings of land 2020 (% of GDP). 
(Source: IMF Data: Public Sector Balance Sheet) 116
Fig. 9.4 PSBS: liability composition 2020/2021 (% of GDP). 
(Source: IMF Data: Public Sector Balance Sheet) 117
Fig. 9.5 PSBS: net worth 2020/2021 (% of GDP). 
(Source: IMF Data: Public Sector Balance Sheet) 119
Fig. 9.6 G7 total assets vs total liabilities 2020/2021 (% of GDP). 
(Source: IMF Data: Public Sector Balance Sheet) 121
Fig. 9.7 G7: asset composition 2020/2021(% of GDP). 
(Source: IMF Data: Public Sector Balance Sheet) 121
Fig. 9.8 G7: liability composition 2020/2021(% of GDP). 
(Source: IMF Data: Public Sector Balance Sheet) 122
Fig. 9.9 G7 net worth 2020/2021 (% of GDP). 
(Source: IMF Data: Public Sector Balance Sheet) 123
Fig. 9.10 G7 net worth 2007 versus 2020/2021(% of GDP). 
(Source: IMF Data: Public Sector Balance Sheet) 124
Fig. 10.1 IMF baseline projections of health expenditure 
(% of GDP). (Source: IMF) 130
Fig. 10.2 IMF projections of health expenditure: sensitivity 
to OADR (% of GDP). (Source: IMF) 131
Fig. 10.3 Baseline projections of pensions (% of GDP). (Source: IMF) 132
Fig. 10.4 Intertemporal net fnancial worth (% of GDP). 
(Source: IMF) 134
Fig. 10.5 Intertemporal net worth (% of GDP). (Source: IMF) 134List of Figures xxiii
Fig. 10.6 Fiscal adjustment required to make INFW = 0 or maintain 
at current levels of NFW (% of GDP). (Source: IMF) 135
Fig. 10.7 Fiscal adjustment required to make INW = 0 (% of GDP). 
(Source: IMF) 136
Fig. 10.8 UK Intertemporal Net Financial Worth (% of GDP). 
(Source: IMF) 139
Fig. 10.9 UK decomposition of changes in UK Intertemporal 
Net Financial Worth (% of GDP). (Source: IMF) 140
Fig. 10.10 Proportion of UK individuals receiving more in benefts 
than paying in taxes 1977–2021. (Source: Ofce for 
National Statistics (July 2022)) 143
Fig. 10.11 UK 10 year gilt yields vs US Treasury 10 year 
yields vs £/$ exchange rate: 1 July – 31 December 2022. 
(Source: Factset) 146
Fig. 11.1 New Zealand’s fscal track record. (Data source: NZ 
Treasury fscal time series data) 158
Fig. 12.1 Public commercial assets 167
Fig. 12.2 Indicative valuations of publicly owned real estate 
in US cities 172
Fig. 13.1 Asset map process 187
Fig. 14.1 Public vs sovereign wealth funds 199
Fig. 16.1 Te three pillars of professional governance of public assets 238
Fig. 16.2 Supervisory board recruitment 241
Fig. 17.1 Public sector debt and pensions obligations, selected 
countries (% of GDP). (Source: IMF Data: Public 
Sector Balance Sheet) 254
Fig. 17.2 Public sector debt and pensions obligations, G7 countries 
(% of GDP) (Source: IMF Data: Public Sector Balance 
Sheet database) 255xxv
Table 7.1 Central bank ownership arrangements 90
Table 7.2 Change in monetary base 2007–2022 (% of GDP) 92
Table 17.1 UK NHS Pension Scheme—change in pension liability 
2021–2022 257
Table 17.2 UK NHS Pension Scheme—contributions and benefts 
2021–2022 257
Table 17.3 Illustrated pension costs—UK nurse 258
Table 17.4 Top 10 Sovereign Wealth Funds by assets 268
List of TablesPart I
Purpose and Prologue© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 3
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5_1
1
Purpose and Prologue
1.1 Owning and Owing
Te balance sheet – a point-in-time assessment of assets and liabilities – 
has been at the heart of human decision-making since we developed laws 
to defne what we own and what we owe. We see this in Greek legends, 
Sumerian clay tablets, the parables of Jesus, the predatory record￾gathering of William the Conqueror, the novels of Jane Austen.
As individuals  many of  our most important fnancial decisions are 
about how we manage our personal balance sheets. For example, buying 
a home; fnancing education; saving for retirement; providing resources 
for children or grandchildren. Personal balance sheet information in turn 
becomes the basis for interactions with mortgage providers, tax authori￾ties, social service providers and divorce lawyers – all of whom can exert 
signifcant infuence over our lives.
For businesses functioning in a market economy, the balance sheet 
becomes still more central. It is the fnancial expression of all that has 
gone before, and a major determinant of what future paths can be fol￾lowed. Without an up-to-date, precise understanding of assets and liabili￾ties, a company cannot access the capital that it needs to develop new 
activities. Worse, the company’s stakeholders  – owners, employees, 4
customers, suppliers, creditors and communities  – will not have the 
information that they need to interact safely with the company. Tese 
matters are so important that accurate, timely fnancial reporting is a 
universal requirement of company law and subject to extensive regula￾tory oversight by governments.
Tere are, of course, arguments that government is diferent, and that 
the simple rules that apply to households and companies should not 
apply. We agree that government is diferent – but only up to a point.
Governments have unique responsibilities for acting in ways that can￾not be addressed by the actions of other economic agents: for example, in 
applying fscal policy to create demand at times of recession; of being the 
lender or guarantor of last resort at times of fnancial crisis; of mobilising 
the resources necessary to meet the health needs of ageing populations, or 
of addressing, or averting, the consequences of climate change.
But none of these functions can be performed by governments unless 
they enjoy the trust of counterparties and markets that they can deliver 
on their commitments, and that the money that they issue has value. If 
that confdence is lost, then fnancial and monetary systemic collapse are 
not far behind. Having a strong balance sheet is the bedrock of efective 
government.
1.2 The Question at the Heart 
of Government Finance…Where Is 
the Balance Sheet?
Te scale and scope of governments – especially national governments – 
far exceeds that of even the biggest companies. In advanced economies, 
governments typically account for 40–50+% of GDP and so employ a 
large proportion of their country’s current and capital resources. How 
governments fund their activities – from current revenues, borrowings or 
money creation – determines whether the costs are borne by current or 
future generations and in what way. Moreover, governments are a huge 
factor in individuals’ balance sheets; private sector pension entitlements 
are often underpinned by government debt; public sector pensions are 
direct government obligations.
I. Ball et al.5
Yet despite the centrality of a government’s fnances to the lives of all its 
citizens, many governments do not produce full fnancial statements. In 
efect, they exempt themselves from the reporting obligations that they 
place on much less important private or public sector bodies. Tose that 
do produce accounts often publish them far too late to be of practical use, 
or without important information about the value of the assets that gov￾ernments are employing. And very few countries – perhaps only one – put 
the balance sheet at the heart of government fnancial decision-making.
So, government accounting practices are anomalous. Te biggest eco￾nomic agents are fnancially the least well understood. But what exactly 
is the problem? Why does it matter? What can we do about it, and what 
can we expect to achieve?
Exploring these questions is the purpose of this book.
1.3 The Importance of History, 
and Historical Importance
Our approach to addressing these issues is grounded in history. Tere are 
several reasons for this.
First, questions about how governments fnance themselves have been 
around for as long as governments themselves: no government super￾structure can exist without fnding a means to extract an economic sur￾plus to support its activity. Taxation, borrowing, episodic plundering or 
systematic colonial exploitation have all featured in many forms in the 
hundreds of polities, and over the thousands of years, for which we have 
records. Success in organising public fnances might not be a sufcient 
condition for success as a political entity, but it certainly is a necessary 
condition. Te ability of states through history to adapt (or to fail to 
adapt) to dynamic change in the demands made on their fnances may 
ofer important lessons for the present.
Second, the present challenges facing government fnances around the 
world are rooted in fnancial management frameworks that are hundreds 
of years old. Yet the large majority of government activities that they sup￾port – the modern welfare state – are much more recent in conception and 
are continually expanding in scope. Tis is due in part to the success of the 
1 Purpose and Prologue6
welfare state in improving longevity, and in part to increased expectations 
about what the state can or should provide. Our thesis is that the tradi￾tional frameworks fall far short of what is required to manage government 
fnances, whether in terms of ensuring long term sustainability, efciency 
in management of resources, or intergenerational fairness. Adopting 
“proper” accounting practices, and putting accounts at the heart of gov￾ernment decision-making, is an essential step in bringing government 
fnancial management from the eighteenth to the twenty-frst century.
Tird, the problems that we are describing afect the world’s most 
advanced economies, including many of the world’s largest. Instability in 
the government fnances of major economies – whether expressed through 
default or monetary collapse – would have major efects on the global 
economic and fnancial systems, and even more profound efects on the 
populations of those countries most directly afected. Te broader conse￾quences are unknowable, but would surely be of great historical signif￾cance, and not in a good way.
1.4 Why Accounting Is Important 
for Democracy
A recurring theme of this book is that democratic political processes 
might not be (or have been) efective in assessing long-term (often inter￾generational) matters when taking short term fscal decisions. Tis should 
not be interpreted as a suggestion that alternative forms of government 
might work better; this would be as repugnant to the authors in principle 
as it would be unsupported by evidence that autocracies promote better 
long-term government.
Efective democracy is centred on stimulating a critical debate between 
multiple competing political entities. But however fair and well-informed 
the debate, the weight that will be ascribed to its various elements – and by 
implication, the value associated with short- versus long-term costs and 
benefts – will be determined by the electorate, over 4- to 5-year electoral 
cycles. Immediate and broadly relevant factors (tax rates, hospital waiting 
lists, the cost of living) are likely to take precedence over longer term, more 
abstract concepts (sustainability of the retirement age, healthcare infation).
I. Ball et al.7
Tis is not to suggest that electorates or politicians are incapable of 
taking long-term views, or of making, or advocating, near-term sacrifces 
in support of these positions. Widespread support across many demo￾cratic nations for measures to address global warming demonstrates this 
point, though it also demonstrates the difculty of eliciting present sacri￾fces necessary to meet future targets in full.
To “sell” the electorate on long-term issues like sustainability of public 
fnances, politicians need to establish the long-term problem and the 
near-term measures to address it, and targets that will defne being 
on track.
Te key political test will be: can the democratic process lead to the 
adoption of much higher taxes, or a substantial change in expectations 
about public services, especially in countries like the UK and US which 
have persistently failed to make such adjustments in the past? And as the 
task gets harder each year, will there be a point of no return, at which 
radical, disruptive change is forced upon governments through extreme 
fnancial stress? And what would the consequences of such a disaster be 
for democratic government?
Better government accounting, and better use of that accounting, can 
make a key contribution to putting democratic states back on the path to 
fscal sustainability, by identifying emerging problems; by providing pol￾icy tools that can ensure that government fnances stay within safe limits; 
and by making intergenerational choices about the allocation of benefts 
and costs more explicit.
Following through on the opportunities that accounting will highlight 
will also allow much better scrutiny of the uses to which public assets are 
put, and will provide information to managers about how best to deliver 
public services efciently and efectively. Similarly, accounting will allow 
better understanding and management of liabilities – including the very 
large, long-term obligations (for example, pensions or nuclear decommis￾sioning) – which are largely ignored by conventional government fnan￾cial measures, yet have a direct efect on long-term government fnances. 
Te opportunities for improvement in this area are of similar magnitude 
to the long-term challenges that we face.
Accounting is about transparency and efciency, which are essential to 
a successful democracy.
1 Purpose and Prologue8
1.5 Eighteenth Century Tools, Twenty-First 
Century Fiscal Rules
Despite the enormous sums involved, and the complexity of the deci￾sions that governments need to make, the large majority of governments 
use very simple fnancial tools to guide their fnancial decisions.
Typically, two metrics are employed: a measure of the relationship 
between income and expenditure in a given year (the fscal defcit/sur￾plus) and a measure of the total amount of government fnancial debt. 
Tese might or might not be embedded in formal “fscal rules”, which we 
discuss in Chap. 11. To provide a sense of proportion, both are often 
expressed as percentages of GDP. And to demonstrate sustainability, gov￾ernments typically ofer multi-year forecasts of income, expenditure and 
anticipated fnancing activity.
Tese metrics have several attractions. Tey are relatively easy to under￾stand and to measure – at least at nominal value (which can itself misrep￾resent the “true” value of liabilities, a point which has long been 
understood by the accounting profession). Tey also allow for relatively 
straightforward comparisons between national government fnances. 
Tis is especially important within the European Union and Eurozone, 
where fscal rules based along these lines are central to maintaining over￾all fnancial stability and “fairness” between member states.
However, there are two big shortcomings with this approach.
First, there is no recognition of the diference between government 
spending on investment versus consumption. So, purchasing assets which 
will generate future benefts has exactly the same impact on the fscal 
surplus or defcit and on fnancial debt as spending (say) on social secu￾rity. At best, distinguishing between current and capital expenditure is 
covered by second order fscal rules and largely ignored by policymakers 
or fnancial markets.
Second, and more profoundly, it ignores the existence of a government 
balance sheet. Other liabilities such as public sector pensions are com￾pletely excluded from the framework though in some cases they exceed 
government fnancial debt. In the same way that asset formation is efec￾tively ignored in measures of expenditure, balance sheet assets are also 
excluded. Yet as we shall discuss, governments have very large asset hold￾ings, often exceeding total fnancial debt in magnitude. Taken together, 
I. Ball et al.9
this means that “net worth” – the diference between total assets and total 
liabilities, the basic measure of wealth – tends not to feature in a govern￾ment’s assessment of its fnancial position or performance.
Failing to measure net worth creates several problems. It obscures a 
government’s true fnancial position, potentially increasing its cost of 
borrowing (especially in crisis situations, which are more likely to occur 
without good fnancial information). It creates a disincentive for public 
sector investment, as in the absence of a net worth measure, there is no 
way to capture the efects of investment on the government’s balance 
sheet. More broadly, it deprives society of a key measure of intergenera￾tional fairness, as periodic assessments of net worth provide a measure of 
whether the government is saving or consuming resources.
As we have suggested, this is especially important in a world where 
governments are the primary providers of post-retirement benefts.
At an aggregate level, all this might not matter very much as long as 
governments are living comfortably within their capacity to tax and bor￾row. However, sooner or later those governments with the most compre￾hensive systems of welfare provision would be likely to reach the point 
where the traditional measures of government fnances cease to provide 
an adequate picture of fnancial viability. Tis would have serious conse￾quences for the fnancial health of the state, for intergenerational fairness, 
or both.
Unfortunately, recent events have sharply increased the near-term 
pressure on government fnances. Te confuence of events often referred 
to as the Global Financial Crisis led to sharp increases in government 
fnancial debt. Te subsequent response to COVID-19 has had a similar 
efect. In both cases, the slow economic recoveries experienced in many 
western countries have protracted plans to return fnancial debt to more 
traditional levels (in absolute terms or relative to GDP).
Te need to meet zero carbon targets implies further pressure to come 
on government balance sheets as does the impact of ageing populations.
By adopting improved fnancial management tools, based on proper 
management of the balance sheet, governments can maximise their fnan￾cial capacity, and manage safely within the limits that fnancial markets 
and other stakeholders will allow. Te time to do this is before the next 
crisis strikes.
1 Purpose and Prologue10
1.6 Credit Risk or Infation Risk? What 
Happens When Government Finances 
Go Wrong
Part of the challenge we face in describing how the public sector balance 
sheet works and why it matters is that what happens when fnances go 
awry is rather diferent for a modern government than for a corporation. 
Tis is because most governments (or rather, their central banks), issue 
their own currency. In the absence of legal constraints (for example, a 
“debt ceiling” embedded in law), governments can meet fnancial obliga￾tions by printing money. Tis is a relatively recent phenomenon; until 
the 1920–1930s money was typically backed by central bank gold, and 
the post-war Bretton Woods system of fxed exchange rates placed similar 
constraints on national fnances. It is also not universally true; Eurozone 
countries operate on the basis of a currency that is controlled by a supra￾national central bank which brings the credit risk of individual countries 
into much sharper focus.
Te consequence is that for many countries, shortfalls in fnancial 
resources to meet (domestic currency) obligations can usually be resolved 
through the printing press. Infation, rather than a classic credit default, 
is the likely result.
Tis might sound like a solvable problem. Most infationary episodes 
can be addressed through restrictive monetary policy. An overheated 
labour market can be cooled; unemployment restored (usually with some 
overshoot) to a level at which wages are stable. Trow in some Rational 
Expectations (a theory which posits that economic agents make decisions 
based upon all available information, including about how other agents 
are likely to react) and the adjustment process will be quicker. Independent 
central banks with predictable infation targets and monetary policies are 
designed to make this process as smooth, and as self-fulflling, as possible.
Te problem is that when infation is the result of printing money 
because the markets won’t lend it any more, then there is no such self￾correcting mechanism. Infation is ever-accelerating. When money is 
seen to be without value, and government guarantees of no worth, then 
the impacts on economic activity, and on personal and public wealth, are 
catastrophic.
I. Ball et al.11
1.7 Delivering Better Public Services, 
More Effciently
As we have said, embracing accounting in government is not just about 
promoting a better understanding of the overall fscal position, it also 
provides insights that can improve the efectiveness and efciency with 
which government is delivered.
First, the focus on net worth as a key balance sheet metric ensures that 
government borrowing to fnance assets that have an accounting value 
equal to their cost has an initially neutral efect. Te increased borrowing 
might be in violation of traditional fscal rules, but would have no imme￾diate adverse efect under a net worth rule.
Second, a focus on government assets is likely to lead to the “recogni￾tion” of much currently unaccounted-for public wealth, especially real 
estate (resulting in stronger balance sheets than previously thought), and 
also to expose opportunities for more efcient management of these 
assets. Tese themes – including a detailed discussion of how better to 
manage public commercial assets – are addressed further in Chaps. 12, 
13, 14, 15 and 16.
Tird, “proper” accounting treats all liabilities – debt and non-debt – 
equally. Tis has important implications for the management of public 
sector pension obligations, which are very often unfunded, and which 
can often exceed fnancial debt in scale.1
 Current fscal rules typically 
allow these to be ignored; they do not fgure in EU debt-to-GDP borrow￾ing rules, for example. A focus on net worth brings these very large liabili￾ties into scope of government fnancial management. Tis will ofer 
opportunities to begin funding liabilities through a sovereign wealth 
fund or similar: raising fnancial debt to invest in higher return assets will 
be neutral to net worth initially, but will be net positive as returns are 
realised. Also, a more diversifed, fnancial asset-rich balance sheet is 
likely to be more resilient, for a given level of net worth. Tis is discussed 
further in Chap. 17.
1 Purpose and Prologue12
1.8 Which Balance Sheet Are 
We Talking About?
Trough most of this book we make reference to the “government bal￾ance sheet” as a general concept. However, this term can have various 
meanings and it is worth exploring these.
As its name suggests, the Central Government Balance Sheet describes 
those assets and liabilities which are owned or owed directly by the 
national government and includes public corporations owned or under 
the control of the central government. Central Government is important 
for the goals of this book because of the scale and infuence of national 
governments; if accounting-driven fnancial management is implemented 
at this level, then a great deal of what we believe is required will have been 
accomplished. Central Government is also important as it is the focus of 
national fscal policy debate and budgetary actions.
General Government comprises the governmental functions carried 
out at central plus regional (or state) and local government levels, but 
does not include the functions of public corporations (which are com￾mercial rather than governmental in nature). Te relative scale of central 
and subnational levels of government varies widely between countries, 
and the amount of infuence that national governments exert over subor￾dinate levels of government will also vary, and may be highly controver￾sial (the US Civil War of 1861–1865 ofers an extreme example). So 
General Government accounts will describe a more complete picture of 
overall national fnances, but might well include activities over which the 
national government does not exercise control, and will exclude activities 
carried out by public corporations at all levels of government.
Te broadest description of a government’s fnancial position is to be 
found in the Public Sector Balance Sheet, which adds assets and liabilities 
from public corporations at all levels of government to those of General 
Government, to create an overall picture of what is owned and owed by 
the state. As such, it provides the most complete picture of the “govern￾ment” fnancial position, even if it is not managed as a single political or 
economic unit. It is, however, a useful vantage point from which to assess 
fscal sustainability or intergenerational fairness, which are major con￾cerns of this book.
I. Ball et al.13
1.9 Why the G7 Focus?
Te principles that we are advocating, and the opportunities that they 
ofer for better government, are applicable to governments at all levels, 
and across all countries; in Chaps. 15 and 16 we look at situations where 
efective asset management has been central to economic development at 
a national and local level. But much of the work that we present on gov￾ernment balance sheets and the sustainability of fscal and policy choices 
focuses on the G7 countries (see Chaps. 9 and 10). Tere are three rea￾sons for this.
First, the G7 countries all have high per capita incomes, relatively low 
economic growth rates, and ageing populations (though over the longer 
term there is a fairly wide variance of demographic projections). All have 
extensive (and expensive) systems for delivering healthcare and social 
security to their populations, which arguably provide aspirational models 
for less economically developed countries.
Second, these are all big economies, which play an important role in 
the global economic and fnancial system. A loss of confdence in the 
ability of governments in any one of these countries to meet fnancial 
commitments would have very serious repercussions indeed. To borrow 
from the lexicon of “macroprudential” fnancial regulation, these are all 
Global Systemically Important countries.
Tird, and worryingly, the group has experienced steady deterioration 
in net worth – the basic indicator of balance sheet strength – to the point 
where today, only two G7 countries have positive public sector net worth 
based upon available accounting information (on the narrower General 
Government measure, only one G7 country has positive net worth). Te 
position has worsened in recent years, with responses to the Global 
Financial Crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic leading to substantial 
increases in debt levels. Looking forward, it is clear that all will need to 
make substantial adjustments to their fscal position in order to remain 
solvent. Tis is particularly true for the US and the UK, where the gov￾ernment’s tax take as a percentage of GDP is relatively low, and the 
required increase correspondingly greater; for example, the European 
members of the G7 will require less adjustment.
1 Purpose and Prologue14
Terefore, the G7 members are amongst those countries which face 
the greatest challenges created by fnancial systems and fscal rules which 
fail properly to account for, or manage, government assets and liabilities. 
If the political systems in the G7 countries were to fail to respond to these 
challenges, the consequences for the wider world would be very 
severe indeed.
1.10 Conclusion
Tis chapter has been a very brief review of the issues that this book is 
intended to address, and how we go about that task.
Subsequent chapters will provide more historical context, discuss how 
proper accounting should be incorporated within a government fnancial 
decision-making framework, examine the quantitative evidence, and set 
out practical solutions that governments can put in place now to capture 
the benefts of better fnancial management in a fnancially-stressed 
world. Our goal will be to establish the following points:
• Te development of the welfare state since the late 19th century, and its 
expansion over the last three generations, has greatly expanded the 
scale and complexity of government, and the demands on government 
fnances and fnancial management.
• Almost all governments do not employ the readily-available account￾ing tools which in all other areas of organised human activity are 
deemed essential to efciency, transparency and fnancial 
sustainability.
• In particular, governments ignore the principles of accrual accounting, 
which is centred on the balance sheet and net worth, and focus their 
attention on cash measures – annual defcits and surpluses, borrowing 
and debt. Tis distorts decision-making and provides a misleading pic￾ture of fnancial health.
• Governments also pay little attention to the long-term consequences 
of policy decisions on their costs or revenues, with potentially very 
serious consequences for fnancial stability or intergenerational fairness.
I. Ball et al.15
• Te best available information suggests that despite three generations 
of relative peace for G7 nations, the fnancial position of these coun￾tries is weak and deteriorating, with major challenges to come. Tis 
poses a threat to political and economic stability, at a national and 
global level.
• By adopting accrual accounting and fully understanding – and disclos￾ing – assets and liabilities, governments can measure their fnancial 
position more accurately and completely, and can better incorporate 
long-term projections of costs and revenues into their fscal policies.
• Better accounting will also unlock tools for improved fnancial man￾agement of assets and liabilities. Te benefts of these might match or 
exceed current projections of “fscal adjustment” required in G7 coun￾tries – and hence could remove the need for substantial future increases 
in taxation or reductions in service provision.
• Accounting-driven management should be embedded in the institu￾tions of government, and in the way that politicians, civil servants and 
the electorate think about public fnances. Tis process must 
begin soon.
Note
1. E.g., the UK  – see UK Whole of Government Accounts 2019–2020; 
June 2022.
1 Purpose and Prologue© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 17
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5_2
2
From Warfare to Welfare in Three 
Generations
Whilst governments and balance sheets have both existed for thousands 
of years, “modern” government fnances are quite a recent invention. 
Much has changed in a relatively short space of time, and our present 
understanding of (for example) the necessary response to climate change 
or the consequences of ageing populations tells us that government 
fnances will face major new challenges over the coming decades. History 
might well repeat itself, but sometimes it moves forward in a new 
direction.
A brief review of the last few hundred years, seen here from a UK per￾spective, will illustrate the point. Formal capital markets to support gov￾ernment borrowing date from the seventeenth to eighteenth centuries; 
continuing, systematic taxation of incomes emerged in the nineteenth 
century. Tese fnancial innovations provided governments with a toolkit 
for expanding the scope of their activities; longer, more expensive wars; 
increased capital investment in the infrastructure necessary to support an 
industrial state. Te social and political consequences of nineteenth cen￾tury industrialisation and twentieth century wars in turn transformed 
expectations of the state’s role in society; governments became primary 
providers of personal security, education, healthcare, welfare and pen￾sions. Te switch from the gold standard to fat currencies and the 18
emergence of international capital markets based on free fows of capital 
and foating exchange rates created scope for further fexibility in govern￾ment fnancing.
2.1 The Evolution of Public Finances over 
300 Years
Te UK experience ofers helpful insights into the issues described by this 
book; the principles of public fnance put in place by the end on the 
eighteenth century have changed little to the present day, and the UK’s 
success in avoiding major fnancial dislocation over the past period, cou￾pled with its central bank’s interest in publishing very long-term fnancial 
statistics, provides invaluable material describing how the expanding role 
of government has had a profound efect on the scale and nature of gov￾ernment fnances.
Figure 2.1, published by the UK’s Ofce for Budget Responsibility 
(OBR) illustrates the profundity  – and the relative newness  – of the 
changes that this has brought about in government fnance in the UK. Te 
charts draw heavily on research performed by the Bank of England. Te 
Fig. 2.1 UK public sector net debt during periods of confict and peace. (Source: 
Bank of England, Offce of Budgetary Responsibility)
I. Ball et al.19
estimates of GDP for the earlier centuries embedded in these charts 
should be treated with some caution but are unlikely to distort the gen￾eral picture.
Troughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and through the 
frst half of the twentieth century, government borrowing was largely 
driven by the desire to fnance wars. After the wars, debt (here expressed 
as a percentage of GDP) tended to reduce, only to increase again with 
subsequent conficts.
As the chart demonstrates, government debt tended to rise during 
wartime, and decline (at least as a percentage of GDP) during peace￾time. Te frequency and expense of eighteenth and early nineteenth 
century wars resulted in debt peaking at 175% of GDP in 1826; rela￾tive peace, economic growth (at least for much of the nineteenth cen￾tury) and generally balanced government budgets allowed a sustained 
reduction in debt-to-GDP until the twin peaks of the First and Second 
World Wars.
Whilst Fig. 2.1 looks at the outstanding stock of government debt, 
Fig. 2.2 illustrates the amount of net borrowing each year. It shows that 
from 1700 until the mid-1970s UK governments only borrowed exten￾sively during wartime; in peacetime, governments typically operated on 
Fig. 2.2 UK central government borrowing during times of confict and 
peace. (Source: Bank of England, Offce of Budgetary Responsibility)
2 From Warfare to Welfare in Three Generations20
the basis of a balanced budget or a surplus. Together with economic 
growth, this enabled the reduction of the debt-to-GDP ratio relative to 
its early nineteenth century peak.
Figure 2.2 also demonstrates that the immediate post-war generation 
represents the most sustained period of surplus in government fnances 
over the 300+ years of this survey; the Bretton Woods system of fxed 
exchange rates, coupled with the UK’s aspirations to continued global 
power compelled action to reduce national debt and domestic consump￾tion despite the expense associated with expanding the provision of 
health, education and social security through the creation of the “welfare 
state” – a term popularised by the Anglican Archbishop William Temple 
during the Second World War.1
 Tis, together with real economic growth 
and (moderately) higher levels of infation, enabled the rapid reduction 
of government debt to GDP; high infation during the 1970s dampened 
what would otherwise have been greater increases in the debt to GDP ratio.
So, the implication is clear: the frst-ever peacetime expansion of gov￾ernment debt in the UK began not with the adoption of the welfare state, 
but a full generation later. We will return to this point shortly.
2.2 Bismarck and the Foundations 
of the Welfare State
It is an often-remarked-upon irony that the frst modern system of national 
social welfare in the world was created by a statesman often seen as 
emblematic of conservatism, Otto von Bismarck. But Bismarck is also 
known as the inventor of Realpolitik, and as such his embrace of socialist￾leaning policies as part of a campaign to undermine emergent socialism in 
Germany can be seen as an authoritative recognition of the inevitability of 
welfare programmes as part of a modern, at least partially, democratic 
state. Under Bismarck’s chancellorship, the Reichstag passed legislation 
covering sickness insurance and accident insurance for the working popu￾lation in 1883 and 1884, and old age and disability insurance in 1889.2
A notable – and highly gratifying – feature of increased governmental 
involvement in supporting the welfare of its citizens is that it has worked. 
When Bismarck’s old age and disability measures were introduced, life 
I. Ball et al.21
Fig. 2.3 German life expectancy at birth 1875–2020. (Source: Statista.com, UN 
DESA, Gapminder)
expectancy at birth was around 40 years, and with a qualifying age of 70 
(adjusted to 65 in 1916) it was expected that only a small fraction of citi￾zens would live long enough to beneft. As Fig. 2.3 demonstrates, German 
average life expectancy at birth reached Bismarck’s pension age in the 
mid-1960s; today, comparable life expectancy is over 80 years. Similar 
trends can be observed in other advanced economies.
As we will see in Chap. 10, changing demographics are a major deter￾minant of the outlook for government fnances.
2.3 The Impact of the Welfare State 
on Public Finances
Delivery of a modern welfare state makes government the largest employer 
of human, physical and fnancial capital by an order of magnitude. As the 
largest employer, government has also become the largest pension pro￾vider, and in many countries ofers its employees’ pension terms that 
would be extremely expensive to replicate in the private sector. Te scale 
of these commitments is impressive: in the UK, for example, government 
statutory pension liabilities at £2.2 trillion in 2020 exceeded central gov￾ernment debt.3
2 From Warfare to Welfare in Three Generations22
Fig. 2.4 UK government spending during periods of confict and peace (Offce of 
Budgetary Responsibility: Fiscal sustainability report July 2022 p.  31). (Source: 
Bank of England, Offce of Budgetary Responsibility)
Figure 2.4 illustrates the composition of public expenditure in very 
broad strokes since 1700. Defence (or rather, war) and debt interest (on 
money borrowed to fund war) dominated expenditure until the late nine￾teenth century; today, “other” spending – largely health, social security 
and education – represents the preponderance of government expenditure.
Te relatively low share of GDP accounted for by debt interest in com￾parison with former times might encourage the view that there is ample 
scope to grow government debt without risking fnancial stress. However, 
it should be remembered that these charts refect only fnancial debt: the 
(often somewhat larger) non-debt liabilities of government, many of 
which have been incurred in the delivery of modern public services, are 
excluded.
Te growth of the welfare state has changed much more than the scale 
and mix of government expenditure. It has also coincided with a major 
change in the age composition of the population and has brought about 
a radical shift in the way that society looks after older generations.
Provision for older people that had been accommodated within the 
family for (literally) thousands of generations has moved outside the fam￾ily and become socialised. Much of this shift has happened within living 
memory. Tis not only has profound consequences for the scale of 
I. Ball et al.23
demands on public fnance, but it also means that difcult decisions 
about resource allocation and cost-bearing have to be tackled at a societal 
level, not within the family. It is one thing for grandparents to make sac￾rifces for their grandchildren; it is quite another matter for them to make 
sacrifces for someone else’s.
2.4 Conclusion
It is clear that the invention of the welfare state has had a profound efect 
on the lives of those who enjoy its benefts. Life after retirement was once 
the exception; now it is the norm. Education creates individual fulflment 
and opportunity, as well as social beneft. Universal healthcare drives 
both longevity and quality of life.
Tese factors are self-reinforcing, and have created a genuinely expo￾nential growth in the demand – and the cost – of the services that the 
state provides. Tis not only increases the demands on the quantity of 
public fnancial provision, but renders ever more acute the question of 
who should carry the fnancial burden. It is noteworthy that despite these 
trends having been in place for well over a hundred years, and despite the 
extraordinary fnancial impact of two world wars, it is only over the last 
generation or so that the answer to this question has become “our chil￾dren and grandchildren”.
In Chap. 9 we will develop this point further in relation to the G7 
countries, and in Chap. 10 explore what the consequences are for long 
term government fnances.
Notes
1. Gough, I: “Welfare State”. In: Eatwell, J., Milgate, M., Newman, P. (eds) 
(1989) Te New Palgrave. Palgrave Social Economics. Macmillan, London. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-349-19806-1_35
2. Steinberg, J: Bismarck: A Life (2011) Oxford University Press.
3. UK Whole of Government Accounts 2019–2020; June 2022.
2 From Warfare to Welfare in Three GenerationsPart II
Accounting for Government© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 27
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5_3
3
Accounting for Government
3.1 Why Government Accounting Matters
Tis chapter explains why accounting properly for governments is critical 
to their good management and, therefore, to achieving what they set out 
to do. In this and the following chapters, we use the New Zealand 
Government as an example to illustrate our arguments, primarily because 
it is the government which has most fully integrated good accounting 
into its fnancial management processes and fnancial decision-making. 
Not only are the annual fnancial statements very comprehensive and 
transparent, but the same principles that underlie the fnancial statements 
also drive the economic and fnancial planning and budget processes, as 
well as budget execution and in-year fnancial monitoring.
By “good accounting” we mean accrual accounting. We will expand on 
this later, but in essence, it is accounting which encompasses all assets and 
liabilities, revenues and expenses, rather than just cash fows and cash bal￾ances. Accrual accounting also reveals the net worth of the government – 
the diference between total assets and total liabilities. It requires the 
production of a full balance sheet, and a set of fnancial statements like 
those that are routinely produced by companies. Until relatively recently, 
governments did not account in this way, but rather accounted just for 28
their cash fows and balances. While this cash information was necessary, 
it was dangerously incomplete.
Moving to an accrual basis of accounting enabled fnancial decision￾making by the New Zealand Government to place signifcant weight on 
its net worth, while not ignoring other fscal indicators such as debt or 
cash fows. Placing weight on net worth refects the importance of a 
strong balance sheet to a country which faces more than the usual risk of 
natural disasters,1
 including in recent years earthquakes and tropical 
storms. A strong balance sheet is similarly helpful in dealing with eco￾nomic shocks such as fnancial crises or those resulting from a global 
pandemic.2
3.2 Governments Are Important
Cyclone Gabrielle hit New Zealand’s North Island with unprecedented 
force on 6 February, 2023. It cost many lives, destroyed houses, seriously 
damaged infrastructure such as roads and bridges, and power lines. 
Communities were completely cut of, some for days, and some roads 
will be closed for months, if not permanently.
When catastrophe strikes, we expect government to be there. And nor￾mally it is – rescuing people from their rooftops or from high ground, 
getting supplies such as drinking water and generators to where they are 
needed, providing fnancial support for individuals and businesses, and 
many other forms of assistance.
In emergency situations, we expect governments to be responsive, 
working alongside the local community, volunteers, and businesses. But 
governments have an impact on our lives all the time – not just when 
disaster strikes – and their impact is pervasive and fundamental.
Governments have many tools at their disposal – they have evolved to 
provide a wide range of public services in areas such as health, education, 
defence, social welfare, law enforcement, transport, and communica￾tions. Within these sectors, such as policing, there are many services, such 
as routine patrolling, as well as those related to police’s regulatory and 
enforcement functions, including registering gun owners, enforcing 
I. Ball et al.29
trafc laws, investigating crimes, and prosecuting alleged ofenders, as 
well as providing support to victims of crime.
Te range of services even within one sector, health services for exam￾ple, is so large it can be quite hard to comprehend.3
 While we rarely pause 
to consider just how extensive are the services governments provide, and 
how pervasive is their impact, even a cursory consideration of the range 
of services should persuade us of their impact on our society and econ￾omy, and on our own lives.
3.3 The Direct Impact of Government Is Far 
Greater Than Service Provision
Trough legislation governments determine what we must, can and can￾not do. We must register our car and pay an annual registration fee, we 
can use our vehicle on public roads, usually without charge, but cannot 
use it in ways that breach laws and regulations such as those that deter￾mine speed limits and alcohol consumption by the driver. Te govern￾ment’s powers to legislate and regulate the functioning of our society and 
economy determine many aspects of our lives – from who can own and 
use a frearm to who we can employ to audit our company’s fnancial 
statements.
Governments impose taxes on a variety of our economic actions, from 
earning an income, purchasing goods and services, owning property, to, 
less desirably, dying. Tey transfer money within society, paying benefts 
to citizens who are unemployed, who are ill or who are old. Tey regulate 
the markets in which we buy a meal in a café, rent a house or raise a 
mortgage to purchase one, or to insure it.
Perhaps less obviously, Governments also have a major impact through 
the portfolio of assets they own. Not only is this portfolio massive, it is 
diverse, impacting society in very diferent ways. Tese assets include 
infrastructure assets, commercial assets, heritage and environmental 
assets, and include ports and roads, electricity systems, commercial build￾ings, national and regional parks, schools, housing, and defence facilities, 
to name but a few.
3 Accounting for Government30
3.4 Indirect Impact of Government
Te impact of governments on our lives may be direct, in the ways 
described above. It may also be indirect, through the impact it has on the 
wider economy, by raising tax revenues, incurring expenses, and conse￾quentially raising debt. Tese can in turn infuence the overall level of 
economic activity, interest rates, the rate of infation and the availability 
of jobs, amongst other aspects of the economy.
Tis indirect, or macroeconomic, dimension of government impact is 
arguably less important than the direct impact of government, though it 
looms larger in the public debate on fscal policy and management. 
Certainly, media coverage of government fnances focuses heavily on gov￾ernment’s impact on the wider economy. But irrespective of relative 
importance, management of this wider dimension of government fnan￾cial management is also important, requiring efective management and 
good information.
3.5 The Scale and Complexity of Government
Te sheer size of government relative to the rest of the economy means it 
has a massive impact on economic wealth and performance and on social 
wellbeing. OECD data4
 shows most advanced industrial countries have 
general government spending in the range of 40–50% of GDP, with 
some countries such as Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Greece, and 
Italy having spending levels greater than 55% of GDP.
Given the nature and scope of government activities, it is not surpris￾ing that they are very large organisations. As noted above, their size alone 
means they are very signifcant players in the economy, whether size is 
measured in levels of tax and expenditure, number of personnel, or the 
size of their balance sheet. However, these measures do not fully refect 
the impact of a government.
When a government regulates, it very frequently imposes costs that it 
does not itself bear. Frequently, governments face a choice of providing a 
service or requiring others to produce it. One example is the eradication 
of animal pests (often introduced species). Tis may be carried out by a 
I. Ball et al.31
government agency or by requiring that landowners remove the pests 
from their land. Te former would have an impact on the government’s 
personnel count and on its level of expense, the latter much less so. Tis 
largely uncounted cost of regulation means the impact of government is 
even larger than expense, personnel or balance sheet numbers may 
suggest.
But governments are not only large, they are also complex. Te needed 
response to the COVID-19 pandemic illustrates this complexity. Here, 
governments faced a major public health crisis and in consequence, a 
major economic crisis. Determining and executing a strategy to address 
the public health challenge required input and coordinated action from 
organisations across the government, including many outside the health 
sector, such as police and immigration to name just two. To add to the 
complexity, there was also a need to coordinate government activity with 
that of many organisations outside government, whether in the private or 
non-proft sectors.
Depending on both the approach to containment of the virus and the 
success of that approach, economic consequences could be more or less 
severe and require diferent responses. Again, the determination and exe￾cution of policy to limit the economic damage from the pandemic 
involved many diferent agencies of government, some with signifcant 
independence in their specifc roles, such as the central banks. Te com￾plexity of the COVID-19 situation exemplifes the challenges faced by 
governments whenever a serious shock hits. But similar complexity exists, 
though without the urgency, even when it is business as usual.
Underlying this complexity, and the management problem this creates, 
is the nature of the relationship between resources consumed (inputs), ser￾vices produced (outputs) and the results achieved (outcomes).5
 To illustrate 
this distinction in a COVID-19 context  – an inoculation campaign to 
reduce the spread of the disease involves the consumption of inputs (nurs￾ing staf, premises in which to administer the inoculation, the vaccine) to 
deliver the output (the inoculation of the patient), with the objective of 
achieving the outcome (reduction in the number of cases).
One aspect of the complexity is that most services (outputs) contribute 
to more than one outcome, and that most outcomes are impacted by 
more than one output. So, for example, the quality of a road surface 
3 Accounting for Government32
contributes to both transport outcomes (speed and efciency in moving 
people and freight) and health outcomes (reduction of injuries and death 
associated with motor vehicle accidents). And the health outcome of the 
number of road accident fatalities is impacted by a number of services 
(speed and quality of response from emergency services, police enforce￾ment of trafc laws such as speed restrictions and alcohol impairment, 
road design and lane barriers, amongst many others).
Tis “many-to-many” relationship between outputs and outcomes 
introduces complexities that are difcult to manage, because of the inter￾related issues of information requirements for both outputs and out￾comes and because of the need to understand the causal relationships 
between them. Deciding whether to improve the quality of the road sur￾face requires information about the current quality of the road surface as 
well as an understanding of the reduction of fatalities that could be 
expected from a specifed improvement in road surfaces.
And, to make a sound decision, it would also be necessary to know the 
costs associated with the improvement in the road surface, as well as the 
cost of other services that contribute to this same outcome. Spoiler alert: 
the need for this cost information hints at the importance of good 
accounting systems and the fnancial information they produce.
3.6 Governments Need to Be Well-Managed
Because the signifcance of government activity for the quality of our lives 
is so great, we need it to be well managed. Good management for a gov￾ernment has many dimensions, ranging across decisions about the nature 
and level of services the government will provide, the levels and composi￾tion of taxes that should be levied, the interventions (including services) 
that will do most to achieve the outcomes sought by government, the 
levels and composition of expenses that should be incurred, how those 
expenses will be fnanced, and the desired strength of the balance sheet, 
to name just a very few.
Good management is not just about making the best decisions. Te 
government may decide to construct a new highway, but achieving the 
outcomes also requires that the decision be well executed. Tis too 
I. Ball et al.33
requires good management. In this case it may involve a decision about 
constructing the highway in-house or contracting it out, and if the latter 
it requires the expertise to assess the proposals from alternative suppliers. 
And whether the highway is constructed using internal resources or con￾tracted out, the execution of the decision will need to be carefully moni￾tored throughout the construction period.
Similarly, at an aggregate level, the government may decide to budget 
for a certain level of expenditure in the coming budget year, and good 
execution means having a fnancial control system that enables progress 
to be tracked during the year and adjustments  – course corrections  – 
made where necessary. Tis same requirement for monitoring and fnan￾cial control should exist at all levels of the government, on the basis that 
control at the aggregate level is ultimately dependent on control at the 
lowest budget level.
If the fundamental purpose of a government is to improve the wellbe￾ing of its citizens, then the management of both decision-making and 
execution determine whether governments achieve the outcomes they are 
seeking.
3.7 Government Finances Are Also Large 
and Complex
Te complexity of governments is mirrored in their fnances. In part, this 
refects the complexity of the organisational structure of the governments, 
with a range of diferent organisation types with diferent relationships to 
the centre, including diferent fnancial and accountability relationships. 
Some sub-entities receive all their funding from the government, some 
part of their funding, and some none at all. Some may borrow, some may 
not. Some receive a guarantee from the government, but some do not. 
Some have proft expectations from the government, as their owner, 
while many don’t. Some have autonomous or semi-autonomous boards. 
Some are in corporate form, some established under other generic or 
specifc legislation. Many have statutory independence in relation to their 
core function, but with fnancial limitations over their aggregate spending.
Te complexity of the “many-to-many” relationship between outputs 
and outcomes is also mirrored in the management of the government 
3 Accounting for Government34
fnances. While accountants can easily determine the cost of the inputs it 
uses (such as staf, accommodation, travel, and use of equipment) it is 
somewhat more difcult to measure the cost of outputs. Tis involves 
estimating the volume and value of the inputs that are consumed in pro￾ducing identifed outputs, and normally also involves some allocation of 
overhead costs. While the wide range of diferent services produced by 
many government agencies complicates this process, establishing the cost 
of outputs is a routine task for accountants.
What is not routine is computing the cost of achieving outcomes, 
given that specifc outcomes will be achieved through a range of services 
(or other interventions such as regulation) and the contribution of each 
output to the desired outcome is difcult, often impossible, to establish. 
Tis is not part of the accountant’s conventional tool box, as it relies on 
knowledge of the causal relationship between outputs and outcomes. To 
illustrate – while it is relatively easy to establish the cost of upgrading 
road signage, it is much harder to know how this output cost should be 
allocated between the outcomes to which it contributes, such as improved 
speed of transportation and reduction of road fatalities, to pick up the 
earlier example.
Te complexity of government fnances also refects the fnancial con￾straints they face – for example, balanced budget or other fscal rules. 
Tese may or may not be legally binding. Tere may be administrative or 
legal sanctions for over-spending a budget or appropriation. In addition 
to these institutional constraints, there are real economic constraints such 
as the willingness of taxpayers to meet existing and potentially increased 
tax demands. And many revenue sources are dependent on levels of eco￾nomic activity, such as retail sales, which may be variable.
Tere is also a need to manage the fnances of the government as a 
whole, rather than as a set of separate sub-entities. Tis implies looking 
through the organisational complexities of the sub-entities, in the same 
way a corporation with many subsidiaries must prepare a consolidated set 
of fnancial statements, which looks through the legal form to the eco￾nomic substance of the entity.
Tis consolidation process allows the government’s balance sheet to 
report the whole, vast range of assets and liabilities that the government 
owns and owes. Te consolidated fnancial statements also capture the 
I. Ball et al.35
revenue and expense fows, reporting in the statement of fnancial perfor￾mance the fows between the government and external parties, such as 
taxpayers, purchasers of services, lenders (holders of government debt), 
public servants, and suppliers, and the diferences between the revenues 
and the expenses – the operating balance.
Te relationship between the aggregate fows (fnancial performance) 
and stocks (the balance sheet) is depicted by the New Zealand Treasury6
in Fig. 3.1:
What these consolidated statements do not report is the internal trans￾actions of the government. Tese are eliminated in the consolidation pro￾cess, enabling the government to be viewed as a single economic entity.
For the government to manage its fnances, the consolidated balance 
sheet provides critical information about what it owns and what it owes – 
its assets and liabilities. But this need for information on assets and liabil￾ities applies whether the concern is with the aggregate fnances of the 
government, or with the delivery of services at the level of a departmental 
budget manager.
Fig. 3.1 The relationship between the operating balance and the balance sheet. 
(Source: The New Zealand Treasury)
3 Accounting for Government36
3.8 Conclusion
Tis chapter explains the importance of the way a government 
accounts – this importance being based on the importance of govern￾ment itself, and therefore the need for it to be well managed. Accounting 
and fnancial management are key components of good management, 
and need to refect the size and complexity of modern governments if 
they are to be useful for decision-making and accountability. But for 
high quality fnancial information to have an impact it needs to under￾pin the whole fnancial management system, and be the basis for bud￾geting and monitoring, as well as end-of-year fnancial reporting. 
Increasingly, this same set of information is seen as being useful in 
managing the impact of the government’s fnances on the external 
economy, especially in the adoption of a balance sheet perspective that 
looks deeper than debt and defcit.
It is easy to overlook the ways in which governments impact on our 
daily lives, and perhaps one of the side-benefts of a good set of fnancial 
statements is that they make clear many of the ways in which govern￾ments have this impact. Tey show the level of taxation that govern￾ment imposes, and the, usually many, diferent bases on which tax is 
levied. Tey also reveal the value of the resources consumed by the 
government, whether it is through public employment, the payment of 
interest for the use of capital, the employment of plant and machinery, 
travel, the use of consultants (a politically contentious category of 
expense) and much, much more. Tey also reveal the magnitude and 
variety of the assets and liabilities held by the government, which rein￾forces the importance of the role of government in such areas as defence, 
transportation, health, education, conservation, and environmental 
protection.
In the next chapter, we show how the size and complexity of a govern￾ment is refected in a key fnancial document – the balance sheet.
I. Ball et al.37
Notes
1. Te Treasury  (2022), Te Tai Waiora: Wellbeing in Aotearoa New 
Zealand, p. 183.
2. Te Secretary to the New Zealand Treasury asserted in an interview 
(National Business Review, 24 March 2022) that “Te strength of the gov￾ernment balance sheet prior to the Covid-19 pandemic allowed the 
Government to support the wellbeing of New Zealanders through an extraor￾dinary shock. New Zealand’s fscal response was large by international stan￾dards; this response has been critical in minimising unemployment, supporting 
a swift economic recovery, and preventing longer-lasting harm to living 
standards”.
3. Consider, for instance, the vast range of diferent surgical procedures that 
can be undertaken, from major operations where the patient has been 
seriously injured in a road trafc accident, to (now) relatively routine 
operations for heart disease, to minor actions to remove a cancerous skin 
condition. Each of these requires signifcantly diferent inputs and their 
costs can be radically diferent.
4. https://data.oecd.org/gga/general-government-spending.htm
5. Te terms” outcomes” and “outputs” are used in the technical sense in this 
chapter. Outcomes are a state or condition of society, the economy or the envi￾ronment, or a change in that state or condition. Outputs are the goods and 
services commissioned by Ministers from public, non-governmental and pri￾vate sector producers (Te Treasury, 2011).
6. Te Treasury (March 2022a).  He Puna Hao Pātiki: 2022 Investment 
Statement, p. 13.
3 Accounting for Government© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 39
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5_4
4
What Does the Government’s Balance 
Sheet Look Like?
Government balance sheets report assets, liabilities, and the diference 
between them – net worth. Tey are reported as at a specifc date – the 
end of the fnancial period. Normally, this is the end of the fnancial year 
(30 June in New Zealand). However, if the fnancial statements are to be 
used for purposes of in-year monitoring and fnancial control, they also 
need to be produced monthly, as is the case in Australia and New Zealand. 
While many countries now produce annual fnancial statements, the 
absence of monthly fnancial statements limits their purpose to transpar￾ency and accountability, rather than decision-making and fnancial 
control.
Te balance sheet itself is a highly aggregated statement, but on the 
face of the fnancial statement (the statement of fnancial position, as it is 
formally called) one can see the broad shape and strength of the balance 
sheet – the composition and relative size of the assets and liabilities. Te 
notes to the fnancial statements, which are referenced on the face of the 
statement, provide a great deal more detail on what lies behind the aggre￾gate numbers.40
4.1 Net Worth
Te basic concept at the heart of the balance sheet – which we argue 
should also be at the heart of every government’s fnancial management 
framework – is net worth.
Net worth is positive when the value of assets is greater than that of 
liabilities. Unlike in the private sector, governments sometimes have lia￾bilities that are greater than assets, in which case net worth is negative.1
In the private sector this would indicate that you are bankrupt. But the 
public sector is diferent, for at least three reasons.
First, governments have the power to tax and can legally use coercion 
to enforce that power. Te power to tax is nevertheless limited, at least in 
a democracy and probably also in countries with autocratic governments, 
by what the citizens2
 will tolerate. Many governments have learned to 
their cost that this can be a very real constraint.
Second, governments can “print” more money, which may solve the 
immediate debt problem even while creating or exacerbating a diferent 
set of problems.
And third, the process for restructuring sovereign debt is diferent, less 
well established and more complex than in the private sector.
As a result, there are many governments, such as the United States 
Government, that report a highly negative net worth but can continue to 
borrow, in some cases with the support of an excellent credit rating. 
Chap. 9 investigates in more detail the net worth of the public sectors of 
a wide range of countries.
4.2 Reading the New Zealand Government’s 
Balance Sheet
An illustration of a government’s balance sheet in Fig. 4.1 (Te Treasury, 
October 2022b). Some things to look out for:
• Te latest numbers (actuals for the 2021/22 fnancial year – in the 
shaded column) can be compared with the numbers from the previous 
I. Ball et al.41
Fig. 4.1 Statement of fnancial position of the New Zealand government. (Source: 
The New Zealand Treasury)
4 What Does the Government’s Balance Sheet Look Like?42
year, the “actual” number for 2021. Tis enables signifcant changes 
over the previous year to be identifed – for example, the amount by 
which the value of total assets has increased. Te 2022 “actual” num￾bers can also be compared, for accountability purposes, with budget 
amounts. Te numbers for Budget 2021 (when the budget for the 
2021/22 fnancial year was frst released) show that it was forecast that 
at the end of the 2021/22 fnancial year total liabilities would be 
$NZ332 billion, which is more than was the actual result ($NZ328 
billion). At the time of the budget for the 2022/23 fnancial year – 
shortly before these fnancial statements are produced  – there is an 
updated forecast of the expected results for the current year – shown in 
the “Budget 2022” column.
• Importantly, the balance sheet shows the level of net worth. At the end 
of the 2021/22 fnancial year total net worth is $NZ174 bn, markedly 
above the amount in the 2021 Budget ($NZ102 billion). To assess the 
size of net worth it is useful to compare it with the size of the econ￾omy – in this case net worth is equivalent to 48.5% of GDP.
• We can also see the composition of the balance sheet – the compo￾nents of total assets for example. Here it is notable that total assets are 
approximately half physical assets (property, plant, and equipment and 
inventory – more on this later) and half fnancial assets (such as cash, 
receivables, marketable securities and share investments). Tis is sig￾nifcant because fnancial assets are generally more liquid than physical 
assets, which can be important in an emergency.
• Another important takeaway from the balance sheet is the existence of 
the notes to the accounts. Tese provide much more detailed informa￾tion than can be ftted onto the face of the balance sheet. If the reader 
of these fnancial statements wants to know more – such as why did 
the value of property, plant and equipment go up so much? – the notes 
are where the answer can be found.
Te importance of net worth was mentioned above. But while public 
debate commonly focuses on debt levels, net worth is a better measure of 
fscal position. Tere are a number of reasons for this. Te main reason is 
that net worth refects all of the government’s assets and liabilities, rather 
than a single, albeit important, liability – debt. Ironically perhaps, but 
I. Ball et al.43
supporting the notion that net worth is a better indicator of fscal posi￾tion, Peppel-Srebrny3
 concludes that:
Te central country-specifc fscal factor driving bond yields hence appears to be 
government net worth.
Te IMF4
 similarly concludes that higher intertemporal fnancial net 
worth is associated with lower debt costs.
Net worth, in other words, is a more comprehensive measure. Net worth 
recognises that fscal position is impacted by the assets available to meet 
obligations, including debt obligations, as well as assets that support service 
provision. Two governments that have identical levels of debt, but one has 
much greater assets, do not have the same fscal position. Net worth also 
gives proper recognition to non-debt liabilities, like public service pen￾sions. Tese pensions are as much a liability of the government as is debt.
Net worth is therefore a better indicator of fscal sustainability and 
resilience, capturing, as it does, all assets and liabilities. A higher net 
worth – a stronger balance sheet – has a number of advantages, including 
greater scope for action in an emergency, a more rapid exit after an eco￾nomic shock, greater policy certainty in general and not passing on to the 
next generation the burden of restoring fscal soundness.
4.3 Classifying Assets and Liabilities 
by Purpose
Te balance sheet shown in Fig. 4.1 classifes assets and liabilities accord￾ing to their nature. But it is worth noting that ultimately, the value of 
balance sheet information is in its ability to contribute to decision￾making. In the New Zealand case, this has led to the government to clas￾sify assets and liabilities by purpose,5
 as explained in Fig. 4.2.
Governments own assets of many diferent types – including a wide 
range of fnancial assets as well as an even wider range of physical assets. 
On the face of the New Zealand Government’s balance sheet, however, 
the main types of fnancial assets are disclosed, while for physical (non￾fnancial) assets the detail is given in a note to the fnancial statements.
4 What Does the Government’s Balance Sheet Look Like?44
Fig. 4.2 The classifcation of assets and liabilities by purpose. (Source: The New 
Zealand Treasury)
Tese assets – fnancial and non-fnancial – are resources available to 
the Government. As with any organisation’s balance sheet, some of the 
assets are more liquid than others, and some are there not to generate 
cash directly but to help deliver services. However, they all represent 
resources at the disposal of the government.
Consider the range of physical assets that governments typically own 
and use – from power stations to ofce supplies. It is hard to conceive of 
an asset type not owned by governments – for transportation the assets 
include planes, helicopters, ships, trucks, buses, tanks, armoured person￾nel carriers, cars, motorcycles, bicycles and more. Probably skateboards 
less so. But they also own highway networks, with all their component 
parts – bridges, tunnels, road surfaces and sub-surfaces, signage, trafc 
lights and more.
All of these assets are more or less useful depending on their condition. 
So, managing this set of assets routinely involves a wide range of deci￾sions, including those concerning maintenance, replacement, redeploy￾ment and sale. All these decisions have fnancial implications – is it more 
efcient to conduct routine maintenance or carry the cost of major repairs 
or replacement? Are there reasons that certain assets should be owned in 
the private sector and leased by the government?
I. Ball et al.45
4.4 Managing Government Assets
Without making too long a detour, it should be noted that the manage￾ment of assets is an important subject in its own right, and a common 
failing of public sector organisations is to pay insufcient attention to 
this function of management. A good sense of what is involved in profes￾sional asset management can be seen in the standards on this subject 
issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). Te 
ISO material recognizes that a well-developed asset management system 
is driven by the organisation’s plans and objectives in determining a stra￾tegic asset management plan with associated objectives, detailed asset 
management plans, the implementation of which is systematically evalu￾ated, all supported by an asset management information system and all 
functioning in a manner consistent with the organisation’s asset manage￾ment policies.
Clearly, asset management is an important management function, and 
one that is facilitated by the more reliable accounting for assets that 
results from accrual accounting. Prior to the introduction of accrual 
accounting in New Zealand, departments had asset registers, so arguably 
should have had the information necessary for asset management. In fact, 
the introduction of accrual accounting, and the need to have fnancial 
statements (which include assets, of course) audited, revealed the unreli￾ability of the information in the asset registers.
Te New Zealand Controller and Auditor -General has routinely 
reported to Parliament on aspects of asset management in New Zealand 
central and local government. In previewing the results of a comprehen￾sive study conducted in 2013, the then Auditor-General referenced the 
link between the introduction of accrual accounting and her Ofce’s 
focus on asset management:
My Ofce has focused on asset management and encouraging good manage￾ment of public assets throughout the range of our audit work since the 
introduction of accrual accounting in the late 1980s. We consistently see that 
best results are achieved when asset management is integrated throughout the 
business. An integrated management approach involves robust information and 
systems that are used co-operatively by asset managers, engineers, valuers, 
4 What Does the Government’s Balance Sheet Look Like?46
planners, corporate fnance staf, management, and the governing body to 
ensure that the right people contribute the right information at the right time.6
Te study (as with many others) also identifed areas in which asset 
management could be improved  – better accounting facilitates better 
asset management, but it is not a guarantee.
Governments also have major assets of cultural, archaeological and 
heritage importance. While in some countries with systems of heritage 
listings, most listed buildings are in private ownership, nevertheless many 
are publicly owned. Tese, too, require informed fnancial decision￾making, which includes decisions on risk and whether insurance coverage 
is warranted, what physical protection is needed, and whether the port￾folio of assets (in the case of a museum or gallery) best meets the cultural 
objectives sought by the government.
A better, more detailed, sense of the nature and range of physical 
assets owned and managed by governments, in this case the New 
Zealand Government, can be seen in the notes to the fnancial state￾ments – the broad types of assets are shown in Fig. 4.3 below, and then 
Fig. 4.3 Extracts from Note 17, Property, Plant and Equipment. (Source: The New 
Zealand Treasury)
I. Ball et al.47
immediately below that another extract shows the assets that make up 
the state highway system (other than the land which is included in land 
and buildings).7
Te frst of the two extracts shows the relative size of the diferent asset 
types – land, buildings, state highways, and so on. Ten for each of these 
there is detail about what was the value of the asset at the beginning of 
the year, what was the value of acquisitions and disposals, whether the 
assets value had increased during the year (the increase in the value of 
land is signifcant, refecting a general increase in land values in the coun￾try). Te note also shows, though it is not in this extract below, the 
amount by which the asset has depreciated during the year.
Te second extract shows more detail about one of the categories of 
assets – state highways. Te note has considerable detail about each of 
these categories, including information about how the assets are valued, 
how often, and by whom. One of the signifcant pieces of information in 
the extract is how much of the value of the state highway network is in 
the formation of the road – all the work that is required before the road 
itself is laid.
It should also be noted that many government assets have much in 
common with assets in the private sector. For example, ofces, car parks, 
water infrastructure could all be described as having a commercial pur￾pose, or at least commercial potential. How to value these assets correctly 
on the public sector balance sheet – and how to manage them to maxi￾mise value – is a topic of great importance, which we will develop in 
Chaps.12, 13, 14, 15 and 16.
But this discussion relates only to physical assets – what accountants 
call property, plant and equipment (PP&E). Governments own other 
types of assets, a signifcant category of which is fnancial assets. Again, 
governments own pretty much every conceivable type of fnancial asset – 
including equities in companies, debt (including student loans), advances, 
trade debtors, cash and deposits, and gold. In the statement of fnancial 
position shown above, PP&E comprises approximately half the asset side 
of the balance sheet, with the other half being largely fnancial assets.
One of the notable points from the Fig. 4.4 is the value of the market￾able securities and share investments held by the government. Tis might 
prompt the question of why does a government hold these assets? In fact, 
4 What Does the Government’s Balance Sheet Look Like?48
Fig. 4.4 Extract from Note 28 – Financial Instruments. (Source: The New Zealand 
Treasury)
these are held to pre-fund the increasing burden of New Zealand’s old age 
pension scheme, recognizing that the New Zealand population of elderly 
people is increasing, as it is in many other countries.
4.5 Liabilities on the Government 
Balance Sheet
Governments also have a huge range of liabilities. Te most discussed is 
debt, and for many governments debt is their largest liability. 
Internationally, government debt has increased markedly in the past two 
decades. Te global fnancial crisis resulted in many governments bor￾rowing to get through the crisis, but many had done little to reduce that 
debt before the COVID-19 pandemic lead to a further round of signif￾cant borrowing.
Te OECD8
 has noted that among the 22 OECD and EU member 
countries (OECD-EU), general government gross debt rose from 97% of 
GDP in 2019 to 115% in 2020.
I. Ball et al.49
Tat is a very large increase in indebtedness in the space of just two 
years. In this context it should be recalled that under the Maastricht 
Treaty the European Union limits gross debt to 60% of GDP,9
 though in 
recent years there have been calls for that to be changed. A variety of 
reasons have been given for the need to reform the existing rules, includ￾ing that the current rules are economically unrealistic in their require￾ments for a reduction in the current debt levels. It was also argued that 
there is no likelihood of interest rates rising to the levels of the 1990s in 
the foreseeable future.
Readers may wish to judge what sort of weight to put on generalisa￾tions of this sort when they have considered the forward-looking ele￾ments of government fnance, discussed in Chaps. 8 and 10. Te 
argument that interest rates will remain low seems simplistic, especially 
in light of historical evidence and economic theory that suggests that the 
then-prevailing very low nominal (and more important, real) interest 
rates are exceptionally unusual.10 Te rapid increase in nominal, and to 
some extent real, interest rates since 2021 demonstrates why it could be 
fnancially damaging for a Government to be complacent about debt lev￾els; the fact that real rates are still (mid 2023) close to zero in many coun￾tries suggests that there is plenty of room for further increases in the costs 
of indebtedness.
But debt is by no means the only liability of governments. In most 
governments, public servants are compensated with both cash and a 
deferred component, received as a pension. To the government, this is 
a liability, and for some governments the public service pension liability 
can match, or exceed, the level of debt. An example of this is can be 
seen in the published whole of government fnancial statements of the 
United Kingdom,11 for the year ended 31 March 2020. It shows that 
the net public sector pension liability of £2189.5bn is signifcantly 
greater than Government borrowings, which total £1445.4 bn (this is 
the total of the Government borrowings due in the next year (the cur￾rent liabilities) and those not due till after the coming year (non-current 
liabilities).
As with the asset side of the balance sheet, the liabilities side is com￾plex. Te complexity is only partly visible on the face of the fnancial 
4 What Does the Government’s Balance Sheet Look Like?50
statements, which are highly summarised, but a better indication of the 
detailed nature of the liabilities is available in the notes to the fnancial 
statements, which explain in more detail the nature and extent of the dif￾ferent liabilities.
For many liabilities, there is a complexity associated with the fact that 
payments due a number of years into the future need to be reported on 
the balance sheet at their present value, recognizing the time value of 
money ($100 received today has more value than $100 received in fve 
years’ time). Tis requires the future payments to be discounted back to 
their present value. Tis process in turn requires the selection of an appro￾priate discount rate, and this rate will vary over time as interest rates in 
the economy change. Of course, this same complexity applies to the lia￾bilities of corporations, and is addressed in accounting standards.
Going back to the most discussed liability – debt – the complexity is 
in part refected in a diferent kind of fnancial instrument – derivatives. 
Governments may be able to borrow more cheaply in a foreign currency, 
or they may be able to borrow only in another currency, frequently US 
dollars. But if they do, they will be exposed to changes in exchange rates. 
Interest rates may be lower, but the currency they borrow in may be 
strengthening, meaning the repayment has a greater cost when measured 
in their own currency. Recognizing the efect of changing exchange rates 
on the local currency equivalent that will be required to repay loans is a 
factor that governments should track. Similarly, if they hedge any of these 
fnancial instruments, or indeed other cash fows into or out of another 
currency, informed management of the fscal position requires knowledge 
of how those derivative contracts are playing out.
Put simply, the fnancial afairs of most governments are much more 
complex than those of the largest private sector conglomerates. 
Governments have a broad range of assets and liabilities, including some 
assets and liabilities that do not exist in the private sector, such as tax 
receivables. Consider the complexity of estimating the corporate income 
tax revenues for a specifc fnancial year when in many jurisdictions the 
income tax returns are not fled until after the fnancial statements for the 
government need to be produced. Tis complexity can, of course, be 
ignored, by accounting only for cash fows. But this does not remove the 
real complexity, it just ignores it for decision-making purposes.
I. Ball et al.51
4.6 Conclusion
Net worth is the summary number that shows the diference between the 
assets a government owns, and the liabilities it owes, in other words its 
aggregate fnancial position. But behind that number is a vast array of 
diferent assets and liabilities, with diferent characteristics. Assets may be 
both fnancial and non-fnancial – such as corporate equities on the one 
hand and roads on the other. All these assets constitute resources that can 
be well managed or badly managed. Liabilities, similarly, have diferent 
characteristics and can be managed well or poorly.
But whether we are considering assets or liabilities, in order to manage 
them, we need to know what they are – they need to be accounted for. 
Tis might seem obvious, but is not the case for the traditional method 
of accounting by governments  – cash accounting. To create a balance 
sheet which records and reports the multiplicity of assets and liabilities, 
we need accrual accounting. So let’s look at these two diferent approaches 
to accounting, consider why accrual accounting is important, and look at 
an example of a government’s balance sheet.
Notes
1. In some cases, where net worth is negative, it has been renamed to some￾thing like “Total liabilities to be funded by future revenues” (United 
Kingdom).
2. Citizens wearing yellow vests are a recent illustration of, amongst other 
things, the limits of the French government’s power to tax.
3. Peppel-Srebrny, J, (2018).
4. Koshima et al. (2021).
5. Te Treasury (2022a). He Puna Hao Pātiki: 2022 Investment Statement.
6. Controller and Auditor-General (2013), Managing Public Assets.
7. Information in even greater detail is available in the annual reports 
(which include fnancial statements) of the individual sub-entities, such 
as government departments.
8. OECD (2021) Government at a Glance.
4 What Does the Government’s Balance Sheet Look Like?52
9. Te TFEU obliges EU Member States to comply with budgetary disci￾pline by respecting two criteria: a defcit to GDP ratio and a debt to 
GDP ratio not exceeding reference values of 3% and 60%, respectively, 
as defned in the Protocol on the EDP annexed to the TFEU. https://
ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/government-finance-statistics/excessive￾defcit-procedure [20 March 2023]
10. Haldane, Andy (2023). Te case for rethinking fscal rules is 
overwhelming.
11. United Kingdom Government, (2022) Whole of Government Accounts 
2019–2020.
I. Ball et al.© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 53
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5_5
5
Why Accrual Accounting Matters
Decision-makers must have the right information if they are to make 
informed, timely decisions across the vast range of diferent decisions 
governments face.
What is the right information depends on the nature of the decision. 
However, it does include, for virtually any signifcant policy or opera￾tional decision, the impact that decision will have on the government’s 
fnances, now and in the future. How much will this policy cost? How 
will it be fnanced? Will it be a current cost, such as an increase in ben￾eft levels, and create an ongoing obligation for the government? Or is 
it an investment in assets which will generate benefts for years into 
the future?
5.1 Financial Decision-Making 
in Government
As noted above, there are two major categories of fnancial decisions in 
government. Direct impact decisions concern the operation of the gov￾ernment as a self-contained economic and fnancial entity. Indirect 54
impact decisions are where the actions of the government will have a 
macroeconomic impact.
Te frst category of fnancial decisions with a direct impact can be 
seen as very similar to the range of decisions faced by a huge multina￾tional conglomerate. Amongst many others, these decisions range from 
major strategic decisions concerning the priority given to diferent prod￾uct and service lines to the detail of budget compliance by small sub￾entities. Governments have to decide what “price” (level of tax) to charge 
citizens for the services they anticipate delivering, and how much to 
charge diferent customers (recognizing, of course, that this is collective 
decision-making, where the prices paid by individual taxpayers would 
normally not equate to the value of the services they receive).
Within this frst category Governments must make decisions such as 
which sub-entities will be responsible for delivering which services (and 
when services should be jointly produced). Tey must decide how much 
to invest in the capital assets needed to produce the services (think 
schools, hospitals, roads, frigates). If they need to raise fnance for the 
capital assets, or indeed to maintain current operations, they must decide 
on the form of fnance to be used.
But this category of decisions also includes the myriad of decisions asso￾ciated with asset ownership, as distinct from policy decisions about the 
nature and level of services to provide, or which entities are to provide 
them. To properly manage a road network requires, for example, informa￾tion about the condition, and therefore value, of the asset presently, its 
projected usage over time and therefore the level of maintenance required, 
and the costs of remediation if the existing condition is allowed to deterio￾rate. Tese are the types of information associated with the strategic and 
routine processes of asset management, outlined briefy in Chap. 4 above.
Te second category, with indirect impact, is diferent and often consid￾ered unique to governments,1
 generally focusing on aggregates such as total 
revenue and expense levels and total borrowing requirements, rather than 
on the specifcs of what services are produced and the cost of those services. 
Tis category of decisions draws largely on macroeconomics in understand￾ing the impacts that government fnancial activity will have on the wider 
economy, especially on the level of demand in the economy, the rate of 
economic growth, the level of unemployment and the rate of infation.
I. Ball et al.55
It is important to recognize that the statements above are generalisa￾tions, and that the two categories of decisions intersect. For example, in 
assessing the impact on the wider economy, spending on new capital 
assets will have a diferent efect than increasing the old age pension.
Finally, delivering services is where the rubber of government decision￾making hits the road. It is the day-to-day business of management in 
government, and it cannot become efcient by accident. Tat requires 
the right incentives and good information.
Good information in this context is what any business would regard as 
the normal products of the accounting system – recording the input costs 
of personnel, equipment, supplies, and travel, ensuring those costs are 
within budget, and if not the reason for the divergence and the corrective 
action, allocating input costs to outputs and in some cases comparing 
those costs with revenues generated (in a “user pays” setting).
It also involves information about the relative benefts and costs of 
producing services in-house or contracting them out, and about cost: 
volume relationships in service production.
5.2 The Required Information Refects 
the Complexity of the Government’s 
Finances
Te complexity of modern governments means the information required 
to make good decisions must refect that complexity. What does this mean?
It means, for example, that information is needed on the various dif￾ferent components that make up a system such as the highway system. 
Tese components wear out at diferent rates – the surface of a highway 
does not normally last as long as the sub-surface. Te life of bridges 
depends on a number of factors, not least the construction material. To 
be able to manage these assets efciently, information is needed on all 
these diferent components, including their age and condition.
In relation to liabilities, it means that information is needed on the 
pattern of payments that will need to be made over time for liabilities 
such as pensions or the nature of risks, for example credit risks or exchange 
5 Why Accrual Accounting Matters56
rate risks to which the liability subjects the government. All these com￾plexities can be managed, but that requires information.
In a world in which governments face a range of diferent crises – from 
climate change to pandemics to war to increasing inequality to unsus￾tainable debt obligations  – their decisions must address not just the 
immediate fnancial consequences of their decisions, but how those deci￾sions will impact on their ability to meet future challenges.
But challenges to government’s long-term sustainability and resilience 
also arise from technological, economic and cultural shifts, which can 
have positive as well as negative impacts. As technology generates new 
products, old ones become obsolete and if the government derives signif￾cant tax revenues from the manufacture of the obsolete products, the 
government’s tax base will be impacted. Similarly, if there is a signifcant 
shift to plant-based diets, governments of countries that produce animal 
food products (New Zealand is one) face a risk to their revenues.
Assessing how resilient a government is in the face of ongoing threats 
and a changing environment requires a comprehensive knowledge of 
assets and liabilities. For example, with rising sea levels and more extreme 
weather events, coastal properties can be at risk. Governments often own 
signifcant coastal property, which may include land and buildings, ports, 
roads and other infrastructure such as electricity distribution. So an 
understanding of where such property is, its condition and value and its 
likely risk is critical information for developing a mitigation strategy.
5.3 Why Accrual Accounting Is So Important
Systematic accrual accounting is required because without it, govern￾ments will not have the information to manage well any of the issues and 
challenges above. More fundamentally, they will not even know, reliably, 
what assets they own and what their liabilities are.
Tey will certainly not know what those assets are worth and therefore 
the opportunity cost of owning them or the cost of replacing them if that 
were required.
Tey will not know what their emergency services cost, or indeed 
health and education services. Tey will not know how exposed they are 
I. Ball et al.57
to foreign currency debt. Tey will be largely indiferent to spending 
money for current consumption rather than on investments. Tey will 
not take account in their policy making of the impact public service pen￾sions will have on their future borrowing capacity.
To understand why accrual accounting is necessary, consider the alter￾native – a cash-based accounting system. Governments have traditionally 
accounted on the cash basis but, over recent decades, an increasing num￾ber have moved to an accrual basis, for good reason. Many, however, 
remain on a cash basis for budgeting purposes. Tis means they are doing 
accrual accounting largely for show, while decision making is still based 
on the cash numbers.
5.4 The Cash Basis for Accounting
A cash basis accounting system records the receipt and expenditure of 
cash. Cash in and cash out, and that is it. A year will start with an open￾ing cash balance, add the diference between cash in and cash out and you 
have the closing cash balance. Receipts may be in the form of tax revenues 
or borrowing. Expenditure may be in the form of payment for current 
expenses, like paying staf, or it may be for the construction of long-lived 
assets such as food defences or high-speed rail lines. In a cash-based sys￾tem, a balanced budget is when receipts match expenditures, which is 
why in some jurisdictions governments will say they have balanced their 
budget even though some of the “income” receipts may be from loans 
which need to be repaid.
Te “balance sheet” of a government operating on a cash basis com￾prises only cash. Te formal accounting system does not record the 
amount the government has borrowed, nor does it record the value of 
non-cash assets it has acquired.
Unsurprisingly, governments need some records where, for example, 
they have loans to repay. Or of what assets they own. But in a cash-based 
system these records are not part of the formal accounting system, and 
would not normally be subject to audit. Tis means that information 
about assets and liabilities, other than cash, may be absent or partial and 
is normally unreliable. It is not part of the audited fnancial statements. 
5 Why Accrual Accounting Matters58
Clearly this limits the ability of the government to base its decisions on a 
comprehensive and reliable picture of their fnances.
Although such a system may sound simple, and in principle is, actual 
cash-based systems can be complex in ways which signifcantly reduce the 
transparency of the government. A very common form of this is fund 
accounting, where a government accounts through multiple funds, which 
may transact with each other in a range of diferent ways, and between 
which cash may be transferred. Each fund is a separate accounting entity 
for which fnancial statements are produced. Multiple funds with trans￾fers between them can make it extremely difcult to get an overall picture 
of the fnancial health of the entire government, especially as the funds 
themselves normally (but not always – funds set up for commercial pur￾poses often account on an accrual basis) account on a cash basis.
To the extent that governments operating on a cash basis produce 
summary fnancial statements they omit a great deal that is important to 
understanding the government’s overall fnancial position – assets being 
key amongst these, but also including non-debt liabilities such as public 
service pensions. By not accounting for these assets and liabilities, they 
do not base their fnancial decision-making processes on a comprehensive 
set of fnancial information.
Tis discussion should not be interpreted as implying that cash infor￾mation is unimportant. It is critically important, as organisations can 
stand or fall depending on the management of their cash fows. It is for 
good reason that the set of fnancial statements that a private company is 
required to produce includes a statement of cash fows. Tis is an explicit 
recognition of the importance of cash. Tis cash fow statement will 
report cash infows and outfows broken down by whether the fows are 
associated with operating, investing, or fnancing activities, information 
which is essential to analysis of the company’s fnances.
But this is true not just of companies. Governments too need to man￾age their cash fows. Unsurprisingly, therefore, a set of accrual-based 
fnancial statements prepared in accordance with either IPSAS or IFRS is 
required to contain a statement of cash fows. Te critical point is that 
while information about cash fows is necessary as part of the fnancial 
reporting of any entity, it is not sufcient. Indeed, while it might seem 
counterintuitive to some, accrual-based information can lead to improved 
I. Ball et al.59
cash management.2
 Good information about debtors and creditors, 
including such information as the age of debtors and their history of pay￾ments can enable a reduced access to and cost of working capital.
5.5 Accrual Accounting Is Different
Accrual accounting is certainly more demanding than cash accounting. 
But it is not rocket-science. Accrual accounting is what virtually everyone 
in the private sector uses. It is used by every business of any size, any￾where in the world. In the private sector, there is nothing else but accrual 
accounting. In the private sector, people refer to accounting, not accrual 
accounting, because the word “accrual” is redundant – it is what everyone 
does. And it is not new  – it has been around for hundreds of years. 
Amongst the earliest extant examples of double-entry book-keeping, the 
essential component of accrual accounting, are records of the Commune 
de Genoa, from 1340.3
Tat a government used double-entry book-keeping and accrual 
accounting this long ago suggests that accrual accounting is of value for 
both the public and private sectors. It is not something to be used just for 
commercial enterprises. It belies the notion that the reintroduction of 
accrual accounting into the public sector was the imposition of a business 
accounting practice where it did not belong. It was developed for the 
public and private sector alike. Over the centuries, many public sector 
organisations have made a choice to discard this vital tool.
Accrual accounting is simply a measurement system  – it measures 
fnancial performance and position, whether the performance and posi￾tion are of a company, an NGO or a government. It does so according to 
a set of rules which seek to represent the economic reality of the organisa￾tion’s performance and position. It difers from cash accounting in that it 
recognizes that cash is not the only economic resource important to an 
organisation’s position and performance. It measures performance regard￾less of whether the organisation’s objective is to make a proft, or to break￾even. In either event, it is necessary to know whether the performance 
during a period has enhanced the organisation’s fnancial position, simply 
maintained it, or allowed it to deteriorate. Tis information is necessary 
5 Why Accrual Accounting Matters60
to evaluate existing organisational strategy and policy, and to assess its 
sustainability.
One way to convey an understanding of accrual accounting is to relate 
it to everyday economic intuition.4
 If, as an individual, or a company, or 
a government, we use some cash to buy shares in a company, how does 
our fnancial position change? We have exchanged one asset, cash, for 
another, shares. Te transaction has two aspects – cash has reduced and 
the portfolio of shares has increased by the same amount. Hence, the 
overall position (net worth) remains unchanged.
Tis contrasts with spending the same amount of money on a cruise. 
In this case, cash is reduced, and as we have no asset to show for the 
expenditure, our net worth is reduced. For all transactions, accrual 
accounting refects both aspects of these transactions, which is where the 
term double-entry book-keeping comes from. Accrual accounting is 
double-entry accounting.
To illustrate the diference in practice between cash and accrual 
accounting, consider the cost of employing a public servant. As we have 
previously seen, the remuneration of a public servant has two major com￾ponents – a cash component paid regularly throughout the year and a 
pension entitlement, payable on retirement. With cash accounting, the 
remuneration is recognized when it is paid, so some of it is recognized in 
the current year and a signifcant part after the public servant retires. 
Under cash accounting, there is no recognition of the right the public 
servant earns during the current year to take annual leave and receive a 
pension. Tese liabilities are simply not acknowledged in the cash 
accounting system, unless there is a cash contribution to the pension 
plan. Under accrual accounting, the pension element of remuneration is 
recognized as it is earned, rather than when it is paid out.
Not only does cash accounting misrepresent the fnancial position of 
the government, it also enables, arguably incentivizes, current govern￾ments to settle wage claims through enhancements of pension rights. 
Tis makes the recipient better of without damaging the current cash 
position of the government. But it leaves future governments and future 
generations with a non-visible liability, an obligation to pay the pension 
when the recipient retires. With cash accounting, the impact of that deci￾sion is not visible at the time of the agreement on compensation is made. 
I. Ball et al.61
But it will be felt when the cash is to be paid out. Tis means the original 
decision maker will not be held accountable – the impact of the decision 
will be felt long after they are gone.
5.6 The Balance Sheet Is Critical
Te balance sheet provides an inclusive picture of the government’s 
fnances at a point in time and summarises at the end of the fnancial 
period all the assets and liabilities of a government and its resultant net 
worth. Generally, the greater the amount by which assets exceed liabili￾ties, the stronger is the balance sheet and the more sustainable and resil￾ient are the government’s fnances.
Te fnancial statements, including the balance sheet, should be 
audited to give assurance about the reliability of the information reported, 
and the information in the fnancial statements should be in accordance 
with international accounting standards, to enable comparisons between 
governments.
As we have seen, the balance sheet tells us, often in considerable detail, 
what assets the government owns and what liabilities it owes. Hopefully, 
by this stage, it should be apparent why it is useful to know what assets 
are owned, and how this facilitates decision-making. Similarly, to manage 
liabilities well, there needs to be high quality information on the nature 
and amount of those liabilities.
Te balance sheet shows us where the fnancial decisions of the past 
have left us today. It also identifes the amounts we are passing on to 
future generations – these can be positive or negative. In most countries, 
at a national level, ongoing fscal defcits mean that the government is 
passing on more by way of liabilities than of assets, imposing a net cost 
on the future.
However, the fnancial statements, including the balance sheet, are 
prepared according to a set of rules, or standards. Te “gold standard” for 
public sector accounting standards are the International Public Sector 
Accounting Standards (IPSAS). Te development program for IPSAS 
commenced in 1995 and they are by now well established. As a conscious 
strategy, there was an intention to have the IPSAS as close as they could 
5 Why Accrual Accounting Matters62
reasonably be to their equivalent private sector standards – International 
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). Te intent was to account in the 
same way for any event or transaction unless there was something that 
would make the IFRS treatment inappropriate for a government. Part of 
the intent was to make governmental fnancial statements more widely 
understood, given that so many people in the private sector understand 
fnancial statements.
5.7 Limitations of the Conventional 
Balance Sheet
Nothing, however, is perfect. Tere are at least three ways in which the 
conventional balance sheet does not tell the whole story.
First, if prepared in accordance with either IFRS or IPSAS, it does not 
recognize the increasing importance in the global economy of assets that 
are intangible. Tese assets include information assets, such as databases, 
intellectual property, and brand and company reputation. Tey represent 
an increasing proportion of the investments made by organisations. Te 
failure to recognize and put on the balance sheet these intangible assets 
means that there is an increasing divergence, in the private sector, between 
the balance sheet value of a company and its market capitalization.5
While governments do not have a market capitalization, they do have 
intangible assets of signifcant value which presently do not appear on 
their balance sheets. For example, governments have statistical agencies 
whose primary asset is intangible and consists of data collected in a range 
of ways including national censuses. Te same is true for agencies that 
create, collect, and manage land information. Te land information, or 
cadastral data, is the authoritative record of the legal description of the 
land, its position and dimensions, and its ownership, and is the basis for 
a multitude of personal, corporate, and governmental decisions. Tese 
range from decisions relating to property taxes to sale and purchase deci￾sions to land management decisions. In the New Zealand case, the insti￾tution responsible for the development, maintenance, and use of this 
vital data set6
 is Toitū Te Whenua  – Land Information New Zealand 
I. Ball et al.63
(LINZ). Although not on its balance sheet, this dataset and a wide collec￾tion of others could be considered its main asset.
Second, and related to the point above, the balance sheet shows only 
those assets that meet the recognition and measurement criteria con￾tained in the accounting standards. In addition to intangible assets, there 
is an increasing focus on “capitals” that do not meet these criteria. 
Integrated Reporting is one example of an approach to reporting which 
has a much wider view of the resources to which an organisation, includ￾ing a government, has access. Te International Framework for Integrated 
Reporting7
 looks to organisations to report their performance and posi￾tion in relation to intellectual, human, social and relationship, and natu￾ral capitals, in addition to fnancial and manufactured capital which 
would currently be included on the balance sheet. Tis could constitute 
an even more radical change than that implied by seeking to include 
more intangible assets on the balance sheet.
Similarly, the recently established International Sustainability 
Standards Board (ISSB)8
 has issued its frst two standards9
 and the 
International Public Sector Accounting Standards Board has commenced 
a project addressing this issue, about which they say:
Public sector-specifc sustainability reporting standards will encourage trans￾parency, allowing governments to be held accountable for the long-term impacts 
of their interventions, and enabling better-informed decision-making. 
Reporting on climate change is one of the most important issues in sustainabil￾ity reporting, which also encompasses environmental, social and gover￾nance issues.10
Tese internationally focused initiatives are by no means the only ones. 
In fact, the establishment of the ISSB was in part motivated by a desire to 
achieve great consistency in the reporting requirements, given the num￾ber of initiatives already underway.
To some extent, climate change is already impacting balance sheets, 
even under existing accounting rules. For example, the New Zealand 
Emissions Trading Scheme is reported by the Government as a liability 
on its balance sheet. But these changes by no means capture the 
5 Why Accrual Accounting Matters64
information which is increasingly being sought, and there can be little 
doubt that the balance sheet will change signifcantly in coming years.
In the context of this book, these changes should be seen as a direction 
for development – there is no doubt that accounting needs to deal better 
with intangible assets as well as with environmental factors and the impli￾cations of climate change. Notwithstanding the need for these issues to 
be addressed, the most urgent need, and the focus of this book, is for 
governments to have balance sheets, and to make them the focus of fnan￾cial decision-making. Tis does, however, leave on the table the question 
of how the balance sheet will evolve, and we can be sure that the changes 
will be signifcant.
Tird, as noted above, the balance sheet presents a picture of the fscal 
position at a specifc date. However, for some decisions, especially those 
looking at the fscal track of a government into the long-term future, the 
conventional balance sheet – such as the New Zealand Government’s – 
can be seen as a starting point. It provides the basis for considering the 
government’s fnances in a more fundamental way – looking at the pres￾ent value of all future cash infows and outfows, described as a compre￾hensive balance sheet. While much of the comprehensive balance sheet is 
based on the conventional balance sheet, it also seeks to forecast, and 
then discount back to present value, the future revenue fows such as 
taxation and expenditure fows such as the input costs of public service 
salaries. Tese future fows are not incorporated into the conventional 
balance sheet, which reports transactions and events that have already 
occurred, as distinct from those that are forecast to occur in the future.
Te New Zealand Treasury is required to produce, at least every four 
years, an Investment Statement. In the 2022 Investment Statement, it 
identifes the key role of the information in the fnancial statements, pre￾pared in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Practice) 
(GAAP) in the following way: “GAAP seeks to establish the fnancial infor￾mation that is most relevant for accountability and decision-making purposes.”
But it then also describes the role of the comprehensive balance sheet:
Other fnancial information is not captured on the balance sheet but is still 
relevant to decision-making. It includes:
I. Ball et al.65
• the value of future revenue and expenditure: the balance sheet does not 
include the present value of future tax revenue and operating expenditure; 
these are the government’s largest future assets and liabilities. Including the 
net present value of these future assets and liabilities (known as a compre￾hensive balance sheet’) provides a greater understanding of the fnancial 
impacts of running current fscal policy into the future, even though they 
are subject to signifcant uncertainty and volatility. A signifcant positive 
balance would suggest that there is scope to increase public services or 
reduce taxes, whereas a signifcant negative position would imply a clear 
signal that the opposite is the case.11
Such a long-term perspective on the government’s fnances relies heav￾ily on assumptions and estimates, is not routinely produced by govern￾ments, and is not subject to audit. In the New Zealand case it is referred 
to as a scenario, rather than a forecast or a projection, to refect the level 
of uncertainty in the numbers. It does, however, provide critical insights 
into the trajectory of the government’s fnances and can be useful in high￾lighting when the fnances are likely to become unsustainable.
So, both “balance sheets” have a role in fnancial decision-making by 
governments, and it is important to be clear about the diferences between 
the two, and their respective uses. Te conventional balance sheet is both 
more reliable, because it reports transactions and events that have already 
occurred and is subject to audit, and better understood, because it is very 
similar to the balance sheets produced by millions of businesses (and 
other organisations) worldwide. For this reason, the production of accrual 
based fnancial statements, including the balance sheet, has been described 
as democratising fscal management. Te conventional balance sheet is 
especially useful in managing the government as a separate economic 
entity, including managing its debt obligations. However, in managing 
the government as a separate entity, the comprehensive balance sheet is 
also useful in medium and long-term fscal sustainability analysis. It indi￾cates the direction in which the government’s fnancial position appears 
to be moving, and can highlight the need for corrective action if, as in the 
New Zealand case, the long-term forecasts, or scenarios, suggest a dete￾riorating position.
5 Why Accrual Accounting Matters66
Te comprehensive balance sheet provides the conceptual underpin￾ning for assessing the fscal trajectory of the government in the long-term 
and the impact of the government’s fnancial operations on the wider 
economy. It is more widely used by macro-economists whose focus is on 
the long-term external impact of government’s fnancial operations. 
While much of the debate on fscal policy focuses on cash fows and debt, 
there has been for some decades recognition that debt alone is not an 
adequate indicator of fscal position, and there is therefore a need to draw 
on the framework of the comprehensive balance sheet.
5.8 The Importance of Timely Information
Finally, and unsurprisingly, to make good decisions the relevant informa￾tion must be available when the decisions are being made.
In a democracy, a crucial set of decisions is made by electors when they 
vote to choose a government. Tese decisions, too, require good informa￾tion, both about the performance of the current government, for account￾ability purposes, and the present fnancial position of the government, 
when assessing alternative policy platforms. A well-functioning democ￾racy is predicated on an informed electorate, a key contributor to which 
is an understanding of the government’s current and forecast fnancial 
position.
To continue the New Zealand example, one way to inform the elector￾ate is to produce an economic and fscal update ahead of a general elec￾tion – the requirement of the Public Finance Act is that such an update 
be produced 20–30 days ahead of the election.12 Tis document includes 
a current set of fnancial statements (including a balance sheet) and a 
forecast of those statements for the three years following the current year. 
Tis lays out the forecasts for taxation and expenditure levels, as well as 
forecasts of the track for debt and net worth, providing a basis for electors 
to consider the feasibility and/or wisdom of alternative policy platforms.
Once the government is installed, it faces a raft of fnancial decisions. 
While decisions are made continuously through a fnancial year, govern￾ments make many of the most critical decisions during the preparation of 
their budget, usually the highlight of the annual fnancial cycle.
I. Ball et al.67
Tis chapter has argued for the use of accrual, as opposed to solely 
cash, information in public fnancial management. Te discussion has 
focussed on the importance of accrual information given the complexity 
of government fnances. But the stage in the annual process where fnan￾cial information has the most impact is during budget preparation. For 
this reason, accrual information needs to be at the heart of the fnancial 
system, and available during the budget process. In other words, the bud￾get needs to be accrual-based, and include forecast fnancial statements. 
Tese forecast fnancial statements then become the basis for holding the 
government accountable at the end of the year, when the actual numbers 
can be compared with the budget.
To continue with the New Zealand example, the budget process is 
based on accrual numbers, with the budget documentation including a 
full set of forecast fnancial statements, including the forecast balance 
sheets presented below from the 2022 Budget Economic and Fiscal 
Update (Fig. 5.1).
Tis set of forecast balance sheets shows the expected results for the 
2021–2022 fnancial year (the current year at the time the 2022–2023 
budget is published) as well as the coming budget year and the three years 
following that.
Notwithstanding the rationale for budgeting with accrual-based num￾bers, many countries continue to budget only on a cash basis, even after 
they have moved to produce accrual-based fnancial statements at year￾end.13 If the accrual-based fnancial information is available only in the 
end of year fnancial statements, that is helpful for transparency but will 
have little impact on decisions. Te information is needed both when 
major decisions are made in the policy and budget processes, but also 
throughout the year as budgets are implemented through day-to-day 
government activity. Tere are two aspects to this point.
First, timely information is important for any purpose, even for 
transparency and accountability. A case in point is the UK Government’s 
Whole of Government Accounts, where accounts have been published 
over two years after the fnancial year-end. For example, the accounts 
for the year ended 31 March 2020, were published on June 6, 2022. In 
the middle of 2023, more than three years had passed since the end of 
the last fnancial year for which fnancial statements had been 
5 Why Accrual Accounting Matters68
Fig. 5.1 Forecast Statement of Financial Position for the New Zealand govern￾ment. (Source: The New Zealand Treasury)
I. Ball et al.69
published. When fnally published, the 2021 fnancial statements were 
well past their use-by date. It clearly shows that the UK Government 
is not using the fnancial statements in the budget process or for any 
serious  decision-making purposes. Teir fnancial statements are at 
best a belated exercise in transparency.
Second, to manage an organisation during a fnancial period, it is nec￾essary to have information on progress towards the fnancial objectives. 
Again using the New Zealand example, monthly fnancial statements 
provide this information. Tese are normally produced about a month 
after month-end so the government’s fscal performance is routinely a 
matter for public reporting and discussion.
An extract from the interim fnancial statements for the seven months 
ending 31 January 2023,14 is shown below (Fig. 5.2).
While these interim fnancial statements also include the end-of￾month balance sheet position, most of the focus for the monthly state￾ments is on how performance during the year is tracking, as a basis both 
for identifying trends that require action and for forecasting the likely 
results for the year.
5.9 Conclusion
Having a clear sight of the magnitude and complexity of government 
explains why it is so important that it be well managed. Getting wrong 
the management of such a large part of an economy can have a huge cost, 
which can be evidenced in inefcient service production, wasteful expen￾diture, poor prioritisation, poorly maintained assets  – especially infra￾structure assets, sub-optimal cash and debt management, inadequate 
management of contingencies, amongst others. Tese issues in turn 
reduce confdence in governments, exacerbating the decline in trust seen 
in so many countries.
Te need for fnancial management systems based on information 
refecting the complexity of modern governments makes clear why cash 
accounting, on its own, is simply not ft for purpose. Information on cash 
fows is important, but cash accounting leaves governments without 
5 Why Accrual Accounting Matters70
Fig. 5.2 Statement of Financial Performance for the seven months to 31 January 
2023. (Source: The New Zealand Treasury)
reliable information on the bulk of their assets and liabilities, and, with￾out this information, major resources cannot be well managed. Given the 
magnitude of the assets owned by governments, the opportunity to make 
good use of those assets is squandered at a time when so many govern￾ments are facing fscal stress, or worse. Later chapters will elaborate how 
better use can be made of these assets, but the fundamental prerequisite 
is a fnancial management system that has accrual information at its heart.
I. Ball et al.71
Notes
1. Increasingly, as companies become more conscious of environmental, 
social and governance (ESG) issues, they have more concern for their 
impact on the social, economic and environmental context in which 
they operate. Only rarely, however, would a company be concerned for 
their impact on the wider economy in the way governments are.
2. In the New Zealand case, a study (Deloitte 1990) found that the cost of 
the fnancial management reforms, including the introduction of accrual 
accounting, was exceeded by the benefts from improved cash manage￾ment alone.
3. Martinelli, Alvaro. (2005). Te Ledger of Cristianus Lomellinus and 
Dominicus De Garibaldo, Stewards of the City of Genoa (1340–41).
4. Peppel-Srebrny (2018) refers to this intuition when she notes that: In 
considering both sides of the government balance sheet in an empirical analy￾sis of the efects of fscal policy on government borrowing cost, we build on an 
idea that is deeply grounded in economic intuition.
5. Since the 1970s, when the assets on the balance sheet represented about 
80% of the value of companies, that percentage has systematically 
declined to less than 20%.
6. https://data.linz.govt.nz/data/category/full-landonline-dataset/ https://
data.linz.govt.nz/data/category/property-ownership-boundaries/
7. https://www.integratedreporting.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/
InternationalIntegratedReportingFramework.pdf
8. For more information on the ISSB see: https://www.ifrs.org/groups/
international-sustainability-standards-board/
9. IFRS S1 General Requirements for Disclosure of Sustainability-related 
Financial Information and IFRS S2 Climate-related Disclosures
10. https://www.ipsasb.org/focus-areas/sustainability-reporting [5 
July 2023].
11. Te Treasury (March 2022). He Puna Hao Pātiki: 2022 Investment 
Statement.
12. Public Finance Act 1989, Section 26 T. Te Pre-Election Economic and 
Fiscal Update (PREFU) for the 2020 general election can be found at: 
https://www.treasury.govt.nz/system/fles/2020-09/prefu20.pdf
5 Why Accrual Accounting Matters72
13. A study by the International Federation of Accountants and the 
OECD (2017) showed that while over 80% of OECD countries 
either report on, or are transitioning to, an accrual basis, more than 
60% continue to budget on a cash basis. https://www.ifac.org/
knowledge-gateway/supporting-international-standards/publications/
accrual-practices-and-reform-experiences-oecd-countries
14. Te Treasury (2023a). Interim Financial Statements for the Seven 
Months to 31 January 2023.
I. Ball et al.© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 73
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5_6
6
Accrual Accounting – A Glimpse of How 
it Works in Practice
Tis chapter has two objectives. First, using a highly simplifed, imagi￾nary week in the life of a small country,1
 we will seek to illustrate in a little 
more detail the diference between cash and accrual accounting. We will 
do this by showing how each represents a set of events or transactions that 
might commonly be undertaken by a government. It merits repeating 
that, under accrual accounting, information on cash position and cash 
fows is still reported, but accrual information becomes the heart of the 
fnancial management system because cash information tells only part of 
the story of fnancial performance and position.
Te illustration that follows is intended to clarify the fundamental dif￾ferences between cash and accrual accounting, but will leave the reader 
well short of a detailed, technical understanding of the application of 
accrual accounting in the public sector. Rather it can be seen as adding 
texture to the intuitive understanding we all have of our own fnancial 
position and how it is represented by our personal balance sheet, with our 
net worth being the diference between our assets and our liabilities.
Second, this illustration is then extended to demonstrate how the same 
accrual-based concepts, when underpinning the whole public fnancial 
management system, can reframe fnancial decisions, such as those taken 
in the budget process. It does this by providing a more comprehensive, 74
richer set of information which is focused on how the decision will impact 
a government’s net worth. Te second part of this chapter also serves to 
reinforce the idea that an integrated public fnancial management system 
is superior to one in which diferent system components are based on 
diferent concepts of resources and fnancial position.2
6.1 A Week in the Life 
of a Small Government
At the beginning of the week our small government has cash in its bank 
account of $100. It also owns an asset – a state-owned enterprise – with 
a value of $130, giving total assets of $230. It has liabilities comprising 
debt of $200 ($100 in local currency and $100 in a foreign currency) and 
a public service pension liability of $100, meaning its net worth (total 
assets of $230 less total liabilities of $300) is -$70. For reasons covered 
previously, governments can operate with a negative net worth, and 
many do.
When we look at the opening position in Fig. 6.1 below, under cash 
accounting we see a positive balance of $100. Under accrual accounting, 
when we also take account of other assets and liabilities, we have a nega￾tive net worth, i.e. -$70. Already we can see a key diference between the 
two approaches, with accrual accounting reporting a wider range of assets 
and liabilities, resulting in a diferent picture of fnancial position. In cash 
accounting, fnancial position is measured by reference to the cash hold￾ing (and, normally, outside the accounting system, the level of debt). In 
accrual accounting the measure of fscal position is net worth, which 
incorporates the values of all assets and liabilities.
Of the events and transactions that occur in the week in the life of our 
small country some, but not all, are cash transactions. Tose that do not 
involve cash still have an impact on our real economic position, and are 
therefore recognised within accrual accounting. A way to think about 
these non-cash events and transactions is to ask the question: Does this 
event or transaction make us better of or worse of? Or to use the jargon, 
does our net worth increase or decrease?
I. Ball et al.75
Events and Transactions
On Monday, the government levies taxes of $100, of which $90 is 
received in cash, and the remaining $10 is still owed at the end of the 
week, and is reported as a tax receivable.
On Tuesday, staf are paid. Teir remuneration totals $35, of which 
$25 is paid in cash, and $10 is their increased pension entitlement result￾ing from the period of service for which they are being paid. Tis amount 
adds to the pension liabilities of the government.
On Wednesday, the state-owned enterprise is sold for $130, which is 
received from the buyer in cash. Because the company is shown on the 
balance sheet at $130, this sale does not result in a proft or a loss.
Tursday sees the government repaying the local currency debt of 
$100, but also sees a change in our small country’s exchange rate, with 
the local currency dropping 10% against the currency of the creditor 
country. While there is no cash fow associated with this event, it means 
the liability of our small government, measured in local currency, increases 
by 10%, or $10, and so we are worse of by this amount.
Finally, on Friday, the courts hand down a decision that the govern￾ment must pay to clean up a contaminated site, the cost of which is 
agreed to be $120. Again, there is no cash fow immediately associated 
with this event, but our small government is worse of by this amount as 
it has a legal obligation to meet this cost.
Tese events and transactions are shown in the Fig. 6.1.
Fig. 6.1 A week in the life of a small government
6 Accrual Accounting – A Glimpse of How it Works in Practice76
Te “CASH” column reports an opening balance and then the trans￾actions that involve cash changing hands, whether infows or outfows. 
Te sum of the opening balance and these transactions gives us the clos￾ing balance. What these “cash accounts” show us is that we start the week 
with a cash position of $100, then receive $90 from taxpayers and $130 
from the sale of SOE Ltd. We also make payments of $25 to staf and 
$100 to repay the local currency debt. Tese cash infows total $220, 
while the cash outfows total $125, meaning we end the week with $95 
more than we had at the beginning of the week. Our cash position has 
improved from $100 to $195. Viewing the world through a cash lens, we 
have reason to celebrate.
Te “ACCRUAL” section of the table is rather more complicated, 
because it seeks to represent a world in which cash is but one asset. You 
will see that this section is divided into an “operating statement” and a 
“balance sheet”. Te operating statement contains the revenues and 
expenses of the period – it reports the events and transactions that make 
our small government better of or worse of. By levying tax, a revenue 
item, it becomes better of. By paying staf, an expense item, it becomes 
worse of. If the total of the revenues exceeds the total of the expenses, we 
have a surplus. If expenses exceed revenues, we have a defcit. Tis surplus 
or defcit is a measure of by how much the government has become better 
of or worse of during the period, and is refected in the balance sheet by 
an increase or decrease in net worth.
In the balance sheet section of the table we show the impact that each 
of the events and transactions have on the assets and liabilities. For exam￾ple, levying the tax results in an increase in our cash position of $90 and 
creates an asset (tax receivable – an amount owed by taxpayers to the 
government) of $10.
We start the week (in the row labelled “Opening position”) with a bal￾ance sheet that shows the various assets and liabilities and their values. 
Te sum of total assets and total liabilities is -$70, which is the negative 
net worth that was referred to above.
On Monday, the government levies the tax of $100, which constitutes 
revenue. Tis total is seen as revenue for the period, even though some of 
it has yet to be received in cash. In other words, while it has been “earned” 
during the week and therefore shown as revenue, at the end of the week 
I. Ball et al.77
some of it had been received in cash and some remains a debt owed by 
the taxpayer to the government. Accrual accounting recognizes the gov￾ernment’s claim to the $10, and reports it as an asset.
On Tuesday, with the payment of staf, we see an expense of $35. Some 
of this ($25) has been paid in cash, while some ($10) is an entitlement to 
an increased pension resulting from the period of service. In the same 
way that accrual accounting recognizes as an asset the government’s claim 
on the taxes yet to be received, it also recognizes as a liability the amount 
yet to be paid to staf.
On Wednesday the company, SOE Ltd., is sold for the amount at 
which it is held in the government’s accounts ($130). In efect, one asset 
(SOE Ltd) has been exchanged for another asset (cash) with the same 
value, meaning the sale does not make the government better of or worse 
of. Had SOE Ltd. been sold for $160, the government would have been 
better of by $30, which would be shown as a proft on sale in the operat￾ing statement.
On Tursday, the government uses $100 of cash to repay its local cur￾rency debt of $100. As both assets (cash) and liabilities (debt) are reduced 
by the same amount ($100) this transaction also leaves the government 
no better of – its net worth remains the same. However, on Tursday the 
local currency depreciates by 10% against the currency of the country 
that has lent it the foreign-denominated debt. While this debt is not 
repaid, its value – measured in local currency – increases by 10%, so this 
is recognized as an expense in the operating statement, refecting that the 
government is worse of as a result of this event. Were the local currency 
to appreciate the following week, that would reduce the value of the debt 
and the government would be better of. Tis illustrates how accrual 
accounting seeks to accurately refect economic events which increase or 
decrease the value of its assets and liabilities, and therefore its net worth.
Finally, on Friday, there is the court ruling which stipulates that the 
government is required to clean-up a contaminated site, which will cost 
$120. Tis amount is recognised in the operating statement as an expense, 
and the amount becomes a liability of the government – something it is 
obliged to pay and which therefore makes it worse of. Again, accrual 
accounting refects the economic consequences of the court decision, 
even though there is no immediate cash outfow as a result.
6 Accrual Accounting – A Glimpse of How it Works in Practice78
Two Diferent “Results”
What this illustration demonstrates is that while cash accounting shows 
us our cash position, and changes to that position, it does not give us an 
understanding of the non-cash resources which we own (SOE Ltd., for 
example) or the liabilities which we must meet in the future (debt, pen￾sion obligations, or clean-up costs). In this important sense cash account￾ing does not adequately convey the government’s fnancial position. Tis 
is illustrated in the table by the row “Results for week” in which on a cash 
basis the government is, at the end of the week, $95 better of than it was 
at the beginning, while on the accrual basis it is $65 worse of.
Tere is a reason that governments require and enforce high standards 
of fnancial reporting by companies, especially listed companies, and why 
these high standards are based on accrual accounting. Te reason is that 
critical decisions, such as capital allocation decisions by investors, are 
made based on this information. If the information is partial (or unreli￾able) the decisions are less likely to be optimal. Te same is the case in 
government, whether the decisions are voting decisions by the electorate 
or spending and investment decisions by the government. High quality 
fnancial decision-making by governments is as dependent on its infor￾mation base as is decision-making by companies and their investors.
Te illustration above shows the key diferences between information 
sets that include only cash fows, and those that include events and trans￾actions that have not (or have not yet) resulted in cash fows. Assessing 
the real fnancial performance and position of a government requires the 
more comprehensive set of fnancial information that is provided by 
accrual accounting.
6.2 Accrual Information for Decision-Making
Te second part of this chapter seeks to do two things. First, it continues 
with the illustration, but puts it into the context of decision-making 
rather than reporting  – budgeting rather than fnancial statements. It 
then addresses the importance of having the whole fnancial management 
I. Ball et al.79
system of a government based on a consistent set of fnancial informa￾tion – in other words being integrated.
Drawing from the “results for the week” in the illustration, consider 
the implications of the two diferent “results” under cash and accrual 
accounting. Te surplus shown under cash accounting is likely to encour￾age decision-makers (especially those at a political level who have valid 
incentives to please electors) to look for options to either spend more or 
to reduce taxation, as they apparently have surplus cash. Tis aggregate 
result can frame budget decisions in the following year, and can encour￾age spending and/or taxation levels that are not sustainable.
Accrual reporting shows that there was actually a worsening of the fs￾cal position during the week, as net worth declined. In these circum￾stances the incentives are quite diferent, and it is much less likely that 
decision-makers will be looking to increase spending or reduce taxation. 
Certainly decision-makers concerned about issues such as the long-term 
sustainability of the government’s fnances, intergenerational equity, or 
the need to have a balance sheet that is resilient in the face of potential 
shocks, will recognize the need not to further weaken the balance sheet.
Te point here is not that spending is good or bad, per se, but that in 
order to make sensible decisions about tax and spending levels, the 
decision-makers need a clear and comprehensive picture of their current 
position and its likely trajectory into the future. One of the advantages of 
accrual information is it provides better information on which to judge 
that trajectory.
For example, in the illustration above $10 of the taxation levied 
remains as an asset – tax receivable – at the end of the week. If we have an 
accrual-based system, it can tell us the pattern of payments we might 
expect into the future, enabling better cash management because we have 
better information about that trajectory. By having a clearer picture of 
the expected future pattern of cash fows, we can more accurately project 
the cash that will need to be raised and hence optimise fnancing costs.
One of the early reviews of the fnancial management reforms in New 
Zealand focused on cash management.3
 It found annual interest savings 
of $37 million per annum associated with the improved cash manage￾ment arrangements which were enabled by the introduction of accrual 
accounting.
6 Accrual Accounting – A Glimpse of How it Works in Practice80
6.3 The Need to Account for Assets
From a decision-making perspective, perhaps the most signifcant prob￾lem associated with cash accounting is that it does not refect the diferent 
economic impacts of investment as opposed to consumption spending. 
In our personal lives, we understand that money spent on the cruise men￾tioned earlier (consumption spending) is very diferent to that spent on 
purchasing a house (an investment). In the case of the cruise, when it is 
over, we may be relaxed but our resources are diminished. With the house 
purchase, you still have a resource, albeit has changed from cash to a 
property asset. Accrual accounting records the value of the asset acquired, 
cash accounting does not. Te substance of the two transactions is that 
the holiday results in a lower net worth, the asset purchase does not.4
Accrual accounting reports this substance, where cash information alone 
does not.
Te governmental equivalent can be illustrated by contrasting cash 
outlays on a hospital building with those making transfer payments to 
benefciaries. Te hospital is an asset that appears on the government bal￾ance sheet, meaning it has the potential to deliver valuable services over 
extended periods of time. Te transfer payment, by contrast, once paid is 
no longer a resource of the government, but of the recipient. In both 
cases, the government has parted with its cash, but in the case of the hos￾pital it retains a resource that is of value and can be used to generate ser￾vices into the future. Cash accounting, by counting the outfow of cash 
but not recording the asset, in this respect treats the two payments as 
identical, whereas their impacts on the government’s fnancial position 
are quite diferent.5
Similarly, if a government is too focused on cash and debt when mak￾ing budget decisions, it may be tempted to sell assets in order to generate 
cash. In the illustration we see the small government selling SOE Ltd. 
Tat is a signifcant factor in the improvement of the cash position dur￾ing the week, and could enable the repayment of some of the 
I. Ball et al.81
government’s debt. But the accrual information paints a diferent pic￾ture – the sale of the company does not change the net worth of the 
government; it merely changes the composition of the assets – increasing 
cash and decreasing the asset “SOE Ltd”. Te balance sheet position 
becomes somewhat more liquid, but no more sustainable.
In this example, SOE Ltd. was sold for the value at which it was 
recorded in the accounts, that is $130. In making a decision to sell an 
asset, its current value is an important piece of information – if it is sold 
for less than its current value the government makes a loss and the pur￾chaser gains an asset worth more than its cost. Knowing the value of 
assets is a critical part of fnancial decision-making, especially when a 
government is contemplating asset sales. In reality, the history of privati￾sations is littered with examples of assets being sold for less than their real 
value, whether those assets have been companies or real estate. And when 
the government operates on the cash basis, and has no reporting of the 
value of its assets, it is much harder for citizens to determine whether the 
sale was fair to the taxpayers or was a “gift” to the purchaser. Again, better 
information enables and incentivizes better decisions.
Another of the transactions in the week of our small government was 
the salary payment to employees. When operating on a cash basis, the 
government needs to budget only for the cash component of the salary. 
In our illustration, the $10 that employees earned in pension rights is not 
accounted for and can easily be ignored in decisions about whether remu￾neration should be increased. Perhaps worse, if decision makers feel they 
are short of cash to fund salary increases, they can ofer increases to the 
pension rights of employees which has no impact on current cash costs. 
Tis kind of short-term solution, encouraged by a cash focus in decision￾making, creates obligations for the future which ultimately come home 
to roost and can lead to serious fscal stress. If the budget is on an accrual 
basis, fnancial planning needs to address both the near-term cash fows 
associated with salaries as well as the pension payments that will be made 
in the long-term, and in the interim are liabilities on the government’s 
balance sheet.
6 Accrual Accounting – A Glimpse of How it Works in Practice82
6.4 Decisions and Incentives
We can see that the distinction between cash and accrual accounting is 
important because it has an impact on the information available to 
decision-makers within government, and also to the public, who need to 
be in a position to hold the government to account for its management 
of the public fnances, which includes all assets and liabilities. Te infor￾mation available to the decision-makers and to the public also creates 
incentives.
Decisions where resources, usually cash, are distributed directly to citi￾zens have signifcantly greater political salience than payments to create 
assets which generate benefts to citizens over the long-term. Tis incen￾tive is reinforced when accounting does not recognize that the invest￾ment expenditure has created an asset which has beneft into the future. 
Cash accounting does not even give a politician the cover that the gov￾ernment’s net worth is largely maintained by the investment in a hospital, 
but is diminished by the transfer payment. In this way poor accounting 
can further aggravate an incentive structure for politicians which is inevi￾tably focussed on the next election. Tis might not matter so much if 
there were no advantage to having a strong balance sheet, but the IMF 
has documented well that those advantages are considerable.6
In a system where the primary measure of a government’s fscal posi￾tion is its net worth, the incentive to invest for the long-term is encour￾aged, as it reports (appropriately) that the fscal position has not been 
diminished by a capital expenditure as is the case for a current expenditure.
Perhaps surprisingly, these misaligned incentives are sometimes embed￾ded in fscal rules. For example, especially in sub-national government in 
the United States, many jurisdictions which operate on the cash basis of 
accounting (which until relatively recently was pretty much all state and 
local governments) have budget balance rules which require cash expen￾ditures to be no more than cash receipts. While on the face of it that 
might not sound unreasonable, it is much less reasonable if borrowing is 
an acceptable source of the cash receipts, as it is in many states and 
localities.
I. Ball et al.83
Similarly, the sale of capital assets (such as a water supply infrastruc￾ture), while a source of cash, is very diferent to the cash generated from 
taxation or user charges in the current year.
6.5 Accrual Information at the Heart 
of the Financial Management System
Above we discuss how accrual information can better inform fnancial 
decision-making within a government. Te discussion that follows looks 
at how the fnancial management system can support a government in its 
fscal decision-making, and the importance of having a fnancial manage￾ment system in which the diferent processes are fully integrated.
Te place to start is with the fnancial results that are being sought – 
the fscal objectives. Te fnancial management system should assist the 
government in the achievement of these objectives. Tere are two key 
ways it does this. First, it measures performance relative to the objectives, 
and second, it provides decision-makers with information that enables 
and encourages them to make decisions consistent with those objectives.
We refer above to fscal rules, which are the subject of more detailed 
discussion in Chap. 11. It has become increasingly common for govern￾ments to formalise their fscal objectives in fscal rules. Te New Zealand 
Government, to continue with our earlier case, was an early adopter of 
fscal rules. Te set of “rules” was expressed diferently than in many other 
jurisdictions7
 and one of the signifcant features was that the principles 
were expressed in accrual, not cash, terms and included net worth as one 
of the principles.
It requires little explanation to convey that a fnancial management 
system will be more efective if the measures of fscal performance and 
position are aligned with the government’s fscal objectives. Similarly, the 
fnancial management system will be more efective if those same objec￾tives are refected in the diferent stages of the fnancial management pro￾cess, from budgeting through to annual reporting and audit.
Much fnancial decision-making takes place within the annual budget 
process, and a key part of holding a government to account for its 
6 Accrual Accounting – A Glimpse of How it Works in Practice84
fnancial management is to be able to compare actual results with those 
budgeted, and to assess these results against the fscal objectives. Te 
implication is that the budget process needs to forecast expected results 
in accrual terms, meaning that it needs to result in a forecast set of fnan￾cial statements.8
A further feature of fnancial management in government is, com￾monly, the role of the legislative body in authorising the use of resources 
by the executive arm of government. Tis authorisation, granted in the 
form of appropriations, is legally mandated and thus the appropriation 
becomes a legally binding limit on the executive’s ability to consume 
resources.
Just as fnancial reporting can be based on cash or accrual information, 
so also can budgeting and appropriations. Traditionally, appropriations 
were specifed in cash terms, as were the budget and fnancial reporting.
In recent decades many governments around the world have moved to 
accrual-based fnancial reporting. A study9
 of progress towards the adop￾tion of accrual reporting by national governments shows that by 2025 it 
is expected that 50% of governments will report on the accrual basis. 
While this constitutes a real advance in transparency, the impact on 
decision-making has not been so signifcant. Many governments have 
adopted the accrual basis for reporting, but have continued to budget 
and appropriate on a cash basis, and to specify their fscal objectives solely 
in cash and debt terms.
While now somewhat dated, a 2016 OECD study10 showed that while 
82% of advanced economy governments were then reporting on an 
accrual basis, only 32% had moved to adopt accrual-based budgeting, 
meaning their budgets and fnancial statements were not aligned. Tese 
numbers show 50% of the OECD countries budgeting on a cash basis 
but reporting on an accrual basis.
Tis is highly signifcant for the efectiveness of the public fnancial 
management system. In Fig. 6.2 we can see the diferent stages of integra￾tion of a fnancial management system. At the lowest level, the system is 
integrated – budgeting, appropriations and reporting are all on a cash 
basis. But this process sufers from the limitations that have been identi￾fed above. Decision-making will focus on cash fows at the expense of 
I. Ball et al.85
Fig. 6.2 Levels of integration of accrual accounting in fnancial manage￾ment systems
asset management, and non-debt liabilities such as pension or insurance 
liabilities are neither budgeted for nor reported.
At the next level up, the reporting moves to an accrual basis, which is 
good for transparency, but as budgeting and appropriations are still on a 
cash basis, fscal objectives and decision-making will focus on cash and 
debt, resulting in weak decision-making that fails to consider assets and 
non-debt liabilities. Tis setting also has the disadvantage that it limits 
the utility of an actual to budget comparison, as actuals are on an accrual 
basis, but the budget is cash.
One level higher, a sensible budget to actual comparison can be made, 
as both sets of numbers are on an accrual basis. But with appropriations 
still on a cash basis, the incentives faced by budget managers in the gov￾ernment are confused, in that they need to pay due regard to the cash 
appropriations, given they are the legal constraint, but there is a diferent 
set of budget numbers which are on an accrual basis. A breach of appro￾priations can be (and should be) a serious matter, so budget managers will 
still have reason to give those higher priority than the budget.
On the highest level, the budget, appropriations, and reporting pro￾cesses are all on the same, accrual, basis. Te budget numbers cover all 
6 Accrual Accounting – A Glimpse of How it Works in Practice86
assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses. Te fnancial statements can be 
directly compared with the forecast fnancial statements, and appropria￾tions authorise not just cash expenses, but the consumption of all 
resources, including, for example, the depreciation on assets. Again, at 
this level, we have an integrated system where the key elements of the 
fnancial management process operate on the same basis, except that in 
this case they all operate of a consistent, comprehensive set of accrual 
numbers.
Importantly, this set of numbers leads to net worth as the summary 
measure of fscal position, rather than debt, as net worth takes account of 
all assets and liabilities. Of course, the value of this information is heavily 
dependent on the fscal objectives set by the government and contained 
in the fscal rules. Ideally, the fscal objectives of the government, the 
budget and appropriations processes, and the monitoring and reporting 
of performance, should be integrated and driven of accrual-based fnan￾cial information. Te efect of such a system is to embed net worth as the 
summary measure of fscal position.
6.6 Conclusion
Tis chapter starts with a week in the life of a small government, illustrat￾ing in a very simple way the diference between cash accounting and 
accrual accounting. Its intent is to demonstrate how poorly cash account￾ing refects the real fnancial situation of a government.
We then address the way fnancial information can impact decision￾making, and on the incentives facing decision-makers. But if we wish our 
fnancial management system to be fully efective it needs to be inte￾grated. Tere needs to be consistency between fscal objectives, the infor￾mation used to make fnancial decisions and to monitor their execution, 
and the way the government reports at the end of a period. Accrual infor￾mation needs to be at the heart of the fnancial management system.
I. Ball et al.87
Notes
1. Tis example is (loosely) based on material used in New Zealand when 
training members of Parliament following the introduction of the Public 
Finance Act 1989. It also draws on material from Ball, Dale, Eggers, and 
Sacco (2000).
2. Te most obvious (and common) example of this is where the budget is 
based on cash information only, while the annual fnancial statements 
are prepared on a full accrual basis.
3. Deloitte Ross Tohmatsu, (1990). “Post-Implementation Review of Cash 
Management Reform”.
4. If the asset subsequently diminishes in value, accrual accounting refects 
that decline in value, usually through depreciation. While ultimately the 
asset may be fully consumed, it continues to have value over a number of 
time periods, and during those periods its continuing value is refected 
on your personal balance sheet.
5. It needs to be noted that many governments, while operating on a cash 
basis and not capitalising (putting on the balance sheet) the cost of the 
hospital, nevertheless do distinguish capital expenditure, and can report 
this separately from current expenditure.
6. International Monetary Fund (2018) Managing Public Wealth, 
Fiscal Monitor
7. Tese were expressed as “principles of responsible fscal management” in 
the Fiscal Responsibility Act 1994, and were later incorporated into the 
Public Finance Act 1989. Te results of this approach are described in 
Gill, Derek, (2018), Te Fiscal Responsibility Act 1994: Te astonishing 
success of a weak non-binding policy.
8. In the New Zealand case these forecast fnancial statements are produced 
for the budget year and the following three years. (Te Treasury (2023b). 
Budget Economic and Fiscal Update)
9. International Federation of Accountants and Te Chartered Institute of 
Public Finance and Accountancy (2021), International Public Sector 
Financial Accountability Index, 2021 Status Report
10. Moretti (2016). Accrual practices and reform experiences in OECD 
countries - Results of the 2016 OECD Accruals Survey
6 Accrual Accounting – A Glimpse of How it Works in Practice© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 89
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5_7
7
Central Banks and the Public Sector 
Balance Sheet
Tere are several reasons why central banks are important to our discus￾sion of the Public Sector Balance Sheet:
• Central banks have a unique and valuable function – the issuance of 
central bank money. Tis creates a rather unusual liability, and also is 
a source of revenue.
• Tey play a major role in the delivery of government economic policy, 
both through their role as “lenders of last resort”, exemplifed during 
the Global Financial Crisis, and through implementation of 
Quantitative Easing (“QE”)1
 and Quantitative Tightening (“QT”). 
Both types of activity can have a signifcant impact on the size and 
composition of the overall balance sheet, and can also involve direct 
transfers of economic value between the public and private sectors.
• Central banks may hold substantial assets, and may function as a sov￾ereign wealth fund. (SWF).90
7.1 Central Bank Structure and Ownership
Central banks have many and varied histories, governance and ownership 
structures. But whatever their ofcial designation and ownership struc￾ture, and whatever type and degree of operational independence they 
may have been granted, in practice central banks are fscal and fnancial 
agents of the state and are benefcially owned by the central government, 
usually through the Treasury Department or Ministry of Finance. 
Terefore, central banks should always be included in the consolidated 
government’s accounts used for fscal sustainability analysis.
As an illustration of central bank diversity, Table 7.1 provides a sum￾mary of central banking arrangements for the G7 countries, together 
with the ECB as a supranational central bank.
Table 7.1 Central bank ownership arrangements
Country Institution Structure/ownership
Canada Bank of 
Canada
100% owned by the Ministry of Finance
France Banque de 
France
100% owned by government
Germany Bundesbank 100% owned by government
Italy Banca d’Italia Banks, insurance companies and other fnancial 
institutions/foundations. 54% of proft paid to 
Italian government
Japan Bank of Japan Juridical entity; max 45% privately owned and 
traded on JASDAQ; government has 100% 
voting interest
United 
Kingdom
Bank of 
England
Joint stock company owned 100% by HM 
Treasury
United 
States
Federal 
Reserve 
System
Federal agency plus 12 regional banks, 
nominally owned by commercial banks; partial 
guarantee by US Treasury to whom profts 
accrue
EU/
Eurozone
European 
Central Bank
Owned by the 27 EU NCBs in proportion to 
population and GDP. The 7 non-euro area 
NCBs are not entitled to receive any share of 
the distributable profts of the ECB, nor are 
they liable to fund any losses of the ECB, so 
ECB is effectively owned by the 20 euro area 
NCBs in proportion to population and GDP
I. Ball et al.91
7.2 A Free Lunch? Money as an Irredeemable 
Liability, and “Seigniorage”
Central bank money or the monetary base consists of currency in circula￾tion plus commercial bank reserves held with the central bank. Central 
bank money is unique for two reasons, which cause some complexity 
when incorporating central banks into the Public Sector Balance Sheet.
First, central bank money, while an undoubted asset to the holder, is 
much less obviously a liability of the issuer – the central bank. Central 
bank money is irredeemable. If you are lucky, you may be able to exchange 
one $20 note for another $20 note at the central bank (or even for two 
$10 notes) but that is the limit of the holder’s claim on the issuer. Tis 
matters because solvency of the State requires that its net true conven￾tional debt (all explicit liabilities minus all explicit assets) be no greater 
than the (expectation of the) present discounted value of its present and 
future primary (non-interest) budget surpluses.
So if a government prints money and buys an asset, how does this 
appear on its balance sheet? Te non-redeemable nature of the liability 
suggests that it isn’t really a liability. Tis implies it is equity. But if that 
were true, all that would be needed for governments to strengthen their 
balance sheet would be to print money and buy stuf, which also doesn’t 
feel like good fnancial management, and might also be rather dangerous 
from an infationary perspective.
Moreover, Quantitative Easing ((on which more below) has led to an 
enormous expansion in central bank money, as central banks purchase 
government bonds (usually) in exchange for central bank reserves (depos￾its by banks at the central banks). Table 7.2 illustrates how the total mon￾etary base has changed, primarily through increases in deposits at central 
banks, since before the Global Financial Crisis.
On the face of it, the fact that many central banks have large amounts 
of irredeemable liabilities in the form of currency and central bank depos￾its suggests that our concerns about the expansion of negative net worth 
across the G7 countries is overdone; if we add back irredeemable liabili￾ties, then the picture would look rather better.
7 Central Banks and the Public Sector Balance Sheet92
Table 7.2 Change in monetary base 2007–2022 (% of GDP)
Country/
region 2007 2022
Currency Deposits Total Currency Deposits Total Change in 
total
Eurozone 
(ECB)
7.2 4.0 11.2 11.8 30.0 41.8 3.7×
Japan (BoJ) 16.0 0.5 16.5 22.7 94.7 117.4 7.1×
USA (Fed) 5.7 0.3 6.0 8.7 12.2 20.8 3.5×
UK (BoE) 3.3 1.5 4.8 3.9 40.5 44.4 9.3×
Source: Willem Buiter
But this overlooks the nature of QE. When central bank money is used 
to purchase an asset which will eventually be redeemed or sold (a process 
known as Quantitative Tightening), then the clear expectation is that this 
component of the monetary base will indeed be retired for cash. Terefore, 
money issued in the context of QE looks like a liability. Te ambiguity 
relates only to the “non-QE” stock which, while hard to pin down pre￾cisely, is at least relatively small in size.
Second, central bank money (or at least currency) generally counts as 
legal tender, which makes it an attractive means of payment and store of 
value. Currency typically pays no interest, so its issuance is proftable 
when interest rates are positive. Te interest rate paid on reserves held at 
the central bank is also typically below the interest rate on other risk-free 
fnancial instruments, so their issuance too can be a proftable business 
for the central bank. Tis ability for a central bank to make money by 
issuing money is called “seigniorage”.
Although there are limits (in the form of undesirably high rates of 
infation) on the amount of seigniorage revenue that the central bank can 
extract in real terms, it remains a non-trivial source of government reve￾nue and should be accounted for properly. Also present and future sei￾gniorage revenues should in principle be included as a component of the 
present and future primary revenues that the central bank can generate, 
but in practice are not.
I. Ball et al.93
7.3 Central Bank Activity and Its Impact 
on the Public Sector Balance Sheet
Central banks can afect the Public Sector Balance Sheet (PSBS) in sev￾eral ways, and recent trends have been towards increasing the scale of 
these efects. Most notably, the pursuit of QE has two important implica￾tions for the PSBS.
First, at least for a time, it entails a substantial expansion of the PSBS, 
as illustrated on the liability side of the increase in central bank deposits 
shown in Table 7.2.
Second, the implementation of QE brings with it a high likelihood of 
economic loss over time. QE involves buying a substantial proportion of 
outstanding government bonds in a relatively short space of time, creat￾ing upward pressure on bond prices, usually at a time when slow (or 
negative growth) is already putting upward pressure on the price of “safe” 
assets like government bonds. Expected rates of purchase are clearly sig￾nalled to the market, allowing government bond prices to adjust 
(upwards) in anticipation of those purchases. Te central bank is there￾fore deliberately buying bonds at artifcially high prices. When the policy 
is reversed (QT) the opposite is true; the supply of government bonds is 
known to be increasing, so prices will fall. Tis efect would be exacer￾bated by the efects on bond markets of the higher infation that is likely 
to be the trigger for QT.
Tese efects are to be expected – and indeed, might well be associated 
with a successful QE intervention, as revived economic growth will itself 
tend to increase infationary expectations. But the economic cost is real; 
value has been transferred from the public sector to the private sector and 
this loss will be permanently refected in the PSBS.
To provide some illustrations of potential costs and vulnerabilities:
• Te Bank of Japan has a balance sheet as of March 31 2023 equivalent 
to 130% of GDP, largely comprised of long duration maturities. If and 
when QT is announced this could lead to heavy losses; a 1% increase 
in the yield of the targeted 10 year maturity applied across the portfo￾lio would reduce Public Sector Net Worth by about 13%.
7 Central Banks and the Public Sector Balance Sheet94
• Te Bank of England estimates that the Treasury will need to pay it 
almost £30 bn a year in 2023, 2024 and 2025 to indemnify it for 
expected losses on its Asset Purchase Facility bond holdings as QE has 
become QT at a rate of £80 bn a year. Between 2009 and 2022 – the 
QE period – the APF’s activities generated positive net cash fows from 
the APF to the Treasury, peaking at a cumulative £123.8 billion at 
end-September 2022.
• Te US Federal reserve bank currently holds assets with a par value of 
36% of GDP.
• Te Swiss National Bank recorded an annual loss of 132 billion Swiss 
francs (US$ 143 billion) in 2022 – around 17.7% of GDP.
As a further note, the UK Ofce of Budgetary Responsibility notes in 
its July 2023 Financial Sustainability Report2
 that the purchase of approx￾imately one third of outstanding government debt in exchange for central 
bank deposits had had the efect of greatly increasing the sensitivity of 
UK debt fnancing costs to short term interest rates, since the repur￾chased debt was being fnanced through overnight deposits at the Bank 
of England, paying interest equal to Bank Rate, the Bank of England’s 
policy rate. At the time of writing (July 2023), Bank Rate is 5%, and the 
face value of bonds held by government approximately £800 billion3
; the 
increase in Bank Rate from 0.1% would have increased the annualised 
cost of holding these bonds by approximately £40 billion, in addition to 
any capital losses sustained.
“Lender of last resort” (LOLR) or “market maker of last resort” 
(MOLR) activity can also entail radical expansion of central bank, and 
hence public sector, balance sheets. During the fnancial crisis, and again 
during the COVID-19 crisis, central banks established facilities to pro￾vide liquidity to the banking sector and corporate sectors. It is possible 
that the mere existence of a large-scale LOLR or MMLR programme 
sufces to restore funding liquidity or market liquidity, without any 
actual transactions taking place. Examples include the ECB’s Outright 
Monetary Transactions (OMT) programme, created in 2012, and the 
ECB’s Transactions Protection Instrument (TPI) created in 2022. Both 
I. Ball et al.95
programmes have unlimited maximum size but neither programme has 
as yet been activated – their mere creation or credible “announcement 
efect” has apparently sufced to perform their intended function of sta￾bilising markets.
Whilst not intrinsic to a central bank’s role, some central banks have 
very large investment portfolios – they manage sovereign wealth funds. 
For example, Norges Bank (the central bank of Norway) manages the 
Government Pension Fund Global (aka the Oil Fund) on behalf of the 
Ministry of Finance through Norges Bank Investment Management. Te 
Oil Fund has US$1.39 trillion (roughly 2.4 times 2022 GDP) in AUM 
as of May 3, 2023, and is invested globally, applying ethical (mostly ESG) 
principles. In addition to investing in global equities (69.8% of AUM), it 
also holds portfolios of real estate (2.7% of AUM) and fxed-income 
investments (27.5% of AUM).
Finally, central banks afect public fnances through the profts gener￾ated through the creation of money (seigniorage). In the case of the Fed, 
this generates some very large sums – in excess of $100 billion in 2021, 
or about 0.47% of US GDP. Te ECB and the national central banks of 
the Eurosystem made cumulative profts before tax and general provi￾sions of approximately €300 billion between 2012 and 2021.
7.4 Conclusion
For the reasons covered in this chapter, it is important that governments 
account properly for central banks. In particular, QE has seen a signif￾cant increase in the size of the balance sheet for many central banks, 
which, when consolidated into the fnancial statements of the govern￾ment, have a consequential impact on the fnancial performance of the 
government and on the size and structure of its consolidated balance 
sheet. Including the central bank in the balance sheet of the government 
is important whether in the context of the conventional balance sheet, 
which we saw in the NZ case, or in the comprehensive balance sheet, to 
which we now turn.
7 Central Banks and the Public Sector Balance Sheet96
Notes
1. We include qualitative easing (the acquisition of higher-risk and possibly 
less liquid assets by the central bank) in QE. Sometimes this combined 
quantitative and qualitative easing is referred to as QQE.
2. Ofce for Budgetary Responsibility (2023). Financial Sustainability 
Report July 2023 p. 14.
3. Key Economic Indicators Number 02802, House of Commons Library, 
22 June 2023.
I. Ball et al.© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 97
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5_8
8
Looking to the Future: 
The Comprehensive Balance Sheet
So far, we have argued that without a complete conventional balance 
sheet – one that accounts for and properly values all assets and liabilities – 
a rational allocation of fscal resources at a point in time and over time is 
impossible.
But as we have discussed, one of the most important features of gov￾ernment is that we rely on it throughout our lives, and depend upon its 
continuing ability to meet our needs and expectations. Tese dependen￾cies may be direct: for example, we might rely on the government con￾tinuing to ofer healthcare services, or a state pension. We also depend 
indirectly on the government’s ability to meet its commitments: if we 
choose to source our future healthcare or pension needs from private 
providers we are likely to fnd that the funds invested on our behalf are 
largely used to buy government securities. Either way, the delivery of 
future services that we rely upon is dependent on the government’s con￾tinuing ability to meet its obligations.
Furthermore, users of state-provided services expect these to continue 
to be available to them throughout their lives, however old, or young, 
they might be. And as time goes by, this continues to be true. So the 
expectations upon government to deliver services to the population are 
indefnite (one might say, infnite) in duration. Te detailed shape and 98
costs of what services are required, will vary with demographics, life 
expectancy and (especially in the case of healthcare), with “exogenous” 
factors – for example, advances in diagnostics and treatments.
Te tax revenues available to fund these ongoing costs will also depend 
largely on the size and demographic profle of the population, and on the 
growth rate of per capita income. Tere are also factors which afect both 
costs and revenues: an increase in the age at which the state pension is 
paid will both reduce expected pension costs and provide an incentive for 
people to work longer, hence generating more tax revenues.
If it is possible to forecast future costs and future revenues, it will also 
be possible to estimate how these compare with each other. By factoring 
the current fnancial position, as described in the conventional balance 
sheet, it will then be possible to assess the overall fnancial position of the 
government. Tis is often described as the comprehensive balance sheet, 
though other terms are sometimes used – we will encounter more of these 
in Chap. 10.
8.1 Building the Comprehensive 
Balance Sheet
Te approach used to develop a comprehensive balance sheet is to take 
the conventional balance sheet, and add to it assets which refect the pres￾ent values of anticipated future revenues and liabilities which refect the 
present values of anticipated future expenditures, where these are not 
already refected on the conventional balance sheet. Tese assets and lia￾bilities can be described as “implicit”; they do not represent formal, con￾tractual entitlements or obligations, but represent a best estimate of what 
these revenues or expenses will be.
To illustrate the distinction between implicit liabilities and explicit 
liabilities, state pensions expected to be paid in the future but subject to 
potential variation will be estimated and included as additional implicit 
liabilities in the comprehensive balance sheet; pensions obligations to 
current or former state employees that are established by employment 
contract and have already been earned will already be included as an 
explicit liability on the conventional balance sheet.
I. Ball et al.99
It will be clear from this defnition that there is signifcant uncertainty 
embedded in this exercise, especially as the analysis is conducted over a 
very long timeframe. Tere is also a very high degree of complexity.
For present purposes, however, we will summarise briefy the three key 
components of the assessment, and factors which may afect these:
• Implicit assets – valuing future revenues
• Implicit liabilities – valuing future policy costs
• Setting the discount rate
Implicit Assets – Valuing Future Revenues
On the asset side, putting a value on future revenues requires a view on 
future levels of economic activity (both trend and cyclical) which drives 
the tax base, and of the tax rules which drive the efective tax rate. Tese 
may well be interdependent; as tax rates rise, so does the likelihood that 
substitution efects might lead people to opt out of productive activity, or 
that high value-added activity might move to lower tax jurisdictions. 
Similarly, there will be dependencies between future revenues and future 
costs; for example, expenditure on higher education is often cited as 
being intended to increase future economic potential, and hence (among 
other things) increase future tax revenues.
Implicit Liabilities – Valuing Future Policy Costs
Te costs of delivering public policy in the future are also very challeng￾ing to forecast. In Chap. 2, we cited Bismarck’s social welfare initiatives 
as policies whose current costs far exceed original expectations, in large 
part because of their success (alongside other government measures) in 
promoting societies in which people live longer lives and enjoy longer 
retirements. Healthcare is also subject to costs arising from advances in 
medical treatments and diagnostics, and to ethical considerations (and 
political ramifcations) associated with withholding treatment on grounds 
of cost. Policies can in principle – and sometimes in practice – be adapted 
to refect changing circumstances; for example, the age at which UK citi￾zens become eligible for state pensions has been increased over recent 
decades, to refect longer life expectancies.
8 Looking to the Future: The Comprehensive Balance Sheet100
Setting the Discount Rate
As noted above, to assess the value today (the “present discounted value” 
or PDV) of future streams of revenue or cost requires the use of a dis￾count rate. Formally, the correct rate to use is the interest rate on the 
central government’s debt that is expected to prevail in the (very long) 
forecast period. (When there is material foreign-currency debt and there 
are economic and/or political limits on the ability of the government to 
generate primary budget surpluses – a problem faced by various Eurozone 
countries since the 2008 Global Financial Crisis – the market rate might 
well include a signifcant default risk premium). Tere are two important 
points to note, however. First, government debt rates are themselves 
afected by government actions, by economic cycles, by trend rates of 
growth and (especially) by global fnancial markets. Second, modest 
changes to the assumed discount rate can lead to sizeable swings in the 
health of the comprehensive balance sheet.
8.2 Comprehensive Balance Sheet: Prediction 
or Planning Tool?
It will be seen from the above discussion that any point-in-time assess￾ment of the comprehensive balance sheet is highly dependent on assump￾tions, and that quite modest variations in these assumptions might have 
a big impact on how the current fnancial position is perceived.
As a result, the comprehensive balance sheet might best be seen as a 
tool for assessing the consequences of potential courses of action (for 
example, changing the retirement age) or of sensitivities to changes in 
assumptions in key inputs (for example, interest rates, uplifts in health￾care costs).
For example, Koshima et al.1
 – to whom we shall return in Chap. 10 – 
construct comprehensive balance sheet estimates for the G7 countries. 
I. Ball et al.101
Tey address the future primary (non-interest) revenues and outlays due 
to fscal policy by making long-term (50-year) fscal projections assuming 
unchanged policy. In several cases, the conclusion is that such policies are 
barely sustainable (at best). Te implication is either that policies will 
have to change, or that there is a likelihood of severe disruption in the 
fnances of some of the world’s leading economies.
8.3 What Does a Solvent – or Insolvent – 
Comprehensive Balance Sheet Look Like?
Te basic function of a balance sheet is to assess “solvency”; whether the 
entity which is being accounted for has assets in excess of its liabilities, 
and is therefore able to meet its future obligations.
As we will see in Chap. 10, at the most recent assessment no fewer than 
5 of the G7 nations show negative net worth on their (conventional) 
public sector balance sheets,2
 and so are technically “insolvent” on this 
measure.
But an important feature of the comprehensive balance sheet is that it 
takes into account not just the current state, but also future expectations: 
is the present value of future revenues less policy costs (pre-fnancing) – 
known as “primary balances”  – sufciently positive to ofset a current 
conventional net worth defcit? Or conversely, does a current conven￾tional net worth surplus ofset the present value of an expected future 
primary defcit?
Of course, as we discussed in earlier chapters, the conclusions that can 
be drawn from fnancial accounts of any sort are only as good as the 
information and assumptions on which those accounts are based. We will 
consider possible causes and consequences of poor accounting at the 
comprehensive balance sheet level later in this chapter, and examine the 
current state of G7 comprehensive balance sheets in Chap. 10.
8 Looking to the Future: The Comprehensive Balance Sheet102
8.4 New Zealand’s Comprehensive Balance 
Sheet Approach
In Chaps. 3, 4, 5 and 6, we highlighted New Zealand as the country 
which has done most to generate accrual-based government accounts in 
a timely manner, and to integrate these into its fnancial decision-making 
process.
As part of this whole initiative, New Zealand has also developed a 
comprehensive balance sheet framework.3
 Te New Zealand Treasury is 
mandated to publish, at least every four years, a Statement of the Long￾term Fiscal Position, which has a horizon of at least 40 years and identi￾fes how demographic and other changes may impact the fscal position. 
Tis is in addition to the Budget Policy Statement and the Fiscal Strategy 
Report which are presented each fnancial year. Te Budget Policy 
Statement has a short-run focus on the upcoming budget. Te Fiscal 
Strategy Report is presented with the Budget. It states the government’s 
long-term fscal policy objectives over a horizon of at least ten years as 
well as the government’s short-term intentions for fscal policy over a 
period of three years.
Since 2004, the New Zealand Treasury has produced fve Statements 
of the Long-term Fiscal Position, the latest in September 2021.4
 It incor￾porates the frst Long-term Insights Briefng to the Minister of Finance, 
which considers medium to long-term fscal-fnancial trends, risks and 
opportunities. Te approach to the long-term fscal position of New 
Zealand involves what are called “scenarios” rather than forecasts, an 
approach which addresses the forecasting challenges discussed in the pre￾vious section. Te historical trends scenario, which has net debt increas￾ing exponentially, is contrasted with a number of alternative scenarios in 
which taxes or expenditures are adjusted to accommodate the fscal pres￾sures and prevent the public debt from rising substantially above 2021 
levels. Te approach adopted in the Statement of the Long-term Fiscal 
Position can be viewed as a 40-year forward-looking approximation to 
the comprehensive balance sheet of the New Zealand government. Te 
alternative scenarios include not only contrasting assumptions about 
demographics, economics and fscal policy but also the impact of major 
I. Ball et al.103
shocks, including climate change, an earthquake disaster and a tempo￾rary decline in the growth rate of labour productivity. As with many other 
countries, New Zealand shows a (markedly) worsening fscal position 
over the 40-year time frame, with the historical trends scenario showing 
net worth declining by 150% of GDP over the forty years. Chapter 10
looks at similar analysis for G7 countries in more detail.
Note that this scenario analysis is not only a key input into any mean￾ingful discussion of longer-term fscal sustainability, it is also essential to 
any informed discussion of how fscal policy, now and in the future, will 
impact the wider economy, including output, employment, productivity, 
capital formation and income and wealth inequality. Proper consider￾ation of the comprehensive balance sheet (preferably more frequently 
than once every four years) will both improve the quality of decision￾making applied to running a very large, complex conglomerate (the 
state), and also help optimise the wider economic and social impact of 
the state.
8.5 Constructing the Comprehensive Balance 
Sheet – and Why Does It Matter?
In Chap. 7 we set out a formal framework for combining the comprehen￾sive balance sheets of the central bank and the Treasury (here meaning 
the government sector as a whole) to create a public sector comprehensive 
balance sheet that fully refects the current position and expected future 
path of public fnances. Tis provides the analysis which underpins much 
of this chapter.
A simplifed version of the combined comprehensive balance sheet is 
set out below; PDV stands for present discounted value, and assets and 
liabilities which relate entirely or mainly to the central bank are described 
in italics (Fig. 8.1).
As discussed in Chap. 7, whether central bank monetary liabilities 
(L1.) should be included is debatable. We have chosen to do so in part 
because this is the approach followed by the IMF, whose analysis we will 
be drawing upon in our discussion of public sector balance sheets in the 
8 Looking to the Future: The Comprehensive Balance Sheet104
Fair value of land, real estate, structures, 
mineral assets and other real assets, 
equity in public enterprises and other 
financial assets
Gold and foreign exchange holdings and 
other foreign assets
Private sector debt and loans to the 
private sector held by the central bank
PDV of taxes, levies and social security 
contributions paid by the public
Total Assets
Monetary liabilities of the central bank. 
Non-monetary liabilities of the central bank
Marketable and non-marketable general
government debt held by the public, 
including pension entitlements
PDV of primary (non-interest) current 
expenditure by the State
ASSETS
A1.
A2.
A3.
A4.
A5.
L1.
LIABILITIES
L2.
L3.
L4.
PDV of seigniorage (interest saved by
 issuing base money) plus PDV of
 terminal stock of base money.
Fig. 8.1 Simplifed comprehensive balance sheet of government and central bank
I. Ball et al.105
following two chapters, and in part because to us it does seem logical to 
include monetary liabilities which relate to QE in the consolidated bal￾ance sheet.
Te two items marked ** (L5 and L6) are included for completeness 
but are typically of small magnitude. As regards L5, central banks gener￾ally lack the legitimacy to make direct transfer payments to the private 
sector (called helicopter money drops if the transfer payments are mon￾etized). L6 is the PDV of the implicit subsidies paid by the central bank 
on its conventional assets and non-monetary liabilities when the rate of 
return on its assets is below the interest rate on the public debt used in the 
present discounted value calculations or when the rate of return on its 
non-monetary liabilities is above the interest rate on the public debt. Tis 
can be positive or negative.
As discussed earlier in this chapter, but made clear in this table, an 
“insolvent” conventional balance sheet need not imply an insolvent state 
(if it did, the consequences would be so severe that the G7 would prob￾ably need to re-invent itself as the G2). Similarly, an apparently strong 
conventional balance sheet can be overwhelmed if the costs of future 
primary expenditures exceed expected primary revenues.
PDV of primary payments by the central 
bank to the private sector **
PDV of implicit subsidies paid by the 
State on its conventional assets and 
non-monetary liabilities**
Total Liabilities
Comprehensive net worth of the State – the
consolidated Treasury and central bank
L6.
L5.
Fig. 8.1 (continued)
8 Looking to the Future: The Comprehensive Balance Sheet106
8.6 Orders of Magnitude: What 
Really Matters?
Te highly simplifed line items in Fig. 8.1 provide some interesting sign￾posts about how poor fnancial management can create major problems, 
some of which we will develop in further chapters. But to begin with a 
few general points:
Te fnancial values involved are extremely large, especially in relation 
to primary expenditures (costs) and revenues. For example, it is not 
uncommon for a developed economy government to account for 50% of 
GDP in its primary expenditure (and to collect a similar amount (if it is 
balancing the books) in taxes.5
 If we use a 2% (real) discount rate and 
assume zero economic growth, this implies that the PDVs of future rev￾enues and expenditure (over an infnite horizon) would each total 
(0.5/0.02) × GDP, that is, 25× GDP. As we will see, conventional devel￾oped country PSBS are typically around 4–6× GDP. By implication, the 
two big implicit line items A4 and L3 are likely to dominate the explicit 
(conventional) items in an assessment of the comprehensive balance sheet.
A great deal of the implicit assets and liabilities relate to the relatively 
distant future; defcits can be addressed by reducing expectations of 
future spending, or increasing the future tax take across the economy. So 
there is a fair bit of scope to “kick the can”, to use the expression popula￾rised during the Eurozone crisis (which revolved around the issue of long 
term sustainability). Tis can create very substantial problems related to 
intergenerational fairness – a point that we will come back to in Chap. 10.
Te stock of government debt (included in L2) is raised on the premise 
(for a developed economy and denominated in domestic currency) that it 
represents a credit risk-free asset for investors, and therefore can be relied 
upon to backstop future needs with a very high level of confdence. Tis 
in turn ensures that government debt markets allow high volumes of 
fnancing and at very low rates compared with those available to non￾government issuers. If this confdence is damaged, then the ability to 
fnance government activity can evaporate very quickly, as demonstrated 
during the Eurozone crisis and in late September and October 2022 in 
the UK gilt market’s reaction to what were seen to be unrealistic spending 
I. Ball et al.107
and fnancing plans promulgated by the government of Liz Truss. In the 
US, repeated stand-ofs and brinkmanship about the debt ceiling have 
not thus far had a material impact on market perceptions of sovereign 
default risk.6
 It only has to go wrong once, however, for serious damage 
to be inficted on US sovereign creditworthiness.
To be useful, the balance sheet relies on the accuracy of the informa￾tion that it contains. But there are strong reasons to believe that govern￾ment balance sheets consistently underestimate the value of public sector 
assets (A1). Inadequate accounting can translate into real losses of value. 
Tis theme is developed further in Chap. 12.
Te sheer scale of government as set out in both the conventional and 
comprehensive balance sheets demonstrates the importance of managing 
government assets and activities well. Small improvements in the man￾agement of assets will yield a measurable impact on GDP (see Chap. 15); 
similarly, small increases in the efciency with which G7 governments 
delivers their 40–50% or so of economic activity will have a similar 
impact.7
 Again, good accounting can drive accountability for perfor￾mance, and hence, through the incentives that accountability can create, 
improved performance.
While the nominal value of seigniorage can be huge (the printing 
presses can be run at full speed and commercial bank reserves can be cre￾ated swiftly and on a large scale), the real value of seigniorage (or its share 
of GDP) is constrained by the negative impact of expected infation on 
the demand for real central bank money balances. Consider the demand 
for currency, which has a zero nominal interest rate. Higher expected 
infation raises the nominal interest rate, which is the opportunity cost of 
holding currency. A sudden large increase in seigniorage can provide 
material additional command over real resources for the State, but only 
for as long as actual and expected infation don’t rise signifcantly and 
cause the real infation tax base to shrink. Once actual and expected infa￾tion adjust, the maximum sustainable seigniorage revenue as a share of 
GDP could be no more than 0.5% for the U.S. – at an infation rate of 
11.9%. Even if we assume a signifcantly lower responsiveness of real cur￾rency demand to its opportunity cost (the short nominal interest rate), 
the maximum sustainable seigniorage as a share of GDP only rises to 
1.2% – and the associated actual and expected constant infation rate is 
8 Looking to the Future: The Comprehensive Balance Sheet108
32.5%. Simply “printing money” therefore runs rather quickly into the 
quite tight limits imposed on real seigniorage revenue by the demand for 
real central bank money balances. Attempts to “outprint” the demand for 
real central bank money balances will likely result in accelerating infa￾tion and ultimately hyperinfation.
8.7 Conclusion
In this chapter we have looked at the nature and role of the comprehen￾sive balance sheet, and how it can assist in understanding the long-term 
trends resulting from current policy settings of the government. For 
many countries, a critical factor which needs to be accommodated in 
long-term fscal planning is the ageing of the population, and we see how 
severely, without remedial policy change, that could afect New Zealand’s 
net worth and fscal sustainability. Tis highlights how the use of the 
comprehensive balance sheet can signal the need for early policy change 
to avoid the need for more signifcant change later.
We have also seen how long-term fscal position and the comprehen￾sive balance sheet are dominated by the trajectory of revenue and expense 
levels – the implicit assets and liabilities. Long-term forecasts may have 
signifcant uncertainties attached to them, but they can draw attention to 
policy settings which, while apparently sustainable in the short-term, 
appear not to be in the long-term.
Notes
1. Koshima et al. (2021). Te Cost of Future Policy: Intertemporal Public 
Sector Balance Sheets in the G7.
2. Te public sector balance sheet is an economic classifcation which com￾prises the general government sector (which includes national, state and 
local government) plus public corporations. References to the New 
Zealand fnancial statements are for the New Zealand central government 
only, including its public corporations.
I. Ball et al.109
3. Tis New Zealand example relates to the central government only, not the 
whole public sector, excluding as it does local government.
4. See https://www.treasury.govt.nz/system/fles/2021-09/ltfs-2021.pdf
5. For the US, government primary expenditure (including capital forma￾tion) was 39.4% of GDP in 2021. Source: IMF.
6. S&P reduced the US sovereign debt rating from AAA to AA+ on August 
5, 2011 in response to the “near miss” the debt ceiling standof had pro￾duced. Te rating has remained at that level since then.
7. A few smaller industrial countries have lower primary government spend￾ing as a share of GDP. In 2021, Switzerland had 34.6% and Ireland had 
24.1%. https://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/prim_exp@FPP/USA/
FRA/JPN/GBR/SWE/ESP/ITA/ZAF/IND
8 Looking to the Future: The Comprehensive Balance Sheet© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 111
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5_9
9
Comparison of Public Sector Balance 
Sheets
In earlier chapters, we described why governments should employ accrual 
accounting at the core of their fnancial decision-making. We made two 
main arguments.
First, that high-quality, up-to-date information is essential to good 
management of the very large, complex organisations that governments 
have become.
Second, that aggregated fnancial information is needed to understand 
the fnancial strength of a government – which has a bearing both on its 
current ability to meet its obligations and on the future demands that it 
is likely to make on its taxpayers.
Te purpose of this chapter is to examine the available information on 
aggregated public sector balance sheets, to consider what it tells us about 
the general state of public fnances around the world, and also to high￾light the very substantial fnancial risks faced by many of the world’s 
leading economic powers.
We will then go on in Chap. 10 to explore the Comprehensive Balance 
Sheet or Intertemporal Budget Constraint.112
9.1 The IMF: Promoting Better Public Sector 
Financial Management
Few governments know how much they own, or how they use their assets 
for the public’s wellbeing1
Tus began a blog by three IMF ofcials heralding the launch of 
research published in 2018.2
 Te IMF’s focus is on the broadest defni￾tion of government fnances – the Public Sector Balance Sheet or PSBS, 
as this represents the most complete picture of fscal sustainability, as we 
discussed in Chap. 1. Te IMF research sought to address the lack of data 
on public sector balance sheets around the world.
Since the 2008 Global Financial Crisis the IMF has been energetically 
promoting the use of improved public  sector  accounting systems. In 
2014, it published a revised Government Financial Statistics Manual 
(GFSM) which set out around 400 pages of instructions on how fnancial 
statistics should be prepared.
In the words of Christine Lagarde, then Managing Director of the 
IMF, writing in the foreword:
Tis manual represents a major step forward in clarifying the standards for 
compiling and presenting fscal statistics and strengthens the worldwide 
efort to improve public sector reporting and transparency. Government 
fnance statistics are a basis for fscal analysis, and they play a vital role in 
developing and monitoring sound fscal programs and in conducting sur￾veillance of economic policies.3
Adoption has not been rapid, and by October 2018 the IMF research 
team was only able to publish balance sheet data relating to 31 of its 190 
member states, with a reference year of 2016.
More recently (March 2023) the IMF published updated data,4
expanding the universe to 55 countries. However, for some countries, 
this is only available for specifc points in time, and in some cases full 
public sector consolidation – combining general government with non￾fnancial and fnancial public corporations (including central banks) – is 
not possible. In total, there are 24 states for which the IMF has been able 
to generate consolidated Public Sector Balance Sheet (PSBS) data up to 
I. Ball et al.113
2020 or 2021, of which 23 are sovereign nations, the other being the 
Hong Kong SAR. Tis data has proved invaluable in writing this book.
However, the IMF statisticians can only work with the information 
that governments publish, and on the basis of the accounting principles 
that governments apply.5
 As the core thesis of this book is that govern￾ments are failing to account properly for their activities, it is not surpris￾ing – and certainly implies no criticism of the IMF researchers – if the 
resulting data is incomplete.
So the limited availability of what should be highly important data 
suggests that we are on to something. But as we will see, what we do have 
paints a rather bleak picture of the current state of public fnances, espe￾cially in the largest, and most developed, countries on which the global 
economy and fnancial system depends. Tis is described further below.
9.2 Assets Versus Liabilities
Figure 9.1 below summarises the IMF’s PSBS data, illustrating the most 
recently available total assets and total liabilities for the 24 states. To facil￾itate comparisons between countries of diferent populations and pro￾ductivity, values are stated as a percentage of each country’s GDP.  It 
should be noted that under the GFSM debt is presented at market value 
which varies according to interest rates. Tis creates volatility in this mea￾sure when rates are changing.
From this chart it is clear that there are wide variations across our 
sample states in total assets and liabilities (relative to each state’s respec￾tive GDP), and in the diference between the two (net worth). Te degree 
of variation, including between ostensibly quite similar states, is interest￾ing and suggests that there is value in a more in-depth assessment.
Government balance sheets have grown in size over recent years, due 
to actions taken in response to the Global Financial Crisis and the 
COVID-19 pandemic, most notably QE and nationalisation of fnancial 
institutions, but also including defcit funding of various short-term ini￾tiatives to reduce the impact of these crises.
Te IMF Public Sector Balance Sheet database allows comparisons of 
changes in General Government liabilities to be made for 46 states for 
which data are available; on average, total liabilities for this group 
9 Comparison of Public Sector Balance Sheets114
Fig. 9.1 PSBS: total assets versus total liabilities, 2020/2021 (% of GDP). (Source: 
IMF Data: Public Sector Balance Sheet) 
increased by 184% (i.e., almost tripled) between 2007 and 2020/2021. 
For G7 countries, the increase was 159%.
Te next step is to explore the two sides of the public sector balance 
sheet in more detail.
9.3 What Assets Do Governments Own?
Te 24 states in the IMF updated database have total public sector assets 
varying from 88% to over 800% of GDP, averaging 284%. Diferences in 
total assets between countries, and year-to-year changes, can often largely 
be explained by government ownership of natural resources and adjust￾ments in commodity prices. For example, Mongolia and Kazakhstan 
have strong public sector balance sheets underpinned by extensive min￾eral reserves; many governments have insignifcant mineral asset holdings 
(though some might still beneft from tax revenues associated with min￾eral extraction). Mineral assets are notoriously difcult to value and there 
is no frm consensus amongst diferent accounting bodies as to how these 
should be accounted for by governments.
I. Ball et al.115
Fig. 9.2 PSBS: asset composition 2020/2021 (% of GDP). (Source: IMF Data: Public 
Sector Balance Sheet)
As Fig. 9.2 shows, fxed assets (largely infrastructure) are a somewhat 
more consistent component of government balance sheets, averaging 
70% – though with a considerable range (23–188%), which might itself 
refect problems with comparability of accounting standards and practice.
Financial assets also form an important component of PSBS. Norway, 
for example, has transformed much of its mineral wealth into large fnan￾cial holdings, valued at around 450% of GDP.  In principle, fnancial 
assets are more liquid than fxed assets, and hence might be used as a 
measure of a government’s ability to respond to near term challenges by 
selling assets rather than raising debt. However, at a consolidated level 
“fnancial assets” will also include assets held on the balance sheets of 
state-controlled banks, broadly matched by corresponding liabilities 
(capital markets debt and deposits), and hence not available to fund gov￾ernment activity. It should also be noted that the IMF data seeks to con￾solidate central banks into the PSBS, and this also accounts for substantial 
holdings of fnancial assets and associated liabilities acquired under QE 
over the period since 2007.
Finally, it is worth noting the rather small component of the public 
sector asset base that is represented by land. Property is usually the 
9 Comparison of Public Sector Balance Sheets116
Fig. 9.3 PSBS: stated holdings of land 2020 (% of GDP). (Source: IMF Data: Public 
Sector Balance Sheet)
biggest single asset class in any given economy (by a large margin), and 
governments are usually overwhelmingly the largest property owners. Yet 
many governments report small or even zero property holdings, and the 
average of those that do report land holdings is only about 25% of GDP 
(see Fig. 9.3). As we will discuss in Chap. 12, this is likely to be a very 
substantial understatement of the true picture, and potentially represents 
a very large opportunity for better management of public fnances.
9.4 Debt – and Other Liabilities
Public sector liabilities also vary across the sample, ranging from around 
80% to 370% of GDP, with an average of 181%.
Debt securities (including directly-issued General Government debt) 
averages around 60% of GDP, but only constitutes an average of 34% of 
total liabilities, underlining concerns that the longstanding focus on 
managing debt can obscure a government’s broader fnancial position – a 
point to which we will return.
Public sector pensions obligations average 40% of GDP.  Tese are 
legally binding commitments, based on past service, to former or current 
I. Ball et al.117
state employees and hence are equivalent obligations to fnancial debt, 
with the important diference that they are usually infation-linked (and 
hence cannot be devalued through infation, unlike fxed rate debt). State 
pensions, paid to all individuals when they reach a certain age, are not 
included in this total as they are not contractual in nature and can be 
changed as a matter of government policy (Fig. 9.4).
Tere are two other major determinants of the value of pension liabili￾ties, which are outside the control of the public sector and require expert 
assessment. First, increases in life expectancy have increased the costs of 
pension commitments of all types, and government pensions are no 
exception. Second, to value these commitments on a balance sheet, it is 
necessary to apply a discount rate, which may vary from year to year and 
hence afect the balance sheet value.
It is also noteworthy that many countries have substantial liabilities 
described by the IMF as “deposits and currency”. We have already com￾mented on central banks, which contribute substantially to this item. But 
some also relates to state-owned or controlled banks, which take deposits 
and issue loans, both of which would then be consolidated onto the 
Fig. 9.4 PSBS: liability composition 2020/2021  (% of GDP). (Source: IMF Data: 
Public Sector Balance Sheet)
9 Comparison of Public Sector Balance Sheets118
PSBS. If the banks are solvent, the value of the assets will exceed the value 
of the banking liabilities; the PSBS might look unusually large, but the 
net efect will be to make a (relatively small) positive contribution to 
Net Worth
9.5 Getting to the Bottom Line – 
The Importance of Net Worth
As we have seen, the public sector balance sheets of the 24 countries in 
our sample vary widely. Tis is only to be expected in what is quite a 
diverse group, whether considered in terms of geography, history, demo￾graphics or economic development. Tere is also signifcant variation 
resulting from diferent accounting standards and practices.
But whatever the shape of the balance sheet, subtracting liabilities 
from assets will yield an assessment of the country’s Public Sector Net 
Worth (PSNW).
As we have discussed in Chaps. 1 and 2, net worth is an important 
concept in the lives of individuals and corporations, and should also be 
in governments. Net worth tells us many things: what we can aford to 
invest in (a new house; a new factory; a new transit system); what is our 
capacity to withstand negative surprises (job loss; recession; earthquake), 
or future expected costs (college fees; product development; net-zero 
measures). And very importantly, what we are handing on to succeeding 
generations.
As illustrated in Fig. 9.5, the range of average net worth across the 24 
countries is very wide: 532% at the high end to −168% at the low end. 
Unsurprisingly, the “wealthiest” states have the largest nationally-owned 
mineral reserves, and/or have invested historic mineral revenues in fnan￾cial assets.
Eight states within our group of 24 have reported negative Public 
Sector Net Worth (PSNW). And it is noteworthy that this includes 5 out 
of the G7 states – the world’s largest developed economies, often seen as 
linchpins of global fnancial stability. It is to these that we shall turn next.
I. Ball et al.119
Fig. 9.5 PSBS: net worth 2020/2021 (% of GDP). (Source: IMF Data: Public Sector 
Balance Sheet)
9.6 Focus on the G7: Overview
Te G7 countries are vital to the global economic and fnancial system, 
and form the core of a distinctive, and broadly aligned, geopolitical 
group. Tey constitute seven of the world’s ten largest economies, com￾prising about 44% of global GDP in 2022.6
 All are advanced economies, 
with developed welfare systems ofering high levels of healthcare and 
other benefts to populations which have experienced (and are still expe￾riencing) increases in life expectancy and in average age.
In addition to these internal pressures on public sector fnances, given 
their status as the world’s longest-established large industrial economies 
the G7 countries are also expected by many other states to show leader￾ship in the transition to a zero-carbon economy and (potentially) to bear 
costs inficted on other nations through climate change.
It should also be noted that none of the G7 countries have experienced 
a major war since 1945, and that real total and per capita GDP have 
expanded substantially over this period for each country. Terefore, they 
have all had a long period in which to reduce legacy debt, and to build up 
9 Comparison of Public Sector Balance Sheets120
fnancial cushions to help manage future shocks or predictable fnancial 
obligations.
Finally, the G7 countries are all mature democracies. Financial policy 
is set by governments which are answerable to their constituencies at 
regular intervals, typically 4–5 years. So, governments in all seven coun￾tries are under pressure to deliver benefts to the electorate over the rela￾tively short term, and must make trade-ofs between these benefts and 
the longer-term fnancial consequences, which will impact on future 
generations.
So how well have the G7 countries addressed this challenge up until 
now, and how well are they set up to deal with future demands on 
resources?
In the remainder of this chapter, we will examine what PSBS data for 
the G7 countries tell us about this very important question, based on 
current positions and historical trends.
In the next chapter, we will then go on to consider the fnancial out￾look for the G7 countries, along the lines of the discussion of the 
Comprehensive Balance Sheet or Intertemporal Budgetary Constraint as 
discussed in Chap. 8.
9.7 G7 Public Sector Balance 
Sheet Comparisons
As one might expect from their similar economic profles, there is rather 
less variation between the G7 countries in size or composition of balance 
sheets (Figs. 9.6 and 9.7).
Total assets range from 144% of GDP (UK) to 378% (Japan); total 
liabilities from 158% (Canada) to 369% (Japan).
Within the G7, only Canada has extensive mineral assets; for the 
rest of the group, the large majority of assets are fxed or fnancial 
in nature.
Fixed assets vary from 39% (UK) to 154% (Japan); variations proba￾bly refect both the scale of transportation assets and utility infrastruc￾ture, and whether these are included in the public or private sectors. 
I. Ball et al.121
Fig. 9.6 G7 total assets vs total liabilities 2020/2021  (% of GDP). (Source: IMF 
Data: Public Sector Balance Sheet)
Fig. 9.7 G7: asset composition 2020/2021(% of GDP). (Source: IMF Data: Public 
Sector Balance Sheet)
Financial assets range from 82% (UK) to 194% (Japan). Again, difer￾ences in fnancial assets are likely to be afected by diferences in the scale 
of QE that has been undertaken, by diferences in state involvement in 
the banking sector, and in diferences between central banks – neither of 
9 Comparison of Public Sector Balance Sheets122
which would be likely to afect the underlying health of public fnances, 
as described by net worth, to a great degree.
For our purposes, the most interesting components of public sector 
liabilities (see Fig. 9.8) are outstanding debt securities and pensions.
Debt securities range from 61% of GDP (Germany) to 128% (Japan). 
Pensions and similar liabilities vary from 14% (Canada) to 84% (Italy). 
It should one noted that the UK reports a somewhat higher level of pen￾sion obligations than is recognised in IMF data. 
Te best benchmark for comparing public sector balance sheets is by 
looking at net worth, a point in time view of whether governments are 
holding wealth on behalf of future generations, or have burdened them 
with a defcit. As we noted above, no fewer than fve of the G7 countries 
show negative net worth on the basis of the IMF data, and this is illus￾trated in Fig. 9.9.
For Italy and the UK, these defcits are very large; 168% and 96%, 
respectively. To provide a perspective to a UK reader, this implies a per 
capita public sector defcit of similar magnitude to the student debt typi￾cally incurred during the completion of an undergraduate degree. Student 
debt is politically controversial, but is at least incurred as a result of the 
student’s decision to study, and brings with it potential future economic 
Fig. 9.8 G7: liability composition 2020/2021(% of GDP). (Source: IMF Data: Public 
Sector Balance Sheet)
I. Ball et al.123
Fig. 9.9 G7 net worth 2020/2021 (% of GDP). (Source: IMF Data: Public Sector 
Balance Sheet)
benefts. None of these factors can be applied to the net worth defcit that 
the UK is passing on to the next generation.
Whilst meaningful adjustments might be made to these defcits as a 
result of better accounting for real estate assets, these are not good places 
to begin a journey dominated by the fnancial challenges of ageing popu￾lations, rising healthcare costs, and an urgent need to show leadership in 
delivering on a zero-carbon economy. We will develop these points fur￾ther in Chap. 10.
9.8 How Did G7 Countries Get 
to This Position?
Since 2007, G7 public sector balance sheets have had to deal with two 
major shocks; the 2008–09 Global Financial Crisis, and the related 
Eurozone crisis over the following few years, and the 2020–22 COVID-19 
pandemic (the fnancial efects of which are only partly incorporated in 
the available data). Between the two was a sustained period of slow eco￾nomic growth, during which governments attempted to maintain fscal 
and monetary stimuli. However, despite the generally good economic 
9 Comparison of Public Sector Balance Sheets124
Fig. 9.10 G7 net worth 2007 versus 2020/2021(% of GDP). (Source: IMF Data: 
Public Sector Balance Sheet)
and fnancial conditions prevailing across much of the G7 during the 
decade or more before 2007, the starting point was not good; three G7 
countries were already showing negative net worth, with two more being 
quite marginal.
Since then, Public Sector Net Worth has deteriorated in every G7 
country except for Germany. Figure  9.10 illustrates this efect at the 
General Government level, as comparable data is not available over this 
period for the full public sector. Te biggest reported decline is in Canada, 
although much of this relates to a major change in the stated valuation of 
mineral resources in 2007/8. Canada is now the only G7 country with 
positive PSNW, which owes much to its government-owned mineral 
assets. Of the remaining countries, the UK shows much the sharpest 
deterioration, despite the “austerity” programmes of the 2010–2019 
period which were supposed to strengthen public fnances after the sharp 
deterioration post-2008.
I. Ball et al.125
9.9 Conclusion
Despite the compelling arguments in favour of governments producing 
comprehensive fnancial statements, relatively few currently do so, and 
useful, up-to-date data on public sector balance sheets is therefore limited 
to a relatively small number of countries.
However, the best available data demonstrates that by focusing on out￾standing fnancial debt, governments are failing to take into account 
non-debt liabilities which are often of similar magnitude, and sometimes 
exceed, fnancial debt. Tere are also concerns that assets might be signif￾cantly understated, which could ofset some of the impact of non-debt 
liabilities, but would also be suggestive of signifcant mismanagement of 
public resources.
Te G7 countries stand out as having especially weak balance sheets. 
Tis might be a sampling issue – our data set is limited. But the G7 coun￾tries matter in their own right. Despite three generations of peace, only 
one is reporting meaningful positive net worth, and the recent pace of 
decline has been rapid.
Tis must raise doubts over their fnancial capacity to absorb further 
external shocks – eg another pandemic. It also raises some very important 
questions for these countries, and for the global economic system which 
is so dependent upon continued stability and prosperity of the G7 and 
similar economies.
Te next question is this: Can these countries aford the rising costs of 
the welfare state, and the emerging costs of moving to zero-carbon? Tis 
means looking at the numbers underlying the comprehensive balance 
sheet, and is the subject of the next chapter.
Notes
1. Gaspar, V. et al. (2018) “Te Wealth of Nations: Governments Can Better 
Manage What Tey Own and Owe”.
2. Harris, J. and Tieman, A.F. (2018) “Managing Public Wealth”.
3. IMF. Government Financial Statistics Manual 2014.
9 Comparison of Public Sector Balance Sheets126
4. See IMF Data website: data.imf.org.
5. It should be noted that there are some diferences between the accounting 
rules adopted by statisticians, as in the Government Finance Satatistics 
Manual, and those used by accountants in the production of fnancial 
statements. For example, International Public Sector Accounting 
Standards do not currently include mineral reserves on the balance sheet.
6. IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2023. GDP expressed at cur￾rent prices.
I. Ball et al.© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 127
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5_10
10
Comparison of Comprehensive Balance 
Sheets
In the previous chapter, we explored Public Sector Balance Sheet data 
collected by the IMF to look at the current state of public fnances across 
the somewhat limited range of states for which such data is available.
As we discussed in Chap. 8, by adding values (implicit liabilities and 
implicit assets) for expected future costs and revenues to existing liabili￾ties and assets, we can create a “comprehensive balance sheet”, which 
expresses the state of a country’s combined current and long-term fnan￾cial position.
Tis can be used to answer several questions (or diferent versions of 
the same question):
• Is the country’s comprehensive balance sheet “solvent”: can the desired 
policies be funded, based on current, or available, tax revenues?
• What changes would be needed to policies to make them fundable by 
the available revenues?
• What changes would be needed to revenues to make the poli￾cies fundable?
• Is the way in which public services are expected to be consumed and 
paid for “fair”?128
Te purpose of this chapter is to explore what the answers to these 
questions look like in practice, and to consider the implications for the 
government decision-making, and for the democratic process, with a 
focus on some of the world’s largest economies with the most challenged 
public fnances.
10.1 Evaluating the Comprehensive Balance 
Sheet: The IMF Framework
As we have seen in the previous chapter, to draw useful conventional bal￾ance sheet comparisons between countries requires the use of balance 
sheet information prepared on a comparable basis.
Tis is also true when it comes to comparing comprehensive bal￾ance sheets.
Members of the IMF’s Fiscal Afairs Department have undertaken a 
study of comprehensive balance sheets,1
 focusing on the G7 countries. 
Te formal purpose of their study is to examine whether diferences in 
comprehensive balance sheets (in their terminology, the Intertemporal 
Public Sector Balance Sheet) translate into diferent borrowing costs 
over time.
Our approach is not so much to examine whether fnancial markets 
recognize diferences in the management of government fnances, but 
rather to examine the absolute and relative state of fnances in the coun￾tries we review. Te IMF’s G7 focus is a limiting factor, but as we have 
seen elsewhere, is highly relevant to other countries as well, both because 
G7 countries are amongst those with the most indebted public sector 
balance sheets and the most comprehensive public service oferings. 
Where G7 countries lead, others will follow. And as we have observed 
elsewhere, if G7 countries experience fnancial difculties, there will be 
major implications for global economic and fnancial stability.
Te value of the IMF study for our purposes, therefore, is that it pro￾vides consistent underlying data, and a consistent methodology, with 
which to measure the sustainability of the public fnances of the world’s 
major developed economies.
I. Ball et al.129
However, we will return briefy to the relationship between compre￾hensive balance sheets and fnancial markets later in this chapter.
Tere are several important assumptions that form the basis of the 
framework presented by the IMF team.
Base Year
Te paper was published in 2021, and therefore uses PSBS data pub￾lished in the IMF’s original 2018 paper,2
 for which the most recent data 
relates to 2016. Te 2023 updates that we discussed in Chap. 5 are there￾fore not taken into account. Tere are two obvious consequences of this:
• Te (negative) impact of the COVID-19 and Ukraine war responses 
on the conventional balance sheet is not taken into account.
• Similarly, the base case policy framework that is assumed to persist for 
the future might be somewhat out of date.
Key Drivers of Cost and Revenue Assumptions
Demographics are at the heart of long-term projections for government 
fnancial health, though there are other factors at work as well. Te IMF 
model looks at:
• Long term projections for economic growth, driven largely by 
demographically-driven models of employment growth.
• Taxation revenues are based on current policies.
• All government expenditure apart from health and pension expendi￾ture is assumed to remain constant as a percentage of GDP.
• Pension expenditure assumptions combine demographics with an 
assessment of current and anticipated future beneft entitlements (cov￾ering the age of eligibility for state pensions, for example).
• Health expenditure is driven by a combination of the age structure of 
the population and an observed long-term growth rate of health 
expenditure relative to GDP.
10 Comparison of Comprehensive Balance Sheets130
• Te same discount rate is applied to all countries in the group, and 
refects the very low rates prevalent in 2021, reverting to more normal 
levels over a 30-year period (much of this shift has already occurred 
since the study was published).
It is important to note that the IMF framework does not provide 
explicit estimates of increased government expenditure associated with 
combating climate change. Tis is presumably because climate change 
expenditure is not driven by demographics or other factors that are sus￾ceptible to economic modelling. However, the potential need for long￾term higher levels of expenditure should be noted, and considered as a 
downside risk to the IMF projections.
Tis focus on pensions and health expenditure, and on their demo￾graphic drivers, is an important feature of the study and it is worth illus￾trating the consequences, which difer quite markedly between countries.
First, healthcare. Figure 10.1 illustrates the growth of healthcare spend￾ing as a percentage of GDP for each G7 country; Japan and the UK 
project the largest increases, at 9% and 8% of GDP respectively; the low￾est increase is for Canada, at 3% of GDP.
Fig. 10.1 IMF baseline projections of health expenditure (% of GDP). (Source: IMF)
I. Ball et al.131
Fig. 10.2 IMF projections of health expenditure: sensitivity to OADR (% of GDP). 
(Source: IMF)
Increased expenditure is driven directly by demographic factors and 
also by the trend increases in health expenditure described above. 
Figure 10.2 illustrates the overall projected growth in health spending 
as a percentage of GDP between 2018 and 2068, and also assesses 
what spending would be if the Old Age Dependency Ratios (OADR)3
were held constant at 2018 levels. Tis demonstrates that in Canada 
projected increases in healthcare expenditure are driven entirely by 
population ageing, whilst in the US and UK most of the increase is 
due to the projected increase in per-person spending (irrespective 
of age).
It should be noted that OADR vary across the group; Canada, France, 
UK and US range between 42% and 48%, whereas OADR for Germany, 
Italy and Japan are 58%, 60% and 70% respectively.
Despite ageing populations, increases in pensions expenditure 
(Fig. 10.3) are relatively small across the group, largely due to planned 
increases in the pension age. In the case of Italy, pension spending is 
expected to drop rapidly after the 2040s as population ageing reverses.
10 Comparison of Comprehensive Balance Sheets132
Fig. 10.3 Baseline projections of pensions (% of GDP). (Source: IMF)
Outputs
Te basic purpose of the model is to assess what public sector fnances 
will look like in 50 years based on projected costs and revenues under the 
assumptions set out above. Tis is expressed in two forms:
• What the impact will be on public sector net worth of the revenue and 
cost trends predicted by the model.
• What changes will be required to the share of tax in GDP in order to 
ensure that intertemporal public sector net worth is zero i.e., that 
current and potential future defcits are covered by increased taxa￾tion, applied evenly throughout the period. Tis is described as 
“meeting the intertemporal budget constraint”. However, it involves 
a number of arbitrary choices: the 50-year period, for example, or 
the constraint that countries with negative public sector net worth 
today will improve their net position as well as meet increased expen￾diture demands.
I. Ball et al.133
To add a little extra detail, two measures of net worth are employed. 
Te study’s authors preferred measure is “Intertemporal Financial Net 
Worth” (INFW), which excludes non-fnancial assets from the assess￾ment of net worth on the grounds that these might not generate revenue. 
Tis might seem unduly restrictive as the purpose of these assets is not 
just revenue generation, but policy delivery, and borrowing to fund (say) 
a hospital might represent a fair allocation of the benefts and costs of 
delivering the hospital between current and future taxpayers. Terefore, 
fnancial net worth might usually be expected to be negative (and at the 
moment is for all G7 countries, and for 21 of the 24 countries for which 
the IMF Public Sector Balance sheet database has recent data4
).
Presumably in recognition of this point, the study also looks at 
“Intertemporal Net Worth”, which allows for a less exacting assessment 
of intertemporal solvency, as well as other measures.
10.2 Sustainability of Public Finances: What 
the Model Tells Us
Figure 10.4 below illustrates the overall state of the comprehensive bal￾ance sheet for the G7 countries, using the 2018 IMF numbers and the 
Net Financial Worth metric. It will be seen from the chart that the start￾ing point for Net Financial Worth was negative for all seven countries in 
2018 (the current position is worse), and that the “present value of pri￾mary balances” indicates an expectation that the position will worsen 
over the 50-year period as the present value of anticipated government 
revenues lags the costs of delivering policy. Te dots serve as a reminder 
that government borrowing contributes to the overall liability position 
but is very far from being its dominant component.
Te US shows both the sharpest deterioration in Net Financial Worth 
and also the biggest defcit at the end of the period.
Figure 10.5 shows the same data, but using the measure of Intertemporal 
Net Worth, which allows non-fnancial assets to be taken into account in 
determining the overall fnancial position. Te dark grey component of 
each bar represents net investment in non-fnancial assets over the period, 
10 Comparison of Comprehensive Balance Sheets134
Fig. 10.4 Intertemporal net fnancial worth (% of GDP). (Source: IMF)
Fig. 10.5 Intertemporal net worth (% of GDP). (Source: IMF)
refecting the inclusion of these assets in this measure. However, the rank￾ings are similar, with the US and UK showing both the worst overall 
positions and the sharpest deteriorations over the period.
I. Ball et al.135
Te fnal stage in the analysis is to assess the fscal adjustment (increase 
in taxation/decrease in spending) as a percentage of GDP required each 
year, starting immediately, in order to return Intertemporal Net Financial 
Worth (Fig. 10.6) or Intertemporal Net Worth (Fig. 10.7) to zero, repre￾senting “intertemporal solvency”. Tis is driven by a combination of the 
required increase in spending, the growth rate (driven by demographic 
factors), and the interest rate (assumed to be a fat 4.5% for the long term 
for all seven countries). Te bigger the (negative) diference between the 
growth rate and the interest rate, the greater the fscal adjustment will 
need to be in order to bring INFW or INW back to zero.
Figure 10.6 demonstrates required fscal adjustments to bring INFW 
to zero (left hand bars) or to maintain it at current levels (right hand 
bars). Meeting the zero INFW target requires adjustments ranging from 
3.6% of GDP (Canada) to over 10% (Japan), with the UK and US both 
requiring adjustments of around 8%. Maintaining INFW at current lev￾els can also be described as setting the Present Value of future primary 
balances at zero. On this measure, the US requires the largest adjustment, 
at 6.5% of GDP, followed by Japan at 4.4%.
Using the less demanding defnition of intertemporal solvency based 
upon INW (i.e., taking non-fnancial assets into account), the required 
Fig. 10.6 Fiscal adjustment required to make INFW = 0 or maintain at current 
levels of NFW (% of GDP). (Source: IMF)
10 Comparison of Comprehensive Balance Sheets136
Fig. 10.7 Fiscal adjustment required to make INW = 0 (% of GDP). (Source: IMF)
fscal adjustments are somewhat reduced, but remain over 5% for the US 
and UK, as illustrated on Fig. 10.7. If this were achieved solely through 
increases in taxation, this would entail an increase in the total tax take of 
10–15% in the two countries. And it should be remembered that this 
assumes an instant change in the fscal position; delaying or phasing in 
adjustments will increase the ultimate shift that is needed to meet the 
target within the prescribed time frame.
10.3 An Alternative Source: The UK Offce 
for Budget Responsibility
As a cross-check we have compared the IMF conclusions for the UK with 
those published by the government body in the UK responsible for look￾ing at long-term government fnances.
Te UK Ofce for Budget Responsibility was set up in 2010 “to exam￾ine and report on the sustainability of public fnances”.5
 Much of its work 
concerns validating short- and medium-term government spending. But 
the OBR also looks at long term spending plans and risks, and in 2022 
I. Ball et al.137
consolidated these into a single document, “Fiscal risks and sustainabil￾ity”, which is published annually; the 2023 edition was issued in July, just 
as this book was going to press.
Te OBR approach is similar to that taken by the IMF in its compara￾tive work: it estimates the future costs of current policies, and forecasts 
revenues that would be yielded by current taxation arrangements. 
However, rather than establish an intertemporal budget constraint (e.g., 
“INFW = 0”), it estimates the impact through time on the stock of gov￾ernment debt and on the primary surplus/defcit. So the focus is on 
changes in fnancial position, rather than the balance sheet as a whole.
Te OBR’s forecast period is also 50 years, but starting in FY 2022–23. 
Changes in debt and in the primary surplus/defcit are calculated from 
the end of the current formal OBR forecast period (2027–28, in the case 
of the 2023 report). Te work refects recent changes in assumptions 
related to UK population growth and life expectancy, which might post￾date the IMF comparative study. Te approach to individual line items of 
policy spending and revenue generation is also rather more detailed than 
the IMF framework. But the basic conclusions are quite similar:
• Total debt as a proportion of GDP is forecast to expand quite slowly 
from 101% in 2022–23 to 133% in 2052–53, and then much more 
rapidly to 310% in 2071–72.6
 Note that this measure does not include 
other liabilities such as public sector employee pensions, which are 
currently of similar magnitude to government debt.
• Te fscal performance shifts from a small surplus (1.1%) in 2027–28 
to a very substantial defcit (−10.4% of GDP) in 2072–73.7
Contributions to the change, as described in detail in the previous 
year’s report8
 include increased spending on health (6.7% of GDP; 
slightly less than the IMF’s estimate), pensions (3%; slightly more 
than the IMF estimate), social care (1.1%) and reduced income from 
motoring taxes as a result of the net-zero commitments (1.5%).
Te OBR report also looks at the efects on the fscal position of vari￾ous forms of external shock. As one might expect, these scenarios involve 
additional sustained multi-percentage points of GDP deteriorations in 
the fscal position.
10 Comparison of Comprehensive Balance Sheets138
Where the OBR difers from the IMF framework – and from the prin￾cipal message of this book – is that it does not publish a long-term view of 
the overall public sector balance sheet (or, for that matter, of any element 
of the balance sheet apart from government debt). Te efects of this are 
not intuitively obvious; on the one hand, existing non-debt liabilities will 
mature and hence be captured in the debt-to-GDP measure; on the other 
hand, new non-debt liabilities almost certainly will be incurred. For exam￾ple, one might expect that a near–doubling of expenditure on human 
resource-intensive healthcare would presumably be expected to bring with 
it substantial increases in non-debt liabilities unless pension arrangements 
were to change (at March 31, 2020 NHS pensions obligations constituted 
around 30% of total UK government pension liabilities, and represent a 
slightly smaller percentage of GDP in their own right9
).
Similarly, no explicit attention is paid to the asset side of the balance 
sheet. Financial and non-fnancial assets would be a factor in determining 
the sustainability of a given debt position or the resilience of government 
fnances in the face of shocks.
However, despite the more limited scope of the OBR’s published 
assessment, the conclusions are quite similar; the UK is in need of a sub￾stantial fscal adjustment if government fnances are to be made 
sustainable.
10.4 A View Through Time – Can Adjustments 
Be Made?
It is one thing to identify the need for future fscal adjustments, it is quite 
another thing to deliver these adjustments over a sustained period.
In the case of the UK, the OBR estimates that an immediate fscal 
adjustment of 4.4%, or an incremental fscal adjustment of 1.5% each 
decade over the 50 years of its forecast period will sufce to keep debt at 
100% of GDP in 2072–73 – in line with current government debt lev￾els.10 Te OBR argues that this rate of fscal adjustment has been accom￾plished in the past, and therefore is not unrealistic. But as we have seen, 
adjustment on this scale, accomplished solely through increasing taxes or 
I. Ball et al.139
reducing services, would be going sharply against the recent trend in UK 
public fnances.
It should also be noted that the current level of government revenue – 
mostly taxation – in the UK is around 37% of GDP,11 compared with 
47% in Germany and 52% in France. So the overall level of adjustment 
that is needed, if delivered entirely through tax increases, would leave UK 
2072–73 taxation below the present level for Germany, and rather more 
below that of France. Te IMF study also estimates what the comprehen￾sive balance sheet looked like for three G7 countries – Canada, Japan and 
the UK – since 1989 (the necessary data were not available for the other 
G7 countries). A closer look at the IMF estimates of the historic path of 
UK Intertemporal Net Financial Worth ofers few grounds for optimism 
about the sustainability of fscal adjustment in the UK.
Figures 10.8 and 10.9 below look at UK INFW since 1989. Figure 10.8
illustrates “static” INFW (i.e., the balance sheet position) and superim￾poses the Present Value of Primary Balances, which estimates total gov￾ernment surpluses/defcits over the period, expressed in present value 
terms, based upon projections of government revenues and expenditure.
Figure 10.8 demonstrates how volatile the forward-looking element is, 
represented by “PV PB” (the Present Value of Primary Balances (PVPB)). 
Fig. 10.8 UK Intertemporal Net Financial Worth (% of GDP). (Source: IMF)
10 Comparison of Comprehensive Balance Sheets140
Fig. 10.9 UK decomposition of changes in UK Intertemporal Net Financial Worth 
(% of GDP). (Source: IMF)
Periods of “fscal consolidation” – increasing taxation or reducing current 
or projected levels of expenditure – can have a major efect on long-term 
projections. However, this is not the same as saying they will have a long￾term efect on the government’s fnancial position. Figure 10.9 identifes 
the factors within the model which led to these changes, with expansions 
in healthcare provision (e.g., late 1990s/early 2000s) typically causing 
declines in INFW, and fscal austerity measures (represented by the out￾look for medium term primary balances, or MT PB), for example in the 
1990s and after the 2008–09 fnancial crisis, resulting in INFW increases.
For example, in the 5  years from 1992 to 1997, following the 
Conservative government’s fscal response to the “Black Wednesday” ster￾ling crisis of 1992, UK IFNW improved by almost 250% of GDP  – 
rather more than the OBR’s 2022 forecast increase in government debt 
(the OBR’s way of measuring the fnancial position) over the next 
50 years. Ironically, the government’s reputation for fnancial competence 
was established not by this extraordinary strengthening of the long-term 
fnancial position, but by the problems that preceded it. Te incoming 
Labour government led by Tony Blair and Gordon Brown made much of 
its fscal rules, committing to capping government debt at 40% of GDP 
and balancing revenues and expenditure over the cycle. But the 
I. Ball et al.141
combined efects of expanding public services and maintaining pre-exist￾ing tax policies had the efect of very sharply increasing the defcit in 
INFW; the fscal rules had very little efect on the long-term situation.
Similar efects can be observed following the Global Financial Crisis. 
Te incoming Conservative-Liberal Democrat  coalition government 
sought to stabilise public fnances, through a combination of short￾term and long-term measures, with reduced growth in health spending 
and increases in taxation (see Fig. 10.9) providing much of the impetus 
in a roughly 200% of GDP improvement in INFW. But these gains did 
not hold; even before the COVID-19 and more recent Ukraine war￾driven challenges, the UK’s long-term position was again in marked 
decline.
It is worth considering these results, because they may give us insights 
into the usefulness of the comprehensive balance sheet methodology, the 
ability of governments to address long term fscal imbalances, or both.
From a methodological standpoint, it is noteworthy that short term 
changes in UK government policy – whether tightening or loosening – 
generated very substantial swings in the long-term fscal position. Tis is 
because current policy expectations are embedded in the long-term 
model, alongside exogenous factors like demographics. Te two tighten￾ing periods (1992–1997 and 2010–2013) did not outlast a single term 
of ofce.
Tis probably refects the way that politicians “sold” their fscal con￾solidation policies to the electorate – as an initiative to correct a short￾term problem, rather than as a frst step in a multi-decade programme of 
fscal improvement. Indeed, the data presented in Chap. 2 suggests that 
since the 1970s, or thereabouts, UK governments have abandoned a tra￾ditional approach of seeing government debt (used in this argument with 
the usual caveats about its incompleteness as a measure of liabilities) as a 
response to infrequent and very expensive events (i.e., wars) rather than 
as a means to fnance the provision of public services.
So the recent history of the UK does little to reassure us about the 
sustainability of needed changes in the fscal position. It also suggests – as 
we might perhaps expect – that periods of fscal adjustment rarely last 
10 Comparison of Comprehensive Balance Sheets142
beyond a single term of ofce; yet the projections suggest that fve 
decades – at least ten governments – of sustained improvement is required.
10.5 Who’s Got the Bill? The Welfare State 
and Intergenerational Fairness
Our discussion of the Comprehensive Balance Sheet so far has focused 
largely on what it tells us about the sustainability of government fnances. 
But it also tells us about the way that costs of service provision are being 
shared between current and future taxpayers.
When Bismarck introduced his various social welfare measures in the 
1880s, the state (in this case, the German Empire) stepped in to provide 
support that would previously have been funded (if at all) through the 
recipient’s own resources, or by his or her immediate family.
It is hard to overstate the implications of this step for the political 
debate, and for modern public fnances.
Availability of (initially, very basic) accident, unemployment or old age 
insurance meant that welfare provision  ceased to depend on family 
fnances or on personal choices between saving and consumption, but 
rather resulted from policy decisions made by an elected government. 
Expanding welfare arrangements became central to policy platforms; for 
example, those of the UK Liberal Party in two elections in 1910, or in 
France the Front Populaire electoral alliance of 1936. Very simplistically, 
the primary political debate in “western” democracies over several genera￾tions could (and often still can) seem to be conducted between “left 
wing” parties seeking to attract the votes of lower-income voters who saw 
themselves as consumers of public services, and “right wing” parties ori￾ented towards higher-income voters with lower demands on public ser￾vice provision.
Terefore, the choices that in the pre-Bismarck era were confned to 
the individual or family group – and often, miserably under-supported 
by availability of resources – have been transferred to a much less per￾sonal, and much better-resourced arena. Tis has yielded immense ben￾efts to billions of people. But it has also removed many of the connections 
between accessing these benefts and paying for them. For example, as far 
I. Ball et al.143
as a large proportion of our beneft costs are concerned the question that 
faces us as citizens is not: “how much do I need to save?”, but rather “how 
much tax do you need to pay to fund my benefts?”
Tis is partly about distribution of benefts and taxes within age￾groups. But given the difering profles of the periods when we receive 
most benefts (earlier adulthood and later life), and when we maximise 
our incomes (middle adulthood) there is always an intergenerational ele￾ment involved.
Over the last few decades, the sharp “left versus right” distinctions 
have become blurred in many economically advanced democracies. Te 
large majority of voters pay substantial amounts of income and other 
taxes; public services no longer ofer a basic “safety net” but are a primary 
source of provision; higher income voters are also often big users of pub￾lic services.
Figure 10.10 illustrates this point for the UK.  Between 1977 and 
2021, the UK Ofce for National Statistics (ONS) calculates that the 
proportion of the UK population receiving more in public service bene￾fts (including health and education services as well as social security) 
than they paid in taxes increased from 37% to 52%. Tis is not an ageing 
Fig. 10.10 Proportion of UK individuals receiving more in benefts than paying in 
taxes 1977–2021. (Source: Offce for National Statistics (July 2022)) 
10 Comparison of Comprehensive Balance Sheets144
population efect; the proportion for non-retired people actually increased 
by slightly more, from 30% to 47%.
Te reader may recall that the 1970s were also the frst peacetime 
decade in which public sector net debt began to rise consistently, driven 
largely by higher spending on public service provision. We have also 
noted that provision of public services can also generate extensive non 
debt liabilities – for example, healthcare workers’ or teachers’ pensions.
Tis increase in the numbers of net beneft-receivers has corresponded 
to an increase in negative net worth. Since 2000 (the earliest year for 
which we have IMF net worth data), UK negative net worth has expanded 
from −32% of GDP to −96% in 2021. Tis a substantial change, though 
some of it may relate to the IMF’s methodology for valuing debt dis￾cussed in Chap. 9. Even if the causality is not the result of a conscious 
policy decision, the proportion of net beneft-receivers in the UK popula￾tion – whether of working age or retirement age – is increasing, and the 
fnancial burden is being passed on to future taxpayers.
Te IMF-derived analysis of G7 comprehensive balance sheets demon￾strated a clear need for future “fscal consolidation” – lower service levels, 
or higher taxes – for a multi-generational period. Tis will require a major 
realignment of public fnances over a sustained period. However, both 
political game theory – the misalignment of benefts and costs inevitable 
in a system which aims to raise taxes on a progressive basis – and practical 
observation demonstrate that over the history of the welfare state and 
especially over the last generation or two, the tendency has been to con￾sume benefts now and pay later.
Somehow, this has to be reversed.
10.6 “Markets Versus Morons”: Do Financial 
Markets Take Financial Sustainability 
Into Account?
Te principal purpose of the IMF study which we have been discussing 
was to assess whether diferences in fnancial sustainability are refected in 
the interest rates at which governments can borrow money.
I. Ball et al.145
Te approach is to look at diferences in long-term fnancial strength 
(Intertemporal Net Financial Worth (INFW)) and compare these with 
the diference between short-term (1 year) and long-term (10 year) bor￾rowing costs. Te underlying hypothesis is that INFW, which is derived 
from a long-term outlook for government fnances, should have a greater 
efect on long-term interest rates than on short-term rates.
Te analysis is somewhat limited in that adequate data (INFW calcula￾tions over multiple decades) only exist for Canada, Japan and the UK out 
of the G7 countries. However, the conclusion is that there is a statistically 
signifcant efect – a 10% increase in INFW reduces borrowing costs by 
2.8 basis points (0.028%). As INFW is very sharply negative for some 
G7 countries under this methodology (e.g., 350–400 basis points for the 
UK and US) this suggests that borrowing costs would be meaningfully 
reduced – by the order of 100 basis points or a little more – if anticipated 
costs and revenues were balanced. (Whether the same relationship would 
apply to the US, with its reserve currency status, is debatable, but outside 
the scope of this discussion).
Te analysis is interesting, and its relevance to the IMF’s objectives of 
promoting fnancial stability is clear: if governments can be convinced 
that it is in their economic interest to manage long term fnances better, 
then perhaps they will do so. But the numbers involved aren’t very large, 
and at present levels of interest rates aren’t very credible either – at the 
time of writing, the implied real interest rate on UK 10 year bonds is 
around 1%, and from an economics perspective it is hard to see why, with 
a better long term fnancial outlook, real interest rates should be zero 
or lower.
Part of the issue, we believe, is that markets assume that governments 
are fnancially responsible until proved otherwise. Tis is deeply embed￾ded in market culture and vocabulary; the “risk free rate” is defned as the 
prevailing rate on government bonds. A key role of central banks is to act 
as lender or guarantor of last resort when crises hit. It is a fundamental 
assumption that governments and central banks will “do what it takes”, 
to use an expression which has been heard repeatedly during recent times 
of global economic and fnancial uncertainty. Government securities, in 
turn, are seen as investment safe havens, even when the stresses on their 
balance sheets are ramping up.
10 Comparison of Comprehensive Balance Sheets146
What seems to destroy market confdence in government fnances is 
worries about short-term foolishness, not long-term fnances. Yet again, 
the UK provides an excellent illustration of this point.
In summer 2022, following the resignation of Boris Johnson, the UK 
Conservative Party held a leadership election amongst its members that 
would have the efect of appointing the next Prime Minister. From an 
early stage, the polls were led by Liz Truss, who espoused fscal policies 
based upon stimulating “growth” (what this meant was undefned) by 
reversing proposed tax rises, which would lead to an increased fscal def￾cit and (presumably) a worse long term fnancial outlook (a more nega￾tive INFW, to use the IMF framework). By mid-August, her lead in polls 
of members was 32%;12 by the end of the month, bookmakers’ odds were 
reported at between 1/20 and 1/100,13 implying a very high degree of 
confdence that she would be elected. So Ms Truss’s election, announced 
on 5 September, was not a surprise, and her intentions were clear. UK 
government bond yields had traded broadly in line with US Treasuries 
(see Fig. 10.11 below) throughout the election campaign, implying no 
particular market concerns, although sterling showed some weakness.
However, a series of measures over the next few days raised concerns. 
On 8 September the permanent Secretary to the Treasury, Sir Tom 
Scholar, was dismissed from his post, removing the senior civil servant 
most directly concerned with preserving conventional fscal policy, with 
Fig. 10.11 UK 10 year gilt yields vs US Treasury 10 year yields vs £/$ exchange 
rate: 1 July – 31 December 2022. (Source: Factset)
I. Ball et al.147
the new Chancellor of the Exchequer (Finance Minister) Kwasi Kwarteng 
directing the Treasury to “focus solely on economic growth”.14 A few days 
later, it became known that a forthcoming “mini budget” announcement 
would not be assessed by the Ofce for Budget Responsibility, as is the 
norm. Bond yields and exchange rates reacted sharply, and the eventual 
announcement on 23 September – which went a little further than origi￾nal expectations in terms of unfunded tax cuts – resulted in further sell￾ofs. In total, UK gilt yields increased by 250 basis points – consistent, if 
attributable solely to changes in the INFW, with a deterioration in the 
INFW equivalent to 900% of GDP under the IMF model. Te policies 
might have been expensive, but they were not that expensive.
Within a few days, it was clear that policies would need to be reversed; 
a new Chancellor (Jeremy Hunt) was appointed, and within a few weeks 
the Prime Minister had resigned to be replaced by Rishi Sunak. By 17 
November, the 23 September tax cuts had been reversed (and more), 
sterling had recovered and yields reduced somewhat.
Te purpose of this narrative is to suggest that it was apparently not 
Ms Truss’s original promises of radical tax cuts that afected markets so 
much as the removal of the checks that were supposed to ensure that poli￾cies would be properly costed, and that fscal responsibility maintained.
Te expansion in UK government bond yields (sustained after the sta￾bilizing measures were put in place), was reportedly referred to as the 
“moron premium” or “moronic risk premium” by city commentators.15
Te phrasing might be ofensive, but the message is clear. Markets expect 
governments to understand what is required for fnancial stability, and to 
do the right thing.
10.7 Conclusion
We draw three main conclusions from the IMF assessments of G7 com￾prehensive balance sheets.
1. Te combination of demographics and rising healthcare costs imply 
substantial pressure on the fnancial position of all seven countries 
over the next 50 years.
10 Comparison of Comprehensive Balance Sheets148
2. Diferences in demographic profles and conventional balance sheet 
“starting points” result in diferent levels of adjustment being required 
across the seven countries, with the US, UK tending to require the 
greatest adjustment.
3. Tese are long-term challenges and require long-term changes in gov￾ernment revenue or in expectations of service provision.
How much adjustment is required depends on the target that we are 
aiming for. Te IMF’s preferred focus on Intertemporal Net Financial 
Worth being zero at the end of the period is perhaps too demanding, as 
it defnes solvency in a way that takes no account of non-fnancial assets. 
Other measures, such as ensuring that the position in 50 years is no worse 
than the present, might be more appropriate.
Using these less-exacting measures, the required adjustment in the fs￾cal position – starting now – varies between 1–2% (Canada, Germany) 
to 5–6% (US, UK).
It should also be noted that this framework takes no account of addi￾tional expenditure related to climate change, or of other challenges relat￾ing to life on a crowded planet, such as pandemics, geo-political tension, 
outright war.
Te G7 countries, and especially the US and UK, have a great deal to 
do to put their government fnances on a sustainable footing. Tis is not 
just about implementing short-term spending cuts or tax increases, 
though these might provide near-term comfort; it is about adopting 
long-term programmes, built around a political consensus that can be 
sustained for multiple decades.
Failure to do this risks undermining the implicit confdence that all 
participants in the economy, including fnancial markets, need to 
have in governments’ ability to meet their obligations and maintain a 
stable monetary system. Tis confdence, once lost, can be very hard 
to regain.
I. Ball et al.149
Notes
1. Koshima, Y. et  al. (2021) Te Cost of Future Policy: Intertemporal 
Public Sector Balance Sheets in the G7.
2. Harris, J. and Tieman, A.F., “Managing Public Wealth” IMF Fiscal 
Monitor October 2018.
3. Te Old Age Dependency Ratio is defned as the ratio of the number of 
people over 65 compared with the number aged between 16 and 65.
4. IMF PSBS database, data for 2020 or 2021 (latest available years).
5. Ofce for Budget Responsibility (2022). Fiscal risks and sustainability; 
July 2022, p 1.
6. Ofce for Budget Responsibility (2023). Fiscal risks and sustainabil￾ity; p 124.
7. Ofce for Budget Responsibility (2023). Fiscal risks and sustainabil￾ity; p 124.
8. Ofce for Budget Responsibility (2022). Fiscal risks and sustainability; 
chapter 4.
9. United Kingdom Government (2022). Whole of Government Accounts 
2019–2020.
10. Ofce for Budget Responsibility (2023). Fiscal risks and sustainabil￾ity; p 127.
11. IMF Public Sector Balance Sheet database.
12. Sky News, August 18, 2022, quoted in inews, August 31, 2022.
13. inews, August 31, 2022.
14. George Parker and Chris Giles: Financial Times, September 12, 2022.
15. Laura Ashworth: Financial Times, October 19, 2022, citing a Dario 
Perkins tweet of 24 September.
10 Comparison of Comprehensive Balance Sheets© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 151
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5_11
11
Fiscal Rules
Before looking at steps that governments can take to manage public 
fnances better, it is important to consider “fscal rules” which act as con￾straints on government spending and borrowing, and help to reassure 
fnancial markets and taxpayers that government fnances are sustainable. 
Tese play an important, often dominant, role in infuencing govern￾ment fnancial decision-making and therefore require discussion.
As we will see, most countries which have adopted a fscal rules frame￾work employ rules focusing on the government defcit/surplus (diference 
between government revenue and spending for a given year), and on the 
amount of outstanding debt, often expressed as a percentage of GDP. We 
have three major concerns about this approach:
First, that such rules ignore what is efectively three-quarters of the bal￾ance sheet; they have nothing to say about assets or about non-debt 
liabilities.
Second, that they tend to act as a disincentive to investment.
Tird, that by ignoring assets and disincentivising asset creation, they 
tend to act against intergenerational fairness, favouring current con￾sumption at the expense of future taxpayers.152
Tese themes were introduced in Chap. 1 of this book, and are devel￾oped further throughout the book.
To provide an underpinning to these arguments, in this chapter we 
will consider the principles underlying fscal rules, the debt-based fscal 
rules that are employed in many countries, and contrast these with net 
worth-based fscal rules, driven by accrual accounting, as used in New 
Zealand.
11.1 Fiscal Rules: What Are They?
Te IMF has defned fscal rules in the following way: A fscal rule is a 
long-lasting constraint on fscal policy through numerical limits on budgetary 
aggregates. Fiscal rules typically aim at correcting distorted incentives and 
containing pressures to overspend, particularly in good times, so as to ensure 
fscal responsibility and debt sustainability.
1
 In essence, a fscal rule is one 
that binds a government in the exercise of fscal policy in order to achieve 
certain fscal goals.
Such rules have increasingly been used by national governments over 
the past 30 years. Prior to that, they were often used at the subnational 
level, including as a means by which national level governments could 
constrain the risk of fscal irresponsibility at the subnational level, on the 
basis that this constitutes a risk to the fscal position of national govern￾ment. Such rules are almost universal in state and local government in the 
United States for example, where virtually all states have a balanced bud￾get requirement, which the states commonly also impose on their local 
governments.
Fiscal rules may be established in diferent ways – they may be consti￾tutionally embedded, they may be in statute, or they may simply be a 
stated policy of the government, though the latter is clearly a weak form 
of rule. In the previous example, US state government balanced budget 
rules are established both by the state constitution or by statute.
I. Ball et al.153
11.2 The UK and EU Examples
A well-known example of a fscal rule is the UK Government’s “golden 
rule”, meaning that over the course of an economic cycle, the govern￾ment should borrow only for investment spending.2
 As with many other 
countries, the UK has over time modifed its fscal rules, and at the time 
of writing the appropriate rules are a matter of debate. Interestingly, while 
actual rules in the UK have focused largely on debt and defcit, a net 
worth rule3
 has received some support in recent times.
Various writers4
 have emphasised the particular importance of fscal 
rules in the European Union. For example, Gaspar and Amaglobeli argue 
that “Binding fscal rules are necessary in a monetary union because market 
forces alone do not provide a sufciently strong mechanism to discipline prof￾ligate governments” and that “Monetary union exacerbates the challenge of 
maintaining fscal discipline in individual countries”.
In an Annex to the Maastricht Treaty, fscal rules were established that 
limited general government debt (specifed as nominal, gross debt) to not 
greater than 60% of GDP and the fscal defcit to not greater than 3% of 
GDP. Countries in violation of the debt rule are expected to cut their 
debt every year by 1/20th of the excess over 60% of GDP (on average 
over 3 years). Te medium-term objective is that the structural (cyclically 
adjusted) budget defcit be no greater than 0.5% of GPD. Te EU bud￾getary rules were suspended at the start of the Pandemic and will remain 
suspended until the end of 2023 to help member states cushion the fall￾out from the Ukraine war. As in the UK, the EU fscal rules have been 
subject to review and change over the period since their introduction in 
1997,5
 and, again, like the UK are under consideration at the time of 
writing. Te European Commission has issued proposals for reform, 
which are currently under debate. In this case, part of the rationale for 
seeking change is the extent to which EU debt levels increased since the 
onset of COVID-19 (to 90% of GDP in 2020, albeit debt levels have 
declined to 84% in 20226
).
Both the European and UK examples show that fscal rules do not 
guarantee fscal results and, in the extensive literature on fscal rules, there 
11 Fiscal Rules154
remain doubts about both the theoretical justifcation for fscal rules and 
their efectiveness, though the evidence seems to point to them being at 
least marginally efective.7
11.3 IMF on Fiscal Rules
Notwithstanding concerns about their efectiveness, the trend for national 
governments to adopt fscal rules has continued, in terms of both the 
number of countries with fscal rules and the number of fscal rules each 
country has adopted. In 2022 the IMF published a dataset showing the 
emergence and current state of fscal rules internationally.8
 Tis dataset 
covers 105 economies for the period 1985–2021.
Te dataset covers four types of rules: budget balance rules (BBR), 
debt rules (DR), expenditure rules (ER), and revenue rules (RR), apply￾ing to the central or general government or the public sector.
In an associated working paper9
 these budget rules are described. In 
the context of this book, it is notable that even some years after the IMF’s 
Fiscal Afairs Department addressed the importance of a balance sheet 
approach to fscal management, and net worth as summary measure of 
fscal position, the working paper makes no reference to net worth and it 
is not included as one of the fscal rules being tracked. Te working paper 
does, once, reference the balance sheet, in the following description of 
the UK Government’s fscal framework, following COVID-19:
In October 2021, the government reinstated the fscal rules as part of the post￾pandemic fscal framework. Te rules require the government to target a bal￾anced current budget by the third year of the rolling forecast period, a ceiling on 
government net investment of 3 percent of GDP on average during the rolling 
period, a declining public sector net debt (excluding the Bank of England) by 
the third year of the rolling fve-year forecast period, a ceiling on welfare spend￾ing and an innovation with a focus on the balance sheet of the public sector.
I. Ball et al.155
11.4 New Zealand as an Exception – The Fiscal 
Responsibility Act 1994
Because we use New Zealand as an example at a number of points in this 
book, it is worth recounting that country’s experience with fscal rules. 
Gaspar10 noted:
In the late 1980s, countries were starting to change their macroeconomic policy 
frameworks in fundamental ways. New Zealand provides an early and pioneer￾ing example. It passed its Public Finance Act and its Reserve Bank Act in 1989.
Following the full implementation of the Public Finance Act, includ￾ing its requirement for the introduction of accrual-based budgeting, 
appropriations and fnancial reporting, the Fiscal Responsibility Act 1994 
was passed, which built on the information made available by the Public 
Finance Act.
Te Fiscal Responsibility Act took an approach to fscal rules that was 
in certain respects diferent to other jurisdictions. First, the variables of 
interest were not, as in most other countries, debt and cash defcit. Instead, 
they were accrual measures of operating revenues, operating expenses, 
(and the diference between them, the operating balance), debt and net 
worth. Second, rather than having specifc numerical targets or limits, it 
laid out a series of principles of responsible fscal management, in rela￾tion to which the government was required, as part of the budgetary pro￾cess, to specify their long-term and short-term objectives. In subsequent 
fnancial reporting, the achievement or otherwise of these objectives was 
transparent. In addition, the Fiscal Responsibility Act recognized that in 
certain circumstances, the principles could not, or would not, be adhered 
to, in which case the government had to explain the reasons for the depar￾ture and the steps that would be taken to return to compliance with the 
principles, and the time within which it planned to regain compliance. 
COVID-19 provided an example of such circumstances.
11 Fiscal Rules156
11.5 Principles of Responsible 
Fiscal Management
Te Fiscal Responsibility Act stated:
Te principles of responsible fscal management are-
(a) Reducing total Crown debt to prudent levels so as to provide a bufer 
against factors that may impact adversely on the level of total Crown 
debt in the future, by ensuring that, until such levels have been 
achieved, the total operating expenses of the Crown in each fnancial 
year are less than its total operating revenues in the same fnancial 
year; and
(b) Once prudent levels of total Crown debt have been achieved, main￾taining these levels by ensuring that, on average, over a reasonable 
period of time, the total operating expenses of the Crown do not exceed 
its total operating revenues; and
(c) Achieving and maintaining levels of Crown net worth that provide a 
bufer against factors that may impact adversely on the Crown’s net 
worth in the future; and
(d) Managing prudently the fscal risks facing the Crown; and
(e) Pursuing policies that are consistent with a reasonable degree of pre￾dictability about the level and stability of tax rates for future years.
Te principles have been added to in the period since the original Act 
was passed,11 but these principles all remain. Te selection of these prin￾ciples can be seen to refect the complexity of the government’s fscal 
performance and position. While net worth is the most comprehensive 
aggregate measure of fnancial position, and is therefore an important 
principle, it is not the only one. Other important measures are the levels 
of revenue and spending, and the budget balance. So also, for reasons of 
political and economic salience, is the level of debt.
Te approach taken to the selection of fscal rules in New Zealand, in 
particular the variables embedded in the principles, could only be 
I. Ball et al.157
achieved on the basis of the prior reforms in the Public Finance Act. Two 
things enabled the selected rules to be successfully implemented. Most 
obviously, the accounting system needed to be on an accrual basis, which, 
while a novelty at the time is now much more common.
Also needed, and still much less common, is for accrual information to 
drive the budget process – at the time key fnancial decisions are made in 
the budget process it was necessary to be able to forecast the impact of the 
decisions on the (accrual-based) variables specifed in the principles laid 
down in the statute. Tis fundamental reshaping of the budget process 
was not a small challenge, but was seen to be critical to the purpose of 
both the Public Finance Act and the Fiscal Responsibility Act. In the 
event, this led to accrual accounting becoming very quickly, and perma￾nently, embedded in the fnancial management system.
If there is a half-hearted consensus on the efectiveness of fscal rules, 
then perhaps in this respect New Zealand is one of the exceptions that, so 
to speak, proves the rules. Te title of Derek Gill’s article12 on the efec￾tiveness of this reform is: Te Fiscal Responsibility Act 1994: Te aston￾ishing success of a weak non-binding policy. For the reader who wants to 
know more about the New Zealand reforms in this area, and how they 
arose, this article is worth the read.
Gill’s frst key point in the article is:
When the Fiscal Responsibility Act (FRA) was introduced, the FRA had limited 
opposition but only lukewarm support because it was expected to be inefective 
due to its lack of legal enforceability. Today it provides the foundation for the 
Treasury’s budgeting process, is embedded in the wider political discourse and is 
part of New Zealand’s constitutional arrangements.
11.6 The Fiscal Outcomes
Not only are the principles embedded in the practice of public fnancial 
management in New Zealand, the Government’s fscal track record over 
the past three decades generally  supports their efectiveness. Te 
Government’s net worth has increased every year since 1995 other than 
4  years following the global fnancial crisis and the Canterbury 
11 Fiscal Rules158
-20,000
 -
 20,000
 40,000
 60,000
 80,000
 1,00,000
 1,20,000
 1,40,000
 1,60,000
 1,80,000
 2,00,000
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Total NZ Government Net Worth 1994-2022
$NZmillions
Fig. 11.1 New Zealand’s fscal track record. (Data source: NZ Treasury fscal time 
series data)
earthquakes in 2010 and 2011, and the year following the outbreak of 
COVID-19 pandemic (Fig. 11.1).
Refecting on the efects of legislation that is almost 30 years old (and 
has since been incorporated into the Public Finance Act) and the lessons 
to be learned, two things stand out. First, the value of transparency. Gill 
notes that the legislation was a product of the determination of the 
Minister of Finance, Ruth Richardson, to address the country’s weak fs￾cal institutions with a preference for numeric fscal rules, and a Treasury 
that was sceptical about the efectiveness of such rules. As Gill describes:
Treasury ofcials however had positive experiences with increased fscal trans￾parency over the period of the reforms, which suggested that transparency could 
be a very efective fscal tool. In 1992, the Treasury had been able to release a 
set of unqualifed consolidated Crown accrual accounts that covered the wider 
state sector using GAAP.  Te resulting information had been infuential in 
avoiding a double downgrade by the international credit rating agencies.
Te second point of note is the alignment of the macro and micro 
aspects of fnancial management. With net worth, the summary measure 
I. Ball et al.159
in an accrual-based accounting system, being one of the principles of 
responsible fscal management and being measured in exactly the same 
way as the performance of individual agencies, means that the numbers 
reporting fscal performance and position run through the whole fnan￾cial management system, including the in-year fnancial monitoring. 
While, of course, the same thing could be said of a cash-based system, 
those numbers did not have the same information content, excluding as 
they do physical assets and non-debt liabilities, a point made earlier in 
this book.
11.7 Conclusion
Te literature on fscal rules makes clear that this is not a simple issue – 
what happens in New Zealand may well not happen in the same way else￾where.13 Tere can be many reasons for this including the extent to which 
the fscal rules are supported by other components of the political and gov￾ernmental system. In the New Zealand setting, two components which 
reinforce the principle-based approach to fscal rules are the transparency 
associated with the New Zealand Government producing fnancial state￾ments every month, and the requirement for the government to produce, 
20–30 days before a General Election, an economic and fscal update which 
ensures that elections take place with current information. Tese two fea￾tures help ensure that fscal responsibility has political salience.
To conclude on fscal rules, while the evidence is that their impact is 
variable, it is also clear that they can play a positive role in creating a cul￾ture of fscal responsibility. And if net worth is to be one of the rules, as 
we believe it should be, the government must have an accrual accounting 
system in order to measure progress against this rule.
11 Fiscal Rules160
Notes
1. IMF Fiscal Afairs Department (2022), Fiscal Rules Dataset 1985–2021, 
[2 July 2023] https://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/fscalrules/
map/map.htm#:~:text=What%20are%20Fiscal%20
Rules%3F,numerical%20limits%20on%20budgetary%20aggregates.
2. Kell, Michael (2001), An Assessment of Fiscal Rules in the United 
Kingdom, IMF Working Paper.
3. Hughes, R., J.  Leslie, C.  Pacitti and J.  Smith (2019), “Totally (net) 
Worth It: the next generation of UK fscal rules”, Resolution Foundation.
4. Gaspar, Vitor and Amaglobeli, David (2019), Fiscal Rules, SUERF 
Policy Note, Issue No 60.
5. International Monetary Fund (2022), Reforming the EU Fiscal 
Framework: Strengthening the Fiscal Rules and Institutions.
6. Euronews.next, Europe’s fscal rules review – what does it mean? Accessed 
3 July 2023: https://www.euronews.com/next/2023/06/07/
europe-fscal-rules-review-what-does-it-mean.
7. Willem Buiter, Giancarlo Corsetti, Nouriel Roubini, Rafael Repullo and 
Jefrey Frankel (1993), Excessive Defcits: Sense and Nonsense in the 
Treaty of Maastricht, Economic Policy, Vol. 8, No. 16 (Apr., 1993), 
pp. 57–100.
8. Davoodi, Hamid, Paul Elger, Alexandra Fotiou, Daniel Garcia-Macia, 
Andresa Lagerborg, Raphael Lam, and Sharanya Pillai. 2022. “Fiscal 
Rules Dataset: 1985–2021”, International Monetary Fund, 
Washington, D.C. https://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/fscal￾rules/map/map.htm.
9. Davoodi H. R., P. Elger, A. Fotiou, D. Garcia-Macia, X. Han, A. Lagerborg, 
W.R. Lam, and P. Medas. 2022. “Fiscal Rules and Fiscal Councils: Recent 
Trends and Performance during the Pandemic”, IMF Working Paper 
No.22/11, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.
10. Gaspar, Vitor (2020). Future of Fiscal Rules in the Euro Area.
11. Te principles were amended in 2013 by adding additional principles: 
when formulating fscal strategy, having regard to the interaction between 
I. Ball et al.161
fscal policy and monetary policy, and when formulating fscal strategy, hav￾ing regard to its likely impact on present and future generations, and; ensur￾ing that the Crown’s resources are managed efectively and efciently.
12. Gill, Derek (2018), Te Fiscal Responsibility Act 1994: Te astonishing 
success of a weak non-binding policy.
13. While this point is generally true, it is especially the case for the Eurozone 
countries where there is a common currency but not common fs￾cal policy.
11 Fiscal RulesPart III
Managing Public Commercial Assets 
and Liabilities© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 165
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5_12
12
Finding, Understanding, and Valuing 
Public Commercial Assets
To manage assets properly, you need to know things about them. At a 
minimum, you need to know what and where they are, what they are 
being used for, and what they are worth. If you don’t know much about 
them, it is a fair bet that they are not being managed well, if at all. Not 
knowing about your assets will also mean that your balance sheet mis￾states your fnancial position.
Tis matters for governments because, without that knowledge, there 
is so much that we can’t do. For example, we can’t tell whether there is 
scope to fund the acquisition of much-needed new infrastructure by sell￾ing no longer-needed or less-needed assets. For some governments, an 
incomplete balance sheet picture might mean that borrowing costs are 
higher than they need to be or, in a time of crisis, fewer solutions are 
available. Bringing accounting systems up to standard is expensive and 
time-consuming but should be done. But in the meantime, there are 
other ways to identify hidden assets, which we will discuss.
A better understanding of public assets creates opportunities for better 
management, and we will explore good examples of how to institution￾alise this.166
12.1 Assets, What Assets?
Governments worldwide own vast assets with a total value greater than all 
global capital markets combined.1
But what exactly is the value assets possess, and how should it be mea￾sured? Te traditional public sector perspective is that public sector assets 
are seen only to have a value if they can be exchanged for cash, that is if 
they are sold. From a fnancial perspective, value is often defned as the 
capacity to generate income, even if not sold. Te accounting perspective 
says assets should be assigned a value regardless of whether the assets are 
generating an income or have the potential to be sold. Assets can generate 
value by being used in the production of services that have value, whether 
or not that value is refected in the individual or collective purchase of the 
service. Assets have an opportunity cost.
Assets can be classifed as being tangible or intangible. Tangible assets 
can be divided into fnancial assets and real assets. Financial assets such as 
stocks and bonds or cash in bank deposits or investment accounts are 
generally liquid. Tese get their value from a contractual right or owner￾ship claim.
Real assets derive their value from their physical qualities—natural 
resources like gold, oil, or land and man-made assets like machinery or 
buildings.
Although they are lumped together as tangible assets, real assets are a 
separate and distinct asset class from fnancial assets. For example, com￾modities and property are real assets, but commodity futures and real 
estate investment trusts (REITs) constitute fnancial assets whose value 
depends on the underlying real assets. Also, a physical asset, such as a for￾est, can be converted into a fnancial asset by giving a company owner￾ship of the asset.
Intangible assets are valuable property that is not physical in nature, such 
as brand names, patents, copyrights, trademarks, and intellectual property. 
Both tangible and intangible assets are assets for which there are clearly 
defned and enforceable property rights. An implicit asset is the present 
discounted value of current and future primary income or revenues of a 
non-contractual nature. Tax revenues are a public sector example. An 
I. Ball et al.167
implicit liability is the present discounted value of current and future pri￾mary expenditure/outlays of a non-contractual nature. Social security ben￾efts and defence expenditures are public sector examples.
We will focus on public commercial assets. Tis is a subset of public 
assets that, if professionally managed, could generate an income for the 
government.
As the term indicates, “commercial assets” are interchangeable, from a 
fnancial perspective, with similar assets owned by the private sector. 
Consequently, these assets are frequently sold of to private owners to gen￾erate cash for the government. Also, we use the term “public” in the fnan￾cial sense, meaning the assets owned by all administrative levels of 
government, including local, regional/provincial/state and national/federal.
12.2 What Are Public Commercial Assets?
With public commercial assets, we mean assets which can generate an 
income (non-tax-based) if professionally managed. Tese can be divided 
into operational assets and real estate assets (Fig. 12.1).
Fig. 12.1 Public commercial assets
12 Finding, Understanding, and Valuing Public Commercial Assets168
Operational assets are businesses, often in corporate form, providing 
products and services. Still, many other legal forms exist worldwide.2
Most common are electric and water utilities and transportation services, 
including airports, ports, and subway systems. In some jurisdictions, gov￾ernments also own fnancial institutions such as banks, insurance compa￾nies, and operations for extracting natural resources and manufacturing. 
Infrastructure – whether toll-based or some sort of public-private part￾nership (PPP) project, as well as other non-corporatized commercial 
activity (e.g., the sale of geographical and other data) could also be 
included.
Real estate is the most prevalent asset segment within any government 
and is often several times larger than the operational segment in value 
terms. Tis excludes heritage assets such as national parks, historic build￾ings, or non-toll-generating roads and bridges. Even if, in principle, at 
least, all of these could be used to generate income.
From a fnancial perspective, commercial assets owned by the public 
sector are no diferent from similar assets owned by the private sector. 
Deregulating a sector without harmonising the accounting rules between 
privately and publicly owned assets in the same industry is where prob￾lems begin. Not using accrual accounting and fair market values of assets 
makes it impossible to manage public commercial assets properly.
Te accounting rules used by most governments rest on the false pre￾sumption that public assets are inherently unlike those in the private 
sector. Tis has led to the misuse of public assets and the distorting of the 
market for privately owned assets in the same market. Such misguided 
accounting rules for public assets, combined with change of ownerhip, 
have also facilitated an undue transfer of public wealth to the pri￾vate sector.
12.3 Hidden Assets – A Missed Opportunity
All local, regional, and national governments are sitting on a goldmine of 
hidden assets. If fully transparent and professionally managed, these 
assets could help pay for much-needed investments. But today’s govern￾ments have largely forgotten the importance of an accurate valuation, 
I. Ball et al.169
and sometimes even a proper inventory, of their assets. Tis problem, 
rooted in government accounting systems, impedes efcient asset 
management.3
For example, America’s Governmental Accounting Standards Board 
(GASB) states that governments shouldn’t measure their assets using 
market prices. Instead, GASB says states and localities should value assets 
according to whatever was initially spent to acquire them, no matter how 
long ago.4
Rio de Janeiro’s Escola Municipal Cicero Pena 
and Best Use
Public institutions typically use public assets without imputing a cost for 
that use. Te lack of proper accounting, based on audited accrual num￾bers, has often led to governments being wasteful in their use of publicly 
held assets. Tis is best illustrated by the example so well described by 
Vito Tanzi of the school on the Avenida Atlantica in Rio de Janeiro.
One day he walked on the splendid avenue that separates Copacabana 
Beach from the large hotels that face the beach. Te land on which the 
hotels are built is very expensive because it is adjacent to the beach, per￾haps the most expensive land in Brazil. He found an Escola Municipal 
Cicero Pena, a public school between two hotels. Tis made him think 
that this was a great illustration of the misuse of public assets. Its location 
in front of the beach would almost surely distract the students from their 
school activities. Furthermore, land with an extremely high market value 
was being used for an activity that, while socially important, could be 
located (to beneft the students’ learning) a couple of blocks away from 
the beach and on much cheaper land. Tis relocation would have released 
the land occupied by the school for use with the highest market value. 
Such a change would undoubtedly improve welfare because it would raise 
national income while afording the government the possibility of build￾ing an equivalent or better school with the cash from the sale or develop￾ment of the land on which the school was built. At the same time, the 
students would move to a location where distractions would be much 
reduced.5
12 Finding, Understanding, and Valuing Public Commercial Assets170
The US Federal Government Owns a Third 
of the Country
Americans often pride themselves on having a smaller state sector and 
consequently fewer public commercial assets than other governments in 
Europe and Asia. But the reality is very diferent.
Te federal government owns a huge amount of real estate, almost a 
third of all the land in the United States—some 640 million acres, where 
only a fraction is accounted for in the government’s balance sheet. Four 
major federal land management agencies administer the majority, includ￾ing the Bureau of Land Management (BLM), Fish and Wildlife Service 
(FWS), and National Park Service (NPS) in the Department of the 
Interior (DOI) and the Forest Service (FS) in the Department of 
Agriculture.6
A ffth agency, the Department of Defense (DOD), administers an 
additional 26 million acres of land in the United States, consisting of 
military bases, training ranges, and more. Te DOD cannot receive a 
clean audit opinion on its fnancial statements, partly due to inaccurate 
records for its 573,000 real property assets. Despite eforts over the past 
Escola Municipal Cicero Pena, Rio de Janeiro
I. Ball et al.171
several decades, the DOD has yet to develop a department-wide strategy 
to address this issue. Instead, each military service is left to develop 
actions to improve its data independently.7
For several decades, private sector consultants have tried to value large 
parts of the property portfolio but have never been permitted to do it 
conclusively. Nevertheless, some of the attempts ended up at several tril￾lions of dollars, while the fnal result was deemed classifed information.
Te DOD numbers do not include the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, 
one of the world’s largest public engineering agencies, managing such 
diverse assets as a quarter of U.S. hydropower capacity and 4300 recre￾ational areas, beaches, and local water and sewer systems. Te agency has 
a history of scandals that surrounds it. Te New Orleans levees during 
Hurricane Katrina is just one example of how mismanagement and cor￾ruption contributed to natural disasters for thousands of people.8
City of Pittsburgh Real Estate Portfolio – 70 
Times Undervalued
Urban areas are a major contributor to the US economy. Metropolitan 
areas account for roughly 90% of U.S. economic output.9
 Local govern￾ments own transport operations such as ports, airports, and subways, as 
well as vital water utilities. But what is less well known is that the public 
sector is the dominant property owner of real estate in every major US city, 
controlling at least half of the property market at a value often equivalent 
to the economic output of the city.10 In total the value of these real estate 
assets is probably close to the value of total GDP of the country, or in the 
case of the US some $23 trillion, if accounted for at a fair market value.
Te indicative value of the real estate portfolio of the City of Pittsburgh 
was a massive surprise even to its government. An indicative market valua￾tion showed that the real estate portfolio was worth 70x its book value in 
the fnancial statements. Due to the misguided accounting rules, the mayor 
and his ofce completely overlooked the real estate portfolio when looking 
for fnancial resources. Teir understanding was that the portfolio only 
consisted of a few hundred assets, most of which were already used by the 
administration. Te reality was that the portfolio of the government-owned 
real estate consisted of more than 10,000 assets, including very valuable 
parcels in middle of the central business district and other valuable areas. 
12 Finding, Understanding, and Valuing Public Commercial Assets172
Plenty of parcels were left undeveloped as parking lots and a large area used 
as an impound lot, close to the attractive river area. Leaving plots undevel￾oped can sometimes be justifed as part of a strategy of maximizing their 
option value. In practice, plain ignorance and oversight is often the more 
likely cause of undeveloped lots. Without yearly updated market values for 
the real estate asset, there is a lack of incentive for the properties’ mainte￾nance and development. More importantly, there is a lack of incentive to 
use each building for its best purpose. Without a fair market value on the 
assets and the corresponding market rents, buildings will most likely be 
underutilised and used for the wrong purpose.
12.4 An Alternative Source of Funding for US 
Infrastructure Investments
Te situation is similar in many US cities such as Boston, Chicago and Los 
Angeles, having real estate portfolios worth the equivalent of the economic 
output of countries like Morocco, Greece, and Denmark. Tese assets are all 
but completely hidden from both view and proper management (Fig. 12.2).
Fig. 12.2 Indicative valuations of publicly owned real estate in US cities
I. Ball et al.173
Te U.S. population has more than doubled since the 1960s when 
most of the country’s major infrastructure systems were designed. Many 
are reaching the end of their lifespan and are dangerously overstretched. 
At least $150 billion per year is required to keep abreast of all the coun￾try’s basic infrastructure needs.11 Tis is not including the increased fund￾ing requirements for the implementation of actions aimed at helping 
communities adapt to the mounting risks of the climate emergency.
Having a better understanding of all assets will not only help mitigate 
humanitarian and fnancial disasters resulting from climate change, but 
also facilitate the planning and reinforcement of impacted areas.
If properly accounted for and managed, public assets could not only 
help pay for some of this much-needed infrastructure but also, poten￾tially, generate some $800 billion every year, if professionally managed.
Transport for London – and “Levelling Up” in the UK
Te lock-down restrictions during the COVID-19 pandemic left many 
public transportation assets from San Francisco to London with a much￾reduced income over several years. Transport for London (TfL), the 
chronically cash-strapped London transport system, was close to bank￾ruptcy during this period but received its ffth state rescue package in 
August 2022 to secure TfL through a post-COVID-19 commuter slump 
which took the total amount pledged to £6bn.12
Tis created a ferce political backlash since the government had won 
the election on the promise to reduce the substantial and persistent gaps 
in regional economic performance through its “Levelling up” agenda. 
Tis programme was designed to remedy the longstanding problem of 
the relative weakness of areas outside London and the South East. Putting 
less money into the dedicated government Levelling Up Fund in order to 
prop up the capital’s transport system did not go down well with the 
electorate outside the capital.
More importantly, the UK Treasury (formally, HM Treasury and less 
formally, HMT) chose to use tax money to prop up TfL without properly 
assessing asset values or opportunities within the balance sheet of TfL 
12 Finding, Understanding, and Valuing Public Commercial Assets174
itself. Both TfL and HM Treasury had known for decades that the com￾pany had most likely failed to account for four-ffths of its assets, with an 
estimated value of some £80bn.13 Tese assets, if properly accounted for, 
would prevent bankruptcy and improve the company’s net worth. 
Professionally managed this vast portfolio could also help pay for improv￾ing the operations of the transport system while also developing much￾needed public housing around London.
Similarly, according to Moody’s Investors Service, the UK’s cash￾strapped local authorities are among the most stretched in Europe.14 Tis 
left them vulnerable to the economic contraction caused by the pan￾demic. Te Financial Reporting Council, which regulates the accounting 
industry, claim that 60% of English local authority audits it had reviewed 
did not meet its required standards.15 Local governments also own a vast 
amount of real estate, most of which is not accounted for in their fnan￾cial statements. If professionally managed, the assets could generate addi￾tional revenues to the local council that would help it survive and improve 
its fnancial independence and the much-talked-about devolution. 
London and Continental Railways, a state-owned property development 
company, tested this model successfully in the UK with the King’s Cross 
development and others elsewhere in the country. It would be one way 
for local governments to drive the levelling-up efort without fnancial 
help from the central government.
A better understanding of the fnancial situation at the local level is 
also required urgently for another reason. In the absence of an under￾standing of their pre-existing real estate portfolios, several local govern￾ments borrowed sums equivalent to multiples of their annual budgets to 
fund investments in commercial real estate. Local governments were 
exploiting their ability to borrow from national government on subsi￾dised terms, as if they were a hedge fund,16 but lacked the proper tools to 
manage that risk.
Te collapse in commercial real estate yields due to COVID-19 created 
serious fnancial problems for many of these local authorities.
Te lack of understanding of assets and liabilities – the balance sheet – 
not only highlighted the perennial fnancial management problem in the 
public sector of poor asset utilisation but also increased the fscal and 
I. Ball et al.175
fnancial risk by taking on additional risk in the shape of additional com￾mercial real estate at the peak of the market.
As a measure of the missed opportunity, we estimate that the UK 
Whole of Government Accounts likely fails to recognise some £1.5–2 tril￾lion worth of real estate assets owned by the public sector. Tis is based 
on the assumption that holds in several other developed economies that 
the value of the government-owned real estate is broadly the same as the 
country’s GDP. Professional management of such a portfolio would yield 
many times the amount of tax revenue each year that HM Treasury has 
so far invested in the UK government’s Levelling Up Fund.
12.5 Governments Are Hiding Assets
Te US and UK are not alone. Similar public sector accounting rules 
exist in most other OECD countries. Te real estate assets owned by the 
City of Stockholm are to a large extent incorporated into limited liability 
corporations adhering to International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS), the internationally accepted accounting rules for the fnancial 
statements of public companies that are intended to make them consis￾tent, transparent, and easily comparable around the world.17
An indicative valuation of the city’s real estate portfolio, however, 
shows the potential market value to be at least three times that of the 
book value shown in the fnancial statements.18 Tis is because Swedish 
local governments (and most OECD countries) are required to use his￾toric cost when accounting for their real assets.19
Tis is possible even if the real estate assets are incorporated in a lim￾ited liability company using IFRS. IFRS only sets out a framework for 
measuring fair value but does not require disclosures about fair value 
measurements. A local law regulating local government-owned assets 
takes precedence in most countries.
On a country-wide basis, this would indicate that real estate assets 
with a value equivalent to two-thirds of Sweden’s GDP are hidden, with 
the consequence that the incentives for putting these assets to their most 
productive uses are usually missing. Te potential income or welfare lost 
12 Finding, Understanding, and Valuing Public Commercial Assets176
by leaving them unused, and by placing them in much less economically 
or socially useful activities, may be substantial.20
“The Fastest Road to Become Rich – Buy Public 
Commercial Assets”
Tese accounting rules and laws are based on the ideological presump￾tion that public assets are never to be sold and therefore do not need to 
be assigned a value. However, the accounting and fnance perspective 
would disagree – recognising that the current market value represents the 
opportunity cost of asset ownership.
Despite the need to properly manage a portfolio of assets equivalent in 
value to global capital markets, only 8% of all professional accountants 
work in the public sector.21 Te relative dearth of public sector accoun￾tants is directly refected in the poor quality of information governments 
use in their fnancial management. Managing fnancial performance and 
position without sound information is like fying blind into a storm. And 
the area where fnancial information is weakest is asset management. Te 
responsibility for this shortage falls squarely on the public sector. Tere is 
no demand for accountants because the accounting regulations do not 
require proper accounting. Te lack of proper accounting and asset man￾agement has left the public sector a gold mine for private sector consul￾tants trying to make some sense of it all, or, if not possible – divest. All to 
the beneft of the private sector.
Tis false logic, that the market value of public assets is irrelevant, has 
allowed governments to value public assets at historical cost, or some￾times assign them a notional value or no value at all. With each year, the 
reality of how public assets are used and what they are worth diverges 
further from their historical use and value. Given the time involved—
decades or even centuries—it is unsurprising that government account￾ing can fail to capture the value of the public real estate and other assets.
Tis is not trivial since government-owned real estate is the largest seg￾ment of public commercial assets, and the government is the single larg￾est property owner in any country. Its real estate portfolio is at least of the 
same magnitude as that of the combined private sector.22 Without a 
I. Ball et al.177
proper understanding of its market value, it will not only lead to inef￾cient management and loss of potential income – it will also distort com￾petition with the private sector and damage the economy.
All commercial assets, whether public or private, can earn income and 
therefore need to be accounted for at a fair market value. While waiting 
for this to happen, public commercial assets have historically been sold to 
the private sector at cutdown prices, supporting the notion that buying 
such assets is the “fastest road to becoming rich”.
UK Government Real Estate – By Far the Most 
Signifcant Element of the British Government’s 
Divestitures
Since 1979 the UK government has sold half of its original portfolio of 
some 2 million hectares of land or 10% of Britain.23 It is the most signif￾cant element of Britain’s divestitures. Te Ofce for National Statistics 
estimated in 2017 that public real estate accounted for some £8.5 trillion 
worth of assets, but what is left of the portfolio remains hidden and 
largely unaccounted for. Tis would indicate that the £1.5–2.0 trillion 
suggested in the above example is likely to be a very conservative estimate.
Te sale of public real estate in the UK, which at current prices would 
be worth around £400bn (2018), took place in dribs and drabs over 
decades, often at cutdown prices. Even allowing for infation, the public 
sector did not realise anything close to the current value from the sales, 
leaving the public balance sheet and net worth in a depleted state.24
According to a National Audit Ofce report, a highly publicised exam￾ple shows the government lost up to £4.2bn after selling of 55,000 
homes for military families to Terra Firma, a private equity frm.25
12.6 Conclusion
Good leadership requires good information to support smart, timely 
decisions. More fundamentally, modern democracy itself relies on infor￾mation that can be understood and trusted by its citizens and interpreted 
12 Finding, Understanding, and Valuing Public Commercial Assets178
by all stakeholders. Nowhere is this more important than in the manage￾ment of our public resources.
Rethinking how governments view public assets will be difcult. Still, 
the evidence is clear: identifying public commercial assets—especially 
real estate—and sustainably accounting for them is a critical build￾ing block.
Te “Asset Map” – a quick, low-cost solution to fnd the hidden assets 
and understand the portfolio’s total value  – is a practical frst step to 
enable the design of a strategy to capture value from the portfolio of com￾mercial assets.
Notes
1. Global capital markets totalled $251 trillion in 2021, of which fxed 
income markets outstanding was $127 trillion and global equity market 
capitalisation $124 trillion, according to the Securities Industry and 
Financial Markets Association (SIFMA), a US industry trade group. Te 
total value of public assets is estimated to be around $289 trillion, of 
which $193 according to the IMF research or 2×GDP excluding pub￾licly owned real estate at a total of $96 trillion, or 1× GDP, estimated for 
the real estate segment.
2. Te term state-owned enterprises (SOEs) could be seen as a subset of 
operational assets and often referred to as a government-owned entity 
which is established or nationalised by the national government. Local 
variations of this term include “government-linked company” (GLC). 
Tese often refer to operations only partly owned by the government 
and sometimes via a holding company, such as Temasek in Singapore. 
Another local term in some of the former British colonies such as 
Australia, New Zealand and Canada is the term “Crown corporation”, or 
“Crown entity”, as cabinet ministers (Ministers of the Crown) often con￾trol the shares in them. Tis terminology is challenged and subject to 
interpretation, starting with the term “state,” which is not clear if it 
relates only to assets owned by the national/federal government or by the 
government at any level of administration. Tis is why using the term 
“public” encompasses all levels of government. Also, having a term such 
as “owned” or “linked” depending on the level of ownership is often seen 
I. Ball et al.179
as a way for the government to avoid accountability, when capital mar￾kets always hold a government owner responsible regardless of the own￾ership percentage. Finally, the term “enterprise” implies statutes in 
private law, which may not always be the case. In some jurisdictions, the 
assets of an operation can be owned directly by the ministry, while the 
actual operations where the business is run are set up as a corporation 
with a mandate to merely oversee the asset without actually owning the 
assets, such as Naftogaz in Ukraine. Using the term “asset” instead 
focuses on the actual asset of the operations, regardless of legal construct.
3. Klein, M. (2017) “America’s Governmental Accounting Standards Board 
is giving ruinously bad advice.” Financial Times, August 23, 2017.
4. US Government Accounting Standards Board (GASB) Standard 
Pronouncements.
5. Tanzi, V. and Prakash, T. (2000) “Te Cost of Government and the 
Misuse of Public Assets”. IMF, November 1, 2000.
6. Congressional Research Service (2020). “Federal Land Ownership: 
Overview and Data” (Updated February 21, 2020).
7. US Government Accountability Ofce (2020). “Defense Real Property: 
DOD-Wide Strategy Needed to Address Control Issues and Improve 
Reliability of Records”.
8. Fukuyama, F. (2015) “Political Order and Political Decay: From the 
French Revolution to the Present”. Profle Books, 2015.
9. (2021) US Bureau of Economic Analysis.
10. Urban3 is a US land value economics frm analysing over 170 US cities 
in 28 states.
11. Barton, D. (2016) “Bridging the infrastructure gap.” Project Syndicate, 
June 14, 2016.
12. Pickard, J. (2022) “London mayor warns of fare rises as TfL signs gov￾ernment support deal”. Financial Times, August 30, 2022.
13. Ball, I., Crompton, J., and Detter, D. (2021) “Tilted Balance Sheet; 
Making the most of public sector assets”. Public Finance, December 
6, 2021.
14. Pickard, J and Hammond, G. (2020) ‘Croydon seeks government help 
amid crisis for councils’, Financial Times, August 26, 2020.
15. Kinder, T. (2020) “UK regulator fnds ‘unacceptable’ rate of failures in 
council audit,” Financial Times, October 30, 2020.
16. Detter, D. (2017) “UK councils are taking huge commercial risks in try￾ing to be hedge fund managers”. Te Guardian, June 5, 2017.
12 Finding, Understanding, and Valuing Public Commercial Assets180
17. IFRS Accounting Standards Navigator.
18. Detter, D. and Fölster, S. (2022) “Konsten att tappa bort fyratusen mil￾jarder”. Samhällsförlaget November 9, 2022.
19. Swedish Law (2018:597) on Municipal book-keeping and accounting 
(kommunal bokföring och redovisning).
20. Tanzi, V. and Prakash, T. “Te Cost of Government and the Misuse of 
Public Assets”. IMF (Washington DC), 2000.
21. Detter, D. (2019) “For Economic Growth, the World Needs 
Accountants”. IFAC, March 26, 2019.
22. Detter, D. and Fölster, S. (2018) “Unlocking Public Wealth”, IMF F&D 
Magazine, March 2018.
23. Christophers, B. (2018) “Te New Enclosure: Te Appropriation of 
Public Land in Neoliberal Britain”. Verso, November 6, 2018.
24. Tooze, A. (2018) “Te New Enclosure: Te Appropriation of Public 
Land in Neoliberal Britain”. Financial Times, January 18, 2019.
25. Bond, D. (2018) “MoD loses up to £4bn in homes deal with UK private 
equity group”. Financial Times, January 30, 2018.
I. Ball et al.© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 181
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5_13
13
The Asset Map: A Shortcut 
to Understanding Property Holdings
Instituting the necessary accounting systems and adopting appropriate 
accounting standards is a complex and lengthy process, though essential 
for efective long-term asset management. In the meantime, the ‘Asset 
Map’—a quick, low-cost solution to fnd the hidden assets and under￾stand the portfolio’s total value—is a practical frst step to enable the 
design of a strategy to capture value from the portfolio of commer￾cial assets.
Te more detailed valuation of the portfolio will be carried out as part 
of the production of the fnancial statements once the assets are consoli￾dated within a corporate holding structure.
Te asset map is the shortcut before this consolidation is done, a quick 
back-of-the-envelope assessment used to form the basis for a business 
plan and a tool to mobilise political will to consolidate the assets within 
a proper holding vehicle. Te asset map will help demonstrate the size 
and value of the portfolio of assets and the potential income that can be 
generated from managing the portfolio better. It establishes why it would 
make sense to invest the political capital to achieve this additional non￾tax income.1
Asset mapping is a process that can be done in weeks or months, 
depending on the quality of the underlying data. Te cost is likely in the 182
tens of thousands of dollars, while the ultimate gain is counted in mil￾lions and billions, depending on the portfolio size.
13.1 The Politics of Asset Maps 
and Improved Transparency
Te ownership of public commercial assets is often widely distributed 
within a government and across the public sector. Te total value and 
extent of the portfolio are not fully understood by the central govern￾ment authority, such as the Ministry of Finance, with an interest in 
understanding the consolidated portfolio. Te data to make such an anal￾ysis possible is often a closely guarded secret by its current owner. Tis 
secret provides leverage, power vis-à-vis the centre and potentially a 
source of income. Any hint of removing this leverage is met with ferce 
resistance from its owner.
As demonstrated by William the Conqueror, undertaking the forerun￾ner of the asset map almost a thousand years ago, it is not so much a 
technical challenge as a political one. After taking control of his new 
domain, his men created an asset map, a survey of his kingdom of 
England—the ‘Doomsday Book’—on horseback in less than a year. As 
the undisputed king of the country, he compiled an inventory of all the 
assets and their value, which helped him understand what revenue they 
should generate and what was due to the Crown in rent or taxes.2
Is the Government Taking the Lead?
Te modern British government has failed to repeat the achievement of 
William the Conqueror, despite continuous eforts for more than two 
decades. Modern information technology and existing resources should 
enable HM Treasury to undertake such an efort in a fraction of the time 
it took William. But the political will has been missing. Central govern￾ment departments are unwilling to share the information they have on 
their real estate portfolio. Experience has taught the departments that 
such information sharing has only resulted in forced sale of assets at bar￾gain prices, to address a budget defcit. Often this occurs without any 
I. Ball et al.183
fnancial beneft to the department that owned the property, creating the 
incentive to avoid disclosure.
Many governments resist accrual accounting or even undertaking an 
asset map although they know full well that the results would uncover a 
vast amount of value. Tis may be in part because it is easier to use taxes 
as the main source of income for the budget. It is not unusual that gov￾ernments deliberately don’t account for assets properly so that they can 
continue to justify taxation at levels they know they could lower if they 
did account for assets properly. Tis is something that has been argued by 
some of the German states and city-states (Bundesländer and Stadtstaaten) 
even though they are in the process of introducing accrual accounting. 
Tis is contrary to any ethical perspective on such intentionally mislead￾ing tactics. Strategically, a government that decides against using an addi￾tional, albeit novel, funding source, such as its balance sheet, could be 
seen as making a bigger mistake than when Intel turned down Apple to 
supply the iPhone with the microchips they needed because the CEO of 
Intel could not foresee a future in mobile devices that would compare to 
its current business.3
Many US cities and counties receive signifcant federal money for 
infrastructure investments. For this reason, they are often reluctant to 
make the value of their assets publicly known, as this would most likely 
reduce their chance of receiving easier money from the federal purse.
Even countries in fnancial distress are often not keen to expose the 
extent and value of their assets unless this disclosure is part of the condi￾tions for a loan from international fnancial institutions such as the IMF.
With the proft motive and the transparency from proper accounting 
missing in the public sector, there is little incentive to do what makes 
sense fnancially, only what makes sense from a political perspective.
Catch-22 and the Rating Agencies
Te rating methodologies of the global rating agencies—S&P, Moody’s 
Investors Service, and Fitch Ratings—do not incorporate public assets or 
net worth in part because they do not have visibility into the full scope of 
the public sector balance sheet. Governments do not have the incentive 
13 The Asset Map: A Shortcut to Understanding Property…184
to produce proper balance sheets because rating agencies do not take 
public sector net worth into consideration in their assessments of sover￾eign creditworthiness. Teir assessment of creditworthiness is limited to 
considering the level of debt.
Tis Catch-22 could potentially be overcome by external pressure. 
One example of such external pressure would be if the IMF were to 
include the concept of net worth in the Article IV consultation, as another 
way of measuring the strength of the government’s balance sheet. At a 
European level, another example would be for the EU to include net 
worth as a measure of fscal sustainability in the fscal rules for the 
Eurozone, in addition to the focus on debt and defcits.
To ensure efcient capital allocation, the government balance sheet 
and taxes are used in an optimal way. Introducing accrual accounting and 
net worth as one of the main fscal measures even at the local and regional 
levels could be enforceable by any central government if that is the main 
source of funding for the sub-national level.
Nonetheless, better management of public assets could still help gov￾ernments improve their ratings, albeit indirectly and in most cases over a 
longer time span. Governments producing a full set of fnancial state￾ments, with comprehensive disclosure of assets, could possibly help avoid 
a downgrade, as was the case for New Zealand in 1991.4
IMF and World Bank—Debt Sustainability Analysis
Extensive IMF research has shown that countries with a stronger govern￾ment net worth experience shallower recessions and recover faster in the 
aftermath of economic downturns.5
 Despite this encouraging fnding, 
the World Bank Group and the IMF incorporate neither assets nor the 
full spectrum of liabilities (and therefore net worth) in their Debt 
Sustainability Analysis (DSA), the key tool that guides their lending 
decisions.
Instead, the DSA and most fscal rules are focused solely on cash and 
debt. Tey simply do not recognise public assets. Tis means that the 
DSA framework does not recognise that the public sector balance sheet 
positions of countries that invest the proceeds of borrowing wisely are 
I. Ball et al.185
stronger than those that use debt to fnance consumption spending. 
Focusing on debt alone, and not also considering net worth, not only 
fails to measure debt sustainability accurately, but it is also misleading 
and has an anti-investment bias.6
 If dependent on the DSA framework, 
low-income countries have no incentive to invest in their public infra￾structure, as borrowing for investment is not distinguished from borrow￾ing for consumption. In other words, their borrowing for investment 
does not count.
13.2 The Mechanics of an Asset Map
Operational assets such as corporations and fnancial institutions are the 
least difcult segment within a government portfolio of commercial 
assets to which to assign an indicative value, as they often have fnancial 
statements. Provided that these corporate entities are using International 
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) for their fnancial statements it 
would be relatively easy to compare them with similar companies in the 
same sector that are listed on the stock exchange or traded in private 
transactions. Such trading multiples are used to understand how similar 
companies are valued by the stock market or from a transaction where an 
entire company has been transacted. It is then possible to use a multiple 
of Revenue, EBITDA (Earnings before interest, tax, depreciation, and 
amortisation), Earnings Per Share, EBIT (Earnings before interest and 
tax), etc. from such a transaction or the stock market price to reach an 
understanding of a relative value. 7
Te portfolio of operational assets could also publish a consolidated 
fnancial statement without being a consolidated legal entity and publish 
an indicative value of the portfolio as a whole.
Te main challenge of an asset mapping exercise is determining the 
real estate, given the lack of data on the real estate portfolio and the 
political sensitivities with reaching out to the fragmented universe of cur￾rent owners. Te question is: Is it feasible to do a desktop analysis of the 
value of real estate using open-source information only? Tis establishes 
the basis for a discussion with the various distributed owners.
13 The Asset Map: A Shortcut to Understanding Property…186
Desk-Top Analysis
Te frst challenge is usually to ensure the completeness of data. Tis 
requires fnding all the properties in the portfolio and the relevant data 
on each property—vital metrics that make it possible to assign an indica￾tive value to the property.
Such open-source data determines if an indicative value for the real 
estate portfolio can be done as a desktop exercise, or if it requires the 
involvement of the various owners. Te beneft of doing a desktop analy￾sis without involving the various owners is the leverage gained by having 
the relevant information in hand before starting any discussion about the 
future ownership structure. Te asset map will at least give an idea about 
the extent and value of the portfolio, prior to engaging and discussing 
this with the current owners.
For a medium-sized city such as Boston (US), Birmingham (UK) or 
Stockholm (Sweden), such a desktop exercise can take anything from a 
few days up to a few weeks. Tis depends on the quality of the data 
sources. Te cost has typically ended up around US$20–30,000.
Information technology companies such as Urban 3 in the US and 
Datscha in Europe (now part of MSCI in the US) have developed elec￾tronic platforms to improve the transparency of private sector real estate. 
Tey are mining data from open public sources, used to enable taxation 
and mortgages of private property, providing indicative valuations 
instantly by the owner, location, or geographical area. Such databases, if 
available, can be invaluable support in the analysis.
13.3 Process
In the absence of fnancial statements and cash-fow data, an indicative 
value of the real estate is reached by using trading multiples from similar 
type real estate assets listed on the stock exchange and traded in private 
transactions. Tese multiples are then compared to the basic data of the 
portfolio, such as type of real estate, location, land area (acres) and foor 
space (square meters) (Fig. 13.1).
I. Ball et al.187
Fig. 13.1 Asset map process
As government owned real estate is often tax exempt, tax authorities 
don’t collect any rent or space/area data on the foor space or even land 
area of public properties since they don’t have any tax to collect from 
them. Which means the cadastre systems also lack the data for public 
properties. In technologically more advanced countries, it is not impos￾sible to estimate these parameters by other means.
Data such as title ID/address and ownership is most often obtained 
through the national land registry, with a possibility to cross reference 
with geospatial maps from Google or other systems. Tis process should 
capture almost everything that is registered by the land registries. 
However, this is without data on what is missing such as unregistered 
land and unregistered leaseholds (less than 7 years in the UK). Liverpool 
Street Station in London is often cited as an example of a public asset that 
is not in the Land Registry, it is presumed to be owned by Department 
for Transport via National Rail.
In many countries, this process will subsequently trigger the need to 
improve the Land Registry and geospatial data, as in Greece after the 
Euro Crisis in 2010. Te land transaction records in Greece were then 
still handwritten in ledgers, logged in by last names. Tere was no lot 
number, no clarity on boundaries or zoning, and no obvious way to tell 
whether two people, or ten, had registered ownership of the same 
property.8
13 The Asset Map: A Shortcut to Understanding Property…188
Such basic information systems are vital not only for public assets but 
also to enable taxation of private sector property, as well as for the entire 
mortgage and banking industry.
Te local registrar of companies is most often able to supply informa￾tion on the company tree structures, to ensure that the property holdings 
of any subsidiaries are also included in the asset map.
Any government that wishes to manage its balance sheet more efec￾tively would aspire to have a similar web-based property technology 
(prop-tech) developed for its portfolios of real estate, such as that devel￾oped by Datscha and others for the private sector.9
 Given that the public 
sector most likely controls at least half the property market in most cities 
in any developed economy, it would be even better if the data on the 
public sector assets were available to prop-tech companies in each juris￾diction so that there was full transparency of all property assets, regardless 
if owned by the public or private sector.
Collaborative Analysis
Countries with less open-source data and less developed electronic infor￾mation systems will require the cooperation of the current owners. Every 
owner, almost without exception, has some kind of data on both land 
area and foor space, be it digital or paper. Asking for their help will not 
necessarily delay the process, but could make it politically more difcult 
and will increase the risk of the owners withholding information so as not 
to reveal their entire portfolio.
Obviously, this route will require the political will to confront each 
owner about their assets without being adequately prepared, highlighting 
the fact that the main challenge to managing public commercial assets is 
political, rather than technical.
Te total valuation in an asset map is a statistical value of the portfolio 
as a whole, rather than a detailed understanding of each individual asset. 
Tis is due to the vast number of assets in many portfolios. Even if the 
value is only an approximation with statistical data, it is a useful starting 
I. Ball et al.189
point that will enable the creation of a business plan and give a rough 
understanding of how to structure and develop the portfolio.
13.4 Conclusion
Managing assets requires the knowledge of their type, worth, use, and 
location. If you don’t know that much about them, it is a pretty fair bet 
that they are not being managed well, if at all.
IPSAS ofers a solution to this problem for general governments—pro￾vided it also becomes the basis of government fnancial management. At 
the corporate level IFRS, the internationally accepted accounting rules 
for the fnancial statements of public companies, will help to make the 
assets and liabilities consistent, transparent, and easily comparable around 
the world. Tis enables governments to show assets, especially property, 
at fair market value rather than historical or zero cost.
But this takes time and, in the meantime, the ‘Asset Map’—a quick, 
low-cost solution to fnd the hidden assets and understand the portfolio’s 
total value—is a practical frst step. It’s an easy and fast way to enable the 
design of a preliminary business plan for the portfolio of commer￾cial assets.
Notes
1. Ball, J. Crompton, J. Detter, D. (2022) “Mapping the unknown”, IMF 
F&D Magazine, March 2022.
2. Ball, J. Crompton, J. Detter, D. (2022) “Mapping the unknown”, IMF 
F&D Magazine, March 2022.
3. Miller, C. (2022) “Chip War—the fght for the world’s most critical tech￾nology”. Simon & Schuster, October 4, 2022.
4. Scott, G. (1995), New Zealand’s Fiscal Responsibility Act, Agenda: A 
Journal of Policy Analysis and Reform, 2 (1). Pp. 3–16.
5. Yousef, R. (2019) “Public Sector Balance Sheet Strength and the Macro 
Economy”. IMF, August 6, 2019.
13 The Asset Map: A Shortcut to Understanding Property…190
6. Gallagher, K. and Wang, Y. (2020) “Sovereign Debt Trough the Lens of 
Asset Management: Implications for SADC Countries”. Boston University 
GEGI Working Paper 042 11/2020.
7. Trading multiples are a type of fnancial metric used in the valuation of a 
company as a complement to or instead of relying upon the Discounted 
Cash Flow (DCF) method, should the data required for a full-blown 
DCF be unavailable. Trading multiples will instead give a relative valua￾tion using the data on how the market perceives a particular company/
stock in the same industry with a similar asset structure.
8. Daley, S. (2013). “Who Owns Tis Land? In Greece, Who Knows?”. New 
York Times, May 26, 2013.
9. Datscha is now owned by MSCI, the US investment information pro￾vider, and is renamed “Property Intel.” It collects property-related data 
from various public and private data sources onto a web-based platform. 
Tis enables investors, owners, agents, developers and other professionals 
to make better-informed decisions by analysing commercial properties, 
owners, transactions and locations to discover new business opportuni￾ties. Additionally, users can drill down to further explore lease details, 
planning permissions and property holdings and simulate market values.
I. Ball et al.© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 191
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5_14
14
Institutionalising the Management 
of Public Wealth
14.1 Separating Wealth Management 
from Policymaking Has Historical Roots
Te idea of separating wealth management from policymaking has been 
a practice since, if not before, the ancient Greek city-states set up a joint 
treasury function on the island of Delos to fund their common defence 
eforts. In Europe during the Late Middle Ages, it was not uncommon 
for governments to set up a separate authority, such as the Swedish 
‘Kammarkollegiet’ established in 1539, with the responsibility for man￾aging the taxation system, the treasury and the crown jewels, government 
fnances and producing the government fnancial statements. Tis was at 
arms-length from both the Royal Household and the Parliament.
In the modern era, Italy was one of the frst countries to set up a hold￾ing company for its public commercial assets to respond to the fallout of 
the great depression. Other countries, including Germany, Russia, and 
Sweden, used public assets to direct industrial policy. Such eforts pre￾vailed globally until state capitalism had run its course in the developed 
world by the end of the 1970s.
Goh Keng Swee, the Singaporean politician who served as Deputy 
Prime Minister of Singapore and was one of the founding fathers of 192
Singapore, decided to see public assets in a somewhat contrarian and dif￾ferent way. Te tiny Asian nation had no signifcant resources, not even 
essential utilities such as water or the capacity to generate electricity. It 
was originally part of Malaysia, a country rich in natural resources, from 
oil to agriculture and water. Separating from Malaysia forced Singapore, 
a developing economy, to rely solely on its wits to survive.
Compared to Malaysia, with which Singapore is connected by geogra￾phy, history, economics, and kinship ties, the development in Singapore 
has taken a diferent track. Both countries developed institutions to man￾age their public assets inside wealth funds. Te objective and purpose of 
the asset management systems difered, however, with Malaysia focused 
on how to divide and distribute its vast wealth among its population, 
while Singapore’s focus on building and maintaining the state. Te out￾come is that Singapore’s GDP per capita today is seven times that of 
Malaysia’s.
Against all odds, the small Asian country without signifcant resources, 
lacking even basic necessities such as water or the capability to produce 
electricity, has thrived thanks to innovative and bold thinking. Tere are 
many reasons why Singapore performed so much better than its peers 
over the succeeding half-century, including the development of human 
capital and a strong rule of law. Still, a signifcant source of Singapore’s 
economic attainment was the creation of robust fnancial institutions and 
the efective use of public assets.
14.2 Competition at the Heart of Economic 
Policy
Governments that aspire to improve the performance of public commer￾cial assets as a fnancial tool to create economic growth understand the 
need to put competition at the heart of their economic policy. Creating a 
level playing feld to enable competition requires a strict separation 
between government ownership of its assets and the government’s role as 
policy maker and regulator. A government that is successfully promoting 
competition will foster a stronger and more competitive management of 
I. Ball et al.193
public commercial assets and a more attractive economy where private 
sector investors fnd it attractive to invest.
Competition is the indispensable disciplinarian of the market econ￾omy, so a government must always be on the side of the market and the 
consumer rather than protecting and subsidising its ownership and role 
as an employer in an industry. Tere is an obvious confict of interest 
between a government’s role as owner of a business and its role as a policy 
maker and regulator that would prevent a level playing feld for existing 
and new entrants.
Te competition for capital and other resources between frms through￾out the economy will also foster restructuring in sectors that have lost 
competitiveness, with money and resources fowing away from weak, 
uncompetitive sectors and frms and towards the strongest, most com￾petitive sectors and to the strongest and most competitive frms within 
those sectors. In this way, the very operation of the competitive process 
leads to the strongest and most competitive economy possible and in 
turn, an attractive economy to both domestic and international investors.
A level playing feld will also produce more productive and proftable 
public commercial assets, increasing the portfolio’s value and improving 
the public sector’s net worth. Te challenge for the government as an 
aspiring professional owner is to address the previous and often inher￾ently weak governance practices arising from conficting objectives, poor 
incentive structures, political interference, and the lack of public scrutiny. 
Tis is a constant struggle and will remain so as long as there is a govern￾ment ownership involvement in the asset.
14.3 Public Service Obligations 
and Other Subsidies
A frst step towards professionalising wealth management would be to 
separate out any policy objectives and potential subsidies, in order to 
focus on a single commercial objective—value maximisation—as if pri￾vately owned.
14 Institutionalising the Management of Public Wealth194
Public service obligations should be removed from public commercial 
assets, outsourced, and managed in a separate entity owned directly by 
the government department responsible for this policy area, at arms￾length from the ownership and governance of the public commercial 
assets. A competitive procurement process inviting also private sector 
competitors to operate a public service obligation will ensure that the 
funding with tax revenues from the budget is spent in the most efcient 
way, rather than mixing the funding with the revenues from a public 
commercial entity. Everything possible should be done to avoid confict￾ing objectives and distortion of the accounting inside a public commer￾cial business. Tis ensures a level playing feld and a government-owned 
business fully comparable with any private sector competitor.
Sweden was one of the frst countries in Europe to deregulate its postal 
service. It is one of the largest countries in Europe by geographical area, 
yet one of the least densely populated. It has less than a tenth of the 
population density of the UK. Public service obligations, the traditional 
argument for continued government monopoly, were of signifcant polit￾ical importance. However, the cost of these services was many times that 
of the revenues generated to pay for these services, causing endless debates 
about the fnancial viability of government monopolies. Outsourcing this 
specifc remit and procuring the service in open competition enabled 
deregulation, competition, and a more efcient market.
Other countries have subsidised the cost to consumers through their 
national utility companies providing gas, such as with Naftogaz in 
Ukraine,1
 or electricity, such as with NEPCO in Jordan.2
 Tis often leads 
to continuing losses over the years, resulting in mounting debts. In the 
case of NEPCO, the mismatch between the cost of sales and revenues 
started with signifcant increases in energy production costs for NEPCO 
after the loss of Egyptian gas imports during the Arab Spring. Tese per￾sistent losses ultimately became a risk to the fnancial sustainability of the 
entire public sector.
Consolidation eforts fell short of expectations under successive IMF 
programs, for reasons including weak growth and extensive tax exemp￾tions that constrained revenue growth below expenditure pressures.3
 Te 
lack of administrative systems is often used as a reason to dismiss the 
simple solution of ofering fnancial support directly where it is needed at 
I. Ball et al.195
the individual level. Tis is a better solution than providing cheap subsi￾dised electricity to the entire country, and thereby not only distorting 
demand but also shattering the productivity and efciency of the 
government-owned utility.
With the support of the IMF, Jordan introduced a new electricity tarif 
system to reduce cross-subsidization. Te reform was designed to be rev￾enue neutral for NEPCO, reduce electricity tarifs for key business sec￾tors and reform the household tarif system in a progressive manner. 
Around 1.1  million households (or 90% of total eligible households) 
applied for subsidies through the online platform launched in 2022. 
Transitional subsidies were provided to the most vulnerable households 
identifed by the UNHCR.4
Another example of subsidies distorting markets is housing. 
Governments keen to provide vital infrastructure, such as housing, would 
beneft from separating demand and supply. Subsidies and fnancing 
solutions aiming to support demand should be paid by the government 
directly to the consumer, as demonstrated in the case of utility services. 
Tis can operate without distorting the supply side of building the hous￾ing stock. Provided production is done commercially by private or pub￾licly owned companies alike, in competition and on equal terms. Tis is 
to ramp up home building so that housing shortages do not drag on 
economic growth or fuel social tension.5
Te contrast between the two diferent systems in Sweden and 
Singapore could serve as an illustration. In Sweden, at least on paper, 
everyone is entitled to the permanent tenancy of a rent-controlled apart￾ment, thanks to a post-war system established by the social democratic 
government. Te reality is that this cap on rent makes it unproftable to 
build apartments in this segment and leads to people waiting years, if not 
decades, for a place to live in the capital Stockholm, where economic 
growth has remained high. While construction of apartments for owner￾ship rather than rental has steadily increased, the post-war system with a 
rental cap has been able to provide only 15% of the population with a 
home over its 80 years of existence.
Tis stands in stark contrast to Singapore, where around 80% of the 
population has been provided with government-built fats. Tis is a major 
achievement considering that at the time of independence hundreds of 
14 Institutionalising the Management of Public Wealth196
thousands of immigrants from China, Malaysia, India, and other parts of 
Asia lived in densely populated squatter towns. Tese had no proper sani￾tation, resulting in high racial and social tensions. Government and pri￾vate housing construction had failed to keep up with demand.
Te Housing and Development Board was set up with the task of 
increasing the supply of homes for the poor to rent. By the middle of the 
1960s, it had housed 400,000 people and started to ofer subsidized fats 
for sale under a 99-year lease, where buyers were forbidden from reselling 
the property for at least fve years. Te potential fnancial gain from the 
value of the fats became an important part of building and improving 
personal wealth and a vital political tool, including ensuring racial inte￾gration. Every new block built would require minimum levels of occu￾pancy of each of the main ethnic groups in the city—Chinese, Malay, 
and Indian—to prevent the formation of racial enclaves and foster what 
is titled ‘Social Harmony’ in Singapore.
14.4 Effcient Capital Allocation
Competition in the fnancial sector is critical for efcient economic capi￾tal allocation. Tis is achieved partly by increasing the share of the lend￾ing done via capital markets and partly by decreasing the lending between 
government-owned banks and government owned companies.
One basic step in that direction would be to separate the ownership 
and governance between state-owned banks and other public sector 
assets. Efcient fnancial intermediation is critical, as productivity and 
economic growth are entirely dependent on the efcient allocation of 
capital to the most productive assets.
In a more competitive environment, banks will likely lose their largest 
state-owned corporate customers to the capital markets, obliging them to 
turn to private companies, SMEs, and consumers instead. Moving the 
lending for the largest government companies to the capital market 
would not only improve the depth of local capital markets but also move 
a bilateral relationship to a competitive multilateral footing.
At a human level, the reality remains that a decision by a state-owned 
bank to lend to a state-owned company is not likely to be criticised and 
I. Ball et al.197
will pass without much scrutiny. But lending to a privately owned SME 
requires not only skill and experience but also internal systems to assess 
the credit quality of borrowers and price their risks accurately. Tis is 
something that initially might be lacking and takes time and efort 
to build.
Tis lack of separation and professional lending procedures is preva￾lent in many markets where the government is a dominant owner of both 
fnancial institutions and large borrowers, such as in the MENA region 
and Asia. But it is perhaps best illustrated in China.
To be successful, regulation has to ensure real competition including 
an optimal balance between the banking sector and capital markets, ide￾ally with international participation.
Any compromise in the fundamental pillars of good governance for 
public commercial assets, including transparency, a clear objective and 
political insulation will instantly be translated into lower returns for the 
portfolio and the individual assets.
Political meddling and compromise with the commercial objective, 
accounting, and independence of a government-owned company will 
result in a ‘political’ discount on the price a potential investor would be 
prepared to pay when considering investing in a public commercial asset, 
regardless of the size of the government stake. Tis is why there exists a 
strong correlation between the level of private sector discipline and the 
yield coming from a government-owned company.
14.5 Why Consolidating Ownership of Public 
Commercial Assets Is Critical
Managing commercial assets involves having the capacity to manage 
commercial risk, which is obviously not a core function of a government. 
Te success of a commercial organisation depends on how well it can 
react and adapt to new information and changing circumstances. Te 
purpose of the competitive process is to foster restructuring in sectors and 
frms that have lost competitiveness. Tis process involves what is called 
the ‘creative destruction’ of commercial enterprises. In other words, 
14 Institutionalising the Management of Public Wealth198
allowing companies to go bankrupt. It is the deliberate process by which 
new and disruptive technologies replace companies that are not able to 
either adapt or innovate to survive. Government owners tend to prop up, 
for political reasons, such as employment, companies that have lost their 
competitive edge.
Governments probably originated with the need to protect people 
from conficts and provide law and order, and claim a monopoly on the 
legitimate use of physical force within their territory. Government 
bureaucracy probably results from the need to interpret and implement 
policies determined by its decision-makers and is designed to maintain 
uniformity and control within the organization. Its systems are meant to 
be formal and rigid in order to maintain order, regardless of individuals 
that come and go. Te system of government does not encourage compe￾tition or creative destruction but opts for a slow and careful evolution of 
its processes. Te absence of a threat of bankruptcy and failure leads to a 
rigid corporate culture and the misuse and waste of capital.
Given the ambition to allow for a market economy to create the stron￾gest and most vibrant economy, it is necessary to separate ownership of 
commercial assets owned by the public sector to an independent profes￾sional institution at arms-length from the bureaucracy that is responsible 
for policy making. By consolidating such ownership under a holding 
company, it will be able to build capacity that is capable of using the tools 
that are required for commercial assets in the private sector. It should be 
subject to the same legal framework and competitive pressure, including 
the risk of failure and potential bankruptcy—as any private sector 
competitor.6
Delegating technical responsibility to independent professionals 
should arguably come rather naturally in the public sector as politicians 
are generally not keen to be measured and held accountable against nar￾rowly defned targets. For many years, governments around the world 
have delegated public management of several core public fnancial opera￾tions to separate professional institutions, including government debt to 
a debt management ofce and interest rates to a central bank. Similarly, 
some governments have delegated the management of surplus revenue 
from exports to Sovereign Wealth Funds (SWFs). Tese SWFs—often in 
resource-rich countries—when well governed have succeeded in 
I. Ball et al.199
Fig. 14.1 Public vs sovereign wealth funds
generating wealth for society and future generations, by investing surplus 
revenue in well-developed international capital markets or in real estate 
in stable developed markets (Fig. 14.1).
OECD research shows that a majority of countries are using or increas￾ingly moving towards using the centralised model of ownership of public 
assets.7
Te use of other governance models such as the coordinating agency 
model, dual ownership model, twin track model or even the decentral￾ised ownership model is a political compromise that leads to relatively 
weak governance, with opposing objectives, political interference, and 
lack of public scrutiny.8
It is only by establishing a clear objective, that a government will be 
able to delegate responsibility to an equally well-defned institution and 
thereby be able to hold the institution and its executive accountable.
For this reason, it is also useful to separate the function of investing a 
government surplus in international securities from the management of 
public commercial assets that most often are domestic.
Tese two institutions are very diferent species and should be kept 
independent from each other. Where a Sovereign Wealth Fund is primar￾ily concerned with managing reserve liquidity, it typically invests in secu￾rities traded on major mature markets internationally to avoid what is 
14 Institutionalising the Management of Public Wealth200
sometimes called “Dutch disease”.9
 SWFs are designed to optimize a 
portfolio by trading securities to achieve balance between risk and returns. 
An example is GIC of Singapore.
A Public Wealth Fund (PWF) is an asset manager, concerned with 
active management of a portfolio of operational assets, often domestic. 
PWFs seek to maximize the portfolio value through active management 
including the development, restructuring, and monetization of the indi￾vidual assets. An example is Temasek of Singapore.
As with a pension fund, they have diferent purposes and objectives 
and should therefore be measured (through proper accounting) separately.
Consolidating public commercial assets under one holding company 
creates the economies of scale to aford hiring professional management 
and board, as well as advisors when required. Te relative size of the port￾folio will also help attract relevant professionals with experience manag￾ing such a diverse pool of assets.
Without such a consolidation inside a holding company, government 
ownership will remain highly difused, and shares of ownership are given 
no or little value and are unable to be sold, so they are unlikely to perform 
as well as private sector owners that have the incentive to monitor the 
performance of their managers and to align the managers’ interests with 
their own.10 Tus, the public sector owners have little incentive to moni￾tor their managers and demand better information disclosure.11
A government owner of commercial assets faces many conficts of 
interest. Not the least with its dual role as a regulator of the business sec￾tors where it also has an ownership stake, but also as the enforcer of law, 
and as the regulator of the banking system from where some or all of the 
funding is derived.12 Politicians are in general more concerned about 
social welfare issues, such as employment, rather than governance issues, 
in order to gain popularity among citizens. Te conficting objectives that 
can come with public sector ownership reduce accountability and clarity 
of purpose for managers and board members. Telling a manager to maxi￾mise multiple objectives “leaves the manager with no objective.”13
I. Ball et al.201
14.6 The Ministry of Finance Is the Natural 
Custodian of Governance
Having value maximisation as the sole objective would involve separating 
the dual responsibility often associated with public assets, refecting 
demand for and fnancing provision of public services and, second, deliv￾ering those services through publicly owned frms. Tis creates an appar￾ent confict of interest, which makes any line ministry an unsuitable 
holding company owner, just as the referee in a football game could not 
be a player in one of the competing teams.
Tis leaves the Ministry of Finance/Economy and the Prime Minister/ 
Presidents’ Ofce, as potential alternative custodians.
From a fnancial and even political perspective, these alternatives might 
seem equally satisfying. From a political perspective being the formal cus￾todian of such a large and complex part of the economy is not without 
risk. Sooner or later, the reality will hit the responsible person with some 
fnancial or commercial trouble, which is due to happen at regular inter￾vals in such a large portfolio, that can shatter a political reputation. Being 
responsible for a large part of the country’s business sector might seem 
attractive, but a clear objective of maximising value and accounting as if 
a listed company, the responsible person will soon fnd that this means 
you will also be held accountable when the performance is not what is 
promised or at the same level as other countries.
In Finland, it took many years of deliberation to decide on the struc￾ture of public commercial assets. Finally, the shareholdings of an opera￾tional asset already listed on the local stock exchange were consolidated 
inside Solidium, the Finnish national wealth fund, in 2008. A limited 
liability company, Solidium acts as the professional asset manager, strictly 
adhering to private sector discipline.
Te total return on Solidium’s portfolio has been 10% per  annum 
since its inception in 2008. Te value of the holding has increased from 
14 Institutionalising the Management of Public Wealth202
€5.6 billion to more than €14 billion, including €7.0 billion in dividends 
that have been paid to the State, making the portfolio’s total value 
€7.1 billion in 2022.14
Te remaining part of the operational assets remains inside the govern￾ment bureaucracy, with the Prime Minister’s ofce as the ofcial custo￾dian. Tese assets include Fortum, the energy company; Finnair, the 
airline; Finnavia, the airports, Postia, the postal service; VR, the rail com￾pany and Patria, defence; as well as several companies within the oil and 
gas sector, such as Neste, Gasgrid, Gasum.
Also, a real estate portfolio of some 8700 government-owned proper￾ties, with a market value of around €4.8 billion, was consolidated under 
a government holding—Senaatti Properties, under the custodianship of 
the Prime Minister’s ofce.
A prime minister has the responsibility to hold a government together 
despite many diferences and to inspire both the country and the cabi￾net of ministers to work efectively as a group through the many chal￾lenges that a government will face. To manage a large part of the business 
sector of a country at the same time is simply not humanly possible. 
Managing this large and complex portfolio is a very challenging efort 
that requires deep understanding and focus, even from the custodian of 
the portfolio.
Since the portfolios under the custodianship of the Prime Minister’s 
Ofce did not have the same professional governance, transparency and 
focus on value maximisation as if it was held under a PWF, it is perceived 
as a policy tool of the government. Tis comes at a price, not only in 
fnancial terms, but also at a political cost.
When the postal workers went on strike over an operational issue in 
November 2019, the strike transformed into a trade-union solidarity 
protest in the country and ultimately forced the resignation of the Social 
Democratic Prime Minister Antti Rinne. Te PM was held accountable 
as the ultimate custodian of Finland’s state-owned postal service. In the 
absence of a holding company and with the PM unable to deny respon￾sibility, he was replaced by popular vote within the social democratic 
party, by Sanna Marin.
I. Ball et al.203
Tis leaves the question of custodianship to the fnance minister or the 
minister of economy if these roles are split in the government. Te duties 
of a fnance ministry difer between countries but typically includes 
responsibility for the management of government fnances, while the 
ministry of economy most often handles industrial policy. Governments 
that aspire to improve the performance of public commercial assets as a 
fnancial tool to increase net worth would fnd it natural to make the 
ministry of fnance the custodian of the public wealth fund and portfolio 
of commercial assets, as this fts well within the remit of fnancial man￾agement and increasing the net worth of the public sector balance sheet.
14.7 Transfer of Wealth 
to Future Generations
To grow and transfer wealth across generations requires a constant 
improvement in the relative performance of each asset, with a focus on 
maximising the value of the portfolio as a whole for the beneft of its users 
and ultimate owners—the taxpayers—rather than for political patronage, 
misuse, or corruption.
Proper governance is the start of the journey, the start of a constant 
tug-of-war between the business requirements of commercial assets and 
the political reality. Te outcome is determined by the political will to 
allow for professional management ‘as if owned by the private sector’.
In Singapore, this tug-of-war is managed through the establishment of 
constitutional rules. Te Singapore Government has put arrangements to 
safeguard the nation’s accumulated ‘Reserves’ from being frittered away 
by future governments. Tese Reserves have the dual role of providing a 
stream of investment income for current expenditure (capped at 50% of 
long-term expected return on investment) and serving as a rainy-day 
emergency fund.15
14 Institutionalising the Management of Public Wealth204
14.8 The Mechanics of Setting 
Up a Holding Company
From a technical perspective, setting up a holding company for a PWF is 
relatively easy—part of the bread and butter of operating in the private 
sector. In practice, four parallel workstreams—commercial, legal, 
accounting, and fnancial—would work simultaneously, coordinated by 
a project management ofce and under the leadership of a steering com￾mittee or non-executive board.
With the required political will, the establishment process would take 
at least six months, depending on the scale and scope of the operation 
and the range and diversity of assets it owns. Te process would include 
a commercial workstream supported by a management consultancy frm 
to do the indicative valuation of the assets and enable the production of 
a business plan for the portfolio.
A law frm would manage the legal workstream to undertake the legal 
due diligence and advise on governance for the holding company to be 
seen as, and function like, a private sector entity.
An international accounting frm would formally evaluate assets and 
produce a set of accounts and fnancial statements for the holding com￾pany using IFRS accounting standards (GAAP in the US).
An international bank would advise on the optimal capital structure, 
dividend policy, and rating advice to support the fnancial workstream 
and obtain the best global credit rating. Tis is to achieve the lowest pos￾sible cost of debt funding.
14.9 Conclusion
Increasing reliance on debt to fnance public expenditures has led govern￾ments to professionalize public debt management in a drive to minimize 
the costs of central government fnancial management without incurring 
excessive risk. Similarly, independent central banks were created to over￾see interest rates to keep prices steady while politicians set broad eco￾nomic policy goals.
I. Ball et al.205
While policymakers in many countries have focused on managing 
debt for decades, they have largely ignored the question of public wealth. 
In most countries, public wealth exceeds public debt: managing that 
wealth better could help to reduce excess indebtedness while providing 
the basis for future economic growth.
Notes
1. Te largest state-owned oil and gas company in Ukraine.
2. Te national electricity company of the Jordanian government.
3. IMF. (2022). “Article IV Consultation for Jordan”. IMF Country Report 
No. 22/221, July 2022.
4. Ibid.
5. Albouy, D. and Zabek, M. (2016). “Housing Inequality”. NBER 
Working Paper 21916.
6. Detter, D. and Fölster, S. (2015) “Te Public Wealth of Nations”. 
Springer, June 29, 2015.
7. OECD (2021), “Ownership and Governance of State-Owned 
Enterprises: A Compendium of National Practices”. OECD, December 
16, 2021.
8. Megginson, W. and Netter, J. (2001) “From State to Market: A Survey 
of Empirical Studies on Privatization.” Journal of Economic Literature, 
39 (2): 321–389.
9. Te term was coined in 1977 by Te Economist to describe the decline of 
the manufacturing sector in the Netherlands after the discovery of the 
large Groningen natural gas feld in 1959. Te presumed mechanism is 
that while revenues increase, in this case from the gas export, the cur￾rency becomes stronger (appreciates) as manifested in the exchange rate. 
Tis results in the country’s other exports becoming more expensive for 
other countries to buy, while imports become cheaper, altogether mak￾ing those sectors less competitive.
10. Alchian, A. A. (1965) “Some Economics of Property Rights”. Il Politico, 
vol. 30, 816–829.
11. Shirley, M., & Walsh, P. (2000) “Public vs. Private Ownership: Te 
Current State of the Debate”. Policy Research Working Paper Series 
No. 2420.
14 Institutionalising the Management of Public Wealth206
12. SOU (2012). “Te Swedish Government inquiry regarding the adminis￾tration of the state-owned enterprises”. (SOU 2012:14).
13. Jensen, M. (1986) “Agency costs of free cash fows, corporate fnance, 
and takeovers”. American Economic Review 76, 323–329.
14. Solidium Investor Presentation, September 2022. https://www.solid￾ium.f/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/Solidium-corporate-presentation￾20220930.pdf.
15. Singapore Ministry of Finance, “What comprises the reserves and 
who manages them?” https://www.mof.gov.sg/policies/reserves/what￾comprises-the-reserves-and-who-manages-them
I. Ball et al.© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 207
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5_15
15
What Should Governments Do 
with Public Commercial Assets?
15.1 The Opportunity Cost of Not Managing 
Public Commercial Assets
While the measurement and valuation of assets is important in and of 
itself (a better understanding of assets can inform asset maintenance and 
replacement decisions, and risk management, improve a government’s 
borrowing terms; allow questions of intergenerational fairness to be 
addressed; allow for a better challenge in the allocation of resources across 
government or between regions, for example), there is an even big￾ger prize.
Our biggest concern about government-owned assets is that they 
should be used productively.
Te IMF estimates that the loss to the global economy caused by the 
inefcient use of government-owned assets is about 1.5% of the total 
value of those assets per year. Using the IMF’s estimate that such assets 
total 200% of global GDP implies an annual efciency loss of 3% of 
global GDP, or around $3.4 trillion per  annum. Publicly owned real 
estate is not included at full value in the IMF estimate of public assets, as 
these values are not available in the government data. An estimate based 
on a large number of US cities, as well as some European sources, gives 208
an estimated value of around 100% of GDP. Tis would imply an annual 
efciency loss of up to 4.5% of global GDP, or around $5 trillion.
To get an idea of the scale of this, compare it to the amount of annual 
funding required for climate adaptation and mitigation, estimated to be 
around 3.5% per annum for the next three decades.1
 Tis is not the cost 
for the public sector alone, but for the global economy as a whole, where 
then the public sector would be able to make a meaningful 
contribution.
Public Assets Are Less Productive Than Private
IMF analysis of the relative inefciency of SOEs refects a view that has 
prevailed for 40 years in many advanced economies. Te weight of inter￾national research shows that government ownership is generally inef￾cient compared to private ownership in terms of corporate economic 
performance.2
 Te most reasonable explanation for the relative underper￾formance of SOEs is the weak governance practices arising from confict￾ing objectives, political interference, and lack of public scrutiny.
Cross-country evidence shows that SOEs are less productive than pri￾vate frms in the same sectors.3
 In part, this diference could refect the 
cost of public mandates. On the other hand, if some of the diferences are 
because SOEs are inherently less efcient when doing the same thing as 
private frms then the resulting misallocation of resources inevitably 
reduces economy-wide productivity.4
Te evidence confrms that partial involvement of the private sector is 
benefcial.5
 Firm productivity is lowest when the government has a major￾ity position but the gap is narrower when the government has a minority 
position.6
Te debate about what to do with public commercial assets is long￾standing, and frequently goes well beyond concerns about efciency; 
asset sales frequently become a tool of fscal policy, with consequences 
that can destroy value and distort decision-making.
I. Ball et al.209
Sale of Public Commercial Assets
Across Europe and in the UK, the post-war consensus supporting state￾ownership in industry remained until the 1970’s. From the 1980s until 
the mid-1990s, selling public commercial assets was an important com￾ponent of economic policy.7
 As a response to the prolonged crisis of the 
1970s, Margaret Tatcher started the trend in the UK rather cautiously 
by privatising already proftable entities to raise cash and thus reduce 
public-sector borrowing in 1979.
Te diferent motives for selling assets were closely related and often 
were carried out for a number of reasons, including improving the 
reported fscal position, making industry more efcient and spreading 
share ownership. Basing a decision in the public sector to sell an asset in 
the absence of a proper public sector balance sheet, fully integrated into 
the budget, could, however, distort the incentive for politicians. When 
governments focus mainly on cash and debt, without recognising the 
value of the assets, using measures such as ‘debt/GDP’ as key targets has 
often led to such short-term decisions, such as privatising utilities because 
of the need for large-scale investments. Investments that, in the absence 
of accrual accounting and only focusing on cash, would have negatively 
impacted the misguided, or at least partial, debt measures of fscal 
position.
15.2 The example of UK Water
To properly understand the longer-term impact of public investment, 
and to make that impact visible, we need assets to be accounted for cor￾rectly. Governments today still focus mainly on debt, without recognis￾ing the value of their physical assets, using measures such as ‘net debt’ or 
‘debt/GDP’ as key targets. Tis has led to wasteful short-term decisions. 
An example is when the British water utilities were sold because of the 
need for large-scale investments, which with cash measures, would have 
hurt public debt measures, resulting in increased taxes to service that 
debt. Selling the asset might reduce public debt relative to GDP. Still, 
15 What Should Governments Do with Public Commercial Assets?210
unless the asset is sold for more than its balance sheet value, the sale will 
reduce net worth and the government’s balance sheet strength.
In 1989, investors paid £7.6bn for the water utilities shares. Still, the 
government took over all the debts of the sector (worth £4.9bn) and gave 
the new private corporations a ‘green dowry’ of £1.5bn, a combined 
injection of £6.4bn of public funds. Te companies were thus efectively 
debt-free when transferred to the private sector buyers.
According to a report by Ofwat, the water regulator in England and 
Wales, investment in the industry increased with the new owners. It 
roughly doubled since being sold in 1989, rising drastically in the 1990s. 
Average total expenditure has been consistently running at around £10bn 
a year since 2000. Average capex (capital expenditure—money spent on 
assets, such as buildings, equipment, and technology) has been between 
£5bn and £6bn a year, reaching the highest point in that range (£6bn) 
between 2015 and 2020.8
Although there was an initial rise in spending, as some companies 
sought to meet European water quality directives, research by the 
Financial Times showed that total capital expenditure by the 10 biggest 
water and sewage monopolies had declined by 15% since the 1990s—
from £5.7bn to £4.8bn a year. One exception is Tames Water, which has 
increased expenditure, although not by enough to stop leaks and burst 
pipes.9
 During the same time the ten companies have borrowed £53bn 
and paid £72bn in dividends.
As this book was going to press (July 2023), the British government 
discussed a temporary nationalisation of Tames Water as the current 
private sector owners have failed to put up additional equity for the debt￾laden utility. Te discussion was triggered by the abrupt resignation of its 
chief executive, battling to turn round a company with a legacy of under￾investment and £14bn of debt just as UK interest rates hit their highest 
level since 2008. Tames Water is not alone but is seen as the canary in 
the coal mine in a sector where a combination of a natural monopoly, 
cheap debt and a weak regulator made water utilities ripe for low-risk and 
high returns. Tames Water is left with operating profts that do not 
equal interest costs, with interest cover at 0.6 times and 0.3 times, respec￾tively. A high share of index-linked debt hurts, while indexed water rates 
lag behind interest payments.10
I. Ball et al.211
Apart from leaking pipes, high debts to service and ageing infrastruc￾ture to maintain, water companies have little fnancial headroom to 
improve their Victorian era pipes, even though customers’ bills have risen 
by almost a third since 1991. Storm overfows, the mix of wastewater and 
rainwater into rivers and the sea – a legacy of sewer design and construc￾tion practices until the second half of the twentieth century – has become 
an increasing problem. While population growth and the paving over of 
green space have continued, and rainfall patterns have changed, it has 
become increasingly difcult for the existing capacity of sewers to keep 
pace. Storm overfows therefore occur more frequently than is acceptable 
to the public even though they are a relatively small contributor to water 
quality standard failures overall.
A report commissioned by the government estimated the cost of elimi￾nating storm overfows at between £350bn and £600bn—an unrealistic 
sum for the companies to pay that could add almost £1000 to customers’ 
annual bills.11
Te sale of the UK water industry is a powerful example of the impor￾tance of accounting in both the public and private sectors. Water as a 
natural monopoly also depends very much on a professional regulatory 
body based on a sound regulatory system, able to balance a reasonable 
return relative to a level of investment and maintenance,
Returning the water companies to the government’s hands, which 
lacks the accounting and professional governance expertise, will not solve 
the problem even though the government has a lower funding cost than 
the private sector.
Te private sector debt and equity providers must bear the cost of 
restructuring the sector to limit the burden for the ratepayers. Te latter 
will carry the cost for future investments but should also be saved from 
being hit through the tax bill.
Regulation and Accounting Is Key
Tames Water is not an isolated problem or a concern only for the UK 
water industry. Changing demographics and climate, while maintaining 
a standard of water quality that we want to drink and minimising what 
we discharge into our lakes, seas and water systems, requires vast 
15 What Should Governments Do with Public Commercial Assets?212
investments. Investments that have not been made over the past century 
or more. Tis is a global problem. A debate about public or private own￾ership is a distraction. Previous generations of politicians have failed to 
make these investments, partly because of a lack of both proper account￾ing and accountability for these systems and the professional manage￾ment required of such assets. Transfer of ownership has only highlighted 
the lack of investments, often because the former monopoly was broken 
up into smaller parts, and each one required to use proper accounting. 
But the change of ownership did not cause the problem—it only brought 
it into the open. Hence ownership is not the quick fx, it is not the solu￾tion. Stronger regulation is. Regardless of who owns the important sys￾tems that provide essential services such as water, electricity and 
transportation, they require strong regulation. Only a ferce watchdog 
can keep such industries in line.
For the water industry, the frst steps were taken when Ofwat changed 
its rules this year to force companies to align their dividend policy with 
performance for customers and the environment.12
But we should not stop there—a regulator should be given further 
powers to ensure a cap on leverage is considered, and health and water 
standards are maintained. Ultimately, however, it is customers who will 
fnd themselves paying for much of the costs of past mistakes—as well as 
those from meeting stricter pollution targets and adapting to climate 
change—via higher bills.
Elected politicians might even be keener to enforce strong regulation, 
and the inevitable rise of user fees, if ownership remains in the private 
sector rather than within their own administration afecting their chances 
of re-election.
New Zealand and Net Worth
From the early 1990s, New Zealand demonstrated that with proper 
accounting, governments could focus on net worth—the measure used in 
the private sector, rather than a focus on debt alone.13 With net worth as 
one ofcial key target, an increase in debt to fnance investment is 
matched with an increase in assets. Tis incentivises investments in 
government-owned assets rather than encouraging wholesale divestitures, 
I. Ball et al.213
which may be for the wrong reasons and and at the wrong price. Since 
New Zealand’s Public Finance Act was passed in 1989, the government 
has been running surpluses and improving its net worth virtually every 
year except the four years following the global fnancial crisis and  the 
2011 Canterbury earthquakes, and the year of the Covid pandemic.14
In the pandemic, the strength of the balance sheet (with strong posi￾tive net worth) and the public’s trust in the government’s numbers, 
helped give the government the confdence to act decisively and quickly. 
As Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern pointed out, a strong balance sheet 
allowed the government to “go early, go hard” in its successful strategy to 
eliminate Covid-19.15
Not surprisingly, academic studies have shown that public sector net 
worth in the UK declined sharply during the years of selling of public 
commercial assets, refecting in part the under-pricing of assets sold.16
New Zealand also divested many assets, but more because the private sec￾tor was seen as a more efcient provider of many services. And this was 
only after the sold entities had been through a corporatization process, 
within a carefully designed regulatory framework, and with a transparent 
sales process.
15.3 State Capitalism on the Rise
While most advanced economies have been focusing on reducing the 
footprint of state companies, others have gone in the opposite direction.
Since 2010, the share of state company assets among the world’s 2000 
largest frms has doubled to 20% in 2018, with a value of $45 trillion, or 
50% of the global GDP. An important factor has been the relatively high 
economic growth rate of emerging market economies and especially 
China.17
State corporations comprised one-third or more of the largest frms in 
several emerging markets such as China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, 
Russia, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates in 2013.18
National oil companies are among the biggest oil companies in the 
world and control more than half of the global oil and gas production. 
State companies dominate power generation in Africa and Asia. Tey 
15 What Should Governments Do with Public Commercial Assets?214
accounted for more than half of all infrastructure project commitments 
in emerging market economies and low-income developing countries.
State-owned banks account for 40% or more of banking system assets 
in the BRIC economies (including Brazil, Russia, India, China) and 
some low-income developing countries, and one-third or more in 
Germany and Portugal among advanced economies. But most state com￾panies are in China, members of the European Union, India, Malaysia, 
Russia, South Africa, and the United Arab Emirates.19
Te growing global reach of state companies means that competitive 
distortions in the home market may spill over into the global market. 
Tis is especially so when governments provide support to compensate 
those companies for pursuing policy goals, or compensate and support 
their national champions’ expansion abroad, either directly or indirectly, 
as a means to achieve foreign policy or national security goals. Such com￾petitive advantages can have economic and fscal implications domesti￾cally and internationally, distort competition and lower income 
and growth.
China, the World’s Most Extensive Laboratory 
for State Capitalism
China has undertaken by far the most signifcant experiment with state 
companies. Where once state companies were the pillars of the socialist 
economy, generating most of the government’s revenues, they are now a 
relatively smaller share of the economy and still rather inefcient.
After the entire sector generated a net fscal loss in 1995, despite earlier 
restructuring eforts, the Communist Party adopted a new divestiture 
policy in 1997. “Grasp the large; let go of the small” was the slogan. Tis 
meant that the Party prioritised of-loading (i.e., liquidation, forced 
mergers, or asset sales) smaller loss-making state companies while retain￾ing the ‘national champions’.
China remains the most signifcant experiment with state capitalism, 
involving a plethora of companies – within several categories – which still 
have close ties to the state and a party secretary as a key company mem￾ber, be it private or public. Tis traditional model is further reinforced 
I. Ball et al.215
and strengthened under the current Chinese leadership. A ruthless mix of 
autocracy, technology and dynamism has propelled growth for years.20
Still, China’s fnancial system has been greatly afected by the lack of 
progress in improving efciency and productivity in the Chinese state 
sector, resulting in a declining rate of return on assets in state-owned 
manufacturing frms. Te growing demand by state-owned frms for 
credit is so great that state-owned banks have been unable to diversify 
their lending away from state-owned frms towards private frms. At the 
end of 1995, for example, the outstanding borrowing of state-owned 
enterprises stood at more than 80% of all bank loans outstanding.21
Ten years later, despite the lack of capital from the banking sector, the 
private sector was a larger GDP share than government companies, with 
the productivity of government companies still half that of private com￾panies, both as a group in aggregate and by industry.
Still, state companies continued to absorb most of the funding from 
the fnancial system, with private enterprises receiving only 27% of loan 
balances. Many resort to China’s sizeable informal lending market with 
higher interest rates.22 Tis is why state banks and companies’ ownership 
was separated into two diferent ownership vehicles, SASAC and Huijin, 
in 2003.
Central Huijin Investment Ltd. (Central Huijin) is a state-owned 
investment company for government-owned banks and other fnancial 
institutions, initially under the custodianship of the central bank. It was 
later transferred to China Investment Corporation (CIC) as part of its 
initial capital contribution. However, Central Huijin’s principal share￾holder rights are exercised by the State Council.23
SASAC or Te State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration 
Commission of the State Council is a special commission that owns the 
largest SOEs and reports directly to the State Council.24
In China all political power is centralised, making any such separation 
superfcial.25 Te dominant power of the Chinese Communist Party 
through the State Council and the party’s Central Organisation 
Department control appointments to state-owned companies as well as 
government bodies. Nevertheless, or perhaps because of this, it has not 
managed to achieve an efcient capital allocation in the fnancial sector, 
evidenced by the current problems in the real estate sector and local 
15 What Should Governments Do with Public Commercial Assets?216
communities. Te Chinese fnancial system is still wholly dominated by 
banks, and the credit allocation decisions among the banks are efectively 
determined administratively, mainly through various forms of “window 
guidance” by the People’s Bank of China, the State Council, and/or local 
governments.26
A decade of rapid credit growth followed by the economic slowdown 
during the Covid years has increased pressure on overleveraged borrow￾ers. Te most vulnerable borrowers are state companies, real estate devel￾opers, and local government fnancing vehicles (LGFVs), many of whom 
are in fnancial distress or already in bankruptcy.27
Between 2012 and 2022 China’s total credit to the non-fnancial sector 
(core debt) increased by $35 trillion and reached around $50 trillion, 
which is 75% greater than the outstanding stock of debt in all other 
emerging markets combined.28
State-owned companies are the largest corporate borrowers in China 
with more than $29 trillion in liabilities at the end of 2021.29 Most state￾owned companies are also signifcantly less efcient and proftable than 
private frms.30 Data for the industrial sector, which are the most compre￾hensive available, show that over the past decade, more than one-third of 
state-owned companies were unproftable with a return on assets in the 
industrial sector consistently lagging that of their private counterparts.31
Still a signifcant portion of the banking system’s capital resources are 
directed toward low-productivity state companies.32 Research by rating 
frm S&P showed that more than 90% of the state-owned companies in 
the sample were stuck in a debt trap, meaning they are forced to borrow 
more to service and repay existing debts.33
In addition, state banks have lent an estimated $838 billion in the Belt 
and Road Initiative (BRI). Te BRI is the world’s largest-ever transna￾tional infrastructure program. It is a way for Chinese state companies to 
use their excess capacity while the government extends its political reach 
internationally. Several projects became known for how not to undertake 
development lending, with many of the borrowers now in fnancial dis￾tress. Beijing is trying to rescue its banks by giving some additional bail￾out lending to the most vulnerable countries. A recent study found 128 
bailout loans worth $240bn to 20 countries between 2000 and 2021.34
I. Ball et al.217
Governments that adhere to the state capitalist model of actively sub￾sidising and promoting their state-owned companies in the belief that it 
will be an engine for growth and development, have a valuable lesson to 
learn from the Chinese experience. Te Chinese economic miracle was 
possible despite—not because of – the extensive government sector. It is 
widely recognised, even among the most die-hard senior party ofcials in 
China, that the country’s economic success is due to the very dynamic 
private sector.
Governments at the other end of this spectrum, are actively trying to 
limit the government’s presence in the commercial sector through whole￾sale divestiture. Both ends, as well as every shade in-between on this spec￾trum, would do better by separating policy making from the management 
of public commercial assets, through an independent holding company.
The Washington Consensus
In developed economies, the wave of selling of public commercial assets 
began in West Germany in the 1960s followed by the United Kingdom 
in the 1980’s and spread around the world with major programs in the 
former Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, Latin America, and India.
Amid the early 1980s recession, the focus in the UK had ofcially 
shifted to selling core utilities in the hope that this would make them 
more efcient and productive, and thus make the British economy more 
competitive relative to its continental rivals. In some industries (espe￾cially water utilities) it was also about getting big, very much needed 
capital expenditure of the government balance sheet and therefore avoid￾ing a confict with public sector borrowing targets.
Te perceived need for further state down-sizing and privatisation 
spread across continental Europe. Te recipe ultimately became part of 
the Washington Consensus, a set of economic policy prescriptions con￾sidered to constitute the standard reform package promoted for crisis￾wracked developing countries by Washington, D.C.-based institutions 
such as the IMF, World Bank and US Treasury. Critics would point to 
the, at best, mixed success of the UK’s privatisation programme but we 
argue that this is further evidence that what matters with publicly owned 
15 What Should Governments Do with Public Commercial Assets?218
assets is not only the nature of ownership but also, and perhaps more 
so, the quality of management—and the need for accurate and honest 
accounting and regulation before privatisation should even be considered.
As a policy, privatization can be said to have had mixed success. In 
some cases, state assets were sold at very low prices (think Russia, after the 
fall of the Soviet Union), efectively transferring signifcant wealth from 
the government to individuals or companies with little beneft to taxpay￾ers. In other cases, privatization resulted in signifcantly improved ser￾vices, and lower prices, benefting consumers.
Many factors infuence the success or otherwise of privatizations, 
including the process through which assets are prepared for sale, the sales 
process itself, the regulatory regime applying in the sector, and the nature 
of the goods or services, to name but four. Our view is that privatization 
is not, per se, good or bad, but that it is a question of what will work best 
in a particular set of circumstances. Our concern is that, too often, priva￾tization is seen as a quick way of raising “revenue” and an easier solution 
than putting in places the regulatory, governance and management 
arrangements that would enable a state-owned asset to operate more 
efciently.
To illustrate the point above, if rail transport is provided by a govern￾ment department, and there is a desire for greater efciency, selling the 
department outright might not be a good idea. First, it might be desirable 
to establish it as a (though it might be more than one) corporation, which 
means it will need to produce fnancial statements, including a balance 
sheet. Tis will give a clearer picture of the cost of providing the services, 
as well as value of the assets, and liabilities, and a better sense of the 
appropriate price. Ensuring the board of the company has clear commer￾cial goals and the power to run the company efectively will give a better 
sense of its proftability and value. Te more so if it operates in a trans￾port market that has a well-designed regulatory regime, enabling fair 
competition between it and other transport providers.
Having reached this point, the government is in a much better posi￾tion to consider whether privatization is the best option, or whether there 
are good public policy reasons for retaining the asset in public ownership.
In summary, ownership and management are both important—apart 
from anything else, the information fows from product and capital 
I. Ball et al.219
markets to a listed entity are very diferent in content and efect than 
those to a government-owned service provider. Te aim of the “holding 
company” model is to achieve some of the benefts of private ownership 
for the beneft of citizens as both consumers and taxpayers. Tis debate is 
often confused by the nature of “public goods” such as defence, or law 
and order.
Te thing about public goods is that without collective action, they 
will not be produced at the “efcient” levels, so state intervention is 
required, and they are fnanced through taxation. But too often there is a 
presumption that if a service is funded through taxation, it must be pro￾duced in the public sector. One of the benefts of privatisation is that it 
made clear that public goods can be produced privately. Tat does not 
mean they should be privately produced, but it is an option.
15.4 Swedish Experiment—As If Owned by 
Private Shareholders
Contrary to the Washington Consensus and the trend to sell of public 
commercial assets, Sweden became the frst country in Europe and among 
developed economies that decided to actively manage its portfolio of 
assets. On the back of the economic and fnancial crisis in the 1990s, a 
number of structural problems were revealed, including outsized public 
expenditures and a vast portfolio of loss-making state-owned companies.
Göran Persson, the Social Democratic prime minister wanted to avoid 
wholesale divestitures and instead attempted an experiment with active 
management of public assets. Te idea was to see if the government could 
be an active and competent owner of commercial assets if backed up by 
the required political will.
Tus began a three-year experiment (1998–2001) of actively manag￾ing the Swedish public portfolio “as if owned by private shareholders.”35
Te Swedish Experiment’ aimed at turning around the largest corporate 
portfolio in the country, representing a quarter of the domestic business 
sector and some of the largest companies with a total of 200,000 
employees.
15 What Should Governments Do with Public Commercial Assets?220
Te ownership of the portfolio was split between Stattum, an indepen￾dent holding company, and the Ministry of Industry. Te government 
introduced private sector discipline and an equity culture with value 
maximisation as the sole objective. Tis meant frst of all the need to 
recruit professionals at every level, starting at the ownership level and 
continuing through the Non-Executive Board members and the corpo￾rate management for all the holdings. Tis led to more than 85% of the 
Non-Executive Board members and 75% of the CEOs and senior man￾agement in the portfolio being replaced over a three-year period, in total 
several hundred people.
Turning around every company required operational improvements 
and optimising the capital structure, as well as business developments 
aiming to focus on the core business. Tis resulted in nearly one-third of 
the assets within all the holdings being seen as non-core and subsequently 
privatized at full value. Restructurings included Vattenfall, the national 
electricity company, Posten, the national mail, and logistics company, 
and Telia, the telecom incumbent – ultimately listing it on the Stockholm 
Stock Exchange, AssiDomän, one of Europe’s largest listed forestry, paper, 
and packaging groups; the restructuring and subsequent sale of Celsius, 
one of Europe’s largest listed defence groups; and the transformation of 
SJ into one of the more proftable rail operators in Europe.
Other signifcant initiatives included the three-way merger of the listed 
companies constituting SAS, the national airline controlled by the three 
Scandinavian governments, as well as the sale of the US$ 2 billion share￾holdings in Pharmacia & Upjohn listed on the NYSE.
Te portfolio was reduced by almost a third during these three years 
including SEK 140 billion from divestitures and SEK 58 billion in divi￾dends, which helped boost economic growth and create fscal space. Tis 
was nearly fve times the amount that was sold during the eight years 
when divestitures was the main policy objective of the previous conserva￾tive government.
At the same time, the valuation of the entire portfolio increased by 
12%, while the local stock market index AFGX increased by 6% (May 
1999–June 2001).36
I. Ball et al.221
Euro Crisis Calls for Reform of Public Assets
Learning from the Swedish experience, the Greek government agreed to 
consolidate all of its public commercial assets inside a PWF as part of the 
conditions for support from the IMF and European partners.
Although public commercial assets were not the main cause of the 
fnancial crisis, they certainly had to be part of the solution. As one of 
many cases to illustrate this point, the Greek railroads reported a loss of 
more than US$1 billion, or four times its annual turnover. Tis was in 
large part due to outsized costs of personnel. Te Greek railroad company 
had been used as an employment resource for the government, taking on 
board more people than it needed by an order of magnitude, as well as 
paying some of its employees’ salaries that would have been the envy of 
people even in the fnancial sector. Tis was a common tactic by the 
Greek government (and many others for that matter) in order to hide the 
real unemployment numbers, as well as gain voters and avoid discontent 
in society.
Te railroad company had also been used to hide public debt, ending 
up with a total debt of $13 billion, equivalent to about 5% of Greece’s 
GDP.37 Without proper accounting for the government or its state com￾panies, it was possible for the government to postpone the unavoidable 
reckoning until Andreas Georgiou, the then head of the government sta￾tistical agency ELSTAT, published some more realistic numbers. Tis got 
him fred from his position and charged in court.38
As part of the bailout by the international institutions, including the 
EC, ECB and the IMF the Greek government agreed to consolidate the 
ownership of all the operational assets and the vast real estate portfolio 
into a holding company  – Te Hellenic Republic Asset Development 
Fund (HRADF) in 2011. Nevertheless, the Greek government somehow 
managed to avoid transferring ownership of assets to HRADF which 
instead remained disbursed with the various ministries. Te entire 
HRADF, its board and management were left to act only as an advisor to 
the government departments, which still controlled the assets.
Ultimately, the pressure from the international institutions forced the 
creation of a new holding company—Hellenic Corporation of Assets and 
Participations (HCAP) in 2016. Tis time ownership was transferred. 
15 What Should Governments Do with Public Commercial Assets?222
But the HCAP was severely hamstrung and not given a proper opera￾tional mandate to actually develop the assets or even improve transpar￾ency. More than a decade after the 2011 bailout, the vast portfolio of real 
estate remains hidden. It remains unaccounted for in the fnancial state￾ments and is left without a proper register or fair market valuation. Public 
assets in Greece remain foremost as a political tool, with HCAP a nomi￾nal owner without being able to have any positive impact on the portfolio 
of assets, the economy, and the business environment.
15.5 Political Will Is Key
Even if unaccounted for, public commercial assets do not disappear. At 
best, widely disbursed public commercial assets will most likely be man￾aged for the beneft of the few that control the assets for the moment, 
rather than for the beneft of society as a whole. At worst, they are simply 
ignored and not managed at all.
Avoiding proper accounting, a tool that has helped the private sector 
allocate capital efciently and created the wealth that we all enjoy today, 
is like avoiding modern medical examination methods for fear of being 
diagnosed with a terminal illness. And this despite knowing that there is 
a higher survival rate if the illness is detected at an early stage.
Introducing private sector discipline to public commercial assets is 
sometimes dismissed with the argument that the public sector has noth￾ing to learn from the private sector, given the private sector’s poor track 
record of accounting scandals, fraud, and embezzlement. But perhaps it 
is rather the other way around, that the lack of proper accounting in the 
public sector is not a sign of health but of an undetected illness. Tere are 
certainly many “symptoms” in evidence, such as poorly maintained assets, 
poor project management leading to cost over-runs and weak fnancial 
controls.
Te challenge to manage public commercial asset better is not a tech￾nical one. Professional management is done with great results in the pri￾vate sector every day. Te challenge is entirely political. What is required 
is political will. A concerted efort supported by the entire government, 
based on a will to unlock the hidden value in these assets and fully backed 
I. Ball et al.223
by its most senior members is required. Te success of such a strategy has 
been amply demonstrated by the government of Singapore, while Greece 
shows what happens in the absence of political will.
Singapore Moved the Economy from Developing 
to Developed Status in a Single Generation
Professional management of public commercial assets has been a core 
component of Singapore’s strategy to move the economy from develop￾ing to developed status in a single generation. In 1971, the newly inde￾pendent state of Singapore created the Monetary Authority and delegated 
management of the asset side of its public sector balance sheet. Its com￾mercial assets thereby became the management responsibility of profes￾sionals inside independent public wealth funds.
Goh Keng Swee, a former Finance Minister and the deputy prime 
minister of Singapore at the time, explained why Singapore chose an 
independent institution with private sector discipline and governance 
tools borrowed from the private sector to manage commercial assets: 
“One of the tragic illusions that many countries entertain is the notion that 
politicians and civil servants can successfully perform entrepreneurial func￾tions. It is curious that, in the face of overwhelming evidence to the contrary, 
the belief persists.”39
Since then, Singapore’s wealth management funds—Temasek and the 
Singapore Government Investment Corp (GIC)—have helped fund the 
economic development of the city-state, while the Housing and 
Development Board (HDB) has provided around 80% of its citizens 
with afordable and well-maintained public housing.40
Te unorthodox mix of socialist economic support of infrastructure 
investments, export-oriented industrialisation, and increased education 
and investment in the people has been one explanation behind the stark 
growth that Singapore experienced. A strong centralised state which for￾mulated and coordinated economic policy while encouraging free trade 
and a liberal market economy that attracted substantial foreign direct 
investments. State power with very little dissent and authoritarian and 
participatory institutional mechanisms managed almost to eradicate pov￾erty completely while creating unprecedented economic growth.
15 What Should Governments Do with Public Commercial Assets?224
15.6 Conclusion
Te traditional counterargument, that mobilising non-tax revenues is a 
complex and time-consuming process, often resulting in a signifcant 
value giveaway, is incorrect. Tis is mainly because generating revenues 
from public assets is not necessarily about divesting but developing and 
managing assets more professionally—just as a country would beneft 
more from the value added to the economy by refning its natural 
resources and developing the capacity to produce the entire range of 
downstream products, instead of simply exporting the raw material at a 
much lower value.
To develop and manage assets professionally, it is essential to frame the 
process in fnancial terms with well-defned fnancial targets and a clear 
timetable. Te main challenge is to improve the weak governance prac￾tices arising from opposing objectives, political interference, and a lack of 
public scrutiny.
Notes
1. Transition cost estimates for a net zero transition by 2050 by McKinsey & 
Company (2022) include both mitigation costs and adaptation costs. It is 
an estimate of not public or fscal costs but the additional capital spending 
required to achieve net zero by 2050. Tis estimates capital spending on 
physical assets for energy and land-use systems in the net-zero transition 
between 2021 and 2050 would amount to about USD 275 trillion, or 
USD 9.2 trillion per year on average, an annual increase of as much as 
USD 3.5 trillion from today. Te Net Zero 2050 scenario of the Network 
for Greening the Financial System (NGFS) has an even chance of limiting 
global worming to 1.5˚C. It assumes emissions are cut by about half by 
2030 and to net zero by 2050. USD 3.5 trillion is 3.5% of 2022 GDP.
2. Megginson, W. and Netter, J. (2001) “From State to Market: A Survey 
of Empirical Studies on Privatization.” Journal of Economic Literature, 
39 (2): 321–389.
3. IMF (2020) “Fiscal Monitor - April 2020: Chapter 3: State-owned 
Enterprises: Te other government”. IMF, April 2020.
I. Ball et al.225
4. Song, Z., K. Storesleten, and F. Zilibotti. 2011. “Growing Like China.” 
American Economic Review 101 (February): pp. 202–41.
5. Megginson, W. and Netter, J. (2001) “From State to Market: A Survey 
of Empirical Studies on Privatization.” Journal of Economic Literature, 
39 (2): pp. 321–389.as well as Vining, A. and Boardman, A. (1992) 
“Ownership versus Competition: Efciency in Public Enterprise”. Public 
Choice Vol. 73, No. 2 (1992), pp. 205–239.
6. IMF (2020) “Fiscal Monitor - April 2020: Chapter 3: State-owned 
Enterprises: Te other government”. IMF, April 2020.
7. Parker, D. (2009) “Te Ofcial History of Privatisation, Volume 1: Te 
formative years 1970-1987.” Routledge, January 29, 2009.
8. Ofwat (2023).” Investments in the water industry”. Ofwat, 11 
March 2022.
9. Plimmer, G., Hollywood, E. (2022). “Sewage spills highlight decades of 
under-investment at England’s water companies.” Financial Times, 
December 28, 2021.
10. Lex (2023). “Tames Water: bursting balance sheet requires large fnan￾cial plug”. Financial Times, June 28, 2023.
11. Stantec (2021).” Storm Overfow Evidence Project”. Water UK, 
November 2021.
12. Ofwat (2023). “Ofwat announces new powers on water company divi￾dends”. Ofwat, 20 March 2023.
13. Ball, I. and Detter, D. (2017) “Lessons from New Zealand on fscal dis￾cipline”. Financial Times, October 11, 2017.
14. Ball, I. “Public Finance Act has proved its worth in good times and bad”. 
Stuf, July 25, 2019.
15. Ball, I. and Detter, D. (2020) “Better Accounting Can Get Us Trough 
the Pandemic.” Bloomberg, December 19, 2020.
16. Florio, M. (2002) “A state without ownership: the welfare impact of 
British privatisations 1979–1997” Working Paper No. 24.2002, Milan: 
Dipartimento di Economia Politica e Aziendale, Universita degli Studi 
di Milano.
17. IMF (2020) “Fiscal Monitor - April 2020: Chapter 3: State-owned 
Enterprises: Te other government”. IMF, April 2020.
18. Kowalski, P, Buge, M. Sztajerowska, M. and Egeland, M. (2013) “State￾Owned Enterprises: Trade Efects and Policy Implications.” OECD 
Trade Policy Paper 147, OECD Publishing, April 24, 2013.
15 What Should Governments Do with Public Commercial Assets?226
19. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development - 
UNCTAD. (2018). “World Investment Report 2019: Special Economic 
Zones.” United Nations, August 9, 2018.
20. Te Economist (2020) “Xi Jinping is trying to remake the Chinese econ￾omy”. Te Economist, August 15, 2020.
21. Lardy, N. (1998). “China’s Unfnished Economic Revolution”. 
Brookings, July 1, 1998.
22. Farrel, D. et al. (2006). “Putting China’s capital to work: Te Value of 
Financial System Reform”. McKinsey Global Institute, May 2006.
23. http://www.huijin- inv.cn/huijineng/About_Us/index.shtml
24. http://en.sasac.gov.cn/sasacaboutus.html
25. McGregor, R. (2010). “Te Party: Te Secret World of China’s 
Communist Rulers”. Haper, June 8, 2010.
26. Pettis, M. (2022). “China’s Overextended Real Estate Sector Is a Systemic 
Problem”. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, August 
24, 2022.
27. Borst, Nicholas. (2023) “China’s Balance Sheet Challenge”. China 
Leadership Monitor, March 1, 2023.
28. BIS (2022) “Credit to the Non-Financial Sector,” Bank for International 
Settlements, December 5, 2022. https://www.bis.org/statistics/tot￾credit.htm
29. SASAC (2022) “Comprehensive Report of the State Council on the 
Management of State-owned Assets in FY 2021”. SASAC, November 
16, 2022.
30. Jurzyk, E. and Ruane, C. (2021) “Resource Misallocation Among Listed 
Firms in China: Te Evolving Role of State-Owned Enterprises,” IMF, 
March 12, 2021.
31. Borst, N. (2023).
32. Lardy, N. (2019) “Te State Strikes Back: Te End of Economic Reform 
in China?” PIIE, January, 2019.
33. Chan, T et al. (2022) “China’s SOEs Are Stuck in a Debt Trap,” S&P 
Global Ratings, September 20, 2022.
34. Horn, S et al. (2023) “China as an International Lender of Last Resort”. 
American Economic Association, March 27, 2023.
35. Brown-Humes, C. (1999) “Welcome to the ways of the market”. 
Financial Times, November 12 1999.
36. Swedish Government, Investor Presentation 2001.
37. Tomas, L. (2020) “Greek Rail System’s Debt Adds to Economic Woes”. 
New York Times, July 20, 2010.
I. Ball et al.227
38. Andreas Georgiou, the former head of the Hellenic Statistical Authority 
(ELSTAT), has spent more than a decade trying to clear his name from 
an accusation by the Greek government. Georgiou was the head of 
ELSTAT between 2010 and 2015 and stands accused by the government 
of falsifying budget data in order to justify the country’s frst interna￾tional bailout, an accusation for which has already been cleared twice 
and appealed to the Greek Supreme Court, requesting that it refer a 
question to the European Court to clarify what European law provides 
regarding the responsibility of statistical authority heads, but his request 
was denied. In March 2023, Te European Court of Human Rights 
(ECHR) declared that Greece had violated the right of Andreas Georgiou, 
to a fair hearing, saying that Greece must if requested provide redress for 
the violation of the applicant’s rights.
39. Goh, K.S., Preface to Te Economics of Modernization, May 1972.
40. Amin-Salem, H. et al. (2019) “Putting Public assets to Work”. Citi 
Perspectives, October 17, 2019.
15 What Should Governments Do with Public Commercial Assets?© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 229
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5_16
16
Managing Assets Better: The Role 
of Public Wealth Funds
16.1 Necessity Is the Mother of Invention
Managing commercial assets, like accrual accounting, is not rocket sci￾ence; it is done daily in the private sector. But an equity culture and a 
fnancial perspective do not come naturally to governments and govern￾ment bureaucracies. It has to be set up as a separate part of the system. 
Te trigger for setting up a professional management of public commer￾cial assets has usually been a fnancial necessity or a crisis that has forced 
decision-makers to see public fnancial management from a fnancial 
perspective.
It was the case of Singapore in the 1970s setting up its asset managers 
Temasek and GIC, New Zealand at the end of the 1980s being the frst 
government to introduce accrual accounting as a decision-making tool, 
and Sweden in the 1990s as the frst European government to manage its 
public commercial assets as if privately owned rather than deferring to 
wholesale divestitures.
Better management of government assets as a whole could earn addi￾tional revenues greater than most developed countries collect in corpo￾rate tax or pay to service their debt. Tis is part of the secret as to why 
Singapore can aford such low taxes and yet develop the entire economy 230
from a developing to a developed country in one generation. In a post￾COVID-19 world, this efort could be critical as it could also not only 
help develop and grow cities and countries—without using taxes – as has 
been demonstrated in several places from Hong Kong to Hamburg. It 
could also help pay for both climate mitigation and adaptation.
16.2 Local Government Development
At the local level, real estate is by far the most signifcant asset segment 
frequently comprising the real estate related to transport assets such as 
railways, airports and ports, as well as former industrial areas within or 
close to city centres.
MTR Corporation Limited, the Hong Kong railway company, is one 
of the most prominent examples. Te Hong Kong government estab￾lished Mass Transit Railway Corporation as government-owned statutory 
corporation in 1972, to build and operate a mass transit railway system 
to meet the growing public transport needs. Te government had made 
the observation in Japan, among other places, that wherever subway sys￾tems have been built, property and land increase in value. Tis opened up 
the possibility that a part of the cost of providing stations could be met 
through arrangements which permit the development of station super￾structures and surroundings. 1
Tis led to the intention of building the railway system using the real 
estate to pay for the development according to the ‘property-driven rail￾way’ development model. Te government of Hong Kong, through its 
company MTR, built an entire subway system the size of New York City 
without using taxes but rather by developing the properties adjacent to its 
stations with what was later called the ‘rail plus property model’.2
Originally, it was internally estimated that property revenues would 
account for 20% of the total proceeds. But as the government saw the 
fnancial benefts, it continued approving the assignment of commercial 
land to MTR, aiming to maximise exploitation of the commercial 
possibilities.
Te original argument was that MTR could make good use of land 
resources of the property built on top of the railway station and its 
I. Ball et al.231
surroundings. Also, the property and the railway station would be built 
simultaneously, thereby reducing the development disturbance during 
the project’s construction. Revenue from property development was not 
originally envisaged as being used to fnance the railway’s capital cost but 
as a contingency reserve and to improve its cash fow.
However, the proportion of property development income became 
increasingly important until property revenue accounted for 40% of 
MTR’s total revenue each year since the late 1990s. 3
In the UK, the government has created a separate real estate com￾pany  – London and Continental Railway. LCR has learned from the 
MTR’s ‘rail-plus-property-model’ and successfully developed areas 
around the stations. King’s Cross in London stands as a good example. 
Tis was once a derelict site in central London but has been developed 
into a desirable place for local residents and international and local com￾panies. LCR also developed the International Quarter of the Olympic 
Village for the 2012 Olympic Games and thereby paid for some of the 
cost of organising the games without using taxes.
When deregulating the railways in Sweden, the incumbent govern￾ment monopoly was broken up into diferent operational parts, such as 
the cargo and passenger business, to enable competition and attract pri￾vate sector investments. All the real estate previously owned by the for￾mer monopoly was consequently demerged into a separate 
company—Jernhusen—directly owned by the government. Once inde￾pendent from the railway operations, with a board and management of 
professional real estate developers, vast development opportunities 
became obvious in the newly established separate balance sheet that had 
hitherto been either hidden or prevented from being realised due to con￾cerns from the operational management prioritising the running of the 
railway. Large development projects in the major cities of Stockholm, 
Göteborg and Malmö were completed around and above the major rail￾way stations and decking over railway tracks in the central business dis￾tricts, creating substantial additional housing and commercial real 
estate assets.
Also, a disused railway yard area in central Stockholm was turned into 
a whole new innovation district and residential district while the com￾pany helped fund some major national infrastructure investments, 
16 Managing Assets Better: The Role of Public Wealth Funds232
including doubling the capacity of the railway infrastructure by expand￾ing its bottleneck in Stockholm.
With the development of standardised shipping containers (‘contain￾erisation’), especially after the second world war, the ports sector was 
completely transformed in almost a single generation. Highly mecha￾nised container transfers resulted in some ports’ decline and others’ rise. 
In general, containerization caused inland ports on waterways incapable 
of receiving deep-draft ship trafc to decline in favour of large seaports, 
which then built vast container terminals next to deep oceanfront har￾bours instead of the dock front warehouses that had formerly handled 
break bulk cargo. Tis meant that the traditional ports integrated into 
city centres were abandoned for wasteland areas closer to the ocean, leav￾ing attractive city areas ready for development, such as Canary Wharf 
in London.
Hamburg in Germany and Copenhagen in Denmark led the way in 
redeveloping these abandoned urban districts without using tax money, 
creating professional Urban Wealth Funds (UWFs). Hamburg redevel￾oped its old harbour, a 2.4 km2
 large inner-city district, under the aus￾pices of the local holding company ‘HafenCity Hamburg Gmbh’. It 
developed seven thousand residential units and ofces for some 35 thou￾sand people, while it paid for schools, universities and kindergartens, as 
well as a landmark concert hall.
Te Copenhagen UWF ‘By og Havn I/S’ (City and Port) took over 
and developed both the old harbour and a military garrison in the city 
centre. With a total area twice that of Hamburg, or some 5  km2
 the 
Copenhagen holding company is the most extensive UWF and urban 
development project in Europe and has resulted in more than 33,000 
new residential housing units, a hundred thousand workspaces, and a 
new university for more than twenty thousand students, as well as new 
parks and retail and cultural facilities. With the fnancial surplus from its 
operations, the UWF has been able to help fund part of the extension of 
the local metro system and other infrastructure investments required by 
the developments and the city.
Te critical question with any such development is the ability to build 
capacity for professional management. Te management should have the 
skills of any equivalent private sector holding company. Such capacity 
I. Ball et al.233
comes at a cost, which is why there is a need for a certain scale of the 
portfolio under management to aford the relevant cost structure. Later, 
we will discuss what is required to build such a holding company and 
how to set it up.
Of course, the faster and easier route would be to sell the entire har￾bour or the individual properties adjacent to or above the stations to a 
private-sector developer, alternatively, manage the development inside a 
government bureaucracy.
Selling a property with such obvious development potential without 
frst capturing the upside by developing the assets, is not dissimilar to a 
country owning natural resources such as oil, and only exporting the raw 
oil without frst developing any of the downstream value-adding indus￾tries domestically in order to capture as much as possible of the value 
added before exporting. Te economy in the country would be deprived 
of the upside that is derived from the development and almost literally 
giving it away to the beneft of another country’s economic growth.
Te challenges with developing commercial projects inside a govern￾ment bureaucracy are several. Without the separate balance sheet of a 
limited liability company that could be allowed to fail, delegating respon￾sibility and accountability to professional management, creating the 
equity culture and incentive system that make up the private sector disci￾pline of a commercial operation would be difcult. Furthermore, the lack 
of commercial independence would also make it difcult to recruit rele￾vant professionals and fund the development in a commercial way. Just as 
with developing natural resources, it is best done by setting up the rele￾vant independent commercial outft to manage the extraction and 
development.
With real estate, this often leads to governments teaming up with the 
private sector in what is called a public-private partnership (PPP) or pri￾vate fnance initiative (PFI). Tis is often a long-term arrangement 
between a government and private sector institutions, using private capi￾tal to fnance government projects. Tis is structured so that borrowing 
for the project does not appear on the balance sheet of the public-sector 
body seeking to make the capital investment. Te private entity fnances, 
constructs, or manages a project in return for a promised stream of 
16 Managing Assets Better: The Role of Public Wealth Funds234
payments directly from government or indirectly from users over the pro￾jected period of the contract. In essence it is the the private entity that 
takes on the commercial risk and the management of the project, while 
the ownership is formally still in the hands of the government. As com￾mercial agreements go, the party that takes the risk will also take the 
potential upside from the project. Whether a government sells outright 
or develops an asset without having the capacity to manage commercial 
risk, it will inevitably lead to an undue transfer of public wealth to the 
private sector.
Te alternative would be to encourage the development of indepen￾dent capacity, as with the example of oil exploration and development, to 
refne domestically and then export a range of downstream products at a 
signifcantly higher price. Te cost of building this capacity must be 
weighed against the value-added gained, including its impact on the 
economy and society.
16.3 Even Selling Assets Requires 
a Professional Institution
Even with a government ambition of outright sale of the portfolio of 
public commercial assets, it is critical to undertake such an exercise at an 
arms-length from politics. It would do this in a holding company that 
can use all the private sector tools to choose, entirely on commercial 
grounds, the best timing and process of divestiture. Te essential difer￾ence is illustrated when a government requires cash for the budget. Selling 
an asset in haste that has been identifed as surplus within a government 
department is at a commercial disadvantage from the start. In contrast, 
requesting a dividend from a holding company can be delivered from the 
company’s existing balance sheet without necessarily selling an asset, at a 
time that may not be the best moment from a pricing perspective.
Te bad-bank concept is a case in point that has been used with great 
success in the past by governments to sell of commercial assets. Separating 
commercial asset governance from the core banking operation has become 
a useful solution for governments when taking over individual banks or 
an entire banking system. Tis model has been used since the US Savings 
I. Ball et al.235
& Loans crisis in the 1980s, from the Swedish and Chinese banking cri￾ses in the 1990s to the more recent banking crisis in Europe following 
the GFC.
Te concept is simple. Te bank divides its assets into two categories, 
the frst is the troubled assets, such as nonperforming loans and busi￾nesses it wants to exit, as it seeks to lessen risk and deleverage the balance 
sheet. What is left are the good assets that represent the ongoing business 
of the core bank, which needs to return to its usual role in the fnancial 
system, extending credit.
In its most popular version, the bad-bank model is a separate asset 
management company (AMC) with an independent balance sheet sepa￾rate from the balance sheet of the healthy part of the bank. Te AMC 
should have an efcient and focused management that has clear incen￾tives for portfolio reduction, to maximize the value of bad assets within a 
certain limited time frame, so as not to become a permanent fxture in 
the business community.4
In many respects, such a vehicle is very similar to a Public Wealth Fund 
in that it is borrowing all the tools from the private sector. Te diference 
is that a PWF should not have a limited life time, but serve as an inter￾generational vehicle transmitting wealth to future generations.
For all intents and purposes, the PWF should be structured just as any 
holding company in the private sector, be it a private equity fund or a 
private holding company. Tese private entities might be listed vehicles, 
which may not be conceivable for a PWF in many countries. Nevertheless, 
the ambition is to emulate the best international standards of listed com￾panies including corporate governance, transparency, and incentive 
structure, in order to best serve society.
Securum—The Swedish Experience
Sweden’s taxpayers eventually emerged rather well from the Swedish 
banking crisis between 1990 to 1994, thanks to the government’s ability 
to structure the process and delegate the responsibility to independent 
institutions. Tis was achieved through the creation of ‘Bankstödsnämnden’ 
16 Managing Assets Better: The Role of Public Wealth Funds236
an institution that took over the failed banks Nordbanken and 
Götabanken.
Te Swedish government set up Securum, the ‘bad bank’, an indepen￾dent holding company or AMC, that took over the troubled debt and the 
collateral behind the debt, which was subsequently converted into own￾ership of the underlying corporates and real estate assets. Many of the 
assets were already unwound by the summer of 1994, resulting in fve 
operating companies and three real estate companies being divested 
through Initial Public Oferings (IPOs), after comprehensive restructur￾ing and transformation. By the summer of 1997, Securum itself could be 
wound down.5
Furthermore, with the sale of the government’s stake in the ‘good 
bank’, the Nordbanken and Götabanken banks merged into what was to 
become the restructured bank Nordea. Nordea was ultimately sold back 
into the private sector at a considerable proft in 2013.6
Securum was tasked to manage the assets taken over from the failed 
entities and ultimately sell them at the best possible price after having 
restructured and reorganised them to form viable businesses and to liqui￾date unviable parts of the portfolio.
One important strategic question for the government was how long a 
period Securum was to be given before being liquidated. Te time frame 
should enable Securum to develop the assets in order to sell them at the 
best possible time and the highest possible price. A strategic decision on 
the lifetime of the holding company was required in order to fnd the best 
balance between minimising the costs to the government and maximis￾ing the amount that could be repaid to the state when the company was 
wound up.7
Some additional lessons from this experience include:
First, move fast as businesses in need of equity support must determine 
quickly whether and how frms could be reorganized concerning both 
operation and fnancial structure and re-emerge as a going concern, as 
well as if necessary close down moribund parts of the business.
Second, maintain commercial principles. Always invest to maintain 
competitive neutrality. Te terms of the investment must be structured in 
a way that gives the company and its owners no grounds to request more 
I. Ball et al.237
state funding than is necessary, combined with the incentives to facilitate 
a swift exit. Yet the terms must be sufcient to ensure that the operations 
can return to proftability without additional government assistance.
Tird, develop an explicit policy on public ownership. A taxpayer stake 
is not a budget expense but an investment and should be treated as such. 
Te government’s aims as an owner are to ensure proftability and fnan￾cial strength and exit from unwanted ownership at the right time. 
European governments are typically nervous about anything that feels 
like privatisation.
Fourth, establish an independent holding company at arms-length 
from short-term political infuence with sole ownership responsibility, 
including for the exit strategy.
Te entire process is a political minefeld and requires a clarity of 
thought about each step and openness in external communication in 
order to maintain the trust of all stakeholders involved. Such a holding 
company can only maintain its freedom to act independently if it retains 
the backing of the political parties and public opinion.
All stakeholders that intend to seek equity support from the govern￾ment should frst agree that the economic pain will need to be shared 
between shareholders, management and employees, or else risk being 
seen as taking advantage of a crisis resulting in a public backlash from 
taxpayers, the ultimate stakeholders paying the bill.
Bank failures are felt by society as a whole. Te sudden ownership by 
the state of an extensive portfolio of commercial assets makes it very clear 
that such a fnancial perspective is paramount. It should be no diferent 
from other commercial assets owned by the government. Every asset 
should be developed to its best use. Tis is just like a country with plenty 
of forest assets does not aim to export only timber but encourages the 
development of the paper & pulp industry, as well as other downstream 
products such as furniture and building material. Everything possible 
should be done to capture as much as possible of the wealth created in the 
entire value chain, instead of giving away that upside to benefciaries out￾side of the domestic economy. A government should not leave money on 
the table to individual entrepreneurs, from assets that all taxpayers own.
16 Managing Assets Better: The Role of Public Wealth Funds238
16.4 Principles for Governing Public, 
Commercial Assets
In a market economy, the government should ideally act only as an inde￾pendent referee to reduce monopoly profts and inefciencies, lower 
prices for end-users, increase investment and productivity, and encourage 
competition in the various sectors. Tis stance is irreconcilable with the 
government having direct involvement in commercial enterprises that 
risk crowding out private sector initiatives. However, when the govern￾ment nevertheless already owns commercial assets or is required to take 
over a private sector company, it needs to borrow all the available tools 
used in the private sector to manage these companies and that is best 
done through an independent holding company (Fig. 16.1).
Corporate governance is necessary to align and coordinate the interests 
of the upper management with those of the shareholders. In large frms 
and especially in frms owned by the public sector, there is a considerable 
gap between owners and management. Tis ‘principal–agent’ problem 
can arise between upper management (the ‘agent’) and the shareholders/ 
the ‘principals’, that in the case of SOEs, ultimately is the taxpayers. Te 
Fig. 16.1 The three pillars of professional governance of public assets
I. Ball et al.239
shareholders/taxpayers and upper management may have diferent inter￾ests. Te taxpayers typically want efciency and productivity that benefts 
the economy as a whole and fnancial proft that could supplement the 
budget instead of taxes or austerity.
Te upper management may be driven at least in part by other motives, 
such as their fnancial compensation. Political masters are often seen as 
poor representatives or agents for the taxpayers, as they risk abusing their 
authority over SOEs for self-interested reasons.8
Te weak governance practices with public sector assets arise from 
conficting objectives, political interference, lack of transparency and a 
weak capacity for public scrutiny. Empirical evidence on how a poor cor￾porate governance environment negatively afects the performance of 
public commercial assets has been supported by numerous empirical 
studies.9
Te development of the OECD Guidelines on Corporate Governance 
of State-Owned Enterprises is a complement to the OECD Principles of 
Corporate Governance, with recommendations to governments on how 
to ensure that SOEs operate efciently, transparently and in an account￾able manner.10 For quite some time, they were the internationally agreed 
standard for how governments should exercise the state ownership func￾tion to avoid the pitfalls of passive ownership and excessive state 
intervention.
Importantly, the fnancial perspective is missing from the OECD pol￾icy guidelines. Tis is undoubtedly partly due to the absence of accrual 
accounting in the public sector. Accrual accounting would give all stake￾holders a better understanding not only of the value of all public sector 
assets and liabilities. It would also give a better understanding of how 
more efciently managed assets would improve net worth and productiv￾ity and generate dividends for the government budget. All of these are of 
signifcant beneft to society.
Given the inherent weakness of public sector corporate governance 
practices, governments must pay special attention to the three fundamen￾tal principles of transparency, clear objectives and political insulation for 
the holding company and the underlying asset to mitigate any contradic￾tion and confict of interest.
16 Managing Assets Better: The Role of Public Wealth Funds240
Transparency—Achieving the same standards of accounting, transpar￾ency, risk management and corporate governance as for a listed holding 
company, including IFRS accounting (GAAP in the US), timely quar￾terly and annual reports, with all fnancial reports available online.
Clear objectives—Having value maximization as the sole objective is 
paramount. Anything else would distort competition and open the door 
to fnancial failure, waste, and corruption.
Political insulation—the portfolio should be kept at arm’s length from 
short-term political infuence, including avoiding political appointees at 
every level as well as on the board/supervisory board.
Political insulation would also serve as protection for politicians. 
Clearly, delegating responsibility and accountability to a holding com￾pany board would protect the government since it lacks the tools to han￾dle fnancial and commercial risk. Successfully insulating the holding 
company and the portfolio will also be the best foundation for recruiting 
the necessary talent from the private sector. Market-based incentive sys￾tems are vital but secondary to the ability to work in a truly independent 
and professional environment. Market-based but not market-leading, as 
expressed in the Swedish government policy guidelines for SOEs, is the 
balance to make the compensation politically acceptable.11
Te three principles must be equally strong and tight for the wheel to 
turn smoothly and with minimal wear. Otherwise, the wheel soon bends. 
Political independence without transparency will create a behemoth lack￾ing checks and balances; political independence without a clear objective 
becomes a wrecking ball against fair competition and efcient capital 
allocation. Keeping a clear objective is not possible without both trans￾parency and political independence. Each principle must be carefully 
refected in the governance structure and continuously upgraded and 
refned with the test of time.
16.5 Recruiting the Supervisory Board
Introducing professional governance of government-owned assets requires 
politically difcult choices for governments. Te technical issues are rela￾tively simple and are managed daily in the private sector. Te ability to 
I. Ball et al.241
Fig. 16.2 Supervisory board recruitment
solve the technical issues, however, depends very much upon the will of 
the political leadership. An indication of the degree of independence and 
professionalism can be inferred from how non-executive directors are 
recruited and kept free from short-term political infuence at the holding 
company and the portfolio company levels (Fig. 16.2).
In the commercial world, the aim is to create value based on three 
fundamental strategies: operational, capital structure and business devel￾opment. Ideally, each Non-Executive Director should have a background 
in at least one of these areas to be helpful to the board, in addition to 
general senior corporate governance experience. Each should also be able 
to share and debate issues from their wealth of knowledge and deep 
expertise. Tese attributes will make the board a useful tool and give it a 
competitive advantage when developing the business. Optimising risk is 
required to maximise value and explains why expertise with fnancial 
control must always be included in the board’s composition.
Operational experience can be found in people having a relevant back￾ground and track record of improving the margins in similar businesses, 
combined with the general skills in overseeing a complex business. 
Depending on the current situation that a company is in, the supervisory 
board might beneft from the experience of a senior executive from a 
related industry, an industry that ideally is more advanced in its 
development.
16 Managing Assets Better: The Role of Public Wealth Funds242
Optimising capital structure is a never-ending struggle for the best mix 
of fnancial instruments and for maintaining a balance between debt and 
equity in a constantly evolving fnancial market. Recruiting a Chief 
Financial Ofcer from a similar-sized business or someone with a strong 
corporate fnance background can be very valuable.
Te importance of business development with public commercial 
assets is a matter of streamlining the business and focusing on the core 
activity, as government-owned companies tend to become conglomer￾ates. To achieve more efcient use of capital, they must focus on their 
primary business and divest non-core assets.
Candidates covering this strategy would have experience managing of 
similar size and complexity of transactions resulting from mergers and 
acquisitions at an international bank or industrial company.
Minimising fnancial risk, however, must never be underestimated. 
Robust fnancial control requires the best possible expertise available at 
all times, regardless of the development phase and market situation. 
Financial control can never be achieved with hindsight. Like personal 
health, the groundwork is made years in advance. Te experience required 
for this potential non-executive director is often found in senior people 
in international auditing frms or with the CFO of a business of similar 
size and complexity.
Boards tasked with managing a commercial business are not demo￾cratic institutions that require equal population representation. Tey 
deliver good outcomes only if stafed by individuals who know how a 
commercial business works. Persons with a background such as politics 
or academia and without relevant commercial experience in maximising 
value or minimising risk would often fnd it difcult to contribute. It is 
rather like a football team or a symphony orchestra. Every Non-Executive 
Director must be able to add value to the enterprise and enhance the 
dynamics of the board as a team.
Te role of the chair, as captain of the team, requires an ability to 
inspire a concerted efort to achieve the best possible commercial results. 
In addition, the chair should be able to communicate with both com￾mercial and public stakeholders. Tis would not require a political back￾ground, merely entrepreneurial networking, and communication skills.
I. Ball et al.243
As governments face unprecedented fnancial challenges from recent 
global economic shocks and the consequences of climate and demo￾graphic change, the need to mobilise all available resources is urgent. 
Terefore, recruiting professionals as Non-Executive Directors to manage 
the portfolio of public commercial assets will help increase fscal space 
and reduce fscal risk.
16.6 Setting Up the Management Team
Apart from a board of directors legally responsible for the portfolio, the 
holding company also needs to attract the right business management 
talent to execute day-to-day business. Tis requires relevant incentives. 
But even more fundamental to attracting the appropriate professionals is 
to demonstrate that the portfolio will be fully commercial and indepen￾dent from short-term political meddling. Moreover, the challenges of set￾ting up a holding company in the public sector are generally similar to 
those in the private sector.
Te initial management team could often be a limited group of around 
ten to ffteen professionals, depending on the breadth of the portfolio. 
Flexibility is gained by hiring external advisers on-demand, able to assist 
on a project-by-project basis. Te team could then grow over time at a 
measured pace by taking on more functions internally that were previ￾ously outsourced. Apart from the senior management, each sector should 
be covered by an investment executive, supported by one or two invest￾ment managers. In addition, the team members should have interna￾tional experience in the relevant industry, either as executives or as 
advisers with international professional service frms.
A network of senior industrial advisers with experience from the rele￾vant industries could also be a valuable support to both the management 
and the board, as non-executive directors on the boards of each holding 
company.
Te work will be similar to what they have been doing in the private 
sector, apart from the risk of a constant drift towards a political agenda. 
16 Managing Assets Better: The Role of Public Wealth Funds244
Terefore, the government-owned holding company must pay special 
attention to the three exceptional principles, that will ultimately deter￾mine success or failure for a commercial business in the public sector.
16.7 The Basics of Developing Public 
Commercial Assets
Managing commercial assets is not rocket science, it is done in the private 
sector daily. As discussed above, a few things need to be in place to create 
the environment, culture and institution to make it possible.
Given the political ownership, some particular issues need to be con￾sidered. Te immediate objective is to consolidate all the relevant public 
commercial assets within the jurisdiction of the appropriate administra￾tive level within a holding company structure.
As discussed, economies of scale are essential in fnancially supporting 
the cost of the entire efort and enabling the use of the best available 
expertise. With economies of scale and by consolidating a broader port￾folio, there will be diferent maturities of assets within the portfolio, 
which creates a certain amount of self-funding that will optimise the risk 
and maximise the opportunity.
Operational assets and corporates tend to become unwieldy conglom￾erates with poor capital allocation, often overburdened by non-core 
assets. Tese enterprises end up as hoarders of assets with poor returns on 
capital partly because they can only raise additional equity through a very 
painstaking political process in which their commercial requirement for 
additional money will compete with the need for social spending and 
other public welfare requirements.
Consequently, managers of government-owned enterprises are incen￾tivised to minimise earnings to avoid paying dividends altogether. Te 
result is that public enterprises end up as ill-defned and opaque opera￾tions with poor returns on capital and wasteful capital allocation. With 
operational assets, it is essential to benchmark operational and fnancial 
efciency with private sector peers to better understand the performance 
gap with the best-in-class examples.
I. Ball et al.245
Proper accounting also allows the government to optimise the capital 
structure and set up a relevant dividend policy in line with its private sec￾tor competitors.
Trough business development, it will be critical to maintain focus on 
the core business and invest only when proftable.
Te real estate segment has seldom been assigned any market value and 
hence never considered its best use. Tis is why an indicative real estate 
valuation would help produce a comprehensive business plan. Tis plan 
provides an assessment of all assets, including those assets that are unused 
or used by third parties, as well as those directly used in the provision of 
public services, but which can either be relocated to more cost-efective/
benefcial locations or for which alternative uses can be found.
All assets beneft from a commercial framework to help optimise their 
most efective use. Rationalising and focusing this portfolio involves 
determining which assets have reached a fair value and would beneft 
from timely disposal rather than being further developed. Tis is only 
possible inside a holding company so that any disposal can be done at the 
best point in the relevant market cycle as part of the broader business 
plan to maximise the yield across the entire portfolio.
Monies generated from realisation activities should be frst made avail￾able as a source of funding for achieving the business plan. Tey could 
ultimately fund other government requirements, such as infrastructure 
investments.
16.8 A Holding Company Is a Tool That Can 
Be Used for Good or Bad
Just like a weapon in the hands of the police or military, good governance 
can be used to protect society. In the wrong hands, it can also be used 
against those interests. Powerful tools require a robust legal framework, 
supportive culture and awareness among its citizens to prevent them 
from being misused.
European countries have experimented with managing public wealth 
for a wide range of purposes and with varied results for almost a century. 
16 Managing Assets Better: The Role of Public Wealth Funds246
IRI, or Istituto per la Ricostruzione Industriale (Institute for Industrial 
Reconstruction) in Italy, was one of Europe’s frst National Wealth Funds. 
It was set up in 1933 during the Depression to restructure and refnance 
its portfolio of assets and provide capital for new industrial investment, 
together with the private sector. Te aim was to use the dividends from 
IRI to pay for modern infrastructure—including roads, cheap energy, 
and some vital industries.12
One year later, almost half of the share capital in Italy and three￾quarters of the Italian economy had ended up owned by IRI.13
After WW2, US support and the Marshall Plan aid helped Italy 
become one of Europe’s leading industrial nations. Between 1958 and 
1963 the country enjoyed industrial growth rates of more than 8% per 
year. IRI played a substantial role in the restructuring of the Italian econ￾omy and for quite some time, was seen as a positive example of a hybrid 
of state intervention in the economy as it allowed for cooperation between 
public and private capital, with many holdings listed on the stock market 
and issuing corporate bonds. However, the objective of IRI was political 
and not commercial, with inefciencies and policy objectives, such as 
maintaining full employment, at substantial fscal costs for the taxpayers.
By 1980, IRI was one of the largest conglomerates in the world and 
the largest commercial grouping in Europe by sales. It had over a thou￾sand diferent holdings, ranging from the motorway system, telecom and 
Alitalia, the airline to banks, steel, and food companies, with over a mil￾lion employees.
IRI started selling some of its holdings in the 1980s and the process 
accelerated after the Tangentopoli investigation in 1992. Tis was a 
nationwide judicial investigation on political corruption, resulting in the 
demise of the political establishment of the so-called First Republic and 
the disappearance of many political parties, as well as some politicians 
and industry leaders who committed suicide after their crimes were 
exposed.14
By 2002 IRI was dissolved, and the last remaining assets in IRI were 
transferred to Cassa Depositi e Prestiti (CDP), a government bank for 
economic development. It stands to this day as an example of a PWF set 
up with good intentions and that most likely did well initially. With a 
lack of political insulation and anything but a commercial objective to 
I. Ball et al.247
maximise value, it soon became a leviathan that crowded out the private 
sector, through sheer dominance and corruption.
16.9 Singapore—Improving the Net Worth 
for Future Generations
Te combined market value of GIC and Temasek is more than twice the 
annual GDP of the city-state and contributes to growing the nation’s net 
worth to beneft future generations. Te strong balance sheet, where debt 
is used only to create an optimal capital structure, has consistently given 
the government the top credit rating—AAA—from the three leading 
credit-rating agencies.
Without any natural resources other than a favourable geographic 
location, Temasek, the Singaporean public wealth fund, has created a 
world-class holding company comparable to many private sector frms. 
What it lacks in natural resources, it has compensated for with an atti￾tude of grit and resourcefulness which helped develop several world-class 
companies and services such as SingTel (telecom), PSA (ports services), 
Singapore Airlines (transportation) and DBS (banking). At the same 
time, as previously noted, the Housing and Development Board has sup￾plied around 80% of the population with public housing.
Te main challenge for a small state such as Singapore with a highly 
successful player such as Temasek seems to have been for the government 
to create the right incentives to increase private-sector entrepreneurship 
in the economy and larger diversifcation of owners on the local stock 
exchange.
16.10 Conclusion
Rethinking how governments manage public assets is a moral goal as 
much as an economic and fnancial one. Making this change is politically 
difcult for governments in developed and developing countries. It 
16 Managing Assets Better: The Role of Public Wealth Funds248
involves a shift towards growing the economic pie rather than just focus￾ing on how to divide it.
Te technical issues are relatively simple and have been managed daily 
in the private sector—for many centuries. Te challenge remains political 
and depends entirely upon the will of the political leadership. But the 
evidence is clear: commercial management of assets by a professional 
PWF can deliver material gains.
Notes
1. Murakami, J. and Gregory, K. I. (2012). “Transit Value Capture: New 
Town Codevelopment Models and Land Market Updates in Tokyo and 
Hong Kong”. Value Capture and Land Policies, pp. 285–320.
2. Leong, L. (2016). Te ‘Rail plus Property’ model: Hong Kong’s success￾ful self-fnancing formula. McKinsey & Co Insights, June 2, 2016.
3. Aveline-Dubach, N., & Blandeau, G. (2019). “Te political economy of 
transit value capture: Te changing business model of the MTRC in 
Hong Kong.” Urban Studies.
4. Brenna, G. et al. (2009) “Understanding the bad bank”. McKinsey 
&Co, December 1, 2009.
5. Bergström, C. Englund, P. Torell, P. (2003). “Securum and the Way 
out of the Swedish Banking Crisis”. SNS—Center for Business and 
Policy Studies, May 2003.
6. Shanley, M. Nordenstam, S. (2013) “Sweden sells remaining stake in 
Nordea for $3.4 billion”. Reuters, September 25, 2013.
7. Bergström, C. Englund, P. Torell, P. (2003). “Securum and the Way 
out of the Swedish Banking Crisis”. SNS—Center for Business and 
Policy Studies, May 2003.
8. Wong, S. (2018). “Te State of Governance at State-Owned 
Enterprises”. IFC.
9. Estrin, S., Hanousek, J., Kocenda, E., & Svejnar, J. (2009). Te Efects 
of Privatization and Ownership in Transition Economies. Journal of 
Economic Literature 47(3), 699–728, and Megginson, W. L., & Netter, 
J.M. (2001). From State to Market: A Survey of Empirical Studies on 
Privatization. Journal of Economic Literature 39, 321–389 and Shleifer, 
A., & Vishny, R. (1997). A Survey of Corporate Governance. Journal of 
Finance, Vol. 52, pp., 737–783.
I. Ball et al.249
10. OECD (2015), OECD Guidelines on Corporate Governance of State￾Owned Enterprises, 2015 Edition, OECD.
11. Swedish Government (2009). “Guidelines for terms of employment for 
senior executives in state-owned companies.”
12. Blinkhorn, M. (1994) “Mussolini and Fascist Italy”. Routledge, 1994.
13. Toniolo, G. et al. (2013) “Te Oxford Handbook of the Italian Economy 
Since Unifcation”. Oxford University Press, 2013.
14. Vannucci, A. (2009). “Te Controversial Legacy of ‘Mani Pulite’: A 
Critical Analysis of Italian Corruption and Anti-Corruption Policies”. 
Bulletin of Italian Politics Vol. 1, No. 2, 2009.
16 Managing Assets Better: The Role of Public Wealth Funds© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 251
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5_17
17
Pensions and Other Liabilities: 
The Benefts of Disclosure 
and Management
In our discussion of the asset side of the public sector balance sheet, we 
identifed two important areas where better accounting can help govern￾ments improve their fnancial management to beneft those they serve.
Our starting point was that under-reporting of assets is endemic across 
governments and that this may result in major under-statements of assets 
on government balance sheets.
Better accounting for public assets brings more than just better fnan￾cial disclosure. It also opens up opportunities for better management of 
those assets and hence creates fscal space. Particularly in the case of prop￾erty, better management can also directly impact on the delivery of public 
policy, for example, in the delivery of housing or urban infrastructure, as 
we have seen in Singapore.
So our next question is: does better accounting for liabilities also 
deliver opportunities for improving fnancial management and for creat￾ing value for taxpayers? We have two main points.
First, we believe that it is essential to include non-debt liabilities and 
assets in fscal rules—hence our call for fnancial management rules or 
targets based on net worth, rather than net debt.
Second, we want to explore whether there are ways for governments to 
manage non-debt liabilities better—and more broadly, to consider 252
whether it is possible to create value by making better use of government 
balance sheet capacity, whether through improving fnances or assisting 
in other policy areas. Tis is the main focus of this chapter.
As we have noted in our earlier discussion of government balance 
sheets, we are interested in two types of balance sheet; the “conventional” 
balance sheet which described the current position of government based 
on its formal assets and liabilities, and the “comprehensive” balance sheet, 
which adds “implicit” assets and liabilities—respectively the present val￾ues of expected future government revenues and expected future costs of 
delivering public services. Te analysis in Chap. 10 demonstrates how 
over time the forecasts embodied in the comprehensive balance sheet 
translate into conventional assets and liabilities; in the case of the G7 
countries that we examined in detail, the outcome of this analysis was 
that there would need to be a considerable amount of “fscal consolida￾tion”—higher taxation, or reduced provision of services—if G7 govern￾ment balance sheets were to be solvent in 50 years’ time.
Our starting point in this chapter is to examine pensions, as these are 
the largest single category of non-debt obligations and take broadly simi￾lar forms wherever they are encountered.
But as our discussion of the comprehensive balance sheet illustrates, 
governments need to consider how to fnance not just existing formal 
commitments but also likely future commitments—the “implicit liabili￾ties”. Te same tools will apply to both.
17.1 How Pensions Appear on the Public 
Sector Balance Sheet
Broadly speaking, governments have two types of pension exposure, with 
diferent accounting consequences.1
Public sector employees will often be entitled to receive “defned ben￾eft” or “DB” pensions, where entitlements are linked to their employ￾ment income (e.g., “fnal salary” or “average salary’”) and their number of 
years of employment. Frequently such pensions are linked to infation. 
Tese pensions form a part of an employment contract and are legally 
I. Ball et al.253
binding based on the terms set out in that contract. Such pensions should 
be accounted for on the balance sheet, although in practice, treat￾ments vary.
Tere are also likely to be state pensions paid to citizens above a certain 
age along the lines of those introduced by Bismarck and now replicated 
widely worldwide. Tese are described as “contingent`’ in nature; they 
are not contractual, and terms can be changed as a matter of government 
policy. From an accounting perspective, these do not appear on the bal￾ance sheet. However, anticipated future pension obligations based upon 
policy assumptions form an important “implicit liability” on the compre￾hensive balance sheet.
Contractual pensions are debt-like obligations in that non-payment, 
or variation in terms of payment, is not an option.
Te value of pensions obligations on a balance sheet—whether public 
or private sector—will be driven by four main factors, which may change 
over time:
1. Pension scheme membership—for example, changes in employment 
levels, employees transitioning to retired status, retired employ￾ees dying.
2. “Mortality” assumptions, which determine for how many years pen￾sion scheme members are  likely to live and hence draw down 
their pensions.
3. Assumptions about salary growth and infation.
4. Te discount rate used to assess the present value of future obligations.
Readers of accounts are dependent on the inputs of the actuaries who 
are responsible for assessing these factors.
As pensions liabilities are very long-lived (potentially in excess of 
70 years), the value assigned to them on a balance sheet is highly depen￾dent on the discount rate applied. Tis is often a point of some contro￾versy. For example, IFRS rules require pensions liabilities to be discounted 
at a rate equivalent to the interest rate on high grade corporate debt. But 
many governments will borrow at lower rates than this—why should 
pensions be discounted at a higher rate than government debt obliga￾tions? Te most that can be said on this point is that this is an area where 
the decisions taken are often inconsistent within fnancial reporting at a 
17 Pensions and Other Liabilities: The Benefts of Disclosure…254
government level, between diferent governments’ approaches, and, 
sometimes, with common sense. So, caution is recommended when read￾ing government balance sheet data on pension liabilities.
It should also be noted that changes in interest rates—especially in recent 
years, when real rates (nominal rates adjusted for expected infation) have 
frequently been negative—make for volatile balance sheets. Tis is true, 
and the efects are exacerbated under the IMF approach for calculating 
debt values as discussed in Chap. 9. But it is also true under IFRS rules for 
all liabilities, including government debt. And lower real interest rates will 
translate into lower (infation-adjusted) government borrowing costs as old 
debts are refnanced and new debts incurred, so there will be an ofsetting 
efect on the overall government fnancial position.
17.2 The Magnitude of Pensions Obligations 
on the Public Sector Balance Sheet
Figure 17.1 illustrates debt securities and insurance/pension guarantees 
relative to GDP for each of the 17 countries for which recent (2020 or 
2021) data is available on the IMF Public Sector Balance Sheet database. 
Figure  17.2 contains the same data for G7 countries, refecting our 
Fig. 17.1 Public sector debt and pensions obligations, selected countries (% of 
GDP). (Source: IMF Data: Public Sector Balance Sheet) 
I. Ball et al.255
Fig. 17.2 Public sector debt and pensions obligations, G7 countries (% of GDP) 
(Source: IMF Data: Public Sector Balance Sheet database)
particular concerns about the dangers to global prosperity emanating 
from this group.
Tere are several important qualifcations to be made. Te universe of 
countries for which the data is available is quite limited. Because the two 
reference years are both strongly infuenced by the difering impacts of 
COVID-19 on GDP and by difering government responses, precise 
comparisons are not appropriate. Our measure of debt (“debt securities” 
in the IMF defnition) is quite limited in scope. Tere may also be incon￾sistencies in the way that pensions data is aggregated.
However, despite these caveats, the importance of pensions obligations 
both relative to debt and in absolute terms is clear, and applies not just to 
the most developed economies, but also to several more recently-devel￾oped economies including Brazil, Hong Kong, Republic of Korea, 
Mexico and South Africa.
Te general picture for the G7 countries is that adding pensions debt 
to the fnancial debt that is the focus of these countries’ fscal rules tells a 
diferent picture, and makes a signifcant contribution to the pattern of 
negative net worth observed in all these countries apart from Canada, as 
discussed in Chap. 9.
17 Pensions and Other Liabilities: The Benefts of Disclosure…256
17.3 Why Accounting Properly 
for Pensions Matters
In Chap. 5, we demonstrated that traditional cash accounting can deliver 
a very diferent picture of reality than accrual accounting. As we have 
discussed, conventional fscal rules are usually driven by cash consider￾ations including comparing government spending with revenues; mea￾suring government net borrowing; measuring total government debt, 
usually as a percentage of GDP.
But uninformed by accrual accounting, conforming with this sort of 
rule can provide a deeply misleading picture.
Te UK National Health Service Pension Scheme (NHSPS) ofers a 
vivid example of this point.
According to the Scheme’s 2021–22 accounts, during the course of the 
fnancial year the value of the Scheme’s liabilities increased by £113 bil￾lion. To put this in context, £113 billion represented 4.8% of UK GDP 
in 2021–22, and is not far short of total public sector net borrowing in 
the year of £122 billion.2
 (For further context, note that the NHSPS, 
whilst being the UK’s largest public sector pension plan, represents less 
than 40% of net pension liabilities on the UK public sector balance 
sheet3
).
Tis was explained in the accounts as described in Table 17.1. below 
(the presentation and notes are ours; we have simplifed some entries and 
rounded to the nearest £ billion):
Te pensions scheme is funded by contributions from employers (vari￾ous NHS entities) and employees, at rates which refect the actuarially 
determined costs of the scheme; in 2021–22, the contributions rates were 
20.6% of salary for employers, and 9.9% for employees. Employment 
costs (salaries, pension and other costs) are paid out of the funding pro￾vided to the NHS by central government.
In 2021, the total NHS salary bill was £56.8 billion. Employer contri￾butions were £11.7 billion, and employee contributions £5.7 billion for 
a total of £17.4 billion.
Te overall cash impact on the Treasury of the NHSPS in 2021–22 
was as follows (rounding to nearest £ billion) (Table 17.2):
I. Ball et al.257
Table 17.1 UK NHS Pension Scheme—change in pension liability 2021–2022
Item
Amount (£ 
billion) Notes
Opening 
liability
£757 As stated in previous accounts
Service cost +£42 Benefts accrued in-year
Financing cost +£10 Applies 1.25% interest rate
Actuarial loss +£74 Refects revised assumptions on discount rate, 
salary growth, mortality
Benefts paid −£13 Benefts paid reduce liability
Closing liability £870
Year-over-year 
change
£113 Impact on public sector balance sheet
NHS Pension Scheme Annual Report and Accounts 2021–22
Table 17.2 UK NHS Pension Scheme—contributions and benefts 2021–2022
Contributions received £17 billion
Benefts paid £13 billion
Net cash received/(paid) £4 billion
So, accrual accounting would say that the NHSPS had cost the tax￾payer £113 billion in 2021–22, almost as much as net public sector bor￾rowing; however, under the Treasury’s fscal rules, the Scheme had the 
positive efect of reducing borrowing by £4 billion.
To ofer a third perspective, the UK Department for Health is required 
to get parliamentary approval each year for its spending plans, via a for￾mal process called by the archaic name Supply Estimates. In the case of 
NHS pensions, the amount approved was £35 billion,4
 representing an 
expected £52  billion of anticipated costs (largely the future benefts 
expected to be earned by employees during the year), less £17 billion of 
employer and employee contributions. Tis is an estimate of accrued 
costs, but it does not include the additional actuarial adjustments that 
make up the £113 billion number. So the Estimates are very much an 
estimate, and arguably not a very good one either.
17 Pensions and Other Liabilities: The Benefts of Disclosure…258
17.4 Out of Sight, Out of Mind
As the above example shows, governments incur very large pension liabil￾ities as a result of the delivery of labour-intensive public services, and 
these impose substantial costs on future taxpayers. We have already dem￾onstrated that these liabilities sit outside typical fscal rules, and so do not 
directly afect government tax, spending or borrowing plans. So there is a 
danger that governments might see their ability to ofer generous pension 
terms as a “costless” way to fund current public services. If this is the case, 
there must be a considerable risk that decisions are being taken that do 
not represent a good use of taxpayer resources, over the long term.
Our UK NHS example ofers an interesting case in point.
Table 17.3 illustrates the pension entitlements of a nurse pursuing a 
40-year career within the NHS. Her (the large majority of NHSPS mem￾bers are female) starting salary would be £28,400,5
 and we assume that 
Table 17.3 Illustrated pension costs—UK nurse
40 year career 2% real 
rate
1% real 
rate
0% real 
rate
−1.35% real 
rate
1% real salary 
growth
Starting salary £28,400
Final salary £42,300
Final pension £34,200
Contributions £667,000 £527,000 £422,000 £318,000
25 year Pensions 
cost
−£680,000 −£761,000 −£855,000 −£1,011,000
SHORTFALL −£13,000 −£234,000 −£433,000 −£693,000
20 year career, 
ending 20 years 
before retirement
1% real salary 
growth
Starting salary £28,400
Final salary £34,653
Final pension £13,300
Contributions £352,000 £259,000 £190,000 £165,000
25 year Pensions 
cost
−£265,000 −£296,343 −£333,075 −£394,000
SHORTFALL +£87,000 −£156,000 −£311,000 £−229,000
I. Ball et al.259
her salary grows by 1% per year in real terms until she retires on a fnal 
salary of about £42,000.6
 Troughout her career, her employer pays con￾tributions at the standard 20.5% rate, and she pays an additional 9.8% 
employee contributions.
At retirement she receives an annual pension which comprises 1/54th 
of the salary she earned each year of her employment, increased each year 
by infation plus 1.5%. Tis would entail an annual pension on retire￾ment, indexed to infation, of £34,200.
Tere are other benefts as well, including lump sum payments in the 
event of early death; the costs of these benefts are not separately disclosed 
and so are not considered in this analysis.
Since the NHSPS is “unfunded”, the government has not invested her 
pensions contributions in investments; rather, the cash received from her 
employer and herself has reduced the amount the government has bor￾rowed. If the government’s real cost of borrowing over the period were 
1%, then the government would have received a total of about £527,000 in 
pension contributions and interest savings over the nurse’s career; if the 
real rate were 0%, then the government’s receipts would total about 
£422,000.
At her retirement date her life expectancy would be likely to be around 
25 years.7
 Te total cost to the UK Treasury of funding her pension would 
be £761,000 (1% real rate)—£855,000 (0% real rate), implying that 
there is a shortfall of £234,000 to £433,000. In other words, at a 0% real 
interest rate, the contribution rate would need to be twice the actual 
combined 30.4% of salary. At the real interest rate used by the actuaries 
to assess the overall liabilities of the scheme (−1.35%), the shortfall over 
a full career would be almost £700,000, and the required annual contri￾bution rate to meet the shortfall would be around 80% of salary!
Te second half of the table indicates that the scheme is less expensive 
when employees leave the NHS well in advance of their retirement date, 
as benefts accrue at a lower rate. However, at low real interest rates the 
scheme pays out substantially more than the value of the contributions it 
receives.
Te implication is that the UK Treasury may be under-stating the 
value of—or under-charging for—the pensions that it provides to NHS 
employees. Whether this matters under debt-based fscal rules is unclear; 
17 Pensions and Other Liabilities: The Benefts of Disclosure…260
if employer contribution rates were increased, public sector debt would 
be unchanged as more cash would be made available to the Department 
for Health, and the same amount received back in increased pension con￾tributions. But the analysis says more about the very high economic cost 
of NHS pensions, and about the lack of incentive to manage these costs 
under the current fscal rules.
Tere are some mitigants to this. Interest rates might rise; at a 2% real 
rate (consistent with the Treasury’s traditional expectations for interest 
rates), the contribution levels look more reasonable. Since September 
2022, yields on UK government infation-linked bonds have turned posi￾tive after over 15 years of being in negative territory; as of mid-2023, real 
yields are around 1%. But while this might make the NHS Pension 
Scheme and other government-sponsored schemes look less uneconomic, 
it would also increase the costs of fnancing UK government debt.
If the NHS Pension Scheme looks very expensive from the point of 
view of the UK Treasury, does it look like a good deal for NHS employees?
To test this, we consider what sort of pension could be provided by the 
private sector for the same contributions via a “defned contribution” 
(DC) scheme in which contributions are made into a ring-fenced invest￾ment account on behalf of the employee, but with no guarantees about 
the benefts ultimately to be received. Based on the same salary profle 
and contribution rate and investment returns of 2.5% over the rate of 
infation, the NHS nurse in our example would expect to accrue a pen￾sion fund of £753,000 over her 40-year career.8
At retirement, she could use this to buy an annuity (pension) that 
would pay her £26,300 per year for the rest of her life, increasing with 
infation. (Tere would also be other benefts, and these would need care￾ful comparison with the NHS scheme for a full assessment to be made).
Terefore, despite the higher investment returns that would be expected 
in a DC scheme of this sort, the contributions are not sufcient to generate 
a similar pension from the private sector. To get to the same pension level 
would require a contribution rate of about 40% of salary per year.
It should be noted that in this scenario the investment risk is carried by 
the employee. If investment returns over the 40  years do not match 
expectations, or if the “annuitisation rate” (the pension that can be pro￾vided for a given sum of money) is lower at maturity than indicated, then 
I. Ball et al.261
she will receive a lower pension. Tere are ways to manage these risks and 
these are refected in the relatively low assumed life-time real returns of 
2.5%, but some exposures are unavoidable and a lot can change over a 
40-year period. Also, there will be quite signifcant costs associated with 
providing the service: administration and fund management fees, and 
capital costs associated with providing the annuity.
17.5 Do Government Pension Commitments 
Represent Value for Money?
Our UK NHSPS example illustrates several interesting points about how 
the failure to employ accrual accounting in assessing fnancial decisions 
might lead to bad outcomes for government fnances.
First, as we saw at the aggregate level, the impact of the scheme in 
2021–22 was cash- positive, if we ignore the fact that the cash contribu￾tions paid to the UK Treasury were themselves funded by taxpayers in the 
frst place. However, a full economic assessment of the scheme, as con￾ducted by its actuaries, suggested that the “true” economic cost in the 
year was £113 billion, as disclosed in the NHSPS accounts. Te difer￾ence between the scheme’s impact on the UK’s debt-based fscal targets 
and its economic cost was almost 5% of UK GDP—for a single pension 
scheme, in a single year. But even if we ignore the changes in actuarial 
assumptions (which could fuctuate), the expected cost was still £35 bil￾lion more than the contributions received to fund these pensions. Adding 
the NHS salary bill in 2021–22 of £57 billion9
 and employer contribu￾tions of £11.7 billion implies that cash employment costs in the year were 
just under £70  billion. A full 1/3rd of total NHS employment costs, 
representing about 20% of normalised total NHS expenditure, were met 
in the form of non-cash pension accruals, which will need to be met by 
future taxpayers.
Second, whilst it is clear that the nurse in our example could not buy 
a comparable pension in the private sector for the contribution levels 
charged by the NHSPS, it is not known whether she would prefer to 
receive a smaller future pension and a higher upfront salary. If the full 
17 Pensions and Other Liabilities: The Benefts of Disclosure…262
costs of the scheme—not just the cash contribution rates—were taken 
into account, there might be even bigger opportunities to develop a sal￾ary package which was both more attractive to our nurse and less costly 
to the taxpayer.
Tird, the high costs of the NHSPS refect the fact that the contribu￾tions are assumed to be “invested” in reduced government borrowing. 
But if the NHSPS (or the Treasury) were to invest contributions made on 
behalf of NHSPS members, in higher-risk, higher-return assets, then the 
expected costs of the scheme would be reduced. On our estimates, for 
example, our nurse’s contributions would fully fund her expected pen￾sion if the real return on investments were 3%, and the real return on 
government debt as low as 0%. lower cost. Under the current arrange￾ments, the government is already bearing a wide range of risks related to 
the provision of the pension. So why not have the government retain the 
risks it already holds, whilst at the same time capturing the beneft of 
superior investment returns?
 Tis would mean investing the contributions made into the NHSPS, 
rather than using them to reduce government borrowing. Debt would 
therefore increase; in efect, government would be borrowing to invest. 
But if it makes sense to fund future pension entitlements via increased 
debt, would it not make sense to fund pre-existing entitlements as well?
Tis is our next topic.
17.6 Should Governments Borrow to Invest?
Unlike assets, properly accounting for pensions (and other long-term 
liabilities) and including them within a government’s fscal rules frame￾work will tend to make a government’s fnancial position look worse than 
it would under traditional debt-focused assessments. But failing to 
account for such liabilities properly does not make them go away, and as 
we have seen, it can also generate highly misleading signals for policy￾makers and other government stakeholders. So proper accounting for 
liabilities is essential, however unappealing the impact may be on the 
presentation of government fnances.
I. Ball et al.263
But when all assets and liabilities are incorporated in the balance sheet, 
and included in the fscal rules framework, new opportunities emerge to 
improve the management of government fnances.
By removing the distinction between debt and other liabilities, it 
becomes possible to consider issuing debt and investing the proceeds in 
fnancial assets without changing net worth. If these assets have a higher 
expected return than a government’s cost of debt, then over time the net 
worth position will improve. Also, if the values of the assets are not closely 
correlated with other assets the government owns, then the government 
will also beneft from diversifcation. Tese are of course the same argu￾ments that led companies in most parts of the world to ofer funded pen￾sion plans rather than to hold pensions on their own balance sheets, 
before government regulation and accounting reforms made private sec￾tor DB pensions arrangements uneconomic.
Te discussion in this section focuses on pensions, as these are fre￾quently an important part of the public sector balance sheet. But the 
same arguments apply equally well to “implicit liabilities” on the compre￾hensive balance sheet.
Our starting point is the country of Exemplia, which is assumed to 
have public sector assets of $1000 billion, debt of $1000 billion, pension 
liabilities of $1000 billion and, as the reader might have guessed, GDP of 
$1000 billion. Te budget is balanced, infation is zero, Exemplia’s cost of 
borrowing is zero, and all items are assumed to be unchanging. Te rela￾tive sizes of these balance sheet items are similar to those of some G7 
countries discussed in Chap. 9.
Exemplia’s balance sheet before the new policy is adopted would look 
like this:
Assets $ billion Liabilities $ billion
Initial assets 1000 Debt 1000
Pensions 1000
Net worth −1000
Total 1000 Total 1000
Net Worth is -$1000 billion, representing −100% of GDP.
17 Pensions and Other Liabilities: The Benefts of Disclosure…264
Now, suppose that Exemplia decides to borrow an incremental $50 
billion each year (a not-unfeasible 5% of GDP) and invest this in a diver￾sifed balanced portfolio, with an expected return of 3%.
On Day 1, Exemplia’s balance sheet appears as follows:
Assets $ billion Liabilities $ billion
Initial assets 1000 Debt 1050
Investment fund 50 Pensions 1000
Net worth −1000
Total 1050 Total 1050
Net worth remains at −$1000 billion.
However, after 16 years of borrowing and investing, the balance sheet 
would be expected to have evolved to the following position:
Assets $ billion Liabilities $ billion
Initial assets 1000 Debt 1800
Investment fund 1038 Pensions 1000
Net worth −762
Total 2038 Total 2038
Net Worth has strengthened to −$762billion, or −76% of GDP. Te 
pensions obligations remain, but they are more than fully ofset by assets. 
In addition, Exemplia’s balance sheet is bolstered by a large asset portfo￾lio, ofering diversifcation and (in extremis) a source of liquidity that 
would not otherwise have been available. So Exemplia’s fnancial position 
is stronger than it otherwise would have been, despite having increased its 
fnancial debt by 80%.
Higher rates of return would imply better results: for example, a 5% 
return would improve the net worth position to −56% of GDP.
Of course, if part of the investment were funded by other government 
revenues (e.g., taxation), the improvement would be greater still. Te fol￾lowing example shows the position after 16 years if half of the investment 
were funded by borrowing, and half by government revenue:
Assets $ billion Liabilities $ billion
Initial assets 1000 Debt 1400
Investment fund 1038 Pensions 1000
Net worth −342
Total 2038 Total 2038
I. Ball et al.265
All these results are dependent upon the assets delivering their expected 
3% return. In practice, whilst such an outcome is statistically likely over 
time, there would be short term volatility—although this would be ofset 
by the efects of “averaging in” as investments would be being made on a 
continual basis.
In our example, it is also noteworthy that after 16 years, Exemplia’s 
annual revenue from investments is slightly more than 3% of its GDP. Tis 
is an improvement in the country’s fscal position. If it were not required 
to meet pension liabilities, it could fund tax cuts, increased public ser￾vices, or—highly relevant to our forward-looking discussion—the 
“implicit liabilities” on Exemplia’s comprehensive balance sheet associ￾ated with demographic change, rising healthcare costs and climate change.
As we saw in Chap. 10, realistic estimates of the long-term fscal adjust￾ment needed to balance the comprehensive balance sheet in the more 
challenged countries are frequently of the order of 5% of GDP, and we 
expressed concerns that this could be very difcult to secure. So a strategy 
which generates 3% of GDP in government revenues annually over the 
long term with no impact on tax or public service provisions appears to 
be extremely valuable.
17.7 Is this a “Free Lunch”?
Any proposal which purports to ofer substantial improvement in gov￾ernment fnances without impacting tax or public service levels deserves 
to be challenged. Typical questions include “is this a free lunch”? Or “if 
this makes sense why aren’t we already doing it?”
As this book seeks to demonstrate, there is no necessary linkage 
between government fnancial practice and common sense; debt-based 
fscal rules and targets, and the absurdities that are perpetrated in their 
name, illustrate this point all too clearly, and it might well be the exis￾tence of debt-based constraints that have prevented this approach being 
taken in the past.
But the “free lunch” issue is important, and worthy of careful 
consideration.
17 Pensions and Other Liabilities: The Benefts of Disclosure…266
Te basic question is whether the benefts that can be captured through 
debt-funded investment bring with them hidden costs. In our view, there 
are two ways in which this might be true, and which we should therefore 
consider.
First, for as long as governments have existed, there have been con￾cerns about their size and scope. In the context of commercial and fnan￾cial matters, these tend to come in two forms: governments might not be 
good at conducting the activity under consideration; and that the conse￾quence of government fnancing the activity might be to crowd out pri￾vate sector investment. Neither of these seem to apply to the sort of 
government investment that we are proposing.
Government-owned investment managers are commonplace (see 
below), and appear frequently to be successful and efcient managers of 
assets. Furthermore, if a government did not feel comfortable creating an 
in-house investment manager, it would be easy to outsource the activity.
Te “crowding out” concern is perhaps more important. Certainly, 
there will be limits to the extent that a government can borrow in any 
given year without afecting the terms on which it and other capital mar￾kets participants can borrow, and there might be other demands on gov￾ernment capacity. Tis could limit the rate at which a “borrow to invest” 
strategy might be implemented, or—perhaps better—suggest that bor￾rowing should be supplemented by the allocation of tax or other govern￾ment revenue to fund investment. But if the government is seen to be 
managing its fnances well, then market capacity is much less likely to be 
a problem.
Second, is the value of the increased returns that the government gen￾erates ofset by risks incurred through increasing borrowing? Tis argu￾ment parallels the Modigliani-Miller (“M-M”) corporate fnance theorem 
that the value of an enterprise is independent of its capital structure (in 
the absence of taxes, bankruptcy costs, agency costs or asymmetric infor￾mation). 10
We believe that there are strong reasons to believe that the rewards of 
the strategy we propose will substantially outweigh any risks.
First, we are advocating this policy as part of an overall strategy which 
recognises and addresses long-term challenges to government fnances by 
managing to net worth targets and taking into account long term 
I. Ball et al.267
expectations of government revenues and policy costs. Tis does not in 
itself prove that the borrow-to-invest strategy has merit in isolation. But 
in aggregate, government would have reduced the overall risk associated 
with its operations as a result of improving its fnancial management pol￾icy. Using the risk-taking capacity thus created to generate investment 
returns which are re-invested in further risk-reduction measures seems 
unlikely to be problematic.
Second, the investment policy that we would advocate would involve 
purchasing a diverse portfolio of global assets. Tis would include equi￾ties, infrastructure assets, and non-domestic corporate and government 
bonds. Tis would have the efect of diversifying government’s portfolio 
of actual and implicit assets and would also involve holding a proportion 
of high quality, liquid assets. In the event of a crisis, the perception of 
government credit should be strengthened by the existence of the asset 
portfolio; government would also have the option of liquidating asset 
holdings as an alternative to borrowing if it needed to raise emergency 
fnance. What we are proposing is not to change the basis on which exist￾ing assets are funded, but rather to fund additional, higher-returning, 
risk-diversifying, assets. Te M-M analogy does not appear to apply.
Tird, there is the future to think about. Sooner or later, pensions will 
need to be paid and (other things being equal) debt incurred to pay them. 
If borrowing is inevitable, then borrowing early does not seem to increase 
risk in any real sense. If expected returns are generated, eventual borrow￾ing will be reduced. Whilst there is some risk that investment returns will 
be lower than borrowing costs, over the long term, with funds being 
invested into the market on a steady, continuing basis, this risk is statisti￾cally very low. Again, rewards would appear to dominate risks.
Overall, therefore, our conclusion is that borrowing to fund diversi￾fed, higher-return investments is a sensible strategy which can poten￾tially make a meaningful contribution to improving public sector balance 
sheets and addressing long-term fscal challenges.
17 Pensions and Other Liabilities: The Benefts of Disclosure…268
17.8 Institutional Structures, 
Policy Implications
Tere are several institutional frameworks within which this type of strat￾egy can be pursued. For example, the investment assets could be managed 
directly by the pension scheme (or schemes), as is usually the case for 
corporate pensions. Te potential disadvantage of this approach is that it 
may overcomplicate things. For example, when full funding is reached, 
should the pension fund buy lower risk assets that more precisely match 
its liabilities, and hence reduce the pensioners’ exposure to government? 
Tis might be good for pensioners but would be much less good for the 
continuing strengthening of the balance sheet through investment 
returns.
A more appropriate approach might be to establish a Sovereign Wealth 
Fund, as described briefy in Chap. 14. Tis could act to manage invest￾ments in order to strengthen government fnances and help meet future 
obligations (Table 17.4).
Te motivations for these funds have typically been to invest surpluses 
for the beneft of future generations, often (but not always) arising from 
Table 17.4 Top 10 Sovereign Wealth Funds by assets
Fund Country
Total Assets ($ 
billion)
China Investment Corporation China $1351
Norges Bank Investment Management Norway $1145
Abu Dhabi Investment Authority UAE $993
State Administration of Foreign 
Exchange
China $980
Kuwait Investment Authority Kuwait $769
Government of Singapore Investment 
Corp.
Singapore $690
Public Investment Fund Saudi Arabia $620
Hong Kong Monetary Authority Hong Kong 
SAR
$500
National Council for Social Security Fund China $474
Qatar Investment Authority Qatar $450
Source: Statista. Data are as at year end 2022
I. Ball et al.269
the export of natural resources—in other words, to recycle what would 
otherwise be very heavy capital infows.
In the application that we are proposing, the objective would be to 
invest borrowed money, at least in part. Te rate at which this could be 
done would of course depend upon the availability and terms of debt 
fnancing, and also on the ability to export borrowed capital without 
exerting undesired downward pressure on the domestic exchange rate, 
since a diversifed portfolio would be likely to entail substantial cross￾border investment. Such considerations are important to bear in mind 
but will be highly situation-specifc.
Creating investment funds on the public sector balance sheet—what￾ever structure is employed—also provides a means of making “strategic” 
investments that have public policy benefts. For example, capital could 
be allocated for investment in areas where the capital markets are per￾ceived as failing to allocate adequate capital, for example, venture capital 
or infrastructure investment. Tere are of course risks to this type of pol￾icy, and limits to the scale on which it can be implemented before the 
benefts of global diversifcation are impaired. Strong investment disci￾pline and appropriate governance would be required, as discussed in 
Chap. 16 in the context of Public Wealth Funds.
17.9 Conclusion
Non-debt liabilities represent a large proportion of total government lia￾bilities. However, debt-based fscal metrics ignore these liabilities alto￾gether. Tis has three adverse consequences for government fnancial 
management.
• Te overall balance sheet picture might be very diferent - and much 
worse - than would be implied by a focus on debt levels.
• By allowing governments to buy current services with promises of 
future payments (as in our NHSPS example), there will be a tendency 
for governments to increase the burden on future taxpayers.
• Tere is no incentive on government to make investments to meet 
future liabilities, despite such investments having potentially very pos￾itive consequences for government fnances.
17 Pensions and Other Liabilities: The Benefts of Disclosure…270
Accrual accounting will remove the danger of basing government fscal 
policy on incomplete or misleading information, and will ensure that 
costs are recognised as they are incurred. Focusing fscal rules and targets 
primarily on net worth will ensure that the value created by investing to 
meet future liabilities is recognised in the overall fscal position, even if 
this is funded entirely by borrowing. Te Sovereign Wealth Fund model, 
employed extensively by countries with large structural government sur￾pluses, can also be applied by G7 countries and other high income econ￾omies with highly developed welfare systems, and ofers the potential to 
meet a substantial portion of the fscal adjustment that will be required as 
populations age.
Notes
1. For a more complete summary discussion, see IMF Working Paper 
Public Sector Balance Sheet Database: Overview and Guide for 
Compliers and Users, 2020.
2. Ofce for National Statistics (ONS). Borrowing fgure is Public Sector 
Net Borrowing excluding public sector banks.
3. UK Whole of Government Accounts 2019–2020; June 2022.
4. NHSPS Annual Report 2021–22, p 39.
5. Tis starting salary is derived from the Nurses.co.uk website, which 
states that as of May 2023 the starting salary of a newly qualifed nurse 
in May 2023 is £28,407. Te website cites the average salary for UK 
NHS nurses as being £33–35,000.
6. According to Nurses.co.uk the fnal salary in our example would corre￾spond to a Band 6/Band 7 role (e.g., Deputy Ward Manager/Ward 
Manager).
7. NHS Pension Scheme Annual Report and Accounts 2021–22, p62. 
Assumes retirement age of 67.
8. Based upon estimated investment returns for a DC pension scheme over 
the long term. Assumed index linked annuit rate with death benefts for 
spouse along similar lines to NHS scheme. Annuitisation rate is 3.5%.
9. Derived from NHS Pension Scheme Annual Report and Accounts 
2021–22, p57.
10. Modigliani, F.; Miller, M. (1958). “Te Cost of Capital, Corporation 
Finance and the Teory of Investment”. American Economic Review. 48 
(3): 261–297.
I. Ball et al.Part IV
Past, Present and Future© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 273
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5_18
18
Balance Sheets, Culture and National 
Achievement in Europe 1560–1834
As we consider the challenges facing government fnances and fnancial 
management today, it is important to remember how long this struggle 
has been going on. A study of the evolution of how states have used bal￾ance sheets and accounting to manage public fnances shows that adopt￾ing appropriate accounting techniques is just the starting point. Good 
outcomes require there to be a political and even civic culture which 
accepts the underlying goals as well as understanding and adopting the 
processes themselves. However, there is good evidence that when these 
factors are in place, accounting can play a major role in facilitating the 
development of the state, improving decision-making across the econ￾omy, and providing insights into the way that economy and society 
function. 
18.1 Balancing the Books of the First 
Global Empire
In the 1560s, Philip II of Spain sat at the pinnacle of the world. Spain was 
a planet empire, that spanned from the Netherlands, Southern Italy, 
South and Central America, the Philippines, and California. But the 274
great king faced a problem: Spain was going bankrupt. In simple terms, 
income exceeded expenditures and the empire, which seemed a massive 
asset, not only cost Spain dearly; it also kept Philip from investing in the 
metropole. Tis was no accident. Philip had an aversion for accounting 
and publicly announced, “I cannot tell a good account book or fnancial 
report on the subject from a bad one. And I do not wish to break my 
brains trying to comprehend something which I do not understand now, 
nor have I ever understood in all my days.”1
However, as Spain’s bankruptcy became acute in 1573, Philip saw no 
other option but to appoint the high ofcial Juan de Ovando (1515–1575) 
to oversee the Council of Finance. Ovando made a striking and histori￾cally unique proposal to rescue Spain’s fnances. He told Philip that there 
was no efective way to manage state resources without creating a balance 
sheet which, he hoped, would unify the fnancial reports from all the 
varying branches of government. It was this way, Ovando told Philip, 
that Spain could efectively tap its existing resources and manage its way 
out of bankruptcy. Even more, he told the king to fre the “priests and 
lawyers” who came up with big theories about how economies should 
work, but could not manage basic accounts.2
Ovando understood that a central ledger was necessary for efective 
fnancial management. Royal tax collectors, auditors, and policy makers 
all kept diferent books. Te idea was to unify them all, and, above all, to 
make one person responsible who could work like a merchant or a banker 
with trained “clerks and accountants” who could produce a ledger clear 
enough to be understood and audited by King Philip II himself.3
 Ovando 
insisted that the only way for the system to work was for the king to be 
able to read and audit the accounts and make policy from the ledger itself.
It is important to realise how unique the concept of a public balance 
sheet was in the sixteenth century and just how visionary Juan de Ovando 
was to insist that the king use it as a tool of government. Philip was 
famous for his attention to administration, but he loathed accounting 
and only agreed to it because leading ministers convinced him it was 
necessary given Spain’s bankruptcy and credit pressures. By August, 1575, 
Spain’s debt was unmanageable. Te crown had a budget defcit of almost 
half its annual income on an income of almost 6 million ducats, and 
basic annual expenditures of around 3 million ducats—this did not 
I. Ball et al.275
include extraordinary expenses, such as war— with a debt of almost 80 
million ducats. Tis represented a ratio of debt to income of 13.3:1. (By 
contrast, Italy – the most indebted large European country – has a ratio 
of total general government liabilities to income of 5.4x, and also benefts 
from much more advanced systems of taxation, better developed capital 
markets and ultimately the backing of the EU/ECB). War expense costs 
far exceeded income, and 40% of income was spent on servicing the 
debt. Even more, the state had sold revenue streams (a typical practice 
before the French Revolution), so that as it tried to cover its liabilities, its 
income lessened.4
Even in such conditions, there were problems creating and implement￾ing the use of the central state ledger. Spain did not have enough accoun￾tants familiar with double-entry accrual bookkeeping both in business 
and in government. Even more, Philip’s other powerful ministers saw 
Ovando as acquiring too much power via his centralisation of state 
fnance. Philip’s counsellors questioned Ovando’s competency and sim￾ply refused to hand over their account books for his audits.
While Philip resisted using the ledger to make policy, he understood 
how essential it was to have a tool to manage his way through bank￾ruptcy. He knew that Spain’s famous Casa de la Contratación—the state 
imperial house of trade in Seville—kept double entry accounts for the 
treasure and goods that arrived from the New World. He hired Pedro 
Luis de Torregrosa (1522–1607), an administrator from the Casa de la 
Contratación with real commercial accounting experience. In the 1580s, 
Philip ordered all state ofcials to hand over their accounts to his new 
fnancial manager so that he might create a ledger for the statecraft of 
“kings, princes, and great lords.”5
However, Philip II died in 1598, leaving Torregrosa alone to organize 
double entry accounts for various branches of government, unifying 
them into two state ledgers. But without Philip II’s support, the new 
government under Philip III undermined these balance sheet reforms. 
Without serious funding, it was impossible to fnd competent accoun￾tants to manage the ledger after the death of Torregrosa in in 1607. 
Without Philip’s impetus and the leadership of Ovando and Torregrosa, 
there was little understanding of accounting at the summit of the state 
and no interest in balance sheet management. Tis meant that Spanish 
18 Balance Sheets, Culture and National Achievement in Europe…276
leaders had no concept of the full level of the debt, or of their assets. 
Tose who inherited the state ledger simply kept it poorly and what was 
one of the most ambitious state reforms disappeared. Spain remained a 
major power for two centuries after Philip’s death, but its debt and debt 
mismanagement were key in its relative decline as a state.
Even the fnest and the most initially successful balance sheet reforms 
are fragile if they are not embedded in the culture of government, are 
dependent on the active endorsement of an autocrat, or threaten 
entrenched positions in the bureaucracy.
18.2 Reclaiming the Land: Dutch Accounting 
Culture and the Birth of a Nation
At the very moment the Spanish government was drowning in debt and 
working on its state balance sheet, its former subjects, the Dutch, were 
using accounting and balance sheets for commerce and public fnance in 
extraordinary ways to audit state accounts and manage public assets. Te 
Netherlands was an outlier in many ways. In 1581, its northern provinces 
broke from the Hapsburg Spanish empire to form the Dutch Republic. 
Te government was decentralized and the economy based not primarily 
on agrarian feudalism, but on international trade. While Spain built a 
huge empire, the Dutch had smaller imperial holdings, preferring instead 
to set up trading counters in the Spanish and Portuguese empires to feed 
of their colonial wealth. It was a more proftable approach. By the seven￾teenth century, Amsterdam was the centre of world trade with gold, sil￾ver, wood, rare fruits, minerals, whale oil and other valuable commodities 
coming into its port.
Te Netherlands was unique in its focus on trade, the prominence of 
its commercial class, and the incomparable wealth of the province with a 
population well under 2 million people. It became the centre of account￾ing literacy and the publication of accounting manuals. Yan Ympyn de 
Christofels (1485–1540) frst translated Luca Pacioli’s frst printed 
accounting manual in Northern Europe as the Niewe Instructie ende 
beweijs der loofelijcker consten des Rekenboeks (Antwerp: Gillis Copyns 
I. Ball et al.277
van Diest for Anna Swinters, 1543). Ympyn’s translation became the pri￾mary conduit of Pacioli’s manual into Dutch, French and English.6
Accounting schools proliferated, often alongside the prestigious and 
more formal Dutch centres of learning, where even prestigious scholars 
and educators like Isaac Beeckman, founder of the infuential Dordrecht 
Latin School, had detailed knowledge of accounting practices.7
 As early 
as 1509, Amsterdam saw the introduction of a “French School” which 
taught double-entry.8
 From the late ffteenth century onwards, 
Handelscholen, or merchant accounting schools could be also be found 
in Leiden, Delft, Gouda, Rotterdam, Middelburg, Deventer, Nijmegen, 
Utrecht and Bergen-op-Zoom. Other cities followed suit and public 
accounting schools became national policy.9
 Numerous infuential math￾ematicians, like Valantijn Mennher (1521–1571) and Claes Pietersz, 
published popular accounting manuals. Tese works often made their 
way to German states, England, and France.10 Accounting manuals 
advertised how to keep and think about balance sheets: “if one wishes to 
know how much one has gained or lost in this period, he must have his 
account (s) closed in all his branches on the same particular day, and if he 
receives together the accounts of all branches, he can see from them all his 
riches in the world.”11
Its history was diferent too. Beginning in the twelfth century, the 
Dutch began reclaiming land from the inland sea in what are called pol￾ders. Tis feat of medieval water engineering was accomplished through 
draining systems, levies, dikes, sea walls, canals, and sluices which allowed 
the Dutch to take what were deltas, inland sea, lakes, and marshes and 
turn them into farmland. Tis unique example of asset creation not only 
relied on engineering: it was also a product of public fnance.
Polders depended on administrative Water Works which were funded 
by taxes, loans, and bonds. To keep the water out and the land dry, the 
Water Works employed accountants from various walks of life. Some 
were professional managers, while others were landowners and city dwell￾ers. Te Netherlands had an extensive culture of public accounting that 
came from their expertise in trade, but also from medieval Hapsburg 
administration. While double entry accounting was not systematic, the 
public wealth of the polders brought accounting into everyday life.12 It 
was common for noblemen and citizens alike to take part in managing 
18 Balance Sheets, Culture and National Achievement in Europe…278
the Water Boards, but also auditing them.13 A culture of public audits 
was normal in Dutch life. Whether the proliferation of accounting liter￾acy in the Netherlands came from widespread commercial practice, the 
Water Boards, or other institutions, the fact is that it became a centre of 
fnancial expertise.
Te health of public assets, and, indeed, the survival of the nation, 
depended on a widespread familiarity with balance sheets. One poet 
wrote of accounting in the Netherlands:
Tis was the fam’d and quick invention, which
Made Venice, Genoa and Florence rich:
Te Low-Countries (in all senses such)
By this Art now speaks high and mighty Dutch.14
Accounting became a central element of Dutch education. Dutch 
elites were a small, tightly-knit group. And they had a sense of the impor￾tance of both literacy and fnancial fuency.15 Literacy was at the centre of 
both Dutch Catholic and Calvinist religion in which personal reading 
was central to understanding the Bible. Tese religious habits co-existed 
with old traditions of mercantile, mathematical education, and, very pos￾sibly, to widespread practices of public fnancial management central to 
the Water Boards and other institutions.
18.3 Polders to Plutocrats: Dutch Accounting 
Culture and the Birth of 
Modern Capitalism
Tis meant that the concept of a balance sheet along with public audits 
were common in society and this created both the expertise and trust 
necessary for many of the most important founding institutions of capi￾talism. Dutch traders succeeded in making more money than anyone else 
in Europe. In 1599, one trade expedition made a proft of 599%.16
Numerous Dutch companies emerged across the Dutch provinces. In 
1602, concerned that too much competition amongst the Dutch them￾selves would undermine trade, the Lands Advocate, and one of the coun￾try’s most important leaders, Johan van Oldenbarnevelt insisted that all 
I. Ball et al.279
the companies of the seventeen provinces of Holland unite as a single 
federated company for foreign trade. In 1602, he helped found the 
United Dutch East India Company (de Vereenigde Oost-Indische 
Compagnie, or VOC).
Te Charter of the company illustrated the mixture of private capital 
and state interests which Oldenbarnevelt felt would best serve the repub￾lic. Te company was charged not simply with developing a trade 
monopoly, but also  with upholding the Interests of the Netherlands. 
Much like the English East India Company, and in the vein of many of 
the commercial builders of the time, these private companies were built 
by the state, and then given state prerogatives, such as building their own 
navies and armies. Indeed, the Dutch state oversaw and managed the 
Dutch East India Company. Recently examined internal company 
memos show that the States General oversaw and regulated company 
policy and played a major role in forming its slave-trading policy in the 
1630s and 40s.17 Tis was not oversight; it was direct administration.
Te Dutch state not only took part in decision-making; it also shared 
its archives and intelligence with the company to help form strategy and 
policy. Te Charter of the company showed the mixture of private capital 
and state interests which Oldenbarnevelt felt would best serve the repub￾lic.18 Te Company was charged not simply with a trade monopoly, but 
also to uphold the Interests of the Netherlands. Tus, the enterprise of 
empire and the formation of the frst large-scale global companies was in 
Holland, as in England and France, state directed.19
At the beginning of the seventeenth century, the VOC boasted double 
the tonnage of the English East India Company, and ten times the capital 
investment and unparalleled profts. It set the prices for most interna￾tionally traded goods from Amsterdam, Brazil and Manhattan to China. 
It built warships, forts, and felded armies. Privately fnanced, it was the 
international arm of the Dutch government, and for more than one hun￾dred years it made little Holland the centre of world trade.
While the VOC was not systematically managed via double entry 
accounting, the survival of the company, and, therefore, of the nation 
that earned its riches from it, depended on a culture of balance sheet 
management. Confdence in the company was to be based on internal 
accounting. Te Charter maintained that the company hire professional 
18 Balance Sheets, Culture and National Achievement in Europe…280
bookkeepers and that “the accounts of the furniture and outft of the ves￾sels, with their dependencies, shall be made up three months after the 
departure of the vessels, and one month after, copies shall be sent to us, 
and to the respective chambers: and the state of the returns, and their 
sales, shall the chambers (as often as we see good, or they are required 
thereto by the chambers) send to us and to one another.” In the Dutch 
spirit of open government, the Charter claimed that every six years, the 
company would publish a public audit which would “make a general 
account of all outfts and returns, together with all the gains and losses of 
the company.”20 Any manager failing to present their accounts would 
be fred.
In spite of these stringent accounting requirements, the VOC fell vic￾tim to poor management. Between 1607 and 1609, stock values dropped 
from 212% to 126%.21 Imbued with the Dutch tradition of accountabil￾ity in public fnance, investors called for a public audit of the company. 
At frst, the government responded that it could not submit to a public 
audit of accounts as this would play into the hands of the Spanish and 
threatened the interests of the state. Tis was no exaggeration. When the 
English East India Company showed its losses to investors, they pulled 
out their money and the venture collapsed. Te VOC was the military 
imperial arm of the Dutch state, which could not aford such a loss. 
Accountability posed risks to all involved. Te Directors successfully 
pushed this argument and garnered shareholder and public trust during 
the frst twenty years of the VOC to avoid a true public audit. Perhaps 
this explains why, in its early years, the VOC did not keep a central 
double-entry ledger, which would have facilitated audits.
However, in 1622, disgruntled stockholders published a remarkable 
public pamphlet and one of the founding texts of stockholder capitalism: 
the Nootwendich Discours, or “Necessary Discourse,” attacking the 
Heren and Bewindhebbers. In it, they rejected the logic of state secrecy 
on the grounds of national security, and insisted that the company be run 
transparently. Tey complained that there had been no audits and that 
instead of producing a rekenboeck, or accounts book, the Bewindhebbers 
had “smeared it with bacon” so it would be “eaten by dogs.”22 Tis was so 
that stockholders “would not be able to solve the mystery how the direc￾tors had suddenly become so wealthy (…).” Te discourse further accused 
I. Ball et al.281
the Bewindhebbers of practices which “conformed to neither reason nor 
the common practice of merchants,” and demanded that the company 
make “a proper accounting in the manner of a steward.” Here again was 
the language of good public fnancial management for a public/private 
company.
In the end, the Stadtholder Prince Maurice of Nassau found a solu￾tion. He himself represented a phenomenon of Dutch accounting cul￾ture. Not only had he learned double entry accounting at school, the 
story of his great personal efort to learn bookkeeping was known to the 
public. Even more, he managed his household with high quality double 
entry books. He was fuent in the language of balance sheets and audits 
and this was public knowledge. Terefore, when he declared that there 
would be no public reckoning, but that under his supervision, the state 
would audit the company in secret, shareholders trusted him and accepted 
his audit of the frm.23 It worked. Te VOC was reformed and back on 
track to make profts.
Yet even for companies, especially ones of such size, complexity, and 
centrality to the state, creating a central ledger was a constant struggle. As 
the mathematician, mayor of Amsterdam and, in 1672, director of the 
VOC, Johannes Hudde (1628–1704) found ffty years later, there was 
still no central ledger or capacity for calculating the total balances for the 
Company.24 Hudde represents this Dutch governing elite, not only fuent 
in mathematics and bookkeeping, but willing to use them for govern￾ment and for internal audits. His management of water levels is still 
famous as he established a system of stone markers, Hudde Stones, which 
marked high water points throughout the city. He studied mathematics 
at Leiden and established Hudde’s Rule: two polynomial equations, or 
two diferent equations which come up with the same sum. It was a ft￾ting discovery for a man who set as a task trying to balance the books of 
the VOC.
Hudde sought to create a balance sheet for the VOC, but realized that 
the central bookkeeping of the company made this difcult. One reason 
was that the company did not account for liabilities. He set about sepa￾rating assets from liabilities, such as “debts in the form of loans with or 
without interest, trade debts, unpaid wages, unpaid accounts according 
to contracts” and share capital. Tis included all goods at sea 
18 Balance Sheets, Culture and National Achievement in Europe…282
(merchandise and cash), ships, equipment, war materials and forts, food, 
property and ammunition.25 He took into account losses at sea and ship￾wrecks, something he might have learned from Spinoza—the pioneering 
Dutch philosopher of atheism—who left business after one of his family’s 
ships never returned, ruining the frm, and, perhaps, his faith.
Hudde also sought to take on the massive challenge of accounting for 
the numerous currencies used in world trade. He further looked to apply 
risk values to merchandise according to local contingencies. He tried to 
tally statistics over ten-year periods, something only both a mathemati￾cian and a merchant accountant could do. Tis was one of the pioneering 
moments in the use of probability statistics in merchant accounting. He 
realised that the cost of maintaining merchandise surpluses often out￾weighed their value, and therefore recommended a plan to destroy cer￾tain stocks of spices, for example, which ended up costing more than they 
were worth after duties and shipment costs.26 He fgured then that rather 
than amassing stock, he needed to create more demand to spur sales. Tis 
was proft-oriented thinking based on liability accounting and probable 
price statistics.
To illustrate his approach, Hudde wrote philosophical principles of 
cost accounting and liabilities for the VOC managers: “A merchant has a 
stock of 100 pounds of cloves. Te annual sale is 50 pounds and the 
annual production 50 pounds. What is the value of the 100 pounds 
stored?” Te answer, he stated, was “Nothing, on the contrary, they 
involve losses, as they cost warehouse rent and other expenses.”27 His 
quest for the right valuation was absolutely necessary to keeping books 
and making profts. He also tried to balance the recording of expected 
profts with real profts, something we struggle mightily with today. To 
do this, he devised a statistical calculation to predict profts over twenty￾fve-year periods. It was the only way to hope to calculate trade values of 
commodities thousands of miles away whose sale value could not be 
established for years to come.28 Hudde’s principle was that no transaction 
could be recorded without assigning a value and loss to it through a credit 
and debit entry for each item.29
Tere is not enough evidence to conclude whether or not Hudde actu￾ally succeeded in drawing up efective balance sheets for the VOC. As 
Director of the Heren Seventien and mayor of Amsterdam, he was a busy 
I. Ball et al.283
man in the particular mix of Dutch politics and trade. But he did appoint 
a number of internal bookkeepers to continue his work. One died in a 
shipwreck, and another, Daniël Braams, was appointed in 1690 to keep 
generale boeken for the whole company, taking into account valuation 
principles. However, he died right after making the frst drafts of his 
accounts.30 Te Heren Seventien appointed another bookkeeper, but the 
order was never carried through. Bad luck and a lack of funding and will 
were common challenges in the world of bookkeepers, even in the Dutch 
Republic.31 If the directors of the company failed to keep good books, 
they nonetheless took Hudde’s lessons to heart and were very prudent 
about predicting profts and costs.32 Te spirit then, if not the practice, of 
good accounting took hold within the VOC’s administration. Tey had 
a keen eye for reading the incoming data, even if their books remained 
primitive.33
Te lesson from the VOC is thus complex. Te greatest capitalist 
enterprise of the era predating the 1800s never instituted double-entry in 
spite of an awareness of the practice and a rich number of experts who 
could have done the job. Nonetheless, the spirit of accounting weighed 
over the company, inspiring internal audits, attempts to make calcula￾tions of assets and liabilities, and brought with it great prudence in calcu￾lating profts and loss. Te impetus for such reforms remains a point of 
speculation. Te company sought proft, but Reason of State was what 
made the accounting reforms necessary.
18.4 Dutch Accounting Culture: Philosophy, 
Politics and Economics
Fluent in the language of accounting, Dutch political leaders pioneered 
the idea of thinking about national wealth through measuring assets. Te 
Protestant clothmaker, Grand Pensionary of Holland, and free-market 
and republican theorist, Pieter de la Court counted ports, boats, and 
businesses to write his Te True Interest and Political Maxims of the 
Republic of Holland (1662).34 Before John Locke, de la Court claimed 
that political liberty and free trade trumped monarchical might. Written 
18 Balance Sheets, Culture and National Achievement in Europe…284
with the support of the Grand Pensionary—the de facto prime minis￾ter—Johan de Witt, it was a virulent attack against monarchy and a 
detailed outline of how political and religious freedom, free trade and 
competition, along manufacturing and shipping were part of a causal, 
economic system. De la Court made direct references to Gerard de 
Malynes, and his Lex mercatoria, or Merchant Laws (1622), in asserting 
the ascendence of merchants over princes. De la Court argued that mon￾archies are bad for economic growth and that the inhabitants of Holland 
could “receive no greater mischief in their polity, than to be governed by 
a monarch, supreme lord, or “earls” who destabilize politics through their 
attempts to gain power undermine what makes countries rich: “Fishing, 
Navigation, Manufacture, and Commerce.”35
De la Court believed that wealth came from “manufactures,” and not 
agriculture and natural bounty.36 He argued that “Fish and Trafck” were 
not enough to maintain the country’s economy.37 Only the manufactur￾ing system created national wealth through taking commodities, turning 
them into goods, and selling them on the international market.38
Holland’s profciency at using water for power was key to manufacturing 
and shipping. Tus public “frugality and good Husbandry” were the basis 
of this industry. It was not enough to collect the goods of nature; they 
had to be processed through manufactures and a complex market system 
of distribution, and managed properly via good accounting.
De la Court’s book is a descriptive catalogue of national assets and 
wealth production. He uses the language of balance sheets to describe 
Holland’s economy. Chapter 3 discusses “Holland’s natural burdens and 
hinderances,” which are literally the nation’s liabilities, costs and chal￾lenges facing the economy.39 He lists the costs of the Water Works and of 
the military as liabilities of the state.40 In the following chapter, de la 
Court describes “the Natural Product and Advantages of Holland” to 
“balance these heavy Burdens beforementioned.”41 Te rest of the book is 
about how Holland’s political system supports its economy, and he details 
all of its aspects as productive wealth creation. He lists republican govern￾ing institutions along with cities, companies, boats, and manufactures, all 
of which he sees as assets. Monarchy, however, he views as a liability.
I. Ball et al.285
18.5 Accounting and Autocracy 
in Seventeenth Century France
Holland was not the only place that began measuring national assets. 
Following the famed French humanist Jean Bodin, who, in his Six Books 
of the Republic (1576), insisted that states were “required” to “count 
their subjects” so that the government could have a sense of national 
wealth and tax income, a number of economic thinkers and government 
ministers across Europe began cataloguing national wealth.42 Foremost 
among them was Louis XIV’s minister Jean-Baptiste Colbert. He not 
only instituted important national accounting reforms: he created the 
model of a national balance sheet for the Sun King which included 
income, expenditures, along with a catalogue of assets. He was part of a 
seventeenth-century movement to create not simply balance sheets of 
income and expenditures, but also of national assets.
Jean-Baptise Colbert (1619–1683) is rare among leading historical 
political fgures in that he began his professional life as a trained accoun￾tant. He was from a traditional merchant family and rose to be France’s 
de facto prime minister when Louis XIV reached his majority in 1661. In 
terms of population, France was the biggest country in Western Europe. 
However, due to almost a century of religious and civil war, not only were 
many of its medieval industries destroyed, the crown was also cash poor 
due to a poor taxation and public fnancial management system. He set 
out on a series of accounting reforms to centralize state fnance and create 
a unique balance sheet for Louis XIV, so that the king could govern with 
a clear view of state fnance.
Early in his relationship with Louis, Colbert taught him the basics of 
double-entry bookkeeping so that the king would be able to audit a bal￾ance sheet. Tis move was remarkable and based upon an agreement 
between the king and his minister. Louis believed his royal “register” was 
key to his mastery of fnances and policy.43 Colbert produced up-to-date 
fgures on royal fnances, taxes, manufacturing, and seaborne trade 
through three central state accounts with “register of funds,” “a register of 
expenditures,” and a central “journal” which he presented monthly to the 
king, for an audit.44 Colbert stated that by auditing his own books, His 
18 Balance Sheets, Culture and National Achievement in Europe…286
Majesty has placed in himself all his own security, and has reduced his 
reliance on those who have the honor to serve him in this function 
(…).”45 Furthermore, Colbert recommended that “an exact register be 
kept of the entire receipts of expenditure of the State for each year,” and 
that passed years be verifed.46
Colbert had wanted that all parts of government employ double-entry 
accounts so that the entire process lead to a verifable balance sheet. 
However, he met the same challenges that Ovandro and Torragrosa did: 
He simply could not fnd enough skilled clerks to do the bookkeeping for 
what were often venal, inherited positions within government. While not 
done fully in double-entry form, the verifcations of the “State of Income 
and Expenditures of the Treasury (1662–1681)” (États de la Dépense et 
Recette du Trésor) show he managed to implement a sophisticated level 
of state accounting. He was able to achieve something unique: Not only 
were the governments working accounts prepared into monthly and 
annual balance sheet ledgers; he created for Louis XIV notebooks under 
the headings, “Carnets de Louis XIV.”47 Tese were rudimentary balance 
sheets that contained revenue and expenditure books as well as inventory 
registers of the king’s wealth and holdings.48 Tis meant that the king 
could view state fnance, but also, at the same time, keep an eye on 
royal assets.
Beginning in 1661, during or after each fscal year, one or two were 
made for Louis, summing up various accounts and giving the fnal bud￾get tally for the year. Tey are bound in red maroquin, with gold titles, 
and held closed by two gold pop clasps. Tey measure about six by two￾and-a-half inches, and were made to be kept in Louis’s pocket for easy 
reference. In the frst edition from 1661 the manuscript writing is stan￾dard, on paper.
Te Sun King encountered the same problem as his Spanish great￾grandfather, Philip II. Louis did not like bad news, and he liked royal 
accountability less. Louis’ royal balance sheets illustrate one of the great 
problems of public fnance, that when political power fnds fnancial 
numbers troublesome, it tends to obscure them. When Colbert died in 
1683, many of his fnancial reforms were coming undone as Louis col￾lected more and more debt through war, the building of palaces, and the 
grandeur of his court. Without Colbert’s infuence, Louis discontinued 
I. Ball et al.287
the balance sheets and even broke up Colbert’s super ministry so that it 
was impossible to keep central ledgers. Only Louis had a clear view of 
state fnance by approximating what he learned from various state 
accounts. France sunk into mismanagement and nearly a century of on￾and-of again bankruptcies. In the 1720s, 1770s, and 1780s, there were 
those who tried to reimplement good accounting measures to create an 
accurate balance sheet. Tey failed due to entrenched interests. One of 
the major complaints of the French revolutionaries was opaque public 
accounting, and one of the most important reforms of the early Revolution 
was the Bureau of Accountability and the quest to implement government￾wide accounting standards and a central balance sheet.49
18.6 Political Arithmetic in Eighteenth 
Century Britain
Te quest to create a state balance sheet made more progress in England 
where not only relatively open government mixed with high levels of 
fnancial literacy and awareness created better conditions. One year 
before Colbert died, William Petty (1623–1687) used fnancial and social 
statistics to write his Political Arithmetick (1682). His goal was to make 
policy based on population and trade statistics and cost accounting that 
measured national income.50
One of Petty’s principal ideas was that wealth could be calculated as 
the product of labour mixed with natural resources. His goal was to cal￾culate national wealth into a rudimentary national balance sheet.51 Petty 
calculated population with individual productivity to try and fgure out 
the wealth of counties and countries.
Petty’s brilliance was to see that those who claimed that England had a 
negative trade balance with France misunderstood how to calculate 
national wealth. England might produce less in terms of pure volume, 
but Petty showed that the English population was more productive. He 
compared France and England by counting trade numbers, productivity 
per capita, and tax income to show that England’s labour force was far 
more efcient and productive than France’s. While France posed a threat 
18 Balance Sheets, Culture and National Achievement in Europe…288
to England and, until the Seven Years War (1756–1763), outpaced it in 
total economic output, Petty rightly perceived that England was richer, 
and poised to overtake France overall. He looked to understand wealth 
not by output, or what we might call GDP today, but rather the market 
net worth of what England produced per capita, the overall value of the 
country.52 Tese are two diferent markers. Petty believed that using a 
double-entry accounting approach to measure overall wealth—assets 
minus liabilities equal net or total value—was much more revelatory than 
simply measuring the national trade balance.
Petty was a pioneer of explaining how efcient commercial labour pro￾duced value and wealth, a concept essential to free market thought. He 
showed that France was, indeed, exporting more to England than it was 
importing. But Petty showed that England’s agriculture and fshing 
brought better returns.53 He believed erroneously that England had more 
manufactures than France, and that they were also more productive in 
“art and industry.” He was right about England’s superior per capita pro￾ductivity. Petty also looked to calculate national assets by counting cattle, 
boats, buildings, artisans, tradesmen, sailors, and agricultural laborers 
along with levels of produce and output. According to his analysis—and 
in this case he was likely correct—England simply needed more people to 
do more industry to catch up to France.
Politicians did not necessarily adopt Petty’s balance sheet approach to 
thinking about economic policy, but by the end of the seventeenth cen￾tury, accounting and balance sheets began to play a major role in politics. 
In 1698, the economic and political theorist, Excise tax collector and 
Tory Member of Parliament, Charles Davenant (1656–1714) had tried 
to calculate the public tax revenues to understand the budget, but, in his 
Discourses on the Publick Revenues (London: James Knapton, 1698), he 
complained that he “met with extream Difculty and Opposition in 
Procuring the sight of Accompts relating to the Revenue…. Te Books of 
the Principal Ofces have been in a manner shut up against any Inquiry 
he desir’d to make; and this has rendered his work more imperfect.”54
Davenant’s proposal of openly calculating excise taxes so as to properly 
budget was central to his argument that public accounting was a neces￾sary part of successful commercial government.55
I. Ball et al.289
While England’s (from 1707, Britain’s) books were opaque, its govern￾ing class was increasingly aware of the importance of using accounting 
and balance sheets in government and for debt management. Te frst 
prime minister, Robert Walpole (governed 1721–1742), regularly dis￾cussed the necessity for good government accounts and used double￾entry to manage the South Sea Bubble crisis and devise a sinking fund 
scheme to manage Britain’s expanding war debt as described in Chap. 2. 
Troughout the eighteenth century, accounting schools proliferated in 
Britain, and leading members of Parliament were not only literate in 
fnance, they produced tracts and political programs based on balance 
sheet analysis. Britain never had the centralized governmental system that 
France did, which, as many observers complained, allowed France to 
make state accounting reforms. But this sword cut both ways. If the royal 
government chose to ignore using balance sheets, there was no recourse. 
In parliamentary Britain, pressure from a well-informed public and gov￾ernment brought results and a slow series of reforms to create govern￾ment balance sheets.
In the mid-1760s, the liberal statesman, staunch abolitionist, and 
British Plenipotentiary to the United States, David Hartley (1732–1813) 
wrote a series of tracts about public fnancial management. In Te Budget
(1765), he looked to calculate national debt by focusing on the complex 
state expenses and liabilities due to both general expenditures, interest 
payments, but also due to war.56 He feared depreciation had undermined 
the efectiveness the Walpole’s sinking fund.57 He compared liabilities to 
various sources of state income, looking for an accurate calculation of 
state net worth by subtracting expenditures and liabilities from income to 
fgure out how big the sinking fund needed to be if it were to efectively 
cut debt levels.
Te focus on debt reduction led to further state balance sheet reforms. 
In his Two Tracts on Civil Liberty, the War with America, and Te Debts 
and Finances of the Kingdom with A General Introduction and Supplement
(1778), the philosopher Richard Price warned against the dangers of 
poorly managed state debt. According to his calculations, by 1788, 
Britain would spend 70% of its tax revenue servicing a debt which would, 
by 1784, balloon from £40 million under Walpole to an astronomical 
£250 million.58 Once considered a radical, Price was now praised in 
18 Balance Sheets, Culture and National Achievement in Europe…290
Parliament as “that able calculator.”59 His treatise contained hundreds of 
pages of calculations and accounts, showing how his sinking fund would 
vanquish national debt.
Political attitudes towards accounting were growing positive which 
gave prime minister William Pitt the Younger’s administration the impe￾tus to throw its support behind the Commission of Accounts.60 Pitt 
needed the commission to fnd income and manage the debt more efec￾tively. Te commissioners met on July 15th, 1785 at Downing Street to 
examine all the accounts, and try to bring them together into a single 
budgetary report. Tey made a series of audits that was then turned into 
an ofcial “statement” was sent to the Lords of the Treasury.61
Te accounts and audits of the Exchequer were now in the process of 
being streamlined into a proto balance sheet. In 1806, Pitt’s former sec￾retary, George Rose, wrote, “Tere has been no period in the history of 
this country in which so much anxiety has been shown to inform the 
public fully and clearly of the state of its fnances as in the past twelve or 
fourteen years.62 Rose believed that keeping double-entry books for state 
receipts and expenditure, and a public rendering of these accounts would 
assuage worries about the debt.63
18.7 “Scarcely Susceptible of Melioration”: 
Accounting Systems in Post Napoleonic 
France and Britain
By 1789, both Britain and France’s politics were focused not only on 
debt, but also on the creation of a public balance sheet. However, it was 
not until the 1820s and 30s, when both countries focused on creating 
national budgets based on balance sheet calculations. In 1831, the 
Commission on Public Accounts sent the famous linguist and future frst 
governor of Hong Kong John Bowring on a parliamentary mission to 
study Dutch and French public accounts.
Bowring found Holland’s fnancial administration opaque and dam￾aged by the Napoleonic wars.64 It was France, which had come out of 
decades of Napoleonic empire and restoration monarchy that most 
I. Ball et al.291
interested him. Bowring was given remarkable access to the accounts of 
Britain’s old foe.65 What sparked Bowring’s attention was France’s cen￾tralized system which allowed French bureaucrats to have a “unifed” 
account of all the state’s fnances.66 Bowring reported back to the House 
of Commons that Jacques Laftte, formerly head of the Banque de France 
and now Prime Minister to the new king Louis Philippe, had assured him 
that the French accounts were so perfect that “he believed that the pres￾ent system was scarcely susceptible of melioration,” and that the “machin￾ery” worked so well that not only did the French government always 
know the exact state of its fnances, it “had provided perfect security 
against all malversation….”67 Te minister personally, and “by hand,” 
drew up the public balances of the treasury, and the government was able 
to show how under the precedent Minister of Finance, the count Chabrol, 
saved £800,000 a year in personnel costs and £14,800,000 in savings on 
the national debt by bringing “harmony and order” to the day-to-day 
operations of the government.68 Trough double-entry, he was able to 
produce a monthly “balance sheet” and an annual return to the 
Commission des Comptes, “the Legislative authorities and the public.”69
Bowring attested to personally witnessing the system and how, in “An 
uninterrupted chain of operation and inspection thus descended from 
the highest to the lowest of authorities, while uniform returns ascended 
from the lowest to the highest.” Te whole of the “books of Treasury” of 
all the administrations were admirably centralized.70 He would note in a 
later report that this system even made it possible to “perfectly audit” the 
military. High praise indeed.
18.8 Conclusion
Tere are many fascinating parallels to be drawn between our sixteenth 
and nineteenth century examples and present-day government fnancial 
management.
One observation would be that, despite the extraordinary informa￾tional advantages enjoyed by modern-day governments compared with 
their predecessors, the decision-making frameworks that they employ are 
actually much simpler. Te balance sheets drawn up for Philip II or Louis 
18 Balance Sheets, Culture and National Achievement in Europe…292
XIV suggest much more sophistication than is to be found in modern, 
defcit- and debt-focused fscal frameworks, even if these are based upon 
far superior information. Indeed, it is arguable that Ovando anticipated 
our twenty-frst century discussion of the Comprehensive Balance Sheet 
through his attempts to pay down current debts through selling future 
taxation streams  – in efect, converting an “implicit asset” into a real 
asset, then selling it to reduce liabilities. Tis might have been unwise 
(and in a modern democracy, of limited applicability), but it did demon￾strate an understanding of the linkage of present and future fscal posi￾tions that appears absent in the fscal policies of many leading developed 
economies.
However, the more useful conclusions for our present purposes relate 
more to distinguishing between necessary and sufcient conditions for 
long-term successful government fnancial management.
We would argue that these histories demonstrate that understanding 
and introducing efective fnancial management techniques is perhaps a 
necessary condition, but is clearly not sufcient. A powerful, wise auto￾crat can enforce use of such techniques, but this does not guarantee their 
continued use. Rather, they must be embedded in the political culture; be 
accepted and employed by professional administrators and politicians, 
and – extrapolating to a modern democracy – visible to, and accepted by, 
the broader electorate to whom those politicians are answerable. We will 
develop these themes further in the next chapter.
Notes
1. Quote from Staford Poole, Juan de Ovando: Governing the Spanish 
Empire in the Reign of Philip II (Norman: University of Oklahoma 
Press, 2004), p. 162.
2. Lovett, “Juan de Ovando,” p. 12.
3. A. W. Lovett, “Juan de Ovando and the Council of Finance (1573–1575),” 
Te Historical Journal 15, no. 1 (1972), 12, 19.
4. Jacob Soll, Te Reckoning, p. 64.
5. Legay, Dictionnaire historique, p. 345.
I. Ball et al.293
6. Raymond de Roover, “Aux origins d’une technique intellectuelle. La for￾mation et l’expansion de la comptabilité à partie double,” Annales 
d’histoire économique et sociale 9, 45 (1937), pp.  270–98 at 285; 
M.  F. Bywater and B.  S. Yamey, Historic Accounting Literature: A 
Companion Guide (London: Scholar Press, 1982), p. 46.
7. Karel Davids, “Te Bookkeepers Tale: Learning Merchant Skills in the 
Northern Netherlands in the Sixteenth Century,” in Koen Goodriaan, 
Jaap van Moolenbroek and Ad Tervoort, eds., Education and Learning 
in the Netherlands 1400-1600. Essays in Honour of Hilde de Ridder￾Symeons (Leiden: Brill, 2004), pp. 235–51 at 236.
8. Tervoort, p. 236.
9. Ibid., p. 241.
10. Bywater and Yamey, pp. 54–5.
11. Ibid., p. 55.
12. Arne Kaijser, “System Building from Below: Institutional Change in 
Dutch Water Control Systems,” Technology and Culture, Jul., 2002, 
Vol. 43, No. 3, Water Technology in the Netherlands (Jul., 2002), 
pp. 521–548 at 522.
13. Milja van Tielhof, “Regional Planning in a Decentralized State: How 
Administrative Practices Contributed to Consensus-Building in 
Sixteenth-Century Holland,” Environment and History 23 (3) (2017), 
pp. 431–453.
14. B. S. Yamey, “Bookkeeping and the Rise of Capitalism,” Te Economic 
History Review 1, 2/3 (1949), pp. 99–113 at 102.
15. Oscar Gelderblom, “Te Governance of Early Modern Trade: Te Case 
of Hans Tijs, 1556-1611,” Enterprise and Society 4 (2003), pp. 606–39. 
Harold John Cook, Matters of Exchange: Commerce, Medicine, and 
Science in the Dutch Golden Age (New Haven: Yale University Press, 
2007), pp.  20–1. Peter Burke, A Social History of Knowledge from 
Gutenberg to Diderot (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2000), p. 164.
16. J. M. de Jongh, “Shareholder Activism of the Dutch East India Company 
in 1622: Redde Rationem Villicationis Tuae! Give an Account of your 
Stewardship!” Online Paper Presented at the Conference on the Origins 
and History of Shareholder Advocacy, Nov. 6 & 7, 2009, Yale School of 
Management (See Jonathan Koppell, ed., Origins of Shareholder 
Activism (London: Palgrave, 2011).
18 Balance Sheets, Culture and National Achievement in Europe…294
17. Alexander Bick, Minutes of Empire: Te Dutch West India Company 
and Mercantile Strategy, 1618–1648, forthcoming, Oxford 
University Press.
18. A Translation of the Charter of the Dutch East India Company 
(Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie, or VOC), trans. By Peter Reynders 
(Canberra: Map Division of the Australasian Hydrographic Society, 
2009), online: http://www.eurostudium.uniroma1.it/ricerche/didattica/
strumenti_didattici/fonti/600/VOCengvers.pdf.
19. = Teodore K.  Rabb, Enterprise and Empire: Merchant and Gentry 
Investment in the Expansion of England, 1575–1630 (Cambridge: 
Harvard, 2014), 38–41.
20. Ibid.
21. Ibid.
22. De Jongh, p. 22.
23. Soll, Te Reckoning, p. 82.
24. Glamann, p. 252.
25. Ibid., p. 253.
26. Ibid., p. 254.
27. Ibid.
28. Ibid.
29. Ibid., p. 256.
30. Ibid., p. 257.
31. Ibid.
32. Ibid., p. 259.
33. Ibid., p. 261.
34. Pieter de La Court, Te True Interest and Political Maxims of the 
Republick of Holland and West-Friesland (London: 1702).
35. Ibid., vi, 4–6, 9.
36. Ibid., 34.
37. Ibid.
38. Ibid., 35.
39. Ibid., 20.
40. Ibid., 21.
41. Ibid., 24.
42. Jean Bodin, Six livres de la république (Paris: Livre de Poche, 
1993), p. 487.
43. Louis XIV, Mémoires for the Instruction of the Dauphin, trans. and ed. 
by Paul Sonnino (New York: Te Free Press, 1970), p. 64; Legay, p. 96.
I. Ball et al.295
44. Ibid., pp. 51–51.
45. Ibid., pp. 44–45.
46. Ibid., pp. 44–45.
47. Bnf Ms.Fr. 6769–91. Te fgures from the notebook for the year 1680 
are reproduced in the Lettres, 2, 2, pp. 771–782.
48. See Bnf. Ms. Mélanges Colbert 311–317.
49. Soll, Te Reckoning, Chap. 9.
50. Andrea Finkelstein, Harmony and the Balance: An Intellectual History 
of Seventeenth-Century English Economic Tought (Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press, 2000), Chap. 4.
51. Letwin, Te Origins of Scientifc Economics, 128.
52. François Crouzet, “Angleterre et France au XVIIIe siècle: essaie d’analyse 
compare de deux croissances économiques,” Annales. Économies, socié￾tés, civilisations 21, no. 2 (1966), 254–291: 268; T.  S. Ashton, An 
Economic History of England: Te Eighteenth Century (London: 
Methuen, 1955), 104; François Crouzet, Britain Ascendant: Comparative 
Studies in Franco-British Economic History (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1991), 17–23.
53. William Petty, Political Arithmetick (London: Robert Clavel, 1690), 18.
54. William Peter Deringer, “Calculated Values: Te Politics and 
Empistemology of Economic Numbers in Britain, 1688–1738,” 
Princeton University Ph.D., 2012, p. 79; Charles Davenant, Discourses 
on the Publick Revenues, 2 vols. (London: James Knapton, 1698), vol. 
1, p. 266.
55. Davenant, pp. 14–15.
56. David Hartley, Te Budget (London: J. Almon, 1765), pp. 4–5.
57. Ibid., pp. 8–9.
58. Carl B.  Cone, “Richard Price and Pitt’s Sinking Fund 0f 1786,” Te 
Economic History Review2 (1951), pp. 243–251 at 243. Peter Dickson, 
Financial Revolution in England: A Study in the Development of Public 
Credit 1688–1756 (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1967).
59. Cone, p. 243.
60. Binney, p. 254.
61. Ibid., p.  208: “Te Examiners frst pore over and observe upon the 
account. Te Inspector next investigates it. Ten both, if necessary, go 
through it, and the Inspector makes his remarks upon it and lays it 
before the superintending Commissioner. He skims over the hostile 
notes, and the Inspector attends afterwards to perfect him in the less of 
18 Balance Sheets, Culture and National Achievement in Europe…296
objections. When the Inspector and instruction have done their utmost 
to make the Commissioner understand these points, he presents the 
accounts, objections, and his own explanation to the Board of 
Commissioners for general consideration. Tey may or may not be 
unanimous, but most probably are not, if the points under consideration 
be of importance. Tis brings on a statement to be referred for the opin￾ion of the Lords of the Treasury.”
62. Ibid., p. 254.
63. Ibid.
64. John Bowring, Report on the Public Accounts of the Netherlands
(London: House of Commons, 1832).
65. Marc Nikitin, “Te Birth of a Modern Public Sector Accounting System 
in France and Britain and the Infuence of Count Mollien,” Accounting 
History 6 (2001), pp. 75–101 at 90.
66. John Bowring, Report of the Public Accounts of France to the Right 
Honorable the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty’s Treasury (London: 
House of Commons, 1831), p. 3.
67. Ibid.
68. Ibid., p. 5.
69. Ibid., p. 4.
70. Ibid., p. 7.
I. Ball et al.© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 297
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5_19
19
How Accounting Can Save Democracy
In the opening chapter of this book, we remarked that governments insist 
on the much smaller, less important entities under their jurisdiction 
being subject to regular, timely audits, yet fail to apply the same rules to 
themselves. A detached observer might regard this as “paradoxical”. A 
more engaged one might see it as “hypocritical”. Our preferred adjective 
is “dangerous”.
Te danger is real. We understand enough about projected public sec￾tor balance sheets, especially in G7 countries, to know that the future 
government fnances face very substantial challenges that the standard 
debt-to-GDP benchmarks that governments use to measure their posi￾tion do very little to address, and that this situation has worsened consid￾erably over the past 30 years or so. We also know that available balance 
sheet information suggests that fve out of the G7 countries are currently 
show a negative net worth on the public sector balance sheet – though 
there are strong reasons to believe that there might be signifcant unrec￾ognised assets that would somewhat improve the assessment if properly 
incorporated on the balance sheet.
Hence our focus on “net worth” – the diference between assets and 
liabilities, a single number that sums up the state of the balance sheet. If 
the balance sheet is prepared well (all assets and liabilities are properly 298
identifed and valued), then this measure will tell a great deal about the 
health of national fnances and – through historic comparisons and future 
projections – about the direction of travel. It also defnes the fnancial 
legacy that we leave to the next generation, and ofers a measure of 
whether we are treating that group fairly.
Te word “accounting” has important connotations that go well 
beyond its narrow defnition as a set of fnancial management rules. Tese 
include transparency, responsibility, and – in some languages – doomsday￾like justice (for example, as in the English “reckoning”). Without account￾ing, there is much less accountability – whether to shareholders or to the 
electorate.
Accounting is also central to management. If companies can’t tell 
whether they are using their stakeholders’ resources efciently without 
reliable accounting information, then neither can governments. In fact, 
the extraordinary complexity of modern government would suggest that 
more, rather than less, information, and quicker, rather than slower, is 
required. Tat governments don’t seem to want this information is a con￾cern in its own right.
To summarise our thesis, accounting ofers us the means to quantify 
the current serious predicaments that are faced by many of our national 
governments, and hence by our global economic system. Understanding 
the problem is a pre-requisite for solving it. Proper application of account￾ing in government will also relax the straitjacket on productive public 
sector investment caused by debt-based fscal rules, and can encourage 
much more productive asset and liability management. Finally, it can 
empower a better-informed democratic process, better equipped to meet 
the coming challenges to public fnances, to make fair decisions about the 
distribution of costs and benefts between current and future generations, 
and to hold politicians to account for their stewardship of current and 
future resources.
In this chapter, we will summarise these themes; the fnal chapter will 
make recommendations on practical steps that can be taken to address 
the challenges and to capitalise on the opportunities.
I. Ball et al.299
19.1 Complex, Big and Growing: The Problem 
in Government Finances
Tere is nothing new about government fnances being stretched, and 
there are many lessons to be learned from how these issues were addressed 
and the apparent causes of success or failure.
Te fnancial problems facing governments, especially in G7 coun￾tries, are very large in scale. Tey have their roots in two related factors.
• Over the long term, the expanding role of government since the late 
nineteenth century, and in particular the delivery of universal health￾care, pensions, unemployment benefts, education and other benefts. 
Tere is no sign of this trend abating; indeed, the 2020–2022 COVID-19 
pandemic and energy price rises in 2022 related to the Ukraine War 
seem to have increased expectations of costly government interventions.
• Changing demographics, probably in large part due to the success of 
the welfare state in improving longevity. Te Old Age Dependency 
Ratio (OADR; ratio of people over 65 to those aged 20–64) is pro￾jected to increase from an average 25.5% across the G7 countries in 
2000 to 59.7% in 2075. Tis is not solely a developed market phe￾nomenon; the OADR is forecast to rise in India from 8.7% to 37.0% 
and in China from 11.4% to 58.8% over the same period.1
As we saw in Chap. 10, the global increase in the OADR will place 
severe pressure on government fnances. Tere will need to be radical 
increases in government revenue – whether from taxation or alternative 
sources of revenue such as better asset or liability management, or equiva￾lent cuts in public services, if governments are to remain solvent.
Despite these visible long-term challenges, over the last generation or 
so, there has been an apparent increased appetite for debt or liability 
incurrence. Following centuries in which governments’ peacetime fnan￾cial goal was to pay of debt incurred in making war, the last 30 years or 
so have seen a clear trend towards expanding liabilities in peacetime. Te 
UK ofers an excellent example: in the 45  years following the second 
world war, Public Sector Net Debt (a very incomplete measure of the 
19 How Accounting Can Save Democracy300
liability side of the balance sheet, as we have seen) was reduced from 
around 250% of GDP to just over 20% of GDP, despite the radical 
expansion of public services over this period. Over the past 30 years or so, 
this measure has increased by 80% points, to around 100%.2
 To put this 
into context, each of the frst and second world wars had the efect of 
expanding the ratio by about 110% points (and in both cases, immediate 
progress was made towards reducing the burden). It is unclear what long￾term public goods or existential necessities have been purchased through 
the recent world-war-scale increase in borrowing; what does seem clear, 
however, is that there is little enthusiasm for paying it down.
19.2 Accounting, Fiscal Rules and Financial 
Management: Why Net Worth Matters
Failure by governments worldwide to place accounting information at 
the heart of fnancial decision-making isn’t just strange; it is dangerous 
and, at times, absurd.
As we have seen, non-debt liabilities frequently match or even exceed 
government debt obligations in scale, yet are excluded from fscal rules 
and, indeed, from public debate of fscal policy.
Te case of the UK National Health Service Pension Scheme, the UK’s 
largest unfunded public sector pension plan, bears out the danger – and 
the absurdity – of this state of afairs.
Readers may recall from Chap. 17 that in 2021–22, NHSPS liabilities 
increased by £113 billion, close to 5% of GDP and very similar in size to 
the increase in Public Sector Net Debt excluding banks, at £122 billion. 
But the increase in the NHSPS liability had no efect on government fs￾cal policy, because it sat outside the framework of the fscal targets. 
Indeed, because cash contributions from NHS employers and NHS 
employees (all, of course, funded by government) exceeded pensions pay￾outs by £4 billion, the NHSPS actually had a positive net efect on fnan￾cial performance versus fscal targets.
Te asset side of government balance sheets is also excluded. A debt￾to-GDP fscal rule recognises no practical diference between 
I. Ball et al.301
debt-fnanced consumption and debt-fnanced investment. Even inefec￾tive and inappropriate fscal targets, like debt-to-GDP, still have teeth; 
when compliance with these targets requires tax increases, cuts in ser￾vices, or cuts in public investment, it is the investment that is likely to be 
sacrifced.
Fiscal rules centred on net worth, rather than net debt, avoid these 
pitfalls.
Te change in UK Public Sector Net Worth in 2021–22 would have 
been negative £235 billion (plus or minus other changes to non-debt 
liabilities and to assets), around 10% of GDP, not the £122 billion or 5% 
reported under the net debt target.
Similarly, there would be no need for governments to make direct 
trade-ofs between investment and consumption spending; assets pur￾chased would be held on government books initially at cost (assuming 
they were worth what they had cost), and would be depreciated over 
time, gradually reducing net worth in line with their expected lifetime.
Net worth, not net debt, is the most comprehensive benchmark for the 
management of government fnances, and the setting of fscal rules. Tis 
means adopting accrual accounting across government.
19.3 Intergenerational Fairness
Another major problem with debt-based fscal rules or targets is that they 
favour present consumers over future consumers, and hide the evidence 
that this is happening.
Te consumption-versus-investment example described above is not 
just about whether a constant population is making the right decisions 
about present versus future consumption. Te population changes over 
time. If a government health service decides to spend money on hiring 
more nurses at the expense of constructing a new hospital, then the peo￾ple who beneft from the better nursing provision might well be diferent 
from those who sufer in 10 years’ time because the new hospital has not 
been built. A bias towards current consumption versus investment is also 
a bias against future generations.
19 How Accounting Can Save Democracy302
Use of net worth as a fscal target solves this problem. Te impact on 
net debt of the new hospital’s construction would be immediate. Te 
efect on net worth would be realised as the hospital is depreciated over 
its life, and hence “paid for” by those who benefted from it. Te choice 
of more nurses over a new hospital might still be a good one, but it would 
not be distorted by dysfunctional fscal rules.
It is interesting to note that over the last 10 years or so, “net investment 
in non-fnancial assets” across all G7 countries has varied between +1% 
and −0.5% of GDP.3
 Perceived needs for public investment have been a 
political theme across many developed economies for many years. Tat 
actual investment levels are so low is at least suggestive of a crowding-out 
efect of debt-based fscal rules on public sector investment – and hence, 
a bias towards consumption versus investment, or towards current versus 
future consumers of publicly-provided benefts.
What we have been discussing above is how the ongoing allocation of 
fnancial resources under a debt-based fscal rule is likely to be channelled 
towards current rather than future benefciaries.
But the use of debt-based rules has even more profound efects on 
intergenerational fairness at the balance sheet level. As we have described 
in Part II of this book, we are interested in two types of balance sheet.
First, the formal “conventional” balance sheet, where the past history 
of income and expenditure is crystallised into a statement of assets and 
liabilities, and the net worth of the government is established at a point 
in time.
Second, the forward-looking “comprehensive” balance sheet, which 
estimates expected revenues and costs of public service provision, and 
capitalises these as “implicit” assets and liabilities, then adds them to the 
conventional balance sheet to provide an assessment of the long-term 
position.
We saw in Chap. 9 that fve out of seven G7 countries currently show 
negative Public Sector Net Worth, and that this represents a sharp dete￾rioration over the past half-generation. Italy and the UK show the largest 
defcits. Also, we saw that in comparison with other countries for which 
data is available this is quite distinctive; only two other countries (Brazil 
and Mexico) have negative net worth. As we have noted, there are good 
reasons to challenge these calculations based on undervaluation of assets 
I. Ball et al.303
(on which more below). But the implication is that, based on the data 
available to decision-makers at the time, the legacy that current consum￾ers are handing to future consumers is an unpaid bill.
As Chap. 10 demonstrates, this is a bad place from which to start. 
Over the next 50 years or so, ageing populations and increasing health￾care costs, amongst other factors, suggest that net worth for G7 nations 
will deteriorate further by between 100% and 300% of GDP on current 
projections of income and expenditure. Tis, of course, assumes no major 
external shocks – wars, pandemics, failures to address climate change, etc. 
Tere are various ways to assess what adjustments might need to be made, 
but in the worst-afected countries (US and UK), and absent the develop￾ment of alternative sources of government revenue, an increase in the 
proportion of tax to GDP of about 5% might be required, starting now, 
to maintain current expectations of service provision. Te next genera￾tion will need to pay more to support services for themselves and the 
retired generation, or to accept a sharp reduction in services.
Te way that our governments make important decisions about allo￾cating and paying for resources systematically favours current over future 
citizens. Tis is unjust. A focus on net worth, and the adoption of an 
accounting-based, forward-looking system for making fnancial deci￾sions, ofer the tools necessary to treat our children, and their children, 
more fairly.
19.4 History, Accounting and Democracy
As we have described, the role that government plays in society has 
evolved and expanded in relation to historical trends. For example, indus￾trialisation and the changes that it has brought in society and politics; 
scientifc advances, especially in relation to sanitation and medicine. 
Events, too, are important; wars, fnancial crises, pandemics have all had 
lasting efects not just on government fnances, but also on how govern￾ment perceives and performs its mission.
Troughout this book, we have touched on the direct relationship 
between the past and present; for example, the way that the welfare state 
has its origins in Bismarck’s German Empire.
19 How Accounting Can Save Democracy304
But in Chap. 18 we also looked briefy at several episodes in the history 
of leading European polities over the centuries leading up to the present 
day. Tese excerpts are selected not because of their direct impact on pres￾ent fnancial management practices, but because they ofer insights into 
what it takes to implement lasting reforms in government fnancial 
management.
Te common theme of these stories is that they concern ways in which 
accounting and related fnancial management techniques have been used 
to solve problems in government. In each case, we fnd examples of polit￾ical leaders who identifed the need to reform fnancial management and 
technical experts who were empowered to design and implement reforms.
Two cases are about autocracies. Philip II of Spain and Louis XIV of 
France both ruled large empires; both were blessed with brilliant fnancial 
administrators and had the wisdom – and authority – to empower these 
ministers to introduce the reforms that would allow their royal patrons to 
exercise personal control over the direction and fnancial management of 
complex, dynamic states.
Autocracies are about personalities as much as they are about political 
structures. Successors with less understanding of the importance of 
accounting tools, or less ability to compel their operation, allowed these 
systems to lapse. Te reforms were not embedded in government, and 
their efects were short-lived.
Te Dutch example is very diferent. Accounting and fnancial man￾agement was essential to the mobilisation and maintenance of the organ￾isations which gave the Dutch people much of the land they farmed. 
Tese skills became embedded in Dutch culture, and contributed to the 
rapid development of the frst recognisably modern capitalist economy, 
as well as to an intellectual understanding of accounting and economics. 
Te sequence of Dutch events that we describe involves “bottom-up” 
assimilation of accounting and fnancial management into business and 
national life.
Te British case from the late eighteenth to early nineteenth centuries 
illustrates fnancial reform within a much more recognisably modern 
framework. Government was answerable to parliament, and hence to an 
electorate, limited in number and gender diversity, but with a good 
I. Ball et al.305
degree of fnancial literacy. Reform was adopted, institutionalised and 
became part of the political consensus.
Te historical precedents demonstrate that lasting fnancial reform is 
much more compatible with systems of government which are constitu￾tional in nature, where the machinery of government is run by profes￾sionals, where governments are accountable to parliamentary and electoral 
scrutiny, and where electorates have respect for fnancial discipline. 
Reforms might be initiated by individuals, but to last they need to be 
embodied in institutions.
Tese conditions appear to apply across the G7 countries where our 
concerns are greatest, and where the consequences for the global eco￾nomic system could be most severe if the necessary measures are not 
taken. Tis should be a source of encouragement to those who agree with 
the thesis of this book. If the intellectual argument is won, accrual 
accounting adopted and put at the heart of government fnancial decision￾making, and appropriate forward-looking fscal rules adopted, then the 
national political debate can take place within a fnancial framework 
which stabilises, rather than destabilises, public fnances.
But does current political reality match up to these optimistic assump￾tions? Are the mature G7 democracies capable of adopting fnancial dis￾ciplines that will entail tough choices about public services or taxes? Can 
voters be persuaded that the long-term collective good should outweigh 
short-term, personal benefts? In our view, the evidence is mixed.
On the positive side, there are several “political” attractions to adopt￾ing accrual accounting and centring government fnances on net worth 
targets. For example, exposing hidden assets creates opportunities to gen￾erate income through better management, or for redeployment of public 
capital to better uses, at both central and local government level. Allowing 
incremental borrowing to fund public sector investment outside current 
debt targets creates further opportunities to press ahead with investment 
in infrastructure or the zero-carbon economy. Better government 
accounting allows better management of public services and better dem￾ocratic scrutiny of government, and this too can form part of a political 
platform.
However, there are major reasons for caution. As we have noted, the 
current trend in G7 democracies appears to be in the opposite direction; 
19 How Accounting Can Save Democracy306
increasing current defcits at the expense of future taxpayers. Populist 
campaigns in G7 countries on both sides of the Atlantic have variously 
emphasised individual welfare over social welfare, or tax cuts over long￾term fnancial prudence. Addressing long-term fscal challenges repre￾sents a political risk: measures designed to have an efect over 50 years 
may be hard to introduce into a political process based on four- to fve￾year election cycles. In March 2023, President Macron’s legislation to 
increase the pension age in France from 62 to 64, as framed in his elec￾tion policy platform the previous year, faced such resistance within a par￾liament controlled by his own party that his government felt compelled 
to press forward without a direct parliamentary vote. Public opposition 
to the measure was reported to approach 75%.4
 In the UK, as of mid-2023 
the opposition Labour Party has announced that it plans to build its poli￾cies on “the rock of fscal responsibility”, a commitment we would 
applaud but which needs to be backed up with fscal policy measures 
which meet the challenges described in this book. A stated focus on pro￾moting higher economic growth5
 might provide a plausible reason for 
postponing tough choices and holding down taxation levels, but does not 
suggest that concern about long-term sustainable public fnances has yet 
found its way to the top of the agenda.
If this book can generate responsible, informed political debate on the 
topic it will have served a useful purpose.
19.5 Can We Rely on Markets to Regulate 
Government Finances?
If we have doubts about whether the political process will result in the 
necessary changes to government fnancial management and fscal policy, 
can we look to fnancial markets to exert control?
It is certainly true that from time to time markets do send very clear 
messages about government policy, and governments are forced to adapt. 
Government and central bank actions during the 2008–09 Global 
I. Ball et al.307
Financial Crisis and the related Eurozone crisis of the early 2010s were 
frequently shaped by the need to respond to market concerns about the 
stability of national and global fnancial systems, and about the conse￾quences for government fnances of a failure to address these issues. More 
recently, the fnancial markets’ response to the UK budget proposals put 
forward by the Liz Truss government was a decisive factor in ensuring the 
ouster of the Prime Minister by her parliamentary party in October 2022.
Market intervention of this sort is rare, and occurs only in extreme 
circumstances. Even in the depths of the 2008–09 crisis UK government 
sterling bond yields went down rather than up; there was apparently no 
serious expectation of a default, or a similarly-damaging infationary spi￾ral. As we argued in Chap. 10, it was perhaps not so much the budget 
plans that led to the downfall of the Truss government, but the fact that 
conventional processes to validate budget proposals had been ignored; 
the government sent a message to fnancial markets that it did not care 
about fnancial sustainability. Markets are based on a strong underlying 
presumption that governments will do what it takes to keep their fnances 
in order, and it takes a lot to undermine this. But when it is undermined, 
the long-term consequences can be severe. Governments which rely on 
markets to tell them when to stop are taking very big risks.
Te very long-term challenges to public fnances that we have described 
are especially hard for markets to take into account. Te large majority of 
government debt is of much shorter maturity than the timeframe in 
which US and UK fnances are likely to come under direct pressure; the 
long-term problems have little efect on likely outcomes for bond-holders. 
Bond-holders are likely to be more concerned about near-term infa￾tion  – which can arise irrespective of government fnances, and hurts 
them whatever its cause. We have already seen that the scale of adjust￾ment required to stabilise long-term fnances in the US and UK is quite 
substantial; by the time the markets start to focus on future mismatches 
of revenues and policy costs, the necessary adjustments might be too 
large to deliver.
19 How Accounting Can Save Democracy308
19.6 Accounting and Management
Much of the discussion in this chapter so far has focused on the long￾term fscal challenges, and on how adopting an accounting-centred New 
Zealand-type approach to fnancial management can help address 
these issues.
Whilst this is our core recommendation, in making it we are at risk of 
confating two separate issues. Te fscal challenges relate largely to demo￾graphics, not to the lack of accounting. Tey can be addressed without 
changing accounting arrangements: the US and UK could adopt fscal 
rules requiring an annual budget surplus equivalent to 5% of GDP for 
50  years, and there would be no need for further action (though this 
might be a very inefcient approach, and it might be extraordinarily dif￾fcult to sustain public acceptance without a framework articulating why 
it is necessary).
In the same way, the case for better accounting does not depend on 
concerns about an impending fscal crisis. At its heart, accounting pro￾vides the information necessary to ensure that assets and liabilities are 
managed properly, and that they can be seen to be managed properly. 
Tis should apply at every level of decision-making, not just at the top. 
Government departments should be accountable not just for the money 
they spend, but for the assets that they employ.
Moreover, as we have demonstrated in Part III of this book, when 
accounting accurately describes government assets and liabilities and is 
incorporated into a fnancial management framework based upon net 
worth, then further opportunities emerge.
To recap from Chap. 12; governments typically own property equiva￾lent to around 100% of GDP, yet much less value appears on relevant 
government balance sheets owing to accounting practices which fail to 
disclose the market values of these assets. If, say, property assets represent￾ing 80% of GDP were revealed by more rigorous accounting, and the 
IMF’s estimate available efciency gain for undermanaged public assets 
of 1.5% were achieved, then the net efect would be an improvement in 
government fnances of 1.2% of GDP per year.
I. Ball et al.309
Similarly, in Chap. 17 we demonstrated that increasing borrowing to 
build up a diversifed global investment fund  – a Sovereign Wealth 
Fund – can plausibly generate 3% of GDP annual improvement in gov￾ernment fnances well within a generation, whilst increasing fnancial 
resilience.
Together, that suggests that long-term fscal improvement in excess of 
4% of GDP per year might be possible without increasing taxation or 
reducing services.
Tese examples are illustrative and are dependent on very broad-brush 
analysis. But they do suggest that the potential for meaningful improve￾ment in government fnances without raising taxes or cutting spending is 
very large in absolute terms, and potentially of a similar magnitude to the 
long-term fscal challenges faced by developed countries with ageing 
populations.
It is hard to imagine why responsible governments, opposition parties 
or professional civil services would not investigate these opportunities in 
detail. And none of this is possible without proper government account￾ing and a system of fnancial management that emphasises net worth and 
long term sustainability ahead of all other measures.
19.7 Conclusion: Saving Democracy
So far in this chapter, we have identifed a series of challenges faced by 
mature democracies with developed economies and ageing populations. 
We have illustrated how these relate not just to a need for substantial “fs￾cal adjustment”, but also raise more complex problems about intergen￾erational fairness.
Do these represent a “threat to democracy”? We think that there are 
major reasons for concern.
First, the scale of fscal adjustment that is required to meet future 
needs, starting from where we are, is very large. To make changes on a 
manageable scale, we will need to begin soon. Failure to do this will cre￾ate much greater risks of government fnancial instability in the future, 
and where this involves major economies, the consequences can be dras￾tic. Te economic and political fallout of the Eurozone crisis of the early 
19 How Accounting Can Save Democracy310
2010s provide some indications of the potential consequences for directly 
afected countries and for the broader economic and geopolitical system; 
the experience and aftermath of the Weimar Republic ofers a more 
extreme example.
Second, and more subtly, the issues that we face relate to a large extent 
to the distribution of economic benefts and costs within society. Tis is 
(mostly) not a “class” issue, as refected in traditional “left versus right” 
politics. Rather. It is a “old versus young versus yet-unborn” contest, in 
which the frst two parties not only fght with each other for scarce 
resources, but all-too-often compromise by adopting policies that beneft 
them both at the expense of the unrepresented third group. Tis might be 
democratic, but it is manifestly unfair, and risks breeding longer-term 
dissatisfaction with the political system.
Accounting does not just help us to understand these threats; it also 
provides us with the tools to counter them.
In part, these solutions are quite technical. Better accounting for assets 
will identify opportunities and means for better management of those 
assets, with the potential for meaningful improvement in government 
fnances. Basing government fnances on accounting-driven net worth￾based rules and targets opens up opportunities for investment to allow 
better management of liabilities, which can create further fscal space, on 
a substantial scale.
But proper application of accounting to government fnances can do 
something even more valuable. It can provide the tools necessary for 
informed debate about policy choices and their long-term consequences. 
If so empowered, independent budgetary oversight ofces can ensure that 
policies are costed not just on the basis of near-term cash implications, 
but on the basis of net worth impact and sustainability. Tis might not 
remove the attraction of unsustainable fscal policy, but it can make them 
much less convincing. Accounting can demonstrate issues relating to 
intergenerational fairness that conventional government fnancial frame￾works tend to obscure. Accounting can also provide the tools for efective 
monitoring of and challenge to government bodies over their ownership 
and use of assets. So the transparency that accounting afords is not just 
good for government, it is also good for the democratic process.
I. Ball et al.311
Notes
1. OECD Labor Force Statistics April 2023; www.data.oecd.org
2. Statista 2023
3. IMF Public Sector Database, 2023. Figures are for General Government, 
i.e., excluding nationalised industries.
4. Leila Abboud, Financial Times 16 March 2023.
5. George Parker, Financial Times 23 May 2023.
19 How Accounting Can Save Democracy© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 313
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5_20
20
Implementing Change
Adopting the accounting-driven principles described in this book has 
widespread relevance, and especially to democratic countries with highly￾developed welfare states. Action steps include adopting fscal targets that 
refect the current balance sheet and long-term projections of future rev￾enues and costs; using accrual accounting-based fnancial information 
across government; developing and sustaining independent institutions 
to evaluate and report upon fnancial sustainability; evaluating and man￾aging government commercial assets (especially property) to improve 
resource use and increase revenues; evaluating and managing non-debt 
liabilities (including anticipated future costs); establishing debt-funded 
Sovereign Wealth Funds to improve government revenues and increase 
fnancial resilience. 
20.1 A Common Programme for Change
We propose that central governments consider the following overall plan:
Adopt a new fnancial management framework, in which government 
fnances as a whole will be assessed based upon current net worth, 
and on the long-term sustainability of government policy.314
NEAR TERM: All government fnancial decisions to be made with a 
view to their impact on net worth. For example, debt-funded investment 
spending will have low to zero impact provided that assets are worth what 
is paid for them. Debt-funded consumption of services will be net worth 
negative. Where debt-funded current consumption is deemed necessary, 
set a clear path for redressing the impact on net worth. Long-term plans 
to be costed and published, and government to defne long-term strategy 
to ensure fnancial sustainability.
LONGER-TERM: Availability of regular (e.g. monthly) fnancial infor￾mation at central government and departmental level will facilitate net 
worth focus, avoid default to readily-available borrowing data as a proxy. 
Regular (e.g. yearly) long-term assessments will retain government/
media/voter focus on sustainability of fnances and progress towards goals.
Institutionalise this approach within government, with full accrual￾based accounting to become the primary fnancial management tool 
at all levels of decision-making.
NEAR TERM: Set goals and implementation timetables for accrual 
accounting framework to be delivered across government. Put in place 
systems for estimating balance sheet data in the interim.
LONGER-TERM: Government departments to make management 
decisions based upon accounting information rather than pre-existing 
tools. Departments to be focused on efcient management of assets as 
well as provision of services.
Develop independent institutions for evaluating the near- and long￾term fnancial sustainability of policy with clear statutory authority. 
Embed these in policy-making, fnancial reporting, and fnancial 
assessment of election manifestos/platforms.
NEAR TERM: Expand existing or create new independent budget over￾sight ofces with statutory powers to evaluate policy proposals, near-term 
and long-term fnancial sustainability, and to assess performance versus 
near- and long-term plans.
LONGER-TERM: Resist temptation to reduce the role or authority of 
these bodies.
I. Ball et al.315
Evaluate commercial assets held on government balance sheets, espe￾cially property, and establish appropriate mechanisms to ensure that 
these are managed on a commercial basis and yield a return to taxpay￾ers commensurate with their economic value.
NEAR TERM: Use “asset map” and similar techniques to assess property 
holdings and operational assets as if held in a virtual holding company, at 
all levels of government. Develop models for arm’s length commercial 
management of these assets at central and regional/local government level 
(e.g., Public Wealth Funds). Provide incentives for early and efective 
assessment and implementation to ensure value is extracted from hidden 
assets and used to meet policy goals.
LONGER-TERM: Full implementation of accrual accounting will allow 
continuing oversight of asset use and asset management at every report￾ing level within government. Ensure best practices at asset management 
organisations (PWFs) are communicated and implemented.
Assess non-debt fnancial liabilities on the balance sheet and future 
anticipated policy costs (“implicit liabilities”), and establish funding 
and investment  mechanisms to minimise the cost to taxpayers of 
these liabilities.
NEAR TERM: Evaluate where non-debt liabilities are being incurred 
across government and consider whether these represent good value when 
assessed in terms of their impact on net worth, with a special focus on 
Defned Beneft pensions schemes. As part of a long-term strategy to 
address existing or future liabilities, establish a Sovereign Wealth Fund to 
invest in a global, diversifed portfolio to generate long term equity-like 
returns, funded by debt, tax revenues, or a combination of the two.
LONGER-TERM: Overall success of strategy and performance of the 
SWF should be evaluated as part of ongoing fnancial sustainability 
assessment.
20 Implementing Change316
20.2 How Implementation Plans Will Differ 
Between Countries
Te right way to implement this proposal will vary according to the cir￾cumstances of each country.
Te situations, and hence the priorities, of individual countries will be 
diferent. For example, we have seen how New Zealand recognised that it 
faces high exposure to natural disasters, and hence adopted a balance 
sheet strategy designed to provide a high degree of resilience in the face of 
external shocks. Demographics vary quite widely across countries; future 
needs will vary. Some countries have extensive natural resources and sub￾stantial positive net worth; the challenge here might be to ensure that 
these resources are used in a way that appropriately balances the needs of 
current and future generations. Others have no such resources, negative 
net worth, and commensurately diferent goals.
Te way that government is structured varies widely and will have 
implications for the fnancial management framework. In some coun￾tries—e.g., the UK—government is quite unitary; local and devolved 
regional governments are heavily dependent on central government for 
funding, and consolidated government (or public sector) accounting is 
likely to be an appropriate basis for describing, and managing, national 
fnances. Other countries are federal in nature, and state or provincial 
governments might be sufciently independent in their fnancial decision￾making to make consolidated accounting and fnancial management 
inappropriate or impractical.
Monetary unions (most obviously, the Eurozone) will need to consider 
how to transition to a focus on net worth and long-term fnancial sus￾tainability whilst maintaining the mutual obligations between states that 
are essential to the stability of these arrangements.
Tere will be diferences in existing accounting arrangements, and in 
the time that it will take to implement the reforms necessary to generate 
timely, accruals-based fnancial information.
I. Ball et al.317
20.3 Final Thoughts
As history reminds us, to be efective, fnancial reforms must be embed￾ded in the culture of the society that has adopted them, and in the insti￾tutions that serve that society.
Sustainable fnance and intergenerational fairness might seem abstract, 
but they are real considerations that relate to the choices that we all face 
in our daily lives. Te political narrative must move on from kicking the 
can on long-term challenges, or (worse) interpreting any short-term 
improvement in government fnances as a reason for tax cuts, to present￾ing a reasoned view about long-term choices to electorates that will 
understand them if they are properly explained.
Te changes that we propose will provide clear, ongoing visibility of 
the near- and long-term outlook for government fnances. Tis can sup￾port policy platforms geared to higher or lower levels of public service 
provision, and commensurately higher or lower levels of taxation. We are 
not advocating a restriction of legitimate political choice. Democracy is 
all about competition between alternative visions of what government 
should do. But if it is to survive and prosper, these choices should be 
made on the basis of a shared understanding of fnancial reality.
Te good news is that not only do these proposals make sense at a 
theoretical level, they will also unlock resources that can help govern￾ments address the long-term fnancial challenges that they face, improve 
service provision, or reduce taxation.
Good accounting will mean better government, greater prosperity, 
more stable democracies, and a fairer society.
20 Implementing Change© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 319
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5
A
Accrued expenses An expense that has been incurred but for which there is not 
yet any expenditure documentation. In place of the documentation, a journal 
entry is created to record an accrued expense and an ofsetting liability. In the 
absence of a journal entry, the expense would not appear at all in the entity’s 
fnancial statements in the period incurred, which would result in reported 
profts being too high in that period. In short, accrued expenses are recorded 
to increase the accuracy of the fnancial statements so that expenses are more 
closely aligned with the period in which they are incurred.
Asset A resource with economic value that an individual, corporation, or coun￾try owns or controls with the expectation that it will provide a future beneft.
Appropriation Te (usually legislative) act of authorising the consumption of 
resources for a specifc purpose, formalising the decisions made in the budget￾making processes.
B
Balance sheet A fnancial statement that provides a snapshot of what a company 
owns and owes, as well as net worth (the diference between assets and liabili￾ties). Formally referred to as the Statement of Financial Position.
Glossary and Abbreviations320 Glossary and Abbreviations
Budget A forecast of the fnancial performance and fnancial position of an 
entity for a future period
Borrowing see debt
C
Consolidated fnancial statements Te fnancial statements of a group in which 
the assets, liabilities, equity, income, expenses and cash fows of the parent 
and its subsidiaries are presented as those of a single economic entity
D
Debt Te amount  of  money  owed  by a  person,  company,  government, or 
organisation to another party, on which they usually have to pay interest
Defned-beneft pension plan A superannuation scheme which provides a speci￾fed payment amount to an employee in retirement (the employer bears the 
investment risks and the cost of administration)
Defned-contribution pension plan A superannuation scheme which provides a 
specifed amount to an employee to invest in funds and other securities for 
retirement (the employee bears the investment risks and the cost of 
administration).
Double-entry accounting Double-entry accounting is a record-keeping system 
under which every transaction is recorded in at least two accounts, and the 
total of all debit entries equals all credit entries. double Double-entry records 
the diferent impacts of an event or transaction – for example, if an asset is 
purchased, double-entry records both the payment of cash and the ownership 
of the asset.
E
Expenditure Expenditure is the payment with either cash or credit to purchase 
goods or services. It is recorded at the time of purchase, compared to 
an expense recorded when the goods or services are consumed.Glossary and Abbreviations 321
Expense An expense is a decrease in an entity’s net worth other than from distri￾bution to owners. Expenses can result from transactions such as employee 
payments or events such as depreciation or other loss of value of assets.
F
Funded pension plan A funded pension plan is funded concurrently with the 
benefts being accrued by employees. Tese funds are set aside and accounted 
for when the employee provides the services, well before the employee retires. 
Advance-funded pension plans are generally defned-contribution plans and 
are fully funded.
Financial asset A liquid asset that gets its value from a contractual right or own￾ership claim, such as cash, stocks, bonds, mutual funds, and bank deposits.
Financial position Te fnancial position of an organisation is reported in the bal￾ance sheet (formally titled the statement of fnancial position), which reports 
the organisation’s assets, liabilities and net worth at the end of a fnan￾cial period.
Financial statements Financial statements are a collection of summary-level 
reports about an organisation’s fnancial results, fnancial position, and cash 
fows. Tey include the income statement (formally the statement of fnancial 
performance), balance sheet (statement of fnancial position), and statement 
of cash fows.
G
General government Institutional units that fulfl government functions as their 
primary activity, including central government, local government, and state 
government units, excluding public corporations. Te essence is the nature of 
the activity – e.g., national defence and education are classifed as govern￾mental activity. General government does not include institutions in the pri￾vate sector that provide these services.322 Glossary and Abbreviations
I
Intertemporal Describing any relationship between past, present and future 
events or conditions.
Infation A rise in prices, which can be translated as the decline of the purchas￾ing power of money over time
Intangible assets Intangible assets are non-physical assets with a monetary value 
since they generate future cash fows. Examples include patents, copyrights, 
and brands. In general, acquired intangible assets are reported as assets on the 
balance sheet, but those generated internally are not.
Input Resources consumed in the production of outputs (goods or services). 
Examples of inputs are personnel costs, materials, the use of plant and equip￾ment, and travel.
L
Liability A liability is a present obligation of the entity resulting from past trans￾actions or events. Liabilities are incurred to fnance the organisation and fund 
its ongoing activities. Examples of liabilities are debt (borrowings) such as 
government bonds, accounts payable, accrued expenses, wages payable, and 
taxes payable. Tese obligations are eventually settled by transferring cash or 
other resources to the other party.
Liquid fnancial asset Cash on hand or an asset other than cash that can be 
quickly converted into cash at a reasonable price. In other words, a liquid 
asset can be quickly sold on the market without a signifcant loss of its value. 
Tese assets include cash, cash equivalents (checking account, savings 
account, money market account) and marketable securities (stocks, govern￾ment bonds)
M
Marketable securities Marketable securities are unrestricted short-term fnan￾cial  instruments  that are either equity securities  or debt securities, where 
the issuing entity creates these instruments to raise funds to further fnance 
business activities or, in the case of governments, for funding of public proj￾ects and expenditures.Glossary and Abbreviations 323
N
Net worth Net worth is the diference between total assets and total liabilities. 
Corporations are considered insolvent if liabilities exceed assets, though gov￾ernments commonly have a negative net worth (total liabilities exceed total 
assets).
Non-fnancial assets Non-fnancial assets are not traded on the fnancial markets, 
and their value is derived from their capacity to generate services or revenues 
rather than from contractual claims. Non-fnancial assets include  tangible 
assets (commonly reported as property, plant, and equipment in fnancial 
statements), such as land, buildings, motor vehicles, and equipment, as well 
as intangible assets, such as patents, goodwill, and intellectual property.
O
Operating balance Surplus or defcit in the government budget, equivalent to 
proft or loss in the private sector
Output Goods or services produced by an entity.
P
Purchasing power Te value of a currency expressed in terms of the amount of 
goods or services that one unit of money can buy
Public sector General government as well as fnancial and non-fnancial public 
corporations, at all levels of administration (national, sub-national and local 
government)
Private Finance Initiative (PFI) PFI is a procurement method which uses private 
sector investment to deliver public sector infrastructure and/or services 
according to a specifcation defned by the public sector. It is a subset of a 
broader procurement approach termed public-private partnership (PPP), 
with the main defning characteristic being the use of project fnance (using 
private sector debt and equity, which the public may underwrite) to deliver 
the public services.324 Glossary and Abbreviations
Public Private Partnership (PPP) A PPP is a long-term contract between a private 
party and a government entity, for providing a public asset or service, in 
which the private party bears signifcant risk and management responsibility 
while also receiving the fnancial return from the arrangement.
Present discounted value Present value (PV) is the current value of a future sum 
of money or stream of cash fows given an assumed rate of return (the dis￾count rate). Te higher the discount rate, the lower is the present value of the 
future cash fows. Determining the appropriate discount rate is the key to 
properly valuing future cash fows, whether they be  earnings  or debt 
obligations
Provisions A provision is an existing liability of uncertain amount or timing.
R
Revenue Revenue is an increase in the net worth of an organization, other than 
an increase resulting from a contribution by the owners. In a governmental 
context the main sources of revenues are taxes, fees and charges, and returns 
from holdings of fnancial assets, including increases in the value of fnancial 
and non-fnancial assets.
Real asset Real property consists of land and improvements, which include build￾ings, fxtures, roads, structures, and utility systems. Property rights give a title 
of ownership to the land, improvements, and natural resources such as min￾erals, plants, animals, water, etc.
S
Sinking Fund Money set aside to pay of a debt or bond. Sinking funds help 
soften the hardship of a large outlay at a future point in time. A sinking fund 
is established to pay in advance to the fund in the years leading up to 
the bond's maturity.
T
Tangible assets Physical assets or property used to produce products and services.Glossary and Abbreviations 325
U
Unfunded pension liabilities Employer-managed retirement plan that uses the 
employer’s current income to fund pension payments as they become neces￾sary. Tese do not have any assets set aside, meaning that retirement benefts 
are usually paid directly from employer contributions. (also called pay-as￾you-go schemes).
Abbreviations
IFRS International Financial Reporting Standards
IPSAS International Public Sector Accounting Standards
GFSM Government Finance Statistics Manual
ESA European System of Accounts
EDP Excess Defcit Procedure
GAAP Generally accepted accounting practice© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024 327
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5
Albouy, D. and Zabek, M. (2016) “Housing Inequality”. NBER Working 
Paper 21916
Alchian, A. A. (1965). Some Economics of Property Rights. IL Politico, vol. 
30, 816–829.
Ball, Ian, Dale, Tony, Eggers, William D. and Sacco, John (2000), Reforming 
Financial Management In Te Public Sector: Lessons Canada Can Learn 
From New Zealand, Frontier Centre for Public Policy
Ball, I. (2019). “Public Finance Act has proved its worth in good times and 
bad”. Stuf, 25 July 2018
Ball, I., Detter, D. (2020). “Better Accounting Can Get Us Trough the 
Pandemic”. Bloomberg, 19 December 2020
Ball, I. Crompton, J. Detter, D. (2022a) “Public Financial Management and 
Google Maps”, IMF Blog
Ball, I. Crompton, J. Detter, D. (2022b) “Public Financial Management 2.0”, 
Public Finance Focus.
Ball, I. Crompton, J. Detter, D. (2022c) “Mapping the unknown”, IMF F&D 
Magazine, March 2022.
Ball, I.  Crompton, J.  Detter, D. (2021) “Tilted Balance Sheets; Making the 
most of public sector assets” Public Finance (London) December 2021
Ball, I., Detter, D. (2017) “Lessons from New Zealand on fscal discipline”. 
Financial Times, 11 October 2017
Bibliography328 Bibliography
Bayliss, K., Hall, D. (2017) “Bringing water into public ownership: costs and 
benefts (Rev’d)” University of Greenwich, 1 May 2017
Bell, Stephanie (2001), “Te role of the state and the hierarchy of money”, 
Cambridge Journal of Economics, Vol. 25, pp. 149–163.
Bergström, C. Englund, P. Torell, P. (2003) “Securum and the Way out of the 
Swedish Banking Crisis” SNS  – Center for Business and Policy 
Studies, May 2003
BIS (2022) “Credit to the Non-Financial Sector,” Bank for International 
Settlements, December 5, 2022.
Blinkhorn, M. (1994) “Mussolini and Fascist Italy” Routledge
Bond, D. (2018) “MoD loses up to £4bn in homes deal with UK private equity 
group”. Financial Times, January 30, 2018.
Borst, Nicholas. (2023) “China’s Balance Sheet Challenge”. China Leadership 
Monitor, March 1, 2023
Brenna, G. Poppensieker, T. Schneider, S. (2009) “Understanding the bad bank” 
McKinsey & Co, 1 December 2009
Brown-Humes, C. “Welcome to the ways of the market”. Financial Times, 12 
November 1999
Buiter, W, Corsetti, G, Roubini, N, Repullo R and Frankel J, (1993), Excessive 
Defcits: Sense and Nonsense in the Treaty of Maastricht, Economic Policy, 
Vol. 8, No. 16 (Apr., 1993), pp. 57–100
Buiter, Willem H. (2007), “Seigniorage”, Economics, the Open-Access, Open￾Assessment E-Journal, No. 2007–10, pp. 1–49. July 25.
Buiter, Willem H. (2013), “Te Role of Central Banks in Financial Stability: 
How Has it Changed?”, World Scientifc Studies in International Economics: 
Volume 30, “Te Role of Central Banks in Financial Stability: How Has it 
Changed?”, edited by Douglas D Evanof (Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 
USA), Cornelia Holthausen (European Central Bank, Germany), George G 
Kaufman (Loyola University Chicago, USA) & Manfred Kremer (European 
Central Bank, Germany), pp. 11–56.
Buiter, Willem H. (2021), Central Banks as Fiscal Players. Te Drivers of Fiscal 
and Monetary Policy Space, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Buiter, Willem H., and Catherine L. Mann (2019), “Modern Monetary Teory 
(MMT). What’s right is not new, what’s new is not right, and what’s left is too 
simplistic”, Citi GPS: Global Perspectives & Solutions, April
Cagan, P. (1956), “Te Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinfation”, in Friedman, 
Milton (ed.). Studies in the Quantity Teory of Money. Chicago: University 
of ChicagoBibliography 329
Chan, T., Tan, E, Ip, C. (2022) “China’s SOEs Are Stuck in a Debt Trap,” S&P 
Global Ratings, September 20, 2022
Christophers, B. (2018). “Te New Enclosure: Te Appropriation of Public 
Land in Neoliberal Britain”
Congressional Research Service (2020). “Federal Land Ownership: Overview 
and Data” (Updated February 21, 2020)
Controller and Auditor-General (2013), Managing Public Assets, 
Discussion Paper
Daley, S. (2013). “Who Owns Tis Land? In Greece, Who Knows?”. New York 
Times, May 26, 2013
Davoodi, Hamid, Paul Elger, Alexandra Fotiou, Daniel Garcia-Macia, Andresa 
Lagerborg, Raphael Lam, and Sharanya Pillai. (2022a). “Fiscal Rules Dataset: 
1985–2021”, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.
Davoodi H. R., P. Elger, A. Fotiou, D. Garcia-Macia, X. Han, A. Lagerborg, 
W.R. Lam, and P. Medas. (2022b). “Fiscal Rules and Fiscal Councils: Recent 
Trends and Performance during the Pandemic”, IMF Working Paper 
No.22/11, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.
Detter, D and Fölster, S. (2018) “Unlocking Public Wealth”, IMF F&D 
Magazine, March 2018
Detter, D. and Fölster, S. (2022) ’Konsten att tappa bort fyratusen miljarder’. 
Samhällsförlaget.
Detter, D. and Fölster, S. (2015) Te Public Wealth of Nations
Detter, D. (2017) “UK councils are taking huge commercial risks in trying to be 
hedge fund managers”. Te Guardian June 5, 2017.
Detter, D.(2019) “For Economic Growth, the World Needs Accountants”. 
IFAC 26 March 2019
Detter, D. Walker, D. Gibson, L. Amin-Salem, H. (2019) “Putting public assets 
to work” Citi Perspectives
Detter, D, Fölster, S, Buiter, W. Rai, V. Finnigan, J. (2018) Te Public Wealth 
of Cities: How to Turn Around Cities’ Fortunes by Unlocking Public Assets, 
Citi GPS: Global Perspectives & Solutions, March 2018.
Deloitte Ross Tohmatsu, Post-Implementation Review of Cash Management 
Reform, November 1990, cited in Petrie, M and Webber, D, Review of 
Evidence on Broad Outcome of Public Sector Management Regime, Treasury 
Working Paper 01/06
de Waal, André (2010), “Achieving High Performance in the Public Sector”, 
Public Performance & Management Review, 34 (1), September 2010, 
pp. 81–103.330 Bibliography
Economist, Te (1992). “New Zealand Inc.” (‘Economic Focus’, August 15, 1992)
Economist, Te. August 15, 2020
Estrin, S., Hanousek, J., Kocenda, E., & Svejnar, J. (2009). Te Efects of 
Privatization and Ownership in Transition Economies. Journal of Economic 
Literature 47(3), 699–728
Farrel, D. Lund, S. (2006). “Putting China’s capital to work”. McKinsey & Co.
Florio, M. (2002) ‘A state without ownership: the welfare impact of British pri￾vatisations 1979–1997’, Working Paper No. 24.2002, Milan: Dipartimento 
di Economia Politica e Aziendale, Universita degli Studi di Milano,
Fukuyama, F. (2014) “Political Order and Political Decay: From the French 
Revolution to the Present”
Gallagher, K.  Wang, Y. (2020) “Sovereign Debt Trough the Lens of Asset 
Management: Implications for SADC Countries” Boston University, GEGI 
Working Paper 042 11/2020
Gaspar, Vitor, Jason Harris, Alexander F.  Tieman (2018) “Te Wealth of 
Nations: Governments Can Better Manage What Tey Own and 
Owe” IMF Blog
Gaspar, Vitor and Amaglobeli, David (2019), Fiscal Rules, SUERF Policy Note, 
Issue No 60
Gaspar, Vitor (2020). Future of Fiscal Rules in the Euro Area. Keynote Address 
to Department Workshop on “Fiscal Rules in Europe: Design and 
Enforcement” DG ECFIN (January 2020)
Georgieva, Kristalina (2023), “Confronting Fragmentation Where it Matters 
Most: Trade, Debt and Climate Action”, IMF Blog, January 16, 2023
Gill, Derek, (2018), Te Fiscal Responsibility Act 1994: Te astonishing success 
of a weak non-binding policy, NZIER, Working paper 2018/1
Goh, K.S., Preface to Te Economics of Modernization, May 1972
Grubisic, Mihaela, Mustafa Nusinovic and Gorana Roje (2009), “Towards ef￾cient public sector asset management, Financial Teory and Practice, 33 (3), 
pp. 329–362.
Haldane, Andy (2023). Te case for rethinking fscal rules is overwhelming, 
Financial Times, 16 May.
Hammond, G., Pickard, J. (2020) “Croydon seeks government help amid crisis 
for councils” Financial Times, 26 August 2020.
Harris, Jason and Alexander F.  Tieman (October 2018). “Managing Public 
Wealth”, IMF Fiscal MonitorBibliography 331
Horn, S., Parks, B., Reinhart, C., Trebesch, C. (2023) “China as an International 
Lender of Last Resort”. American Economic Association 2023 Annual 
Meeting session “China and U.S. in the International Monetary System”.
HM Treasury (2018), Financial relationship between HM Treasury and the 
Bank of England: memorandum of understanding, June.
House of Commons Library. (2023). Key Economic Indicators Number 02802, 
22 June 2023
Hughes, R., J. Leslie, C. Pacitti and J. Smith (2019), “Totally (net) Worth It: the 
next generation of UK fscal rules”, Resolution Foundation.
International Federation of Accountants and OECD (2017). Accrual Practices 
and Reform Experiences in OECD Countries.
International Federation of Accountants and Te Chartered Institute of Public 
Finance and Accountancy (2021a), International Public Sector Financial 
Accountability Index, 2021 Status Report
International Monetary Fund (2014). Government Financial Statistics Manual
International Monetary Fund (2018), “Managing Public Wealth”, October 
2018 Fiscal Monitor (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
International Monetary Fund Fiscal Monitor (2020). “State-owned Enterprises: 
Te other government”. April 2020
International Monetary Fund (2021), “Argentina, ex-post evaluation of excep￾tional access under the 2018 stand-by arrangement – Press release and staf 
report”, IMF Country Report No. 21/279, December 2021.
International Monetary Fund (2022a) “Country Report No. 22/221. Article IV 
Consultation for Jordan”.
International Monetary Fund (2022b), Reforming the EU Fiscal Framework: 
Strengthening the Fiscal Rules and Institutions.
International Monetary Fund (April 2023). World Economic Outlook,
International Federation of Accountants and Te Chartered Institute of Public 
Finance and Accountancy (2021b), International Public Sector Financial 
Accountability Index, 2021 Status Report.
International Public Sector Accounting Standards Board (2014), Te Conceptual 
Framework for Financial Reporting by Public Sector Entities.
International Public Sector Accounting Standards Board (2006) International 
Public Sector Accounting Standard 17 - Property, Plant, and Equipment
Jensen, M. (1986). Agency costs of free cash fows, corporate fnance, and take￾overs. American Economic Review 76, 323–329.332 Bibliography
Jurzyk, E. Ruane, C. (2021) “Resource Misallocation Among Listed Firms in 
China: Te Evolving Role of State-Owned Enterprises,” International 
Monetary Fund, March 12, 2021
Kell, Michael (2001), An Assessment of Fiscal Rules in the United Kingdom, 
IMF Working Paper
Kinder, T. (2020) “UK regulator fnds ‘unacceptable’ rate of failures in council 
audits” Financial Times, October 30, 2020
Klein, Matthew, (2017) ‘America’s Governmental Accounting Standards Board 
is giving ruinously bad advice.’ Financial Times, August 23, 2017
Kowalski, P., M.  Buge, M.  Sztajerowska, M.  Egeland (2013) “State-Owned 
Enterprises: Trade Efects and Policy Implications.”
Koshima, Yugo, Jason Harris, Alexander F. Tieman, and Alessandro De Sanctis 
(2021), “Te Cost of Future Policy: Intertemporal Public Sector Balance 
Sheets in the G7”, IMF Working Paper, WP/21/18, May 2021
Lardy, N. (1998). “China’s Unfnished Economic Revolution”. Brookings 
Institution Press.
Lardy, N. (2019). “Te State Strikes Back: Te End of Economic Reform in 
China?” Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics
Leong, L. (2016) “Te ‘Rail plus Property’ model: Hong Kong’s successful self￾fnancing formula” McKinsey & Co, 2 June 2016
Martinelli, Alvaro. (2005). Te Ledger of Cristianus Lomellinus and Dominicus 
De Garibaldo, Stewards of the City of Genoa (1340–41). Abacus. 19. 
83– 118.
McGregor, R. (2010). “Te Party: Te Secret World of China’s Communist Rulers”,
McKinsey & Co (2016)” Bridging the infrastructure gap.”
Megginson, W. and Netter, J. (2001). “From State to Market: A Survey of 
Empirical Studies on Privatization.” Journal of Economic Literature, 39 
(2): 321–389.
Miller, C. (2022) “Chip War – the fght for the world’s most critical technol￾ogy”. Simon & Schuster
Moretti, D. (2016), “Accrual practices and reform experiences in OECD coun￾tries  - Results of the 2016 OECD Accruals Survey”, OECD Journal on 
Budgeting, vol. 16/1, https://doi.org/10.1787/budget-16-5jlv2jx2mtzq.
National Business Review (24 March 2022). “Government balance sheet in 
good shape despite Covid”.
Nordenstam, S. Shanley, M. (2013) “Sweden sells remaining stake in Nordea for 
$3.4 billion” Reuters,Bibliography 333
OECD (2021a), Ownership and Governance of State-Owned Enterprises: A 
Compendium of National Practices 2021
OECD (2021b). Government at a Glance: General Government Gross Debt.
OECD (2015), OECD Guidelines on Corporate Governance of State-Owned 
Enterprises, 2015 Edition, OECD
OECD Trade Policy Paper 147, OECD Publishing, Paris.
Ofce for Budget Responsibility. (2022) Fiscal risks and sustainability. July
Ofce for Budget Responsibility. (2023). Financial Sustainability Report 
July 2023.
Ofce for National Statistics (July 2022). Efects of taxes and benefts on UK 
household income: fnancial year ending 2021
Parker, D. Te ofcial history of Privatisation: Volume 1, 2009
Peppel-Srebrny, J (2018). Government borrowing cost and balance sheets: do 
assets matter? University of Oxford, Department of Economics Discussion 
Paper Series, Number 860
Pettis, M. (2022). “China’s Overextended Real Estate Sector Is a Systemic 
Problem”. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
Reuters. 6 May 2021. EU debt limit of 60% no longer makes sense  - 
ESM's Regling.
RICS (2021), “Strategic public sector property management”, 3rd edition, 
September 2021
Scott, G. (1995), New Zealand’s Fiscal Responsibility Act, Agenda: A Journal of 
Policy Analysis and Reform, 2 (1). Pp. 3–16.
Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R. (1997). A Survey of Corporate Governance. Journal 
of Finance, Vol. 52, pp , 737–783.
Shirley, M., & Walsh, P. (2000). Public vs. Private Ownership: Te Current 
State of the Debate. Policy Research Working Paper Series No. 2420.
Singapore Ministry of Finance (2023) “What comprises the reserves and who 
manages them?” Retrieved 4 May 2023
Song, Z., K. Storesleten, F. Zilibotti. 2011. “Growing Like China.” American 
Economic Review 101 (February): 202–41.
SOU (2012). “Te Swedish Government Inquiry regarding the administration 
of the state-owned enterprises”. (SOU 2012:14)
Solidium Investor Presentation, September 2022
State Council (2022) “Comprehensive Report of the State Council on the 
Management of State-owned Assets in FY 2021” State-Owned Assets 
Supervision and Administration Commission of the State Council. 
November 16, 2022,334 Bibliography
Swedish Government (2001) “Investor presentation of government company 
portfolio”. Stockholm, 2001.
Swedish Law (2018:597) on Municipal book-keeping and accounting (kom￾munal bokföring och redovisning)
Swedish Government (2009). “Guidelines for terms of employment for senior 
executives in stet-owned companies.
Tanzi, V. and Prakash, T. (2000) ‘Te Cost of Government and the Misuse of 
Public Assets’. IMF
Te Treasury (2011). Putting It Together
Te Treasury (2020). Pre-election Economic and Fiscal Update
Te Treasury (2021). He Tirohanga Mokopuna 2021 Te Treasury’s combined 
Statement on the Long-term Fiscal Position and Long-term Insights Briefng
Te Treasury (March 2022a). He Puna Hao Pātiki: 2022 Investment Statement.
Te Treasury (October 2022b). Financial Statements of the Government of 
New Zealand for the Year Ended 30 June 2022,
Te Treasury. (November 2022c). Te Tai Waiora: Wellbeing in Aotearoa 
New Zealand,
Te Treasury (2023a). Interim Financial Statements for the Seven Months to 31 
January 2023
Te Treasury (2023b). Budget Economic and Fiscal Update
Tomas, L.(2010) “Greek Rail System’s Debt Adds to Economic Woes” Te 
New York Times, 20 July 2010
Toniolo, G. et  al., Te Oxford Handbook of the Italian Economy Since 
Unifcation, (Oxford University Press) 2013, (p.
Tooze, A. (2018). “Te New Enclosure: Te Appropriation of Public Land in 
Neoliberal Britain”. Financial Times, January 18, 2019
UNEP (2022) “Adaptation Gap Report 2022”. United Nations Environment 
Program, 1 November 2022
US Government Accountability Ofce (2020). “Defense Real Property: DOD￾Wide Strategy Needed to Address Control Issues and Improve Reliability 
of Records”
US Bureau of Economic Analysis (2021)
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). 2019. 
World Investment Report 2019: Special Economic Zones. Geneva: 
United Nations.
United Kingdom Government, 2023. Whole of Government Accounts 
2019–2020.Bibliography 335
Vannucci, A. (2009). “Te Controversial Legacy of ‘Mani Pulite’: A Critical 
Analysis of Italian Corruption and Anti-Corruption Policies”. Bulletin of 
Italian Politics Vol. 1, No. 2, 2009, 233–64
Vining and Boardman 1992
Wong, S. (2018). “Te State of Governance at State-Owned Enterprises”. IFC
Yousef, R. (2019) “Public Sector Balance Sheet Strength and the Macro 
Economy”. International Monetary Fund, 6 August 2019337
Index1
1Note: Page numbers followed by ‘n’ refer to notes.
A
Accounting, vi, 5, 27–36, 45, 55, 74, 
101, 112, 157, 165, 181, 194, 
211, 240, 251, 273, 297–310, 314
literacy, 276, 278
manuals, 276, 277
Accrual accounting
diference between cash basis 
accounting system and, 57
Accrual-based fnancial reporting, 84
Asset management, 13, 45, 46, 54, 
85, 169, 176, 181, 192, 315
Asset management company (AMC), 
235, 236
Asset map, 178, 181–189, 315
Asset mapping exercise
collaborative analysis, 188–189
desktop exercise, 186
Asset ownership, 54, 176
Assets on government balance sheet, 251
AssiDomän, 220
Autocracies, 6, 215, 285–287, 304
B
Bad-bank concept, 234
Balance sheet, v, vi, 3–5, 8–13, 17, 
27, 28, 30–32, 34–36, 37n2, 
39–51, 57, 61–67, 69, 71n4, 
71n5, 73, 75, 76, 79–82, 
87n4, 87n5, 89–95, 97–108, 
111–125, 127–148, 151, 154, 
165, 170, 173, 174, 177, 183, 
184, 188, 203, 209, 210, 213, 
217, 218, 223, 231, 233–235, 
247, 251–256, 263–265, 
267–269, 273–292, 297, 300, 
302, 308, 314–316, 319, 
321, 322
limitations, 62–66
© Te Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
I. Ball et al., Public Net Worth, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44343-5338 Index
Banking crisis, 235
Black Wednesday, 140
Borrow-to-invest strategy, 266, 267
Bretton Woods system of fxed 
exchange rates, 10, 20
BRIC economies, 214
C
Capital allocation, 78, 184, 
196–197, 215, 240, 244
Capitalism, 213–219, 278–283
Cash accounting, 51, 59, 60, 69, 74, 
78–80, 82, 86, 256
Cash basis accounting system, 57
Cash fow statement, 58
Central bank
activity and its impact on public 
sector balance sheet, 93–95
irredeemable assets of, 91
money or monetary base, 91
seigniorage revenue, 92, 107, 108
structure and ownership, 90
Central Government Balance 
Sheet, 12
Central Huijin Investment Ltd. 
(Central Huijin), 215
Chinese fnancial system, 216
Competition, 177, 192–198, 214, 
218, 231, 238, 240, 278, 
284, 317
Comprehensive balance sheet
approach to developing, 98
assessment of, 100, 106
comparisons between 
countries, 128
evaluation using IMF 
framework, 128–133
Containerisation, 232
Copenhagen UWF, 232
Corporate governance, 
235, 238–241
Credit risk of countries, 10
Crowding out concern, 266
Custodianship, 202, 203, 215
D
Datscha, 186, 188, 190n9
Debt-based rules, 302
Debt ceiling, 10, 107, 109n6
Debt Sustainability Analysis 
(DSA), 184–185
Debt-to-GDP benchmarks, 297
Democracy, v, 6–7, 40, 66, 120, 142, 
143, 177, 292, 297–310, 317
Discount rate, vi, 50, 99, 100, 106, 
117, 130, 253, 324
Doomsday Book, 182
Double-entry book-keeping, 59
Dutch accounting and fnancial 
management
capitalism and, 278–283
national assets and wealth 
production, 284
philosophy, 283–284
E
Earnings before interest and tax 
(EBIT), 185
Earnings before interest, tax, 
depreciation, and amortisation 
(EBITDA), 185
Economic growth, vi, 13, 19, 20, 54, 
93, 123, 129, 147, 192, 195, 
196, 205, 213, 220, 223, 233, 
284, 306Index 339
English East India Company, 
279, 280
Escola Municipal Cicero Pena, Rio 
de Janeiro, 169–170
Eurozone crisis, 106, 123, 307, 309
Exemplia, 263–265
F
Financial assets, 42, 43, 47, 115, 
118, 121, 166, 263, 321, 324
Financial decision-making
accrual information, 67, 70, 73, 
83–86, 157
importance of timely 
information, 66–69
Financial management policy, 267
Financial risk management, 175
Financial sustainability, 144–147, 
194, 307, 314–316
Fiscal adjustments, vi, 135, 136, 
138, 139, 141, 265, 270, 309
Fiscal austerity measures, 140
Fiscal objectives, 83–86
Fiscal rules
in European Union, 8, 153
in UK, 153, 308
Free lunch, 91–92, 265–267
G
G7 countries, 13, 14, 23, 90, 91, 
100, 103, 114, 119, 120, 
122–125, 128, 130, 133, 139, 
145, 148, 252, 254, 255, 263, 
270, 297, 299, 302, 305, 306
General Government accounts, 12
Generally Accepted Accounting 
Practice (GAAP), 64, 204, 240
Germany
under Bismarck, 20
German life expectancy 
1875-2020, 21
welfare programmes, 20
Global fnancial crisis, 9, 13, 48, 89, 
91, 113, 141, 157, 213
Global Financial Crisis, 2008, 
100, 112
Good accounting, 27, 32, 107, 283, 
284, 287, 317
Governance of public sector 
assets, 239
Government accounting practices, 5
Governmental Accounting Standards 
Board (GASB), United 
States, 169
Government balance sheet
assets and liabilities, 3, 12, 34–36, 
39, 42–44, 50, 51, 61, 65, 76, 
252, 263, 297, 302
net worth, 9, 13, 27, 28, 39, 40, 
42, 61, 66, 76, 81, 101, 122, 
184, 203, 210, 213, 302
of New Zealand, 28, 39–43, 
64, 102–103
Government borrowing, 11, 17, 19, 
49, 71n4, 133, 254, 262
Government fnances
accounting and fnancial 
management, 304, 316
challenges, 5, 10, 17, 243, 266, 
273, 297, 317
complexities of, 34, 55–56, 67
direct government obligations, 4
efect of instability, 6, 309
importance of history, 5–6
problems in, 140, 299–300, 304
regulation of, 13340 Index
Government-owned assets, 175, 207, 
212, 240
Governments, importance of
complexities, 8, 30–33, 36, 
55, 69, 298
impact on lives, 28
management of, 128, 203, 
229, 301
power to legislate and regulate, 29
public services, 22, 28, 43, 49, 
265, 299, 305
Greece, land transaction 
record in, 187
Greek railroad company, 221
Greek real estate portfolio, 221
H
HafenCity Hamburg Gmbh, 232
Hamburg, 230, 232
Hellenic Corporation of Assets and 
Participations (HCAP), 
Greece, 221, 222
Hellenic Republic Asset 
Development Fund (HRADF), 
Greece, 221
Hidden assets, 165, 168–172, 178, 
181, 189, 305, 315
Holding company, setting up, 
204, 243
Housing market, Sweden and 
Singapore, 195–196
I
IMF Public Sector Balance Sheet
G7 countries, 133, 254, 255
projections of health expenditure, 
130, 131
sustainability of public 
fnances, 133–136
Implicit assets, 99, 106, 108, 127, 
166, 252, 267, 292, 302
Implicit liabilities, 98, 99, 127, 167, 
252, 253, 263, 265, 315
Incentives, 55, 79, 82–83, 85, 86, 
98, 107, 152, 172, 175, 183, 
185, 193, 200, 209, 233, 235, 
237, 240, 243, 247, 260, 
269, 315
Infation, 6, 10, 20, 30, 54, 92, 93, 
107, 108, 117, 177, 252–254, 
259, 260, 263, 307, 322
Intangible assets, 62–64, 166, 322, 323
Integration of fnancial management 
system, 84
Intergenerational fairness, 6, 9, 12, 
106, 142–144, 151, 207, 
301–303, 309, 310, 317
International Financial Reporting 
Standards (IFRS), 58, 62, 175, 
185, 189, 204, 240, 253, 254
International Monetary Fund (IMF)
analysis of SOEs, 208
on fscal rules, 152, 154
International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO), 45
International Public Sector 
Accounting Standards (IPSAS), 
58, 61–63, 126n5, 189
International Sustainability 
Standards Board (ISSB), 63
Intertemporal Financial Net Worth 
(INFW), 43, 133, 135, 137, 
139–141, 145–147
Istituto per la Ricostruzione Industriale 
(Institute for Industrial 
Reconstruction), Italy, 246Index 341
L
Land management agencies, United 
States, 170
Pittsburgh real estate 
portfolio, 171–172
Land registry, 187
Lender of last resort (LOLR), 94
Liabilities on government balance 
sheet, 48–50, 254
Local government 
development, 230–234
London and Continental Railway 
(LCR), 174, 231
M
Maastricht Treaty, 49, 153
Market maker of last resort 
(MOLR), 94
Mass Transit Railway 
Corporation, 230
Mineral assets, 114, 120, 124
Modigliani-Miller (“M-M”) 
corporate fnance theorem, 
266, 267
Moody’s Investors Service, 
174, 183
MTR Corporation Limited, Hong 
Kong, 230
N
Netherlands, the, 205n9, 
273, 276–279
Net worth, 9, 11, 13, 27, 28, 39, 
40, 42, 43, 51, 51n1, 60, 61, 
66, 73, 74, 76, 77, 79–83, 86, 
91, 101, 103, 108, 113, 118, 
122–125, 133, 144, 152–159, 
174, 177, 183–185, 193, 203, 
209–213, 239, 247, 251, 255, 
263, 264, 266, 270, 288, 289, 
297, 300–303, 305, 308–310, 
313–316, 319, 321, 323, 324
New Zealand
asset management, 45
Budget Policy Statement, 102
comprehensive balance sheet, 
64, 102–103
Emissions Trading Scheme, 63
Fiscal Responsibility Act 
1994, 155
forecast statement of fnancial 
position, 68
government’s balance 
sheet, 40–43
net worth, 28, 108, 212–213
population of elderly people, 48
Public Finance Act, 66, 87n1, 
155, 157, 213
public fnancial 
management in, 157
Treasury, 35, 37n2, 41, 44, 46, 
48, 64, 68, 70, 102
O
Old Age Dependency Ratio 
(OADR), 131, 149n3, 299
Operating statement, 76, 77
Operational assets, 167, 168, 178n2, 
185, 200–202, 221, 244, 315
Opportunity cost, 56, 107, 166, 
176, 207–208
Outright Monetary Transactions 
(OMT) programme, 94342 Index
P
Pensions, vi, 4, 7, 8, 11, 17, 21, 43, 
48, 49, 55, 57, 58, 60, 74, 75, 
77, 78, 81, 85, 97–99, 116, 
117, 122, 129–132, 137, 138, 
144, 200, 251–270, 299, 300, 
306, 315
entitlements of a nurse, 258
Pension schemes, 48, 253, 261, 
268, 270n8
Political attitudes towards 
accounting, 290
Political insulation, 197, 239, 240, 246
Present Value of Primary Balances 
(PVPB), 133, 139
Primary balances, 101, 140
Privatisation, 81, 217–219
Public accounting schools, 277
Public commercial assets
basics of developing, 244–245
business development with, 242
governance practices with, 193
ownership of, 182, 197–200
professional management of, 200, 
222, 223, 229
sale of, 209, 234
Public sector balance sheet (PSBS)
assets and liabilities, 12, 113
of G7 countries, 128, 133, 254, 
255, 297
investment funds, 269
land holdings, 116
pensions, 263
Public sector fnancial 
management, 112–113
Public sector net worth (PSNW), 13, 
93, 118, 124, 132, 184, 213, 
301, 302
Public service obligations, 193–196
Public Wealth Fund (PWF), 200, 
202–204, 223, 229–248, 
269, 315
Q
Quantitative Easing (QE), 89, 
91–95, 96n1, 105, 113, 
115, 121
R
Rail plus property model, 230, 231
Rating agencies and rating 
methodologies, 183
Real estate development
at local level, 230
private fnance initiative 
(PFI), 233
public private partnership 
(PPP), 233
Reserves, 91, 92, 107, 114, 118, 
126n5, 145, 199, 203, 231
Responsible fscal management, 
principles, 87n7, 
155–157, 159
S
Securum, 235–237
Seigniorage, 91–92, 95, 107, 108
Singapore
asset management of, 192
Government Investment Corp 
(GIC), 200, 223, 229
housing market, 195
net worth management, 247Index 343
professional management of 
public commercial assets, 223
Solidium, 201
Solvency assessment, 101
Sovereign Wealth Fund (SWF), 11, 
89, 95, 198–200, 268, 270, 
309, 315
Spain’s bankruptcy and credit 
pressures, 274
State capitalism, 191, 213–219
case of China, 214–217
Supervisory board, 240–243
Sustainability of public fnances, 
7, 133–136
Swedish banking crisis, 235
Swedish Experiment, 219–222
Swedish public portfolio, 219
T
Tangible assets, 166, 323, 324
Temasek, Singapore, 178n2, 200, 
223, 229, 247
Transactions Protection Instrument 
(TPI), 94
Transfer of wealth, 203
Transparency, vi, 7, 39, 58, 63, 67, 
69, 84, 85, 112, 158, 159, 
182, 183, 186, 188, 197, 202, 
222, 235, 239, 240, 298, 310
Transport for London (TfL), 
UK, 173–175
U
UK government real estate, 177
UK National Health Service Pension 
Scheme (NHSPS), 256, 
261, 300
UK Ofce for Budget 
Responsibility, 136–138
UK public fnances
GDP, 138
government debt, 19
government spending during 
confict and peace, 22
UK water industry, 211
United Dutch East India 
Company (de Vereenigde 
Oost-Indische Compagnie, 
VOC), 279–283
US infrastructure investments, 
funding for, 172–175
V
Value maximisation, 193, 201, 202, 
220, 240
W
Washington Consensus, 217–219
Wealth management, 191–193, 223
Welfare state, 5, 6, 20–23, 125, 
142–144, 299, 303
World Bank, 184–185, 217
