Roland Bardy
Public Goods and CommonsRoland Bardy
Public Goods and
Commons
The Foundation for Human WellbeingISBN 978-3-11-113252-5
e-ISBN (PDF) 978-3-11-113461-1
e-ISBN (EPUB) 978-3-11-113511-3
Library of Congress Control Number: 2023946633
Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publication in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie;
detailed bibliographic data are available on the internet at http://dnb.dnb.de.
© 2024 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston
Cover images: Top left to bottom right: SergeyIT/iStock/Getty Images Plus; Daniel Balakov/E+/Getty
Images; mbaysan/iStock/Getty Images Plus; Urupong/iStock/Getty Images Plus; vm/E+/Getty Images;
loloalvarez/iStock/Getty Images Plus. Back: Fahroni/iStock/Getty Images Plus.
Typesetting: Integra Software Services Pvt. Ltd.
Printing and binding: CPI books GmbH, Leck
www.degruyter.comPreface
This book was written when the war commenced by Russia against the Ukraine was
damaging peace in Europe and its consequences were destructing food security,
above all, in Africa, and when the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic were still impair￾ing health in many countries and were also impeding the free flow of merchandise in
world-wide supply chains. Global peace, global availability of food, global health, and
global access to markets – these are foundations of wellbeing; they are public goods
which need to be accessed by all members of humankind, and no one shall have to
suffer from obtainability by another member. Free accessibility and non-depletion
through the use by one individual or party is what makes the essence of public goods.
But when war rages without a peace treaty in sight, when it obstructs food channels
and damages lives and prospects of living, and when all this happens while a pan￾demic is still threatening the world, no such access to our primordial public goods is
possible. There are more than just those four goods which are presently endangered
by a warmonger and by a pandemic; to a certain extent, all of them, whether natural
ones like clean air and fresh water or social ones like education and a well working
labor market, are exposed to detriment if the society, on a global level and on all local
levels, does not act with prudence and carefulness. Prudence and carefulness will not
only protect and expand the public goods – and the wellbeing of all people, for which
another expression would be the “public good”. Public goods, hence, are a foundation
of the public good – or the “common good”. This term connects to “the commons”,
which, other than being available to all, are participatory resources to which access
may be restricted. Public goods foster the public good, the commons foster the com￾mon good – this is not just a play of words, but it describes a connection which
a priori seems evident. As will be shown in the book, there is more to this nexus, both
from the purely notional and from the pragmatic. The pragmatic relates to the out￾comes, and the book will deal with the comprehensive efforts that are needed on a
global scale to ensure that public goods provision achieves the public good.
Some content that this book entails is related to a work which the author did in
collaboration with Raymond Saner of Basle University, Lichia Yiu from the Centre
pour le Développement Socio- Éco-Nomique in Geneva and Arthur Rubens of Florida
Gulf Coast University, and which was laid down in their joint publication “Public
Goods, Sustainable Development and the Contribution of Business” (Cambridge Schol￾ars Publishing, 2021). The focus, here, is different, even though there is no doubt that
the business sector, when partaking in the provision of public goods, contributes sub￾stantially to the public wellbeing. The author of this book, nonetheless, feels the need
to acknowledge his gratefulness to his colleagues Raymond, Lichia and Arthur for al￾lowing him to build, in part, on their common composition.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111134611-202Contents
Preface V
Introduction 1
Chapter 1
Defining public goods and commons 4
1.1 The societal/philosophical approach 4
1.2 The public finance perspective 9
1.3 The property rights approach 11
1.4 The commons: Collective ownership and self-regulation 14
1.5 Connecting public goods and commons to human wellbeing 18
1.6 Public goods and the measurement of wellbeing 21
Chapter 2
Typologies of public goods and commons 25
2.1 Fully or not fully non-excludable and non-rivalrous: Pure, impure and
club goods 30
2.2 Collective spending 32
2.3 Local – regional – global 34
2.4 Intergenerational public goods 37
2.5 Club goods of a specific type: The commons 40
Chapter 3
Sources for providing public goods and commons 42
3.1 Who creates benefits to society? 42
3.2 The role of the public sector 44
3.2.1 Providing systemic governance for societal concerns 45
3.2.2 The example of public health 47
3.2.3 The example of public education 51
3.3 The welfare state 56
3.4 Externalities: Who pays for public goods usage? 59
3.4.1 Contingent valuation 62
3.4.2 Free riding 65
3.4.3 Philanthropy 65
3.5 The private sector providing public goods 67
3.5.1 The contribution of private business 68
3.5.2 Corporate responsibilities: Social returns and market returns 72
The triple bottom line and the multiple capitals concept 73
The circular economy 80
3.5.3 The role of civil society organizations (CSOs) 833.6 Public-private partnerships (PPPs) 88
3.6.1 Models and content of PPPs 88
Construction 89
Water 90
Health 91
Education 94
3.6.2 Beyond the local level 96
3.6.3 Co-funding and co-production 98
Chapter 4
Policymaking and managing 101
4.1 The commonstock and the dis-appropriation argumentations 102
4.2 The market failure argument 106
4.3 Policies that lead out of the antagonistic public-versus-private
resentment 108
4.3.1 Solving the decision makers’ dilemmas 109
4.3.2 Convincing and non-convincing solutions 112
Japan’s resources policy 112
“Green Deals”: U.S. climate policy and the European Union’s green
taxonomy 113
Austerity measures in the United Kingdom 114
Labor market policies in Europe 115
Privacy protection and policies in the European Union 117
4.4 Frameworks for managing collective efforts 121
4.4.1 Legal requisites 121
4.4.2 Risk sharing 122
4.4.3 Public consultation 124
4.4.4 State participation in commons 125
4.4.5 Mirroring viewpoints of practitioners on PPP management with
theory 126
4.5 The database 129
4.5.1 Which value for which goods? 130
4.5.2 Non-monetary value indicators 133
4.5.3 Monetization of tangible and intangible public goods 137
Resource effectiveness for the Urmia Lake Basin 142
Social capital in sustainability reporting of Italian cities 144
4.5.4 Public goods in public statistics 147
4.6 Monitoring public goods provision 150
4.6.1 Enablers and monitors global collective efforts: WTO, UNCTAD and
UNHRC 152
VIII Contents4.6.2 Food security: A global public good to be controlled bottom-up 156
4.6.3 Safety for fishermen 161
4.6.4 Standards: A means to control provision of public goods 163
4.7 Fighting corruption and free riding 166
Chapter 5
The global level revisited: Public goods in the SDGs 175
5.1 Social, economic and ecological wellbeing are inseparable 175
5.2 Societal control 178
5.2.1 Transformation of issue spaces 179
5.2.2 Control activities by the global non-profit sector 180
5.2.3 Rediscovering social capital 182
Conclusion: Businesses, individuals and state actors collaborating for public
goods and human wellbeing 186
References 189
Index 219
Contents IXIntroduction
Human wellbeing, whether for individuals, for families, for regions or countries rests
on a large array of factors and prerequisites. Its constituents can be determined as
personal and public security, access to basic materials, to infrastructure, to food,
healthcare, good social relations and last not least as the freedom of choice and ac￾tion. The enumeration clearly spells one basic presumption: The individual is intrinsi￾cally linked to the public – without a foundation laid by the community, there is no
wellbeing for a member of it. The other indication given by that enumeration is that
there are components which can only be provided if they are available to each and
everybody and that no one can prevent someone else from using them – which cer￾tainly is the case with the provision of public security of clean air and fresh water
and the provision of freedom to choose one’s action. Here we are with two terms in
the definition of public goods: non-rivalrous consumption and non-exclusive accessi￾bility. These terms denote publicness and hence there is a close relation to the terms
of the “public good” or the “common good” which can be seen as a synonym of public
wellbeing. So, studying the economics of the public good should include the perspec￾tive that it is built, to a large extent, on the provision of public goods. This perspective,
though, is not very often found in writings on human wellbeing and on the public
good. E.g., in “Economics for the Common Good”, a text recently published by Nobel
laureate Jean Tirole (Tirole 2017), only a short paragraph mentions the connection.
This book will attempt to close that gap.
The public good – the wellbeing of people – has been a foremost concern for hu￾mankind from the ancient Greek philosophers and early Christian authorities up to
present time sociologists. Human wellbeing drives social and economic progress, and
the ethical and policy foundations for fostering human wellbeing have influenced not
only the conceptions of the topic; they have become the guiding principle for inter￾vention by the state and other authorities until today. One such authority is Pope
Francis: In his May 2015 encyclical, Laudato Si’: On Care for Our Common Home, he
argued eloquently for common-good thinking in an ever-changing world. This is not
just abstract idealism. Deliberating about the common good offers a useful framework
both for setting shared goals and for working out how to achieve them. Francis talks
about the need for subsidiarity (the principle that any issue that affects human well￾being is best addressed at the most local level possible), and he calls for viewing the
world through the eyes of the most vulnerable. For protecting the conditions that sus￾tain human life, Francis asks us to explore whether social, economic, and political
changes are needed. He argues that decision-making for the common good means de￾fending the dignity of the socially, politically, and economically marginalized – not
just with words but with policies and new forms of collaboration. It means building a
network of solidarity through which the unheard can partake in critical decision￾making processes. For the Pope, it is not enough to see the tenet of the common good
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111134611-001as a corrective for the current system’s excesses, it should constitute the system’s cen￾tral objective. Equally important is collaboration: All parties must be on the same
page about the ‘what’ in addition to the ‘how’. With a common-good approach, each
step of the process is almost as important as the result (Schneck 2016).
From the angle of an economist, Tirole (2017, p. 1) asks whether the market econ￾omy has produced a new environment that sacrifices the concern for (public) wellbe￾ing. With the crises of the twentieth century – wars, financial disasters, increased
unemployment, the pandemic, climate change – the focus on wellbeing and social
progress might appear to fall behind the pressing imperatives of economic enhance￾ment and of building a new global order. There is no doubt that we live in a period of
deep change and transformation with significant impact on societies, economies, and
people. But history has shown (if we take, e.g., the industrial revolution) that there
are often positive impacts of seemingly calamitous evolvements. There was progress
which has improved the lives of people and has advanced societies. If we compare
what we have now with how life was in pre-industrial times, there is visible progress
in basic terms like providing access to water, access to food, job opportunities, and
roads that reduce physical distances – public goods that all contribute to wellbeing.
Some of them are provided by the state, and some are provided by the private sector.
In both sectors, failures may evolve – whether through an over-emphasized predomi￾nance of the market or through excessive state-intervention. Overcoming these nega￾tives through public-private collaboration eventually strengthens the welfare state,
and it may also re-focus the attention on human wellbeing. Wellbeing will become a
central concern in politics, in management, economics, and business sciences, in
human resource and workplace management. These fields also connect to psychology,
science, and medicine, and all of them relate to understanding how to improve and
consolidate human wellbeing. Progress in society (and in science) develops the most
when there are many areas of concern that overlap.
There is an overlap, also, of the terms “The Public Good”, “Public Goods” and “Com￾mons”; while they have different meanings that the book will keep apart, they will
often appear to be intertwined. One case is that very often the outcome of policy deci￾sions affects all three. Public policies affect the commons to a lesser extent, as they are
“socially owned” (commons, per definition, are a broad set of resources, natural and
cultural which are shared and governed by a definite group of many people1
). But with
regards to wellbeing, the commons often can contribute faster and more direct support
through collective action and communal efforts. This can be seen when social coher￾ence increases in crises like natural disasters or in circumstances that stem from man￾made disasters such as the outflow of migrants from the war-torn regions of the
Ukraine. Still, during times of crisis, in view of the magnitude of the problems, the call
for receiving goods and services from the state also increases. So, commons and public
 For more on the definition of the commons see section 2.5.
2 Introductiongoods will merge into each other and together provide the power that is needed for a
community to manage its concerns. If that community is mankind as a whole, the term
“global commons” is an apt description for issues that span beyond national jurisdic￾tions, when essential resources need to be managed or topics such as biodiversity con￾servation and climate need to be addressed by local, global, private and public actors.
But there are distinctions between the goods concepts; the definitions that have evolved
over time will not only improve the understanding, but also assist decision-making.
Therefore, Chapters 1 and 2 will first present the various approaches to the phenome￾non, followed by a discussion of the sources for public goods and policy considerations
exhibited in Chapters 3 and 4. Then, Chapter 5 revisits the issue of global public goods,
before a brief summary is given in the Conclusion.
Introduction 3Chapter 1
Defining public goods and commons
There is a centuries old historical perspective of the topic which mainly builds on
what philosophers, principally in Europe, have defined to be the responsibilities of
the nation states. These responsibilities, in whichever form the nation state is gov￾erned, end up in representing all citizens and in ensuring that fundamental human
rights are respected. So, there is a close nexus to individual and public wellbeing. But,
as the view on the role of the state has changed over time, the view on public goods
has, too. For the purpose of this book which aims to exhibit how the development, the
use and the governance of public goods connect to human wellbeing, two more ap￾proaches to the phenomenon will be discussed: One is the public finance approach,
the other one is the property rights approach. The public finance approach leads the
way to the characterization of public goods that was mentioned in the Preface: they
are non-exclusive (anyone can use them) and they allow collective consumption
(when one person uses a public good this does not reduce the use by another person) –
both promote wellbeing, i.e. wellbeing of all members of society. The property rights
approach or legal approach sets the context to ownership of a good and the responsi￾bilities connected with this ownership, and it exhibits how public-private interaction
can provide the benefits that arise from those goods.
1.1 The societal/philosophical approach
There have been efforts in all early societies to distinguish between what is public and
what is private. One very distinct manifestation is what the Roman Republic phrased as
res publica, which literally means “public thing/public affair”, and which is opposed to
res privata. The term res publica has a triple meaning: It denotes (1) the executive
power of the republic which it has over all its citizens; (2) the publicly accepted consti￾tution set up by the republic; and (3) the objective behind the republic, which is the
public or common good (bonum commune). Peter Wivel (2007) in his study The State
and the Citizen – Natural Law as a Public Good, exhibits two concepts on which the
Roman Republic was based: first, on consensus regarding the law, iuris consensus;
and second, on common utility, utilitatis communio. The latter is drawn from the trea￾tise De re publica written by Roman statesman and philosopher Marcus Tullius Cicero
about 54–51 B.C., and the same concept is exposed by Saint Augustine, Father of the
Church, in his extended book The City of God which he wrote from 413 to 426. Saint
Augustine’s proposition is that any society is “the people’s concern”. Like Cicero, he pro￾nounces that only a state governed by the people can be called a state at all.
Like Saint Augustine, many European thinkers after him worked on the concep￾tion of “the state” and of “the bonum commune” as will be explicated below. But there
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111134611-002were developments on the topic in the Far East well before the Roman republic. As
early as 500 B.C., Confucius claimed that collectivist wellbeing ranks higher than indi￾vidual. Confucianism’s perception of what is “human” is equal to the common good con￾cept. It fundamentally considers that people’s actions stem from their membership to
social groups (the family, the clan, the political community) and not from their individ￾ual motivations. To Confucius, the “good of the state” is the specific advantage which is
shared by all and beneficial for all members of a given community (Zhang 2010).
Confucius was a contemporary of the Greek philosophers Plato and Aristotle. It was
their thoughts from which Cicero took his viewpoints, like Plato’s imagine of an ideal
society where all goods are communal and Aristotle’s application of this to reality in
life. Both, however, acknowledged that a “community of goods”, while largely beneficial
to society and producing wellbeing for all, may not be the only resolution. It can also be
beneficial, they said, if some goods are privatized and a charge is raised for their use
(Tirole 2017). An example for this in present times is privatization and pricing for water
as it will keep this good from being wasted, or the charges for carbon dioxide emissions,
which “privatizes” the use of air and upgrades its quality, or allocating the limited re￾source of bandwidth to those operators who are able to use it in a way that benefits all
(Tirole 2017, p. 5). The Greek philosophers’ main concern was the relationship between
public and private interest. The writings of Aristotle strikingly appeal to the struggles of
today in balancing the goals of state and the individual: “For even if the end is the same
for a single man and for a state, that of the state seems at all events something greater
and more complete whether to attain or to preserve; though it is worthwhile to attain
the end merely for one man, it is finer and more godlike to attain it for a nation or for
city-states” (Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, Book I, 2, [1094b], p. 7f.).
As mentioned, Saint Augustine applied Cicero’s definition of res publica to his con￾ception of the common good. He asked which types of “goods provision” should be deliv￾ered by the state. But while the Roman philosopher argued for “utility”” to be ultimate
measuring stick of judging what the state should procure, St. Augustine’s petition was
for a higher rationality: The decisive argument, according to his writings, would be
“what the people hold dear” (Wivel 2007, p. 5). Hence it is consensus that determines
whether a certain good should be provided by the state or not. This reasoning catapults
Saint Augustine’s thinking into the most contemporary setting and towards what is
meant to be “social welfare”. As per a definition created early on by Nobel laureate Ken￾neth Arrow, social welfare is not the group of assistance programs designed to ensure
the wellbeing of a nation’s citizens, it is the outcome of these programs, of which he also
said that it constitutes the state of social order, the “social state” of a community. Arrow
argued that the aim of society can be “described by saying it seeks consent on how to
maximize the social utility or social welfare subject to whatever technological or re￾source constraints are relevant”, “. . . it chooses the social state yielding the highest pos￾sible social welfare” (Arrow 1950, p. 334). So, while social welfare is certainly a public
good, the public welfare policies are just its “input”. The various policies, e.g., as re￾distributional transfers or wage subsidies produce different outputs which, in their
1.1 The societal/philosophical approach 5total, yield the outcome of welfare. The obvious output of transfer policies, for example,
is social peace and to reduced distortions in the economy (Sala-i-Martin 1992). The poli￾cies may be categorized as public goods per se or productive public goods because they
produce an output (more on the categorization of public goods will be exhibited in Chap￾ter 2 of this book).
After St. Augustine, the history of Europe was shaped, in substance, through
power struggles between the Catholic Church, whose authority kept growing, and the
private interests of mighty kings, dukes, counts and other rulers of fiefdoms. As the
control wielded by the papacy evolved through the Middle Ages, the church evolved
into the guardian of common interests. For this, the term “unitarian” was coined by
the U.S. social/political philosopher Victoria Held (Held 1970). The presumption is that
when there is one unifying source that defines the best way of pursuing true needs
and interests to the benefit of the common good, all members of society are served
best. Simm very fittingly described what was believed at the time.
The common good is viewed as objective and normative. It is not an object of discussion
and debate but rather a law of nature and provides a God-given goal for the society.
There is no fundamental opposition between the common good and the individual good. All
individual goods are contained within a common good.
The knowledge of the common good lies with good rulers. The only real threat for the com￾mon good arises when the rulers act in their own selfish interests. (Simm 2011, p. 558)
Whether it is sufficient or desirable to rely on a “good ruler” was seriously questioned
afterwards. The most prominent critic was the English philosopher Thomas Hobbes,
(1588–1679). In his view, “the state” is something which is independent from the struc￾ture of government. Best known is his comparison of the ruler of the to the figure
depicted in his book Leviathan (1651), which he named after a creature from Jewish
belief that has the form of a sea serpent, is omnipotent and breaks all resistance. It
can only be overpowered by Behemoth of the Earth. Behemoth is a symbol of God’s
power over nature. From there Hobbes derived the concept of the natural state. Human
nature, he argued, would be able to craft an entity the would be the best format to fur￾ther human development, irrespective of how it is ruled. This would warrant perfect
freedom for a society and its citizens; it would guarantee security and protect private
ownership. That entity is called, alternately, the common good or the public good and is
brought about by the Laws of Nature. He said that “before social contracts and laws
were formulated, neither justice nor injustice, neither public goods nor public evils were
more natural among human beings than they were among animals” (Wivel 2007, p. 9).
After Hobbes, the sequence of political thinkers in England who discussed the social
contract and the public good went to John Locke (1632–1704), to David Hume (1711–1776)
and to Adam Smith (1723–1790). Smith dealt with the concept of public good in what he
wrote on moral philosophy, which then inspired John Stuart Mill (1806–1873). In Locke’s
opinion, only a society with a representative democracy can uphold the Laws of Nature,
and this parliamentary form of government was – in nuce – established in England in
6 Chapter 1 Defining public goods and commonsLocke’s time. So, his followers’ concern was not which system of government to choose,
but rather which politics affect the citizens’ wellbeing. The rationale was that for achiev￾ing common interest/the common good, one first must have choices, i.e., conscious
moral choices. From these choices society’s laws are created. They include the question
from where to provision the common good – whether it would be wholly procured by
the state or through a configuration of goods provided both by the state and private par￾ties. Therefore, what determines a public good would have to be social processes in
which one catalyst is the pursuit of private interests. But these individual interests must
be compatible with the public interest. The optimum is found where a society is capable
to align these oftentimes conflicting interests. While one might assume this to be self￾evident, there is ample evidence, currently, where private groups like militant environ￾mentalists or greedy businesses take the public interest hostage and thus severely
damage social processes that would have led to consensual decisions. Civil society organ￾izations play an eminent role here. This will be dealt with later in the book.
In view of the conflicts that are mounting between the various sectors of society,
contemporary social philosophers emphasize that the most critical component for de￾fining public goods is common interest. In consequence, they connect the definition of
public goods to social and community-based arrangements. For instance, Dupré (1994,
p. 173) speaks of “goods proper to, and attainable only by the community, yet individu￾ally shared by its members”, and Cahill (2005, p. 9) defines a public good to be a solida￾ristic association of persons that is more than the good of individuals in the aggregate.
On another end, for Hollenbach (2002, p. 81) the common good (singular) is the
good realized by the mutual relationships in and through which human beings achieve
their wellbeing, while Deneulin and Townsend (2007, p. 20) argue that the extent to
which goods are perceived as “public” – common goods – (plural) does not depend as
much on their inherent characteristics as on prevailing social values within a given so￾ciety: these values define what should be provided by non-market mechanisms.
Sekera (2014), a contemporary sociologist, meanwhile points out that public goods
can only be created through collective choice, that they need to be paid for collectively
and that, in their pure form, they must be provided through non-market, public produc￾tion without charging the cost to individual recipients. But sociology’s request that public
goods provision must stay in public hands is failing as it does not look at the inadequa￾cies of government: No government anywhere possesses the means, the power, and the
abilities to procure all the essentials of life; what is needed to ensure the wellbeing of a
society is collective action of all its members. The term “collective action”, while has
been developed to denominate occurrences in many areas of the social sciences, like an￾thropology, psychology, political science, and economics, has best been applied by Man￾cur Olson’s reference to social processes that produce the common good.
Olson (1965) posits that if a society or a group of people benefit from a public good,
then they have a common interest and will make sure that the good is provided suffi￾ciently (and not abused or deleted) and that it produces a generalized benefit. This is a
very positive assumption, and it negates that there may be private groups who attempt
1.1 The societal/philosophical approach 7to abuse public interest, even though the assumption accepts that there will very often be
a mismatch between individual motives and collective outcomes. On the other hand, it
would allow that when one party needs to be rewarded for contributing to the outcome,
the other parties will accept and provide this incentive. The reason is that otherwise the
question may arise whether all parties would have to be forced to share the burden of
cost. On this, Olson says that the attitude will generally be rational and self-advantageous;
therefore, when some party would seek to get the result for free it will soon recognize
that all are better off if a collective interest is realized (Olson 1965, pp. 14–15).
Collective action works differently whether a group is large or small. When one
member of a small group refuses to contribute its share, the others might withdraw en￾tirely which would forfeit the effort altogether. Or, positively, if one self-interested mem￾ber of the group foots the bill for the whole group, the collective action can still produce
the common good. An example would be the case for wastewater treatment where one
large production facility allows a few smaller ones to discharge polluted water into its
treatment plant. In a large group this type of solution might be prevented by the lack of
solidarity or deficiencies in communication and coordination (Olson 1965, pp. 48–50).
Some critics of Olson’s declare that his idea of “convivial, expressive, affectionate
and non-acquisitive behavior may work in the separate realm of leisure and consump￾tion but not in business or in government” (Stretton and Orchard 1994, p. 68). Another
line of reasoning which argues that there is an advantage of large groups in securing
certain types of collective goods because a large group may often resolve itself into an
assemblage of smaller groups (Hardin 2015). Nevertheless, a group whose members
number in the millions may still include someone who finds that for the benefit to be
produced by a collective good, singular action is needed (Crenson 1987, p. 230). This will
often motivate philanthropy in areas that are not accounted for by multiple donors. For
example, parents of schoolchildren may find that the outcome of basic education does
not meet their expectations. So, they will start collective action on their community￾level as shown by some notable efforts in Australia and in the U.S. which aim at raising
the quality of public schooling. One case is the Florida-based initiative Enlighten Educa￾tion,2 where retired teachers or other qualified persons assist within the schools. The
program has extended beyond the state of Florida, not the least because school authori￾ties supported the idea and made it widely known.
Olson was also criticized for his supposition that coercion would be a substitute
for voluntary cooperation where governments cannot persuade their citizens that
they should join in contributing to maintain a public good. Coercion, the critics say, is
notoriously ineffective to achieve consensus, and it would only succeed if it was sup￾plemented by what is called “habitual obedience” (Schauer 2015, p. 7). Habitual obedi￾ence is not just complete subjugation; rational, self-interested people would also be
obedient when they encounter a framework of enduring social relationships. An ex-
 https://www.enlighteneducation.com.
8 Chapter 1 Defining public goods and commonsample of this is the decision-making processes in the European Union: Here the nation
states habitually surrender parts of their erstwhile autonomy to this international re￾gime because they believe that the regime provides and expands a broad array of
public goods for their citizens (Hurrelmann, Schneider and Steffek 2007).
There may be shortcomings in what Olson said about coercion and about the in￾fluence of group size on collective efforts and their outcome. But his contributions to
the topic have led to explorations into the spectrum of public goods and how some of
them convert into being not purely public (i.e., where benefits can be partially excluded
from society as a whole). The example that is quoted the most is public swimming pools
which can only serve a community if access is restricted: The number of users must be
subject to an exclusion mechanism. But this may increase allocative efficiency. From
this discernment, a typology has been developed that distinguishes between pure public
goods, impure public goods and club goods. This will be dealt with in Chapter 2. At this
stage, the discussion of the societal/philosophical view on the public goods phenomenon
will be ended, and the other two approaches to the concept will be presented. While
the philosophical view extends from the local to the regional and global levels because
public goods like security and peace have a cross-border perspective, the public finance
and the property rights approach are, at first sight, limited to the area of state finances
and state regulation of ownership. But, as will be explained in the sections that follow,
these two perceptions have ramifications to a global perspective as well.
1.2 The public finance perspective
The public finance view on the phenomenon of public was first introduced by Nobel
Prize winner Paul Samuelson. Samuelson reproached conventional economic thinking
for solely concentrating on the theme of taxation without considering the topic of public
expenditure and its destinations. He set up an explicit classification of goods which are
available to society: One type, he stated (Samuelson 1954), are private consumption
goods. They can be parceled out to different individuals. The other type is collective con￾sumption goods; they can be enjoyed by all individuals at the same time and one indi￾vidual’s consumption of that type of goods does not diminish its consumption by any
other individual. These characteristics have been called non-excludability and jointness
in consumption (or overall accessibility), and non-rivalry. Another term for non-rivalry
is “indivisibility of benefits” (Drahos 2004).
Non-rivalry and non-excludability are very strict terms, and even when looking
at gradual deviations within these characteristics, Samuelson’s definition cannot
wholly encompass the concept of neither public goods nor commons. The concept of
commons is affected as well by the definition even though commons are partially pri￾vate. As was mentioned above and will be specified below, policy frameworks for pub￾lic goods may as well apply to commons. In their pure forms, commons are only
available to private members. Access may be limited, and rival consumption can occur
1.2 The public finance perspective 9(like in a privately installed irrigation system for a big area of farmlands – which is the
classic example of Elinor Ostrom who won the Nobel prize for her seminal work on the
concept; see Ostrom 1990). With a special view on wellbeing, handling common goods
can often contribute benefits faster (see Section 1.4 below).
The weakness of Samuelson’s definition is that the claim of full non-rivalry and
overall accessibility makes it highly restrictive. Strictly speaking, as observed by Bu￾chanan (1999 [1968]) and others, no good or service will fit the extreme definition: There
are almost no “pure” public goods. Buchanan proposed a classification that would em￾body various degrees of publicness. He pointed out that “jointness” can occur both in
consumption and in production of a public good (e.g., public roads provided and used
by both private businesses and the state). And he showed that external economies, or
externalities, because of the many interrelations within an economy, arise in the provi￾sion as well as in the consumption of public goods. The behavior of one user can very
often adversely or positively affect the consumption of a certain public good (Buchanan
and Kafoglis 1963). An example is public access to water where one user can benefit to
the disadvantage of another user. The other way round, others will benefit (a positive
externality) from, e.g., education or vaccination paid for by someone else.
The first economic contribution to the issue of private benefits from public goods and
the creation of the term “externalities” came from Arthur Cecil Pigou who founded the
School of Economics at the University of Cambridge (Pigou 1946). He referred to situations
where a government finds it necessary to correct a societal problem where one party
earns a benefit from public goods usage and another party receives a loss, and where no
mechanism can be installed for compensation. This has later been equated with market
failure (e.g., Bator 1958), and government regulation is seen to be the way out of this (see
Section 4.2 of this book). But it has also been shown early on that an externality could also
be dealt with through bargaining between the affected parties (Coase 1960). This book will
deal with the theme of externalities in a separate section. But the concept is closely inter￾twined with public goods, and hence, it will appear in several passages of the text.
Whether dealing with externalities or simply with the question of how to produce
and to manage public goods, there have always been discussions between govern￾ments and businesses on the functions that should be delivered by the state. This dis￾cussion extends to the public at large: The reasoning goes about what should be “in
the market” and what not, i.e., it should be provided by the state. But non-state actors
are increasingly taking over – there are many examples, in the areas of health, secu￾rity and education. Some political theorists deplore this to be of ‘neo-medieval’ char￾acter because there often is a “multitude of authorities and actors of varying power at
different jurisdictional levels . . . that are moved more by political compulsion than
by concern for all” (Offe 2018, p. 152). Is there really a need to deplore this? And does
the reference to “medieval” make sense?
Let us look how health issues were managed in the Middle Ages. We definitely
see a configuration of overlapping authorities in the 13th and 14th centuries because
10 Chapter 1 Defining public goods and commonshospitals were managed privately and funded privately by churches or charities, and
state rulers only interfered when fear of infection and death broke out publicly. Simi￾larly, poorhouses that were born out of charitable considerations would also shield the
public from health concerns and against crime and social unrest (Desai 2003, p. 66). Cer￾tainly, this is not the case today. Significant public efforts have been made in health
management ever since – whether in sanitation, induction of health certificates or
quarantine, and this has led to significant change in how the public good of health is
dealt with. While there may be differences in how the health sector is managed in dif￾ferent countries, there are always interventions from the public domain. The same ap￾plies to other public goods: roads, water, housing, and transport are always managed
collaboratively by public and private actors. Desai (2003, p. 64) has suggested to exam￾ine the question of who shall do what by examining three basic issues:
a) Preference revelation: Which goods does the public want in the public domain
and what it is willing to pay for them to the public coffers?
b) Political bargaining: How are decisions made on which goods to include in the
public domain, how much of these goods to include, and how to make them acces￾sible to all?
c) Production of these goods by public or private agents.
These “Three Ps of public goods provision” (preference revelation, political bargain￾ing, production) can serve as a base to analyze the consequences which arise for pol￾icy makers if they approach a specific avenue for accessing the public goods issue.
The three Ps do not include the topic of financing. The issues related to finance
are covered in the sections which exhibit the sources of public goods delivery in Chap￾ter 3. There is a similarity to the property approach which will be presented below:
For many public goods, finance often comes exclusively from the state, and they are
hence owned by “the public”; the ownership question becomes more difficult, if pub￾lic and private funds are used. And commons often have other sources of finance, de￾pending on their level: Global commons need public finance, local commons rarely
do. This then has an effect on who can claim ownership and ownership rights.
1.3 The property rights approach
Both the philosophical/societal access and the public finance access to the phenomenon
of public goods are connected, at least to some extent, to another origin of the concep￾tion, which is the legal debate over ownership. For a long time, the conventional view
among Western jurists was that the foundation of property in ancient times was occu￾pation of land – either by a single proprietor or a family (Ostrom and Hess 2007). Then,
in 1861, the English jurist H. S. Maine, having extensively researched, among others, on
the work of 19th-century lawyer Georg Ludwig von Maurer on the ancient Germanic
village communities (the “Marks”), concluded that “it is more than likely that joint own￾1.3 The property rights approach 11ership, and not separate ownership, is the really archaic institution” (Maine 1963 [1861],
p. 252). Beyond their academic contribution, these findings caused a major political de￾bate in the late 1800s and the early 1900s over the status of common property, and the
connotation of private property compared to common property remains contested in
scholarship. The famous article by Garrett Hardin (1968) “The Tragedy of the Commons”
on the impact of greedy conduct has foreshadowed the discussion on the demise of all
collectively managed endeavors. However, in a 1998 update, Hardin acknowledges that
his statement was led by an overestimation of how far greed might reach: He went
back to the famous quote which he had taken from William Forster Lloyd’s 1833 Oxford
lectures on pasturelands that were left open to many herds of cattle and where, with
this resource available to all, the greediest herdsmen would gain for a while; but then,
as demand would grow in step with population (while supply remained fixed), a time
would come when all herdsmen would be trapped by their own competitive impulses
and the unmanaged commons would be ruined by overgrazing. In his update, Hardin
offered a way out, which was “most notably the suggestion that the way to avoid disas￾ter in our global world is through a frank policy of mutual coercion, mutually agreed
upon” (Hardin 1998, p. 683).
Mutual coercion, to expand Hardin’s postulate, is a prerequisite for positive out￾comes of all collaborative efforts, irrespective of how the goods in question are owned.
Private actors can provide goods that contribute to public wellbeing – and, after all,
most politicians agree that private property is a fundamental ingredient in economic
development (see, e.g., Welch 1983). They would also agree that there are both rights
and limits of private ownership: Ownership implies responsibility of the owners (and
their property) for all actions relating to the property. These responsibilities mainly de￾rive from moral considerations, but there also are legal provisions with regard, e. g., to
land use (see Parkinson 2013) or to cases of collisions between copyright and competi￾tion law (see Ramello 2002). The legal protection of ownership rights is high, but the
powers that are conferred to an owner in relation to others reach an end where they
affect others negatively. This is “corrective justice”, a contested topic in law theory. It
has been addressed since Aristotle (Weinrib 2002), and, in its extreme abridgement, it
means that private ownership must be converted into public ownership when this can
avoid harms to society. However, the very notion of what is public ownership is also
contested: When an asset is publicly owned, this should not necessarily mean that a
government or a state agency owns it. The primary meaning of public is the people; the
people elect representatives to whom they confirm the management of this asset. This
is a mechanism which must be embedded in a legal conception, and all affected parties
must agree on this mechanism. Chapter 4 of this book will deal with the forms in which
the public sector should fulfill its ownership responsibilities and how delivery of public
goods by the state should be monitored.
Apart from the legal treatment, there may be economic motivations that lead
away from the hegemony of private property. It is commonly agreed that “within a
system of property rights which protects and gives meaning to people’s right to be left
12 Chapter 1 Defining public goods and commonsin peace, individual initiative will produce the essential elements of human flourish￾ing” (Schmidtz 1988, p. 185), but there also is consensus that this requires an efficacy
of markets which may be faulty. Markets can fail. This is where the need arises for a
public entity, a state, to step in: A state, to cite a famous statement by Mancur Olson,
is “first of all an organization that provides wellbeing for its members, the citizens“
(Olson 1965, p. 15). The state provides benefits to all people irrespective of whether, or
not, they contribute to the state´s budget by paying taxes or join in collective efforts to
produce a public good. This collective provision of public goods is collectively rational,
but it often may lack individual rationality, above all, when the benefits are distrib￾uted unevenly. The most frequently cited cases are publicly financed opera houses
that are maintained, in part, from taxes paid by people who never visit a theater, and
public schools that are also financed from the taxes of people who do not have chil￾dren (see Towse and Hernández 2020). Is it “socially fair” (Kohn 2020) that citizens
contribute taxes for governmental activities whose outcomes they do not share? The
question essentially is what should be provided by the state and what should be left
for private provision.
On the question whether a good should be provided by the state and on which
grounds, Adam Smith’s argumentation on lighthouses is often referred to by econo￾mists: Since the benefit of a lighthouse’s beams cannot practically be withheld from
any ship passing by, the lighthouse should be regarded as a public good (see, e.g.,
Wood 1996, p. 130). At present times, the argument cannot hold: When Adam Smith
lived, there was no alternative around to this warning system. However, 250 years
later, state-of-the-art technology can provide an alternative like radar, and the pro￾duction of this good can be adapted to demand. There are many other cases where a
decision must be taken in the political field whether to convert a private good into a
public good or vice versa, and politicians have to give a reason for this. They will al￾ways be confronted with side effects: Some economists, for example, take the case of
the U.S. 1927 and 1934 legislation that privatized broadcasting, because, as they say,
the ”control of the airwaves” through the broadcasters “meant that commercial val￾ues would dictate the evolution of our culture” (Bollier 2001, p. 67). But, for one, the
state might not have had enough funds to develop broadcasting to new technical levels.
And secondly, if we take the German public TV to prove the culture argument, the ca.
8 billion € that enter the coffers of the state annually from levies on each household
and each business location are by no means contributing to raise the cultural content
of the TV programs. The focus on education of public television in Germany is steadily
dwindling. Topics of history, medicine, nature, and technology (in that order) are cov￾ered in documentaries, but the bulk of programming is focused on TV series (thrillers,
soap operas, comedy) which sometimes have very low-level content (Hoynes 2019).
Provision of culture and education, two foremost public goods, is a topic that can
neither be looked at from an ideological perspective nor from a purely economic one. It
is a typical case for collective efforts. The commons, a frontrunner of collective efforts,
may offer a solution with these two eminent public concerns. This will be shown in the
1.3 The property rights approach 13next section that will deal with the characteristics of the commons, the history of their
development and their significance for public wellbeing.
Before getting to the theme of the commons, a prominent sociologist’s view on
property shall be presented here as a sideline. The quote is from British scientist John
A. Hobson (1858–1940), who is said to have introduced welfare into the sphere of eco￾nomics and whose lifelong activism for legislation on the subject has shaped new social
policies in Britain and elsewhere. His stance on social order is, in part, grounded on the
idea that constituting private property is “natural law . . . because any individual uses
up vital energy by carrying out productive efforts, and hence every member of a society
has a right to replenish this usage and thus establish property: . . . nature assigns to
every producer as his separate property that portion of his product or some equivalent
in exchange required to sustain his productive energy” (Hobson 1919, p. 99–100). There
is a nexus of this to societal collaboration and to public goods/commons, because the
producers, as Hobson calls them, need social institutions, they need knowledge, they
need a public legal system, public roads, etc. These are all goods that are collectively
provided by the various actors in those markets: state, businesses, civil society, high￾class individuals. The topic is discussed in academia within social economics (see e.g.,
Lutz 1999), which may also be called the Economics for the Common Good (Tirole 2017).
All these endeavors by economists addresses issues of the day, no matter what the spe￾cific area of an economist would be. Economists who join in public debates, and politi￾cians/practitioners who join in academic debates will forward solutions to the many
challenges facing society.
1.4 The commons: Collective ownership and self-regulation
Whether from the property rights perspective or from the societal perspective, a view
on the commons always combines several distinct attributes. Apart from collective
ownership,3 there also is the user perspective, which was introduced into the debate
on the consumption of publicly available resources through Garret Hardin as men￾tioned above. His views on the topic can be summarized in the conclusion that any
good which cannot be sufficiently excluded from private use is a common good and
will eventually be either overused or neglected (Brunnhuber 2022). The debate which
followed among economists and politicians found its culmination when, in 2009, the
Nobel Prize in Economics was awarded to Elinor Ostrom (1933–2012). She was criti￾cized because she connected the theme to Mancur Olson’s concept of collective action
(Olson 1965).4 It was said that ‘forcing’ collective action into a format of self-regulation
 Commons are also called collective property resources, or common property resources (see Capelari
et al. 2017).
 For other criticism, see end of this section.
14 Chapter 1 Defining public goods and commonsis not compatible with uniting people to fight for a societal objective. But then a new
stimulation was given to the discussion by the worldwide adoption of the UN Sustain￾able Development Goals (SDGs) in 2015, because many of these goals meet the attrib￾utes of a common. The old question comes back within the SDG implementation
efforts: How can over-usage or neglect be avoided? There also is a new question, as
the SDGs are looking at all economic levels from the local to the global. This question
is about how to guarantee sound and safe financial incentives. The nexus to the SDGs
has led to a more comprehensive categorization of the commons that relates to all lev￾els of provision and consumption: Firstly, ecological (or “natural”) commons such as
clean air, fresh water, usage of land and biodiversity, and secondly, social goods such
as access to education, access to healthcare and to information.5 While there is general
agreement on the content and the social impact of commons, opinions on how to fi￾nance them are heterogenous.
How to finance the commons naturally differs by their magnitude and their spa￾tial extension. But financing also has an impact on how they are managed. For both,
the caveats have already been shown in the historic examples of communal irrigation
and grazeland: If there are members who contribute a higher share than the other,
they will want to take control, and if there are greedy members, they will try to out￾maneuver the others. When the communities are small and stable, they should be
able to prevent these malicious commotions from happening. The means would be in￾centives and sanctions which in turn require strong management. But this cannot
work for a large-scale setting like, e.g., mitigating the consequences of climate change
in a specific region. Here the stakeholders are a multitude of, for example, farmers or
fishermen or small dwellers, and it would need some cross-regional authority to im￾plement and enforce stand standard approaches for managing these commons. On an
even larger scale, supranational entities need to intervene, as would be the case with
tackling the effects of global warming. One solution would be that the beneficiaries of
such measures internalize the cost (Tirole 2017, p. 200). Pricing, hence, might be an
instrument that alleviates the funding of the pertinent measures and their control.
Financing the commons through setting a price for their usage is one of the re￾sorts that may ultimately lead out of the conundrum that there are not enough funds
in private or public budgets for meeting the commitments to be made by public au￾thorities – like through the Kyoto Protocol. First, though, there will be the call for gov￾ernment funding of products and services that contribute to public wellbeing and the
common good. The state authorities will have to resort to financial institutions, and
these might then also turn into large impact investors or philanthropic organizations.
There is enough financial capital around in the financial markets that seeks alloca￾tion, but those funds (these purchase powers) need to be properly aligned. Toxopeus
 The emphasis must be on “clean air” and “safe water”, not just air and water, and “access”, not just
availability.
1.4 The commons: Collective ownership and self-regulation 15et al. (2017) suggest a very clear-cut scheme for realigning purchasing power towards
meeting the needs of finance for large commons:
Table 1 shows how the private and the financial sector can cooperate in making im￾pactful investments when a common good is missing or when individuals are not in a
position or are not willing to pay for individual wellbeing. The four types of finance
would all be applied to organize impact investing, i.e., providing funds for achieving
social or environmental goals with the intention to also generate profit. An example
for regular impact investing are funds directed towards agricultural cooperatives that
produce food (an activity that benefits the wellbeing of its consumers), along with the
condition that they produce it in a way which minimizes the detriment of common￾pool resources (no air pollution, no deforestation, no overuse of pesticides). The exam￾ple for pricing a commons that is referred to the most is emission rights trading
which translates the cost of governing the common good of clean air into a price. Crit￾ics hold that a commitment like the one made by the European Union which uses pric￾ing schemes for reducing greenhouse gas emissions has failed because they address a
phenomenon which cannot be curbed locally: If the countries beyond Europe do not
follow the example, they are just free riders on Europe’s clean air (Tirole 2017, p. 208).
This has brought up the idea of compensating for this negative by introducing a Euro￾pean Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism. The format would be to levy a tax on
imports of products manufactured in countries that cause high carbon-dioxide emis￾sions. But a measure like this would only make sense if the proceeds of the levy were
hypothecated towards innovation in low-carbon technology and channeled towards
adaptative investments in Least Developed Countries (Burke et al. 2021). It is, how￾ever, not very likely that such hypothecating will take place (Marcu et al. 2020). Pro￾tecting the public good of sustainable living conditions in Least Developed Countries
requires other measures. The book will cover this aspect in Section 3.5.4 which deals
with the role of the SDGs.
The lower left quadrant of the scheme exhibited in Table 1 refers to improve￾ments of individual wellbeing through collective funds. This is the classic case of wel￾fare payments through governments: They are handed out to individuals whose lives
would be improved by a specific common good or service (access to affordable hous￾ing, nursing in case of disabilities, etc.), but who cannot invest in their wellbeing
themselves. Private investors might join those government efforts by providing addi￾Table 1: Realigning purchasing power.
Individual wellbeing Common goods
Individual purchasing power Regular impact investing Pricing the commons
Collective purchasing power Public-Private finance Community finance
Source: Toxopeus et al. 2017, p. 187.
16 Chapter 1 Defining public goods and commonstional finance and/or charitable contributions. If we go back to the nineteenth cen￾tury, these type of private ventures, which may be called “social partnerships”, were
already undertaken by business pioneers such as Cadbury, Rowntree and the Lever
Brothers in England and some others on the continent: They provided housing and
healthcare to their workers, and they also cared for education (Waddock 1988, Bush
et al. 2008), one first case of impactful investment.
In the fourth quadrant (lower right) of Table 1, the term “collective purchasing
power” applies to not only public funds but to a community of investors who unite in
supporting a common cause. One of the means could be crowdfunding. Crowdfunding
has some elements in its format that may seem to increase the propensity to invest in
commons, like flexible investment structures which are adaptable to the specific proj￾ect, a transparent process which allows potential investors to view who has invested
already, and a series of payoff structures to choose from. The format can raise billions,
like Kickstarter, a NY-based public benefit corporation whose mission is to help bring
creative projects to life. As of January 2023, Kickstarter has received 7.0 billion US$ in
pledges from about 22 million backers to fund some 232 000 projects, such as films,
music, stage shows, comics, journalism, video games, board games, technology, publish￾ing, and food-related projects (https://www.kickstarter.com). These are all concerns of
the common good. The payoff often is tangible rewards or experiences in exchange for
the pledges.6,7
From the medieval irrigation systems to “Kickstarter”, there has been a long way
of successes and failures in the history of the commons. The essential characteristic,
though, which is collective management of a participatory resource, can be found in
all evolvements. Whichever the magnitude and the field of activity, there are several
conditions and prerequisites for making collective efforts in common goods provision
effective. They comprise the definition of exit strategies, harmonization with the local
settings, rules for choice and decision making, surveillance and conflict resolutions
(Ostrom 1993). This corollary of features constitutes an important part of the com￾mons concept. A more detailed view of this is given in Section 3.5.
Two critics of the common goods concept shall be mentioned here: One is the
American economist Kenneth J. Arrow. While his writings came out prior to Ostrom’s,
his claim that an objective social good does not exist would also relate to commons,
because they serve a large group of members who all have individual desires. He de-
 Kickstarter has used its civic platform to build for–profit–entities as well, like a building project for
3.6 million US$ in Brooklyn as headquarter, where the finance, however, comes from venture capital￾ists. Many other common goods platforms use this model also, especially in the media industry (Ridg￾way 2015).
 For reward–based crowdfunding, trust between all parties is vital. Therefore, incidents of fraudulent
behavior by campaign creators can be lethal. So, when suspicions came up of fraudulent campaigns
related to Kickstarter (like the campaign ‘Rewards Not Delivered’), Kickstarter established a ‘Trust &
Safety Team’ to uncover evidence, and then suspended dubious campaigns (Cumming et al. 2023).
1.4 The commons: Collective ownership and self-regulation 17plores that by viewing at individual preferences, academia mostly relegates the exis￾tence of a social ideal to the meaningless (Arrow 1951; see Lutz 1999, p. 105). By con￾trast, his contemporary Joseph Schumpeter, the Austrian economist most known for his
theory of creative destruction, using health an example, stated that we all speak of the
same when we talk about the common good of public health, but that this is strictly not
a social ideal, only a very important commons (Schumpeter 1954, p. 801).
The other, very fierce, criticism is from Walter E. Block, Professor of Economics at
Loyola University New Orleans. He condemns the concept of the commons “because it
contains a nasty, vicious attack on private property rights, the lynchpin of a civilized
order. Anything that weakens private property rights promotes barbarism . . .” (Block
2011, p. 1, 2). His argument is about common property actually being a partnership and
not common ownership. He says: “If one can be excluded from the ‘common’ resource
(by not being accepted into the partnership), everyone can be deterred from participat￾ing in its benefits, except for the partners who will then exclusively share the benefits
specified in the contract among them” (Block 2011, pp. 3–4). But Block’s criticism, and
Arrow’s, too, do not hold if exposed to positive and normative economic grounds. Posi￾tive economics is based on fact. If confronted with the factual evolvements of the com￾mons concept, even the skeptics must agree that the many collective efforts therein
have strengthened human wellbeing (Karpoff 2022). And normative economics, which
is based on value judgments, builds on the assumption that people´s actions seek to sat￾isfy coherent and a priori preferences. So, why should people not relate the institutional
design of the commons concept to their commonly held value judgements? And in view
of the benefits offered, why should they not (commonly) prefer this format to its alter￾natives? If we hold that normative economics is focused on questions of efficiency
(maximizing net benefits), the net benefit to society from the practice of commons is
undisputable as will be shown in the next section: The scale of society has grown, and
commons problems have spread across communities and across nations. A good exam￾ple is water allocation issues, which by nature often cross borders. They are, as of
today, frequently addressed by common-property regimes of collective management
(Stavins 2011). And in larger spaces, where no over-arching authority can offer complete
control (air and water quality, hazardous waste, species extinction, ozone and green￾house gases in the stratosphere), collective action is the only way for rendering
solutions.
1.5 Connecting public goods and commons to human wellbeing
In the discussion that was presented in Section 1.3 on the issue of private and public
property, Mancur Olson was quoted with “the state is first of all an organization that
provides wellbeing for its members, the citizens” (Olson 1965, p. 15), and this was con￾trasted to distributive deficiencies, like benefits from statal activities being unfairly
distributed, contributions levied from people who do not enjoy the benefits and other
18 Chapter 1 Defining public goods and commonsinadequacies. Yet even though quite a few members of society may feel that their public
authorities are imperfect and the services they deliver are insufficient, it is first the
state whom people have in mind for providing public goods. The expectation is that
those public goods provided will benefit all and maintain or increase wellbeing of ev￾erybody. The main petition here is that each person who wishes to benefit from those
public goods can actually do so.
There also is the point whether a strong state is in a better position to ensure that
all citizens behave in a way that wellbeing for all is accomplished. One example is the
strife for clean air: When comparing the fight against air pollution in China and in
India, China’s progress and India’s malfunctioning can be traced back to the strength
of China’s one-party system that brooks no opposition and where local authorities
necessarily fall in line with initiatives prioritized by the central government; in India,
with local governments being run by an array of different parties, the coordination is
much more complicated. Also, India is much less wealthy than China: here the eco￾nomic output per inhabitant was US$ 12 500 in 2021, India’s was a mere US$ 2 300.
This may explain why India has obviously decided that it has urgent economic needs
which will be prioritized over environmental clean-up (Raj et al. 2022).
The strong-state argument must be pondered carefully. While the unitary struc￾ture of a strong state enables it to impose policies over the objections of particularistic
interests, the danger is that this jeopardizes civic freedom. But if there is a system
where state policies that articulate collective interests are balanced with robust social
forces, a strong government will not inhibit participative policies. France and Ger￾many, even though their political structures differ considerably, are good examples.
In France, the president has more powers than the German chancellor. But in either
country, when a new party comes into power and wishes to demonstrate leadership,
the robustness of social forces will prevent excessive changes because society and so￾cietal powers are fairly developed. The state will have to ensure that its delivery of
public goods contributes to social inclusion and strengthens the sense of shared citi￾zenship. Only the state can provide the public goods of maintaining law and order,
protecting the rights of workers and a well-functioning labor market. Another aspect
is that some public goods need entrance barriers to safeguard them against depletion
from over-consumption that would reduce the wellbeing of all. Public space and phys￾ical infrastructure, for instance, if used by too many at the same time, will deteriorate
and jeopardize wellbeing. It is the duty of the state to prevent this. On another end,
the state must accept that there is the question of choice: A public healthcare system,
while apparently creating the common good of easy access to physicians and hospi￾tals, may be rejected by citizens because even though they may associate this with
welfare, they might not want that governments provide each facet of it. And they
would certainly want to stay away from a system that is prone to defects, over-usage,
and abuse (Poteete et al. 2010). An example is the long-standing discussion in the
United Kingdom on the National Health Service – the NHS – which has led to a broad
array of suggestions for transforming publicly funded health – “wellbeing”, in this
1.5 Connecting public goods and commons to human wellbeing 19context, would rather mean that account is taken of the changing needs and wants of
society (see, e.g., Bevir and Waring 2018).
For a more exhaustive understanding of how public goods contribute to public
wellbeing, the perspective of wellbeing must be widened beyond the welfare discus￾sion to the perspectives of an educated society, of technological capabilities and the
standards of living, to take the foremost features. From there we get to what is also
encompassed by the concept of public goods, which are solidarity, connectivity, and
identifiability. As per this typology that was introduced by Kalthoff (2014), goods that
can be enjoyed in the company of others, like public television or public transport
would fall under the solidarity criterion; this would as well apply to any other net￾work. All these would also fulfill the criterion of connectivity. However, as said be￾fore, there might be the need to set up entrance barriers in order to prevent over￾usage; on the other hand, full connectivity with low or no entrance barriers must be
provided in many cases where technology is not an argument. U.S. philosopher John
Rawls (1921–2002) has included connectivity in what he called “primary goods” in
public space, like liberties, economic means, chances of good positions and self￾esteem (Rawls 1996, p. 181). These goods would build the structures which a society
needs to regenerate itself. With regards to identifiability, the meaning of the term can
best be exposed by what it means in statistics of mathematics, where it defines the
property that a mathematical model must have in order satisfy inference. Analo￾gously, if a person feels that he or she can identify how another person will act or
react, this contributes to individual wellbeing, and when translated to all members of
a society, we have collective wellbeing. Transparent policing and policymaking would
be the main public good which fosters identifiability (Loader and Walker 2001).
Transparent policing and policymaking through governments and governmental
agencies is an example of a public good for which no other provider than the state itself
is conceivable. If well applied, all members of a society will benefit. For many other pub￾lic goods, the benefits that they deliver may as well be procured by non-state actors.
Which goods this should be, and to which extent the state should allow privatization is
the subject of a never-ending discussion. The debate reaches from the claim that this
would end up in “private plunder of our common wealth” as per the title of a book by
David Bollier (2002), to what has been called the folk theorem by Nobel laureate John
E. Stiglitz: “Anything that the government can do, the private sector can do as well or
better” (Stiglitz 1994, p. 31). Neither of these arguments is valid. There are mostly practi￾cal reasons: Governments, sometimes, do just not have the funds to support the range of
public goods that society needs – which may sound ”tragic” (Nussbaum 2000), but this
shortage can only be remedied by private intervention; also, cost-benefit considerations
will often suggest private intervention. On the other end, distrust in the powers and the
competence of the public sector is often unfounded.
A positive approach to the topic is from Barrett (2007) who lists a series of reasons
why public-private interaction is not only feasible but also desirable in providing pub￾lic goods. He mentions that each provider (the businesses and the state) will reap
20 Chapter 1 Defining public goods and commonssome monetary benefit, that coordinated efforts in establishing public good regimes
will create new ways of accessing the main issue and side-issues, and that the citizens
might find that where the state remains the sole provider, government regulation,
after all, may safeguard public goods for this and the future generations (Barrett 2007,
pp. 74–102). And where governments lack the knowledge that is needed or the costs of
supervision would be too high, and businesses are not willing or not able to provide
resources, new institutions must be created to protect and manage public goods – like
the commons. Also, as stated by Ostrom (1990), leaving certain policy areas to the gov￾ernments alone might end up in bad scenarios – from inadequacies, fallacies, and
mounting cost to developments into completely failed states, where the wellbeing of
citizens is down to nothing. “Failed state” may be the extreme, but that status can be
quickly reached through conflict and political instability, with dire consequences for
e.g., nutrition, healthcare, and employment, as has been seen in many African states,
in Afghanistan and parts of Southeast. Is private provision of public goods an ade￾quate remedy in failed-state situations? This issue will be discussed below in Chapter 4
within the topic of policymaking.
1.6 Public goods and the measurement of wellbeing
If public goods contribute to wellbeing, this should be reflected in measures for wellbe￾ing. One good deposition that shows this nexus is a definition of wellbeing that “refers to
diverse and interconnected dimensions of physical, mental, and social wellbeing, . . . in￾cluding choices and activities aimed at achieving physical vitality, mental alacrity, social
satisfaction, a sense of accomplishment, and personal fulfillment. It captures aspects of
welfare beyond real income, which is what economists typically use to proxy utility . . .
Health is the most obvious example; education, civil liberties, civic participation, respect,
dignity, and freedom are others” (Naci and loannidis 2015, pp. 121/122). The traditional
measure used by economists on the level of national economies, or on some lower aggre￾gates, was gross domestic product (GDP) and its growth over time: If GDP, the value of all
goods, increases – including physical public goods like public infrastructure, public
schools, and public roads –, then utility and wellbeing increase. The notion of utility,
here, starts from the assumption that wellbeing is represented by a usefulness function
that is also the basis of decisions made by individuals and by the state. By contrast, mod￾ern behavioral economics rests on the supposition that people’s decisions deviate from
economic utility because they have deviating value judgments. It was Samuelson , origi￾nator of the public goods concept, who claimed that it should be the “concern of eco￾nomic analysis to examine the consequences of various value judgments” (Samuelson
1947, p. 220). Since then, many attempts have been made to establish measurement of
this judgements’ outcome. Whether “Beyond GDP” explorations (see, e.g., Bleys 2012),
Bhutan’s Gross National Happiness Index (see, e.g., Burns 2011), the OECD wellbeing
Framework (OECD 2020) or “happiness regressions” based on self-reports (Deaton 2018),
1.6 Public goods and the measurement of wellbeing 21all include a weight of immaterial personal judgments – goods that, to many, matter
more than material public goods.8 Still, the measures also encompass the service/the ben￾efits from physical public goods. This book cannot portray all these indicators and mea￾surement instruments; it will just present the basics of the OECD framework because the
nexus to public goods can be seen very well here.
The OECD Framework for Measuring Wellbeing is based on recommendations
made in 2009 by a high-level expert group attached to the OECD. It also reflects earlier
OECD work and various national initiatives which have taken up concerns about the
inadequacy of macro-economic statistics in providing a picture of the living condi￾tions experienced by ordinary people. The framework is built around three distinct
components: current wellbeing, inequalities in wellbeing outcomes, and resources for
future wellbeing (OECD 2020). Figure 1 exhibits the eleven indicators for current well￾being in the upper part, and it also shows propositions on how to quantify them.
Income and Wealth
RESOURCES FOR FUTURE WELL-BEING
Key dimensions How we measure them
Key dimensions How we measure them
Subjective Well-being
Averages
Inequalities between
top and bottom
performers
Inequalities
between
groups
Deprivations
Safety
Work-life Balance
Social Connections
Civil Engagement
Natural Capital Human Capital Stocks
Risk factors
Flows
Economic Capital Social Capital Resilience
Work and Job Quality
Housing
Health
Knowledge and Skills
Environment Quality
CURRENT WELL-BEING
Figure 1: The OECD Wellbeing Framework.
Source: https://www.oecd.org/wise/measuring-well-being-and-progress.htm
 A method to convert personal judgments into monetary values through specific survey techniques
is “Contingent Valuation”. See Section 3.4.1 of this book.
22 Chapter 1 Defining public goods and commonsThe lower part of Figure 1 shows the “resources for future wellbeing” (i.e., the founda￾tions on which wellbeing can be built for all times). Their quantification can resort to
measurement in monetary terms – even though there are many different opinions on
whether monetization is possible (or desirable) of natural and human and social re￾sources or not. An overview of this discussion is given in Bardy et al. (2021). This book
will cover a part of the topic in 4.5 which deals with the valuation of public goods.
The question of whether and how to monetize natural, human, and social resources
is not only led by economists, accountants, and statisticians. It has become a political
theme among humanists who detest the idea of numerical values for an individual, and
among the advocates of strong sustainability who hold that to avoid the commercializa￾tion of the biosphere, any type of monetization must be avoided right away (see, e.g.,
Helm 2016).
With the set-up of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals and the delib￾eration on how to monitor and evaluate their implementation, not only have account￾ing schemes come up (Long 2019), but the idea has also influenced the programs of
political parties: One example is Labour in the UK where the collectivist argument for
full employment, public goods and a fairer distribution of income has been expanded
to the argument that for determining how social goods increase people’s wellbeing
their effects need to be treated like a growth in private income (Jacobs 2011, pp. 9–10).
There is no positioning in the OECD framework about which element of wellbeing
ranks above the other. This would depend on the situations – in war torn Ukraine,
safety and health will certainly rank highest. And it is apparent that, generally,
human rights are prioritized above economic wellbeing. But as there is no taxonomic
definition of human rights,9 civil society organizations and judges in administrative
courts often demand a broadness of that definition which may jeopardize economic
or social progress. There are two examples where court decisions have marked a con￾spicuous unbalance against economic prosperity:
One case is a November 2022 court ruling in Australia which sets the protection
of a large area of Aborigines land and the affectedness of future generations by car￾bon dioxide emissions from coal mining near that land over the economic need of
providing coal to users who are short of other energy. The users are customers in
India, and the coal would be burned there and not in Australia. While the Aborigines
could be compensated, the Indian users would lose a basic resource. The Australian
government is not bound by that court decision, but the government followed the
court decision in previous cases that were similar but of less economic magnitude.10
 There is definitely a common understanding that human rights guarantee all human beings to
have inherent dignity and worth, and that they should be treated with respect and fairness. The Uni￾versal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted by the United Nations on 10 December, 1948, but all
human rights organizations agree that the concept does not allow an explicit taxonomy because many
of its elements are being judged over time (Park et al. 2020).
 http://envlaw.com.au/waratah.
1.6 Public goods and the measurement of wellbeing 23The second case is Milieudefensie (a Dutch environmental activist group) versus
Royal Dutch Shell. In May 2021, the District Court in the Hague ordered the company
to cut its global carbon dioxide emissions by 45 percent by 2030, as compared with
2019 levels. The court did not consider that this imposition of a specific technical obli￾gation over and above the reduction targets set by ‘cap-and-trade’ regulations in the
European Union may cost billions of euros which the defendant might have used for
creating jobs, advance technological progress and invest in large-scale climate mitiga￾tion projects. In its decision, the court explicitly referred to what it called the duty of
care arising for Royal Dutch Shell from the European Convention on Human Rights.
From the standpoint of law theory this may be seen as advance because it ‘hardens’
international soft law (the EU Convention) in relation to standards of corporate con￾duct. But from a practical perspective, it is highly problematic that a court connects
what the Convention spells out on human rights, specifically the right to life and the
right to respect for private and family life, with the obligation of Royal Dutch Shell to
contribute to diminishing the temperature rise in the Netherlands (Macchi and van
Zeben 2021). If courts become an avenue for imposing climate mitigation obligations
on public and private actors, the question must be asked if governmental policies are
not sufficient or not effective to deal with climate change. The answer may be that
policymaking, other than the ruling of a single case by a myopic court, must contem￾plate all effects on all constituents, whether on mitigation of climate change or any
other field.
Policymaking in relation to public goods is the subject of Chapter 4. This will be
preceded by an overview of the different typologies of public goods and their sources.
These differences give rise to differences in policy approaches.
24 Chapter 1 Defining public goods and commonsChapter 2
Typologies of public goods and commons
Any attempt to classify a variety of categories must set out from discriminating fac￾tors. When contrasting between private and public goods, a discriminating factor
would be political choice: It is the citizens who determine what is a public good (Stret￾ton and Orchard 1994). Hence, the way towards categorizing the varieties of public
goods would set out from the criteria which should be used for political choice deci￾sions. Political choice must be rational; the wrong way would be to demand that the
extent to which a good is perceived as public depends on those values that achieve
the highest approval within a given society (Wuyts 1992). There is an unwanted conse￾quence of this utilitarian view: It narrows the scope to a status where the only way to
create the largest benefit to the largest number of people would be through providing
as much goods as possible through the state: Only through centralized decisions
would the state escape from the malaise that what is understood by benefit comes
from an almost infinite number of individual preferences (Bürgenmeier 1999, p. 451).
But this creates another malaise: The state does not have the means to provide all
public goods. The way out of that dilemma can be the following: In order to warrant
rationality which cannot be guaranteed by social choice expressed through a myriad
of individuals, the inception must be set not with terms that are based on preferences
but with terms based on operations (Mortimore 2014). There are three terms on public
goods which are operational: “created through collective action”, “paid for collec￾tively” and “supplied without charge (or below cost) to recipients” Sekera (2014). They
can be further specified (Sekera 2014, p. 6):
– Public goods are created by human effort, as contrasted with natural goods. Air is
a natural good; clean air is a public good. Land is a natural good; national parks
are public goods. Public goods are created to protect and preserve natural goods).
– Public goods are not the same conceptually as the commons. The legal structure
that protects the commons is a public good.
– Public goods are created by law.
From these specifications, even though one may contest that all public goods have
legal origin, and from the standard approach of defining public goods’ properties as
being non-rival and non-excludable in consumption, a first classification can be made
(Figure 2):
Quadrant 1 shows that private goods are mostly rivalrous and excludable – as
with the example of milk: A person who has a glass of milk is not generally obligated
to share it. Once that milk is drunk, it is not available any more for others. However,
in other examples, this interpretation does not hold in practice. Whether a parcel of
land should be considered private, or public is full of heavy contention. Any govern￾ment on federal, state or municipality levels, may purchase land to be used for official
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111134611-003purposes. But it is not accessible to all. And there is land that has never been acquired
by a public agency, but it is deemed to be accessible to everybody, as with lakefront
and beachfront. While beachfront properties are owned by private people, they do
not have rights over the beach itself – but they have duties to keep it safe (and
clean) – like the pedestrian ways in downtown areas (Mears 2009). Appeals have been
coming up from homeowners of beachfront properties who claim that their property
rights extend to the water’s edge (Mears 2009). But when, in Florida, a rash of hurri￾canes washed the beaches away and massive amounts of public money was spent for
beach re-nourishment, municipalities have called for these lands to be deemed public:
Suggestions are that, for a beach which is 200 feet wide, the 75 feet that are nearest to
the water’s edge were to be considered public (Mears 2009).
In quadrant 3 (non-rivalrous, non-excludable goods) and in quadrant 2 most cases
would be purely public goods. Moonlight, laws, controlling communicable diseases –
these are all intangibles that are available for everyone. Kaul (2003) gives another ex￾ample: A country’s growth and development potential (quadrant 3) mainly depends
on an educated and productive workforce. For this, universal access to education is
required, as well as, ultimately, respect for human rights (quadrant 2).
Rivalrous Non-rivalrous
Excludable QUADRANT 
Examples
– Milk
– Land
– Education
QUADRANT 
Examples
– Research and development
– Non-commercial knowledge
– (such as the Pythagorean theorem)
– Norms and standards
– Respect for human rights
– Television signals
Non–excludable QUADRANT 
Examples
– Atmosphere
– Wildlife
QUADRANT 
Examples
– Moonlight
– Peace and security/conflict
– Law and order/anarchy
– Financial stability/excessive
– financial volatility
– Economic stability/flagging growth
– Growth and development potential
– (such as educated workforce)
– Effective/inefficient markets
– Communicable diseases spreading/controlled
or eradicated
Figure 2: A Conventional Approach of the Basic Properties of Goods.
Source: Kaul and Mendoza 2003, p. 82.
26 Chapter 2 Typologies of public goods and commonsIn a refinement of the classification given in Figure 2, Kaul and Mendoza (2003)
go beyond the basic conventions on public goods’ properties towards how they exist
in the social environment of nowadays. This modification is shown in Figure 3.
The main differences between the two tables are goods that have a socially deter￾mined status, which in Figure 3 applies to rivalrous and non-exclusive goods whose
intensive use is prone to threaten their sustainability (Kaul and Mendoza 2003). The
solution is to make goods more exclusive: Atmosphere (in quadrant 4), is a good
which is available for all people to enjoy. With policies such as air pollution permits,
this good is made partially exclusive (only if a firm buys this permit, it may pollute
the air), and it becomes manageable. The same goes with fish stocks and roads: The
implementation of fish quotas and road tolls enable better management of these re￾sources. On the other end there are rivalrous goods that may be kept or made non￾exclusive, like basic education and healthcare. Although they can as well be designed
to be fully private, which is the case with most of U.S. healthcare, the government
may impose policies which make them non-exclusive, like with the systems of Medi￾care and Medicaid in the U.S. (Scutchfield et al. 1997). The refined classification shown
in Figure 3 also allows to introduce the business perspective. If we take knowledge
that is referred to as a public good (i.e., something from which the greater society can
benefit), we must add that patenting and intellectual property rights may grant exclu￾sive rights to the specific users of knowledge, mostly in the business sector. These pri￾vate incentives then produce an incentive to execute research and invest in research
and new production which consequently will incite more research and innovation.
What this entails is the question which utility can be earned from using a public good,
because this utility may influence the provision of the good. It is not enough to ascer￾tain that a good is available for general usage. The utility of the good needs to be en￾abled.
Enabling the utility of a public good allows to surpass the ideal assumption that it
might serve society with its potential – its potential utility (Laudal 2019). For instance,
public healthcare is intended to be available to all, but without a well-refined system
that provides access to all in all its corollaries, it is only potentially so. Any reference
to the U.K. National Health Service will confirm this (see, e.g., Chaplin 2018). It is the
enabled utility which counts. As claimed by Laudal (2019), when defining the charac￾teristics of a public good, the contextual factors must be considered: a) the utility
layer, which is the qualities of the good; b) the supply layer, which is how good is
provided; and c) the conversion layer, which is the elements of the value-added pro￾cess. Figure 4 exhibits how the three layers interact.
In this graph, for U1 through U4 and for S1 through S4, all four ownership choices
are given, with “Toll” referring to private ownerships whose accessibility is regulated
by state authorities. When assessing the graph for the utility layer which shows the
“excludability dimension” and the “jointness/rivalry dimension”, one can deduce the
qualities of these dimensions from the following:
Chapter 2 Typologies of public goods and commons 27EXCLUDABLE
QUADRANT 
Private goods
– Milk
– Land
– Education
PRIVATE DOMAIN
PUBLIC DOMAIN
QUADRANT 
a Non-rivalrous goods
made exclusive
– Patented knowledge of
manufacturing
processes
– Cable/satellite
television
2b Non-rivalrous goods
kept or made non￾exclusive-
– Public television
– Property rights
regimes
– Norms and standards
– Non-commercial
knowledge
– Respect for human
rights
– As yet unknown
“bads”, (undiscovered
pollutants)
NON–EXCLUDABLE
QUADRANT 
a Rivalrous goods
made (partially)
exclusive
– Atmosphere; air pollution permits
– Fish stocks/fishing quotas
– Toll roads
4b Rivalrous goods
kept or made non–
exclusive
– Atmosphere
– Wildlife, fish stocks
– Public parks and nature reserves
– Basic education and healthcare for all
QUADRANT 
Pure public goods
– Moonlight
– Peace and security
– Law and order/
anarchy
– Financial stability/
– financial volatility
– Economic stability/
flagging growth
– Growth and
development potential
(such as educated
workforce)
– Effective/inefficient
markets
– Communicable
diseases spreading
controlled or
eradicated
– Knowledge embodied
in pharmaceutical drugs
Figure 3: An Advanced Approach of the Basic Properties of Goods.
Source: Kaul and Mendoza 2003, p. 83.
28 Chapter 2 Typologies of public goods and commons– If the good is part of a common resource, this would indicate non-rivalry.
– If the good is non-subtractable (it cannot be depleted), there is jointness or sharing.
– If the benefits from the good are restricted to a selected group, we have exclusive￾ness.
– If the good allows for market-based transactions, and supply and demand will de￾termine its prices, we also have exclusiveness.
In the supply layer, the two dimensions of excludability and of jointness/rivalry can
be determined as follows:
– If the suppliers of the good compete for the same customers, this would indicate
rivalry.
– If the suppliers are threatened by suppliers of a substitute or by new entrants to
the market or, we have rivalry.
– If the need for the good is limited to a fixed quantity per consumer/user and the
options to differentiate are scarce, this would indicate low rivalry.
– If the good addresses a basic human need and there is no big need for suppliers to
differentiate, we have low rivalry.
If we stay with the example of healthcare and we assume that hospital treatment is a
private good (exclusive), the provision of this good might will mostly be non-excludable.
In going further, Laudal (2019) notes that changes in the qualities of healthcare (the util￾ity layer) are often due to technological change, while it is primarily changes in the do￾Figure 4: Distinguishing between Supply Layer, Utility Layer and Conversion Layer.
Source: Laudal 2019.
Chapter 2 Typologies of public goods and commons 29mains of organization and policy that produce changes in the supply layer. So, there are
distinguishing differences between the two supply layers, and they will very often deter￾mine the value of the good’s provision. Shifts between the various statuses are possible
in various public goods also (Laudal (2019, p. 27):
1. Hospital care: For U1 the trajectory is S1 + S2 => S3 through growing turnovers of
private hospitals.
2. University education: For U2 the trajectory is S2 => S3 when more private univer￾sities come up.
3. Accommodation: For U3 the trajectory is S3 => S4 when Airbnb challenges the
hotel business.
4. Electricity distribution: For U4 the trajectory is S3 => S4 when smart grids substi￾tute traditional power grids.
Changes in the conversion-layer are mostly caused by changes in the level of material
efficiency or energy (“efficacy”). Their consequences may affect the utility of supply,
but they would not trigger trajectories because increase in efficiency is usually ex￾ploited within the ownership structure where it was developed.
The utility/supply/conversion-concept adds substantially to the question how to
adapt the format of policies for providing, managing, and expanding specific public
goods. Another way to format policies can be based on ownership and space determi￾nants. It is from these where the standard typification arises both for public goods
and commons. This will be explored in the next sections with the non-exclusiveness
and non-rivalry dimensions, followed by the issue of collective spending, then with
differentiations through space (level and time), and from there with manageability.
Manageability is an important ingredient in the commons concept, the discussion on
which will be given the final section of this chapter.
2.1 Fully or not fully non-excludable and non-rivalrous:
Pure, impure and club goods
In their purest form, public goods are those that can be provided to an unlimited
number of users (with the marginal cost of that provision for any additional user
being zero), and where no person can be excluded from its use. When enumerating
examples of “tangibles”, like clean air, fresh water and unspoiled natural habitats,
and “intangibles” like safety, security, peace, general knowledge, access to law sys￾tems and markets we uncover one other characteristic: Those who use these good
cannot possibly be charged for their use, and if there were such charges, it would be
impossible to exclude non-payers from enjoying the good. Technology can change this
as was the case, e.g., with TV. In the 1950s, when television started, a television signal
could not be encrypted because there was no apposite technology around. TV was
purely public. As soon as encryption technology was developed, exclusion became
30 Chapter 2 Typologies of public goods and commonspossible, and private firms that invested in television could then set a price for it and
earn a return on the investment (Demsetz 1970). However, technology was an issue
before modern times already as shown by Ostrom’s (1990) famous irrigation provision
example where members had the option and the technical means to exclude others.
When only a small group of consumers is able/is allowed to use a public good, it
becomes an “impure” public good as was first specified by Buchanan (1999 [1968]). An
impure public good has a limited capacity and hence cannot be used by all: Roads or
public parks may become congested; therefore, some users need to be excluded from
them. Congestion determines exclusion here, but it may also result from the necessity
for protecting the natural environment. Whether because of potential congestion or
from the need to preserve a resource, rationalizing becomes necessary. There is a tip￾ping point, a threshold, beyond which negative consequences occur from over-usage.
This extends beyond the local sphere of a park to wider natural resources. Fish stocks,
which were already mentioned above, which may be doomed to collapse, are one issue,
as are grasslands or the rainforests. If they vanish, human wellbeing vanishes.
The case of public parks and grasslands can also serve to demonstrate the case of
rivalry in consumption. When a national park gets overcrowded, latecomers are not
admitted or are charged a higher fee (Case 2008). Beyond this local level, an expanse
of frontier land or outer space may also be subject to rivalrous behavior. The solution
would be varied zoning of land, and when there are too many satellites up in space,
those who send new ones will have to pay a higher cost (McNutt 1999).
Exclusivity also governs when a price is charged for the use of a good or service,
like, for instance, a membership fee or an entrance fee to prevent the good from be￾coming congested. Then we have club goods. The cost of their supply is not borne by
the public, it is distributed over a finite number of users, and the (infinite) divisibility
of benefits becomes restricted. The other logic behind this, apart from crowding, is
depreciation. Depreciation affects the carrying capacity of the respective good. The
most often used examples to illustrate this are public swimming-pools, tennis courts,
golf courses and museums. Other than with commons, where all members care for
protection and maintenance, caring for club goods is entrusted to the owner/owners of
the good. There are transitions between the various types of goods as has been shown
above within the topic of and potential and enabled utility. Another example is given
by Dawson (2007): A farmer protects his herd against a contagious disease by vaccina￾tion. This it is a private good, protecting his cattle and securing his livelihood, but it will
also contribute to preventing an epidemic. Hence, it is a public good as well.
The example of protecting the health of livestock exhibits that any classification of
goods is dynamic: It depends on market conditions, and also on the level of technical
development. When the market does not work – e.g., in providing vaccines at an afford￾able cost – a public authority will have to step in. Then, protecting the health of live￾stock will become a public good and all farmers will identically benefit from this public
good. The downside here and in quite a few other cases will be that some people would
be tempted to benefit as much as possible and to contribute as little as possible. In the
2.1 Fully or not fully non-excludable and non-rivalrous: Pure, impure and club goods 31livestock example, this freeriding can be prevented because the farmers need to hire a
veterinarian. But, in other cases, like a dam being constructed to protect a village
against flooding, every inhabitant will benefit from the dam, and no one can be ex￾cluded from its usage, irrespective of who shares the cost. Here, at first sight, no inves￾tor will offer a market solution:11 People know that they will be able to consume this
service for free, and they will not reveal if and how much they would be willing to pay
for this. The dam will have to be paid for collectively, i.e., from public money, which
may constitute the dam to become a public good. In this context, it is worthwhile to
make an excursion to the arena of public budgets where decisions on collective spend￾ing also determine what is a public good. After this, the non-exclusivity, and the non￾rivalry issues at the various levels of local – regional – global will be discussed in detail
in section 2.3.
2.2 Collective spending
The legal denomination of collective spending plays into the typology of public goods.
Research on legislative policymaking and government spending (see, e.g., Battaglini,
and Coate 2008) discerns between legislative preferences for collective spending and
the amount of the budget actually allocated to the public goods it wishes to provide.
Legislators are often confronted with partisan preferences at regional levels to direct
more collective funds for particularistic programs which leads to deficiencies in other
public goods (Volden and Wiseman 2007). Particularistic programs are targeted to poli￾ticians’ preferred locale or constituency. Even as they may serve some social or eco￾nomic purpose, they are pursued primarily for political benefit with a key constituency
(Díaz-Cayeros et al. 2003). The pejorative expression in the U.S. for this is “pork barrel
spending”.
12 When the term was first introduced in 1863, it was just a reference to any
money a government spent on its citizens. But the meaning shortly changed to describe
spending by a politician that benefited certain constituents in exchange for their sup￾port, either financial or via the ballot box.
With a view to how define what is public and what is not, collective spending
funding (which would comprise all moneys expensed by a government, whether local
 Still, there are market solutions: The communities alongside the area that is exposed to flooding
can sell the terrain and the adjacent land to an investor who builds the dam. He will be able to re￾cover the investment from the increase in land value that shall occur when the dam has been built.
 The pork barrel metaphor supposedly originates from one of many unsavory practices of slave
owners. Without refrigeration in the late 19th century, people preserved pork by brining it in barrels.
Slaves, who all had their access to food restricted, would rush to the pork barrel to receive their ra￾tions. The theory is that someone likened the slaves stampeding to get pork to congress members get￾ting their local appropriation items into bills. Pure chaos! (https://study.com/academy/lesson/what-is￾pork-barrel-spending-definition-examples.html).
32 Chapter 2 Typologies of public goods and commonsor state or federal) cannot be a denominator for its provision of public goods: As per
the discernment made above, the budget which a government allocates to public
goods is lower than the whole of collective spending. But if particularistic programs
serve some social purpose, they might still serve some social group’s wellbeing, if only
within a small community. There is nothing wrong with this if the community pays
taxes to the authority that spends money for a particularistic purpose in that particu￾lar community (e.g., property tax that is paid to the county in the U.S.). We would call
the pertinent issue a local public good. The problem arises when taxation is central￾ized and spending decisions are decentralized, i.e., where the taxpayer cannot see the
fiscal cost-benefit. So, as the voters do not fully internalize the link between higher
taxes (the costs) and more particularistic spending (the benefits), they may only see
the higher taxes and not recognize the addition to their wellbeing.
Collective spending for other than public goods financing may run into excessive
government expenses when decision makers are fragmented along partisan lines.
This can only be remedied by disciplining mechanisms through the ministry of fi￾nance or some other institution in other ministries (Bawn and Rosenbluth 2006).
Díaz-Cayeros et al. (2003) gave the example of Japan, with its strong oversee mecha￾nism through the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI). Their numeri￾cal analysis13 examined government construction investment – in railways, roads,
bridges, housing, and community centers, which has historically been the object of
particularistic programs in the Japanese budget. In 1998, which was the focus of the
study, Japan spent 626.5 billion US$, or 15.2% of GDP in construction; the U.S., despite
having 24 times the land mass, spent 651.6 billion US$ (only 4% more than Japan),
which is 8.1% of GDP.14 Between 1984 and 1998, private sector construction in Japan
grew at only 1.1% per year, while government investment grew at 3.6%, and the rela￾tion between public sector spending to overall spending increased from 38.7% to
46.9%. But profitability in the industry decreased from 3.4% in 1990 to 1.6% in 1998.
So, when the government knowingly spends money in a non-profitable sector, there
is room to suggest that this has political background. There is a proof: The share of
expenditure in public works increased as the ruling party’s vote share decreased. To
secure its majority in parliament, the party engaged in heavy construction invest￾ment, particularly in rural areas where it has a hard voter base and where the effect
of public works on local economies becomes clearly visible. Still, with 39% of the tax
revenue raised directly from local political entities, there is some fiscal cost-benefit
nexus on the local level, and when transfers from the central government become
necessary, this has always been tightly controlled by the MITI and the Ministry of Fi￾nance, showing a coincidence with changes in the electoral system (Horiuchi and
Saito 2003).
 All numerical data in this paragraph are taken from Díaz-Cayeros et al. (2003).
 Engineering News Record 1998, https://www.enr.com.
2.2 Collective spending 33The Japanese case not only sheds a light on the pros and cons of including all col￾lective spending in public goods investment; it also shows that fiscal oversee on the
national level can impede expenditures that are only made to please the electoral
base. Only when particularistic programs contribute to wellbeing in the community
where they are executed, they should be labeled public goods. Anyhow, it is on the
community level, the local level, where citizen enjoy most of the benefits from public
goods – which leads to the next section.
2.3 Local – regional – global
Citizens enjoy most of the benefits from public goods on the local level – at least visi￾bly (there are exceptions: clean air, though breathed in by anyone wherever staying
locally, should be available anywhere, and hence it would be considered a global
good). And the locals also suffer the most when supply of public goods is inadequate,
such as poor rural transportation, insufficient supply of electricity, drinking water,
education, and internet access. This often limits regional communications even in a
developed country like Germany where, as of 2023, there are quite a few regions
where is not up to date (Thomä 2023). There is another aspect in the usage of public
goods on the local level: it is not just the locals who benefit from local public goods,
like, e.g., city streets and pedestrian areas. They may also provide benefits to users
from outside the local community. So, what develops is an “impure” local public good.
The communities might charge their usage, but if the users are mobile, they will be
able to choose between different communities which offer different public goods
schemes. And they may decide that they want to be offered a determined package of
public goods in a determined community. There would be more users in that area,
which could raise this community’s (and these goods’) efficiency. The other communi￾ties, however, might then offer a lower price for their services (e.g., lower local taxes),
and this could end up in a race to the bottom, leaving the public entities with inade￾quate resources for attending to the needs of many of their citizens. There is a para￾dox in this which was first revealed by US economist and geographer Charles Tiebout
(1956): If various local jurisdictions differ in the packages of public goods they offer
and the local taxes they raise, he said, this will lead to an optimal partition within the
citizenry through a process of voting with the feet (people leave the community, or
they do not come for visits). So, there would be fewer users, and it would be from this
smaller number that efficiency would rise (Cornes and Sandler 1996, p. 9).
The linkage between the offer of local public goods and fiscal competition be￾tween local governments affects wellbeing, or to be more precise, both influence eco￾logical and social sustainability: Local governments will raise the attractiveness for
(new) citizens and businesses and can then choose spending policies that increase the
value of their public goods – tangible ones like environmental protection and intangible
ones like social coherence. A proof is the outcome of tax competition between Belgian
34 Chapter 2 Typologies of public goods and commonsmunicipalities which was investigated by public goods researcher Henry Tulkens over a
period of 15 years (Richard, Tulkens and Verdonck 2006). By adapting the rate of the sup￾plemental income tax and the property assessment factor to each other’s rates settings
they effectively altered the preferences of businesses to remain or to move away. Where
businesses moved in, tax revenue increased, and the municipalities offered more and
better public goods. In the end, what matters are not tax rates and tax incentives but the
provision of public goods. Sweden has a high tax burden for individuals of an average
(!) 57.2%.15 Her citizens, though, do not emigrate to low-tax countries because they feel
that the delivery of public services and public goods is to their satisfaction.
When a public good is provided locally, the beneficiaries can closely collaborate with
the goods provider in shaping the scope and the qualities of the service. For instance,
education in public schools has largely been left to local units in most states over a system
governed on a state or federal level. There are exceptions – in Austria, secondary schools
are federal as opposed to the system in Germany where homogenization of curricula,
exams and working conditions of teachers is sought through inter-state ministerial com￾mittees (with mixed results – see Huisman 2003).16 But for primary schools, the most com￾mon model found anywhere is local jurisdiction, and funding is from (local) taxes.
However, when the need arises to accommodate a larger number of students, to hire
more teachers and to build larger schools, this often goes beyond or county budgets or
municipal budgets. The consequence is private schools – so, from the “production side”,
schooling is not a pure public good. On the consumption side, however, one would con￾ceive and consider schooling as a pure public good because returns from education pro￾duce benefits not only to those being educated, but to all society. However, evidence
shows that the more schooling remains a pure public good, the smaller will the return be
to the student compared with the return to all society (Barzel 1973). From there, it may be
deduced that private investment (business involvement) in education contributes posi￾tively to the outcome of schooling. If there is a well-balanced blend of public and private
schooling, the advantage for society may even reach beyond local boundaries. This
across-borders effect can also be found in other local public goods. E.g., climate change
adaptation only works within a certain region, but as it affects climate change mitigation,
it promotes a global public good.
When expanding the scope from the local to the regional and global levels, the
benefits provided by public goods reach farther, and we also touch the critical link to
 This entails taxes and contributions for health care provision, unemployment and old age pension:
https://tradingeconomics.com /sweden/personal-income-tax-rate.
 Paradoxically, the French education system while it claims to have uniform curricula still creates
inequalities to the advantage of those who come from families who care for childhood learning and
who often live in well-off neighborhoods (Tirole 2017, p. 56). Likewise, the educational levels at state
schools in the US and in Britain simply reflect whether they are in a poor or in a wealthy neighbor
neighborhood (see, e.g., Dreier et al. 2014). More on the issue of education will be discussed below in
section 3.2.
2.3 Local – regional – global 35globalization. The nexus between global public goods and globalization requires an
understanding that is not “shaped by disjointed political pressures and jurisdictions –
which are likely to favor the emergence of public bads that might hinder the develop￾ment of public goods” (Kaul et al. 2003, p. 2). But it is not only that we see disjoint
public policies; the same goes for public responsibilities. There is also a deep division
in the general attitudes towards globality. Globalization is often connected to in￾creased influence of the private sector which affects the workforce, consumers, citi￾zens in general, and, last not least, policy makers. Therefore, lawmakers, elected
officials, and heads of government agencies need to address the topic without ideolog￾ical prejudice, and whatever efforts they develop in the context of globality, their
undertakings must include the private sector. Otherwise, they will hamper interna￾tional interdependencies and disable them from producing the goal of advancing peo￾ple’s wellbeing. On the other hand, they must intervene when people feel that the
global activities of the private sector cause negative consequences (“public bads”), like
ecological calamities and financial crises. But this must not induce politicians to think
that it is solely them who can provide the avenues for managing globalization and
global public goods in an orderly fashion. A proper way towards solving the problem
is reflected in the European Union’s definition: “Global public goods refer to the ad￾vantages to society from the provision of certain utilities and from satisfying particu￾lar wants and needs such as the eradication of disease or the elimination of pollution.
Broadly, they can be classified into five main types: environment, health, knowledge,
peace and security, and governance” (European Commission 2002). Examples are
given in Table 2, and it becomes apparent that for providing the utilities and satisfying
the wants and the needs as per the EU definition, the private sector is indispensable.
On the global scene, provision of public goods raises two main concerns. One is gov￾ernance, the other is financing/financing mechanisms. These concerns are intertwined:
Public goods issues on a global can only be managed and overseen effectively through
inter-state cooperation and international institutions. And it is mainly international insti￾tutions and inter-state agencies that provide or procure finance. When the good is not
fully public because only a few institutions are concerned with the issue, as with, for ex￾ample, satellite communication networks, we have global commons. They will require
specific forms of funding, but the main difference from public goods is that they require
a specific form of governance. The difference can be gleaned from a statement made by
Boonen et al. (2019) who studied the formats of power in global ventures. Whereas the
provision of public goods may necessitate coercive powers for avoiding action dilemmas,
they say, commons depend on stakeholder agreements and ad hoc rules. Commons “re￾flect the ideal of self-governance of social movements and communities wary of market
logic and state hierarchy” (Boonen et al. 2019, p. 570). “Wary of market logic and state
hierarchy” might be a strong expression, especially when talking of the global level. But
the logic behind this is that some topics can better be addressed by smart self-governance
rather than by strict economic effectiveness and efficiency or high-level specialization.
This will primarily apply to the topics within the category of the environmental public
36 Chapter 2 Typologies of public goods and commonsgoods as shown in Table 2. Approaching these challenges globally will be more compli￾cated than on the local and regional levels. But there are quite a few ventures, e.g., in
ecological land development or the preservation of rain forests, that have a successful
outcome on the global level as well. Their management and governance features will
have to be more horizontal than vertical. An in-depth analysis on this will be given in
Chapter 4 of this book.
2.4 Intergenerational public goods
The term ‘intergenerational’ leads to the temporal dimension. When actions or deci￾sions on public goods have an effect into future, the stakeholders of these goods or
their representatives are accountable for the impacts on the next generations. In prin￾ciple, all public goods have that repercussion. For instance, when a community by the
sea or by a river builds a dam, this would be an ‘intergenerational club’ – the mem￾bers of the club will be the present and the future beneficiaries form the protection
that the dam provides. If one member of the club is a government institution, it may
be supposed that this institution will last beyond generations. It will have a say in de￾termining that the layout of the dam is strong enough to subsist. If the club is owned
Table 2: Types of Global Public Goods.17
Environment: Health: Knowledge: Peace and
Security:
Governance:
Clean air
Ecological land
development
Reduced
exposure to
harmful ozone
layer exposure
Preservation of
rain forests
Providing
public health
infrastructure
Limiting the
spread of
epidemics
Satellite
communication
network
International
standards
Education
Science
Deterrence
through
peacekeeping
Intelligence
Law and order
Non￾discriminatory
law and order
agents
Trade
Agreements
Investment
treaties
Functioning
institutions
Transparent
and effective
courts
Source: Adapted from European Commission 2002.
 It takes wonder that the categorization of the EU Commission does not include cultural goods of
which the global manifestation would be the UNESCO World Heritage List (https://whc.unesco.org/en/
list). But the context in which the Commission gave this definition of global public goods was the inter￾national efforts to achieve sustainable development. Still, there is a EU policy on culture, where the
main actor is the European Parliament. As early as in May 1974 it passed its basic resolution on the
protection of the European cultural heritage (OJ C 62, 30.5.1974, see: Prutsch 2018)
2.4 Intergenerational public goods 37through equity stocks, they will be traded between generations. From this, a strong
incentive exists that the founding members act with foresight: They will build the
dam in a way that it subsists, because otherwise the value of the stock drops prema￾turely. When they act carelessly, they will pay for their shortsightedness by incurring
a loss because the next generations will buy the stock at a reduced price (Cornes and
Sandler 1996, p. 239). Conversely, if the present generation increases maintenance ex￾penditure for the dam, this will increase the value of this public good. This has been
called ”intergenerational social efficiency” by Nobel laureate Robert Merton Solow: If
a society invests in the maintenance of its stock of capital, it can benefit from a con￾sumption stream over time and time (Solow 1986).
Social efficiency will rise when an intergenerational club has many (small) owners
who enjoy its benefits – like the dam of the example that was given above, or a toll￾road. Widespread ownership will guarantee that a status can be reached where it is
impossible that some people are better off than others. The economists’ term for this is
Pareto-efficiency, named after the Italian civil engineer and economist Vilfredo Pareto
(1848–1923) who was among the first scholars who used mathematics to explain eco￾nomic phenomena. He proved that the distribution of incomes and wealth follows a
consistent pattern in most societies, ending up in a status where a change in the alloca￾tion of wealth would make no one better off without making another worse off.18 In the
public goods sphere, Pareto-optimality does not only apply to a status of social effi￾ciency but to economic efficiency as well: The consumption or production of public
goods can give rise to externalities, which implies that those who consume or produce
the goods reap benefits that would obliterate a Pareto optimal distribution of wealth in
an economy (Buchholz et al. 2018). But if all externalities are internalized, i.e., the cost
which they produce for other players in the market are borne where the extra benefits
arise, optimality is restored. In a situation with positive externalities, e.g., where prop￾erty owners benefit from a new road built nearby without paying for it (as with the toll
road, our other example, where it is only its users that pay), the beneficiaries would
have to participate in its cost, too. Politicians will rarely make decisions of this kind.
Generally, governments favor the present generation by charging current users less
than full cost. Highways will thus deteriorate quickly, leaving a torn-up infrastructure
for future generations – an “intergenerational myopia” (Sandler 2013).
The main discussion on intergenerational public goods is not about toll roads, river
dams, or other club goods, it is about global public goods. Global public goods provide
benefits across borders and across generations. Whether by the forecasts of the Intergov￾ernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)19 or by simply observing nature, there is
 With a very high degree of simplification, this is related to what John Rawls, about 100 years later,
claimed to be fair justice in wealth distribution: Inequality in a society is acceptable if it works to the
benefit of the least–advantaged members of society (Rawls 1971).
 For more on the forecasts of the IPCC see section 4.5.3.
38 Chapter 2 Typologies of public goods and commonsclear evidence that limiting carbon dioxide creates benefits for the near and for the dis￾tant future. Preserving natural habitats, providing means of communication, accumulat￾ing knowledge, etc.: All are efforts that will improve the wellbeing of future generations.
Politicians and social activists always point to the responsibilities which the present gen￾eration has to that effect. Very rarely do they mention the benefits that the elderly have
produced for the young. The prevailing topic is the harms caused by the present genera￾tion – to the atmosphere, to the biosphere, to the natural resources. No one comments
on medicines that were developed, for example, in the early 1900s and which still cure
diseases; similarly, it is the present generation that improves access to fresh water and
sanitation, to name one of the SDGs. This will amend health and human development
for all generations to come. There is more in the SDGs to raising life expectancy and the
standard of living in future times, and there are many other very ambitious collabora￾tive arrangements that promote developments with long-term effects. One example
which is much less known than the 2015 Paris Agreement on Climate Change is the “Sen￾dai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction”, which was also signed in 2015 (UNISDR
2015). The objective is to reduce risks from natural and man-made catastrophes through
scientific and technical cooperation for research and development in the field. This will
prevent losses in lives and livelihoods, and it will contribute to preserving the assets of
mankind – physical, economic, social, environmental, and cultural ones, whether owned
by individuals, businesses, communities, or nation states (Aitsi-Selmi et al. 2016). Sadly,
the Sendai framework is included in the Paris Agreement by just one brief reference,
and it has almost never been covered in the media.
A similarly low coverage is given by the media to advances in nuclear technology.
While intensive public debates have been conducted on the intergenerational burden
from nuclear waste, technological progress on the issue is almost being negated. The
press very scarcely mentions technology that uses recycled nuclear waste, and only
after quite a few plants and research reactors had been in operation in the U.S. for
several years, media coverage started (Taylor 2015). The same goes for advances to
eliminate the most critical technical process, which is the loss of coolants from con￾ventional power plants, by pebble bed reactors. They have become active in China in
2021 – again, without being reported in the press. Their design is such that they can
gradually dissipate heat just by continuing the operation, and it would not matter if
coolants were lost.20 It seems that Western media are biased against nuclear energy.
There was only one article on new types of a nuclear reactor in the New York Times
when it came up in 2011 (Bradsher 2011). China, where several plants use the new
technology, is confident that this will substantially contribute to cutting China’s CO2
emissions per unit of GDP by 60 to 65% from the 2005 level by 2030 (World Nuclear
 A similar effect is attained by dual fluid reactors that are presently developed by German scien￾tists. The first pilot installation due in Africa in 2024 (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
abs/pii/S0306454915000730).
2.4 Intergenerational public goods 39News 2019) – and if this is in fact achieved, it should, with all due reservation, be
rightly called a sign of intergenerational concern.
Caring for the needs of future generations should influence today’s political deci￾sions in a way that promotes innovation and not through restrictions. For example,
the German parliament, in its total ban of nuclear energy, has barred future genera￾tions from research (and international cooperation) on the topic.21 The decision will
diminish the capabilities of upcoming scientists and engineers; it will potentially de￾prive the German society of far-ranging benefits, and, contrary to the politicians’ in￾tention, nuclear research in other countries will be subsidized by German taxpayers’
money because the system of finance within the European Union will add it to inter￾state payments for new developments in energy production.
One-sided perceptions on technology negate that all research produces joint out￾puts (e.g., the microwave is a by-product of NASA’s research on aeronautics). With
joint products, more positive external effects will occur that produce future public
benefits. There is another example: Excluding carbon dioxide capture and sequestra￾tion from development programs that consume steel dust produced in steel plants
will also bar a constructive way to use this waste (Ibrahim et al. 2019). Intergenera￾tional equity with public goods will not happen through taboos. The concept of public
goods needs fruitful argumentation, and successful technical approaches will provide
good additions s to the theoretical discourse.
The intergenerational attribute and the local/interregional/global attribute also
apply to commons. Of the attributes “non-exclusivity” and “non-rivalry”, the first one
does not apply in general, because commons usually have specific members who
manage them – like in the case of a club good. The second only applies where the
good in question is not depleted by over-exploitation. The main difference, though,
lies with manageability and governance.
2.5 Club goods of a specific type: The commons
The way in which communities self-organize common-pool resources deviates from a
management solution that would be deployed for an exclusively public or an exclu￾sively private good. It comes close to a managing a club good – again, the most illustra￾tive view here is Ostrom’s famous example of farmers collectively providing irrigation.
Beyond small-scale institutions on the local level, like the irrigation scheme, today’s
 It was not the parliament only which seems to have a wrong judgment on what to do for the future
generations and what not. In 2021, the German Constitutional Court, giving in to complaints raised by
young climate activists, declared the German Climate Protection Act unconstitutional because it does
not regulate emission reduction pathways from 2031 (https://verfassungsblog.de/the-constitution￾speaks-in-the-future-tense). Asking for this regulation, however, is equal to demanding that the law￾makers foreknow all technologies that may arise in the future.
40 Chapter 2 Typologies of public goods and commonscommons applications concern a wide range of multi-size self-government arrange￾ments on interregional and international levels. There are three elements which make
the commons solution unique: How they deal with power, which consequences the
power of the stakeholders to a commons has for the role of the state, and how they find
the most appropriate spatial scale of governance (Boonen et al. 2019). All three may
change over time. Also, getting the operation rules right on the first try or even after
several tries mostly is impossible (Ostrom 1990). The institution, however, if it is robust
will find an institutional equilibrium, meaning that if changes come about, the partners
will “transpire according to an ex-ante plan” (Shepsle 1989, p. 142), i.e., following to the
collective-choice rules of the institution.
An ex-ante plan, collective-choice rules, monitoring, and continued commitment
are three major ingredients to the specifics of commons governance. Commitment
can prevent that members reap isolated benefits, even without harsh restrictive rules
for exclusion and sanctions systems. There may be a high cost of negotiating the ré￾gime that governs a commons. But it is indispensable for its functioning that all par￾ties affected by a resource regime participate in making and modifying rules, either
in person or through their representatives. The result will be a horizontal contract
among the commons members that lasts almost forever. A study by Harvard histori￾ans Maass and Anderson (1978) has proven that this has made many rural commons
(irrigation systems, grazeland, etc.) most efficient in using all their input factors com￾pared to other forms of management.
It has been met with skepticism that a horizontal contract among the members of
a commons can work on the global level because no sovereign state would allow that
its sanctions – against, e.g., free riding – are executed by another state (Kaul et al.
1999, pp. 6–13). This alludes to the element of power that is one component of com￾mons governance. But when supranational institutions like the World Trade Organi￾zation can deploy mechanisms to coerce defectors, why should inter-state cooperation
not be able to “design punishments that are sufficient to induce compliance?” (Tracht￾man 2012, p. 161). One example is the human rights provisions contained in American
and European preferential trade agreements. Statistical evidence has shown that they
have a more significant effect on human rights performance than the United Nations
Human Rights treaties – so, the power of coercion in these commons is stronger
(Hafner-Burton 2009).
The factor of power – be it the power of the state or of a potent member of a
commons – constitutes a challenge: When not all partners that procure public goods
are equal economically, thorough diligence and careful negotiations will have to be per￾formed before the institution is built. Solutions to this challenge will be exhibited in
Chapter 4 which deals with how to manage collective efforts.
2.5 Club goods of a specific type: The commons 41Chapter 3
Sources for providing public goods and commons
The typology of public goods draws a landscape that shows destinations; for a full pic￾ture, the routes which lead to these destinations need to be added. If all public goods
were provided by the state, one route would remain only. But human need in all its
facets cannot be satisfied in one way only. Creating benefits for humans is a societal
concern, and the state must take account of this. Adam Smith has already described to
which extent the state can create benefits: He speaks of “erecting and maintaining
those public institutions and those public works, which though they may be in the high￾est degree advantageous to a great society, are, however, of such a nature that . . . any
individual or small number of individuals should erect or maintain it” (Smith 1981
[1776], p. 723). So, economically, any individual, i.e., the private sector, needs the state,
and the other way round, the state must account for the needs of the private sector:
Public goods are not correctives to the sovereignty of private preference but simply a
particular instantiation of it (Brennan and Lomasky 2006). And this instantiation sets
out from the question which benefits – which wellbeing – can be created by which sec￾tor of a society.
3.1 Who creates benefits to society?
Wellbeing is a term that connotates benefits both to single individuals and all society –
it is satisfaction of human needs. Ancient Greek philosophy suggests that satisfying
the basic human needs (i.e., natural desires for real goods – food, clothes, shelter,
health) is a matter to be left to the capacities of all humans, but that their true fulfill￾ment depends on fair treatment and cohesion within society (i.e., acquired desires for
goods of fortune – respecting others, respecting the laws, self-realization, access to ed￾ucation, etc.). Aristotle further demands that satisfying these “higher” needs and mak￾ing the goods of fortune available to all is the duty of the state (Adler 1996, pp. 8 ff.).
Over all the centuries, this doctrine has remained valid: The state secures the base for
the private sector to create benefits for society, and the private sector is supported in
this by state intervention where needed. Intervention can reach from regulation to
taking on ownership of a good or service (for which the argument mostly is market
failure; this will be discussed below in section 4.2). In in between these ends lies part￾nering with other stakeholders to jointly deliver a service (and jointly create benefits).
There is a complementarity between the market and the state. They do not compete,
and they can combine their forces in public-private partnerships or in commons.
What has been stated by the ancient Greek thinkers was refined later. There are
two contemporary philosophers who further developed Aristotle’s concept of a need
being an end in itself – implying that it is not about ‘we need some X in order to provide
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111134611-004for some Y‘, but about ‘we employ certain of our own functions that allow us to create
what we need’. Harvard professor Amartya Sen’s famous proclamation is that function￾ings (i.e., what makes things work) connect resources and capabilities, and so, ulti￾mately, we can generate our wellbeing ourselves (on Sen see, e.g., Binder and Coad
2014). From this, Law and Ethics Professor Martha Nussbaum, together with World
Bank researcher Narayan, suggests six categories of wellbeing that span from the indi￾vidual to the collective level both with regard to the ability to create them and to enjoy
their benefits (Narayan et al. 2000):
– Material wellbeing, including food, assets, and work.
– Bodily wellbeing: being and appearing healthy and living in a decent physical
environment.
– Psychological wellbeing: having peace of mind, happiness, and harmony.
– Social wellbeing: being able to care for and bring up children, having self-respect
and dignity and having good relations with one’s family and neighbors.
– Security: enjoying civil peace in a safe environment with personal physical secu￾rity and access to the means of justice, with security in old age and confidence in
the future.
– Freedom of choice and action.
The lower part of the list is cataloguing what must be procured by the state, in the mid￾dle we have what can very well be provided by commons, and for the upper part any
individual, at least in today’s societies, needs to resort to the markets. This mix gener￾ates benefits to all if all parties stay with their limits: The state defines the rules and
responsibilities, the players in the market (those who offer goods or services and those
who buy them) must pursue their self-interest – Adam Smith’s prerequisite for the in￾visible hand: “It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker
that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest” (Smith 1981
[1776], p. 14). And while the term benevolence is often used in relation to governments’
concern for the welfare, the reality is that decision-makers in public authorities cannot
be just benevolent; they must cope with the constraints of voter expectations, counter￾vailing interests, tight budgets, and restricted access to advanced technology. It may be
far-fetched to say that only dictatorships can remove all those barriers (Acemoglu et al.
2008), but even well-intended sociologists would call it a “myth that government acts
out of a primary concern for the welfare of all its citizens, or that its policies represent
an effort to find solutions to all recognized social problems” (Marcuse 2017). This pro￾vocative argument was made with regard to the public housing policies in the U.S.
which have always been under the stress of all the constraints mentioned above. But
the core meaning is that “all citizens” and “all social problems” can never be satisfied
and solved by the state through the provision of public gods. So, what, then, is the role
of the public sector?
3.1 Who creates benefits to society? 433.2 The role of the public sector
Whether from the Aristotelian viewpoint (‘the state needs to make the goods of fortune
available to all’) or from that of contemporary sociologists, the habitual stance is that
the public sector is substantially committed to the main issues of public health, public
education, infrastructure, and social security. This applies to developed countries and
the developing world, but there are very notable differences in scope and quality. One
reason for the difference is that the tax revenues are higher in developed countries,22
the other reason is the quality of institutions, which means, above all, bureaucratic effi￾ciency, political stability, respect for the law and absence of public officers’ corruption.
These are essential public goods that constitute government effectiveness – a public
good which in turn enables provision of other public goods. So, above all, it is institu￾tional quality that allows to levy taxes effectively, spend them prudently (on public
goods) and enable free markets to thrive. This is an outcome that, according to re￾nowned World Bank economist Hernando de Soto explains “why capitalism triumphs
in the West” as per the title of his most famous publication (De Soto 2000).
There are weaknesses in capitalism, all the same, that may jeopardize a well￾balanced provision of public goods. The big advantage of capitalism is that it pro￾motes equality (i.e., equal opportunities) for all members of the society by giving a
chance to everyone, that it creates vast openings for innovation, and that its rules of
supply and demand enable self-regulation of the markets (for advocating capitalism
see, e.g., Meltzer 2012). But just because capitalism offers everyone the same (first)
chance this does not mean that it is a completely fair system. If there are breakdowns
in consumption and production, even compensating this through a process of “crea￾tive destruction” (Schumpeter 1942), i.e., new and better ventures, will not suffice to
compensate all losses. Another downside is that big businesses can build monopolies
that restrict fair competition. They can overpower governments. Also, when they get
“too big to fail” they must be bailed out by the community of taxpayers. So, the capi￾talist state must find remedies to improve fairness for all, to appropriately counterbal￾ance losses of productive capacity that cause losses of wellbeing (a suitable but highly
contested measure would be subsidies for the respective industries) and to harness
overpowering corporations. The instruments to achieve these remedies lie within the
public goods which the state can provide. They require astute political wisdom be￾cause they are interdependent, i.e., their effects are systemic, they comprise all levels
from the deep local to the high spheres of international cooperation, and they require
diligent planning and implementation.
 The average for central government spending as a share of the GDP between the years 1996 and
2000 was almost 40% in the high-income group of countries and less than 15% in the low-income group
of countries (authors’ calculations based on the World Bank Development Reports). In countries for
which data are available, the share of the GDP collected through tax revenues in those years was about
30% in high-income countries, but only around 10% in low-income countries (Arora and Chong 2018).
44 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsOn the topic of multilevel systemic governance of public goods there is high-class
research coupled with discussions on policy considerations for the European Union
and the global levels. The research and the discussions are carried out in various in￾stitutions like the Robert Schumann Centre for Advanced Studies at the European Uni￾versity Institute in Badia Fiesole, Italy (see: Petersmann 2012). The range of this
research is beyond the scope of the book; the following section will merely demon￾strate how some features of these investigations also apply to the local communities
and state levels.
3.2.1 Providing systemic governance for societal concerns
Societal concerns are interwoven – health with security, education with access to job
markets, etc. The author of this book, when working with students in Northern
Ghana, had a stunning response from a youth group who had never heard of the
SDGs, but they immediately found out that access to water would help children to
spend more time in the schools because they would not have to walk long ways to
fetch water, that security on the streets would allow the women to walk home from
evening classes where they could train for jobs, and so on. It is commonplace that the
SDGs are systemically interrelated, but one has to experience this type of responses to
clearly grab what this means for even a small and remote location. So, to stay with
this example, if there is a nexus between providing access to water and security on
the streets with other public goods, this clearly explains why the effectiveness of pub￾lic goods provision by the state depends on policies that are carefully coordinated.
There is another nexus which is between wellbeing and innovation. If the state
wishes to achieve that as many people as possible enjoy a high level of wellbeing, soci￾eties have to be innovative. Public authorities must establish an environment for vi￾sionary entrepreneurs, inspired employees, and smart researchers. On the other
hand, a high level of wellbeing is, in itself, a fruitful basis for innovation. However,
the impact of innovations on society depends on the way it deals with them. This is
where innovation policies merge with social policies where the state does not hamper
novel undertakings by the private sector but instead supports them. According to a
reference from Mariana Mazzucato, founding director of the Institute for Innovation
and Public Purpose at University College, London, governments in the Western world
have done just this in the last century and up to the beginning of the 21st century:
They stepped in with the necessary investments along the entire innovation chain
where the private sector has been reluctant to put money afraid to make (Mazzucato
2015). There is hope that this continues despite the new challenges which states face
from warmongers, climate change and pandemics. State authorities will prevail if
they address the challenges in a way that sustains political participation and the inter￾action with businesses and citizens. There is a field in which this is almost preor￾dained: Digitization. Increasing digitization of the society and the economy only
3.2 The role of the public sector 45works when all sectors participate. Then it will not only improve living conditions
and reduce social inequality, but it will also help to cope with warfare tactics that use
the internet, with improvements in the analyses of global warming, with securing
health and other public goods in times of the pandemics, etc.
The immense power of the internet raises the concern whether this omni-present
device can be controlled at all. With global availability of the internet, the issue of gov￾ernance reaches new dimensions: The internet, at least from how it can be accessed, is
certainly a public good; internet usage extends beyond borders; monetization of the in￾ternet affects the balance between individual rights and public good. Can the traditional
foundation of public goods aptly encompass all these phenomena? From whichever
viewpoint, there is a shared responsibility of businesses, governments, and individuals
in governing the Internet, and they must collaborate on a global level.
A first focus in internet governance is on technology-based approaches. Technol￾ogy, here, comes from institutions, and each of them delivers a specific contribution.
Two of these institutions have a dominant role: the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF, https://www.ietf.org), a large international community of network designers, op￾erators, vendors, and researchers, and the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names
and Numbers (ICANN, https://www.icann.org). Their work is supplemented by govern￾ment authorities worldwide. And almost all countries, in some way, use their state
power to regulate the internet’s physical infrastructure and the activities of the firms
that provide internet content. The most effective approach is to address guiding rules
for regulators on different levels: Bottom-up, the ‘regulator’ on the user level would be
the actor himself/herself, and the rules would follow or come from the individual’s per￾sonal/institutional ethics. On the next level up, contractual provisions would guide
trade partners. Following further up, social, and other non-governmental organizations
would apply norms of conduct, and on the uppermost levels state- and international
authorities would issue laws and enforceable ordinances. There are technology-based
and regulation-based solutions for each of the levels (Ang 1997):
– Regulations on the user level are mostly based on code-architecture, communica￾tions protocols and other software that determine how the internet operates.
– On the level of interpersonal and inter-organizational agreements, market forces
drive the fundamental decisions about the technology of the internet.
– Social groups and collective clusters would regulate themselves through what has
been called spontaneous ordering of the cyberspace which is premised on the
idea that the internet is a self-governing realm of individual liberty, beyond the
reach of government control (Johnson and Post 1996).
– The level of national governments and law which issue regulatory decisions on fun￾damental concerns (national security, protection of human dignity and health).
– The level of transnational institutions and international organizations which op￾erate through quasi-private cooperatives based on treaty arrangements between
national governments.
46 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsSpecific challenges lurk behind all this. But finding solutions has become more
urgent – there is cyberwar, there was the pandemic and the consequences it has
caused. The combined efforts to improve internet governance must end up in an ar￾rangement of user-based regulation models and multidisciplinary approaches based
on engineering, economics, law, and social choice. In the COVID-19 pandemic, with
many fake information that endangered public health, the urgence of internet control
has risen (see, e.g., Bardy and Rubens 2022). Best results will be achieved in states
where social policies are in place which foster their citizens’ innovative capabilities: A
ranking of the EU countries according to their innovative capability shows that the
Scandinavians which are welfare states by tradition have the highest positions (Buhr
2020). But this needs good governance also. In the following, two exemplary cases will
be exhibited where benefits for society can best be reached through systemic gover￾nance: Health and education.
3.2.2 The example of public health
How can health for all be secured? On a world-wide scale, the ambitious goal of
“Health for All in the Year 2000” was promulgated at the United Nations Alma Ata
conference in 1978. The first paragraph of the declaration read as follows (Birn et al.
2009, p. 177):
Health is a fundamental human right and the attainment of the highest possible level of health is
a most important world-wide social goal whose realization requires the action of many other so￾cial and economic sectors in addition to the health sector.
This is a call for investments in people and in primary care as well as in economic
and social development, and the hope to achieve that goal shortly was based on con￾crete worldwide successes in public health of the 1960s and 1970s. Also, the declara￾tion clearly refers to the social determinants of health on which topic the World
Health Organization (WHO) convened a new commission in 2005 which bears this
name.23 In the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals of 2015, a reference to
the social perspectives can only be found indirectly, because Goal # 3 mainly sets “out￾come targets” like reduction of maternal mortality and infant death, reduction of
communicable diseases, access to and achieving universal health coverage including
financial risk protection and access to essential medicines and vaccines. But in the
context of SDG # 3 it is also mentioned that all this requires social policies, manage￾ment, and governance. The list entails (see Bardy et al. 2020):
 WHO Commission on Social Determinants of Health; see https://www.who.int/initiatives/action-on￾the-social-determinants-of-health-for-advancing-equity
3.2 The role of the public sector 47– improving the working conditions for employees by paying a “fair” and “livable”
wage, by providing minimum social protection which prevents the poverty trap
and malnutrition of the family members (elder, children),
– ensuring a safe and healthy physical environment of the workplace and prevent￾ing occupational hazard and health risks as well as road deaths,
– providing health education to employees and their families including on nutri￾tion, healthy diet, and primary healthcare practices,
– organizing regular sport programs for employees to foster physical stability in￾cluding events for their families,
– minimizing pollution and emission,
– engaging in education campaigns in the communities regarding infectious dis￾ease, personal hygiene, and environmental conservation,
– building partnerships for healthcare provision between the public and the pri￾vate sectors, including co-regulation, coordination, and monitoring,
– securing finance, human resources and know-how for target setting, definition of
progress indicators and milestones.
SDG # 3 sets numerical targets for these goals to monitor implementation. They have
a standing or their own and are only loosely connected to public health statistics.24
The pertinent social policies and the management require that the state closely coop￾erates with the private sector – entrepreneurs who invest in corporate responsibility,
businesses that finance private hospitals, the pharmaceutical industry, and, last not
least, the medical profession and civil society organizations that represent the inter￾ests of patients. Leaving all medical services to the state will overburden the govern￾ment agencies as the fate of the British National Health Service has shown (see, e.g.,
Bevir and Waring 2018). Public health is a common venture pursued by all members
of society. An appropriate governance of this common venture must specify a clear￾cut division of work, a workable monitoring system and exit strategies in case of mis￾haps. The officials in public agencies must be able to apprehend the close intertwine￾ment of all actions and all actors.
A good example that shows the range of interconnected social and economic ef￾fects of healthcare is the impact of vaccines (Figure 5). The figure shows some effects
that warrant further exploration – which will also elucidate why the term “systemic”
is a fitting denomination for the governance issues that follow from these effects
(and, similarly, from the nexus between other health care measures and social/eco￾nomic policies). One nexus which the Figure exhibits is that women are empowered
by vaccination schemes in a two-fold sense: When they learn about and have experi￾ence with vaccines, they will become autonomous in making health-related decisions;
and they acquire knowledge that can make them less dependent on their male part-
 Health data in public statistics will be dealt with in section 4.5.
48 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsPrevent cancer
Eradicate infectious
diseases
Reduce infectious disease
morbidity and mortality
Induce herd
immunity Cost-effective
preparedness for
outbreaks
Impact of
vaccines
Social
Health
HOSPITAL
Economic
Cost savings
Establish programmes
for vaccine
development
Empowerment of
women
Equity of
healthcare
Strengthen health
and social care
infrastructure
Impact of life
expectancy and
opportunity
Productivity gains
Minimise the
impact on family
Prevent antibiotic
resistance
Reduce diseases that
complicate vaccine￾preventable diseases
$ £ ¥€
₱ ₤ Rp ₩
Figure 5: The health impact, the social impact, and the economic impact of vaccines.
Source: Rodrigues and Plotkin 2020, p. 1528.
3.2 The role of the public sector 49ners. Hence, social programs like health education that was mentioned in the above
list may have a repercussion on vaccination campaigns and vice versa.
What Figure 5 also shows is that the impact of life expectancy is coupled with im￾provement of opportunity: When ill-health and mortality from an infectious disease no
longer determine one’s life chances, the degree of social mobility rises – travelling gets
safer, people who need to flee from war and conflict in their home countries will be pro￾tected against contagious organisms that differ from what they find in their own world.
In the economic benefits, since vaccines are very cost-effective in comparison to
other public health interventions, governments can reduce the pressure on their
budgets when they acquire state-of-the art medication. Apart from the cost of pur￾chase, the infrastructure to run a vaccination program can be tailored to the specific
needs, healthcare and administrative personnel can be reduced. Economic break￾downs can be minimized, some treatments can be spared, so that patients and their
parents need less time off work.
All the above effects depend on the efficiency of public agencies – e.g., in the
COVID-19 crisis, governments whose administrative processes were highly digitized,
fared better than others (Mukoyama 2021). Some developing countries were better off
with this than, e.g., Germany, whose authorities did not recognize this interconnected￾ness and were unprepared for online reporting and analysis of COVID-19 cases
(Tucker and Yang 2021).
As there are social determinants of public health, states should have policy agendas
that take account of the systemic relationship between these determinants and public
wellbeing. One policy is to foster by welfare programs. The WHO Commission of Social
Determinants of Health proposes a ‘package’ of policy measures accordingly (WHO
2008). Above all, it acknowledges that the goals of public health go beyond (merely) the
absence of illness in general and that it must also confront socially determined inequal￾ities between population groups in measures of health – life expectancy, premature
mortality, rates of disease, disease burden, disease risk etc., for which the term is
‘health inequity’. The policy agendas, hence, must extend into a space of broader politi￾cal values and build the capacity to deliver the goods for human wellbeing jointly. So￾cial and economic disparities cause disparities in health, and this is where systemic
intervention has been asked for since social research and social economics came up.
But when it has been known for decades that people in the lower social classes have
the highest morbidity and mortality rates, and that there must be more reasons for this
than inadequate nutrition, unavailability of medical care, substandard housing, un￾healthy work circumstances, and lack of education (Syme 1998), where are the meas￾ures to access these sets of inequalities? Is it not that the moral legitimation of the
political system is lost when it neglects this compound of issues?
The problem is that politicians tend to think in silos – there is very often no mecha￾nism to approach a compound of issues that run across the various jurisdictions of re￾sponsibilities. But inter-institutional synergies are fundamental to the provision of public
goods – in terms of resources, knowledge, negotiation abilities, and rulemaking. Whether
50 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonson a local level or in the international scene, this “helps to reduce transaction cost, to
create links across issues; and to diffuse ideas, norms, and expectations” (Binger 2003,
p. 8). The quote is from a background paper prepared for the United Nations Develop￾ment Policy Committee, but the benefits it points out from cross-sector collaboration can
be produced in any other context, especially in a field like public health with its numer￾ous ramifications. On a state level, whether in managing public health or any other public
good, the formats and the outcomes of this collaboration will be ultimately governed by
parliaments and citizens. Citizens also have another role: With active community partici￾pation they can raise synergies to access inequalities and contribute to diminish dispar￾ities in the availability of health services and health treatments (comparative results of
various participatory schemes are given in Falleti and Cunial [2018]). But it will remain
the role of the state to warrant broad access to health services – and also, at least in ad￾vanced industrialized democracies, to guarantee health insurance. In this regard, it may
suffice here to mention the three types of systems commonly used in these democracies:
the single-payer system that provides universal access through one state purchaser of
health services (the NHS in the United Kingdom); full proprietary provision through uni￾versal health insurance (as in Japan, in France, the Netherlands, and Germany); and a
system that both subsidizes and regulates private markets (as in the United States and in
Switzerland).25 The systems feature very different types of state intervention. Very often,
therefore, the question is asked why there is no universal health insurance in the United
States. The answer is a pointer to what “public” really is: It is the people. So, when Ameri￾can voters and politicians, based on the historical distinctiveness of the United States and
its political culture are not willing to accept the concept, well-minded advisers from out￾side will not be able to change the United States’ (complicated) system.
3.2.3 The example of public education
Like public health, education is a prerequisite for societies to flourish and to progress.
Economically, the availability of a well-educated labor force raises the effectiveness
and efficiency of labor; socially, being well-educated promotes equality and unity
among the citizens. So, what is “well-educated”? Does it suffice to say, as U.S. colleges
have done, that when an individual is well-educated, he or she is “able to rapidly
adapt to and compete effectively within a changing worldwide labor market?” (Gor￾don 2013, p. 1). It does not, because this only points to an output. The ability to adapt
and compete must be built on an input that shapes the mindset of a person. When
aspiring that the mindset of college students must be suited for a worldwide labor
 There is no room in this book to cover the ongoing discussion among health politicians about the
advantages and disadvantages of health insurance regimes. An overview to is given in a pivotal WHO
study (WHO 2005). Follow-ups are to be found on the WHO Website https://www.who.int
3.2 The role of the public sector 51market, it must be a global mindset. The Najafi Global Mindset Institute in Phoenix,
Arizona, lists the following components/sub-components of a global mindset (Javidan
and Teagarden 2011).
– Psychological: Self-Assurance, Quest for Adventure, Passion for Diversity
– Social: Diplomacy, Intercultural Empathy, Interpersonal Impact
– Intellectual: Cognitive Complexity, Cosmopolitan Outlook, Entrepreneurial attitude
Except for the cosmopolitan outlook (which can be interpreted, on a level that does not
look for the global, as openness for what lies beyond one’s immediate environment),
these components would as well fit into the requirements for any type of education ev￾erywhere and at all levels. But it is up to each country to figure out the appropriate way
to educate, to train, and to develop their people. And each country must find the best
avenue to integrate into education programs what (future) employers need – whether
public agencies, businesses, universities, or the armed forces. This starts with basic edu￾cation: Children in Sub-Saharan Africa may need more intercultural empathy and self￾assurance, children in the United States may need to be confronted with more cognitive
complexity, etc. – yet one will rarely find these subjects in curricula for schoolteachers.
Still, a look at schoolteacher profiles, e.g., in Canada, the UK and Australia, reveals that
there are ingredients of mindset-building in the three main categories of what they
should deliver to students and which are (1) knowledge, (2) skills, (3) values and atti￾tudes: Providing knowledge not only includes particular disciplines but also the build-up
of an intellectual framework, skills provision entails elements of interpersonal and inter￾cultural communication, and teaching values to shape attitudes offers a range of moral
conceptions (Darling-Hammond 2012). Selecting the proper content for educating school￾teachers, hence, is a primary task that governments must fulfill. It is often left to special￾ists, and what they recommend and why they recommend it rarely enters into public
dialogues. In the public, the issue of how to train the trainers is heavily overshadowed
by discussions that focus on the question whether governments should run schools and
whether or not private schools are endangering equity in society.
Equity in society, with regard to schooling, should not be about a school system
that is fully controlled by the state, it is about equitable learning outcomes. The out￾comes of education are what the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) spell out, in
the first place (SDG # 4). The emphasis is on all children and young people equitably
acquiring basic numeracy and literacy skills. How best to organize education systems
to achieve this is a question that comes second place. The contentious debates over
public versus private that are often held in the U.S. on dogmatic, ideological, and par￾tisan grounds and which will not be dealt with in this book,26 detract from the muti￾faceted problems in low- and lower-/middle-income countries. In these countries, as
 From a public goods perspective this debate is relatively irrelevant because what constitutes
the public good is not ownership of schools, but outcome of education. In spite of what many U.S.
52 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonswell as in the U.S., private schooling has proliferated over the recent decades. And
they have certainly brought some learning gain to those who attend private schools –
but the same is valid, especially in the U.S., for public schools that offer tailored cur￾ricular programs and that draw students from across the school zones in which fami￾lies reside (“magnet schools”; see Riel et al. 2018).
In the low- and lower-/middle-income countries, the learning outcomes may be bet￾ter, in some cases, in private schools, but this effect misses the goal of producing equal
opportunities by equitably acquired basic skills in the primary level as spelled out in
SDG # 4. Evidence from Tanzania, Kenya and Uganda show that even when expanding
access to private schooling via voucher programs to children from disadvantaged
households, the gaps between rich and poor are maintained and at best the proportion
in the public school sector of the poor children learning the basics versus the wealthier
children is raised (Alcott and Rose 2019). As with access to health, access to schooling –
whether to private or public – is not only a matter of one social policy area. Learning
inequalities also reflect extent disparities in various fields of access and choice between
the rich and the poor who live in different parts of each of their communities. And
there are the issues of child labor and the need for sending children to fetch water or
firewood. What needs to be developed are policies that bring children to the school
from their home. If we go two levels up from basic to tertiary education in Africa, there
are local colleges and universities offering outreach programs to the communities
which improve knowledge and attitudes of the adults towards the essence of schooling
for their young (Bardy et al. 2018). This way of making the parents aware should be
proliferated wherever a college or a university is located.
The public good of education has a production perspective, as, e. g., the question of
whether it is provided by the government or not, but there is also the consumption per￾spective. Decisions on how much money to spend on schooling are made by households
(they are part of “the public”). They will base their spending on cost-benefit assess￾ments, looking at factors like pupil to teacher ratios, school terms, and qualification of
teachers (Angrist and Lavy 1999; Krueger 2003), and, last not least, at the school fees
and other schooling expenditures they must pay. One additional aspect that comes
from a very different perspective is property values: They may reflect how potential
residents value schooling in a particular area: Home buyers are willing to “pay” for
their preferences to locate close to schools. This would add up to the difference between
benefits and cost: They obtain a private net benefit (Barrow 1999; Black 1999). There is a
public net benefit also, which comes from balancing the public investment in schooling
(or the social cost of schooling) against the public gross benefit (Riddell 2004). Figure 6
shows how the structure of social cost for schooling could look like:
academicians and politicians see as a provision of privileges to educational institutions that serve white
upper- and middle-class Americans only (e.g., Kitzmiller 2019), it has been shown that the existence of
private schools and private funding for public schools has a negligible effect on the learning environ￾ments within primary and secondary schools (Jerrim and Sims 2019).
3.2 The role of the public sector 53Determining the social benefit of schooling is less simple. Social benefits (benefits at the
societal level) have been defined as “outcomes that accrue to individuals or groups of
individuals other than the person or family making the decision about how much
schooling to acquire” (Riddell 2004, p. 15). In economic terms, these are increases in
growth, productivity, and income. Figure 7 shows some of the effects.
Recurring Capital 
Land and 
buildings
Equipment
Scholarships
Stipends
Endowments
Student aid Opportunity cost
Foregone earnings 
associated with 
additional school 
years or from 
renouncing 
alternative 
investment
Staff
Running 
cost
Maintenance
Figure 6: Social cost of schooling.
Source: Author, adapted from Ridell 2004.
Financial benefits at the
individual level
Estimated
ROI ✶
Financial benefits at the societal level Estimated
ROI ✶
Higher income Higher income from labor taxes %
Higher probability of being
employed
Higher income from consumption taxes %
Better health and knowledge
about health conditions
Lower social benefits costs (e.g.,
unemployment
benefits)
–%
Higher productivity Lower cost of healthcare –%
Spillovers (increase in productivity of co￾workers and business partners)
%
Total return per additional year
of schooling
% ✶✶ Total:
–%
✶ Return on investment in education expensed by the individual/the public authorities.
✶✶ Aggregate return measured by the Mincer earnings function.27
Figure 7: Financial benefits from education.
Source: Adapted from Wolfe and Haveman 2001.
 The Mincer earnings function, named after Jacob Mincer, a founder of labor economics, explains
wage income as a function of schooling and experience. It has been examined on many datasets (see,
e.g., Grossbard 2006).
54 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsAt the end of this section, a brief glance shall be shed on privately-owned universities.28
Their effectiveness can be measured by the outcome of both education and research at,
for example, MIT or Stanford University (see, e.g., Antony 2014). But state-run universi￾ties may also perform well; however, the privately owned have better financial resour￾ces from bequests, donations, and high tuition fees. It is often argued that the high
tuitions asked for by private schools can better be afforded by rich families and that the
result is discriminatory selection of students. This may deepen societal divisions, espe￾cially those that are based on ethnic or class origin. So, here is a field for the state to set
the rules of the game for the competition between public and private universities, e.g.,
by granting support to students or by attracting private funds to state-owned educational
institution. There are notable differences across countries, but higher education on the
average stands closer to the “state pole” than to the “market pole” even in richer OECD
countries as exhibited on the OECD Education GPS website (https://gpseducation.oecd.
org). While there were changes towards “more market” all over the world, they have not
been so critical that they could undermine the weight of a welfare-state-inspired model
with funds for higher education being largely collected from taxpayers; also, the model
where students in the U.S. need bank loans to support their tuition has become under
scrutiny because of its adverse economic effects. This has caused the U.S. government to
introduce schemes of student loan forgiveness (Yannelis and Tracey 2022). There is, how￾ever, the question if across-the-board forgiveness is a good method to eliminate the ra￾cial and socioeconomic wealth gaps which the loans have exacerbated, and whether
these inequities can be better addressed by (Looney 2022). They would not only access
the consequences of indebtedness of students but other causes for disadvantages of stu￾dents from less well-to-do families – these are, once more, systemic issues that demand
systemic governance of state policies.
Across-the board measures are rightly criticized anywhere. They often come
in situations where the state believes it needs to quickly subsidize a mass of beneficia￾ries in an urgency. During the energy crises of 2022/2023 the German government
gave money to all households, including the very rich29 (Anghel and Jones 2022). The
other way round, when the state cuts welfare costs across the board, for which a fre￾quently used denomination is “welfare-state-retrenchment” (Levy 2021), it will hit the
poor. However, it is more frequent that the welfare state, as it aspires to secure well￾being for all its citizens, will tend to overdo the dimensions of public goods. This will
be discussed in the next section.
 For public-private collaboration in education see section 3.6.1
 Germany’s strict privacy laws do not allow transfer of data between different state agencies, and
therefore the agencies who paid out the subsidies could not retrieve information on household in￾comes from tax authorities. This is a case where the public good of privacy is ranked higher than
expensing public money.
3.2 The role of the public sector 553.3 The welfare state
Caring for the welfare of its citizens through a bundle of varied support programs
was first practiced, in modern times,30 by the government of German chancellor Otto
von Bismarck in the 1870s. He launched a series of conservative reforms for workers,
like unemployment protection, health insurance, and old age pension (see, e.g., Briggs
et al. 2006 on Bismarck’s Sozialstaat). The term “welfare state” was coined during the
Second World War by Anglican Archbishop William Temple in his book Christianity
and the Social Order (1942) – most likely because the literal translation of the German
word Sozialstaat (“social state”) did not catch on in the English language. The objec￾tive has been widened beyond Bismarck’s policies to support workers: The main
entry on Welfare State in the Britannica Online Encyclopedia says that it is a ”concept
of government in which the state or a well-established network of social institutions
plays a key role in the protection and promotion of the economic and social wellbeing
of its citizens” and that it is “based upon the principles of equal opportunity, equitable
distribution of wealth, and public responsibility for citizens unable to avail them￾selves of the minimal provisions for a good life”.
31 If any country wherever in the
world would try to finance this objective on its own, many of the other objectives, like
safety, economic progress, law and order, etc., would have to be truncated. The
choice, therefore, is to either secure wellbeing through finance and provision of pub￾lic goods from the private sector (for which there often are ideological barriers) or to
fulfill parts of the objective inadequately (which might cause civil unrest). In between
these lies the tendency to overextend and overstrain the public sector and public sec￾tor spending.
When the public sector is overextended, and when the state attempts to do too
much with insufficient resources, the claim to cut back is directed at all public expen￾diture, all public goods. For obvious reasons state officials who want to be re-elected
will hesitate to cut welfare programs (to the detriment, often, of investments that are
not so visibly related to citizens’ wellbeing, like, e.g., digitization of the public admin￾istration). Any business firm, when confronted with scare resources would set up a
business plan that enables the firm to survive. But when government agencies are
asked to develop a business plan that identifies their product, their customers, their
suppliers and their strategic objectives, outcries will be heard that blemish all this as
neoliberalism (e.g., Abramovitz and Zelnick 2018). But without these instruments,
poorly organized structures, irrational decision-making processes, mismanagement of
staff, and weak accountabilities may be maintained, and public goods provision may
 In ancient times, India under emperor Ashoka and China under emperor Wen established a vari￾ety of measures which resemble modern welfare policies (Bhatta 2005), and the free distribution of
grains in the Roman Republic and Empire (coupled with free access to entertainment, a policy of
panem et circenses) was a form of welfare policy, too.
 https://www.britannica.com/money/topic/welfare-state
56 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsget deteriorated. Even if these deficiencies are not showing, due diligence is needed
regularly. And even if it does not seem that the public sector programs are poorly de￾signed and public services are poorly delivered: Why not deploy organizational tools
that have been successfully applied in the corporate sector? A response to this was
given through public sector reform attempts across Europe, for which the United
Kingdom went ahead with its New Public Management (NPM) as early as in the 1980s
(Lægreid 2017). There was the fear that NMP would do away with public welfare and
with the welfare state. But a recent stock-taking gives proof that despite ongoing post￾NPM public sector reforms all changes were placed within a larger socio-political
order and a system of governance where history and context matter. Also, most of the
reforms were implanted in more technical and economic policy areas and not in the
“softer” welfare state areas (Christensen and Lægreid 2022). This was the case outside
the United Kingdom as well, but for making comparisons, one has to bear in mind
that there are at least three different types of welfare states.
Welfare states differ, depending on the respective political and social history and
the political power relations. These shape the quality of social rights, social stratifica￾tion, and the relationship between state, market, and family. From there, distinct clus￾ters can be deduced for the Western (capitalist) world: ‘liberal’, ‘corporatist’ and ‘social
democratic’ – a categorization made by Danish sociologist Gøsta Esping-Andersen in
1990 (Esping-Andersen 1990) and which still typifies the formats of welfare capitalism/
welfare states (Powell 2015). Capitalism here, refers to allowing for institutional settings
that may allocate public goods and welfare provision to entities that are independent
from the state as would not be the case in communist systems where the labor market,
social investments, and material support to people are all centrally governed. After the
fall of the Soviet Union, only Russia and China and a handful of smaller countries like
Venezuela are the remaining centralized command economies. For the other parts of
the world, the typification would be as follows (Buhr 2020, p. 32–33).
– The liberal (or Anglo-Saxon) model focuses social policy on the neediest, it sup￾ports the market mechanism of providing public goods through the public and
the private sector, and it leaves decision-making to the family/to the individual.
Country examples are the United Kingdom (even though health provision is fully
entrusted to the state), Canada, the U.S. and Australia.
– The conservative (or continental European) welfare states assume a strong socio￾political role for the governments, while the socio-political role of the market is
generally low; the locus of decision-making, though, in accordance with the prin￾ciple of subsidiarity, is the family level/the individual level. The principle of sub￾sidiarity also confers the power of influence to trade unions and churches, which,
on the other hand, may lead to the preservation of status and group differences.
Archetypes of this form are Germany, France and Austria.
3.3 The welfare state 57– The social democratic (or Scandinavian) model is characterized by social policies
that are based on universalism, ambitious ideas of equality and full employment,
and it seeks to minimize dependence on the market. Examples are Sweden, Nor￾way, Denmark, and Finland.
Globalization and the growth of international competition have nourished concerns
that each of the models may fail or may at least have to resort to cutting corners in
welfare and public goods provision. In this context, warnings have been expressed
early on, like, e.g., by Alan Greenspan, chairman of the U.S. Federal Reserve System
from 1987 to 2006, that a rising number of employees in major companies were fear￾ful of being laid off, and that even those who seem more secure in their jobs think
they will not be able to finance their retirement. Countries with a more generous sup￾port system for the poor, the sick and the elderly would be forced to dispense with
some of their munificent social regulations (WSJ 1997). Otherwise, they would lose
their competitiveness. But the systems have mastered the 2007/2008 financial crisis as
well as the COVID-19 pandemic, and it seems that what also worked was their resolute
policies to protect households and businesses from the toll which Russia’s war against
the Ukraine had wrought on their economies. Sweden, the flagship of welfare provi￾sion, did not relinquish its welfare, and it still is the 4th most competitive nation in
the 2022 edition of the IMD world competitiveness ranking; Norway is 9th.32
Sweden’s and Norway’s competitive positions may as well be due to their abundant
natural resources and their many relatively large businesses that operate world-wide.
But, as stated above, their citizens are willing to pay high taxes for the exchange of re￾ceiving a full and satisfactory set of public services and public goods. Taxes, certainly,
pay for public goods delivery by the state, and so do excise and toll levied on specific
services and for granting specific permits and for rights to enjoy specific benefits. Spe￾cific benefits are those which are only enjoyed by a limited number of individuals and
business firms and which others do not enjoy. A river where a manufacturing firm may
enter its effluents (after, hopefully, the wastewaters have been treated) gives a benefit
to a firm, which, while not taking away benefits from other users of the river, is spe￾cific. Depositing waste in a landfill is a different situation: Both require a permit. But
while the users of the river will not be affected in most of the cases, the property own￾ers around the landfill will not be able to fully benefit from their dwellings. The effects
of discharging wastewater and of depositing waste are examples for externalities: One
party earns a benefit from public goods usage and another party may receive a loss. So,
demanding that the party that benefits should pay for its portion of usage is very plausi￾ble. But there is the outer way round as well: Should parties who finance a public good
receive a contribution from those who benefit from its usage?
 https://www.imd.org/centers/world–competitiveness–center/rankings
58 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commons3.4 Externalities: Who pays for public goods usage?
The first mentioning of externalities in this book quoted British economist Arthur Cecil
Pigou 1877–1959). In his time, Great Britain was economically deprived. So, public wel￾fare, and providing fundamental public goods was of primary interest to the govern￾ment, and in the interest of social justice, parties who benefitted to the disadvantage of
others were in focus. After Pigou, not only did the progress of economic theory further
develop the concept, but it was that numerous cases came up where appreciable benefits
are conferred on some party (or appreciable damages were inflicted) without this party
contributing to what produced the benefits or the damage. The main damage that came
into focus was pollution, and the title of the book which another British economist, Nobel
prize winter James Edward Meade, wrote in 1973 says it all: The theory of economic exter￾nalities: The control of environmental pollution and similar social costs (Meade 1973).
Damages from polluting the natural environment have risen considerably in the
decades after Meade draw attention to the issue, and the cost of ecological im￾pairment is in the center of the externalities debate. The discussion is about social
cost/social value and about environmental policies; for positive externalities there
also is the question of how to compensate businesses or private parties for activities
that produce benefits to others without them being able to charge them. Which poli￾cies can be adopted to encourage those who provide such benefits and to discourage
those who cause damages? While maintaining a clean environment is expressed as a
fundamental interest by all, there is no unanimous consent on who will bear the cost.
For example, when the German government spent about 4 billion € to recompense
the owners of coal-fired power stations that they were forced to shut down by law, it
was not the German energy consumers who had to bear the cost, but the taxpayers
(Baudisch and Fouquet 2019). The argument is that the money shall serve to develop
new jobs in new, innovative industries. However, forced shutdowns like those that
were also practiced for the nuclear power plants in Germany are not likely to foster
innovation on the whole; they discourage research and development in those fields
and in adjacent ones: As per 2022, the Federal Statistical Office of Germany shows
that, even though 35% of all Master’s degrees were in a STEM subject (science, tech￾nology, engineering and mathematics), university enrolment in STEM subjects has
been declining year per year by an average 6%.33 One might say that this is a negative
externality caused by Germany’s energy policies.
There is another perspective of the payments which businesses have to expense
for compensating an externality: If a public authority levies an excise on emissions
and effluents, this is equivalent to dropping off a budget constraint (Hellwig 2003):
When the cost of a public good – in this case, clean air or decontaminated water near
 https://www.destatis.de/europa/EN/Topic/Population-Labour-Social-Issues/Education-Culture/MIN
TFaecher.html
3.4 Externalities: Who pays for public goods usage? 59a production site – is covered by the excise, this lowers the expenses the authority
would have to make. This, then, is a benefit for all citizens, including the businesses
that are not charged with the excise even though they contribute to the emissions in￾directly. If the authority wishes to capture them all, the alternative would be a scheme
of what is called mixed bundling, i.e., levying a fee that covers several facets of the
production activity. Mostly, municipalities do this through a manufacturing license
(Niessink and Uslu 2018).
Licenses by which a public authority confers the right to perform a productive
activity shall be tied to clearly defined characteristics of that activity, like energy con￾sumption, output, or the volume of emissions. This should as well include levies on
production waste if not charged otherwise, and it also applies to nuclear waste from
power plants, including the contaminated materials that result from reactor decom￾missioning – a highly dangerous externality. In the U.S., there is the Nuclear Waste
Policy Act, which places the authority for permanent disposal of commercially spent
fuel to the federal government, whereas the states are responsible for securing proper
disposal of low-content waste (Holt 2010). Both raise a fee for this on nuclear power
production. In the EU, the respective responsibilities are defined by the Nuclear Safety
Directive.34 Japan has the Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency of Japan with updated
regulations following the Fukujima catastrophe; China has the Long-Term Nuclear
Power Development Plan with specific rules for waste disposal (Lyman, Schoeppner
and von Hippel 2017). All these regulations expressly consider the long-term perspec￾tives of nuclear waste.35 One aspect is regulated outside these decrees, and this is the
responsibilities arising from the bankruptcy of firms that are active in nuclear power.
These bankruptcies involve a risk from contaminated waste. In the United States, the
risk is mutually covered, in some countries, by nuclear plant operators through the
so-called joint and several liability rule which mandates all operators to jointly con￾tribute to the payment of damages caused by one of them (Zweifel 2017). The question
is whether this contribution, like other fees levied from the nuclear industry, can
fully factor the cost of all storage and security measures required to protect future
generations from radioactive waste.
The effects of emission and pollution cause social externalities beyond the eco￾logical: Thousands of people suffered from the oil spills in the wake of the Shell drill￾ings in Nigeria (see, e.g., Takon 2014), and in Myanmar, indigenous populations were
expelled from their homesteads by a gas exploration and pipeline project (see, e.g.,
Smith 2010). Making the respective companies pay for the impairments – ”internaliz￾ing” those effects – cannot fully compensate the losses in cases like the afore men￾tioned. A better way might have been to offer incentives for relocation – provided that
there was space, that those who are affected, accept, and that those who offer them are
 http://www.ensreg.eu/nuclear-safety-regulation/eu-instruments/Nuclear-Safety-Directive
 https://www.iaea.org/ topics/radioactive-waste-and-spent-fuel-management
60 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonspowerful enough to make sure that the objectives of the incentives are achieved. On the
local level this can be successful as has been proven in China where the central govern￾ment has incentivized urban officials to pay more attention to environmental chal￾lenges. The incentives were based on the performance that would lead to more
“greenness” in their cities (Zheng et al. 2014). On the global level of public goods, a uni￾versally effective regime would have to warrant the success of incentivizing. The fore￾most requirement here is mitigating climate change, and low carbon investment could
be one decisive dynamic.
Incentivizing low carbon investment is a task for international agreements that
would serve as drivers for influencing investors. Figure 8 depicts which role govern￾ments can play, how these and civil society pressures impact business decisions, and
how all this can be supported through international organizations by a framework of
measures.
The framework (see Figure 8) would be built by concretizations within the Multilateral
Environmental Agreements (MEAs) of the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP),
the Climate Change Conventions (Kyoto/Paris/Doha), and the World Trade Organization’s
(WTO) policy schemes on carbon tax. Another instrument is WTO-compatible domestic
and export subsidies for providing competitive advantage to countries with restrictive
environmental standards.36
By calculating the accumulated returns from these investments, one would have to
valuate the externalities that will be diminished by low carbon investments. This could
International
Organizations:
WTO, UNEP
IMF, World Bank
UNCTAD
Multilateral Environmental
Agreements (MEAs)
Governments
Regulations, laws, 
decrees
Sanctions/Incentives
Subsidies for green 
technologies
Subsidies for green jobs
Businesses
Market price mechanism
Dealing with public pressures 
that 
create consumer backlash
Partnerships and Joint 
Ventures
CSOs, e.g.:
Carbon Allowance
(Oxford Model)
Green Cities
Low-Carbon 
Investments
Figure 8: Incentivizing low-carbon investments.
Source: Arquit, Gage and Saner 2011.
 On the contradiction between WTO rulings and MEAs see, among others, Bermejo 2014, pp. 60–62.
3.4 Externalities: Who pays for public goods usage? 61be used to determine the magnitude of fees to be levied on negative environmental ex￾ternalities (where investments are not made), or to determine which prices should be
set in trading schemes for greenhouse gases. While valuation of carbon credits is a
topic that has various dimensions which have been extensively discussed (see, e.g.,
Watt 2017), uncertainty remains, e.g., within the European Emissions Trading System,
about how to arrive at a CO2 allowance price that is sufficiently stable and high to pro￾vide incentives for investing in low-carbon technologies (Capozza and Curtin 2021).
Valuating positive externalities is often easier than valuating negative ones. The
toll levied on a public road internalizes the externality associated with its use. Using a
basic accounting instrument, one can hold that the toll reflects the marginal cost of
depreciation and maintenance; capitalizing the cost gives the monetary value of the
road. Even in cases that are much more complex, the accounting instrument of cost￾benefit analysis will attain valuation results. The first attempt to valuation of an exter￾nality is that of a nature park. Robert K. Davis (1963) assessed the benefits of outdoor
recreation by asking what users would be willing to pay (their cost) for its usage. In
the case of a negative externality, the survey would ask what they were willing to pay
for having an externality removed. If the respondents to the survey are asked to
choose between alternatives that incur different levels of cost, the outcome will be an
alternative that is contingent on a specific condition favored by the respondents;
hence the method is called contingent valuation.
3.4.1 Contingent valuation
Contingent valuation (CV) is most frequently used on the local level. An example is
the public park which was quoted above. For almost all goods and services that have
no ‘market’ and cause externalities, a monetary value can be derived by the method.
With this, passive use is introduced into economic analysis. As it is based on surveys,
the practice has met considerable controversy because it may deliver arbitrary re￾sults. Still, it has found wide application, and there were some enhancements to the
technique, for instance through giving the actors in environmental decision-making
an opportunity to scrutinize the survey before it was employed (Stigka et al. 2014).
Another fact that speaks for the method is that it incorporates elements of cost￾benefit analysis. Implicitly, it introduces benefits from maintaining environmental
use of resources and compares this usage to the opportunity costs for alternative
uses. This would allow to determine the social cost of an environmental project which
is very important for a public agency that must decide on the viability of a project
(Ahmed and Gotoh 2006).
Generally, a CV survey develops scenarios that encompass a range of actions to
be chosen by a government. Then it asks the participants of the survey to select their
preferences. Their answers are then analyzed – like choices that consumers make
when buying a good in a real market. With this, the survey creates a hypothetical
62 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsmarket, and it attaches an economic value to the respondents’ choices. The question
format which is most used in a CV survey allows two alternatives of responding: One
is the environmental policy that the government presently applies (e.g., charging a fee
on plastic bottles), the other is a substitute policy that would cost more than that of
the status quo (e.g., a system where consumers can return the empty bottles to the
seller). The participants are told that they will be charged the cost for the alternative
policy if this alternative is pursued. The consequences of the alternative, how much it
will cost and how it will be regulated, must be very clearly specified in the survey
questions (Carson 2000). If the respondents chose the policy that produces a higher
cost, the outcome is their “Willingness to Pay” (WTP) for this policy (for this environ￾mental good).
WTP can be an appropriate measure in a situation where potential users want to
acquire a good. The opposite is “Willingness to Accept Compensation” (WTA). WTA
would be an appropriate indicator in situations where owners of a good are asked
whether they would voluntarily give up the claim to the good. But where consumers
or businesses do not own a good (like an environmental good) and do not have a legal
entitlement to them (for instance, the right to use a river), the correct measure is
WTP. However, if a business has, for instance the permission to introduce sewage into
a river, it may be asked to give up that right. Then, WTA is the correct denominator.
Over 50 countries are said to have conducted CV studies (Carson and Mitchell
1993). It is either government agencies or international organizations which use it. CV
is the preferred method applied on a global scale by EVRI (Environmental Valuation
Reference Inventory; https://www.evri.ca). EVRI is a large online database assembled
for policymaking purposes by prominent agencies like the U.S. Environmental Protec￾tion Agency, the , Environment Canada, as well as similar agencies in Chile and Mex￾ico, and the Economy and Environment Program for South East Asia (Carson 2000).
Hence, one might assume that the method produces highly reliable outcomes.
The optimism on WTP’s reliability is tempered by newer publications (Hausman
2012). The criticism primarily holds that the hypothetical response can lead to a bias
that would result in overstatements of value, of which the proof is that the survey
often shows large differences between willingness to pay and willingness to accept.
Another critique is that, generally, the scope offered in the surveys is too narrow
(Hausman 2012). Some of these criticisms are not new – CV has been criticized from
the onset. Kahneman and Knetsch (1992), in their overview of the method, argue that
WTP varies depending on whether the preference for a specific good is evaluated on
its own or if the good is part of a more inclusive category. Also, the respondents may
rather express their moral satisfaction from personally contributing to a public good
and not give an account of its economic value: The main deficiencies of CV, critics say,
lie with WTP being elicited such that it shows non-economic motivations and, there￾fore, it cannot represent monetary value (Szabó 2010; Cooper et al. 2004).
Willingness to pay reveals the use-value of a good. This distinguishes from non￾use value. Use value includes the value of recreation in a forest as was the case in the
3.4 Externalities: Who pays for public goods usage? 63first application of CV performed by Davis (1963), or, opposed to it, the value of timber
production the proceeds of which represent the forest’s value (these two uses pre￾clude each other: Timber production makes enjoyment of the forest impossible). Non￾use values are those that are not dependent on the good being actually used. There
are three types that often add up to each other (Dott et al.1996):
– Option value, which represents the value associated with securing an option to
use the good at some future time, although the buyers of the option may recog￾nize that they will possibly never use the good;
– bequest value, which represents that the good will be maintained for future
generations;
– contributory value, which measures the contribution of the good to the overall
functioning of the system by which it is encompassed (like a nature park within a
large woodland.
Within the cases mentioned in use-value and in non-use value we have seen mone￾tary terms (proceeds of timber, buying an option). Other methods to arrive at mone￾tary valuation for public goods will be taken up in section 4.5 below. Apart from the
debate on whether monetary values are acceptable or not for the majority of public
goods,37 there are two directions into which value consideration is moving: One is
towards more monetization (see section 4.5), the other is complementing monetary
values by non-monetary ones, e.g., through the “Beyond GDP” alliance.38 One meth￾odology in the latter is surveys on distinct levels of “happiness”, or “subjective well￾being” (Levinson 2012). For instance, surveys on the value of cleaner air or better
weather information can be linked to demographic characteristics and incomes of
the participants, and with the specific air quality on the location where they were
surveyed. This would result in a relation between annual household income and an
air quality that would leave respondents happy (Levinson 2012, p. 879). Analogously,
more factors “beyond GDP” can be construed by linking demographics and surveys
on preferences. The relation of this to wellbeing measurement has been shown in
section 1.6 of this book.
There is a completely different topic that also relates to the externality issue:
What about parties that benefit from measures to curb external effects without pay￾ing for these measures? In many cases these are free riders. The question is how to
make them pay or how to avoid that they can reap a benefit at all.
 See section 1.6 of this book.
 The effort to measure progress beyond GDP through the dimensions of environmental, social, and
digital assets (see section 1.6 of this book) has received momentum when the United Nations set up its
High-Level Committee on Programs (HLCP) on Beyond GDP. See: https://unsceb.org/topics/beyond-gdp
64 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commons3.4.2 Free riding
The debate on externalities is most intense if there are beneficiaries that escape from
being charged with the cost they cause – whether through abuses of the welfare state
(which often shuns prosecution of the culprits) or through other forms of free riding.
From Hardin’s example of shepherds sharing common land who overgraze to the det￾riment of others (“The Tragedy of the Commons“, Hardin 1968, p. 244), to free and
open access on all sorts of documents on the internet there is an increase in the incen￾tives to abuse (see, e.g., da Silva et al. 2012). The same happens when emitters of car￾bon dioxide bypass cap-and-trade systems because there are no sanctions (Nordhaus
2015), and when the use of common-pool resources in urban developments is dis￾torted – like spaces in park-and-ride systems that are blocked by people that do not
use public transport (Ostrom 2010). There are remedies to some of these issues. For
example, in the case of the trade system for carbon dioxide emissions, the global com￾munity might set up “Climate Clubs” to put pressure on countries to participate in
transnational agreements (Nordhaus 2015, p. 27). On the local level, free riders can be
detected much easier, and they can be blocked out from the usage of a public good;
local communities may be able to short-circuit the incentives that invite to take a free
ride, as, for example, in public transport. If they are successful, they will restore the
trust that needs to reign in the public field. If they are not, the tendency to more
cheating and free riding will destroy the belief that all are playing by the rules. Toler￾ance of free riding comes close to tolerance of corruption: it threatens the very basis
of an open multilateral society.
Is free riding a case of corruption? Free riding is an abuse of a public good and it
should be seen as a crime. The abusers enrich themselves, but one might say that
freed riding works one way, while corruption works two ways: One person benefits
from an abuse committed by another. The issue of corruption will be discussed in the
policies chapter (Chapter 4) of this book which will also take up more on policies to
fight free riding.
3.4.3 Philanthropy
Philanthropy is perceived as the use of private resources for public benefit and social
change. Historically, there is a long line of wealthy individuals who contribute to citi￾zens’ social needs and wellbeing (Sulek 2010).39 There is also a long history, from the
 Public benefit and social change are the objectives of millions of NGOs as well. It is estimated that
in the U.S. alone there are 1.6 million NGOs (including religious congregations). They engage in numer￾ous activities: arts, culture, and humanities; education; environment and animals; health; human serv￾ices; international and foreign affairs; civic and public benefit and religion, as per a classification by
the U.S. Internal Revenue Service. Out of these, a 2003 survey lists 56,600 that are registered as philan￾3.4 Externalities: Who pays for public goods usage? 65provider of first resort in pre-modern times (the 12th and 13th century Italian nobility
funding hospitals or almshouse developments in 15th century England and the Dutch
Republic; see Jung and Harrow [2015]) to modern welfare donations that complement
or upgrade public goods provided by the state. Philanthropists and governmental in￾stitutions often intertwine. A case is the city of Leipzig, Germany, where in the early
1900s about two thirds of all philanthropic assets were entrusted to endowments man￾aged by the city government (Adam and Lingelbach 2013). In other cases, the state
supports charities by offering them public land or conjoining in administration.
From the 19th century onwards, it has been wealthy entrepreneurs, like, in the
UK, business pioneers such as the Lever Brothers or Cadbury and Rowntree (Bush
et al. 2008) who provided housing, medical support and schooling to their employees
and their families. Fundamentally, they felt that they should act responsibly towards
the communities where they had business. In the U.S., Andrew Carnegie’s interest in
science motivated him to build local libraries and to promote education and scientific
research on a very large scale.40 Then there is the Rockefeller Foundation which ad￾vanced a new concept of global health after WW I, when philanthropies were the
only way to take on tasks beyond state boundaries (Weindling 1997). This continues
with the Ford Foundation’s development of green technology (Stansfield 2002) and
the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation’s funding of new drugs, vaccines, and diagnostics
development (Jamison 2006). While all the finance had its origin in corporate profits,
the actions were led by individuals, not by their firms. Another format is corporate
philanthropy, where corporate funds are devoted to social needs.
Corporate philanthropy works in two ways: One is giving donations to non-profit
organizations (routinely or at special instances); which public good or service will
benefit from the donation would largely depend on the institution which receives the
donation. The other format is direct provision of a public good: Whether engaging in
community service, educational or cultural projects or volunteer initiatives, quite a
few business firms achieve significant, lasting societal impacts. There are innumerous
cases where small enterprises are reaching out to the boroughs or to the municipali￾ties around them; they feel this to be their duty as good citizens. Large corporations
act similarly and also on a broader scale: In the “Best Corporate citizens list” which
surveys societal activities of big firms, Fannie Mae, the U.S. mortgage company, and
the multinational consumer goods producer Procter & Gamble Co., were ranked first
and second (Bruch and Walter 2005). Their impact is very favorable for the beneficia￾ries, but it would be wrong to see this as pure altruism. They certainly act out of self￾interest: The firms expect to create win-win opportunities for themselves and for the
recipients of their social activities.
thropic foundations, holding total assets of 486 billion US$, distributing 27.6 billion US$ per year to
further their missions (Foundation Center 2003).
 Carnegie gave away around 350 million US$ (roughly 5.5 billion in 2023 terms), over only the last
18 years of his life (https://www.carnegie.org/about–us).
66 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsWin-win situations were always created when firms deployed social activities.
Going back in history, when the German chemical industry chose locations in the
mid-1800s that were far away from communities which offered a civic and cultural
environment, the companies built kindergartens, lecture rooms, concert halls and
medical centers, and they founded and sponsored sports clubs. Bringing these serv￾ices as well as arts and culture to those locations attracted well-educated technicians
and scientists to areas that they may have not chosen without this. The philanthropic
activities of the chemical industry in the 1800s improved competitive advantage
through higher attractiveness as an employer and created good relationships with
governmental and nongovernmental organizations. The range goes beyond communi￾ties that are directly impacted by a firm’s manufacturing or service activities: Deut￾sche Lufthansa, to take another example, enhances its relationship with communities
in which it operates by running a series of community-involvement programs (Bruch
and Walter 2005, p. 50). This is still a form of philanthropy, and it differs from produc￾ing a specific public good directly, e.g., provision of healthcare, building and maintain
roads and running private educational institutions. But contribution of these – tangi￾ble – public goods by private business has become one of the main achievements in
modern history.
3.5 The private sector providing public goods
Public engagement means all activities that unites citizens, for-profit and non-for￾profit institutions as well as the public administration in an effort to foster citizen￾ship, democracy, and citizens’ wellbeing. With this, the concept of “public” is extended
to all who are part of the private sector: Engagement is possible for everyone – the
‘poor widow’ quoted in the Bible (St. Mark, 12, 42), who shares a good cause, wealthy
individuals who engage in philanthropy, as well as associations and private business
firms. They all partake in public goods provision. Contributions by the private sector
may have no economic intention at all, as with philanthropy, or they may connect
profit-seeking to the delivery of goods that serve a public purpose. There is a differ￾ence: Philanthropy often is directed to a smaller group of beneficiaries; the delivery
of public goods purports to benefit the populace as a whole; it serves a public pur￾pose. Conjoining public purpose with private investment can result in completing
mega-projects like the construction work for the 1996 Atlanta Olympic Games 1996.
Andrew Young, who was the mayor at the time, created the term “Public Purpose Cap￾italism” for this and other undertakings in his town which stimulated the economy
and put people to work (Sehgal 2010). There is a moral sentiment in this, similar to
philanthropic action: doing good for the other. This raises the question if a business
firm can be “moral” (doing good). Some answers to that will be presented here before
passing on to the topic of philanthropy and the specific contributions of private busi￾ness to public goods provision.
3.5 The private sector providing public goods 67Whether a business firm is “moral” can be seen in its business practices. Moral
business practices come from moral culture, from moral culture comes a moral orga￾nization. In the 1980s there was a view on this that restricted the means for creating a
moral organization to “corporate credos, programs such as training, ethics audits and
codes tailored to the specific needs of a functional area“ (Murphy 1989, p. 81). But the
spectrum is much wider nowadays. Milton Friedmann’s dogma that “only people can
have responsibilities; a corporation is an artificial person, and in this sense may have
artificial responsibilities, but business as a whole cannot be said to have responsibili￾ties” (Friedman 1970, p. SM 12) has long been surpassed. Business firms, today, have
accepted a double responsibility for “doing good” and for “avoiding bad”. Most of
them prevent corporate social irresponsibility, such as cheating customers, violating
human rights, or damaging the environment not just in their own firms but far be￾yond (Lin Hi and Müller 2013). The corporate scandals of the 1990s (Enron and Tyco
and WorldCom) were thought to have ended – still, Volkswagen was reported of
squeezing small suppliers in 2015 and became a forerunner in the Diesel scandal; see,
e.g., Rauwald (2016) and Mansouri (2016). But there were always “high-ethics, high￾profit” firms – Motorola, 3M , Cadbury Schweppes, Northern Chemical, Apple, to
name just a few recorded by Pastin (1986) – not to speak of the myriad of small enter￾prises that are firmly embedded their local communities. They are the leading exam￾ples of “business in society” – a term that reflects their connection to caring for the
wellbeing of all their stakeholders and which is the title of two professional associa￾tions which pursue real life dissemination of the concept: Business in Society LLC
(http://businessinsociety.net), and the Academy of Business in Society (http://www.
abis-global.org).41
3.5.1 The contribution of private business
Business firms have partly replaced state agencies and/or state-owned firms in public
goods provision for quite some time. One background is the reversal of post-war poli￾cies in Europe, beginning in the late 1960s. After World Word II, many countries had
extended government ownership in a wide range of industries. They shielded these
industries and their secure jobs from international pressures by high tariffs’ and im￾posed high taxes to fund their investments. When the economies slowed down, many
political leaders, whether conservatives or socialists, started to reduce the role of gov￾ernment. This was connected to opening the economies for trade with the wider
world. In this, entrepreneurship had shown to be more successful than the officers in
state-owned firms. People would see that private firms were more efficient, and even
 For more on morality and ethics in business see, among others, the Ethical Economy book series,
Springer publishers, https://www.springer.com/series/2881
68 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsthough many would think that the state should engage in public goods like healthcare
and utilities provision, the general opinion would be that the government should own
less economic resources. Studies of public opinion in Europe have shown that people
who live in market-societies perceive private enterprise as more efficient, in contrast
to what people believe who grew up in the time when their societies were transform￾ing (Sikora and Kelley 2005). Outside Europe, where communism still prevails, e.g., in
Southeast Asia, people accept that new management methods are implanted in the
state sector as they felt the progress that was made when state-agencies were con￾verted into state-owned enterprises (Kim et al. 2010). So, it is the efficiency and effec￾tiveness that makes the difference.
Another background for the involvement of the private sector in public goods:
More and more, businesses have recognized that their responsibilities extend beyond
the corporate borders and that the purpose of businesses is creating value, not maxi￾mizing profit – which assigns them a greater role in society. Increasing shareholder
value alone cannot not sustain their existence. This wider perspective has been de￾fined with terms such as ”public purpose capitalism” that was mentioned above, and
“moral capitalism”, “conscious capitalism”,
42 as well as “social entrepreneurship” and
“social business”. These terms refer to systems and businesses that create a social
good and do it profitably (they create “social and ecological wellbeing” [Coretcaia and
Grosenbaugh 2020]). This has not been accepted without skepticism, most frequently
from civil society organizations (CSOs). Their reproach is that corporate social respon￾sibility, which expresses this expanded entrepreneurial conscience, is just to enhance
reputation. They often oppose collaboration with the business sector,43 but there are
also CSOs which understand that fostering societal progress is a common concern and
must be based on mutual respect, mutual accountability and equality of all partners.
In the end, everyone is a beneficiary. There needs to be a give and take of inputs be￾tween businesses, CSOs and governments, and the more visible outcomes are pro￾duced, the more acceptance will occur. Illustrations are Pepsi-Co’s WaterHope, a
community-driven venture that makes clean drinking water available to poor com￾munities in the Philippines and supports local development (Brown 2011), and the
Merck-Nicaraguan Ministry of Health RotaTeq® Partnership which helps to improve
children’s health (Murninghan 2018). And there are Chevron’s and Unilever’s commu￾nity engagement initiatives in Africa. They have widely proven that this give-and-take
mechanism works, and they have often changed attitudes of public institutions and
local authorities in a host county (Kolk et al. 2008). This also includes changes in the
way governments see collaboration with CSOs, which has paved the way for multi￾sector efforts to jointly address conflicts. One exemplary case is Chevron’s Angola
 Sisodia, Raj,and Mackey, John (2012):Conscious Capitalism – Liberating the Heroic Spirit of Business.
Brighton, MA: Harvard Business Review Press; Stephen B. Young (2003): Moral Capitalism – Reconcil￾ing Private Interest with the Public Good. Oakland, CA: Berrett-Koehler.
 For more on the role of CSOs see section 3.5.4 below.
3.5 The private sector providing public goods 69Partnership Initiative that was launched in 2002 together with U.S. based Search for
Common Ground,44 one of the largest international NGOs whose main objectives are
peacebuilding and improvement of living conditions. It has helped this country in
going through a ‘triple’ transition phase: from war to peace, from state controlled to
market based economy, and from devastated country to developed country (Kolk and
Lenfant 2012). This contribution to wellbeing of a whole nation is outstanding.
One fine description for businesses that are acclaimed for their contribution to
social wellbeing is ”Firms of Endearment”, i.e., firms that view society and their work￾ers as the ultimate stakeholders (Sisodia et al. 2014). This engagement, as it meets
wide recognition, has contributed to their share value having increased about ten
times more than that of the S&P 500 companies over the 15-year period ending in
2014. Examples are Johnson & Johnson, Patagonia, UPS, BMW, Honda and Toyota
(Bhatt 2021). What makes a firm a moral organization – “a firm of endearment”? Siso￾dia et al. (2014, pp. 8f.) list the following:
– They subscribe to a purpose for being that is different from and goes beyond
making money.
– They actively align the interest of all stakeholder groups and not just balance
them.
– Their executive salaries are relatively modest.
– They operate at the executive level with an open–door policy.
– Their employee compensations and benefits are significantly higher than the
standard for the company’s category.
– They devote considerably more time than their competitors to employee training.
– Their employee turnover is far lower than the industry average.
– They empower employees to make sure that customers leave every transaction
experience fully satisfied.
– They make a conscious effort to hire people who are passionate about the com￾pany and its products.
– They view their suppliers as true partners.
– They honor the spirit of the law rather than merely following the letter of law.
The list exhibits the fundamental content of conducting stakeholder relations respon￾sibly. It addresses the public goods of decent job conditions, social coherence, and
transparent market relations. And it shows how corporate social responsibility (CSR)
works. The effects of CSR will be discussed in the next section. First, CSR will be con￾trasted to ill behavior (Table 3). So, what guides an irresponsible business, and what
guides a moral business?
 https://www.sfcg.org
70 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsIrresponsible behavior may produce a short-time advantage – but the advantage will
not last long neither for the firm nor for the managers that act ill-behaved. There is a
long list of executives who committed criminal acts at Enron and Tyco and World￾Com, to name the most notorious cases in the U.S., and which cost shareholders and
customers billions of US$. They were all taken to justice, as were the managers who
used bribery schemes at Siemens and who frauded authorities and customers at
Volkswagen on diesel emissions. The media played an important role in this. The mil￾lions of honest businesspeople, however, never make it to the news.
Irresponsible corporations diminish their shareholders’ worth in the long run,
but they also destroy public goods. They may have accomplices: Some states, not only
in the developing world, adopt a policy of competing against each other for foreign
investment by very leniently regulating observance of economic, environmental, and
social human rights, and this can trigger a ‘race to the bottom’ (see, for instance,
Rudra 2008). Foreign investors, their managers and their local supply chains are at
least morally obliged or bound by international law to respect all those rights, but low
standards in the host country may induce them follow local practice or even benefit
from it personally. The way out may lie in the legislation passed in 2022 in Europe
which rules that enterprises have to watch over all tiers of their global supply chains
Table 3: What guides the irresponsible corporation and what guides moral business.
The irresponsible corporation The moral corporation
Ideal Greed, disregard of others Human dignity, stewardship
Principles Maximize shareholder wealth irrespective
of consequences to others
Respect for all stakeholders, including nature
Sincerity, candor, truthfulness
Abiding by rules, abstaining from and
eliminating illicit operations
Contributing to justice and social
development; promoting free trade
Standards Stock price, total compensation Self-assessment of strategies
Reflection for improvement of results
Stakeholder
Benchmarks
“Caveat emptor” (buyer beware),
concealment of liabilities, bullying
suppliers, destroying competitors
Customer and supplier sovereignty, treating
employees as moral agents, protecting
owners’ assets, giving back to the community
Source: Adapted from Young 2003, pp. 38 and 88.
 Standards for the moral corporation were developed by the Caux Round Table, an international
network of principled business leaders, founded in 1986 in Caux, Switzerland, by Frederick Phillips,
former president of Philips Electronics and Olivier Giscard d’Estaing, Founding Dean of the INSEAD
business school. The Caux Round Table Principles for Business were formally launched in 1994 and
presented at the UN World Summit on Social Development in 1995.
3.5 The private sector providing public goods 71in regard to obedience of human and environmental rights regulations.46 In the U.S.,
the Dodd-Frank Act on corporate due diligence is applied to the issue, and several
states have legal requirements on their own like California’s Transparency in Supply
Chain Act of 2010; new lawmaking has been discussed on the federal levels (Franken
and Schütte 2022). Another instrument has been put in place by the Guiding Principles
on Business and Human Rights established by the Human Rights Council of the United
Nations in 2011. They provide access to remedy for victims of business-related abuse
through judicial, administrative, and legislative means for which each member state
of the UN needs to introduce effective grievance mechanisms (Ruggie 2017). All this
cannot prevent criminal minds to try abuse, but it can take them to justice and will
bring down irresponsibility. Corporate social responsibility is on the rise.
3.5.2 Corporate responsibilities: Social returns and market returns
Entrepreneurial ventures are not meant to be altruistic. When they produce social re￾turns, there always is a market return also: profit, increase in reputation and attractive￾ness for high talent. This connects to an economic rationale; as such, it differs from
corporate philanthropy. For instance, reducing negative externalities produces both a
social return (by, e.g., increasing a county’s income through fees on pollution) and a
market return: 3M , for example, saved over 500 million US$ from 1975 to 1989 through
its “Pollution Prevention Pays” program while preventing 500,000 tons of pollution. As
of 2004, the company reported total cost savings at 1 billion US$ and pollution preven￾tion at 2.2 billion tons. The “trade off” for them was an increase in market value: Be￾tween 1975 and 2004, split-adjusted stock price rose from US$ 1.96 to US$ 77.86 (Calia
and Guerrini 2006).
The 3M example of reducing negative externalities is matched by many more
cases in various sectors of industry worldwide (World Economic Forum 2017). But the
social and the market benefits go far beyond externalities reduction. Firms create
value not only for their customers and their other stakeholders, but their value crea￾tion process is intrinsically aligned with the wellbeing of society and the environment.
This can very visibly be absorbed from a statement by George W. Merck (1894–1957),
 The German government, like what it did when transferring the EU Directive on Privacy into national
law (see section 4.3.2 of this book), has adopted severe limitations in its Supply Chain Due Diligence Act
that are more restrictive than the EU legislation. When the act came into force in January of 2023, Stra￾bag, one of the largest European construction companies, announced that it will discontinue all its under￾takings in Africa because it says it can just not comply with the requirements of the act. The building
industry, in all countries of the world, works with many tiers of subcontractors, and one can surmise
that in developing countries it is practically impossible to oversee whether the very strict rules asked for
by this law are followed in even the most remote activity tier (Schäfers 2022). The damage done by this
act might be considerable – Europe will possibly lose more terrain in Africa against China.
72 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonspresident of the pharmaceutical giant Merck & Co. and a member of the Merck family:
”We must never forget that medicine is for people. It is not for the profits. Profits fol￾low, and if we have remembered that, they never fail to appear” (Gibson 2007, p. 39).
This has been said long before the infamous 1970 Milton Friedman essay in the
New York Times whose headline was: “The Social Responsibility of Business Is to In￾crease its Profits.” The modern theory of the firm rates value creation as the highest
business objective, with profits not an end but an effective result (Laffont 1975). This
meets with what we are seeing in praxis: Firms aim at accounting for people, planet,
and profit in a Triple Bottom Line, they disclose their contribution to public goods
through Sustainability Reporting and they seek to secure responsibly use of resources
in the Circular Economy.
The triple bottom line and the multiple capitals concept
The “Triple Bottom Line” is a scheme which incorporates social and environmental per￾formance into financial reporting of firms. The term was coined by the British business
consultant John Elkington (1998). He argued some years later that his idea was not about
numerical measures (Henriques and Richardson 2013), but there have been numerous
attempts by business firms to assign monetary values to the effects their activities cause
to stakeholders (see, e.g., Savitz and Weber 2006). An illustrative case is South African
Breweries which set up the format shown in Table 4. The company values all items
shown in the format by the net outlays expensed in each year; many of them relate to
public goods. E.g., in the fiscal year 2022, the net cash that flowed out to the community
and the public sector (the net benefit produced from corporate social investment and
environmental and regulatory charges and taxes) was 865 million US$ compared to the
total value added of the firm which was 2119 million US$ (Richardson 2013). It may be
questioned whether the amount of 865 million US$ represents the firm’s contribution
public goods, but at least it shows what the firm ’pays’ for public goods usage. Critics
argue that this is just to show data for making a company look good without producing
genuine positive change, and that corporate financial accounts can serve to reveal the
financial cost of pollution, but not the social cost they cause to families who are forced
to move away from dangerous production sites or who suffer from long-term health
problems (Slaper and Hall 2011).
Another critique regards comparability. But even the advocates of the method
agree that there is no universal standard to calculate the triple bottom line, and that
each company will value completely different factors (Milne and Gray 2013). But com￾parison between firms is not the main objective: A firm that has chosen the factors
which it evaluates can very well prove the progress it makes from year to year.
3.5 The private sector providing public goods 73On a standalone base, the method can very well quantify ecological and social impacts
of isolated projects outside the realm of a business firm. There is a wide range of ap￾plications for, e.g., sports events, water gardens, fisheries, or landscape resilience
(Coffman and Umemoto 2010).
A special methodology has been suggested for the tourism industry, and the re￾sults are promising: There are ten factors that were chosen, from Community Health,
Safety and Security and Community Charity to Green Building and Infrastructure,
Water, Energy, Material Consumption and Waste Reduction. These factors are mea￾surable across the industry and might serve to enhance the industry members’ deal￾ings with natural and social public goods (Tyrrell et al. 2013).
Table 4: South African Breweries Corporate Stakeholder Relations.
Examples of External Costs and Benefits
Environmental Social Economic
Customers Environmental costs or
benefits in the use and
disposal of products
Ethical, social and health costs
or benefits associated with the
product
Consumer surplus over
and above the market
price
Suppliers Environmental impacts
associated with the processing
of purchased goods and
services
Ethical, social and health costs
or benefits associated with the
processing of purchased goods
and services
Stimulation of economic
growth through the
supply chain
Employees Environmental benefits or risks
associated with the workplace
Workplace social costs (such as
unpaid overtime) and benefits
(such as training and
development)
Employment creation
through the economic
multiplier effect
Community Emissions, effluents and waste
to land, air, and water (local,
regional, national and
international)
Community health impacts;
wider social impacts of
redundancy and plant closure;
nuisance and disturbance
Urban and rural
regeneration;
infrastructure (e.g.,
transport links and
congestion)
Public
sector
Environmental benefits from
public-sector investment of
corporate taxes in
environmental health
education, and health
protection
Social benefits from public￾sector investment of corporate
taxes in education and social
programs
Public-sector economic
multiplier effects
Investors Risks to investors from poor
corporate environmental
reputation
Risks to investors from poor
corporate social and ethical
reputation
Risks to investors from
poor corporate economic
reputation
Source: Richardson 2013, p. 38.
74 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsDespite the conflicting opinions, the Triple Bottom Line tool has become an ac￾cepted accounting technique,47 and even critics admit that the firms who employ the
framework invest in building value chain resources and focus on expenses or invest￾ments that do not make short-term but long-term economic sense (Glavas and Mish
2015). An important sign of recognition is that the Triple Bottom Line concept is re￾flected in the reporting standards of the Global Reporting Initiative (see section 4.5.2
of this book). The Triple Bottom Line concept not only associates with performance;
its objective to determine the impact of business activities also connects to value cre￾ated, to value creation and to the capital created and consumed by value processes.
The three prongs of the economic, the natural and the social effects point to the con￾struct of multiple capitals: Capital comprehends more than the financial capital that
is reported in the books of a firm. There also is natural, social/relational, and human
capital. They are the total of “sustainable capital from where we derive the goods and
services we need to improve the quality of our lives” (Coulson et al. 2015, p. 301).
The notion that businesses employ multiple capitals was first conceptualized by the
SIGMA Project of the British Standards Institution in 2003. “SIGMA” stands for Sustain￾ability Integrated Guidelines for Management, emphasizing that it is a manager’s per￾sonal duty to address all facets of sustainability at the workplace. The key feature of
SIGMA is that it aligns sustainability objectives to established management processes
(Sigma Guidelines 2003). Its five forms of capitals (natural, social, human, manufac￾tured, and financial) build on the triple bottom approach. In 2009, an initiative by the
name of Forum for the Future suggested the same approach. The Forum is a collabora￾tion of large companies, accountancies, banks, think tanks and NGOs.48 Accounting
firms also played a major role in founding the International Integrated Reporting Coun￾cil (IIRC) which initiated the International Integrated Reporting Framework, Launched
in 2013,49 it introduces a categorization of capitals into six denominations, adding the
mark of intellectual capital (with the components of the structural and the organiza￾tional) and connecting the mark of relational capital to human capital. It is from the
accounting terminology (where total assets equals capital) that the financial profession
has taken the term of “capital” instead of “assets” for labeling the source of value crea￾tion. However, connecting the terms “capital” and “value creation” has raised the ques￾tion if one can turn all assets (i.e., all what humanity possesses) into transactional goods
and services for which prices can be determined (e.g., Kolomiiets and Petrushenko 2017,
Gowthorpe 2009). Pricing of values is crucial for decision making in all spheres of soci￾ety, and there is no justification to the claim that using the term ‘human capital’ will
end up in putting humans for sale. But the debate must be taken seriously as it still per￾meates the discussion about value creation.
 A “New and Extended Balance Sheet for Sustainable Business” that builds on the Triple Bottom
Line was suggested by Fagerström et. al. (2017).
 https://www.forumforthefuture.org/the-five-capitals
 https://www.integratedreporting.org/the-iirc-2
3.5 The private sector providing public goods 75In the human capital debate, one criticism argues that the predominant meaning of
capital, quite literally, is “money or assets bought for money, and that which is owned”
(Coulson et al. 2015, p. 292), and that the components of human capital (labor, education,
skills, teamwork, and labor markets) are not commensurable with components of assets
in a balance sheet. Other critics accentuate that inclusive conceptions of capital as
“stores of value or wealth” are mere metaphors that help one to understand one
“thing” in terms of another (the relation of one from of capital to another), but that this
aggravates the complexities of accounting and does not solve them (Young 2001). The
proponents hold that drawing upon the economic relationship between capital and in￾come helps to expound that managers are very often under the illusion that production
is solely about employing labor and machinery and that they do not account for the
“irreplaceable capital which man has not made, but simply found in the environment
and without which he can do nothing”, as per a quote from German-British statistician
and economist Ernst Friedrich Schumacher. Schumacher made this statement in his
seminal work Small Is Beautiful: A Study of Economics As If People Mattered (Schu￾macher 1973, p. 11) which he wrote in the aftermath of the energy crisis. He highlighted
the lack of insight for maintaining natural capital which mankind cannot afford to lose
as a source to economic income. Human capital, he wrote, is an indispensable source
for a society’s economic wellbeing like natural resources, and when it is not treated in
the same way as the other capitals value and viewed at as a readily available input for
value creation, three major perspectives are neglected: One is that its contribution to
economic output is underestimated, another one that it may get severely over-exploited,
and a third is that it gets detached from the individual level (Okeke 2016). Responsible
businesses will pay attention to all three, but there is always evidence of firms acting
irresponsibly by destroying human capital.
Cutting jobs for good, while it may not be irresponsible when it serves to avoid
the total loss of a business, always destroys capital that is irreplaceable. But there are
many cases of outright irresponsibility: When the COVID-19 pandemic caused major
textile firms in Europe to cancel all orders placed with manufacturers in Bangladesh
and to even deny the fulfillment of running contracts, millions of workers were sent
home without their wages. This triggered factory closures that eradicated the liveli￾hood of more than almost half of the labor force in the country’s apparel industry
(Sen et al. 2020). Much less direct jobs (about 10,000) were lost when telecommunica￾tions conglomerate MCI-WorldCom collapsed in what was to be largest bankruptcy in
U.S. history with assets of 103.8 billion US$, but the eradication of human capital that
resulted in the industry was still enormous. It was estimated that with all subcontrac￾tors about 100,000 jobs were destroyed (Heracleous and Werres 2016). A major reason
was fraudulent undertakings of the CEO who was later sentenced to 25 years in
prison. Shareholders lost all equity. They would recover a part of their capital when
Verizon Communications acquired what was left from WorldCom. This met with wide
coverage in the news. The fate of the employees was not covered by the news exten￾sively, but it became known that many of the former MCI employees, when the firm
76 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonswas purchased by Verizon, were placed in a lower-tiered operation by the name of
Verizon Business outside the main holding (Verizon Telecom). While they performed
virtually the same work as their counterparts at Verizon Telecom, they were denied
the higher wages, fully paid health benefits, and a pension plan; they were also lack￾ing job security (Johansson 2007). Respecting human capital seems to not have been
in the minds of the managers who completed this merger.
For responsible managers, embedding human capital into responsibly designed
business processes is equal to conscientiously dealing with the human side of enter￾prise, as per the title of a landmark publication by Douglas McGregor. In his book,
McGregor (1960) breaks managers into two groups: In one group, the managers are
focused almost solely on tasks; in the other one their focus is on people and how to
motivate them. One might hope that the two generations who became managers after
this title was published will follow what McGregor recommends and that cases like
WorldCom/Verizon become rare exceptions.
There is another aspect in the value chain perspective. When businesses use all
the available assets (their own and those of society) in their productive processes,
they may comprise relationships which should be peer-to-peer a priori. They need to
avoid this by accounting for the less powerful stakeholders and more vulnerable
members of society which contribute to the processes. It is the management’s respon￾sibility to ensure that all stakeholders are treated peer-to-peer. A special responsibility
must be dedicated to business processes that are directed to humans, whether in the
workplace or outside the firm. These processes not only create value for the firm but
they also create the values which individuals derive from their work – a living wage,
a safe and harmonious work-climate, transparency, fellowship, empathy, and loyalty
both from above and below. If “wellbeing is not procured for all members of an orga￾nization, there is no wellbeing for that organization” (Lepeley 2017, p. 22). Any model
of value-creation will have to be placed under the prerequisite of adequate working
conditions for all labor contracted by the firm.
Value processes create outputs and outcomes that can be tangible and intangible
(where outcomes are, e.g., the changes which process participants’ experience – suppli￾ers, customers, employees and other stakeholders), and they produce value changes to
the various communities affected by the activities of a business. A part of the outcomes
and outputs (know-how, contracts with new partners, intermediate goods, etc.) return
to the organization and serve as new inputs. This is illustrated in Figure 9 which is
taken from the International Integrated Reporting Council’s (IIRC) “Octopus” model.
The exhibit shows how capitals create value and, the other way round, how value
creates capital. On both ends, the capital which is involved represents public goods.
As can be seen, the IIRC has chosen to delineate the process through six forms of capi￾tal. IIRC’s choice of six capitals can be considered as having been condensed from var￾ious subtypes. A comprehensive typology which compacts 20 subtypes into IIRC’s six
categories is the following (Castillo 2016): With financial capital they are money, debt,
equity; with physical capital they are natural and built; with human capital they are
3.5 The private sector providing public goods 77External environment
Value creation (preservation, diminution) over time
Performance
Risks and
opportunities
Strategy and
resource allocation
Mission and vision
Business
activities
Business model
Outputs
Outlook
Inputs Outcomes
Governance
Financial Financial
Manufactured
Intellectual
Human
Social and relationship
Natural
Manufactured
Human
Social and relationship
Natural
Intellectual
Figure 9: Value creation from six types of capital input.
Source: https://integratedreportingsa.org/faq-the-octopus-model
78 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsphysiological, creative, intellectual, psychological, and moral; with relational capital
they are social, political, spiritual; with symbolic capital they are cultural, reputa￾tional, temporal, spatial; and with structural capital they are organizational, rule of
law, and processes. Many of these represent public goods.
It is not just accountants who use the term capital for all assets that create value.
One prominent founder of the IIRC was King Charles III, then Prince of Wales, with
his Accounting for Sustainability Project.50 In his 2010 book Harmony: A New Way of
Looking at Our World, Charles touched on the multiple capital perspective: “Money is
not wealth, but only the measure of wealth and a means of exchange. True wealth
consists in good soil, unspoiled forests, clean rivers, healthy animals, vital communi￾ties, satisfying food and human creativity. If this capital is not available and responsi￾bly employed, the many social problems we try to solve through economic growth –
poverty, stress, insufficient health, etc. – will increase” (Charles 2010, pp. 100f.).
Integrated Reporting (IR) is voluntary, but many prominent business firms and
some public entities employ it. European corporations use it to comply with the EU’s
Non-Financial Reporting Directive.51 The directive requires what the EU calls ‘large pub￾lic interest entities’ (listed companies, banks, and insurance companies) to disclose non￾financial information in a consistent and comparable manner. The directive gives rules,
but they are non-binding in detail; so, the IR guidelines may be used further on. As all
information given in corporate reports under IR is audited by accounting firms, invest￾ors, policy makers and consumers have a reliable means to evaluate a corporation’s
non-financial performance and may exploit this to push companies towards widening
their responsible to business approaches. In consequence, the business contribution to
public goods and public wellbeing will become measurable: IR reports value-creation
as an increase or decrease in the six capitals. The intended audience of the IR is not
providers of financial capital only; any stakeholder is entitled to inquire about a firm’s
report on those capitals, including the extent and the form of changes in natural capital
and social capital (Albertini 2019). Creating value to customers, suppliers and to the in￾ternal stakeholders, which are the employees. has replaced, for quite some time, the
“profit maximization” canon. There is a simple logic for enhancing human capital in a
firm or an institution: It serves both the employees and the employer if capabilities are
built (‘intellectual capital’) which then also affects social capital. These three types of
capital have portions inside and outside the corporate border like all the other ones:
Businesses are ‘in’ the society (as has been enunciated by ABIS, The Academy of Busi￾ness in Society, a global network of over 100 companies and academic institutions who
are pooling expertise, commitment and resources to invest in a more sustainable fu-
 https://www.accountingforsustainability.org
 https://finance.ec.europa.eu/publications/commission-guidelines-non-financial-reporting_en
3.5 The private sector providing public goods 79ture.52 If businesses create value for the society by carefully pursuing their mission,
they are also able to create value by partaking in public goods provision.
The multiple capitals proposition, before having been introduced as a business con￾cept, was set forth as a concept for the creation of wealth by David Pearce, a pioneer of
environmental economics, who was closely connected to the set–up of the Millennium
Development Goals.53 Pearce (2005) believed that it is not depletion of resources which
affects wealth, but that wealth is destroyed by under-valuing these resources. As for
natural resources, Pearce’s assumption that we under-value their contribution to
growth rejects an infamous conclusion made by ecological economists. They purport
that nations first surrender environmental quality in the name of economic growth and
then improve it later when average incomes are higher (the Environmental Kuznets
Curve, EKC54). But if natural resources are included in the wealth of a nation, and if
they are assigned a proper value, the EKC does not make sense anymore, because
“growth” gets a different meaning (Pearce 2005, p. 31). Table 5 depicts the categories
which Pearce defined for wealth assets – of which the majority are public goods.
Notably, Pearce talked about assets, not capitals, as he was aware of the division
within academia on whether it is appropriate to apply the term “capital” beyond fi￾nance and economics to social issues and nature (see above for the debate on the term
“human capital”). In his view, the usefulness of the multiple assets/multiple-capitals per￾spective does not lie in better approaches to monetary valuation, but it points to the
heterogeneity of resources in which organizations are embedded. Anyhow, like Triple
Bottom Line accounting and sustainability reporting,55 the multiple-capitals concept is a
tool that visualizes what businesses contribute to environmental and social improve￾ments. A concretization of this contribution is the circular economy.
The circular economy
Businesses using environmental resources have not always felt the need to give back
to the environment. In the industrial revolution, the business model was that of a lin￾ear economy with a single-use philosophy (‘take, make, dispose’). Production worked
 https://www.abis-global.org
 UN Member States have agreed to the United Nations Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in
the September 2000 Millennium Summit at the United Nations headquarters in New York City. The
eight goals commit to combat poverty, hunger, disease, illiteracy, joblessness, environmental degrada￾tion, and discrimination against women, and to foster global partnerships. The aim was to achieve the
goals by 2015.
 This hypothesis follows what was advanced by economist Simon Kuznets in the 1950s for incomes:
As an economy develops, market forces first increase economic inequality. Likewise, it is hypothe￾sized, market forces first neglect the environment. The title of Pearce’s publication says why this is
wrong: Managing environmental wealth for poverty reduction refers to natural capital being a source
of growth.
 More on sustainability reporting is given in section 4.5.2.
80 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsunidirectional: Natural resources provided factory inputs, used them to create goods,
producers disposed of production waste, and consumers disposed of what they had
bought – quite often, after a single use. The increase in world population has driven
the demand for resource-intensive goods such as vehicles and other conveniences.
Warnings have been expressed that as we are consuming resources at a 50 percent
faster rate than they can be replaced, our demand will require more than three plan￾ets’ worth of natural resources by 2050 (Esposito et al. 2018). This is not new, but the
demand for a careful use of resources is not new, either. Treating the environment as
a regenerative system (‘reduce, reuse, recycle’) has been promulgated since the early
1900s: US philosopher and pedagogist John Dewey (1859–1952) is said to have been an
early environmentalist with his statement that “Renewal of Life by Transmission” will
save natural resources for future generations (Gadotti 2002). Also, scholars of the 19th
century, while often referred to as only thinking about safeguarding open space for
recreation (which led to the Foundation of National Parks system in the U.S.), strongly
Table 5: Types of capital assets.
Household level Community level National level
Physical assets Housing Schools Major infrastructure
Tools Hospitals
Animals Local infrastructure
Machines
Financial assets Cash Access to credit/insurance Access to credit/insurance
Human assets Labor Pooled labor Labor markets
Education
Skills
Health
Environmental assets Land Common land Rivers/seas/lakes
Soil fertility Fisheries Large watersheds
Woodlots Forests Minerals
Water, Fuels
Watersheds
Sanitation
Air quality Global climate
Social assets Family trust Community trust Inter–community links
Solidarity Security
Governance Government trust
Participation Political freedoms
Cultural assets Rights, Justice
Justice Markets
systems
Source: Pearce 2005, p. 32.
3.5 The private sector providing public goods 81warned about industrialism’s negative effects on the biomass and called for con￾sciousness in industry’s relations to the environment (Hall 2014).
Advocating for an economic system which dissociates environmental pressure
from industrial growth is the primary concern of a circular economy’s pursuit. The
following list of principles for a circular economy lays the focus on how to treat pro￾ductive resources (Table 6):
The principles of the Circular Economy are applied in many industries. An important
forerunner is the 1985 Responsible Care initiative of the chemical Industry, a world￾wide self-regulation program. Its objectives are:56
– Continuously improve the environmental, health, safety and security knowledge
and performance of our technologies, processes, and products over their life
cycles so as to avoid harm to people and the environment.
– Use resources efficiently and minimize waste.
– Report openly on performance, achievements, and shortcomings.
– Listen, engage, and work with people to understand and address their concerns
and expectations.
– Cooperate with governments and organizations in the development and imple￾mentation of effective regulations and standards, and to meet or go beyond them.
– Provide help and advice to foster the responsible management of chemicals by all
those who manage and use them.
Many other industries as well as several government agencies have embraced Re￾sponsible Care as a role model. Responsibility, as also comes out from the list of the
initiative’s objectives, expressly speaks to concerns and expectations of people. The
initiative as well as the circular economy Circular Economy concept produce environ￾mental and socio-economic benefits. They challenge the technological, organizational,
institutional, and social status quo. This should lead to strategies, policies and pro￾Table 6: 16 Principles for a Circular Economy.
 Design with a purpose  Source/produce with renewables
 Design for longevity  Source/produce with good ethics
 Design for resource efficiency  Provide services to support long life
 Design for Biodegradability  Reuse, recycle and compost all remains
 Design for recyclability  Collaborate well and widely
 Source/produce more locally  Use, wash and repair with care
 Source/produce more without toxicity  Buy quality as opposed to quantity
 Source/produce with efficiency  Consider rent, loan, swap, second–hand or redesign
Source: Bermejo 2014, p. 277.
 See: https://cefic.org/our-industry/responsible-care
82 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsgrams which turn economic activities into “loops of care for people and the environ￾ment” (Pla-Julián and Guevara 2019, p. 66).
Not all members of the corporate community may have followed this allegiance
whole-heartedly, but they will gradually be forced into the right track. E.g., Davos
2020 and other similar events demonstrate the new role of businesses (Schwab 2019).
Figure 10 shows the numerous sectors of society affected by this role. Businesses who
work towards a circular economy model (and generally towards environmental and
social responsibility) will contribute to the wellbeing of all societal sectors listed in
the diagram shown above. This was already recognized in the 1960s by Peter Drucker,
world famous author and consultant, who countered the sole attention to the share￾holders which some economists and industrialists held at the time: “An organization
is not an end in itself. An organization is an organ of society and fulfills itself by the
contribution it makes to the outside environment” (Drucker 1967, p. 32).
What is pronounced by the Davos conferences and others is also becoming the
practice of business education: In April 2016, AACSB, the international the accredita￾tion body for business schools, announced a new “collective vision”: The vision high￾lights that the schools must commit to add value, create market differentiation, and
better serve society globally: “. . . business schools and businesses will act as: catalysts
of innovation, co-creators of knowledge, hubs of life-long learning, leaders in leader￾ship, and enablers of global prosperity” (AACSB 2016, p. 4). Enabling global prosperity
was afterwards expanded to say: “business is now expected to be an active participant
in addressing broad societal goals and social challenges” (AACSB 2016, p. 5). Beyond
this, many other international institutions have aligned to issue guidelines for respon￾sible behavior of business, from the UN Global Compact57 to the Earth Charter (The
Earth Charter Commission 1992), and to the SDGs, to name the most prominent.
So, businesses have their agenda to work on and to collaborate with the other
sectors of society. One player in this collective effort is civil society organizations.
Their role needs to be redefined from antagonists to partners of industry.
3.5.3 The role of civil society organizations (CSOs)
Citizens are recipients of the benefits provided by public goods, but they can also en￾gage in the production of public goods. Philanthropic activities of wealthy individuals,
as exhibited above, promote the common good, and so do contributions by associa￾tions of citizens – CSOs. CSOs are, as per a definition by the United Nations, “non￾state, not-for-profit, voluntary entities formed by people in the social sphere that are
 The Global Compact is a non-binding agreement between the UN and businesses which commit to
adopt socially responsible and environmental policies, and to report how they implement them. It
was launched in July 2000. See section 5.2.3 below.
3.5 The private sector providing public goods 83separate from the state and the market, and which represent a wide range of interests
and ties”.
58 Civil society organizations (or non-profit organizations), also defined as
“charity organizations”, “non-commercial organizations”, “non-business entities”, if
measured by the total of their turnover, would rank as the world’s eighth-largest
economy; estimations give figures between 1 and 1.3 trillion US$ (Salamon et al. 2004).
They can only exist in free democracies because an authoritarian regime and a cen￾trally planned economy which do not allow independent actions of individuals, can￾not allow free associations of citizens either. This can be seen from what happened in
Circular
Economy
A Regenerative
Food System
Technologies Enabling
Circularity Circular Design
Circular Business
Models
Systems-Level Circular
Change
A Circular
Economy in Cities
Circular Finance Forests
A Regenerative
Food System
Technologies Enabling
Circularity Circular Design
Circular Business
Models
Systems-Level Circular
Change
A Circular
Economy in Cities
Circular Finance
Global Health
Biodiversity
Aerospace
Future of Mobility
Internet of Things
Infrastructure
Electronics
Information
Technology
Advanced
Manufacturing and
Production
Fourth Industrial
Revolution
Digital Economy and Society
Digital
Communications
Future of Energy
Arts and Culture
Financial and
Monetary Systems
Capi
Banking and
tal Mar
Oil and Ga
kets
s
Mining and Metals
Private Investors
Development
Finance
Entrepreneurship
Aviation, Travel
and Tourism
Innovation
Inclusive Design
Behavioural
Sciences
Institutional
Investors
Global Governance
Agriculture, Food
and Beverage
Corporate
Governance
Environment and
Natural Resource
Security
Plastics and the
Environment
Ageing
3D 
Printing
Agile Governance
Transport
Supply Chain and 
Economic
Future of
Progress
Youth Perspectives
Retail, Consumer
Goods and
Lifestyle
Future of Food
Oceans
Climate Change
Future of
Consumption
Cities
Urbani
 and
zation
Water
Sustainable
Development
Artificial
Intelligence and
Robotics
Figure 10: Diagram of the Circular Economy .
Source: World Economic Forum 2020.
 https://www.ungpreporting.org/glossary/civil-society-organizations-csos
84 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsthe late 1970s and during the 1980s in Eastern Europe where organizing civil society
was a way to fight the communist regimes – whether it was through independent
trade unions or independent academic circles. One case was Poland where Solidar￾ność (“Solidarity”) started in 1980 as a broad anti-authoritarian social movement for
advancing workers’ rights and social change. Attempts by the government to destroy
the union through imposing martial law failed, in part because the movement got sig￾nificant financial support from the Vatican and the United States, and the regime was
forced to enter into round table talks with Solidarność. This led to Poland’s first plu￾ralistic election in 1989.
The authoritarian repression against which the Polish wrestled a heroic fight
sharply contrasts from the permissive society in Western democracies of today which
accepts a myriad of objectives for which CSOs engage. The downside is that the gov￾ernments also tolerate all sorts of abuses by CSOs. There are thousands of CSOs in all
parts of the world which operate in multiple spheres (local, national, provincial, inter￾national) with numerous points of contacts with the state or the business sector. Some
CSOs choose to collaborate and to build pragmatic partnerships, others may adopt an
oppositional approach and keep a distance. There are a few (but they get wide cover￾age in the media) which incite violent protests in the street and criminal acts like
those committed by the “Last Generation” in Germany, “Extinction Rebellion” and
“Occupy Wall Street” in the US, the UK, and elsewhere. They openly destroy public
goods. When the state continues to tolerate this, coherence in society will break apart.
Coherence in society is a public good in itself. It requires respect for the other, truth￾fulness and open participation. Collective provision and maintenance of this public good
and others only works through comprehensive stakeholder cooperation between all ac￾tors – where ‘comprehensive’ means that individual freedom, including a free market
and private property rights, are firmly upheld, and that all actions are consistent with the
intellectual and affective capacities of human nature (Struhl 2014). Otherwise, public
goods will be abused by special interests or hijacked by so called “activists”.
If society organizations uphold that a free state guarantees freedom of action,
they very often claim this freedom for themselves only. By opposing the attitudes or
activities of another party, sometimes with force, they not only limit this party’s free￾dom, but they also risk that the state excludes them from decision-making on public
goods matters. Those who demonstrate in the streets and claim that they represent
“people”, tend to not respect others. But “people” always comprises all people. If we
take the case of pollution prevention, the chemical, and the oil-producing businesses
as well as their employees must also be heard, plus the businesses who fear that their
crops or their livestock feed are damaged by pollution.
Then there are those who do not go to the streets but to courts. An outstanding
case is that of the “German Environment Aid Aid”, a CSO that specializes in taking
municipalities and car manufacturers to court for alleged failures to fight climate
change without acknowledging the progress that is under way. Their actions trigger
situations of mutual distrust, and with a rhetoric that is full of confrontational naming
3.5 The private sector providing public goods 85and shaming, the CSO’s representatives destroy all willingness of the other side to co￾operate (Reiners and Versluis 2022). The paradox is that the state provides finance for
all this: The German Law on Charitable Purposes rules that financial support, apart
from tax exemption, is given to institutions whose statutes petition that they “benefit
the public” through “socially useful objectives”, like, in this case environmental pro￾tection. There have been attempts to remove “German Environment Aid” from this
preferential regime, but they failed. “German Environment Aid” claims that being a
member in the Transparent Civil Society Initiative59 makes it a fully complying social
group, but that is not the point. The point is that its mission aims at abusing judicial
procedures to simply make money and attract plaintiffs who want to make money
also. The scheme is to pile up class actions and to get paid by the plaintiffs which col￾lect from their legal protection insurance if the cases are lost, which occurs almost all
the time (Piller 2023).
The “German Environment Aid” and other misbehaving CSOs misuse that they
are shielded behind the strong societal acceptance of civil society movements by the
citizens. They “capture the public” and do not really contribute to change. Change,
rather, is aimed at by groupings that are not about violence and about making money
by taking governments to court. They are often rooted in unremarkable networks,
such as religious organizations, trade unions, and professional organizations from
where they take and pronounce their objectives. These groupings have been called
“quotidian civil society organizations” (Pinckney et al. 2022). Since they have stable
preferences for democracy and cooperativeness and are embedded in larger quarters
of society, they can generate mobilization and keep the momentum (Thurber 2019).
Mobilization and momentum are what makes CSOs successful. The third success
factor is societal acceptance. Only then will CSOs contribute to arriving at lasting
agreements that satisfy all. The agreements must be based on common understanding
of the issues in question, and on argumentations which respect all. This is the best
way to achieve that “reasoned agreement becomes a way of life among equals” as put
by American political philosopher Joshua Cohen (2005, p. 359). Equality also relates to
equal accountabilities. In dealing with other parties, accountability not only refers to
business firms who need to be sensitized to and internalize the cost which their deci￾sions cause for their stakeholders, but to civil society organizations as well. One, there
is their accountability towards society, and two, there is the accountability which a
CSO has to its members. In this, CSOs are comparable to businesses which also have
accountabilities to various stakeholders. And CSOs, even though not pursuing a profit,
often operate like business ventures. With this, there is responsibility. But, as said,
 The initiative was founded by the renowned Transparency International organization and has
about 1700 charitable institutions which commit to disclose their finance, but not all sources of fi￾nance are revealed (https://www.transparente-zivilgesellschaft.de). There is no mandatory disclosure
in Germany for charities, other than, for example, in the U.S., where applying for tax-exemption re￾quires organizations to file annual returns with data on their revenue, expenses, and assets.
86 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsCSOs often are not open to accountability. Several important questions are mostly left
unanswered (Onyx 2008):
– To whom is the organization accountable, and for what?
– How is this accountability to be demonstrated, and what compliance mechanisms
are available and necessary to ensure that the organization remains within its ac￾cepted zone of conduct?
– Put another way, isn’t it the state who has (or should have) the power to enforce
that CSOs comply with law and order, and is such power sufficient to curtail ex￾cessive behavior of the organization?
The wide range of activities that many CSOs pursue makes the need for holding CSOs
accountable yet more important. They sometimes conflict or intersect with each
other. All of them demand that it is businesses that must be held accountable because
it is them whose activities affect society. And they repeatedly claim that businesses
rank profits over the interest of all stakeholders. Only very few accept that this claim
is outdated in general. And where there are those businesses, rather than smashing
their office windows, the better way for CSOs is to make those abuses of corporate
power widely known and to join with other stakeholders into a dialogue that leads to
judicial enforcement. This would lead to societal control not only of business behavior
but also of how the various sectors interact in providing public goods.60
Fruitful cooperation between CSOs, governments and business firms will ultimately
help the beneficiaries of CSO activities. Partnerships of this type have a long history.
Two less known examples: One is the efforts to give more farmers access to agriculture
in developing countries (Ghatak 2003). The other is the endeavors to alleviate the situa￾tion of the underserved in the Palestinian regions of the West Bank and Gaza where
about 1,200 CSOs, together with businesses, provide almost two thirds of the primary
health care, most of the agricultural services, as well as microcredits and low-cost hous￾ing (Salem 2012). There are many partnerships between CSOs and United Nations agen￾cies; they often start with informal information and may end up in formally binding
contracts. While civil society was predominantly considered as the beneficiary when
the United Nations reached out development and technical assistance programs in the
1900s, the declarations of the September 2000 Millennium Summit painted a new situa￾tion where civil societies and their organizations are recognized in a new role as active
partners (Mezzalama 2002).61 The pathway goes from limited and sporadic consulta-
 See section 5.2 on societal control.
 A very visible part of the UN’s engagement with civil society organizations, youth representatives
and academia is its “Town Hall meetings with Civil Society”, where the President of the General As￾sembly partakes together with other UN representatives. It has an open format and allows participa￾tion of anyone who is interested. Ideas are exchanged on the transformations that are necessary for
improving the implementation of the SDGs. The last such meeting was on 20 April 2023.
3.5 The private sector providing public goods 87tions to involvement of CSOs during the planning and execution process of United Na￾tions activities. The format, here, is that of public-private partnerships.
3.6 Public-private partnerships (PPPs)
Cross sector engagements for common purposes of which the most are public goods
provision, are summarized under the concept of public-private partnerships (PPPs).62
The public is not merely meant to be a state authority, it is the people, represented by
elected officials or by civil society organizations, and the private is individuals and
businesses. There are partnerships where businesses are not involved, as in the cases
mentioned above where CSOs engage with United Nations agencies; but that line of
differentiation is blurred, because CSOs may very well take on the character of busi￾ness ventures. Whichever composition they have, PPPs have become a key element of
public policies worldwide; they have the potential to bring not only cost benefits in
the implementation of policy programs like public construction and public utilities,
but also in terms of developing “soft” public goods like building socially inclusive
communities (Osborne 2000).
3.6.1 Models and content of PPPs
PPPs are a concept which has evolved into many forms of organizational arrange￾ments to provide public goods and services: One of the first applications was private
participation in the provision of infrastructure-services. Other than traditional public
procurement, which is a contract for purchasing an asset, the public sector, in a PPP,
purchases a stream of services for which a detailed service agreement specifies ex￾plicit terms and conditions. This is mostly done via a concession contract where a gov￾ernment grants a license or concession to a private party.63 There are projects on
economic infrastructure like road, rail and air transport, bridges, sewage treatment
plants, drainage systems, and telecommunications facilities, as well as on social infra￾structure like health, education, jailhouses, and recreational facilities. PPPs may have
 There are two concise definitions of a PPP. One is by the Canadian Council for PPPs: “A cooperative
venture between the public and private sectors, built on the expertise of each partner, that best meets
clearly defined public needs through the appropriate allocation of resources, risks and rewards”. The
other is from the OECD, and lists the main fields where the concept is applied: “An arrangement
whereby the private sector provides infrastructure assets and services that traditionally have been
provided by government, such as hospitals, schools, prisons, roads, bridges, tunnels, railways, and
water and sanitation plants”. See LaRocque 2008, p. 8.
 Legal prerequisites and management issues of PPPs will be discussed in Chapter 4 on public goods
management which will also exhibit the arguments on pro and contra PPPs.
88 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsmany forms – from privatization of previously state-owned industries to simply con￾tracting out of services, but it is a few models that have become widely used. In the
following, some typical examples will be exhibited which show the content and the
most frequent formats of the undertakings.
Construction
In construction, the decisive success factor is to best utilize synergies from design,
buildability, operability, and finance. From this, the advantages for the public sector
(reducing budget strains and adding certainty to cost and delivery terms) and the pri￾vate sector (client is reputable, operation is secured) can be clearly envisaged (Car￾tlidge, D., 2006). The ideal contractors, hence, will be those which combine design,
construction, and facilities management in-house. The concept is by new means a
new one: It was already used for the construction of the Suez Canal starting in 1858:
Funding came from a mix of Egyptian and European finance support, and the conces￾sion to design construct/ operate the canal (and to earn the revenue) was awarded to
a newly formed corporation, the Compagnie Universelle du Canal Maritime de Suez,
owned by both French and Egyptian interests. The firm built the canal and administered
it for 99 years after which time the ownership passed over to the Egyptian government
Contract Type Description Level of
Risk
Management contract Operator receives fee to perform operation and routine
maintenance. Asset owner pays for repairs, extensions,
etc. Little risk to private operator.
Asset
holder
Private
operator
Lease contract Operator keeps revenue but must pay specified
operating and maintenance costs and lease fee, and
possibly percentage of revenue. Operator loses money if
costs and fees exceed revenue and thus has incentive to
lower cost and increase water connections and bill
connection.
Build-and-operate contract/ Build,
Own, Operate, Transfer
Eventual operators construct or rehabilitate and
sometimes design water system, then manage
operations under either management- or lease￾arrangements.
Invest-build-and-operate contract Contractor-operator is also required to provide portion of
investment costs. Schemes are operated as concessions
in which operators assume all costs and retain all
revenue for extended period (e.g.,  years in Paraguay,
 years in Bangladesh).
Figure 11: Common types of Public-Private Partnerships.
Source: Kleemeier and Lockwood 2012, p. 4.
3.6 Public-private partnerships (PPPs) 89(Montel 2018). Since then, thousands of PPP applications have come along, with roads,
bridges, jailhouses, government buildings, among others, having been completed.
Figure 11 shows the three formats that are most frequently applied. The model
used in the Suez Canal (“Build, Operate, Transfer”), which passes ownership to the
public entity involved in the project after a time in which the contractor performs
operation, maintenance and upgrading, has been upgraded, and risks perspectives
have been added. From a risk perspective, the Management Contract model leaves
more responsibilities to the asset holder, which is the public entity. So, for precarious
infrastructure, like kindergartens or asylums, this format would be appropriate. By
contrast more risk lies with the contractor if the contractor also provides finance.
A public good that is precarious as well is access to fresh water. Here, private sec￾tor participation is very often seen very critical.
Water
The criticism with private sector participation in providing water to households starts
with the question whether access to water is an undisputable human right. What
seems more important is the question whether the scarcity of water supply in devel￾oping countries can be effectively reduced through private sector participation. There
is certainly no single, universal answer to worldwide water provision. In any case, the
decision which system of water provision to adopt can only be made by each country
independently. Technically, the Management Contract/Concession model is the most
common scheme.
In the concession model, public authorities, and not individual users, pay for serv￾ices provided by a private contractor. The contract services extend from performing
maintenance in the distributive system to fully investing in the system. This should
guarantee that households continuously get water through a private contractor using
public infrastructure. The only argument against this would be economic inefficiency.
But apart from inefficiencies in the public sector there are other disadvantages which
may include – in both developed and developing countries – systematic underfunding
and corruption. The full spectrum of approaches to water management can be catego￾rized as exhibited in Table 7.
When looking at water issues in developing countries, another issue comes up: In
rural areas, e.g., in Africa, infrastructure such as wells and pipes is missing, despite
broad support having been provided for this from international CSOs. In the towns,
unplanned urban zones are rapidly expanding, and quick solutions are sought to cope
with peak load specifications. The solutions may quickly become outdated, and mu￾nicipalities often cannot afford to bridge those technical difficulties (Bakker 2003).
Worse even is political patronage that bars non-governmental actors from public
goods provision. Political patronage in essence, is the transfer of wealth to constituents
through the abuse of government-owned assets in exchange for political support, an
everlasting problem not just in the developing world. As observed by Shleifer (1998),
90 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsthis explains why government provision is much more widespread than what is socially
desirable from the efficiency perspective. In healthcare, the same reason, together with
ideological bias, has prevented private-sector-involvement for many years.
Health
Private intervention in public health has met with skepticism and criticism up to out￾right opposition. Part of this is accurate, because what often lacks is a clear-cut and
transparent governance structure that defines the responsibilities and the division of
work between the public and the private sector. Without this, the public sector may
end up in absorbing the lion’s share of the risks and costs, while the private sector
reaps a disproportionate share of the profit (Ollila 2005). Above all, the main reason
of private sector involvement is the notorious dysfunctionality in public healthcare
Table 7: Perspectives to the organization and management of the water sector.
Public Private Private–Public
Partnership
Cooperative.
Conceptual
background
A human right and
a social good
An economic
good or a
commodity
An economic
good and a
renewable
natural resource
A socio–ecological good, an
economic good and a
renewable natural resource
Advantages Protection against
customers’
exploitation
Access to
unserved
areas
Increased
competition
during tendering
stage
Voluntary and open
membership
Education, training and
information
Inflow of private
capital
Private sector
knowledge,
technology and
capacity
Equitable Concern for the community
distribution of
services
High level of
competition
Disadvantages Lack of political will
to charge cost￾recovering tariffs
More
expensive than
network water
Private monopoly
can erode public
power
Lack of awareness of their
business potential among
governments and the general
Inequitable supply public
Lack of access to loan finance
to help them expand their
business
Inefficient
operation
Environmental
concerns
Lack of
transparency
with regulator
Lack of technical
Exposed to cross￾subsidization to
other government
services
knowledge and access to new
technology
Little voice for
consumers.
Price fixing
could occur
Source: Saner, Yiu and Khusainova 2015.
3.6 Public-private partnerships (PPPs) 91systems of which there is abundant proof, and which has been discussed for over 100
years.64 Inefficiencies are found in developing countries (see, e.g., Duru and Nwagbos
2007; Nwagbara and Rasiah 2015) and in developed countries like, e.g., the United
Kingdom (Mudyarabikwa and Regmi 2016). They can be attributed to the shortage of
professional (competent medical staff), financial and institutional resources, and they
are often caused by underbudgeting. So, what the private sector should contribute,
above all, is efficiency and finance.
Apart from conjoining in healthcare provision through PPPs, private and public
healthcare are operating independently from each other in many countries. Histori￾cally, the private sector was meant to provide services mostly to the wealthy, while the
government served the poor. However, evidence has suggested that is not meeting with
reality: The private sector often is the primary source of treatment for the poor while
the government system often provides far more services to the rich in urban environ￾ments than to the poor (Mitchell 2008). The following table (Table 8) which is taken
from a case study by the British medical journal The Lancet illustrates this evidence:
Not all manifestations in these countries are public-private partnerships: In India and
Nigeria there is a dominant private sector of individual practitioners who receive out￾of-pocket spending and also expenditure by insurers; in Sri Lanka and Thailand the
private sector is active in both primary and secondary care in private clinics; in Ar￾gentina and South Africa private doctors and hospitals are at the top of a stratified
Table 8: Relation between private and total health expenditure in
Global South countries.
Health expenditure
 Private
% of total
 Private
% of total
India  
Nigeria  
Sri Lanka  
Thailand  
Argentina  
South Africa  
China  
Malawi  
Tanzania  
Nepal  
Source: Mackintosh et al. 2016.
 Within the American Public Health Association, violent confrontations on the pros and cons of pri￾vate involvement started as early as 1919 (https://ajph.aphapublications.org/doi/pdf/10.2105/AJPH.9.12.951)
92 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonssystem with the public sector on the low level but which also relies on charges; in
China the public sector is highly commercialized with a relatively high but now falling
share of private expenditure; in Tanzania, Malawi and Nepal there is a stratified pri￾vate sector with hospitals and clinics for the better off and substantial use of private
shops particularly by the poor. The variations between 2000 and 2012 are due to a
mix of factors, from populist policies and high inflation in Argentina to a rise of public
spending for a universalist public sector elsewhere that channels private sector in￾vestment into complementary roles (Mackintosh et al. 2016).
When it comes to setting up healthcare partnerships, the most common form is
between a government and a for-profit company. There are several varieties:
The upper right and the lower left boxes in Figure 12 exhibit the two predominant
types: The public sector provides finances while the private sector performs services,
and the opposite, with the private sector financing while the public sector performs
services. In the first type, contracting is used for a wide spectrum of services ranging
from auxiliary services such as food, logistics and maintenance, to the private hospi￾tals delivering care to patients directly. The latter is the format which comes into
mind when viewing the hospital landscape in the U.S., but there is also the other type
where the private sector just finances hospital buildings, and healthcare is provided
by a municipality (Bindman 2019).
There is more which the private sector can provide to public health outside the
healthcare industry. Businesses can improve the working conditions for employees by
paying a fair and livable wage, by providing minimum social protection, preventing
the poverty trap and malnutrition of the family members (elder and children), by en￾suring a safe and healthy physical environment of the workplace (preventing occupa￾tional hazard and health risks), providing health education to the employees and
their families including advice on nutrition, healthy diet and primary healthcare prac￾tices. They can engage in organizing regular sport programs for the employees and
Provision of Services
Financing of Services
Public Private
Public Public health facilities
Surveillance programs
Health education
Contracts
Social Insurance programs
Social Marketing
Fee for service
Private Autonomous hospitals
Drug donations
Vaccine development
Regulation
Participation in national
Control programs (e.g., HIV)
Figure 12: Formats of partnerships in health service.
Source: Mitchell 2008, p. 14.
3.6 Public-private partnerships (PPPs) 93their families, in providing sport campuses and other activities to the youth in the
community, extending the company medical services to the families in the commu￾nity, and in education campaigns for the community regarding infectious disease, per￾sonal hygiene and environmental conservation (see, e.g., Winterhalter et al. 2017).
Whether through formalized collective structures or by private initiatives from
businesses outside the healthcare industry, serving the public good of health needs
intense collaboration, the co-creation of both ends and means (e.g., combining new
practices with new infrastructure) and collective intelligence. Intelligence also com￾prises the utilization of what the digital economy offers, which includes state-of-the￾art handling of health data. This requires that digital services’ terms and conditions
comply with certain ethical standards. But as public health is a common good, privacy
concerns, while justified in the personal environment of a patient, should not stand in
the way of research, drug trials and cohort studies. Observation research needs pa￾tient data from the health system for achieving insights, e.g., on incidents of cancer,
survival from cancer, or on the interaction of treatment regimens with outcomes in
this and many other diseases. These data are a highly important public good; it takes
wonder that in Europe, which lives off a solidarity-based healthcare system, it has
taken very long to balance the value of individual control that subjects are granted
for ‘their data’ with the mutual dependency on health data needed by the ever￾learning system of healthcare (van Veen 2018). Data protectionists should use the posi￾tive experience which the Netherlands had with the use of a contract tracing app for
containing the spread of the coronavirus. The discussion on this by the Dutch has led
to a better identification of which public goods are at stake and how technology, ethi￾cally founded, can be of use in contested matters (Siffels 2021).
Education
In the ongoing debate about privatization of schools there is one argument which is
always being brought forward: Social equity can only be brought about by a compre￾hensive public school system. On the other hand, it is widely acknowledged that the
sheer size of education systems, when provided by one single entity, burdens them
heavily with bureaucracies, multiple streams of policies, shortages of finance and of
teachers and ever-increasing enrolment. Hence, the argument for privatization would
be that it secures greater operational efficiency and productivity. But then it is also
argued that a private enterprise entrusted with schooling can as well become over￾burdened with financial constraints, high turnover of teachers, low or excessive en￾rolment, etc., and will abandon the project. One way out would be a close oversee of
the private schools by public authorities and integration of private education in exist￾ing regulation policies (which is practiced, e.g., in France and in Canada; see, e.g., Pons
et al. 2015). Still, a risk of the private enterprise defecting from the obligations would
always remain. However, as experience with the many private schools in the U.S. and
in the UK shows, not one of them was ever abandoned (Reeves et al. 2017). But the
94 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsU.S. and UK systems, with fully private schools at all education levels, cannot be a
model for the rest of the world because they are outcomes of a long societal process
which took centuries. In continental Europe, government authorities have a say in
teaching programs for all schools at the primary and secondary levels, whether public
or private (see, e.g., Arimoto 2014), and in developing countries the structures of society
request formats which can guarantee that the ideals of social equity and education
quality are not compromised. A good option for this is public-private partnerships.
Public-private partnerships in education, similar to what was discussed for health￾care above, may either be funded by the private sector and run by the public sector or
vice versa. In praxis, there is a mix of private philanthropy, private sector management
initiatives, subsidies for funding school programs, vouchers to fund students, capacity
building initiatives and school infrastructure partnerships (Patrinos et al. 2009). Local
initiatives, when they are sustained by coalitions between civil society (parents groups,
community organizations) and school boards would be the ideal arrangement for draw￾ing in resources from the private sector. This is valid for all categories listed below
(LaRocque 2008):
– School boards or other educational authorities contract directly with private pro￾viders to operate public schools, while the schools remain publicly owned and
funded; examples are Concession Schools in Latin America, government schools
in the Punjab managed by the Cooperation for Advancement, Rehabilitation and
Education NGO,65 and similar ventures in Pakistan.
– Governments contract with private schools to deliver education at public ex￾pense; examples are to be found in several African states; another one is the Edu￾cational Service Contracting scheme in the Philippines.
– Governments fund students (with “vouchers” to attend private schools. This is
also popular in the U.S.
– Private sector partners provide cash and in-kind resources to complement gov￾ernment funding of public schools or directly design, finance, construct and oper￾ate public school infrastructure under long-term contracts with the government.
Examples are buildings projects in Pakistan, Malaysia, Egypt, and, also, in West￾ern Europe and in Canada.
– Private sector partners provide teacher training and curriculum enhancement
programs; an example is the Cluster Based Training of Teachers and Quality As￾surance Resource Centers in India (Sarangapani and Pappu 2021).
These examples were presented because they show that the many voices that deny
the validity of private intervention in schooling are simply overruled by what hap￾pens in the world, especially in the developing world. The advances in access to qual￾ity education achieved on a global scale since the late 1900s are mainly due to those
 See: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/247765392
3.6 Public-private partnerships (PPPs) 95PPPs. Overall, the progress reports of the Millennium Development Goal No. 2 (“En￾sure that, by 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to complete
a full course of primary schooling”) show an increase of the net enrolment ratio in
primary education from 83% to over 89% worldwide between 2000 and 2016. The rise
in the proportion of pupils starting grade 1 who reach grade 5 was similar, with Mid￾dle East and Africa having made the most significant strides (https://data.un.org).
One last aspect has to be mentioned: When actors from the public and the private
sector partner with each other – even with the best intention to cooperate collabora￾tively – each of them will retain a look on its own interests. Rather than accepting
that this may cause an ongoing tension, managing this “unity-diversity tension” (Car￾ranza and Opsina 2011) is one of the foremost missions in the common effort. This
and other management perspectives will be discussed in Chapter 4.
3.6.2 Beyond the local level
Global partnerships for development (which mainly stands for development of public
goods) have been built by multiple stakeholders, from international consumer associ￾ations, campaigns for responding to HIV, to youth organizations and environmental
groups. They engage in advocacy and support for the underserved; CSOs are grow￾ingly networking with nontraditional partners in other segments like trade unions,
faith groups, profession associations, and think tanks. Cooperation of CSOs with the
public sector and with the corporate sector is often limited to special occasions, e.g.,
where consumer rights need to be enforced or disadvantaged groups of society need
support in a particular case. CSOs have very rarely entered into formal, long-run part￾nering with government entities or with businesses. An exception is global partner￾ships for health, which is mostly because contemporary issues in health are “wicked
problems” (i.e., difficult or impossible to solve because of incomplete, contradictory,
and changing requirements that are often difficult to recognize; the term was coined
by Mason and Mitroff 1981).
Global health issues are complex and complicated – neither governments nor the
private sector can resolve them on their own: As per a categorization of the World
Health Organization (2000), they comprise elevating health in the climate debate, deliv￾ering health in conflict and crisis, making healthcare fairer, expanding access to medi￾cines, stopping infectious diseases, preparing for epidemics, preparing people from
dangerous and unsafe products, investing in the health workforce, keeping adolescents
safe, and earning public trust. All of them are public goods per se, and they relate to
public goods. There are over 90 global health-PPPs, all of them transnational arrange￾ments, with the purpose of drug development, improving access to healthcare products,
mechanisms for global health coordination, strengthening health services, public policy,
health education and regulation and quality assurance. Some examples include Global
Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization, Safe Injections Global Network, Global Polio
96 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsEradication Program, International Aids Vaccine Initiative, Concept Foundation (which
works on improving access to sexual and reproductive health medicines), Global Alli￾ance to Eliminate Leprosy, Global Alliance for Improved Nutrition, and Alliance for
Health Policy and Systems Research (Babacan 2021). The enumeration shows that pa￾tients’ interest must be represented as well; so, in the partnerships we also find civil
society organizations and philanthropic agencies. UN agencies may also be partners,
but they must follow the guideline which the UN has set for partnering with the busi￾ness sector. The guideline stipulates that “The United Nations should not partner with
business sector entities that systematically fail to demonstrate commitment to meeting
the principles of the United Nations Global Compact or the United Nations Guiding Prin￾ciples on Business and Human Rights” (United Nations 2015). The positive effect is that
this would motivate businesses to stay away from human rights violation.
There has been a lot of achievements from global PPPs. Still, critics fear a rising
influence of businesses and venture philanthropies on health matters and the weak￾ening of the authority of nation-states (Romero 2019). However, the merits of the PPPs
offset the risks. Risks are inherent in any PPP, but most of the global ventures are sub￾jected to the strict regulations, close surveillance, and the many reporting require￾ments by which PPPs in the health sector must abide.
Other than in the health sector, the number of transnational ventures is small in
areas like education or poverty reduction. There is the Global Partnership for Education
(https://www.globalpartnership.org), a multi-stakeholder platform of international organ￾izations, civil society, teacher associations and the private sector. It aims to strengthen
education systems in developing countries. The Global Partnership for Effective Develop￾ment Cooperation (https://effectivecooperation.org) brings together governments, bilat￾eral and multilateral organizations, civil society, the private sector and representatives
from parliaments and trade unions, among others. Its objective is to maximize the effec￾tiveness of all forms of co-operation for development. Both organizations are, above all,
pursuing definite projects in various formats unlike the PPPs in health of which the most
are dedicated to a specific purpose. There is another organization which also bears the
name ‘Global Partnerships’ (GP). While the name may be misleading because this is a
standalone impact-first investment fund manager, it merits to be mentioned in the con￾text. Impact-first investing means investing in a way that seeks the highest possible social
impact, and in the case of this institution it is about expanding opportunities for people
living in poverty. As per the end of 2022, GP and its affiliated funds have deployed
678.5 million US$ to 189 social enterprise partners, with an impact that reaches an esti￾mated 30.7 million lives in 32 countries (https://globalpartnerships.org). Impact investing
is one form of financing public goods; PPPs need other forms, too, as will be exposed in
the next section.
3.6 Public-private partnerships (PPPs) 973.6.3 Co-funding and co-production
It is mainly on the global level where financing partnerships for public goods becomes
a complex issue. Four mechanisms of funding are most suggested (Anderson and Rey￾nolds 2016): Public resources, private resources, international organizations, and fi￾nancial alliances. Private sources are businesses, not-for-profit organizations, and
wealthy philanthropists. In many cases, the private sector initiates further funding
from international organizations. For instance, the Rockefeller and the Ford Founda￾tions’ development of green technology (Stansfield 2002) and the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation’s funding of new drugs, vaccines, and diagnostics development (Jamison
2006) have sparked activities from various UN departments. But there is much more:
If we consider the SDGs to represent mostly public goods, financing SDG implementa￾tion is synonymous to financing public goods. This is money that mainly comes from
states and their citizens’ taxes. Budgetary prudence demands, in any state, will de￾mand that decisions are made to only finance a goal which produces the greatest im￾pact (i.e., the greatest effect on this goal and on all other goals) with the least resources.
The intertwinement between health, energy, peace, and justice may not be clearly no￾ticeable, but when living standards (which include health) are acceptable, when energy
provision is sufficient and when people feel that the legal system works well, there will
be no reason for political unrest or for going to war – except where the citizens do not
have a say in such decisions. Health, access to water and sanitation are clearly inter￾linked, and so are education and job opportunities. All this has a cross-border dimen￾sion, and financing will require international mechanisms.
International finance is a vast territory of which only the minimum can be re￾viewed in this book and only as it regards public goods. In this, there are a few main
players. These are global finance institutions like the World Bank Group, the Interna￾tional Monetary Fund, several multilateral development banks like the Inter-American
Development Bank (IDB), the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(EBRD), the African Development Bank (AfDB) and the new Asian Infrastructure Invest￾ment Bank venture (AIIB) that was initiated by the Chinese government. Decision mak￾ers are the United Nations in its many branches and an array of regional organizations
such as the European Union (EU), the Andean Community (AC), the Central American
Common Market (CACM), as well as several African communities of which the largest
ones are the African Union and the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA).
Financing global partnership arrangements will often comprise temporary pro￾grams and includes coalitions between governments, international institutions, busi￾nesses, and private foundations. For attaining maximum results, these arrangements
must be structured in a way which warrants that all partners absorb a fair share of
the costs and the risks. The SDGs, which might be viewed as the supreme global public
good of our time (Dill 2018), can only be financed if financial support comes from all
sectors and is not limited to official donors like the World Bank. Providing finance
from the World Bank only would end up in a reverse construction: Instead of caring
98 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsfor global concerns, states and private business would first consider their existing
agenda and capacities, and only if an SDG is crucial for them would they adapt their
priorities (Dill 2018, p. 2).
The range of partnerships to be financed is wide: At the beginning of 2023, about
21,000 multi-stakeholder partnerships were registered at the online platform of the
UN Partnerships for SDGs (https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/partnerships); 4,622
referred to ocean conservation and climate change (Goals 14 and 13), while only 814
referred to Goal 9 which is “Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sus￾tainable industrialization and foster innovation” (https://sdgs.un.org/partnerships).
There seem to be some “bestsellers”, which, however, might mean that institutions
wishing to be involved in SDG partnerships are pondering which action they can best
sell to their constituencies. This is of great disadvantage, because the institutions
should rather look for what is most needed and consider the interlinkages between
the SDG goals. Following the example from above, Goal 9 heavily influences Goal 13
and Goal 14. The UN partnership register does not reveal sources of finance. But it
must be assumed that funding has been reduced because of the COVID-19 pandemic
and the Ukraine war which have led to a sharp increase in government expenditure
and to constraints in the fiscal capacity of both developed and developing countries.
There was an increase in the global extreme poverty rate from 8.4% in 2019 to 9.3% in
2020 and a rise in the number of people affected by hunger by 150 million between
2018 and 2021 to 828 million in 2021. This has led budgeting priorities away from fi￾nancing those partnerships. The challenge was to mobilize resources both from do￾mestic and international sources to sustain the livelihoods, health, and basic welfare
of people; finance for other SDGs missed out (Arora and Sarker 2023). The shortfall in
financing the SDGs prior to COVID-19 was expected to be 2.5 trillion US$ for develop￾ing countries, but post COVID-19 it will reach 3.7 trillion US$ (OECD 2021). There are,
though, other sources apart from donor money that can be mobilized.
Solutions for financing the SDGs goals in the Global South can be found on the
ground, i.e., within the states that need sustainable development. There are technolog￾ical solutions for several SDGs that can be developed even in dire times, and these
can directly produce benefits to the communities affected the most by, e.g., health de￾ficiencies and climate change. Also, many developing countries are still lost in tax
avoidance, corruption, theft from public authorities, mismanagement, and ineffi￾ciency. The magnitude is high: Data regarding SDG16 indicate that corruption, bribery,
theft and tax evasion cost some 1.26 trillion US$ for developing countries per year
(UNDP 2020). Technology can help here, too. It can provide digital solutions that
toughen revenue accounting which will increase tax income. The states will thus be
able to devote taxes to those SDGs that best fit their national interests. And there is
another way for developing countries (and many other countries) to leverage taxes:
Multinational online technology companies (together with some more from other in￾dustries), while generating revenue in those countries declare minimal taxable profits
in those jurisdictions because their companies are structured in a way that enables
3.6 Public-private partnerships (PPPs) 99this type of tax evasion (Truby 2019). Closing loopholes of that kind will also help to
improve local finance, especially in the developing world. This should be a strong ar￾gument on whether taxation based on the destination principle is legitimate and en￾forceable. It certainly is, and a coalition among the good-willing should consider that
the present system does not give the developing countries very much scope for negoti￾ating within tax competition. The situation would change if taxation were to be based
on sales’ destination (Schippers and 2018). Another means to increase state income is
digitization of payments: When connecting customers digitally, money is saved, and
GDP is raised. This can provide employment and business opportunities that go to￾wards the achievement of SDG 8 (Digitization), and it can also help to find inclusion of
women entrepreneurs, a key to achievement of SDG 5 (Demirguc-Kunt 2017).
Technological solutions for improving revenue collection and reducing corrup￾tion will certainly alleviate the financial situation in developing countries. But they
must be complemented by international finance. International finance should also
consider which of the SDGs is ranked highest in those countries and which public￾private- partnerships need the most support on the ground. For example, in Ghana
and Benin “Infrastructure and Industrial Innovation” (Goal 9) is at rank one, while in
Nepal, “Peace” (Goal 16) and “Responsible Consumption” (12) take the lead. Interest￾ingly – or sadly – goals such as “Climate Action” (13), “Health” (3), “Education” (4) and
“Gender Equality” (5), the favorites of many international organizations, are not at
the top ranking for countries in the developing world (Dill 2018, p. 5). This imbalance
needs to be rectified from both ends. It is hoped that developmental interventions mo￾bilized from the private sector for PPPs66 have followed the priorities called for by the
beneficiaries, and so should the Official Development Assistance (ODA)67 from donor
countries to developing countries (Arora and Sarker 2023, p. 8). Balancing the needs
of the recipients with those of the donors has always been a difficult and controver￾sial task. E.g., Stiglitz 2006, has critically asked: Does global governance ensure that
the global public interest is served? This question goes for all policymaking on public
goods as will be shown in the next chapter.
 Private sources contributed 38% of the total annual average 50 billion US$ of finance for interna￾tional PPPs during 2018–2020 as per the latest data released by OECD in June 2022.
 Total ODA was 162 billion US$ in 2020 and 186 billion US$ in 2021. In average, 24% each went to the
Least Developed Countries and the Middle-Income Countries (Arora and Sarker 2023).
100 Chapter 3 Sources for providing public goods and commonsChapter 4
Policymaking and managing
Policymaking and managing of public goods, whether by governments or within the
many formats of cooperation that have developed over time between public and pri￾vate actors, needs to be coordinated. This will ensure that the best mutual benefits
can be obtained. On the global level, the United Nations have set new goals for a coor￾dination of efforts with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development; not only are all
SDGs systemically intertwined per se, but it is preordained that the respective endeav￾ors and decisions happen on all levels of society. So, holistic participation must be
warranted for the whole set of activities. This starts with sharing all data on the
agenda within all constituencies – citizens (represented by their parliaments as well
as by CSOs), the state, international organizations, and businesses – and ends up with
collaborative decision making, implementing, and monitoring of all the activities. The
coordination will often start with the question if the status of a good (whether private
or public) should be socially determined. Renowned public goods researcher Inge
Kaul has called this “the triangle of publicness” – that is, complementing the concept
of publicness in consumption with the concepts of publicness in decision-making and
in distribution of benefits (Kaul 2001). Those who receive benefits from public goods
would also be required to protect and to maintain them – whether individuals or
businesses or other groups of society.
It is the consideration of benefits (mainly of benefits allotted to the business sector)
which causes fierce opposition in many political circles against participation of the cor￾porate sector. The arguments spin around the question of who owns public goods. The
standard answer to this question often is that the tax-paying citizens do, and that they
elect public officials for management of public goods and stewardship. This answer neg￾ates that not all public goods are paid for by taxes because there are private institutions
that partner with the state in providing and maintaining many public goods that society
enjoys. Theoretically, the construction must be such that best results are secured for the
partners: The partners jointly secure financing and management expertise, with which
the state gains efficiency and the private partner gains income or at least, status. How￾ever, this cooperative model is flatly contested by opponents who say that “when you
orient society toward economic goals, then human development is seen as a private
good that will add value for the private partners to better compete in their market, and,
consequently, these goods become subject to market forces and managerial gover￾nance” (Lipman 2013, p. 559). It may be rightly claimed that there are many societal
issues where the economic perspective places private interests above the interest of the
community. But a downright hostility towards the corporate sector’s involvement in
public goods provision not only lacks theoretical validity but also obstructs societal
progress and prevents prudent policymaking. This will be shown through the discus￾sion on the “commonstock”, the dis-appropriation and the market-failure argumenta￾https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111134611-005tions. The chapter then continues with policies that lead out of ideological resentments
(4.3), and with frameworks that unite private and public actors for collective efforts
(4.4), followed by a brief view on the database on public goods (4.5), and with monitor￾ing procedures (4.6). The chapter ends with a section on policies to fight free riding
(4.7).
4.1 The commonstock and the dis-appropriation argumentations
The idea that public goods need to be commonly owned, and that involvement of the
business sector must be seen as dis-appropriation of this “commonstock” is a political
one, not even a social one, nor has it economic elements. There is ideological bias –
anti-capitalistic or neo-Marxist, but apologetics of the market-economy must accept
that there are concerns which must be dealt with through arguments. An early warn￾ing came from the Austro-Hungarian economic anthropologist and politician Robert
Polanyi, best known for his book The Great Transformation (1944) that he wrote at an
age of 30 years while the second world war was still raging and in which he questions
the conceptual validity of self-regulating markets. He feared that democracy and its
institutions are not capable of preventing “the market mechanism to be sole director
of the fate of human beings and their natural environment (Polanyi 2001 [1944], p. 3).
Seven decades after that statement, critics of the market economy still believe that it
is valid: They deplore the erasure of the social state and say that “the social contract
has become a distant memory and the ‘corporate state’ distances itself from minori￾ties and workers who become disposable in a new age of uncertainty and manufac￾tured fear“ (Giroux 2015, p. ix).
However, Polanyi’s statement never described a real situation, and the erasure of
the social state has not taken place anywhere in the West. Still, there may be busi￾nesses who misuse the market system, and there may be politicians who do not inter￾vene. But they do not represent the total of the corporate or the public sector, just like
the Stalin massacres cannot be seen as a direct outcome of socialism. The worldwide
efforts that are pursued nowadays to accomplish inclusive and equitable sustainable
development along the 2030 UN agenda show convincing evidence to the contrary.
This, and the power which trade unions have in many Western states also counter the
criticism that the capitalist system excludes workers through the enclosure pursued
by the capital owners – i.e., prohibiting full access to the rights and opportunities that
democracy should offer to all (e.g., Lindblom 1977; Anton 2000). But the critics of the
market system still uphold that businesses have a tendency to commodify assets
which are owned by all society (commonstock) and convert them into market inputs:
“Many parts of nature that have been considered the common heritage of mankind
are transformed into feedstock for global markets. Wildlife and local ecosystems are
threatened by the property-rights movement; global water supplies are being com￾modified for transport across vast distances” (Bollier 2001, p. iv). The critique extends
102 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingto non-tangibles: “One of the most persistent illusions of neoliberalism that fly in the
face of the sociological concept of ‘cultural capital’ is that individuals with the same
talents and abilities would be equally productive independent of the social resources
available to them and, thus, owe little to the society that provides the context for their
achievements” (Anton 2000, pp. 23–24). There is sufficient proof to offset this state￾ment: Talented individuals can use any societal context to their advantage. Over his￾tory, yes, their chances for success were different. However, this was not because of
their social environment, but because they made use of it differently. Those who took
their chances owe a lot to society, and many of them have given back, whether the
industrialist Cadbury in 19th century Britain, or Carnegie and Bill Gates in the U.S.
(Zhulina 2018).
The notion of commonstock would only be plausible without the concept of
stakeholders. The stakeholders of statal decisions are all groups in society. If they
are not allowed to pronounce their interests and get actively involved in the deci￾sion-making processes, the use and enjoyment of collectively shared resources
would be administered by the state only. This would be government for the gov￾erned. Then it would be the government only which has the authority to limit or
grant access to resources, and this leaves no space for the governed to assume any
responsibility. But in a modern democracy, both governors and the governed share
responsibilities. For this to become practical, public goods need to be managed and
administered in a way that stakeholders can make the providers accountable. The
commonstock-logic postulates that neither a private property regime (which would
constitute rights of access) nor a market regime (which would set prices) should
rule public goods because this could entail the right to exclude others from “social
property” (Anton 2000, p. 4). Resorting to the idea of social property is dangerous. It
provokes a sequence which ends up in producing a final stage where private prop￾erty is collectively expropriated. And the idea is myopic as it does not look at the
many facets of the concept denoted by the term “property”, i.e., the “complex rela￾tions between people that regulate access to things and ideas that a society consid￾ers to be useful, valuable, or desirable” (Ince 2014, p. 208). So, when society decides
how to define and regulate these relationships, it will look for the proper regime to
deal with a shared resource-base. And it has always found it: In 14th-century Britain
the resource was game and firewood, and in the 21st century it is tribal lands that
are allocated by the local leaders in Africa or in Polynesia. No expropriation is con￾ceived in those cases. Social property thinking, though, and the commonstock￾philosophy, would need to overturn a proprietorship regime handed down through
centuries and democratically installed in legal systems.
In the dominion of laws and lawmakers the phenomenon of how to distinguish
between different types of property has existed for centuries, and it has been adapted
4.1 The commonstock and the dis-appropriation argumentations 103to new necessities.68 An important new application is ecological law/natural resources
law which determines property rights in natural resources conflicts. Legal doctrine and
legal solutions for those conflicts (U.S. statutes and U.S. case law) are based on the con￾stitutional concept of Takings Law. This is laid down in a government directive that
“limits the use of private property beyond the government’s legitimate police power
(as, e.g., the power to enact safety regulations) and for which the owner may receive
compensation. Here we have the only legal instrument for llectivizing private prop￾erty”.
69 In the context of collectivization or expropriation, ecological law defines three
types of property arrangements: a core human property which may be taken away
upon the terms of the holder only; private property or entitlements that may be taken
only with compensation; and a social or provisional property interest which may be re￾defined to the detriment of the holder without compensation (Rodgers 1982, p. 207).
The commonstock-argumentation would also not help with issues that regard
ownership of land in natural environment that is worthy of ecological protection. Ev￾erywhere, changes of ownership in the context of natural resources exploitation may
come with ambiguous results. In some cases, the practices are downright unlawful.
One case is the ongoing point-blank thefts by state officials of indigenous land in Bra￾zil who claim “public interest” (see, e.g., Burton 2010). There also was the infamous
Myanmar gas project where “public interest” (foreign investors collaborating with the
host country’s state officials) drove hundreds of citizens from their homesteads (see,
e.g., Lawrence and Tolley Jr. 2003). The other way round, we are seeing new cases of
silent expropriation in Southeast Asia which originated in resource nationalism poli￾cies that are used as a pretext for avoiding Foreign Investment Settlement Disputes
(Junita 2015). Closer to home, citizens in the Austrian Alps claim violation of their
rights when the government establishes national parks on what used to be their prop￾erty (Hansen and Clausen 2004). None of these cases is comparable to another, but all
are minor or major attacks on society. Beyond land ownership cases, silent expropria￾tion may apply to car owners whose user rights are sacrificed against the public good
of clean air in the city centers, or to shop owners whose businesses are closed to
avoid contagion of the customers in a pandemic. It is alright that public health, here,
ranks higher than freedom rights. But then, the state must also compensate losses.
Coming back to government practices of forced land ownership change and lead￾ing over to the topic of appropriation and dis-appropriation, there is the proclamation
of the African National Congress (ANC) in South Africa which declared that the coun￾try’s resources, including its minerals, belonged to all the people (Maduna 1989). In
consequence, when the ANC became the ruling party, all lands that white settlers had
taken away from the tribes during Apartheid and before were given back to the local
 For a sociological view on property rights Table 11 in section 4.4.5 which lists Ostrom’s conception
on the topic.
 https://www.merriam–webster.com/legal/regulatory–taking.
104 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingcommunities. But this came with the responsibility of the new owners to cultivate the
land. If they could not abide by this regulation, they were to hire the former white
owner for land administration. It was hoped that this would end a story of duplicate
dis-appropriation and re-appropriation.70 As shown by the South African case, a dili￾gent analysis each situation needs to prove whether dis-appropriation is a suitable
means for expanding a public good. Generalization is not appropriate. Likewise, it
makes no sense at all to generally speak of appropriation when the private sector in￾volves into in public goods provision. To the contrary, there has been a discourse
coming up both among politicians and academia whether appropriation of public
goods by the private/the business sector can be a way to better serve society. This has
to do with the decline of public investment.
Public investment began to decline in the late 20th century and with this, re￾regulation of public services and public spaces rose. It was feared that this would re￾sult in a less equitable distribution of resources with negative socio-economic side ef￾fects for low-income groups (Aernouts and Ryckewaert 2015). But there also were
positive views on this reorientation right from the start. It was seen as a way from
“publicness” towards “the common” through a new interpretation of the market￾versus-state paradigm which sees appropriation of public goods by the civil sector as
common purpose (Mattei 2012). The negative view has been upheld, though: “Appro￾priation of public assets by the private sector spreads market values to areas of life
where they should not go and ends up with businesses enclosing the commons” (Bol￾lier 2001, p. iii). This line of reasoning negates that there has always been cooperation
between sectors (the “community”) and that this has often generated substantial so￾cial and economic progress. Excluding the corporate sector from “community” is re￾markably narrow-minded. Businesses are a part of society, even though one will
always find examples of businesses that disregard their obligations as what has been
called ‘corporate citizens’. There is no conflict between the sectors if each party re￾spects the rules. A simple illustration is from Hoppe (2011, p. 4):
How is it possible that formerly unowned common streets can be privatized without thereby gen￾erating conflict with others? The short answer is that this can be done provided only that the
appropriation of the street does not infringe on the previously established rights – the ease￾ments – of anyone else to use such streets “for free.” Everyone must remain free to walk the
street from house to house, through the woods, and onto the lake, just as before. Everyone re￾tains a right-of-way, and hence no one can claim to be made worse off by the privatization of the
street. Positively, in order to objectify – and validate – the claim that the formerly common street
is now a private one privately owned, the appropriator (whoever it may be) must perform some
visible maintenance and repair work on and along the street. Then, as its owner, the appropria-
 In the end, however, the results appear mixed because ownership after restitution often changed
rapidly with many parcels of arable land ending up in the hands of the newly rich from the urban
elite with strong ties to the government which withheld them from cultivating the land (Khunou
2016).
4.1 The commonstock and the dis-appropriation argumentations 105tor – no one else – can further develop and improve the streets as he sees fit. This would be an
investment that benefits all users.
It may be argued that this is a simple example of limited local dimension and that it
cannot be compared to issues of a higher scale like the cases of airwaves and of higher
education that were quoted above. However, speaking of an enclosure by the private
sector when the state invites specialists form the industry to improve the service (of
airwaves or of education), comes close to utter nonsense. For airwaves to be effectively
used, commercial firms (and not the government) need to invest in the development of
new technologies, and if privately-owned universities compete with state-universities,
the outcome of both research and education will reach high levels. This is not to neglect
that private schools have more financial resources and that only well-to-do families can
afford their high tuitions without support from the state. But in a free society, competi￾tion between different systems must be permitted. If the state cannot assure equal con￾ditions, both the private and the public systems will not work. This can be exemplified
by contrasting two regions where policymaking produced different outcomes: From the
1980s, Brazil quasi-stagnated while East-Asia continued to grow. In East-Asia, private
ventures were carefully monitored by the governments, while in Brazil too much lais￾sez-faire was allowed for the private sector (Bresser–Pereira 2021). Brazil’s laissez-faire
regime limited fair competition between the public and the private sector and thus lim￾ited the capacities of the state to provide public goods. There was no room left to the
state sector. The argument against laissez-faire, however, is often used in favor of the
state-sector and against excessive freedom of the private sector.
4.2 The market failure argument
Laissez-faire has been equated, in the theory of economics, with a competitive model
where market exchange is based on the fundamental principles of exclusion, of re￾vealed preferences, free flow of information, and self-regulating mechanisms (Allan
1971). In practice, though, laissez faire is understood to be characterized through situa￾tions where companies fix prices and limit competition, where consumers have no ac￾cess to sufficient information for selecting adequate products and services, and where
some industries are structured in a way that blocks new firms from entering business
(Lehne 2006). It is true that situations like this exist or have existed, at least in some
markets. But nowhere has a government not succeeded in eradicating this type of
abuse through strict and specific intervention policies. What most governments – in the
West as well as in the democracies of Asia – have mostly refrained from, is unrestricted
interventionism. Still, many governments have overstressed their capacities through ex￾cessive state-provision of goods and services. But they were forced to cut back by out￾side influence like the oil crisis of the 1970s and what followed: The Western economies
plunged into recession, with mounting budget deficits that forced them to reduce public
106 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managinggoods provision, from welfare to research support to infrastructure (Kethineni 1991).
The pendulum moved to the other side, and the states adopted monetarism which led
to privatization, new public management, and highly liberalized financial markets. If
there were interventions, they were through market-based regulatory instruments
driven by information flows rather than hierarchical or collective decision making
within national or international institutions (Busch et al. 2005). This led to the import of
potential economic and financial malaise, and when the 2007/8 financial crisis broke
out in 2007/8, the United States, West European nations needed to expense bailouts as
well. As of November 2008, a total of 4.1 trillion US$ in rescue aid was assigned to the
US and European financial institutions (Anderson et al. 2008). Given the enormity of the
crisis, it was agreed by most bankers, regulators, politicians, and lawmakers that only
government intervention could turn the global economy around. But what is right for
an enormous global crisis cannot be applied to cases where specific public goods or
services are successfully provided by non-state actors. Are there any reasons to replace
the commitment of these actors?
There is one public good on which it can be exemplified that, even on a high level
of procuration, provision by the state or the private sector may lead to the same ef￾fect. This is security. In the U.S., most prisons are run by private contractors (see, e.g.,
Pozen 2003), while airport security is handled by public officials. In many European
states it is the other way round. There are arguments on both sides to keep it like this.
One is that only if a public good’s provision costs exceed the benefits for those who
are concerned, they would have to provide the good collectively. So, in the case of
airport security, the U.S. view is that the benefits go to all – in Europe, the view is on
the travelers, and the airline fees contain a charge for security.
From a more general standpoint, history shows that exclusive domination of ei￾ther the free market or a state economy has disastrous consequences. In both cases,
the main cause is failure to establish institutional safeguards and control mecha￾nisms. This relates to an economic system as a whole and, also, to distinct partitions
of a market. So, when tax dollars cannot ensure a satisfactory level of welfare, e.g.,
when tax-financed public healthcare needs to be enhanced, the private sector will
take over. And in a system of checks and balances it is the duty of the state to regulate
private sector involvement (in healthcare this happens almost anywhere). The ‘pri￾vate contribution’ will certainly accrue a benefit to the contributor, but there also are
positive consumption externalities through spillovers that lead to improvements, e.g.,
in the overall health sector (García-Prado and Gonzalez 2007). With regard to market
failure, if we take the example of healthcare in Germany, where regulation is strong,
and where the German Cartel Office will curtail takeovers when they threaten to mo￾nopolize the relevant markets, institutional safeguards and control mechanisms were
in place at least from the early 2000s (Hess 2005). And the government has pledged
that it will watch whether further hospital privatizations are the appropriate way for
securing the optimal use of the scarce resources in the health sector.
4.2 The market failure argument 107The market failure discussion often overlooks that government depends on busi￾ness and business depends on government. Business investment creates employment
and improvement of the standards of living – all this creates government revenues.
On the other end, one of the foremost activities of governments is to secure a competi￾tive operating environment, ensure a level playing field and enable profitability. Such
coexistence benefits society, and with the view on benefits, all sectors will accept that
correcting specific market failures is a necessity. But, as referred to above, govern￾ments have more instruments at hand than just taking on a centralized provision of
all public goods and services. Beyond the pure instrumental, scholars increasingly em￾phasize the notion of socioeconomic factors in the context of public versus private
(see, e.g., Aikins 2009). The boundaries of the two spheres are tenuous: Social pro￾cesses shape economic activity and economic activity affects social processes. The
“market is merely one of a number of collective decision-making mechanisms” (Bür￾genmeier 2012, p. ix).
4.3 Policies that lead out of the antagonistic
public-versus-private resentment
In democratic states, it is social collaboration that defines what and how much of pub￾lic goods (how much of contribution to wellbeing) is to be provided by which mecha￾nisms. The policy challenge therefore is to achieve a balanced policy-mix recognizing
the societal roles of all sectors. There are two prerequisites: One is that a public entity,
before it sets out to formulate what it wants to achieve by a certain policy, executes
deep analyses and due diligence, and the other is participation of the relevant part￾ners in society before any process of legislation or regulation begins. This has been
called the “morality of a cooperative society” (Schmidtz 1988, p. 185). Policies on public
goods (or all policymaking), hence, are aggregations of prerogatives and correlate re￾strictions: On the first, is there an exclusive power to command, decide, rule, or
judge? There are public goods for which the answer is affirmative, like national secu￾rity; in many other cases, this power must be shared. On the second, restrictions of
the right to use public goods may have to be correlated with scarcity issues and with
social or economic development. Most policy arrangements have developed incre￾mentally; they often have been stacked upon each other and may contain counter￾productive instrument mixes (Howlett and Rayner 2007). This will, even if the deci￾sions on the policies were made collaboratively, inevitably lead to dilemma situations:
politicians cannot know how public goods users/providers will react to government
policies and policy changes, while the users/providers of public goods cannot be sure
if their choices will lead to corrections of government policies.
108 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managing4.3.1 Solving the decision makers’ dilemmas
Dilemmas are situations in which a conflict of interest will prevent that a specific goal
can be reached. In a societal context this translates into common interests not being
brought to their fruition. Solutions to a dilemma can result in win-win situations,
though. The classical paradigm for this is the “prisoner’s dilemma”, a setting that is
based on specific incentive conditions for a prisoner to get free when guessing the
right answer to questions on his accomplice (see: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Prisoner’s_dilemma):
Two prisoners are in solitary confinement with no means of communicating with each other.
The prosecutors lack sufficient evidence to convict the pair on the principal charge, but they
have enough to convict both on a lesser charge. Simultaneously, the prosecutors offer each pris￾oner a bargain. Each prisoner is given the opportunity either to betray the other by testifying
that the other committed the crime, or to cooperate with the other by remaining silent. The possi￾ble outcomes are: If A and B each betray the other, each of them serves two years in prison; If A
betrays B but B remains silent, A will be set free and B will serve three years in prison (and vice
versa); If A and B both remain silent, both will serve only one year in prison (on the lesser
charge).
Positioning this into a societal issue, the analogy is that one of the two parties (the gov￾ernment or the public goods user) may suspect that the other party exploits the contri￾bution which the cooperative one makes for accomplishing the common goal. This
presumption of each actor on how the other will behave is the pivotal point of the pris￾oner’s dilemma construct. Regrettably, the cooperative party will lose: For instance,
when decisions need to be made about the quantity in which a public good is to be
offered, the decision base for each party might be the cost which either of them is will￾ing to pay or to forfeit. Neither party can know about their counterpart’s willingness. If
the providers of the good accept that the return to the users is higher than the return
on the cost that they expense for providing the good, there will be no defection and the
parties will consent on the quantity to be produced. Once this decision has been made,
compensation talks can start, and since they are based on a consensus.
Here are two examples. They connect to exploiting natural resources. The parties
in question, though, are not government and the private sector but two competitors
in a market where decision-making is non-communicative (like the two prisoners
which are isolated from each other).
One case is palladium which is mined in Russia and China and exported to Japan by both coun￾tries. If they ask the same price, they will have a comparable market share. If one of them under￾cuts its rival, its market share will increase, but mining more palladium and selling it a low price
will diminish its profit. For a time, both attempted to outbid the other which shrank their profits
constantly. They found that they need to change towards some type of cooperation by always
following the decision the other one had taken. In the end, profits rose about 11% for each (Saner
2012, pp. 104 f.).
4.3 Policies that lead out of the antagonistic public-versus-private resentment 109Another case is from the oil industry. Dietrich Fischer, former director of the European University
Center for Peace Studies, describes a situation where two oil companies, A and B, work on the
same underground oil well (Fischer 2006). They cannot extract the oil too rapidly, otherwise the oil
does not flow to the well, and instead gets stuck in the sand. Each company, rather than pumping
oil slowly, can also pump fast but will then lose about a quarter of the volume. The assumption is
they can extract 8 million barrels each when pumping slowly, and when they pump fast, each can
only get 6 million barrels, with the rest being lost in the sand. So, pumping slowly would clearly be
in their joint interest.If one company pumps slowly and the other pumps fast, the output is
14 million barrels altogether. But by pumping fast, one of them wins time, and fast gets a bigger
share, e.g., 10 million barrels. This results in the following payoff matrix (Fig. 13):
The payoffs are known by each of the two (e.g., that A can obtain 8 million barrels if both A and B
pump slowly as per the upper left quadrat of the matrix), but A does not know what B may do as
they do not communicate with the rival. So, what would be the decision-making process in com￾pany A? If B pumps fast, A can as well pump fast and obtain 6 million barrels; it can pump slowly
and will only obtain 4 million barrels. In the latter case, B should better pump fast. However, if B
pumps slowly? Then A can pump slowly also and obtain 8 million barrels, or it can get 10 million
barrels by pumping fast. Anyway, pumping fast is better for A. So, without knowing what B will do,
A will always prefer to pump fast. By the same logic, B will also prefer to pump fast. They will only
obtain 6 million barrels each, although both could have achieved 8 million barrels each if they
would have cooperated (Fischer 2006, pp. 9–10).
The prisoner’s dilemma model can also be extended to cases where there are more
than two participants. This is the typical situation in societal contexts. The following
graph illustrates a case of five participants of which one is a government entity
(Table 9). The case reflects the decision-making process issue that would determine
who operates 5G communication systems in the European Union. The EU Commission,
as the regulatory authority (the “S” in Table 9) opted for a minimum of four network
operators – this would still be an oligopolistic market, but regulation would eliminate
the build-up of a cartel. For the process of granting the licenses, a negotiation scheme
was suggested that would run along the lines of a prisoner’s game. As from Table 9, a
good result would have been achieved (6 out of 10 on a scale where 10 is the maximum)
Company A
Company B
pump slowly pump fast
pump slowly 8
8
10
4
pump fast 4 
10
6
6
Figure 13: Payoff matrix from alternative actions.
Source: Fischer 2006, p. 22.
110 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingif only two of the four parties would have cooperated with the regulatory authority. But
with only two parties winning, the result is predisposed to monopolism. So, in the end,
the states that were involved, instead of applying that scheme, have chosen to work
with public tenders (Arnaiz del Pozo 2017).
The case of the 5G licenses is typical for a setting where the state deliberately lim￾its access to a public good. This comes with the condition that a gain in allocative effi￾ciency is higher than the cost of the exclusion mechanism. A similar logic may apply
to other infrastructure items like highways, railways, airspace, and ports. In infra￾structure, this policy has led to an increase in the participation of the private sector
over the last 100 years, and it spans beyond the local level. On that level, though, limit￾ing access is mostly handled through the club-good format – as with public swimming
pools. It might be asked why the operation of the swimming pool is not conferred to a
private firm. But keeping it in public hands is seen to be justified from the viewpoint
that this can better secure the higher good of public health.
A new facet of the club good format and of state-regulation is financing for sus￾tainable development. When a club of investors shares a common risk and a common
understanding, finance for sustainable development can be regarded as a public good
on its own (Schnebel 2020). The view that finance is a functional, communicative sys￾tem that benefits society was initially introduced by sociologists Talcott Parsons (1990)
and Niklas Luhmann (1998). They hold that finance communicates about systemic
risks and therefore enables a coupling of surrounding issues (risks) with measure￾ment of financial risk. The rationale is non-excludability: As with the swimming pool,
if it were non-exclusive, nobody will invest because there is the risk that it cannot
operate; hence, the public authority must allow the investors to gain a competitive
advantage from making it exclusive. If the operability is at risk, the pool members
would reduce their investment which equals that they de-couple from the shared un￾derstanding of the purpose and the impact of that investment (Schnebel 2020, p. 15).
Table 9: Example of a Five-Person Prisoner’s Dilemma Game.
A Five-Person Prisoner’s Dilemma Game
Choice of S Number of Others Choosing C

D     
C  
S denotes one of the five members of the group.
C and D denote cooperative and defecting choices, respectively. If S would
choose to not interfere in the game and none of the others would choose to
cooperate (as per column 1 of the matrix), the result for S would be “2”, and it
would be “0” for the others. Now, if all were to cooperate (as per the last
column), the result would be 10 for S and 8 for all the others.
Source: Komorita and Parks 2019, p. 9.
4.3 Policies that lead out of the antagonistic public-versus-private resentment 111Shared understanding is fundamental for any view on the Sustainable Development
Goals, and adding the communicative aspect to the decisions on financing develop￾ment will make it easier to amalgamate funding efforts. The magnitude of this goes
into the trillions: An outlook on global infrastructure (Global Infrastructure Hub 2017)
predicts the following:
“Until 2040, the world will invest about 3.0% to 3.6% of GDP, or an approximate average of 3–3.7
trillion US$ a year, for new and existing economic infrastructure: energy (1 trillion US$ a year),
water (230 billion US$ a year), telecommunication (300 billion US$ a year) and transportation
(1.5 trillion US$ a year). Electricity and roads account for more than two-thirds of global needs on
infrastructure while meeting the SDGs for universal access to drinking water, sanitation and elec￾tricity increasing the need for global spending on public infrastructure by a further 3.5 trillion
US$ by 2030. In consequence, the 2021 Financing for Sustainable Development Report of the
United Nations (https://developmentfinance.un.org/fsdr2021) calls for a risk-informed approach
to finance for sustainable development, and for investments in prevention, risk reduction and
resilience: “As many such investments have a public good character, governments must incorpo￾rate risk analysis into their planning processes and . . . align the private sector risk landscape
with SDG risks (Schwank and Spiegel 2021).71
Shared understanding is a prerequisite for public policies’ acceptance on all levels
and it leads to solutions that are convincing – they are realistic, their implementation
is feasible, and the outcomes are beneficial for all parties. Without this, they are not,
especially if they are loaded with ideology.
4.3.2 Convincing and non-convincing solutions
Japan’s resources policy
Ensuring a safe and stable supply of resources is crucial for the upkeep of industrial
production and technological progress. For Japan, which depends on the import of
key resources like energy and minerals, close cooperation between all sectors has
been its foremost policy features for decades. For instance, the Ministry of Interna￾tional Trade and Industry (MITI) was pivotal when the economy had to be restored
after World War II, and for gaining international competitiveness. From the 2000s, in
the advent of global crises, intensification and refinement of the MITI policies lead to
a set of governmental and non-governmental entities in whose center is the Japan Oil,
Gas and Metals National Corporation (JOGMEC), an administrative institution created
in 2004that is not attached to a state ministry, and which has about 600 employees
and 13 foreign representations, among others in Botswana and Peru. Together with
the Japan Bank for International Cooperation and the Nippon Export and Investment
Insurance it handles import coordination, debt guarantees and financing as well as
geological surveys and exploration (https://www.jogmec.go.jp). This delivers a compet-
 More on financing public goods will be presented in section 4.5.4 of this book.
112 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingitive edge to the country which has proven to be robust not only in 2020 to 2023 when
supply chain breakdowns happened elsewhere but also for mastering future crises.
JOGMEC was the first to successfully extract methane hydrate from seabed deposits,
and with its Geological Remote Satellite Sensing Centre in Botswana, JOGMEG is active
in minerals exploration from remote. It is also the first to carry out large-scale deep
sea mining of hydrothermal vent mineral deposits in several sea fields (Malala and
Adachi 2022). German politicians, who lost against Japan in bidding for a ten-year con￾tract for hydrogen produced in Australia, enviously state that “it is not the resources,
it is the resources policy that makes Japan a treasure island” (Detzer 2022).
The Japanese resources policy is a highly productive public good, and there is noth￾ing to be found in the world that were comparable. Even Chinese observers admit that
their country lags far behind because their bureaucracy produces many problems in the
decision procedures through contradictory overlaps caused by the intervention of diverse
state authorities (Jiang et al. 2015). The European Union has its Raw Materials Alliance
(https://erma.eu) that was formed in September 2020. But it does not have the legal basis
to develop a regulatory framework. Still, the crisis brought about through Russia’s war
on Ukraine has motivated the EU leadership to expedite specific policies not only for se￾curing minerals to its members but also for preparing the way towards global minerals
and metals governance (Christmann 2021).
“Green Deals”: U.S. climate policy and the European Union’s green taxonomy
The idea of a Green New Deal for the U.S. aroused heated debates in the electoral cam￾paigns of 2020 but then the discussions ebbed down. What the U.S. Administration has
basically installed is a set of legal devices that produce a substantial “green” achieve￾ment: Together with the Build Back Better Act, the Inflation Reduction Act and heavy
support for carbon-neutral investments will contribute to drastically reducing green￾house gas emissions by 2050. This will promote technological change in manufacturing
and in the provision of energy. The green bargain between the government and the re￾spective industries, with reciprocity at its core (i.e., as commentators point out, “linking
carrots to sticks”), represents a crucial innovation in climate policy: It links subsidies and
similar financial supports with tailored requirements, which should incentivize innova￾tion and discipline the industry to perform, while blocking firms from access to funds if
they underperform (Meckling and Strecker 2022). On the political end, i.e., with a view to
reaction from voters, this way of policymaking avoided the argumentations in favor or
not of a carbon tax. It made the notion of subsidies sound much more positive, because,
other than making things more expensive by levying a tax, the government makes things
cheaper for the consumer/the industry. And the jobs created from battery and solar
panel manufacturing, or installation, are visible to all. The opinion page of the New York
Times read: “Biden’s energy policy went virtually unnoticed. Great!” (Krugman 2022). One
other part of this policy was to save communities from flooding by relocating them to
higher ground. Three native tribes received 75 million US$ to help them move away from
4.3 Policies that lead out of the antagonistic public-versus-private resentment 113coastal areas or rivers, and eight more got 5 million US$ each (Flavelle 2022).72 Altogether,
in terms of its ambitions, commentators view the Biden plan as the biggest shift in public
goods since the New Deal and since the mid-1960s. But they call for careful monitoring on
the local level to ensure that the details are handled in a way which redounds to the pub￾lic and not just to private equity investors (Titolo 2023).
The European Union has also combined “building back better” with climate policy
by coupling its Recovery and Resilience Plan with its Green Deal, totaling 1.8 trillion €
altogether. But it created a quite difficult entanglement by demanding that all crisis pol￾icy measures must be measured by their effect on environmental outcomes (Sikora
2021). For this, the EU leans on its “green taxonomy”. The EU’s green taxonomy, though,
when it first came up as a part of the EU Sustainable Finance Action Plan, merely
sought to promote sustainable investment across the 27-nation bloc. Applying that tax￾onomy to recovery and resilience projects seems very unpractical. It subjects a total of
1.8 trillion € in investments, subsidies, reduction of levies, etc., to the environmental
outcomes criterion. For some industries, this is not viable at all. The tourist industry,
for example, has been severely impacted by the pandemic. But there has been a trend
to sustainable tourism before the pandemic: Hotels, transport, and other offers already
follow the imperative of sustainability. They could not elevate new investments to a
higher sustainability level. Another case is social infrastructure: Increasing the wages
for health-workers cannot be related to any environmental impact. So, no “carrots”
here. In their place: bureaucratic obstacles. There are several interdisciplinary recom￾mendations that suggest a different treatment, like weighing the externalities of those
recovery investments (Bardy and Rubens 2022). As this book goes to print, the EU’s Re￾covery and Resilience Task Force which oversees the investment promotion policy, has
started a process of endorsing the national plans. The strict requirement of “green”
projects seems to have weakened as the plans also entail social undertakings (without
any reference to an environmental effect), like, e.g., Malta with its digital preparedness
and social resilience plan.73
Austerity measures in the United Kingdom
Austerity measures and fiscal consolidation through cuts of cash benefits and reductions
in public payouts are widely perceived to have an impact on income distribution and
equality, with the poor losing more than the rich. However, countries like Greece and the
United Kingdom, where the measures were accompanied by reform programs following
 This proactive motion contrasts with the year-long delay of flood protection by German authorities
in the Ahrtal region. And when 174 people were killed by a massive deluge in June 2021, one official
reaction was to blame climate change and not the utter negligence in flood protection (Ionita and Na￾gavciuc 2021).
 https://commission.europa.eu/about-european-commission/departments-and-executive-agencies/re
covery-and-resilience-task-force_en.
114 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingthe 2007/8 financial crisis, experienced a different outcome. Among others, they adopted
decentralization strategies which strengthened local authorities (Callan et al. 2011). Local
authorities know much better than the central state how to compensate reductions in the
provision of one public good by stepping up another. And urban institutions that provide
public services represent the public interest and simultaneously seek efficiency, which
may be called a ‘combination of practical and economic rationality’ (McEldowney 2016).
The positive outcome, reported by the National Audit Office (http://www.nao.org.uk), be￾came especially evident in public housing, waste management, electricity provision and
public transport services.
After the United Kingdom left the European Union, the consequences of Brexit, the
COVID-19 pandemic, and, later, the Russian war against Ukraine, caused economic effi￾ciency to go down sharply, and the government that came into office in October 2022
had no other choice than to resort to austerity measures once more. Its ‘doom-and￾gloom-budget’ burdens the citizens with a painful ordeal of tax increases and spending
cuts. But it soothed the financial markets, which substantially reduced the extra bor￾rowing costs that the government had been forced to pay because investors no longer
trusted it. While the government’s hope was that recovery would begin in 2023, the pub￾lic reacted with a series of strikes that threatened to halt all economic and social activi￾ties. The government originally projected a 7% decline in household income over the
next two years, but it then announced that the plan to rebuild the public sector will
soften this figure. The plan to restore the public sector would again strengthen the local
provision of public goods, to which the trade unions agreed because it would also
strengthen their local base. A positive outcome would give proof once more that public
goods policies need collaborative decision-making (Lander and Castle 2022).
Labor market policies in Europe
When the 2008/2009 recession brought a harmful impact on young people, mainly in the
South of Europe, this led to a wave of labor market reforms. One objective was to reduce or
eliminate segmentation which had produced a divide between permanent jobs – the upper
tier of the market – and temporary jobs – the lower tier. Segmentation is robustized by
barriers to competition that serve vested interests of power groups like trade unions and
professional associations. While these groups protect employment of their members and
secure superior benefits, jobseekers are left out. The upper tier workers (i.e., the permanent
ones) tend to align themselves with their employers, and, hence, two-tier reforms that treat
permanent and temporary separately, have proven to be more successful because they
minimize opposition (Lucifora and Moriconi 2012). Many of the reforms have improved
protection for non-permanent employees by setting strictions on fixed-term contracts and
against early dismissal. In some countries, unemployment benefits and coverage were
stepped up for this tier also. This was helpful, but nowhere have the reforms produced a
noticeable reduction in labor market segmentation. For the employers, though, the reforms
produced advantages in some cases: In France, workers who do not accept collectively
4.3 Policies that lead out of the antagonistic public-versus-private resentment 115agreed wage and working-time adjustments in economic crises can now be dismissed. In
the Netherlands, the 2015 Work and Security Act introduced a streamlined formula for sev￾erance pay, which will considerably reduce the amount in some cases (Eichhorst et al.
2017). When considering how delicately labor reacts on all policy impacts, the accomplish￾ments achieved by the reforms may appear well balanced: there was no labor unrest.
There is another aspect of labor market policies: Labor market outcomes are, in part,
dependent on educational systems. A study that was conducted in the late 1980s has
found that with a standardized educational system (where educational standards are
equal nationwide), job changes occur less frequently than with a stratified system (where
the standards are selected within the school systems). The study also showed that in the
US (with a stratified system) a high-school certificate is not significant for the prediction
of occupational status, while in Germany a high-school certificate (which gives equal
entry rights to all students) significantly increases status attainment in the first job. An￾other result was that half of all German employees complete the final job match within
two years of entry into the labor market; in the United States, it takes twice as long (All￾mendinger 1989). One might say that this has constituted a competitive advantage for Ger￾many. So, did the recession of the early 2000s affect Germany less that the US? And what
was the impact of the labor market reforms? A statistic from Eurostat (2015) for the years
from 1985 to 2014 reveals that the share of German young workers (aged 19–24 years)
with temporary employment contracts rose from 22% of all young workers employed to
40% until 2008 and has remained at this level. Hence, no, there seems to have been no
positive impact on short-term employment from the reforms. After 2008, the situation
has worsened due to the influx of immigrants and their integration into the labor market,
and through the short-term worker programs that were created to avoid lay-offs of work￾ers in the COVID-19 crisis. But policymakers, in Germany and in the EU, have worked on
improvements. The idea was to combine major reforms in the factors which drive inno￾vation (including higher education and public research), with major changes in employ￾ment protection laws and in social security (Eichhorst and Rinne 2020).
With all these positives, there is an outstanding negative as well which is the serious
malaise in the French labor market. Whether rooted in situational factors (an overall lack
of mobility, unsatisfactory working conditions, insecure jobs) or in the incontrollable
power of the trade unions (Tirole 2017, pp. 233 ff.), employment rates for the young (29%
for ages between fifteen and twenty-four) and for the older (46% for ages between fifty￾five and sixty-four) are considerably lower than, e.g., in the Netherlands (62% and 70%,
respectively) and in Germany (47% and 58%).74 The French government’s attempt to im￾prove labor market conditions by raising the pension age from 62 to 64 was met with
fierce resistance by the trade unions with strikes affecting refineries, bin collections, rail
transport, air travel and schools. The government’s stance was firm; it only offered dia-
 Figures are for 2015.
116 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managinglogues with unions on other labor issues (Chrisafis 2023). Both parties seem to be un￾aware of the damage this causes to all categories of public goods in the country.
Privacy protection and policies in the European Union
Privacy protection in the EU is ruled by the General Data Protection Regulation which be￾came enforceable in May 2018. Other than an EU directive which has to be transferred
into national law by each member state, a regulation is directly binding and applicable,
but it still provides flexibility for certain aspects to be adjusted by individual member
states.75 In total, the EU members have used this flexibility in a way that balances the jux￾taposition of all public goods. The exception is Germany which has applied the regulation
in a strict coercive format and in an interpretation which consistently regards privacy
rights as stronger than other values of the common good, like public health, security, and
proper use of public funds, etc.76 In health, individual data on patients cannot be shared
for research purposes without the consent of the patient – which, however, can be given
for one specifically named single purpose only; public security is endangered because po￾lice data cannot be transferred between state agencies without the consent of a judge;
abuse of public funds is made easy for criminals because government offices which pay
out benefits in cash in one province are not allowed to share this with offices elsewhere.
The consequences of ranking data privacy so high can be disastrous: It took eighteen
months to launch a 100 m € project of expanding the Heidelberg Cancer Research Center
to an outside location because privacy experts struggled to come to terms with how to
interchange of health data of individuals (https://www.dkfz.de/en/index.html). There is a
sharp contrast in this to Chinese thinking: While the German concept is to protect health
data of individuals, the Chinese use individual date to protect public health and they have
sacrificed economic growth for that even though some of the methods may seem question￾able (Chen and Chen 2022).
The right to privacy is regarded to have its ideological and legal base in an 1890
(!) article written by U.S. Supreme Court Justice Louis Dembitz Brandeis and Boston
attorney Samuel Warren: “The Right to Privacy” (Brandeis and Warren 1890). The mo￾tive was to chastise the journalists of the time for prying into people’s private lives
and to plea for imposing liability in tort for invasions of privacy. U.S. law of today
recognizes four types of torts against privacy which are (1) “unreasonable intrusion
upon the seclusion of another,” (2) “appropriation of the other’s name or likeness,” (3)
 See: http://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST–9565–2015–INIT/en/pdf.
 A similar policy is to be worried about when the new data regulations of the European Union
come into force. Businesses will have to get prepared for navigating the digital landscape: There are
five acts, The Data Governance Act on managing data and data sharing, The Digital Markets Act on
competitiveness in the digital sector, The Digital Services Act on user rights, The Data Act on cloud
providers and access to data in B2B, B2C, as well as in B2G (business-to-government) relationships,
and The AI Act on (high-risk) AI systems. The question is how their implementation will affect free￾dom rights (Mikkelsen et al. 2023).
4.3 Policies that lead out of the antagonistic public-versus-private resentment 117“unreasonable publicity given to the other’s private life,” and (4) “publicity that un￾reasonably places the other in a false light before the public” (Bratman 2002, p. 624).
Privacy protection issues have changed since then, like the needs of society have
changed. But there is a link which is the element of respect for social life, as per the
mentioning of ‘publicity’ and ‘public’. However, there is no mentioning of an “autono￾mous private self” (Lindroos-Hovinheimo 2021), nor of a ‘private sphere’.
The attention to private and public spheres was raised by German philosophers
Jürgen Habermas, Hannah Arendt and others who founded the Frankfurt School of Phi￾losophy. They argued that capitalism and mass society are characterized by decreasing
autonomy and freedom (limiting the private self), along with greater alienation and
conformity (Hansson 2008). It can be assumed that the philosophical foundation of the
autonomous self is the background to how the German privacy protectors interpretate
and apply the European regulation. The paradox is that this ideology contradicts court
rulings throughout Europe, and particularly in Germany, which rank individualistic
benefit lower than collectivistic benefit. However, that does not seem to affect the Ger￾man privacy protection agencies (there are public agents on the federal, the state and
the municipal levels and in universities and research centers). Or is the German predi￾lection for bureaucracy to be blamed for this mismatch?
The German privacy protectors’ latest threat was to limit the availability of Micro￾soft Office 365, and the conference-ware Microsoft Teams: Microsoft announced that
it will provide the products cloud-based only – from which the privacy protection
agents assume that data may spill over from one user to the other. The firm has as￾sured that this possibility does not exist, and that the product complies with the EU
regulation. Nevertheless, the state of Baden-Württemberg in Germany’s South prohib￾ited the use of Microsoft 365 and Microsoft Teams in public schools, even when they
were in high demand for remote learning during the COVID-19 pandemic (Budras
2022). The effect was that another public good, education, was de-ranked. There are
no advocates on its side – Microsoft, though, was able to defend its business model in
the European Court. Earlier, and similar to the state of Baden-Württemberg, the data
protection authority of the state of Hessen temporarily ordered that Hessian schools
not use Microsoft Office 365. This decision followed an announcement from Microsoft
about data storage: The firm would not ensure that data were stored on the German
cloud only and that they would use the US cloud as well. The data protection authority
found that there is a risk in allowing US authorities “to access European children’s
data without appropriate guarantees” (Celeste and Fabbrini, 2020 p. 52). The Hessian
ban was lifted a month later after an intense dialogue with Microsoft.
It takes a short step from prohibiting the use of freely available computer soft￾ware to limiting freedom of speech. The nexus lies with the usage of social networks.
There always is a tension between the benefits they provide for free speech and the
negative impact they have on user privacy. So, in a strict sense, limiting the access to
social networks by inhibiting its software is equal to limiting free speech. Again, we
have two public goods that need to be balanced (free speech and privacy). In view of
118 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingthe wide-spread use of social networks and despite the many scandals that have oc￾curred, there seem to be no clear solutions to this – the standard answer is: ‘parental
discretion advised’. Another issue is freedom of speech at educational institutions: It
is claimed for students everywhere, but increasingly negated to educators in many
places. With this comes misuse of the right to demonstrate under the guarantees of
free speech, which has been growing with so-called “activist” movements. Both have
impacts on society that can be highly destructive.
Freedom of speech at educational institutions, whether for students or for educa￾tors, is an important public good. When it is limited, education and research will lose
their effectiveness. A notorious case in point is Hungary, where the government,
among other limitations, has banned gender-related lecturing from all schools and
prevented the set-up of the ‘Central European University’ founded by the Hungarian￾American billionaire George Soros (Rónay 2018). The European Union has not come to
terms with this blunt infringement of EU fundamental rights by its member state.
While the European Court ruled in June 2020 that the respective amendment of the
Higher Education Law represented unjustified restrictions, the Hungarian govern￾ment refused to make any changes. It argues that by the EU Charter, education is a
member states’ competence (Zaccagnino 2020).
The Hungarian case is by far the most problematic one, and on a large scale. But
there are many instances in European universities where the freedom to express one’s
opinion is limited in a very subtle but nevertheless shrewd manner, or even violently
crushed outright. The subtle alternative can be played by various instruments. One in￾strument is withholding campus facilities for a discussion that is against mainstream,
another is denying research funds; the violent alternative is by giving in to student acti￾vists (from woke77 movements), or to self-appointed censors who oppose what they call
neoliberalism or colonialist attitudes or white supremacy thinking. Whether from this
side or from ideological bias in the professional bodies, even the field of mathematics
has become embattled. Mathematics has been criticized for its academic elitism, for
marginalizing women and minorities, for being based on a patriarchal structure and a
male-centered epistemology. And mathematics is said to have served as the gatekeeper
to numerous other areas of study because schools rely on numerical rankings to filter
out students who are unable to fulfill program pre-requisites (Sriraman et al. 2010, Rie￾gle and King 2010). This criticism has now entered the scenario of the woke who blame
mathematics to be Euro-centric, racist and bound for suprematism, and it seems that
academic lecturing will be regulated by norms which abide by that criticism: The Brit￾ish Quality Assurance Agency has set new standards for teaching mathematics, statistics
and organizational research in 2021, and the German Research Foundation has issued
 The term “woke” came to the American vocabulary after the 2014 death of Michael Brown in Fer￾guson, Missouri, and it first carried the idea of being fully aware of systemic racism in America. The
term was taken over by protesters of all denominations. The “woke have been enlightened to under￾stand the only politically progressive truth about society” (Dahlen 2021).
4.3 Policies that lead out of the antagonistic public-versus-private resentment 119new diversity standards in 2022 to “take greater account of differences between research￾ers in the Foundation’s funding activities” (http://dfg.de/en). Censoring is in the frontline,
and critics are upset: They call it “The Death of Culture and Creativity” (Thomas 2022).
Add to this what occurred in Cambridge, UK, when Irish journalist and executive editor
at The Economist Helen Joyce was due to appear in a panel to discuss her book “Trans:
When Ideology Meets Reality” which critically analyzes transgender activism based on
complex statistics, legal statutes, and other evidence. She was disinvited by the rector
who sent a note to the students that she will boycott the event and commenced a smear
campaign against the author (Woolcock 2022).78
When university personnel do not protect freedom of speech on all sides of the
lectern,79 favors one party above the other and ranks quality of education and re￾search lower than membership to a group, all society (not just the scientific commu￾nity) is in demise. A parallel is politicians who look the other way when activists deny
open dialogues with parties that dissent, or when members of the extremist group
“Last Generation” attack public goods to raise awareness on what they think are gov￾ernment neglects in fighting climate change. Yet looking the other way was obviously
not enough for the German Federal Minister for the Environment, Nature Conserva￾tion, Nuclear Safety, and Consumer Protection, Ms. Steffi Lemke, a member of the
Green party: Her comment on the roadblocks performed by the activists who glue them￾selves to streets (in 2022, the group performed 276 road blockades), was that “this serves
a good cause” (Theurer 2022). An attitude like this creates hateful environments, erases
cohesion among societal groups and discredits the efforts of all factions in the private
sector to find common terms with state authorities on how to best secure public goods. It
may seem that in the eyes of such politicians, civil society organizations, trade unions,
businesses, and individual professionals have less weight than activists. But even if some
political groups (not just “activists”) may have reservations against public-private partner￾ships (see section 3.6), decisions by the government to pursue this type of collective action
must not be jeopardized by one single cabinet member and her/his associates.
The examples which were presented here of public policies on public goods re￾veal that their acceptance on all levels depends on an approach that is not partial or
 Interestingly, Cambridge University alumni started to pull funding from their college to express
protest against the activity of the rector (Sommerville 2022).
 There are governmental initiatives on the issue – not in Europe, but in Canada. The Ontario Minis￾try of Training, Colleges and Universities requested that publicly assisted colleges and universities de￾velop and publicly post speech policies by 1 January, 2019. It expressly refers to “faculty, students,
staff, management and guests” (http://news.ontario.ca/opo/en/2018/08/ontario–protects–free–speech–
on–campuses.html). There is no government request in the U.S., but many schools refer to the Univer￾sity of Chicago Principles on Free Expression. They demand “free, robust, and uninhibited debate and
deliberation” for all members of the university community (http://provost.uchicago.edu/sites/default/
files/documents/reports/ FOECommitteeReport.pdf). So far, on the other side of the Atlantic, it seems
that protection is meant for students only. Otherwise, the Anti-Radicalisation Law that was introduced
in the UK in 2015 (HM Government, 2015) would have stopped cases like that of Helen Joyce.
120 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingthat ranks one public good too far above the others. A holistic approach is needed
here. The same goes for implementing the decisions on policies: They need to be em￾bedded in a framework that balances the diverse interest of those who make them
and those who are affected.
4.4 Frameworks for managing collective efforts
4.4.1 Legal requisites
Whether it is the state on its own, or the private sector, or a public-private effort which
provide a public service: It is the outcome of the service that counts, and this outcome is
publicly owned. Therefore, any legal framework for a collective effort, e.g., a public￾private partnership (PPP), must first consider the objective, then the question how to
measure output and outcome and, lastly, how to proceed if the desired results are not
obtained. This is why, from a pure legalistic view, a PPP often is compared to a contract
into which a public body enters. A contract is a set of terms with which to regulate the
provision of services by the private sector and secure the funds provided by both part￾ners. But a PPP is more: It is a compound system of relationships, and like any long
term-relationship there is more than just reciprocal obligations. Beyond the contract be￾tween the two partners, the partners also have a contractual obligation to the beneficia￾ries of the public good. In the case of an educational institution this would be the
students, the parents, and the teachers. In a PPP there is constant interaction, a sense of
community. Neither the two parties nor the beneficiaries can maximize their own inter￾est; they certainly need to ensure that their interests are satisfied, but they must adopt
an “ethic of care for the interests of all others” (Marique 2014, p. 259).
An example of a framework with recommendations on PPP structuring and gov￾ernance is the European Commission’s Green Paper “On Public-Private Partnerships
and Community Law on Public Contracts and Concessions” issued in April 2004. This
was followed by an EU Public Procurement Directive which member states were re￾quested to transpose into national law by 31 January 2006. Most of them, like Ger￾many, did not issue a specific legislation but, instead, altered existing laws, which did
not really fulfill the aim of the Green Paper which was “was to facilitate the develop￾ment of PPPs under conditions of effective competition and legal clarity” (Rosell and
Saz-Carranza 2020). Anyhow, the Commission did not pursue its original idea of speci￾fying modalities for PPPs; in view of the broad variety both in PPP application and in
the member states’ tradition of public contracting, there had been significant opposi￾tion to such a regulatory regime (Calleja 2010). A concept that finds more approval is
issuing regulation or providing statutory guidance on a state- or local level. This con￾cept has been deployed in the UK. The rationale is that a local public authority, e.g., a
municipality, when entering into a PPP, should have the power to set rules that apply
4.4 Frameworks for managing collective efforts 121to ventures of this type. With this comes the question of which autonomy exists on a
local level as opposed to that of a central government.
In the United Kingdom, the scope of legal powers granted to local governments
and the provision of financial means by the upper authorities have changed over
time: Between 1990 and 2010, legal powers of local authorities have been extended,
but finances and organization have not followed suit. This has undermined local au￾tonomy in general and for PPPs in particular (Badcoe 1999). So, in 2011, an update to
the regulation80 for the format of financing PPPs was launched by the UK Treasury,
the “Private Finance Initiative 2 (PF2)”. It rules that in all PPPs, a private finance com￾pany – a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) – be set up which borrows funds to construct
a new asset such as a school, hospital, or road. The taxpayer then makes payments
over the contract term (typically 25 to 30 years), which cover debt repayment, and, in
some cases, costs of finance, maintenance and any other services as well. The UK De￾partment of Health and Social Care and the Department for Education have used this
format, and by 2018, there were 700 deals, with a capital value of around 60 bn £ and
annual charges of about 10 bn £ in 2016–17 (National Audit Office 2018).
The British PF2 format is the classic case of a “Build, Own, Operate, Transfer”
model of PPPs (see section 3.6.1. above). As repayment from the taxpayers is widely
guaranteed, the model is attractive to private investors. However, the government
will not spend tax money without guarantees either: Apart from regulating finance,
PPP contracts must spell out which risks are to be borne by the parties.
4.4.2 Risk sharing
Long-term contracts have a high likelihood of unforeseeable circumstances which
bear risks. Not all of these can be listed in a risk sharing agreement, and in a PPP, like
in long-term procurement where no partnership is established, the parties must mu￾tually trust the capacities of each other. But risk allocation in PPPs is different: The
public partner wishes to obtain a reasonably risk-free long-term service and will not
cover asset-based risks if the service is not delivered to the specified standards (like,
in a road project, deterioration from excessive use even though the time of use ex￾ceeds what was stipulated in the contract). Decisions on issues like this must be made
before concluding the contract, and ways must be found on how to distribute the re￾maining risks and between the parties. The format of transferring a risk, in general, is
that the party who will bear it gets an incentive to manage the risk effectively. There
is value for money in this, and the public partner will have to determine which risks
 The old regulation, PFI, dates from 1992. It was launched as an initiative of the Conservative Party
by Prime Minister John Major, but the Labor government of Tony Blair supported the move and ex￾panded it considerably.
122 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingit should take back. The criterion will be whether there are risks which it can more
efficiently manage by itself. This is exhibited in Table 10 which is an excerpt from a
risk matrix set in a comprehensive work on PPPs by Australian researchers Grimsey
and Lewis (2007) and which shows which risks are mostly taken by the public party
in infrastructure projects.
Many projects on road and railway construction have followed this type of risk shar￾ing, e.g., the 270 km Lyon-Turin high-speed railway connection, a megaproject involv￾ing funds from the EU, France, Italy, and a construction consortium including the
national railway companies SNCF Réseau and Rete Ferroviaria, and which is about to
be completed in 2030. The initiator was France which has a long-established tradition
of public private cooperation especially in sectors such as toll-roads water, where
PPPs are widely accepted. The acceptance by society may be the reason why the pro￾cess of the project was not conflictual in France, while construction was delayed in
Italy for several years through construction stoppage brought about by civil society
groups in the Susa Valley (Esposito et al. 2023). It seems that this risk was not contem￾plated early enough, and that public consultation before starting the project was
incomplete.
Table 10: Risk sharing in public-private infrastructure projects.
Site risks:
Pre–existing liability on site
Land titles from cultural heritage
Revenue risks:
Changes in taxes and tariffs are commonly shared between the parties
Decrease in demand for output is commonly shared between the parties
Financial risks:
Interest rates, inflation are commonly shared between the parties
Force measure risks:
Impact of floods earthquakes riots strikes are commonly shared between the parties
Regulatory/political risks:
Changes in law to be compensated by government as per contract
Political interference, cancelation of license
Asset risks
Residual transfer value
The risks which are not listed remain with the contractor: Construction risks and operating
risks remain with the contractor except for delays and changes in specifications by the
government that occur during construction and operation.
Source: Adapted from Grimsey and Lewis 2007, p. 182.
4.4 Frameworks for managing collective efforts 1234.4.3 Public consultation
Private entities partaking in public goods provision will face a demand from all other
stakeholders and from the general public on full transparency and deep disclosure.
Citizens will often suspect that the benefits businesses obtain from the venture will
excessively outweigh their cost. This is one reason why public consultation should be
held before launching a PPP. The public partner must also consider the accountabil￾ities towards the electorate. At the core of PPP projects there always is a complex web
of relationships among government officials, politicians, media, the general public,
very often beyond the local, and special interest groups. This socio-political context
requires that public consultation is fully integrated into the planning process. If all
stakeholders are invited to public hearing before a PPP is built, acceptance will be a
given. For instance, the Victorian Department of Treasury and Finance in Australia￾which annually procures over 1.8 billion US$ of public infrastructure, holds civic dia￾logues regularly (Ng and Loosemore 2007). It was found that, irrespective of any
ideological preferences that governments of the day may promote, such dialogues can
satisfy the high expectations which interest groups invariably have in relation to the
management of projects in the environment, health and safety, etc. Any infrastructure
project lives or dies on its reputation with these groups (Sharpe 2004).
The critics of PPPs who claim that they represent the public overlook that it was
the public, the people, who were the driving force of transformation towards more
efficiency in service delivery. The state responded – otherwise, wellbeing in the West￾ern world would not have risen as it did in the last decades. But when the public feels
marginalized, uncontrollable repercussions may arise. Even in China PPP projects
failed because of heavy protests of the locals (Shan et al. 2011). Examples of more such
cases are given in Rwelamila et al. (2015) who call public consultation the “missing
link in PPP projects”. But who exactly are to be consulted? Is it the taxpayers who
ultimately pay for a project when, e.g., it is in the format of ‘Build-Own-Operate￾Transfer’? There are others who also benefit from the project and would be affected if
the project fails, like travelers from abroad, foreign missions, associations that are
tax–exempt (which is the case for most CSOs. Or is it only the users of a facility fi￾nanced by a PPP? In any case, it is more than just the immediate stakeholders, and
careful selection for the consultation dialogues is needed. Exclusion for the reason of
commercial confidentiality may become rampant (Yuan et al. 2012).
Extensive public consultation and stakeholder engagement has been shown to be
the most critical element in strategies for PPP implementation as per an extensive sur￾vey conducted in developed and developing countries by Osei-Kyei et al. (2018). The
other elements are:
– existence of well-structured and clear policy guidelines by the public partner,
– thorough assessment of value for money, innovation, cost, and risks,
– employment of highly skilled and competent staff during evaluations,
– competitive, fair, and transparent tendering processes,
124 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managing– comprehensive evaluation of the impact on sector/national policy,
– adequate protection of intellectual property rights of partnering firms.
These findings are for infrastructure projects on the local/regional level. But they can
be transferred to other areas. E.g., in education, if consultation is limited to parents
groups without identifying the needs of various civil communities and the business
sector, PPPs may fail (Srivastava 2010). If innovations, particularly those that are initi￾ated from outside the education system, are introduced into educational PPPs without
adequate consultation with key personnel, implementation will go wrong. Without
transparent decision-making, the PPP cannot be sustained over time. Walk-aways can
only be avoided by clearly defining the desired outcomes and to what the partners
need to be committed (Robertson and Verger 2012).
There are examples from the global level where wide-spread consultation is the
main requisite before making decisions, e.g., on health projects. For instance, The Global
Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (https://www.theglobalfund.org), an inter￾national financing institution that organizes in-country programs to prevent and treat
HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria, is designed as an open council. The fund works as
a permanent intergovernmental-private arrangement which formally incorporates
non-state actors as equal players in its membership and core governance structures.
Apart from the Foundation Board, the Secretariat and the Technical Review Panel,
there is a Partnership Forum which prepares all decisions. The composition of the
Forum reaches beyond states to include donor representatives, multilateral develop￾ment cooperation agencies, civil society, NGO and community-based organizations,
technical and research agencies, and the business sector. Their consultation work en￾sures that each PPP project is responsive to the interests of the affected constituencies
(Aziz 2009).
4.4.4 State participation in commons
Commons, by principle, are not designed to incorporate state actors because their
main characteristic is self-organization by an independent community. This would ex￾clude interventions by market and state actors. However, when it comes to specific
situations, the actors of the commons may decide to have the state participate in fi￾nancing a public good and in controlling processes related to the quantity and quality
of its provision while the provision itself is executed by others (Capelari et al. 2017).
One example is water governance in the Western U.S. which has served as a case in
point for commons protagonists Vincent and Elinor Ostrom. There, several state and
federal agencies engage in water use and control while it is other actors that are in￾volved in the resource appropriation, use and distribution (Ostrom 1972).
Water is the object of another example, too. This is about treatment of effluents.
Here, the state actor is not controlling the issue, but it is one partner in the commons
4.4 Frameworks for managing collective efforts 125that uses the service. The scheme that is most widely used is a communal water treat￾ment plant. Everyone who is allowed to dump polluted water into it is an authorized
user. The operator of the plant is a lead-partner in the commons. The proprietary and
the claimant functions must be negotiated between the authorized users. German
chemical giant BASF has been operating one such installation since 1975 with the city
of Ludwigshafen, and it opened another a few years later with the participation of
several other firms and municipalities. All participants have established the appropri￾ate format of governing the resource in a joint commitment (Wilken 2006).
With water, again, there is one more case to be presented, which is agricultural
drainage in the Western Lake Erie Basin (WLEB) region of Ohio. This has a history
going back to 1841 when the state, unlike anywhere else in the U.S., established agree￾ments on agricultural drainage. County-offices and landowners organized, designed,
and built the WLEB drainage projects. These mechanisms worked well for a long time
before new systems were developed in the 2000s (Nolte 1981). The new systems pro￾vide coverage to over 7.4 million acres of cropland in Ohio with a water governance
format where landowners agree to provide drainage facilities and improvements. The
cost is then financed and maintained via assessments on the benefitting landowners
levied by the county commissions (Mecklenburg and Fay 2011).
There are other large-scale cases, like forests in India, the rainforest in Brazil or
coastal fisheries, where there may be important roles for the state. With a well work￾ing government, and with clear cut definitions of responsibility, state monitoring and
participative organizations can be reconciled, and a status of accountable autonomy
can be preserved (Fung 2004). On the global level, the monitoring function would
have to be entrusted to some intergovernmental entity which legitimates powers of
coercion including the right to impose a solution if the other parties cannot come to a
negotiated agreement. For this, an arena for negotiating must be created, which
would also enable sanctioning when parties do not comply with the communal com￾mitments (Mansbridge 2014).
4.4.5 Mirroring viewpoints of practitioners on PPP management with theory
Managing PPPs requires flexibility and recognition of the other partners’ interests.
Also, there are behavioral aspects and aspects that reflect owners’ positions. When
practitioners are asked on the governance of PPPs, they rather consider the question
of managerial freedom. This comes out from a survey conducted by scholars from
Erasmus University, Rotterdam, Copenhagen Business School and the University of
Toronto. The survey included 119 public and private professionals in Canada, the
Netherlands and Denmark (Warsen et al. 2020). Canada is considered a global leader
in using PPPs, followed by the Netherlands, while Denmark is a slow mover. Even
though experience, country, and culture have an influence on the practitioners’ view￾points, there is unanimity among the respondents that PPP governance can sway be￾126 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingtween two sets of extremes: One is collaboration opposed to control, the other is man￾agerial freedom opposed to restrictions in management. The Canadian respondents
exhibited that in their country the public partner usually enforces control, and the
private partner must deliver according to performance indicators but has little room
to make own decisions. This might be explained by the government’s fear that if it
does not show that it is in control, it will not meet the public’s expectations. The
Dutch respondents reported that there is horizontal collaboration between the part￾ners and no strict control but the room for the private partner to make its own deci￾sions is limited, nevertheless. In Denmark, the private partners get more room to
make their own decisions and manage the project and the public partner’s role is
more of an enabler (Warsen et al. 2019, p. 134).
Even though the survey presented above is a three-country study, the interna￾tional character of the PPP phenomenon suggests that to a certain degree similar per￾spectives can be found in all countries. There are only slight differences in the
discourse on PPPs from country to country. Also, everywhere, beyond the issues of
managerial freedom, PPP managers are confronted with questions like these: How do
we approach situations where the partners are different in their normative beliefs or
the perception of a problem or its solutions? What if orientations are highly competi￾tive or downright hostile? Situations of this kind are a field of studies at the Max
Planck Institute for the Study of Societies in Cologne, Germany. The institute has de￾veloped a typology of problem situations (see: Mayntz 2009). The sequence of argu￾ments is the following (Mayntz 2009, pp. 74–75):
The chances of cooperative problem solutions will depend on depicting the problem generation
(who causes a given problem by what kind of behavior), problem impact (who suffers what kind
of negative effects) and problem solution (who engages in what kind of coping behavior). The
genetic, the impact, and the coping structures are linked in a causal way. Initially, there is a
group of actors in pursuit of their individual interests, e.g., to consume as much as possible of a
scarce resource. This structure of interests motivates behavior or actions, and these give rise to a
problem, e.g., that a desired public good becomes unavailable, or a scarce resource is depleted,
i.e., a public good is destroyed. The impact of the problem creates a new interest structure, as the
actors perceive the need to arrive at a problem solution – e.g., to stop the erosion of the resource.
The efforts to cope with the situation will be shaped by cost-benefit considerations; however, in
many cases it is just the coping that is considered and not how coping, problem generation and
impact are interrelated: Where has the problem arisen and who is affected determines how a
solution is found and what it will look like. Depletion of a public resource is a problem case for
which the genetic, the impact, and coping structures typically include the same group of actors,
and their interests relate to the same issue.
Solutions to these conditions can be provided when contemplating that the involve￾ment of private business in public goods provision will, of necessity, affect property
rights. When a business devotes its capital to a common cause, it abandons a piece of
property. In return, the owner of that capital wants to get a share of the common ben￾efit. The private party engaging in the provision of a public good extends some type of
4.4 Frameworks for managing collective efforts 127property right to it. There is a bundle of rights related to property. Five categories are
discerned: access, withdrawal, management, alienation, and exclusion as per Table 11:
The water treatment and agricultural drainage cases exhibited in section 4.4.4. can ex￾emplify the categorization of properties very well: all five categories of Table 11 assign
particular roles to the parties of these commons. Elinor Ostrom who also conceptual￾ized the bundling of property rights admonishes that a common venture will only work
if the composite rights by which it is governed, and their boundaries are specified be￾fore any such venture is started (Schlager and Ostrom 1992). She also constructed a
clear-cut regime for effectively managing public goods provision through communal ef￾forts (see Ostrom 1993; Cox, Arnold and Tomás 2010). Comparing her list of conditions
to the wastewater treatment and agricultural drainage cases gives evidence of its re￾markable practicality. These are the elements of the list (Ostrom 1993, p. 2):
Table 11: Bundles of property rights.
Property right Description Bundles of property rights
Access (P) The right to enter a
defined physical
property
Withdrawal (P) The right to obtain
the “products” of a
resource
Authorized user (P + P)
Management (P) The right to
regulate internal
use patterns and to
transform the
resource by making
improvements
Claimant (P + P + P)
Exclusion (P) The right to
determine who will
have an access
right, and to how
that right may be
transferred
Proprietor (P + P + P + P)
Alienation (P) The right to sell or
lease the right of
management,
exclusion, or both
Owner (P+P+P+P+P)
Source: Ranjan and Koontz 2018, p. 64.
128 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managing1. Clearly Defined Boundaries: Rights to withdraw from the common venture are
separated from running the common venture.
2. Congruence between Appropriation and Provision Rules and Local Conditions: Re￾stricting time, place, technology, and/or quantity of access to the common venture
need to correspond to local conditions regarding requiring labor, material, and/or
money.
3. Collective Choice Arrangements: All members, or at least those who are elected
for the job, can participate in modifying operational rules.
4. Monitoring: Conditions need to be actively audited through persons/institutions
who are accountable to the appropriators.
5. Graduated Sanctions: Appropriators who violate operational rules are likely to re￾ceive graduated sanctions.
6. Conflict Resolution Mechanisms: All need to have access to low-cost, local arenas
for resolving conflict.
7. Minimal Recognition of Rights to Organize: Appropriators must be allowed to de￾vise their own institutions without interference from external governmental
authorities.
8. Nested Enterprises: In a larger system, smaller-scale resource regimes should be
linked in multiple layers to form larger entities of governance.
This list points to the institutional success factors of PPPs. There are managerial suc￾cess factors as well, of which the foremost are relationship management (Zou et al.
2014) and procedural effectiveness. Not surprisingly, well-structured payment mecha￾nisms were named as the most important factor of effectiveness in an international
questionnaire survey on PPP success. The survey was conducted with purposively
sampled PPP experts from the private, public, and academic sectors (Osei-Kyei and
Chan 2017). The private parties to the PPP need clear terms on cashflows for facilitat￾ing effective service operations and to recover investment cost, and the public parties
must have exact positions on which to place their budgets. Following in the survey’s
ranking were well-structured legal dispute resolution mechanisms and effective oper￾ational risk management and. If we go beyond managing procedures, what also is re￾quired, in general, are data, because decisions can only be made properly with a
numeric or monetary database.
4.5 The database
This section will first ask what ‘value’ is in regards to a public good, then it covers the
topic of monetary and non-monetary value indicators for tangible and intangible pub￾lic goods and, at the end of the section a brief overview will be given on public goods
in public statistics.
4.5 The database 1294.5.1 Which value for which goods?
“Value” always comprises several related concepts. One is ‘intrinsic value’ or the
‘value in their own right’ for all natural and social resources. The term was first used
by the English painter, writer, philosopher and art critic John Ruskin (1819–1900) in
his book The Maintenance of Life (1860). He defines intrinsic value as the absolute
power of a good to support life, a power that requests respect (Griffiths and Lucas
2016, p. 146). The meaning of intrinsic value (and of value in general) has become the
subject of deep-founded philosophical discussions which mostly relate to wellbeing
(see, e.g., Vilkka 2021, McShane 2007). “Intrinsic” can be brought down to such simple
terms as ‘An apple has value if it is tasty and good looking’ or ‘A knife has value if it is
sharp’ – they are sought for their own sake, they have an ends value (Vilkka 2021,
p. 11). This can be transferred to natural environments like rivers and forests and to
social resources like cohesion in a family or a community. Then there are means
values. Means are sought for to achieve ends. So, if health is an end value, good nutri￾tion, securing of proper rest and avoiding toxic substances become means to that end.
From there, the second connotation of value comes up: What is it that a good (a public
good) contributes to the welfare of a society compared to what other goods contrib￾ute – the ‘instrumental value’. Policy makers employ this value concept. They base it
on preferences because many types of resources that provide welfare do not have a
value that can be determined by a price as they are not traded in markets. But non￾marketable resources can also have an ‘economic value’, i.e., a monetary value. Exam￾ples of non-market goods are natural resources such as clean air, and environmental
services such as flood prevention and water filtration). But they can be allocated to
productive processes, and for assigning an economic value to these inputs, they need
to be expressed in monetary terms.
Assigning monetary values to environmental resources and other public goods
makes it possible to determine the cost which businesses have to bear for using them.
An easier way is to determine the cost for protecting the environment. With this we
have a clear market-concept: Policymakers, here, are confronted with the decision on
which part of the public budgets they assign to that objective. Another category is de￾mands which policymakers must satisfy and for which there are no price regimes,
like the desire to relax in a public park or by the riverside.81 Theoretically, even if
there were a market for this, it would be a dysfunctional market, because it neither
reaches an equilibrium (for instance if all citizens demand access to the riverside at
the same time) nor can that market be efficient (there is no information on supply
and demand which could lead to prices (Perelman 2003).
 Section 3.4 on has dealt with this type of market. Relating to that, another connotation of values is
use- and non-use value. See section 3.4 as well.
130 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingDysfunctional markets are a pronounced feature of public goods, which makes it
difficult to apply welfare criteria to them: How should governments determine which
good provides the maximum benefit to the largest possible number of people (the util￾itarian principle; see, e.g., Brown 1992)? What they need is a criterion that shows, for
instance, if their environmental policies achieve the optimum of what is called “social
value” (Bürgenmeier 2000). Social value, according to Sheth et al. (1991), is ‘‘the per￾ceived utility acquired from an alternative’s association with one or more specific so￾cial groups’’ (Sheth et al., 1991, p. 161).82 The term alternative in this definition comes
from Sheth’s consumption theory, which studies customer choice behavior, i.e., the
reason why a customer decides to acquire one of various offerings. So, social value is
not always equal to all society. This is why an optimum must be sought for policy
decisions.
There are social values in all shared resources. Some are obvious, like in the case
of environmental protection, and some are less so. E.g., it is evident that a society
heavily depends on shared infrastructure. But it may be valued differently by differ￾ent groups of society (Frischmann 2012). The social value of environmental protection
and of the natural environment, in terms of economics, rests on ecological scarcity,
on the quest to overcome asymmetric costs and asymmetries in information and on
the pursuit of wellbeing (Zaharia and Zaharia 2012). There are several components
from which a specific social value can be determined (Szántó 1995):
1. Achieving economic goals is always accompanied by that of social goals. Hence, a
nexus can be established.
2. Like all actions, economic actions occur in a social context from which two-way
feedbacks impart with (possibly) asymmetric information.
3. Economic judgments are mostly linked to value judgments.
Environmental policies will have to prove the environment’s social value in the long
run. Proofs that the policies work can be attained through citizens’ participation in
deliberative democracy or if the parties affected by the policies unanimously legiti￾mize them (Kenter 2017). In the short run, though, policy makers must find and imple￾ment solutions whose effect can be seen immediately. As politicians are, in most parts
of the world, bound by their oath of office which obliges them to avert harm to society
when they become aware of it, immediately visible results are elemental. This extends
beyond policymaking: If harm is brought by an extensive use or a misuse of a public
good, governments must intervene on the instant, revert the misuse and at once impose
penalties. A state can also try to avert harm or injustice through preventative measures,
 Social value, in a consumer-related context, is one of five consumption values, with the others
being the functional, the epistemic, the emotional and the conditional values. In the context of politi￾cal choice, the other four values are on a sideline.
4.5 The database 131like taxes on emissions, charging for emission rights and fines for water pollutants.
They will base them on the monetary value of the damage which they cause.
Monetary assessments for environmental damages can also serve to derive esti￾mates for the monetary value of the goods affected by these damages. An example is
fines for polluting a river. There also is another way that can lead to specification of
values: When developing and managing large river systems, choices may have to be
made that relate to alternative combinations of water usage, like cargo shipping, hy￾droelectric power, recreational or commercial fishing, etc. It may also be proposed to
‘re-nature’ a river by removing an existing dam. All this raises questions: One ques￾tion may be whether the recreational and ecological benefits from removing a dam
are higher than what the community loses from having power generation and water
storage reduced Here, it becomes obvious that a type of valuation is needed which
would encompass a holistic perspective regarding the resources in question. For this
we should “view the environment as an asset or a kind of non-reproducible capital
good that produces a stream of various services for man” (Freeman et al. 1973). These
services can be tangible (such as minerals or flows of water), they can be functional
(such as removing, dispersing, storing or degrading wastes and residuals) or intangi￾ble (such as enjoying a national park). On the intangible ones, monetary values can be
found through contingency valuation as set forth in section 3.4. above. On the tangible
and functional ones, a relation to value can be sought through the concept of produc￾tivity: They are the “fruits” coming from productive usage of public goods.
Relating productivity to public goods usage is founded in considering them as an
investment: As with any investment, the effort required for increasing the output of a
public good must not be greater than the value gained from the extra output. Other￾wise, the effort is worthless. Now, when a government has provided all the goods on
the extensive menu of consumption available to a modern society in the right amounts,
and the problems of equity and consumer satisfaction have been approached (Heath
2001), the relation between effects and expenses becomes apparent. Expenses are ex￾pressed in monetary terms, and so a monetary value can be assigned to the benefits as
well. This can be made for a range of publicly provided services, like educational bene￾fits, childcare, healthcare and housing or food stamps. On average across OECD coun￾tries, social benefits from education and healthcare are estimated to be about 13% of
GDP, ranging from 8% in Turkey up to 20% in Denmark and Sweden (Verbist, Förster
and Valaavuo 2012). The services can be valued at their production cost. This can be
used to show that those benefits increase the income of the households who are the
beneficiaries – arriving at what is called Extended Income. The notion of “extended”
properly indicates that income distribution changes when publicly provided services
get included. This reduces the magnitude of income inequality. Still, the extended in￾come concept is not applied to one of the most known inequality measures, the Gini83
 The Gini index is named after the Italian statistician Corrado Gini (1884–1965).
132 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingindex. The reason mainly is it’s the index’ connection with poverty indices of the
World Bank (https://pip.worldbank.org). Statisticians recommend that interpreta￾tions of the Gini index should at least be accompanied by a comment that when
using extended income, the inequalities would be lower. Studies have shown that
this is valid for all types of families: one earner, double earner, childless or with
children, and for different levels of education of the head of the family (Addabbo
and Caiumi 2017).
Using extended income would be supported by many welfare economists: They
posit that when a public good is provided to all (like free healthcare) and adds to
human wellbeing, it has economic value – a monetary contribution to public benefit
(e.g., Adler and Posner 2006). The healthcare case demonstrates that economic/mone￾tary value of a public good can be calculated based on production cost of the services
it renders or which are needed to build it. The following sections will extend this to
services rendered by natural resources; these services can be viewed as the ‘rent’ of
those resources. Before discussing the respective techniques in section 4.5.3, the topic
of non-monetary indicators will be exposed. They also are a vehicle to exhibit value.
4.5.2 Non-monetary value indicators
In the categorization of values, we have seen the intrinsic, the instrumental, the ends
and the means value, the use-and non-use values, social values, and economic/mone￾tary values. Monetary terms indicate that the demand for a good can be reflected in
its price. Private goods, for instance a commodity or a long-term asset, if they are high
in demand, have a high value. A public good which satisfies a need that is important
to many will also be in high demand. There are goods for which a price is set or
whose value can be derived from its production cost, like a waterway or a road.
Others do not have a monetary value; if they are in high demand, they will have a
high non-monetary value. For example, the presence of police officers satisfies the
need of feeling safe in the streets. There is a demand for this, and the demand has to
be met by a matching supply. The public good of safety is supplied by a public institu￾tion, but while it is in demand, there is no market for it; no price can be determined.
So, how can government officials or the elected bodies of a town decide which part of
the municipal budget is to be allocated to providing that good? How can they assess
the demand – that is the amount of security which its citizens want – and its value?
Safety accounts for a set of expense items in a municipal or a county budget, i.e., what
is spent to serve the citizens. Therefore, the best way to determine the amount which
should be set aside for serving the citizens’ demand for safety is to leave the decision
to the voters. Switzerland is the country where this is practiced with many issues of
public interest. They are resolved through referendums or similar initiatives on the
local level and higher. Various forms are applied: one is popular initiatives, where a
political debate on a specific issue can be launched by the signatures of 100,000 vot￾4.5 The database 133ers; another is optional referendums, which can put any bill approved by parliament
to a nationwide vote with just 50,000 valid signatures; and the third one is mandatory
referendums. A mandatory referendum is required for any constitutional amendment
before being approved by parliament (Ladner 2002). It must be put to a nationwide
popular vote: If there are multiple choices, the result of a voting can be a list which
shows which priorities exist among the voters, i.e., which outcome they value higher
than another. This, ranking, hence, is the value indicator .
Safety is a public good that is ranked high in the Maslow pyramid. The need for
self-actualization, though, has the highest level on Maslow Hierarchy of Needs).84 Sat￾isfying this need places an immense responsibility on public officials: The human de￾sire to exploit one’s intellectual and physical faculties requires a range of social skills
and technical skills. Also, like any human need, it corresponds to other public goods
and services. So, the measure of the economic value of this need, whether for an indi￾vidual or the society as a whole, can be expressed in terms of the physical units of the
goods and services which are necessary to attain it (Felline 2020). Self-actualization
can be attained by education, training, and professionalization, but also, among
others, through involvement in cultural and social networks. There is a demand for
any of these. Decisionmakers in the public realm must find out which public good
would best meet which demand and how to provide it. Referendums on that question
will give a ranking, but the citizens can also be asked to rank-order a list of choices
which are opposed to each other, such as more police patrols or state subsidies for
alarm systems in residential buildings. This method has been widely applied to other
public goods, e.g., to environmental issues: It was used to identify options for forest
management in Finland (Hiltunen, Kangas and Pykalainen 2008) and for determining
total allowable catch in Chilean fisheries (Leal, Quinones and Chavez 2010).
A wide assortment of non-monetary indicators which measure progress in public
goods provision is in the SDG framework (https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/indica
tors-list). For briefly exemplifying it may suffice to look at one indicator for SDG 1
(End poverty in all its forms everywhere), which is “Proportion of the population liv￾ing below the international poverty line by sex, age, employment status and geo￾graphic location” (Indicator 1.1.1), or at SDG 3 (Ensure healthy lives and promote
wellbeing for all at all ages) where Indicators 3.1.1 to 3.2.2 refer to mortality rates and
3.3.1 to 3.3.4 to incidences of infectious diseases). Within SDG 16, one of the targets
points to ‘promoting the rule of law at the national and international levels and en￾sure equal access to justice for all’. The respective indicators are activity-based (e.g.,
‘reduce the proportion of victims of violence and of unsentenced detainees’ – Indica￾tors 16.3.1 and 16.3.2). However, the UN has no overall measures for the quality of
legal systems because official data on the rule of law in many countries are scarce,
and local capacity in the national statistics offices is still to be built. But the UN Secre-
 https://www.simplypsychology.org/maslow.html.
134 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingtary General had given an impetus before the SDGs came up when he appealed for
thorough assessments, baseline data and ongoing monitoring and evaluation on
which to base the UN’s rule of law assistance (Parsons and Thornton 2011).
There are indicators on the value of law and order, which also indicate to the cul￾ture of a society and to public policy investment. Allowing for inconsistencies in na￾tional data, the United Nations Rule of Law Indicators provide an assessment of
quality in police, courts, and prisons. They were jointly developed by the UN Depart￾ment of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office of the UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights. The two UN agencies’ concern is about peace and security which is the
global analogue to law and order; so, the rule of law indicators help to reflect if prog￾ress has occurred in post-conflict and unstable settings (OHCHR 2011). Another value
indicator is the World Justice Project’s Rule of Law Index, a private initiative founded
by the American Bar Association. It works with national surveys of more than 130,000
households and 4,000 legal practitioners and experts. The focus is on government con￾straints, regulatory enforcement, and absence of corruption (https://world justicepro￾ject.org). A different focus is sought by the European Union’s EU Justice Scoreboard
(see, e.g., European Commission 2019). It monitors the following parameters of an ef￾fective justice system:
(1) Efficiency, measured by developments in caseload, like number of incoming cases
by case type (civil, commercial, and administrative), length of the proceedings,
clearance rate, number of pending cases by case type.
(2) Quality, measured by:
(a) the accessibility of justice, like means and effectiveness of obtaining relevant
information about the justice system, how to initiate a claim, about the re￾lated financial aspects, the state of play of proceedings up until their end;
(b) resources, i.e., finance (government expenditure per inhabitant and as a
share of gross domestic product) and staff, like number of judges and lawyers
per 100,000 inhabitants);
(c) assessment tools/standards for timing (time limits, timeframes, backlogs), and
for information to parties.
(3) Independence of courts and judges:
(a) as perceived by the general public;
(b) composition of the court, rules for the appointment, length of service and
grounds for abstention, rejection and dismissal of its members;
(c) management powers over national prosecution services, like Prosecutor Gen￾eral/Prosecutorial Council, Minister of Justice/Government/Parliament.
The enumeration shows the innate relation of law and order to other public goods, like
freedom of movement, separation of powers within the state, transparent governments.
In another field, various parameters are also monitored to build non-monetary
indicators. This is the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) which has become the global
standard-setter for corporate sustainability reporting (Willis, Campagnoni and Gee
4.5 The database 1352015). Most firms use GRI; some, out of consideration to their stakeholders, employ
other reporting standards systems such as the AA1000 Standards for Sustainability￾Related Assurance (AccountAbility®, https://www.accountability.org/standards) and
the Social Accountability Standard on workers’ rights and workplace conditions
(http://www.sa-intl.org). GRI is of a wider scope. It has three sets of topic-specific
standards whose composition reflects to which public goods they purport (environ￾mental ones, like clean water and fresh air as well as social ones like health and pri￾vacy). The following list (abbreviated) exhibits these relations:
– The GRI 200s are indicators on economic standards, including Procurement Prac￾tices (GRI 204), Anti-corruption and Anti-competitive Behavior (GRI 205), and Tax
Policies (GRI 207).
– The GRI 300s are on environmental issues, ranging from Materials (GRI 301), En￾ergy (GRI 302), Water and Effluents (GRI 303) to Environmental Compliance (GRI
307) and Supplier Environmental Assessment (GRI 308). For the latter, disclosures
would have to be on:
a) Number of suppliers identified as having significant actual and potential neg￾ative environmental impacts.
b) Significant actual and potential negative environmental impacts identified in
the supply chain.
c) Percentage of suppliers identified as having significant actual and potential
negative environmental impacts with which improvements were agreed
upon as a result of assessment.
d) Percentage of suppliers identified as having significant actual and potential
negative environmental impacts with which relationships were terminated as
a result of assessment, and why.
– The GRI 400s are on social issues, ranging from Employment (GRI 401), Labor/
Management Relations (GRI 402), Occupational Health and Safety (GRI 403) to
Rights of Indigenous Peoples (GRI 411), Supplier Social Assessment (GRI 414), Cus￾tomer Privacy (GRI 418) and Socio-economic Compliance (GRI 419).
These indicators, together with the macro-economic indicators of the SDGs, could help
build a better understanding of how to determine the value of public goods and how
they serve the business sector. By measuring the economic contribution of firms in
achieving the SDGs, monetization of the public goods in question becomes feasible.
The minimum achievement would be to monitor progress in SDG implementation by
using data from company accounts (Bebbington and Unerman 2020). Conjoining the
GRI indicators on ecological themes with those of the SDGs can also pave a way to
quantify resource contribution and thus to arrive at monetary values for natural pub￾lic goods. From another end, as there are value indicators for the rule of law and pub￾lic health as shown above, conceptualizing them as quantifiable resources can lead to
a re-definition of social resources which can also lead to monetization. This will be
discussed in the next section.
136 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managing4.5.3 Monetization of tangible and intangible public goods
Placing a monetary value on an environmental or a social good not only is a difficult
tiling to do, but it has also met with criticisms. One hostile argument is that monetiza￾tion leads to marketization of the state, its functioning, authority, and legitimation –
which “is equal to neo-liberalization of nature, education, healthcare, infrastructure,
public service delivery, and so on” (Birch and Siemiatycki 2016, p. 178). Blaming what
critics call neoliberalism for social deficiencies, alleged or actual, is not new (see, e.g.,
Castree 2006). These critics deny the fact that decisions, whether by state officials or
by business managers, win more acceptance from their constituencies and their stake￾holders if the decisions’ base is cash numbers. So, other than decried, the state’s func￾tioning improves when using monetization wherever possible.
The other argument against monetization of public goods, especially environmen￾tal goods, comes from the advocates of ‘strong sustainability’ who view nature as indi￾visible and rebuff what they call the commodification of the environment. If market
instruments are applied to nature, they say, this leads to collective action against pres￾ervation. It would favor unlimited extraction of resources and “subjugates nature to
human technology and methods engineered by humans, when theoretically it should
be the other way around” (Scherhorn 2004, p. 14). They reject all efforts to replace
natural resources by manmade capital. Now, it is certainly reasonable to carefully ex￾amine each case where manmade capital substitutes natural capital. But in most
cases, there is no substitution at all: Manmade capital is complementary to nature:
Extra sawmills do not substitute for diminishing forests, more refineries do not substi￾tute for depleted oil wells, and larger nets do not substitute for declining fish popula￾tions (Daly 1990). The outcome of this complementarity is that the one good in
shortest supply gets attention, and if its productivity can be raised by the other good,
a status can be achieved where natural and manmade capital are managed at optimal
levels. This would secure that they are maintained over a long period of time and for
the future generations. This is what ‘weak sustainability’ is about (as opposed to
‘strong sustainability’), and it becomes clear that monetary values are needed to cal￾culate those optimal levels.
Another criticism against monetization of natural goods draws at the uncertain￾ties of ecological forecasting: If we cannot project what will happen with the environ￾ment, we should not assign an economic value to it: Early on, the following three
types of uncertainties were exposed by Arrow, Parikh and Pillet (1996) who explored
forecasting frameworks for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change:
– Scientific uncertainties, like technical relationships between, e.g., greenhouse gas
emissions and climate feedbacks;
– Socio-ecologic uncertainties regarding relationships between human societies
and nature, e.g., diseases that may stem from agriculture on eroded soil;
– Socio-economic uncertainties, like the human welfare effects of climate change.
4.5 The database 137Despite these uncertainties, the panel’s projections have influenced policymaking
worldwide, and the monetary value of what these policies have brought is enormous.
Dealing with uncertainties is normal in climate policy, and climate policy affects a
wide range of public goods. Hence, why should uncertainties in climate projection
stand in the way of assigning monetary values to natural goods? One advantage is
that this can improve decision making. Confining uncertainties by using monetization
as a base for decisions is a tool that environmental politics should eagerly take over
from the corporate world: Many valuations set up in business, were it computing the
return of an investment or marketing prognostics, entail assumptions on future devel￾opments, be they socio-economic or technical.
There are cases where valuation is easy: An infrastructure project, which is a
public good., e.g., a road or a pipeline, has a determined cost defined by the expenses
made for it. If it causes environmental damage, as building a road or a pipeline neces￾sarily will do, these environmental losses can be monetized and added to the invest￾ment cost. Compensating the losses (the damages) requires expenses. That cost is the
base for estimating the monetary value of the respective public good. Then the ex￾penses would be capitalized. The good side-effect of a reasoning like this is that people
who get aware of realistic (monetary) values assigned to the environment will care
more about negative environmental impacts. Numbers always are persuasive.
Capitalizing expenses or costs is a normal way to arrive at monetary values. Its
analogue is rent capitalization. Defining cost and defining rent is not always so easy
as when there is a clear cause-effects relation like between the origin of damages to
the environment and the affected part of the environment. And there are more than
one cause-effects relation very often. A method to deal with this is by translating the
effects (i.e., the outcomes of activities deployed in a natural environment) into flows
of environmental services The following exhibit shows five of these services in for￾estry. They can be delivered by man or by the biophysical relationships that exist in
forests; they have effects and monetary impacts as shown in Table 12.
The example shows that the economic value of a resource/an environmental sys￾tem can be calculated as the total of the discounted present values of these flows. An￾other type of service flows is rents obtained from an asset. If the asset is tangible, like
an office building which is on the market, monetary values are available for the in￾vestment and the returns. But not all flows are traded in the market. For instance,
while an acre of wetland might trade in the market based on its value for commercial
or residential development, it may also be used a as a wildlife habitat and as a means
of controlling floods and recharging groundwater. From these services, quite a differ￾ent value will be produced: There are different ‘rents’ obtained from different uses
(Freeman et al. 2014).
The methodology of rent capitalization for public goods has been refined over time;
it has become a prominent technique in frameworks for comprehensive valuation meas￾ures. One such framework is the “Survey of Methodologies for Valuing Externalities and
Public Goods” (Hayden 1989); the subject is both natural ecosystems and socio￾138 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingecosystems. The survey lists systems analysis, matrices, rent capitalization and
cost-benefit approaches. One of its main achievements is that it has created a com￾prehensive terminology for service flows that distinguishes between provisioning
services, regulating, supporting, and cultural services. The terminology was taken
up by The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity Initiative (TEEB), a global ef￾fort commissioned by the Group of Eight (the “G8” inter-governmental political
forum) and hosted by the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP). The com￾ponents are:85
– Provisioning services are the products obtained from ecosystems such as food,
fresh water, wood, fiber, genetic resources, and medicines.
– Regulating services are defined as the benefits obtained from the regulation of
ecosystem processes such as climate regulation, natural hazard regulation, water
purification and waste management, pollination, or pest control.
– Supporting services are those that enable the production of all other ecosystem
services, like biomass production, production of atmospheric oxygen, soil forma￾tion and retention, nutrient cycling, water cycling, and provisioning of habitat.
– Cultural services include non-material benefits that people obtain from ecosys￾tems such as spiritual enrichment, intellectual development, recreation, and aes￾thetic values.
This categorizing allows a pertinent definition for various types of ecosystem service
flows. When all the impacts caused by a specific flow ecosystem are quantified, their
Table 12: Linking Forests, Water, and Cost of Environmental Maintenance.
Relationship Effect Monetary Impact
The rate of runoff in a watershed
is slowed down
Forest vegetation takes up water and delays
the time to soil saturation
Lower cost for soil
improvement
Soil erosion and sedimentation of
waterways is reduced
Vegetation and leaf litter protect the soil
from the impact of rain
Cost for drainage is
lowered
Forest soils filter out
contaminants
Influence on water chemistry Cost for water
treatment is lowered
Groundwater recharge is reduced Precipitation is intercepted by vegetation and
returned to the atmosphere
Irrigation cost is
lowered
Forests sustain aquatic
productivity
Trees shade waterways and moderate water
temperatures
Population of
freshwater fish grows
Source: Adapted from Johnson et al. 2001, p. 3.
 http://www.teebweb.org.
4.5 The database 139aggregate monetary value equals the total net benefit of the policy that has set these
flows. Again, here we have a numeric base for decision making.
In social public goods, policy decisions may directly affect wellbeing. And they are
often based on monetary considerations as with health and healthcare. Unfortunately,
the monetary is mostly restricted to expenses and income of health institutions. There
are other monetary aspects, though: Health is influenced by social support (Iecovich
et al. 2011, Saito et al. 2005), by living conditions (Wahl et al. 2009) as well as, among
others, by social institutions and culture (Hall and Lamont 2009). All these, each to a
different extent, indicate public and private expenses for public goods which reflect
monetary value. And insufficient provision of these goods leads to monetary losses for
society. The losses decrease social resources/social capital.
Social resources/social capital has become a prolific concept but it has also become
critically debated in the social sciences. Since the works of Bourdieu (in his seminal
work of 1974; see also Bourdieu 1986), the approaches to the term have shifted over
time. For Bourdieu, social capital originates in families and clans, or in clubs, where
members are homogenous. This similarity of attitudes and cultural practices produces
and reproduces social benefits which perpetuate a class society. Putnam (1993), from
his studies on civic associations in Italy defines it as set of horizontal relations between
people, from which attitudes and norms develop that impact the productivity of a com￾munity. Coleman (1988) gives a broader definition: “a variety of different entities, with
two elements in common: they all consist of some aspect of social structure, and they
facilitate certain actions of actors – whether personal or corporate actors – within the
structure” (Coleman 1988, p. 12). This implicitly considers relations among groups rather
than among individuals. A more encompassing view includes the political and social
and environment which shapes social structures and enables norms to be developed
and applied (see, e.g., Grootaert 2001). Social capital cannot be detached from the socie￾tal foundation laid by public institutions. Otherwise, one could assume that civil society
conflicts can simply be settled by society itself and “in its inner workings” (e.g., Foley
and Edwards 1997; 1999; Grix 2001) and not through the political system. However, the
political system – well functioning government agencies – is needed to prevent that so￾cietal conflicts end up in civil disruption. Social networks and CSOs cannot avert this on
their own. Hence, over-simplifying the social capital concept is not an abstract matter
that can be dissociated from praxis. A practical approach, i.e., the operationalization of
the social capital concept, is needed to exhibit how it connects with social institutions,
with value creation and with increase in wellbeing (Bhandari and Yasunobu 2009; Ros￾tila 2011).
Attempts to operationalize the social capital concept have long been overshad￾owed by the World Bank approach which is restricted to a networking perception:
“The institutions, relationships, and norms that shape the quality and quantity of a
society’s social interactions” (World Bank 1998). While the definition includes “institu￾tions”, which should encompass the political environment, the five key aspects which
the World Bank engrained in its indicator for measuring the state of social capital are
140 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingall intangible (World Bank 1998, p. 9): groups and networks – trust and solidarity –
collective action and cooperation – social cohesion and inclusion – information and
communication. And there are no indications to numerals that would properly reflect
how to measure these aspects. Therefore, the Bank resorted to proxy statistics; in
doing so, it tried to bring in a contextual relation between social capital aspects and
available statistics, e.g., between the number of civic associations and the level of wel￾fare. But this context differs from country to country and even from one district to
the other,86 and no indicator can mirror these differences. For this reason, the con￾cept became very controversial from the beginning and has remained so to this day.
In consequence, the World Bank no longer provides updates to its index (Hammer
and Pritchett 2004). A new emphasis on social capital was laid with the bank’s new
strategy for reducing povertywhich seeks a connection between institutional reform
and the promotion of social associations. The reasoning is: If state and social institu￾tions are made more responsive and accountable to the poor, service agencies get
closer to poor communities and poor people and the “social capital” of these commu￾nities will notably influence development (Ruckert 2010).
The need for more and more effective social capital also comes out from the con￾cern for the next generation as per the Brundtland definition of sustainable develop￾ment (see: WCED 1987). It does not suffice to solely employ tangible production
factors for future generations to achieve as much welfare or possibly more than for
the current generation; intangible inputs of social capital also play a major part.
Social capital in its more extensive meaning generates definite benefits for indi￾viduals or for groups (i.e., for their wellbeing) and the effects may last for a long time.
The variety of such outcomes spans from job opportunities to competitive advantage
of firms, from individual and public health to educational performance, from socio￾economic development to government effectiveness (see, e.g., Lin and Erickson 2008,
Kay and Johnston 2007; Portes 2000, Woolcock 1998). Viewing social capital as an out￾comes concept makes it receptive to monetary valuation: When making the concept
encompass institutions like government and government agencies, the rule of law, the
court system, etc., input/output relations as well as cost and benefit assessments can
be brought in. This would lead to quantifiable items with which to measure the value
of social and institutional infrastructure.
The wider interpretation of social capital also comprehends the terms of Social
Value, Social Resources, Institutional Capital, and Governmental Social Capital (North
1990). It is the assets engrained in the political, legal, and institutional environments
which produce or condition social capital. By attributing value to the formal institu￾tions (an input) which produce social cohesion (an output), we get a link between a
tangible base and intangible outcomes which determine human progress. This makes
 A method to measure social capital on a local base (district, ZIP–codes) was developed by the
Basel Institute for Commons and Economics (http://www.commons.ch). See: Dill and Gebhart 2016.
4.5 The database 141the outcomes quantifiable. When looking at developing countries, for instance, invest￾ment in the efficiency of the basic government institutions, the rule of law, and the
labor market should have a measurable output, i.e., improved, or higher, or more so￾cial capital. And th. outcomes– more job opportunities, higher business competitive￾ness, better health conditions and better schooling, etc., – become measurable as well.
Figure 14 demonstrates how to construe a relation between the World Bank’s social
capital definition and the resources definition:
The figure exhibits that both resources or relationships build social capital:
Embedding them into an integrated concept will make the definition of social capital
more precise and will lead to improving the efforts to make it measurable (Poder
2011). This can best be studied on the local and regional levels, where regional institu￾tions as well as local businesses exert the most direct influence on building social cap￾ital (Peiró Palomino and Tortosa-Ausina 2012).
The following will show two cases where quantifications have been made – one for
natural and one for social public goods.
Resource effectiveness for the Urmia Lake Basin
The Urmia Lake Basin87 is an area of about 52,000 square km located in the northwest
of Iran. The minimum level of the basin is 1171 meters above sea level, the maximum is
3732 meters. It has the world’s second largest salty lake. The lake has faced a gradual
deterioration in the early 2000s as it suffers from unsustainable development in the en￾vironment around the lake (see, e.g., Schulz et al., 2020), apart from the consequences
Quantifiable Outcomes 
Groups and networks
Trust and solidarity
Collective action and cooperation
Social cohesion and inclusion
Information/communication
Social Capital as per the World Bank 
“Social Resources / “Institutional (Social) Capital”/ 
“Governmental Social Capital”/”Social Value”
The (quantifiable) fundament for Social Capital
Figure 14: Social Capital and Social Resources.
Source: Bardy, Saner and Yiu 2015.
 Bozorgzadeh and Mousavi (2021).
142 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingof natural factors such as precipitation decrease and prolonged drought. The anthropo￾genic factors are dam construction, overexploitation of groundwater resources and un￾sustainable use of surface water. The assumption is that changes in agricultural water
abstraction would have a significant impact on the lake volume and could either stabi￾lize the lake or lead to its complete collapse (Schulz et al., 2020). Hence, the assessment
model uses an equation from physics which states that mechanical work (W) is equal to
the amount of energy transmitted by a force (F) acting within a distance/direction (D):
W = F. D = j j F Dj cos α
F and D are vectors, and α is the angle between the two vectors. Now, in a develop￾ment process where a set of strategies, contingency plans, and techniques has been
defined to determine organizational goals, the respective agencies spend natural, eco￾nomical, and human resources to reach these goals. But there is often a gap between
the predefined goals and the outcomes. Expressed in the terms of the equation, the
force is exerted (the resources are used), but no effective work is done (the goals are
not met). In physics, effectiveness is signaled when the angle between two vectors is
acute (see Figure 15 below, where f denotes the actual direction).
If the angle is obtuse (D is low), the function of F is ineffective. For the assessment
and quantification of strategy effectiveness, resources enter the equation as the force
vector, strategies are the direction vector, and development achievements are the
work done.88 In order to seek for failure in sustainable development, the model cho￾D
α
D cos α
f cos α → →
→
→
→
F
f
Figure 15: Force and distance vectors in a strategy-resource relation.
Source: Author.
 A detailed description of the model is given in Bozorgzadeh and Mousavi (2021), pp. 12–15.
4.5 The database 143ses a classification for the resources into (1) human, (2) financial and (3) environmen￾tal ones. This corresponds with the resources used in the Urmia Lake Restoration Pro￾gram established by the Iranian government in 2013. The numerical results of the
study indicate that environmental resources (e.g., decrease of effluents) have a con￾structive role (the angle α is acute), pushing unwanted runoff down by 21%, which
represents a factor ratio equal to 0.79. By contrast, the ratio for human and financial
resources was 1.9, meaning that the negative role of investments in the development
process more than offset the result of the environmental resources. Combining the
factor of 1.9 with the monetary value of the financial resources and the cost of labor
gives a monetary measure for the environmental damage, and it also allows to assess
a total value for the environmental treasure of the Urmia Lake.
Social capital in sustainability reporting of Italian cities
Italian municipalities have introduced monetary valuation of their social infrastructure
for quite some time (Rollo 2022).The first jurisdiction which issued a sustainability re￾port on a regular basis was the Province of Modena in Northern Italy (Provincia di Mod￾ena 2004). The intention was to account for the five social resources of fertility, social
security, mobility, and well working institutions each second year until 2014 (Sancas￾siani 2005). Then, with the upcoming of the United Nations agenda on the SDGs, the
Modena officials together with other cities sought to construe a local sustainability
index that would correspond to the SDGs. The effort was also influenced by the Smart
Cities debate which recognized that urban performance, apart from depending on phys￾ical infrastructure, is as well built on social infrastructure and knowledge communica￾tion (Fondazione Ambrosetti 2012; see also Evans et al. 2013; Cardullo and Kitchin 2019).
The attempt to draw up an urban sustainability index in Italy was, to some extent,
motivated by the fact that a ranking on SDG implementation89 placed Italy 29th of 6
countries in 2017, after Sweden, Denmark, and Finland, but behind also other coun￾tries like Slovakia, Hungary and Latvia (Farnia, Cavalli and Vergalli 2019). This was
taken up as a challenge by Italian scholars and practitioners: Conjoining an urban
performance index with the SDGs would allow to determine where the SDG imple￾mentation process was progressing and where more impetus was needed. The nexus
to implementation places the Italian Cities Sustainable Development Index visibly
above other indicators, like the 2009 Global City Indicators Program of the World
Bank (https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/10244), or the Cities Data
Book (CDB) of the Asian Development Bank dating from 2001 (https:// www.adb.org/
publications/urban-indicators-managing-cities).
 Rankings of this kind are regularly undertaken by the Sustainable Development Solutions Network
(SDSN). SDSN is a UN initiative for mobilizing scientific and technological expertise to promote practi￾cal sustainable development solutions in its agencies. See: https://www.unsdsn.org.
144 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingThe Italian Cities Index (https://resources.unsdsn.org/sdg-cities-index-for-italy) con￾tains 53 elementary indicators that are connected to 16 out of the 17 SDGs (Goal 14, “Con￾serve Life Below Water”, is excluded). The index measures several Italian municipalities’
performance compared to the average of all municipalities. The data are taken from the
Italian Statistical Office, and special weighting criteria are applied to avoid an overweight
of indicators, particularly of those which are interrelated. As some of the SDGs have
more indicators and some have less, the effect of SDG targets on the composite index was
accounted for: E.g., Goal 1 (“Eradicating Poverty”) gets a high weight but less influence
(reflecting that municipal programs cannot act on their own and need support from na￾tional programs on poverty alleviation), while Goal 8 (“Procuring Decent Work and Eco￾nomic Growth”) gets about the same weight but a higher influence as a municipality is
more autonomous in that respect (Farnia, Cavalli and Vergalli 2019, pp. 8f.). This proce￾dure enables breaking the composite index down into partial performances of a city
within each of the goals.90
An experimental sustainability index for municipalities that would concur with
the SDGs was also attempted for New York City under the auspices of the SDSN91 (Pra￾kash et al. 2017). Another measurement approach has been undertaken by the British
government: A list of 39 indicators for communities has been in use since 2005; this
had been preceded by a list of 49 indicators taken from the Housing Corporation,
which is a non-departmental public agency in the UK (HM Government 2005). Simi￾larly, a list of 40 urban sustainability indicators is employed by the municipality of
Seattle, and other standalone examples can also be found elsewhere (Turcu 2013). But
while they could certainly serve well the respective towns for policymaking in, their
lack of embeddedness in the wider concept of the SDGs does not allow references to
progress in overall sustainable development.
The Italian cities’ approach can serve to find monetary values for social capital:
When connecting an indicator to the outcome it produces, its value can be deter￾mined. For instance, it was found that the indicators for electoral participation and
for willingness to give back to the community (two elements of social capital) affect
whether households invest less in cash and more in stock, use more checks, have
higher access to institutional credit and make less use of informal credit. Allowing for
household income and household wealth, a survey that contrasted cities in Northern
 The qualities of this index, both the break–down facility and the combination of indicator weight
and influence rank it very high in comparison to other composite indices, e.g., the Bertelsmann SDG
Index for OECD countries (Kroll 2015) and its extension, the SDG Index and Dashboard for 149 coun￾tries (Schmidt–Traub et al. 2017). Their objective is not operational; the main purpose is to show dif￾ferences. Still, as they will be updated regularly, they might become the key tool for measuring
progress in the SDG implementation. The big question, which is not a topic to be further discussed
here, is whether the data inputs for the dashboard are comparable or even redundant as the range of
149 countries compels to the usage of statistics that are, in places, not reliable (Dill and Gebhart 2016).
By contrast, the Italian method uses data from one country only.
 See Fn. 89.
4.5 The database 145Italy (high electoral participation) with those in the South (low participation) revealed
that the percentage of cash in portfolio, deposits in portfolio, and stock in portfolio
indicators is clearly linked to these social capital indicators. The effect can be ex￾pressed in numerical terms. So, there is a monetary outcome which enables to esti￾mate the value of this specific social capital (Guiso et al. 2004).
Another method to arrive at monetary terms is by including social capital into a
wellbeing function and estimating the shadow price of social capital. The technique
determines the value of foregone income that people accept in lieu of an increase in
interpersonal trust or fairness, of institutional trust and of family cohesion. The nu￾merical results were achieved through an in-depth analysis of the answers given in
the European Values Study92 and they show that people are willing to sacrifice up to
ca. € 8000 per year if they stay in a relation with high trust and cohesion instead of
moving elsewhere (Orlowski and Wicker 2015). This has a very practical consequence
with regard to . Similarly, an analysis based on individual-level data for housing and
labor markets in Italian cities found that individuals are willing to pay a positive and
significant monetary price (up to € 1150 per year in terms of higher housing costs and
foregone wages) to live in cities where people spend more time with their friends (Co￾lombo and Stanca 2014). On the macro-economic level, a cross section study on 54 Eu￾ropean regions exposed that regional differences in economic growth are related to
social capital, in the form of generalized trust and associational activity – where it is
not the mere existence of networks which counts but active involvement in these rela￾tionships. Again, the data on social capital were taken from the European Values
Study; GDP growth was found to be affected to an extent of ca. 0.5 percentage points
by investments in community relations, in schooling, and for living in agglomerations
(Beugelsdijk and van Schaik 2005).
The interest in measuring social capital has grown over time. It is acknowledged
by researchers and politicians that “we have a pressing need to study social capital
building and the value this produces for society – which may best be understood if its
monetary value is known” (Halstead and Deller 2015, p. xxxvi). This shows how impor￾tant it is to determine the extent at which all public goods, not just the tangible ones,
can improve economic, social, and ecological performance – be it in a bounded envi￾ronment like a city or on a more aggregate level. Many of the SDGs are connected to
social capital. But it seems that the overemphasis on the climate goal often obscures
the view on the manifold efforts that are needed to improve social wellbeing. The
same goes with data on public goods in public statistics.
 The European Values Study is a large–scale, cross–national, repeated cross–sectional survey re￾search program that provides insights into the ideas, beliefs, preferences, attitudes, values and opin￾ions of citizens all over Europe. It was started in the late 1970s by informal grouping of academics,
and it is now carried on in the setting of a foundation: https://Europeanvaluesstudy.eu.
146 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managing4.5.4 Public goods in public statistics
A comprehensive statistical approach requires measures of both how well we are pre￾serving our assets (resource indicators) and how well we are satisfying current needs
(outcome indicators). A resource accounting framework of this type would need to
complement the basic national accounts system for economic statistics. As economic
statistics in the macro-sphere adhere to the United Nations System of National Ac￾counts (“SNA”: https://unstats.un.org/unsd/nationalaccount/docs/1993sna.pdf) in most
countries of the world, the task of building this accompanying accounting system was
undertaken by the United Nations Statistics Division. The outcome of this endeavor is
the UN System of Environmental-Economic Accounts (SEEA), an “SNA satellite system”
(meaning that it is not incorporated into SNA), which has been in process since the
early 1970s.93
Similar to the SNA’s basic structure of discerning between monetary assets (stocks)
and monetary transactions (flows), the SEEA is intended to measure resource stocks at a
point in time (for example, land, forest, water, and animals) and resource flows per unit
of time. The flows correspond to both resource-use by the economy (inputs of energy and
materials into production) and resource-subtraction from the economy (ecosystem inputs
and residuals that are incidental and undesired outputs from the economy). SEEA, unlike
SNA, has one more set of accounts that are separate from stocks and flows. This is envi￾ronmental protection and resource management expenditures (expenses incurred by in￾dustry, government, and households to protect the environment or to manage natural
resources). An additional feature is a reservoir of valuation techniques whose primary
aim is to calculate the cost of natural capital and environmental depletion and degrada￾tion (which, ultimately, would serve to adjust GDP for reflecting the full range of socio￾economic activities beyond merely monetary transactions94). With this, SEAA casts a very
wide net: Further than merely assigning monetary value to the outcome of physical
stock-taking (which is a herculean task in itself), the SEAA aspires to measure what the
natural environment contributes to the economy (the resource flow), as well as the im￾pact of the economy on the natural environment (from pollution and depletive use).
SEEA was employed at the national level for Japan to estimate environmental
damages (Uno 1989). One other application was attempted in India (Haripriya 2001)
which was to adjust GDP for the depletion of the Indian forest resources. It was
shown that this would lower GDP by 1.6%. Both studies were isolated from the routine
of official statistics. No work in this matter has been done recently, perhaps because
of the overwhelming output of climate change analyses which also tie up professional
 Section 4.5.4 is taken, in part, from Bardy et al. 2021, pp. 101 ff., with kind permission of all authors.
 The intention of SEEA to provide indicators for adjusting GDP runs parallel to the “Beyond GDP”
initiatives that have gained momentum after the EU released a “road map” in 2009 for making GDP
inclusive of environmental and social aspects (see: https://ec.europa.eu/environment/beyond_gdp/back
ground_en.html).
4.5 The database 147resources. Still, in forums that are much less raucous than the climate debate, there is
progress under way in improving both the data base and the solutions for contexts
that encompass valuation of natural resources. One such context is the Aichi targets
which predate the Paris climate accord.
The Aichi targets were signed in 2010 when the 194 signatories of the Convention
on Biological Diversity (https://www.cbd.int) met in Nagoya, Aichi prefecture, Japan,
to establish conservation goals for safeguarding global biodiversity, for measuring
progress and attaching values to the effects (https://www.cbd.int/sp/targets). In the ac￾cord, the objective was to:
– address the underlying causes of biodiversity loss by mainstreaming biodiversity
across government and society,
– reduce the direct pressures on biodiversity and promote sustainable use,
– improve the status of biodiversity by safeguarding ecosystems, species, and ge￾netic diversity,
– enhance the benefits to all from biodiversity and ecosystem services,
– enhance implementation through participatory planning, knowledge manage￾ment and capacity building.
The Aichi process involved the business sector, other stakeholders and data holders
right from the beginning (Weber 2014). So, any Aichi activity sets off with a perspec￾tive that integrates the public and the private entities, both for management of a proj￾ect and project resources. One case is the project for the management of two natural
protected areas of the coastal zone of Campeche, Mexico (Galindo-González and Riv￾era-Arriaga 2018). The project had been delayed for over 23 years because federal,
state, and municipal governments could not agree on a suitable scenario that would
include businesses. Then the Aichi determinants were used to define the value of the
two areas; this helped to trigger the launch of the project. The Aichi process also con￾tributed to evolve suitable marine governance in protected areas of the sea around
the United Kingdom which were endangered by over-industrialization (Wright 2015).
The winning factors here were creating reliable data, arguing in a non-ideological
way, and transparent cooperation between all stakeholders.
The Achi targets are not meant to build and value inventories of natural resour￾ces, but their valuation method can be used to set monetary values to specific objects.
The SEEA, by contrast, set out to build such inventories. The UN Statistical Commis￾sion adopted an experimental version of SEEA in 2012 which was tested in a few proj￾ects. The objective of the projects was to develop additional methods (Murty and
Panda 2016, Friend 2012, 2019). In parallel with these projects, Statistics Netherlands
developed a supporting methodology developed for the European Union Commission.
This is the National Accounting Matrix of Environmental Accounts (NAMEA). NAMEA
describes the flows of material through the economy through an input-output matrix
(Stauvermann 2006). All European Union member states are participating in the Euro￾pean Commission’s NAMEA project.
148 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingAnother expansion of the SNA is the Social Accounting Matrices (“SAMs”) (Leader￾ship Group SAM 2003). SAMs start with linkages between sectors of an economy (like
an input-output matrix), but other than the traditional framework95 which is limited
to institutional units and shows how outputs of the government, the business and the
household sector serve as inputs to the other sectors, SAMs features a different type
of units: (1) products, (2) establishments (production units), (3) primary input units
(employed persons, loans, etc.). With this, a SAM incorporates detailed information on
labor and households (the “social”) into the system. It provides data on the generation
of income in an economy by differentiating labor inputs according to sex, level of edu￾cation, and type of profession. This gives a sub-division of the household sector. Form￾ing household groups can also provide a lead towards measuring social capital/social
resources: When the breakdown follows economic criteria (level of income or expen￾diture), social criteria (education, age, gender, affiliation with societal groups), and
geographical criteria, it records inter-relationships. And it attaches a monetary value
to the benefits from these relations (Mainar-Causapé et al. 2018; also, Keuning and de
Ruuter 1988, Pyatt 1991).
Data on the cost of public health are a rubric of their own. They are, however, not
disclosed uniformly in each country because the System of National Accounts does
not clearly define the components of health cost. This disfigures cross-country com￾parisons of healthcare-spending and -outcomes which complicates debates on the effi￾cacy of healthcare. For example, in discussing the US healthcare system, observers
note that the U.S. spends more on healthcare (per capita and as a share of GDP) than
any other nation, while it ranks very low in the quality of health among major devel￾oped economies. But the data on spending do not reveal the distribution of that
spending across the population, the drivers of cost by type of provider and disease,
and the productivity (or quality- adjusted real output) of spending (Aizcorbe et al.
2018). While the SNA counts all the costs for private for-profit hospitals, including
their capital costs, it excludes the depreciation component and the interest component
for hospitals run by the government. This leads to a bias between countries where the
share of private hospitals is different. Also, a number of countries list medical re￾search and development and training/education expenditures under healthcare cost
(Schreyer and Mas 2018). So, the national accounts reveal contents that may differ
from country to country. A better source for comparable data is the World Health Or￾ganization (WHO).
The World Health Organization issues annual reports that show recent trends,
e.g., on life expectancy and causes of death.96 They specifically relate to the health￾related goal in the SDGs, which is SDG # 3. It aspires to ensure health and wellbeing
 The traditional Input-Output Matrix is a key tool in the economic analysis since its origins (Leon￾tief, 1936) as it provides useful description of inter-sectorial relations. It analyzes the production side
of the economy, but it does not mirror the complete behavior of the economic system.
 https://www.who.int/gho/publications/world_ health_statistics/2019/en.
4.5 The database 149for all, including universal health-coverage and safe/effective access to medicines and
vaccines. The WHO explicitly states, though, that disaggregation is not possible for all
indicators; meaning that the national statistics which serve as the sources are defi￾cient. Hence, the WHO reports are incomplete. The lack of local level data is not just a
feature of health statistics. It has become one of the many statistical obstacles with
regard to implementation of the SDGs. In the health sector the statistical problems
also reveal institutional deficits (Bloom, Standing and Lloyd 2008). Therefore, many
developing countries do not have the information on where to launch specifically con￾figured projects and programs for improving or restoring health, which impedes
progress in, e.g., eradicating the consequences of a pandemic like COVID-19, or for im￾provements in other areas of social concern. SDG # 3 is connected to several other
SDGs that indirectly cover health issues. So, measuring progress in all of these is
hampered.
For improving progress measurement, the WHO has adopted some features of
what has been developed by the Statistical Office of the EU, Eurostat (Macfarlane and
AbouZahr 2019). Eurostat gives the following categorization for health statistics (see,
e.g., Aromaa 1998):
1. Health status (including data on span of healthy life years, mortality and life ex￾pectancy, causes of death);
2. Specific health conditions (affectedness by types of diseases and injuries);
3. Health determinants – lifestyles (including consumption, obesity, mental wellbeing);
4. Healthcare expenditure;
5. Healthcare human and physical resources (physicians, nurses, hospital beds, etc.);
6. Healthcare activities (surgeries, consultations, preventive services, etc.).
The World Health Organization’s adapted Framework for Country Health Information
can now detect the need for specifically tailored aid, and when programs are set up,
their performance can be monitored directly. This also relates to private programs, as
it coincides with World Bank Group restructuring itself from being a lender for major
development projects to a broker for private sector investment (Sridhar, Winters and
Strong 2017). Together with SDG Agenda’s overall emphasis on improving the local da￾tabase, better World Bank data will substantially support the implementation of SDG
# 3 and upgrade the global public good of health (see, e.g., UNECE 2017).
4.6 Monitoring public goods provision
Monitoring the public goods delivery involves several questions: Which methods can
be applied for controlling public goods provision? Which indicators are available on
the local, national, and global level for determining if provision of a public good
meets the needs? How can public good provision be coordinated effectively? A broad
array of tools for this and other types of monitoring and controlling is available from
150 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingbusiness administration, like Zero-Based Budgeting, Outcome-Based Budgeting, and
the Balanced Scorecard, to name a few.97 A local community, for instance, must install
monitoring schemes that observe if the projected demand for a public good is fulfilled
by quantity and quality. Data can often be drawn from surveys and statistics, e.g., fig￾ures on the demand for schooling (Brasington 2002). The same applies to the demand
for healthcare, where econometric techniques, forecasting through parametric proba￾bility, dynamic panel data models, etc., can be deployed (see, e.g., Jochmann and
León‐González (2004).
The monitoring scheme will have to get different for cross-border ventures or
global public goods. When a multitude of governments, businesses and individuals in
various countries align their activities for a common purpose, they may be bound to￾gether through treaties, regulatory mechanisms, and systems of standards. These are
coordination instruments that can be applied both to the core activity of a venture
(like conservation of the biosphere) and for activities that complement it. Table 13 ex￾hibits examples of such core and complementary activities.
 The baseline of Zero-Based Budgeting is that it starts with questioning a budget-position: What
would happen if it would not be funded? Outcome-Based Budgeting asks for non-monetary conse￾quences of a budget, and the Balanced Scorecard looks at cause-effect relations from various perspec￾tives that are interlinked.
Table 13: Linkages between international and national activities in public goods.
Sector & Scope Core Activity Complimentary Activity
Environment
International Research to reduce emissions Regulation and tax incentives
National Conservation Environmental education
Health
International Research to eliminate disease Vaccine distribution system
National Preventive health care Health care system
Knowledge
International Specialized research centers Internet Infrastructure
National Education service Education infrastructure
Security
International Conflict Prevention Institutions for conflict Management
National Crime reduction Policing
Governance
International Multilateral institutions Strengthening domestic civil society
National Good government Civil service reform
Source: Barrett 2007, p. 41.
4.6 Monitoring public goods provision 151The terms “core” and “complementary” in this table are taken from the World Bank’s
terminology of Official Development Assistance (ODA) for financing development
projects (many of which are national or international public goods). Complementary
expenditure, in most cases, is higher than core expenditure. It is directed to activities
“on the ground”, i.e., within a particular country or region, and the cause-effect rela￾tion in the project can be controlled locally (World Bank 2001). For example, conflict
prevention (an international core activity as per Table 13) starts with policing at the
national levels, but the core may lie at a level above. The importance of local activities
has motivated the World Bank, in elaborating new modalities for control, to increase
local staff for monitoring the activities of its regional projects. This was seen as a stra￾tegic change from the more centric control it had hitherto practiced (Corral et al.
2020). With this, national governments whose faculties for control had been limited,
will now assume the role of the monitoring agency. This extends beyond checking if
funds are coming in as planned towards direct intervention when deviations arise.
The local staff would have the power to enforce fulfillment of contracts – the interna￾tional institutions often lack this power. This new division of work allows the interna￾tional institutions to better concentrate on their role as program enablers, not only
with regard to funding arrangements but also with regard to conceptual tasks that lay
the base for control and monitoring. Two cases are the World Trade Organization
(WTO) and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). An￾other one is the United Nations Human Rights Council (UNHRC).
4.6.1 Enablers and monitors global collective efforts: WTO, UNCTAD and UNHRC
Both the World Trade Organization (WTO and the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development (UNCTAD) are concerned with building a better foundation for global
wellbeing. The WTO mission statement says it is about “ensuring a level playing field
for all, thus contributing to economic growth and development” and it clarifies that
businesses, consumers and the state are all alike.98 “Level playing field” is not merely a
phrase. Arranging for equitable conditions is the quintessence of WTO corrective ac￾tions (see, e.g., Grané 2001). Similarly, UNCTAD, one of whose primary roles is to pro￾vide investment treaties that warrant fair conditions for all parties, establishes level
playing fields among national governments, enterprises, and civil society organizations.
UNHRC, the United Nations Human Rights Council, monitors whether businesses and
states comply with thematic human rights issues like women’s rights, freedom of belief
and religion, freedom of expression, freedom of association and assembly, and the
rights of racial and ethnic minorities. The United Nations Forum on Business and
Human Rights, set up by UNHRC in 2011, uses its Guiding Principles on Business and
 https://www.who.int/gho/publications/world_ health_statistics/2019/en.
152 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingHuman Rights to prevent and address the risk of adverse impacts of business activity
on human rights. Likewise, guidelines for business cases have been established in the
field of ecology by UNCTAD’s sister organization, the United Nations Environment Pro￾gram (UNEP), such as “The Business Case for the Green Economy: Sustainable Return
on Investment” (UNEP 2012). They also address the need for equity in international eco￾nomic rules; the call is for a “hand-in-hand association” among equals – whether rich
or poor (see, e.g., Saner 2016).
The broad mandate of UNCTAD and the WTO, which is linking trade and invest￾ment to economic, social, and environmental development, includes dozens of pro￾grams that affect public goods – e.g., the programs for mitigating the consequences of
global climate control. In the developing world, this is about measures for climate
change adaptation which must be balanced with the public good of socio-economic
wellbeing. Program designs need to consider this carefully. Often, ecological reflec￾tions are not at par with economic issues, and therefore implementing those meas￾ures may often end up in conflicts. Also, local conditions are different, and the overall
cost of mitigation measures may be less, e.g., for protecting small island states from
rising waterlines than for reducing carbon dioxide emissions in the African hinter￾land. Cost matters, though, must be pondered thoroughly. Above all, budgets must
comprise the cost of the overall consequences. For example, in Africa, it would be
easy (and not incur high cost at first sight) to ban the use of unclean energy like fire￾wood. The argumentation from outside is mostly about positive consequences. It is
unquestionable that terminating the use of unclean cooking facilities will diminish
health hazards, domestic/shack fire accidents, and premature deaths, and that chil￾dren who need to spend hours for collecting firewood in far-away areas can attend
schools instead (Longe 2021). This will certainly outweigh negative consequences in
many cases, but if access to clean residential fuel like liquefied petroleum gas (LPG)
and electricity is not accelerated throughout all regions of a country, households are
left with no choice. In rural Kenya, for instance, almost 88% of fuel source is firewood,
while for urban consumption, 44% is kerosene (Waweru et al. 2022). So, a simple solu￾tion will not help here – other than in the case of the small island states, where mov￾ing people away from the waterlines is a clear-cut way out of the problem. The way
out of a conundrum like the firewood issue will lie with new technologies that over￾come the scarcity of clean sources of energy. As a matter of fact, many of the United
Nations support programs are about technology transfer combined with demand side
solutions for, e.g., settlement planning and changes of land use (Creutzig et al. 2016).
Support programs by the community of international organizations always need to in￾clude local governments at par with global technology firms and their regional counter￾parts. With its Inter-Agency Task Force on Social and Solidarity Economy, the UN has set up
a vehicle that is destined to address the social challenges arising from solving environmen￾tal issues in the developing world (see: http://www.unrisd.org/tfsse). Providing what is called
‘ownership’ of an international development project to the local authorities is a main objec￾tive of an OECD initiative for effective private sector engagement in development co￾4.6 Monitoring public goods provision 153operation. Its guidelines are laid down in the Kampala Principles, named after the capital of
Uganda, where the steering committee of the Global Partnership for Effective Development
Cooperation group99 met in March 2019. Numerous projects have been launched since then
in Asia, Africa, and South America (examples are given at https://effectivecooperation.org/
landing-page/gpedc-stories-progress). The focus is on improvement of farming, small indus￾tries, and trade where the outcomes impact social progress of the respective communities
and beyond.
The Kampala Principles projects which reach down to the local level are one seg￾ment of global development cooperation. There are other segments which address is￾sues that originate at local levels, but their effects can go way beyond. One such issue
is liability for environmental damage. The global community, in coping with the man￾ifold problem of pollution, has developed two options: One is the ‘polluter pays’ strat￾egy that attempts to remedy what results from market failure. The objective is to
internalize the effects of pollution into the cost calculus of the market players. The
party that is responsible for the damage done to the environment will be charged
with the cost associated with reverting that damage. But can the culprit be found out
easily? Is it the manufacturers of plastic who damage the environment with their
products? Is it the consumers who do not dispose of plastic products in an orderly
fashion? Is it the recycling firms which have formed alliances with fraudsters off all
the seashores? These questions reveal that concerted action is required from the in￾ternational community. Levying charges on the producer may relieve local communi￾ties from the cost of cleaning their streets, but this would not educate those who
pollute the streets, and it would not prevent skippers from dumping their garbage
cargos into the oceans. Close monitoring of ships by satellite systems and drastic fines
might be a solution, but the wrongdoers will often escape justice. So far, protecting
the global public good of clean oceans is still a global challenge.
The other strategy lies with devising a new format of private ownership rights
and assigning these rights to environmental goods. This would create entitlements,
and these entitlements could be traded on markets. For example, a community can
become ‘owner’ of a seashore which is polluted by plastic waste. Then it can contract
a specialist firm for clearing up and concede this ownership right to the contractor.
The idea was born by Gary Don Libecap, University of California Professor of Corpo￾rate Environmental Management, a research associate at the U.S. National Bureau of
Economic Research. Property rights, he says, “link individual incentives with social
objectives for environmental and natural resource use. Property rights allow for mar￾kets, and markets provide price signals on alternative uses, generating data on the
costs and benefits of constraining emissions, fishing, and other forms of common-pool
 Global Partnership for Effective Development Co-operation (https://effectivecooperation.org) is a
multi-stakeholder platform attached to the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Its objec￾tive is to advance the effectiveness of global development efforts on all levels.
154 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingextraction and of providing environmental amenities and other potential public
goods” (Libecap 2009, p. 132). This type of a rights-based solution, as it asks for a novel
form of trade, needs an enabler (whether the WTO or UNCTAD) that validates it on an
international scale. The topic has already been taken up on a regional scale: The Ca￾ribbean Environment Program Regional Action Plan for Marine Litter and the Arctic
Regional Action Plan Against Plastic Pollution employ rights-based solutions that in￾volve the private sector (Balton et al. 2020). The Arctic Regional Action plan operates
under the auspices of the Oslo Paris Commission (OSPAR; https://www.ospar.org), an
international convention that fights dumping and marine pollution in the North-East
Atlantic. OSPAR has coordinated marine litter measuring in the region for many
years. There are many standalone activities by individual governments but challeng￾ing the trans-boundary concern of plastic waste requires an overarching initiative
like the Arctic Regional Action Plan. The plan couples indigenous knowledge of local
communities with industrial innovation for waste prevention and cleaning. The
plan’s cleanup projects compile data on the location and on the amount, origin, com￾position, and distribution of plastic waste. Thus, collection of waste and recycling can
be paired. This enables funding. From there, all involved parties, including “scientists,
politicians, industry leaders, communities, indigenous peoples, non-governmental or￾ganizations, and other stakeholders – will be able to co-create lasting solutions to the
Arctic marine plastic pollution problem” (Balton et al. 2020, p. 3).
Libecap’s proposition to abate pollution from plastic waste by conferring cleaning
rights comes close to the U.S. system of permits for releasing SO2 and NOx emissions
that can be traded in a special market. In its first years, the system has produced cost
savings of over 1 billion US$ relative to what might have been possible under a regula￾tion that merely defined restrictions (Tietenberg 2007). The European system of emis￾sion rights trading is based on the same idea, and both systems need polycentric
approaches at multiple levels. It is hoped that the plastic waste issue can get a similar
treatment in a transnational setting. The topic of the greenhouse gases is older. But if
we simply replace “greenhouse gases” with “plastic waste” in the wording which has
been used for collective action against global warming, the urgence of both issues be￾comes comparable: “Global warming is a quintessential global pure public good, be￾cause each country’s release of greenhouse gases augments the world’s atmospheric
stock in an additive fashion and each country’s cutback results in a greater cost than
benefit for that country unless assurances can be given that a sufficient number of
nations will act” (Sandler 1998, p. 225).
The dumping of plastic has a visible effect, more than global warming, where the
cause-effects relation will always be a subject of debate. There is another public good,
though, where the cause and effects relations are also very visible. This is food security.
4.6 Monitoring public goods provision 1554.6.2 Food security: A global public good to be controlled bottom-up
Meeting the food demands anywhere in the world is one of the biggest challenges facing
mankind. With the rapidly expanding global population, this is one of the most urgent
problems that needs to be solved. in the world. The carrying capacity, which is the abil￾ity of the world to feed and sustain itself, is presently estimated to be between 9 and 10
bn people.100 Present population reports total approximately 8 bn, of which about one
third is undernourished, and about 13.5% suffer from chronic hunger or food insecurity
(Sasson 2012). Fighting hunger already requires huge resources from the global commu￾nity. Estimates are that the demand for food will increase by 70% (van Dijk et al. 2021).
Having sufficient food sources is imperative for our continued existence. “Suffi￾cient”, “affordable”, and “nutritious” come within the definition of by the World Food
Summit.101 There are four central dimensions (FAO 2006):
– The availability of sufficient quantities of food of appropriate quality, supplied
through domestic production or imports (including food aid).
– Access by individuals to adequate resources (entitlements) for acquiring appro￾priate foods for a nutritious diet. Entitlements are defined as the set of all com￾modity bundles over which a person can establish command given the legal,
political, economic, and social arrangements of the community in which they live
(including traditional rights such as access to common resources).
– Utilization of food through adequate diet, fresh water, sanitation and healthcare
to reach a state of nutritional wellbeing where all physiological needs are met.
This brings out the importance of non-food inputs in food security.
– Stability through securing continuous access to food even through times of sud￾den shocks (e.g., an economic or climatic crisis) or cyclical events (e.g., seasonal
food shortages).
For attaining food security, businesses, state actors, international institutions and civil
society organizations need to work together, beginning at the local level – food pro￾ducers, food retailers, independent auditors and certifiers, state and federal ministries,
and consumer protection institutes. But it is often hotly debated that these diverse pub￾lic and private actors form a coalition. The contentious phrase is ‘co-regulation by the
interested parties’. The argument against this is that the “fundamental ways how people
eat, how much they pay for food, and how it reaches the dining table” (Rudder, Fritsch￾ler and Choi 2016, p. 21) cannot be left to private intervention, and that food security
should be governed by the state exclusively. However, the business sector is one of the
key players: Farmers earn a business income by producing food, tradespeople deliver
 https://www.livescience.com/16493-people-planet-earth-support.html.
 The first World Food Summit took place from 13 to 17 November 1996 in Rome under the direc￾tion of the United Nations Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO).
156 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingand distribute food. The public sector can only prevail in the long run if it involves busi￾nesses in setting the rules. A single central effort cannot secure sufficient levels and ad￾equate types of food, not for the citizens of a state nor of a region.
On the global level, the pertinent institutions are the United Nations agencies of FAO
(Food and Agriculture Organization) and IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural De￾velopment (IFAD) together with WFP (World Food Program), a multi-stakeholder organi￾zation founded in 1961 at the behest of US President Dwight D. Eisenhower. The three
organizations are committed to a multilateral system approach. They cooperate in
channeling the resources for activities on local, regional, and global levels, they promote
investment for increasing sustainable agricultural production, and they support pro￾grams to mitigate the effects of climate change on agriculture and to increase the resil￾ience of agricultural producers towards crises in general (World Summit on Food
Security 2009). The main work for alleviating hunger must be done on the local level.
But there are some issues of food security which require solutions on the global level.
International approaches that aim to secure sufficient, affordable, and nutritious
food are trade agreements, assistance to national governments to formulate policies on
agricultural production, on the pricing of products, and regulations in the commercial,
the healthcare, the fiscal and the occupational areas. This then must reach down to the
community/district levels because it is there and at the household level where the ef￾fects of food-insecurity are felt first and where deficiencies in production, distribution,
transport, and delivery cause defects in food provision quickly. Also, in many countries
households not only consume food but also produce the most of it. Subsistence farming,
which is the term for a type of agriculture that produces only enough to feed the farm￾ers and their families, usually without any significant surplus for sale or trade, nour￾ishes millions of people in the developing world. But they are also most vulnerable:
They regularly suffer from seasonal food insecurity in the period before harvest known
as ‘the season of hunger’. In many countries, especially in Africa, governments are try￾ing to transform this low-income mode to a more competitive income mode (Guma
et al. 2022). The challenges are manifold: smallholder farmers prefer to stay on their
own, and this traditional type of agriculture is not attractive to new entrants; improving
productivity and strengthening under-developed value chains requires ample funding;
land ownership is fragmented and often ruled by tribal authorities. But this is where
international organizations and civil society associations can provide specific support
(Oyo and Kalema 2016).
Whichever type of support is convened, it must first build a system that under￾stands and rapidly addresses food shortages. Signals of shortages always emanate
from the local level, whether in the developing world or elsewhere. In developed
countries they can be monitored by observing groceries and supermarkets. In devel￾oping countries, signals of early warning come from the rural population – shortages
will first be felt by small and marginal farmers, landless workers, small fisheries,
sharecroppers, and small livestock raisers where poverty and food insecurity go hand
in hand. FAO estimates that the largest numbers of the hungry and poor live in 88
4.6 Monitoring public goods provision 157countries. These countries cannot produce enough food, or they are unable to import
food because they lack the financial resources (Liamzon 2010). Their populations are
the most vulnerable when sudden shocks occur (a climatic or an economic crisis) or
who regularly suffer from seasonal food shortage. More than anywhere else, it is in the
regions where these vulnerable societies live that an adequate monitoring system is
needed. From this base, data for control and coordination of remedies can be compiled.
There are technical solutions for monitoring the causes which might produce an im￾minent shortage of food. For instance, several African states have established a ‘National
Early Warning System’ and a ’Famine Early Warning System’ with the support of exter￾nal donors and outside agencies, such as FAO and USAID, the United States Agency for
International Development (Seaman 2002). Beyond merely alleviating ad-hoc deficiencies
in food supply and food balance, they must connect to the daily routines of the rural
communities, where local perceptions and qualitative data can be observed. This would
feed information into the systems that pave a way for development planning and make
those communities familiar with measures they can take on their own (Downing 1990).
If there are technological aspects, they should be kept apart from the political and socio￾economic aspects of direct support. The beneficiaries, then, would better accept technical
innovation. The following points should be thoroughly studied (Saner 2010):
– Techniques must be made transparent, like satellite-based monitors that are al￾ready in orbit for detecting underground water catchment areas and anticipating
signs of drought and deforestation. If the population in these areas understands
what the systems provide, they will cooperate.
– Supranational organizations that participate in the system, like the Intergovern￾mental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and the International Telecommunica￾tions Union (ITU), should be aware that some of the key countries may pursue
strategies of their own, like pushing a vehement industrialization plan for their
agriculture.102 The donors should try to convince them that these particularities
will negatively impact the resolve of the international community.
– While capacity-building for control and monitoring are a prime concern, they
must be embedded in a holistic perspective that would lead to gradually moving
these countries’ agriculture and food processing towards a higher level in the
global value chain.
‘Holistic’ would also entail that the programs for advancing food security are con￾nected to other initiatives. This was done, e.g., through the Save the Children Fund103
 E.g., in 2013, amidst harsh economic and climate change conditions, the government of Uganda
introduced a plan to move the country from a predominantly peasant system with a per capita income
of US$ 500 to an industrialized state with a per capita income of US$ 9,500. Donors responded nega￾tively (Kjær and Ulriksen 2014).
 Save the Children is an international, non-governmental organization that was founded in the UK
in 1919.
158 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingwhich established inclusive systems of data collection in the Mopti region of Mali
(Lambert 1994) as well as in several regions of Uganda, Rwanda, and Burundi (Suresh
and Ergeneman 2005). In village meetings and with key informants like traders and
village elders, methods were designed to retrieve bottom-up data on the availability
of produce and fish, on the conditions of livestock, food consumption and exchange,
employment in farms, and migration. The informants also provided secondary infor￾mation on soil condition and rainfall. There is rich indigenous wisdom in the rural
population that contains techniques for conservation of soil and water, for rational
land-use in agroforestry, and a large array of early warning signals to forecast
weather and temperature (see, e.g., Akolgo-Azupogo et al. 2021, Subramanian and Pi￾supati 2010). From these data, seasonal calendars can be assembled which the various
producer groups can use for harvesting activities and for strategies to cope with exter￾nal events. And foreign donors will better understand how rural communities react
when they connect the indigenous information to other data on livelihood criteria.
Then, labor or capital requirements can much better be assessed for overcoming lo￾calized food insecurity timely and effectively (Davies 2016).
Another connection that must be built is between information providers and cli￾ents/consumers on the level above the rural communities (Kiratu et al. 2011). Efforts
have been made, by, among others, the United Nations University Institute for the Ad￾vanced Study of Sustainability (UNU-IAS; https://ias.unu.edu/en) whose objective is to
improve the use of indigenous knowledge on a broader scale. For this, the United Na￾tions established an Education for Sustainable Development Program with regional
hubs in many African and Asian countries. As of 2023, the program has a global net￾work of about 150 Regional Centers of Expertise (RCEs, https://www.rcenetwork.org/
portal /regional-centers-expertise-rce). These RCEs create partnerships among educa￾tors, policy makers, researchers and community leaders, including young people. One
output is a framework for strategic thinking and collective action on sustainability in
agriculture.
Bottom-up control is essential, but there are obstacles. If there is a price shock for
globally traded agricultural goods, poor countries are much more affected than the
other players on the world market. While some Euro-centric economists argue that it
is the “poor performance of African agricultural trade” (Lamy 2011) which causes
harms and distorts resilience, the main cause lies elsewhere. It is the impediments
fabricated by tariff escalation in the rich countries. They protect their food industry
by levying high tariffs on imports of processed food. But exports of processed food
would bring a higher level of value addition to producers in the developing world.
The effect of those tariffs is that African economies lose all chances to increase the
income from these agricultural exports. Another barrier has been erected by the Eu￾ropean Union, which does not allow imports of genetically modified crops and of food
that is processed from these crops. The paradox is that U.S. donors give genetically
modified seeds to African smallholders for free because they are resistant to dry cli￾mate. The EU practice, which is partly based a ‘green’ ideology, jeopardizes the prog￾4.6 Monitoring public goods provision 159ress which Africa could attain in their economies. The Europeans, as per a bitter ex￾pression, are “sowing misery in Africa” (Hassett and Shapiro 2003). But there is no
other way for the Africans to increase productivity: the alternative would be to apply
expensive chemical pesticides, which is a no go. They abstain from this, which is a
creditable endeavor to avoid the unwanted consequences of chemicals for the quality
of soil. Still, European policy makers do not honor that endeavor (Matthews 2015). An￾other example of harm produced by ideology is the one-sided acceptance in Europe of
the argument that avocado production leaves a “big global footprint” because of its
high use of water (Hoekstra 2015). This type of reasoning neglects that by reducing
avocado growing the livelihood of thousands of small farmers worldwide will be ex￾tinguished – the contrary of support for food security.
There are, though, well-balanced policies that can disjoin African farmers from the
instability of staple food prices. Mainly, they provide incentives which conduce to up￾grade investment in the agricultural sector. This gives rise to a wider range of export
products which will also create spillovers to employment and technological advance￾ment. Parallel to this, developed countries must lift the unilateral measures that impede
imports from Africa on grounds which they justify with what they call “ecological con￾cerns” as mentioned above (Guha and Alier 2013). There are some signs which show
that international policy makers begin to understand which course of action is needed
for African agriculture. One reflection was the launching of the Comprehensive Africa
Agriculture Development Program (CAADP), which increased market integration in
Africa (https:// www.un.org/en/africa/osaa/peace/caadp.shtml). CAADP is a great exam￾ple of teaming up knowledge. Cooperation with, FAO, the UN Economic Commission for
Africa and the African Union, among others, has led to a change of the outdated stance
in the 2001 WTO Agreement on Agriculture which had rested on the false belief that
when opening up agriculture markets in developing countries, they would benefit from
worldwide supply and demand (Skoet et al. 2004). What happened was that Europe
traded poultry to Africa. In consequence of the CAADP, Europe started to discontinue
these controversial exports (Rudloff and Schmieg 2016).
Mainstream institutions like the World Bank or the WTO, as they need to serve all
member countries, tend to favor information that leans on the interests of their major
shareholders. Both pursue research in global markets, and the monitoring of regional
food markets is sometimes neglected. But if market makers – commodity exchanges
and transnational food companies – would direct their attention to the trade flows
into and out from developing countries, they could assist in forward planning and
thus contribute to proactive action if scarcities are anticipated. Such “food and agri￾culture observatories” were built in a few regions in Africa in the wake of the food
crisis of 2007–2008. The intention was to reduce public stockholding (state acquisition,
storage, and subsequent release of food stocks, especially rice, corn, and wheat). This
met with the interest of the key market players to integrate more countries into the
international trade system; in turn, they provided support for the design and im￾provement of food availability prognostics (International Center for Trade and Sus￾160 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingtainable Development 2014; Saner, Tsai and Yiu 2012). Together with international pol￾icies that persistently lower trade barriers, these measures have terminated what has
been called the “institutionalized inequality” in world food markets. This has fortified
a free flow of marketable food products and thus improved agricultural development
in regions that had hitherto been disadvantaged (Nakuja and Kerr 2019).
The food security issue as well as cleaning the oceans from plastic waste show
that the controls which are applied both bottom-up and top-down contribute satisfac￾torily to improve the provision of a global public good. Another case is securing the
human rights of fishermen, which falls under the jurisdiction of the United Nations
Human Rights Council.
4.6.3 Safety for fishermen
Decent working conditions for fishermen, including the protection of their lives has
been the subject of years-long collaborative efforts between UNHRC, maritime states,
global shipping agencies, international CSOs and the international food industry. But
their commitments were unable to fully stop human abuse on fishing vessels. The
problem lies with the overlapping competencies of states, shipowners that operate off￾shore, international regulatory institutions, etc. It seems that they just cannot be har￾monized. Even the UN International Maritime Organization (IMO) cannot remedy the
issue. So, a deplorable situation of modern slavery persists in many offshore territo￾ries, especially in Asia. It seems that Northern buyers cannot (or do not) exert an in￾fluence on labor practices in these countries, and even if international organizations
have a mandate, they cannot enforce it. An example is Thailand’s and Indonesia’s fish￾eries with a high number of unregulated and unreported illegal activities on a large
scale. While there is cooperation between governments, the International Labor Orga￾nization and buyers of seafood, unlawful practices up to human trafficking endure
offshore to where they cannot reach. An attempt was made to eliminate the criminals
from the market by employing third party certification for wild capture fisheries, but
the effect was minimal: Very often, an oversee by governments or by local civil soci￾ety organizations is prevented by maneuvering between jurisdictions (Marschke and
Vandergeest 2016). But there is the Code of Safety for Fishermen and Fishing Vessels
which has been in effect since 2005. The question is why it cannot be enforced on all
types of vessels and in all waters.
Three of the highest-ranked global organizations have approved the Code of Safety
for Fishermen and Fishing Vessels – the Maritime Safety Committee (MSC), the FAO Com￾mittee on Fisheries, and the Governing Body of the International Labor Organization
(ILO). The code explicitly refers to “ensure compliance with appropriate safety require￾ments for fishing vessels and fishers in accordance with international conventions, inter￾nationally agreed codes of practice and voluntary guidelines” (IMO 2006, p. 160). The
4.6 Monitoring public goods provision 161most pertinent conventions are the UN Palermo Protocol104 which sets legal provisions
against human trafficking and the ILO Work in Fishing Convention which is key for en￾suring effective protection of the rights of fishers. For both treaties, the Monterey Frame￾work for Social Responsibility in the Seafood Sector105 provides a Social Responsibility
Assessment Tool which member states use to monitor whether there are indicators in
fisheries of forced labor, abuse of vulnerability, deception, restriction of movement, isola￾tion, physical and sexual violence, intimidation or threats, retention of identity docu￾ments, withholding of wages, debt bondage, abusive living and working conditions,
excessive overtime and whether workers have access to grievance procedures (Lout
2023). The catalogue exposes the vulnerability of people who are subjected to unfair treat￾ment of all sorts. But there are still employers on fishing vessels anywhere who deploy
unlawful conduct towards their employees, and who evade prosecution. A new means to
stop this is SDG Target 8.7 which specifies that “immediate and effective measures be
taken to eradicate forced labor, end modern slavery and human trafficking”. This should
evolve to becoming an effective vehicle, which, first, makes the oftentimes invisible
crimes visible and then gradually eradicate them (Hampton 2019). Another possibility of
action that has been suggested is to involve non-traditional actors such as the financial
and banking sector who are indirectly implicated in the money transfers and laundry
schemes of the traffickers (Saner, Yiu and Rush 2018). A pioneering example has already
been set by Dutch ABN AMRO (Coster van Voorhout 2020).
The fight against human trafficking, whether in fisheries or elsewhere cannot
stop at prosecuting the criminals and bringing them to justice. The needs of the vic￾tims must get better attention as well. Local CSOs can help there, but it would also
help to globally raise more interest in the fate of the workers that are employed in
Indonesia’s and Thailand’s offshore fisheries. The issue has finally been connected to
the Open Government Partnerships initiative. The initiative was founded by the
Obama Barack Administration in 2011 together with the United Kingdom, Norway, the
Philippines, Brazil, Mexico, Indonesia, and South Africa (https://www.opengovpartner
ship.org). Its projects have improved healthcare provision in India and Vietnam and
water services in Chile and Mexico by increasing transparency, by global and local civil
society participation, and by holding public institutions more accountable (Hughes
et al. 2017). The initiative’s endeavors are now embedded in the general context of the
sustainable development agenda. This will help the international community to
give more concerted support to those who are denied their fundamental rights –
 The Protocol was adopted by the United Nations in November 2000 in its session in Palermo,
Italy, as part of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. Member states
that ratify this treaty must develop and enforce anti-trafficking laws.
 The Monterey Framework was developed in 2017 to align efforts for aligning social responsibility
in the seafood sector by a large number of businesses, NGOs, and workers representatives. It is now
recognized by the Conservation Alliance for Seafood Solutions in their Common Vision (Conservation
Alliance for Seafood Solutions 2021).
162 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managinglike the offshore fishermen and the children who work in sweatshops, on coffee
fields, or in illegal or unprotected mine-pits.
Another advance came on when the seafood industry, adopting what has become
common practice in other industries worldwide (McBride 2017), established a system
of standards for fisheries which also include employment attitudes: The Fisheries
Transparency Initiative (FiTI)106 addresses twelve thematic areas, from national fish￾eries laws, regulations, and official policy documents to conditions of labor and fisher￾ies law enforcement. Official development assistance from foreign doners will only be
granted to states which engage in FiTI (Biermann 2021). In many other fields, stand￾ards, if they are recognized on an international scale, and if their application can be
enforced, may also become an instrument to supervise an industry and to monitor
how industry behavior affects public goods and societal wellbeing.
4.6.4 Standards: A means to control provision of public goods
Standards are public goods. This emanates from how standards fit into the public
goods definition: They are available to all, and one firm can use a standard without
diminishing another firm’s use of the standard. Any business can freely obtain an in￾dustry standard from a standard organization without having to invest in their initial
development. Still, for updates, potential adopters may have to invest without being
able to solely profit from the output. This can give rise to collective action dilemmas
(e.g., withholding of information) especially when the groups are relatively small (Per￾eira and Santos 2019). So, a commitment to ensure the diffusion of the standard must
be secured early on. But when the dilemmas have been identified and solved, a stan￾dard will create new public goods, e.g., new knowledge on technical procedures. An
example is Good Manufacturing Practice to which industries adhere voluntarily, but
the rules, in some cases, may become mandatory when a public authority chose to
endorse it. Two have become very important: In the U.S., it is Food and Drug Adminis￾tration (FDA)’s standards for the manufacture of drugs, in Europe, it is the EU Clinical
Trial Regulation (Lamph 2012). The U.S. and the EU have synchronized their standard
setting-in medicine to reach optimum practice transfer. This would ensure that drugs
maintain health and do not endanger it; the standards are an instrument for safe￾guarding the public good of global health.
If standards are not equal throughout borders, less responsible firms will move
parts of their business to jurisdictions where lower standards apply, for instance with
regard to environmental regulations. The consequences may be disastrous. In 1984,
 The German-based non-profit organization Humboldt-Viadrina acted as the fiscal host after is
launch as an association formed by a multi-stakeholder group. The Seychelles, being one of the
first countries to commit to the FiTI, became the official host in 2019 (https://www.fiti.global).
4.6 Monitoring public goods provision 163hundreds of people were killed at the Union Carbide plant in Bhopal because basic
rules for keeping production sites safe (and for ensuring that no dwellings are built
by the factory fence) were not upheld. The contamination of the land in that region
and of the groundwater reserves has not been fully reverted and is likely to stay for￾ever (Mandavilli 2018). There are other cases: Inadequate safety investments in a
chemical plant near Seveso in Italy caused a catastrophe in 1976 when a cloud of di￾oxin and other toxins was released into the air through a sudden exothermic reaction.
It contaminated hundreds of homes in the region. Standard procedures for handling
dioxin did not exist at the time, and neither the producer nor the regional govern￾ment were able to handle this emergency (Centemeri 2010). Since then, these and
other standards were introduced, whether on minimum content of toxins, on plant
safety and hygiene or on laboratory manufacturing practice. Reports on new develop￾ments are issued regularly, and information is exchanged and updated on these prac￾tices. For instance, the United States Government has assured, through reports of that
kind, that the U.S. manufacturing standards for the chemical industry and their inter￾national counterparts continuously provide increases in security within the entire
supply chain of this field (Iveson 2014).
With a view to the catastrophe of Bhopal, the question arises if the many interna￾tional treaties and agreements which have come into force since then would prevent a
multinational firm from resorting to low standards, e.g., in a developing country, in￾stead of applying the high standards of its home country. An answer is given by the ac￾claimed Professor Peter Buckley, a renowned figure in the field of international
business: He says that it is not the regulations emanating from governments which may
have or not have the power to enforce them. But it is “the web of rules and signals
within which corporations operate today”; this web is an outcome from compliance
with industry standards, customer expectations, supplier demands, and civil society
norms. Signals come from all stakeholders of the corporation, not only expressed as
price signals but also through means such as social movements, ownership changes,
and lobbying. “Corporations are not passive receivers of rules and signals; they also
make them. Business organizations, collectively and individually, formulate rules and
send signals to the rest of society” (Buckley 2018, p. 361). This opinion may look very
positive, but feedbacks show that deviations from generally accepted standards are
rare, and they are detected quickly (FDA 2021).
While control of standards application may not be enforceable everywhere,
standards are very useful for assessing if and to what extent businesses contribute
to sustainable development and to sustaining public goods. A well-known instru￾ment are certification schemes. For instance, the UTZ107 standards are used to cer￾tify whether cocoa, coffee, tea, and hazelnuts are sustainably farmed (https://utz.
 The UTZ program founded by Netherlands-based Ahold Coffee Company has its name from Utz
Kapeh which means “good coffee“ in the Mayan language Quiché.
164 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingorg). Similarly, the World Fair Trade Organization sets standards that aim at im￾proving working conditions and prices in small-hold-farming globally (https://wfto.
com/). Ten principles are set by Fair Trade of which almost each refers to a public
good and to human wellbeing (Figure 16):
Another example is standards for sustainable production issued by the Roundtable on
Sustainable Biomaterials (https://rsb.org).
In all standards, the composition of partners is varying: Single firms, industry
consortiums, civil society organizations, public-private stakeholder initiatives, and
government agencies. The diversity of institutional participation reflects the different
forms of standards application in diverse fields and on diverse levels, but this guaran￾tees the effective outcomes in practice (Schouten, Vellema and van Wijk 2014).
Many standards directly relate to the target schemes of a sustainable develop￾ment goal, like SDG 14 (“Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine
resources for sustainable development”) and SDG 15 (“Protect, restore and promote
Principles of Fair Trade
1 OPP0RTUNITIES FOR
DISADVANTAGED
PRODUCERS
3 4 
GOOD WORKING
CONDITIONS
CAPACITY BUILDING
TEN
PRINCIPLES
OF
FAIR TRADE
FAIR TRADE
PRACTICES
FAIR PAYMENT
$
7
PROMOTE 9 FAIR TRADE
RESPECT FOR THE 10 ENVIRONMENT
8
2 TRANSPARENCY &
ACCOUNTABILITY
NO DISCRIMINATION,
GENDER EQUITY,
FREEDOM OF
ASSOCIATION
6 NO CHILD LABOUR 5 NO FORCED LABOUR
O R G A NIZ A TIO N
WORLD FAIR TRAD
E
Figure 16: The World Fair Trade Organization’s Principles.
Source: https://wfto.com
4.6 Monitoring public goods provision 165sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems”). Some standards started as a proprietary
technique. E.g., dairy firm Danone developed its Regenerative Organic Certification
Standard to advance research on regenerative processes for which it committed
6 million US$. The addressees were dairy farms in Danone’s supply chain. They were
taught how to use regenerative agricultural practices (techniques for soil enrichment,
increase in biodiversity, and watershed restoration). The standard became globally
used by the dairy industry and its suppliers, with the worldwide societal benefit that
ecosystems’ abilities are strengthened and that farms’ resilience to impacts from cli￾mate change is enhanced (Doh et al. 2019). In the Danone case, the CSOs who had first
claimed that the firm bought from suppliers which applied non-regenerative farming
methods and was therefore responsibly for ongoing deficiencies in nitrogen fixing,
water storage, and filtration capacities, entered a cooperation with the firm at a later
stage (Marais et al. 2018).
Standards are indispensable also when legal measures are adopted to control the
increasing influence of technology on human lives. The regulatory frameworks issued
by the legislative bodies can only be enforced by the relevant executive agencies if
they are complemented with technical specification material from non-government
sources. Enforcement, though, should not mean punishment and court action: This
would be an indication of failure. The focus must be on understanding and facilitating
compliance. Studies have shown that U.S. authorities, in general, consider compliance
with “a named, nationally recognized code or standard . . . as prima facie evidence of
satisfying the fixed standard of duty”, and that UK courts, when they rule on building￾laws have stated that “specification of technical detail with which conformity is held
shall be a sufficient proof of compliance with standards” (Hitchcock 2006, p. 136). On a
global scale, where national jurisdiction does not reach, control of compliance with
standards can only be performed if all sectors cooperate in monitoring business be￾havior (see below, section 5.2). Such monitoring will also contribute to preventing free
rides and corruption.
4.7 Fighting corruption and free riding
Free riding and corruption abuse and eventually destroy commons and public goods.
Free riding disregards the efforts of others to build and preserve communal property,
and corruption is downright disregard for morality. Whether passive corruption by
“the misuse of public office for private gain”, or active corruption by “inducing a re￾sponsible office holder by monetary or other rewards to take actions which favor
whoever provides the reward”, both produce private benefits illegally to the detri￾ment of a public good (Nye 2002, p. 966). The same is valid for a free rider, but while
corruption can be prosecuted by law, free riding can only be deterred by societal ef￾forts: Free riders place themselves out of one of the major foundations of all economic
actions, which is cooperation. Hence, this position outside society must be made fer￾166 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingvently unpleasant to the free riders. One way is negative incentives, like punishment,
another way is positive ones, like rewards. On the level of individuals, it would suffice
to have a sufficiently high number of cooperators that would crowd out the defectors,
and the threat of punishment or the expectation of a reward (mostly, for naming ac￾complices) might induce them to rather sustain the public good and turn away from
free riding, e.g., in networks that share media objects (Lehmann and Keller 2006).
Still, a network may find that giving away its services to non-members has positive
externalities, e.g., for achieving its goals. Then non-members who make use of these
services would not be viewed as free riders. If they would, networks that wish protec￾tion will find many technical ways to secure access.
Free riding is of a different category on the institutional level. Manufacturing firms
and energy producers can find a high potential for free riding in the carbon-dioxide
emission reduction program. If participation is voluntary, industry members cannot be
forced to partake in the program, and some will enjoy the fruits of the work of self￾regulation while avoiding the costs. So, e.g., the European Union’s Emissions Trading
System (ETS), while mandatory for carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide, and perfluorocar￾bons, can be undercut: In some sectors, only operators above a certain size are in￾cluded, certain installations can be excluded if governments use other measures for
cutting their emissions, and in the aviation sector it only applies to flights between air￾ports located in the European Economic Area (EAA108) (https://climate.ec.Europa.eu/eu￾action/eu-emissions-trading-system-eu-ets_en). The problem lies with the heterogeneous
industrial levels in the various European countries; other compulsory systems are na￾tionwide (Canada, the UK, China, New Zealand, Japan, and South Korea), which makes
monitoring much easier.
Another area of institutional free riding is international trade. Firms which partici￾pate in international trade will achieve an advantage edge if the institutions in their
homeland work effectively, whether political institutions like an unbiased legislative
body and well-working government agencies, and economic ones that the political envi￾ronment protects. If the political system secures rights to real property and to intellec￾tual property, consistent honoring of contracts, impartial courts, they will be better off
than firms based in unstable political environments. There are international organiza￾tions and treaties which set rules for trade (WTO, UNCTAD, etc.). But while rules set by
national institutions can be enforced within the nation state, international organiza￾tions and treaties only have force where the involved countries honor them. This gives
a loophole to free riders who exploit this type of cross-border insecurity (Gmeiner
2021). While the effectiveness which institutions have in an advanced economy can be
transferred with the transfer of its – tangible – products to an importing country, intan￾gibles cannot “carry” these marks. The most prominent example is intellectual prop-
 The EEA links the EU member states and three EFTA states (Iceland, Liechtenstein, and Norway)
into an internal market governed by the same basic rules.
4.7 Fighting corruption and free riding 167erty. Intellectual property is an intangible good which makes the surplus which it pro￾vides susceptible to international misappropriation. The same goes with other ad￾vantages which the economic institutions of an export country propagate, like well
educated workers, quality education and resourceful innovation in product- and mar￾ket-development. The importer may pay for that with the price of the good or the fees
for a know-how contract or for technical assistance. But the exporter cannot control
how other businesses related to the importer make use of these knowledge-transfers.
This is where free riding can even end up in a government institution of the importing
country (Office of the United States Trade Representative 2021).
A few response mechanisms against institutional free riding by traders exist and
can be deployed. If the attack is on common resources or public goods (which leads to
their overexploitation or diminishing), governments can react together with the ex￾port firms in question. Free riding on U.S. pharmaceutical intellectual property, for
instance, affects knowledge protected by U.S. patents. One remedy which the U.S.
chose to curtail this practice was aiding U.S. pharmaceutical companies with subsidies
because interference with the trade systems of the importing countries is a “no go”
(Feldmann 2016). The other American response has been a ban on reimportation of
lawfully produced U.S. drugs that were exported by U.S. firms at lower prices because
some import countries threaten that they would otherwise compulsorily license pro￾duction of generic drugs (Yang and Maskus 2009). An ultimate resort, though the over￾all policy in free markets is to support free flows of goods, is trade restrictions. The
key in implementing such trade restrictions is that they are limited to target the prac￾tices of free riding such as smuggling and theft, and not the outcomes like improve￾ments in natural resource use (Sarker et al. 2018). The question is whether these
improvements (e.g., of groundwater, when perpetrators use a water treatment plant
for free) override the need to penalize free riding. The context of environmental free
riding is a complex one, and sanctions may not achieve the desired effect.
Environmental free riding, at first sight, reaps benefits without the perpetrator
having to bear the cost of cooperation in an ecological effort. While the members to
such efforts produce collective benefits from, e.g., reducing pollution and conserving
resources, the free rider achieves an individual benefit. On a global scale, a country
that engages in conservation of nature will, rationally, wish to secure the benefits that
accrue to foreign countries from this endeavor (Barrett 2003). If these countries coop￾erate by committing to similar policies, the problem is solved. If not, enforcing com￾mitments might be a solution, but this may have unintended consequences. For
instance, in the discussion on policies for protecting rainforests, Germany has sug￾gested that trade sanctions be applied on ozone-depleting substances and products
which contain them, and it has threatened to completely ban the trade in goods
whose production uses ozone-depleting substances (Casarões and Flemes 2019). Apart
from harming the export industries in poor countries, the measure meets legal con￾straints. If this move ever came to pass, the World Trade Organization would declare
such action as non-compliance with international trade agreements (Beaufils et al.
168 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managing2023). The case of carbon border adjustments proposed by the European Union is a
similar one, and it raises similar concerns.
The European Union’s carbon border adjustment mechanism intends to “put a
fair price on the carbon emitted during the production of carbon intensive goods that
are entering EU countries, and to encourage cleaner industrial production in coun￾tries outside the EU”.
109 This would have the same effect as a tariff, but there is more:
UN experts fear that the mechanism would most likely “encourage foreign firms to
export to the EU from their ‘cleanest’, most carbon-efficient plants, while selling
‘dirty’ products to their own domestic users or third countries” (Hufbauer et. al., 2021,
p. 1; UNCTAD 2021). The measure would only make sense if the levy’s proceeds were
hypothecated towards low-carbon innovation in the developing world, and if they
were channeled towards climate change mitigation and adaptation investments in
Least Developed Countries (Burke et al. 2021). That, however, is a very unlikely sce￾nario. But without a recompense to the countries that will suffer from the effects of
the EU’s carbon border adjustment, a new potential of trade-distortion and protection￾ism may come up, and trade relations that are already fraught might be further
strained. Countries which adopt programs to bar carbon intensive goods from enter￾ing their territory might as well fall back on trade sanctions. An outcome of that kind
is undesirable and should be avoided from both a climate-protection and a trade gov￾ernance perspective.
A different view turns up when sanctions are discussed that aim to combat cor￾ruption on a state level where criminal procedures in governments inhibit the moral
development of a country’s legal, political, economic, and cultural institutions. The
players can be found on the level of state officials and on the business level, and on
one level between those, which is the meso-level of industry associations, cartels and
clans that influence markets. They may employ corrupt practices which obstruct the
collaboration between a government and the private sector and are a major hin￾drance for public goods provision (Hoffiani 2019).
While corruption was a predominantly regional or national preoccupation in the
1900s, globalization and public sector deficiencies all over the world have turned cor￾ruption into a global issue where it endangers global public goods. The fight against
corrupt practices has been taken up by governmental and non-governmental organi￾zations on the international echelons – the United Nations, the International Chamber
of Commerce, Transparency International, the World Economic Forum, Interpol and
 See: https://taxation-customs.ec.europa.eu/green-taxation-0/carbon-border-adjustment-mecha
nism_en. The measure is part of a broad set of proposals laid down in 2021 and in which the European
Commission introduced the bloc’s climate change policy agenda for the coming years - the “Fit for 55”
package. They embrace an update of the EU Emissions Trading System and developments with respect
to emissions and removals from land use and forestry, renewable energy, energy efficiency, emission
standards for personal vehicles, among other areas (https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/
green-deal/fit-for-55-the-eu-plan-for-a-green-transition).
4.7 Fighting corruption and free riding 169the OECD.110 There is the unanimous understanding that attacks on corruption must
be launched from the supply side (the bribers) and the demand side (government offi￾cials who are prone to accept or to extort bribes). Sanctions against bribers and black￾listing are arrows in the quiver of the OECD that extinguish a source of income which
the bribers achieve from imports and exports. Governments should be aware that
stopping corruptive practices in cross-border trade will lead to growth in fiscal in￾come that can be used to build better living conditions for their citizens; also, stopping
corruptive practices can rectify distortions in the domestic price system caused by
those practices. This will create improvements in the markets, like better job opportu￾nities – another case where the effects of one SDGs implementation (SDG 16 includes
commitments to fight corruption) also impacts the objectives of another SDG (# 8 calls
for full and productive employment).
Trade sanctions can also help to improve attention for the conservation of natural
public goods: In developing countries the ecological sphere is often neglected. Efforts to
maintain the habitat often fail – and sometimes the reason is corruptive practices.
While many African countries have regulations that demand the mining industry to re￾cultivate depleted mining pits, restoration often just does not happen as corrupt local
governments block the implementation of the laws (Selmier II and Newenham-Kahindi
2017). Another case is when crooked politicians and their partners in business misuse
public funds for sustaining or expanding the palm oil industry (Ayokhai and Naankiel
2016). This happens frequently even though ecologists warn that new oil palm planta￾tions trigger environmental damage and above all, cause forest destruction (Jean et al.,
2019). This obstructs economic growth in areas where people really need it. Interest￾ingly, indigenous societies can mitigate the effect of corruption ‘from above’. E.g., the
high cohesion which exists within African rural societies enables them to counter crimi￾nal practices of corrupt governments: The measures they can take, e.g., on sustainable
farming, strengthen the ties within their communities (Akolgo-Azupogo et al. 2021). By
contrast, in the developed world those ties seem to weaken: Conscientiousness on eco￾logical concerns may advance in Europe, but social concerns get out of the spotlight.
This enables “soft” corruption, which works to the detriment of social sustainability
(Bronzini 2017). Favoritism, cronyism, and nepotism, which are forms of “social corrup￾tion” (Holmes 2015), wear off the democratic societies’ fabric. While often being blamed
for the rise of corruption in Europe, the main cause is not the transformation of the
former communist states. There, a new group of politicians may be tempted to abuse its
political influence, but subtle forms of bribing and taking bribe are found in all other
European states (Tänzler and Maras 2016). And even though personal experience with
corruption may be low among citizens, if they perceive corruption elsewhere, social co￾hesion will wane (Charron 2016). And worse: When citizens cannot thwart public abuse
 The OECD Convention on Combating Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business
Transactions entered into force in early 1999.
170 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingof power, they might respond with adopting corruptive practices on their own. Society
will fail, people’s needs will not be met, public goods will not be delivered to the extent
that is necessary (Rothstein 2013).
Failed societies and failed states are at the worst end. However, there are many
in-between stages on that journey. In the context of public goods, two main questions
arise:
– Can corruption be reduced by privatization of public goods, or would an increase
in public goods provision by the state reduce corruption?
– If corruption affects public goods provision, which measures can be found to
fight this, and do they work?
For answering the first question, a response can be found from reviewing the three
major forms in which corruption occurs (as per U.S. Code, Title 18, § 201):111
a) Receiving bribe – public officers receiving money or other benefits with the pur￾pose of changing the application of an act that falls within regarding their
competence.
b) Giving bribe – giving money or other benefits to a public officer to illegally satisfy
an interest like buying a contract with the state, obtaining benefits from the state,
obtaining licenses from the state, or accelerating the process of being granted a
certain permission on behalf of the state.
c) Buying influence – giving money or other benefits to a physical or legal person
who has influence over a public officer, in order to determine the latter to do or
not do an act that is required by their place of employment.
Which are the public goods that would be most susceptible for what the three defini￾tions depict? If the state supplies all that is presumed to be needed for its citizen’s
livelihood, like nourishing, housing, supply of water, sanitation, healthcare, educa￾tion, and all means of transport, then state officers have immense responsibilities.
This “caretaker state” was seen to be the normal in the 1800s and early 1900s. Per￾forming this type of statehood requires that responsibilities are attached to efficacy;
however, the assumption that a state can shoulder all the responsibilities (and that it
has all the capabilities for producing all public goods efficiently cannot be upheld in
modern times: In a statement for the Vatican, Hans Tietmeyer, former president of
Deutsche Bundesbank, underlined that this assumption has to be given up when look￾ing at rising intergenerational struggles, at the crises which welfare-state regulations
impacted in many countries and at unsustainable public sector budgets. Debt over￾load, whatever its cause (from mismanagement to tax evasion), can lead to the under￾provision of public goods and to their complete collapse. There also is the upsurge of
underground economies which abuse the welfare state: Countries with large under-
 https://www.justice.gov/archives/jm/criminal-resource-manual-2041-bribery-public-officials.
4.7 Fighting corruption and free riding 171ground economies, not just in Africa but to some extent in Italy and Greece as well,
have weak institutions and weak and understaffed and underpaid judiciary staff who
are prone to corruption because the oversight governance system does not work or is
not sufficiently developed (Tietmeyer 2004; see also Bovi 2002).
Some well-meaning economists defy the idea that full provision of public goods
by the state tempts public officers to become corruptive. They argue that countries
with large welfare programs have low levels of corruption, a high degree of social
trust, and high levels of social wellbeing (e.g., Rothstein 2010), and they prove this
with statistics based on averages for a whole country. However, a county-by-county
analysis will give starkly different results (Ziblatt 2008; Dill 2015). In China, for exam￾ple, corrupt practices and heavy-handed tactics used by local officials are frequent in
spite of public supply of welfare, for example, of housing (Dickson 2016). But it obvi￾ously is a question of government style whether this equation is true. Singapore pro￾vides 90% of housing publicly, and no cases of bribes have ever been reported. So, a
high degree of publicly provided welfare will not automatically induce corruption.
The issue is that Singapore is a state with strong governance and with citizens who
have a high sense of solidarity. (Khanna 2019).
Are private enterprises better off with regard to corruption because, other than
public institutions, they have legally prescribed governance systems? Sadly, oversight
from shareholders (or, in the case of co-determination, from composite supervisory
boards which include employee representatives) does not always work. There are ex￾amples of collusion (like with Swissair, where the main consultant and the board mem￾bers were of the same political party which led to acquisitions that were highly
overpaid – see, e.g., Nwabueze and Mileski 2008); there has been outright deceit in the
infamous Enron fraud (see, e.g., Kroger 2005), there was mishandling of company funds
by the chairman and several other board members and officers of Japanese optical
equipment manufacturer Olympus (Dutta et al. 2014). Each of the three firms was a
partner in public goods provision – Swissair in public transport, Olympus, with its pow￾erful medical division, in public health, and Enron, in the field of public utility. Hence,
whether a public good is provided by a business firm or the state, officials may become
corrupt in either case. The only way to inhibit this – in government agencies and in
private firms – is through effective “bureaucratic”
112 control, transparency, public and
private scrutiny – i.e., an appropriate institutional design. This would encompass a new
format established in public agencies that has been called “professionalized bureaucra￾cies” where independent specialists (“unelected bureaucratic agents”) are hired by their
 For German sociologist Max Weber, who created a new notion of the term, bureaucracy consists
of two parts: One is the “existence of fixed and official jurisdiction areas that are generally ordered by
rules”, and the second is “an office hierarchy with graded levels of authority” (Foster 1990, p. 223).
Modelling control along these lines should be on the agenda of any officer in whichever institution.
172 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingpolitical “principals”.
113 After the 2007/8 financial crisis, when independent regulators
and central banks were staffed by professionals from outside the public agencies, the
outcome was strict oversee on all levels – an effect that was largely unanticipated by
politicians (Miller and Whitford 2016).
On the international level, the supranational authorities are all professionalized
bureaucracies, but they can only be effective in supervising public goods provision if
the members to international treaties cooperate. Practically, it is mainly negotiations
between nation states that determine which contribution is to be furnished by which
member of a partnership. If one of the members acts in self-interest, it will try to get a
free ride (McGuire and Olson 1996). There are partnerships that include non-state
members, for example in treaties about the global preservation of rain forests or the
transnational provision of satellite communication networks – private individuals,
civil society organizations and business firms. Each of these stakeholders, and each
decision they are to make, is susceptible to free riding, and, worse though, to corrup￾tion. A case where trans-border collaboration succeeded in overpowering criminals
and wrongdoers was the effort to control diamond operations in African conflict
areas. The intention was to impede the illegal trade of diamonds with which militias
were financed (Saunders 2014). The ongoing offenses were jeopardizing the public
goods of international peace and security, of providing a livelihood for the workers
on the lowest level of the value chain, and of maintaining trust in institutions. It all
started with mining giant De Beers declaring that it would stop selling gemstones
which originate in zones where rebel forces fight against elected governments. This
instrument that was used was a global tracking system for export and import verifica￾tion, the “Kimberley Process” (see Howard 2016). By 2019, the system proved that
99.8% of the world’s diamonds came from fully conflict-free sources (https://www.kim
berleyprocess.com/en/kp-action). Collaboration from the ground was intense: There
were partnerships between governments, civil society organizations, the mining in￾dustry, and the gem sellers early on, all united in the Responsible Jewelry Council114
(Jakobi 2013). This worked better than the official means that are in place to fight
transnational corruption, like the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, the UK Bribery
Act and the Council of Europe’s Criminal Law Convention on Corruption (for an over￾view, see: Ryder and Pasculli 2020). Significant non-governmental contribution comes
from the OECD Anti-Bribery Convention and blacklists like the Transparency Interna￾tional Corruption Perceptions Index.115
 The principal-agent relation is a cornerstone of governance theory and practice; if asymmetries
of interests and of knowledge are overcome, a trustworthy agent will work to the best outcome for
the principal (for practice in the public field, see, e.g., Potůček 2017).
 See: https://www.responsiblejewellery.com.
 The OECD Anti-Bribery Convention requires signatory countries to criminalize bribery of foreign
public officials. In this, the convention becomes legally binding. Being listed on the Corruption Percep￾tions Index does not induce legal consequences, but the power of Transparency International, even
4.7 Fighting corruption and free riding 173As with any other criminal intent, ill-willing ‘experts’ will always find ways to un￾dermine anti-corruption provisions, and they will find loopholes. There is one type of
loopholes which is difficult to eradicate and which is tax evasion. When nations com￾pete in favoring investors, tax laws granting advantages will always create a gray
area between what is allowed by law and what may become illegal. Much of tax eva￾sion has been stopped through diligent monitoring and close cooperation between tax
authorities (see, e.g., Hanlon et al. 2015), but eliminating tax evasion completely on a
global scale would require far-reaching controls for all modalities of international fi￾nance transfer. Today’s interconnected world provides many means of communica￾tion to a ‘globalized individual’ that can undermine control, and there are many
markets to choose from. Some activities are legal but still questionable: Between
April 2014 and March 2015 overseas buyers bought more than 100 billion US$ worth of
real estate in the United States. 55% of these transactions were all cash and it remains
unknown how much of this was money laundering and how much of this was from
unpaid taxes (Cooley and Sharman 2017). The buyers used the concept of beneficial
ownership to disguise: A property’s actual owner can be different from the benefi￾ciary of property ownership: the thresholds above which disclosure is required are
relatively high and only apply to residential property. U.S. legislation that regulates
the use of these shell companies has been delayed for years (Salvo and Beaulieu 2022).
In Europe, despite the issuance of five Money Laundering Directives by the European
Union as per 2022, some countries, among which the largest is Germany, still allow
cash in real estate purchase (Meyer 2022).
The illegal as well as the questionable practices of capital transfers are mostly un￾covered by investigative journalists and not by state officials (e.g., the Panama Papers
scheme; see Obermayer and Obermaier 2016). Media activity, hence, plays an impor￾tant role in the efforts to attain transparency in this and other areas of public goods.
Sharpening public interest may lead to effective control by state authorities as well,
which should restore trust in public institutions.
Trust is the public good which deteriorates the most when damaged by corrup￾tion, with highly negative impacts on social capital in all its dimensions, including the
international one. Locally, if social cohesion is sustained, the joint resolve of good￾willing citizens can be a bottom-up source to (re)build a “decent society” (Abbott et al.
2016). Rebuilding social capital and building new one on the global level is harder. But
there are chances for this, too, as will be exhibited in the next chapter.
though non-governmental, is such that businesses and state actors will refrain from intensifying rela￾tions with a country that has a high ranking on the index.
174 Chapter 4 Policymaking and managingChapter 5
The global level revisited: Public goods in the SDGs
The quality of cooperation between governments, business and civil society has
changed through the understanding that all will benefit from positive outcomes of the
United Nations Global Compact and the Millennium Goals initiative which were fore￾runners of the United Nations 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda. Apart from the
collaborative efforts that followed these programs, additional frameworks were set
up for collective action on the international scene, including (see OECD 2015a, p. 78):
– the Istanbul Principles that guide civil society organizations in putting the princi￾ples of development effectiveness into practice;
– the Guidelines for Effective Philanthropic Engagement;
– the network of international CSOs;
– the United Nations Program on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and For￾est Degradation (REDD);
– the International Health Partnership.
Indices have been designed for ranking the actors’ performance on common goals
and commitments, such as the Commitment to Development Index set up by the Cen￾ter for Global Development, and forums for dialogue and learning that encourage
changes of mindset, behavior, and policy change. Some of these are: the OECD Devel￾opment Assistance Committee (https://www.oecd.org/dac/development-assistance-com
mittee), the Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation (see section
4.6.1), and the Development Cooperation Forum (https://www.un.org/ecosoc/en/con
tent/about-development-cooperation-forum). An overarching objective is to address
all facets of human wellbeing – the social, the economic and the ecological.
5.1 Social, economic and ecological wellbeing are inseparable
When all societal groups collaborate in procuring, improving, or maintaining public
goods, this neither favors the interests of the rich nor does it overemphasize the con￾cerns of the poor. SDG Goal #1, “End poverty everywhere”, rightly is the first one in
the SDG list. There is a direct track to enhancing wellbeing not just of the beneficiaries
of that goal but of all members of society. It is inherent in the SDGs that they are inte￾grated and indivisible and that they affect multiple sectors and levels simultaneously.
Optimizing ecological, social, and economic objectives (and the public goods they rep￾resent) embodies conceptions which embody dualities of this trinity: Green growth –
combining the natural environment with the economy, green society – combining
ecological with social goals, and inclusive growth – combining economic growth with
social aspects (Gupta and Vigilin 2016). Human wellbeing is embodied in each of these
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111134611-006dyads: the quality of human life depends on social inclusiveness, green growth and
“greening the society” altogether. And it is up to all humans to create the quality of
life – their own and that of future generations. The present generation is responsible
to leave a stock of natural, man-made, and social capital for future generations, a
stock from which they can sustain an income. If this capital stock is not preserved
and maintained, it will be depleted prematurely to the detriment of all. Human sus￾tainability, hence, becomes an “economic calculus” (Brätland 2006). This applies to all
individuals: Bestowing a resource to a future generation is a human act, and it is nec￾essarily an act of a property owner. With this, the economic sphere comes into play,
and the indissoluble nexus between the social, the ecological and the economic be￾comes clearly visible. So, the Brundtland definition of intergenerational sustainability
(WCED 1987) rests on the intervention of individuals, and, since individuals assemble
in businesses, it also rests on business intervention. This embodiment was formulated
some time before Brundtland marked out the ‘intergenerational’ in sustainable devel￾opment. In 1963, authors Harold J. Barnett and Chandler Morse said in their work
Scarcity and Growth: The Economics of Resource Availability:
By devoting itself to improving the lot of the living, therefore, each generation, whether recogniz￾ing a future-oriented obligation to do or not, transmits a more productive world to those who
follow. . . . The most important components of the inheritance are knowledge, technology, capital
instruments and economic institutions (Barnett and Morse 1963, pp. 248f.).
The book became one of the most influential books which were published on the human
prospect. Scarcity and Growth made a convincing case that scarcity of resources does not
halt economic growth – in contrast to statements made by the Club of Rome a few years
later. In Limits to Growth Meadows et al. (1972) predicted that resource limits and, in con￾sequence, collective peril, were fast approaching. But since 1972 economic performance
has grown globally, and it has kept pace with the sharp increase in world population: On
average, the people who lived on the planet in 1950, got by on an income that, estimated
as best as we can, was just about US$ 2,000 per year. But, as of 2005, the income had risen
to nearly US$ 6,000 per year within two generations and with four billion more people on
the planet (Simpson et al. 2005, p. 8). US$ 6,000 per year is an average, certainly. On the
lower end there is more than a billion people who only have an income of about a dollar
a day. And economic growth among these poor can certainly not replicate the production
possibilities and the consumption of the wealthy. But growth is not a quantitative phenom￾enon only. Output and income statistics do not account for the qualitative phenomenon,
they do not reveal changes in product ranges and changes in the sources of productivity,
nor do they consider that many public goods are provided for free.
The appeal expressed in Scarcity and Growth is, among others, about capital instru￾ments and effective economic institutions which the present generation shall bestow
upon those who will live later. Capital instruments are used by a firm to raise finance;
finance is provided by asset management firms. And the condition given by Barnett
and Morse is that investment must serve the objective to leave a more productive and
176 Chapter 5 The global level revisited: Public goods in the SDGsmore sustainable world to those who follow. So, two generations before asset managers
became obliged to account for sustainable investment, the path was set by Scarcity and
Growth for the finance world towards prioritizing genuine non-speculative investment ob￾jects. The common denomination for directing asset managers towards sustainable devel￾opment outcomes has become ‘green investment’. Before making a green investment
decision, its environmental, social and governance aspects must be checked and moni￾tored. The most important monitoring principles for this have been published in a 2012
OECD review (Inderst et al. 2012). The concepts and definitions to be applied in the market￾place are mainly built on the environmental, social and governance implication standards
(ESG) of impact investing. The following list shows the main characteristics of ESG
(Table 14); the left and the middle columns almost exclusively deal with public goods.
Since 2012, green investment pledges have soared; developed countries have promised
to mobilize 100 billion US$ a year in climate change finance until 2025 (see, e.g.,
Marke and Sylvester 2018). There are numerous types of activities, diverse actors, and
multiple investment schemes. The underlying rationale can be condensed into three
points of departure (Bürgenmeier 2008):
1) The ethical dimension of sustainable development;
2) adhering to the best available technology principle, namely, to produce and to distrib￾ute goods and services according to state-of-the-art techniques with respect to ecology;
3) stock market evaluation for determining how the investment handles its relation￾ship with all stakeholders.
In principle, it is these three points from which all human, societal and financial ef￾forts should start out. Businesses should review their investments with the objective
Table 14: Exemplary issues of ESG.
Environmental Issues Social Issues Governance Issues
■■ Climate change and
carbon emissions
■■ Customer satisfaction ■■ Board composition
■■ Air and water pollution ■■ Data protection and
privacy
■■ Audit committee structure
■■ Biodiversity ■■ Bribery and corruption
■■ Deforestation ■■ Executive
compensation
■■ Political contributions
■■ Energy efficiency ■■ Lobbying ■■ Whistleblower schemes
■■ Waste management ■■ Community relations
■■ Water scarcity
Source: CFA Institute 2015.
5.1 Social, economic and ecological wellbeing are inseparable 177to channel finance into private ventures that promote social and ecological responsi￾bility. They should bring their knowledge, technology, and financial capacities into
ventures where the other partners are public institution or civil society organizations.
It is not businesses and economics only: There is a new term in ecological geology
which speaks to the ‘wellbeing economy’, an economic model that is focused on the
pursuit of human and ecological wellbeing. The idea is to extend the social purpose of
geology beyond material and financial goals to the ultimate ends of sustainability
through delivering long-term wellbeing for all (Stewart 2023). When looking at social
efficiency and social effectiveness, geology is an excellent field to demonstrate that
results can be obtained without ideologically biased argumentation. Geology abstains
from mixing nature and society, and it can uphold an analytical distinction between
the two. Thus, the “narrative that portrays humanity as a species ascending to power
over the rest of the Earth System, which entails the attribution of fossil fuel combus￾tion to human megalomania, will implode” (Malm and Hornborg 2014, p. 63). Only an
unbiased approach of this kind will lead to an optimal distribution of benefits to all
members of a society (“social efficiency”) and align it with this society’s long-term ob￾jectives (“social effectiveness”). This involves the question who should generally con￾trol public goods delivery. The best way would be direct control by society, i.e., by
those who use public goods.
5.2 Societal control
If monitoring of whichever undertaking on public goods involves its beneficiaries, the
principle of ‘no one to be left behind’, which stands above all the SDGs, will be most
properly fulfilled. The task requires collective efforts, where citizens partake in com￾munal action with governments and corporate actors. On a global scale, international
institutions need to be added to that collective action. Today’s global public domain,
apart from state actors, entails transnational firms and civil society associations that
span the world; production of globally available public goods is a result of the inter￾play between this (private) sector and national/transnational institutions. The public
actors had been traditional overseers of global public goods before the internationali￾zation of the private domain came up. As the public and the private domains are in￾tertwined, there is a wider interplay which must be controlled by all society.
Societal control, on a state or regional level, begins with check-and-balance mech￾anisms inherent in democratic systems; on specific topics, referendums may be held,
or roundtables that include all which are affected by a governmental decision. There
is a long history of such controls in the area of technology. For this, lawmakers have
always used specification material from non-government sources. This has evolved in
the establishment of standards boards that represent a democratic system of self￾regulation. Standard setting as a means of self-regulated control has been covered
above in section 4.6.4. On a global scale, three perspectives come into mind: One is
178 Chapter 5 The global level revisited: Public goods in the SDGswhat has been called the “transformation of issue spaces” (Ruggie 2004 a), the other is
globally active civil society organizations and the third is building and utilizing social
capital.
5.2.1 Transformation of issue spaces
The international political world after World War II had a system of rules for prob￾lem-solving (global governance arrangements) that were designed to work between
independent states, with some interference through the United Nations. Then, territo￾rial associations were formed like the European Union, and trade agreements like
NAFTA or the Mercosur in North and South America, and ASEAN in Southeast Asia.
Another change was brought about by powerful non-state actors like multinational
enterprises and global CSOs. This led to a transformation of political and economic
relations – policy spaces were no longer either “internal” or “external”, and public
goods provision became dependent on issues inside a state and outside a state. There
is a parallel to what happened at international trade, where concerns on border
measures (tariffs, volume restrictions) were made up for by concerns on subsidies
and other protectionist measures – internal factors that have an impact on external
relations (Ruggie 2004 a, p. 508). Likewise, while pollution had been a matter to be
dealt with inside the borders of a state or even a province, causes and effects of pollu￾tion have become universal: Plastic waste in the oceans, oil spills and marine litter on
the high seas, etc., have a source that is located elsewhere. And within the global sup￾ply chains, external parties (foreign buyers) proliferate human rights issues that ad￾dress the most internal political regulations between a government and its citizens in
the state where the producer is located.
Which instruments can be deployed to control issues that endanger public goods
internationally? First, one must consider that control starts earlier – with discourse,
contestation, and action, all organized around the production of public goods, in a
new format of interactions among non-state actors as well as states. An example is
global health: The interaction of states, the healthcare and pharmaceutical industries
as well as patients’ representatives allows that a wide variety of human interests, not
merely those interpreted and promoted by governments, can be expressed and pur￾sued (Kickbusch 2013). If all the actors are involved in rulemaking and rule-enforcing,
no group will be able to claim that its interests have not been accounted for. But real￾ity shows that rule-enforcing, as it has to be conferred to a public authority, can meet
with difficulties. Staying with the field of global health: While the World Health Orga￾nization (WHO) has the power to establish rules that apply across borders, rule￾enforcement lies with national governments which often shun the investment for a
health measure. If they bring in private actors for investing, they can better concen￾trate on control. A case for this is the partnerships in malaria control that were built
in many countries affected by the plague (Nahlen and Steketee 2012). Similarly, with
5.2 Societal control 179HIV/AIDS, the United Nations announced in 2002 that they would abandon their policy
of relying on governments and would instead fund corporate efforts to provide anti￾retroviral drugs (Lamont 2002).
The HIV/AIDS case shows that private firms can become authoritative and legiti￾mate players in a global public goods effort because they have expertise, successful
practice, and are explicitly granted coercive power by, in the case of HIV/AIDS, the
United Nations. Another case is the public good of intellectual property rights, where
multinational corporations are functioning as autonomous actors because govern￾ments let them act freely. The agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property (TRIPS) was devised and entered into the WTO negotiations by an indepen￾dent team of twelve industry representatives (the Intellectual Property Committee116).
It was industry that identified a trade problem, devised a solution, reduced it to a con￾crete proposal and advanced it to negotiations of governments. “In effect, twelve cor￾porations made public law for the world” (Sell 2003, p. 96).
It may be argued that giving business firms political authority in international
politics is questionable with a view to societal control. In the TRIPS case, though,
there was enough room for the governments who negotiated within WTO. Admittedly,
there is a fine line between this procedure and business firms as interest groups lob￾bying their governments or international organizations. But, first, lobbying is getting
more and more regulated in many parts of the world (see, e.g., Ban and You 2019),
and, secondly, civil society nowadays has developed the power to harness excessive
abuse of corporate power. For instance, in 2001, when the pharmaceutical industry
intended to privilege considerations of patent rights over global health concerns, civil
society organizations played a key role in forcing the industry to reduce prices signifi￾cantly. Also, media all over the world denounced this industry’s position as untenable
(Spar and Bartlett 2003).
5.2.2 Control activities by the global non-profit sector
The non-profit sector (non-governmental organizations [NGOs], civil society organiza￾tions) have constantly increased their profiles at the international level throughout the
last decades. There were about 30 000 entities with an intentionally transnational reach
in 2002, and about 1000 had members from three or more countries (Ruggie 2004 a,
p. 554). The numbers have increased, but what is more important, their political clout
has risen (Lewis et al. 2020). There are a number of factors that contribute to this, like
globalization and advances in communications technology. Also, governments have de-
 The committee was formed in 1986 by Bristol-Myers, DuPont, FMC Corporation, General Elec￾tric, General Motors, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Merck, Monsanto, Pfizer, Rockwell and Warner Communi￾cations. Their work was finalized in 1994.
180 Chapter 5 The global level revisited: Public goods in the SDGsliberately chosen to support NGOs, and there is an increasing occurrence of multilateral
negotiations between states that inspire NGOs and activists to shadow them (Keane
2003). Many of them started on a local level with local objectives, like Oxfam that was
founded in 1942 by Oxford citizens who wished to support war-torn suburbs (“Oxford
Committee for Famine Relief”). Today, Oxfam is an international organization consist￾ing of 21 affiliates and the international secretariat in Nairobi, with an operational bud￾get of over 100 million US$ annually for international activities (https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Oxfam). There were prominent involvements of Oxfam in Ethiopia where it
urged Starbucks to agree on fair trade coffee arrangements (Arslan and Reicher 2011),
and in post-genocide Rwanda where it supported land-restitution on a broad scale (Pot￾tier 2002). On climate change, the Climate Action Network (CAN), an association repre￾senting environmental NGOs, has taken part in multilateral climate negotiations since
its founding in 1989.
The foremost field of international NGO activities is to support developing coun￾tries, whether through local projects or in transregional efforts. Many of them entirely
concentrate on monitoring the attitudes of multinational enterprises (MNEs), with
their objectives varying from control of prices, of workplace conditions and quality of
products/services, to checking on consumer information and environmental conduct.
They act as powerful watchdogs without having any formal mandate except that they
may have some directive from a government agency. There often is no recourse to a
specific legal framework, which may put managers of MNEs into a dilemma: The man￾agers might be willing to respond to an NGO request positively, but they are also
bound to corporate guidelines and disclosure requirements. So, they are sometimes
uncertain about what is expected of them. In any case, NGOs can assume the function
of reducing the ‘information asymmetry’ that exists between consumers and pro￾ducers in a globalized economy. This improves the knowledge which consumers have
about how the goods they purchase have been produced, how workers were treated
in the supply change, how waste was processed, whether there was corruption of pub￾lic officials or whether raw materials come from countries at war. This may incite
consumers to penalize, and it may also create an incentive for producers to become
more socially responsible (Lodge and Wilson 2006).
Another field of societal control is to monitor international financial institutions
(IFIs) such as the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and transregional de￾velopment banks. This is pursued by IFIwatchnet (http://www.ifiwatchnet.org), an inter￾national NGO network of nearly 60 organizations from 35 different countries in every
region of the world. They use, among others, the experience of the Bretton Woods Proj￾ect117, a UK-based NGO with long-standing involvement in making global institutions ac￾countable to the people they serve (http://www.brettonwoodsproject.org). Recent topics
 The name was chosen because it was the so-called Bretton Woods institutions (IMF and World
Bank) which were at the center of the Project’s fist scrutiny activities.
5.2 Societal control 181which were taken up by the Bretton Woods Project are the African food crisis and inter￾national trade, the unfinished debt agendas of African states, and scrutiny of the IMF
and World Bank-led COVID-19 response (Lewis et al. 2020, pp. 155f.).
National and international NGOs, for their monitoring work, can use a knowledge
device that was set up by the Division for Sustainable Development Goals in the United
Nations’ Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA). The device is a large plat￾form by the name of SDG Knowledge Platform (https://sustainable development.un.org).
All information which citizens, private sector associations and businesses as well as local
authorities upload to the platform is accessible to any user in a high-quality fashion that
is timely, reliable and both aggregated and disaggregated. Cross-border joint action built
on these data and the networks behind the data can contribute to the formation of a pow￾erful civil society. They can help to craft institutions that safeguard the rights and the
independence of citizens and protect the natural environment: This way of cooperation
builds social capital, as was shown above, on a local level, for the case of dairy producer
Danone, where the opposition between the company and the CSOs who had first fought
against the firm turned into productive togetherness (which is social capital) in the com￾mon effort to promote regenerative farming methods. Any business which reaches out to
its community builds social capital. And there are sources for social capital on the inter￾national level as well.
5.2.3 Rediscovering social capital
A formidable leverage for social capital formation on a global scale is to be found in
the United Nations Global Compact initiative which enlists corporate engagement in
promoting fundamental principles on human rights, on rights at work and on envi￾ronmental responsibility (https://unglobalcompact.org). Its ten118 principles all relate
to public goods:
1. Businesses should support and respect the protection of internationally pro￾claimed human rights; and
2. make sure that they are not complicit in human rights abuses.
3. Businesses should uphold the freedom of association and the effective recognition
of the right to collective bargaining;
4. The elimination of all forms of forced and compulsory labor;
5. The effective abolition of child labor; and
6. the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and occupation.
 Principle no. 10 was added in June 2004 in accordance with the United Nations Convention
Against Corruption which had been adopted in 2003.
182 Chapter 5 The global level revisited: Public goods in the SDGs7. Businesses should support a precautionary approach to environmental challenges;
8. undertake initiatives to promote greater environmental responsibility; and
9. encourage the development and diffusion of environmentally friendly technologies.
10. Businesses should work against corruption in all its forms, including extortion
and bribery.
The Global Compact has become a “values-based platform for bringing the relevant
social actors together in seeking joint solutions to the imbalances and dislocations re￾sulting from the gap between the global economy and national communities” (Ruggie
2004 b). It is these imbalances and dislocations that hamper the balanced provision of
public goods on a global scale. With the three instruments employed by the Global
Compact – information sharing and learning, policy dialogues and partnerships – sol￾utions can be found where public goods provision is deficient, lagging behind sched￾ule or quality, and not inclusive.
An example that combines the three instruments is “Green Shipping Africa” on
which a partnership was built between the UN’s International Maritime Organization,
seventeen maritime authorities from across Africa and several shipping companies.
The onset was a conference held in Ghana in February of 2023, which was co-organized
by the Danish Maritime Authority119 and the Maritime Just Transition Task Force
(https://unglobalcompact.org/take-action/think-labs/just-transition) whose aim is to sup￾port a just and human-centered decarbonization of the shipping industry. The members
of the Maritime Just Transition Task Force are industry (the International Chamber of
Shipping), labor (the International Transport Workers’ Federation and the International
Labour Organization) and the International Maritime Organization, representing na￾tional authorities worldwide. With these diverse memberships, the new venture is on
the best way to achieve progress in the effort to get the oceans clean, the atmosphere
less burdened with carbon-dioxide and providing new jobs of which many will be avail￾able in Africa. As per a statement from a Global Compact officer, “moving towards a
low-emission global economy will create tens of millions of new, high-quality green
jobs across sectors. Through ensuring a Just Transition to a green economy, Africa has
an opportunity to capitalize on the emerging green jobs of the future – in shipping and
beyond”.
120
“Green Shipping Africa” promises to become effectful, not least because decar￾bonization is an uncontested issue on all global agendas. The initiative contributes to
 The Danish involvement has its roots in the fact its maritime industries have a long history of
social links. This nexus supports a common mentality and attitude towards shipping, with mutually
accepted social norms, formal organizations and laws, codes, and regulations (Sornn-Friese and
Iversen 2011).
 https://unglobalcompact.org/news/5009-02-15-2023.
5.2 Societal control 183offset, at least in part, the overweight of the climate change theme. And it raises the
attention on resource exploitation and working conditions in developing countries
which (by the general public, at least) is badly neglected. Still unobserved, mostly, by
the general public, the Global Compact, and also pressures by CSOs, have led to the
issues of resource exploitation and working conditions being increasingly taken up
through cross-sectoral partnerships. One other example is the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI), an international organization that obliges member
states to comply with a standard for transparency regarding exploitation of oil, gas,
and mineral resources. The mission statement of EITI has all the elements that can
build social capital: “We believe that a country’s natural resources belong to its citi￾zens. Our mission is to promote understanding of natural resource management,
strengthen public and corporate governance and accountability, and provide the data
to inform policymaking and multi-stakeholder dialogue in the extractive sector”
(https://eiti.org). Over 50 countries have committed to strengthening the accountability
of their extractive sector management. A very valuable effect is that a country’s EITI
membership has also helped to build trust in its politicians (Villar 2020).
Another case is the Ethical Trading Initiative (ETI), a London-based alliance of
companies, trade unions and CSOs. It promotes respect for workers’ rights around the
globe. Companies that join adopt a code of labor practice that they expect all their
suppliers to work towards. Codes address issues such as wages, hours of work, health
and safety and the right to join free trade unions (http://www.ethicaltrade.org). These
organizations not only provide support to members but also to the communities af￾fected by their members’ business. They are part of a social capital that is formed by
those communities and the respective government agencies. Their objective is to arbi￾trate and monitor. For this, they collaborate with CSOs on the ground and with trans￾national CSOs. There are corporations that have yet to assess how to cooperate with
those CSOs. EITI and ETI can provide support to them and install partnerships that
utilize the power of both sides in terms of specific knowledge, communications exper￾tise, and public credibility.
A case where it was not possible to build social capital for remedying a cata￾strophic situation was the failure of the international community to provide aid to the
victims of the February 2023 earthquake in Syria’s northwest. There was a political
background to this because the region is held by the opposition to Syria’s regime that
is backed by Russia. This motivated the UN relief agencies to not take the lead, and
that prevented the other relief organizations to proceed. One may see this as a moral
obtuseness towards claiming the priority of saving human lives over all other consid￾erations (Wintour 2023). Sadly, it seems there is no power in the Global Compact to
overcome political obstruction, and the Syrian failure is one of the situations where
good will is bluntly extinguished and all efforts of an operation to rescue minimal
wellbeing are reduced to useless. There is some hope through the Global Compact
being complemented by a “Global Compact on Refugees”, established by the United
Nations General Assembly on 17 December 2018 and which affirms a comprehensive,
184 Chapter 5 The global level revisited: Public goods in the SDGsmulti-stakeholder approach to refugee situations. But, as a commentator said, it will
stay unfinished work if it only spells out new modalities for international cooperation
and not specific commitments (Aleinikoff 2018). Harsh to say, but even the United Na￾tions are ostensibly powerless against the realities of evil powers attacking the world
order.
5.2 Societal control 185Conclusion: Businesses, individuals and state actors
collaborating for public goods and human
wellbeing
Members of a society, anywhere, do not act in isolation; they live together. This refers
to individuals, to businesses and to state authorities. They may pursue their own proj￾ects, but they always cross each other’s paths in the process. Their pursuits often have
external effects, that is effects which spill over into the spheres of the others. This
may be with or without the consent of these others, and these externalities may be
negative time and again, but they can also be a boon. The external effects which are
most pronounced come from the delivery of public goods: For instance, people who
defend their homeland generate positive externalities; they benefit other members of
the society, not just themselves. In the light of these effects, one may claim that society
is obligated to produce public goods, and to produce them communally, by collabora￾tive action. This will secure wellbeing for all. With some restrictions, the same goes
for commons. A commons, or collective property arrangement, is a specific format of
goods. Commons are owned and governed by its members; while they are not accessi￾ble to all society, their implications produce benefits which go beyond the borders of
that arrangement. For instance, a communal water treatment plant that is managed
by partners from industry and public institutions ensures that groundwater stays
clean. Provision of water, healthcare and education are further examples. These
goods, like many other public goods, may be procured by the state, by businesses or
by a common venture for its associates only. But their effect will very often reach all
members of society.
Whichever format is chosen, whether pure public goods or commons, it is state
actors, businesses, individual citizens, and their representations by parliaments as
well as by civil society organizations who must cooperate openly and without precon￾ditions. This works well on the local and state levels even though there may be free
riders and negative externalities. On the international level, cooperation to procure
and defend global public goods is much more difficult. The war which Russia started
against the Ukraine has shown how one party that obstructs cooperation in all fields
can destroy peace, security, and the wellbeing of hundreds of millions of people.
Global public goods have become vulnerable, also, through digitization of all pro￾cesses in all spheres of human life. Not even on a regional level can statal authorities
protect their constituencies against cybercrime and misuse/falsification of publicly
available information. Attempts must be made on the global institutional level to reg￾ulate this and other social affairs and thus protect public goods.
Citizens, and this includes corporate citizens because businesses are members of
society, must ask themselves what they can do to help secure the benefits of public
goods. But they must also rely on worldwide institutions to “get it right”, as per a
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111134611-007statement of Nobel laureate Amartya Sen (Sen 2010, p. 57). When citizens trust in pub￾lic institutions, they look for effectiveness, in the first place, Sen claims, not for a
‘just’” institution, and he asks for policymakers to broaden their perspectives beyond
national borders. With this appeal, Sen contrasts fairness principles that are based on
the interests of a closed society only, and he returns to Adam Smith’s concept of im￾partiality as going beyond the “concerns of the local partners to a social contract”
(Sen 2010, p. 61).
What citizens also expect from policymakers is that they carefully balance the
promotion of one public good against that of another. An example is the ongoing dis￾cussion on how to best integrate renewable energy resources which often neglects the
economic wellbeing of consumers. The collective voice must be heard in any such
vital issue: Democratic participation and deliberation are essential to prepare society
for necessary change and for future emergencies. These implications arise most
clearly when societies are under stress – whether from an environmental catastrophe
or in a war, or when markets break down. The extreme level of stress brought by the
COVID-19 pandemic gave momentum to the forces that hold society together, with
some differences among countries and among some groups of society. But paradoxi￾cally, while social coherence increases in times of crisis, it is during these times when
the call for receiving public goods and services from the state is overwhelming. The
paradox may be solved when one looks at the sheer magnitude of the problems a cri￾sis produces: They appear to hugely exceed the power that is available for a (smaller)
community to co-produce and manage its commons according to its own rules and
norms. One lesson learned for the pandemic is that successful implementation of
response and recovery needs both a strong government and strong cohesion in soci￾ety. When looking at the public goods that the pandemic has endangered, which
mainly were
– health services and health systems,
– social protection services and basic welfare services,
– productive employment and decent work,
– supply networks and global connectivity,
it is the same goods, whether on a local or on a global level, that are affected if provi￾sion of environmental or infrastructure goods is deficient or unbalanced. Climate
change, the weakness of cyber-security, economic or military warfare and their after￾maths will augur imminent restructurings of the global economic order as per a cri￾sis-briefing by McKinsey (Craven et al. 2020). Society is intimately connected in the
affectedness of such events and in the need to overcome them. Many institutions (and
businesses) will see that they must collaborate. Subsequently, there is a realistic
chance for political, economic, and social restructuring. This would produce new
types of relations between state authorities and civil society, a redefinition of inter￾generational relations, better recognition for which public goods to foster and for
how to make sure their benefits reach all. The question is not whether entering coop￾Conclusion 187erative endeavors for producing a public good has to be coerced or whether it is a
prerogative; the question is how to prevent that non-cooperation becomes tanta￾mount to defectors getting a free ride, which destroys social cohesion. The more we
get into crisis situations, the more will coercive public goods provision become a case
in point for restricting defection. But that should only be practiced if voluntary efforts
alone are not sufficient to sustain society.
With globalization, we are getting more and more societal challenges which re￾quire that the members of society transcend their self-interest to engage in imper￾sonal cooperation (i.e., to collaborate with ‘strangers’) for creating public goods. This
is required for conserving natural resources, mitigating the consequences of climate
change, suppressing the spread of a deadly disease, halt military aggression and other
public goods. It can easily be seen that the benefits of these concerted efforts will be
non-rival and non-excludable. However, this only works with a unity of purpose around
that collective action challenge, and then coercion should not become necessary. A
unity of purpose would also achieve that
– the world’s businesses, public entities and third sector organizations work to￾gether to preserve and improve wellbeing of mankind,
– the controversy of arguments for or against non-market approaches to any eco￾nomic activity, especially in the delivery of public goods is settled for good,
– a comprehensive agenda is set up a on all societal levels for maintaining and ex￾panding public goods, whether tangible ones or intangible ones,
– decision-making support for communal efforts on public goods is built from
whichever source,
– communal efforts are made visible and measurable through measuring and valuat￾ing public goods (as monetization will also contribute to ease funding decisions),
– the interdependencies and interrelationships of the SDGs are utilized as they are
essential for the wellbeing and the survival of mankind.
The contents of this book might help to improve an understanding for all these objec￾tives and to motivate the audience of the book too seek ways for contributing to the
effort from their own ends. The book also shows that the boundaries of the private
and the public spheres are tenuous. There has never been an underpinning for sepa￾rating these spheres, neither a political nor an economical nor an ethical one. From
this viewpoint, the book highlights how the mission of businesses has changed and
how they emphasize the greater stakeholder models that move towards including all
members of society. So, the provision of public goods and services can be understood
as jointly safeguarding the common good and the human wellbeing. This brings two
old economic traditions together – the positivist one (outcome) and the moral one
(motivation). Hence, the public goods concept becomes the social compact binder that
unites what has been generally confined either to the public or to the private sectors,
and it should thus be able to reduce the social tensions that we observe all over.
188 ConclusionReferences
AACSB (Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business, 2016). AACSB Announces Collective Vision for
the Future of Business Education. Retrieved from: https://www.aacsb.edu/insights/reports/a-collective￾vision-for-business-education
Abbott, P., Wallace, C., and Sapsford, R. (2016). The decent society: Planning for social quality. London:
Routledge.
Abramovitz, M. and Zelnick, J. (2018). The logic of the market versus the logic of social work: Whither the
welfare state? Social Work & Society, Vol. 16 (2), pp. 1–11.
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., Robinson, J. A. and Yared, P. (2008). Income and Democracy. American Economic
Review, Vol. 98 (3), pp. 808–842.
Addabbo, T., and Caiumi, A. (2017). Extended income estimation and income inequality by gender. Picchio,
A. (ed.), Unpaid Work and the Economy, New York: Routledge, pp. 59–102.
Adam, T., and Lingelbach, G. (2013). The Place of Foundations and Endowments in German History: A
Historical Statistical Approach. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, published online 6 December.
Adler, M.J. (1996). Adler’s Philosophical Dictionary: 125 Key Terms for the Philosopher’s Lexicon. New York:
Simon and Schuster.
Adler, M.D., and Posner, E.A. (2006). New foundations of cost-benefit analysis. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Aernouts, N., and Ryckewaert, M. (2015). Reconceptualizing the “publicness” of public housing: The case of
Brussels. Social Inclusion, Vol. 3 (2), pp. 17–30.
Agénor, P.R. and Yilmaz, D., 2017. The simple dynamics of public debt with productive public goods.
Macroeconomic Dynamics, Vol. 21(4), pp.1059–1095.
Ahmed, U. S., and Gotoh, K. (2006). Cost-Benefit Analysis of Environmental Goods by Applying Contingent
Valuation Method. Tokyo: Springer.
Aikins, S.K. (2009). Political economy of government intervention in the free market system. Administrative
Theory & Praxis, Vol. 31 (3), pp. 403–408.
Aitsi-Selmi, A., Murray, V., Wannous, C., Dickinson, C., Johnston, D., Kawasaki, A., and Yeung, T. (2016).
Reflections on a science and technology agenda for 21st century disaster risk reduction. International
Journal of Disaster Risk Science, Vol.7 (1), pp.1–29.
Aizcorbe, A., Baker, C., Berndt, E.R., and Cutler, D.M. (eds., 2018). Measuring and Modeling Health Care Costs.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Akolgo-Azupogo, H., Rubens, A., and Bardy, R. (2021). Soft skills in developing economies: An African view
on the hidden linkage between indigenous knowledge and business perspectives. Journal of African
Studies and Development, Vol. 13 (3), pp. 47–58.
Alcott, B. and Rose, P. (2019). Does private schooling narrow wealth inequalities in learning outcomes?
Evidence from East Africa. Oxford Review of Education, Vol. 42 (5), pp. 495–510.
Aleinikoff T.A. (2018). The Unfinished Work of the Global Compact on Refugees International Journal of
Refugee Law, Vol. 30 (4), pp. 611–617.
Albertini, E. (2019). Integrated reporting: an exploratory study of French companies. Journal of
Management and Governance, Vol. 23 (2), pp. 513–535.
Allan, C. M. (1971). The theory of taxation. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.
Allmendinger, J. (1989). Educational systems and labor market outcomes. European sociological review,
Vol. 5 (3), pp. 231–250.
Anderson, C. L., and Reynolds, T. (2016). Global Public Goods. University of Washington Evans School Policy
Analysis Research Brief # 325. Seattle, WA: University of Washington.
Anderson, S., Cavanagh, J., and Redman, J. (2008). Skewed priorities: How the bailout dwarfs other global
crisis spending. Washington, DC: Institute for Policy Studies.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111134611-008Ang, P.H. (1997). How countries are regulating Internet content. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the
Internet Society in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Montreal, Canada: The Internet Society, Vol. 3., pp. 1–7.
Anghel, V. and Jones, E. (2023). Is Europe really forged through crisis? Pandemic EU and the
Russia–Ukraine war. Journal of European Public Policy, Vol. 30 (4), pp. 766–786.
Angrist, J.D. and Lavy, V. (1999). Using Maimonides' rule to estimate the effect of class size on scholastic
achievement. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 114 (2), pp. 533–575
Anton, A. (2000). Public goods as commonstock: Notes on the receding commons. Anton, A., Milton Fisk,
M., and Holmstrom, N. (eds.), Not for sale: In defense of public goods. Boulder, Colorado: Westview
Press, pp. 3–40.
Antony, J. (2014). Readiness factors for the Lean Six Sigma journey in the higher education sector.
International Journal of Productivity and Performance Management, Vol. 63 (2), pp. 257–264.
Arimoto, A. (2014). Higher education reforms: Determinants and directions. McGinn, N. F. (ed.), Learning
through Collaborative Research, New York: Routledge, pp. 133–156.
Aristotle. Nicomachean Ethics [Internet]. The Internet Classics Archive. Available from: http://classics.mit.
edu/Aristotle/nicomachaen.html. I.2.1094b7-10.
Arnaiz del Pozo, R. (2017). Impact of regulatory aspects on 5G mobile communication systems. Bachelor’s
thesis. Madrid: Universidad Carlos III.
Aromaa, A. (1998). Health observation and health reporting in Europe. Revue d’Epidemiologie et de Sante
Publique, Vol. 46 (6), pp. 481–490.
Arora, P., and Chong, A. (2018). Government effectiveness in the provision of public goods: the role of
institutional quality. Journal of Applied Economics, Vol. 21 (1), pp. 175–196.
Arora, R.U., and Sarker, T. (2023). Financing for Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in the Era of
COVID-19 and beyond. The European Journal of Development Research, Vol. 35 (1), pp. 1–19.
Arquit, A., Gage, J., and Saner, R. (2011). Levers to enhance TNC contributions to low carbon
development–Drivers, determinants and policy implications. Geneva: CSEND, Diplomacy Dialogue.
Arrow, K. J. (1951). Social choice and individual values. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Arrow, K.J. (1950). A difficulty in the concept of social welfare. Journal of political economy, Vol. 58 (4),
pp. 328–346.
Arrow, K.J., Parikh, J., Pillet, G. (1996): Decision-Making Frameworks for Addressing Climate Change.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Climate Change (ed.), Economic and Social
Dimensions of Climate Change, Contribution of Working Group III to the 2nd Assessment Report of the IPCC.
Cambridge (U.K.): Cambridge University Press, pp: 52–77.
Arslan, A. and Reicher, C.P., 2011. The effects of the coffee trademarking initiative and Starbucks publicity
on export prices of Ethiopian coffee. Journal of African Economies, Vol. 20 (5), pp. 704–736.
Ayokhai, F.E.F., and Naankiel, P.W. (2016). Towards resolving Nigeria’s development crisis: a historical
diagnosis of the oil palm industry. International Journal of Asian Social Sciences, Vol. 6 (9), pp. 537–551.
Aziz, D.A. (2009). Privileges and Immunities of Global Public-Private Partnerships: A Case Study of the
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. International Organizations Law Review, Vol. 6 (2),
pp. 383–419.
Babacan, H., 2021. Public–Private Partnerships for Global Health: Benefits, Enabling Factors, and
Challenges. Haring, R., Kickbusch, I., Ganten, D., and Moeti, M. (eds.), Handbook of Global Health,
Luxemburg: Springer, pp. 2755–2788.
Badcoe, P. (1999). Public Private Partnerships in Local Governments: The Legal, Financial and Policy
Framework. Public Procurement Law Review, Vol. 6 (2), pp. 279–301.
Bakker, K., (2003). Archipelagos and networks: urbanization and water privatization in the South.
Geographical Journal, Vol. 169 (4), pp. 328–341.
Balton, D., Janis, B., Logaddóttir, H.H., Maddox, M., and Ulmer, F. (2020). Policy and Action on Plastic in the
Arctic Ocean. Cambridge, MA: Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs Harvard Kennedy
School.
190 ReferencesBan, P., and You, H.Y. (2019). Presence and influence in lobbying: Evidence from Dodd-Frank. Business and
Politics, Vol. 21 (2), pp. 267–295.
Bardy, R. and Rubens, A. (2022). Weighing Externalities of Economic Recovery Projects: An Alternative to
Green Taxonomies that is Fairer and more Realistic. Business Ethics and Leadership, Vol. 6 (3),
pp. 23–34.
Bardy, R., and Rubens, A. (2022). The Covid-19 Pandemic and the Public Good of Knowledge: Is There
Enough Internet Governance? L’industria, Vol. XLIII (2), pp. 1–25.
Bardy, R., Rubens, A., and Akolgo-Azupogo, H. (2018). The African Way Towards a Sustainable Future:
Integrating Indigenous Wisdom and Academic Knowledge. Journal of African Studies and Development,
Vol. 10 (2), pp. 8–18.
Bardy, R., Saner, R., and Yiu, L. (2015) Conceptualizing and Operationalizing Sustainable Development Goals
through System Theory Perspectives: Recommendations for the Post-2015 Targets. CSEND Working paper:
Geneva: CSEND (Centre pour le Développement Socio-Eco-Nomique).
Bardy, R., Yiu, L., and Saner, R. (2020). Collective Action on Public Goods for Sustainable Development:
Ethics in Action. Business Ethics and Leadership, Vol. 4 (4), pp. 14–27.
Barnett, H.J., and Morse, C. (2013). Scarcity and growth: The Economics of Natural Resource Availability. New
York: Routledge.
Barrett, S. (2007). Why cooperate? The incentive to supply global public goods. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Barrow, L. (1999). School Choice Through Relocation: Evidence from the Washington, D.C. Area. Research
Department of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper No. 99–7. Chicago: Federal
Reserve Bank.
Bator, F.M. (1958). The Anatomy of Market Failure. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 72 (3),
pp. 351–379:
Barzel, Y. (1973). Private schools and public schools finance. Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81 (1),
pp. 174–186.
Battaglini, M. and Coate, S. (2008). A dynamic theory of public spending, taxation, and debt. American
Economic Review, Vol. 98 (1), pp. 201–36.
Baudisch, K., and Fouquet, D. (2019). Germanýs coal exit plan–a legal and political outline on how
Germany plans to phase out coal fired power stations by 2038. Renewable Energy Law & Policy Review,
Vol. 9 (2), pp. 45–59.
Bawn, K. and Rosenbluth, F., 2006. Short versus long coalitions: electoral accountability and the size of the
public sector. American Journal of Political Science, Vol. 50 (2), pp. 251–265.
Beaufils, T., Ward, H., Jakob, M. and Wenz, L. (2023). Assessing different European Carbon Border
Adjustment Mechanism implementations and their impact on trade partners. Communications Earth
Environment (Nature Portfolio), Vol. 4 (1), pp. 1–9.
Bebbington, J., and Unerman, J. (2020). Advancing research into accounting and the UN Sustainable
Development Goals. Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, Vol. 33 (7), pp. 1657–1670.
Bermejo, R. (2014). Handbook for a Sustainable Economy. Dordrecht: Springer.
Beugelsdijk, S. and van Schaik, T. (2005). Social capital and growth in European regions: an empirical test.
European Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 21 (2), pp. 301–324.
Bevir, M. and Waring, J., eds. (2018). Decentering Health Policy: Learning from British Experience in Healthcare
Governance. London: Routledge.
Bhandari, H., and Yasunobu, K. (2009). What is social capital? A comprehensive review of the concept.
Asian Journal of Social Science, Vol. 37 (3), pp. 480–510.
Bhatt, I., (2021). Firms of Endearment Vs. Non-Firms of Endearment. CLEAR International Journal of Research in
Commerce & Management, Vol. 12 (7), pp. 11–13.
Bhatta, C.P. (2005). Leadership excellence: the Asian experience. Asia Pacific Business Review, Vol. 1 (1),
pp. 1–8.
References 191Biermann, S. (2021). Sustainable fisheries need transparency. The International Journal for Rural
Development, Vol. 55 (4), pp. 14–20.
Binder, M., and Coad, A. (2014). Capability, Functioning, and Resources. Michalos, A.C. (ed.) Encyclopedia of
Quality of Life and Well-Being Research. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 524–529.
Bindman, A. B. (2019). Learning healthcare systems: a perspective from the US. Public Health Research and
Practice, Vol. 29 (3), e2931920.
Binger, A. (2003). Global public goods and potential mechanisms for financing availability. Background paper
prepared for the Fifth Session of the Committee for Development Policy meeting. New York: United
Nations.
Birch, K. and Siemiatycki, M. (2016). Neoliberalism and the geographies of marketization: The entangling
of state and markets. Progress in Human Geography, Vol. 40 (2), pp. 177–198.
Birn, A. E., Pillay, Y., and Holtz T. (2009). Textbook of International Health, 3rd ed. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Black, S. E. (1999). Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Education. Quarterly Journal
of Economics, Vol.114 (2), pp. 577–599.
Bleys, B., (2012). Beyond GDP: Classifying alternative measures for progress. Social Indicators Research,
Vol. 109 (3), pp. 355–376.
Block, W. E. (2011). Review of Ostrom’s Governing the Commons. Libertarian Papers, Vol. 3 (21), pp. 1–11.
Bloom, G., Standing, H., and Lloyd, R. (2008). Markets, information asymmetry and health care: towards
new social contracts. Social Science & Medicine, Vol. 66 (10), pp. 2076–2087.
Bollier, D. (2001). Public assets, private profits: Reclaiming the American Commons in an Age of Market
Enclosure. Washington DC: New American Foundation.
Bollier, D. (2002). Silent Theft: The Private Plunder of our Common Wealth. London: Routledge.
Boonen, C., Brando, N., Cogolati, S., Hagen, R., Vanstappen, N., and Wouters, J. (2019). Governing as
commons or as global public goods: two tales of power. International Journal of the Commons, Vol. 13
(1), pp. 553–577.
Bourdieu, P. (1986). The Forms of Capital. Richardson, J. G. (ed.), Handbook of Theory and Research for the
Sociology of Education. New York: Greenwood Press, pp. 241–258.
Bourdieu, P. (1974). Avenir de classe et causalité du probable. Revue française de sociologie, Vol. 15 (1),
pp. 3–42.
Bovi, M. (2002). The nature of the underground economy: some evidence from OECD countries. Rome: Istituto
di studi e analisi economica (ISAE).
Bozorgzadeh, E., and Mousavi, S.J. (2021). A quantitative approach to resource effectiveness assessment:
Application in the Urmia Lake Basin. Journal of Environmental Management, Vol. 289, Article no. 112559.
Bradsher, K. (2011). A Radical Kind of Reactor. New York Times, March 24.
Brandeis, L.D., and Warren, S. (1890). The Right to Privacy. Harvard Law Review, Vol. 193, pp. 1–12.
Brando, N., Boonen, C., Cogolati, S., Hagen, R., Vanstappen, N. and Wouters, J. (2019). Governing as
commons or as global public goods: Two tales of power. International Journal of the Commons, Vol. 13
(1), pp. 553–577.
Brasington, D. M. (2002). The demand for local public goods: The case of public school-quality. Public
Finance Review, Vol. 30 (3), pp. 163–187.
Brätland, J. (2006). Toward a calculational theory and policy of intergenerational sustainability. Quarterly
Journal of Austrian Economics, Vol. 9 (2), pp. 13–35.
Bratman, B. (2002). Brandeis & Warren’s ‘The Right to Privacy’ and the Birth of the Right to Privacy.
Tennessee Law Review, Vol. 69, pp. 623–651.
Brennan, G. and Lomasky, L. (2006). Against reviving republicanism. Politics, Philosophy & Economics, Vol. 5
(2), pp. 221–252.
Bresser-Pereira, L.C. (2021). Brazil’s quasi-stagnation and East-Asia growth: A new-developmental
explanation. Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, Vol. 58 (September), pp. 500–508.
192 ReferencesBriggs, A., Pierson, C. and Castles, F.G. (2006). The welfare state in historical perspective. Deakin, N., Finer,
C.J. and Matthews, B. (eds.), Welfare and the state: critical concepts in political science. New York (Vol. 2).
New York: Taylor & Francis, pp. 15–46.
Bronzini, M. (2017). Contested issues surrounding social sustainability and self-building in Italy.
International Journal of Housing Policy, Vol. 17 (3), pp. 353–373.
Bronzini, M. (2017). Contested issues surrounding social sustainability and self-building in Italy.
International Journal of Housing Policy, Vol. 17 (3), pp. 353–373.
Brown, M. (2011). PepsiCo’s WaterHope: A Community Driven Enterprise. Schilling, D. and Narine, N. (eds.),
Building Sustainable Communities through Multi-Party Collaboration. New York: Interfaith Center on
Corporate Responsibility, pp. 46–48.
Brown, P. (1992). The failure of market failures. Journal of Socio-Economics, Vol. 21 (1), pp. 1–24.
Bruch, F.W.H. (2005). The keys to rethinking corporate philanthropy. MIT Sloan management review, Vol. 47
(1), pp. 49–55.
Brunnhuber, S. (2022). The Real Tragedy of the Commons–Garrett Hardin (1968) Revised. Problemy
Ekorozwoju, Vol. 7 (2), pp. 1–45.
Buchholz, W., Cornes, R. and Rübbelke, D. (2018). Public goods and public bads. Journal of Public Economic
Theory, Vol. 20 (4), pp. 525–540.
Buchanan, J.M. (1999 [1968]). The Demand and Supply of Public Goods. The Collected Works of James M.
Buchanan. Indianapolis: Liberty Fund Inc.
Buchanan, J.M. and Kafoglis, M.Z., (1963). A note on public goods supply. The American Economic Review,
Vol. 53 (3), pp. 403–414.
Buckley, P. (2018). Can corporations contribute directly to society or only through regulated behaviour?
Journal of the British Academy, Vol. 6 (s1), pp. 323–374.
Budras, C. (2022). Droht Microsoft-Software das Aus? Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, Nov. 29, p. 17.
Buhr, D. (2020). Innovative Societies and Wellbeing. Frankenberger, A., and Chernenkova. E. (eds.), Local
Governance and Public Wellbeing. Baden-Baden, Germany: Nomos Verlagsgesellschaft, pp. 27–41.
Bürgenmeier, B. (1999), Globalization versus Sustainable Development: A Question of the Common Good.
International Journal of Sustainable Development, Vol. 2 (4), pp. 449–457.
Bürgenmeier, B. (2000). Market versus non-market values: where to draw the line? International Journal of
Sustainable Development, Vol. 3 (1), pp. 1–15.
Bürgenmeier, B. (2008). The contribution of asset management to climate change policies. Wessex Institute
of Technology Transactions on Ecology and the Environment, Vol. 108, pp. 127–136.
Bürgenmeier, B., 2012. Socio-economics – an interdisciplinary approach: ethics, institutions, and markets.
Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer Science & Business Media.
Burke, J., Sato, M., Taylor, C. and Li, F. (2021). What does an EU Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism mean
for the UK? London: Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, London
School of Economics and Political Science.
Burns, G.W., 2011. Gross National Happiness: A gift from Bhutan to the world. Biswas-Diener, R., (ed.),
2011. Positive psychology as social change, Dordrecht, NL: Springer, pp. 73–87.
Burton, G. (2010). Lula and economic development. Global Affairs, Vol. 20 (1) pp. 1–7.
Busch, P., Jorgens, H., and Tews, K. (2005). The global diffusion of regulatory instruments: The making of a
new international environmental regime. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science,
Vol. 558, pp. 146–167.
Bush G., Grayson, D., Jordan, A., and Nelson, J. (2008). Engaging Business in the Community: Not a quick fix.
London: The Smith Institute.
Cahill, L. S. (2005). Globalisation and the Common Good. Coleman, J. A. and Ryan, W.F. (eds.), Globalization
and Catholic Social Thought: Present Crisis, Future Hope Ottawa: St Paul University, pp. 42–54.
References 193Calia, R. C., and Guerrini, F. M. (2006). Thirty Years of 3M’s Pollution Prevention Program. School of
Engineering of São Carlos Working Paper 0040131. São Carlos, São Paulo, Brazil: School of
Engineering of São Carlos.
Callan, T., Leventi, C., Levy, H., Matsaganis, M., Paulus, A. and Sutherland, H. (2011). The distributional
effects of austerity measures: a comparison of six EU countries. Research note 2/2011. Brussels: European
Commission, Directorate General for Social Affairs, Employment and Equal Opportunities.
Calleja, A. (2010). The legal and policy considerations in the award of public-private partnerships. European
Public Private Partnership Law Review, Vol. 5(2), pp. 97–105.
Capelari, M.G., Calmon, P.C.D.P. and Araújo, S. (2017). Vincent and Elinor Ostrom: two confluent
trajectories for the governance of common property resources. Ambiente & Sociedade, Vol. 20 (2),
pp. 203–222.
Capozza, I. and Curtin, J., 2021. Towards Consistent and Effective Carbon Pricing in Germany? OECD
Environment Working Papers No. 52. Paris: OECD.
Cardullo, P., and Kitchin, R. (2019). Smart urbanism and smart citizenship: The neoliberal logic of ‘citizen￾focused’ smart cities in Europe. Environment and Planning C: Politics and Space, Vol. 37 (5), pp. 813–830.
Carson, R. T. (2000). Contingent Valuation: A User’s Guide. Environmental Science & Technology, Vol. 34 (8),
pp. 1413–1418.
Carson, R. T., and Mitchell, R. C. (1993). The issue of scope in contingent valuation studies. American Journal
of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 75 (5), pp. 1263–1267.
Cartlidge, D. (2006). Public private partnerships in construction. New York: Routledge.
Casarões, G., and Flemes, D. (2019). Brazil First, Climate Last: Bolsonaro’s Foreign Policy. GIGA Focus
Lateinamerika, No. 5. Hamburg: GIGA German Institute of Global and Area Studies.
Case, K. E. (2008). Musgrave’s vision of the public sector: The complex relationship between individual,
society, and state in public good theory. Journal of Economics and Finance, Vol. 32 (4), pp. 348–355.
Castillo, E.A. (2016). Beyond the balance sheet: Teaching capacity building as capital building. Journal of
Nonprofit Education and Leadership, Vol. 6 (3), pp. 287–303.
Castree, N. (2006). From neoliberalism to neoliberalisation: Confusions, consolations, and necessary
illusions. Environment and Planning, Vol. 38 (1), pp. 1–6.
Celeste, E. and Fabbrini, F., 2020. Competing jurisdictions: Data privacy across the borders. Lynn, T.,
Mooney, J. G., van der Werff. L., and Fox, G (eds.). Data Privacy and Trust in Cloud Computing, Cham,
Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 43–58.
Centemeri, L. (2010). The Seveso disaster legacy. Armiero, M., and Hall. M. (eds.), Nature and History in
Modern Italy. Athens, OH: Ohio University Press, pp. 251–273.
Charles (Prince of Wales, 2010). Harmony: A New Way of Looking at Our World. London: Harper Collins.
Charron, N. (2016). Do corruption measures have a perception problem? Assessing the relationship
between experiences and perceptions of corruption among citizens and experts. European Political
Science Review, Vol. 8 (1), pp. 147–171.
Chen, J.M. and Chen (2022). China can prepare to end its zero-COVID policy. Nature Medicine, Vol. 28 (6),
pp. 1104–1105.
Chrisafis, A. (2023). Emmanuel Macron’s uphill battle to achieve ‘lasting order’ in deeply divided France.
The Guardian, July 5, p. 1.
Christensen, T. and Lægreid, P., 2022. Taking stock: New Public Management (NPM) and post-NPM
reforms-trends and challenges. Handbook on the Politics of Public Administration, Cheltenham, UK,
Edward Elgar, pp. 38–49.
Christmann, P. (2021). Mineral resource governance in the 21st century and a sustainable European Union.
Mineral Economics, Vol. 34 (2), pp. 187–208.
Coffman, M., and Umemoto, K. (2010). The triple-bottom-line: Framing of trade-offs in sustainability
planning practice. Environment, Development and Sustainability, Vol. 12 (5), pp. 597–610.
194 ReferencesCohen, J. (2005). Deliberation and Democratic Legitimacy. Matravers, D., and Pike, J. (eds), Debates in
Contemporary Political Philosophy. London: Routledge, pp. 352–370.
Coleman, J.S. (1988). Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital. American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 94,
pp. 95–120.
Collins, J. C. (2001). Good to great: Why some companies make the leap–and others don’t. New York: Random
House.
Colombo, E. and Stanca, L. (2014). Measuring the monetary value of social relations: A hedonic approach.
Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics, Vol. 50 (June), pp. 77–87.
Computer History Museum (2019). Internet History of 1960s. Retrieved from: https://www.computerhistory.
org/Internethistory/1960s
Cooley, A., and Sharman, J. C. (2017). Transnational Corruption and the Globalized Individual. Perspectives
on Politics, Vol. 15 (3), pp. 732–753.
Cooper, P., Poe, G. L., and Bateman I. J. (2004). The Structure of Motivation for Contingent Values: A Case
Study of Lake Water Quality. Ecological Economics, Vol. 50 (1), pp. 69–82.
Coretcaia, O., and Grosenbaugh, G. (2020). Wellbeing Business: 8 ways that businesses are challenging the
corporate mindset to ensure social and ecological wellbeing for all. Erasmus University Arts & Culture
Studies research paper. Rotterdam, Netherlands: Erasmus University.
Corneo, G. (2017). Is capitalism obsolete? A journey through alternative economic systems. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Cornes, R., and Sandler, T. (1996). The theory of externalities, public goods, and club goods. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Corral, P., Irwin, A., Krishnan, N., and Gerszon-Mahler, D. (2020). Fragility and Conflict: On the Front Lines of
the Fight against Poverty. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Coster van Voorhout, J.E. (2020). Combatting human trafficking holistically through proactive financial
investigations. Journal of international criminal justice, Vol. 18 1), pp. 87–106.
Coulson, A. B., Adams, C. A., Nugent, M. N., and Haynes, K. (2015). Exploring metaphors of capitals and the
framing of multiple capitals: Challenges and opportunities for IR. Sustainability Accounting,
Management and Policy Journal, Vol. 6 (3), pp. 290–314.
Cox, M., Arnold, G., and Tomás, S.V. (2010). A review of design principles for community-based natural
resource management. Ecology and Society. Vol. 15 (4), article 38 [online].
Craven, M., Liu, L., Wilson, M., and Mysore, M. (2020). CoVID-19 Briefing Note. McKinsey Insights, March 02.
Crenson, M. A. (1987). The private stake in public goods: Overcoming the illogic of collective action. Policy
Sciences, Vol. 20 (3), pp. 259–276.
Creutzig, F., Fernandez, B., Haberl, H., Khosla, R., Mulugetta, Y. and Seto, K.C. (2016). Beyond technology:
Demand side solutions for climate change mitigation. Annual Review of Environment and Resources,
Vol. 41 (1), pp 173–198.
Cumming, D., Hornuf, L., Karami, M., and Schweizer, D. (2023). Disentangling Crowdfunding from
Fraudfunding. Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 182 (4), pp. 1103–1128.
da Silva, N. S. A., da Costa, G. J. M., Prior, M., and Rogerson, S. (2012). The evolution of e-learning
management systems: An ethical approach. Khosrowpour, M. (ed), Virtual Learning Environments:
Concepts, Methodologies, Tools and Applications. Hershey, PA: IGI Global, pp. 67–79.
Dahlen, M., 2021. A Woke New World. The Objective Standard, Vol. 16 (2), pp. 11–15.
Daly H. (1990) Commentary: Toward some operational principles of sustainable development. Ecological
Economics, Vol. 2 (1), pp. 1–6.
Darling-Hammond, L., 2012. Powerful teacher education: Lessons from exemplary programs. Chichester, UK:
John Wiley & Sons.
Davies, S. (2016). Adaptable livelihoods: Coping with food insecurity in the Malian Sahel. Berlin: Springer.
Davis, R. K. (1963). Recreation planning as an economic problem. Natural Resources Journal, Vol. 3,
pp. 239–249.
References 195Dawson, A. (2007). Herd protection as a public good: vaccination and our obligations to others. Dawson,
A., Verweij, M. and Verweij, M.F. (eds.) Ethics, prevention, and public health, New York: Oxford
University Press, pp. 160–78.
De Soto, H. (2000). Mystery of capital: Why capitalism triumphs in the West and fails everywhere else.
New York: Basic Books.
Deaton, A., 2018. What do self-reports of wellbeing say about life-cycle theory and policy? Journal of public
economics, Vol. 162, pp.18–25.
Demirguc-Kunt, A., Klapper, L., Singer, D., and Ansar, S. (2018). The Global Findex Database 2017: Measuring
financial inclusion and the fintech revolution. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Publications.
Demsetz, H. (1970). The private production of public goods. The Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 13 (2),
pp. 293–306.
Deneulin, S. and Townsend, N. (2007). Public Goods, Global Public Goods and the Common Good.
International Journal of Social Economics, Vol. 34 (1/2), pp. 19–36.
Detzer, S. (2022). Schatzinsel Japan. Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, Nov. 11, p. 9.
Desai, M. (2003). Public goods: a historical perspective. Kaul, I., Conceicao, P., Le Goulven, K., and
Mendoza, R. U. (eds.). Providing global public goods: managing globalization. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, pp. 63–77.
Díaz-Cayeros, A., McElwain, K.M., Romero, V. and Siewierski, K.A. (2003). Fiscal Decentralization, and
Particularistic Spending across Countries. Proceedings of the Conference on Comparative Analysis of
Political Institutions, Princeton: Princeton University, pp. 18–62.
Dickson, B. (2016). The dictator’s dilemma: The Chinese Communist Party’s strategy for survival. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Dill, A. (2018). The SDGs are public goods: Costs, Sources and Measures of Financing for Development. Policy
paper to the UN Inter-Agency Taskforce on Financing for Development. Basel: Basel Institute of
Commons and Economics.
Dill, A. (2015). What is Social Capital 2015 – A Review. Basel: Basel Institute of Commons and Economics.
Dill, A. and Gebhart, N. (2016). Redundancy, Unilateralism and Bias beyond GDP –results of a Global Index
Benchmark. Munich Personal RePEc Archive (MPRA) paper no. 74628. Munich: University of Munich,
MPRA.
Doh, J. P., Tashman, P., and Benischke, M. H. (2019). Adapting to grand environmental challenges through
collective entrepreneurship. Academy of management perspectives, Vol. 33 (4), pp. 450–468.
Dott, D.R., Wirasinghe, S.C. and Chakma, A. (1996). Putting the Environment into the NPV Calculation:
Quantifying Pipeline Environmental Costs. Proceedings of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers
International Pipeline Conference, Vol. 2, pp. 1271–1277.
Downing, T. (1990) Monitoring and Responding to Famine: Lessons from the 1984–85 Food Crisis in Kenya.
Disasters, The Journal of Disaster Studies and Management, Vol. 14 (2), pp. 204–29.
Drahos, P. (2004). The regulation of public goods. Journal of International Economic Law, Vol. 7 (2),
pp. 321–339.
Dreier, P., Mollenkopf, J. and Swanstrom, T. (2014). Place matters: metro-politics for the twenty-first century.
Kansas City: University Press of Kansas.
Drucker, P.F. (1967). The effective executive. Human Resource Management, Vol. 6 (1), pp. 29–38.
Dupré, L. (1994). The Common Good and the Open Society. Douglas, R. B. and Hollenbach, D. (eds.).
Catholicism and Liberalism. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Duru, E. J., and Nwagbos, C. I. (2007). The problems and prospects of public health care development in
Nigeria’s local government system. Global Journal of Social Sciences, Vol. 6 (1), pp. 51–56.
Dutta, S. K., Caplan, D., and Marcinko, D. (2014). Blurred Vision, Perilous Future: Corporate Governance
Failure at Olympus. Issues in Accounting Education, Vol. 29 (3), pp. 459–480.
Eichhorst W., Marx, P. and Wehner, C. (2017). Labor market reforms in Europe: towards more ‘flexicure’
labor markets? Journal for labour market research, Vol. 51 (1), pp.1–17.
196 ReferencesEichhorst, W. and Rinne, U. (2020). Short-Run Labor Market Impacts of COVID-19, Initial Policy Measures and
Beyond. Bonn, Germany: Institute for the Study of Labor.
Elkington, J. (1998). Accounting for the triple bottom line. Measuring Business Excellence, Vol. 2 (3),
pp. 18–22.
Esping-Andersen, G. (1990). The three worlds of welfare capitalism. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Esposito, G., Felicetti, A., and Terlizzi, A. (2023). Participatory governance in megaprojects: the Lyon–Turin
high-speed railway among structure, agency, and democratic participation. Policy and Society, Vol. 42
(1), pp. 1–15.
Esposito, M., Tse, T. and Soufani, K. (2018). Introducing a circular economy: new thinking with new
managerial and policy implications. California Management Review, Vol. 60 (3), pp. 5–19.
European Commission (2002). EU focus on global public goods. European Commission briefs. Luxembourg:
Publications Office of the European Union.
European Commission (2019). EU Justice Scoreboard 2019. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European
Union.
European Communities (2002). Guidance Document No. 1, Economics and the Environment – The
Implementation Challenge of the Water Framework Directive. Brussels: European Commission.
Eurostat (2015). Temporary employees as percentage of the total number of employees, by sex, age, and
citizenship. Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/lfsa_etpgan
Evans, B., Joas, M., Sundback, S., and Theobald, K. (2013). Governing sustainable cities. New York: Routledge.
Fagerström, A., Hartwig, F., and Cunningham, G. (2017). Accounting and auditing of sustainability:
Sustainable Indicator Accounting (SIA). Sustainability, Vol. 10 (1), pp. 45–52.
Falleti, T. G., and Cunial, S. L. (2018). Participation in social policy: public health in comparative perspective.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
FAO (2006). Policy Brief June 2006 on Food Security. Rome: FAO.
FAO (United Nations Food and Agricultural Organization, 2016). Safety for Fishermen: Final Report (TCP/RLA/
0069) – Development of Standards for the Construction. Rome: FAO.
Farnia, L., Cavalli, L., and Vergalli, S. (2019). Italian Cities SDGs Composite Index: A Methodological Approach to
Measure the Agenda 2030 at Urban Level. Milan, Italy: Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei.
FDA (Food and Drug Administration, 2021). Facts About the Current Good Manufacturing Practices
(CGMPs). Silver Spring, MD: FDA.
Feldman, R. (2016). Regulatory property: the new IP. Columbia Journal of Law and Arts, Vol. 40 (1),
pp. 53–68.
Felline, V. (2020). Value of needs and purchasing power. Trento (TN), Italy: Edizioni del Faro.
Fischer, D. (2006). A Brief Introduction to Game Theory. Springer Briefs No. 231. New York/Heidelberg:
Springer.
Flavelle, C. (2022). U.S. to Give Tribes Millions to Escape Climate Threats. New York Times, Nov. 30, p. 11.
Foley, M. W., and Edwards, B. (1999). Is it time to disinvest in social capital? Journal of Public Policy, Vol. 19
(2), pp. 141–173.
Foley, M.W., and Edwards, B. (1997). Editors’ introduction: Escape from politics? Social theory and the
social capital debate. American Behavioral Scientist, Vol. 40 (5) pp. 550–561.
Fondazione Ambrosetti (2012). Smart Cities in Italy: an opportunity in the spirit of the renaissance for a new
quality of life. Milano, Italy: Ambrosetti Foundation.
Foster, J.L. (1990). Bureaucratic rigidity revisited. Social Science Quarterly, Vol. 71 (2), pp. 223–238.
Foundation Center (2003). Foundation Yearbook. New York: Foundation Center.
Franken, G. and Schütte, P. (2022). Current trends in addressing environmental and social risks in mining
and mineral supply chains by regulatory and voluntary approaches. Mineral Economics, Vol. 35 (3–4),
pp. 653–671.
Freeman, A.M., Haveman, R.H., and Kneese, A.V. (1973) The Economics of Environmental Policy. New York:
John Wiley.
References 197Freeman, A.M., Herriges, J.A., and Cling, K. L. (2014). The Measurement of Environmental and Resource Values.
Theory and Methods, 3rd edition. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future Press.
Friedman, M. 1970. The social responsibility of business is to increase its profits. The New York Times
Magazine, Sept. 13, pp. SM 6–SM 11.
Friend, A. (2012). System of Accounts for Global Entropy-Production (SAGE-P): The Accounting in the
Topological Domain Space (TDS) of the Econosphere, Sociosphere, and the Ecosphere. Shmelev, S.,
and Shmeleva, I. (eds.), Sustainability Analysis, London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 25–51.
Frischmann, B. M. (2012). Infrastructure: The social value of shared resources. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Fung, A. (2004). Empowered Participation. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Gadotti, M. (2002). Pedagogy of the Earth and Culture of Sustainability. Sao Paulo: Instituto Paulo Freire.
Galindo-González, J. D., and Rivera-Arriaga, E. (2018). Biodiversity Conservation in Mexico: Assessing the
Institutional Capacity for Implementing Nagoya Protocol and Aichi Targets. Ortega-Rubio, A. (ed.),
Mexican Natural Resources Management and Biodiversity Conservation: Recent Case Studies, Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, pp. 3–52.
García-Prado, A. and Gonzalez, P. (2007). Policy and regulatory responses to dual practice in the health
sector. Health Policy, Vol. 84 (2–3), pp.142–152.
Ghatak, M. (2003). Who Should Provide Public Goods? A Perspective from the Theory of Organizations.
Marjit, S., and Banerjee, M. (eds.), Development, Displacement and Disparity – India in the Last Quarter of
the Century. Calcutta, Center for Studies in Social Sciences, Calcutta, pp. 1–31.
Gibson, K., 2007. Ethics and business: an introduction. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Giroux, H.A. (2015). Against the terror of neoliberalism: Politics beyond the age of greed. New York: Routledge.
Glavas, A., and Mish, J. (2015). Resources and capabilities of triple bottom line firms: Going over old or
breaking new ground? Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 127 (3), pp. 623–642.
Global Infrastructure Hub (GI Hub, 2017). Outlook of Global Infrastructure. Sydney, Australia: GI Hub.
Gmeiner, R. (2021). International free riding on institutions. Economic Affairs, Vol. 42 (1), pp. 123–140.
Gordon, J. A. (2013). Defining individual global competitiveness: A mixed methods study of contributing global
mind-set components. Doctoral dissertation. Fort Wayne, IN: Indiana Institute of Technology.
Gowthorpe, C. (2009). Wider still and wider? A critical discussion of intellectual capital recognition,
measurement and control in a boundary theoretical context. Critical Perspectives on Accounting, Vol. 20
(7), pp. 823–834.
Grané, P. (2001). Remedies under WTO law. Journal of International Economic Law, Vol. 4 (4), pp. 755–772.
GRI (Global Reporting Initiative, 2014): Sustainable Development Goals update: promising signs for
sustainability reporting. Available at https://www.globalreporting.org/information/news-and-press￾center/Pages/Sustainable-Development-Goals-update-promising-signs-for-sustainability-reporting.
aspx
Griffiths, M.R., and Lucas, J.R. (2016). The Ethical Implications of Value for New Economic Thinking. London:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Grimsey, D., and Lewis, M. K. (2007). Public private partnerships: The worldwide revolution in infrastructure
provision and project finance. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Grix, J. (2001). Social capital as a concept in the social sciences: The current state of the debate.
Democratization, Vol. 8 (3), pp. 189–210.
Grootaert, C. (2001). Social capital: The missing link. Dekker and Uslaner, E.M. (eds.). Social Capital and
Participation in Everyday Life. London and New York: Routledge, pp. 9–29.
Grossbard, S. (2006). Jacob Mincer 1922–2006. Review of Economics of the Household, Vol. 4 (4), pp. 441–442.
Guha, R. and Alier, J.M. (2013). Varieties of environmentalism: essays North and South. New York: Routledge.
Guiso, L., Sapienza, P. and Zingales, L. (2004). The role of social capital in financial development. American
Economic Review, Vol. 94 (3), pp. 526–556.
198 ReferencesGuma, I.P., Rwashana, A.S., and Oyo, B. (2022). Food security indicators for subsistence farmers
sustainability: A system dynamics approach. International Journal of System Dynamics Applications,
Vol. 7 (1), pp. 45–64.
Gupta, J. and Vigilin, C. (2016). Sustainable development goals and inclusive development. International
Environmental Agreements, Vol. 16 (9), pp. 433–448.
Hafner-Burton, E.: 2009. Forced to Be Good: Why Trade Agreements Boost Human Rights. Ithaca: Cornell
University Press.
Hall, D. (2014). Romantic naturalists, early environmentalists: An ecocritical study, 1789–1912. London: Ashgate
Publishing.
Hall, P.A. and Lamont, M. (eds., 2009). Successful Societies: How Institutions and Culture Affect Health.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Halstead, J.M., and Deller, S.C. (eds., 2015). Social capital at the community level: An applied interdisciplinary
perspective. New York: Routledge.
Hammer, J., and Pritchett, L. (2004). Scenes from a marriage: World Bank economists and social capital.
Bebbington, A., Woolcock, M., Guggenheim, S. E., and Olson, E. (eds.), The search for empowerment:
social capital as idea and practice at the World Bank. West Hartford, CT: Kumarian Press, pp. 63–90.
Hampton, D.B. (2019). Modern slavery in global supply chains: can national action plans on business and
human rights close the governance gap? Business and Human Rights Journal, Vol. 4 (2), pp. 239–263.
Hanlon, M., Maydew, E. L., and Thornock, J. R. (2015). Taking the long way home: US tax evasion and
offshore investments in US equity and debt markets. The Journal of Finance, Vol. 70 (1), pp. 257–287.
Hansen, H. P., and Clausen, L. T. (2004). The Democratic Transformation of Nature Conservation and Public
Planning. Proceedings of the 3rd Global Conference on Environmental Justice and Global Citizenship.
Copenhagen: Copenhagen Business School.
Hansson, M.G. (2008). The Private Sphere: An Emotional Territory and its Agent. Dordrecht, Netherlands:
Springer.
Hardin, G. (1968). The Tragedy of the Commons. Science, Vol.162 (3859), pp. 1243–1248.
Hardin, G. (1998). Extensions of “the tragedy of the commons”. Science, Vol. 280 (5364), pp. 682–683.
Hardin, R. (2015). Collective action (3rd. ed). Washington, D.C.: RFF Press.
Haripriya, G.S. (2001). Integrated Environmental and Economic Accounting: An Application to the Forest
Resources in India. Environmental and Resource Economics, Vol. 19 8(1), pp. 73–95.
Hassett, K.A., and Shapiro, R.J. (2003). How Europe sows misery in Africa. On the Issues, American Enterprise
Institute for Public Policy Research. AEI Online. http://www. aei. org/publications/pubID, 17839.
Hausman, J. (2012). Contingent valuation: from dubious to hopeless. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
Vol. 26 (4), pp. 43–56.
Hayden, F.G. (1989). Survey of Methodologies for Valuing Externalities and Public Goods. Lincoln, Nebraska:
University of Nebraska Department of Economics.
Health Metrics Network (2012). Framework and Standards for Country Health Information Systems, 2nd
edition. Geneva: World Health Organization.
Heath, J. (2001). The Efficient Society: Why Canada Is as Close to Utopia as It Gets. Toronto, Canada: Viking.
Held, V. (1970). The Public Interest and Individual Interests. New York: Basic Books.
Hellwig M.F. (2003). Public-Good Provision with Many Participants. Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 70 (3),
pp. 589 –614.
Helm, D. (2016). Natural Capital: Valuing the Planet. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Henriques, A., and Richardson, J. (2013). Triple Bottom Line. Does it all Add Up? New York: Routledge.
Heracleous, L. and Werres, K. (2016). On the road to disaster: Strategic misalignments and corporate
failure. Long Range Planning, Vol. 49 (4), pp. 491–506.
Hess, W., 2005. Hospitals walking a tightrope between reform pressure and financial straits. Allianz Research
Working Paper No. 49. Munich: Allianz Group.
References 199Hiltunen, V., Kangas, J. and Pykalainen, J. (2008). Voting methods in strategic forest planning: Experiences
from Metsahällitus. Forest. Policy and Economics. Vol. 10, pp. 117–127.
Hitchcock, E. (2006). Technological law: societal control of technology and the potential of the world standards
movement. Auckland NZ: Research Space.
HM Government (2015.) Counterterrorism and Security Act 2015. London: Home Office. Available at: www.
legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2015/6/contents/enacted.
Hobson, J.A. (1919). The Social Problem: Life and Work. Eyemouth, UK: J. Nisbet & Company.
Hoekstra, A.Y. (2015). The water footprint: The relation between human consumption and water use.
Lamastra, L. (ed.), The Water We Eat: Combining Virtual Water and Water Footprints. Basel: Springer
International Publishing, pp. 35–48.
Hoffiani, M. (2019). The Nexus between Corruption, Sustainable Development and Rule of Law. Örebro
University Juridicum thesis paper. Örebro, Sweden: Örebro University.
Hollenbach, D. (2002) The Common Good and Christian Ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Holmes, L. (2015). Corruption: a very short introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Holt, M. (2010). Nuclear energy policy. Darby, PA: DIANE Publishing.
Hoppe, H.-H. (2011). Of private, common, and public property and the rationale for total privatization.
Libertarian Papers, Vol. 3 (1), pp. 1–13.
Horiuchi, Y., and Saito, J. (2003). Reapportionment and Redistribution: Consequences of Electoral Reform
in Japan. American Journal of Political Science, Vol. 47 (4), pp. 669–682.
Howard, A. (2016). Blood Diamonds: The Successes and Failures of the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme in Angola, Sierra Leone and Zimbabwe. Washington University Global Studies Law Review,
Vol. 15 (1), p. 137–159.
Howlett, M. and Rayner, J., 2007. Design principles for policy mixes: Cohesion and coherence in ‘new
governance arrangements’. Policy and society, Vol. 26 (4), pp. 1–18.
Hoynes, W. (2019). Public television for sale: Media, the market, and the public sphere. New York: Routledge.
Hufbauer, G. C., Kim, J., and Schott, J. J. (2021). Can EU carbon border adjustment measures propel WTO
climate talks? Policy Brief PB21-23. Washington, D.C.: Peterson Institute for International Economics.
Hughes, T., Scott, K., and Maassen, P. (2017). Improving Public Services: Guidance for Developing Open
Government Partnership Commitments. London: Open Government Partnership.
Huisman, J. (2003). Higher education in Germany. Enschede, NL: Center for Higher Education Policy Studies.
Hurrelmann, A., Schneider, S., and Steffek, J. (2007). Legitimacy in an age of global politics. London: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Ibrahim, M. H., El-Naas, M. H., Zevenhoven, R., and Al-Sobhi, S. A. (2019). Enhanced CO2 capture through
reaction with steel-making dust in high salinity water. International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control,
Vol. 91, Article 102819.
ICTSD (International Center for Trade and Sustainable Development, 2014). Developing Countries Table Food
Security Proposal at WTO. Geneva: ICTSD.
Iecovich, E., Jacobs, J.M. and Stessman, J. (2011). Loneliness, social networks, and mortality: 18 years of
followup. The International Journal of Aging and Human Development, Vol. 72 (3), pp. 243–263.
IMO (International Maritime Organization, 2006). Code of Safety for Fishermen and Fishing Vessels 2005.
Part A: Safety and Health. London: IMO.
Ince, O. U. (2014). Property. Gibbons, M. T., Coole, D. H., Ellis, E., and Ferguson, K. (eds.), The encyclopedia
of political thought. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell, pp. 3008–3018.
Inderst, G., Kaminker, C., and Stewart, F. (2012). Defining and measuring green investments: implications
for institutional investors’ asset allocations. OECD Working Papers on Finance, Insurance and Private
Pensions No. 24. Paris: OECD Publishing.
International Integrated Reporting Council (2013). Capitals background paper. London: International
Integrated Reporting Council.
200 ReferencesIonita, M., and Nagavciuc, V. (2021). Extreme floods in Europe: large-scale drivers and associated impacts.
Water, Vol.13 (8), pp. 1122–1148.
Iveson, S. W. (2014). Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP)/Good Laboratory Practices (GLP) Review and
Applicability for Chemical Security Enhancements. Albuquerque, NM: Sandia National Laboratory.
Jacobs, M. (2011). Wellbeing: The Challenge for Labour. C. Seaford (ed.), The Practical Politics of Wellbeing,
London: New Economics Foundation, pp. 97–120.
Jakobi, A. P. (2013). Governing war economies: Conflict diamonds and the Kimberley Process. Jakobi, A.,
and Wolf, K. (eds.), The transnational governance of violence and crime: Non-state actors in security.
London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 84–105.
Jamison, D. T. (ed. 2006). Disease control priorities in developing countries. World Bank Publications.
New York: World Bank.
Javidan, M., & Teagarden, M. B. (2011). Conceptualizing and measuring global mindset. Mobley, W. H., Li,
M. and Wang, Y. (eds.), Advances in Global Leadership, Vol. 6. Bingley, West Yorkshire, UK: Emerald,
pp. 13–39.
Jean, A., Folefack, J., Gaelle, M., Njiki, N., and Darr, D. (2019). Forest policy and economics safeguarding
forests from smallholder oil palm expansion? The case of Ngwei forest (Cameroon). Forest Policy and
Economics, Vol. 101 (1), pp. 45–61.
Jerrim J. and Sims, S. (2019). The Teaching and Learning International Survey (TALIS) 2018. London:
Department for Education.
Jiang, Y., Zhao, F., Li, F. and Zhang, S. (2015). Japan’s Seamless Aid Mechanism of Overseas Mineral
Resources Exploration and Development. Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on
Mechatronics, Electronic, Industrial and Control Engineering, MEIC-15, pp. 1404–1408.
Jochmann, M., and León‐González, R. (2004). Estimating the demand for health care with panel data: a
semiparametric Bayesian approach. Health Economics, Vol. 13 (10), pp. 1003–1014.
Johannson, E. (2007). Broken Promises: Verizon neglects its commitment to provide good jobs and quality
service. Washington, D.C.: American Rights at Work.
Johnson, D.R. and Post, D. (1996). Law and Borders: The Rise of Law in Cyberspace. Stanford Law Review,
Vol. 48 (5), pp. 1367–1402.
Johnson, N., White, A., and Perrot-Maître, D. (2001). Developing markets for water services from forests: Issues
and lessons for innovators. Washington. D.C.: World Resources Institute.
Jung, T, and Harrow, J. (2015). Philanthropy, the State and Public Goods. in RP Guerrero O., R.P., and
Wilkins, P.(eds.), Doing Public Good? Private Actors, Evaluation and Public Value, New Brunswick, N.J.:
Transaction Publishers, pp. 71–98.
Junita, F. (2015). The foreign mining investment regime in Indonesia: regulatory risk under resource
nationalism policy and how international investment treaties provide protection. Journal of Energy &
Natural Resources Law, Vol. 33 (3), pp. 241–265.
Kahneman, D., and Knetsch, J. L. (1992), Valuing public goods: the purchase of moral satisfaction. Journal
of environmental economics and management, Vol. 22 (1), pp. 57–70.
Kalthoff, A. (2014), Why societies need public goods. Critical Review of International Social and Political
Philosophy, Vol. 17 (6), pp. 635–651.
Karpoff, J.M. (2022). The Tragedy of “The Tragedy of the Commons”: Hardin versus the Property Rights
Theorists. The Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 65 (S1), pp. S65–S84.
Kaul, I. (2003). Public goods: a positive analysis. UNDP (United Nations Development Program) Office of
Development Studies Discussion Paper. New York: UNDP.
Kaul, I. (2001). Public goods in the 21st Century. Faust, M. G., Kaul, I., Le Goulven, K., Ryu, G., and Schnupf,
M. (eds.), Global Public Goods: Taking the Concept Forward. Discussion Paper 17. New York: UNDP,
Office of Development Studies.
References 201Kaul, I., and Mendoza, R. U. (2003). Advancing the concept of public goods. Kaul, I., Conceicao, P., Le
Goulven, K., and Mendoza, R. U. (eds.), Providing global public goods: managing globalization. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, pp. 78–111.
Kaul, I., Conceição, P., Le Goulven, K. and Ronald U. Mendoza, R.U. (2003). Why Do Global Public Goods
Matter Today. Kaul, I., Conceicao, P., Le Goulven, K., and Mendoza, R. U. (eds.), Providing global public
goods: managing globalization. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 2–20.
Kaul, I., I. Grunberg, I., and Stern, M.A. (1999). Global Public Goods. International Cooperation in the 21st
Century. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kay, F. M., and Johnston (eds., 2007). Social Capital, Diversity and the Welfare State. Vancouver: University of
British Columbia Press.
Keane, J. (2003). Global Civil Society. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kenter, J.O., 2017. Deliberative monetary valuation. Spash, C.L. (ed.), Handbook of Ecological Economics:
Nature and Society, Abingdon, UK: Routledge, pp. 351–361.
Kethineni, V. (1991). Political economy of state intervention in health care. Economic and Political Weekly,
Vol. 26, pp. 2427–2433.
Keuning, S.J. and de Ruuter, W.A. (1988). Guidelines to the construction of a social accounting matrix.
Review of income and wealth, Vol. 34 (1), pp. 71–100.
Khunou, S. F. (2016). The Legal Crisis of Land Restitution in South Africa: A Critical Analysis. Recht in Afrika –
Law in Africa – Droit en Afrique, Vol. 18 (2), pp. 153–180.
Kickbusch, I., (2013). A game change in global health: the best is yet to come. Public Health Reviews, Vol. 35
(1), pp.1–20.
Kim, W., Nam, I.C. and Cuong, T.T. (2010). On the governance of state-owned economic groups in Vietnam.
Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1729093
Kiratu, S., Märker, L. and Mwakolobo, A. (2011). Food security: the Tanzanian case. Winnipeg, Canada:
International Institute for Sustainable Development.
Kitzmiller, E.M., 2019, April. Public schools, private dollars: An education arms race. Phi Kappa Phi Forum,
Vol. 99 (1), pp. 14–17.
Kjær, A.M. and Ulriksen, M.S. (2014). From consensus to contention: changing revenue and policy dynamics in
Uganda. United Nations Research Institute for Social Development (UNRISD) Working Paper
No. 2014–21. Geneva: UNRISD.
Kleemeier, E., and Lockwood, H. (2012). Public-private partnerships for rural water services. The Hague,
Netherlands: International Water and Sanitation Center (IRC).
Kohn, M., 2020. Public goods and social justice. Perspectives on Politics, 18(4), pp.1104–1117.
Kolk, A., Van Tulder, R. and Kostwinder, E. (2008). Business and partnerships for development. European
Management Journal, Vol. 26 (4), pp. 262–273.
Kolk, A., and Lenfant, F. (2012): Multinationals, CSR and Partnerships in Central African Conflict Countries.
Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management, Vol. 20 (1), pp. 43–54.
Kolomiiets, U., and Petrushenko, Y. (2017). The human capital theory. Encouragement and criticism.
SocioEconomic Challenges, Vol. 1 (1), pp. 77–80.
Komorita, S. S., and Parks, C.D. (2019). Social dilemmas. New York: Routledge.
Kroger, J. R. (2005). Enron, Fraud, and Securities Reform: An Enron Prosecutor’s Perspective. University of
Colorado Law Review, Vol. 76 (1), pp. 57–76.
Kroll, C. (2015). Sustainable development goals: Are the rich countries ready? Guetersloh, Germany:
Bertelsmann Stiftung.
Krueger, A.B. (2003). Economic considerations and class size. The Economic Journal, Vol. 113 (485), pp. F34–F63.
Krugman, P. (2022). Biden’s energy policy went virtually unnoticed. Great! New York Times, Nov. 17, p. 13.
Ladner, A. (2002). Size and direct democracy at the local level: the case of Switzerland. Environment and
Planning C: Government and Policy, Vol. 20 (6), pp. 813–828.
202 ReferencesLaffont, J. J. (1975). Macroeconomic constraints, economic efficiency and ethics: An introduction to Kantian
economics. Economica, Vol. 42 (168), pp. 430–437.
Lægreid, P. (2017). New Public Management. Thompson, W.R., et al. (eds.), The Oxford Research
Encyclopedia of Politics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lambert, R.J. (1994). Monitoring local food security and coping strategies: Lessons from information
collection and analysis in Mopti, Mali. Disasters, Vol. 18 (4), pp. 332–343.
Lamont, J. (2002). UN Seeks Help from Companies in War on HIV/AIDs. Financial Times, Aug. 30, p. 1.
Lamph, S. (2012). Regulation of medical devices outside the European Union. Journal of the Royal Society of
Medicine, Vol. 105 (1 supplement), pp. 12–21.
Lamy, P. (2011). Doha Round can help lift Africa’s agriculture. Opening Speech at the “Harnessing Agriculture for
Development through Trade” CUTS Conference. Geneva: Consumer Unity & Trust Society (CUTS).
Lander, M., and Castle, S. (2022). Trying to Sell Austerity in Already Lean Times. New York Times, Nov. 18,
p. A 10.
LaRocque, N. (2008). Public-private partnerships in basic education: An international review. Reading: CfBT
Education Trust.
Laudal, T. (2019). A New Approach to the Economics of public Goods. London: Routledge.
Lawrence, A. T., and Tolley Jr., H. (2003). Unocal and the Yadana gas pipeline project. Thomas, D.C. (ed.),
Readings and Cases in International Management: A Cross-Cultural Perspective, Thousand Oaks,
California: SAGE Publications, pp. 75–91.
Leal, C. P., Quinones, R. A., and Chavez, C. (2010). What factors affect the decision-making process when
setting TACs? The case of Chilean fisheries. Marine Policy, Vol. 34: (6), pp. 183–195.
Lehmann, L., and Keller, L. (2006). The evolution of cooperation and altruism – a general framework and a
classification of models. Journal of Evolutionary Biology, Vol. 19 (5), pp. 1365–1376.
Lehne, R. (2006). Government and business: American political economy in comparative perspective.
Washington, DC: CQ Press.
Leontief, W. (1936). Quantitative input-output relations in the economic system of the United States.
Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 18 (3), pp. 105–125.
Lepeley, M. (2017). Human Centered Management. 5 Pillars of Organizational Quality and Global Sustainability.
New York: Routledge.
Levinson, A. (2012). Valuing public goods using happiness data: The case of air quality. Journal of Public
Economics, Vol. 96 (9), p. 869–880.
Levy, Jonah D. (2021). Welfare Retrenchment. Béland, D. et al. (eds). The Oxford Handbook of the Welfare
State, 2nd edition. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, D., Kanji, N. and Themudo, N.S. (2020). Non-governmental organizations and development. London
and New York: Routledge.
Li, S. (2015). The Role of Farmer Cooperatives in Public Good Provision. Available at SSRN 2989753.
Liamzon, C. M. (2010). Food security issues. Elliott, R.C. (ed.), Institutional Issues Involving Ethics and Justice,
Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS), Saxon Beck, Oxford: EOLSS Publications, Vol. 1,
pp. 145–150.
Libecap, G. (2009). The tragedy of the commons: property rights and markets as solutions to resource and
environmental problems. Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics, Vol. 53 (1),
pp. 129–144.
Lin, N., and Erickson, B. H. (2008). Theory, Measurement, and the Research Enterprise on Social Capital. In
Nan, Lin, N., and Erickson, B. H. (eds.), Social Capital: An International Research Program. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, pp. 1–24.
Lin Hi, N. and Müller, K. (2013). The CSR bottom line: Preventing corporate social irresponsibility. Journal of
Business Research, Vol. 66 (10), pp. 1928–1936.
Lindblom, C. E. (1977). Politics and markets: The world’s political-economic systems. New York: Basic Books.
References 203Lindroos-Hovinheimo, S. (2021). Private Selves: Legal Personhood in European Privacy Protection. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Lipman, P. (2013). Economic crisis, accountability, and the state’s coercive assault on public education in
the USA. Journal of Education Policy, Vol. 28 (5), pp. 557–573.
Loader, I. and Walker, N. (2001). Policing as a public good: Reconstituting the connections between
policing and the state. Theoretical criminology, Vol. 5(1), pp. 9–35.
Lodge, G. and Wilson, C. (2006). A Corporate Solution to Global Poverty: How Multinationals Can Help the Poor
and Invigorate Their Own Legitimacy, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Long, J., (2019). The United Nations’ 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Impact of the
Accounting Industry. Pforzheimer Honors College Theses # 260. New York: Pace University.
Longe, O.M. (2021). A Study on the Use of Unclean Energy Fuel in Rural South Africa. Proceedings of
the August 2021 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Power & Energy and Industry Applications
Society (IEEE PES/IAS) PowerAfrica Conference in Nairobi, Kenya, pp. 1–5.
Looney, A., 2022. Student loan forgiveness is regressive whether measured by income, education, or wealth.
Hutchins Center Working Paper no. 75. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution.
Lout, G.E. (2023). Human rights in a sea of market-based approaches: Evaluation of market-based tools
integrating social responsibility in the Sustainable Seafood Movement. Sustainable Production and
Consumption, Vol. 35 (1), pp. 1–12.
Lucifora, C. and Moriconi, S., 2012. Political instability and labor market institutions. IZA Discussion Papers,
No. 6457, Bonn, Germany: Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
Luhmann, N. (1998 [2012]). Theory of Society. Translated by Rhodes Barrett. Stanford: Stanford University
Press.
Lutz, M.A. (1999). Economics for the common good: Two centuries of economic thought in the humanist
tradition. London: Routledge.
Lyman, E., Schoeppner, M., and von Hippel, F. (2017). Nuclear safety regulation in the post-Fukushima era.
Science, Vol. 356 (6340), pp. 808–809.
Maass, A. and Anderson, R.L. (1978). . . . and the desert shall rejoice: Conflict, growth, and justice in arid
environments. Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Macchi, C. and van Zeben, J. (2021). Business and human rights implications of climate change litigation:
Milieudefensie et al. vs. Royal Dutch Shell. Review of European, Comparative & International
Environmental Law, Vol. 30 (3), pp. 409–415.
Macfarlane, S. B., and AbouZahr, C. (2019), The Palgrave Handbook of Global Health Data Methods for Policy
and Practice. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Mackintosh, M., Channon, A., Karan, A., Selvaraj, S., Cavagnero, E., and Zhao, H. (2016). What is the private
sector? Understanding private provision in the health systems of low-income and middle-income
countries. The Lancet, Vol. 388 (10044), pp. 596–605.
Maduna, P. M. (1989). Judicial review and protection of human rights under a new constitutional order in
South Africa. Columbia Human Rights Law Review, Vol. 21 (1), pp. 73–81.
Mainar-Causapé, A.J., Ferrari, E. and McDonald, S. (2018). Social accounting matrices: basic aspects and main
steps for estimation. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union.
Maine, H. S. (1963). Ancient Law; Its Connection with the Early History of Society and its Relation to Modern
Ideas. Boston: Beacon Press (Reprint of 1861 edition).
Malala, O.N. and Adachi, T. (2022). Japan’s critical metals in the medium term: A quasi-dynamic approach
incorporating probability. Mineral Economics, Vol. 35 (1), pp. 87–101.
Malm, A., and Hornborg, A. (2014). The geology of mankind? A critique of the Anthropocene narrative. The
Anthropocene Review, Vol. 1 (1), pp. 62–69.
Mandavilli, A. (2018). The World’s Worst Industrial Disaster Is Still Unfolding. The Atlantic, July 18.
Mansbridge, J., 2014. The role of the state in governing the commons. Environmental Science & Policy,
Vol. 36 (1), pp. 8–10.
204 ReferencesMansouri, N., 2016. A case study of Volkswagen unethical practice in Diesel emission test. International
Journal of Science and Engineering Applications, Vol. 5 (4), pp. 211–216.
Marais, M., Reynaud, E., and Vilanova, L. (2018). CSR dynamics in the midst of competing injunctions: The
case of Danone. European Management Review, Vol. 15 (3), pp. 285–306.
Marcu, A., Mehling, M. and Cosbey, A. (2020). Border carbon adjustments in the EU: Issues and options.
Brussels, Belgium: ERCST (The European Roundtable on Climate Change and Sustainable Transition)
stakeholder event Jan. 27.
Marcuse, P. (2013). Housing policy and the myth of the benevolent state. Tighe, R. J., and Mueller, E.J.
(eds.), The Affordable Housing Reader, Milton Park, Oxon: Routledge, pp. 36–43.
Marique, Y. (2014). Public-Private Partnerships and the Law. Regulations,Institutions and Community.
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Marke, A., and Sylvester, B. (2018). Decoding the Current Global Climate Finance Architecture. Marke, A.,
(ed.), Transforming climate finance and green investment with blockchains. Cambridge, MA:
Academic Press, pp. 35–59.
Marschke, M., and Vandergeest, P. (2016). Slavery scandals: Unpacking labour challenges and policy
responses within the offshore fisheries sector. Marine Policy, Vol. 68 (1), pp. 39–46.
Mason, O., and Mitroff, I. (1981) Challenging strategic planning assumptions: theory, case, and techniques.
New York: Wiley.
Matthews, G. (2015). Pesticides: health, safety and the environment. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Mattei U. (2012). The strategy of common assets: Providing direct access to social justice by renewing
common sense. Fattori, T. (ed.), Redefining and combating poverty. Trends in social cohesion, No. 25.
Strasbourg: Council of Europe Publishing, pp. 307–324.
Mayntz, R. (2009). Common Goods and Governance. Mayntz, R., Über Governance: Institutionen und Prozesse
politischer Regelung, Schriften aus dem Max-Planck-Institut für Gesellschaftsforschung, No. 62, Frankfurt
a. M.: Campus Verlag, pp. 65–79.
Mazzucato, M. (2015). The Innovative State: Governments should make markets, not just fix them. Foreign
Affairs, Jan./Feb., pp. 61–73.
McBride, M. (2017). Cleaning up the industry: Improving protections for precarious and child domestic
workers. Fordham International Law Journal, Vol. 41 (5), pp. 1335–1400.
McCormack, K. P., and Johnson, W. C. (2016). Supply chain networks and business process orientation:
advanced strategies and best practices. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
McEldowney, J., 2016. Delivering public services in the United Kingdom in a period of austerity. Hellmut
Wollmann, H., Koprić, I., Marćou, G. (eds.) Public and Social Services in Europe: From Public and
Municipal to Private Sector Provision, London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 41–54.
McGregor, D. (1960). The Human Side of Enterprise. New York: McGraw-Hill.
McGuire, M. C., and Olson, M. (1996). The economics of autocracy and majority rule: The invisible hand
and the use of force. Journal of economic literature, Vol. 34 (1), pp.72–96.
McNutt, P. (1999). Public goods and club goods. Encyclopedia of law and economics, Vol. 1, pp. 927–951.
McShane, K. (2007). Why Environmental Ethics Shouldn’t Give Up on Intrinsic Value. Environmental Ethics,
Vol. 29 (1), pp. 43–61.
Meade, J. E. (1973). The theory of economic externalities: The control of environmental pollution and similar
social costs. Alphen an den Rijn: Sijthoff and Noordhoff.
Meadows, D.H., Meadows, D.L., Randers, J. and Behrens III, W.W. (1972). The Limits to Growth. Bethesda,
MD: Potomac Associates.
Mears, B. (2009). Justices debate rights of beachfront landowners. CNN.Com, December 2, 2009.
Mecklenburg, D., and Fay, L. A. (2011). A functional assessment of stream restoration in Ohio. Ohio
Department of Natural Resources, Division of Soil and Water Resources.
Meckling, J. and Strecker, J. (2022). Green bargains: leveraging public investment to advance climate
regulation. Climate Policy, published online: 25 Nov.
References 205Meltzer, A. H. (2012). Why capitalism? New York: Oxford University Press.
Meyer, D. (2022). The New Money Laundering Act: Another Attempt at Cash Restrictions. Meyer, D. (ed.),
European Union and Monetary Union in Permanent Crisis, Wiesbaden: Springer, pp. 121–131.
Mezzalama, F. (2002). Involvement of Civil Society Organizations and the private sector in technical cooperation
activities of the United Nations System. Geneva: United Nations Joint Inspection Unit.
Mikkelsen, D., Scheurle, S., Soller, H., Strandell-Jansson, M. (2023): The EU digital strategy: The impact of
data privacy on global business. McKinsey & Company Daily News, March 01.
Miller, J., and Whitford, A.B. (2016). Above politics. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Milne, M.J. and Gray, R. (2013). W(h)ither ecology? The triple bottom line, the global reporting initiative,
and corporate sustainability reporting. Journal of Business Ethics, Vol 118 (1), pp. 13–29.
Mitchell, M. (2008). An overview of public private partnerships in health. International Health Systems
Program Publication. Harvard, MA: Harvard School of Public Health.
Montel, N. (2018). Le chantier du canal de Suez (1859–1869). Paris: Presses des Ponts.
Mortimore, G.W. (2014). Rational social choice. Benn, S. I., and Mortimore, G.W. (eds.), Rationality and the
Social Sciences, London and New York: Routledge, pp. 384–404.
Mudyarabikwa, O., and Regmi, K. (2016). Public-private partnerships and efficiency in public procurement
of primary healthcare infrastructure: A qualitative research in the NHS UK. Journal of Public Health,
Vol.24 (2), pp. 91–100.
Mukoyama, J. (2021). Data debacle: Covid-19 and digital transformation. East Asia Forum Quarterly, Vol. 13
(3), pp. 9–10.
Murninghan, M. (2018). Improving Impact: Collaborative Multi-Party, Multi-Sector Engagement (2011). New
England Journal of Public Policy, Vol. 30 (1), pp. 1–16.
Murninghan, M. (2018). Improving Impact: Collaborative Multi-Party, Multi-Sector Engagement. New
England Journal of Public Policy, Vol. 30 (1), pp. 12–32.
Murphy, P.E. (1989). Creating ethical corporate structures. MIT Sloan Management Review, Vol. 30 (2),
pp. 81–96.
Murty, M. N., and Panda, M. (2016). Current Status of Environmental and Economic Accounting: Review of
Some Countries Experiences and Way Forward for India. Ghosh, N., Mukhopadhyay, P., Shah, A., and
Panda, M. (eds.), Nature, Economy and Society: Understanding the Linkages, New Delhi: Springer,
pp. 51–85.
Naci, H, and loannidis, J.P. (2015): Evaluation of Wellness Determinants and Interventions by Citizen
Scientists. Journal of the American Medical Association, Vol. 314 (2), pp. 121–122).
Nadam, A., Runnalls, D., and Halle, Mark (2007). Environment and globalization. Five propositions. Winnipeg:
International Institute for Sustainable Development.
Nahlen, B.L. and Steketee, R.W. (2012). Malaria: Partnerships in Malaria Control. Low-Beer, D. (ed.),
Innovative Health Partnerships: The Diplomacy of Diversity. Singapore: World Scientific Publishing
Company, pp. 221–240.
Nakuja, T., and Kerr, W.A. (2019). International trade and food security: Can public stockholding be
dismissed? International Journal of Food and Agricultural Economics, Vol. 7 (2), pp .91–106.
Narayan, D., Chambers, R., Shah, M.K. and Petesch, P., 2000. Voices of the Poor: Crying out for Change.
New York: Oxford University Press for the World Bank.
National Audit Office (2018). PFI & PF2. London: National Audit Office.
Ng, A. and Loosemore, M. (2007). Risk allocation in the private provision of public infrastructure.
International journal of project management, Vol. 25 (1), pp. 66–76.
Niessink, R. J. M., and Uslu, A. (2018). Assessment of green deals related to sustainable heat. Petten, NL:
Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific Research.
Nolte, B. H. (1981). The Ohio drainage laws petition procedure. Columbus, Ohio: County Engineers
Association of Ohio.
206 ReferencesNordhaus, W. D. (2015). Climate clubs to overcome free riding. Issues in Science and Technology, Vol. 31 (4),
pp. 27–34.
Nussbaum, M.C. (2000). The costs of tragedy: some moral limits of cost-benefit analysis. The Journal of
Legal Studies, Vol. 29 (S2), pp. 1005–1036.
Nwabueze, U., and Mileski, J. (2008). The challenge of effective governance: the case of Swiss Air.
Corporate Governance, Vol. 8 (5), pp. 583–594.
Nwagbara, V. C., and Rasiah, R. (2015). Rethinking health care commercialization: evidence from Malaysia.
Globalization and health, Vol. 11 (1), pp. 44–56.
Nye, J. (2002). Corruption and Political Development: A Cost Benefit Analysis. Nye, J., Heidenheimer,
A.J. and Johnston, M. (eds.), Political Corruption. Contexts and Concepts, New Brunswick: Transaction
Publishers, pp. 963–983.
Obermayer, B., and Obermaier, F. (2016). The Panama Papers: Breaking the story of how the rich and powerful
hide their money. London: One world Publications.
OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2021). Mobilising institutional investors for
financing sustainable development in developing countries: Emerging evidence of opportunities and
challenges. Paris: OECD Publishing.
OECD (2020). How’s Life? Measuring Well-being. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Offe, C., 2018. Contradictions of the welfare state. Keane, J. ( ed.): Welfare and the State. Routledge Library
Editions, Vol. 16. London: Routledge.
Office of the United States Trade Representative (2021). 2020 Special 301 Report. Journal of the Indian Law
Institute, Vol. 63 (3), pp. 325–335.
OHCHR (Office of the High Commissioner of Human Rights, Department of Peacekeeping 2011). The United
Nations Rule of Law Indicators: Implementation Guide and Project Tools. Geneva: OHCHR.
Okeke, R. (2016). Human capital accounting: A literature review. Accounting, Vol. 2 (1), pp. 1–10.
Ollila, E. (2005) Restructuring global health policymaking: the role of global public-private partnerships.
Mackintosh, M., and Kovusalo, M. (eds.), Commercialization of health care: global and local dynamics
and policy responses, London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 187–200.
Olson, M. (1965). The Logic of Collective Action. Public Goods and the Theory of Groups. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.
Onyx, J. (2008). Third Sector Organisation Accountability and Performance. Hasan, S., and Onyx, J. (eds.).
Comparative Third Sector Governance in Asia. New York: Springer, pp. 119–129.
Orlowski, J., and Wicker, P. (2015). The monetary value of social capital. Journal of Behavioral and
Experimental Economics, Vol. 57 (August), pp. 26–36.
Osborne, S. P. (2000). Public-Private Partnerships. Theory and Practice in International Perspective. London:
Routledge.
Osei-Kyei, R., and Chan, A.P.C. (2017). Perceptions of stakeholders on the critical success factors for
operational management of public-private partnership projects. Facilities, Vol. 35 (1/2), pp. 21–38.
Osei-Kyei, R., Chan, A. P., Dansoh, A., Ofori-Kuragu, J. K., & Oppong, G. D. (2018). Strategies for effective
management of unsolicited public–private partnership proposals. Journal of Management in
Engineering, Vol. 34 (3), 04018006.
Ostrom, E. (2010). The challenge of self-governance in complex contemporary environments. Journal of
Speculative Philosophy, Vol. 24 (4), pp. 316–332.
Ostrom, E. (1993). The evolution of norms, rules, and rights. Property Rights and the Performance of Natural
Resource Systems Workshop. Bloomington: Indiana University.
Ostrom, E. (1990). Governing the commons: The evolution of institutions for collective action. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Ostrom E., and Hess, C. (2007). Private and Common Property Rights. Indiana University, Bloomington:
School of Public & Environmental Affairs.
References 207Ostrom, E., and Ostrom, V. (1972). Institutional Arrangements for Water Resource Development with Special
Reference to the California Water Industry. Prepared for the National Water Commission. Springfield,
VA: National Technical Information Service.
Oyo, B., and Kalema, B. M. (2016). A System Dynamics Model for Subsistence Farmers’ Food Security
Resilience in Sub-Saharan Africa. International Journal of System Dynamics Applications, Vol. 5 (1),
pp. 17–30.
Park, B., Greene, K. and Colaresi, M. (2020). Human rights are (increasingly) plural: Learning the changing
taxonomy of human rights. American Political Science Review, Vol. 114 (3), pp. 888–910.
Parkinson, J. R. (2013). How is space public? Implications for spatial policy and democracy. Environment
and Planning C: Government and Policy, 31(4), pp. 682–699.
Parsons, J., and Thornton, M. (2011). Data as a United Nations Rule of Law Programming Tool: Progress
and Ongoing Challenges. Botero, J.C.; Janse, R.; Muller, S., and Pratt, C. (eds.), Innovations in rule of
law: a compilation of concise essays. The Hague, NL: Institute for Innovation of Law, pp. 21–24.
Parsons, T. (1990). Prolegomena to a theory of social institutions. American Sociological Review, Vol. 55 (3),
pp. 319–333.
Pastin, M., 1986. Lessons from High-Profit, High-Ethics Companies: An Agenda for Managerial Action.
Pastin, M., and Hayward, G. (eds.). The Hard Problems of Management: Gaining the Ethics Edge. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Patrinos, H.A., Osorio, F.B. and Guáqueta, J. (2009). The role and impact of public-private partnerships in
education. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Publications.
Pearce, D. (2005 [2008]). Managing environmental wealth for poverty reduction. Galizzi, P., and Herklotz,
A. (eds.), The role of the environment in poverty alleviation. New York: Fordham University Press,
pp. 30–63.
Peiró Palomino, J., and Tortosa-Ausina, E. (2012). Social Capital, Investment and Economic Growth: Evidence
for Spanish Provinces. Documentos de Trabajo, No. 14. Madrid, Spain: Fundación BBVA.
Pereira, L.M. and Santos, F.C. (2019). Counterfactual thinking in cooperation dynamics. Nepomuceno￾Fernández, Á., Magnani, L., Salguero-Lamillar, F.J., Barés-Gómez, C. and Fontaine, M. (eds.), Model￾Based Reasoning in Science and Technology. Models for Logic, Language, Cognition and Computation.
Berlin: Springer International Publishing, pp. 69–82.
Perelman, M. (2003). The Perverse Economy. The Impact of Markets on People and the Environment. New York:
Springer.
Petersmann, E.U. (ed., 2012). Multilevel governance of interdependent public goods. Theories, Rules and
Institutions for the Central Policy Challenge in the 21st Century. EUI Working Papers RSCAS (Robert
Schumann Centre for Advanced Studies Global Governance) no. 2012/23. Badia Fiesolana, Italy: European
University Institute.
Pigou, A.C. (1946). Income: An Introduction to Economics. London: Macmillan.
Piller, T. (2023). Entrüstung statt Umweltschutz. Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, Feb. 28, p. 15.
Pinckney, J., Butcher, C., and Braithwaite, J. M. (2022). Organizations, Resistance, and Democracy: How Civil
Society Organizations Impact Democratization. International Studies Quarterly, Vol. 66 (1), sqab094.
Pla-Julián, I. and Guevara, S. (2019). Is circular economy the key to transitioning towards sustainable
development? Challenges from the perspective of care ethics. Futures, Vol. 105 (1), pp. 67–77.
Poder, T. G. (2011). What is really social capital? A critical review. The American Sociologist, Vol. 42 (4),
pp. 341–351.
Potůček, M. (2017) Public Policy: A Comprehensive Introduction. Prague: Karolinum Press, Charles University.
North, D. C. (1990). Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Polanyi, K. (2001 [1944]). The great transformation: The political and economic origins of our time (2nd
ed.). Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
208 ReferencesPons, X., Van Zanten, A. and Da Costa, S., (2015). The national management of public and Catholic schools
in France: Moving from a loosely coupled towards an integrated system? Comparative Education,
Vol. 15 (1), pp. 57–70.
Portes, A. (2000). The Two Meanings of Social Capital. Sociological Forum, Vol. 15 (1), pp. 1–12.
Poteete, A.R., Janssen, M.A. and Ostrom, E. (2010). Working together: collective action, the commons, and
multiple methods in practice. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Pottier, J. (2002). Re-Imagining Rwanda. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Potůček, M. (2018). Public policy: a comprehensive introduction. Prague: Karolinum Press, Charles University.
Powell, M. (2015). A Re-specification of the welfare state’: conceptual issues in ‘the three worlds of welfare
capitalism. Social Policy and Society, Vol. 14, (2), pp. 247–258.
Pozen, D.E. (2003). Managing a correctional marketplace: Prison privatization in the United States and the
United Kingdom. Journal of Law & Politics, Vol. 19 (2), pp. 253–284.
Prakash M., Teksoz, K., Espey, J., Sachs, J., Shank, M. and Schmidt-Traub, G. (2017). Achieving a Sustainable
Urban America. Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN) Report. New York, SDSN.
Provincia di Modena (2004). Third Sustainability Report of the Province of Modena. Indicatori socioeconomico
ambientali di area vasta. Modena, Italy: Associazione Mario del Monte.
Prutsch, M.J. (2018). The European parliament and the European year of cultural heritage 2018. Santander
Art and Culture Law Review, Vol. 4 (2), pp.19–28.
Putnam, R.D. (1993). Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press.
Pyatt, G. (1991). Fundamentals of social accounting. Economic Systems Research, Vol. 3 (3), pp. 315–341.
Raj, S., Stevens, M., Yoon, J. and Bradsher, K. (2022). Beijing is Fixing Its Foul Air. Why Can’t New Delhi?
New York Times, Nov. 22, pp. A4 f.
Ramello, G. B. Copyright and Antitrust Issues (2002), LIUC Papers in Economics, Vol. 114. Castellanza, Italy:
Università Carlo Cattaneo-LIUC (Libera Università Carlo Cattaneo).
Ranjan, P., and Koontz, T. (2018). Resource asymmetry and property rights in agricultural drainage
systems: Implications for collective action. International Journal of the Commons, Vol. 12 (1), pp. 60–81.
Rauwald, C. (2016), Volkswagen to Daimler: We could do with your help on compliance. Bloomberg
Business, October 16, p. 1.
Rawls, J. (1971). A Theory of Justice. Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Rawls, J. (1996). Political liberalism. With a new introduction and the ‘reply to Habermas’. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Reeves, A., Friedman, S., Rahal, C. and Flemmen, M. (2017). The decline and persistence of the old boy:
Private schools and elite recruitment 1897 to 2016. American Sociological Review, Vol. 82 (6),
pp. 1139–1166.
Reiners, K. and Versluis, E., 2022. NGOs as new Guardians of the Treaties? Analysing the effectiveness of
NGOs as decentralised enforcers of EU law. Journal of European Public Policy, Vol. 29 (1), pp. 1–19.
Richard, J.F., Tulkens, H., Verdonck, M. (2006). Commodity tax competition between member states of a
federation: Equilibrium and efficiency. Parkash Chander, P., Dreze, J., Knox Lovell, C. and Mintz, J.
(eds.), Public goods, environmental externalities and fiscal competition. Essays by Henry Tulkens. Boston,
MA: Springer, pp. 449–489.
Richardson, J. (2013). Accounting for Sustainability: Measuring Quantities or Enhancing Qualities?
Henriques, A., and Richardson, J. (eds). The triple bottom line: Does it all add up? New York: Routledge,
pp. 34–44.
Riddell, W. C. (2004). The social benefits of education: new evidence on an old question. Taking Public
Universities Seriously Conference. Toronto: University of Toronto.
Ridgway, R. (2015). Crowdfunding the Commons. G., Lovink, G., N. Tkacz, N., and De Vries, P. (eds.).
Amsterdam: INC Institute of Network Cultures, pp. 281–295.
References 209Riegle-Crumb, C., and King, B. (2010). Questioning a white male advantage in STEM. Educational
Researcher, Vol. 39 (4), pp. 656–664.
Riel, V., Parcel, T.L., Mickelson, R.A. and Smith, S.S. (2018). Do magnet and charter schools exacerbate or
ameliorate inequality? Sociology Compass, Vol.12 (9), p.e12617.
Roberts, M. (1993). Care Gives Industry a Leadership Role in Sustainable Development. Chemical Week,
July 07, pp. 20–21.
Robertson, S. L., and Verger, A. (2012). Governing education through public private partnerships.
Ginsburg, M., Robertson, S., Mundy, K., Verger, A., and Menashy, F. (eds.), Public private partnerships in
education: new actors and modes of governance in a globalising world. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar,
pp. 21–42.
Rodgers Jr., W. H. (1982). Bringing People Back: Toward a Comprehensive Theory of Taking in Natural
Resources Law. Ecology Law Quarterly, Vol. 10 (2), pp. 205–252.
Rodrigues, C. M., and Plotkin, S. A. (2020). Impact of vaccines; health, economic and social perspectives.
Frontiers in microbiology, Vol. 11, pp. 1526–1532.
Rollo, F. (2022). Towards sustainability and safety solutions in a smart city. Doctoral thesis, Università degli Studi
di Modena e Reggio Emilia. Modena, Italy: Università degli Studi.
Romero, M. (2019). The fiscal costs of PPPs in the spotlight. Brussels: European Network on and Debt and
Development.
Rónay, Z., 2018. Centralizations and Autonomies: The Delimitation of Education by The Hungarian
Government. Bulgarian Comparative Education Society Conference Books, Vol. 16, pp. 177–182.
Rosell, J., and Saz-Carranza, A. (2020). Determinants of public-private partnership policies. Public
Management Review, Vol. 22(8), pp. 1171–1190.
Rostila, M. (2011). The facets of social capital. Journal for the theory of social behaviour, Vol. 41 (3),
pp. 308–326.
Rothstein, B., 2013. Corruption and social trust: Why the fish rots from the head down. Social research,
Vol. 80 (4), pp. 1009–1032.
Rothstein, B. (2010). Corruption, happiness, social trust, and the welfare state: A causal mechanisms approach.
Quality of Government Institute working paper series #9. Gothenburg, Sweden: University of
Gothenburg.
Ruckert, A., (2010). The forgotten dimension of social reproduction: the World Bank and the poverty
reduction strategy paradigm. Review of International Political Economy, Vol. 17 (5), pp. 816–839.
Rudder, C. E., Fritschler, A. L., and Choi, Y. J. (2016). Public policymaking by private organizations: Challenges
to democratic governance. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Rudloff, B. and Schmieg, E. (2016). More bones to pick with the EU? Controversial poultry exports to Africa:
Sustainable trade policy as a task for the G20. SWP Comment, 57/2016). Berlin: Stiftung Wissenschaft
und Politik (SWP).
Rudra, N. (2008). Globalization and the Race to the Bottom in Developing Countries. Cambridge (UK),
Cambridge University Press.
Ruggie, J. G. (2004 a). Reconstituting the Global Public Domain – Issues, Actors and Practices. European
Journal of International Relations, Vol. 10 (4), pp. 499–531.
Ruggie, J.G. (2004 b). The global compact: an extraordinary journey. Fussler, C., A. Cramer and S. Van der
Vegt (eds.), Raising the Bar. Creating Value with the United Nations Global Compact, Sheffield: Greenleaf
Publications, pp.15–17.
Ruggie, J.G. (2017). The social construction of the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.
Harvard Kennedy School Corporate Responsibility Initiative Working Paper no. 67. Cambridge, MA:
John F. Kennedy School of Government.
Rwelamila, P. D., Fewings, P., & Henjewele, C. (2015). Addressing the missing link in PPP projects: What
constitutes the public? Journal of Management in Engineering, Vol. 31 (5), 04014085.
210 ReferencesRwelamila, P., Fewings, P., & Henjewele, C. (2015). Addressing the missing link in PPP projects: What
constitutes the public? Journal of Management in Engineering, 31(5), 04014085.
Ryder, N., and Pasculli, L. (eds., 2020). Corruption, Integrity, and the Law: Global Regulatory Challenges.
New York: Routledge.
Saito, E., Sagawa, Y. and Kanagawa, K., (2005). Social support as a predictor of health status among older
adults living alone in Japan. Nursing & Health Sciences, Vol.7 (1), pp. 29–36.
Sala-i-Martin, X. (1992). Public welfare and growth. Yale Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper No. 666.
New Haven, CT: Yale University.
Salamon, L.M., Sokolowski, S.W. and List, R. (2004). Global Civil Society. Bloomfield, CT: Kumarian
Publishers.
Salem, W., (2012). Civil society in Palestine: Approaches, historical context, and the role of the NGOs.
Palestine-Israel Journal of Politics, Economics, and Culture, Vol. 18 (2/3), pp. 17–23.
Salvo, D. and Beaulieu, B. (2022). Ten Legislative Proposals to Defend America against Foreign Influence
Operations. Policy Brief 016. Washington, DC: Alliance for Securing Democracy.
Samuelson, P.A. (1954). The pure theory of public expenditure. The Review of Economics and Statistics,
Vol. 36, pp. 387–389.
Samuelson, P. A. (1947). Foundations of economic analysis. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Publishing.
Sancassiani, W. (2005). Local agenda 21 in Italy: an effective governance tool for facilitating local
communities’ participation and promoting capacity building for sustainability. Local Environment,
Vol. 10 (2), pp. 189–200.
Sandler T. (1998). Global and regional public goods: a prognosis for collective action. Fiscal Studies, Vol. 19
(3), pp. 221–247.
Sandler, T. (2013). Buchanan clubs. Constitutional Political Economy, Vol. 24 (2), pp. 265–284.
Saner, R. (2016). Greening the World Trade Organization. Milan, Italy: Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei.
Saner, R. (2012). The expert negotiator: Strategy Tactics Motivation Behaviour Leadership. 4th revised
edition. Leiden, NL, and Boston: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.
Saner, R., Tsai, C., and Yiu, L. (2012). Food Security in Africa: Trade theory, modern realities and
provocative considerations for policymakers. Governance, Regional integration, Economics, Agriculture
and Trade (GREAT) Insights, Vol. 1 (7), pp. 17–18.
Saner, R. (2010) The Planet Earth: Agriculture and Food Security. Revista de Ciencias y Humanidades de la
Fundación Ramón Areces, December Issue, FRA No. 1 (December), pp. 146–150.
Saner, R., Yiu, L., and Rush, L. (2018). The measuring and monitoring of human trafficking. Public
Administration and Policy. Vol. 21 (2), pp. 94–106.
Saner, R., Yiu, L., Filadoro, M., and Khusainova, V. (2015). Access to water in developing countries: four
options for provision and regulation in the water sector. Asia Pacific Journal of Public Administration,
Vol. 37 (3), pp. 193–206.
Sarangapani, P.M. and Pappu, R. eds. (2021). Handbook of education systems in South Asia. Singapore:
Springer.
Sarker, A., Poon, W.C. and Herath, G. (2018). Natural resource use, institutions, and green ergonomics.
Thatcher, A., and Yeow, P.H. (eds.), Ergonomics and Human Factors for a Sustainable Future: Current
Research and Future Possibilities, Singapore: Springer, pp. 271–297.
Sasson, A. (2012). Food security for Africa: An urgent global challenge. Agriculture & Food Security, Vol. 1 (1),
pp. 2–14.
Saunders, R. (2014). Geologies of power: blood diamonds, security politics and Zimbabwe’s troubled
transition.
Savitz, A. W., with Weber, K. (2006). The Triple Bottom Line: How Today's Best-run Companies Are Achieving
Economic, Social and Environmental Success – And How You Can Too. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
References 211Saz-Carranza, A., and Opsina, S. (2011). The behavioral dimension of governing inter-organizational goal￾directed networks: Managing the unity-diversity tension. Journal of Public Administration Research and
Theory, Vol. 21 (2), pp. 327–365.
Schäfers, M. (2022). Wir beenden das klassische Baugeschäft in Afrika. Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung,
Nov. 29, p. 13.
Schauer, F. (2015). The Force of Law. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Scherhorn, G. (2004). Sustainability Reinvented. Cultures of Consumption Working Book Series No. 15,
London: Birkbeck College, University of London.
Schippers, M.L. and Verhaeren, C.E. (2018). Taxation in a digitizing world: solutions for corporate income
tax and value added tax. EC Tax Review, Vol. 27 (1), pp. 61–71.
Schlager, E., and Ostrom, E. (1992). Property-Rights Regimes and Natural Resources: A Conceptual
Analysis. Land Economics, Vol. 68 (3), pp. 249–262.
Schmidt-Traub, G., Kroll, C., Teksoz, K., Durand-Delacre, D., and Sachs, J. D. (2017). National baselines for
the Sustainable Development Goals assessed in the SDG Index and Dashboards. Nature Geoscience,
Vol. 10 (8), pp. 547–555.
Schmidtz, D. (1988). Public goods and political authority. Philosophical Papers, Vol. 17 (3), pp. 185–191.
Schnebel, E. (2020). Finance for Sustainability as Public Good. Research paper in the Ethics in Finance Project
of Johannes W. Goethe University Frankfurt. Frankfurt: J.W. Goethe University.
Schneck, S. (2016). Laudato si: On care for our common home. A review. Washington, D.C.: The Energy Bar
Association.
Schouten, G., Vellema, S., and van Wijk, J. (2014). Multinational enterprises and sustainability standards:
Using a partnering-intensity continuum to classify their interactions. Van Tulder, R., Verbeke, A., and
Strange, S. (eds.), International Business and Sustainable Development, Bingley, U.K: Emerald,
pp. 117–139.
Schreyer, P., and Mas, M. (2016). Measuring health services in the national accounts: An international
perspective. Aizcorbe, A., Baker, C., Berndt, E. R., and Cutler, D. M. (eds.), Measuring and Modeling
Health Care Costs, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 25–52.
Schulz, S., Darehshouri, S., Hassanzadeh, E., Tajrishy, M., and Schüth, C. (2020). Climate change or
irrigated agriculture – what drives the water level decline of Lake Urmia. Scientific Reports, Vol. 10 (1),
pp. 1–10.
Schumacher, E. F. (1973). Small Is Beautiful: A Study of Economics as If People Mattered. New York: Harper &
Row.
Schumpeter, J. (1954). History of economic analysis. New York: Oxford University Press.
Schumpeter, J. (1942). Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. New York: Harper & Brothers.
Schwab, K. (2019). Davos Manifesto 2020: The Universal Purpose of a Company in the Fourth Industrial
Revolution. Davos: World Economic Forum.
Schwank, O. and Spiegel, S., 2021. Risk-informed finance. United Nations Department of Economic and
Social Affairs Policy Brief No. 98. New York: United Nations.
Scutchfield, F.D., Lee, J. and Patton, D. (1997). Managed care in the United States. Journal of Public Health,
Vol. 19 (3), pp. 251–254.
Seaman, J. (2002) Rethinking early warning systems, Humanitarian Exchange Magazine, Vol. 60 (22),
pp. 10–13.
Sehgal, K. (2010). Walk in my shoes: conversations between a civil rights legend and his godson. London:
Macmillan.
Sekera, J. (2014). Re-thinking the Definition of Public Goods. Real-World Economics Review Blog.
https://rwer.wordpress.com/2014/07/09/re-thinking-the-definition-of-public-goods.
Sell, S. K. (2003). Private Power, Public Law: The Globalization of Intellectual Property Rights. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
212 ReferencesSelmier II, W. T., and Newenham-Kahindi, A. (2017). Under African skies–mining TNCs in Africa and the
Sustainable Development Goals. Transnational Corporations, Vol. 24 (3), pp. 120–132.
Sen, A. (2010). Adam Smith and the contemporary world. Erasmus Journal for Philosophy and Economics,
Vol. 3 (1), pp. 50–67.
Sen, S., Antara, N., and Chowdhury, S. (2020). The apparel workers are in the highest vulnerability due to
COVID-19: a study on the Bangladesh Apparel Industry. Asia Pacific Journal of Multidisciplinary Research,
Vol. 8 (3), pp. 1–7.
Shan, X., Hou, W., Ye, X. and Wu, C. (2011). Decision-making criteria of PPP projects: Stakeholder theoretic
perspective. International Journal of Economics and Management Engineering, Vol. 5 (5), pp. 627–631.
Sharpe, W. (2004). Talking points: managing stakeholder relations in PPP projects. Public Infrastructure
Bulletin, March, pp. 8–15.
Shepsle, K.A. (1989). Studying institutions: Some lessons from the rational choice approach. Journal of
Theoretical Politics, Vol. 1 (2), pp. 131–147.
Sheth, J.N., Newman, B.I., and Gross, B.L. (1991). Why we buy what we buy: A theory of consumption
values. Journal of business research, Vol. 22 (2), pp. 159–170.
Shleifer, A. (1998). State versus private ownership. Journal of economic perspectives, Vol. 12 (4), pp. 133–150.
Siffels, L. E. (2021). Beyond privacy vs. health: a justification analysis of the contact-tracing apps debate in
the Netherlands. Ethics and Information Technology, Vol. 23 (Suppl 1), pp. 99–103.
Sigma Guidelines (2003). Putting Sustainable Development into Practice – A Guide for Organisations. London:
British Standards Institution.
Sikora, A. (2021). European Green Deal − legal and financial challenges of the climate change. ERA Forum,
Journal of the Academy of European Law, Vol. 21 (4), pp. 681–697.
Sikora, J. and Kelley, J. (2005). Attitudes to private and public ownership in East and West. Research in
Social Stratification and Mobility, Vol. 23, pp. 229–274.
Simm, K. (2011). The concepts of common good and public interest: from Plato to biobanking. Cambridge
Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics, Vol. 20 (4), pp. 554–562.
Simpson, R., Toman, M., and Ayres, R. U. (2005). Scarcity and growth revisited. Natural Resources and the
Environment in the New Millenium. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.
Sisodia, R., Wolfe, D., and Sheth, J. (2014). Firms of Endearment: How world class companies profit from Pasion
and Purpose, 2nd Ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Publication.
Skoet, J., Stamoulis, K.,and Deuss, A. (2004). Investing in agriculture for growth and food security in the ACP
countries. FAO Agricultural Development Economics Division (ESA) Working Paper No. 04–22. Rome:
FAO.
Slaper, T. F., and Hall, T. J. (2011). The triple bottom line: What is it and how does it work? Indiana Business
Review, Vol. 86 (1), pp. 4–8.
Smith, A. (1981 [1776]). Wealth of Nations. Indianapolis: Liberty Press.
Smith, M. (2010). Ethnic politics in Myanmar: a year of tension and anticipation. Southeast Asian Affairs,
Vol. 2010 (1), pp. 214–234.
Solow, R. M. (1986). On the Intergenerational Allocation of Natural Resources. Scandinavian Journal of
Economics, Vol. 88, pp. 141–149.
Sommerville, E. (2022). Cambridge University Alumni pull funding from their college after academics said
gender speaker is hateful. The Telegraph, Oct. 29.
Sornn-Friese, H., & Iversen, M. J. (2011). Incentives, Capability and Opportunity: Exploring the Sources of
Danish Maritime Leadership. International Journal of Maritime History, Vol. XXIII (1), pp. 193–220.
Spar, D., and Bartlett, N. (2003). Life, Death, and Property Rights: Pharmaceutical Industry Faces AIDS in Africa.
Harvard Business School Case No. 9-702-049. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School.
Sridhar, D., Winters, J., and Strong, E. (2017). World Bank’s financing, priorities, and lending structures for
global health. British Medical Journal (Clinical research ed.), Vol. 358, article j3339.
References 213Sriraman, B., Roscoe, M. and English, L., 2010. Politicizing Mathematics Education: Has Politics gone too
far? Or not far enough? Sriraman, B., and English, L. (eds.), Theories of mathematics education: Seeking
new frontiers, New York/Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 621–638.
Srivastava, P. (2010). Public-private partnerships or privatisation? Questioning the state’s role in education
in India. Development in Practice, Vol. 20 (4–5), pp. 540–553.
Stansfield, S. K. (2002). Philanthropy and alliances for global health. Kaul, I., Le Goulven, K., and Schnupf,
M. (eds.), Global Public Goods Financing: New Tools for New Challenges – A Policy Dialogue. New York:
United Nations Development Programme, Office of Development Studies.
Stauvermann, P. J. (2006). Why and How Should We Account for the Environment? Policy Paper No. 0606.
Rensselaer, NY: Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Department of Economics.
Stavins, R.N. (2011). The problem of the commons: still unsettled after 100 years. American Economic
Review, Vol. 101 (1), pp. 81–108.
Stewart, I., (2023). Geology for the wellbeing economy. Nature Geoscience, Vol. 16 (2), pp. 1–2.
Stigka, E. K., Paravantis, J. A., and Mihalakakou, G. K. (2014). Social acceptance of renewable energy
sources: A review of contingent valuation applications. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,
Vol. 32 (1), pp. 100–106.
Stiglitz, J. E. (2006). Global public goods and global finance: Does global governance ensure that the
global public interest is served? Touffut, J. P. (ed.), Advancing Public Goods, Cheltenham, UK: Edward
Elgar, pp. 149–164.
Stiglitz, J.E. (1994). Whither socialism? Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stretton, H. and L. Orchard, L. (1994). Public Goods; Public Enterprise, Public Choice: Theoretical Foundations of
the Contemporary Attack on Government. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Struhl, K.J. (2014). Why Socialists Should Take Human Nature Seriously. Radical Philosophy Review, Vol. 17
(1), pp. 133–148.
Subramanian, S.M., and Pisupati B. (2010). Traditional knowledge in policy and practice: Approaches to
development and human well-being. Tokyo-New York-Paris: United Nations University Press.
Sulek, M., 2010. On the modern meaning of philanthropy. Nonprofit and voluntary sector quarterly, Vol. 39
(2), pp.193–212.
Suresh, B., and Ergeneman, A. (2005). A framework for evaluating food security and nutrition monitoring
systems. African Journal of Food, Agriculture, Nutrition and Development, Vol. 5 (2), pp. 1–26.
Syme, S. L. (1998). Social and economic disparities in health: thoughts about intervention. The Milbank
Quarterly, Vol. 76 (3), pp. 493–505.
Szabó, Z. (2010). Increasing the validity of valuing biodiversity: Reducing protest responses by deliberative
monetary valuation. Corvinus University of Budapest, Environmental Economics Department,
Budapest, Hungary. http://www.bioeconnetwork.org/pages/12th_2010/Zolt%E1n.pdf
Szántó, Z. (1995). Social embeddedness of the economy. Revija za sociologiju, Vol. 26 (3–4), pp. 205–208.
Takon, N. (2014). Environmental damage arising from oil operations in Niger Delta of Nigeria: How not to
continually live with their impact on population and ecology. International Journal of Development and
Sustainability, Vol. 3 (9), pp.1878–1893.
Tänzler, D. and Maras, K. (2016). The social construction of corruption in Europe. New York: Routledge.
Taylor, R. (ed., 2015). Reprocessing and recycling of spent nuclear fuel. Amsterdam, NL: Elsevier.
The Earth Charter Commission (1992). The Earth Charter. San José de Costa Rica: Earth Council.
Theurer, J., 2022. Klimaschutz und Gewalt. Wiesbaden: Springer Essentials.
Thomä, J. (2023). An urban-rural divide – or not? Small firm location and the use of digital technologies.
Journal of Rural Studies, Vol. 97 (2), pp. 214–223.
Thomas, G. (2022). Tod von Bildung und Kreativität. Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, Dec. 05, p. 12.
Thurber, C. (2019). Social ties and the Strategy of Civil Resistance. International Studies Quarterly
Vol. 63 (4), pp. 974–986.
214 ReferencesTiebout, Charles M., 1956, A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 64,
pp. 416–424.
Tietenberg, T. (2007). Tradable Permits in Principle and Practice. Freeman, J., and Kolstad, C.D. (eds),
Moving to Markets in Environmental Regulation: Lessons from Twenty Years of Experience, New York:
Oxford University Press 69, 63–94.
Tietmeyer, H. (2004). Intergenerational Solidarity and the Crisis of the Welfare State: Pensions and Healthcare.
Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences, Acta 10, Vatican City: the Vatican, pp. 191–206.
Tirole, J., 2017. Economics for the Common Good. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press.
Titolo, M. (2023). Biden's Infrastructure Plan: A New Commitment to Public Goods? The University of St.
Thomas Journal of Law & Public Policy, Vol. 16 (1), pp. 188–197.
Towse, R., and Hernández, T. N., eds., (2020). Handbook of cultural economics. Cheltenham, UK: Edward
Elgar Publishing.
Toxopeus, H.S., Maas, K.E. and Liket, K.C. (2017). Innovating for impact investment. Vecchi, V., Balbo, L.,
Brusoni, M., and Caselli, S., eds., Principles and Practice of Impact Investing: A Catalytic Revolution.
New York: Routledge.
Trachtman, J. P. (2012). The Future of International Law: Global Government. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
University Press.
Truby, J. (2019). Financing and Self‐Financing of SDGs through Financial Technology, Legal, and Fiscal Tools.
Walker, J. Pekmezovic, A., and Walker, G. (eds.) Sustainable Development Goals: Harnessing Business to
Achieve the SDGs through Finance, Technology, and Law Reform, New York: John Wiley & Sons, pp. 205–218.
Tucker, C. E. and Wang, Y. (2021). The Role of Delayed Data in the COVID-19 Pandemic. SSRN paper # 3867021.
Turcu, C. (2013). Re-thinking sustainability indicators: local perspectives of urban sustainability. Journal of
Environmental Planning and Management, Vol. 56 (5), pp. 695–719.
Tyrrell, T., Paris, C. M., and Biaett, V. (2013). A Quantified Triple Bottom Line for Tourism: Experimental
Results. Journal of Travel Research, Vol. 52 (3), pp. 279–293.
UNCTAD (2021). A European Union Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism: Implications for developing
countries. Geneva: UNCTAD.
UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, 2017). Road Map on Statistics for Sustainable
Development Goals. Geneva: UNECE.
UNEP (2012). The business case for the green economy: Sustainable return on investment. Paris: UNEP.
UNISDR (United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, 2015). Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015–2030. Geneva: United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction.
United Nations (2015). Guidelines on a Principles-based Approach to the Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Business Sector. New York: United Nations.
Uno, R. (1989). Economic Growth and Environmental Change in Japan; Net National Welfare and Beyond.
Archibugi, F., and Nijkamp, P. (eds.), Economy and ecology: towards sustainable development. Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 307–332.
Van Dijk, M., Morley, T., Rau, M.L. and Saghai, Y. (2021). A meta-analysis of projected global food demand
and population at risk of hunger for the period 2010–2050. Nature Food, Vol. 2 (7), pp. 494–501.
van Veen, E. B. (2018). Observational health research in Europe: understanding the General Data
Protection Regulation and underlying debate. European Journal of Cancer, Vol. 104 (1), pp. 70–80.
Verbist, G., Förster, M. F., and Vaalavuo, M. (2012). The impact of publicly provided services on the distribution
of resources: review of new results and methods. OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working
Books, No. 130. Paris: OECD.
Vilkka, L., 2021. The intrinsic value of nature. Amsterdam and Atlanta, GA: Editions Rodopi BV.
Villar, P.F., (2020). The extractive industries transparency initiative (EITI) and trust in politicians. Resources
Policy, Vol. 68, no.101713.
Volden, C. and Wiseman, A.E. (2007). Bargaining in legislatures over particularistic and collective goods.
American Political science review, Vol. 101 (1), pp. 79–92.
References 215Wackerbauer, J. (2007). Regulation and privatisation of the public water supply in England, France and
Germany. Competition and Regulation in Network Industries, Vol. 8 (2), pp.101–116.
Waddock, S. A. (1988). Building Successful Partnerships. Sloan Management Review, Vol. 29 (4), pp. 17–23.
Wahl, H.W., Fänge, A., Oswald, F., Gitlin, L.N. and Iwarsson, S. (2009). The home environment and
disability-related outcomes in aging individuals: what is the empirical evidence? The Gerontologist,
Vol. 49 (3), pp. 355–367.
Warsen, R., Greve, C., Klijn, E.H., Koppenjan, J.F. and Siemiatycki, M. (2020). How do professionals perceive
the governance of public–private partnerships? Evidence from Canada, the Netherlands and
Denmark. Public Administration, Vol. 98 (1), pp.124–139.
Watt, R., 2017. The moral economy of carbon offsetting: ethics, power and the search for legitimacy in a new
market. Doctoral thesis. Manchester, UK: The University of Manchester.
Waweru, D., Mose, N. and Otieno, S. (2022). Household energy choice in Kenya: An empirical analysis of
the energy ladder hypothesis. Journal of Energy Research and Reviews, Vol. 10 (4), pp. 12–19.
WCED (World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987). Our Common Future. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Weber, J. L. (2014). Ecosystem natural capital accounts: a quick start package. Convention on Biological
Diversity (CDB) Technical Series, No.77. Montreal, Canada: CDB.
Weindling, P. (1997). Philanthropy and world health: the Rockefeller Foundation and the League of
Nations Health Organisation. Minerva, Vol. 35 (3), pp. 269–281.
Weinrib, E. J. (2002). Corrective justice in a nutshell. The University of Toronto Law Journal, Vol. 52 (4),
pp. 349–356.
Welch, W.P. (1983). The political feasibility of full ownership property rights: The cases of pollution and
fisheries. Policy Sciences, Vol. 16, pp. 165–180.
WHO (World Health Organization, 2005). Sustainable health financing, universal coverage and social health
insurance. Geneva: World Health Assembly.
WHO (World Health Organization, 2008). Closing the gap in a generation: Health equity through action on
the social determinants of health. Commission on Social Determinants of Health, Final Report.
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2008/WHO_IER_CSDH_08.1_eng.pdf
Wilken, R. D. (2006). The recovered Rhine and its history. Knepper T.P. (ed.) The Rhine. Handbook of
Environmental Chemistry, Vol. 5, Berlin and Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 47–87.
Willis, A., Campagnoni, P., and Gee, W. (2015). An Evolving Corporate Landscape: A Briefing on Sustainability
Reporting, Integrated Reporting and Environmental, Social and Governance Reporting. Toronto: Chartered
Professional Accountants Canada.
Winterhalter, S., Weiblen, T., Wecht, C.H., and Gassmann, O. (2017). Business model innovation processes
in large corporations: insights from BASF. Journal of business strategy, Vol. 38 (2), pp. 62–75.
Wintour, P. (2023): Syria accused of playing politics with aid in aftermath of earthquake. The Guardian,
Feb. 7., p 1.
Wivel, P. (2007). The State and The Citizen Natural Law as a Public Good. Andersen, E. A., and Lindsnaes,
B. (eds), Towards New Global Strategies: Public Goods and Human Rights, Leiden: Martinus Nijhoff
Publishers, pp. 3–28.
Wolfe, B. L., and Haveman, R. H. (2001). Accounting for the social and non-market benefits of education.
Helliwell, J. F. (ed.), The contribution of human and social capital to sustained economic growth and well￾being, Madison: Institute for Research on Poverty, University of Wisconsin, pp. 97–131.
Wood, J.C., ed. (1996). Adam Smith: Critical Assessments. New York: Routledge.
Woolcock, M. (1998). Social Capital and Economic Development: Toward a Theoretical Synthesis and Policy
Framework. Theory and Society, Vol. 27 (2), pp. 343–400.
Woolcock, N. (2022). Cambridge don ‘blocked publicity’ for Helen Joyce gender talk. The Times, Nov. 12.
World Bank (1998). The initiative on defining, monitoring and measuring social capital. Overview and program
description. World Bank Social Capital Initiative Working Paper No. 1. New York: The World Bank.
216 ReferencesWorld Economic Forum (2020). Stakeholders for a Cohesive and Sustainable World. Geneva: World
Economic Forum.
World Health Organization (2020). Urgent health challenges for the next decade. Geneva: World Health
Organization.
World Nuclear News (2019): China-confident-of-new-era-for-nuclear.https://www.world-nuclear-news.org/Ar
ticles/China-confident-of-new-era-for-nuclear-says-CNNC
World Summit on Food Security (2009). Final Declaration of the 2009 World Summit on Food Security. Rome: FAO.
Wright, G. (2015). Marine governance in an industrialised ocean: a case study of the emerging marine
renewable energy industry. Marine Policy, Vol.52 (1), pp. 77–84.
WSJ (Wall Street Journal, 1997). Greenspan Renews Concerns, Feb. 26, p. A4.
Wuyts, M. (1992). Deprivation and Public Need. Macintosh, M., and Wuyts, M. (eds.) Development Policy and
Public Action. Milton Keynes: Oxford University Press, pp. 13–37.
Yang, L. and Maskus, K.E. (2009). Intellectual property rights, technology transfer and exports in
developing countries. Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 90 (2), pp. 231–236.
Yannelis, C. and Tracey, G. (2022). Student loans and borrower outcomes. Annual Review of Financial
Economics, Vol. 14, pp. 167–186.
Young, J. (2001). Risk(ing) metaphors. Critical Perspectives on Accounting, Vol.12 (3), pp. 607–625.
Young, S. (2003). Moral Capitalism: Reconciling Private Interest with the Public Good. San Francisco: Berrett
Koehler Publishers.
Yannelis, C. and Tracey, G. (2022). Student loans and borrower outcomes. Annual Review of Financial
Economics, Vol. 14, pp. 167–186.
Young, J. (2001). Risk(ing) metaphors. Critical Perspectives on Accounting, Vol.12 (3), pp. 607–625.
Young, S. (2003). Moral Capitalism: Reconciling Private Interest with the Public Good. San Francisco: Berrett
Koehler Publishers.
Yuan, J., Wang, C., Skibniewski, M.J. and Li, Q. (2012). Developing key performance indicators for public￾private partnership projects: questionnaire survey and analysis. Journal of Management in Engineering,
Vol. 28 (3), pp. 252–264.
Zaccagnino, J.M. (2020). The Tragedy of the Central European University: Theorizing Hungarian Illiberal
Democracy and Its Threat to Academic Freedom. Connecticut Law Review, Vol. 52 (3), pp. 1187–1242.
Zaharia, C., and Zaharia, I. (2012). The dynamics of ecologic-economic systems and the social value of the
environment. Economics, Management and Financial Markets, Vol. 7 (1), pp. 114–119.
Zhang, E. (2010). Community, the common good, and public healthcare – Confucianism and its relevance
to contemporary China. Public Health Ethics, Vol. 3 (3), pp. 259–266.
Zheng, S., Kahn, M. E., Sun, W., and Luo, D. (2014). Incentives for China’s urban mayors to mitigate
pollution externalities: The role of the central government and public environmentalism. Regional
Science and Urban Economics, Vol. 47 (1), pp. 61–71.
Zhulina, A. (2018). Performing Philanthropy from Andrew Carnegie to Bill Gates. Performance Research,
Vol. 23 (6), pp. 50–57.
Ziblatt, D. (2008). Why some cities provide more public goods than others: A subnational comparison of
the provision of public goods in German cities in 1912. Studies in Comparative International
Development, Vol. 43 (3–4), pp. 273–289.
Zou, W., Kumaraswamy, M., Chung, J. and Wong, J (2014). Identifying the critical success factors for
relationship management in PPP projects. International journal of project management, Vol. 32 (2),
pp. 265–274.
Zweifel, P. (2017). Uranium and Nuclear Energy. Zweifel, P., Praktiknjo, A., and Erdmann, G. (eds.). Energy
Economics, Berlin and Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 247–267.
References 217Index
AACSB 83
ABN AMRO 162
Aborigines 23
abuse 19, 65, 72, 90, 106, 117
access to food 2, 32, 156
access to law 30
access to water 2, 10, 45, 90
accessibility V, 1, 9–10, 27
accountability 69, 86–87
Accounting for Sustainability 79
acquired desires 42
affordable housing 16
Africa V, 69, 72, 90, 92, 96, 153–154, 157, 160,
162, 172
African agriculture 160
African Continental Free Trade Area 98
African Development Bank 98
African Union 98, 160
agricultural cooperatives 16
agricultural production 157
agriculture 87
Aichi targets 148
airport security 107
Alliance for Health Policy and Systems Research 97
allocative efficiency 9, 111
Alma Ata conference 47
Andean Community 98
Angola 69
Anti-Bribery Convention 173
Apple 68
appropriation of public goods 105
Arctic Regional Action Plan Against Plastic
Pollution 155
Argentina 92
Aristotle 5, 12, 42
Arrow, Kenneth 5, 17
ASEAN 179
Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank 98
Australia 8, 23, 52, 57, 113, 124
Austria 35, 57
autonomous private self 118
bandwidth 5
Bangladesh 76, 89
Basel Institute for Commons and Economics 141
BASF 126
basic education 8, 52
beachfront 26
Behemoth 6
beneficial ownership 174
Beyond GDP 21, 64
Bhopal 164
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 66, 98
Bill Gates 103
biodiversity 3, 15, 148, 166
biomass 82, 139
biosphere 23, 39, 151
BMW 70
bonum commune 4
bottom-up control 159
Bretton Woods Project 181
bribe 170–171
bribery 71, 99, 171, 183
Bribery Act 173
broadband connectivity 34
Brundtland 141, 176
Build Back Better Act 113
Build, Operate, Transfer 90
Build, Own, Operate, Transfer 89, 122
bundling of property rights 128
Burundi 159
business education 83
Business in Society 68, 79
buying influence 171
Cadbury 17, 66, 68, 103
call neoliberalism 119
Cambridge 120
Campeche 148
Canada 52, 57, 94–95, 126, 167
carbon border adjustment 169
carbon dioxide 5, 23–24, 39, 65, 167
carbon dioxide capture and sequestration 40
Carnegie 66, 103
carrying capacity 31, 156
Catholic Church 6
Caveat emptor 71
Center for Peace Studies 110
Central American Common Market 98
Central European University 119
certification schemes 164
Chevron 69
child labor 53, 182
Chile 63, 162
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111134611-009Chilean fisheries 134
China 19, 39, 56–57, 60–61, 72, 92–93, 109, 124,
167, 172
Cicero 4–5
circular economy 73, 80, 82–84
Cities Data Book 144
citizens 4, 6, 13, 67, 133
civic dialogues 124
civil disruption 140
civil society organizations 7, 23, 48, 69, 83, 86–88,
97, 120
clean air V, 1, 15–16, 19, 25, 30, 34, 59, 130
clean sources of energy 153
Climate Action Network (CAN), 181
climate change 2, 15, 24, 35, 85, 114, 137
climate change adaptation 35, 153
Clinical Trial Regulation 163
club goods 9, 30–31, 38
Code of Safety for Fishermen and Fishing
Vessels 161
coercion 8–9, 12, 41
coexistence 108
coffee fields 163
co-funding 98
coherence 2
collaboration V, 1
collaborative decision-making 115
collective action 2, 7–8, 14, 120, 141, 155, 159
collective bargaining 182
collective choice 7, 41, 129
collective consumption 4, 9
collective decision-making 108
collective efforts 9, 13, 17–18, 102
collective ownership 14
collective spending 30, 32, 34
collectivistic benefit 118
colonialist 119
Commitment to Development Index 175
common good V, 1, 5–8
common interest 7
common interests 6
Commons V, 2, 4, 11, 14, 17–18, 36, 41, 125
commons governance 41
commonstock 101–103
communicable diseases 26, 47
community 5, 46
community of goods 5
community participation 51
community relations 146
compensation 104
competition 106
compliance 87
Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development
Program 160
compulsory labor 182
Concept Foundation 96
concession contract 88
concession model 90
Concession Schools 95
conflict prevention 152
Conflict Resolution 129
Confucianism 5
congestion 31
connectivity 20
conscious capitalism 69
conservation 3, 48
construction 33, 67, 72, 88–89, 123
consumption 1, 31, 150
consumption externalities 107
contingent valuation 62
Copenhagen Business School 126
co-regulation 48, 156
corporate citizen 66
corporate philanthropy 66
corporate responsibility 48
corporate social responsibility 69–70
corporatist 57
corrective justice 12
corruption 65, 99–100, 136, 166, 169, 171, 183
COVID-19 V, 47, 50, 58, 76, 99, 115–116, 118, 182
creation of wealth 80
creative destruction 18, 44
criminal 171
criminal acts 71, 85
Criminal Law Convention on Corruption 173
CSOs 69, 83, 85–88, 90, 96, 101, 140, 166, 179, 184
cyberspace 46
dairy industry 166
dam 32, 37–38
Danish Maritime Authority 183
Danone 166, 182
database 102, 129
Denmark 58, 126, 132, 144
destination principle 100
Deutsche Lufthansa 67
Development Assistance Committee 175
Development Cooperation Forum 175
220 Indexdevelopment planning 158
Dewey, John 81
diesel emissions 71
Diesel scandal 68
dignity 1, 23, 71
dilemma situations 108
dioxin 164
dis-appropriation 101–102
discrimination 182
disease 31, 36, 94, 96, 134, 150
dismissal 115
disparities 51, 53
distrust 20, 85
diversity standards 120
Dodd-Frank Act 72
doom-and-gloom-budget 115
drainage 88, 126, 139
Earth Charter 83
Eastern Europe 85
ecological law 104
economic efficiency 38
economic infrastructure 88, 112
economic utility 21
economic value 63, 130, 133–134, 137–138
Economics for the Common Good 1, 14
ecosystems 138–139, 148
education V, 10, 13, 15, 17, 27, 45, 54, 66, 88,
93–94, 96
education campaigns 48, 94
Education for Sustainable Development 159
effectiveness 36, 45, 69
efficiency 18, 30, 36, 69, 92, 94
effluents 58–59, 125, 136, 144
Egypt 95
Eisenhower, Dwight D 157
emission reduction 40, 167
emission rights 16, 132, 155
emission standards 169
emissions 48
Emissions Trading System 62, 167, 169
employee training 70
employees 48, 77
enabled utility 27
enclosing the commons 105
enclosure 102, 106
energy production 40
Enron 68, 71
entitlements 104, 154, 156
entrepreneurs 66
Environment Canada 63
Environmental Compliance 136
environmental damage. 154
environmental depletion 147
environmental protection 34, 86
Environmental Protection Agency 63
environmental reputation 74
environmental responsibility 183
Environmental Valuation Reference Inventory 63
epidemic 31
equality 44, 58, 69
equity 94
Erasmus University 126
ESG 177
ethic of care 121
ethical reputation 74
ethical standards 94
Ethical Trading Initiative 184
Ethiopia 181
EU Justice Scoreboard 135
European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development 98
European Environment Agency 63
European Union Raw Materials Alliance 113
European Values Study 146
executive salaries 70
expropriation 103–104
extended income 132–133
externalities 10, 58–59, 62, 72
externalities valuation 130
externality 64
Extinction Rebellion 85
extortion 183
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative 184
failed states 21, 171
Fair Trade 165
Famine Early Warning System 158
Fannie Mae 66
FAO Committee on Fisheries 161
financial cost of pollution 73
financial crisis 58, 107, 115
Finland 58, 134, 144
Firms of Endearment 70
fiscal competition 34
fisheries 74, 126, 162
Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) 156
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 163
Index 221food availability prognostics 160
food security V, 155–156
Ford Foundation 66, 98
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 173
Forum for the Future 75
Forum on Business and Human Rights 152
Framework for Country Health Information 150
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 39
Framework for Social Responsibility in the Seafood
Sector 162
France 19, 51, 57, 94, 115, 123
Frankfurt School of Philosophy 118
free riding 41, 65, 166–167
free trade 71
freedom of association 182
freedom of choice 1
freedom of movement 135
freedom of speech 119–120
French labor market 116
fresh water V, 1, 15, 30, 39, 90, 139, 156
Friedman, Milton 68, 73
functionings 43
Gaza 87
General Data Protection Regulation 117
German Environment Aid 85–86
Germany 13, 19, 34–35, 50–51, 55, 57, 59, 66,
85–86, 107, 116–118, 121, 174
Ghana 45, 100, 183
Gini index 132–133
Global Alliance for Improved Nutrition 97
Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization 96
Global Alliance to Eliminate Leprosy 97
Global City Indicators Program 144
global collective efforts 152
global commons 3, 36
Global Compact 83, 97, 175, 182–184
Global Compact on Refugees 184
global development cooperation 154
global governance 100, 179
global health V, 66, 96, 163, 179
global infrastructure 112
Global Mindset Institute 52
global order 2
Global Partnership for Education 97
Global Partnership for Effective Development
Cooperation 97, 154, 175
Global Partnerships 97
global partnerships for health 96
Global Polio Eradication Program 96
global PPPs 97
global public goods 36, 38
global public interest 100
Global Reporting Initiative 75, 135
global value chain 158
global warming 15, 46, 155
globalization 36, 58, 169, 180, 188
good livelihood 1
Good Manufacturing Practice 163
goods of fortune 42, 44
governance 36
governance structure 91
government control 46
government effectiveness 44
government ownership 68
government schools 95
Greece 114, 172
green growth 176
green investment 177
Green New Deal 113
Green Shipping Africa 183
green taxonomy 113–114
greenhouse gas emissions 16, 113, 137
grievance procedures 162
Guidelines for Effective Philanthropic
Engagement 175
Guiding Principles on Business and Human
Rights 72, 97, 153
habitual obedience 8
health V, 1, 10, 45
health determinants 150
health education 48, 50, 74, 93
health expenditure 92
health inequity 50
health insurance 51, 56
health management 11
healthcare 15, 17, 21, 27, 29, 48, 50, 69, 107
healthcare partnerships 93
high-school certificate 116
HIV 93, 96, 125, 180
Hobbes, Thomas 6
Honda 70
hospital privatizations 107
hospital treatment 29
hospitals 11, 48, 88, 92–93
housing 11, 17, 172
human abuse 161
222 Indexhuman capital 75–77, 79–80
human rights 4, 23–24, 26, 41, 161, 182
Human Rights Council 72, 152, 161
human trafficking 161–162
Hume, David 6
Hungary 119, 144
hygiene 48, 94
identifiability 20
IFIwatchnet 181
impact investing 16, 177
impact of vaccines 48–49
impure public good 31
impure public goods 9
India 19, 23, 56, 92, 95, 126, 147, 162
individual preferences 18, 25
individualistic benefit 118
Indonesia 161–162
industrial revolution 2, 80
infectious disease 48, 50
Inflation Reduction Act 113
innovation 16, 27
input-output matrix 149
insecure jobs 116
Institute for the Advanced Study of
Sustainability 159
institutional capital 141
institutional safeguards 107
instrumental value’ 130
intellectual property 27, 125, 167
Intellectual Property Committee 180
Inter-American Development Bank 98
intergenerational 37–40
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 38,
137, 158
International Aids Vaccine Initiative 96
International Chamber of Commerce 169
International Fund for Agricultural Development
(IFAD) 157
International Health Partnership 175
International Integrated Reporting Council 75, 77
International Integrated Reporting Framework 75
International Labor Organization 161
international law 71
International Maritime Organization 161, 183
International Monetary Fund 98
International Telecommunications Union 158
internet 34, 46, 65
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and
Numbers 46
Internet Engineering Task Force 46
internet governance 46–47
Interpol 169
intervention policies 106
intrinsic value 130
investment 105, 138
investment in education 54
invisible hand 43
Irresponsible 71
irresponsible behavior 71
irresponsible business 70
irrigation 10, 15, 17, 31, 40–41
Istanbul Principles 175
Italian Cities Sustainable Development Index 144
Italy 123, 140, 144, 172
iuris consensus 4
jailhouses 88, 90
Japan 33, 51, 60, 109, 147–148, 167
Japan Bank for International Cooperation 112
job opportunities 2, 98, 141–142, 170
Johnson & Johnson 70
joint and several liability 60
jointness 10
jointness in consumption 9
Kampala Principles 154
Kenya 53, 153
Kickstarter 17
Kimberley Process 173
knowledge 27, 30, 36, 52, 82
knowledge management 148
Kuznets Curve 80
labor market V, 19, 51
labor market mobility 146
labor market policies 115–116
labor market reforms 115–116
laissez-faire 106
landscape resilience 74
Last Generation 85, 120
Latin America 95
Latvia 144
law and order 19, 87, 135
Law on Charitable Purposes 86
Least Developed Countries 16, 100, 169
Index 223Leipzig 66
level playing field 108, 152
Lever Brothers 17, 66
Leviathan 6
liability in tort 117
life-long learning 83
Limits to Growth 176
living conditions 16, 22, 46, 70, 140
living wage 77
local public good 33–34
Locke, John 6
low carbon investment 61
malaria control 179
Malaysia 95
Mali 159
malnutrition 48, 93
managing collective efforts 121
Managing of PPPs 126
marine litter 155, 179
Maritime Just Transition Task Force 183
Maritime Safety Committee 161
maritime states 161
market failure 10, 42, 101, 106–107
market return 72
Maslow Hierarchy of Needs 134
Max Planck Institute for the Study of Societies 127
McGregor, Douglas 77
means value 130
Merck 69, 72
Mercosur 179
Mexico 63, 148, 162
Middle Ages 6, 10
Milieudefensie 24
Mill, John Stuart 6
Millennium Development Goals 80, 95
Millennium Goals 175
Millennium Summit 80, 87
minerals and metals governance 113
Ministry of International Trade and Industry
(MITI) 33, 112
Modena 144
monetary value 62–64, 130, 132–133, 137–138, 140,
144, 146–147, 149
monetization 23, 46, 64, 137
Money Laundering Directives 174
monitoring 48, 150, 182
moral business 70
moral capitalism 69
moral culture 68
moral organization 68, 70
morality of a cooperative society 108
morbidity 50
mortality 47, 50, 150
Motorola 68
Multilateral Environmental Agreements 61
multiple capitals 73, 75, 80
Myanmar 60, 104
NAFTA 179
National Accounting Matrix of Environmental
Accounts 148
National Audit Office 115, 122
National Bureau of Economic Research 154
National Health Service 19, 27, 48
natural capital 76, 80, 137
natural desires 42
natural habitats 30, 39
negative externality 59, 62
neoliberalism 56, 103, 137
Netherlands 24, 51, 94, 116, 126, 148
New Public Management 57
New Zealand 167
Nigeria 60, 92
nitrous oxide 167
non-excludable 30
non-exclusive 1, 4, 27
Non-Financial Reporting Directive 79
non-monetary value 64, 129, 133
non-rivalrous 1, 26, 30
non-rivalry 9, 40
non-state actors 10
non-use value 63–64
normative economics 18
Northern Chemical 68
Norway 58, 162
Nuclear Safety Directive 60
nuclear technology 39
nuclear waste 39, 60
Nuclear Waste Policy Act 60
numerical values 23
nursing 16
nutrition 21, 48, 50, 93
nutritional wellbeing 156
Obama, Barack 162
occupational hazard 48, 93
Occupational Health 136
224 IndexOccupy Wall Street 85
OECD 21–23, 55, 88, 99–100, 132, 153, 170, 175, 177
OECD Development Assistance Committee 175
OECD-Wellbeing Framework 21
Official Development Assistance 100, 152
Ohio 126
oil-producing businesses 85
old age pension 56
oligopolistic 110
Olympus 172
Open Government Partnerships 162
open-door policy 70
Oslo Paris Commission 155
Ostrom 10–11, 14, 17, 21, 31, 40, 65, 125, 128
over-consumption 19
over-usage 15, 19–20, 31
ownership 4, 11–12
Oxfam 181
Pakistan 95
Palermo Protocol 162
Panama Papers 174
pandemic V, 2
partnerships for development 96
pasturelands 12
Patagonia 70
peace V, 9, 30, 36
Pepsi-Co 69
perfluorocarbons 167
philanthropy 8, 65–67, 72, 95
Philippines 69, 95, 162
physical infrastructure 19, 46, 144
Pigou, Arthur Cecil 10, 59
plastic waste 155, 179
Plato 5
policymaking 24, 101
political patronage 90
polluter pays strategy 154
pollution 16, 19, 27, 36, 48, 72
Pope Francis 1
positive economics 18
positive externalities 38, 59, 62, 167
positive externality 10
potential utility 27
poverty trap 48, 93
PPPs 88, 95–97, 121–122
Prince of Wales 79
prisoner’s dilemma 109–110
prisons 88, 107
privacy protection 117–118
Private Finance Initiative 122
private ownership 6, 12
private sector participation 90
privatization 20, 89, 105
privatization of schools 94
Procter & Gamble 66
Program on Reducing Emissions from
Deforestation and Forest Degradation
(REDD) 175
property 11–12, 14, 128
property rights 4, 11–12, 18, 26–27, 104, 127–128
property values 53
provisional property interest 104
public consultation 123–124
public education 44, 51
public finance 4, 9, 11
public health 18, 37, 44, 47–48, 50–51, 91, 93–94,
104, 111, 117, 136, 141, 149, 172
public housing 43, 115
public infrastructure 21, 90, 112, 124
public interest entities 79
public investment 105
public parks 31
public procurement 88
Public Procurement Directive 121
public purpose 67
Public Purpose Capitalism 67, 69
public responsibilities 36
public sector, role of 43–44
public sector spending 33, 56
public statistics 147
public stockholding 160
public television 13
public transport 20, 65, 115
publicness, degrees of 10
public-private interaction 4, 20
public-private partnerships 42, 88, 95
public-versus-private resentment 108
Punjab 95
pure public goods 9
Quality Assurance Agency 119
race to the bottom 34, 71
rationality 5, 25
Rawls, John 20, 38
reciprocal obligations 121
Recovery and Resilience Plan 114
Index 225recycling firms 154
referendums 133–134, 178
Regenerative Organic Certification Standard 166
Regional Action Plan for Marine Litter 155
Regional Centers of Expertise 159
regional public good 34
rent capitalization 138
res publica 4–5
resource effectiveness 142
resource flows 147
resource stocks 147
resources policy 112–113
responsibilities, shared 103
Responsible Care 82
Responsible Jewelry Council 173
responsible management 82
restriction of movement 162
right to privacy 117
Rights of Indigenous Peoples 136
rising waterlines 153
risk allocation 122
risk sharing 122–123
roads 2, 11, 88, 90
Rockefeller Foundation 66, 98
Roundtable on Sustainable Biomaterials 165
Rowntree 17, 66
rule of law 79
Rule of Law Indicators 135
Ruskin, John 130
Russia V, 57–58, 109, 113
Rwanda 159, 181
Safe Injections Global Network 96
safety 30
safety for fishermen 161
safety regulations 104
Saint Augustine 4–5
Samuelson, Paul 9, 21
Sanctions 129
sanitation 11, 88
satellites 31
Save the Children Fund 158
Scarcity and Growth 176
Schumpeter, Joseph 18
SDG Knowledge Platform 182
Search for Common Ground 70
security 1, 6, 9–10, 26, 30, 36, 45, 81–82, 107
security on the streets 45
self-actualization 134
self-governance 36
separation of powers 135
Seveso 164
sewage treatment 88
shared understanding 111
shareholder value 69
Shell 24, 60
shipping agencies, 161
Siemens 71
SIGMA Project 75
silent expropriation 104
skills 52
slavery 161–162
Slovakia 144
Small Is Beautiful 76
Smart Cities 144
Smith, Adam 6, 13, 42–43
Social Accounting Matrices 149
social business 69
social capital 79, 140–142, 145, 182
social coherence 34, 70
social cohesion 141, 170
social collaboration 108
social contract 6, 102
social corruption 170
social cost 59, 62, 73
social democratic 57
social development 47, 71
social efficiency 38, 178
social entrepreneurship 69
social externalities 60
social impact 15
social impact investing 97
social inclusiveness 176
social infrastructure 88, 114, 144
social institutions 14, 56, 140–141
social movement 36, 85, 164
social order 5, 14
social partnerships 17
social peace 6
social processes 7, 108
social protection 48, 93
social relations 1
social responsibility 72, 83
social returns 72
social skills 134
social support 140
social value 59, 131, 141
social values 7
226 Indexsocial welfare 5
socially fair 13
societal control 87, 178
societal divisions 55
socio-economic benefits 82
soil enrichment 166
solidarity 1, 20
Solidarność 85
Solow, Robert Merton 38
South Africa 39, 104
South African Breweries 73–74
South America 154
South Korea 167
Soviet Union 57
Sozialstaat 56
sport programs 48, 93
Sri Lanka 92
stakeholder 36, 70, 163
stakeholder cooperation 85
stakeholder engagement 124
stakeholder relations 70
standards 26, 82, 163, 177
standards for fisheries 163
Starbucks 181
state-owned firms 68
Statistical Office of the EU 150
stewardship 71, 101
Strabag 72
strategic objectives 56
strong sustainability’ 137
subsidiarity 1, 57
subsidies 55, 95
subsistence farming 157
Suez Canal 89
supply chain V, 71, 74, 113, 136, 164, 166, 179
supranational institutions 41
Susa Valley 123
sustainability reporting 73, 80, 135, 144
sustainable capital 75
Sustainable Development Goals 15, 23, 47, 52, 112
sustainable investment 114
sustainable tourism 114
sweatshops 163
Sweden 35, 58, 132, 144
Swissair 172
Switzerland 51, 133
synergies, inter-institutional 50
Syria 184
System of Environmental-Economic Accounts 147
System of National Accounts 147
systemic governance 45, 47, 55
systemic risks 111
Takings Law 104
Tanzania 53, 92–93
Task Force on Social and Solidarity Economy 153
tax evasion 99, 171
tax evasion. 174
teacher training 95
television 20, 30
textile firms 76
Thailand 92, 161–162
The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity
Initiative 139
The Great Transformation 102
The Human Side of Enterprise 77
The Maintenance of Life 130
The Tragedy of the Commons 65
Tirole, Jean 1–2, 5, 14–16, 35, 116
Toyota 70
trade agreements 41, 179
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property 180
Tragedy of the Commons 12
transfer policies 6
Transparency in Supply Chain Act 72
Transparency International 86, 169, 173
transport 11, 88
triangle of publicness 101
Triple Bottom Line 73, 75, 80
Tyco 68, 71
Uganda 53, 154, 158–159
UK Treasury 122
Ukraine V, 2, 23, 58, 99, 113, 115
UN Department of Peacekeeping Operations 135
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights 135
UN Partnerships for SDGs 99
underground economies 172
unemployment 2
unemployment protection 56
Unilever 69
Union Carbide 164
unitarian 6
United Kingdom 19, 51, 57, 92, 114–115, 122, 148, 162
United Nations 23, 47, 87, 98, 152, 180, 182
United Nations Development Policy Committee 51
United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) 139,
153
Index 227United Nations support programs 153
United States 51, 107, 116, 158, 168
United States Agency for International
Development 158
unity of purpose 188
University of Toronto 126
UPS 70
Urmia Lake Basin 142
use-value 63–64
utilitarian 25, 131
utilitatis communio 4
utilities 36, 69
utility 27
utility versus rationality 5
UTZ 164
vaccination 10, 31, 50
value chain 75, 77
value creation 72, 75–76, 140
value judgments 18, 21, 131
values and attitudes 52
Verizon 76–77
Victorian Department of Treasury and Finance 124
Vietnam 162
Volkswagen 68, 71
von Bismarck 56
vouchers 95
wage subsidies 5
waste 39, 60, 82
waste management 115, 139
waste prevention 155
wastewater 8, 58, 128
water 11, 15, 88, 90
water allocation 18
water gardens 74
water governance 125
water treatment 126, 139
weak sustainability 137
wealth assets 80
welfare 14, 56, 66
welfare capitalism 57
welfare state 2, 55–57, 65, 171
welfare-state-retrenchment 55
wellbeing economy 178
well-educated 51
West Bank 87
Western Lake Erie Basin 126
white supremacy 119
wild capture fisheries 161
Willingness to Accept Compensation 63
Willingness to Pay 63
woke 119
Work and Security Act 116
Work in Fishing Convention 162
working conditions 35, 48, 77, 93, 116, 161–162,
165, 184
workplace 2, 48
World Bank 98, 133, 140
World Bank Development Reports 44
World Economic Forum 72, 84, 169
World Food Program 157
World Food Summit 156
World Health Organization 47, 96, 149, 179
World Justice Project 135
World Trade Organization 41, 61, 152
WorldCom 68, 71, 76
youth organizations 96
3M 68, 72
5G licenses 111
228 Index
