PALGRAVE STUDIES IN 
THE HISTORY OF SUBCULTURES 
AND POPULAR MUSIC
Punk, Ageing and Time
Edited by
Laura Way · Matt Grimes
PALGRAVE STUDIES IN THE 
HISTORY OF SUBCULTURES 
AND POPULAR MUSICPalgrave Studies in the History of Subcultures 
and Popular Music
Series Editors
Keith Gildart
University of Wolverhampton
Wolverhampton, UK
Anna Gough-Yates
University of Roehampton
London, UK
Sian Lincoln
Liverpool John Moores University
Liverpool, UK
Bill Osgerby
London Metropolitan University
London, UK
Lucy Robinson
University of Sussex
Brighton, UK
John Street
University of East Anglia
Norwich, UK
Peter Webb
University of the West of England
Bristol, UK
Matthew Worley
University of Reading
Reading, UKFrom 1940s zoot-suiters and hepcats through 1950s rock ‘n’ rollers, beat￾niks and Teddy boys; 1960s surfers, rude boys, mods, hippies and bikers; 
1970s skinheads, soul boys, rastas, glam rockers, funksters and punks; on 
to the heavy metal, hip-hop, casual, goth, rave and clubber styles of the 
1980s, 90s, noughties and beyond, distinctive blends of fashion and music 
have become a defning feature of the cultural landscape. The Subcultures 
Network series is international in scope and designed to explore the social 
and political implications of subcultural forms. Youth and subcultures will 
be located in their historical, socio-economic and cultural context; the 
motivations and meanings applied to the aesthetics, actions and manifesta￾tions of youth and subculture will be assessed. The objective is to facilitate 
a genuinely cross-disciplinary and transnational outlet for a burgeoning 
area of academic study.Laura Way • Matt Grimes
Editors
Punk, Ageing 
and TimeISSN 2730-9517 ISSN 2730-9525 (electronic)
Palgrave Studies in the History of Subcultures and Popular Music
ISBN 978-3-031-47822-2 ISBN 978-3-031-47823-9 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47823-9
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer 
Nature Switzerland AG 2024
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the 
Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifcally the rights of 
translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on 
microflms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, 
electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now 
known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this 
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specifc statement, that such names are 
exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information 
in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the 
publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to 
the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The 
publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affliations.
This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG.
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland
Paper in this product is recyclable.
Editors
Laura Way
University of Roehampton
London, UK
Matt Grimes
Birmingham City University
Birmingham, UKWe want to dedicate this book to all the punks that make up this diverse, 
global community which the editors and contributors are proud to be 
aligned to. UP THE PUNKS!vii
The editors would like to extend their thanks again to those who contrib￾uted to this collection. We would also like to thank the peer reviewers for 
the time and energy they have given to critically support the authors in 
strengthening their arguments and contributing towards an academically 
rigorous edition.
Thank you to the Birmingham Centre for Media and Cultural Research 
at Birmingham City University for fnancially supporting the process of 
indexing the collection and thank you to Dino Costi for providing your 
very thorough indexing services.
We would lastly like to acknowledge the support from the editorial 
team at Palgrave Macmillan and thank them for their ongoing support and 
guidance to bring this book to publication.
Acknowledgementsix
About the Book
Punk Passages offers the frst edited collection to focus on punk, ageing 
and/or temporality. Whilst a body of work concerned with punk and age￾ing has begun to be developed, this is still very much in its infancy. Indeed, 
work approaching punk and ageing, which takes into consideration inter￾sectionality (for example, speaking to also how gender, ethnicity/race, 
sexuality, disability and/or class intersect with ageing), is extremely lim￾ited. Similar problems are found in scholarship focusing on how punk is 
remembered and represented—this might entail the ‘writing out’ or the 
minimising of particular participants’ involvement (Reddington, 2006; 
Stewart, 2019; Wiedlack, 2015), for example, or the way punk historiog￾raphy assumes whiteness as the taken-for-granted subject position in punk 
(Davila, 2019). Punk Passages responds to such issues, covering areas such 
as punk and ageing; the relationship between temporality and particular 
concepts relevant to punk; and punk memory, remembering and/or for￾getting; and offers consideration of areas which have as yet received very 
little to no academic attention.xi
Contents
1 Introduction 1
Laura Way and Matt Grimes
2 Rejecting and Resisting Ageism: Female Perspectives of 
Ageing with Punk 15
Alison Willmott
3 Lifestyle and Memory: Profling Two Generations of 
Ageing Czech Male Punks 33
Ondrej Daniel
4 ‘… And Out Come the Comps’: Punk-O-Rama, Pro 
Skater, and Their Roles as Peak Music Experiences in a 
Current Punk Identity 53
Ellen Bernhard
5 Young Punk, Old Punk, Running Punk: Keeping the 
Old Ones Cool and the Young Ones Fresh 71
Ashley Morgan and Chris Inglis
6 Live Fast, Die Old. Experiences of Ageing in Portuguese 
Punk DIY Scenes since the Late 1970s 93
Paula Guerraxii
7 “I’m Not Someone Who Calls Himself an Anarchist, 
I am an Anarchist”: The Continuing Signifcance of 
Anarchism in the Later Lives of Ex-Adherents of British 
Anarcho-Punk 113
Matt Grimes
8 Memories of the Past, Inequalities of the Present: The 
Temporality of Subcultural Violence, Gender, and 
Authenticity 135
Matthew Newsom
9 Punk, Literature and Midlife Creativity: Ordinary 
Stories, Ordinary Men 157
Philip Miles
10 Exploring Older Punk Women’s Conceptualisation 
of ‘Punk’ through Participant-Created Zine Pages 177
Laura Way
11 Working With/In: An Exploration of Queer Punk Time 
and Space in Collaborative Archival Workshops 201
Kirsty Fife
12 Enduring Attachments: On the Temporalities of Punk 225
George C. Grinnell
13 Generation Lost: Resignation, Rupture, and the Infnite 
Realities of Post-Future Punk 243
Owen Morawitz
Index 259
Contentsxiii
Ellen  Bernhard is an assistant professor of Digital Communication at 
Georgian Court University, New Jersey. Her book Contemporary Punk 
Rock Communities: Scenes of Inclusion and Dedication was published in 
2019. She is US East Coast representative of the Punk Scholars Network 
since 2019.
Ondrˇej  Daniel is an assistant professor in the Department of World 
History at Charles University. His current work examines intersections of 
class and xenophobia in contemporary Czech society, and he has pub￾lished on the role of subcultures and violence in the development of post￾socialist mainstream Czech culture and DIY subcultural practices.
Kirsty Fife is a lecturer in Digital Information and Curation at Manchester 
Metropolitan University, UK. Lecturer, archivist, zine maker and cultural 
organizer in DIY music communities. Their PhD research explores docu￾menting and archiving UK DIY music spaces.
Matt  Grimes is a senior lecturer in music industries and radio at 
Birmingham City University. He was awarded his PhD in 2020, research￾ing British anarcho-punk and its ideological signifcance in the life courses 
of ageing anarcho-punks. His other research interests include music cul￾tures/subcultures; music entrepreneurship and innovation; DIY music 
scenes and music activism. He has published on the subjects of anarcho￾punk, anarcho-punk ‘zines, punk pedagogy, popular music and spiritual￾ity, DIY/Underground music cultures/subcultures, counter-cultural 
movements, and radio for social change. He is the general secretary of the 
Notes on Contributorsxiv NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS
Punk Scholars Network and associate editor for the journal Punk & Post￾Punk. Matt is also a lifelong supporter of Millwall FC.
George  C.  Grinnell is an associate professor in English and Cultural 
Studies, UBC Okanagan Campus, British Colombia. Author of The Social 
Life of Biometrics and The Age of Hypochondria and is the recipient of the 
Gustave O. Arlt Award in the Humanities in 2011 from the Council of 
Graduate Schools. SSHRC-funded research on culture and theory.
Paula Guerra is Professor of Sociology, University of Porto, Portugal, 
and researcher at the university’s Institute of Sociology. Also part of other 
international research centres: Centre for Geography and Spatial Planning 
Studies; Transdisciplinary Research Centre; Adjunct Associate Professor of 
the Griffth Centre for Social and Cultural Research, Australia.
Chris Inglis is a Learning Support Coordinator, BIMM Bristol. Received 
his PhD in Musicology from the University of South Wales in 2019 with 
a thesis entitled ‘Engaging with Electro Swing: Resurrection, 
Recontextualisation, and Remix’.
Philip Miles is Senior Lecturer in Sociology, University of Bedfordshire, 
UK. Cultural sociologist with specifc interests in the sociology of litera￾ture and the study of creativity. He is the author of an ethnographic 
account of the creative practices of musicians, fne artists and literature 
authors.
Owen  Morawitz is an independent scholar based in Australia. His 
research focuses on violence in narrative fction and media, alongside 
issues in continental philosophy, ontology, representation, aesthetics, 
anthropocentrism, and posthumanism. Also a freelance writer with a focus 
on music, flm, media, and alternative culture.
Ashley Morgan is a masculinities scholar, Cardiff Metropolitan University 
(UK). Researches into masculine identity, clothing, geeks, sex, toxic mas￾culinity, and hybrid masculinity. Recently published on hybrid masculinity 
and clothing amongst rock stars. Award-Winning Running Punk.
Matthew  Newsom is a visiting assistant professor of Anthropology, 
Department of History, Sociology and Anthropology, Southern Utah 
University. Cultural and psychological anthropologist interested in the 
mutually constitutive relationship between collective memories and the 
myriad social identities people fashion for themselves.NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS xv
Laura Way is currently senior lecturer in Sociology at the University of 
Roehampton, UK. A feminist sociologist, Laura specialises in qualitative 
research which employs creative and/or participatory methods, and she 
researches predominantly in areas concerning ageing and gender, margin￾alised identities and communities, subcultures, and punk pedagogies. 
Laura’s PhD research with older punk women led to the publication of the 
monograph Punk, Gender and Ageing. Just Typical Girls? (Emerald, 
2020), and she has co-edited several academic collections (Postgraduate 
Voices in Punk Studies; Men and their Welfare; Punk Pedagogies in Practice). 
Laura is currently a co-editor of Sociological Research Online and sits on 
the advisory board of Punk & Post-Punk.
Alison  Willmott Independent Scholar, UK.  Holds a PhD from the 
Centre for Women, Ageing and Media, University of Gloucestershire, for 
research concerning ageing punk women.xvii
Fig. 5.1 A group of Running Punks 87
Fig. 10.1 Zine page by Nina N 185
Fig. 10.2 Zine page by REM 187
Fig. 10.3 Zine page by Anon 2 188
Fig. 10.4 Zine page from Anon 3 189
Fig. 10.5 Zine page by Anon 1 191
Fig. 10.6 Zine page by Nat 192
Fig. 10.7 Zine page by Suzyska 194
List of Figures© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 1
Switzerland AG 2024
L. Way, M. Grimes (eds.), Punk, Ageing and Time, Palgrave Studies 
in the History of Subcultures and Popular Music, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47823-9_1
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Laura Way and Matt Grimes
The social study of time has been valuable in demonstrating how time “is 
socially produced, represented and organized” (Lahad, 2012, p. 164). To 
date there has been no plotting, so to speak, of punk scholarship which 
speaks to ‘time’ yet there are some clear bodies of work pertaining to par￾ticular issues relevant to it including, ageing and/or the life course and 
punk (e.g. Andes, 1998; Bennett, 2006, 2013; Grimes, 2020; Way, 2019, 
2020, 2021); memory and/or nostalgia and punk (e.g. Adams, 2008; 
Arnold, 2022; McLoone, 2004); ‘punk history’ (e.g. Glasper, 2014, 
2020; Reddington, 2007; Worley, 2012, 2017); and archiving and punk 
(e.g. Fraser & Haley, 2018; Liew & Williams, 2012; Bérubé-Sasseville, 
2022; Nguyen, 2015; Fife, 2019). Punk, Ageing and Time is therefore a 
timely (pun intended) collection covering areas such as punk and ageing; 
the relationship between temporality and particular concepts relevant to 
L. Way (*) 
University of Roehampton, London, UK
e-mail: laura.way@roehampton.ac.uk
M. Grimes 
Birmingham City University, Birmingham, UK
e-mail: Matt.Grimes@bcu.ac.uk2
punk (such as authenticity, DIY, identity, resistance, spatiality and style); 
and punk memory, remembering and/or forgetting.
In this introductory chapter, we will contextualise this publication—
looking at how punk scholarship has thus far engaged with time, memory 
and ageing, respectively—before introducing the aims of this collection, 
which very much emerge from such existing discussions and debates. 
Lastly, we provide an overview of the chapters contained within, high￾lighting some of the threads which run across these.
Punk and Time
Since the emergence, and subsequent ‘explosion’, of punk in the UK in 
the 1970s Britain, it has continued to hold a public presence as well as 
gaining academic interest and attention. The celebration of 40 years of 
punk across London in 2016 (Fox, 2016), for example, serves to demon￾strate this as do the many, academic or otherwise, published books per￾taining to punk. The public’s view of punk, however, is usually quite a 
narrow one, revolving around the ideas of punk being at its height in the 
late 1970s, bands such as the Sex Pistols representing the punk movement 
musically, and a particular iconic punk ‘look’. Punk, in such a view, then, 
is being understood as located in, or aligned with, a particular era. And 
such sentiments can also be found in some academic framing of punk (par￾ticularly those which trace the history of punk as a musical movement, talk 
about the emergence of ‘post-punk’, and so forth). From this we can 
already see how and why we might talk about punk in relation to time. But 
it is also important to consider how such historical commentary on punk, 
such as above, is constructed. There are problems concerning how punk is 
remembered and represented, particularly when the historicising of punk 
entails the ‘writing out’ or the minimising of particular participants’ 
involvement (Reddington, 2007; Stewart, 2019; Wiedlack, 2015). Davila 
(2019) raises the point too about the way punk historiography assumes 
whiteness as the taken-for-granted subject position in punk. Archiving and 
archival practices are very much related to this question of how punk is 
remembered and represented.
Punk and (Re)presentation, Punk and Remembering
The ‘40th anniversary of punk’ referred to above, is something which 
Francis Stewart’s (2019) research takes up in terms of problematising the 
L. WAY AND M. GRIMES3
memorialisation of punk. Stewart (2019) focuses on the British Library’s 
exhibition which was a part of the anniversary celebrations across London, 
evidencing how this exhibition sidelined the voices and experiences of 
marginalised punks (non-cis-men, disabled people, people of colour and 
LGBTQIA individuals) through an analysis of the exhibition itself as well 
as through interviews with punk women from Northern Ireland who trav￾elled over to London specifcally to attend it. As one of Stewart’s (2019) 
interviewees, Emma, commented on the representation of punk women in 
the exhibition: “You’re either Debbie or Nancy—sex siren or whore”. 
Robinson (2018) deftly summarises the various issues pertaining to (re)
presentation and remembering too with the 40th anniversary:
Punk London raised a lot of questions about who gets to remember what, 
and how. It also posed anew some traditional subcultural hang-ups: the cur￾rency of ‘authenticity’, contempt for ‘the sell-out’, ambivalence over the 
role of the market, and the marginalization of experiences beyond a few 
key players.
As noted in the introduction to this section, such issues do not merely 
reside in punk anniversary events. Ward (2019), for example, notes how 
oral histories of punk and post-punk have been predominantly written by 
men, and Reddington (2007) argues that accounts of punk are often male 
focused. Research has highlighted too how punk history has undervalued 
or deleted ‘African American punk cultural productions’ (Ensminger, 
2010) and how marginalised groups, especially punks of colour, have had 
to engage in the localised reconstructing of punk history in order to rein￾corporate that which was before obscured (Lopez & Mills, 2017).
Punk and Archiving
Scholarship pertaining to punk and archiving has explored epistemological 
and methodological, including ethical, issues concerning the building and 
use of archives. This includes work considering the building of punk rock 
collections at UCLA Library Special collections (Fraser & Haley, 2018), 
curating and archiving through subcultural events by punks in Singapore 
(Liew & Williams, 2012) and archiving of the Montreal hardcore scene 
Bérubé-Sasseville (2022). In the latter, Bérubé-Sasseville (2022) considers 
the collection and preservation of self-produced documents (in this case, 
videos) and how the gathering and organising of these allowed the 
1 INTRODUCTION4
creation of (subcultural) collective memory and the development of ‘scene 
identity’. Work has also problematised, more so, the process of punk 
archiving. Mimi Thi Nguyen (2015), for example, speaks on the entry of 
‘minor objects’, including some of her own zines, into institutionalised 
punk archive, asking questions such as, “How do the politics surrounding 
institutional discourses of a minor threat, especially at the crash with race 
or gender, displace or defuse that threat through its integration into a 
politics, history, or archive?” Kirsty Fife (2019) too raises the ethical impli￾cations of archiving zines, highlighting how archive workers need to criti￾cally think about and incorporate the originating politics of zine culture 
into archiving processes and subsequent use, particularly when these zines 
are created by marginalised markers/communities.
Punk and Age, Punk as Youth
When punk rock emerged in the 1970s, the popular media went into a 
frenzy, branding the subculture as a deviant youth culture, whose sole 
purpose was to shock, offend, antagonise and evoke disapproval from par￾ents and authority, and challenge the hegemonic order. The moral panics 
created around the punk subculture by the fervent media coverage only 
served to popularise it in the eyes of many young people, who were also 
emerging from a period of industrial and economic gloom. No doubt feel￾ing in some ways let down by the very people that were supposed to sup￾port them, it came as no surprise that for some of Britain’s youth, punk 
presented an opportunity to reject their parent’s values and morals.
That said, the garnering of such a rebellious reputation was not unique 
to punk, as other previous youth subcultures such as Teddy Boys, Mods 
and Rockers and Hippies all had previously had their fair share of media 
demonisation. What links these various, and often polarised and confict￾ing subcultural groupings, is that they all were soundtracked by popular 
musical forms and that they were almost all uniquely linked to notions of 
youth. When Simon Frith claimed that “the sociology of rock is insepara￾ble from the sociology of youth” (1983, p. 9), he not only amplifed the 
youth-centric master narrative of popular music subcultures, but seem￾ingly dismissed the potential that subculturalists have for utilising those 
youthful experiences as a component of post-youth forms of identity. 
Frith’s problematic comment also feeds into the popular assumption that 
subcultural membership and belonging is a temporary youthful phase on 
a path to the more serious responsibilities associated with adulthood 
L. WAY AND M. GRIMES5
(Haenfer, 2012, p. 11). However, evidence has shown that in Western 
society these stages are often delayed, leading to a redefnition of youth 
that has less in common with notions of youth as a transitional period 
(Buchmann, 1989; Wyn & Woodman, 2006). Weinstein (1995, 1999) 
has suggested that youth and notions of youth have become less con￾nected to age or a period of one’s life, but rather youth has been co-opted 
into leisure cultures as a lifestyle device or signifer. Strong (2011) argues 
that the lifestyles and leisure activities that have widely been associated 
with youth have become more widely accepted in society, with the pursu￾ance of youthful passions continuing into middle age and beyond.
Growing Up Punk, or Growing Old Punk
Increasingly, then, comes an understanding that involvement in such 
‘youth’ cultures, like punk, can extend ‘post-youth’, and a growing body 
of research has developed concerning ageing and subcultures. Time has 
also afforded us, as scholars, the opportunity to investigate and document 
the trajectory of post-youth subcultural and scene affliation, with many of 
the subculturalists who were active participants in youth subcultures from 
the 1970s to 1990s now having moved into adulthood and, for some, 
reaching late adulthood. Early studies around popular music, subcultures 
and ageing were being documented in the late 1990s and early to 
mid-2000s (e.g. Andes, 1998; Kortaba, 2002; Vroomen, 2004; Davis, 
2006; Bennett, 2006) with an edited collection on ageing and youth cul￾tures published by Andy Bennett and Paul Hodkinson (2012), featuring 
work on ageing Goths (Hodkinson, 2012), B-Boys and ageing (Fogarty, 
2012), and slam-dancing and ageing (Tsitsos, 2012) among many others. 
Such studies have all challenged the master narrative of youth-driven 
music cultures and subcultures whilst also recognising things such as phys￾icality, parenting, employment and other adult responsibilities, which 
need to be at times negotiated or which can impact on participants’ con￾tinuing engagement.
With regards to music, Schulkind et al. (1999) speak of how nostalgic 
feeling can be prompted by engagement with music during one’s youth, 
and, more broadly, music can be a stimulus for accessing nostalgic feelings 
(Pickering, 2018). Nostalgia has been a way in which to frame ageing 
within popular music cultures and subcultures, and whilst it would be 
remiss to ignore the importance that nostalgia has in rationalising ones 
continuing engagement and its ability to connect one to their youthful 
1 INTRODUCTION6
past, there is a sense of a lack of conviction that many ageing subcultural￾ists would want to be young again. Bennett (2013) argues that this goes 
beyond mere nostalgic longing of wanting to return to one’s youth but 
often manifests itself in a dynamic relationship to music, its relevance to 
their everyday lives and its broader sociocultural signifcance. In some 
ways, this is confrmed by Andy Bennett’s (2006) study of ageing punks 
(discussed in more length below). Grimes’ (2020) work is particularly 
relevant here, focusing on identity and memory through research with 
those who once identifed as anarcho-punks. Grimes’ (2020) participants, 
for example, used nostalgic narrative to construct their continued connec￾tion to ideologies, beliefs and values that they had acquired during their 
affliation with anarcho-punk during their adolescence. These nostalgic 
narratives showed how their memories represented, in some ways, an ide￾alised past as well as how they drew upon nostalgia as a resource for con￾tinuation (Grimes, 2020).
In terms of ageing and punk, then, there have been a number of studies 
that have either been published as individual/stand-alone pieces or 
appeared within edited collections that investigate ageing within a broader 
range of popular music cultures and subcultures. One of the earliest stud￾ies around ageing punks was conducted by Linda Andes (1998), which 
proposed a developmental model for understanding ‘growing up punk’. 
This refected the ‘punk career’, consisting of four stages, each involving a 
consideration of how the individual defnes themselves/punk, who the 
reference group are, associated behaviour and the core values held. This 
was followed by research on older punks by Davis (2006) and Bennett 
(2006). Like Andes, Davis (2006) argued that punk identity ceased as one 
aged unless they retained subcultural involvement through a creative or 
organisation role—Davis (2006) examines the reasons for this taking place 
through four typologies of ageing punks, arguing that this needs to take 
place so ageing punks do not ‘stagnate’. Bennett’s (2006) work on older 
punk fans considered how older punks can maintain a punk identity 
through adulthood by modifying aesthetic/discursive practice, engaging 
in a level of accommodation when it comes to the punk style and internal￾ising ‘punkness’. Research has also been carried out by Haenfer (2012) 
with older straight edgers which found that for most, straight edge (sXe) 
had become “less of an embodied stylistic display and more of a personal 
philosophy or expression of lifestyle politics” (Haenfer, 2012, p. 10) with 
‘periodic’ and ‘strategic’ displays of straight edge affliation to communi￾cate their longevity in the scene, to set an example for younger members 
L. WAY AND M. GRIMES7
or to symbolise their continuing resistance to conventional norms 
(Haenfer 2012). Other examples of research concerning ageing and punk 
include the following: work on straightedgers and transitions to adult￾hood by Torkelson (2010); Tsitsos (2012), who looked at slamdancing 
and ageing; Davis’ (2012) consideration of punk and expectations of 
adulthood; and research with anarcho-punks by Grimes (2020). There has 
been critique aimed at ‘post-subcultural’ work, however, for its marginali￾sation of older, or ageing, punk women, and this has prompted research 
focused on the experiences of older punk women as well as more explicit 
gender analyses of ageing and punk (see, Way, 2019, 2020; Willmott, 
2020). Despite such moves, there still remains a notable absence of aca￾demic attention being given to other marginalised identities in the context 
of punk and ageing.
The Aims of This Collection
What this edited collection does for the frst time is bring together con￾temporary investigations and discussions specifcally around punk and 
ageing and/or time. It covers areas such as punk and ageing; the relation￾ship between temporality and particular concepts relevant to punk (such 
as authenticity, DIY, identity, resistance, spatiality and style); and punk 
memory, remembering and/or forgetting. It will offer consideration of 
areas which have received very little to no academic attention. It is of a 
multidisciplinary nature and offers diversity in scholarship.
Overview of Chapters
The book begins with Alison Willmot’s chapter, entitled Rejecting and 
Resisting Ageism: Female Perspectives of Ageing with Punk. In her chapter, 
Alison ably sets the context and tone of this edited collection by exploring 
the experiences of older women who identify with punk across the life 
course. Ageism and expectations of age are powerful in society and cul￾ture, and she asks, if punk is characterised by an anti-authority attitude and 
a resistance to conformity, surely women who identifed with punk may be 
better equipped to resist conforming to wider cultural expectations of age￾ing? Ondrej Daniel’s chapter, ̌ Lifestyle and Memory: Profling Two 
Generations of Ageing Czech Male Punks, considers the ageing of two gen￾erations of Czech male punks by analysing the different life experiences 
connected with ageing punks who were still active in 2010. His research 
1 INTRODUCTION8
suggests that lifestyle and memory differences between these two genera￾tions of punks are mutually reinforcing, despite their different genera￾tional experiences and politicised lifestyles.
The next chapter, Ellen Bernhard’s ‘…And Out Come the Comps’: 
Punk-O-Rama, Pro Skater, and Their Roles as Peak Music Experiences in a 
Current Punk Identity, investigates the ways the punk compilation CD 
Punk-O-Rama and skateboarder Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater video game 
proved to be peak music experiences in terms of introducing people to 
punk rock in the late 1990s and early 2000s. Her chapter shows how 
exposure to these two music media formats prevailed as a gateway into 
deeper exploration of the punk genre and the role punk rock compilations 
and video game soundtracks played in establishing a continued punk rock 
identity in adulthood. Following on from Bernhard, the next chapter, 
Young Punk, Old Punk, Running Punk: Keeping the Old Ones Cool and the 
Young Ones Fresh, is co-authored by Ashley Morgan and Chris Inglis. Here 
the authors conduct an auto-ethnographic approach to examine their own 
relationship with punk and ageing, explorating a sense of shared identity 
through their engagement with a running club called Running Punks, a 
group of individuals who have gravitated together because of the punk 
ethos of the founders of the club and their love of music.
In Chap. 6, Paula Guerra broadens out the discussions around ageing 
by focusing on the ageing experiences of DIY music scene producers from 
the late 1970s to the present. In her chapter, Live Fast, Die Old: Experiences 
of Ageing in Portuguese Punk DIY Scenes since the Late 1970s, Paula argues 
that these cultural/creative producers aged 50 or more, through their 
participation in DIY music scenes (punk, indie-rock, rap, EDM), have 
contributed decisively to the reconfguration of Portuguese contempora￾neity through their cultural, artistic and creative experiences. Matt Grimes’ 
chapter, “I’m Not Someone Who Calls Himself an Anarchist, I am an 
Anarchist”: The Continuing Signifcance of Anarchism in the Later Lives of 
Ex-Adherents of British Anarcho-Punk, examines ageing ex-British 
anarcho-punks’ relationship with the anarchist ideologies that they 
engaged with in their adolescence, as participants in the British anarcho￾punk subcultural scene of the 1980s. Through a set of in-depth, semi￾structured interviews, Grimes seeks to reveal whether those anarchist 
ideologies have remained with those ex-adherents of British anarcho￾punk, into late middle age, and if those anarchist ideologies have impacted 
on the refexive framework through which their subsequent life courses 
are experienced, presented and understood.
L. WAY AND M. GRIMES9
In his chapter Memories of the Past, Inequalities of the Present: The 
Temporality of Subcultural Violence, Gender, and Authenticity, Matthew 
Newsom argues that mnemonic discourses about Berlin’s psychobilly past 
are structured hegemonically, and serve to reproduce gender inequality in 
the subcultural present. Through ethnographic participant observation, 
and semi-structured and unstructured interviews with scene participants, 
Matthew concluded that Berlin psychobillies present as heteronormative 
and otherwise reproduce binary expectations in several ways. Following 
on from Newsom, Philip Miles takes an interesting and creative approach 
to examining punk’s ideological and aesthetic legacy as it assimilates with 
midlife cultural and creative labour. In his chapter Punk, Literature and 
Midlife Creativity: Ordinary Stories, Ordinary Men, Philip draws on data 
from a broader diverse and intersectional ethnographic study to focus in 
on four middle-aged male writers, and the personal meaning of creativity 
in terms of quasi-Bergsonian experiences of time, action and meaning. In 
doing so, Philip argues that ‘punk’ translates into middle age not as a 
retained ideology as such, but more like a trace that is left by association.
In her chapter Exploring Older Punk Women’s Conceptualisation of 
‘Punk’ through Participant-Created Zine Pages, Laura Way considers the 
process of creating zines and utilises the participation of a group of older 
punk women creating zines to explore how punk is conceptualised within 
the participant-created zine pages. Locating her analysis through core 
punk values such as DIY, community, subversion and political conscious￾ness, she refexively explores the methodological advantages and chal￾lenges of the use of creating zine pages as a research method. In Chap. 11, 
Working With/In: An Exploration of Queer Punk Time and Space in 
Collaborative Archival Workshops, Kirsty Fife takes a broadly similar 
approach to Laura Way, in-so-much as she also examines how method and 
participatory research practices can address a number of incumbent issues 
around lack of representation of marginalised groups in the practices of 
archiving and historicisation by ‘outsider’ professionals and institutions. 
The chapter explores the facilitation of a documentation workshop in 
2019 at Bent Fest, a queer punk festival based in London. Drawing on 
data from that workshop, Fife suggests that grassroots forms of archival 
work can create more dialogic and representative archival sources which 
are in tune with, rather than opposed to, the politics of queer punk 
communities.
This collection’s penultimate chapter, by George C. Grinnell, which is 
titled Enduring Attachments: On the Temporalities of Punk, explores how 
1 INTRODUCTION10
three authors—Alice Bag, Michelle Cruz Gonzales and Shawna Potter—
interrogate a punk temporality that involves personal experiences of age￾ing, recollection and enduring attachment. Their memoirs document their 
personal ongoing desires to remodel punk with new stories that remake its 
past and future. These works also explore the temporalities of punk and its 
ever-shifting relations of power, particularly those that intersect with race, 
gender and age. The fnal chapter, by Owen Morawitz, titled Generation 
Lost: Resignation, Rupture, and the Infnite Realities of Post-Future Punk, 
also explores notions of temporality and the perception of ‘lost futures’ in 
punk, through the lens of three musical punk bands: Code Orange, 
Spanish Love Songs and Enter Shikari. Within the ‘futureless’ projections 
of neoliberal society, Owen argues that these artists seek to reclaim punk 
as a multi-valent movement for the youth subculture of the present, of and 
for the collective subjects of our ephemeral ‘now’; a movement with vast 
potential and an unknown future trajectory; a movement that must 
embrace communal solidarity and the infnite realities of lost futures.
References
Adams, R. (2008). The Englishness of English Punk: Sex Pistols, Subcultures, and 
Nostalgia. Popular Music and Society, 31(4), 469–488.
Andes, L. (1998). Growing up Punk: Meaning and Commitment Careers in a 
Contemporary Youth Subculture. In J. S. Epstein (Ed.), Youth Culture. Identity 
in a Postmodern World. Blackwell Publishers Ltd..
Arnold, G. (2022). Death in Vegas: Punk Rock and Nostalgia. In G. McKay & 
G. Arnold (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Punk Rock. University Press.
Bennett, A. (2006). Punk’s Not Dead: The Continuing Signifcance of Punk Rock 
for an Older Generation of Fans. Sociology, 40(2), 219–235.
Bennett, A. (2013). Music, Style and Aging: Growing Old Disgracefully? Temple 
University Press.
Bennett, A., & Hodkinson, P. (2012). Ageing and Youth Cultures. Music, Style and 
Identity. Berg.
Bérubé-Sasseville, O. (2022). Bone in the Throat. Video Archiving and Identity 
Building within the Montreal Hardcore Scene. Punk & Post-Punk, 11(1), 71–85.
Buchmann, M. (1989). The Script of Life in Modern Societies: Entry into Adulthood 
in a Changing World. University of Chicago Press.
Davila, R.  C. (2019). See No Colour, Hear No Colour, Speak No Colour: 
Problematizing Colourblindness in Los Angeles Punk Historiography. Punk & 
Post-Punk, 8(1), 89–104.
L. WAY AND M. GRIMES11
Davis, J. (2006). Growing Up Punk: Negotiating Aging Identity in a Local Music 
Scene. Symbolic Interaction, 29(1), 63–69.
Davis, J. R. (2012). Punk, Ageing and the Expectations of Adult Life. In A. Bennett 
& P.  Hodkinson (Eds.), Ageing and Youth Cultures. Music, Style and 
Identity. Berg.
Ensminger, D. (2010). Coloring Between the Lines of Punk and Hardcore: From 
Absence to Black Punk Power. Postmodern Culture, 20(2). https://doi.
org/10.1353/pmc.2010.0010
Fife, K. (2019). Not for You? Ethical Implications of Archiving Zines. Punk & 
Post-Punk, 8(2), 227–242.
Fogarty, M. (2012). Each One Teach One. In A. Bennett & P. Hodkinson (Eds.), 
Ageing and Youth Cultures: Music Style And Identity. Berg.
Fox, K. (2016, March 13). Happy Birthday Punk: The British Library Celebrates 
40 Years of Anarchy and Innovation. The Guardian. Retrieved September 13, 
2018, from https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/13/
punk-1976-1978-british-library-40th-anniversary-sex-pistols-buzzcocks
Fraser, M., & Haley, M. (2018). Building Punk Rock Collections at UCLA Library 
Special Collections. In N. Guthrie & S. Carlson (Eds.), Music Preservation and 
Archiving Today. Rowman and Littlefeld.
Frith, S. (1983). Sound Effects: Youth, Leisure and the Politics of Rock ‘n’ Roll. 
Constable.
Glasper, I. (2014). Burning Britain: The History of UK Punk 1980–1984. PM Press.
Glasper, I. (2020). The Scene That Would Not Die: Twenty Years of Post-Millennial 
Punk in the UK. Earth Island Books.
Grimes, M. (2020). ‘Life We Make’: Identity, Memory and British Anarcho-Punk.
PhD thesis, Birmingham City University, UK.
Haenfer, R. (2012). More than the Xs on My Hands: Older Straight Edgers and 
the Meaning of Style. In A. Bennett & P. Hodkinson (Eds.), Ageing and Youth 
Cultures: Music, Style and Identity. Berg.
Hodkinson, P. (2012). The Collective Ageing of a Goth Festival. In A. Bennett & 
P. Hodkinson (Eds.), Ageing and Youth Cultures: Music, Style and Identity. Berg.
Kortaba, J. (2002). Rock ‘n’ Roll Music as a Timepiece. Symbolic Interaction, 
25(3), 397–440.
Lahad, K. (2012). Singlehood, Waiting, and the Sociology of Time. Sociological 
Forum, 27, 163–186.
Liew, K.  K., & Williams, J.  P. (2012). Looking Beyond Music: Curating and 
Narrating Punk Subculture in Singapore. In R. Bestley, M. Dines, P. Guerra, & 
A.  Gordon (Eds.), Trans-Global Punk Scenes. The Punk Reader Volume 2. 
Intellect.
1 INTRODUCTION12
Lopez, T. M., & Mills, M. (2017). How to Forget (and Remember) ‘The Greatest 
Punk Rock Band in the World’: Bad Brains, Hardcore Punk and Black Popular 
Culture. In et  al. Youth Culture and Social Change. Palgrave Studies in the 
History of Subcultures and Popular Music. Palgrave Macmillan. https://doi.
org/10.1057/978-1-137-52911-4_8
McLoone, M. (2004). Punk Music in Northern Ireland: The Political Power of 
‘what might have been’. Irish Studies Review, 12(1), 29–38.
Nguyen, M. T. (2015). Minor Threats. Radical History Review, 122, 11–24.
Pickering, M. (2018). Popular Music and the Memory Spectrum. In S. Baker, 
C. Strong, L. Istvandity, & Z. Cantillon (Eds.), The Routledge Companion to 
Popular Music History and Heritage (pp. 191–198). Routledge.
Reddington, H. (2007). The Lost Women of Rock Music. Female Musicians of the 
Punk Era. Ashgate Publishing Limited.
Robinson, L. (2018). Exhibition Review Punk’s 40th Anniversary—An Itchy Sort 
of Heritage. Twentieth Century British History, 29(2), 309–317.
Schulkind, M. D., Hennis, L. K., & Rubin, D. C. (1999). Music, Emotion, and 
Autobiographical Memory: They’re Playing Your Song. Memory & Cognition, 
27(6), 948–955. https://doi.org/10.3758/bf03201225
Stewart, F. (2019). ‘No More Heroes Anymore’: Marginalized Identities in Punk 
Memorialisation and Curation. Punk & Post Punk, 8(2), 209–226.
Strong, C. (2011). Grunge: Music and Memory. Ashgate.
Torkelson, J. (2010). Life after (Straightedge) Subculture. Qualitative Sociology, 
33, 257–274. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11133-010-9153-1
Tsitsos, B. (2012). Slamdancing, Ageing and Belonging. In A.  Bennett & 
P. Hodkinson (Eds.), Ageing and Youth Cultures. Music, Style and Identity. Berg.
Vroomen, L. (2004). Kate Bush: Teen Pop and Older Female Fans. In A. Bennett 
& R.  Peterson (Eds.), Music Scenes: Local, Translocal and Virtual (p.  238). 
Vanderbilt University Press.
Ward, J.  B. (2019). Who Remembers Post-punk Women? Punk & Post-Punk, 
8(3), 379–397.
Way, L. (2019). ‘I don’t go to the gigs to go to the gigs—I don’t give a shit about 
the gigs!’: Exploring Gig Attendance and Older Punk Women. Punk & Post￾Punk, 8(2), 257–269.
Way, L. (2020). Punk, Gender and Ageing. Just Typical Girls?.
Way, L. (2021). Punk is just a state of mind: Exploring what punk means to older 
punk women. The Sociological Review, 69(1), 107–122.
Weinstein, D. (1995). Alternative Youth: The Ironies of Recapturing Youth 
Culture. Young, 3(1), 61–71.
Weinstein, D. (1999). Youth. In B.  Horner & T.  Swiss (Eds.), Key Terms in 
Popular Music and Culture. Blackwell Publishers.
Wiedlack, M. K. (2015). Queer-Feminsit Punk. An Anti-Social History.
L. WAY AND M. GRIMES13
Willmott, A. (2020). Oh Ageism Up Yours! Female Perspectives of Ageing and Punk 
Identities Across the Lifecourse. PhD thesis, University of Gloucestershire. 
https://doi.org/10.46289/QAZY7824
Worley, M. (2012). Shot by Both Sides: Punk, Politics and the End of ‘Consensus’. 
Contemporary British History, 26(3), 333–354.
Worley, M. (2017). No Future: Punk, Politics and British Youth Culture, 1976–1984.
Cambridge University Press.
Wyn, J., & Woodman, D. (2006). Generation, Youth and Social Change in 
Australia. Journal of Youth Studies, 9(5), 495–514.
1 INTRODUCTION© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 15
Switzerland AG 2024
L. Way, M. Grimes (eds.), Punk, Ageing and Time, Palgrave Studies 
in the History of Subcultures and Popular Music, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47823-9_2
CHAPTER 2
Rejecting and Resisting Ageism: Female 
Perspectives of Ageing with Punk
Alison Willmott
Introduction
We all age. It is (if we are lucky) an inevitable part of life and a biological 
fact. Asked to think about ageing, many people relate it to the bodily 
changes that come over time, not just the visual signifers of older age such 
as grey hair or wrinkled skin, but the ways bodies function or sometimes 
cease to function, for example aching backs or hearing loss. However, the 
cultural landscape of ageing encompasses far more than the body. Older 
people in Western societies are subject to cultural expectations that infu￾ence the way they look, act and spend their time, and this is restricting. 
Imagine your perfect old age: What does it look like? Aside from a decent 
income, it probably involves maintaining the freedom to be yourself, to 
retain values and interests that are important, to be yourself—just older. 
Perhaps there is the sense that there is extra freedom in being older, a 
liberation that comes from knowing yourself well and no longer caring 
what others think. Some people experience older age in exactly that way. 
A. Willmott (*) 
Cheltenham, UK16
I would qualify this—some older people initially think they do, until they 
examine the small ways in which expectations of age, and by this I mean 
ageism, permeate their daily lives. With a critical eye and an understanding 
of cultural gerontology, which will be explored shortly, the impact of cul￾tural pressures on the ageing life course can be better understood. This 
means acknowledging that changes made across the life course may be less 
about individual choice than a consequence of insidious cultural pressures 
that are often diffcult to identify and equally diffcult to resist. If ageism 
is understood as a disciplining structure of society, functioning in the same 
way as patriarchy, to keep older people quite literally in their place (in the 
domestic sphere, rather than in social spaces), then its startling reach 
becomes clearer. Resistance is vital and punk values are a part of the 
armoury. 
Cultural Expectations of Age and Why Women Are
Affected More
Early studies on ageing linked ageing with decline, creating a narrative 
that presented older age as something to be avoided and feared, and older 
people as somehow ‘other’. Conversely, competing theories of age have 
since developed and, while these initially appeared promising, have failed 
to address that narrative. For example, the theory of ‘successful ageing’ 
(Rowe & Kahn, 1987) might sound appealing, but its linking of ‘success’ 
with the continuation of youthful pursuits and looks nonetheless contin￾ues the binary of young = desirable versus old = undesirable. Older people 
who do not ft the criteria of successful ageing, including people who are 
disabled, are therefore positioned as unsuccessful (Chivers, 2017). 
Stereotypical representations of older age are typically heteronormative 
(Sandberg, 2016), and fail to include people of colour. The theoretical 
framework of cultural gerontology offers a different way of looking at age 
and casts an interrogative gaze on representations of older people. Cultural 
gerontology asserts that old age is represented by a spectrum of experi￾ences, each equally valid. It also enables age to be examined through the 
lens of culture, looking at how the depiction of older people contributes 
to their experience of age. Women are subject to extracultural pressures 
that do not reduce as they age, and punk women are subject to the same 
ageing expectations and ageism as everyone else.
A. WILLMOTT17
Older women are policed by a continual fow of cultural messages, not 
least in relation to ‘age appropriateness’ (Blaikie, 1999; Twigg, 2007), a 
concept designed to stife and limit, and applied to appearance and behav￾iour. It is perhaps diffcult to imagine that women who have resisted con￾vention throughout their lives would fnd themselves susceptible to age 
expectations but it is not that simple. Ageism must be recognised in order 
to resist it, but it is sneaky. Women may grow used to constant surveillance 
of their appearance and bodies, but this evolves as women become older. 
A woman conforming to the cultural pressure of age appropriateness may 
expect herself to be clad in a muted palette, not tight enough to reveal her 
ageing body, yet neat and tidy to reassure everyone that she maintains 
some control over signs of ageing—a beige and sensible cloak of invisibility. 
The ‘invisibility’ of older women is a familiar theme in ageing studies lit￾erature (Gullette, 2017). Given that older women are not actually invisi￾ble, what does this mean? It could be said that women are made to feel 
invisible when other people fail to respond to them, acknowledge their 
existence, or value their contributions. Twigg (2004) summarises the 
experience for older women as being ‘socially invisible’ (p. 62), denied 
power, denied male attention and no longer fully represented in media 
and advertisement images.
Visibility is about more than appearance. It connects to age stereotypes 
relegating older women to the domestic sphere, at home and out of sight. 
It also connects to cultural messages that position older women as passive 
and dull. Women who do not ft this mould can expect to be castigated. 
Assertive older women are often constructed as being eccentric or mad, no 
matter the content of their speech, their opinions too strongly held, their 
speech ‘too’ loud. Wilson (2014) warns that media representations of the 
‘mad old woman’ ‘perform a powerful regulatory purpose’ (p. 8). There 
may be some comfort in the notion that older age is indicative of experi￾ence and wisdom, deserving of respect. Yet this kind of aged wisdom is 
depicted as a time of quiet passivity and acceptance and leads to older 
people being silenced (Woodward, 2002) when the injustices of older age 
often invite rage. Other pressures result from the unequal division of 
household labour, and this shapes retirement. While many men in hetero￾sexual relationships continue their social lives unimpeded, women often 
take a hiatus for childcare, whether through choice or not. When women 
withdraw from social lives to look after children, then the reintroduction 
of a social life in later life can be problematic. In this scenario, women 
must re-enter social scenes. Reclaiming social spaces often means fnding 
2 REJECTING AND RESISTING AGEISM: FEMALE PERSPECTIVES OF AGEING…18
someone to go out with, or going out alone in the knowledge that this will 
be judged, a lone woman often a target for unwanted sexual attention. 
Women who have remained child free may feel an advantageous element 
of continuity, but the other factors remain, gathering pace silently across 
the life course. In 1988, Copper recognised that ‘ageism, not aging, 
oppresses us’ (p. 3). Yet ageism has not retreated in the following three 
decades, with Gullette’s (2017) more recent proclamation of ‘fear ageism, 
not ageing’ (p. xi), the prelude to an anti-ageism manifesto and a declara￾tion of grievances.
Punk Values across the Life Course
While women’s experiences of punk were not always non-sexist, punk 
offered women and girls opportunities to resist mainstream culture and 
stereotypical gender roles. There are shared subcultural features in punk, 
and together they create its ethos, its members often integrating the fol￾lowing traits into their lives: (1) DIY ethos, (2) anti-authority attitude and 
(3) unconventional appearance. From this starting point, it can be seen 
that there is potential for these values to be taken across the life course, 
punk tactics for shaping older age. Punk’s DIY ethos embraced the idea 
that anyone could have a go at anything (Reddington, 2007), and this 
extended beyond music—a willingness to make a noise is enough—to 
many other aspects of life. The DIY ethos went hand in hand with what 
Savage (1991) referred to as a forgotten part of punk: anti-consumerism. 
The practice of Bricolage (Hebdige, 1991), using everyday cultural objects 
to make something new, such as a bin liner to make a skirt, or the use of 
collage in artwork, epitomised a DIY approach. This can be seen as a skill 
to be deployed across the life course, not only in relation to concerns 
about the fnancial landscape of older age but in relation to having a go at 
new things, no matter what your age. An anti-authority attitude encom￾passes a questioning attitude, interrogating how society works and express￾ing discontent through protest and dissent. In relation to age, an 
anti-authority attitude is unlikely to fail to fnd an outlet, whether this is 
questioning the tyranny of age expectations or campaigning for pension 
justice for women. The third part of the punk ethos, an unconventional 
appearance, might function as an outward symbol of resistance, a sign that 
the wearer is not going to give in to cultural expectations of age and is 
determined to remain visible. Appearance is not part of punk culture for 
everyone, although the rejection of any focus on appearance can be a 
A. WILLMOTT19
feminist statement in itself. The ethos of punk invariably contains dichoto￾mies, such as the emphasis of individuality versus the conformity of ‘being 
punk’, yet in exploration of ageing and punk it is of negligible importance. 
This is because mainstream culture and cultural expectations are known to 
impose restrictions on older women. To divert from these surely offers 
liberation in some form. If women who identifed with punk retain a spirit 
of non-conformity, what shape, if any, does this take in older age? Are 
these women more able to resist wider social expectations of age? The fol￾lowing section explores the complexities.
Conflict between Punk and Ageing
Equipped with the punk ethos and an understanding of what it means to 
resist mainstream conformity, older punk women are theoretically well 
placed to age in a manner that suits them, their lives limited only by prag￾matic and fnancial constraints. With punk values securely safety pinned 
into place, women approach older age armed with the experience of dis￾sent and resistance: for example, resisting conforming to stereotypical 
notions of femininity and rejecting ‘age appropriateness’ as irrelevant and 
restricting. However, competing tensions between punk values and cul￾tural expectations of age persist. This can be partly attributed to the devi￾ous ways that age expectations seep into everyday culture, accepted as 
being representative of the ways that older people live, rather than an 
ageist pressure that infuences and restricts the way older people navigate 
their lives. This benefts from further exploration to understand how these 
tensions might be negotiated. The DIY ethos is in keeping with qualities 
that are often admired in women, a ‘can-do’ attitude for fnding solutions. 
Apply this to domestic challenges of managing a household budget, and 
this is a feminine superpower—watch her make do and mend, the thrifty 
domestic goddess. However, characterisations of women as passive endure 
throughout the life course, and similar ageist stereotypes depict older 
women as unproductive, dependent and timid (Rosenthal, 1990). 
Characterisations such as these potentially affect older women’s belief that 
they can try something new, or that they should make themselves visible 
by doing so. An anti-authority attitude can be about quietly rejecting 
unwanted authority and fnding another way. More often it is exemplifed 
by highly visible activities such as protest and dissent, whether this is 
through a large-scale demonstration or smaller acts of resistance. Cultural 
expectations of older age yet again come into play. Protest and dissent, for 
2 REJECTING AND RESISTING AGEISM: FEMALE PERSPECTIVES OF AGEING…20
example, take place in social spaces, the places that older women are not 
expected to inhabit. They are often loud—visible and vocal, things older 
women are not supposed to be. These are in confict with the seemingly 
positive correlations of old age and quiet wisdom. As Copper (1988, p. 8) 
warns, ‘the rebellious young share signals of their mutiny with other 
women of their own age. They have not thought about the possibility of a 
rebellious old woman’.
Punk women are theoretically well placed to resist cultural pressures to 
simmer down and blend in as they age. Women in the original era of punk 
often experienced insults and unhidden stares, ‘as if by dressing in “a cer￾tain way”, you gave up your rights as a woman to be respected’ (O’Brien, 
1999, p. 193). Maintaining a non-conformist appearance, despite censure 
from others, is surely a skill with which to resist ageism. However, the 
cumulative effect of encroaching ageism, the invisibilisation of older 
women and the expectation that older people should somehow ‘give way’ 
to younger generations as if there is only enough attention to go round—
these can have a corrosive effect. This creates a dichotomy between punk 
values and ageing.
Outline of Research
This chapter draws on the author’s doctoral research. This feminist 
research, which explored the experience of ageing for older women in the 
UK who identifed with original-era punk, was undertaken from an inter￾disciplinary ageing studies perspective. Ageing/age studies evolved from 
cultural studies and includes the representation of age in culture. In my 
case, this included subculture, using punk as a tool to examine age, rather 
than solely looking at ageing within subculture. The research addressed a 
research gap, where punk and ageing have been explored, but the experi￾ences of women neglected. Nineteen women aged 50 to 65 were inter￾viewed for the research between 2017 and 2018, the qualifying criteria 
being (a) aged 50+, (b) identifed with original era/1970s punk in the 
UK, the latter being self-defned. The women in the study were from 
England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, and interviews lasted an 
average of one hour each. Following thematic analysis, fve themes were 
identifed, two of which are explored in this chapter: the ‘Punk Toolkit’, 
the ‘Feminist Toolkit’ alongside a smaller element, ‘Moments of 
Conformity’ to illuminate the female experience of ageing with punk. 
Findings suggested that ageist cultural pressures are powerful, and this 
A. WILLMOTT21
often results in a time-consuming inner narrative, whereby exhortations to 
be ‘age-appropriate’ and those to ‘resist conformity’ or ‘be individual’ are 
pitted against each other. The punk side often wins, but it is a tiresome 
process, indicative of the tyranny of ageism.
The Punk Toolkit
In the fght against ageism, the punk toolkit is a necessity. The concept of 
the punk toolkit arose as a result of discussions about what punk means to 
the women in the study, the values they take from it and how these are 
manifested across the life course. Exploration of how punk values are 
embedded into everyday life gave rise to practical examples of how they 
impact on the way punk women live their lives: actions, decisions and 
strategies for negotiating life. Woven into this was a research question 
asked of all participants: ‘If you could take one thing from punk and pass 
it on, what would it be?’ Answers encouraged exploration of the aspects of 
punk that are meaningful to women, and their use across the life course 
was examined. This resulted in the characterisation of the punk ethos as a 
toolkit. This concept also acknowledges that while there are commonali￾ties, people take different things from punk and interpret its ethos in an 
individual fashion. The toolkit offers a punk  favoured pick n mix that 
women can use or ignore in a way that suits them. It is important to note 
that changing priorities and interests across the life course, amongst other 
factors, mean that individual elements of the punk toolkit may be used for 
a time, become less important, and then are picked up again. That is the 
beauty of the punk toolkit. It remains there waiting for the right moment.
If the punk toolkit can be organised into broad themes, these would be:
• Be yourself—Don’t conform
• Question Authority
• Have Attitude
• Be open—minded
• You can do anything—just do it
The broadness of these themes suggests a freedom to interpret them in 
a way that suits the user. The infuence of the three overarching punk val￾ues—the anti-authority attitude, DIY ethos and unconventional appear￾ance—can clearly be seen. The punk toolkit offers strategies for life, and 
while the stereotypical, eye-catching nature of punk suggests that this 
2 REJECTING AND RESISTING AGEISM: FEMALE PERSPECTIVES OF AGEING…22
means bold gestures, confrontation and confict, a big ‘fuck you’ to any￾thing a punk woman does not agree with, this defnition is not representa￾tive of all older women’s experiences. Cultural gerontology maintains that 
older age encompasses a spectrum of experiences, and so it is for punk 
women. The punk toolkit is versatile because each element can be inter￾preted in a way that suits the individual. For example, at one end of the 
spectrum ‘Question Authority’ can be used as a basis for political protest, 
or the underpinning of anarchist beliefs and their expression in lifestyle 
choices. However, ‘question authority’ can also be integrated more subtly 
into everyday life. This might mean simply remembering that hierarchies, 
including those at work, can be questioned, or being mindful that media 
rhetoric should be challenged. As the media endlessly perpetuates ageist 
tropes, the punk toolkit is valuable to an older woman.
Moving onto ‘You can do anything—just do it’, this has power in the 
face of ageist restrictions on how an older woman lives her life, and there 
is a parallel with ‘be yourself—don’t conform’. Cultural pressures mean 
that older women can feel that certain activities become out of bounds 
across the life course. Even if these pressures are resisted, they can create 
uncertainty. These succinct aide memoires from the punk toolkit provide 
something to hold onto, when ageist pressures threaten to erode a sense 
of identity or purpose. Putting these statements to use recalls the question￾ing outlook of punk culture. However, it must be noted that it is the per￾vasive and insidious nature of ageism that creates diffculty. When ageism 
is not recognised for what it is, then it is diffcult to provide that coun￾ter argument of ‘well, I am going to do it’, or ‘this is what I want to do/
look like—this is me’.
Have ‘attitude’ is a resistance tactic against undercover ageism. 
Statements made about older women are often less complimentary than 
they originally seem—ageist insults in disguise. For example, ‘you don’t 
look it!’ in response to revealing age (it is not an insult to look your age). 
Statements about older age and wisdom or knowledge are also under￾pinned with constraining tropes about older age. When older age is repre￾sented in this way, it is generally portrayed as a particular kind of quiet 
wisdom and passivity, a knowing that comes from age and experience, 
effectively outlawing anger in older people and dismissing older people’s 
voices (Woodward, 2002). Drawing on a sense of punk attitude is the 
antidote to being silenced by cultural expectations of age. If punk women 
refuse to be censored in the way they speak, or in speaking out, this is a 
A. WILLMOTT23
useful tactic of resistance against ageism and a rejection of age 
stereotypes.
Feminist Toolkit
Not all punk women are feminists, and many actively reject the label of 
‘feminist’. If feminism is considered in the context of an anti-authority 
punk ethos, this is hardly a surprise. Reddington (2016) found that some 
1970s punk women perceived feminism as ‘another set of rules’ (p. 96), 
and despite the integration of anti-sexist and questioning narratives, Raha 
(2005) noted that many women in the 1970s punk scene preferred to 
construct an identity of their own making, rejecting being labelled as 
either feminist or punk. This sentiment was echoed by a minority of the 
participants in my own study, but this does not necessarily mean the rejec￾tion of principles that can be considered feminist. The feminist toolkit 
pulls together strategies for life for punk women, and they mirror those in 
the punk toolkit, but with emphasis on resisting sexism, misogyny and 
gender stereotypes and negotiating a life course in a patriarchy. The broad 
themes in the feminist toolkit are as follows:
• Fuck the patriarchy
• Reject gender stereotypes
• Refuse sexist language
• Take up space
• Be heard
These fve elements of the feminist toolkit can be used by women of any 
age, but when gendered expectations become embedded into the ageism 
that older women are subject to, they become especially relevant. Fuck the 
patriarchy expands on an anti-authority attitude, acknowledging that 
patriarchal structures and systems within the UK automatically disadvan￾tage women. In older age, recent pension reforms that disadvantage 
women have given rise to female organisations such as Women Against 
State Pension Inequality (WASPI) (https://www.waspi.co.uk/), and this 
is a direction that punk women, with experience of protest and dissent, 
can get their teeth into. The rejection of gender stereotypes—and sexist 
language can be included here—fnds no shortage of targets in female 
older age. An older woman with a younger partner can expect censure, a 
sense that this is not quite normal behaviour for an older woman, 
2 REJECTING AND RESISTING AGEISM: FEMALE PERSPECTIVES OF AGEING…24
combined with disbelief that she could be found attractive by this person 
who, by virtue of youth, is granted an automatic allure. Older men can 
expect their younger partner to be far more acceptable. Punk women have 
form when it comes to rejecting stereotypes, and indeed this was part of 
the appeal for many women.
For women in the 1970s who had had enough of gender conformity 
and the idea that women needed to ‘get ready’ to go out, punk provided 
an alternative and could be expressed with an appearance that reinforced 
punk women’s agency to do as they pleased. While there is no doubt that 
patriarchal norms were played out in punk culture as they were in main￾stream culture, punk provided options (Reddington, 2003). This included 
freedom not to conform to stereotypical feminine appearance (Bayton, 
1998), to reject any emphasis on appearance (get ready to go out? Just 
GO OUT) and to query the desirability of motherhood and a rejection of 
feminine socialised traits, such as subsuming one’s own ambitions for oth￾ers. Restrictive gender stereotypes in older age include the notion that 
women welcome ‘grandmother’ as a defning role, sidelining their own 
late careers and interests. There are further gender and age stereotypes to 
resist. Older women can expect, regardless of whether they are parents or 
are actually child-free, to be characterised as mothers and grandmothers. 
The tendency to refer to older women as ‘like a grandmother’ or ‘like a 
mum’ imposes a caring responsibility and maternal nature. When it comes 
to age-related sexist language, a punk woman might fnd herself spoilt for 
choice. Crone, hag, mad cat lady or spinster would justifably be rejected 
for the malicious intent behind the words. However, an older punk woman 
might consider reclaiming some words. One participant in my study told 
me that she was reclaiming ‘spinster’ for herself, taking pride in the bare 
facts of being a single older woman, rejecting negative associations that 
other people attach to it and refusing to be defned by other people.
Women are socialised to consider other people’s feelings before making 
themselves heard and also to keep their bodies to themselves: legs together, 
limbs tucked in (Ahmed, 2017). The phrase ‘be ladylike’ exists to keep 
women in their place in a most literal way, with an awareness of how they 
seem to others dictating their every move. Older women are extremely 
likely to have been subject to these kinds of gendered restrictions as chil￾dren and young women, and old habits die hard. The feminist toolkit 
reminds women to use their bodies and voices to reject gendered expecta￾tions. This advice comes from punk women who have found these tactics 
invaluable as part of the armoury against gendered restrictions and 
A. WILLMOTT25
misogyny. Women who identify with punk have often used their voices 
and physicality to be heard (Reddington, 2007). Applying a DIY ethos to 
vocals meant rejecting the idea of a ‘nice’ singing voice and being willing 
to make some noise. The DIY approach has been disparaged as ‘derivative, 
inadequate and immature’ when displayed by women (Downes, 2012, 
p. 215) but making noise has a wider function for females, whose voices 
are softer than males, producing a sound that is not easily ignored, and the 
ramifcations of this extend further than music-making.
Moments of Conformity
Conforming to restrictive age expectations is surely something to be 
resisted, yet ‘conformity’ is a subjective experience. Punk women often 
approach older age with existing experiences of conformity, and this isn’t 
necessarily detrimental. Identifying with punk is not synonymous with 
being a punk or excluding other interests. An innate punk ethos, expressed 
in the values that have been explored, does not have to be matched with a 
punk aesthetic or activities. Punk women often experience moments of 
conformity throughout their lives. These often result from social and cul￾tural pressures at certain moments in time or place, and these pressures 
ebb and fow throughout the life course. The pressures are not just from 
mainstream culture: Gregory (2009) found that other people within sub￾cultures also project expectations that participation should cease at a cer￾tain age or stage (e.g. motherhood) in life. Appearance is the most visible 
manifestation of punk culture but punk women experience moments of 
conformity in ways that may not be obvious to others. The challenge of 
retaining a punk identity, whilst recognising cultural pressures of how a 
mother ‘should’ be, is diffcult to avoid. An older punk woman might fnd 
that her conformity is viewed as a ‘natural’ part of ageing, entirely appro￾priate for her stage in life. Haenfer’s (2014) observation of a spectrum of 
participation across subculture practices suggests an ebb and fow of 
attachment across the life course, and so moments of conformity are 
hardly unexpected. This chapter has already discussed the barriers that 
older women encounter in re-entering social scenes, and while punk scenes 
are often perceived as being welcoming to older people, this does not 
necessarily counterbalance the ageist inner narrative that may be whisper￾ing ‘stay at home, this is not for you’. This suggests the value of the punk 
toolkit in establishing punk values that can be put down and picked up at 
2 REJECTING AND RESISTING AGEISM: FEMALE PERSPECTIVES OF AGEING…26
will. As age expectations creep in, resistance to conformity can become an 
ongoing negotiation.
Balancing the Tension: Ageist Pressures versus
Punk Values
So what is it like to negotiate older age in this way? Punk women experi￾ence, observe and indeed perpetuate ageism in the same way that everyone 
else does. They are not immune to cultural expectations of age, which is 
barely surprising, given how these expectations have been permeating 
their consciousness for decades. Expectations of age are powerful. 
However, the punk ethos provides strategies—an internal set of punk val￾ues, which can be drawn on across the life course. Think of this as a ‘punk 
favoured pick n mix’ (Willmott, 2020) comprising the punk and feminist 
toolkits that can be dipped into when the need arises. The effect of cul￾tural expectations of older age is a constant awareness of age. The most 
immediate manifestation of this is in the notion of ‘age-appropriateness’. 
No matter how determined you are to maintain individuality, it is diffcult 
to avoid messages about ‘age-appropriateness’. Online lists of ‘Things that 
women over ffty should NEVER wear!!’ are an obvious culprit, but 
women also absorb these messages through the marketing of clothes and 
cosmetics, through ‘anti-ageing’ adverts and through the more subtle dis￾approval of those around them. Ageism can be seen in the way that spec￾tacular style is often construed as eccentricity or madness if the wearer is 
older. Compliance suggests being muted in colour and voice. Many punk 
women reject this version of older age, drawing on values of individuality 
and being yourself but they are nonetheless affected. Resistance takes 
effort, even when the thing being resisted is your own internal narrative 
about what to wear. One visibly punk woman described her rejection of 
external pressures.
My husband said “you’re not meant to wear tight jeans at ffty”. Are you not—
oh well. You know what, I don’t give a fuck…He said it, no, how did he phrase 
it? It was “they say” I think was the phrase. He’d read something some￾where …I’m not bothered, I don’t care. I never have cared. Well I have, I’ve told 
you I have cared but I’ve decided not to care if you know what I mean.
(Michele, age 53)
A. WILLMOTT27
Michele describes how unattributed ‘they’ views are reiterated. Michele 
resists and rejects the idea that tight jeans should not be worn by older 
women, but nonetheless the thought has been imposed on her, to be 
remembered. It lurks, waiting to ruin every straightforward decision about 
getting dressed. Women drawing on punk and feminist values often 
encounter the paradox of deciding not to care what other people think. 
Ageing punk women, having ‘not cared’ more effortlessly in their youth 
and seeing this as part of the punk ethos, often make a more conscious 
effort not to care (what others think about them) as they age. Other punk 
women experience this differently: for example, drawing on the feminist 
toolkit’s ‘reject gender stereotypes’, with ‘take up space’ and ‘be heard’ 
being more valuable ways of maintaining visibility. Several women in the 
study articulated their punk ethos as giving them the freedom not to be/
do/look punk at all, noting the dichotomy of being non-conformist, 
while conforming to subcultural norms.
I heard quite recently somebody saying you know as you get older you do have to 
put in a lot more attention to yourself, make sure that you’re presented, because 
you can’t carry off the scruffy look. I’ve always been quite scruffy, always, and 
being a young girl you can but I don’t think I could, you know that’s how I am 
and I don’t think I’m ever going to be well groomed…I don’t care. I don’t care. 
I am a punk still (laughs), I am going to be scruffy still. (Liz, age 51)
Liz perceives that the acceptability of being ‘scruffy’ lessens as a woman 
gets older. This epitomises the insidiousness of cultural messages about 
how an older woman should be and can be related to the increasing harsh￾ness with which ‘lapses’ of dress are judged as a person ages (Twigg, 
2007), a symptom of ‘social and moral decline’ (p. 295). Twigg’s fndings 
perhaps relate to much older age and judgements of not being able to 
cope or cognitive impairment, but, as Liz’s comments suggest, these fears 
and judgements weave their way into consciousness, with internalised age￾ism and misogyny combining to limit how an older woman expresses her￾self. Conversely, a punk appearance can disrupt expectations of age. 
Examples of this are someone expressing disbelief at a punk woman’s age 
in a way that is different to the typical ‘oh you don’t look it’ ageism. 
Women in the study talked about these encounters as someone’s gaze 
stopping at subcultural aspects of their appearance such as ear stretchers, 
unusual hair or even high fashion (which they might expect to see on 
someone younger) and somehow failing to notice wrinkles or other signs 
2 REJECTING AND RESISTING AGEISM: FEMALE PERSPECTIVES OF AGEING…28
of age. Subcultural style can confuse the onlooker in relation to age, mak￾ing ageism just that little bit trickier to enforce. Cultural expectations of 
age also manifest themselves in internal narratives assessing whether you 
are in the ‘right’ place for your age. This leads to judgements as to whether 
that place feels comfortable. Do you feel at home? Or welcome? This con￾stant awareness of age can also be recognised in daily calculations of age in 
relation to the people around. Where do you ft on that spectrum of age? 
It is a rare woman that does not make these calculations, an internalisation 
of the ageism and age awareness that orders society. These calculations 
expand beyond people to include places.
When I was in my thirties, going to a disco at the university and thinking 
mmm I’m probably pushing my luck here, probably a bit too old. That kind of 
thing. On the other hand, I’ve been to cinema where it’s been all old people and 
then I’ve thought oh I’m the youngest here. (Caroline, 53)
This is where the impact of internalised ageism can really be felt, because 
this particular form of ageism is rarely recognised as such. It may be instead 
rationalised as an individual sense of discomfort due to not going out so 
frequently or being unfamiliar with a place. But let’s name it for what it 
is—it is an ‘ageist forcefeld’ (Willmott, 2020, p. 86), so named because of 
its intangible nature. You can’t see it, but you know it’s there! The punk 
and feminist toolkits offer strategies. Bennett (2013) has detailed some 
pragmatic changes that older male punks experience in relation to gig 
going in older age, and many of these are shared with women. These 
include changes to gig-going, such as choosing to stand towards the back 
of the room, away from the chaos of the moshpit as self-protective mea￾sures, underpinned by an awareness of the reality of ageing bodies. This is 
not about accepting an older-age/decline narrative but understanding 
that bodies reveal the impact of years of use, manifesting in a decreasing 
ability to tolerate long hours of dancing or drinking. One participant in 
my study noted some intergenerational antagonism on a night out, over￾hearing younger punk women mocking the appearance of an older punk 
woman. This may connect more to the ageist scrutiny of older women’s 
appearance, rather than questions of place. However, the punk toolkit’s 
internalised values and tactics can engender self confdence in older age, 
rendering the judgements of others less relevant, the twinning of attitude 
and age confdence epitomised by ‘I feel like I’ve now got the maturity to 
carry off, what I was trying to carry off thirty-fve years ago…The not 
A. WILLMOTT29
giving a fuck I think’ (Kat, 51). One participant noted the advantage she 
held in having always been non-conformist, whether this was in the way 
she looked, her attitude to parenting and domesticity or her views. 
Observing that the way she expresses herself avoids comment because 
being non-conformist conforms to her norms, she had the opportunity to 
draw comparisons with more conventional age-peers. She identifed a clear 
element of apprehension in standing out, if this is something new in older 
age. Holland (2004) noted that ‘getting away with it’, subculturally speak￾ing (p126), in older age relies on an existing subcultural appearance, rather 
than a sudden change.
I think it’s more acceptable for me because people know me and I’ve never been 
any different. (Wendy, 65)
There is a strand of ageism that suggests that trying new things, espe￾cially being new and bad at something, is not quite right in older age. If 
older women are expected to live their lives in this way, as if older age is a 
‘stage’ where the learning has already been done, then they are restricted. 
However, punk gave many women the impetus they needed to make 
themselves visible and have a go at things, without having to be good at 
them frst. The experience for many older punk women is that being punk 
models a way of negotiating new things in later life, and this is signifcant 
for retirement. The prospect of retirement brings a feeling of anticipation 
that is not solely about having free time. Even if women have not felt espe￾cially restricted in their workplaces, the possibility of leaving brings the 
relationship between work and conformity into sharp focus, even if the 
‘moment’ has only taken place in work hours. Retirement provides the 
opportunity to pick up the thread of punk values, using it to shape an 
individual retirement. One woman in the study contrasted her retirement 
plans with those of more conventional age peers, noting that they appeared 
to conform to expectations of a sedate older age:
Do sensible things when you go on holiday and hire a car. ‘Don’t use public 
transport.’ I think it’s just, some of my peers that have retired, ‘well we like long 
country walks, oh we don’t fy anywhere, we don’t want to go abroad’…. I think 
some people regard it as almost like getting ready for the end of their life. 
(Josie, 64)
2 REJECTING AND RESISTING AGEISM: FEMALE PERSPECTIVES OF AGEING…30
Josie feels able to resist and reject ageist cultural pressures herself, plan￾ning a retirement that includes travel, music and a move to a city. A punk￾infuenced retirement resists expectations of what retirement should look 
like and rejects the ageism that informs that narrative. Ultimately, older 
punk women juxtapose their ageing experiences with a punk ethos which 
remains of signifcance across the ageing life course. This offers a compel￾ling way of maintaining agency and a sense of continuity across the life 
course. Ageist cultural pressures are powerful, and while they can be dis￾rupted, it isn’t straightforward. The result is often a time-consuming inner 
narrative, whereby exhortations to be ‘age-appropriate’ and exhortations 
to ‘resist conformity’ or ‘be individual’ are pitted against each other. The 
punk ethos is a valuable tool for resisting and rejecting the ageism that 
threatens an autonomous and individual older age—the punk and feminist 
toolkits perfectly placed for disruption.
References
Ahmed, S. (2017). Living a Feminist Life. Duke University Press.
Bayton, M. (1998). Frock Rock: Women Performing Popular Music. Oxford 
University Press.
Bennett, A. (2013). Music, Style and Aging: Growing Old Disgracefully. Temple 
University Press.
Blaikie, A. (1999) Ageing and Popular Culture, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press
Chivers, S. (2017). Cripping Care Advice: Austerity, Advice Literature, and the 
Troubled Link Between Disability and Old Age, at Aging/Disability Symposium. 
Ryerson University.
Copper, B.  B. (1988). Over the Hill: Refections on Ageism Between Women, 
California: The Crossing Press.
Downes, J. (2012). The Expansion of Punk Rock: Riot Grrrl Challenges to Gender 
Power Relations in British Indie Music Subcultures. Women’s Studies, 
41, 204–237.
Gregory, J. (2009). Too Young to Drink, Too Old to Dance: The Infuences of 
Age and Gender on (Non) Rave Participants. Dancecult: Journal of Electronic 
Dance Music Culture, 1(1), 65–80.
Gullette, M. M. (2017). Ending Ageism: Or, How Not to Shoot Old People. Rutgers 
University Press.
Haenfer, R. (2014). Subcultures: The Basics. Routledge.
Hebdige, D. (1991). Subculture: The Meaning of Style. Routledge.
Holland, S. (2004). Alternative Femininities. BERG.
A. WILLMOTT31
O’Brien, L. (1999). The Woman Punk Made Me. In R. Sabin (Ed.), Punk Rock: 
So What? (pp. 186–198). Routledge.
Raha, M. (2005). Cinderella’s Big Score: Women of the Punk and Indie Underground. 
Seal Press.
Reddington, H. (2003). ’Lady’ Punks in Bands: A Subculturette? In D. Muggleton 
& R. Weinzierl (Eds.), The Post-Subcultures Reader (pp. 239–252). Berg.
Reddington, H. (2007). The Lost Women of Rock Music: Female Musicians of the 
Punk Era. Ashgate.
Reddington, H. (2016). The Political Pioneers of Punk: (Just Don’t Mention the 
F-word). In M.  Dines & M.  Worley (Eds.), The Aesthetic of Our Anger: 
Anarcho-Punk, Politics and Music (pp. 91–116). Minor Compositions.
Rosenthal, E. (Ed.). (1990). Women, Ageing and Ageism. Harrington Press.
Rowe, J. W., & Kahn, R. L. (1987). Human Aging: Usual and Successful. Science, 
237, 143–149.
Sandberg, L. (2016). Towards a Happy Ending? Positive Ageing, Heteronormativity 
and Un/happy Intimacies. Lamda Nordica, 20(4), 19–44.
Savage, J. (1991). England’s Dreaming: Sex Pistols and Punk Rock. Faber and Faber.
Twigg, J. (2004) ‘The Body, Gender and Age: Feminist Insights in Social 
Gerontology’ in Journal of Aging Studies, 18(1), pp. 59–73
Twigg, J. (2007). Clothing, Age and the Body: A Critical Review. Ageing and 
Society, 27, 285–305.
Willmott, A. (2020). Oh Ageism Up Yours! Female Perspectives of Ageing and 
Punk Identities Across the Lifecourse. Unpublished PhD thesis. https://
eprints.glos.ac.uk/9297/
Wilson, S. (2014). She’s Been Away: Ageing, Madness and Memory. In 
U. Kriebernegg, R. Maierhofer, & B. Ratzenböck (Eds.), Alive and Kicking at 
All Ages: Cultural Constructions of Health and Life Course Identity (pp. 1–19). 
Transcript.
Woodward, K. (2002). Against Wisdom: The Social Politics of Anger and Aging. 
Cultural Critique, 51, 186–218. https://www.waspi.co.uk/
2 REJECTING AND RESISTING AGEISM: FEMALE PERSPECTIVES OF AGEING…© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 33
Switzerland AG 2024
L. Way, M. Grimes (eds.), Punk, Ageing and Time, Palgrave Studies 
in the History of Subcultures and Popular Music, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47823-9_3
CHAPTER 3
Lifestyle and Memory: Profling Two 
Generations of Ageing Czech Male Punks
Ondrˇej Daniel
Introduction
This study draws on research funded by Czech Science Foudation: GA Č
R 
24-12087S Negotiating the Revolt in Czech and Slovak Postsocialist 
Transition.  It  considers the ageing of two generations of Czech male 
punks, who were born respectively in the 1960s or 1970s and the 1980s 
or 1990s and were active in the 2010s. Its core is the analysis of different 
life experiences connected with ageing punks. Punk became a more-than￾one generation commitment which resulted in specifc intergenerational 
solidarities as well as in some tensions. Here, I consider predominantly 
controversies and differences between older and younger Czech punks, 
and I link them in particular with their ageing. Generational conficts 
among Czech punks are of relatively rich variety; here, I propose to con￾centrate only on those layers that can be considered as illuminating due to 
the specifc context of punk in postsocialist Europe, in particular 
that of different understandings of punk in relation to the Communist 
O. Daniel (*) 
Charles University, Prague, Czechia34
dictatorship on the one hand and neoliberal capitalism on the other. First, 
older punks may play roles of either legends or bad models for younger 
ones, with younger generations of Czechs sometimes described in the 
emic narratives as more prude than older ones (e.g. Dedek & Vlc ̌ ek, ̌
2012). Second, the lifestyle differences were also often politicized. The 
frst punk generation in this study has drawn its subcultural capital from its 
recollections of state socialism, memories that have mostly led to its fer￾vent anti-communism. For the second generation, state socialism was gen￾erally no longer an issue, and its members were more committed to various 
anti-capitalist struggles. While asking about the different meanings of 
punk, in this chapter I underline lifestyle and memory differences as mutu￾ally reinforcing. I examine these two layers here by focusing on specifc 
practices connected with the idea of home and family, in particular relation 
to the ageing male punk body.
Generations and Punk Masculinities
Studying “generations” draws back to the work of Karl Mannheim (1928). 
In this theory, the term is linked with a similar age group infuenced by 
same historical references crucial for the socialization of the individual. 
For the frst group of Czech punks, such crucial historical period was the 
last decade of Communist dictatorship in Czechoslovakia, its isolation 
from the West as the global cultural core and shared references to the life 
in Soviet bloc. Second group of punks shared generational references to 
the period of the aftermath of economic crisis in 2008 and different strug￾gles that followed the period of austerity in the late 2000s and early 2010s 
and saw itself importantly tied not only to Occupy Wall Street and differ￾ent European social movements but also to Jasmine revolution, Gezi pro￾tests or Kurdish autonomy in Rojava. It could be tempting to frame 
differences among these two punk cohorts as those between boomers and 
millennials, but both these labels are often depreciative, and furthermore 
they do not fully correspond to profling of Czech punks.
In this study, I focus on ageing of male punks and stress four issues 
anchored around ageing masculinity (Jackson, 2016). First, I question 
meanings connected with punk in the understanding of different ageing 
punks. Then I turn to the question of memory, heritage and exploiting the 
past. Further question of conceptualization of home relates in discussed 
material also to different understandings of rural masculinity. This was 
conceived as relational, contextual, intersectional and multi-scalar (Pini & 
O. DANIEL35
Mayes, 2020). Finally, in relation to materiality of body and family subsis￾tence, fatherhood is discussed. Helena Wahlström Henriksson (2020) 
analysed it in terms of presence and provision on the one hand and legiti￾macy and access on the other.
When discussing masculinity in relation to music, Sam de Boise pointed 
to punk with reference to Matthew Worley (2017), who differenti￾ated between
stress on sonic markers associated with (white) working-class men’s leisure 
activities (inspired by football chants) as well as a lyrical and sub cultural 
stress on physical toughness, aggression and self-suffciency (de Boise, 
2020, p. 416)
and “gender-subversive aspects of punk style and ethos”. As there is more 
than one generation of Czech punks as well as a whole array of different 
sub-scenes, there is thus a whole scale of possibilities to perform punk 
masculinities between these two poles.
Punk between Subculture and Legacy
The debate about  the analytical category of subculture seems far from 
being over. Here, I refer to the critique of the overuse of the concept 
(Hesmondhalgh, 2005), as well as to its careful renaissance, especially in 
the British academic environment (Gildart et al., 2020). Punk music and 
lifestyle can also be perfectly analysed in terms of different taste fractions, 
particular styles, different local or regional scenes and temporal waves. On 
the other hand, it remains still the frst (Hebdige, 1979) and possibly also 
the last subculture (Clark, 2003), understood as a distinctive model for 
other “formations of style” that may correspond with more diffculties to 
this category. Here, I borrow from these endless debates the notion of 
subcultural capital (Thornton, 1995) pointing to the lack or abundance of 
prestige and resulting status differences. The notion evolves from the cul￾tural sociology of Pierre Bourdieu (1979), and negotiation of subcultural 
capital in punk is also provided by emic evaluation of authenticity (Lewin 
& Williams, 2009).
In its soon to be half-century of existence, punk also has become a cul￾tural heritage or a legacy (Sabin, 1999), studied beyond the United 
Kingdom not only in the context of 1990s  US “Triumphant Empire” 
(Pearson, 2021) but also as a global phenomenon (Patton, 2018; Bestley 
3 LIFESTYLE AND MEMORY: PROFILING TWO GENERATIONS OF AGEING…36
& Dines, 2018). Particularly pertinent for the context of this study are 
different aims to analyse punk in the postsocialist space. Unsurprisingly, 
among the frst works to write about punk in Eastern Europe in the inter￾national academia, we also fnd a British scholar (Pilkington, 2012). 
Important works in different national languages preceded but their recep￾tion was usually limited locally (e.g. Aksiutina, 2005; Fuchs, 2002; 
Perasović, 2001). Only later, different works about punk in postsocialist 
space were published internationally, either as large collaborations focus￾ing on different sub-scenes in chosen urban settings (Golobov et  al., 
2014) or in a strict focus to local (Muršic, ̌ 2009; Císar & Koubek, ̌ 2012) 
or national scenes (Marciniak, 2015; Hammer, 2017; Ventsel, 2020).
Punk and Ageing
Many of these works however study different aspects of punk than those 
crucial for this discussion of punk ageing. The issue of intergenerational 
relations and ageing in Polish punk was opened by sociologist Marta 
Marciniak (2015), who has examined the coming of age of a legendary 
hardcore punk band Dezerter. Marciniak has stressed both, the formative 
experience of living under Communist dictatorship for the band and its 
uneasiness with becoming a role model for the following generation of 
hardcore punks. In the Hungarian case, many important questions resid￾ing from different understandings of punk in the 1980s and 2010s were 
covered by the documentary of Lucile Chaufour (2012) entitled East 
Punk Memories. These had particular to do with the relation to the anti￾communism and resulting far-right leanings of many Hungarian punks. In 
the not-so-fully polarized Czech case, a pivotal work can be considered 
that of the geographer Michaela Pixová (2011), who pointed frst to the 
generational differences in understanding of punk before and after the fall 
of Soviet-backed regime. Another important research focusing on a local 
scene in a rather long-term perspective of 1990s–2010s, in a small town in 
Eastern Moravia Rožnov pod Radhoštem (later referred as Ro ̌ žnov), was 
published by anthropologist Bob Kurík ( ̌ 2018).
An illuminating documentary, part of the Czech Television series of 
Kmeny (Tribes), depicted also important lifestyle differences between 
older and younger punks. Its director, Daniela Gébová (2015), put in 
juxtaposition a legendary 1980s and 1990s punk of Petr “Sid” 
Hošek  (1967–2023), fuelled by drugs and alcohol, and a generation 
younger drummer of band “Pipes and Pints” Lukáš Vincour, who 
O. DANIEL37
advocated animal rights and a healthy lifestyle. Tension between their dif￾ferent understandings of punk lifestyles was one of direct impulses feeding 
into this research. The lifestyle split nevertheless does not fully copy the 
generational one. In the frst third of the 1990s, one part of the Czech 
hardcore punk scene adopted the “straight edge” mode originating in the 
1980s American hardcore rejecting alcohol, cigarettes and other drugs 
and, to a large extent also, animal products and sexual promiscuity. In a 
fascinating account about American “straight edge” scenes, Ross Haenfer 
(2006) focused also on ageing while presenting different consequences 
“straight edge” had for older hardcore punks. One of them was that the 
asceticism became for many of them eventually a social burden, while for 
some of them the age meant deeper refection and commitment replacing 
the earlier embracing of “straight edge” as fashion. Further issues of punk 
and ageing have been studied since the end of 1990s (Andes, 1998), with 
particular commitment by Andy Bennett (2006, 2013, 2018) and collab￾orators (Bennett & Taylor, 2012; Woodman & Bennett, 2015). One of 
the important questions raised in this research was the question of appro￾priateness of such presumably “disgraceful” style for aged punks. More 
importantly for the approach in this study, Bennett and his collaborators 
also stressed topics of family and work as well as of ageing punk bodies. 
Ageing female punks were studied by Laura Way (2020, 2021), who 
pointed to the relevance of their DIY practices for subversion and specifc 
political consciousness. The very topic of tensions between older punks 
“often seeking to differentiate themselves from the naivety, exhibitionism 
and competitiveness they attribute to the young” and young ones was 
studied by Paul Hodkinson (2013), who also called for research on “refer￾ence to the attitude and orientation of younger participants vis-a-vis their 
elders as well as the other way around.” In result, this study aims to answer 
his call, in relation to the Czech punk of the 2010s.
Methodology and Sources
I am a relative outsider of Czech punk, born at the very end of the 1970s 
in between the two studied generations. I have listened to some punk 
records since the early 1990s and participated in several punk shows since, 
but my cultural references were broader. I remain nevertheless infuenced 
by punk ethics and aesthetics and have reconnected to hardcore punk 
through my younger colleagues and students during political mobiliza￾tions of the early 2010s. One of my motivations to write this study 
3 LIFESTYLE AND MEMORY: PROFILING TWO GENERATIONS OF AGEING…38
departed from my caution to heroic and self-congratulating stands of 
punks who reproduced major ideological narratives. I tried to cope with 
the ethical dimension of my research approach by aiming to provide con￾textual understanding to their different motivations.
The  basic methodological approach of this study is biographical. I 
relied mainly on the online research that regrettably could not be topped 
up by the on-site observations due to the pandemic restrictions. I have 
conducted an online interview with one informer in his early 30s who had 
left Prague during the 2010s for a village close to Liberec in Northern 
Bohemia. In this study, I will call him Josef. Without my own personal 
involvement and resulting interaction, I have also followed the Facebook 
account and other digital imprints of a 60-year-old punk, active since the 
1980s and 1990s in Prague, living currently in a village in the south of the 
Czech-Moravian Highlands. I will call him Robert in this study. My col￾leagues of the Czech and Slovak Archive of Subculture warned me to 
approach him directly because of his peculiar personality and expected 
hostility towards the academic research of punk. I have extended this 
empirical material by the analysis of already-published interviews in local 
press, punk fanzines and anthologies stored mainly in the Czech and 
Slovak Archive of Subcultures as well as in the repositories of bachelor’s 
and diploma works of Charles University in Prague and Masaryk University 
in Brno.
The research three bachelor’s and one master’s students presented in 
their fnal works enabled me to add further empirical material. The bach￾elor’s work of Vojtech R ̌ ̌
ehák (2020) observed and questioned the punk 
rock group E!E active since 1987. Ř
ehák presented a refection on punk 
music practice in relation to ageing with the idea of authenticity and sub￾cultural capital put in front. Another informative bachelor’s work was that 
of Eva Hrabovská (2016), who conducted interviews with different punks 
active in Brno and Eastern Moravia with the aim to discuss the differences 
between younger and older generation of punks. The bachelor’s work of 
Dan Beringer (2020) presented interviews with older punks discussing the 
changes in perception of authenticity of punk and its subcultural capital. 
Finally, the diploma work of Petra Kumová (2014) discussed predomi￾nantly the processes of individualization and commodifcation and pre￾sented statements of several hardcore punks active in the early 2010s 
Prague. In result of this combined research, I draw empirical material 
from over 20 interviews with different punks led mainly in the second half 
of the 2010s.
O. DANIEL39
Meanings of Punk
The tendency to describe punk dialectically as a set of controversies is far 
from my own. Earlier in this chapter, I have pointed to opposing under￾standings of punk masculinities. A dialectical understanding of punk was 
also presented by one of the informers of Hrabovská, 35-year-old Tomáš:
[Punk is] freedom, being torn apart, equality, one’s own way, access to 
things, music, drugs, enjoying life, but also problems, defance, addictions, 
inconveniences, dirt, disgust and negative things. (Hrabovská, 2016, 
pp. 38–39)
It is particularly noteworthy that this informer can also be placed rather 
in-between the two ideal generations sketched in this chapter. Therefore, 
his dialectical understanding could be understood as a result of both gen￾erational stands, of older as well as younger punks.
But the positive aspects of punk were also shared intergenerationally. 
The younger informer Josef stated that the central idea of punk for him 
was not in the distinction from the society but, for him, punk was both 
lifestyle and a sociopolitical subculture, and its mission consisted in the 
protection of those who are fragile, endangered or in precarious conditions.
It needs to be underlined that Josef referred particularly to hardcore 
punk and antifascism with hardcore punk being a myriad of punk-inspired 
styles and scenes aiming to bring the idea of radicalism back to the pre￾sumably depoliticized music and lifestyle (Kumová, 2014, p. 12). Such 
practices would refer to what was described in the Czech context as a 
“non-commercial hc/punk” (Kurík, ̌ 2018, p. 170), or “opinion punk” 
(Pixová, 2011, pp. 81–82). These were put to contradiction and nega￾tively labelled “Czech punk”, “3P punk” (from pivo, párek, prcackǎ : “beer, 
sausage, easy fuck”) (Kurík, ̌ 2018, p.  171), or simply “musical punk” 
(Pixová, 2011, pp. 81–82). Similarly to younger Josef, one of the inform￾ers of Beringer, 52-year-old Ota, stated:
[Punk is] against the bad in the world. At least a little, mostly you do shit, 
but at least you try a little bit. (Beringer, 2020, p. 53)
Such positive understanding of punk as a service to society can be put 
in contradiction with the stress on provocation and autonomy from the 
3 LIFESTYLE AND MEMORY: PROFILING TWO GENERATIONS OF AGEING…40
society at large as its key components. For 55-year-old Jan, interviewed by 
Hrabovská, the 1980s Czechoslovak punk were simply about
people looking in disbelief, old ladies lamenting, but we were completely 
fucked up. We had simply our own world and felt good about it. (Hrabovská, 
2016, p. 44)
The antisocial aspect was also stressed by 50-year-old Václav, inter￾viewed by Beringer:
Punk isn’t like you have to have some hair. Punk is freedom, absolute free￾dom, punk is the greatest freedom that you can say “fuck off” to everyone. 
(Beringer, 2020, p. 43)
Such understanding of punk was particularly pertinent for the 1980s 
Czechoslovakia as 50-year-old Jaroslav, interviewed by Beringer, put it:
Because people were afraid of us, some were afraid, some mocked us, it was 
fun and we provoked them. And the music, it was just something else. 
Nobody really knew punk then, it was just great. (Beringer, 2020, p. 31)
Tensions resulting from different understandings of punk can be thus 
translated not only to dialectics of provocation and/or responsibility but 
also to lifestyle choices, as already briefy sketched above. Preference given 
to alcohol and drugs against veganism and other “clean” lifestyles can also 
create misunderstandings, as in the case of 55-year-old Jan, interviewed by 
Hrabovská. Asked to evaluate lifestyles and political leanings of younger 
punks, Jan replied:
Now they say they are fghting against consumerism. Yeah, but which one? 
It’s like they don’t eat animals and cuddle with fowers, that’s what they call 
protest. (Hrabovská, 2016, p. 44)
Many older punks admit having fallen into addiction, be it drugs or 
alcohol. The addiction may also have then taken over punk, as in the case 
of 50-year-old Jaroslav, interviewed by Beringer:
I was just booze then, I didn’t do anything, I was completely devastated that 
I didn’t even go to any concerts, nothing. […] I was no longer attracted to 
it. (Beringer, 2020, p. 39)
O. DANIEL41
My younger informer, Josef, stated he was a vegan but also crafted his 
own beer which helped him to socialize in the village where no public bar 
or café was in function. Sixty-year-old Rudolf is a long-term advocate of 
legalization of marihuana (Hubicka, ̌ 1997). Judging from his Facebook 
posts, he is also an occasional consumer of psilocybin. Together with beer, 
these three substances are fairly common not only to punks but also to all 
the generations referring to the Czech 1990s as the peak of their subcul￾tural activities.
Exploiting the Past
Sarah Thornton (1995) introduced the category of subcultural capital as a 
concept coined for analysing “objectifed and embodied” hipness, often 
drawn from distinction from what the participants consider as negation of 
their tastes. In the case of ageing Czech male punks, subcultural capital 
often draws from specifc generational experience of 1980s punk in socialist 
Czechoslovakia. One of the musicians interviewed by Rehák evoked a spe ̌ -
cifc chemistry lived due to the (real or perceived) repression in the 1980s:
Those beginnings were unforgettable. When we came somewhere to the 
pub secretly, we slowly crept in with guitars on our backs, dude, that was 
incredible. And today no one will experience it and we will remember it 
forever and it’s a complete bombshell. (Ř
ehák, 2020, p. 30)
Similarly, 55-year-old Jan, interviewed by Hrabovská, attributed his 
generational punk experience to the opposition to the Communist regime:
You could have really screamed out what pissed you off in that fucking 
Communist era. You could show a little bit your anger. (Hrabovská, 
2016, p. 43)
This would probably also be the position of 60-year-old Rudolf, who 
can be considered as an anti-Communist dissident and was persecuted by 
the police in 1987 for being in possession of the non-offcial prints. His 
name fgures on the “List of members of the Independent Peace 
Association—Initiative for the Demilitarization of Society” covering the 
activities between April 1988 and July 1989 and also on an offcial “List 
of issued certifcates of participants in the resistance against Communism” 
of June 2021. It is noteworthy to mention that his dissident activities and 
3 LIFESTYLE AND MEMORY: PROFILING TWO GENERATIONS OF AGEING…42
clashes with the police did not end with changes of 1989/1990 but con￾tinued from the 1990s onwards. In 1992, he was also detained and threat￾ened by police violence, possibly as a vengeance for his previous anti-police 
stands (Maraczi, 2003).
Further views on politicization of punk in late state socialist 
Czechoslovakia was expressed by 52-year-old Ota, interviewed by 
Beringer:
We didn’t want to be against [the regime] originally. We just wanted to live 
our way and then all of a sudden, the commie and cop bitches start fucking 
into our lives, and that’s when they just suck and we started fghting them. 
They actually raised us, otherwise we wouldn’t really care. (Beringer, 
2020, p. 43)
Subcultural capital of older punks could also be drawn from their long￾term punk engagement. One of the musicians interviewed by Ř
ehák stated 
vis-à-vis young music fans:
The worst thing is when they come: “May I kindly ask you, could give me a 
drumstick?”. I tell them, “Piss off, if you speak to me like this, I won’t give 
you shit!”. And they always look… I say, “That doesn’t mean if I’m going 
to be almost 60 now [… that] I’m old, and you’re going to speak to me like 
that. […] We’re old punks, you guys.” (Ř
ehák, 2020, p. 30)
Noteworthy repetition in many of the narratives with important conse￾quences for raising of subcultural capital is a discourse of previous punk 
unity. It could also be given to the particular context of the resistance 
against state socialist apparatus, as one of the musicians interviewed by 
Ř
ehák put it:
Today, as punks have ten thousand opinions, before it was quite united 
against Communists and today they scold everything, the West, the Union, 
the Germans, the Russians and I don’t know who else. (Ř
ehák, 2020, p. 33)
The perceived unity could also go back to the early 1990s and trans￾gress punk towards other subcultures, as Valis, one of the frst punks in 
Rožnov who was interviewed by Bob Kurík, remembered: ̌
After the coup [of 1989] it was all connected—long-haired, punks, but also 
skinheads. (Kurík, ̌ 2018, p. 172)
O. DANIEL43
Such subcultural memory and the “mnemonic community” (Jacobson, 
2019) gathered around it results in transmitting of the memory to younger 
punks. Michaela Pixová (2011, p. 67), quoted an interview with 18-year￾old Vidlák, who expressed similar nostalgia for the historical coherence of 
the scene. One of the younger hardcore punks, Štepán, interviewed by ̌
Kumová, overstepped this post-memory to a more refned political 
critique:
[…]I’ve seen in recent years that even our subculture is terribly atomized, 
just like the rest of the society […] and I think it’s wrong, that the collective 
dimension is very important, especially in today’s Internet age, so I try to in 
fact, with almost everything I do, to give it that collective dimension again, 
or at least to integrate it into some whole that is trying to do so. (Kumová, 
2014, p. 64)
Such collectivist thinking is rather rare among punks drawing their gen￾erational experience from the 1980s Czechoslovakia. It would probably be 
understood with suspicion, in line with dominant anti-Communist narra￾tives. For younger punks however, this kind of past is only history, and 
their formative years were infuenced by privatization of the public sphere 
and strict individualism to which they propose an antidote in collective 
organization.
Finding Home
Giving a sense to one’s life temporarily is only one yet evidently important 
part of the layers of identifcation of Czech ageing punk males. Another 
one is the spatiality, and, in this context, I consider particularly fruitful to 
explore different understandings of notion of home. Furthermore, ques￾tioning home as a practice also reveals deep political meanings tightly 
related to punk memories. In most cases of the research of punk, it has 
been described as a predominantly urban phenomenon, with main scenes 
in big cities. The research of a particular punk scene in a small town with 
a rather traditional cultural elite (Kurík, ̌ 2018) is rather rare, and even in 
the international academic works there is only a handful of mentions about 
punk in rural environment (e.g. McKay in Sabin, 1999, p. 65 or Bennett, 
2013, pp. 73, 90–91). But some punks, such as those of English band 
Crass, followed earlier examples of abandoning a city life for founding 
communes in the rural environment. Such practices were documented as 
3 LIFESTYLE AND MEMORY: PROFILING TWO GENERATIONS OF AGEING…44
well in the socialist Czechoslovakia, where they derived from the “under￾ground” milieu that also partly encompassed some early punks. Many of 
such geographical places corresponded to those marginal ones that Rob 
Shields described as “towns and regions which have been ‘left behind’ in 
the modern race for progress” (Shields, 1991, p. 3).
Moving from the city and integration in the new environment opens 
further questions of in-betweenness of ageing punks in the rural commu￾nity and their respective scenes, as well as change from cultural centre to 
the periphery and resulting feelings of isolation or changing of their life 
priorities. Josef, a hardcore punk in his 30s, originally from the Central 
Bohemian region with perfect public transport accessibility to the capital, 
described moving to the relatively remote location in the north of the 
country close to the Polish and German border as a personal and strategic 
choice. In our interview, he stated being attracted by the scene in the 
nearby regional centre of Liberec. He had chosen the village of some 880 
inhabitants to move to with his partner since it was accessible, with many 
abandoned properties and the possibility to buy a house for a reasonable 
price. Besides, several like-minded people from Liberec and elsewhere had 
settled in the village. In response to my questioning about the experiences 
of moving into a property that needed to be taken care of, Josef stated that 
this was something he had accounted for and thus was prepared. The only 
challenge he found was the pitiful state of internet and cell phone coverage 
of the region.
The Facebook account of 60-year-old punk Rudolf bears a testimony of 
many conficts with his neighbours in a tiny village of some 43 houses and 
not much more than 50 inhabitants, whom he repeatedly accused of being 
collaborators of Communist secret police and voluntary border guards. 
Adding to the conficts with police described earlier, Rudolf socializes else￾where. He is well-integrated into a network of non-conformist artists and 
their sympathizers in the region, often visiting bars, music clubs, book￾stores and art galleries of several small towns near the village. This network 
follows non-conformists residing in the area that is part of the larger topo￾graphical region of Czech-Moravian Highlands. The region extending to 
the Forest Quarter in Lower Austria can be described as an internal periph￾ery between Prague, Vienna and Brno. The relative vicinity to the big 
centres but also isolation made it particularly appealing for some of the 
participants of the Czechoslovak “underground” who found refuge there 
from the late 1970s onwards. On his Facebook, Rudolf expresses his fas￾cination of the aesthetics of seemingly empty landscapes of large and 
O. DANIEL45
relatively high-elevated felds, forests and ridges through many snapshots. 
When dressed for work in the forest or riding one of his horses, it would 
be, possibly with the exception of an ironic beanie with the inscription 
“Policie” (Police), hard to distinguish him from other locals of the 
same age.
The uneasiness of Rudolf fnding his place in a remote rural setting can 
be at best illustrated by the following incident dating to a late afternoon 
of November 2008 when a police patrol from some 15 km far small town 
was called to the village because a dog, a cross between a Rhodesian 
Ridgeback and an American pit-bull terrier, was running around the com￾mons. The dog had reportedly previously bitten two people, and the vil￾lagers were afraid of him. At the request of the police, then 46-year-old 
Rudolf came out of the house and began swearing at the patrol, threaten￾ing them with an iron rod, further provoking the dog to attack the police￾men. The dog eventually bit into the buttocks of one of the intervening 
police offcers. At the trial in April 2011, Rudolf’s advocate stressed that 
Rudolf was a peculiar person, who many disliked, but whose life cannot be 
suppressed by the power of the state, as it has happened before the politi￾cal changes of 1989/1990. According to the defence, the visit of the 
police offcers was unjustifed. Testimonies of earlier attacks of the dog 
needed also to be questioned. The policemen were supposed to have arrived 
in the dark, shouted in front of the house and shone a torch at the win￾dows; they knew Rudolf was going to be aggressive because of his bad 
relations and negative experiences with the police (Majer, 2011). 
Collections of narratives of ageing Czech punks analysed in the four stu￾dent works rarely mention the experiences of homelessness, and, if so, 
these are assessed negatively. This may be due to the diffculties faced in 
approaching homeless informers as well as the predominantly middle-class 
profles of interviewed ageing punks. Experiences of political squatting are 
mentioned more often as a part of radical stands linked with hardcore 
punk but these either focus on description of the 1990s squats without 
leaving space for personal memories or relate to the last political squat in 
Prague, Klinika, that was expelled in January 2019. Punk musicians inter￾viewed by Ř
ehák have expressed age-dependent diffculties of touring 
with the band (Ř
ehák, 2020, p. 56).
Study of Kurík presents narration of one ageing punk, bearing the punk ̌
name Kope, who works as a university lecturer in Ostrava and is active 
in local politics: 
3 LIFESTYLE AND MEMORY: PROFILING TWO GENERATIONS OF AGEING…46
Rožnov punk was never like those drunks I met in Ostrava. There it has 
never been so intellectually focused, whereas the punks here were all very 
well-read. In this, Rožnov is quite specifc. (Kurík, ̌ 2018, p. 167)
Political engagement of Czech ageing male punks in local politics was 
nevertheless not a specifcity of Rožnov with its some 16 thousand inhab￾itants. Former singer of the punk band N.V.Ú., then 53 years old, Štepán ̌
Málek took part in  local politics of the town of almost 100 thousand 
inhabitants in Eastern Bohemia, Hradec Králové. In an interview to a 
music webzine Frontman, he reacted to the idea of selling out of punk 
ideas towards the participation in the mainstream politics:
It was a coalition of Pirate Party, Green Party and independents. I know 
many of those people personally and I trust them. I asked if they are con￾vinced that they want me. They said yes, so I went into that. I certainly 
don’t feel the need to follow to higher levels, because it would eat me up, 
but at the local level, where I know the terrain, I didn’t have a problem with 
taking part in it. (Málek, 2019)
Liberal, centrist and independent politics particularly on the local level 
were thus contextually understood as acceptable. For many ageing punks, 
home was defned locally, through networks of like-minded people.
Ageing Punk Materiality
Final consideration of Czech ageing punk males in this chapter concerns a 
set of narratives centred around ageing body, work issues and family. In 
linking these diverse themes, I approach the position of historical material￾ism pioneered by Friedrich Engels (1845), who collected evidence of pre￾dominantly negative effects of urbanization. Engels turned then his 
attention to individual and collective experiences of workers and their 
families. While the context of ageing Czech punks can hardly be compared 
to the suffering presented by Engels, his method remains inspiring for its 
humanistic focus. Issues linked with the ageing body were outlined par￾ticularly by punk musicians interviewed by Ř
ehák. In these interviews, 
they stressed their need to relax more often, including a nap needed before 
the show, to cope with frequent loss of energy, including diffculties get￾ting up in the morning, as well as obstacles resulting from the abuse of 
alcohol, particularly with their long hangovers (Ř
ehák, 2020, pp. 43–44). 
O. DANIEL47
Also Málek (2019), explaining his reason for leaving the band N.V.Ú., 
stressed health reasons and decreasing of energy with age. He added 
a  general observation of ageing punks gaining weight and being more 
susceptible to falling ill with viruses.
Musicians interviewed by Ř
ehák stressed the necessity of preserving 
their jobs outside of the music industry, particularly in such domains that 
enabled fexibility for touring with the band (Ř
ehák, 2020, p. 46). For 
them, work would also be reason of preserving their minds and bodies in 
an adequate condition (Ř
ehák, 2020, p. 42). Fifty-two-year- old Lukáš, 
interviewed by Beringer, expressed the necessity of having several 
side jobs:
In the morning I go to school, I teach there, then I go to training and at 7 
PM I come home, eat and fall asleep, and it went on like this all the time. As 
you have a family, you’re always trying to get some money somewhere. I’m 
not saying that you should have wealth or anything, but to survive at all, I 
had three jobs. (Beringer, 2020, p. 38)
Such a life was hardly compatible with visiting punk shows:
I taught, I trained, then I had a job in one school, and then I also had a 
cleaning job in a block of fats. I lasted like that about fve years […] so of 
course there wasn’t much time for [going to the concerts]. (Beringer, 
2020, p. 38)
This experience infuenced by low level of wages in the Czech educa￾tion sector only partly contradicts that of 24-year-old Karel from Eastern 
Moravia, interviewed by Hrabovská online because of his heavy workload 
and diffculties to arrange a meeting in-person. Karel stated about his 
company that he did not have any problems at work, because “[T]hey are 
all a little bit punks there” (Hrabovská, 2016, p. 36). Such statements that 
could possibly also refect a  “new spirit of capitalism” (Boltanski & 
Chiapello, 1999) need to be of course understood in context. As one of 
the musicians interviewed by Ř
ehák puts it:
It also depends on the fact that if you are actually single, you do not have 
children, you do not have to deal with some mortgages and income and all 
this. (Ř
ehák, 2020, p. 42).
3 LIFESTYLE AND MEMORY: PROFILING TWO GENERATIONS OF AGEING…48
According to them, their careers as musicians were only enabled because 
of the understanding and support of their partners (Ř
ehák, 2020, 
pp. 46–47), and punk relationships seem to be particularly fragile. For a 
certain period, 60-year-old Rudolf put on his Facebook page many snap￾shots with his one-generation younger girlfriend. Posting of these snap￾shots eventually stopped in favour of melancholic landscape pictures 
discussed above. In an online interview, Josef in his early 30s, insisted on 
collective decisions in both, activist groups and family.
Josef, who worked on the research project focusing on industrial heri￾tage and enabling important share of the remote work, stressed on the 
importance of socialization in the village life through childcare. One of the 
most powerful Facebook posts of Rudolf also related to him visiting his 
grandchild and his daughter.
On the contrary, one of the hardcore punks, Honza, interviewed by 
Kumová, expressed his distance from children but at the same time under￾stood that enabling punk childcare activities meant a possibility for their 
parents to participate in radical politics:
I have personally no relationship with children, children just do not interest 
me and I even he wasn’t thinking about some children’s corner, but some￾one came and said, “It would be good, if there is a children’s corner here.” 
I rolled my eyes up, Jesus, again some children, I’m not in the mood for 
that, but at that moment I was like, why not? If anyone wants to do it and 
thinks it’s important, so let them just do it. (Kumová, 2014, pp. 68–69)
In general, the issues of punk fatherhoods are often framed on the scale 
between responsibility and neglect and are a particularly sensitive topic for 
not only many ageing punks but also their children. One of the young 
second-generation punks interviewed by Hrabovská stated that there were 
rumours at school about her taking drugs and her parents neglecting her 
(Hrabovská, 2016, p. 41). Geographer Michaela Pixová, who is also the 
daughter of a relatively known Czech punk musician, confessed she was 
bored by the music of the band of her father and had embraced punk only 
when having later discovered The Exploited (Pixová, 2011, p. 49). The 
musician, interviewed by Ř
ehák, mentioned his “8 years old daughter 
enjoying performance” (Ř
ehák, 2020, pp. 47–48). Such a diffcult, verif￾able observation was however at least partly confrmed by the previous 
childhood experience of 21-year-old Šimon from Eastern Moravia, inter￾viewed by Hrabovská, who remembered visiting punk festivals with his 
dad: “It was fun. Music and people were cool” (Hrabovská, 2016, p. 37).
O. DANIEL49
Conclusion
The frst generation of Czech male punks analysed in this chapter draws its 
subcultural capital from its recollections of state socialism, memories that 
have mostly led to their fervent anti-Communism. For the second genera￾tion, state socialism was generally no longer an issue, and its members 
were more committed to various anti-capitalist struggles. Mutual incom￾prehension of these two groups, who are now heading towards middle or 
silver age, results from the political divide around their different collective 
memories and experiences. Their opposing preferences include individual￾ism versus collective action; rebellion and provocation versus more socially 
responsible choices; and alcohol and drug misuse versus a “clean” lifestyle 
of veganism; and different understandings of home, health, work and fam￾ily. Further research possibilities could include generational conficts 
around commodifcation, commercialization and the cohesion of the punk 
scene that have created further age-based oppositions between self-labelled 
real punks on the one hand and “posers” and “parasites” on the other. 
Curiously and even more so because the resulting practice differed sub￾stantially, the very motive of leaving the city for the countryside remained 
almost unchanged for representatives of both punk generations. It coin￾cided with the aim for searching alternatives vis-à-vis urban lifestyle based 
on the hectic rhythm of capital, be it in the entertainment sector or in 
academia.
References
Aksiutina, O. (2005). DIY pank-kul’tura kak fenomen molodezhnoi kontrkul’tury 
v postsovetskom postranstve. In I. V. Kondakov (Ed.), Sovremennie transfor￾matsii rossiiskoi kul’tury (pp. 564–603). Nauka.
Andes, L. (1998). Growing Up Punk: Meaning and Commitment Careers in a 
Contemporary Youth Subculture. In J. S. Epstein (Ed.), Youth Culture: Identity 
in a Postmodern World (pp. 213–231). Blackwell.
Bennett, A. (2006). Punk’s Not Dead: The Continuing Signifcance of Punk Rock 
for an Older Generation of Fans. Sociology, 40(2), 219–235. https://doi.
org/10.1177/00380385060620306
Bennett, A. (2013). Music, Style, and Aging: Growing Old Disgracefully? Temple 
University.
Bennett, A. (2018). Popular Music Scenes and Aging Bodies. Journal of Aging 
Studies, 45, 49–53. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0261143012000013
3 LIFESTYLE AND MEMORY: PROFILING TWO GENERATIONS OF AGEING…50
Bennett, A., & Taylor, J. (2012). As Time Goes By: Music, Dance and Ageing. 
Popular Music, 31(2), 231–243.
Bestley, R., & Dines, D. (2018). Punk Sans Frontières: Mapping the Trajectory of 
Global Punk. In S.  Krüger Bridge (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Global 
Popular Music. Oxford University Press.
Boltanski, L., & Chiapello, E. (1999). Le nouvel esprit du capitalisme. Gallimard.
Bourdieu, P. (1979). Distinction. Critique sociale du jugement. .
Císar, O., & Koubek, M. (2012). Include ‘em all: Culture, Politics and a Local ̌
Hardcore/Punk Scene in the Czech Republic. Poetics, 40(1), 1–21.
Clark, D. (2003). The Death and Life of Punk, The Last Subculture. In 
D.  Muggleton & R.  Weinzierl (Eds.), The Post-Subcultures Reader
(pp. 223–236). Berg.
de Boise, S. (2020). Men, Masculinities and Music. In L. Gottzén, U. Mellström, 
& T. Shefer (Eds.), Routledge International Handbook of Masculinity Studies
(pp. 414–424). Routledge.
Dedek, H., & Vlc ̌ ek, J. (2012). ̌ Zub casu. Rozhovor ̌ . Galén.
Engels, F. (1845). Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England. Otto Wigand.
Fuchs, F. (2002). Kytary a rev aneb Co bylo za zdí. Punk rock a hardcore v ̌
Č
eskoslovensku pred rokem 1989 ̌ . Papagájův Hlasatel.
Gildart, K., Gough-Yates, A., Lincoln, S., Osgerby, B., Robinson, L., Street, J., 
Webb, P., Worley, M., & (eds.). (2020). Hebdige and Subculture in the Twenty￾First Century: Through the Subcultural Lens. Palgrave.
Golobov, I., Pilkington, H., & Steinholt, Y. B. (2014). Punk in Russia: Cultural 
Mutation from the ‘Useless’ to the ‘Moronic’. Routledge.
Haenfer, R. (2006). Straight Edge: Hardcore Punk, Clean Living Youth, and 
Social Change. Rutgers University Press.
Hammer, F. (2017). Punk in Hungary. In D.  Horn & J.  Shepherd (Eds.), 
Bloomsbury Encyclopedia of Popular Music of the World (Vol. 11, pp. 600–602). 
Bloomsbury.
Hebdige, D. (1979). Subculture: The Meaning of Style. Routledge.
Hesmondhalgh, D. (2005). Subcultures, Scenes or Tribes: None of the Above. 
Journal of Youth Studies, 8(1), 21–40. https://doi.org/10.1080/1367626
0500063652
Hodkinson, P. (2013). Spectacular Youth Cultures and Ageing: Beyond Refusing 
to Grow Up. Sociology Compass, 7(1), 13–22.
Hubicka, F. (1997). Konopí místo ume ̌ lé hmoty. Lidové noviny, 19. 5. , 16. ̌
Jackson, D. (2016). Exploring Aging Masculinities. The Body, Sexuality and Social 
Lives. Palgrave Macmillan.
Jacobson, M. (2019). Graffti, Aging and Subcultural Memory—A Struggle for 
Recognition through Podcast Narratives. Societies, 10(1), 1–17.
Kurík, B. (2018). C ̌ ̌lovek-chyba z Vraha: existenciální revolta punkem v c ̌ ase “mrt ̌ -
vých havlů”. In B. Kurík & J. Charvát (Eds.), ̌ Mikrofon je naše bomba: politika 
a hudební subkultury mládeže v postsocialistickém Č
esku (pp. 161–209). Togga.
O. DANIEL51
Lewin, P., & Williams, P. J. (2009). The Ideology and Practice of Authenticity in 
Punk Subculture. In J. P. Williams & P. Vannini (Eds.), Authenticity in Culture, 
Self, and Society (pp. 65–83). Routledge.
Majer, V. (2011, April 24). Podmínka za psí zuby v hýždi policisty. Jindrichohradecký ̌
deník. https://www.denik.cz/regiony/podminka-za-psi-zuby-v-hyzdi￾policisty20110421.html
Málek, Š. (2019, October 28). Mladí revolucionári, star ̌ í hófráti. Interview with ̌
Jan Hamerský. Frontman. https://www.frontman.cz/stepan-malek-nvu￾mladi-revolucionari-stari-hofrati
Mannheim, K. (1928). Das Problem der Generationen. Kölner Vierteljahrshefte 
für Soziologie: Zeitschrift des Forschungsinstituts für Sozialwissenschaften in Köln, 
9(1/2), 157–185.
Maraczi, P. (2003, June 23). O absurdite paragrafu Útok na ver ̌ ejného c ̌ initele. ̌
Neviditelný pes. www.archiv.neviditelnypes.zpravy.cz/clanky/2003/06/
31168_11_14_0.html
Marciniak, M. (2015). Transnational Punk Communities in Poland: From Nihilism 
to Nothing Outside Punk. .
Muršic, R. (2009). Punk Anthropology: From a Study of a Local Slovene ̌
Alternative Rock Scene Towards Partisan Scholarship. In L. Kürti & P. Skalník 
(Eds.), Post-socialist Europe: Anthropological Perspectives from Home
(pp. 188–205). Berghahn Books.
Patton, R.  A. (2018). Punk Crisis: The Global Punk Rock Revolution. Oxford 
University Press.
Pearson, D. (2021). Rebel Music in the Triumphant Empire Punk Rock in the 1990s 
United States. Oxford University Press.
Perasović, B. (2001). Urbana plemena. Sociologija subkultura u Hrvatskoj. 
Hrvatska sveucili ̌ šna naklada.
Pilkington, H. (2012). Punk—But Not as We Know It: Punk in Post-Socialist 
Space. Punk & Post-Punk, 3(1), 253–266.
Pini, B., & Mayes, R. (2020). Rural Masculinity. In L. Gottzén, U. Mellström, & 
T.  Shefer (Eds.), Routledge International Handbook of Masculinity Studies
(pp. 302–310). Routledge.
Pixová, M. (2011). Č
eský punk za oponou i pred oponou. In M. Kolár ̌ ová (Ed.), ̌
Revolta stylem: hudební subkultury mládeže v Č
eské republice (pp.  45–82). 
Sociologické nakladatelství.
Sabin, R. (Ed.). (1999). Punk Rock: So What? The Cultural Legacy of Punk. 
Routledge.
Shields, R. (1991). Places on the Margin: Alternative Geographies of Modernity. 
Routledge.
Thornton, S. (1995). Club Cultures. Music, Media and Subcultural Capital. Polity.
Ventsel, A. (2020). Identity, Class and the Economics of an Eastern German 
Subculture. Berghahn.
3 LIFESTYLE AND MEMORY: PROFILING TWO GENERATIONS OF AGEING…52
Wahlström Henriksson, H. (2020). Exploring fatherhood in critical gender 
research. In L.  Gottzén, U.  Mellström and T.  Shefer (Eds.) Routledge 
International Handbook of Masculinity Studies (pp. 320–330). Routledge.
Way, L. (2020). Punk, Gender and Ageing: Just Typical Girls? Emerald Books.
Way, L. (2021). Punk Is Just a State of Mind: Exploring What Punk Means to 
Older Punk Women. The Sociological Review, 69(1), 107–122.
Woodman, D., & Bennett, A. (Eds.). (2015). Youth Cultures, Transitions, and 
Generations. Bridging the Gap in Youth Research. Palgrave Macmillan.
Worley, M. (2017). No Future: Punk, Politics and British Youth Culture, 1976–1984. 
Cambridge University Press.
Bachelor Works
Beringer, D. (2020). Punkerem v padesáti? Refexe promen punkové subkulturní ̌
identity. Charles University.
Hrabovská, E. (2016). Generacní rozdíly v subkultur ̌ e punk v C ̌ ̌
R. Masaryk 
University.
Ř
ehák, V. (2020). “My jsme starí punker ̌ i”: Autorefexe star ̌ ší generace aktivních 
hudebníků v ceské subkultur ̌ e punku ̌ . Charles University.
Diploma Work
Kumová, P. (2014). Malé kousky svobody. Individualizace a komodifkace v hardcore￾punk subkulturě. Charles University.
Documentaries
Chaufour, L. (2012). East Punk Memories. Supersonicglide.
Gébová, D. (2015). Punk. Kmeny Series. Czech Television.
Other
Czech and Slovak Archive of Subcultures, ziny.info.
Facebook page of Rudolf.
List of members of the Independent Peace Association—Initiative for the 
Demilitarization of Society, https://www.vons.cz/data/pdf/bulletiny_NMS/
Seznam%20%C4%8Dlen%C5%AF%20NMS%201988-1989.pdf
List of issued certifcates of participants in the resistance against Communism, 
https://3odboj.army.cz/
Online interview with Josef, June 2020.
O. DANIEL© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 53
Switzerland AG 2024
L. Way, M. Grimes (eds.), Punk, Ageing and Time, Palgrave Studies 
in the History of Subcultures and Popular Music, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47823-9_4
CHAPTER 4
‘… And Out Come the Comps’: Punk-O￾Rama, Pro Skater, and Their Roles as Peak 
Music Experiences in a Current Punk 
Identity
Ellen Bernhard
Introduction
For many music listeners, specifc albums and songs reignite a nostalgic 
recollection of youth. Music fans of all genres can remember the frst time 
they heard a particular song or a memorable album. As such, it is impor￾tant to consider the ways that these memories and the music itself infu￾ence and impact our own understandings of identity. While music is 
integral to the formation of self, it is also used to establish connections 
with others (Hancock & Lorr, 2013). The moment of exposure to this 
music infuences its continued signifcance for the listener moving for￾ward, especially so when considering music preferences that emerge dur￾ing adolescence (Schubert, 2016). Research shows that there is often a 
E. Bernhard (*) 
Georgian Court University, Lakewood, NJ, USA
e-mail: ebernhard@georgian.edu54
nostalgic connection between media content and the consumption of it 
during one’s youth (Bolin, 2016). The purpose of this research is to con￾sider the nostalgic impact of Epitaph’s Punk-O-Rama compilations and 
Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater soundtracks for participants, and to understand 
how this music acted as a “peak music experience” (Green, 2016) for 
those who were introduced to punk rock through these means.
The Rise of Punk-O-Rama and Pro Skater
By the mid-1990s, punk rock prevailed as the next rising alternative music 
genre, one squarely on the radar of a music industry which sought to capi￾talize on yet another style of music with an unconventional sound and 
defant ethos. Pop punk entered the public consciousness in 1994 with 
Green Day’s major label debut of Dookie and the Offspring’s release of 
Smash. The pop punk genre was introduced to the mainstream with 
resounding acclaim. Dookie and Smash climbed the Billboard charts and 
have sold millions of copies since their initial releases (Bienstock, 2014; 
Chandler, 2014; Pack, 2018). Green Day and the Offspring, along with 
other pop punk bands that followed, helped to usher in a new generation 
of fans who were introduced to punk rock through commercial outlets 
such as MTV, music magazines, and Top-40 radio stations, which circu￾lated punk rock to the masses.
As MTV capitalized on the heightened interest in a new wave of alter￾native music, CD compilations and video games prevailed as two success￾ful mediums for punk rock to thrive. In 1994, Epitaph Records released 
its frst Punk-O-Rama compilation album, featuring 16 songs from several 
bands on the record label. The punk rock compilation business model was 
simple: feature 15–25 bands on one CD and sell it for half (or even a third 
of) the price of a full-length album. At a time when CD prices averaged 
$13.42 in 1999 (Hogan, 2015), Epitaph’s low price point allowed curious 
listeners to explore the genre in a low-stakes fashion—compilations ranged 
in price from US $6 to 8, and were priced more cheaply if purchased used. 
Appealing to both casual and dedicated listeners of punk rock during the 
mid- to late 1990s, the Punk-O-Rama series included recognizable bands 
such as Bad Religion and the Offspring, but also introduced fans to 
smaller, lesser-known bands on the Epitaph roster. Ozzi (2017) writes: 
“Not only did comps help punk rock infltrate the malls and chain stores 
of America, it carved out a self-contained industry for bands whose songs 
wouldn’t have otherwise landed on Billboard charts.” With their low price 
E. BERNHARD55
point and extensive track listing, the albums—which were sold at mass 
retailers such as Best Buy, Walmart, and Blockbuster Video—were released 
annually until 2005.
While Punk-O-Rama was one of the frst punk compilations to reach 
commercial popularity in the mid-1990s, other punk labels saw the bene￾fts in releasing similar compilations of their own rosters, quickly adopting 
this business model to sell compilation albums featuring bands on their 
labels. Other independent labels such as Fat Wreck Chords, Hellcat 
Records, Hopeless Records, Go-Kart Records, and Kung Fu Records 
released their own compilation series in the same format, with many labels 
also releasing shorter compilations and samplers which were often handed 
out for free at concerts and festivals or were used promotionally in con￾junction with the sale of other full-length albums and band merchandise.
During its 11-year run, the Punk-O-Rama compilation series sold over 
1.7 million copies worldwide (“The Seventh Edition,” 2002). The compi￾lation album, a practice conjured in a pre-digital era, offered fans an inex￾pensive entry into the genre at a time when the price of a CD was often a 
prohibitive barrier for those looking to experiment with new music. Bray 
(2014) writes: “[Punk comps] gave you a road map to what bands you 
had to check out and which ones were worth skipping. Rather than rolling 
the dice and paying $12 for a full album that may or may not be any good, 
you could get a taster’s choice of 20 or 25 bands in one sitting.” With the 
extensive variety offered, fans could purchase several compilations from 
various record labels and be exposed to a signifcant number of songs and 
artists for the price of one traditional CD.
Like Epitaph’s Punk-O-Rama compilations and those that followed, 
Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater video game series proved to be another accessible 
and low-stakes way for listeners to explore punk rock. Pro Skater frst 
became available in 1999 to consumers on the PlayStation console. In the 
game, players assume the avatar of a famous skateboarder and complete 
tricks and objectives of varying diffculty as the levels progress. Each Pro 
Skater game included its own curated soundtrack, which was comprised of 
songs from punk bands such as Dead Kennedys, Adolescents, the Vandals, 
and the Suicide Machines. In a 2019 interview, Hawk said of the musical 
choices on the early Pro Skater soundtracks:
Skateboarding was counter-culture, so [skaters] were interested in a differ￾ent kind of soundtrack; the kind of do-it-yourself, against-the-establishment 
thing … I was excited to dig deep into the culture and lifestyle of skating 
4 ‘… AND OUT COME THE COMPS’: PUNK-O-RAMA…56
and the music that went along with that that I grew up listening to at the 
skatepark. (Leak, 2019)
The series, described as “a porthole to a world of alternative music” 
(Longbottom, 2020), is often cited alongside the Punk-O-Rama compila￾tions as having provided fans and new listeners exposure to a wide range 
of artists within the punk genre. Pro Skater was one of the frst video 
games to include convincing sound effects and a soundtrack featuring 
music from alternative artists (Bertoli, 2019). While often closely associ￾ated with the punk rock explosion of the mid- to late 1990s, the Pro Skater
video game score was not exclusively composed of bands from the punk 
rock genre—the soundtrack included tracks from metal, hip-hop, ska, and 
alternative rock artists as well. Since its 1999 release, the Pro Skater series, 
with 20 different releases in the original franchise, has sold over 1.4 billion 
copies worldwide (Perez, 2020). In 2020, Pro Skater 1 + 2 was released as 
a remastered edition of the two original games in the series. The game 
became the fastest-selling edition of the Pro Skater series, selling more 
than one million copies in its frst two weeks (Singh, 2020).
Peak Music Experiences and Nostalgia
The current connections listeners have to their favorite music genres can 
provide insight into the reasons why music enjoyed in adolescence prevails 
as signifcant later in life. Schubert (2016) describes a “reminiscence 
bump” as “a psychological phenomenon that favours autobiographical 
recall of events that took place or were ‘encoded’ within the second and 
third decade of life” (p. 1007). Music-specifc reminiscence bumps, which 
form in adulthood, can be understood as the result of music’s impact and 
the continued preference for that genre as listeners age. A prolonged 
fondness toward this music in adulthood is linked to feelings of nostalgia 
for adolescent years (Jakubowski et al., 2020).
Defned by Green (2016) as “specifc experiences involving music that 
are especially memorable, infuential and even pivotal for the individuals 
involved” (p. 333), peak music experiences are the moments in a music 
listener’s life that are deemed extraordinary. An extension of Maslow’s 
(1971) discussion of “peak experiences,” which are described by Lowis 
(2002) as “profound experiences variously described as moments of great 
awe” (p. 351), and Denzin’s (1989) “epiphanies,” which are described by 
Kien (2013) as experiences “that one can identify as a turning point in 
E. BERNHARD57
one’s understanding of oneself and one’s relationship to the world” 
(p. 578), peak music experiences are music-related events that resonate 
more powerfully than others, often resulting in a lasting impact on the 
listener. Examples of peak music experiences might include vivid memo￾ries of listening to a favorite album for the frst time or attending a concert 
of a beloved artist. What is important to note is that peak music experi￾ences “stand out” in the recollections of music habits and preferences 
(Green, 2016, p. 334). Meaning is assigned to peak music experiences, 
and they ultimately become “narrative resources” which listeners use to 
establish personal and group identities (Green, 2016, p. 337). As such, the 
stories shared by participants serve as evidence of peak music experiences 
for those who vividly recalled elements of an introduction to punk rock 
that began with these recordings.
Punk Rock and Age
Addressing the impact of these recordings on participants’ understanding 
of a current punk identity suggests the importance of this music as the 
listener moves into adulthood. For early subcultural researchers, youth 
cultures were viewed as the reaction of working-class youth to “structural 
changes” in the UK following World War II (Bennett, 1999, p. 600), and 
thus involvement in a subculture served as a “temporary transitional 
phase” before responsibilities such as a career and family obligations 
became a priority (Hodkinson, 2013, p. 1072). Later scholarship viewed 
youth involvement in subcultures not as a reaction to class struggles or 
dominant culture, but as a lifestyle marked by fuid indicators such as con￾sumption habits and insider knowledge (Force, 2009). Research also sug￾gests individualized participation in these so-called youth movements, 
with involvement fuctuating over time (Andes, 1998). While early subcul￾tural research considered mass media a detriment to the existence of a 
subculture, post-subcultural theory identifed an “osmotic” relationship 
between subcultural elements and mainstream popular culture and media 
(Weinzierl & Muggleton, 2003, p. 7). In addition, Thornton (1996) sug￾gests that the relationship between youth cultures and mass media is not 
only inevitable but “central to the process of subcultural formation” 
(p. 117). As such, insight into the impact of Punk-O-Rama and Pro Skater
will further support the claim that the pervasiveness of commercial and 
widely distributed media played an important role in introducing new fans 
to punk rock.
4 ‘… AND OUT COME THE COMPS’: PUNK-O-RAMA…58
Further contemporary research on subcultures and music scenes sug￾gests that participation within a punk scene often extends into adult years 
(Bennett, 2006). While markers of involvement may evolve due to profes￾sional and career obligations (Sklar & Delong, 2012), many scene partici￾pants continue to identify with chosen elements of a subcultural ideology 
(Haenfer, 2018), or participate in subculture-specifc activities and con￾sumption habits as they age (Bernhard, 2019). As it will be explored here, 
participants identify themselves as members of their respective punk 
scenes, and while this commitment may be varied, participants often cited 
their continued affliation with punk rock (however it is defned) to an 
exposure to Punk-O-Rama and/or Pro Skater during adolescence.
Methods
To complete this study, 44 semi-structured in-depth interviews with par￾ticipants from seven countries (the United States, the United Kingdom, 
Indonesia, Canada, Australia, Brazil, and Italy) were conducted in May 
and June 2021. Participants were recruited via social media posts on 
Facebook and Twitter and through snowball sampling. Experiences with 
the Punk-O-Rama compilations and the Pro Skater soundtracks were 
sought in the recruitment posts, as an early pilot study focusing solely on 
the Punk-O-Rama compilations yielded only a handful of responses. The 
inclusion of both recordings produced a larger population of responses to 
the recruitment fyer. Interviews were conducted virtually, and partici￾pants were asked about their initial introduction to either the Punk-O￾Rama compilations or Pro Skater soundtracks. Interviews lasted between 
20 and 90 minutes. Questions addressed participants’ perceived signif￾cance of these recordings, how their continued interest in punk rock man￾ifests itself today, and how their current interest in punk rock can be 
credited to exposure to these recordings. Interviews were transcribed and 
analyzed using thematic analysis (Terry & Hayfeld, 2021). Relevant 
themes were determined and supportive evidence from the interviews are 
identifed below. Using interviewing as a methodology for this study was 
useful in considering the narrative retelling of participants’ introductions 
and their current connections to their own punk scenes today.
E. BERNHARD59
Findings
This study considers participants’ introductions to punk rock through 
Punk-O-Rama and Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater as peak music experiences 
that contributed to a long-term interest in punk rock. Themes identifed 
in this data provide insights into such introductions, a consideration of 
these recordings as gateways to further exploration of punk rock, and the 
lasting impact of Punk-O-Rama and Pro Skater on a current punk identity 
some 20 years later.
The Mall, the Wall, and Pizza Hut: Commercial Introductions
And then there was also a place called The Wall, they had a whole section of 
just compilations, and not having a lot of money back then, it was either you 
could spend seven to ten dollars on a [compilation] CD and you’d get like 
20 to 30 songs of various artists, or you spend $20 for one CD and you 
hope you like it all. (Ari)
Prior research shows that many listeners of contemporary punk rock were 
exposed to the genre through highly commercial means during the late 
1990s and early 2000s. Commercial sources include outlets such as MTV 
or local radio stations (Bernhard, 2019). With punk rock’s continued 
presence on these mediums, exposure to the genre often began as the lis￾tener learned about more popular bands, such as Green Day or the 
Offspring, through music videos or frequent radio plays. While many of 
the bands featured on Punk-O-Rama and Pro Skater were not always 
given similar airtime as bands such as Green Day, the ubiquity of the com￾pilations and video games in chain stores such as Best Buy and Walmart 
meant that listeners had access to bands that were easy to locate but were 
not necessarily featured on the commercial airwaves to the extent of more 
popular bands in the genre.
When asked about their introduction to either Punk-O-Rama or Pro 
Skater, several participants described their introduction to these record￾ings, which often came by way of promotional materials, mass media, and 
trips to the mall. Versions of Punk-O-Rama and Pro Skater were used 
promotionally in partnerships with other brands. In 1999, Pizza Hut 
announced a partnership with PlayStation to release game demo disks to 
promote upcoming video games for the platform (Silva, 2020). The pro￾motional disks offered a basic preview of the Pro Skater video game along 
4 ‘… AND OUT COME THE COMPS’: PUNK-O-RAMA…60
with one song that accompanied the level. Below, JB describes receiving 
the demo for Pro Skater, and how the demo led to an interest in punk rock 
and skateboarding:
I believe it was seventh, or sixth grade for me. So sixth grade, that had to 
have been 99, maybe 2000, before the game came out, because I received a 
demo from Pizza Hut. It was a demo from Pizza Hut where you can only 
play as Bob Burnquist or Tony Hawk. And you only have the frst level, and 
the only song was Goldfnger’s ‘Superman.’ And I would play it nonstop …. 
That basically flled up my days, it was just the same level over and over and 
over again.
Like JB, Austin found the music through a Pro Skater demo disk that 
came with a subscription to Offcial Dreamcast Magazine, a magazine dis￾tributed by Sega from 1999 to 2001, which promoted the video game 
console and corresponding video games:
In 2000, when I was 13, I got a Sega Dreamcast of all things. And I had a 
subscription to the Dreamcast magazine. And every month it had a demo 
disk, and one month the demo disk had the Tony Hawk Pro Skater demo on 
it. And it had three things: you had the warehouse level, you had Tony 
Hawk, and you had ‘New Girl’ by the Suicide Machines. And I played that 
demo, just that one two-minute loop so many times … I’ve listened to 
[‘New Girl’] literally thousands of times.
For others, the process of exploration began at the local mall. While 
some participants shared experiences of learning about the music from 
small independent record stores or through siblings and friends, several 
participants cited the mall as the locus of their introductions. Low price 
points for the Punk-O-Rama compilations meant that they were attractive 
to younger listeners, who may have lacked the disposable income to pur￾chase full-price, single-artist CDs. José recalled the appeal of this price 
point, along with the communal practice of trading and sharing the Punk￾O-Rama albums with friends:
This was defnitely during the era when, you know, most of my friends and 
I were too young to drive. So we’d be spending a lot of time mall rattin’, 
you know, nothing better to do. So those things were usually impulse buys 
on the counter at Hot Topic, like the various Punk-O-Ramas and Fat Wreck 
comps and some other ones. And it was just like, ‘hey, here’s a CD with like, 
E. BERNHARD61
15 or 20 bands for like, fve bucks, I could actually afford this and still get 
some food at the food court afterwards because none of us are old enough 
to work yet.’ And then you kind of worked out a system with your friends 
where it’s like, ‘alright, you buy that one, I’ll buy this one for fve bucks 
each, and then we’ll copy them off each other.’
Throughout the interviews, many participants cited cost and quantity 
as attractive features of these recordings. When asked about his interest in 
the Punk-O-Rama compilations, Devan explained the appeal of the series, 
and how the variety on the compilations led to further exploration of 
the genre:
[The compilations] were cheap. And if you spent fve bucks on one, and 
there was like two or three songs on it that you really liked, that seemed 
worth fve bucks, especially if that turns you on to another band that you’d 
be willing to explore further. We didn’t have flesharing, we didn’t have 
YouTube, there wasn’t even really a huge internet presence, not like we have 
now. Basically, if you wanted to discover a band, you really had to work hard 
at discovering a band and getting into it. So I think that you could call the 
comps a gateway drug for a lot of that because it helped facilitate your dis￾covery of a lot of different bands that maybe you wouldn’t have had a chance 
to check out.
With this low-price, high-quantity model and the availability of these 
recordings in locations such as the mall, participants did not need to have 
signifcant insider knowledge of punk rock to locate this music. The music 
was delivered (literally, in the case of the Pizza Hut promotional discs) to 
their doorsteps. In some cases, the introduction involved only one or two 
songs, whereas other participants described the compilation-sharing pro￾cess that would result in exposure to dozens of songs, bands, and record 
labels. Through connected networks of friends, participants viewed their 
purchases as a low-risk means for exploratory investigation into the genre, 
and these recordings helped to establish the groundwork for more in￾depth research into lesser-known bands and record labels.
The Enduring Impact of Punk-O-Rama and Pro Skater
As we get older, no matter what you’re into, I think you always want to kind 
of hold on to your youth … music always brings you back to some type of, 
4 ‘… AND OUT COME THE COMPS’: PUNK-O-RAMA…62
part of your life, whether you got into it in your 20s or your teens or what￾ever … as much as we may not want to admit to it. (Toby)
The enduring impact of Punk-O-Rama and Pro Skater proved signifcant 
in the interview data. Many participants viewed their exposure to either 
recording as a gateway to punk rock, which grew from an awareness of a 
few songs in the genre to a quest to fll the missing gaps in their punk 
discographies. Like the Punk-O-Rama compilations, the diverse 
soundtrack featured on Pro Skater offered a starting point for those inter￾ested in alternative music. For Andy, the soundtrack became an opportu￾nity to learn more not just about punk rock but also about other alternative 
genres featured on the soundtrack:
I defnitely think it was a gateway into that kind of culture, that kind of 
scene … if you like it, I think you’re going to naturally want to explore 
more, because it kind of exposed me to what else is out there in terms of 
music … like once you hear [punk rock] on [Pro Skater] and you’re like ‘oh, 
there’s a whole area of music that I’m completely not being exposed to, like 
what else is out there that I probably will like?’
Sam described their introduction, and recalled the importance of Punk￾O-Rama in providing a gateway to both punk rock and the coinciding 
punk ethos, while acknowledging the lack of women represented across 
the Punk-O-Rama series:
Like any time that anyone ever talks about how I got into punk, I remember 
specifcally Punk-O-Rama 3. So that was defnitely a gateway because it was 
such a variety of bands. Looking back at it the only thing that sucks is 
women weren’t really represented very well in a lot of these compilations, 
but it defnitely set me on that path of just being interested in music, being 
interested in subversive music communities.
For Max, the shared network of friends with similar music tastes, paired 
with research on the internet, became the logical next step in further pur￾suit of the genre. At a time prior to social media, streaming services, or 
algorithms, exploration of new music often meant relying on various 
resources to piece together a cohesive discography:
And so much of what I was doing was reading and listening to music, and 
using the early dial-up internet to fnd stuff to do and stuff that was 
E. BERNHARD63
interesting. And so, if somebody at school would give me a tape or CD … I 
just wanted to devour every second of it. I wanted to understand every note 
if they gave me the booklet with it, I was digging through the liner notes 
and looking for like any reference to something else that could be cool. And 
then, when we got access to the internet, it was like, looking for websites or 
interviews that were published online, printing them, which now seems 
ridiculous. But at the time that was like how to get them because I could go 
somewhere and buy a Rolling Stone or whatever. And sort of just poring 
over them and digging into them.
As the soundtrack of Pro Skater included a track listing of songs and 
artists, users could immediately identify the songs on the soundtrack, 
rather than having to locate this information elsewhere. Having this track 
listing allowed Caleb to search for these featured artists online and make 
connections with others interested in punk rock:
The soundtrack was in, it was in the credits of the game. So immediately, 
you could search for the band. And like I said, they’d mention other bands 
and there wasn’t an ‘associated artists’ at that time on Google, or anything. 
But that was the frst game for like, the hard online kids that would come to 
be, and I think it was so important in building a shared experience with 
people that you didn’t know.
Participants also described Punk-O-Rama and Pro Skater as evidence of 
being in the right place at the right time—a perfect storm facilitated by 
popular culture and technological advancements—and being the target 
demographic for these products. With pop punk on the radar of the 
masses, Punk-O-Rama and Pro Skater took advantage of the public’s 
interest in the genre during the mid and late-1990s. Below, Francisco 
describes the enduring legacy of Punk-O-Rama, and Epitaph’s role in 
bringing punk rock to mass audiences:
It seems like it was just a perfect moment in time for a lot of people. And it 
seemed like a really good, I guess, gateway drug. And they’re pretty time￾less. Every time I listen to [Punk-O-Rama] it’s like the frst time I’ve heard 
it. And I think they’ll stand the test of time. I haven’t really found many 
other comps that have really topped that as far as impact goes. But I think it 
was really just because of the age I was at [and] hearing it.
4 ‘… AND OUT COME THE COMPS’: PUNK-O-RAMA…64
Jared understood the Punk-O-Rama compilations to be evidence of 
Epitaph’s savvy marketing and their capitalizing on the public’s awareness 
of punk, which was brought on by more commercial bands receiving air￾play at the time:
Before the idea of flesharing, before this 21st century idea that music should 
be free, music was the thing you needed to purchase if you wanted to listen 
to it. And Epitaph was very, very smart, considering the bump they got from 
the Offspring, and then Rancid … it was this really sort of unique moment 
where the 80s underground was sort of splashing into the mainstream in 
this way that we, at the time, are still trying to grasp … and I think that the 
Punk-O-Rama series was Epitaph’s ‘we gotta strike while the iron’s hot.’
Many factors contributed to the success of Punk-O-Rama and Pro 
Skater and their prolonged impact on audiences. As evidenced here, these 
soundtracks were readily available in a time before flesharing—they were 
often the frst step for many participants to a more detailed exploration of 
alternative music. Participants described these experiences as gateways to 
further exploration, which was often facilitated by research conducted 
prior to a time when music was catalogued and readily available on the 
internet. In their discussion of seeking out this music, participants demon￾strated the ways that this process contributed to a peak music experience 
during adolescence. With music immediately available on smartphones 
and tablets today, the details of locating this music in a time when technol￾ogy was less intuitive, highlight the impact of both the music itself and the 
steps taken to complete a punk discography in the mid- to late 1990s.
Lasting Impression of Punk-O-Rama and Pro Skater
on the Current Punk Identity
In considering the long-term impact of Punk-O-Rama and Pro Skater and 
the infuence on a current punk identity, participants identifed many rea￾sons their exposure to the genre continued to be signifcant today. Political 
ideology often surfaced as a motivation for continued participation in a 
punk scene (however that participation is defned). For Vanessa, exposure 
to punk rock meant an introduction to relevant political ideologies that 
have stayed with her into adulthood:
E. BERNHARD65
[Punk rock] taught me that it was okay to be different. And I encourage 
myself and people in my life to do what they want, like not to worry about 
what people are going to say. I’m also, politically, I’m pretty strongly like 
left, socialist, and that kind of stuff. So I feel like it’s really shaped that 
aspect, like politically. I didn’t care about politics at all when I was younger, 
and as I’ve gotten older, it’s like all of these things are connected. Like my 
ideals that came along with being interested in this type of music go along 
with my ideals for what I think everybody should be allowed to access.
Like Vanessa, Frank and Isaac credited Punk-O-Rama and Pro Skater as 
facilitating their introductions to leftist politics, citing bands like Rage 
Against the Machine and Anti-Flag as integral to a current political 
mindset:
Frank: “I don’t know that I would have discovered Rage Against the 
Machine apart from Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater soundtrack. More 
than that I don’t think I would have gotten involved in more 
leftist thought or radical thinking.”
Isaac: “I think with the [George W.] Bush stuff in 2000–2001, or 
maybe a little after, I guess when the reelection was coming up 
and everyone was releasing like Punk Voter, and Anti-Flag was 
doing those albums, I think that was when I fnally got some￾what political. I don’t think I listened to any of those bands … so 
it defnitely helped shape me politically.”
In considering the legacy of either Punk-O-Rama or Pro Skater, par￾ticipants shared their views on the music’s impact and the ways this intro￾duction shaped an identity or current participation in a punk scene. For 
Alex, punk rock allowed for exploration into an identity during adoles￾cence, and a sense of camaraderie with other like-minded individuals:
I think playing Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater and listening to that music led me 
to begin to craft I guess one of my earliest senses of identity. And it was an 
identity that was cool, that was mine … And I think as I grew up and I went 
to college, the identity part of punk has always been a really big part of it, 
like this is a place with like-minded people. For once I feel like I sort of 
belong. I think that goes for a lot of punk … it’s like a feeling of community 
and camaraderie. Sort of shared commiseration.
4 ‘… AND OUT COME THE COMPS’: PUNK-O-RAMA…66
For Francisco, a love of punk rock—which began in adolescence—
transpired into a long-term participation in punk bands and punk-adjacent 
genres. Like Frank, Francisco credited the Punk-O-Rama compilations as 
providing an introduction to other, similar music styles:
Well, I started playing bass pretty shortly after getting those comps. We 
formed a band, I think in like early 2001. And I still play in bands now. So I 
guess I’ve been playing music—I’ve been playing punk and hardcore now 
for 20 years, which is pretty wild … But those comps were an introduction 
to more hardcore as well, because there were some other bands on there. 
Like Epitaph was kind of getting into the New York hardcore stuff. So, I 
heard Agnostic Front and H2O and Madball, and all those people. So today, 
I’m very involved, I play in a hardcore punk band. And also I play in a power 
violence band. I think I kind of started out in silly pop punk and made the 
evolution all the way up.
From the interviews conducted, it is evident that participants had 
strong nostalgic memories of both the music and the technology of the 
era—in this case, CDs and video games on long-obsolete consoles. Bolin 
(2016) describes this form of nostalgia as “technostalgia,” or a longing for 
media that is no longer cutting edge. This nostalgia is marked by the 
“shared media experience of people who have similar experiences” with 
this technology (p. 261). Jared described the process of collecting compi￾lations as a badge of honor—a practice that, due to streaming services and 
the decline of physical CD sales, manifests itself differently today:
I can only speak for myself here, but I think part of the attachment to the 
Punk-O-Rama series is that it is a bit of a secret handshake for people of a 
certain age. Because this is something that is defnitely something that you 
can brag about, like remembering a time when, you know, it’s like our gen￾eration’s version of ‘you had to walk uphill to school in the snow both ways’. 
You actually had to go to the CD shop and pay an exorbitant price for a 
piece of plastic that you would then put on your little boombox in your 
bedroom. Not too loud so your parents wouldn’t complain downstairs.
While Bolin (2016) argues that it is not the content that listeners miss, 
but, rather, the technologies themselves, this study is evidence that a long￾ingness for both can exist. Throughout the interviews, it was apparent that 
participants felt nostalgic for not only the music but also the music-fnding 
process. For participants, the act of fnding compilation CDs or playing 
E. BERNHARD67
video games was as important as the music itself. In thinking about this 
introduction and experience today, participants described their early expo￾sure to Punk-O-Rama and Pro Skater as integral to their continued appre￾ciation of the music and many of the ideologies found within, citing 
elements such as an aligned political ideology and the timing of their 
introductions as relevant.
Conclusion: Punk-O-Rama and Pro Skater as Peak
Music Experiences
That idea, that era, was super special. Getting comps was almost like a rite of 
passage. One, there’s a very real factor that they were cheap. But like, espe￾cially that time in that place, and at the age that I was, and realm of it being 
like, 2000, 2001, it really did feel like a rite of passage. (Austin)
As evidenced in this study, participants’ memories of the Punk-O-Rama
compilations and Pro Skater soundtracks are examples of peak music expe￾riences—such stories demonstrate that these specifc introductions were 
integral to a long-term interest in punk rock. An interest in punk rock was 
ignited by the compilation albums and soundtracks that were made acces￾sible due to their ubiquity in big box outlets, malls, and chain CD stores. 
Thus, the enduring success of these recordings demonstrates the inevita￾ble link between alternative cultures and popular culture. Punk-O-Rama
and Pro Skater provided low-cost, low-stakes introductions to punk rock, 
and because of the variety of these recordings, fans were exposed to a 
range of sounds they might not otherwise be exposed to from purchasing 
a $15 CD from one artist.
While the reminiscence bump may provide some insight into the sig￾nifcance of these albums for participants some 20 years later, this study 
demonstrates the ways these recordings provided a shared experience, 
connecting listeners to other likeminded individuals and spaces. According 
to Hancock and Lorr (2013), “musical practices, whether intentionally or 
unintentionally, are part of the constitution of self, social interaction, 
social settings, and social worlds” (p. 323). In their interviews, partici￾pants often described vivid recollections of their shared experiences—the 
time spent at the mall with friends looking for CDs or playing the video 
games in a bedroom after school with a sibling. Other participants men￾tioned the process of gathering “clues” in their investigations—tracking 
down similar artists or albums from the liner notes of CDs or studying 
4 ‘… AND OUT COME THE COMPS’: PUNK-O-RAMA…68
catalogs and mail-order fyers for new bands. While the music remained 
paramount, these peak music experiences manifested through both the 
music and the shared experience of exploring punk rock. While nostalgia 
for these times may be an important factor in the positive recollections 
participants had of these recordings, it is evident that this nostalgia is 
embedded in a current appreciation for both past and present music within 
the genre. Participants described their current perspectives on punk rock, 
noting their own involvement in bands, current appreciation for these 
recordings, and continued pursuit of new music as indicators of this impact.
The recordings’ releases at the turn of the millennium, coupled with 
the rise of at-home internet access and popular culture’s promotion of the 
genre meant that Punk-O-Rama and Pro Skater provided a gateway to 
punk rock for an entirely new generation of young fans through conve￾nient means. While technological advancements may keep another compi￾lation series or video game soundtrack from having such a lasting impact 
on fans, there is evidence to suggest that the peak music experiences shared 
in the interviews for this study demonstrate the nostalgic power of Punk￾O-Rama and Pro Skater and their contributions to an enduring interest in 
punk rock today.
References
Andes, L. (1998). Growing up Punk: Meaning and Commitment Careers in a 
Contemporary Youth Subculture. In J. S. Epstein (Ed.), Youth Culture: Identity 
in a Postmodern World (pp. 212–231). Wiley-Blackwell.
Bennett, A. (1999). Subcultures or Neo-Tribes? Rethinking the Relationship 
Between Youth, Style, and Musical Taste. Sociology, 33(3), 599–617. https://
doi.org/10.1177/S0038038599000371
Bennett, A. (2006). Punk’s Not Dead: The Continuing Signifcance of Punk Rock 
for An Older Generation of Fans. Sociology, 40(2), 219–235.
Bernhard, E. (2019). Contemporary Punk Rock Communities: Scenes of Inclusion 
and Dedication. Lexington.
Bertoli, B. (2019, August 25). The original Tony Hawk’s. Pro Skater Soundtrack 
is Still a Blast. Kotaku. https://kotaku.com/the-original-tony-hawks￾pro-skater-soundtrack-is-still-1836549933
Bienstock, R. (2014, April 8). How The Offspring’s Smash Defeated the Majors. 
Rolling Stone. https://www.rollingstone.com/music/music-news/the￾offsprings-smash-the-little-punk-lp-that-defeated-the-majors-189742/
E. BERNHARD69
Bolin, G. (2016). Passion and Nostalgia in Generational Media Experiences. 
European Journal of Cultural Studies, 19(3), 250–264. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1367549415609327
Bray, R. (2014, July 21). Punk Compilations Have Everything You Need. 
Consequence. https://consequence.net/2014/07/punk-compilations-have￾everything-you-need/
Chandler, A. (2014, February 1). Green Day’s Album Dookie is 20 Years Old 
Today. The Atlantic. https://www.theatlantic.com/culture/archive/
2014/02/green-days-album-dookie-20-years-old-today/357625/
Denzin, N. (1989). Interpretive Biography. SAGE.
Force, W.  R. (2009). Consumption Styles and the Fluid Complexity of Punk 
Authenticity. Symbolic Interaction, 32(4), 289–309. https://doi.org/10.1525/
si.2009.32.4.289
Green, B. (2016). ‘I Always Remember That Moment’: Peak Music Experiences 
as Epiphanies. Sociology, 50(2), 333–348. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0038038514565835
Haenfer, R. (2018). The Entrepreneurial (Straight) Edge: How Participation in 
DIY Music Cultures Translates to Work and Careers. Cultural Sociology, 12(2), 
174–192. https://doi.org/10.1177/1749975517700774
Hancock, B. H., & Lorr, M. J. (2013). More Than Just a Soundtrack: Toward a 
Technology of the Collective in Hardcore Punk. Journal of Contemporary 
Ethnography, 42(3), 320–346. https://doi.org/10.1177/0891241612465652
Hodkinson, P. (2013). Family and Parenthood in an Ageing “Youth” Culture: A 
Collective Embrace of Dominant Adulthood? Sociology, 47(6), 1072–1087. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0038038512454351
Hogan, M. (2015, April 16). How Much Is Music Really Worth? Pitchfork. 
https://pitchfork.com/features/article/9628-how-much-is-music￾really-worth/
Jakubowski, K., Eerola, T., Tillmann, B., Perrin, F., & Heine, L. (2020). A Cross￾Sectional Study of Reminiscence Bumps for Music-Related Memories in 
Adulthood. Music & Science, 3, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1177/
2059204320965058
Kien, G. (2013). The nature of epiphany. International Review of Qualitative 
Research, 6(4), 578–584. https://doi.org/10.1525/irqr.2013.6.4.578
Leak, B. (2019, August 30). “Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater,” Hugely Infuential in 
Both Music & Video Games, Turns 20. Loudwire. https://loudwire.com/
tony-hawk-pro-skater-20-anniversary-music-soundtrack-interview/
Longbottom, J. (2020, May 13). An Oral History of the Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater
Soundtrack, with Tony Hawk and Goldfnger’s John Feldman. Kerrang!
https://www.kerrang.com/features/20-years-of-tony-hawks-pro￾skater-an-oral-history-of-the-soundtrack-with-tony-hawk-goldfingers￾john-feldmann/
4 ‘… AND OUT COME THE COMPS’: PUNK-O-RAMA…70
Lowis, M. J. (2002). Music as a Trigger for Peak Experiences Among a College 
Staff Population. Creativity Research Journal, 14(3-4), 351–359. https://doi.
org/10.1207/S15326934CRJ1434_6
Maslow, A.  H. (1971). Peak Experiences in Education and Art. Theory Into 
Practice, 10(3), 149–153. http://www.jstor.org/stable/1475907
Ozzi, D. (2017, November 17). The Shape of Punk to Comp: How Cheap 
Compilation CDs Helped Revive a Genre. Vice. https://www.vice.com/en/
article/a37dzz/the-shape-of-punk-to-comp-v24n8
Pack, B. (2018, February 12). The Year Punk Went Pop: The Making of Green 
Day’s Dookie. https://vintageking.com/blog/2018/02/green-day-dookie/
Perez, M. (2020, September 14). ‘Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater 1 & 2’ Becomes 
Fastest-Selling Game in Series with 1 Million Copies Sold-Through. Forbes.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/mattperez/2020/09/14/tony-hawks-pro-skater￾1%2D%2D2-becomes-fastest-selling-game-in-series-with-1-million-copies￾sold-through/?sh=75626f757059
Schubert, E. (2016). Does Recall of a Past Music Event Invoke a Reminiscence Bump 
in Young Adults? Memory, 24(7), 1007–1014. https://doi.org/10.1080/
09658211.2015.1061014
Silva, M. (2020, April 14). Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater, Pizza Hut, and the Greatest 
Video Game Demo Ever. Escapist Magazine. https://www.escapistmagazine.
com/tony-hawks-pro-skater-demo-disc-pizza-hut/
Singh, S. (2020, September 15). ‘Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater 1 + 2’ Sells 1 Million 
Copies, Makes Franchise History. NME. https://www.nme.com/news/
gaming- news/tony- hawks- pro-skater- 1 - 2 -sells- one- million￾copies-makes-franchise-history-2753100
Sklar, M., & DeLong, M. (2012). Punk Dress in the Workplace: Aesthetic 
Expression and Accommodation. Clothing and Textiles Research Journal, 30(4), 
285–299. https://doi.org/10.1177/0887302X12467848
Terry, G., & Hayfeld, N. (2021). Essentials of thematic analysis. American 
Psychological Association.
“The Seventh Edition of Epitaph Records’ Punk-O-Rama Compilation Series Will 
be Released June 25 and Feature 19 Tracks from the Likes of Rancid, Bad 
Religion, NOFX, Pennywise, the Hives, and Bouncing Souls.” (2002, April 8). 
https://www.billboard.com/articles/news/76192/epitaph-acts-crowd￾punk-o-rama
Thornton, S. (1996). Club Cultures: Music, Media and Subcultural Capital. 
Wesleyan University Press.
Weinzierl, R., & Muggleton, D. (2003). What is “Post-subcultural Studies” 
Anyway? In D. Muggleton & R. Weinzierl (Eds.), The Post-Subcultures Reader
(pp. 3–23). Berg.
E. BERNHARD© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 71
Switzerland AG 2024
L. Way, M. Grimes (eds.), Punk, Ageing and Time, Palgrave Studies 
in the History of Subcultures and Popular Music, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47823-9_5
CHAPTER 5
Young Punk, Old Punk, Running Punk: 
Keeping the Old Ones Cool and the Young 
Ones Fresh
Ashley Morgan and Chris Inglis
Introduction
This chapter explores ageing from the perspective of two individuals who 
met through a running club, Running Punks. Ashley Morgan is 55 and 
has been running for 34 years; Chris Inglis is 28 and has been running for 
much of his life. The main perspective of this work is the way in which they 
have established a friendship, despite their age difference, through a 
mutual love of punk music and the way in which they have developed a 
sense of shared identity as Running Punks.
Running Punks is a weekly running group with a large social media 
presence founded in South Wales in 2020. The group was formed by two 
A. Morgan (*) 
Cardiff Metropolitan University, Cardiff, UK
e-mail: asmorgan@cardiffmet.ac.uk
C. Inglis 
BIMM Bristol, Bristol, UK72
ex-musicians: Jimmy Watkins—guitarist and award-winning athlete (hav￾ing represented Wales in the 2006 Commonwealth Games)—and drum￾mer and teacher Rhodri Morgan (Lloyd, 2021). The group was set up in 
the pandemic to provide a space for people who wanted to run but were 
alienated by the ‘sportiness’ of traditional running groups (Morgan, forth￾coming). Running Punks have developed merchandise with a distinctive 
logo comprising of two safety pins (to refect punk attitude) in tie-dye 
fabric, pink and leopard print, which have traditionally been outside the 
norm of the standard running kit.
Since the launch, the group has expanded signifcantly, with online fol￾lowers and participants joining in from all over the globe with so-called 
virtual runs in their own local areas. These runs are also supplemented by 
a series of videos, in which Watkins regularly uploads recordings of himself 
reviewing brand new and classic albums whilst running. Despite very few 
of the group being old enough to have been present during the original 
punk scene of the 1970s, they share a mutual sense of appreciation for the 
music of this era, and for the various subgenres and scenes that were to 
grow out of this movement. Transcending various ages, the group is 
united by their shared punk identity and by a recognition of the social and 
physical benefts of collective exercise.
The term ‘punk’ is used here to mean a DIY attitude to running, based 
on rebellion against the usual confnes of running clubs (Lloyd, 2021). 
For example, there are no coaches, membership is not contingent on 
going at a specifc pace, and there is no focus on Personal Bests (PBs) in 
the group. Moreover, there is an anarchistic approach to membership, 
there are no subscription fees to pay, and the group consciously rejects the 
customary ‘sportiness’ commonly associated with running clubs, groups, 
and runners (Morgan, forthcoming). In this way, Running Punks espouses 
DIY as a ‘core punk value’ (Way, 2021, p. 107) and punk here as a ‘state 
of mind’ (Way, 2021).
While much research exists on ageing runners and ageing punks, until 
now they have been exclusive of each other. Research about punk and age￾ing has focused primarily on music (Davis, 2012; Bennett, 2006; 
Hodkinson, 2013; Way, 2020), some of which discusses the intergenera￾tional aspects of ageing (Bennett & Hodkinson, 2012). Research on age￾ing and running tends to focus on ageing bodies of athletes rather than on 
people who run for recreational purposes (Tulle, 2008a, 2008b).
Therefore, this chapter aims to examine ageing and punk as a sense of 
shared identity. Employing an auto-ethnographic method, we explore the 
A. MORGAN AND C. INGLIS73
ways in which shared discourse of music through friendships formed in 
Running Punks affords a sense of ‘age-convergence’ and shared identity 
amongst a group of individuals aged between 21 and over 60. We have 
adopted the term ‘age-convergence’ to demonstrate that, despite coming 
from different generations, members of the group share more commonali￾ties than differences in terms of who they are.
The chapter is split into three distinct areas. Beginning with a brief sec￾tion on our methods to provide a rationale for our auto-ethnographic 
approach, we will then give insight into the existing literature surrounding 
the topics of punk and ageing, and ageing and running, before turning to 
our own experiences of punk and running. We will locate our memories of 
growing up and the ways in which we accessed music; question how we 
became people who run and our relationship with running; and explore 
why we joined the Running Punks. Through these accounts, we aim to 
give insight into the cultures of punk, running, and ageing that have previ￾ously been absent.
Method
Initially, we intended to conduct qualitative research across the legion of 
Running Punks, who have a healthy global following; for instance—at the 
time of writing—Twitter shows 10,400 followers, Instagram 11,300, and 
Facebook 4691. Obviously, there will be some crossover between these fol￾lowers, and not all of them will necessarily identify as punk, or indeed as 
runners. We aimed to fnd a sample of participants from a wide range of 
ages and backgrounds and to conduct one-to-one interviews to gain 
insight into a range of perspectives.
However, time, space, pandemic conditions, and ill health all impacted 
on our ability to do this to the degree we wanted. Therefore, we shifted 
our approach to employ an auto-ethnographic method instead, to explore 
our own experiences of music, running, and ageing. While intergenera￾tional friendships are not uncommon, aside from meeting in a workplace, 
it is unlikely that Ashley and Chris would know each other socially in a 
domain other than through Running Punks. Therefore, we see this as an 
opportunity to discuss the ways in which music and running impacted our 
lives when growing up, shaping who we are today, and which has brought 
us together as friends with a shared identity.
By valuing hindsight and ‘epiphanies’ (Ellis et al., 2011; Cotter, 2017), 
the auto-ethnographic method aims to contribute frst-hand ‘experiences 
5 YOUNG PUNK, OLD PUNK, RUNNING PUNK: KEEPING THE OLD ONES…74
of the cultural freedoms and constraints one encounters’ (Ettore, 2017, 
p. 257). By focusing on music and running, we have tried to ‘help one 
another relive and describe [our] recollection of emotional experiences’ 
(Rodriguez & Ryave, 2002, p. 7). Through examining the ways in which 
we see our own identities through punk in terms of being outside of the 
norm (Crossley, 2015) and the impact of the shared experiences of music 
on our ageing, we argue that our shared love of music considered to be 
‘alternative’ and running in a group where the usual constraints of compe￾tition are absent breaks down the usual barriers of age which would nor￾mally be more prevalent in a running group. Therefore, we have both 
been able to lay claim to a shared identity, and a convergence of age as 
Running Punks, despite our generational and other experiential 
differences.
Ageing: Punk and Running
Ideas about what it means to age and to get ‘older’ have shifted consider￾ably in the past 25 years. Many late twentieth-century academic studies 
have focused on the cultural construction of ageing through a prism of 
negativity: fears around loss of identity, social and cultural depreciation, 
and confation of ageing with illness (Featherstone & Hepworth, 1991; 
Blaikie, 1999; Turner, 2008; Gilleard & Higgs, 2000), in parallel with the 
conficting political and economic desire to ‘age well’ (Dupuis & 
Alzheimer, 2011). Yet the tide inexorably turned. In the West, people 
raised after the Second World War, known as baby boomers (those born 
between 1946 and 1964) (Singh & Weimar, 2017), changed ideas about 
ageing from that of deterioration, to success. This has largely been defned 
through economic prosperity and longevity, along with positive attitudes 
(Bowling, 2005). Music championed and enjoyed by baby boomers such 
as rock and punk has also endured. Much has been written about punk as 
a musical and anarchic attitude, with young people seeking to challenge 
existing established tropes of being and creativity (Hebdige, 1979). At 
frst, punk was seen as a particularly youthful subculture, and even those 
who might be described as older punks were usually only just beyond ado￾lescence (Crossley, 2015). Yet, now, baby boomer punks are as likely to 
engage with the punk subculture as younger fans, to the point that punk 
gigs have been referred to as ‘increasingly multigenerational’ (Bennett & 
Hodkinson, 2012, p. 2).
A. MORGAN AND C. INGLIS75
Punk Music and Ageing
When I’m lying in my bed at night;
I don’t want to grow up;
Nothing ever seems to turn out right;
I don’t want to grow up ….
(Ramones, 1995)
A great deal of research exists about punk. For instance, it has been 
argued that punk ‘is symbolic of Britain’ (Crossley, 2015, p. 2); that the 
ethos of punk is based on the precepts of anarchy and radicalism (Cogan, 
2007); and that it is a means through which one can resist standard gen￾der norms (Leblanc, 1999). Indeed, since 2012, the journal Punk & 
Post-Punk (Intellect.com) has devoted itself to various discussions around 
the genre.
The topic of punk and ageing has gained signifcant traction amongst 
academics, as people who were probably too young to be in the thick of 
punk in the early 1970s have kept it alive, maintaining a punk identity 
despite their increasing years (Davis, 2012; Way, 2020). However, much 
of the present explorations into punk and ageing have been somewhat 
limited in scope, as most of this research has been done specifcally in the 
context of people who engage with each other through the music alone. 
As Way confrms (2020), there are very few academic examinations to date 
which address the ways in which older people engage with punk in areas 
outside of the music.
There are therefore gaps in the current literature. Morgan (forthcom￾ing) notes that while much has been written about punk and activities 
such as cycling, football, skateboarding, and surfng, there has been very 
little written about the relationship between punk and running, other than 
the much-quoted (and possibly apocryphal) stories about marathon run￾ning from the lead singer of punk rock band The Clash, Joe Strummer 
(Morgan, forthcoming). This would suggest that few have considered 
there to be an established link between the two, and that the Running 
Punks group has managed to tap into a unique alliance that was previously 
unexplored.
In the mid-twentieth century, due to the rise of burgeoning youth cul￾ture (Hebdige, 1979), ageing and the signs of ageing became problem￾atic. Youth was considered to have more cultural capital than older people, 
5 YOUNG PUNK, OLD PUNK, RUNNING PUNK: KEEPING THE OLD ONES…76
and anyone over the age of ffty was ‘past it’, out of touch with important 
issues of youth and part of the much-hated establishment (Gilleard & 
Higgs, 2000). Life as an older person meant that you were sequestered 
from regular society (Blaikie, 1999; Gilleard & Higgs, 2000) perhaps in 
poverty and deteriorating: ‘a period of decline which is at best laughable, 
and at worst, disgusting’ (Featherstone & Hepworth, 1991, p. 380). 
Accordingly, fear of ageing was reproduced through music. Many songs 
from the late 1960s onwards such as ‘Turn! Turn! Turn!’ by the Byrds 
(1965), ‘When I’m Sixty-Four’ by The Beatles (1967), and ‘Those Were 
the Days’ by Mary Hopkin (1969) either refected on better, more youth￾fully pleasant times or jokingly feared what happened when ageing took 
hold. Each generation turned its back on the previous decade, and, for 
some, death sounded preferable to a life of old age, as The Who infamously 
pointed out in the song ‘My Generation’ (1965), through the lyric ‘hope I 
die before I get old’. Several decades later, these themes would crop up 
most notably for the punk movement in the Ramones’ cover of Tom Waits’ 
‘I Don’t Want to Grow Up’ (1995)—the lyrics of which introduced this 
section—which speaks of fear of responsibility, fnancial hardship, and physi￾cal decline: ‘I don’t want to be flled with doubt, I don’t want my hair to fall 
out’. This would symbolise what many would consider to be the emblem￾atic punk attitude: that youthful spirit of rebellion that refuses to acknowl￾edge one’s inevitable ageing, instead focusing solely on the now. (There is 
some level of irony in the fact the Joey Ramone was already 43 when the 
song was released in 1995, although his imminent death only six years later 
meant than his words would remain somewhat more truthful than Roger 
Daltrey’s—who is still singing ‘My Generation’ into his late 70 s).
As the 1960s gave way to the 1970s, punk as a movement and then a 
subculture aimed to challenge the mediocrity of 1970s music and estab￾lishment through DIY processes of music, clothing, and attitude (Crossley, 
2015). Once responsibility kicked in, through work or family, life was bor￾ing, and, moreover, ageing equalled ugliness, especially for women (Ross, 
2021). Punk music of the late 1970s and 1980s also refected this fear of 
ageing and the economic recessions of the 1970s and 1980s in the UK 
(Crossley, 2015). The Clash 1977 track ‘Janie Jones’, starkly outlines life 
for many young people in Britain at the time, when work might often be 
boring, and people looked for ways to alleviate that boredom. Indeed, Joe 
Strummer worked as a grave digger in South Wales in the early 1970s 
(Barnes, 2021).
A. MORGAN AND C. INGLIS77
He’s in love with rock ’n’ roll, whoa
He’s in love with gettin’ stoned, whoa
He’s in love with Janie Jones, whoa
He don’t like his boring job, no.
Ageing, and the ways in which people expressed their ageing bodies or 
spoke about the absence of ageing also became subject to much sociologi￾cal scrutiny in the late 1980s and 1990s. This saw a shift in traditionally 
gerontological scientifc approaches to ageing which had been the stan￾dard approach to examining how people felt about their ageing bodies, 
and bodies became much more central to discussions of ageing and ageing 
‘well’ (Öberg, 1996). Ageing was linked to decline in the body from a 
cultural perspective (Hepworth, 2003) and feminist perspectives (Paulson 
& Willig, 2008), amongst others. Ageing was often absent in popular 
culture (Featherstone & Hepworth, 1991; Blaikie, 1999), TV series such 
as The Golden Girls (1985–1992) notwithstanding. Blaikie refers to ageing 
as an ‘organising principle’ of society which impacts on the structure of 
society and the way that individuals see themselves, and are seen by others, 
within that structure (1999, p. 15); as Twigg argues, signs of ageing are a 
‘key indicator of identity of difference’ (2006, p. 2). Consequently, since 
the early twentieth century, age has created distinctions between people.
These distinctions have resulted in a binary opposition of ‘us and them’, 
that Davis suggests is embodied by the punk ethos (2012). This theory is 
supported by Tsitsos (2012), who analyses the proximity between the 
stage and the mosh pit in terms of ageing, and suggests that the older fans 
get, they move away from the front ‘zone’, which they then look back on 
nostalgically. However, Marciniak (2015) refers to the ‘continuous 
involvement’ of people of all ages in the punk subculture in Poland, chal￾lenging the notion of punk being the subcultural domain of young people.
Auto-ethnographic Accounts
Punk Across Generations
The research is split into three distinct sections. Using auto-ethnographic 
accounts from memory, we explore the differences and similarities between 
our experiences of punk music, of running, and of the Running Punks. We 
discuss the ways in which we accessed music in a time before digital stream￾ing, the desire to appear ‘alternative’ to the mainstream, and authenticity.
5 YOUNG PUNK, OLD PUNK, RUNNING PUNK: KEEPING THE OLD ONES…78
When You Were Growing Up, What Music Did You Listen To?
Ashley: I became a teenager in the 1980s. I honestly can’t remember how I 
came to like the music that I do, or indeed how I accessed it. I remember 
listening to John Peel, and hearing ‘Omega Amigo’ by The Shamen, his 
criticism of The Cocteau Twins Victorialand LP as being ‘all New Agey’ and 
playing very early Pulp. When I was in school, I was listening to Bauhaus 
and Gene Loves Jezebel, as well as Billy Joel and Ann Peebles, so it was 
weird. I also remember that music was much less democratic then. You had 
to pick a side. I chose punk. The Fall, Sonic Youth, Magazine and Johnny 
Thunders, The Only Ones, as well as a bit of Crass on the side.
My friend had a video recorder. In the 1980s as a teenager, I remember 
going around to hers after school to see the Bill Grundy Interview of the Sex 
Pistols from 1976, and she recorded Michael Jackson’s ‘Thriller’. We kept 
rewinding it and watching it; it was one of the most amazing things we’d 
ever seen. I also remember seeing Blondie sing ‘Atomic’ on Top of the Pops, 
and it stayed with me. Debbie Harry in a bin bag with a telephone wire 
around her neck was one of the frst times I released that I found women 
attractive.
Where I was from, you either liked chart music such as Wham! or punk 
or metal. At the time, Top of the Pops was one of the few places one could 
access music, and you had to wait to hear the song you liked by someone 
like, The Cure, for example. I always was an outsider from where I am from. 
I had a funny name and people often didn’t like me as I seemed outside of 
the norms for the area. While I got bullied a great deal, and I sought to ‘ft 
in’, I was conficted as I didn’t like mainstream music very much.
My friends and I followed a punk group from Warminster; was it the 
Subhumans?1
I remember travelling in the back of a van to Swansea to see them. I 
remember seeing The Damned several times. I went to Art College when I 
was 19, and one of the other students was Roman Jugg’s brother. My friends 
and I would go to Cardiff to see bands such as Siouxsie and the Banshees, 
Billy Bragg, and New Model Army, then catch the ‘milk train’ in the middle 
of the night to get home. But I wasn’t always allowed out to gigs especially 
in different towns.
By the time I was 20, I had moved to London and my love affair with 
John Peel continued. I was able to see more bands, The Sugarcubes, That 
Petrol Emotion, Sonic Youth supported by Mudhoney, the Wedding 
Present, and Shelleyan Orphan. I guess it was a bit more post-punk late 
1 It was actually Shrapnel, a punk band from Briton Ferry, South Wales, who supported 
Subhumans on tour.
A. MORGAN AND C. INGLIS79
1980s music then. Its latterly that I have seen a band with punk credentials 
such as Public Image.
Chris:I think that there’s an extent to which I’ve always had a bit of an 
outsider approach to music. Growing up as a teenager, I would take a cer￾tain amount of naïve pride in deliberately rejecting that which a lot of my 
peers were listening to, and would pay very little attention to whatever was 
happening in the mainstream charts, choosing instead to listen to classic 
rock from long before my time (in fact, it was only really once I reached my 
20s that I realised just how fantastic some pop music can actually be). Of 
course, I didn’t realise the irony in that much of what I was listening to was 
just as mainstream as the pop music I chose to reject, and I didn’t yet realise 
that one really had to dig to fnd the most interesting stuff.
I can recall vividly my frst discovery of punk, having somehow gotten my 
hands on a compilation CD that came free with a copy of Mojo magazine in 
March 2003—when I would have been nine—entitled Up Yours! I still have 
the CD. Featuring 1970s acts such as the Sex Pistols and the Clash alongside 
more contemporary bands like the Libertines and Sleater-Kinney, this record 
thoroughly changed my outlook on music. I had never before experienced 
anything so expressive, demonstrating such visceral passion as the songs on 
this release; and I realised that you didn’t have to be as polished or refned 
as the artists I was already familiar with to create truly great art.
I also quickly fell in love with the bands coming out of the 1990s 
California scene around this time, such as Goldfnger, NoFX, Rancid, and 
The Offspring. Although I was perhaps a little late to the scene, it was so 
exciting to have these artists continue to both tour and release new music, 
and I would eagerly follow all exciting new developments in their careers. 
On top of this, I was continually discovering more and more of the ‘classic’ 
punk groups, and acts such as X-Ray Spex, the Ramones, and Talking Heads 
remain some of my favoured go-to acts to this day.
Like countless other teenagers throughout time, I also founded and 
played in several bands, combining a mixture of three-chord originals with 
crowd-pleasing (or sometimes not so crowd-pleasing) covers. Across my 
various outfts, we regularly gigged in and around Newcastle upon Tyne, 
and for a few innocent years I was seriously trying to pursue an eventual 
career as a professional punk rocker. The thrill of being on stage is a memory 
that has not left me, and those early experiences were undoubtedly educa￾tional and formative with regard to creating the person I am today.
A key theme which emerged in both our narrative accounts is ‘outsider￾ism’, and the feeling that we both have tastes that fall somewhere beyond 
the status quo. For example, for Ashley it was the realisation that through 
female-fronted bands such as Blondie, she found women attractive, an 
5 YOUNG PUNK, OLD PUNK, RUNNING PUNK: KEEPING THE OLD ONES…80
idea which was unconventional in the 1980s. Although Blondie were 
post-punk, Debbie Harry in a binbag in the video for Atomic clearly 
espoused the punk aesthetic of the 1970s, through both her subversion 
and reappraisal of the traditional gender norms of the time.
For Chris it was a matter of feeling authenticity and pride in his interest 
in punk music. As individuals who may have struggled to identify with 
some of the more mainstream cultures or subcultures, punk has presented 
an outlet by which individuals may identify with others who were unable 
to identify anywhere else. Arguably, this is the core of the punk mentality 
and the ideology that punk gave rise to has its roots in this state of mind. 
This has been explored at length by Anderson, who speaks of ‘the experi￾ence of alienation as a common ground that leads to bonding’ within the 
punk subculture (Anderson, 2012, p. 57).
Bennett’s 2006 study into ageing fans who would have been adoles￾cents when punk frst emerged found that they still placed a signifcant 
value on the music and scene. Although some participants had modifed 
their appearance to ft in with ageing and the responsibilities that it brings, 
they still considered punk to be a major infuence in their lives. 
Bennett notes:
the older punk fans I interviewed celebrated punk’s longevity as a ‘living 
culture’, punctuated both by the musical and stylistic innovations of new 
punk generations and by a reverence among old and young members of the 
punk scene for the ‘subcultural moments’ of the past’. (2006, p. 230)
He describes this shared understanding of what punk is and means 
through a lens of ‘collective nostalgia’, in which the older fans help to 
educate the younger fans about the lessons of the past, whilst the younger 
fans in turn help to keep the scene alive. Echoing this, in describing his 
own experiences as an ageing punk, Hermann believes that ‘I did not just 
tell my story, I told our story. I became a bridge from our past into our 
present’ (2014, p. 167).
This notion is something that we have then seen repeated within our 
own accounts. As a participant in the scene from the comparatively 
younger generation, Chris’ discovery of punk was defned by the presenta￾tion of this music to him by older participants, situated alongside the more 
contemporary examples of the genre from his generation. It is Ashley’s 
generation who are responsible for disseminating this information. 
Through each generation’s passing of the culture onto the next, the music 
of punk has been given the opportunity to endure.
A. MORGAN AND C. INGLIS81
Running Across Generations
Having explored our respective relationships with music, the next part of 
the research will address our relationships with running. Again, we intend 
to give insight into the different ways one can engage with this activity.
When Did You Start Running and What Have Been 
Your Experiences?
Ashley: I have never been a ‘sporty’ person. At school I was the person 
picked last for netball, and the other girls would collectively groan, and then 
shout at me as I dropped the ball. I started running when I left home at 20. 
I had moved to London and was living with a boyfriend who ran. I remem￾ber buying my frst pair of running shoes from Run and Become in Covent 
Garden in 1988. They were Brookes. I don’t know what shorts or top I 
wore. There might have been a bra, but it wasn’t a special running bra. I 
used to run around the housing estate I lived on. I ran in the evenings, in 
the dark, and I really, really loved it, despite once being chased by a gang of 
teenage boys.
I moved back to Wales and carried on running. I tried to join a running 
group. Everyone wanted to run and then drink pints of beer after it. There 
was much talk of ‘PBs’ (personal bests)—I realised then that I was a solitary 
runner, and I enjoyed running for its own sake. Moreover, when I began 
running, it was mainly men who you saw out running the streets.
I went to university, and I carried on running. Eventually, it became who 
I am rather than something that I did. If I go on holiday, I go for a run. If I 
go to academic conferences, I go for a run. I fnd it a really interesting way 
to discover cities I might not already know and being alone is always positive.
Having joined the Running Punks and listening to what other people 
think and feel about running, I realise that I am a compulsive runner—it 
never occurs to me that I might not ‘want’ to go for a run. I just run. I don’t 
like competition unless it’s being competitive with myself. I did one of the 
frst Cardiff Half Marathons in the late 1980s, and I have run it numerous 
times, but, fundamentally, I don’t like races. It’s clearly not why I run.
Chris:Running is the only sport I’ve ever really excelled at. We covered 
various sports when I was at school. I hated football and cricket. Rugby was 
okay but growing up in England there was never too much attention focused 
on it. But a few weeks in the winter meant cross-country, and a few more in 
the summer meant athletics—and this was the only time I’d ever be able to 
exhibit any sort of prowess in PE.
I carried on running after I left school. The sport is thought of very 
highly in Newcastle, with several world-class athletes hailing from the 
5 YOUNG PUNK, OLD PUNK, RUNNING PUNK: KEEPING THE OLD ONES…82
Northeast—Steve Cram, Brendan Foster, etc.—as well as being the home of 
two signifcant races: the Great North Run, the world’s biggest half mara￾thon; and the Blaydon Race, which forms a crucial part of the city’s cultural 
history. Most Geordies will therefore feel some sort of affnity with the sport 
then, and I was certainly no exception. I competed in the Great North Run 
for the frst time in 2010, at the age of 17.
After I left Newcastle, I carried on running, though it was fairly infre￾quent. I would probably average around one or two races per year, but 
always tried to compete in the offcial half marathon of whichever city I was 
living in at the time—the half marathon being the distance I was keenest on. 
It wasn’t until around 2018, a couple of years after moving to Cardiff, that 
I decided to take running a little more seriously. I joined a club—CDF 
Runners; started taking part in Saturday morning Parkruns on a weekly 
basis; and began entering a lot more races. It felt good to have something to 
dedicate myself to, and it was something that I genuinely enjoyed. This has 
remained the number one priority for me—and I have always placed my 
enjoyment above any race times or other achievements.
Running, like punk, can be viewed as a culture of its own. As with many 
sports, it can be based on uniformity and exclusivity (Morgan, forthcom￾ing), with a greater focus on competition, athletes, and athleticism than 
recreation and enjoyment—even at a non-competitive level. It has also 
been argued that competitive running is essentially ageist, with the age of 
veterans starting at 35 (Fish, 2018); this is despite evidence to suggest that 
decline in competence of running with age happens very slowly 
(Middlebrook, 2020). Tulle’s seminal work on ageing runners focuses on 
the philosophy of embodiment and effects of ageing amongst elite runners 
in athletic circles (2008a). However, running as a recreational activity has 
fourished in recent times, with record numbers of people of all ages run￾ning outside (Smith, 2020).
One aspect of running that has been explored extensively is the sense of 
identity it can afford. For instance, in their study into another group of 
distance runners, Chalmers and Arthur discuss the process of ‘leisure 
activities taking on extreme levels of importance for an individual and 
becoming the dominant aspect of the individual’s lifestyle and social iden￾tity’ (2008, p. 570).
as individuals become more embedded in a collective, their perception of 
self changes from that of an individual person to being an exemplar of the 
group. This occurs as an individual increases their level of identifcation with 
A. MORGAN AND C. INGLIS83
the group though increased involvement, knowledge, possessions related to 
the identity, esteem related to the identity, and social connections related to 
the identity (Chalmers & Arthur, 2008, p. 571)
Arguably, what emerges for many in groups is the ‘social world which 
has fourished over time as a consequence of sustained participation by 
enthusiasts in that activity’ (Shipway et al., 2013, p. 260). Moreover, the 
sense of collective identity as a runner can be so strong that some may 
make an effort to maintain it even during times of injury:
Not only did we signify to ourselves the continuity of our running selves, 
but also to other members of the running community, despite our current 
injured state. We sought to claim social identities as runners. (Allen￾Collinson & Hockey, 2007, p. 15)
This also explains Tulle’s description of ‘the self as the true site of social 
value [in which] agers seek social and cultural rehabilitation by distancing 
the self from its physical shell’ (2008b, p. 4). The ageing runner may con￾tinue to run, even if they are potentially inficting damage upon their body, 
as by this point it is simply a part of who they are. Consequently, we fnd 
a distinction between this identity and that of someone who is just an 
occasional runner—with Hitching and Latham making distinct reference 
to a participant in their study, who ‘is not merely someone who runs, she 
is a runner’ [original emphasis] (2017, p. 4). Runners tend to be people 
who want to push themselves hard, and not just run (or engage in any 
other activities) for recreational purposes alone. Moreover, the relation￾ship between running and mental health wouldn’t have been so overtly 
discussed in the past as it is now (Oswald et al., 2020).
In both of our responses, this sense of identity seems profound. Both 
of us indicated that running is congruent with who we are. We also both 
placed great value upon our reasons for running being that of recreation 
and enjoyment. As with our love of music, we can see that the gratifcation 
we receive from participating in this activity remains our key reason for 
doing so. This sense of enjoyment that has led to the ‘runner’ identity that 
we have both adopted seems to be present regardless of age. While Chris 
began running throughout his teens, for Ashley, it helped her transition 
into independent adulthood, and the consideration of age is not some￾thing that has factored into this outcome.
5 YOUNG PUNK, OLD PUNK, RUNNING PUNK: KEEPING THE OLD ONES…84
Generations Across Running Punks
The third, fnal section of our research explores the Running Punks directly 
and examines our respective reasons for identifying with and joining 
the group.
When Did You Join Running Punks and Why Did 
You Join Them?
Ashley: In the summer of 2020 when the lockdown was in full swing, I was 
giving a presentation through Twitter for a conference, and I was nervous. 
I used Twitter to message Lauren Laverne the breakfast DJ on BBCRadio6 
music and asked her to play my request. Which she did. Later in the week, I 
heard her talking about a Welsh man called Jimmy Watkins who was a run￾ner, but also did music reviews as he ran. I found and friended him on 
Twitter, and he made me laugh. One day I saw a video that he posted in 
which he was wearing a silly hat and child’s sunglasses and said that there 
would be a run in Cardiff that Sunday, at 8.30.
Given my lack of interest in running in groups, I was extremely tentative. 
I turned up, and Jimmy and I recognised each other. I looked at the other 
people. It was a sea of men with beards, one of whom had a pink mohawk, 
and two women. I remember thinking, ‘oh no, I don’t like this at all’. I am 
wary of men in general. Having run for over 30 years before joining Running 
Punks, I had received considerable abuse from men, from the general ‘get 
your tits out, keep your legs up’ variety, to having things thrown at me, and 
men trying to corner me. So, I was very, very put off when I turned up.
Many of the men seemed to know each other and stood around chatting. 
Some of them looked like actual athletes. Chris was there, and it was his 
birthday. Jimmy was friendly and recognised me from social media, and gave 
me this amazing pink top with a Running Punks logo on it to run in. The 
idea was that we would run together with music. So, Jimmy had a little 
speaker system. His catchphrase for the running music reviews was, ‘the 
watch is on, the music’s on’, which he shouted as we set off. Something 
weird happened inside me when we set off, I felt positive and free within a 
in a group of people, which I never usually do—I normally feel very self￾conscious. So, I let out a four-syllable cry, which is from the song ‘Lucky 
Number’ by Lene Lovich. And Jimmy responded with ‘exactly’. Since then, 
it’s become my ‘thing’, which I do when I am happy and/or running under 
bridges.
As it was the frst run, and the Punks wanted to be as encouraging and 
inclusive as possible, we had the option of turning back after 5k, but I think 
most people stuck with it. A quiet chap called Rhod came to chat to me. 
A. MORGAN AND C. INGLIS85
Started asking me questions about myself, ‘Had long had I been running 
long etc?’ I told him how much I liked the Running Punks logo and the 
T-shirts. He said that it had been designed to mirror band merchandise.
Chris:My frst priority in running has always been pleasure and enjoy￾ment—one thing I quickly noticed after I began to take running more seri￾ously is that this is a philosophy not necessarily shared by all runners. I have 
encountered runners all too often who approach the sport with such seri￾ousness as to suck a large part of the joy out of it. My perspective, rather, is 
to approach running the same way that I approach music: in that it’s a 
means for various different people to come together under a shared passion 
and appreciation, and that—like with punk—any assumed level of expertise 
is not considered a condition for one’s participation.
I’ve never followed any strictly regimented training plan; I’ve never felt 
the need to manage my diet. I don’t run with a watch; and I don’t spend a 
fortune on the most high-end shoes—and I only buy a new pair about twice 
a year. These are all the things that could of course make one’s running bet￾ter, but for me they are not what running is about. And it was this way of 
thinking that led me to the Running Punks.
I attended the Running Punks’ inaugural event in Cardiff in July 2020. I 
recall that I had seen someone in a Running Punks shirt several months 
earlier, and was signifcantly intrigued, but had initially been unable to fnd 
anything about them online. But something must have piqued my curiosity 
later on—evidently at the right time—as a subsequent search revealed the 
frst in-person event, to be held as the frst wave of Covid lockdowns were 
easing up. Finding a group of like-minded people—with a strong passion for 
both music and running, and who don’t take either too seriously (for this 
can be found in music too, through purists of any genre)—was a delight￾ful moment.
I’ve continued attending Running Punks sessions on regular Sundays—
not every week, but as often as I can make it. Whilst it hasn’t replaced my 
formal club that I’m affliated with as an athlete, I fnd that the mix of the 
two provides the perfect combination for someone who views running in 
the way that I do. Through Running Punks, I have also discovered lots of 
new music, and have been to several gigs with others from the group. Thus, 
it has not only had a positive impact upon my athleticism, but upon my 
social life as well.
In their study into punk and ageing, Bennett and Taylor found that ‘the 
majority of [their] interviewees all referred to the scene ageing with them’ 
(2012, p. 238). This highlights the importance of the journey to adult￾hood, and that ‘ageing punks commonly suggested that punk had played 
5 YOUNG PUNK, OLD PUNK, RUNNING PUNK: KEEPING THE OLD ONES…86
an important part in their transition from youth to adulthood, providing 
them with a streetwise outlook and a sense of realism’ (2012, p. 239). 
Indeed, this echoes Bennett’s earlier suggestion that punk’s ‘visual image, 
although it had initially been regarded as important, has been superseded 
over the years by a general punk ethos’ (2006, pp. 226–7).
This same point is echoed by Way:
Whilst the majority of participants’ initial interest in punk had been 
grounded in the associated music (and some had initially adopted what they 
perceived as a punk style), there was this sense then of their punk identity 
having moved beyond that—punk had become an attitude, a way of think￾ing. (2021, p. 112)
Referring to inclusion within the punk subculture, Way made the delib￾erate decision within her study that ‘participants could decide for them￾selves whether they ftted this description to avoid any imposition of what 
was considered “punk”’ (2021, p. 109).
What this suggests is that with age punk may be considered more of a 
personal thing, and thus it can mean whatever the individual wants it to 
mean. In the case of the Running Punks, what this has come to mean is 
running: ‘Running is the chance to do something new … Running is 
punk’ (Watkins, 2020). Across the broad range of ages already identifed, 
what links the various Running Punks members is this attitude. This join￾ing together of participants who share a mutual perspective on how one 
should approach their membership of such a group has provided a catalyst 
for different individuals of different ages to interact, who may not in day￾to-day life. This approach to intergenerational mixing even comes through 
in Jimmy Watkins’ online ‘running review’ series—videos of which are 
created for both brand new and long-established records.
We can see in both of our responses that we found something within 
Running Punks that encompassed our approach to both music and run￾ning. Neither of us ft the mould of a traditional athlete, and both have a 
similar outlook upon music as well. Whilst both of us are passionate about 
these two areas, there is an extent to which we could be considered ‘out￾siders’ in both. Yet this shared ‘outsiderism’ has contributed to this new 
identity, one which many other members of the group would presumably 
fall into as well.
What Running Punks ultimately does for its members is the facilitation 
of this shared identity: one which draws from both the constituent 
A. MORGAN AND C. INGLIS87
elements that make up this group, and one that transcends generations. It 
is not uncommon, for instance, to see members of the group include the 
phrase ‘running punk’ within their Twitter biographies, suggesting that 
the membership of this group is an essential part of the image they choose 
to put forward to the world. In a similar vein, the proliferation of offcial 
Running Punks merchandise bought and proudly displayed by members is 
another way of publicly demonstrating their belonging to this group. 
Punk has always encompassed both an outsider aesthetic and a lifestyle. In 
Running Punks, we identify with each other through the distinctive logo, 
and designs of the clothing. Through recognition of clothing, people who 
have never previously met might notice another person running in a 
Running Punks top and discover a new member of the group, or, as what 
usually happens, discover they are friends on social media, but have never 
met in real life (Fig. 5.1).
Fig. 5.1 A group of Running Punks
5 YOUNG PUNK, OLD PUNK, RUNNING PUNK: KEEPING THE OLD ONES…88
Conclusion
One of the things that we set out to explore in this research is the degree 
to which membership of Running Punks facilitates cross-generational love 
of established music, in concert with the discovery of new music, and the 
ways in which these impacts on identity. Through engaging with music, 
and the punk ethos of ‘outsiderism’ in Running Punks, we suggest that 
music allows for ‘age convergence’. What is meant by this is that age, signs 
of ageing, and youthfulness are not prerequisites for being a Running 
Punk. The only thing that is required is that one wishes, and is able, to 
run. Moreover, by sharing musical and running experiences discursively 
through social media platforms, and in the real-life running groups, age is 
transcended. On top of this, as people of all ages now have access to digital 
music, this allows for many of us to revisit music of our youth and access 
the affects that may have been present at the time. And sharing these expe￾riences with people of all ages reminds us of the similarities between us, 
rather than the differences which might normally be present between peo￾ple from such a diverse range of age groups.
References
Allen-Collinson, J., & Hockey, J. (2007). Working Out’ Identity: Distance 
Runners and the Management of Disrupted Identity. Leisure Studies, 
26(4), 381–398. Retrieved January 25, 2022, from https://doi.org/
10.1080/02614360601053384
Anderson, T. (2012). The Experience of Punk Subcultural Identity. PsyD 
Dissertation, John F. Kennedy University.
Barnes, J. (2021). Remembering when The Clash’s Joe Strummer lived in 
Newport. In South Wales Argus, 9th May 2021.
Bennett, A. (2006). Punk’s Not Dead: The Continuing Signifcance of Punk Rock 
for an Older Generation of Fans. Sociology, 40(2), 219–235. Retrieved March 
25, 2022, from https://doi.org/10.1177/0038038506062030
Bennett, A., & Hodkinson, P. (2012). Ageing & Youth Culture: Music, Style and 
Identity. Routledge.
Bennett, A., & Taylor, J. (2012). Popular Music and the Aesthetics of Ageing. 
Popular Music, 31(2), 231–243. Retrieved January 25, 2022, from https://
doi.org/10.1017/S0261143012000013
Blaikie, A. (1999). Ageing and Popular Culture. Cambridge University Press.
Bowling, A. (2005). Ageing Well: Quality of Life in Old Age. McGraw-Hill.
A. MORGAN AND C. INGLIS89
Chalmers, T. D., & Arthur, D. (2008). Hard-Core Members’ of Consumption￾Oriented Subcultures Enactment of Identity: The Sacred Consumption of Two 
Subcultures. Association in Consumer Research, 35, 570–575.
Cogan, B. (2007) “Do They Owe Us a Living? Of Course They Do!” Crass, 
Throbbing Gristle, and Anarchy and Radicalism in Early English Punk Rock. In 
Journal for the Study of Radicalism, 1(2), (Summer 2007), 77–90 (14 pages).
Cotter, A. (2017). ‘Moving and Being Moved Through Time: Autoethnographic 
Refections on First-Person Research and Its Development Over 30 Years. 
Counselling and Psychotherapy Research, 17(2), 104–112. Retrieved April 29, 
2022, from https://doi.org/10.1002/capr.12098
Crossley, N. (2015). Networks of Sound Style and Subversion. The Punk and Post￾punk Worlds of Manchester, London, Liverpool and Sheffeld. Manchester 
University Press.
Davis, J. R. (2012). Punk, Ageing and the Expectations of Adult Life. In A. Bennett 
& P.  Hodkinson (Eds.), Ageing & Youth Culture: Music, Style and Identity
(pp. 105–118). Routledge.
Dupuis, S. L., & Alzheimer, M. (2011). Leisure and Ageing Well. World Leisure 
Journal, 50(2), 91–107. Retrieved March 23, 2022, from https://doi.org/
10.1080/04419057.2008.9674538
Ellis, C., Adams, T. E., & Bochner, A. P. (2011). Autoethnography: An Overview. 
Forum Qualitative Social Research, 12(1), 273–290.
Ettore, E. (2017). Autoethnography as Feminist Method: Sensitising the feminist ‘I’. 
Routledge.
Featherstone, M., & Hepworth, M. (1991). The Mask of Ageing and the Post￾Modern Life-Course. In M.  Featherstone, M.  Hepworth, & B.  S. Turner 
(Eds.), The Body: Social Process and Cultural Theory. SAGE Publishing.
Fish, B. (2018, September 5). When Should Life as a Veteran Runner Begin? Fast 
Running. Retrieved May 1, 2022, from https://www.fastrunning.com/
fast-10/2018/ben-fsh/when-should-the-veteran-ranks-start/19189
Gilleard, C., & Higgs, P. (2000). Cultures of Ageing: Self, Citizen and the Body. 
Routledge.
Hebdige, D. (1979). Subculture: The Meaning of Style. Routledge.
Hepworth, M. (2003). Ageing Bodies: Aged by Culture. In J.  Coupland & 
R.  Gwyn (Eds.), Discourse, the Body, and Identity (pp.  89–106). Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Herrmann, A. F. (2014). Never Mind the Scholar, Here’s the Old Punk: Identity, 
Community, and the Aging Music Fan. Studies in Symbolic Interaction, 39, 
153–170. Retrieved January 15, 2022, from https://doi.org/10.1108/
S0163-2396(2012)0000039007/full/html
Hitchings R., & Latham, A. (2017). How ‘Social is Recreational Running? 
Findings from a Qualitative Study in London and Implications for Public 
5 YOUNG PUNK, OLD PUNK, RUNNING PUNK: KEEPING THE OLD ONES…90
Health Promotion. Health & Place, 46, 337–343. Retrieved May 1, 2022, 
from https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthplace.2016.10.003
Hodkinson, P. (2013). Spectacular Youth Cultures and Ageing: Beyond Refusing 
to Grow Up. Sociology Compass, 7(1), 13–22. Retrieved March 5, 2022, from 
https://doi.org/10.1111/soc4.12008
Leblanc, L. (1999). Pretty in Punk: Girls’ Gender Resistance in a Boys’ Subculture. 
Rutgers University Press.
Lloyd, A. (2021). In Focus: Running Punks, Men’s Fitness. London: Kelsey Media.
Marciniak, M. (2015). Intergenerational Relations and Ageing in the Punk 
Subculture. Studia Socjologiczne, 1(216), 211–228.
Middlebrook, H. (2020, September 2). Aging Doesn’t Slow Down Your Running 
That Much. Runner’s World. Retrieved May 5, 2022, from https://www.run￾nersworld.com/health-injuries/a23845530/running-speed-decline-aging/
Morgan, A. (forthcoming). Running Punks as an Anarchic Rejection of Traditional 
Sporty Endeavour. In J. Donaghey, C. Kaltefeiter, & W. Boisseau (Eds.), The 
Anarchism and Punk Book Project, Active Distribution.
Öberg, P. (1996). The Absent Body: A Social Gerontological Paradox. Ageing and 
Society, 16(6), 701–719. Retrieved May 5, 2022, from https://doi.
org/10.1017/S0144686X00020055
Oswald, F., Campbell, J., Williamson, C., Richards, J, & Kelly P. (2020). A 
Scoping Review of the Relationship between Running and Mental Health. 
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 17(21), 
8059. Retrieved January 26, 2023, from https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph17218059
Paulson, S., & Willig, C. (2008). Older Women and Everyday Talk About the 
Ageing Body. Journal of Health Psychology., 13(1), 106–120. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1359105307084316
Rodriguez, N., & Ryave, A. (2002). Systematic Self-Observation. Sage.
Ross, K. (2021). Ageing Women on Screen: Disgust Disdain and the Time’s Up 
Pushback. In C. M. Scarcelli, D. Chronaki, S. De Vuyst, & S. V. Baselga (Eds.), 
Gender and Sexuality in the European Media: Exploring Different Contexts 
Through Conceptualisations of Age. Routledge.
Shipway, R., Holloway, I., & Jones, I. (2013). Organisations, Practices, Actors, 
and Events: Exploring Inside the Distance Running Social World. International 
Review for the Sociology of Sport, 48(3), 259–276. https://doi.org/
10.1177/1012690212442135
Singh, U., & Weimar, D. (2017). Empowerment Among Generations. German 
Journal of Human Resource Management, 31(4), 307–328. Retrieved May 3, 
2022, from https://doi.org/10.1177/2397002217719864
Smith. J. (2020, December 30). 2020 Was A Crazy Running Year: Here’s The 
Data to Prove It. Runners World. Retrieved May 3, 2022, from https://www.
runnersworld.com/news/a34949046/2020-year-in-running-data/
A. MORGAN AND C. INGLIS91
Tsitsos, B. (2012). Slamdancing, Ageing and Belonging. In A.  Bennett & 
P.  Hodkinson (Eds.), Ageing & Youth Culture: Music, Style and Identity. 
Routledge.
Tulle, E. (2008a). Ageing, The Body, and Social Change: Running in Later Life. 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Tulle, E. (2008b). The Ageing Body and the Ontology of Ageing: Athletic 
Competence in Later Life. Body & Society, 14(3), 1–19. Retrieved February 25, 
2022, from https://doi.org/10.1177/1357034X08093570
Turner, B. (2008). The Body and Society. Sage.
Twigg, J. (2006). The Body in Health and Social Care. Macmillan.
Watkins, J. (2020) Running Punks. Retrieved January 26, 2023, from https://
www.runningpunks.com/
Way, L. (2020). Punk, Gender and Ageing: Just Typical Girls? Emerald 
Publishing Limited.
Way, L. (2021). Punk is Just a State of Mind: Exploring What Punk Means to 
Older Punk Women. The Sociological Review, 69(1). 107–122. Retrieved March 
24, 2022, from https://doi.org/10.1177/0038026120946666
Discography
Hopkin, M. (1969). Post Card. Apple Records.
Ramones. (1995). ¡Adios Amigos! Radioactive Records.
The Beatles. (1967). Sgt Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band. Parlophone.
The Byrds. (1965). Turn! Turn! Turn! Columbia Records.
The Clash. (1977). The Clash. Columbia Records.
5 YOUNG PUNK, OLD PUNK, RUNNING PUNK: KEEPING THE OLD ONES…© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 93
Switzerland AG 2024
L. Way, M. Grimes (eds.), Punk, Ageing and Time, Palgrave Studies 
in the History of Subcultures and Popular Music, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47823-9_6
CHAPTER 6
Live Fast, Die Old. Experiences of Ageing 
in Portuguese Punk DIY Scenes since 
the Late 1970s
Paula Guerra
To Everything There Is a Season …
We have all heard it said that, as we age, some clothes or styles of music are 
no longer appropriate.1 Many stereotypes exist about age in late moder￾nity (Higgs & Gilleard, 2020; Bytheway, 2005), including the view that 
some lifestyles are only suitable for certain age groups. This is particularly 
visible when talking about popular music, and particularly musical genres 
such as punk. As we will see, journalistic and even academic works are full 
of prejudices and stereotypes about older fans of subcultures such as punk, 
who are derogatively labelled ‘weekend punks’. However, in recent years 
a body of academic work has examined the relationship between ageing 
1This chapter was supported by FCT—Foundation for Science and Technology, within the 
scope of UIDB/00727/2020.
P. Guerra (*) 
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal
e-mail: pguerra@letras.up.pt94
and popular music (Bennett, 2013; Davis, 2006; Hodkinson, 2011; Way, 
2020). This research approaches music cultures as multigenerational, 
comprising fans who, rather than ‘calming down’, have critically refected 
on their subcultural participation. If it is incorrect to say that all actors 
‘calm down’ after a certain age, then it is also wrong to say the concept of 
youth has lost its value and that everyone needs to have the same level of 
participation in the various music scenes (Guerra, 2023a). Older people 
have to deal with other social dimensions, such as employment and family, 
with all the pressures these entail, so they look at punk differently.
To account for the multitude of positions that older members of the 
Portuguese punk scene have regarding their subcultural participation, we 
will structure this chapter2 as follows: frst, we will analyse the state of the 
art of youth studies and how its scholars position themselves on ageing; 
second, we will analyse how these older punks position themselves regard￾ing those from younger generations—in essence, how they look at the 
younger generation and their ability to maintain and enlarge the Portuguese 
punk scene; and fnally, we will address the relationship between punk age￾ing and employment, namely the concept of the do-it-yourself (DIY) 
career—how the punk ethos was incorporated into the lives of members of 
the Portuguese punk scene and how this infuenced (and infuences) them 
in several social dimensions.
2This chapter follows on from the development of the project Keep It Simple, Make It 
Fast! Prolegomenons and Punk Scenes, A Road to Portuguese Contemporaneity 
(1977–2012) (PTDC/CS-SOC/118830/2010), known as KISMIF, was funded by FEDER 
through the COMPETE Operational Program from the Foundation for Science and 
Technology (FCT). The information with which we work here is the result of semi-structured 
interviews with 214 individuals who have/had strong links to the Portuguese punk scene in 
a variety of different ways. The development of this chapter is part of the project Lost and 
Found Sounds: Cultural, Artistic and Creative Scenes in Pandemic Times, which is being 
developed at the Institute of Sociology of the University of Porto and the Griffth Centre for 
Social and Cultural Research, Queensland, Australia. Additionally, it is part of the progress 
of a research network led by Paula Guerra and Andy Bennett around DIY cultures and 
underground creative-music scenes. Project details can be found at www.kismifcom￾munity.com
P. GUERRA95
‘I Don’t Want to Grow Up’: Ageing Studies
and the Elasticity of Youth
The concept of youth has been called into question in recent years. It 
ceased to be a category that clearly defned an age group up to their mid￾twenties and came to encompass individuals beyond that age group as well 
(Baker et al., 2016; Furlong, 2017). The new body of work in ageing 
studies has shown that, despite being inevitable from a biological perspec￾tive, ageing is in fact a socio-historical construction. If we look at Western 
society in the twentieth century, we have proof of such a change. Until the 
emergence of the consumer society, there were social conventions about 
behaviour, clothing, cultural practices and so on, to which people had to 
conform when they reached a certain age. Giddens (1991) rightly notes 
that this was not a real change of self, but merely the emergence of a mask 
that denied people’s identity. Featherstone and Hepworth (1991) address 
how, in late modernity, older individuals maintain their leisure tastes and 
activities throughout their lives, with an emphasis on maintaining a youth￾ful identity. Like identity, age is open to (self-)negotiations and refections 
(Mansson et al., 2022). Yet the idea of youth being an elastic concept has 
its problems. Despite the changes that have occurred in late modernity, 
some aspects continue to separate the age groups. The market takes this 
into account, which is why certain musical genres are aimed at younger 
people. When talking about musical genres with a multigenerational audi￾ence, differences can be found in the practices and meanings attributed to 
them by each age group.
Older social actors are often analysed in a distorted way, and the media 
play an important role in the dissemination of such stereotypes. Older 
music fans are usually seen as adults with a kind of Peter Pan syndrome 
who have refused to grow up and take responsibility of their lives. 
According to this argument, being middle aged is incompatible with punk. 
Adults with money are the antithesis of the youthful angst that defnes 
punk, so these older fans are mere ‘tourists’ (Bennett, 2013). Taking a 
different approach, Gregory (2009) analyses the incompatibilities between 
the core elements of rave culture and the demands of adult life. Another 
issue relates to the emergence of studies on nostalgia (Reynolds, 2012). 
One part of the argument refers to the ageing of the baby boomers and 
their memories of their youth. This seemingly essentialist approach associ￾ates music with youth, viewing the continuation of a subcultural belong￾ing throughout life as impossible. One either appreciates it when younger 
6 LIVE FAST, DIE OLD. EXPERIENCES OF AGEING IN PORTUGUESE PUNK…96
or remembers it wistfully when one reaches old age. The work of Holland 
(2004) and Bennett (2006, 2013) has attracted greater attention to this 
issue. Bennett (2006) analyses the existing negotiation between involve￾ment and demands inherent to adult life: what exists is a decrease in par￾ticipation, such as going out less often, and not being involved in mosh 
pits with younger people, for example. Holland (2004) addresses the bal￾ance between the idea of personal authenticity and what is considered 
age-appropriate. These studies emphasise an increasing individualisation 
and privatisation of subcultural participation with ageing.
Notwithstanding the fact that these works highlight a certain tendency 
towards individualisation and the privatisation of subcultural participation 
with age, we want to emphasise that nostalgic attachment and its modali￾ties tend to be experienced—by Portuguese punks—as positive experi￾ences of empowerment, dynamism and community involvement. Thus, 
among the modalities of nostalgic attachment most enunciated by the 
interviewees, we can highlight the following: the participation in Facebook 
groups of discussion and historical reconstruction of punk; the collection, 
cataloguing and archiving of photographs, posters, fanzines and concert 
tickets; the participation in the collection and identifcation of cassettes, 
demos and videos; the organisation of social moments (lunches, dinners or 
picnics); the organisation of campaigns to support colleagues and/or 
friends who are in a diffcult economic or health situation; the organisa￾tion and assembly of local exhibitions; or even the participation in bands 
as musicians or the organisation of gigs (Keightley & Pickering, 2006, 
2012). All these forms of nostalgia are positively represented by the 
patients themselves, their families and friends (Baars, 2012; Boym, 2001). 
They are, above all, a way of reconnecting with the self, promoting self￾esteem and strengthening identity even in the face of ascending genera￾tions (Gardner, 2020). Also in their analysis of the Gothic subculture, 
Hodkinson (2002, 2011) considers that instead of fnding an individualis￾tic ethos, the idea of what it is to be Gothic has remained in the collective 
sphere, especially as a community based on sharing common tastes and 
practices. However, if such a feeling is maintained, the intensity of partici￾pation is not, and there is a need for adjustments to the link between 
subcultural participation and adult life. There is a quantitative reduction, 
for example, regarding going out, which is at the heart of participation in 
Gothic subculture. There has also been a qualitative change in where older 
people go: they prefer bars where it is possible to talk.
P. GUERRA97
Aesthetics are essential in subcultures such as punk or Goth, and the 
greater the enthusiasm, the greater the concern for subcultural presenta￾tion. For older participants who do not go out regularly, the collective 
rewards of this subcultural presentation are reduced. In her analysis of 
older punks, Davis (2006) addresses discourses on age-appropriate forms 
of participation and the sarcasm directed at those who do not conform to 
the norms. This author postulates several ideal types of the older punk and 
their relationship with the music scene, both successful and unsuccessful. 
Davis has two ideal types of failures: the frst, ‘scene rejecters’, comprises 
all those who, when entering adulthood, break their relationship with 
punk. The second, ‘stagnant punks’, refers to those punks who maintain 
their participation in the scene without taking their age into account. This 
stagnation is met with criticism, such as of the inability to move forward 
with one’s life.
Regarding the ideal types of successful negotiations, the frst ideal type, 
‘legends’, refers to a very small group of social actors: the well-known 
fgures who have achieved commercial success and thereby manage to 
make a living from punk. The second ideal type, ‘corporate incorporators’, 
includes those who have found a career outside the punk scene but who 
nevertheless continue to have an involvement in the scene. The third ideal 
type, ‘career punks’, includes those who fnd a way to fnd a job within the 
scene, as musicians, editors, promoters and so on.
We can associate this with the concept of DIY careers (Bennett & 
Guerra, 2019), given that punk infuences the choice of such careers. First, 
though, it is necessary to make some adjustments to the more conventional 
defnition of DIY, roughly associated with music and youth cultures. DIY 
is something that stays with individuals, often infuencing them through￾out life. Far from being static, this vision is subject to deep refections and 
adjustments, a consequence of the various events that mark people’s lives. 
Punk, as well as other subcultures, gives individuals a specifc perspective, 
an ethos that infuences not only their musical experiences but also their 
social experiences. Such a sense of individual autonomy shapes attitudes 
towards work and leisure and is refected in career choices that oppose 
traditional ‘nine-to-fve’ employment. The DIY career is a refexive strategy 
to deal with existing precariousness, as well as with a specifc subcultural 
ethos. It is the choice of ontological security over economic security. The 
idea of success is not measured in economic terms but, rather, in the pos￾sibility of having free time and space to continue investing in oneself.
6 LIVE FAST, DIE OLD. EXPERIENCES OF AGEING IN PORTUGUESE PUNK…98
These approaches are relevant to demonstrate how dynamic the process 
of negotiation between subcultural participation and ageing can be. They 
also simultaneously demonstrate processes of subcultural individuation 
and the stability of a sense of group belonging (Bennett, 2006; Davis, 
2006; Haenfer, 2009). Due to many older participants remaining 
involved, this ageing becomes an integral part of subcultures. The subcul￾tures themselves, as well as their collective norms, values and criteria, are 
ultimately infuenced.
Losing My Edge3: Difficult Relations
with the Younger Generations
James Murphy sang in 2002:
I’m losing my edge. The kids are coming up from behind. (…) I’m losing 
my edge to the Internet seekers who can tell me every member of every 
good group from 1962 to 1978.
And nothing seems more appropriate. As the members of the frst waves 
aged, punk became a multigenerational genre (Bennett, 2012). However, 
there are many differences between subcultural generations. Our research 
revealed many differences in the way punk is perceived.
There is a valorisation of each era by its members. Take the representa￾tion of some members of the Portuguese punk scene in the decades 
between 1970 and 1990. The hardships of that time, the absence of cul￾tural products such as albums or venues, and the stigma they suffered from 
society all now form a narrative not of a ‘golden age’ of punk, but rather 
a golden age in terms of authenticity—of what is truly punk (Guerra, 
2016, 2020). The hardships undergo a transmutation and are now seen as 
trials that had to be overcome. If there were no records, they had to wait 
for the radio show and be ready to record it on cassettes; or when some￾one had an album, it was collectively listened to over and over. All this is 
understood as part of the trials and set against the current opportunities 
experienced by younger punks. Estevão and Fernando explain this:
3 ‘Losing My Edge’ is the debut single by LCD Soundsystem. It was released as a 12-inch 
single in July 2002 through DFA Records. It was listed at number 13 on Pitchfork’s Top 500 
Songs of the 2000s list.
P. GUERRA99
Nowadays, kids don’t even have time to know anything in-depth. It’s all so 
superfcial. There are always new things coming out, new styles, new music, 
artists … a lot of things. I think they are rare. That’s the idea I have. It’s not 
that I know many kids like that, teenagers. I don’t think they have the time 
or the inclination to know the past and try to understand why things are the 
way they are today. (Estevão, 46 years, master’s or equivalent, scientifc 
researcher, Lisbon)4
It was really the movement changing … losing its genuineness. It was no 
longer a question of music, you had to have a good guitar, a good amplifer, 
and what you were saying lost a little of its meaning. Moreover, in the old 
days it was always what was important, what you said, what you transferred 
to the people. (Fernando, 45 years, master’s or equivalent, teacher, Lisbon)
There are countless examples of this type of discourse. There is a cor￾relation between diffculties and authenticity versus abundance and ideo￾logical and praxeological fragility. Almost all criticism is directed towards 
the negative effects of the internet. According to our interviewees, this has 
levelled the knowledge, dematerialised music and, above all, resulted in 
anomie, which would be seen in the dissolution of the Portuguese punk 
scene or in its decline. There is also an association between the internet, 
and consequently young punks, and subcultural instability. Verónica, one 
of our interviews, demonstrates her perplexity with the fact that ‘a person 
can be punk one day, do the whole reactive process, and the next day 
already be glam and the day after hip-hop’. The possibilities offered by the 
internet create a misunderstanding among older punks, who associate this 
omnivorous form of cultural consumption with a lesser involvement with 
punk. However, what troubles older punks the most is what Eduardo calls 
‘cheeky ignorance’, a consequence of the democratisation of information, 
which creates experts about everything. Fernando demonstrates this well:
The internet levels everything, for better or worse, and ends up making 
everything very equal. It’s a standardization with all the good and bad 
things that it entails. And the internet, in fact, was a damn revolution, 
because the ‘kids’ today have access to everything: suddenly they become 
hardcore punk experts in three weeks. They download all the fles, they read 
4Throughout the chapter, I will make use of excerpts from the discourse of the interview￾ees as a form of illustration. All participants are assigned a fctitious name in keeping with the 
guidelines of the Code of Ethics of the American Sociological Association.
6 LIVE FAST, DIE OLD. EXPERIENCES OF AGEING IN PORTUGUESE PUNK…100
all the stuff, it’s all available, it’s all online. (Fernando, 45 years, master’s or 
equivalent, teacher, Lisbon)
This contrasts with a long and costly apprenticeship, based on pirate 
recordings, reading and going to concerts, which gave the older punks a 
subcultural capital, a legitimacy to discuss and argue about punk, bands 
and albums. Yet the constant comparisons between the experience they 
had and that of younger people today, with a clear advantage for the for￾mer, don’t take the socio-economic changes that occurred in Portugal 
into consideration. We can also point to an unwillingness to understand 
the new experiences and priorities of younger punks, who also show a dis￾satisfaction with and repulsion towards society and the capitalist system of 
work, with their poorly paid or precarious jobs—something that can be 
seen in the lyrics of many contemporary punk songs (Guerra, 2019). In 
essence, there is a system of codifed rituals today as there was one in previ￾ous decades, a system closely linked to the state of socio-economic change 
in the country (Guerra, 2016, 2018, 2020).
This misunderstanding is visible in the persistent accusations that 
younger punks don’t have the necessary knowledge and that the democ￾ratisation of the internet has led to a loss of punk authenticity. It is also 
evident in criticism that contemporary punk is either just a fashion or a 
place to vent violent impulses. Eduardo says:
Nowadays, it’s like ‘Yeah, I’m going to a concert, but it’s just another con￾cert’, like people who go to concerts without any ideas, just to fght, to 
make trouble or to criticise. (Eduardo, 25 years, lower secondary education, 
student, São João da Madeira, metropolitan area of Porto)
According to Martim:
The evolution, especially of hardcore punk … and especially the new genera￾tions, this cannot go on only with the older generations, they don’t know, 
and they will never know the level of authenticity that we lived. They live it 
in a more superfcial way, in the sense that they don’t value it, or don’t feel 
things the way we did. It is a generation of Facebook, YouTube, whatever, 
and they live that more than the values. (Martim, 55 years, upper secondary 
education, transport salesman, Loures, metropolitan area of Lisbon)
We cannot dissociate these narratives from the phenomenon of nostal￾gia (Reynolds, 2012), of linking personal moments of their lives with key 
P. GUERRA101
moments in the history of punk, of looking at the past—even with all its 
diffculties—with positive eyes. Nostalgia operates on three levels: nostal￾gia, biographical nostalgia and format nostalgia, as noted by Thurnell￾Read (2022). This nostalgic discourse, propagated by older people, the 
media, TV series and documentaries, in part infuences younger people 
who look to the past as a pure and authentic era:
Sometimes it’s the younger people who notice. They’re in a small group 
with older people and they say, ‘Hey, I wish I’d lived 20 years ago!’ So, they 
have a very idealized image of things—the fea markets, the Gingão.5
Everything was very pure, very naïve, the people, I don’t know … (André, 
49 years, bachelor’s or equivalent, computer technician, Lisbon)
What we can take away is a sense of recognition and cultural authority 
grounded in a subcultural memory (Jacobson, 2020). This feeling goes 
hand in hand with a devaluation of the current state of punk. One reason 
for this situation is the estrangement of some fgures, due to issues such as 
employment, parenting and emigration. Two problems remain: frst, the 
inability of younger people to be authentically involved due to the choice 
offered by the internet; and second, the departure of several ageing mem￾bers central to the perpetuation of the scene. This means the few key 
actors who remain possess a hugely important role in terms of subcultural 
legitimacy, as well as exemplifying what a true punk should look like:
Then people switch off a bit. Most are either no longer there, they’ve left 
the scene, or they’ve got into shit. There are few people that can say I’m still 
there. Frágil is one of the few that continues to be there, to receive people, 
he’s an entity; the guy, without wanting to, is a landmark that passed 
through generations and is still there. Even though he enjoys other things, 
he is now all about African music, he went on a trip to treat children with 
malaria. That’s what attitude is, it’s not coming to Porto at the weekend 
with a crest made the previous Friday. (Gustavo, 35 years, incomplete upper 
secondary, auxiliary teaching, Maia, metropolitan area of Porto)
Gustavo’s perspective serves to highlight that the criticism of punks 
who continue to participate in the scene without taking their age into 
5One of the most emblematic Portuguese bars of the 1980s, situated in Bairro Alto, the 
trendiest neighbourhood in Lisbon. It rapidly became a meeting point for the burgeoning 
Portuguese subcultures.
6 LIVE FAST, DIE OLD. EXPERIENCES OF AGEING IN PORTUGUESE PUNK…102
account does not apply to the central fgures in the scene—who Davis 
(2006) calls ‘legends’. On the Portuguese scene, Frágil6 possesses this cen￾trality. He may have gone through ebb and fow, but no one would think 
of accusing him of Peter Pan syndrome. There is a relationship between 
the subcultural capital on the scene and the way people look at their trajec￾tory and ageing on the scene. Similarly, Frágil’s maturing contributes to 
this, as Gustavo explains that the most important thing is not a style to 
shock, but rather a punk way of being, in this case materialised in a volun￾teer trip to fght malaria in Africa.
Because of their rarity, actors such as Frágil are essential for the trans￾mission of subcultural knowledge to the various generations of punk neo￾phytes. And if the criticism is a combination of nostalgia and paternalism, 
there is a sincere concern with sharing information and subcultural knowl￾edge, as well as a need to feel appreciated by the younger punks for doing 
so—in essence, to follow the paths they followed in the 1970s and 1980s. 
Take the opinion of Emanuel, another central fgure in the Portuguese 
punk scene. He states that he learned a lot listening to older punks, and 
now it is his turn to pass on this knowledge to the younger members of his 
current band:
I’m telling you this because this has a lot to do with the vehicle of informa￾tion, with the way things arrived and infuenced and I’ve followed punk 
since I was a kid, with guys who had access to the whole thing, because they 
were passionate for new things and transmitted it to kids like me at the time, 
who in turn transmitted it to kids who came after me and so on until we had 
a bass player aged twenty, a guitar player aged 29, a drummer aged 38 and 
me the vocalist aged 41. (Emanuel, 41 years, incomplete upper secondary, 
driver, Lisbon)
According to Bennett (2013), one strategy adopted by older punks was 
positioning themselves as critical overseers of the scene. This was seen as a 
way of celebrating their subcultural trajectory and maintaining a form of 
collective authority. However, one major difference was an attitude of 
hypercriticism on the part of the Portuguese older punks—a real pessi￾mism about the state of punk and a devaluation of younger people’s ways 
of being punk. One way to explain this position is as a rupture of what had 
6Frágil Lapa is a Portuguese punk vocalist, played in several bands such as Senisga, 
Renegados de Boliqueime, Speedtrack, Motornoise and Religião and Moral. He has been a 
legendary fgure in Portuguese punk since the 1980s.
P. GUERRA103
been happening until then: one entered the scene and followed the infu￾ence and knowledge of older punks in a slow process of acquiring subcul￾tural capital. Social media and the internet opened different ways of 
acquiring this knowledge, causing a feeling of disenchantment among 
many of our interviewees. It is like going through the whole process and 
being deprived of the last part: becoming a kind of informal educator of 
younger punks (Hodkinson, 2016).
Career Opportunities: The Art of Transforming
Subcultural Capital
A good proportion of studies on careers in music either focus specifcally 
on the music world, such as bands or solo careers, or refect the idea that 
youthful dreams of a music career dissipate with age and everyone ends up 
with a typical nine-to-fve career. In other work (Bennett & Guerra, 2019; 
Guerra, 2017, 2018), we have demonstrated that this is not always the 
case and that music—notably the DIY ethos—infuences actors’ life 
choices. The professional career is no exception.
The question of employment is addressed in our interviews, where we 
fnd dichotomic positions. Most participants emphasised the importance 
of getting a job, especially when children or family are involved, not giving 
much credence to the idea of staying out of society. There is a concern to 
separate their jobs and their way of being punk. For these interviewees, 
being punk is much more than a position of complete intransigence. In 
fact, for many of them, retirement is a time to return to the world of pos￾sibilities of the DIY punk activities they used to do before entering formal 
employment—a far cry from their previous DIY collaborative activities. 
However, there are hardliners who consider that a punk life implies the 
rejection of any hierarchical relationship, so one cannot both be a punk 
and have a boss:
So, here in Portugal you keep saying that they’re punks and I disagree, 
because from the moment you accept to work and accept the conditions of 
the boss, you’ve already lost 95 per cent of what you think is your identity, 
your way of being and thinking—it’s gone. You will be what the boss wants 
you to be. So, from then on, don’t give me any bullshit, that’s why I often 
say that for me punks are those who continue there, even though most of 
them are a bit snotty. (Telmo, 59 years, upper secondary, account manager 
at a bank, Porto)
6 LIVE FAST, DIE OLD. EXPERIENCES OF AGEING IN PORTUGUESE PUNK…104
It is not easy to follow this path, as we saw from many of our interview￾ees. However, one way is through DIY careers, which allow actors to get 
away from some constraints of the job market. When we asked Anselmo 
about the importance of music in his life, he was clear that music was only 
half the story. Punk music was important to his life, but what had really 
changed his life was his contact with DIY, defned as a toolbox, and the 
ability to make things independently, allowing him to pursue a DIY career:
Punk for me gets really interesting when you don’t take the ideals as a bible, 
as some rules, but when you take from there some tools to make things. For 
me one of the best things that punk has is DIY, because through doing 
things yourself, you can make the things you want. Through DIY I com￾pletely changed my life, I started organizing gigs. It’s not just a soundtrack 
for the rest of your life—no, you get very positive things out of it. (Anselmo, 
20 years, incomplete bachelor’s or equivalent, musician/computer engi￾neering student, Lisbon)
Here we have the combination of a DIY ethos and love of music as 
reasons for the career choice. Some of our interviewees admitted they 
would like the possibility of working with music, even if it implied a some￾what precarious life. One possibility we discovered on the Portuguese 
scene was employment in independent record shops (Guerra, 2022). This 
is explained by the ability to translate subcultural capital into DIY careers 
(Guerra, 2016, 2018). When choosing a job, several members of subcul￾tures opted for a position that allowed them more time and space (Guerra, 
2023b) for their creative passions at the expense of greater economic secu￾rity. We can see here the combination of a bohemian lifestyle, a job chosen 
for love and a refexive strategy to deal with the precariousness of the 
labour market (Bennett, 2013). This provides an advantage for record 
shops, as employing members of the music scene brings them greater 
legitimacy (Thornton, 1995). This can be seen in the quote from 
Martinho, who was faced with a job offer from the owners of a record 
shop—also his friends—through which he could make a living from music:
I was a long-standing client. By the time Pedro left, they spoke to me, and I 
said I’d really like to work with them. We already knew each other quite 
well, and I thought it would be a valuable asset for the shop because I would 
be able to keep the customers. And I managed to keep the customers. 
(Martinho, 42 years, non-university educated, record shop clerk, metropoli￾tan area of Lisbon, London)
P. GUERRA105
On the other hand, Jesualdo—also employed in an independent record 
shop—admits that, due to his desire to continue dressing as he always 
did—crest and all—his employment options are reduced: he either works 
in record shops or in a tattoo studio. Jesualdo’s case is very much linked 
to the challenges of maintaining a punk style and to more extreme posi￾tions about the punk perspective in the job market. But it is different from 
Telmo’s opinion, which we saw earlier. If for the former it was inconceiv￾able to have a boss, Jesualdo only chooses to employ himself in under￾ground environments, closer to his punk attitudes. Basically, if this position 
is maintained, we see a narrowing down of job options; even with infor￾malisation (Wouters, 2007), there are still certain styles that only seem 
acceptable in contexts linked to the underground:
With age, people change and they will ft in with the so-called normal soci￾ety. You can’t go to work with a crest unless you work in a record shop, like 
me, or a tattoo studio. So society itself tells you the way you should go. But 
mainly if a person continues to like listening to punk, as is my case, it is very 
diffcult to forget punk and the punk attitude. (Jesualdo, 42 years, bache￾lor’s or equivalent, electrotechnical engineer, Braga)
Caetano,7 owner of one of the main DIY labels and independent record 
shops in Lisbon, admits that there is a constant moving from publishers to 
publishers and to record shops and other similar jobs—demonstrating the 
diffculty of getting and keeping a stable job in the underground cultural 
and music scene in Portugal. As we have shown elsewhere (Guerra, 2016, 
2017), the Portuguese reality is diffcult for actors who want to make a 
living from music, directly or indirectly: precariousness, under-employment 
and sometimes the need to have more than one job—yet, continuing with 
Caetano, always with the ‘rope in the throat’.
The examples in our interviews are varied. Besides the cases of partici￾pants with jobs in record shops or record labels, such as Martinho or 
Jesualdo, we also found cases of former musicians who at a certain point 
moved on to other jobs within the music scene. For example, after per￾forming in a historic Portuguese straight edge band, X-Acto, Ângelo came 
into contact with DIY merchandising during a stay in New York. He saw 
how the members of an American hardcore band made T-shirts and other 
accessories at home, and when he arrived in Portugal, he asked his band 
7Caetano, 45 years, bachelor’s or equivalent, record dealer, Aljustrel, Alentejo.
6 LIVE FAST, DIE OLD. EXPERIENCES OF AGEING IN PORTUGUESE PUNK…106
mates to help him fnancially to do the same. He made a proft and was 
soon overwhelmed with requests from other bands. He soon had a mer￾chandising company:
They, being a hardcore band, and having that punk ‘do it yourself’ spirit, 
they used to make their t-shirts at home … And we looked at that, me and 
a friend, and we found it very curious! … I know that, at a certain point, 
after I came from the United States, I remember talking to the band and 
saying, ‘Look, why don’t you lend me some money, a little bit? I have some￾one there who lends me some material and someone else who lends me 
other material, and I’ll buy some material and try to make some t-shirts for 
us.’ From the moment I started making t-shirts for our band, as there were 
many concerts at the time, people started asking and I—I’m a person who 
likes to move a lot and I’m very active—I started doing that. (Ângelo, 42 
years, short-cycle tertiary education (Level 5), merchandising, Lisbon)
We found that reaching a certain age means one must choose. One 
option is ‘choosing poverty’ (Threadgold, 2017)—that is, not reaching 
the level of income one could reach otherwise and maintaining a lifestyle 
that we can call bohemian. On the other hand, we have Violeta’s opinion 
about the consequences of the punk ethos. It is common to hear inter￾viewees highlighting what they learned from punk and how this has con￾tinued throughout their lives—always with a positive perspective. Violeta 
has an opposite perspective: after a certain age and with two children, she 
concluded that the punk ethos was holding her back. Punk conditioned 
her possibilities of choice, as she rejected anything connected to the main￾stream. As we can see from the excerpt, such a position was untenable with 
two children, and she needed to ‘unpick myself from this punk question’:
What happens is that then you grow, you evolve, and money also speaks 
louder, and people also have to survive, they have to subsist. And I am aware 
of one thing: punk conditioned me, not in a bad way, but during this time 
of career that I have been making … When I was invited to do certain 
things, I always had that question, still the punk chip, ‘Oh, this is main￾stream, and I am not that mainstream.’ And there comes a time when you 
think, ‘Calm down, you should do things with seriousness, with class, but 
I’m a mother of two children. I’m a single mother, I have two children to 
take care of, I have to work, I have to succeed, I have to be able to unfold, 
to use my voice to get things done!’ and get rid of that punk question. 
(Violeta, 43 years, bachelor’s or equivalent, visual artist, musician, Cascais, 
metropolitan area of Lisbon)
P. GUERRA107
Valentino had a rather different perspective:
You can’t live off your own work [in music], it’s a bit frustrating and it 
always makes you go back, go ahead, give up from time to time. But I don’t 
know—I don’t have children, we’re never going to have any, it doesn’t 
interest us and so maybe we can always move forward. At the weekend, 
instead of going to the mall, we go to Badajoz or Valencia, to Helsinki or 
Rome. Be there selling books, having drinks, meeting people, inviting new 
people, new generations to work with you, discovering refreshing things 
and all that, right? Okay, that would be the most optimistic and positive way 
of looking at it. (Valentino, 45 years, lower secondary education, transla￾tor, Lisbon)
These two excerpts revolve around an old dilemma in the Portuguese 
music scene. It is practically impossible to make a living from music. Either 
one chooses a DIY career, which implies a trajectory based on precarious￾ness, moving or accumulating several jobs, from editor to musician, record 
shop employee, DJ and so on (Threadgold, 2017), or one refects on pri￾orities, as Valentino postulates: giving up a secure career and betting on a 
bohemian lifestyle with music at its heart. This is a way of proving how the 
punk ethos remains far beyond youth (Guerra, 2020). Finally, we have 
those who feel the need to break away. Violet perhaps demonstrates the 
potent strength of the punk ethos most effectively. The breaking away 
occurred because her punk ethos was so strong that it prevented a career 
that was not in opposition to the mainstream. For a single mother with 
two children, that option became unviable and eventually meant she 
needed to break away. Here we can refect on the gender inequalities that 
permeate punk and the social demands that affect women more, especially 
those without family support (Way, 2020). For Violeta, unlike Valentino, 
it was impossible to choose a bohemian lifestyle.
Few of the interviews refect the position of a total rejection towards 
societal norms. More widespread is the incorporation of values that reject 
the uncritical acceptance of the norms of the job market. There is a critical 
refection on the world of work and the pursuit of DIY careers, from sell￾ing merchandising to opening independent record shops. As Anselmo 
told us, punk ‘is not just a soundtrack’; it is something that is embodied in 
the agents and refected in their lifestyles and social practices.
6 LIVE FAST, DIE OLD. EXPERIENCES OF AGEING IN PORTUGUESE PUNK…108
What’s My Age Again?8 Final Remarks
Despite the academic and journalistic emphasis on the youthful aspect of 
subcultures, subcultural participation is far from over as one enters adult￾hood. Our empirical material supports the idea that participation under￾goes a quantitative and qualitative change. Not so much time is spent on 
the punk scene, as there are competing social factors, such as family and 
work, but a qualitative change takes place—an individual refection on 
what it is to be punk. In almost all the interviews, we noticed a concern to 
explain how punk is still relevant in the participants’ lives. They leave aside 
the spectacular aspect of the subculture and focus instead on applying a 
punk perspective in the various dimensions of social life—what we call a 
DIY ethos.
One of the most surprising issues we found in our research was the 
position of older Portuguese punks in relation to younger punks. Their 
devaluation of the knowledge and practices of the younger generations 
was almost unanimous. These younger punks were disparagingly called 
the YouTube or Facebook generation. The older punks look at this effort￾lessness, as they see it, and devalue it—especially when they compare it 
with the hardships they had to face, whether recording pirate tapes or hav￾ing to make their own clothes.
A long time ago, Socrates criticised the frivolous youth who did not 
want to learn. And perhaps that is the crux of the matter. Let’s remember 
Gustavo’s quote: the big problem lies in the abrupt cut in the process of 
subcultural transmission. Gustavo learned much of what he knows about 
the punk scene by listening to punks of the previous generation; however, 
with the emergence of information mediums such as social networks and 
the internet, the importance of these actors has lost some of its impor￾tance. And from what we have seen, this causes a resentment that is hard 
to hide in older punks.
There is a complex relationship both between generations and between 
punks and ageing. We have seen positions ranging from rejecting ageing 
and continuing to live the punk life as if they were young. Yet the vast 
majority, in line with Bennett’s (2013) fndings, rework their punk per￾spective. Over the years—especially when joining the labour market and 
having a family—what they understood as punk begins to change to a 
8Title derived from  the  Blink-182 song from  1999, included on  the  album Enema 
of the State.
P. GUERRA109
more nuanced position of what being punk entails, far from the shock and 
the spectacle to a more lasting effect—the constitution of a punk perspec￾tive applied to all dimensions of social life.
In another few decades, all older people will have lived in an age marked 
by the importance of music and popular culture. This will revolutionise 
research in this area and the way we think about ageing. As Andy Bennett 
(2013) states, analysing these issues solely as a refection of youthful 
behaviour is no longer feasible. Social expectations and stereotypes regard￾ing age, which are promoted by the media and reinforced by common￾sense views that with age people will calm down and become more 
conservative, will also be challenged. However, despite being able to see 
this social change, academic research is currently failing to keep up with it, 
with few studies on the relationship between popular music and ageing 
(Bennett, 2013; Hodkinson, 2011, 2013). This situation will have to 
change for us to do justice to these older punks, who remain as punk as 
their younger counterparts and their younger selves.
References
Baars, J. (2012). Critical Turns of Aging, Narrative and Time. International 
Journal of Ageing and Later Life, 7(2), 143–165.
Baker, S., Robards, B., & Buttigieg, R. (Eds.). (2016). Youth Cultures and 
Subcultures. Australian Perspectives. Routledge.
Bennett, A. (2006). Punk’s Not Dead: The Signifcance of Punk Rock for an 
Older Generation of Fans. Sociology, 40(1), 219–235.
Bennett, A. (2012). Dance Parties, Lifestyle and Strategies for Ageing. In 
A. Bennett & P. Hodkinson (Eds.), Ageing and Youth Cultures: Music, Style 
and Identity (pp. 95–104). Berg.
Bennett, A. (2013). Music, Style, and Aging. Growing Old Disgracefully? Temple 
University Press.
Bennett, A., & Guerra, P. (Eds.). (2019). DIY Cultures and Underground Music 
Scenes. Routledge.
Boym, S. (2001). The Future of Nostalgia. Basic Books.
Bytheway, B. (2005). Ageism and Age Categorization. Journal of Social Issues, 
61(2), 361–374.
Davis, J. (2006). Growing Up Punk: Negotiating Aging Identity in a Local Music 
Scene. Symbolic Interaction, 29(1), 63–69.
Featherstone, M., & Hepworth, M. (1991). The Mask of Ageing and the 
Postmodern Life Course. In M. Featherstone, M. Hepworth, & B. S. Turner 
(Eds.), The Body: Social Process and Cultural Theory (pp. 371–389). Sage.
6 LIVE FAST, DIE OLD. EXPERIENCES OF AGEING IN PORTUGUESE PUNK…110
Furlong, A. (Ed.). (2017). Handbook of Youth and Young Adulthood (2nd ed.). 
Routledge.
Gardner, A. (2020). Ageing and Contemporary Female Musicians. Routledge.
Giddens, A. (1991). Modernity and Self-Identity: Self and Society in the Late 
Modern Age. Polity Press.
Gregory, J. (2009). Too Young to Drink, Too Old to Dance: The Infuences of 
Age and Gender on (Non-)rave Participation. Dancecult: Journal of Electronic 
Dance Music Culture, 1(1), 65–80.
Guerra, P. (2016). Keep It Rocking: The Social Space of Portuguese Alternative 
Rock (1980–2010). Journal of Sociology, 52(4), 615–630.
Guerra, P. (2017). Just Can’t Go to Sleep: DIY Cultures and Alternative Economies 
from the Perspective of Social Theory. Portuguese Journal of Social Science, 
16(3), 283–303.
Guerra, P. (2018). Raw Power: Punk, DIY and Underground Cultures as Spaces 
of Resistance in Contemporary Portugal. Cultural Sociology, 12(2), 241–259.
Guerra, P. (2019). The Song Is Still a ‘Weapon’: The Portuguese Identity in Times 
of Crisis. YOUNG, 28(1), 14–31.
Guerra, P. (2020). Iberian Punk, Cultural Metamorphoses, and Artistic Differences 
in the Post-Salazar and Post-Franco Eras. In G. McKay & G. Arnold (Eds.), 
The Oxford Handbook of Punk Rock. Oxford University Press.
Guerra, P. (2022). House of Golden Records: Portugal’s Independent Record 
Stores (1998–2020). Societies, 12(6), 188. https://doi.org/10.3390/
soc12060188.; https://www.mdpi.com/2075-4698/12/6/188
Guerra, P. (2023a). Underground artistic-creative scenes between utopias and 
artivisms. Journal of Cultural Analysis and Social Change, 8(2), 10. https://
doi.org/10.20897/jcasc/14063
Guerra, P. (2023b). Living popular music in “high fdelity.” Portugal’s indepen￾dent record stores, 1998–2020. In G. Arnold, J. Dougan, C., Feldman-Barrett, 
& M. Worley (Eds.), The Life, Death, and Afterlife of the Record Store. A Global 
History (pp. 109–119). New York: Bloomsbury Academic. https://doi.
org/10.5040/9781501384547
Haenfer, R. (2009). Straight Edge: Clean-Living Youth, Hardcore Punk and Social 
Change. Rutgers University Press.
Higgs, P., & Gilleard, C. (2020). The Ideology of Ageism Versus the Social 
Imaginary of the Fourth Age: Two Differing Approaches to the Negative 
Contexts of Old Age. Ageing and Society, 40(8), 1617–1630.
Hodkinson, P. (2002). Goth: Identity, Style and Subculture. Berg.
Hodkinson, P. (2011). Ageing in a Spectacular ‘Youth Culture’: Continuity, 
Change and Community Amongst Older Goths. The British Journal of Sociology, 
62(2), 262–282.
Hodkinson, P. (2013). Family and Parenthood in an Ageing ‘Youth’ Culture: A 
Collective Embrace of Dominant Adulthood? Sociology, 47(6), 1072–1087.
P. GUERRA111
Hodkinson, P. (2016). Youth Cultures and the Rest of Life: Subcultures, Post￾subcultures and Beyond. Journal of Youth Studies, 19(5), 629–645.
Holland, S. (2004). Alternative Femininities: Body, Age and Identity. Berg.
Jacobson, M. (2020). Graffti, Aging and Subcultural Memory: A Struggle for 
Recognition Through Podcast Narratives. Societies, 10(1). https://doi.
org/10.3390/soc10010001
Keightley, E., & Pickering, M. (2006). The Modalities of Nostalgia. Current 
Sociology, 54(6), 919–941.
Keightley, E., & Pickering, M. (2012). The Mnemonic Imagination: Remembering 
as Creative Practice. Palgrave Macmillan.
Mansson, J., Samuelsson, E., & Torronen, J. (2022). Doing Adulthood—Doing 
Alcohol: What Happens When the ‘Sober Generation’ Grows Up? Journal of 
Youth Studies, 25(1), 84–99.
Reynolds, S. (2012). Retromania: Pop Culture’s Addiction to Its Own Past. 
Faber & Faber.
Thornton, S. (1995). Club Cultures: Music, Media and Subcultural Capital. 
Polity Press.
Threadgold, S. (2017). Youth, Class and Everyday Struggles. Routledge.
Thurnell-Read, T. (2022). ‘A Couple of These Videos Is All You Really Needed to 
Get Pumped to Skate’: Subcultural Media, Nostalgia and Re-viewing 1990s 
Skate Media on YouTube. YOUNG, 30(2), 165–182.
Way, L. (2020). Punk, Gender and Ageing: Just Typical Girls? Bingley.
Wouters, C. (2007). Informalization: Manners and Emotions Since 1890. Sage.
6 LIVE FAST, DIE OLD. EXPERIENCES OF AGEING IN PORTUGUESE PUNK…© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 113
Switzerland AG 2024
L. Way, M. Grimes (eds.), Punk, Ageing and Time, Palgrave Studies 
in the History of Subcultures and Popular Music, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47823-9_7
CHAPTER 7
“I’m Not Someone Who Calls Himself 
an Anarchist, I am an Anarchist”: 
The Continuing Signifcance of Anarchism 
in the Later Lives of Ex-Adherents of British 
Anarcho-Punk
Matt Grimes
Introduction
British anarcho-punk was a unique subset of the 1970s and 1980s punk 
rock subculture, wherein notions of anarchism were explored and enacted, 
beyond the attention-grabbing anarchist sloganeering of many punk bands 
of that era. Through a series of interviews with ageing ex-adherents of 
British anarcho-punk and drawing on their memories of their engagement 
with British anarcho-punk, in their adolescence and late adolescence, this 
chapter examines the continuing signifcance that their relationship with 
anarchist ideologies has impacted on the refexive framework through 
M. Grimes (*) 
Birmingham City University, Birmingham, UK
e-mail: Matt.Grimes@bcu.ac.uk114
which their subsequent life courses are experienced, presented and under￾stood. Through their refexive narratives, my interviewees show how they 
constructed, developed, manifested and maintained their relationship with 
anarchism and their anarcho-punk identities. Firstly, this chapter will 
briefy outline the emergence of British anarcho-punk as a distinctive sub￾set of the 1970s and 1980s punk rock subculture. Secondly, I will discuss 
anarcho-punks relationship with anarchism, and the 1960s and 1970s 
countercultural manifestation of anarchist principles and ideologies. I will 
then briefy outline the methodological approach deployed in the primary 
research, followed by a discussion encompassing identity, memory and 
nostalgia as conceptual frameworks that situate my research. The penulti￾mate section of this chapter documents and analyses the primary data 
gathered through in-depth semi-structured interviews with my research 
respondents. Lastly, I will show that, although my respondents’ identities 
have developed and changed over time, and been impacted on by various 
life course events, elements of their relationship with anarchist ideologies 
and principles have remained and impacted on the refexive framework 
through which their subsequent life course is experienced, presented and 
understood.
British Anarcho-Punk
“Yes that’s right, punk is dead, it’s just another cheap product for the con￾sumer’s head. Bubblegum rock on plastic transistors, schoolboy sedition 
backed by big time promoters.
CBS promote the Clash, but it ain’t for revolution, it’s just for cash.
Punk became a fashion just like hippy used to be and it ain’t got a thing 
to do with you or me”
‘Punk Is Dead’ (Crass (1978))
Seminal anarcho-punk band Crass released their frst record ‘The Feeding 
of the 5000’ in 1978. The EP’s ffth track, ‘Punk Is Dead’, was penned as 
a searing critique of the process by which punk had become commodifed 
by the music and culture industries, and the failures of the frst wave of 
punk rock to harness and propagate the energy of punk into something 
that had the potential to challenge the hegemonic order (Bestley, 2016; 
Cross, 2010; Dines, 2004; Gordon, 2016; Grimes, 2019). Along with 
Crass’s declaration of the death of punk and in the wake of what has 
become termed as the ‘frst wave of punk’, which ‘existed’ between 1975 
M. GRIMES115
and 1979 and any points in-between, depending on whose chronology 
one goes by, a slew of post-punk (sub)cultures emerged in its wake, each 
carving out its own identity and ideology within the fragmenting punk 
milieu (Colegrave & Sullivan, 2001; Liptrot, 2012). One such punk (sub)
culture that emerged in the wake of the ‘frst wave’ of punk was British 
anarcho-punk which Dines (2004), Grimes (2019) and Worley (2017) 
successfully document as a reappropriation and transformation of certain 
features of frst wave of punk in the early 1980s, combined with notions of 
anarchist and libertarian thought and action, which provided a space 
where people could nurture a more informed identity and lifestyle in artic￾ulating a resistance and aversion towards the hegemonic culture and the 
political and corporate structures of society.
At the forefront of this emerging subcultural scene were seminal 
anarcho-punk band Crass, who were formed at the tail end of the frst 
wave of punk rock and set about challenging what they saw as the ideo￾logical and political failings of frst wave punk (Cross, 2010). Crass have 
come to be defned by many1 as the originators and ‘reluctant leaders of a 
British anarcho-punk movement that essentially eschewed all leadership’ 
(Glasper, 2006, p. 8). This reluctance comes despite them claiming that 
they were responsible for bringing the globally recognised circled ‘A’ for 
anarchy symbol back into cultural and subcultural circulation through 
their musical and artistic DiY productions (Crass, 1982a). As Crass began 
to get recognition and gain a wider punk audience, many punk bands took 
infuence from Crass and aligned their music and politics with the then 
emerging and developing anarcho-punk subcultural scene, or some formed 
a band as a direct response to Crass’s infuence.2
British Anarcho-Punk and Its Relationship
with Anarchism
The trajectory of the emergence of British anarcho-punk, and its interpre￾tation of anarchism, is important in defning the difference and distinctive￾ness between a number of subsets that came out of the frst wave of punk. 
1 See (Berger, 2006; Bestley, 2016; Cross, 2004, 2010; Dale, 2012: Dines, 2004; Gibbs, 
1996; Glasper, 2005, 2006; Gordon, 2016; Gosling, 2004; Laing, 1985; Liptrot, 2012; 
McKay, 1996; O’Hara, 1999; Robb, 2006; Sabin, 1999; Savage, 1991; Worley, 2017). 2 See Ian Glasper’s historiography The Day the Country Died: A History of Anarcho Punk 
1980–1984 (2006), for an insight into the British anarcho-punk bands from that period.
7 “I’M NOT SOMEONE WHO CALLS HIMSELF AN ANARCHIST…116
The inclusion of the prefx anarcho, which is rooted in anarchism, with the 
existing subcultural term punk, suggests that there was a combinational 
development of a more politically and ideologically focused form of punk 
emerging as a distinctive subset of punk (Avery-Natale, 2012). Therefore, 
the very term ‘anarcho-punk’ would suggest that there was a link between 
punk and the ideologies of anarchism. Whilst this chapter does not seek to 
provide a historiography of anarchism (see Christie & Meltzer, 1970; 
Woodcock, 1975; Marshall, 1993), it is worth noting that the frst wave of 
punk, adopted the sloganeering of anarchism mostly for shock value or as 
a rhetorical device “rather than a clear form of ideological positioning or 
political allegiance” (Bestley, 2016, p. 46). Savage (1991) suggests that 
when the Sex Pistols released their frst single ‘Anarchy in the U.K’, a link 
between anarchism and punk was declared, though as noted by Penny 
Rimbaud3 (1998), albeit perhaps by name rather than by intent. Many of 
the ‘frst wave of punk’ bands such as the Sex Pistols and The Clash had 
little interest in the ideologies of anarchism much beyond the term being 
used as a way of signifying a broader anti-establishment rhetoric, or to 
provoke media and consumer attention (Dunn, 2016, p. 197).
Gordon (1995, 2016), McKay (1996), Rimbaud (1998), Cross (2004, 
2010), Dale (2012), Dines (2004), Glasper (2006), Liptrot (2012) and 
Worley (2017) all suggest that what British anarcho-punk did was to take 
some of the political and ideological sloganeering of earlier frst wave punk 
and politicise them in a more literal way.
Dines (2004, p. 253) states:
[Al]though anarchism was at frst taken as a means of mere shock value and 
expression of political rhetoric encompassing an eclectic mix of symbols … 
it was soon transformed within certain fragments of the punk rock move￾ment into a ‘space’ for a more organised form of dissent. Subsequently, 
anarchism was taken seriously by the newly emerging anarcho-punk scene as 
a means of interjecting a sense of fervent political ‘self awareness’ into the 
punk rock movement.
Crass’s ideological approach to anarchism was in many ways linked to 
the type of anarchism associated with the 1960s and 1970s hippie 
3Penny Rimbaud was one of the co-founders of seminal anarchist punk band Crass, which 
disbanded in 1984.
M. GRIMES117
counterculture and the Situationist International (SI)4 movement. As 
McKay (1996, p. 75) suggests:
The anarchism [Crass] espoused was not the anarchy of the Pistols …but a 
lifestyle and worldview they developed through a combination of hippy ide￾alism and resistance, punk energy and cheek, and some of the cultural strate￾gies of the Situationists.
Crass’s relationship with the counterculture further highlighted com￾monalities between hippies and British anarcho-punks in their resistance 
to the establishment. However, in the booklet Series of Shock Slogans and 
Mindless Token Tantrums (Crass, 1982a), which was included with Crass’s 
‘Christ – The Album’ (Crass, 1982b) Rimbaud talks at length about his 
involvement with the 1960s/1970s counterculture and what he saw as the 
failings of it in effecting any real change in society through countercultural 
and political resistance. The inclusion of the booklet signifed the impor￾tant infuence of that period on some of the ideological and philosophical 
positions espoused by Crass and their interpretation of anarchism as a 
political ideology they endeavoured to live by. Crass’s relationship with 
more politically overt anarchist organisations was, to some degree, brief in 
that they staged a beneft gig to raise money for the Persons Unknown 
trial5 and to help fnance the Wapping Autonomy Centre,6 also known as 
4The Situationist International (SI) (1957–1972) was a relatively small yet infuential 
Paris-based group that had its origins in the avant-garde artistic tradition. The situationists 
are best known for their radical politics which were heavily infuenced by Marxist philosophy. 
SI drew inspiration from art movements like Dadaism and Surrealism by creating artwork 
that challenged capitalism and consumer culture and presented an alternate view of everyday 
life, one not infuenced by advertising and media. 5The Persons Unknown trial was a trial of six alleged anarchists, and others unknown and 
not arrested, allegedly linked to the 1970s anarchist group The Angry Brigade and to Black 
Flag. They were accused of being part of an anarchist terrorist conspiracy, who were plotting 
to cause explosions and radically change society through violent means. After 18 months in 
custody during the length of the trial, all defendants were acquitted and immediately released. 
British anarcho-punk bands Crass and Poison Girls recorded and performed a beneft record 
and performance in support of the defendants which enabled the development of the 
Wapping Autonomy Centre, aka The Anarchist Centre. 6The Wapping Autonomy Centre, also called The Anarchist Centre, was a social space set 
up in Metropolitan Wharf, Wapping, from late 1981 to 1982. The centre was the idea of 
anarchist Ronan Bennett and others initially funded by money raised by the Poison Girls/
Crass beneft single ‘Persons Unknown/Bloody Revolutions’, as well as beneft gigs by Poison 
Girls and Crass. It became a hub for the British anarcho-punk scene in London for a short 
period of time, with live gigs, book fairs, fanzine conventions, discussion groups, flms, 
debates and political workshops, until the building was vacated in 1982.
7 “I’M NOT SOMEONE WHO CALLS HIMSELF AN ANARCHIST…118
The Anarchist Centre. The centre, which closed after only a year of opera￾tion, was a focal point for a number of informal anarchist support groups 
and provided a space for debates, workshops, and a venue for the increas￾ing number of British anarcho-punk bands that were forming (Rimbaud, 
1998, pp.  117–124). So, whilst the literature signifes relationships 
between British anarcho-punk, anarchism and the counterculture, the 
type of anarchism that developed was based less on ‘traditional’ political 
anarchist principles (Gordon, 2016).
Cross (2010, p. 2) argues that the relationship between anarchism and 
punk was not always cohesive in that “the punks who raised new anarchist 
banners of their own making were quickly revealed in pursuit of very dif￾ferent goals” to an anarchist tradition that focused on political power, 
economic and personal exploitation, and class relationships. So, whilst 
O’Hara (1999, p. 71) suggests that most punks “share a belief formed 
around the anarchist principles of having no offcial government or rulers 
and valuing individual freedom and responsibility”, the manifestation of 
those principles in tandem with other individual and personal principles 
and politics varies greatly amongst them. Donaghey (2016, p. 45) deftly 
summarises the relationship between punk and anarchism:
So, while a connection between anarchism and punk (or even a ‘punk￾anarchism’) is widely recognised, it is qualifed as being somehow different 
from other anarchisms, and even then there is no unanimously shared 
understanding of anarchism that is shared by all punks [...].
As British anarcho-punk emerged and developed, it appropriated the 
theoretical defnition of anarchy in the sense that “anarchy is the rejection 
of that state control and represents a demand by the individual to live a life 
of personal choice not one of political manipulation” (Crass Flipside #23 
1981 cited in Dines, 2004, p. 244). Craig O’Hara’s detailed and philo￾sophical analysis of anarchism within the punk movement goes some way 
to supporting this by stating:
Anarchist punks view anarchy as a freedom from authority and rules; a place 
where people can live their lives without some form of external compulsion. 
Thus police and formalized laws would not be necessary. (1999, p. 95)
However, Cross (2004, p. 32) argues that there was no one cohesive 
political agenda or ideology within British anarcho-punk and that
M. GRIMES119
Crass’s own reading of anarchism retained hippy’s concern with the freedom 
of the individual from the intrusion of the state but infused it with militant 
opposition to the ‘war machine’, and an excoriating critique of the alienated 
social relations of capitalism.
Crass, also displayed the circled ‘A’ anarchy symbol across a number of 
their multi-media outputs, as did many other British anarcho-punk bands 
of that period and beyond (Bestley, 2016). Whilst this could be seen as a 
direct alignment with the politics of anarchism, Rimbaud (1998) states 
that the band, who were by then attracting large audiences, were being 
put under pressure by the political left and political right to clarify their 
political affnities. The use of the anarchist symbol enabled Crass to disas￾sociate themselves from either polarised political position and allowed 
them to continue with their own message of libertarian and anarchist self￾determination (1998, pp. 108–109).
Engagement with the politics of pacifsm was also central to Crass phi￾losophy (Worley & Lohman, 2018) and British anarcho-punk ideology. 
Cross (2004) argues that, for Crass, anarchism and pacifsm were symbi￾otic. As British anarcho-punk gained momentum and a larger audience, 
organisations such as Class War,12 whose anarchistic ideologies were 
focused on class division and direct action, started to gain traction (Bone, 
2006; Dines, 2004, pp.  215–223, Worley, 2017). Similarly, the British 
anarcho-punk ‘zine Pigs For Slaughter, which was representative of the 
Anarchist Youth Federation (AYF), took a more hard-line approach. The 
frst issue contained a three-page searing critique of Crass and British 
anarcho-punk, highlighting their contradictions, the failure of its pacifst 
approach and lack of commitment to direct action and confrontation with 
the ‘system’ and all its agents (Bestley & Binns, 2018). It was often in the 
DiY punk ‘zines of the early 1980s where debates over what constituted 
anarchism, pacifsm versus direct action, collective vs individual anarchism 
created and maintained points of tension (Bestley & Binns, 2018; Grimes, 
2016, 2019; Worley, 2018). However, Crass’s pacifst approach to anar￾chism was being unquestioningly reproduced and reiterated in a propor￾tion of ‘zines. In doing so, British anarcho-punk was seen to be limited, 
stifing, partisan and dogmatic, with a number of ‘zine editors critiquing 
what was seemingly becoming the commoditisation of a subcultural move￾ment spurred by Crass and developed, and in some ways reproduced, by 
other British anarcho-punk bands that followed after Crass (Bestley & 
Binns, 2018; Grimes, 2019). This commoditisation, partisan and 
7 “I’M NOT SOMEONE WHO CALLS HIMSELF AN ANARCHIST…120
dogmatic development within the British anarcho-punk movement and 
subcultural scene would eventually lead to its fragmentation in the mid to 
late 1980s, accelerated by the disbanding of Crass in 1984 (Grimes, 2019).
Research Method
This chapter draws upon my doctoral research around anarcho-punks, 
ageing and identity. Previous research into ageing fans and ageing within 
youth cultures of popular music tend to focus on the fans or participants’ 
continuing relationship with music or their continuing participation in an 
existing subculture or post-subculture. My doctoral research however 
sought to answer issues around what happens to those people when their 
affliation to a subculture ceases? What becomes of their subcultural or 
post-subcultural identities? What continuing infuence or impact does 
their previous participation have on their subsequent lives and identities? 
Thus, revisiting and re-examining a subcultural scene from over 30 years 
ago created a retrospective account, which, as Strong (2011, p. 13) argues, 
“adds a new perspective to the literature on music, which mostly studies 
movements as they occur, or presents historical accounts that do not 
involve the recollections of fans”. Taking from Hobb’s (2006, p. 101) 
descriptor of ethnography as a “product of a cocktail of methodologies” 
my method combined a ‘cocktail’ of interviewing approaches and tech￾niques which were all focused around a biographic-narrative interview 
(Fischer-Rosenthal, 2000; Wengraf, 2001). These included approaches 
such as life history interviewing, which is a form of individual interview 
directed to documenting the respondent’s life, or an aspect of it that has 
developed over the life course (Jupp, 2006); oral history interviewing, 
which involves interviewing people about their historical lived experience, 
(Smith, 2001); and narrative interviewing, where a set of semi structured 
questions provide an opportunity for the participant to narrate their life 
experiences (Allen, 2017). This ‘cocktail’ of interviewing approaches 
enabled me to fully consider how people, through their previous affliation 
and engagement with a musical subcultural scene, form their identities 
through narratives constructed from their personal memories. Gathering 
the research data was achieved by conducting a set of semi-structured in￾depth interviews with 18 participants, 4 female and 14 male, between the 
ages of 45 and 62, who self-identifed as anarcho-punks during their ado￾lescence and into their early to mid-20 s during the late 1970s and into the 
M. GRIMES121
late 1980s. The in-depth semi-structured interviews, both face to face and 
online, consisted of two to three interviews with each participant over a 
period of 17 months.
(Anarcho-Punk) Identity Memory and Nostalgia
When I use the term ‘identity’ in this chapter, I’m referring to the com￾plex ways in which people come to understand who they are and where 
they ft into the world, both psychologically and socially. The identities 
that we develop in our adolescence are understood as being quite signif￾cant in terms of forming distinctive identities, as it is a period of consider￾able cognitive and psychosocial development (Erikson, 1950, 1968; 
Kroger et al., 2010; Meeus et al., 1999, cited in Decker et al., 2014). 
Damon and Hart (1991) argue that adolescence is the transitional shift 
from physical characteristics to more psychological judgements involving 
feelings, emotions and participation/non-participation with other people 
and things around us.
For the majority of my research respondents, their initial engagement 
with British anarcho-punk took place during their adolescence. So, for 
them, this period of adolescence and frst engagement played an impor￾tant role in forming a distinctive identity (Hodkinson, 2002; Liptrot, 
2012) for them. My respondent’s anarcho-punk identity, although indi￾vidual, would have also been impacted by group affliation and member￾ship in those early stages of development.
Therefore, my approach to identity allows me to consider not only how 
my research respondents considered the narrative construction of their 
individual anarcho-punk identities and sense of self, but how being part of 
a subcultural scene had an impact on the development of their anarcho￾punk identities through the shared ideologies, politics and cultural prac￾tices of the subcultural scene. The literature suggests that the construction 
and creative production of one’s identity is produced through narratives, 
or the telling of stories. Here, identity is constructed through the assem￾blage of various stocks of knowledge, memories, values, beliefs, experi￾ences, ideas, images and sounds that are refexively embedded in social 
constructions, which make them meaningful to the individual’s sense of 
self through the narratives they tell (Lawler, 2014; Schütz, 1964). Drawing 
on the work of French philosopher Paul Ricœur (1991a, 1991b), Lawler 
(2014) argues that identities are constructed and creatively produced 
7 “I’M NOT SOMEONE WHO CALLS HIMSELF AN ANARCHIST…122
through narratives. We come to be who we are by locating ourselves or 
being located in social narratives (Somers, 1994, p. 606). Narrativity and 
the process of ‘telling stories’ then plays a central role in how we under￾stand ourselves and others. In this sense, the story we tell is the chronol￾ogy of events within the narrative that we narrate through a set of 
discourses, wherein the particular discourses we employ refer to the 
manipulation of that specifc story in the presentation of the narrative. The 
identity is constructed through the assemblage of various memories, expe￾riences and how we make sense of those narratives through interpretation 
of the episodes within the narrative (Lawler, 2014, pp. 24–26).
Most of my respondents encountered and self-identifed with British 
anarcho-punk during their adolescence, and for many this is where they 
frst became aware of, or were introduced to ideas of, anarchist ideology 
and thought. In doing so, they began to establish their anarcho-punk 
identity, which in many ways was informed by their introduction to 
anarchism.
Because the narratives of my respondents are refective, I could not 
overlook the roles of memory, nostalgia, ageing and the life course in 
terms of how they impact on narrative identity, identity construction and 
identity development. As one ages, self-narratives become crucial to one’s 
successful negotiation and migration in and through time (Harrington 
et al., 2011; Westerhof, 2010). The narrative accounts of our life stories 
are dependent on memory, and the ways in which memories are recon￾structed in our narratives is bound up in notions of self-identity. Our iden￾tity is constructed through the assembling of various memories and 
experiences and how we interpret them and reconstruct them (Lawler, 
2014). This process of reconstruction takes place in the present, and 
through our relationship with those continually reproduced memories, 
our identity is maintained (Halbwachs, 1992 [1942]). As King (2000, 
p. 2) argues, a sense of continuity between past events, actions and present 
experiences is essential to a sense of personal identity. Returning to my 
earlier discussion around adolescence and identity construction and con￾solidation, Conway (1997) argues, particular events and interactions, both 
individual and collective, that occur during late adolescence where identity 
consolidation takes place are seen as more signifcant and being more 
important, and as a result are generally remembered more and are more 
likely to become fxed in one’s memory.
This process of memory is not without its problems though, as the time 
between the event or action, and the recalling or reconstruction of the 
M. GRIMES123
event, has an impact on what we choose to remember, what we choose to 
forget and subsequently what then gets narrated. As King (2000, p. 22) 
states, “Autobiographical narratives reconstruct the events of a life in the 
light of ‘what wasn’t known then’, highlighting the events which are now, 
with hindsight, seen to be signifcant” and “the idea that events might 
have turned out differently, and if interpreted differently, might still be 
capable of changing the subject’s understanding of her life and herself”
(King, 2000, p. 23). The process of remembering, then, might be under￾stood as both a mediated act that connects the human mind and process 
and the available social frameworks and sociocultural settings within which 
it is experienced and constructed.
However, remembering also involves forgetting, and is a selective pro￾cess where within those narratives we select the important and signifcant 
events from the ordinary and inconsequential (Little, 2008) and recon￾struct our past identities in collaboration with our present identities. Here, 
past and present are brought together, and in the recounting of past mem￾ories we add to the narrative elements of ourselves in the present—what I 
term ‘post-memory narrative’.
Nostalgia also plays a part in how one refects on the past as a means of 
continuation with the development of the self and one’s identity. Davis 
(1979) argues that nostalgia is one of the psychological lenses we use in 
the construction, maintenance and reconstruction of our identities. Like 
memory, nostalgic reconstructions also have the capacity to flter out and 
mute the unpleasant, painful and elements of our former selves about 
which we may feel some guilt and shame. Conversely, it also has the poten￾tial for depicting a romanticised ideal of a time that might have been quite 
ordinary and also a romanticised version of ourselves, especially in our 
later life, where we might convey that it was better in the past, when in fact 
it may not have been. Nostalgia has the capacity to locate in memory an 
earlier version of the self to which we measure to advantage some current 
condition of the self. This is aided by nostalgia’s ability to simplify and 
romanticise the past to a point of patronising our former self. With this 
comes the encouragement that we have grown and matured and are able 
to cope with the challenging demands of the present (Davis, 1979). 
Therefore, where nostalgia is a means for the continuity of identity, it also 
is a lens through which to look back at one’s identity, benchmarking peri￾ods of those life transitions Nostalgia becomes a means for the continuity 
of identity by locating in our memory an earlier version of the self, which 
we can measure to positively enhance some current condition of the self. 
7 “I’M NOT SOMEONE WHO CALLS HIMSELF AN ANARCHIST…124
Our connectedness to youthful associations and activities are often sup￾ported by remaining connected to the subcultures and scenes we engaged 
with in our youth and retain elements of our adolescent identity in our 
present identity. Therefore, ageing does not necessarily exclude us from 
our past activities and memories of those periods. Therefore, we make use 
of these stocks of knowledge to meaningfully frame who we are and utilise 
them in the processes of constructing the self and identity.
Anarchism Then and Now
For the majority of my participants, the political and ideological values 
they were exposed to and engaged with in their adolescence played a cen￾tral role in developing and affrming their anarcho-punk identities. 
Transition into adulthood can involve taking on a number of responsibili￾ties, and that can often bring a change in values, beliefs and ideologies. As 
people mature, their political and ideological beliefs and values can change 
with their identities. As my participants have moved through the life 
course, they more than likely would have moved through a number of 
identities, taking with them some of those values and beliefs as residual 
identity into each one. I was interested to fnd out if, and how, the political 
and ideological values and beliefs that were part of their adolescent 
anarcho-punk identity had in some ways remained with them. All of them 
stated that refecting on their time being an anarcho-punk during their 
adolescence had mostly a number of positive impacts on their lives then 
and introduced them to a number of beliefs, ideologies and values that 
they still hold on to now. These include anarchism, animal rights, anti￾authoritarianism and personal politi
cs. Whilst anarchism was connected to a common set of ideologies, my 
interviewees’ interpretation and manifestation of those beliefs varied. I 
asked those who stated they were anarchists then whether they still consid￾ered themselves to be anarchists now. Most said they did, but the few who 
no longer consider themselves to be anarchists still retained some of their 
anarchist values, beliefs and principles, though to what degree varied 
between them:
Basically, I’m an anarchist and I’m not someone who calls himself an anar￾chist, I am an anarchist and I do believe in these things [ ] If anything, I am 
more committed to the idea than I was then. Fundamentally, I believe it’s in 
what you do, actions you take. The reason I think I’m attracted to the ideol￾M. GRIMES125
ogy is that it fts well with my personality. You know it’s not something I 
struggle with, it’s ideas that I sort of thought all of that stuff but didn’t have 
a name to call it [ ] it kind of, it imbues every decision I make, but not in a 
conscious way. I don’t go, “what would an anarchist do in this situation?” 
It’s just like, if something is unfair you just don’t do it, if it’s taking advan￾tage of people, you don’t do it. If there’s a way to do something that 
includes people, you do it that way. (Pete)
What is of particular interest in Pete’s narrative is that, for him, anar￾chism is still made meaningful by action or practices centred around anar￾chist ideologies and principles. In particular, Pete states that he is more 
committed to the idea of anarchism now than he was then. Further discus￾sion with Pete revealed an understanding of anarchism in more nuanced 
ways, as a result of maturation and engaging with anarchist literature, 
which subsequently has enabled him to appreciate and apply anarchism 
more cohesively in his daily life.
For a number of my participants, they had encountered and engaged 
with anarchism before they had become aware of and identifed with 
anarcho-punk. Guy and Simon had both identifed as anarchists before 
their awareness of and engagement with anarcho-punk. Both Guy and 
Simon said that they had attended a number of meetings and discussions 
organised by anarchist organisations, such as The Anarchist Black Cross,7
Anarchist Federation8 and the Persons Unknown Trial support group in 
London. Whilst these meetings were useful in terms of gaining a deeper 
understanding of anarchist politics and ideologies, both of them expressed 
frustration at the lack of action that arose from these types of meetings:
I went to these meetings and they went on for hours. There were anarchists 
talking about theoretical things. They believed in it but it was more theo￾retical than practical [...] no one was practically doing anything, there was 
no, “let’s set this up, let’s get a space working, let’s live this way”. It was all 
just talk and no action. In the end I got so disillusioned with it all because 
no one was actually doing anything. Then I started hanging out with the 
anarcho-punks at the Anarchy Centre in Wapping, after seeing an ad about 
the centre in a fanzine I bought in Freedom Books. I went down there, and 
7The Anarchist Black Cross (formerly the Anarchist Red Cross) is an organisation founded 
in 1906/1907 to provide support to Anarchist and Social Revolutionary Political Prisoners. 8The Anarchist Federation (formerly the Anarchist Communist Discussion Group) is an 
organisation founded in London in 1986.
7 “I’M NOT SOMEONE WHO CALLS HIMSELF AN ANARCHIST…126
it was like brilliant-at last people doing stuff and organising stuff, so I got 
involved in it. (Guy)
And then there was the crossover with Crass doing their beneft single (rais￾ing and donating money towards the court costs of the Persons Unknown 
trial and the Anarchy Centre), erm, but again I was quite comfortable with 
that and in fact my alignment moved more from the older anarchist group 
to the punk anarchist group who were creating things and actively trying to 
effect change and that was defnitely something I was more comfortable 
with. (Simon)
Their narratives suggest that this association with punk anarchists drew 
them away from what they considered to be serious or traditional anarchist 
politics to a group of people expressing anarchism in a way that ftted with 
their existing anarchist identities and principles. With the traditional anar￾chists that Simon and Guy were involved with, there seemed to be a lot of 
meetings and discussions but little anarchist-based action. This suggests 
that they both wanted to put some of their own anarchist ideals and values 
into practice to reaffrm what they considered to be an authentic anarchist 
self, and that these groups of punk anarchists presented them with that 
opportunity. So, in many ways this presented a better ft to their already￾established anarchist identities.
When I asked them both about their experiences within the anarcho￾punk subculture, they both expressed a generally positive experience. 
However, towards the end of their affliation with anarcho-punk, they 
both expressed that the ‘anarchism’ within anarcho-punk became more of 
a ‘badge’ than a set of anarchist principles that were manifested in the daily 
lives of the anarcho-punks they knew or met. For both of them, this led to 
disillusionment with the anarcho-punk subculture, and they eventually 
disassociated themselves from it, but remained committed to their anar￾chist beliefs and principles.
Being part of the anarcho-punk scene really helped me understand in many 
ways the possibilities of anarchism, but it also highlighted the utopian ideal￾ism that often goes with it. Unless you have a critical mass of people behind 
that [anarchist] movement that are willing to take action, it will in many 
ways remain idealistic and utopian. But I am ever the optimist and remain 
committed to my anarchist beliefs and try to live by those principles as much 
as I can within the framework of a neo-liberal capitalist society. Yes, I do 
(consider myself an anarchist). What kind of anarchist? I’m still working on 
M. GRIMES127
that. It’s alright talking about theoretical stuff, but you’ve got to get off 
your backside. If you want it to work, you’ve got to try to make it work. I 
still think it’s workable. I think it’s doable in a practical way, which I’ve tried 
to do in my jobs and through other things I’ve done. (Guy)
For some, their past anarcho-punk beliefs and values had been revised 
and refashioned in ways that they considered to be more compatible with 
their current lives and identities. One of my participants Kate broke her 
ties with the anarcho-punk subculture in the mid- to late 1980s to live a 
nomadic lifestyle as a New Age traveller9 because she perceived that group 
of people to be living a more anarchic lifestyle “without the trappings of 
society which was what we [anarcho-punks] were sort of against”. After 
living a nomadic lifestyle for a number of years, she fnally settled within a 
community of other New Age travellers who have chosen to live, to some 
degree, outside of mainstream society. When I asked her if this current 
lifestyle was a continuation of her anarchist beliefs and her commitment to 
anarchism, she stated that she still considers herself an anarchist and that, 
for her,
Anarchy still means self-rule, it’s about living and let living, it’s about having 
respect for other people and it’s about being responsible for your own 
actions. It’s incredibly diffcult to do and it doesn’t always work. I mean liv￾ing in a community like this, we like to think we can police ourselves, but it 
doesn’t always work and sometimes you have to go to the outside world to 
get it sorted out. It goes against the grain big time, it goes against the grain 
really badly because we have no trust for the police, we have no trust for the 
authorities because we know how corrupt they are, and how they have 
viewed us in the past. We are having to actually get the authorities in to 
come and sort somebody out and it’s horrendous. The one good thing is 
that we are actually all coming together, all of us as a community and stand￾ing together and saying, look, we can’t deal with this person and we need 
you to take him away and deal with him. (Kate)
Her narrative pulls into focus the diffculty in attempting to live by a set 
of principles and values that are at times at odds with the society outside 
9New Age travellers emerged out of the counterculture and free-festival movements of the 
1960s and 1970s but gained prominence and numbers during the 1980s and 1990s. 
Originally differentiated from Gypsy, Roma and Irish travellers, who are seen as ‘ethnic’ 
travellers rather than ‘Cultural’ travellers, many existing New Age Traveller families have 
been nomadic for three consecutive generations.
7 “I’M NOT SOMEONE WHO CALLS HIMSELF AN ANARCHIST…128
of the community she lives in. Having to call on those representatives of 
authority that she disapproves of to intervene in this specifc case creates 
an interesting paradox, where her anarchist principles are challenged and 
she herself questions the diffculty in wanting to uphold them and live by 
them. For some of my respondents, the sense of paradox and tension 
between wanting to uphold anarcho-punk values and ideologies into later 
life as residual identity is seen as problematic. Davis (2012, p. 118) argues, 
“Coming to embrace change and paradox seems to be central to the expe￾rience of becoming an adult and therefore resistance must be reframed as 
a way of being not necessarily a clear – cut rebellion against some name￾able force”. Since their introduction to anarchism, as anarcho-punks in 
their adolescence, some of my participants still self-identify as being anar￾chists. It seems that this particular element of their residual anarcho-punk 
identities has remained prominent. What has shifted for them is the way in 
which they manifest their anarcho-punk or anarchist identarian values, 
beliefs and ideologies. A common type of response to how some of them 
resolved paradoxes between their beliefs, values and ideologies, adult￾hood, ageing and society is best summed up by Phil:
It’s about being realistic. I recognise that I don’t live in an anarchist society 
and at times I have to compromise, well let’s say adjust [laughs], my anar￾chist beliefs and just try to change people’s outlook and hope that by adjust￾ing my anarchist take on things I can fnd more, shall we say, subtle ways of 
exercising my anarchist beliefs whenever and wherever possible. Most of the 
people I know, including my work colleagues, know I am an anarchist, and 
they know I have remained committed to anarchism since I was a teenage 
anarcho-punk. It does make for some interesting conversations, and I often 
get the piss taken out of me for being idealistic, unrealistic and living in 
some utopian dream, and that’s fne by me, they are entitled to their opin￾ion. I say to them just because I don’t act as they think an anarchist might, 
it doesn’t mean I’m not an anarchist, it’s just as much about the ways in 
which I think and conduct myself. I suppose, in a nutshell, I do what I can 
when I can, whilst living in this capitalist system. (Phil)
His account suggests that his current manifestation of an anarchist 
identity still focuses on the doing and exposition of anarchist principles, as 
highlighted by Guy and Pete’s narratives on anarchism. Phil highlights 
that the way he thinks and conducts himself is important in the daily mani￾festation of his anarchist beliefs and values. Davis (2012, p. 118) states 
that within the punk scenes that she investigated, “the meaning of punk is 
M. GRIMES129
reconfgured to make sense with the realities that come with adulthood” 
and punk is “more broadly defned to accommodate adulthood – punk 
becomes compatible with the lifelong endeavour; it becomes a philosophi￾cal approach to living”. So, we can see from the narratives presented that 
the exposition of anarchist beliefs and values is exercised through notions 
of enacting anarchist principles and ideologies and also through a sense of 
it becoming a philosophical approach to living and functioning within the 
real world.
Conclusion
From the majority of my respondents’ narratives, it seems that over time 
their interpretation of anarchism has remained, and the notion of respect￾ing others and allowing people autonomy in their lives still remains at the 
forefront of those narratives. However, it seems that over time how that 
manifests itself has shifted. In Bennett’s (2013, p. 170) analysis of ageing 
punks, he argues that many older punks “articulated a highly refexive 
awareness of the naïveté inherent in their earlier music-inspired political 
beliefs”. Likewise, for my research participants, some expressed that in 
hindsight there was a degree of youthful naivety and utopian idealism in 
their engagement with anarcho-punk and anarchism. This is best summed 
up by Adam:
At the time, yes, we thought anarchy was a big, big possibility. Like every 18 
and 19- year-old at the time, you wanted to smash the system and change 
the world for the better, to the way you believe it should be. I still believe in 
anarchism. I still believe it’s the right way to go.
For others, their attachment to anarchism over time had waned to vary￾ing degrees. So, whilst some of them still considered themselves to be 
anarchists, others I interviewed did not explicitly identify as anarchists but 
still empathised and incorporated some of those anarchist values and ide￾ologies in their current political lives. Most of them expressed having left￾leaning libertarian politics and green politics and were highly critical of 
mainstream politics, the norms and expectations of mainstream society 
and considered themselves to have a set of alternative views that often 
conficted with or challenged traditional mainstream values. Many of them 
said that their political awakening and education was during their adoles￾cence when they were anarcho-punks, so whilst not wholly attributing 
7 “I’M NOT SOMEONE WHO CALLS HIMSELF AN ANARCHIST…130
that to their political views now, they expressed that anarcho-punk and 
their awareness of anarchism had a marked infuence on their current adult 
political leanings. Herein the notion of a residual anarcho-punk identity is 
seen to still permeate into their current identities, 30+ years after they had 
relinquished their anarcho-punk identities.
References
Allen, M. (2017). The SAGE Encyclopedia of Communication Research Methods
(Vol. 4). Sage Publications, Inc.. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781483381411
Avery-Natale, E. A. (2012) Narrative Identifcations Among Anarcho-Punks In 
Philadelphia. Ph.D. Thesis. Temple University.
Bennett, A. (2013). Music, Style and Aging: Growing Old Disgracefully? Temple 
University Press.
Berger, G. (2006). The Story of Crass. Omnibus Press.
Bestley, R. (2016). Big A Little A: The Graphic Language of Anarchy. In M. Dines 
& M. Worley (Eds.), The Aesthetic of Our Anger: Anarcho-Punk, Politics and 
Music (pp. 43–66). Minor Compositions/Autonomedia.
Bestley, R., & Binns, R. (2018). The Evolution of an Anarcho-Punk Narrative, 
1978–84. In The Subcultures Network (Ed.), Ripped, Torn and Cut: Pop, 
Politics and Punk Fanzines from 1976 (pp.  129–149). Manchester 
University Press.
Bone, I. (2006). Bash The Rich: True Life Confessions of an Anarchist in the 
UK. Tangent Books.
Christie, S., & Meltzer, A. (1970). The Floodgates of Anarchy. Stanmore Press Ltd.
Colegrave, S., & Sullivan, C. (Eds.). (2001). Punk. Cassell & Co..
Conway, M. A. (1997). The Inventory of Experience: Memory and Identity. In 
J. W. Pennebaker, D. Páez, & B. Rimé (Eds.), Collective Memory of Political 
Events: Social Psychological Perspectives (pp.  21–46). Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates Inc.
Crass. (1982a). A Series of Shock Slogans and Mindless Token Tantrums. 
Exitstencil Press.
Cross, R. (2004). The Hippies Now Wear Black: Crass and the Anarcho-punk 
movement 1977–1984. Socialist History, 26, 25–44.
Cross, R. (2010). ‘There Is No Authority But Yourself ’: The Individual and the 
Collective in British Anarcho-Punk. Music and Politics, 4(2), 1–20.
Dale, P. (2012). Anyone Can Do It: Empowerment, Tradition and the Punk 
Underground. Ashgate Publishing Ltd.
Damon, W., & Hart, D. (1991). Self-Understanding in Childhood and Adolescence. 
Cambridge University Press.
Davis, F. (1979). Yearning for Yesterday: A Sociology of Nostalgia. Free Press.
M. GRIMES131
Davis, J. R. (2012). Punk, Ageing and the Expectations of Adult Life. In A. Bennett 
& P. Hodkinson (Eds.), Ageing and Youth Cultures: Music, Style and Identity
(pp. 105–118). Berg.
Decker, S. H., Pyrooz, D. C., & Moule, R. K., Jr. (2014). Disengagement From 
Gangs as Role Transitions. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 24(2), 268–283.
Dines, M. (2004) An Investigation Into The Emergence Of The Anarcho-Punk 
Scene Of The 1980’s. Ph.D. thesis. University of Salford.
Donaghey, J. (2016) Punk and Anarchism: UK, Poland, Indonesia. Ph.D. thesis. 
Loughborough University.
Dunn, K. (2016). Global Punk: Resistance and Rebellion in Everyday Life. 
Bloomsbury Academic.
Erikson, E. H. (1950). Childhood and Society. Norton.
Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity, Youth & Crisis. Faber & Faber.
Fischer-Rosenthal, W. (2000) Biographical Work and Biographical Structuring in 
Present-Day Societies. In: J, Bornat, P. Chamberlayne and T.Wengraf , eds. 
Turn To biographical Methods In Social Science: Comparative Issues and 
Examples. : Routledge, pp 109-125
Gibbs, A. (1996). Destroy: The Defnitive History of Punk. Britannia Press.
Glasper, I. (2005). Burning Britain: The History of UK Punk 1980–1984. Cherry 
Red Books.
Glasper, I. (2006). The Day The Country Died: A History of Anarcho-Punk 
1980–1984. Cherry Red Books.
Gordon, A. (1995). Throwing The Punk Rock Baby Out With The Dirty Bath 
Water: Crass And Punk Rock, A Critical Appraisal. BA UG Diss. Nottingham 
Trent University.
Gordon, A. (2016). Crass Refections. Itchy Monkey Press.
Gosling, T. (2004). “Not For Sale”: The Underground Network of Anarcho￾Punk. In A. Bennett & R. A. Peterson (Eds.), Music Scenes: Local, Translocal 
and Virtual. Vanderbilt University Press.
Grimes, M. (2016). From Protest to Resistance: British Anarcho-Punk Fanzines 
(1980–1984) as Sites of Resistance and Symbols of Defance. In M. Dines & 
M.  Worley (Eds.), The Aesthetics of Our Anger. Anarcho-Punk, Politics and 
Music (pp. 157–178). Minor Compositions/Autonomedia.
Grimes, M (2019). “Life We Make”: Identity, Memory and British Anarcho-Punk. 
Ph.D. thesis. Birmingham City University.
Halbwachs, M. (1992 [1942]). On Collective Memory (L.  A. Coser, Trans.). 
University of Chicago Press.
Harrington, C. L., Bielby, D. D., & Bardo, A. R. (2011). Life Course Transitions 
and the Future of Fandom. International Journal of Cultural Studies, 
14(6), 567–590.
Hobbs, D. (2006). Ethnography. In V. Jupp (Ed.), The Sage Dictionary of Social 
Research Methods (pp. 101–102). Sage.
7 “I’M NOT SOMEONE WHO CALLS HIMSELF AN ANARCHIST…132
Hodkinson, P. (2002). Goth: Identity, Style And Subculture. Berg.
Jupp, V. (Ed.). (2006). The SAGE Dictionary of Social Research Methods. SAGE 
Publications Limited.
King, N. (2000). Memory, Narrative, Identity: Remembering the Self. Edinburgh 
University Press.
Kroger, J., Martinussen, M., & Marcia, J.  E. (2010). Identity Status Change 
During Adolescence and Young Adulthood: A Meta-Analysis. Journal of 
Adolescence, 33, 683–698.
Laing, D. (1985). One Chord Wonders: Power and Meaning in Punk Rock. Open 
University Press.
Lawler, S. (2014). Identity: Sociological Perspectives (2nd ed.). Polity.
Liptrot, M. (2012) Beyond The Lifespan of A Scab: The Longevity of The Diy Punk 
Subcultural Movement in Britain. Ph.D. Thesis. University of Bolton.
Little, D. (2008) History, Memory and Narrative. Retrieved February 20, 2023, 
from http://understandingsociety.blogspot.co.uk/2008/08/history￾memory-and-narrative0.html
Marshall, P. (1993). Demanding the Impossible: A History of Anarchism. PM Press.
McKay, G. (1996). Senseless Acts of Beauty: Cultures of Resistance Since the 
Sixties. Verso.
Meeus, W., Iedema, J., Helsen, M., & and. Vollebergh, W. (1999). Patterns of 
Adolescent Identity Development: Review of Literature and Longitudinal 
Analysis. Developmental Review, 19, 419–461.
O’Hara, C. (1999). The Philosophy of Punk: More Than Just Noise. AK Press.
Ricœur, P. (1991a). Narrative Identity. Translated by David Wood. In D. Wood 
(Ed.), On Paul Ricouer: Narrative and Interpretation (pp.  188–199). 
Routledge.
Ricœur, P. (1991b). Life in quest of Narrative. Translated by David Wood. In 
D. Wood (Ed.), On Paul Ricouer: Narrative and Interpretation (pp. 20–33). 
Routledge.
Rimbaud, P. (1998). Shibboleth: My Revolting Life. AK Press.
Robb, J. (2006). Punk Rock: An Oral History. Ebury.
Sabin, R. (1999). Punk Rock: So What? The Cultural Legacy of Punk. Routledge.
Savage, J. (1991). England's Dreaming: Sex Pistols and Punk-Rock. Faber & Faber.
Schütz, A. (1964). Studies in Social Theory. Martinus Nijhoff.
Smith, R.  C. (2001). Analytic Strategies for Oral History Interviews. In 
J. F. Gubrium & J. A. Holstein (Eds.), Handbook of Interview Research: Context 
and Method (pp. 711–731). Sage Publications Inc.
Somers, M. R. (1994). The Narrative Constitution of Identity: A Relational and 
Network Approach. Theory and Society, 23(5), 605–649.
Strong, C. (2011). Grunge: Music and Memory. Ashgate.
Wengraf, T. (2001). Qualitative Research Interviewing: Biographic Narrative and 
Semi-Structured Methods. Sage.
M. GRIMES133
Westerhof, G. J. (2010). ‘During My Life So Much has Changed That It Looks 
Like a New World to Me’: A Narrative Perspective on Migrating in Time. 
Journal of Aging Studies, 24, 12–19.
Woodcock, G. (1975). Anarchism: A History of Libertarian Ideas And 
Movements. Pelican.
Worley, M. (2017). No Future: Punk, Politics and British Youth Culture 1976–1984. 
Cambridge University Press.
Worley, M. (2018). No Doves Fly Here: British Punk and Cold War Dystopia. 
Journal for the Studies of British Cultures, 24(1/2017), 59–71.
Worley, M., & Lohman, K. (2018). Bloody Revolutions, Fascist Dreams, Anarchy 
and Peace: Crass, Rondos and the Politics of Punk, 1977–84. Britain and the 
World: Historical Journal of the British Scholar Society, 11(1), 51–74.
Discography
Crass. (1978). Punk Is Dead. On: The Feeding of the 5000. [Vinyl 12”] Recorded 
in London 1977/1978 (Small Wonder Records WEENY 2;621984).
Crass. (1982b). Christ the Album/Well Forked-But Not Dead. [Vinyl 12”] 
Recorded in London June 1981-February 1982 (Crass Records BOLLOX 
2U2).
7 “I’M NOT SOMEONE WHO CALLS HIMSELF AN ANARCHIST…© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 135
Switzerland AG 2024
L. Way, M. Grimes (eds.), Punk, Ageing and Time, Palgrave Studies 
in the History of Subcultures and Popular Music, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47823-9_8
CHAPTER 8
Memories of the Past, Inequalities 
of the Present: The Temporality 
of Subcultural Violence, Gender, 
and Authenticity
Matthew Newsom
MN: So, in the 80 s, why did psychos fght other psychos?
Jakob: Because of ‘I’m better than you, I’m gonna knock you down.’
MN: Is it still like that?
Jakob: Still? No. No, no. Now it’s very, very soft.
In Berlin, older psychobilly men often speak of their youthful experiences 
with violence during the scene’s inception during the 1980s. Many recall 
gang-like clashes between psychobillies and other subcultural groups, like 
skinheads or punks. Other men emphasize violence that took place within 
the scene, recounting the broken bones and knockout punches they 
administered or received during concert brawls. Refecting in hindsight, 
M. Newsom (*) 
Southern Utah University, Cedar City, UT, USA
e-mail: matthewnewsom@suu.edu136
narrators justify their experiences as essential subcultural mechanisms for 
testing the resolve and dedication of newcomers. These men’s violent per￾sonal narratives comprise the dominant collective memories surrounding 
the psychobilly scene’s early history. Following Mary Fulbrook, I under￾stand collective memories as “a conversation about the past” (1999, 
p. 146). The dynamics and content of such conversations are important to 
subcultural theorists because people use them to defne their subcultural 
present and project their subcultural future. In Berlin, psychobilly fans 
regretfully admit their scene is in decline—whether in the symbolic sense 
of its dissipating toughness, as Jakob describes, or in the literal sense of the 
number active members.
In this chapter, I argue mnemonic discourses about Berlin’s psychobilly 
past are structured hegemonically and serve to reproduce gender inequal￾ity in the subcultural present. Between 2014 and 2019, I conducted 
24 months of ethnographic research in Berlin. I spent countless hours as a 
participant observer at innumerable shows, subcultural events, get￾togethers, and known hang-out spots. In addition to producing compre￾hensive feld notes, I completed multiple rounds of person-centered life 
history interviews (Hollan, 2005) with roughly 20 men and 10 women, 
numbers which refect my estimates for the broader gender makeup of this 
particular scene. All of my research participants report involvement with 
subcultures since at least their teenage years and nearly all of them discov￾ered psychobilly at this age. Interviews were both semi-structured and 
unstructured, with each ranging from as little as 30 minutes to as long as 
6 hours. Unlike other subcultural scenes in which queer and nonbinary 
people are either marginalized (Ambrosch, 2016) or “seen but unknown” 
(Sharp, 2019), Berlin psychobillies present as heteronormative and other￾wise reproduce binary expectations in several ways.
Below, I draw primarily (though not exclusively) on interview data 
from psychobilly men to demonstrate how these men possess and with￾hold the power to defne their scene’s collective memories. I do this 
through critical examination of three prominent memory themes. First, I 
explore the gender and memory dynamics people use to defne what they 
recognize as “real” psychobilly. I then detail discourses surrounding what 
locals refer to as “fashionbillies,” a specifc model of inauthentic subcul￾tural personhood that many people consider a worrying feature of the 
contemporary psychobilly scene. Finally, I focus on behavioral forms of 
spatial marginalization to explain how the same gatekeeping mechanisms 
found in collective memories of psychobilly’s past are visible in the present 
M. NEWSOM137
day. Before considering these issues at length, I briefy review the role of 
memory among other German subcultures to contextualize how psycho￾billies describe the early scene in Berlin.
Memory and Subculture in Germany
Memory and history are essential to understanding punk-based subcul￾tures in Germany. By analyzing specifc historical fashpoints, researchers 
can locate the social, political, and economic conditions responsible for 
subcultural origins. For example, in a recent edited volume, Hall, Howes, 
and Shahan see punk as “so inevitable to German cultural history precisely 
because of the tensions in Germany’s Nazi past and present, its division 
post-1949, and the international Cold War powers dominating daily life” 
(2016, p. 3). Indeed, the impacts of this cultural history are particularly 
relevant to subcultural life in Berlin. After the fall of the Berlin Wall, newly 
vacant buildings and other deindustrialized spaces provided the physical 
infrastructure for musical subcultures and rebellious creativity to fourish 
(Bader & Scharenberg, 2010).
Scholars also frequently examine specifc subcultural waves and produc￾tions as responses to distinct historical and geopolitical periods (e.g., 
Hayton, 2013; Silva & Guerra, 2019; Ventsel, 2012). This approach is 
itself a mnemonic exercise in that such research places different historical 
discourses in conversation with each other. In the context of Germany, for 
example, Melanie Eis and Fabian Eckert (2016) analyze late 1970s West 
German punk songs through the lens of Holocaust discourses that were 
circulating through various German media at the time. Other research on 
West German punk considers how memories and images of left-wing ter￾rorism and national socialism in the 1970s and 1980s directly infuenced 
West German punk identities (Shahan, 2008). In my previous work 
(Newsom, 2021), I have built on this scholarship to show how the model 
of hardened masculinity prominent in psychobilly is taboo among the cul￾tural mainstream due to its association with collective memories of Nazi￾era violence. Broadly speaking, Berliners have renounced the violent past 
and established their city as a hub for left-wing political values and cultural 
inclusivity. One sees this in the many gendered features that dominate the 
city’s landscape, such as the rampant graffti proclaiming feminist and 
queer political slogans or the advertisements for public transportation 
which depict homosexual couples in fetish wear. Psychobilly’s gender 
dynamics belie this reputation. Instead of conforming more neatly to 
8 MEMORIES OF THE PAST, INEQUALITIES OF THE PRESENT…138
Berlin’s mainstream political imaginaries (Rohrer & Thompson, 2022), 
the overwhelmingly White psychobilly members embrace otherwise￾problematic qualities like masculine toughness and men’s sexual prowess.
In this chapter, I am interested in the active construction of subcultural 
memory narratives. People often invoke ideas about subcultural origins 
when they discuss notions of authenticity; consider, for example, the rel￾evance of Afro-Caribbean infuences to debates over racial politics in skin￾head (Marshall, 1994) or the now-mythical role of Ian MacKaye in the 
origins of straightedge (Williams, 2006). In these cultural discourses, 
people analyze and explain the subcultural present through the subcul￾tural past. As subcultural scholars, it is therefore worthwhile to consider 
the role of collective memories in the formation of localized identity mod￾els among specifc scenes.
The Violent Origins of Psychobilly
Among Berlin psychobillies, who I refer to in this chapter using pseud￾onyms, such memories hinge largely on the concept of violence. As Timo 
told me, “People were more violent back then [in the 80s]. They were 
mean to each other.” He even says his frst six months in the scene “were 
horrible for me because I wanted to be part of the group that beat me up.” 
Jakob explained, “at every gig, at every concert you could be sure there 
would be a broken nose or something like that happening. There were 
fghts at every concert.” In the London scene, where psychobilly origi￾nated during the 1980s, violence was also normalized. Eddie, a British 
man in his 40s, told me psychobilly was a place for people in London to 
“go mad,” that the music was for the “people who just fucking like to 
shoot people, who are just fucking into music!” Jamie, another man active 
in the London scene during the 1980s, described the pleasure he would 
take from those early days:
I used to love it, the Klub Foot was great. It used to get really heavy. I loved 
it man. You used to come back completely bruised and covered in scrapes. 
And all the women used to stand on the edge and scratch your fuckin back! 
Right fun.
Jamie’s description hints at the gendered analysis of psychobilly spaces 
below, where forms of spatial marginalization place women “on the edge” 
of subcultural events. Before exploring this in detail, I offer a few 
M. NEWSOM139
ethnographic examples to demonstrate the central role of violence in psy￾chobilly memories. People active during the early years of the Berlin scene 
suggested violence was not unique to them but was rather a larger phe￾nomenon occurring throughout the city’s underground. Psychobilly men 
in particular associated inter-subcultural violence with youthful aggres￾sion, as the following interview excerpts indicate:
It was only young people in the early psychobilly days. Only young people. 
There was no one older than 25. And at that age you’re more aggressive. 
And at that time there was psychobilly, rockabilly, skinheads, punk rockers, 
and all of them were against each other, fghting. (Jakob, late 40s)
And also Kreuzberg [the iconic subcultural district in Berlin] was a danger￾ous, alternative, punk area. It was dangerous. The 80s and early 90s, in all 
of Germany, when you were 15 or 16, it was dangerous because subcultures 
were fghting with each other. (Bruno, mid-40s)
In the 80s, like I said, during puberty, I was getting into the psychobilly 
scene and at the time, we didn’t really have many problems with punks but 
with skinheads we had really big problems. Because, I don’t remember his 
name any more, but there was a skinhead who was stabbed by a psychobilly. 
He survived, but after that a bunch of skinheads came to Berlin from all over 
Germany and were hunting anyone with a quiff (Flat). And that was also the 
time when I had a Flat (laughs). But despite that, everyone stuck around in 
the scene. But then, in the 90s, a bunch of kids would come to shows, take 
a punch to the face, and they didn’t stick around. (Kappi, early 50s)
Memories of intra-subcultural violence also persist in Berlin, centering 
on a wider musical feud between two UK-based bands. In 1988, The 
Meteors released an album called “Only the Meteors are Pure Psychobilly,” 
and many in the scene consider this as a direct attack on the more punk￾inspired sounds that began to emerge in psychobilly, particularly those of 
the band Demented Are Go. Kappi describes how this confict ultimately 
fractured the scene and led to violent clashes between opposing fans:
The idea that “only the Meteors are pure psychobilly” divided the scene. So 
you had people who only listened to the Meteors, and everyone else was 
shit. And they would go in groups and beat up people for wearing Demented 
[Are Go] shirts. And that destroyed the scene. (Kappi)
8 MEMORIES OF THE PAST, INEQUALITIES OF THE PRESENT…140
Most members of the scene criticize the pointlessness of this confict; 
for example, Simon referred to the issue as “stupid” because it resembles 
“football hooligan shit.” While in Berlin, I observed violence related to 
the Meteors-Demented confict when a man suddenly and without provo￾cation smashed a beer bottle over the head of another man just because he 
was wearing a Meteors shirt.1 While most people I spoke to condemned 
the aggressor’s behavior, they also reluctantly admitted that such violence 
was part of the scene, for better or worse. From a theoretical perspective, 
people who invoke the Meteors-Demented confict, whether in conversa￾tion or direct action, can be seen as actively contributing to the violent 
memory bank that people draw on when making determinations about 
psychobilly authenticity. As shown below, these memories later erupt 
through a range of psychobilly practices and discourses. Ultimately, I 
argue the examples below demonstrate how memories of psychobilly vio￾lence in the past come to privilege hardened models of masculinity in the 
present.
“Real” Psychobilly
Throughout my research, I often witnessed people debate what Sharp 
(2019, p. 374) might call the “master narrative” of psychobilly identity. 
Disagreements over what qualifed as real psychobilly arose during conver￾sations, comments, and jokes. Whatever alternative, inauthentic versions 
of psychobilly were almost always referenced through gendered and infan￾tilizing language. One common example is the notion of “pussy psycho￾billy,” a term ostensibly meant to describe the more melodic sounds and 
crooning vocals that typify many American and Canadian bands—for 
example, The Brains, Tiger Army, The Creepshow, and Rezurex. To folks 
in Berlin, the North American scene lacks what Bruno described as the 
“hard and aggressive” sounds of “old-school” psychobilly bands from the 
1980s, such as Guana Batz, the Meteors, and Coffn Nails. The typical 
1This altercation occurred in 2018 shortly after a hotel surveillance video surfaced online 
in which Meteors fans in Brazil violently confronted male fans of As Diabatz, an all-female 
psychobilly band from Brazil. In the video, the Meteors fans act as aggressors and emasculate 
their subcultural peers by forcing them to stand outside and physically remove their As 
Diabatz T-shirts. In Berlin, the victim reported to me that his attacker walked up to him and, 
after expressing outrage over the video, he struck him with the beer bottle and quickly left 
the venue.
M. NEWSOM141
European sound is characterized by twangy guitar riffs and upbeat 
rhythms, mixed with a healthy dose of vulgarity.
Inherent to the notion of “old school” psychobilly is the sense that 
bands ftting this mold are somehow more authentic because they are 
closer to an imagined original. Such an “authentic original,” Alastair 
Gordon tells us, “operates through the award of authentic subcultural 
credentials to the speaker whilst simultaneously ‘othering’ inauthentic 
genres/participants” (2014, p. 192). For many in the Berlin scene, North 
American bands are poor attempts at psychobilly, even among those who 
like them. For example, Simon once explained his view, which I italicize 
for emphasis:
So, Tiger Army’s new album, I’ve heard it, and it’s absolutely not psychobilly, 
I want to say that. Also, American psychobilly is not psychobilly. Just because 
they play with upright bass doesn’t make them psychobilly. But, it’s a very 
good album. It is soft pop music, but very good songs. I listen to the album 
for example. And it’s not psychobilly. But I like the album.
As Simon sees it, Tiger Army has some necessary psychobilly ingredi￾ents, such as a standup bass. But their “soft pop” aesthetic runs contrary 
to the edgier sounds of old school bands. Simon demonstrates how 
authentic originals are largely constructed out of knowledge and experi￾ence about the subcultural past and present (Gordon, 2014). For exam￾ple, the still-circulating records and images produced in the “old school” 
era help defne what is understood about “original” psychobilly style, 
sound, values, and attitude. This chapter builds on Gordon’s work by sug￾gesting the narration of memories about subcultural pasts—bygone eras, 
events, and origins—actively construct and reproduce notions of authen￾ticity. As shown in the excerpts above, psychobilly narratives from the 
1980s and early 1990s are marked by violence.
Many people describe this early violence as a mechanism for testing 
subcultural dedication. Timo described his entrance to psychobilly during 
the 1980s as “super rough” and “horrible” because newcomers like him 
were treated as “wanna-bes” (pseudos). He says those who were new to the 
scene were regularly beaten up until they could prove themselves worthy 
of being considered full-fedged members. Kappi, a 50-something clerk, 
echoed the inescapabilty of psychobilly violence while sitting at an out￾door cafe. He held his hands over the table and turned them over, saying:
8 MEMORIES OF THE PAST, INEQUALITIES OF THE PRESENT…142
Look at me, I’m all scarred up (vernarbt). I’ve had my nose broken, I think, 
eight times? Back then, I also had to beat people, but it was never to the 
point of getting people to leave. For me, it was the opposite, it was more or 
less that I had to defend myself, you know? And of course I was also hanging 
around a group of friends who always had violence going on. And so when 
something happened, I couldn’t get away, I had to join in somehow. So 
yeah, I don’t know, maybe the people at that time were harder.
Although Kappi denies any intentional gatekeeping on his part, he 
acknowledged in a different conversation that the 1980s and 1990s were 
times during which “you would beat on people at shows and stuff to kind 
of test them, and whoever stayed around was incorporated into the scene.” 
His suggestion that early psychobillies may have been “harder” indicates 
his sense of how the Berlin scene has changed since its inception.
Others specifcally lament the supposed softness of psychobilly and view 
barriers for entering the scene as a positive means for maintaining authen￾ticity. When he entered the scene in the 1990s, Karl says he had to “prove” 
he wanted to stay there. However, some 20 years later, he thinks psycho￾billy is “slowly dying” (geht langsam kaputt):
It’s too easy to become a psychobilly nowadays. It’s just too easy. You pay 
your fve-Euro cover charge, go inside, and then you’re a psycho. But before 
it was more like, you had to wait outside frst and ask if you were allowed to 
come inside!
Of course, Karl was half-joking when he said this. Rather than literally 
requesting permission to enter, I believe Karl meant that newcomers pre￾viously had to keep showing up to demonstrate their dedication before 
others would accept them. Now, without this liminal period, Karl says “so 
many fake people are able to come into [the scene]” (dadurch kommen 
ganz viele falsche Menschen rein).
These memories cast violence and toughness as integral to psychobilly. 
In mainstream German society, strength and aggression are both histori￾cally and mnemonically associated with masculinity (Hecker, 1993; 
Jerome, 2001; Newsom, 2021). When members of the psychobilly scene 
relate stories of how things were “back then,” they reproduce the associa￾tion of authenticity with traditionally masculine qualities. The fipside of 
these associations is that femininity is somehow rendered inauthentic in 
psychobilly, hence the dismissal of North American bands through the 
M. NEWSOM143
gendered label of “pussy psychobilly.” In other words, bands with softer 
or more melodic sounds come to comprise what Gordon (2014, 
pp. 197–200) describes as the “hated yet related” part of the scene. For 
example, Bruno complained about female-fronted psychobilly bands that 
he described using the English word “crap”:
They make me feel like I’m listening to music that an 11-year old would 
listen to, or like the Monster High dolls. Mad Marge is one of the better 
ones, but Creepshow is a good example.
As in the US at the time, the Monster High TV show, dolls, and other 
merchandise were popular among young girls in Germany. I asked Bruno 
if he liked any women singers in psychobilly. For emphasis, I italicize key 
words in his response:
Yes, Sin Alley. They were from Belgium, back in the 90s. But she had a really 
rough voice which suits the rockabilly and psychobilly style. […] I don’t 
have anything against female singers or against women in music. It’s just 
that psychobilly is a hard and aggressive music. Even if there’s fun psycho￾billy, it’s still fast and a bit rough and tough. So I don’t like that connected 
to a girly singer. [Switches to singing in high pitch] ‘La la la la.’ I don’t 
like that.
Bruno’s perspective is hardly surprising considering punk scenes in gen￾eral are known to privilege men and masculinity (Leblanc, 1999; Dunn, 
2014). Despite their proclaimed values of egalitarianism and gender equal￾ity, research suggests that gender and sexual minorities experience both 
direct and indirect forms of discrimination, marginalization, and violence 
(e.g., Mullaney, 2007; Griffn, 2012; Ambrosch, 2016; Wälty, 2017). 
Although feminist interventions in punk scenes continue to effect mean￾ingful change (Rouse, 2019; Donaghey, 2021), these impacts have not yet 
reached psychobilly. In a separate interview, Bruno points to the scene’s 
historical infuences to explain why psychobilly is more “sexist” than other 
subcultures and “normal society” more generally. As he says:
In the psychobilly scene we take a lot of elements from the ‘50s, from before 
feminism and emancipation, before all that. So, a lot of how we see women 
is still based on ‘50s things, like the ‘50s pinup [...] With the women, they’ve 
gotten a little bit, like, there’s more women in the scene, but they dress up 
more female than normal girls, I think.
8 MEMORIES OF THE PAST, INEQUALITIES OF THE PRESENT…144
Bruno’s description of women in the psychobilly scene as being “more 
female” than “normal girls” distances those women from the subculture’s 
raison d’être, its “hard and aggressive” music. By his logic, the “normal” 
women who are less feminine could be considered more psychobilly than 
the hyper-feminine women who are in the scene! His example of Sin Alley 
boasted a female singer—but she is distinct from her hyper-feminine coun￾terparts in that she sang with “really rough” vocals. In other words, Sin 
Alley is both temporally and qualitatively closer to psychobilly’s authentic 
original.
Younger psychos, both men and women, come to internalize ideas 
about masculinity and authenticity as they listen to these and related nar￾ratives while growing up in the scene. For example, Claudia, a woman in 
her late 20 s, explained she was introduced to psychobilly via Tiger Army, 
but relegates her interest in the band to her teenage years:
Of course, when you begin getting involved with old school psychobilly, 
your musical tastes change. And then of course there are the people who are 
against Tiger Army, and of course I understand them. But at that point in 
time, when I was 16, I really liked their music. But that was a Teenie thing. 
Like, they’re Teenie music, you know? They’re poppy and stuff.
In Berlin, Teenie is a term specifcally used to describe normative teen￾age girls who listen to boy bands and other pop music. Claudia’s distinc￾tion between “old school psychobilly” and memories of her Teenie phase 
reiterates gendered assumptions about psychobilly authenticity. Moreover, 
her personal development in the scene and characterization of Tiger Army 
as “Teenie music” also “conform[s] to the expectation that [older] male 
participants have for proper subcultural behavior, thereby reproducing 
hegemonic masculinity” (Williams, 2011, p. 60). Regardless of the rea￾sons for her change in sound preference, which are likely complex, 
Claudia’s gendered discourses bolster the masculine default that gives 
shape to psychobilly’s “old school” temporality. These discursive effects 
are compounded through conversations about “fashionbillies,” or people 
who are presumed to lack ample subcultural knowledge and values.
M. NEWSOM145
Fashionable Memories
As many others have shown (e.g., Thornton, 1995; Muggleton, 2000), 
embodied style is essential to subcultural authenticity. This is as true for 
psychobilly today as it was in the “old school” era. As Bruno proclaimed, 
“Fashion was really important in the 80s. Some people always say, ‘today 
it’s only fashion.’ But it was always very much about fashion.” In those 
days, some psychobilly women, but especially psychobilly men, accentu￾ated their scene’s rockabilly roots to establish a harder and more rugged 
sense of style. By converting pompadours into chiseled, fat-topped quiffs 
(in German, Flats), acid-washing their denim jeans, and cutting the sleeves 
off of their T-shirts, early psychobillies embodied a form of toughness that 
matched their experiences with subcultural violence.
Bruno is correct that many contemporary psychos grumble about fash￾ion. As Claudia once told me, “In the last few years, you hear a lot from 
the older psychos that it’s gotten to where there’s much more fashion in 
the scene, and that the concerts are like a catwalk (Laufsteg).” Such per￾ceptions highlight the larger gender dynamics at play here. In the West, 
fashion is generally and traditionally understood as a feminine enterprise, 
and the catwalk in particular is associated with women’s sexual objectifca￾tion (Entwistle & Mears, 2012, p. 328). Anxiety over the role of subcul￾tural fashion illuminates how authenticity is not limited to embodied 
style—that the personifcation of specifc values, attitudes, and other inner 
qualities is equally, if not more, signifcant (e.g., Muggleton, 2000, p. 30). 
Consider, for instance, what one woman expressed to Lauraine Leblanc: 
“I don’t label someone a punk just because they have a mohawk. Any idiot 
can shave their head” (1999, p. 87). In strikingly similar language, Karl 
told me, “Any idiot (jede Idiot) can just say they’re psychobilly and then 
suddenly they’re psychobilly.” For these individuals, subcultural identity 
runs deeper than fashion—a sentiment often aroused by concerns that 
subcultures “are becoming increasingly important as niche markets” 
(Bader & Scharenberg, 2010, p. 79).
Margarit, a woman in her 40s, explained this as an inevitable cycle with 
which all subcultural scenes must contend:
The underground always changes, until it’s not underground any more—
like when fashion designers say, ‘Oh that’s cool.’ That happened with punk, 
[…] where it becomes a new look for Prada. You see Prada with studs on 
shoes, or cargo pockets. And when the fashion is discovered (entdeckt), then 
8 MEMORIES OF THE PAST, INEQUALITIES OF THE PRESENT…146
people wear it. They can buy something and look exactly like a punk, or like 
a biker, and it’s not underground any more. And that always happens, 
sooner or later.
Elaborating on this inevitable transition from subculture to main￾stream, Margarit refected on her own experience and explained women’s 
psychobilly fashion as a recent phenomenon:
Once it becomes a fashion, then you see more people with it. And then sud￾denly more women wear that style. Years ago, when I’d be at a show, there 
were so few women. And now, and I’d say it’s 60% men, 40% women. Right 
now, it’s great, you can make yourself pretty (dich hübsch machen), put on a 
beautiful dress. You can be a woman (du kannst Frau sein), but that’s new. 
It wasn’t that way before […] You had jeans on, you should be like a tom￾boy or something. Before, there wasn’t the styling, the burlesque, the chic 
clothing, pencil skirts, we didn’t go around like that. We wore jeans, we 
wore a jean jacket, we wore chucks or boots, we actually looked like the 
men. And when you had a t-shirt on, it was also chic, but not like it is today 
with high heels. That came later. And through that more women came into 
the scene, through the styling.
Margarit’s perspective highlights how psychobilly gender norms have 
changed such that femininity has a new place—one that has not always 
existed. As several examples illustrate below, not all of my research partici￾pants agree that femininity belongs in the scene. However, Margarit’s per￾ception that its presence has increased certainly parallels the wider notion 
that psychobilly’s style and membership have gone astray from their 
authentic original.
In Berlin, concerns over the distinction between style and authenticity 
are most visible through so-called fashionbillies, a negative identity label 
for people who are presumed to be interested in the scene strictly for its 
fashion appeal. In most cases, such concerns are expressed anonymously—
only rarely did I encounter accusations directed at or about specifc indi￾viduals. However, considering fashion models are traditionally rendered 
feminine throughout the West (Entwistle & Mears, 2012, p. 325), I have 
come to understand critiques about fashionbillies as veiled critiques about 
femininity. First, discourses surrounding fashionbillies rely on stereotypi￾cal gender constructions that cast fashion as an attribute of the feminine 
object. But also, when subcultural style and values are “created along the 
precepts of masculinity” (Leblanc, 1999, p. 141), as they so often are, 
M. NEWSOM147
women and others who do not live up to such gendered ideals face unique 
barriers to subcultural membership. Consider, for instance, what we fnd 
in the literature on straightedge. Women in Denver’s straightedge hard￾core scene have few female role models to provide opportunities for entrée 
into a “hypermasculine atmosphere” (Haenfer, 2006, p. 134). In other 
US cities, assumptions that straightedge hardcore women cannot fully 
embody the toughness of their masculine counterparts mean that these 
women face increased scrutiny over their subcultural motivations and 
commitment (Mullaney, 2007, pp. 402–403). More recently, the straight￾edge women and female-presenting punks in Northern Ireland, who are 
either unable or unwilling to reproduce normalized forms of masculinity, 
are “labelled as deviant or as outsiders within a community they consider 
themselves to have helped create and shape” (Stewart, 2021, p. 32). In all 
of these examples, what determines the authenticity of subcultural style 
and internal values (or subjectivity) is the extent to which these adhere to 
a masculine original. Fashionbillies, or those who ostensibly lack these 
masculine attributes, are thus presumed to intentionally objectify them￾selves as if modelling themselves on a distinctly feminine catwalk.
When Berliners invoke fashionbilly discourses, they draw on stereotypi￾cal associations of femininity with fashion to both refect and perpetuate 
the gender hegemony rooted in psychobilly’s collective memories. For 
example, Markus explained fashionbillies as “the pretty (die hübschen) psy￾chobillies, who spend all their money on outfts and stuff.” This perspec￾tive does more than merely imply that fashionbillies purchase their 
membership from a “style supermarket” (Blackman, 2014, p. 506). In this 
case, Markus’s description of “pretty psychobillies” evokes stereotypical 
links between femininity, fashion, and shopping. Claudia was quick to 
label these automatic associations as sexist. To her, men can make a radical 
stylistic change and be more readily accepted because others presume their 
fashion as more sincere. She recounted her own experiences when frst 
moving to Berlin with her psychobilly boyfriend. Although she had been 
in the scene longer than he had,
People would say, ‘oh yeah, that’s the girlfriend of Thomas.’ So, you know, 
this guy or that guy, they’ve already been in the scene, but now they have a 
new girl. And you don’t know the woman herself, or think she has her own 
personality or even a name. Just, ‘oh yeah, she’s the girlfriend of so-and-so.’
8 MEMORIES OF THE PAST, INEQUALITIES OF THE PRESENT…148
Claudia’s experience as a “girlfriend” is widely documented in punk 
subcultures (e.g., Haenfer, 2006; Mullaney, 2007; Griffn, 2012; 
Donaghey, 2021). However, while discussing fashionbillies in the same 
interview, Claudia also espoused the very sexism she laments above. Even 
though she claimed women are more likely to be considered fashionbillies 
due to sexism, she did not question the assumption that women take 
greater interest in psychobilly fashion than they do psychobilly music. 
When asked why women have a harder time getting into the psychobilly 
scene, she answered:
The fashion thing; girls (Mädels) think the clothes are cool, and that’s why 
they wear them. There’s also a lot of men who bring women into the scene 
[…] and the longer they’re there the more they adopt the psychobilly style. 
But yeah, I don’t know, the men bring in the women from other subcul￾tures, and when they break up, then the women leave. That’s how they are.
Claudia’s skepticism of women who come into the scene conficts with 
her personal experience. Through her third-person linguistic construction 
(“that’s how they are”), she reproduces the stereotype about women that 
she herself had to endure: that women may spend time in the scene and 
adopt the fashion, but they are unlikely to stick around. Such a stereotype 
perpetuates the notion that women’s subcultural authenticity is only 
skin-deep.
And yet, not all psychobilly women adhere to such rigid expectations 
about style. Maia, a psycho in her 40s, is proud of her ability to alternate 
between professional fashion—the “normal” clothing and makeup she 
wears at her workplace—and the subcultural fashion that she wears to 
nightly concerts. She resembles the older punk women in Laura Way’s 
study (2020, pp. 111–118) who show that there is no one way to ‘do’ 
punk, and that people continuously adapt punk values and style based on 
social expectations, personal interests, and other contextual factors. Maia 
considers her ability to engage in this sort of embodied code switching as 
what proves “the music” and identity are still frmly lodged beneath her 
clothing, in her “heart.” As she says, fashion is really just a collection of 
objects (Gegenstände):
For me it makes no difference. For example, if a Louie Vuitton purse works 
better with my outft, then I wear it. Both worlds belong to me—psychobilly 
M. NEWSOM149
and the fashion world. And so, why shouldn’t I say I’m psychobilly? For me, 
only the music is important.
Maia’s perspective critiques narrow subcultural expectations for authen￾tic style. In Berlin, where dominant ideas about psychobilly authenticity 
are rooted in hardened masculinity, people—but especially women—face 
criticism if they stray too far from any “authentic original.” This is just as 
true for Maia and her hypothetical purse as it is for women like Sonja, a 
woman in her 30s, who describes her fashion sense as distinctly “feminine”:
Then there are those in the psychobilly scene, who say, ‘Oh, Sonja, you 
don’t have a Flat, you’re not a real (richtige) psychobilly.’ Psychobilly was 
always—so, in the 80s, everyone had a Flat, you had to have acid-wash 
jeans, you needed a vest with patches. And so these people tell me, ‘you’re 
dressed too much like a pinup.’ Yeah, good, ok, fuck you […] There are, I 
think in every scene, a few people who take it too seriously, and are too 
fanatical (fanatisch). I think that’s a subculture problem, to say ‘I’m the 
ultimate psychobilly,’ and ‘I’m the ultimate rockabilly.’ Yeah, you already 
had a Flat when you were born as a baby, huh? I understand now.
Sonja indicates how members of the scene police those who do not 
conform to an imagined set of the 1980s standards. This may be a general 
subcultural problem; however, in the Berlin psychobilly scene, this prob￾lem is entangled with wider gender politics.
One fnal example from Lina, a psycho in her late 30s, illustrates this. 
During one interview, we discussed how people get into psychobilly, and 
she spoke at length about a man who she considered odd because of his 
feminine behavior:
It was super embarrassing, his behavior was somehow very, very embarrass￾ing. He did this thing I thought was awful: he had so many selfes, and 
uploaded them to Facebook. And I was like, ‘Nooooo!’ Sure, it’s a bit sexist, 
but I don’t know, I think that’s such a woman’s thing. So, I mean, really, if 
you upload a daily selfe, and then do it with a flter and make everything 
beautiful and stuff, that’s somehow embarrassing (irgendwie peinlich). That 
doesn’t ft into psychobilly, you know? I found it so weird somehow. (Das 
passt halt auch irgendwie nicht so zu psychobilly, weißt du? Fand ich irgendwie 
merkwürdig.)
8 MEMORIES OF THE PAST, INEQUALITIES OF THE PRESENT…150
Lina clearly considers this man’s behavior to be womanly and embar￾rassing, qualities that are antithetical to psychobilly’s iconic toughness. 
She recognizes the sexism of her perspective, and, along with Claudia 
above, she reminds us how subcultural women can internalize the gender 
hegemony present in their scenes (Leblanc, 1999, p. 105). Yet, Lina is 
unable to articulate exactly what bothers her about the man’s behavior—
she only knows he is “somehow” embarrassing, “somehow” weird. An 
explanation lies in her scene’s collective memories, which (re)produce an 
association between masculinity and authenticity while also encouraging 
the general dismissal of femininity as inauthentic, or “pussy psychobilly.” 
This, I think, is why Lina fnds the man weird. Instead of fghting or 
roughhousing in normatively masculine ways, this man behaves in ways 
that Lina considers feminine, a quality that she recognizes as not “ft[ting] 
into psychobilly.” This example demonstrates how discourses about psy￾chobilly authenticity extend beyond the verbal. That is, discourses sur￾rounding power relations also include specifc behaviors (Foucault, 1978). 
In the context of psychobilly, this includes the ways in which subcultural 
men regulate and control physical space at concerts.
Spatial Marginalization and Embodied Authenticity
As Angela McRobbie and Jenny Garber suggested early on, the women 
who successfully navigate the mainstream barriers to subcultural participa￾tion must still negotiate the fact that, within subcultures, male “domi￾nance” ultimately pushes women “to the margin of each social activity” 
(1991, p. 211). Because subcultural men retain control of the physical 
spaces where group members congregate, women are restricted in their 
ability to access symbolic and performative behaviors. One key way this 
happens in musical venues is the physical prevention or deterrence of 
women’s participation in the pit—the center of the scene (see Leblanc, 
1999, p. 108; Griffn, 2012, p. 76; McDowell, 2017, p. 235). The histori￾cal tendency for women to encounter this kind of spatial marginalization 
helps contextualize the revolutionary behavior of Riot Grrl bands, who 
maximized inclusiveness and participation at shows by encouraging 
“women to come to the front of the stage, where they passed out lyric 
sheets” (Dunn, 2014, p. 320).
At psychobilly shows, fans gather at the front of the stage to “wreck.” 
This style of moshing is distinct to psychobilly and consists of pairs or 
small groups of people who simulate a fstfght by pummeling each other 
M. NEWSOM151
in the arms and chest. If not broken up by the chaos of human bodies 
hurling around, these simulated brawls symbolically reenact memories of 
the past for up to 30 seconds or more. People describe wrecking as painful 
but also boast about their injuries. For example, in 2014 I interviewed 
Stefan, a late 30s psycho who learned English from watching American 
TV shows and horror movies. I asked him if psychobilly was violent, and 
he explained:
Very much. Like the whole wrecking thing. At the Koffn Kats show I was 
wrecking in the front and now I have a broken rib. I also had a broken rib 
at the end of the Psychomania festival in Potsdam […] But it’s so much fun. 
[Fun? How is that fun?!] I can’t really tell. Everybody’s looking after each 
other, not trying to hurt someone badly, but it happens. And I wear my 
bruises with pride. Everything was green and blue, and that’s pretty much fun.
Stefan may not enjoy his injuries, but it is clear he enjoys the experience 
through which those injuries are sustained. Not long after this interview, 
Stefan and I walked from a venue in Kreuzberg to our homes in the neigh￾boring district of Neukölln. As we passed underneath streetlights, he held 
out his arms several times and asked me to admire all the bruises he earned 
from wrecking that night.
Although wrecking pits are not exclusively comprised by men, they are 
largely masculine spaces. Such gender dynamics are made clear by The 
Minestompers (2015) when they derisively sing, “Get off your momma’s 
clit, and join the wrecking pit!” Memories are communicated in bodily 
practice (Cattell & Climo, 2002; Csordas, 1994), which means those who 
are physically capable of reenacting the past are also capable of authoring 
collective memories. At psychobilly shows, wrecking symbolically refects 
and commemorates the violence and fghting that comprise early memo￾ries of the scene. As Paul Connerton writes, “Our bodies, which in com￾memorations stylistically re-enact an image of the past, keep the past also 
in an entirely effective form in their continuing ability to perform certain 
skilled actions” (1989, p. 72). Whenever psychobilly fans stuff themselves 
into sweaty, tightly packed venues, it is not long before several men take 
off their shirts and fght to maintain physical dominance in the pit. In 
Berlin, the behavioral discourses related to wrecking reinforce normative 
modes of masculine violence and toughness. For example, I have wit￾nessed men single out newcomers to the scene and test their resolve with 
8 MEMORIES OF THE PAST, INEQUALITIES OF THE PRESENT…152
targeted pushes, punches, and other body blows. The following scene in 
my feld notes were recorded after an Evil Devil show in 2017:
I noticed a small, skinny man who I had never seen before. He didn’t appear 
to be from a subculture, with just a plain t-shirt and a normal-looking hair￾cut. The show’s turnout was rather small, making him stick out more than 
he would have at a bigger show. The man, who appeared to have come 
alone, stood near the pit on one side of the room as he watched what I sus￾pect to be his frst psychobilly show. Suddenly, two known members of the 
scene who clearly outweighed the loner grabbed him and threw him into the 
pit. The man looked uncomfortable and awkwardly made his way out of the 
pit toward the back of the room. The same two men again tried to pull him 
in, but he resisted. For the rest of the show, the two men took turns fnding 
the loner and smashing into him with their fsts, elbows, or entire bodies.
I never saw that same loner again during my research, but I have 
observed this kind of behavior on multiple occasions. A familiar script 
plays out in these situations, where apparent newcomers are challenged to 
participate in the pit, and, despite or because of their refusal, they are 
picked on and likely made to feel unwelcome. Such behavior corresponds 
with the lyrics of classic, “old school” songs. For example, in their 1983
song, “Wreckin’ Crew,” The Meteors invite listeners to “come and join us 
if you think you’ve got the guts.”
In related situations, I have observed men mock women for wrecking. 
Jakob, for instance, once overdramatized two women’s wrecking behavior 
behind their backs. He did this because, as he explained, “It was so girly! 
It was so girly. I don’t even like girls in the real pit […] It looked like they 
don’t belong in there, they were just trying to ft in. Like doing the same 
stuff as the others and just pretending.” Here, Jakob’s explanation echoes 
fashionbilly discourses and the mnemonic association of psychobilly with 
masculinity. This discussion with Jakob, which took place in English, indi￾cates he has a specifc imagined model for what psychobilly looks like, and 
that this model is decidedly not feminine. To him, women do not look like
they belong. Even if they are “doing the same stuff as the others,” they are 
“just pretending.” This example reminds us that, even when lower-status 
groups subvert power dynamics through mimicry (e.g., Butler, 1990), 
such efforts will always be limited because imitations can only ever be 
“almost the same, but not quite” (Bhabha, 1984, p. 126). In response to 
what he perceived as a failed imitation, Jakob parodies what he most 
M. NEWSOM153
considers to stick out as not-quite psychobilly: the women’s femininity. In 
so doing, he challenges perceptions that psychobilly has grown “soft” by 
recreating the gatekeeping mechanisms that psychobillies of the past used 
to screen newcomers.
Together, these verbal and behavioral discourses reassert toughness as a 
normative, symbolic trait that is central to psychobilly identity—both 
ideologically and spatially. However, the physicality of the above examples 
also indicates that hardened masculinity is integral to psychobilly as an 
embodied experience. Here, subcultural authenticity is determined by the 
ability to enact certain corporeal competencies (Driver, 2011; McDowell, 
2017). These competencies are gendered and hierarchical in psychobilly. 
As men spatially exclude those perceived as lacking toughness, they dem￾onstrate how “the choreography of authority is expressed through the 
body” (Connerton, 1989, p. 74). The importance of violence to psycho￾billy’s early years means the bodies capable of successfully enacting hard￾ened masculinity in the present represent authenticity. Conversely, the 
bodies unable or perhaps unwilling to reproduce such performances can￾not reproduce collective memories of violence, thereby drawing accusa￾tions of inauthenticity.
Conclusion: Memory, Inequality, and Authenticity
As the anthropologist, Kevin Birth (2006) suggests, the past is always 
“immanent,” meaning it provokes action in the present. In considering 
this book’s theme of temporality, Birth challenges us to consider how 
subcultural histories (re)produce present inequalities. Among the Berlin 
psychobilly scene, memories of early violence are inherently tied to present 
discourses and behaviors that contribute to gender hierarchy. Specifcally, 
memories of fghting and subcultural confict reinforce notions of psycho￾billy authenticity as looking and feeling like hardened masculinity. As new 
members of the scene encounter the images, sounds, and narratives of 
previous psychobilly generations, they learn to determine authenticity 
based on the presence or absence of different traits—for example, the abil￾ity to distinguish between a “rough” singing voice and one that is “girly,” 
the ability to embody psychobilly fashion correctly, and the ability to both 
take and administer a punch. It is through these learned and reproduced 
behaviors, I argue, that gender hierarchy becomes naturalized in psycho￾billy. In this way, inequality itself comes to represent authentic 
psychobilly.
8 MEMORIES OF THE PAST, INEQUALITIES OF THE PRESENT…154
References
Ambrosch, G. (2016). ‘Refusing to Be a Man’: Gender, Feminism, and Queer 
Identity in the Punk Culture. Punk & Post-Punk, 5(3), 247–264.
Bader, I., & Scharenberg, A. (2010). The Sound of Berlin: Subculture and the 
Global Music Industry. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 
34(1), 76–91.
Bhabha, H. (1984, October 28). Of Mimicry and Man: The Ambivalence of 
Colonial Discourse. Special Issue on Psychoanalysis, 125–133.
Birth, K. (2006). The Immanent Past: Culture and Psyche at the Juncture of 
Memory and History. Ethos, 34(2), 169–191.
Blackman, S. (2014). Subculture Theory: An Historical and Contemporary 
Assessment of the Concept for Understanding Deviance. Deviant Behavior, 
35(6), 496–512.
Butler, J. (1990). Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. 
Routledge.
Cattell, M. G., & Climo, J. J. (2002). Introduction. In J. J. Cattell & M. G. Climo 
(Eds.), Social Memory and History: Anthropological Perspectives (pp.  1–38). 
AltaMira press.
Connerton, P. (1989). How Societies Remember. Cambridge University Press.
Csordas, T. J. (1994). The Sacred Self: A Cultural Phenomenology of Charismatic 
Healing. University of California Press.
Donaghey, J. (2021). Punk and Feminism in Indonesia. Cultural Studies, 
35(1), 136–161.
Driver, C. (2011). Embodying Hardcore: Rethinking ‘Subcultural’ Authenticities. 
Journal of Youth Studies, 14(8), 975–990.
Dunn, K. C. (2014). Pussy rioting: The Nine Lives of the Riot Grrrl Revolution. 
International Feminist Journal of Politics, 16(2), 317–334.
Eis, M., & Eckert, F. (2016). “1979 Deutschland”: Holocaust, West German 
Memory Culture, and Punk’s Intervention Into the Everyday. In M. M. Hall, 
S. Howes, & C. M. Shanahan (Eds.), Beyond No Future: Cultures of German 
Punk (pp. 109–128). Bloomsbury Academic.
Entwistle, J., & Mears, A. (2012). Gender on Display: Performativity in Fashion 
Modelling. Cultural Sociology, 7(3), 320–335.
Foucault, M. (1978). The History of Sexuality Volume I: An Introduction. 
Pantheon Books.
Fulbrook, M. (1999). German National Identity After the Holocaust. Polity Press.
Gordon, A. (2014). Distinctions of Authenticity and the Everyday Punk Self. 
Punk & Post-Punk, 3(3), 183–202.
Griffn, N. (2012). Gendered Performance and Performing Gender in the DIY 
Punk and Hardcore Music Scene. Journal of International Women’s Studies, 
13(2), 66–81.
M. NEWSOM155
Haenfer, R. (2006). Straight Edge; Hardcore Punk, Clean Living Youth, and 
Social Change. Rutgers University Press.
Hall, M. M., Howes, S., & Shahan, C. M. (2016). Punk Matters: An Introduction. 
In M. M. Hall, S. Howes, & C. M. Shahan (Eds.), Beyond No Future: Cultures 
of German Punk (pp. 1–14). Bloomsbury Academic Publishing.
Hayton, J. (2013). Härte Gegen Punk: Popular Music, Western media, and State 
Response in the German Democratic Republic. German History, 31(4), 523–549.
Hecker, M. (1993). Family Reconstruction in Germany: An Attempt to Confront 
the Past. In B. Heimannsberg & C. J. Schmidt (Eds.), The Collective Silence: 
German Identity and the Legacy of Shame (C. O. Harris & G. Wheeler, Trans.). 
pp. 73–93). Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Hollan, D. (2005). Setting a New Standard: The Person-Centered Interviewing 
and Observation of Robert I. Levy. Ethos, 33(4), 459–466.
Jerome, R. (2001). Introduction. In R.  Jerome (Ed.), Conceptions of Postwar 
German Masculinity (pp. 3–12). SUNY Press.
Leblanc, L. (1999). Pretty in Punk: Girls’ Gender Resistance in a Boys’ Subculture. 
Rutgers University Press.
Marshall, G. (1994). Spirit of ’69: A Skinhead Bible. S.T. Publishing.
McDowell, A.  D. (2017). Aggressive and Loving Men: Gender Hegemony in 
Christian Hardcore Punk. Gender & Society, 31(2), 223–244.
McRobbie, A., & Garber, J. (1991). Girls and Subcultures: An Exploration. In 
S. Hall & T. Jefferson (Eds.), Resistance Through Rituals: Youth Subcultures in 
Post-War Britain (pp. 209–222). (Original work published 1975).
Muggleton, D. (2000). Inside Subculture: The Postmodern Meaning of Style. 
Berg Press.
Mullaney, J. L. (2007). “Unity Admirable But Not Necessarily Heeded”: Going 
Rates and Gender Boundaries in the Straight Edge Hardcore Music Scene. 
Gender & Society, 21(3), 384–408.
Newsom, M. D. (2021). The Power of Memory: Gender Inequality Among the 
Berlin Psychobilly Scene. In R. Bestley, M. Dines, M. Grimes, & P. Guerra 
(Eds.), Punk Identities, Punk Utopias: Global Punk and Media (pp. 39–56). 
Intellect Press.
Rohrer, Ingo and Michelle Thompson 2022. Imagination Theory: Anthropological 
Perspectives. Anthropological Theory, 0(0): 1-23.
Rouse, J. (2019). “Punks are not Girls”: Exploring Discrimination and 
Empowerment Through the Experiences of Punk and Alt-Rock Musicians in 
Leeds. Punk & Post-Punk, 8(1), 73–88.
Shahan, C. (2008). Punk Poetics and West German Literature of the Eighties. 
Dissertation Submitted to Department of Germanic Languages and Literatures, 
UNC-Chapel Hill.
Sharp, M. (2019). Hypervisibility in Australian Punk Scenes: Queer Experiences 
of Spatial Logics of Gender and Sexuality. Punk & Post-Punk, 8(3), 363–378.
8 MEMORIES OF THE PAST, INEQUALITIES OF THE PRESENT…156
Silva, Augusto Santos and Guerra, Paula. (2019). The Global and the Local in 
Music Scenes: The Multiple Anchoring of Portuguese Punk. In Mike Dines, 
A. ‘Gords’ Gordon and Paula Guerra (Eds.), The Punk Reader: Research 
Transmissions from the Local and the Global (pp. 69-95). : Intellect Ltd.
Stewart, F. (2021). From Belfast With Love: The Women and Female Presenting 
Punks of Northern Ireland and Their ‘Subculture’. In R. Bestley, M. Dines, 
M. Grimes, & P. Guerra (Eds.), Punk Identities, Punk Utopias: Global Punk 
and Media (pp. 21–38). Intellect Press.
The Meteors. (1983). Wrecking Crew. Wreckin’ Crew. I.D. Records.
The Meteors. (1988). Only the Meteors are Pure Psychobilly. Anagram Records.
The Minestompers. (2015). Mama’s Clit. The Minesompers. Crazy Love Records.
Thornton, S. (1995). Club Cultures: Music, Media and Subcultural Capital. 
Routledge.
Ventsel, A. (2012). “This Is Not My Country, My Country is the GDR”: East 
German Punk and Socio-economic Processes After German Reunifcation. 
Punk & Post-Punk, 1(3), 343–359.
Wälty, T. (2017). “I’ve Always Been a Misft”: Body and Beauty in Mexico City’s 
Punk Women. In M.  Dines & L.  Way (Eds.), Postgraduate Voices in Punk 
Studies: Your Wisdom, Our Youth (pp.  103–115). Cambridge Scholars 
Publishing.
Way, L. (2020). Punk, Gender, and Ageing: Just Typical Girls? Emerald Publishing.
Williams, J. P. (2006). Authentic Identities: Straightedge Subculture, Music, and 
the Internet. Journal of Contemporary Ethnography, 35(2), 173–200.
Williams, J. P. (2011). Subcultural Theory: Traditions and Concepts. Polity Press.
M. NEWSOM© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 157
Switzerland AG 2024
L. Way, M. Grimes (eds.), Punk, Ageing and Time, Palgrave Studies 
in the History of Subcultures and Popular Music, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47823-9_9
CHAPTER 9
Punk, Literature and Midlife Creativity: 
Ordinary Stories, Ordinary Men
Philip Miles
Introduction
Does the geist of ‘punk’ have longevity? Can a spirit of youthful resistance 
transition from its origins of performative fashion, lifestyle and music into 
a channelled dynamic of mature creativity? This chapter sets out to detect 
traces of punk’s ideological and aesthetic legacy as it assimilates with 
midlife cultural and creative labour as detected in contemporary creative 
writing, leaving behind musical fandom and musical ingenuity (Laing, 
1985), ‘DIY’ fashion (Hebdige, 1979), and territorial sociality of a scene 
(Straw, 1991; Bennett & Peterson, 2004; Crossley, 2015) and, alterna￾tively, considering punk as something of a conscious, retained ‘philoso￾phy’ that has endured over time and understood via the words of creatively 
active people within the feld. Seeking a unifying theory of creative dispo￾sition and tenacity, taking the form of three portraits of middle-aged male
writers, the data is drawn from a larger and diverse intersectional 
P. Miles (*) 
University of Bedfordshire, Bedfordshire, UK
e-mail: Philip.Miles@beds.ac.uk158
ethnographic study on the personal meaning of creativity involving men 
and women (Miles, 2019).1 It is concerned with the philosophical, socio￾logical, and psychological aspects of what it ‘is’ and ‘means’ to be creative, 
drawing on quasi-Bergsonian experiences of time, action and meaning 
that are often connected to embedded ideologies and identity (Bergson, 
2014), examining the shift towards a realisation of the creative muse that 
harnesses the lingering energy and intent of the original ‘scene’ into the 
creation of, inter alia, memoir, motion picture screenplays, science fction 
novels and the odd work of musical biography. Consequently, this chapter 
emphasises punks that have got old but do not appear to have lost the pos￾session of that cultural zeitgeist of 1976–1979, adding substance to an 
assertion that ‘punk’ need not be retired with the 28-inch waist Paul 
Simonon white jeans.
Midlife, Creativity and ‘Punk’
It is enduringly problematic to defne ‘midlife’; there is a reliance on arbi￾trary notions of what it is to ‘be’ middle aged, a predilection for cliché and 
prejudice rather than offcial defnitions. Ageing, of course, is an omni￾present fact of life (the passage of time, the sense of experience and wis￾dom and so on), but midlife is often articulated in terms of crisis (Setiya, 
2017), an experience of hiatus (Hamilton, 2014), or a sense of stability
(Swinnen, 2018)—essentially it is something of a marker of generic sur￾vival (Hepworth & Featherstone, 1982), a transitioning point from youth 
to old age, simultaneously fuid and secure. However, it is also arguably a 
moment of renewal, both symbolic and strategic, resulting in tangible pro￾ductivities relating to a variety of strategies and dynamics, a ‘place’ where 
transformative creativity can fourish and become the location of the 
development of overlapping, synchronous identities (Miles, 2019). This
midlife is about recognising the potential of one’s accrued human capital 
to fll ‘blank’ spaces (cf. Bourdieu, 1993) and consequently develop a rein￾vigorated sense of self. Such desired outcomes, detectable in individuals 
via an assortment of pastimes, hobbies and stratagems, can be achieved, 
1For an excellent discussion of female punks and refections on ageing, see Laura Way’s 
(2021) analysis of female identity and the longevity of the ‘state of mind’ attached to youth 
culture and self-concept. Additionally, the central role of women in the creation of punk 
music has been documented over the years, with Amy Raphael’s Never Mind the Bollocks: 
Women Rewrite Rock (1995) and notable autobiography, such as Viv Albertine’s Clothes, 
Music, Boys (2014), being strong, almost prototypical, examples.
P. MILES159
inter alia, by way of specifc artistic creativity and, if Raymond Williams’s 
observation that the repetitiveness of the creative process is understood as 
a recurring reliance on developed techniques (Williams, 1961, p. 20), the 
method of recycling accrued ideology, talent and spirit. ‘Punk’, in this 
instance, can be viewed in these terms, including recognising the soft con￾fict of the fuid ‘subcultural/scene’ dichotomy that arguably emerges 
from an organic nostalgia, incremental in nature, and almost Hegelian in 
its continual, historical transmogrifcation via synthesis of time, identity, 
sociality and the search for idealisation (Davis, 2006). It is, however, argu￾ably more of a highly idiosyncratic applied and augmented cultural capital 
that can drive a variety of artforms, somehow external to linear time-space, 
not necessarily associated with urban or rural ‘scenes’ or ‘place’ (Straw, 
1991; Miles, 2023), ‘networks’ (Crossley, 2015), ‘careers’ or ‘phases’ in 
subcultural attachment and development (Andes, 1998), or ‘myths’ 
(Bennett, 2002) and not simply attached to omnipresent artefacts of music 
and design. It is therefore a personal, individualistic and encompassing 
worldview, perhaps best understood here as an assimilation of those ‘recy￾cled’ approaches and skills that create something perceived as useful
(Feldman et al., 1994) to the participants involved in this research dedi￾cated to ascertaining the ‘meaning’ of the creative process, centring on 
writing, fne art, photography, performance and music making, and using 
methods that observed, questioned and sensually appraised the artistic 
routine (Miles, 2019, 2020). Analysing the data produced evidence that 
‘art’ is unpredictable in emergence, liminal in creation, intertextual, inter￾sectional and intuitive. It is driven by processes of explosive, risky ‘anarchy 
of thought’ and instinct, serving as an affrmation of personal security and 
vitality, and furnishing the protagonist with self-effcacy and self-wonder. 
Art consolidates life; it is what it means to be alive, but what is the origin 
of the spirit and how does it sustain itself over time?
Transitions and Transformations
In this particular instance, meeting the men who have transitioned from 
music into writing was one of the fnal phases of the ‘midlife creativity’ 
project. Pete Haynes, former drummer of punk band The Lurkers, was 
arguably the most prominent of the former musicians that I met, having 
been active the longest and sporting an impressive back catalogue of 
releases and notable stage performances over his life. However, Steve 
Hardy and Darrell Buxton—a Derby-based partnership founded in horror 
9 PUNK, LITERATURE AND MIDLIFE CREATIVITY: ORDINARY STORIES…160
and sci-f script writing—gave insight into the continual motivation of the 
amateur post-punk writer, and talking to Johnny Vincent, erstwhile front￾man of post-punk/alt-rock band The Ruins about his sociocultural oral 
histories that appeared two decades after he frst took to the stage with a 
volatile mix of youthful abandon and considerable self-doubt, gave addi￾tional insight into the essence of punk that remains in the creative muse. 
In each instance, there is a tangible, detectable ‘sense of the possible’ cou￾pled with a belief in the productive status of the ‘outsider’ that emerges in 
the dialogue. Art, it seems, is a continual process that articulates life as it 
has been, and continues to be, lived. Punk and art are simply one and the 
same thing, an esprit de corps spanning time, space, and place, and Johnny, 
it seems, has the perfect angle on such matters with which to begin.
Just Stories
Johnny Vincent looks tired; he’s had a tough week at work. These days his 
day job and everyday life vie for a balance alongside his music and his writ￾ing. He has a lot to do and, in his view, he fears he has insuffcient time to 
achieve what he wants to achieve. His artistic origin is situated in the 
immediate post-punk (or ‘new wave’) scene in Derby in the English 
Midlands in the late-1970s and early 1980s, initially attending gigs and 
socialising with like-minded stylists in clubs before beginning to create his 
own music with early bands such as the Thoroughbreds of Wisdom and 
Last Mourning. On listening to the outputs (mainly live recordings) of 
these bands now, one is struck by the omnipresent energy and optimism 
in the music combined with the evident anxiety of infuence that partially 
stymies the emergence of something entirely novel; this is the music born 
of a scene (Bennett & Peterson, 2004), a network of sound based on value 
and pleasure (Crossley & Bottero, 2015) that refects style and the infu￾ences that helped create it rather than acting as a lamp that shines light 
into unexplored corners of musical virtuosity. That said, Johnny’s career in 
(mostly amateur) music making is long, varied and continually exciting; 
the originality eventually emerged in his writing, born of the synthesis of 
musical advancement, variation in musical colleagues and the continual 
desire to do. His later 30s contained an interesting hiatus and associative 
spur back into creative life: his day job was mundane, his music career was 
on hold and his priorities had changed.
P. MILES161
Johnny Vincent (JV): I took a lot more control of my own destiny [and] 
ditched what I didn’t want to do with my life. […] I used to see [music] as 
a way of getting out of the rat race. […] You don’t do an awful lot because 
you’ve got your family […] and when you’re bringing up your kids you 
can’t spend a lot of time [making music] because they are so demanding.
Thus, it was his new attachment to the home, via the nurturing of his 
daughter, that saw Johnny subconsciously consider an alternative means of 
creative expression; things, he stoically acknowledges, eventually some￾how come together—songs, gigs, writing and his recent acting duties with 
a local dramatic company. However, alongside The Ruins producing high￾quality albums, his day job has continued to remind him of the persistent 
linearity of life itself and Johnny admits that he has had a tough pandemic, 
experiencing at frst-hand life and death, the fragility of existence, and how 
people prioritise, organise and memorialise. Back in 2005, Johnny had 
sensed a desire to place something on the record, just in case. He sought 
to create a history of a Derby music and fashion scene (Vincent, 2008) as 
something emotionally and sensually tangible, which related to those who 
lived through it and those who wished to know more about the scene. ‘I 
weave my own life through it’, he says, relating his own experiences as a 
participant at the time and as an observer across time of something that 
was transient and exciting but has left perceptible traces. To get his 
thoughts in some kind of order and to give the project vitality, Johnny 
spoke with luminaries such as Peter Hook and members of the UK Subs, 
along with other participants of the era, such as members of Derby’s Anti￾Pasti. Having compiled a huge amount of written and oral data he hesi￾tated, overcome by self-doubt about his entitlement to comment, to 
publish, to somehow act as a curator of the scene’s intimate and subcul￾tural details. The book, sitting as a digital fle and ready to be published, 
felt that it had ‘got to the stage where it wasn’t “me” now, it seemed to be 
someone else’, he recalls. It ‘seemed to have been a different person who 
had lived this thing’, he continues, alluding to the creative ‘in-between 
state’ of what I have termed the ‘mezzanine’ (Miles, 2019). This pattern 
of ‘fow’ and ‘aura’ that is gained from the writing process visited Johnny, 
but it left him with something that he considered to be valuable and an 
achievement:
JV: You write it like a “third person” […] it was very therapeutic […] and, 
in another way, something to do […]; but the best thing it did was bring me 
9 PUNK, LITERATURE AND MIDLIFE CREATIVITY: ORDINARY STORIES…162
confdence […], not to be scared to do something, […] that actually I could 
do anything if I want to, just a case of putting my mind to it. (Original emphasis)
Eventually, Johnny ordered 20 copies via a self-publishing platform and 
sold them all at gigs, and the book has since shifted over 500 units in the 
UK and some abroad. Confdence, it seems, came not only from sales 
bearing out its qualities, but also in self-acceptance, good oral reviews and 
the idea that the book contributed to a folk history of his home city. In 
doing so, he managed to synthesise the original spirit of punk with 
researching and writing, recording music, playing gigs, being a father and 
husband, and working on a ‘front line’. To do this as effcaciously as pos￾sible it’s all about, in Johnny’s view, overcoming insecurity and self-doubt—
a resistance that is diffcult to summon, but ultimately instrumental.
JV: do it yourself, and not being scared of having a go at anything, […] the 
carefree attitude, I suppose, not to be overly concerned; […] it don’t really 
matter what other people think about it, it’s what you’ve done for yourself.
There is a sense that individualistic labour is rewarding, that the task is 
more important than the reception, a cathartic process that instils conf￾dence, sense of self, sense of destiny rather than a resistance to ideology or 
the ‘system’ that creates subculture as an opposition to the dominant ide￾ology. Thus, ‘punk’ production is something of a self-empowering strat￾egy that has little directly to do with resistance but is probably a by-product 
of the system that isolates and excludes those who ‘buck it’. Ultimately, it 
is all driven by a sense of legacy—it is, he says, ‘not what you do, it’s what 
you leave behind that matters’. Johnny senses that depositing such traces 
of the creative self in the public domain are equal to defeating the creeping 
sense of the mortal that affects us as we age. It is also driven by the desire 
to communicate, to feel human, to contribute to informal discourse. It is, 
he adds, simply ‘something to talk about […] it’s just swapping stories, 
isn’t it?’ This articulation of the informal is very telling; we are left with the 
sense that the spirit of punk was to communicate, to somehow give a for￾mality to the informality of the street, the subcultural subtleties that exist 
beyond the fashion and the shocks, the sense that it’s just people commu￾nicating with other people and sharing experience. Such as it is, this expe￾rience never really stops, and, in effect, this informal communication need 
not cease with the natural fzzling out of a subculture in tandem with the 
passage of time. Punk, therefore, may have been a subculture located in a 
P. MILES163
time and space—namely the mid- to late 1970s—but it is also simply a 
pause point of human progression illustrated by a youth subculture. Those 
punks of 1976–1977 still exist and they still talk, and they continue to 
have a common dialogue, common values and a sense of community even 
if they have moved on in life from the ‘look’ and the ‘sounds’. ‘You’ve 
lived through something’, he states, while emphasising again that ‘it’s just 
stories; you just write down what has happened’. Thus, we are confronted 
with the interesting metaphor of a ‘punk fction’ that frames the oral his￾tories: the idea that the punk spirit is somehow manifest in a living homol￾ogy of interpretation (cf. Willis, 1978) that allows participants to ‘write 
history’ as an anecdote, highly individualistic, driven by the composite of 
a ‘reception’ theory of interpretation (Willis, 2019) that may envelop 
‘postmodern’ subcultural histories (Muggleton, 2000), an anxiety of infu￾ence that involves an inherent revisionism (cf. Bloom, 1973), and involv￾ing something of a utilitarianism of memory (cf. Felski, 20082) 
incorporating a sense of place within the linear development of punk and 
the desire to create novelty from such a disparate recall and the omnipres￾ent, media and print text–driven, public discourse. Johnny considers him￾self best suited to social/oral history rather than shifting into the world of 
novels or drama. ‘You can’t make something up that you don’t know’, he 
says, suggesting—ultimately—that immersion is required to create an 
authentic narrative in writing. Johnny believes, strongly, that he is better 
documenting what he knows. I asked him if it was really all about docu￾menting his own past, flling in the blanks, recalling the scene as a com￾munity. He responded to the contrary—in essence, it is about 
communicating to people who don’t know, leaving the kids something 
where currently they ‘have nothing to work with’. Old punks realise, in 
many ways, that they never ‘did anarchy’ but, instead, ‘did communica￾tion’—the fanzine, the music, the languages of subculture. Johnny’s writ￾ing is simply another phase of this process, leaving behind a record both 
on vinyl and on the page, some tangible traces for new generations 
to value.
2 In some ways, Rita Felski’s study presents a taxonomy of reading motivations (and 
rewards), and, in essence, the notion is presented here as an example of how interpretation, 
revisionism, infuence and time-space combine to create both the ‘work’ and the ‘value’ of 
the work as tangible and conjoined.
9 PUNK, LITERATURE AND MIDLIFE CREATIVITY: ORDINARY STORIES…164
Stories That I Want to Write
There is evidence that when participatory punks—those who bought the 
records, went to the gigs, wore the clothes and occasionally created some 
sounds—get a bit older, they want to bring that experience that Johnny 
spoke of to bear in good writing. While Johnny concentrates on sociocul￾tural histories, written via the gathering of oral evidence, Steve Hardy and 
Darrell Buxton lean very much on the extra-experiential, weaving in the 
infuences of punk rock, its spirit and it’s imagery, into the creation of the 
fantastical; the creation of spectacle via writing, the elementary forms of 
punk life—be it the DIY essence of the fanzine (Laing, 1985, pp. 24–25) 
or the exhibitionism of the style (Bennett, 2006) or the many things in￾between—fnds a fresh voice in the generation of novel forms of fction. 
Steve and Darrell are old friends and now collaborators, an embodiment 
of the point where individual fandom of science fction and horror, via TV 
and cinematic releases over the decades, combine with a lingering, strong, 
personally valued infuence of subculture, art and music to create some￾thing new. This is the point where the intertextuality of sight, sound and 
text is discovered, and the spirit of punk is most certainly retained.
On meeting them both at Steve’s suburban home in Derby, there is an 
immediate detection of the sense of the ‘outsider’ in their words, their 
memories of life on the edges, outside of the mainstream. This unifying 
theme across all participants is striking, illustrating that there may have 
been an additional layer of translation of the punk spirit between the urban 
classes and the urban and the ‘provincial’. The building blocks of punk 
resistance appear to be the same in the context of rejection of the estab￾lished norms and values of the mainstream of society, but there appears to 
be that sense of exclusion the farther from the major urban areas one gets. 
Punk, to these men, was about growing up and self-discovery but also the 
creation and maintenance of an intellectual character. ‘I didn’t want to 
know about the ‘mainstream”, says Darrell with some considerable con￾viction. Growing up in a village in south Derbyshire, he sensed strongly 
that ‘I was sort of on my own doing this’, and Steve concurs, adding that 
he always felt ‘on the outside, looking in […] not joining in with what the 
other people were doing’. It is therefore ironic that the sense of isolation, 
exclusion and the subconscious sense of ‘difference’ actually saw the devel￾opment of similar interests in artistic merit. Their passion was for science 
fction on TV and was just the beginning of a connectivity across a range 
of arts. Glam came and went, Bowie and Ronson and T. Rex, but it was 
P. MILES165
the Sex Pistols (and the surrounding public controversy) that transitioned 
them from the acknowledgement of the staid conventional towards a per￾ceivable anarchy of possibility. A durable connection was created.
Steve: As a creative type, as a writer, there has always been a connection 
between science fction and punk rock, which culminated some time later 
with the bands I liked in the eighties […] a lot of science fction fans feel like 
they’re outsiders, [it] creates a world that is different to the world that 
they live in.
To Darrell, the punk ‘movement’ unfolded in a slightly different way to 
the received wisdom of some commentators. This was not about fashion
but, instead, about the spirit of the laissez-faire and the destruction of the 
quasi-intellectual anxiety of infuence (cf. Bloom, 1975). Punk was about, 
he says, quoting Kevin Rowlands of Dexy’s Midnight Runners, ‘burning 
it down’,3 destroying the daunting legacies of rock and art, and adhering 
to a situationist view that ‘sanitisation neutralises’. Steve adds that ‘with 
reminiscence, there’s always a touch of nostalgia—that’s the problem’, 
and they are both quick to state that their writing is very much resisting 
such ‘sanitisation’. Their work, therefore, needs some form of defnition 
of approach, of method, of ideology. If it is not drawing on something, 
where is it ‘coming from’? To Darrell, the lingering infuence of his punk 
days is in the ‘DIY’ essence of production, a cultural labour that continues 
to have resonance with what Johnny called ‘swapping stories’, the notion 
that subcultural communication is a structuralist layer of language that 
transcends linear time. ‘It’s very punk, very fanzine’, says Darrell, but 
Steve elaborates on this, suggesting that there is a distinction between 
those who create and those who consume, and that such communications 
embody a distinction between transitory interest and a new way of life and 
lifestyle (Chaney, 1996):
Steve: In the seventies you were either a punk or a punk rocker […] some￾body who went out and bought the records, it was a fashion for them […] 
but, if you were a punk with a capital ‘P’, that was a lot broader, […] a whole 
society that was going on. (Original emphasis)
3Dexy’s Midnight Runners, Burn It Down (Rowland), on the Searching for the Young Soul
Rebels album released July 1980 by EMI/Parlophone.
9 PUNK, LITERATURE AND MIDLIFE CREATIVITY: ORDINARY STORIES…166
A whole subculture existed, to be sure, but Punk had a series of dimen￾sions that other subcultures didn’t have, including fanzines. The two men 
see the subculture as creative, but not exclusively so—the hippies, says 
Darrell, had fanzines (International Times and Oz, for example—see 
Neville, 1971) and so did the sci-f community. This, he adds, suggested 
‘anyone could do it; the means of production—you didn’t need to go to a 
publisher to produce it’. However, to Steve and Darrell, the spirit—as well 
as the physical manifestation—of fanzines is central to the way that punk 
praxis transitioned into the literary world. ‘The next logical step was to 
make my own work’, says Steve, acknowledging that punk instilled an idea 
to ‘do’, to be active in music and writing. Music didn’t need to be at the 
heart of artistic creation, Darrell adds, mimicking the famous Tony Moon 
graphic, by stating ‘here’s no chords, don’t form a band!’ However, some 
bands danced along an edge between music and fanzine, combining mes￾sage with sound even if the chords were not necessarily in the right order.
Darrell: no-one really cared if people could play […] who decides who 
plays, […] how you play, whether you’re doing it right or not? […] The Slits 
encompass this different angle […] and Crass was all about getting things 
out, they are a fusion of music and fanzine. (Original emphasis)
The transition into writing was, perhaps, entrenched in their subcul￾tural roots, a fusion of music and fanzine that might mean that Crass were 
actually onto something (Berger, 2006). Steve eventually went off to do a 
creative writing degree, seeking authentication for his chosen pathway, but 
fearing that he may ‘become part of the spectacle’ (Debord, 1967) as a 
result. Submitting to conventions, according to Steve, is not a very ‘punk 
thing’, but he acquiesces, understanding that good grammar, syntax and 
spelling are a must, despite Darrell’s light-hearted protestations that 
‘Sniffn’ Glue didn’t have a grammar checker!’. They laugh, but there is 
something latent here. ‘The message need not be lost by tighter content’, 
says Darrell before concluding that ‘I’m all for the raggedness of the pro￾duction method, but I like the content to be red hot’.
There is a belief that there was a latent sophistication in punk all along 
and that, as Darrell points out, ‘the reason that it was perceived as a threat 
was because it was […] a dangerously intelligent youth culture’ and well 
beyond three chords. The visual transformation of ‘punk’ into ‘gothic[k] 
P. MILES167
punk’ (Savage, 19914) and the ‘dramaturgical shift’ from resistance 
towards the theatrical (perhaps always embodied by Dave Vanian and 
Siouxie Sioux) and the development of an intertextuality of ‘punk’, flm 
and literature sealed this veiled sophistication, seen and heard in many 
instances—for example, in the connection between the gothic horror nov￾els of Anne Rice and the LA gothic rock of Concrete Blonde5—but also 
traced earlier in the connectivity between visual, artistic infuences via TV 
scheduling of horror ficks on Saturday nights in the early 1970s. The 
stylistic development of Vanian, Siouxie and bands such as Bauhaus con￾nected with Steve. ‘When I started to write stuff it was born out of a fusion 
of punk and sci-f’, he says, creating a subcultural style of writing consoli￾dated with infuences such as the band Japan and the goth imagery and 
sound, but also via the cultural infuences of friends and co-authors. The 
original punk laissez-faire approach that they adopted so long ago there￾fore remains, woven with eclectic intersectionality and genres, but they 
acknowledge that the paymasters expect, need, a script that can be work￾able. Recent work on their script for the British flm Ouijageist illus￾trated this.
Darrell: [we want to] write something that has got a conventional setting 
and a conventional structure and then to invade, or tear apart, that structure.
PM: Is that how ‘punk’ fnds its way into the way you write?
Steve: It’s moving within a framework.
The dramaturgical mixes with the ideology and the phantasmagorical 
to inform their style, genre, and approach, but there is continually a 
Goffman style adherence to the idea of the ‘stage’ and the ‘private’ 
(Goffman, 1959) in the way that they continue to consider contemporary 
philosophy of writing and the mindset of the punks that they have 
remained. They see themselves as still creating the way that they did when 
they were younger but that, as Steve says, ‘experience makes it better’. The 
‘on-stage’ is simply the way that they do things creatively, as ‘off stage’ 
they are fully conversant with the passage of time and its limitations. It all 
combines to create the ‘framework’ that they acknowledge. They now 
4 Jon Savage discussed style and genre throughout but also hints at the dramaturgical, 
proto-horror-fick look of Siouxie Sioux and Dave Vanian as representative of the envisioning 
a post-punk, stylistic form. 5 See/hear ‘Bloodletting (The Vampire Song)’ on the album Bloodletting, released May 
1990 by IRS records.
9 PUNK, LITERATURE AND MIDLIFE CREATIVITY: ORDINARY STORIES…168
have time and energy to write, free of family commitment and fnancial 
constraints commonplace amongst men in their late 50s, retaining the 
desire to be creative, to explore their craft, to continue to fuse punk, drama 
and the destiny of writing. It’s all about being an outsider and revelling in 
its freedom.
Steve: I absolutely chose the route I took […] I needed to live the life the 
way I needed to live it, not wanted to live it.
Darrell: We all wanted to learn, we just didn’t want the conforming 
system, we wanted to learn our own stuff […] Are other people going to get 
this? Then I concluded ‘fuck them!’, I don’t care; I’ve written the story that 
I want to write. The end!
Stories of God’s Lonely Men?
Pete Haynes has come a long way from Top of the Pops. The drummer of 
The Lurkers drifted into music and out of it again, stopping at building 
sites and university and the screen of his computer to write novels before 
synthesising the whole lot with autobiography and a reformed band who 
fnd themselves recording and gigging again after many years. His opinion 
on punk is immediate and sincere: it was a state of mind that saw people 
fnd common ground, articulated through music, style and the sense of 
being on the ‘outside’ of the mainstream, conventional world. It lost its 
way after its initial entrée into the musical and cultural world in 1975–1976, 
becoming simultaneously disingenuous and shallow, political and com￾mercial. He recalls that ‘it was an art school explosion’, involving subcon￾sciously privileged middle classes, and
Pete Haynes (PH): it doesn’t come from building sites or from factories, it 
comes from people who have time on their hands and see themselves as 
interesting and with something to say [with] access to things [and] the 
knowhow to put things together.
Infuenced by The Ramones, The Lurkers were the ‘loners [lurking] in 
the corner of the bar’, Pete opines, who ‘never went to discotheques, 
never really spoke to girls, pretty much disconnected’. The Lurkers con￾sidered themselves an ‘outsider’ band, not quite a philosophy but a way of 
life, defned by the ‘ordinary’ (Williams, 1958), the everyday, the sense of 
separation from a mainstream that had little to offer but a lot to take. 
P. MILES169
Fulham Fallout—their frst album released in 1978—cemented their repu￾tation on the circuit, gaining plauditry from John Peel, supporting key 
bands at key clubs (such as The Roxy), and developing their own follow￾ing. ‘The conventional life wasn’t for me’, says Pete, ‘but [neither was] the 
designer unconventionality, to be “this kind of person”’. The Lurkers—
and Pete ‘Esso’ Haynes—were in the scene but frmly not of it.
PH: Punk provided a platform for many types of people, you might have 
had the person who went a bit crazy with their hair, and you had the ‘anar￾chy’ people, but there was also the unsung heroes, the oddball types who 
would have never got out of their bedroom.
The version of punk that The Lurkers arguably ascribed to was based 
on voice: outsiders—including people with disabilities—regularly made up 
signifcant sections of the audience, and Pete saw intrinsic value in their 
experiences, their enjoyment and their humanity. As he later turned to 
writing, he was able to draw on this tranche of experience (see: Haynes, 
2009), consequently articulating the strength of feelings that he had expe￾rienced at the gigs, the witnessing of pleasure in the faces of the crowd, 
and accordingly channelling such energy into the text that he was produc￾ing. Such satisfaction in the impact of the music, and sense of belonging
that it appeared to cultivate, all infuenced recurring narratives in his fc￾tion and is explored in his memoir of The Lurkers, Gods Lonely Men
(2007). Ordinary life creates art.
However, if ordinary life creates art, where is it protected and where is 
it lost? Pete, author of novels, plays and autobiography/sociological 
observation (an approach he shares with his friend John King, author of 
The Football Factory), is left under no doubt that ‘punk’ had no discernible 
‘ideology’ and was nothing, in effect, beyond a feeting meeting of minds 
and money. The idea of a creative anarchy—to coin a phrase—had poten￾tial, but Pete believes that the essence of such freedom was eventually 
fattened by the interests of commerce. Writing, he states, is riven by vari￾ety and refexivity, thus ‘sink[ing] into more cracks and pores without 
having to be […] committed to being within a given remit, but I’ve 
changed my thinking’. The cause for such a change of mind is that pub￾lishers, in his view, have been swept along with events, causes and themes, 
resulting in a ‘trendy commerciality that has squashed such anarchy’. Over 
time he has come to consider himself an ‘underground writer’, he says, but 
(perhaps as a result) he encounters problems getting commercial interest, 
9 PUNK, LITERATURE AND MIDLIFE CREATIVITY: ORDINARY STORIES…170
getting past gatekeepers at the big publishing houses, attracting agents 
and so on. It’s a cynical thing, he adds, with the potential of creative writ￾ing being ‘broader’ in the past; these days, in effect, the ‘reading public’ 
(Leavis, 1932) set the boundaries of consumption via the popular cultural 
dynamics of consumption, setting (and settling) taste (Bourdieu, 1984) 
while ensuring simultaneous commercial conservativism in the main￾stream. The artist still exists as a quantifable ‘thing’, but it is driven by a 
sense of authenticity—and authenticity tends to come with no commercial 
success and is, ostensibly, framed by a sense of socio-cultural legitimacy. ‘I 
don’t believe artists are on the outside; obviously you are going to get a 
few who are, but you’re [also] going to get a few bricklayers who are’, he 
says. Artists that ‘come selling’ things are false; in the days of the punk 
‘scene’ he recalls that some prominent contemporaries were such false 
prophets, people who dropped into a scene as middle class revolutionaries, 
expecting Pete to be the same, and backing away when confronted by his 
attested working-class identity, born of secondary modern schooling, the 
council estate and manual labour. ‘I could see the fear in his face because 
he thought I was like him’, he recalls.
PH: He thought I was a bullshitter […] from a middle class background, 
just like him. […] I come from a different background [to him], I was laying 
concrete at 15. […]. He saw lying about the system as being nothing more 
than a politician […] an affected accent, false camaraderie and things.
This friction persists in the writing world, but he’s older now. ‘I’ve had 
a couple of run-in’s with theatre directors’, he says, but he insists that he 
won’t doctor his writing for commerciality. The theatre ‘plays to a bunch 
of liberals’ who don’t understand the overall structure of division, divi￾sions that he encountered in the generation of punk music that exist also 
in the feld of writing; it’s not about the music, the writing, the creative 
self or indeed the scene, sociality or the liminality and interpretation of 
fashion; it is instead about exploitation of power and the vagaries and 
boundaries of structural exclusion and social class. Thus, he perceives him￾self as something of an observant sociologist within literature, and his fc￾tional narratives follow this path with vivid precision.
PH: I don’t write with an agenda in mind […] so, I’m not thinking ‘this is 
a salient social issue that I can jump on’, which a lot of people do. […] They 
are like tailors, or engineers, a lot of writers—they make a storyboard, the 
P. MILES171
whole thing, […] research, and then they write it; mine writes itself as it 
goes along.
When asked if the ‘punk spirit’ has ‘hung on’ in his writing technique 
and routines, he is categorically sure that ‘punk’ is not external to the self; 
it was not a ‘scene’, but that ‘way of life’ that must express itself—natu￾rally—in your creative routines and outputs.
PH: It’s not a thing you take with you; it is you. [Some people] might apply 
a punk message or a punk philosophy to something they’re writing, an 
objective, structural view to what they’re writing; to me, it’s purely subjec￾tive, and my emotional response to what impacts upon me and it just so 
happens to be exactly the same—I haven’t changed at all.
Life is a framework for the creation of art; the art—in this instance 
being music and literature—is merely something from within, a natural 
instinct, driving the individual without coaxing, labour that is done largely 
without effort, an effortless articulation of what it is to be working class 
and an outsider.
Maintaining Anarchy: The Outsider and the Desire
for Novelty
At the outset I asked whether the authors apply a ‘meaning’ of punk to 
their writing, whether they see ‘resistance’ as still existing in their outputs, 
and whether a vitality of punk rock is still detectable in their writing. In 
truth, the sense is that these matters never really mattered at all; instead, 
the men I spoke to were concerned more with life as it is lived, how to 
make progress, how to articulate themselves in the most productive way, 
and how to represent their values in the creative labours that they under￾took. Punk, if anything, was simply a passing phase in time, an opportu￾nity to engage publicly, a media-driven music-style-social curiosity that 
enabled articulation rather than something functionally tangible as a 
framework for creativity. Instead, ‘punk’ remains simply as an emblematic, 
though dynamic, enunciation of values and techniques that exists exter￾nally to help articulate a way of seeing that would have ‘been there’ any￾way, burning on the inside. Punk is not now, or arguably has ever been, 
something relating to specifc lifestyle, consumer choices, perceived nos￾talgia, hackneyed fashion, structurally driven and reproduced ideologies, 
9 PUNK, LITERATURE AND MIDLIFE CREATIVITY: ORDINARY STORIES…172
or three-chord-structured songs lasting two minutes. Instead, it is a hard￾wired, continued desire to publicly participate, produce, exhibit and cele￾brate the ‘outsider’ via creative writing. This has ‘usefulness’.
This usefulness is achieved via introspection, self-discipline and aspects 
of continued resistance as well as a functional, explosive creative routine, a 
process, a unique space that I call ‘the mezzanine’—simultaneously liminal, 
transitory, trance-like, empowering and interpretive. The mezzanine is 
effectively a ‘condition’, a required situation experienced as the creative 
place between anticipation and invention of novelty; interpretations hap￾pen here, though they cannot be summonsed on demand (Miles, 2019, 
p. 161). The inventive mezzanine, therefore, is a state of mind that embod￾ies momentary resistance of the banal everyday (cf. Highmore, 2011) that 
is accordingly experienced in unpredictable, feeting bursts, embodying 
the skilful manipulation of talent, the revisionist urge, sensual and intel￾lectual self-confrontations, and resulting (mostly) in reinterpretations of 
existing ideologies, semiotics, mimetic language and artefacts. The mez￾zanine draws, ultimately, into the theatre of unpredictable creativity a 
combination of existing perceived structures of feeling (Williams, 1961; or 
the innate understanding of structural biography/identity) and refexive, 
discursive and personal dimensions of interpretation. This creates ‘border￾less risk’ otherwise determined as the chaos and constructive anarchy of 
creativity, the sucking in of the past that shall result in the throwing out of 
the future, but understood as uncanny ‘aura’ (Benjamin, 1927), unrepeat￾able and always somehow fruitful prior to the predictable, value-laden 
process of post-mezzanine determination of meaning by artist and audi￾ence. Punk, as an ideology, lifestyle and spirit, is a dynamic of the mezza￾nine’s process, but it is only that: a sense of ‘who I am, somewhere’, 
assisting in the shaping of novelty. A lot of time has passed for these men, 
beyond the music, the contested styles, the inspirations to act; the litera￾tures that they now create are infuenced by their formative years, but the 
spirit of punk is somehow only detectable via a sense of purpose rather 
than a rigid ideological—or nostalgic—code. Punk exists, it seems, not 
only as an echo, a trace of inspiration, engagement and nostalgia but also 
as a reason to do. It is about crafting legacies, articulating empathy and 
justice, generating powerful (and creative) dramaturgy and, ultimately, all 
about life itself.
It is clear that the artistic lives of the four creative men that I have dis￾cussed are intrinsically representative of what Howard Becker would vari￾ously describe as the ‘outsider’ in the ‘art world’ (Becker, 1963, 2008). 
P. MILES173
The art-text produced is arguably a ‘front region’ product (Goffman, 
1959), a dramaturgical embodiment of the aura of punk (whether 
acknowledged as such or not), while the artist himself is refexive, the 
artistic process discursive, and the artefact that emerges at the end of the 
creative cycle is intertextual and intersectional, involving the text, the art￾ist, history and the reader. The texts created are therefore arguably poly￾phonic in that the authors utilise multiple voices (emotional, experiential, 
ideological-political, cultural, aesthetic and so on) that are drawn from 
those recycled experiences, techniques and requirements, indicative of a 
‘liquidity’ of meanings detected in analysis of late modern society (Bauman, 
2000) and reminiscent of Julia Kristeva’s (1980) ‘semianalytical’ status,6
the place where the textual voices are never quite consolidated and where 
the author (as well as the object, subject, reader etc.) is in a continual state 
of development (Allen, 2011). Plus ça change. Such poststructural disso￾nance is, if anything, representative of the elusive punk ‘spirit’ (rather than 
the associative commerce) and is detectable in the narratives of the novels 
of Pete Haynes, the form of Johnny’s writing and presentation within his 
social histories, and the historical artistic and genre intertextuality of Steve 
and Darrell’s horror scriptwriting. Thus, ‘punk’ translates into middle age 
not as a retained ideology as such, but more like a trace that is left by asso￾ciation; it is, in short, a way of continuing to articulate ‘outsider status’ 
and a cacophonous fuidity of meaning, this time via the creative labour of 
writing rather than composing. It is seen as consisting of a continued sense 
that ‘work must be done’ to resist the ordinary, the bounded confnes of 
commercialism, transcendent histories, and reproduced social and cultural 
inequalities.
References
Albertine, V. (2014). Clothes, Music. Boys. Faber and Faber
Allen, G. (2011). Intertextuality (2nd ed.). Routledge.
Andes, L. (1998). Growing up Punk: Meaning and Commitment Careers in a 
Contemporary Youth Subculture. In J. S. Epstein (Ed.), Youth Culture: Identity 
in a Postmodern World (pp. 212–231). Blackwell.
Bauman, Z. (2000). Liquid Modernity. Polity.
6Kristeva’s ideas often interweave, in this instance, with those of Roland Barthes, essen￾tially entering into analysis of text via prolonged appreciation of meaning, via form (and after 
Mikhail Bakhitin) and something of an ongoing conversation with the text that gives promi￾nence to the notion of the intertextual.
9 PUNK, LITERATURE AND MIDLIFE CREATIVITY: ORDINARY STORIES…174
Becker, H. (1963). Outsiders: Studies in the Sociology of Deviance. Free Press.
Becker, H. (2008). Art Worlds, 25th Anniversary Edition. University of 
California Press.
Benjamin, W. (1927 [2008]). The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical 
Reproduction. Penguin.
Bennett, A. (2002). Music, Media and Urban Mythscapes; A Study of the 
‘Canterbury Sound’. Media, Culture & Society, 24(1), 87–100.
Bennett, A. (2006). Punks Not Dead: The Continuing Signifcance of Punk Rock 
for an Older Generation of Fans. Sociology, 40(1), 219–235.
Bennett, A., & Peterson, R. A. (2004). Music Scenes: Local, Translocal and Virtual. 
Vanderbilt University Press.
Berger, G. (2006). The Story of Crass. Omnibus.
Bergson, H. (2014). Key Writings (K. Ansell Pearson and J. Ó Maoilearca, Eds. 
and M. McMahon, Trans.). Bloomsbury.
Bloom, H. (1973). The Anxiety of Infuence: A Theory of Poetry. Oxford 
University Press.
Bloom, H. (1975 [2003]). A Map of Misreading. : Oxford University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1984). Distinction. Routledge.
Bourdieu, P. (1993). The Field of Cultural Production. Polity.
Chaney, D. (1996). Lifestyles. Routledge.
Crossely, N., & Bottero, W. (2015). Music Worlds and Internal Goods: The Role 
of Convention. Cultural Sociology, 9(1), 38–55.
Crossley, N. (2015). Networks of Sound, Style and Subversion: The Punk and Post￾Punk Worlds of Manchester, London, Liverpool and Sheffeld, 1975–80. 
Manchester University Press.
Davis, J. R. (2006). Growing Up Punk: Negotiating Aging Identity in a Local 
Music Scene. Symbolic Interaction, 29(1), 63–69.
Debord, G. (1967). Society of the Spectacle. Rebel Press.
Feldman, D., Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Gardner, H. (1994). Changing the World: 
A Framework for the Study of Creativity. Praeger.
Felski, R. (2008). Uses of Literature. Blackwell.
Goffman, E. (1959). The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. Penguin.
Hamilton, C. (2014). Middle Age. Routledge.
Haynes, P. (2007). Gods Lonely Men: The Lurkers. Head-Hunter.
Haynes, P. (2009). Malayan Swing. London Books.
Hebdige, D. (1979). Subculture: The Meaning of Style. Routledge.
Highmore, B. (2011). Ordinary Lives: Studies in the Everyday. Routledge.
Kristeva, J. (1980). Revolutions in Poetic Language: A Semiotic Approach to 
Literature and Art (L. S. Roudiez, Ed., and T. Gora, A. Jardine, & L. S. Roudiez, 
Trans.). Columbia University Press.
Laing, D. (1985). One Chord Wonders: Power and Meaning in Punk Rock. PM Press.
Leavis, Q. D. (1932 [2000]). Fiction and the Reading Public. Pimlico.
P. MILES175
Miles, P. (2019). Midlife Creativity and Identity: Life into Art. Emerald.
Miles, P. (2020). Creative Routine and Dichotomies of Space. In T. Ashley & 
A.  Weedon (Eds.), Developing a Sense of Place: The Role of the Arts in 
Regenerating Communities. UCL Press.
Miles, P. (2023). Music from The End of the Land. In A. Bennett, M. Cashman, 
& N.  Lewandowski (Eds.), Popular Music Scenes: A Regional and Rural 
Perspective. Palgrave Macmillan.
Muggleton, D. (2000). Inside Subculture: The Postmodern Meaning of Style. Berg.
Neville, R. (1971). Playpower. Paladin.
Hepworth, Mike & Featherstone, Mike. (1982). Surviving Middle Age. Oxford: 
Basil Blackwell.
Raphael, A. (1995). Never Mind the Bollocks: Women Rewrite Rock. Virago.
Savage, J. (1991). England’s Dreaming: Sex Pistols and Punk Rock. Faber and Faber.
Setiya, K. (2017). Midlife: A Philosophical Guide. Princeton University Press.
Straw, W. (1991). Systems of Articulation, Logics of Change: Communities and 
Scenes in Popular Music. Cultural Studies, 5(3), 368–388.
Swinnen, A. (2018). ‘Writing to Make Ageing New’: Dutch Poets’ Understandings 
of the Late-Life Creativity. Ageing and Society, 38(3), 543–567.
Vincent, J. (2008). An Alternative Derby. Lulu.com.
Way, L. (2021). Punk Is Just a State of Mind: Exploring What Punk Means to 
Older Punk Women. The Sociological Review, 69(1), 107–122.
Williams, R. (1958). Culture Is Ordinary. In Williams, R. (1989), Resources of 
Hope: Culture, Democracy, Socialism, Ed. Robin Gable. Verso.
Williams, R. (1961). The Long Revolution. Penguin.
Willis, I. (2019). Reception. Routledge.
Willis, P. E. (1978). Profane Culture. Routledge.
9 PUNK, LITERATURE AND MIDLIFE CREATIVITY: ORDINARY STORIES…© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 177
Switzerland AG 2024
L. Way, M. Grimes (eds.), Punk, Ageing and Time, Palgrave Studies 
in the History of Subcultures and Popular Music, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47823-9_10
CHAPTER 10
Exploring Older Punk Women’s 
Conceptualisation of ‘Punk’ through 
Participant-Created Zine Pages
Laura Way
Introduction
Despite a growing academic interest in ageing subculturalists, and an 
increasing acknowledgement that identifcation with punk can extend 
‘post-youth’ (e.g., Andes, 2002; Bennett, 2006; Bennett & Hodkinson, 
2012), little still has been done in rendering visible the understandings 
and experiences of older punk women. Additionally, whilst there has been 
an abundance of literature concerning pre-existing zines as a source of 
(secondary) data, less has been said concerning zines created as part of a 
research study, for example as a form of primary data, and, indeed, outside 
of a pedagogical context. Bringing these two areas together, this chapter 
refects upon initial fndings concerning how punk was conceptualised 
through zines pages created by my research participants (older punk 
women) as well as considering methodological advantages and challenges 
L. Way (*) 
University of Roehampton, London, UK
e-mail: laura.way@roehampton.ac.uk178
of such an approach in this context. Proposing that ‘zines commonly 
maintain a particular ‘ethos’, my chapter will refexively explore how this 
played out in the context of my own research experiences and the extent 
to which their democratic and participatory ideal, DIY ethic, and their 
transformative potential were upheld. I open this chapter with some brief 
context regarding research with older punk women before contextualising 
the use of zines as a methodological tool and offering some consideration 
of ‘zine ethos’. I turn then to my initial fndings before refexively consid￾ering my use of zines in research with older punk women.
Research with Older Punk Women
My decision to conduct research with older punk women stemmed from 
my argument that they have been marginalised and largely rendered invis￾ible in academic literature concerning subcultures. Since early work on 
punk in which it was theorised as a male-dominated, youth-centred sub￾culture (Hebdige, 1998), there has been greater recognition of the pres￾ence of women within punk (Griffn, 2012; Leblanc, 2002; Roman, 1988) 
as well as ageing punks (Andes, 2002; Bennett, 2006, 2012, 2013). 
However, the limited inclusion of older punk women in such research 
samples or attention to gender analysis means knowledge produced can be 
critiqued as being ‘malestream’1 (Gurney, 1997; Oakley, 1998), and exist￾ing theoretical and conceptual understanding of punks fails to consider 
the interaction between ageing, gender and subcultural affliation. I have 
provided a much fuller discussion of this elsewhere (see Way, 2020), 
though, for time and space reasons, the brief summary above will suffce 
for the purpose of contextualising the research sample that this chapter 
concerns. A much fuller discussion contextualising zines and their meth￾odological use now follows.
Zines: A Brief History and Ethos
Zines […] are self-published, low-budget, non-proft print publications. 
Originally born out of fandom; particularly sci-f, music, sport, and cultural 
iconography, they have long served as a signifcant medium of communication 
in various subcultures and considered a mainstay of the “do-it-yourself” 
creative movement. (French & Curd, 2022, p. 77)
1 In sociology, this can refer to male dominance in the discipline (in terms of researchers, 
samples and perspectives) and when fndings from samples comprising of only men are taken 
to represent women as well.
L. WAY179
Though arguably zines can be diffcult to defne, the above defnition of 
zines does a particularly neat job of summarising some of their key aspects 
and historical context. Subcultures which have utilised zine making and 
sharing have particularly included punk and riotgrrrl, and fanzines (zines 
which focus on fandom, e.g. concerning a particular band or music) appear 
a key aspect of the British punk movement from the 1970s onwards 
(Grimes, 2016; Worley, 2015). Whilst zines originally tended to be A5 
sized and produced via photocopier, containing a mixture of images and 
text, they can be created in a variety of sizes, design, look and layout, and 
now can be produced electronically and/or online as well as being paper/
materially based.
As noted above, zines are commonly understood as a form, or aspect, 
of DIY culture(s). This can be seen as an important aspect of a zine ethos, 
with a DIY ethic key to this (Fletcher, 2017). In unpacking this DIY 
notion, a bit more, it’s relevant here to draw upon how this has been 
understood academically. Some link DIY to anarchist ideas, particularly in 
terms of the individual taking responsibility for themselves but also in 
terms of cooperating with others to enact change (O’Hara, 1999). DIY, 
then, can be understood as comprising a “collective independence” 
(Martin-Iverson, 2014, p. 187), grounded in the values of both autonomy 
and community.
Furthermore, zines have been presented as encompassing a democratic 
and participatory ideal, possessing an experimental spirit and politicising 
infuence, and holding a transformative potential (Fletcher, 2017). This 
democratic and participatory ideal relates to how “[h]istorically, zines 
have been an underground way for marginalised communities to record 
their stories, share information and organize” (French & Curd, 2022, 
p. 78). Indeed, this was in part my rationale for deciding to use participant￾created zine pages in addition to interviews in my research with older 
punk women as a means of ‘raising their voices’ amidst academic work 
which had otherwise marginalised them. This participatory ideal indicates, 
perhaps unsurprisingly(!), that zines are well suited as a method to be uti￾lised if engaging in research which seeks to be grounded in a participatory 
ethos. As Ptolomey (2020) notes, zines can be a medium for agency, and 
this sits particularly well too with such an ethos and can be a means of 
democratising the research process (Edwards & Brannelly, 2017). 
Returning to zines’ democratic ideal, their capacity to be ‘multimodal’ 
(Ptolomey, 2020) opens up opportunities for a range of participants to 
engage in zine making. They do not, for example, require artistic ability 
nor do they rely on literacy. This can make zine making an adaptable and 
10 EXPLORING OLDER PUNK WOMEN’S CONCEPTUALISATION OF ‘PUNK’…180
accessible methodological tool, though it is recognised that the DIY ethic 
in punk has been criticised for its ableist advocation of being ‘open to 
all’ when this is not the case for everyone (Dale, 2008; Phoenix, 2020; 
Stewart & Way, 2023a, b).
Zines in the Context of Research
Qualitative research is increasingly utilising creative and participatory 
methods, exploring new and innovative ways to engage participants in 
research projects and moving to research being done with participants 
rather than being done to them. Zines, when used in the context of 
research, can be understood as a creative method, and, depending on how 
zines are used, they can also be seen as a participatory method. It is this 
difference I will discuss frst in this section on zines in the context of 
research.
In considering zines as creative and/or participatory methods, I draw 
here upon a distinction I have used elsewhere (Way, 2017) in which I dis￾tinguish between ‘zines as resource’ and ‘zines as creation’ when discuss￾ing zines in the context of research. ‘Zines as resource’ refers to when 
zines are treated as secondary data with pre-existing zines being used by 
the researcher and analysed (e.g., through a content analysis, textual anal￾ysis and so forth). Red Chidgey’s (2013) work concerning young wom￾en’s zines and feminist memory uses zines in this way, for example. ‘Zines 
as creation’, on the other hand, treats zines as primary data more so than 
secondary. Zines in this context are produced as a part of research (e.g., 
they did not exist prior to the research). Katharine Houpt et al.’s (2016) 
work which involved zine making with older adults in nursing homes 
would be an example of ‘zines as creation’.
Undoubtedly, both of these approaches entail zines being understood 
as a creative method; however, this distinction should make clear the 
potential for zines to be used as a participatory method too if taking a 
‘zines as creation’ approach. This approach of utilising zine making as a 
part of research has increased in prominence as a methodological tool 
amongst social researchers, though still remaining an area fruitful for 
development, and it is this approach to zines which I focus upon in this 
chapter. I will consider some of the existing literature relevant to ‘zines as 
creation’ next.
L. WAY181
Zines as Creation
Where a ‘zines as creation’ approach can be identifed, this often concerns 
zines being made as a part of an in-person or online ‘zine workshop’. 
Ptolomey’s (2020) research concerning disabled young women’s everyday 
lives and imagined futures, for example, used zine-making workshops with 
the individually produced zines then used as a precursor to interviews with 
participants—these interviews then involved some refection on the zine 
the participant made as well as other questions pertaining to the research’s 
empirical focus. Creating individual zines whilst in a shared space with 
others also creating zines can also be found in research by Lupton and 
Watson (2021) and Gray et al. (2021) (with, in this case, the shared space 
being an online one). The organisers of the ‘Welfare Imaginaries’ work￾shop series also took such an approach, and, additionally, they then col￾lated the zine pages together with text from themselves to produce a 
fnished zine which was made available online (Welfare Imaginaries, 2022).
Where a ‘zines as creation’ approach has been taken, this has not just 
entailed participant-created zines/zine pages being treated as data and 
analysed but also the process of their creation and the ‘afterlives’ of the 
zines themselves, and zines’ capacity for participation and collaboration 
has been drawn upon by researchers. Zine workshops, therefore, can be a 
place for this collaboration to be realised. The Covid Realities (2022) 
research team, for example, carried out remote feldwork during the pan￾demic and subsequent lockdown, and, in addition to other creative and 
participatory methods, they facilitated online zine-making workshops 
with their participants. After participants had created zine pages, the 
researchers ran an additional workshop with them concerning how to 
present and organise the fnal zine itself. Such an approach has also been 
used by the ‘Researchers don’t cry’ project (2022), whereby online work￾shops making zines are run with participants before a ‘sharing symposium’ 
for participants to share creations and refect on the process. Such collab￾orative zines can go beyond the call-out for submissions approach which 
has been utilised within the zine community (by which a call is put out for 
submissions which the organiser then collates and distributes) and can 
involve a ‘back and forth’ process between participants and researcher(s), 
the exact nature of which can be shaped by whether the workshops are 
online or in-person, and demonstrate how “the act of creative making is 
not simply a medium to facilitate or communicate research fndings: it is a 
research generation practice in itself” (Lupton & Watson, 2021, p. n.p).
10 EXPLORING OLDER PUNK WOMEN’S CONCEPTUALISATION OF ‘PUNK’…182
Concerning the afterlives of zines mentioned above, some research has 
considered not just what zines can ‘do’ for those creating them but also 
for those engaging with them thereafter. Houpt et al.’s (2016) research, 
for example, concerned the creation of zines with nursing home commu￾nity members (in-person), with these zines becoming a way for the partici￾pants to share their experiences and ideas with other nursing home 
members and staff. Furthermore, they took their collaboratively created 
zine ‘on tour’ to conferences and festivals to share these ideas with the 
public and professionals more widely, making their voices heard and offer￾ing alternative narratives concerning ageing. This refects a belief that 
zines can be a form of social action and have the capacity to enact change. 
In a similar vein, zine workshops (albeit this time online) have been uti￾lised more recently in online spaces as a feminist response to COVID-19 
(Gray et al., 2021). When discussing the ethos of zines earlier in this chap￾ter, their capacity for providing marginalised communities with a voice was 
noted, and part of zines’ increasing use as a creative and participatory 
method comes from their potential for breaking down traditional 
researcher/participant hierarchies and providing visibility for those often 
marginalised in academic research (Gray et  al., 2021; Ramdarshan 
Bold, 2017).
Zine Making with Older Punk Women
My use of zine making with older punk women formed a smaller aspect of 
a larger research study which utilised qualitative interviewing in exploring 
their construction and maintenance of punk identities. In the research, my 
plan was for participant-created zine pages to supplement the interviews I 
was already carrying out with them. This plan was adapted as the research 
progressed and what follows now is an overview of that process.
My original plan for the participant-created zine pages was that this 
would be an additional ask of those who participated in an interview. 
When I was recruiting interview participants for the research, then, I 
would explain that they would be invited to create to create a zine page on 
‘what being punk means to them’ after the interview. Out of my twenty￾two research participants, only two took up the invitation to create and 
submit a zine page. Refecting on this, there were some possible reasons 
for this low uptake. Firstly, some of the participants said they were not 
familiar with zines and what they were and that whilst they’d happily take 
part in an interview, they did not want to make a zine page. I had wrongly 
L. WAY183
assumed then that punk women would know what a zine was and had not 
built in any explanation of what a zine was as a part of the information 
provided to them. This may have been a refection of my insider posi￾tion—zines were something I was familiar with because of my involve￾ment in punk, for example, and therefore I had wrongly assumed them as 
part of some kind of punk subcultural knowledge. The other potential 
reason for participants’ low uptake was the extra effort being required. 
Many participants, for example, commented on how they would not have 
time to create a zine page.
Wanting to still utilise zine pages, I adapted my original plan and 
decided to branch out the invitation to create a zine page beyond the 
interview participants. I created a ‘call out’ asking any women who identi￾fed as punk over the age of thirty, advertising this in the same way as I had 
done for the initial calls for interview participants (through social media, 
relevant online forums etc.). In addition to the two submissions from the 
women within my research sample, I received six further contributions. 
Participants were left to decide for themselves whether to include a name 
(real or otherwise) on their page. I collated these into a zine which I pho￾tocopied, sending copies out to the contributors and making copies avail￾able at a local zine fair. Sending copies back to the contributors was 
understood as a way of ‘giving back’ and celebrating their combined 
efforts in creating the zine.
Thematic Analysis of the Zine Pages: Initial Findings
The zine pages the research participants created were not analysed along￾side the interviews as originally hoped or planned for during my PhD; in 
fact, the analysis of the zine pages was paused during my doctorate for 
several reasons, and I recently returned to this, a few years later. Currently, 
my analysis is concerned with coding the zine pages for themes which 
emerged from the interviews I carried out with older punk women. As the 
zine pages were proposed as a method to supplement the interviews with 
older punk women, the approach to analysis thus far has been to consider 
them thematically as to the extent their themes mirrored or differed to the 
fndings based on the interview data. My current focus is on the text pre￾sented on the zine pages the women created, omitting one of the pages in 
the analysis here as it featured an image and no text. Beyond this initial 
analysis (and this chapter), I plan to conduct greater open coding of the 
zine pages as well as exploring textual analysis. The interview data had 
10 EXPLORING OLDER PUNK WOMEN’S CONCEPTUALISATION OF ‘PUNK’…184
highlighted a commonality amongst the women I spoke with concerning 
how punk was conceptualised as a ‘state of mind’, comprising of particular 
‘punk values’ (Way, 2020, 2021). I drew upon these as the themes guiding 
my initial analysis of the zine pages and I discuss this in greater detail now.
Punk is a ‘State of Mind’
All the zine pages comprising of text spoke to this notion of them associat￾ing particular values with punk (detailed further below), implying, then, 
that punk could comprise a mindset or set of beliefs which underpin 
behaviour. Two pages were more explicit in presenting this understanding 
of punk as being a ‘state of mind’. One of the participants wrote on their 
page how punk was “more than just studs on your jacket and safety pins in 
your ears”, that it was “not just about music” and that punk was “a way of 
life”, for example. This speaks as well to how punk can be conceptualised 
through comparisons to that which it is not. This emphasis on punk not
just being about dress and/music also emerged in my interviews with 
older punk women (Way, 2020) and could be indicative of an internalisa￾tion of punkness as one ages, or a demonstration of subcultural knowledge 
(by virtue of knowing what punk is and is not). My analysis of the inter￾view data revealed four key punk values—subversion, DIY, community 
and political consciousness—and I will consider this now in relation to the 
participant-created zine pages.
Punk Value 1: Subversion
I frstly draw upon here the way subversion was differently conceptualised 
in the interviews with older punk women to situate this ‘punk value’ in the 
participant-created zine pages. Amongst the interview data, the conceptu￾alisation of subversion differed in terms of the source of the power/
authority that the subversion was aimed at—this source could be under￾stood as wider/mainstream society, which was more commonly the case, 
but one participant also understood punk ‘others’ as the source (Way, 
2020). There was potentially one example of the latter too amongst the 
zine pages (see Fig.  10.1)—in this zine page the author, for example, 
talked about being in a feminist punk band and placed an emphasis on 
women being capable of ‘doing it themselves’, with this used in contrast 
to experiences of sexism from men in the music scene.
L. WAY185
Fig. 10.1 Zine page by Nina N
More common, however, was this idea of wider/mainstream society 
being the source of the power/authority that the subversion was aimed at. 
One zine author felt punk was about “challenging norms”, for example 
(and norms are commonly accepted ways of being/doing), another con￾structed this idea of speaking out against the “status quo”, whilst a third 
zine author felt punk was to “dress differently, answer back”.
10 EXPLORING OLDER PUNK WOMEN’S CONCEPTUALISATION OF ‘PUNK’…186
Punk Value 2: DIY
The example above also alludes to the collective aspect of DIY—“it made 
me feel welcomed and encouraged to be involved”. Whilst the collective 
was not explicitly always spoken about in the context of DIY across the 
zine pages, the overlapping value of community featured more heavily 
(which I will discuss in the next section). The way DIY was presented and 
understood by the zine page authors overlapped with how it had been 
conceptualised amongst the older punk women I interviewed. DIY 
involved being pro-active and taking individual responsibility. As Sam 
(one of my interview participants) had said, “if it’s not there and you want 
it, make it yourself” (Way, 2020), and near on these very words featured 
on one of the created zine pages—“if it doesn’t exist, make it!” (see REM’s 
zine page, Fig. 10.2). The use of this ambiguous ‘it’ or ‘things’ by several 
zine page participants could be all encompassing—moving away from 
some conceptualisations of DIY which have been largely tied up with the 
context of music (e.g., Hannerz, 2015; O’Hara, 1999; Martin-Iverson 
2014). For my participants, DIY could be spoken about in the context of 
music, but it could also be related to other things too, such as craft and 
this link between DIY and craft (and punk) has been evidenced elsewhere 
too (including, for example, Hackney, 2013; Wallace, 2014).
Punk Value 3: Community
Community can align with collectivity, and therefore be bounded up with 
the DIY value—this can be seen, for example, with the zine page author 
who wrote that punk meant to them “Team work to change the world”. 
The sense of helping others could also be demonstrated—one zine page 
author wrote, “I have chosen a career which will always be tough and I 
will never be rich, but I know I am trying to help people who need it”, 
also suggesting how punk values can be exuded through the nature of the 
work one does or how punk might shape educational/employment 
choices. This was something found too in the interviews with older punk 
women. One interview participant, Ces, for example, spoke of how her 
punk had contributed to her wishing to work in a job which allowed her 
to help others, and she rejected the idea of a vocation being merely for 
monetary gain. This rejection of pursuing work to ‘get rich’ was empha￾sised by a number of interview participants.
L. WAY187
Fig. 10.2 Zine page by REM
Relevant to this theme of community too is ‘skill sharing’, which one 
zine page author referred to (see Fig. 10.3), having this as one of their 
words they had representing what punk meant to them. Again, this can 
overlap with DIY—sharing skills as a part of collectively doing things for 
yourselves, making things happen, for example. Though not exclusive to 
them, skill sharing can be an important aspect of and practice within anar￾chist, DIY and/or punk communities (Hemphill & Leskowitz, 2013; 
Lohman & Pearce, 2021; Martin-Iverson, 2018; Shantz, 2012).
10 EXPLORING OLDER PUNK WOMEN’S CONCEPTUALISATION OF ‘PUNK’…188
Fig. 10.3 Zine page by Anon 2
Punk Value 4: Political Consciousness 
The relationship between punk and politics was conveyed in several ways 
by the women I interviewed, and there were overlaps between this and the 
participant-created zine pages. For example, the idea that politics was built 
into punk music through songs/lyrics which expressed particular ideas/
L. WAY189
views and the feeling that punk’s political component came from the 
music, rather than being part of punk more broadly as a state of mind. 
One of the zine page authors conveyed this idea of punk music itself pro￾viding political awareness and/or education, writing that they protested 
because “punk opened their eyes”, citing a punk band, The Clash, as ini￾tially prompting this (see Fig. 10.4).
More prevalent, however, was the implicature that politics was just 
built into and part of a broader punk ethos, demonstrated, for example, 
by stand-alone words or phrases used by participants on their zine pages 
in response to what punk meant to them. Whilst a few zine authors 
referred to feminism and one to anarchism, it was more common for 
more generalised political affliations to be made which could refect a 
dislike of punks towards labelling and categorisation (Way, 2020). These 
more generalised political references commonly linked punk with 
Fig. 10.4 Zine page from Anon 3
10 EXPLORING OLDER PUNK WOMEN’S CONCEPTUALISATION OF ‘PUNK’…190
fghting social injustice, for example anti-racist views, and environmental 
issues/animal rights also featured. This was the case too in my interviews 
with older punk women. One potential difference between the interview 
data and the zine pages, however, was the greater reference to feminism 
amongst the zine pages. If working on the basis that those who created 
zine pages had an existing knowledge of and/or involvement in zine 
making, then they may have come to this through riotgrrrl, which would 
explain the greater connections to feminism though this is very much a 
personal musing at this stage.
Finding Ageing Within Zine Pages
Whilst the prompt given to those creating the zine pages (of ‘what does 
punk mean to you’) lent itself well to the creations being analysed in terms 
of punk values, ‘fnding ageing’ amongst the zine pages proved more dif￾fcult. This highlighted a faw on my part in setting up the zines as a meth￾odological tool, particularly in the context of my research which sought to 
explore temporality and ageing in relation to the construction and main￾tenance of punk identities. Amending the prompt to ‘what does punk 
mean to you as an older punk woman’ might have achieved this and cap￾tured further relevant insights.
However, there were some insights relevant to ageing and time. Earlier, 
I spoke of this notion of punkness being internalised, and one of the zine 
page authors spoke directly to this internalisation of punk values over time 
(see Fig. 10.5), something found too in my interviews with older punk 
women (Way, 2020) and which has also been found in other research con￾cerning older punks (Andes, 2002; Bennett, 2006). There was also the 
idea of punk values being negotiated alongside responsibilities that adult￾hood might present or the expectations of new roles—as one participant 
wrote: “But now I’m an adult with responsibilities. I am a parent and 
therefore a role model. Sometimes my fuck you attitude has to be put 
aside” (Fig. 10.6).
My interviews with older punk women offered weight to a social con￾struction view of ageing, presenting, in some cases, this notion of “you’re 
as young as you feel” (Way, 2020). There can be a role for punk in such 
constructions, and this was evidenced too in one of the zine pages whereby 
L. WAY191
Fig. 10.5 Zine page by Anon 1 
the participant wrote: “Punk helped me grow up, but it’s also keeping me 
young”. This could speak to the nostalgia sometimes felt by older punk 
women when punk has featured in their lives since their teenage (or pre￾teenage) years or how punk offers a way to resist societal, often gendered, 
expectations of ageing (Way, 2020).
10 EXPLORING OLDER PUNK WOMEN’S CONCEPTUALISATION OF ‘PUNK’…192
Fig. 10.6 Zine page by Nat
Methodological Reflections on Using ‘Zines
as Creation’
My methodological refections are a mixture of refection noted at the 
time of my doctoral research and refections now, some years later, when 
returning to the zine pages for analysis. This ‘distance’ and time away 
L. WAY193
from them no doubt shaped my thoughts, potentially this distance allowed 
for stronger critical refection, and I recognise too how my research expe￾riences since my doctorate and the subsequent use of zine making with 
research participants (this time, young fathers) will have contributed to 
my thinking through zines methodologically. I group these refections 
around some of the aspects of the zine ethos discussed earlier in this chap￾ter, namely their democratic and participatory ideal, their DIY ethic, and 
the transformative potential of zines. However, I do recognise the over￾lapping nature of some of these.
Zines’ Democratic and Participatory Ideal
By default, a ‘zines as creation’ approach entails zines being utilised as a 
participatory research method (I would argue that the same cannot neces￾sarily be said when a ‘zines as a resource’ approach is taken, however). 
Taking a ‘zines as creation’ approach allows research to be done with
rather than on participants, with participation enacted through the making 
of a zine/zine page(s). Refecting on how I used zine making with older 
punk women; however, it is evident there can be different levels of partici￾pation, and this becomes even more so evident when comparing my 
approach to some of the research examples I highlighted earlier in this 
chapter. This opens up questions concerning the degree to which, then, I 
was democratising the research process through the use of a participatory 
tool such as zines. My reliance on the use of zines to enact the participa￾tory ideal in my research should be problematised and greater consider￾ation of how a participatory approach could have been enacted across the 
research process in such cases would be needed.
Though the focus of the zine page was pre-determined (with a prompt 
question provided to the participants), this single prompt question allowed 
the content direction to be left fairly open for the participants. In addition 
to this, participants could (feasibly) have used whatever materials they 
wished or format they wanted when creating their zine pages. For the 
most part, the zine page authors used typed text, but others used hand￾written text, collage, drawings and/or a more ‘cut and stick’ aesthetic (see 
Fig. 10.7). This freedom might not have been realised to the same degree 
potentially had the zine making taken place during an in-person workshop 
with materials provided. There is also the element of time here too. Zine 
workshops often entail zines/zine pages being made ‘in the moment’, 
whereas my approach involved participants having a fairly extended period 
of time to work on their pages (a couple of months in most cases). This 
10 EXPLORING OLDER PUNK WOMEN’S CONCEPTUALISATION OF ‘PUNK’…194
Fig. 10.7 Zine page by Suzyska
provided time also could have meant participants could ‘source’ things for 
their zines, be it materials or otherwise. As well as being relevant to how 
participation is enacted, this speaks as well to the DIY ethic of zines which 
I will turn to next.
L. WAY195
Zines’ DIY Ethic
As discussed earlier, DIY can be conceptualised as being about individual 
agency and/or autonomy as well as about people doing things collectively, 
potentially to enact change. My approach for using zines with older punk 
women might indeed be seen as focused upon the participants’ agency and 
autonomy (in ways discussed in the section above) but the collective aspect 
needs further consideration.
As detailed earlier in this chapter, my approach for making this collab￾orative zine with older punk women entailed a call for submissions with 
the submitted pages then collated by myself, photocopied and distributed. 
This way of making a group zine ‘at a distance’ (e.g., not in a face-to-face 
zine-making workshop) is often used within the zine community,2 but, at 
the time of doing my PhD research, academic consideration of zine mak￾ing with participants ‘at a distance’ was largely absent. This has developed 
however far more now, largely prompted by researchers adapting to online 
and/or remote methods because of lockdown/pandemic, and, whilst still 
in its infancy, there is now greater methodological consideration of group 
zine making ‘at a distance’ (as demonstrated in my earlier review of litera￾ture). These examples offer excellent methodological approaches in how 
to facilitate collaborative zines, making use of online conference calling 
facilities and building in processes which allow group refection and cre￾ation more so than that which was achieved in my own research. This 
certainly gives food for thought concerning how I might do things differ￾ently in order to ensure greater collaboration and sense of collectivity.
Zines’ Transformative Potential
A great deal of my rationale for researching with older punk women was 
recognising them as having been marginalised previously in empirical 
work concerning punk and subcultures more broadly, and I aimed to con￾tribute towards their increased visibility in academic discussions. This sat 
well with the transformative potential of zines but the degree to which the 
zine creation and sharing contributed to any such transformation needs to 
be considered. In Houpt et al.’s (2016) work involving collaborative zine 
making and sharing to challenge ageism and provide counter narratives of 
2Penfght Zine Distro, for example, has a dedicated page to such ‘calls for entries’, and the 
International Women’s Day Zine 2020 is an example of a zine collated in such a way.
10 EXPLORING OLDER PUNK WOMEN’S CONCEPTUALISATION OF ‘PUNK’…196
nursing home experiences, it was noted that such changes cannot be made 
all at once, yet making the participants’ voices heard was a step in the right 
direction. This too could be said with my own research, that whilst it 
would be unfeasible to think that one group zine could correct the mar￾ginalisation of older punk women’s voices, it can be at least seen as a step 
in the right direction.
The transformative potential of zines is aligned with their long history 
as a social action tool (Houpt et al., 2016) but it is also important to con￾sider this transformative potential and action on an individual level. Some 
argue that engaging in participatory research can be empowering for those 
participating (Titterton & Smart, 2008) so it could be that being involved 
in research focused on their experiences and being listened to left partici￾pants feeling empowered. Indeed, creating their zine pages could have 
had a benefcial personal, emotive aspect (this was the case for the partici￾pants involved in Houpt et al.’s, 2016 zine making). However, it is diff￾cult to gauge this without any refection from the older punk women 
involved in the zine making in the context of my own research. It would 
have been benefcial to have built in some refection on how the partici￾pants who created zine pages found taking part in their creation to con￾sider this aspect of the transformative potential further.
Conclusions
This chapter has refected on the use of a ‘zines as creation’ approach in 
the context of research with older punk women, drawing out some initial 
analysis concerning what these pages might reveal about what punk means 
to these participants. Initially, there is much overlap with some of the fnd￾ings from interviews with older punk women, highlighting still how punk 
can be constructed as a ‘state of mind’ or set of beliefs. Critical refection 
on this process of zine creating as a part of research contributes to ongo￾ing academic learning concerning the use of zines as a participatory meth￾odological tool, highlighting some potential tensions between maintaining 
the ethos of zines and negotiating the research process itself. Initial analy￾sis of the zine pages did require some ‘searching’ for that which could 
offer insights concerning ageing/temporality, but it remains to be seen 
what further analysis will bring.
L. WAY197
References
Andes, L. (2002). Growing Up Punk: Meaning and Commitment Careers in a 
Contemporary Youth Subculture. In J. S. Epstein (Ed.), Youth culture: Identity 
in a Postmodern World (pp. 212–231). Blackwell.
Bennett, A. (2006). Punk’s Not Dead: The Continuing Signifcance of Punk Rock 
for an Older Generation of Fans. Sociology, 40(2), 219–235.
Bennett, A. (2012). Dance Parties, Lifestyle and Strategies for Ageing. In 
A. Bennett & P. Hodkinson (Eds.), Ageing and Youth Cultures: Music, Style 
and Identity (pp. 95–104). Berg.
Bennett, A. (2013). Music, Style and Aging: Growing Old Disgracefully? Temple 
University Press.
Bennett, A., & Hodkinson, P. (2012). Ageing and Youth Cultures. Music, Style and 
Identity. Berg.
Chidgey, R. (2013). Reassess Your Weapons: The Making of Feminist Memory in 
Young Women’s Zines. Women’s History Review, 22(4), 658–672.
Covid Realities. (2022). Covid Realities—Our Zines. Retrieved January 2, 2023, 
from https://covidrealities.org/zines
Dale, P. (2008). It Was Easy, it Was Cheap, so what? Reconsidering the DIY 
Principle of Punk and Indie Music. Journal of Popular Music History, 
3(2), 171–193.
Edwards, R., & Brannelly, T. (2017). Approaches to Democratising Qualitative 
Research Methods. Qualitative Research., 17(3), 271–277.
Fletcher, N. (2017). Designing a Space for Thoughtful Voices: Aligning the Ethos 
of Zines with Young-driven Philosophical Inquiry. Journal of Unschooling and 
Alternative Learning, 11(11), 53–75.
French, J., & Curd, E. (2022). Zining as Artful Method: Facilitating Zines as 
Participatory Action Research Within Art Museums. Action Research, 
20(1), 77–95.
Gray, E. M., Pollitt, J., & Blaise, M. (2021). Between Activism and Academia: 
Zine-making as a Feminist Response to COVID-19. Gender and Education, 
34(8), 887–905.
Griffn, N. (2012). Gendered Performance and Performing Gender in the DIY 
Punk and Hardcore Music Scene. Journal of International Women’s Studies, 
13(2), 66–81.
Grimes, M. (2016). From Protest to Resistance: British Anarcho-punk ‘Zines 
(1980–1984) as Sites of Resistance and Symbols of Defance. In M. Dines & 
M.  Worley (Eds.), The Aesthetic of Our Anger. Anarcho-Punk, Politics and 
Music. Minor Compositions.
Gurney, C.  M. (1997). “…half of me was satisfed”: Making Sense of Home 
Through Episodic Ethnographies. Women’s Studies International Forum, 
20(3), 373–386.
10 EXPLORING OLDER PUNK WOMEN’S CONCEPTUALISATION OF ‘PUNK’…198
Hackney, F. (2013). Quiet Activism and the New Amateur. Design and Culture, 
5(2), 169–193.
Hannerz, E. (2015). Performing Punk. Palgrave Macmillan.
Hebdige, D. (1998). Subculture: The Meaning of Style. Routledge.
Hemphill, D., & Leskowitz, S. (2013). DIY Activists: Communities of Practice, 
Cultural Dialogism, and Radical Knowledge Sharing. Adult Education 
Quarterly, 63(1), 57–77.
Houpt, K., Balkin, L. A., Broom, R. H., Roth, A. G., & Selma. (2016). Anti￾Memoir: Creating Alternate Nursing Home Narratives Through Zine Making. 
Art Therapy, 33(3), 128–137.
Leblanc, L. (2002). Pretty in Punk: Girls’ Gender Resistance in a Boys’ Subculture. 
Rutgers University Press.
Lohman, K., & Pearce, R. (2021). SEVEN: Queering Community Development 
in DIY Punk Spaces. In Arts, Culture and Community Development. Policy 
Press. Retrieved January 12, 2023, from https://bristoluniversitypressdigital.
com/view/book/97814473405
Lupton, D., & Watson, A. (2021). Towards More-Than-Human Digital Data 
Studies: Developing Research-Creation Methods. Qualitative Research, 
21(4), 463–480.
Martin-Iverson, S. (2014). Running in Circles: Performing Values in the bandung 
‘do it yourself’ Hardcore Scene. Ethnomusicology Forum, 23(2), 184–207.
Martin-Iverson, S. (2018). The DIY Ethic and the Politics of Value in the 
Indonesian Hardcore Punk Scene. In A.  Bennett & P.  Guerra (Eds.), DIY 
Cultures and Underground Music Scenes. Routledge.
O’Hara, C. (1999). The Philosophy of Punk: More than Noise! AK Press.
Oakley, A. (1998). Gender, Methodology and People’s Ways of Knowing: Some 
Problems with Feminism and the Paradigm Debate in Social Science. Sociology, 
32(4), 707–731.
Phoenix, R. (2020). DIY as Privilege: A Manifesto. Rough Trade Books.
Ptolomey, A. (2020). “It made us all kind of feel like we were on the same level 
and that if we’re sharing stuff you’re sharing stuff too”: Exploring Zine-making 
as a Creative Feminist Research Method. University of Glasgow Sociology 
Seminar Series, April 23.
Ramdarshan Bold, M. (2017). Why Diverse Zines Matter: A Case Study of the 
People of Color Zines Project. Pub Res Q, 33, 215–228.
‘Researchers don’t cry’ Project. (2022). Researchers Don’t Cry?! Retrieved 
January 2, 2023, from https://researchersdontcry.wordpress.com
Roman, L. (1988). Intimacy, Labor and Class: Ideologies of Feminine Sexuality in 
the Punk Slam Dance. In L. Roman, L. Christian-Smith, & E. Ellsorth (Eds.), 
Becoming Feminine: The Politics of Popular Culture (pp.  143–184). The 
Falmer Press.
L. WAY199
Shantz, J. (2012). Spaces of Learning: The Anarchist Free Skool. In R. H. Haworth 
(Ed.), Anarchist Pedagogies. Collective Actions, Theories, and Critical Refections 
on Education. PM Press.
Stewart, F., & Way, L. (2023a). Beyond Boundaries: Disability, DIY and Punk 
Pedagogies. Research in Education, 115(1), 11–28. ISSN 0034-5237.
Stewart, F., & Way, L. (2023b). Punk Pedagogies in Practice: Disruptions and 
Connections. Intellect.
Titterton, M., & Smart, H. (2008). Can Participatory Research be a Route to 
Empowerment? A Case Study of a Disadvantaged Scottish Community. 
Community Development Journal, 43(1), 52–64.
Wallace, J. (2014). Handmade 2.0: Women, DIY Networks and the Cultural 
Economy of Craft. PhD thesis, Concordia University.
Way, L. (2017). Here’s Some Scissors, Here’s Some Glue, Now Go Make a Zine! 
A Teacher’s Refections on Zine-Making in the Classroom. In G.  Smith, 
M. Dines, & T. Parkinson (Eds.), Punk Pedagogies. Routledge.
Way, L. (2020). Punk, Gender and Ageing. Just Typical Girls? Emerald Publishers.
Way, L. (2021). Punk is Just a State of Mind. Exploring What Punk Means to 
Older Punk Women. The Sociological Review., 69(1), 107–122.
Welfare Imaginaries. (2022). Welfare Imaginaries. Retrieved January 2, 2023, 
from https://welfareimaginaries.wordpress.com
Worley, M. (2015). Punk, Politics and British (fan)zines, 1976–84: ‘While the 
world was dying, did you wonder why?’. History Workshop Journal, 
79(1), 76–106.
10 EXPLORING OLDER PUNK WOMEN’S CONCEPTUALISATION OF ‘PUNK’…© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 201
Switzerland AG 2024
L. Way, M. Grimes (eds.), Punk, Ageing and Time, Palgrave Studies 
in the History of Subcultures and Popular Music, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47823-9_11
CHAPTER 11
Working With/In: An Exploration of Queer 
Punk Time and Space in Collaborative 
Archival Workshops
Kirsty Fife
Introduction
The last decades have highlighted a growing interest in the histories of 
punk subcultures, demonstrated through the publication of memoirs 
(Albertine, 2015; Brownstein, 2015; Gordon, 2015; Grace, 2016) oral 
history books (McNeil & McCain, 2016; Robb & Craske, 2006; Warfeld 
et al., 2021), exhibitions of music heritage (Punk: 1976–1978 at British 
Library and Punk at Museum of London) and the deposit of archival 
materials such as the Riot Grrrl Collection at Fales Library (Keenan & 
Darms, 2013). However, tensions emerge when punk moves into the 
museum, archive and/or history books. Punk exhibitions have been criti￾cised as overly nostalgic (Press Association, 2016) and for erasing the con￾tributions of women and people of colour (Bulut, 2016). The writing of 
K. Fife (*) 
Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester, UK
e-mail: k.ffe@mmu.ac.uk202
histories of music subcultures has similarly been criticised for centring 
whiteness, affuence, commercial success and masculinity (Nguyen, 2015; 
Sheffeld, 2016; Strong, 2011; Wiedlack, 2015), in turn erasing, minimis￾ing and pushing out the contributions of individuals from marginalised 
backgrounds (Lohman & Raghunath, 2019).
The extensive pushing back against the historicisation and curation of 
punk by outsider professionals could lead us to logically conclude that 
there is a fundamental misalignment between punk cultures and heritage. 
However, community-led and grassroots archival projects have also devel￾oped across the past decades. These include online archives such as 
Manchester Digital Music Archive and Birmingham Music Archive, and 
subcultural collections in institutions including the UCLA punk archive 
and the Riot Grrrl Collection at Fales Library, which have been instigated 
by information professionals with pre-existing background within com￾munities. These initiatives demonstrate the positive impact and progres￾sive potential of alternative and grassroots forms of archiving. Caswell 
et al. describe
The transformative affective potential of community archives as spaces for 
members of marginalised communities to represent themselves and learn 
about their histories. (Caswell et al., 2017, p. 5)
Community-led initiatives emerge from contexts which share the par￾ticipatory politics of queer punk communities, and therefore can be posi￾tioned as aligned with these communities.
This chapter draws from my doctoral research, which explores methods 
for documenting and archiving current or recently active UK-based DIY 
music spaces (Fife, 2022). The analysis explores the facilitation of a docu￾mentation workshop in 2019 at Bent Fest, a queer punk festival based in 
London. Infuenced by Cooper’s work with “A Queer and Trans Fat 
Activist Timeline” (Cooper, 2012), this workshop utilised a roll of wallpa￾per, a pile of permanent markers and the audience of the festival to create 
a microhistory (Caswell & Mallick, 2014) of UK queer punk. The follow￾ing section contextualises this chapter within existing literature about DIY 
cultural and music heritage. After this I explore the methods used in the 
research project. The main body of the chapter divides into two subsec￾tions—frstly, a critical examination of the use of the timeline method and, 
secondly, an examination of the resulting source and what can be learnt 
about queer punk heritage from it.
K. FIFE203
The methodological dimensions of this chapter are shared to inform 
others beginning grassroots heritage projects. The analysis of the resulting 
archival source contributes to scholarship about the nature of queer punk 
historiography and heritage. By exploring both of these aspects in tandem, 
I seek to examine how grassroots forms of archival work can create more 
dialogic and representative archival sources which are in tune with rather 
than opposed to the politics of queer punk communities.
How Does Existing Scholarship Engage
with Archives of Music Cultures?
Academic examination of popular music heritage has fourished alongside 
an increased focus from heritage institutions. Bennett and Janssen describe 
this interest from heritage institutions as an acknowledgement of the 
“sociohistorical signifcance [of popular music] in a post-1945 context”. 
Popular music heritage can exist in many forms including temporary exhi￾bitions, heritage tours, permanent museums and the consecration of child￾hood homes of musicians (Bennett & Janssen, 2016, p.  2). Financial 
investment in popular music heritage projects by national funding bodies 
demonstrates awareness of “the crucial contributions that… [music] 
makes to both the UK’s economy and its social fabric” (Behr et  al., 
2014, p. 1).
Scholars have sought to understand the motivations which underpin 
the recognition of post-1945 music heritage in exhibitions and program￾ming. Leonard links the popular cultural turn in museum programming to 
“cultural policy agendas and government targets for museums aimed at 
facilitating greater social inclusion” (Leonard, 2010, p. 175). Robinson’s 
review of Punk London at the British Library situates the exhibition as one 
of the most popular free exhibitions in the organisation’s history 
(Robinson, 2018, p.  311), evidence of the audience appeal of popular 
music exhibitions. Although the success of recent exhibitions demon￾strates the value of popular music to national heritage institutions, 
researchers have identifed ways in which these initiatives can displace 
music communities through what De Cesari and Dimova refer to as “the 
heritagisation-and-gentrifcation nexus” (De Cesari & Dimova, 2019, 
p. 868). In reference to tensions around the development of creative cit￾ies, Ross describes how without appropriate consultation and dialogue “a 
city’s development initiatives risk counterproductively destroying the 
11 WORKING WITH/IN: AN EXPLORATION OF QUEER PUNK TIME…204
precise characteristics they are otherwise seeking to nourish, create, and, 
even, commodify” (Ross, 2017, pp. 32–33).
Members of music communities can beneft from popular music heri￾tage when projects are used to rebuild lost connections and historically 
dispersed networks (van der Hoeven, 2018, p.  215)—for example, the 
Manchester-based Excavating the Reno project involved an archaeological 
excavation which recovered artefacts from The Reno, a nightclub and 
community hub for mixed race youth in the 1970s (Pidd, 2017; Tailor, 
2019). The project and subsequent exhibition enabled the rebuilding of a 
dispersed community through surfacing and displaying previously lost 
heritage. Projects can also have a positive or transformative impact on the 
living conditions and socio-economic circumstances of community mem￾bers. In their exploration of popular music heritage initiatives within dein￾dustrialised cities, Cantillon et al. posit that grassroots projects can “resist 
some of the injustices impelled or compounded by deindustrialisation” 
and produce cultural justice outcomes through the (re)formation of 
archives, narratives and community networks (Cantillon et al., 2021, p. 85).
Community-led archival projects have also received attention in a clus￾ter of research infuenced by Bennett’s concept of “DIY preservationists” 
(Bennett, 2009, p.  475) and Roberts and Cohen’s models of self￾authorised and unauthorised heritage (Roberts & Cohen, 2014), which is 
derived from Smith’s formulation (Smith, 2006). The concepts of autho￾rised and self-authorised heritage inform research about fan-led and inde￾pendent community music archives (e.g. Baker, 2015b; Baker & Huber, 
2015; Collins & Long, 2015; Guthrie & Carlson, 2018; Long et  al., 
2017; Long, 2018). Baker uses the term “DIY institutions” to refer to
a group of popular music archives, museums and halls of fame that were 
founded by enthusiasts, run largely by volunteers and which exist outside 
the frame of authorised projects of national collecting and display. (Baker, 
2016, p. 173)
The traditional boundaries of the archive and practice of record-keeping 
are challenged by such cultural theorists, who situate record collectors, 
bootleg makers, reissue labels and tape collections as informal forms of 
heritage activity embedded within communities (Berg, 2018; Carlson, 
2018; Kwame Harrison, 2018; Maalsen & McLean, 2018).
Although queer punk is the subject of several sociological studies 
(Downes, 2010; Wiedlack, 2015), queer punk archives remain 
K. FIFE205
underexplored. Cantillon et al. identify queer music heritage as overlooked 
within the feld of popular music heritage (Cantillon et al., 2017, p. 3). 
This could be attributed to overemphasis on the cultural production of 
straight white men in punk and subcultural histories, which in turn ren￾ders queers marginal or invisible in turn (Halberstam, 2003, p.  319). 
Conversely, punk communities are also underexplored in examinations of 
queer archives (Brown, 2020; Lee, 2020; Sheffeld, 2016). Emerging 
analyses of queer punk identify informal and embodied forms of archival 
practice including tattooing (Rosenberg & Sharp, 2018) at work within 
queer punk communities. Examinations of fanzine networks in queer 
punk communities highlight the intersection of information, identity and 
community building (Fenster, 1993). These articles identify connections 
between queer punk and information, archival, and history practices, 
which would beneft from more intensive attention in scholarship. This 
chapter therefore addresses this gap by focusing on queer punk heritage 
through a sustained examination of one methodological intervention.
Making the Timeline
Methods
This project employed methods taken from action research and participa￾tory archival practice to develop and facilitate the workshop. Action 
research is defned by Bradbury as “a democratic and participative orienta￾tion to knowledge production” (Bradbury, 2015, p. 1). Emerging from 
research contexts located within workplace and community settings 
(Adelman, 1993), the development of the methodology was also informed 
by the development of the popular education movement associated with 
Paulo Freire (1972). By working with participants as co-producers of 
knowledge, action research can transform both the traditional power 
dynamics of researcher/participant relationships and the everyday lives of 
those involved in a research project.
In tandem with the development of community-led archives, which 
empowered communities to collect and facilitate access to their own his￾tories, participatory archival practice emphasises the importance of inter￾rogating and rebuilding archival processes (e.g. collecting, curating, 
cataloguing, arrangement, access and preservation) in more equitable 
ways (Allard & Ferris, 2015, p. 361). Participatory archival practitioners 
view the involvement of community members within the management of 
11 WORKING WITH/IN: AN EXPLORATION OF QUEER PUNK TIME…206
archives as a way to create “empowered narratives” (Shilton & Srinivasan, 
2007, p.  90) and to resist the othering of marginalised individuals in 
description, exhibition and interpretation of archival materials. This proj￾ect utilised action research to respond to a perceived problem through 
undertaking archival practice. Participatory methods informed the devel￾opment of an approach to archival work in my PhD, particularly through 
the critical interrogation of curatorial “expertise” and utilisation of 
community-led alternatives to traditional archival practices.
The following section evaluates how these methods affected the result￾ing archival source. To write up this analysis, I utilised my research diary 
as a data source, along with the timeline itself. The entries on the timeline 
were transcribed prior to the deposit of the object, and this transcription 
was subsequently coded using thematic analysis along with my 
research diary.
Reflections
Before refecting on the process of facilitating the workshop, I will intro￾duce the space in which the research was undertaken. Bent Fest was a queer 
punk festival that was active in London between 2014 and 2019. The 
2014 festival was held in Power Lunches (a small DIY music space in 
Dalston, which subsequently closed in 2015), and in DIY Space for 
London from 2015 to 2019. The festival was organised by a collective of 
UK-based cultural organisers and musicians, instigated by shared experi￾ences of exclusion, marginalisation and isolation within broader punk 
scenes. Each festival took place over a weekend in May of each year, and 
consisted of events including zine fairs, discussions, talks, gigs, club nights 
and karaoke. The collective produced a zine for each festival, which acted 
as an informal document of the people participating and performing as 
well as capturing/expressing the politics and motivations behind their/its 
organising. In 2019, the organising collective announced that the upcom￾ing festival would be the last that would happen in its current format, and 
that there were no immediate plans for successor events.
I had an established background in both the festival and broader 
UK-based queer, punk and DIY cultural networks. In prior iterations of 
the festival, I had performed in bands, spoken on panels and run daytime 
events (e.g. zine fairs) which happened in the duration of the festival. This 
positioned me as what Taylor refers to as an “intimate insider” (Taylor, 
2011) in this research context. My pre-existing relationship with 
K. FIFE207
organisers and peers meant that I was able to propose using the festival as 
an opportunity to test out documentation methods with relative conf￾dence that this would be well received. I liaised with the collective about 
using the daytime space of the festival to run a documentation/history 
making workshop. It was agreed that I would use the Saturday afternoon 
slot to run a group discussion and practical exercise to document memo￾ries of queer punk spaces.
The workshop was facilitated using a timeline mapping exercise which 
had been employed by other activists pursuing DIY ways of documenting 
their own community. These include Charlotte Cooper, who used the 
timeline format in the context of queer and trans-fat activism. Cooper ran 
workshops at international gatherings of activists, in which individuals 
could write their signifcant moments in fat activism on a timeline. As she 
writes of the workshop:
people talked and wrote, asking for clarifcation and discussing events they 
were simultaneously memorialising. It was like a dialogue between the past 
and the present, a statement of memory. (Cooper, 2012, p. 63)
In addition, community heritage researchers have adopted geographi￾cal mapping exercises in grassroots heritage settings. For example, Brett 
Lashua used collaborative mapping workshops to document the intangi￾ble heritage of Liverpool’s black community-led music social clubs in 
Liverpool throughout the 1980s and 1990s (Lashua, 2015, p. 55). Beate 
Peter utilised digital mapping in combination with oral histories of 
Manchester’s club scene to create the Lapsed Clubber Audio Map project 
(Peter, 2020). The Warzone Dialectogram zine project utilises graphic 
methods to document the history and space of the Warzone collective, in 
the face of the closure of a physical space due to gentrifcation (O’Donaghey, 
2020). The success of these grassroots initiatives informed the develop￾ment of this project.
The Bent Fest workshop aimed to create a record rather than collect 
what already existed, due to a perceived lack of documentary sources of 
queer punk. Queer and feminist theorists identify the absence or “haunt￾ings” of queer feminist pasts, who persist despite their absence in formal 
archival records (Chidgey, 2013; Cowan & Rault, 2014; Mitchell & 
McKinney, 2019). At the end of Watermelon Woman, a fctional docu￾mentary in which a protagonist attempts to fnd more about the history of 
a black, queer actress listed only as “the watermelon woman” in the 
11 WORKING WITH/IN: AN EXPLORATION OF QUEER PUNK TIME…208
credits, the audience is left with the quote “sometimes you have to create 
your own history” (Dunye, 1997). This sentiment aligns with the politics 
of community-led archives, who, as Caswell et al. write, are aware of “the 
urgent need to undertake… documentation before such stories are lost” 
(Caswell et al., 2016, p. 71).
With little resource to support the activity, we decided our timeline 
would be created using a roll of paper that I marked with a central line 
with annotations for each year from 1970 to 2019. By doing this, we were 
using everyday and familiar materials, which were accessible to peers in 
DIY cultures (paper and Sharpies or permanent markers). The workshop 
(a two-hour session which was advertised via the festival’s channels) was 
attended by a small group of participants. This session began with an 
introduction to my research project followed by a group discussion, which 
was recorded and later transcribed for data analysis. This part of the work￾shop felt unsuccessful despite producing data which was later incorporated 
into my PhD. As a facilitator, I felt uncomfortable doing what felt like 
“traditional” academic data collection activities (e.g. focus group inter￾views) in punk spaces. Rather than enabling me to have useful conversa￾tions with peers based on our shared histories, I instead felt that this 
method placed an unnecessarily formal frame on our discussion. Downes 
et al. describe feelings of
discomfort experienced [by DIY cultural researchers] in performing the 
researcher engaging participants in moments of thesis-orientated data col￾lection. (Downes et al., 2013, p. 116)
This early instance of discomfort led me to move away from discussion 
activities in later data collection during my doctoral research, instead 
adopting a mixture of creative methods and individual interviews to col￾lect data.
After the conclusion of the discussion, we began adding to the timeline 
as a group. The change in activity caused a shift in atmosphere, and the 
activity began to feel more sociable, creative and collaborative. As the 
workshop continued, more people began drifting into the room and the 
workshop developed a more informal and social nature, much more in line 
with the general atmosphere of a punk festival. The gradual shift into a 
more sociable space had a positive impact on the progression and purpose 
of the activity. Although this shift made it harder to monitor the “bound￾aries” of the research (e.g. who was participating and who was just 
K. FIFE209
chatting to a friend?), the activity began to blend into the festival with less 
perceived friction between formalised academic data collection and infor￾mal leisure time. In response to the issues of discomfort described in the 
preceding paragraph, Downes et al. suggest that researchers employ cre￾ative methods drawn from cultures to enable data generation within the 
“everyday life” of these communities (Downes et al., 2013, p. 117). The 
timeline exercise seemed to ft more comfortably within what was expected 
of the festival and felt more comfortable to facilitate than the discussion.
Following discussion with the rest of the Bent Fest organising collective 
after the conclusion of the small workshop, we decided to move the time￾line onto the wall of the gig space so that the documentation exercise 
could be contributed to by a wider variety of attendees. To accompany the 
timeline, I wrote some brief information about the research project and 
the intention to deposit the timeline at an archive following the festival. I 
left a stack of marker pens close to the timeline, and then left it alone for 
the rest of the event. I did this deliberately, to see whether people would 
interact with it differently without any guidance or the pressure of partici￾pating in a structured workshop. Over the course of the festival, people 
took to adding to the timeline naturally without any intervention from me 
or monitoring from the collective. It often happened in the breaks between 
bands, and people would often tell a friend to add something, so it became 
a natural group activity. The act of documenting became something which 
was just part of the rhythms of the space, existing alongside the music and 
the socialising and dancing, something to do and talk about around every￾thing else. The source that was created was a time and place specifc time￾line of things that happened, co-created by people who participated in or 
ran them.
In the context of historical geography, Ashmore et al. talk about the 
experience of “working-with” in archival processing. As they write:
Working-with the owner of an archival collection… offers alternative forms 
of communal knowledge formation which are worthy of further consider￾ation. The process of working-with, combining the physical graft of moving 
and discarding, intellectual work of evaluating, organising and making con￾nections, and emotional work of listening, discussing and reviewing particu￾lar objects can be productive. (Ashmore et al., 2012, p. 82)
By working collaboratively to create the timeline, we utilised the tem￾porary space of a queer punk festival to create an archival object. In a 
11 WORKING WITH/IN: AN EXPLORATION OF QUEER PUNK TIME…210
socio-economic context in which grassroots spaces are frequently forced 
to close (The Mayor of London’s Music Venues Taskforce, 2015), the act 
of documenting (even at a small scale) can feel like a small act of resistance 
against inevitable loss. Participants commented on the emotional nature 
of undertaking this work informally to me. We can situate these personal 
and emotional responses to the workshop and timeline activity as being 
connected to broader impulses to memorialise within music cultures, 
which Baker and Huber refer to as “the process of materialising their own 
experience and expertise through the collection, declaring and naming its 
importance” or “enacting memory” (Baker & Huber, 2015, p. 122).
The Archival Source
The preceding section of this chapter explored the facilitation of a timeline 
workshop at Bent Fest. This section shifts focus from the methods 
employed to the resulting source, and what can be learnt about the cul￾tural memory of queer punk through its examination. The following sub￾sections explore a series of three thematic categories of memory that were 
identifed during data analysis: creativity, space and place, and personal 
accounts of subcultural involvement. In each section, I provide illustrative 
examples from the timeline before using cultural theory to examine the 
role of each theme within queer punk subcultures.
In this exploration, I am infuenced by Halberstam’s ideas about the 
queer archive and specifcally archives of queer subcultures. Halberstam 
situates the archive as an “immaterial repository” that not only collates 
and curates material but ultimately constructs and underpins identity 
(Halberstam, 2005, p. 33). Much like archives, memory too is described 
by theorists as “under construction” by individuals, communities and 
technologies (Smit, 2020, p. 90). By examining the types of memory doc￾umented on the timeline, I identify and critically explore what experi￾ences, spaces and narratives are considered valuable and worthy of 
preservation through documentation within this community context.
Creativity
The frst category of memory identifed is creativity, by which I refer to the 
documentation of creative projects and collaborations. Examples include 
zines (Move Under Yr Own Power; Chemical Smile zine), podcasts and 
radio (DIY or Die), mixtapes (Hell Hath No Fury Records releases Vol. 3 
K. FIFE211
mixtape), and bands (Pink Grip; Mouth Full; Livid; Spook School; Cat 
Apostrophe; Irn Brunette; Killjoys; Jean Genet; Sister George). The pres￾ence of creative projects in the source speaks to the signifcance placed on 
cultural production by queer punk communities. Taylor’s examination of 
ageing LGBTQ individuals in queer subcultures also links queer tempo￾ralities to cultural production:
Queer time is not only a departure from and a critique of temporal hetero￾normativity, but it is also a form of temporality that invests heavily in, and 
places great value upon, cultural production and innovation. (Taylor, 
2010, p. 897)
Punk scholarship also explores the relationship between subcultural 
involvement and cultural production, identifying how cultural production 
enables communities to enact resistance against mainstream creative 
industries (Moore, 2007). Creative collaborations also “enhance subcul￾tural camaraderie, [allowing participants] to make friends and support 
them” (Moore, 2007, p. 451).
Cultural production through music is one way in which individuals are 
encouraged to participate in DIY music scenes (alongside, for example, 
putting on gigs or hosting touring bands). However, many of the result￾ing projects are short-lived with recorded releases published and circu￾lated within small communities. Therefore, few of these projects make it 
into archive collections unless the band achieves commercial success or 
critical acclaim. The writing down of individual projects on the timeline 
nonetheless demonstrates a motivation to remember and celebrate bands 
and collaborations. In an examination of zine culture, Zobl writes that 
self-publishers are motivated to make zines in order to carry forward lega￾cies and create “an alternative [to mainstream representation] that refects 
and resists their cultural devaluation” (Zobl, 2009, p. 5). The inclusion of 
creative projects allowed individuals to assign value to projects that were 
personally signifcant in creative journeys and resist the devaluation of 
work done by others.
Queer theorists have also situated creative practice and cultural produc￾tion as another form of record-keeping. Halberstam describes how cul￾tural producers “also play a big role in constructing queer genealogies and 
memories” (Halberstam, 2005, p. 170). In an article exploring the poetry 
of Langston Hughes and its relation to the very temporal spaces of Harlem 
queer nightlife, Vogel positions Hughes’ poetry as a record which
11 WORKING WITH/IN: AN EXPLORATION OF QUEER PUNK TIME…212
inscribes a queer time consciousness that is impossible to archive under the 
offcial regimes of documentation and verifcation. The queer time and 
space of the afterhours club, in other words, is archived in the line of the 
poem, if not at the library at Yale. (Vogel, 2006, p. 400)
In the context of queer punk, creative projects can enable the persis￾tence of cultural memory through the production of recorded outputs 
(e.g. cassettes, digital releases and artwork) and the use of referencing or 
linking to situate bands within legacies of queer cultural production (e.g. 
covers, acknowledgements, references in lyrics and visual materials). 
Similar motivations underpin critical analyses of sampling and remixing, 
which carry forward musical legacies that are otherwise not readily 
archived (Campbell, 2021; Ishmael et al., 2020). Outputs of creative proj￾ects, whilst not consciously positioned as such, often later become the 
evidence of activity and documentary material which continues beyond 
the short-term existence of the bands themselves.
Space and Place
The frst category of memory identifed through my analysis was space. 
Physical spaces were documented regularly on the timeline. These include 
music venues with a fxed (albeit still ultimately short-lived) physical loca￾tion—for example, Power Lunches and DIY Space for London, which 
were both London-based music venues. Participants also documented 
temporary uses of spaces, including squatting (“Dalston Lane queer 
squat”, “Funeral Parlour squat party anti-pride” and “Vauxhall Grove 
queer squat”) and house shows/parties (““Nundeath” house show at 
Colette’s house—frst Roseanne Bar show and Chaps, Universal Orders, 
Corey Orbison”). Regularly programmed temporary events represented 
included club nights (Homocrime, Unskinny Bop, Fuck Like Bunnies 
Club, Suck my Left One, Club Vaseline at The Garage), gig nights (Bloody 
Ice Cream, Queer Union gigs, “The Bakery queer matinees at Pullens 
Centre, Elephant and Castle”) and festivals (Queeruption, Bent Fest, 
Ladyfest, Get Bent). Individual gigs were also afforded signifcance 
(“Mouth Cull frst gig”, “Jean Genet gig”, “Limp Wrist play the 
Grosvenor”, “Sister George gigs at the Monarch”) as well as tours 
(“Huggy Bear and Bikini Kill joint UK tour” in 1993 and “Husbands/
Chaps/Drunk Granny UK tour’).
K. FIFE213
The earlier entries on the timeline indicate that temporary uses of spaces 
(through either hire of existing venues or the creative use of domestic 
spaces like squats or houses to host shows) was more common than the 
establishment of more permanent spaces (such as grassroots music spaces 
or social centres). The regular documentation of club nights, promoting 
collectives and temporary occupation of spaces, indicates that the subcul￾tural memory of queer punk is commonly located in ephemeral and short￾lived spaces which leave little trace. Queer theorist Muñoz asserted that
Queerness is often transmitted covertly… Instead of being clearly available 
as visible evidence, queerness has instead existed as innuendo, gossip, feet￾ing moments, and performances that are meant to be interacted with by 
those within its epistemological sphere. (Muñoz, 1996, p. 6)
Both queer and punk spaces (and therefore queer punk spaces) may 
need to remain covert and/or live little behind due to the potential for 
surveillance from authorities, privacy needs of peers and the illegitimacy of 
specifc spaces (e.g. squats). However, the spaces documented on the 
timeline nonetheless indicate that ephemeral spaces are valued and signif￾cant to community members, especially when under-documented in off￾cial records. This aligns with writing about queer time, space and 
subcultural memory by Halberstam, who proposes that
we need to theorise the concept of the archive, and consider new models of 
queer memory and queer history capable of recognising and tracing subter￾ranean scenes, fy-by-night clubs, and feeting trends. (Halberstam, 
2005, p. 161)
Queer time, according to Halberstam, develops differently to time 
which relies upon heteronormative markers of life progressions including 
marriage, reproduction, well-being and housing stability. Without follow￾ing this linear narrative and achieving these goals, a queer life course com￾monly “goes uncelebrated or at least it is informally marked in 
non-prescriptive or obscure ways” (Taylor, 2010, p. 894), therefore also 
being less documented in offcial records. Queer spaces, whether long or 
short term, allow for individuals and communities to build and reimagine 
communities outside of these markers, creating possibility and necessary 
alternatives. The presence of these spaces on the timeline therefore assigns 
value to spaces that are often otherwise easily forgotten due to a lack of 
documentation and feeting existence.
11 WORKING WITH/IN: AN EXPLORATION OF QUEER PUNK TIME…214
Accounts, Anecdotes and Experiences
Memories documented on the timeline included individual accounts of 
subcultural involvement. These included the development of relationships 
and friendships—with comments including “Taysti: In love with my 
neighbour” in 1980, and “my frst queer kiss (Power Lunches)” and “fell 
in love with the bassist/vocalist in my band”, both positioned around 
2013 on the timeline. Although some memories are explicitly situated in 
relation to queer punk spaces (e.g. by association with creative projects or 
spaces), others document the personal lives or milestones within individ￾ual queer life stories. These entries illustrate what DiVeglia (in relation to 
wider LGBT histories) refers to as a desire “to assign signifcance to one’s 
own life and the lives within one’s community” (DiVeglia, 2012, p. 78). 
Similarly, Sue McKemmish conceives of record-keeping as
a “kind of witnessing”. On a personal level, record keeping is a way of evi￾dencing and memorialising our lives—our existence, our activities and expe￾riences, our relationships with others, our identity, our “place” in the world. 
(McKemmish, 1996, p. 175)
More specifcally, the presence of personal memories on the timeline 
also demonstrates the value of subjective experience within queer punk 
historiography. This contrasts with Western archival traditions, which 
value professional neutrality in history and archival work. This is described 
by Michelle Caswell as “a purportedly objective ‘view from nowhere’ 
(which in fact belies a dominant but unnamed white male position)” 
(Caswell, 2019, p. 7). However, both queer theorists and popular music 
heritage scholars articulate personal and emotional dimensions of grass￾roots archival projects (e.g. Baker, 2015a; Cifor, 2015; Cvetkovich, 2003; 
Long et al., 2017). For example, Muñoz describes how “anecdotal and 
ephemeral evidence grants entrance and access to those who have been 
locked out of offcial histories” (Muñoz, 1996, p. 9). The inclusion of 
anecdotes and personal narratives in collections enable continuing con￾nections with the “structures of feeling” of queerness (Muñoz, 1996, 
p. 11) and the affective dimensions of subcultural involvement.
Although many personal accounts were positive, others highlighted 
tensions and conficts within community settings. The position of personal 
confict and interpersonal violence in DIY music spaces was raised in both 
the discussion and on the timeline itself. In the recent past, there have 
K. FIFE215
been several public disclosures of abuse perpetrated in popular, alternative 
and local music subcultures (Anonymous, 2018; Bowcott & Snapes, 
2019; Flanagan, 2017; O’Connor, 2018). Examples of confict and abuse 
which manifest on the timeline include the disclosures about abuse perpe￾trated by a member of American queer punk band PWR BTTM which 
were published around the time of a 2017 UK tour and led to them being 
dropped from a record label (Cills, 2017). This is written on the timeline 
near another memory of the band playing the Garage in London. The 
multiplicity of memories and perspectives relating to this and other inci￾dents on the timeline illustrates a need for histories and the voices of 
records to talk to each other, in dialogue and sometimes in confict with 
one another. This is also drawn out in relation to participation and archival 
activism by Cameron, who calls for archives to be understood “not as self￾contained repositories where one quietly gathers the ‘facts’ but rather as 
webs of connections and opportunities for dialogue (sometimes with liv￾ing kin or colleagues)” (Cameron, 2014, p. 100).
The presence of interpersonal confict and violence on the timeline also 
speaks back to the presentation of queer spaces and punk spaces as utopias 
and safe spaces. Of the establishment of queer spaces, Eves writes that
they tend to have been constructed as ‘safe’ in response to the real and 
imagined threat of homophobic violence and naturalized heterosexual hege￾mony. (Eves, 2004, p. 486)
However, as the data on the timeline suggests, queer punk spaces are 
nonetheless spaces in which people experience violence, abuse and con￾fict. Archives have been positioned as a source of radical accountability 
and survivor-led action against historical abuses (Palmer-Mehta, 2018; 
Petro, 2015). In this context, “the sharing of survivor accounts has been 
a resource for identifcation and community building” (Palmer-Mehta, 
2018, p. 166). Archiving can therefore enable people to be understood, 
seen and believed even against a cultural context which is otherwise set up 
to discredit survivors and devalue individual testimony. The participants in 
the timeline workshop documented both the positive and the negative 
experiences which form their personal histories of participation, and as 
such to create nuanced and complex historical narratives that differ from 
the nostalgic accounts often produced in histories and exhibitions of 
punk’s pasts. Writing these memories down can in turn affrm experiences 
and enable people to recover or process traumatic experiences.
11 WORKING WITH/IN: AN EXPLORATION OF QUEER PUNK TIME…216
Conclusion
This chapter has explored the facilitation of a collaborative archival work￾shop at queer punk festival Bent Fest. Through my account of the work￾shop’s development and delivery, I have contributed a critical account of 
the use of this method, which I hope will inform those undertaking similar 
work in their own communities. My analysis of the timeline method iden￾tifed opportunities and limitations of the exercise, and the subsequent 
analysis of the timeline as archival object has contributed to a research gap 
about queer punk archives.
The exercise was successful because it enabled the collaborative forma￾tion of a history through contributions from individuals. This is different 
to the production of historical narratives in exhibitions and interpretation, 
which rely upon the authority of a curatorial expert and selective collect￾ing practices. By undertaking history work in a community space using 
more collaborative methods, this workshop succeeded in producing more 
diverse and nuanced narratives of subcultural involvement. The facilitation 
of this activity within a familiar space also demonstrates potential for trans￾formations of documentary and archival practices into sociable and col￾laborative activities that can occur in queer punk settings.
There are limitations to this project which are important to note. The 
timeline was produced at one event in 2019 and is as such partial and not 
representative of a wider community. The memories documented inevita￾bly represent queer punk as an urban community, due to the workshop 
happening in London. Nonetheless, the small scale of the project was 
appropriate for the size of the community and indeed grassroots 
community-led archival projects. Future work utilising these methods 
might adopt a more extensive period of data collection involving visits to 
multiple events or the long-term installation of a timeline in a venue to 
gather more memories across a less feeting period. Digital mapping tech￾nologies could be used for projects which are not site-specifc, or to engage 
with dispersed networks following the closure of a space. However, overall 
the method shows promise for future development by both scholars and 
grassroots communities.
The resulting archival object is now deposited at Bishopsgate Institute 
Library and Archive in London. The memories on the timeline document 
spaces, projects and experiences that often go unarchived due to their 
short-lived existences, a lack of personal capacity, and the tensions that 
surround documentation (and therefore increased visibility) of queer punk 
K. FIFE217
lives. Clustered together, queer punk is represented as complex, emotive, 
collaborative, social and ever-changing. The types of memories docu￾mented are evidence of the ephemeral (and the value placed on the ephem￾eral within queer punk communities), but also of the experiential and 
affective dimensions of subcultural involvement.
Returning to the tensions outlined at the outset of this chapter, the 
timeline demonstrates how many individual and often conficting narra￾tives underpin experience of gigs, spaces, music networks and fandom. 
Traditionally, histories and archives have been formed through “selective 
collection practices which work to reinforce existing musical canons” 
(Baker, 2016, p. 183). When queer punk is historicised in this way, the 
resulting archives inevitably emphasise those of us that made money or 
reached large audiences, and they will always exclude many experiences 
and those most marginalised in communities. Instead of constraining the 
disorderly subculture of queer punk within a singular historical narrative, 
this method demonstrates the power of rewriting from the ground up, 
together. Embracing the messiness of community history rebuilds our col￾lective memory on more equitable grounds and transforms the archive 
from a place of exclusion to one of recovery and connection across 
generations.
References
Adelman, C. (1993). Kurt Lewin and the Origins of Action Research. Educational 
Action Research, 1(1), 7–24. https://doi.org/10.1080/0965079930010102
Albertine, V. (2015). Clothes, Clothes, Clothes. Music, Music, Music. Boys, Boys, Boys
(Main ed.). Faber & Faber.
Allard, D., & Ferris, S. (2015). Antiviolence and Marginalized Communities: 
Knowledge Creation, Community Mobilization, and Social Justice through a 
Participatory Archiving Approach. Library Trends, 64(2), 360–383. https://
doi.org/10.1353/lib.2015.0043
Anonymous. (2018). Wharf Chambers Statement Response—Abuse Apologism and 
Racism. Wharf Abuse and Racism. http://wharfabuseandracism.tum￾blr.com/?og=1
Ashmore, P., Craggs, R., & Neate, H. (2012). Working-With: Talking and Sorting 
in Personal Archives. Journal of Historical Geography, 38(1), 81–89. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jhg.2011.06.002
Baker, S. (2015a). Affective Archiving and Collective Collecting in Do-it-Yourself 
Popular Music Archives and Museums. In S. Baker (Ed.), Preserving Popular 
Music Heritage: Do-it-Yourself, Do-it-Together (pp. 46–61). Routledge.
11 WORKING WITH/IN: AN EXPLORATION OF QUEER PUNK TIME…218
Baker, S. (Ed.). (2015b). Preserving Popular Music Heritage: Do-it-Yourself, Do-it￾Together. Routledge.
Baker, S. (2016). Do-it-yourself Institutions of Popular Music Heritage: The 
Preservation of Music’s Material Past in Community Archives, Museums and 
Halls of Fame. Archives & Records, 37(2), 170–187. https://doi.org/10.108
0/23257962.2015.1106933
Baker, S., & Huber, A. (2015). Saving ‘Rubbish’: Preserving Popular Music’s 
Material Culture in Amateur Archives and Museums. In S. Cohen, R. Knifton, 
M. Leonard, & L. Roberts (Eds.), Sites of Popular Music Heritage: Memories, 
Histories. Routledge.
Behr, A., Brennan, M., & Cloonan, M. (2014). The Cultural Value of Live Music 
from the Pub to the Stadium: Getting Beyond the Numbers. University of 
Edinburgh and University of Glasgow.
Bennett, A. (2009). “Heritage Rock”: Rock Music, Representation and Heritage 
Discourse. Poetics, 37(5–6), 474–489. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
poetic.2009.09.006
Bennett, A., & Janssen, S. (2016). Popular Music, Cultural Memory, and Heritage. 
Popular Music and Society, 39(1), 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1080/0300776
6.2015.1061332
Berg, J. (2018). Preserving Music Through Reissues. In N. Guthrie & S. Carlson 
(Eds.), Music Preservation and Archiving Today. Rowman and Littlefeld.
Bowcott, O., & Snapes, L. (2019, July 26). King Blues Singer Jonny Fox Suing 
Five Women over ‘Sexual Predator’ Allegations. The Guardian. https://www.
theguardian.com/music/2019/jul/26/king-blues-singer-itch-jonny-fox-suing-fve￾women-over-sexual-predator-allegations
Bradbury, H. (2015). Introduction: How to Situate and Defne Action Research. 
In H.  Bradbury-Huang (Ed.), The SAGE Handbook of Action Research
(pp. 1–10). SAGE Publications. http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/
detail.action?docID=2120425
Brown, E.  H. (2020). Archival Activism, Symbolic Annihilation, and the 
LGBTQ2+ Community Archive. Archivaria, 89, 6–33.
Brownstein, C. (2015). Hunger Makes Me a Modern Girl: A Memoir. 
Riverhead Books.
Bulut, S. (2016, July 15). Viv Albertine Defaces Punk Exhibition for Ignoring 
Women. Dazed Digital. https://www.dazeddigital.com/music/arti￾cle/32077/1/viv-albertine-defaces-punk-exhibition-for-ignoring-women
Cameron, L.  J. (2014). Participation, archival activism and learning to learn. 
Journal of Historical Geography, 46, 99–101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhg.2014.07.003
Campbell, M.  V. (2021). Djing Archival Interruptions: A Remix Praxis and 
Refective Guide. In E.  Navas, O.  Gallagher, & X.  Burrough (Eds.), The 
Routledge Handbook of Remix Studies and Digital Humanities (pp. 488–499). 
Routledge.
K. FIFE219
Cantillon, Z., Baker, S., & Buttigieg, B. (2017). Queering the Community Music 
Archive. Australian Feminist Studies, 32(91–92), 41–57. https://doi.org/1
0.1080/08164649.2017.1357004
Cantillon, Z., Baker, S., & Nowak, R. (2021). A Cultural Justice Approach to 
Popular Music Heritage in Deindustrialising Cities. International Journal of 
Heritage Studies, 27(1), 73–89. https://doi.org/10.1080/1352725
8.2020.1768579
Carlson, S. (2018). Bootleg Compilations as Fan Preservation. In S. Carlson & 
N.  Guthrie (Eds.), Music Preservation and Archiving Today (pp.  157–176). 
Rowman and Littlefeld.
Caswell, M. (2019). Dusting for Fingerprints: Introducing Feminist Standpoint 
Appraisal. Journal of Critical Library and Information Studies, 3(1), 1–36.
Caswell, M., Cifor, M., & Ramirez, M. H. (2016). “To Suddenly Discover Yourself 
Existing”: Uncovering the Impact of Community Archives. The American 
Archivist, 79(1), 56–81. https://doi.org/10.17723/0360-9081.79.1.56
Caswell, M., & Mallick, S. (2014). Collecting the Easily Missed Stories: Digital 
Participatory Microhistory and the South Asian American Digital Archive. 
Archives and Manuscripts, 42(1), 73–86. https://doi-org.libproxy.ucl.ac.
uk/10.1080/01576895.2014.880931
Caswell, M., Migoni, A.  A., Geraci, N., & Cifor, M. (2017). ‘To Be Able to 
Imagine Otherwise’: Community Archives and the Importance of 
Representation. Archives and Records, 38(1), 5–26. https://doi.org/10.1080/
23257962.2016.1260445
Chidgey, R. (2013). Reassess Your Weapons: The Making of Feminist Memory in 
Young Women’s Zines. Women’s History Review, 22(4), 658–672. https://doi.
org/10.1080/09612025.2012.751773
Cifor, M. (2015). Presence, Absence, and Victoria’s Hair: Examining Affect and 
Embodiment in Trans Archives. TSQ: Transgender Studies Quarterly, 2(4), 
645–649. https://doi.org/10.1215/23289252-3151565
Cills, H. (2017). Member of Queer Punk Band PWR BTTM Accused of Sexual 
Assault. Jezebel. https://jezebel.com/member-of-queer-punk-band-pwr￾bttm-accused-of-sexual-as-1795132781
Collins, J., & Long, P. (2015). ‘Fillin’ in Any Blanks I Can’: Online Archival 
Practice and Virtual Sites of Musical Memory. In S.  Cohen, L.  Roberts, 
M. Leonard, & R. Knifton (Eds.), Sites of Popular Music Heritage: Memories, 
Histories, Places. Routledge.
Cooper, C. (2012). A Queer and Trans Fat Activist Timeline: Queering Fat 
Activist Nationality and Cultural Imperialism. Fat Studies, 1(1), 61–74. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/21604851.2012.627503
Cowan, T.  L., & Rault, J. (2014). Trading Credit for Debt: Queer History￾Making and Debt Culture. Women’s Studies Quarterly, 42(1/2), 
294–310. JSTOR.
11 WORKING WITH/IN: AN EXPLORATION OF QUEER PUNK TIME…220
Cvetkovich, A. (2003). An Archive of Feelings: Trauma, Sexuality, and Lesbian 
Public Cultures. Duke University Press. https://doi.org/10.1215/
9780822384434
De Cesari, C., & Dimova, R. (2019). Heritage, Gentrifcation, Participation: 
Remaking Urban Landscapes in the Name of Culture and Historic Preservation. 
International Journal of Heritage Studies, 25(9), 863–869. https://doi.org/1
0.1080/13527258.2018.1512515
DiVeglia, A.  L. (2012). Accessibility, Accountability, and Activism: Models for 
LGBT Archives. In L.  Bly & K.  Wooten (Eds.), Make Your Own History: 
Documenting Feminist and Queer Activism in the 21st Century (pp. 23–38). 
Litwin Books.
Downes, J. (2010). DIY Queer Feminist (Sub)cultural Resistance in the UK [PhD 
Thesis]. University of Leeds.
Downes, J., Breeze, M., & Griffn, N. (2013). Researching DIY Cultures: Towards 
a Situated Ethical Practice for Activist-Academia. Graduate Journal of Social 
Science, 10(3), 100–124.
Dunye, C. (Director). (1997). The Watermelon Woman [Documentary; DVD]. 
First Run Features.
Eves, A. (2004). Queer Theory, Butch/Femme Identities and Lesbian Space. 
Sexualities, 7(4), 480–496. https://doi.org/10.1177/1363460704047064
Fenster, M. (1993). Queer Punk Fanzines: Identity, Community, and The 
Articulation of Homosexuality and Hardcore. Journal of Communication 
Inquiry, 17(1), 73–94. https://doi.org/10.1177/019685999301700105
Fife, K. (2022). Challenging Voices: Documenting and Archiving UK-Based DIY 
Music Spaces [Doctoral thesis]. UCL.
Flanagan, A. (2017). Dramatic Fallout For PWR BTTM After Accusations Of 
Sexual Misconduct. NPR. https://www.npr.org/sections/therecord/2017/
05/15/528456757/dramatic-fallout-for-pwr-bttm-after-accusations-of￾sexual-misconduct
Freire, P. (1972). Pedagogy of the Oppressed. Herder and Herder.
Gordon, K. (2015). Girl in a Band (Main ed.). Faber & Faber.
Grace, L. J. (2016). Tranny: Confessions of Punk Rock’s Most Infamous Anarchist 
Sellout (Illustrated ed.). Hachette Books.
Guthrie, N., & Carlson, S. (2018). Pursuing Preservation in the Do-It-Yourself 
Music Community. In N. Guthrie & S. Carlson (Eds.), Music Preservation and 
Archiving Today (pp. 121–140). Rowman and Littlefeld.
Halberstam, J. (2003). What’s that Smell?: Queer Temporalities and Subcultural 
Lives. International Journal of Cultural Studies, 6(3), 313–333. https://doi.
org/10.1177/13678779030063005
Halberstam, J. (2005). In a Queer Time and Place: Transgender Bodies, Subcultural 
Lives. NYU Press.
K. FIFE221
Ishmael, H. J. M., Sowinski, E. A., Foster, K., Joseph, E., & Richards, N. E. (2020). 
Locating the Black Archive. In S. Popple, A. Prescott, & D. Mutibwa (Eds.), 
Communities, Archives and New Collaborative Practices (pp.  207–218). 
Policy Press.
Keenan, E.  K., & Darms, L. (2013). Safe Space: The Riot Grrrl Collection. 
Archivaria, 76, 55–74.
Kwame Harrison, A. (2018). Preserving Underground Hip-Hop Tapes in 
Ethnographic Context. In N. Guthrie & S. Carlson (Eds.), Music Preservation 
and Archiving Today. Rowman and Littlefeld.
Lashua, B. (2015). Mapping the Politics of ‘Race’: Place and Memory in 
Liverpool’s Popular Music Heritage. In S. Cohen, R. Knifton, M. Leonard, & 
L. Roberts (Eds.), Sites of Popular Music Heritage: Memories, Histories, Places
(pp. 45–61). Routledge.
Lee, J.  A. (2020). Producing the Archival Body. Routledge. https://doi.
org/10.4324/9780429060168
Leonard, M. (2010). Exhibiting Popular Music: Museum Audiences, Inclusion 
and Social History. Journal of New Music Research, 39(2), 171–181. https://
doi.org/10.1080/09298215.2010.494199
Lohman, K., & Raghunath, A. (2019). Notes in the Margins. Punk & Post Punk, 
8(2), 189–192. https://doi.org/10.1386/punk.8.2.189_2
Long, P. (2018). What is Popular Music Cultural Heritage? In S. Baker, C. Strong, 
L.  Istvandity, & Z.  Cantillon (Eds.), The Routledge Companion to Popular 
Music History and Heritage (pp. 121–133). Routledge.
Long, P., Baker, S., Istvandity, L., & Collins, J. (2017). A Labour of Love: The 
Affective Archives of Popular Music Culture. Archives & Records, 38(1), 61–79. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/23257962.2017.1282347
Maalsen, S., & McLean, J. (2018). Record Collections as Musical Archives: 
Gender, Record Collecting, and Whose Music is Heard. Journal of Material 
Culture, 23(1), 39–57. https://doi.org/10.1177/1359183517725101
McKemmish, S. (1996). Evidence of Me.... [Personal Recordkeeping]. Archives 
and Manuscripts, 24(1), 28–45.
McNeil, L., & McCain, G. (2016). Please Kill Me: The Uncensored Oral History of 
Punk. Grove Press.
Mitchell, A., & McKinney (Eds.). (2019). Inside Killjoy’s Kastle: Dykey Ghosts, 
Feminist Monsters, and other Lesbian Hauntings. UBC Press.
Moore, R. (2007). Friends Don’t Let Friends Listen to Corporate Rock: Punk as 
a Field of Cultural Production. Journal of Contemporary Ethnography, 36(4), 
438–474. https://doi.org/10.1177/0891241607303520
Muñoz, J. E. (1996). Ephemera as Evidence: Introductory Notes to Queer Acts. 
Women & Performance, 8(2), 5–16. https://doi.org/10.1080/07407709
608571228
11 WORKING WITH/IN: AN EXPLORATION OF QUEER PUNK TIME…222
Nguyen, M.  T. (2015). Minor Threats. Radical History Review, 2015(122), 
11–24. https://doi.org/10.1215/01636545-2849495
O’Connor, R. (2018, November 1). Hookworms Split as Frontman Denies Sexual 
Abuse Allegations. The Independent. https://www.independent.co.uk/arts￾entertainment/music/news/hookworms-split-matthew-mj-johnson￾allegations-sexual-abuse-statement-latest-a8611926.html
O’Donaghey, J. (2020). The Warzone Dialectogram. Black Fox Books.
Palmer-Mehta, V. (2018). The Subversive Power of Survivor Rhetoric: An 
Innovative Archive of Survivor Discourse in New  York Magazine. Women’s 
Studies in Communication, 41(2), 159–182. https://doi.org/10.108
0/07491409.2018.1471764
Peter, B. (2020). Negotiating the Co-Curation of an Online Community Popular 
Music Archive. Popular Music History, 13(1–2), 58–76. https://doi.
org/10.1558/pomh.39666
Petro, A.  M. (2015). Beyond Accountability: The Queer Archive of Catholic 
Sexual Abuse. Radical History Review, 2015(122), 160–176. https://doi.
org/10.1215/01636545-2849594
Pidd, H. (2017, October 27). Digging the Reno: Moss Side’s Legendary Club 
Unearthed—30 Years On. The Guardian. http://www.theguardian.com/uk￾news/2017/oct/27/digging-the-reno-moss-sides-legendary-club￾unearthed-30-years-on
Press Association. (2016). Punk Funeral: Joe Corré Burns £5m of Memorabilia on 
Thames. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/
nov/26/punx-not-dead-joe-corre-burns-memorabilia-worth-5m-on-thames
Robb, J., & Craske, O. (2006). Punk Rock: An Oral History. Ebury Press.
Roberts, L., & Cohen, S. (2014). Unauthorising Popular Music Heritage: Outline 
of a Critical Framework. International Journal of Heritage Studies, 20(3), 
241–261. https://doi.org/10.1080/13527258.2012.750619
Robinson, L. (2018). Exhibition Review Punk’s 40th Anniversary—An Itchy Sort 
of Heritage. Twentieth Century British History, 29(2), 309–317. https://doi.
org/10.1093/tcbh/hwx047
Rosenberg, S., & Sharp, M. (2018). Documenting Queer(ed) Punk Histories: 
Instagram, Archives and Ephemerality. Queer Studies in Media and Popular 
Culture, 3(2), 159–174.
Ross, S. G. (2017). Development versus Preservation Interests in the Making of a 
Music City: A Case Study of Select Iconic Toronto Music Venues and the 
Treatment of Their Intangible Cultural Heritage Value. International Journal 
of Cultural Property, 24(1), 31–56.
Sheffeld, R. T. (2016). More Than Acid-Free Folders: Extending the Concept of 
Preservation to Include the Stewardship of Unexplored Histories. Library 
Trends, 64(3), 572–584.
K. FIFE223
Shilton, K., & Srinivasan, R. (2007). Participatory Appraisal and Arrangement for 
Multicultural Archival Collections. Archivaria, 63(0), 87–101.
Smit, R. (2020). Connective Memory Work on Justice for Mike Brown. In 
S. Merrill, E. Keightley, & P. Daphi (Eds.), Social Movements, Cultural Memory 
and Digital Media: Mobilising Mediated Remembrance (pp. 85–108). Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Smith, L. (2006). The Uses of Heritage. In Uses of Heritage (pp.  15–22). 
Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203602263-9
Strong, C. (2011). Grunge, Riot Grrrl and the Forgetting of Women in Popular 
Culture. The Journal of Popular Culture, 44(2), 398–416. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1540-5931.2011.00839.x
Tailor, N. (2019, March 27). Unearthing The Reno, Manchester’s Lost Mixed-Race 
Clubbing Haven. Gal-Dem. https://gal-dem.com/the-reno-whitworth￾gallery-manchesters-lost-mixed-race-clubbing-haven/
Taylor, J. (2010). Queer Temporalities and the Signifcance of ‘Music Scene’ 
Participation in the Social Identities of Middle-aged Queers. Sociology, 44(5), 
893–907. https://doi.org/10.1177/0038038510375735
Taylor, J. (2011). The Intimate Insider: Negotiating the Ethics of Friendship 
When Doing Insider Research. Qualitative Research, 11(1), 3–22. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1468794110384447
The Mayor of London’s Music Venues Taskforce. (2015). London Grassroots 
Venues Rescue Plan: A Report. Greater London Authority.
van der Hoeven, A. (2018). Narratives of Popular Music Heritage and Cultural 
Identity: The Affordances and Constraints of Popular Music Memories. 
European Journal of Cultural Studies, 21(2), 207–222. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1367549415609328
Vogel, S. (2006). Closing Time: Langston Hughes and the Queer Poetics of 
Harlem Nightlife. Criticism, 48(3), 397–425. JSTOR.
Warfeld, L., Crasshole, W., & Leyser, Y. (2021). Queercore: How to Punk a 
Revolution: An Oral History. PM Press.
Wiedlack, M. K. (2015). Queer-Feminist Punk: An Anti-Social History. Zaglossus. 
https://library.oapen.org/handle/20.500.12657/33098
Zobl, E. (2009). Cultural Production, Transnational Networking, and Critical 
Refection in Feminist Zines. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 
35(1), 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1086/599256
11 WORKING WITH/IN: AN EXPLORATION OF QUEER PUNK TIME…© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 225
Switzerland AG 2024
L. Way, M. Grimes (eds.), Punk, Ageing and Time, Palgrave Studies 
in the History of Subcultures and Popular Music, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47823-9_12
CHAPTER 12
Enduring Attachments: On the Temporalities 
of Punk
George C. Grinnell
Introduction
There was a picture on Instagram of Alice Bag, Michelle Cruz Gonzales, 
and Shawna Potter together in 2019. It is a joyful image of three genera￾tions of punk women in the United States whose musical heydays are 
often categorized as belonging to the 1970s, the 1990s, and the present. 
The image is notable for more than just capturing three pioneering women 
from three different eras of American punk. It illustrates several common￾place but not always recognized features of punk: women have always 
been central fgures; people of colour have always been vital participants; 
punk has always been more of an attitude and an allegiance to a DIY ethos 
than a fxed sound; and what was once a youth subculture has developed 
a variety of ways of thinking about the enduring attachments that some 
have with punk.
G. C. Grinnell (*) 
The University of British Columbia—Okanagan Campus, Kelowna, BC, Canada
e-mail: george.grinnell@ubc.ca226
The image was taken at 1-2-3-4 Go! Records in Oakland, and while 
these women are known for being musicians in bands such as Alice and the 
Bags, Spitboy, and War on Women, they are also authors who have written 
about punk. This chapter examines some of their writing as a way of pos￾ing questions that hover at the edges of this photo. How are their experi￾ences of punk similar and different? How do relations of power within 
punk shape the accounts they write about punk? How do their narratives 
refect on the reality of ageing in punk and ideas of temporality that express 
a desire to change punk in the present?
In Violence Girl: East L.A. Rage to Hollywood Stage, A Chicana Punk 
Story (2011), Bag narrates her experiences growing up and becoming a 
founding fgure in LA punk in the 1970s. Gonzales offers a quite different 
experience of what it means to be a person of colour in punk during the 
1990s in The Spitboy Rule: Tales of a Xicana in a Female Punk Band
(2016). Shawna Potter addresses the end of the 2010s with Making Spaces 
Safer: A Guide to Giving Harassment the Boot Wherever You Work, Play, 
and Gather. While her book is not a memoir but an activist manual that 
seeks to empower individuals to make punk a safer space, it makes explicit 
many of the themes central to the discussions of power and inequality that 
inform the narratives by Bag and Gonzales.
In different ways, each of these narratives refects on what it means to 
live in the wake of the disappointed ideals of punk, a story that becomes 
clearer with age, in some cases, and rawer in the moment of telling, in oth￾ers. While these women write about distinct periods in the history of punk, 
each of them refects on gendered and racialized relations of power in 
punk and do so from the perspective of individuals who remain attached 
to punk and what it can yet become. Their narratives assess the past and 
intervene in the present by telling stories that can reshape punk. This 
means that this chapter examines something not quite visible in this pho￾tograph: a concept of temporality that lies beyond the familiar chronolo￾gies of punk history and beyond the personal memoir and accounts of 
one’s salad days. What kind of punk temporality is it that emerges out of 
their continued attachments to punk culture and their desires to docu￾ment the past while also reshaping what punk is and means for individuals 
in the present and future? As Bag, Gonzales, and Potter show, the reality 
of ageing and refecting on one’s continued attachment to punk can shift 
ideas we might have about punk and its temporality, including when it 
happens, its lifespan, and its effects, and what the stories we tell about it 
might do to shape the future.
G. C. GRINNELL227
Although two of these works involve life writing, my focus is not mem￾oir and genre, though there is certainly much that one could say about 
such matters. Instead, my focus is on what unites each of them: they are a 
trio of works that make visible some of the relations of power that have 
long structured punk.
As such, these books contribute to histories of punk women and add an 
important qualifcation to that project with their shared consideration of 
time, circumstance, and experience, especially for Xicana women, as well 
as the attention they bring to white male privilege in North American 
punk and its uneven dominance (Bag, 2012; Nguyen, 2011; Griffn, 
2012). These authors write themselves into a project documented by 
Helen Reddington regarding the prominence of women in punk that 
begins in the 1970s in the United Kingdom. She sees this period as “an 
important historical moment when women instrumentalists established 
themselves in an infuential new rock music genre” and seeks to rescue 
“this moment from the amnesia of conventional popular music historiog￾raphy in the same way that other ‘histories from below’ have been written 
about the achievements and experiences of other excluded or marginalized 
social groups” (Reddington, 2016, p.  194). This chapter extends such 
research in two ways. First, it explores how temporality and femininity 
have been braided together such that one cannot think one without the 
other, given that there is no chronology of punk without the story of the 
gradual hostility directed towards women and the substantial barriers that 
had to be overcome to participate “in male identifed music” (p. 194). 
Second, the chapter recognizes that the marginalization of women is part 
of an uneven and never fully successful movement to normalize white, 
heterosexual, male privilege in punk. As Michelle Phillipov notes, if punk 
is understood as “an essentially positive progressive movement articulating 
egalitarian, community-based, broadly leftist politics” that resists dehu￾manizing social relations under capitalism (2006, p. 386), this perspective 
cannot be neatly reconciled with the marginalization of women, queer and 
transgender people, as well as people of colour in punk. These works insist 
that any chronology of punk must acknowledge such unpromising reali￾ties even and especially when they challenge a redemptive narrative that 
celebrates the impressive accomplishments of a DIY spirit and anti￾establishment punk politics.
These works offer more than just an account of ageing in punk. They 
mediate how punk ages, then, and contribute to a body of criticism con￾cerned with the narration of what punk is. More, they actively intervene in 
12 ENDURING ATTACHMENTS: ON THE TEMPORALITIES OF PUNK228
the maturation of punk by exploring areas of its history that have not 
always received the attention they deserve. Punk began as a youth culture, 
and it has an uneven relationship with ageing. It celebrates immaturity 
with claims like “we are the kids” (in a song of the same name by In/
Humanity) and often appreciates crude exploits over polished outcomes in 
sound and design. Such attachments to a cult of youthful exuberance are 
themselves a kind of lived theoretical exploration of “how that transition 
to adulthood is a culturally constructed social phenomenon” (Davis, 
2012, p. 118) that takes the form of a daring departure from maturity. 
One could fairly wonder if immaturity has since become a dominant fea￾ture of politics and culture in many of the places where punk frst four￾ished. Punk rock’s obvious antagonism towards that “adult crash” that has 
meant the topic of ageing is often unthinkable: what follows after youthful 
punk adventures comes to be represented primarily as death or an abdica￾tion of one’s punk ethics. The recurring declarations that punk is dead, for 
example, express this anxious refusal to let punk age and mature. If one is 
a punk, one is a kid. To become an adult is to leave punk behind.
Such an equation is not the whole story. Punk was sometimes the most 
mature kid in the neighbourhood; it had to be to get away with some of 
the shit it tried. Kids created entire networks to distribute music and tour; 
they learned to live without consuming animals in a culture hostile to ani￾mal ethics; and they hosted shows in venues they created themselves 
because they wanted to express themselves and their culture. Such activi￾ties don’t happen if one is childish and immature. DIY takes commitment 
and coordination and a serious-minded approach. Such passionate dedica￾tion and practical habits age well, and it not surprising that many have 
remained part of punk throughout adulthood. Laura Way (2019) notes 
that “what punk means to older punk women” (p. 258) is defned less by 
the gravity of music and more by the “core punk values … such as DIY 
and community” (p. 268). Ross Haenfer (2012) similarly explores how 
punks come to practice ideals “professed in their youth but lived in adult￾hood” as they age (p. 23). Bennet (2006) comments that one of the fea￾tures of ageing punk is an increase in “the variety of practices through 
which individuals retain a commitment” to punk (p. 223). Bag, Gonzales, 
and Potter each exemplifes how punk is “reworked to ft across time, 
rather than being clearly situated in one moment of a person’s life” (Davis, 
2012, p. 106).
The stories told about punk often acknowledge its interest in “a range 
of political and social discourses in a concrete and immediate way, but it is 
G. C. GRINNELL229
often ignored that it was marginalized groups who contributed this vital 
factor and provided the necessary enrichment to allow punk to be more 
than just another youth style dominated by white, cisgender, heterosexual 
men” (Lohman & Raghunath, 2019, p.  190). Punk’s “countercultural 
and political credentials were almost entirely dependent on these [margin￾alized] groups who defantly confronted and dismantled stereotypes and 
were crucially and, often for the frst time, visible not only to a wider cul￾ture but more importantly also to each other” (p.  190). It would be 
tempting to reply, as some do, that “much of punk history and criticism 
has been written by people who weren’t there at the time” and that what 
is needed are frst-hand accounts from individuals who are in the “unique 
position to describe punk as I lived it (and still do) as well as provide a 
forum for others who were there to share their stories and perspectives” 
(Bag, 2012, p. 233). But there are plenty of oral histories, memoirs, and 
narratives of punk that forget the lives of marginalized punks, precisely 
because those oral histories listen to only some voices. Bag, Gonzales, and 
Potter suggest a further consideration when one thinks about the stories 
we tell about who has built and sustained punk culture: punk is now 
shaped by a curious temporality in which the present is partially a product 
of still-evolving accounts of its past. I will discuss this temporality more 
soon, but I want to frst explore some of the primary aims and effects of 
these books.
Alice Bag is a founding fgure in the LA punk scene in the 1970s, and 
Violence Girl tells the story of her youth growing up in East LA and her 
life-altering experiences in a punk community that was creative, sustain￾ing, destructive, persecuted and eventually transformed by the emergence 
of hardcore. She was the lead singer of The Bags, a group known for per￾forming in sexually provocative outfts and paper bags over their heads. 
Bag was also a founding member of the iconic feminist punk band The 
Castration Squad. Writing as Alice Bag, not Alicia Velasquez, the memoir 
raises many fascinating questions about the more and less performative 
nature of identity, matters that lie beyond my focus on this occasion. For 
now, I will simply note that I am guided by Bag’s decision to refer to her￾self by her punk rock stage name.
Her story is a familiar one in the genre of punk memoirs and for good 
reason because DIY has always been among the most compelling origin 
stories of punk. Bag (2011) recalls being inspired by the frst punk show 
she witnessed, a bill that included the Zeros, the Weirdos, and the Germs, 
with the Damned in attendance: “it was as though someone had taken a 
12 ENDURING ATTACHMENTS: ON THE TEMPORALITIES OF PUNK230
torch to all of our ridiculous fears and self-imposed limitations” such that 
“everything and anything was possible” (p. 183). “All we needed was the 
guts to try” (p. 183), Bag recalls, because that night “Mexicans, Weirdos, 
and teenagers with more courage than musical skill could take the stage 
and bring the house down,” kicking the establishment “off their gilded 
thrones”, and “it was us – the rabble – who were going to do the kicking” 
(p. 183). Not only was punk transforming music, it was a “cultural revolu￾tion” affecting “everyday activities, from what we consumed to what we 
produced, from what we believed to what we found improbable” (p. 194). 
As Bag puts it, “punk was changing us from the outside in” (p. 194).
The Bags started “because two good friends dared to dream of having 
their own all-girl band” (p.  325), even if the band would eventually 
emerge with an even gender split among the four members. The title of 
the memoir recalls a song by The Bags entitled “Violent Girl,” a reference 
to Bag’s willingness to throw down with the boys in an effort to police 
violence against women at concerts: “my protective instincts went into 
high gear and my fsts were swinging before I could think about it” 
(p. 234). As Bag notes, this rage was a response to threats to “my new 
home and my new family” as well as an expression of ongoing domestic 
abuse that was part of Bag’s childhood (p. 235). Such aggression on stage 
meant that she “was often accused of being too masculine in my perfor￾mance… too violent, too in your face for a girl” (italics in original, p. 221). 
Some had “never seen a woman so angry”, and punk was upending norms 
of gender and power (p. 308). The revolution was temporary, however. 
Bag’s memoir ends by noting how the landscape of punk in L.A. “was 
changing before my eyes” (p. 308). Punk was receiving more attention 
from outside than ever before. It was subject to state violence as police 
invaded punk clubs in full riot gear. These events were familiar to Bag as a 
racialized person in LA: “I’d sensed this danger many times before; I’d 
grown up with it all my life. It was the plight of the defenseless in the face 
of unrestrained power and force. It happened in East L.A. when the 
L.A. County sheriffs gunned down Chicano activists” (p. 304). And the 
revolution of punk was being policed from inside as well: “The once 
quirky men and women artists who prized originality above all else were 
being replaced by a belligerent, male-dominated mob” at concerts, chang￾ing the tone and spirit of punk (p. 309). Gone was an ideal that celebrated 
difference: the rallying cry of “the more variety the better” was being 
drowned out (p. 303). “Early punk was as much a rejection of the status 
quo as it was the product of the rejects of the status quo,” Bag (2012) 
G. C. GRINNELL231
elsewhere writes, appreciating that “we were a band of misfts” for whom 
there “was no white, male hierarchy” (pp. 236–237). Looking back more 
than thirty years later with age and perspective, Bag sees that early punk in 
LA represented a temporary loosening of social norms that was compro￾mised by the rise of those same discriminatory relations of force that had 
policed her life as a Chicana woman growing up.
The freedom from norms of race, sexuality, and gender that Bag associ￾ates with punk in California was short-lived, and, over the next two 
decades, punk in the United States continued to become increasingly 
male-dominated, even if that led to sometimes thoughtful conficts 
between sensitive and aggressive masculinity. As Gonzales explains in her 
memoir on this era, punk had learned to perpetuate many of the discrimi￾natory norms that defned the world it claimed to oppose.
Gonzales was the drummer for the seminal all-female hardcore band 
Spitboy, and her memoir chronicles these days as a member of a band writ￾ing music that was “tough, and vulnerable, and it had attitude” (Gonzales, 
2016, p. 128). The Spitboy Rule is especially notable for the story it tells of 
her place within the East Bay (Oakland and San Francisco) hardcore scene 
as both a woman and a Xicana. To create “something totally fresh and 
new, like the female punk band I had been waiting to hear, waiting to 
discover for some time” was a rare achievement for women at this moment 
in punk (p. 128). The scene had become dominated by men, even if its 
commitments to masculinity were sometimes ambivalent, and starting a 
“band that would soon be named after a female-body-centric creation 
story, a story that didn’t involve god, a rib, or a man” was radical (p. 129). 
To do so and also forcefully declare their independence from Riot Grrrl 
during the height of its ascendancy as a female-focused sphere of punk 
culture was quite another. Riot Grrrl emerged in 1991 and was associated 
especially with scenes in Olympia, WA, and Washington, DC.  It chal￾lenged the marginalization of women in punk with a generation of exclu￾sively female bands such as Bratmobile, Bikini Kill, and Team Dresch 
alongside a vibrant zine culture. Spitboy sought to carve out a separate 
path by remaining attached to hardcore and insisting on their place within 
that male-dominated scene rather than identify with Riot Grrrl. As a mem￾oir that revisits these tensions, the book reminds punks in the present of 
the variety of ways that one can address inequality and appreciate diversity.
Despite their impressive performances, national and international tours, 
positive reception, prominence in the surging DIY punk scene of the 
1990s, and support from prominent labels such as Lookout, Allied, and 
12 ENDURING ATTACHMENTS: ON THE TEMPORALITIES OF PUNK232
Ebullition, Spitboy was often received as an exception frst, a band that 
was good considering they were women. As Gonzales notes, Spitboy did not 
always receive “the same respect [men] gave each other” (p.  23), and 
comments like “You hit hard for a girl” became a predictable assessment 
of her drumming. Capturing the spirit of Gonzales’ immediate desire “to 
punch each guy who said it in the face” (p. 31), The Spitboy Rule is a sus￾tained middle fnger to punk sexism. Gonzales documents the triumphs, 
joy, and life-changing experiences of “playing what everyone thought of as 
male music” (p. 23) with talented female artists who “genuinely liked one 
another and admired one another in many ways, too” (p. 55).
The memoir celebrates the rare achievement of a dominant all-female 
punk band in the 1990s and recognizes how needlessly diffcult that was. 
Moreover, it levels powerful critiques against expressions of punk femi￾nism that harmfully promoted colour-blindness by ignoring the “relative 
comfort and white privilege” some experienced. Such feminism had little 
to offer a Xicana woman “who grew up in a small town, who was raised by 
a single mom, and who had been raised in relative poverty” (p.  19). 
Gonzales explores how her Xicana and punk identities did and did not 
converge, noting that people saw her as a woman only and that meant 
“people in the scene did not see me, who I really was at the core, the face 
and body through which I experienced the world” (p. 90). While I can 
only imagine how much this book must mean to Xicana women in the 
punk scene today and tomorrow who will fnd they are not alone, Gonzales 
knew just how transformative such a realization could be. Spitboy would 
release a split LP with Los Crudos, Latino punks from Chicago who were 
“one of the most beloved hardcore bands in 1990s” who sang “about 
Latino issues in Spanish” (p. 117). Not only was the “scene’s enthusiasm 
for Los Crudos … an indirect form of personal validation” (p. 119), it also 
meant no longer going it alone, even when surrounded by her white 
female bandmates. Gonzales notes that their record, Viviendo Aperamente
(Roughly Living), explored “Latino struggles and feminist struggles” and 
“the cover image of a woman who looked like me felt like a personal vic￾tory” after “spending so many years feeling invisible” in the punk scene (p. 
117). Age and experience give Gonzales perspective, and The Spitboy Rule
documents a seminal band and recognizes the vital contributions of the 
author at time when Xicana women were not being acknowledged in 
punk. One of the continuing legacies of the memoir will be the effects it 
can have upon future generations who will know they belong here and are 
G. C. GRINNELL233
following in the footsteps of others like Bag and Gonzales who have gone 
before them.
The Spitboy Rule ends with an account of the pleasure of writing their 
frst song and discovering who they could become as women together in 
punk culture. “Seriously” was a “simple, three-chord song” that spat back 
all the rage that followed from “a night two guys in a visiting punk band 
sexually harassed me at a party at my house” (p. 128). The realities of 
misogyny in punk had been long ignored by the subculture, and these are 
the conditions that Potter has set out to address and transform with 
her book.
Potter is the lead singer of the feminist punk band War on Women, and 
her guidebook is a road map to putting feminist philosophy into practice 
in punk. It establishes frameworks to make punk culture, and ultimately 
anywhere else that depends on sociability as a binding agent, more hospi￾table especially to women, people of colour, queer, and trans individuals, 
people living with disabilities, and others who have faced discrimination 
within spaces that are not always as counter-cultural in practice as they 
proclaim to be. Making Spaces Safer started off as a zine and a set of work￾shops that Potter shared during tours. She writes for those hosting a 
“house party, basement show, art opening, punk club, community space” 
as well as “festival, scene” in order to make just about any “space where 
people gather” safer for those who experience discrimination for being 
who they are, including one’s sexuality, gender, race, and ability (Potter, 
2019, p. 10). The work is guided by the idea that whatever else punk does, 
it is fundamentally social in the sense that it exists as an effect of human 
interaction and occurs in spaces that can be structured by unequal rela￾tions of power whether by intention or neglect. As Bag noted, punk could 
create safer spaces for marginalized individuals, and Gonzales recognized 
that it often did not.
Potter’s book is obviously different from a memoir, and while it might 
not tell a story about a life lived in punk, it is clearly motivated by the 
personal realities faced not just by Potter but by too many women in the 
punk scene. If one of the rhetorical effects of memoir is to invite the reader 
to identify with and refect upon the personal experiences of the author, 
Potter achieves a similar degree of intimacy by beginning from the assump￾tion that she speaks not just for herself but for many more who have found 
that punk is not as safe a space as it could be.
Potter writes with a mix of pragmatic utility—there’s a template for a 
“Punk Club Confict Resolution Plan,” for example—and an encouraging 
12 ENDURING ATTACHMENTS: ON THE TEMPORALITIES OF PUNK234
tone that, in the tradition of the best zines, speaks directly to the reader, 
wondering “were there any bits that just didn’t click, that you were hesi￾tant to listen to? Congrats! Now you know where your weak points are 
and can address them. Do what you can, then fgure out how you can do 
more. Keep a steady pace and take care of yourself” (p. 172). Potter situ￾ates her efforts within a broader history of the development of safer spaces 
during gay liberation and feminism, noting that the goal is not to create 
spaces “free of challenging ideas or different opinions” but to recognize 
the existence of discrimination and then “doing what we can to ensure 
[those facing discrimination for who they are] are believed and supported 
if it happens on our watch” (p. 11). Potter quotes Ren Aldridge from The 
Petrol Girls who survived sexual assaults at house shows in London: “We 
need safer spaces to make it easier for everyone to organise politically, and 
also for us all to have a fucking break sometimes” (p.  18). The book 
embraces a punk ambition to build “a better a world inch by diffcult 
inch” (p. 38) and that means recognizing the complexity of discrimination 
within “truly DIY spaces” that offer “no legal protections or rights” 
(p. 56) as well as in “small social scenes where most people know one 
another” (p. 55). Potter makes inspiring and direct connections between 
the anarchist safety precautions that gave rise to the tagline “ask a punk” 
on fiers in the case of gigs held illegally, on the one hand, and the need to 
exercise a similar degree of care at a show, on the other: “just because the 
law doesn’t know you exist, doesn’t mean you can’t help validate the exis￾tence of everyone who walks through your doors” (p. 57). Recognizing 
the power of artists to shape the venues that host them, Potter encourages 
bands to ask if venues have policies in place to make a space safer and then 
explain why it is important “that your audience feels safe and welcome at 
your shows” and/or “make the venue a safer space the night you’re there” 
by inviting relevant local organizations to set up and share their info, cre￾ating trans-friendly bathroom signage, and ensuring that a merch person 
is trained in bystander intervention and crisis response (p. 67).
Potter’s book recognizes that punk is not juvenile anymore. But its 
maturity is inconsistent: “if our goal is a less violent world, focusing on the 
positive change you can make locally is a perfect place to start” (p. 70). 
Potter shows that ageing in punk is not just a personal experience; it is a 
social experience that involves taking responsibility—whether one should 
have to or not—for changing punk and bringing it closer to many of its 
stated goals of equality by realizing what it takes to actually transform rela￾tions of domination.
G. C. GRINNELL235
One way to understand how these three books refect on ageing in 
punk would be to ft them into a chronology of disappointed ideals, a 
story that perhaps becomes clearer the longer one is attached to punk: Bag 
looks back to celebrate the diversity of early punk in which Latinos and 
women were central participants; Gonzales recalls how that earlier para￾dise was lost; and Potter depicts an organized feminist response designed 
to recover some of the equality glimpsed by early punk. These three works 
are united by their common commitments to feminism and anti-racism, as 
well as their understanding that punk can be transformed by the work of 
dedicated individuals, whether that means making venues safer or by tell￾ing one’s own story and insisting that these experiences matter to the his￾tory, and present, of punk rock. Each of these works sees that punk is a 
community that can transform lives in ways that are positive or harmful. 
These works believe in the vitality and promise of punk, and I would 
speculate that their authors would not go to all of the effort to write books 
were they not still attached at some deep emotional level to punk, regard￾less of how large or small a part it might play in their present daily activities.
These works express an enduring attachment to punk despite age and a 
continuing desire to alter it with one’s written contributions in the pres￾ent. Ageing is not, in these works, a refection on what it means to be a 
punk in one’s thirties or forties or ffties or older. Ageing is an unspoken 
context evident primarily in how these authors remain attached to a social 
experiment called punk, taking the time and effort to document it and 
shaping what it can yet become for the future.
Bag, Gonzales, and Potter each illustrates how the recent surge of 
works remembering punk can reshape the present in ways that are more 
just and equitable based on whose stories are told and what topics are 
recognized to matter. These works see that cultural memory is always 
more than just a matter of recording what happened. There will always be 
multiple stories to tell and different ways to narrate the past. Whose voices 
dominate? Whose experiences are acknowledged and prioritized? When 
these works demand that women and women of colour be remembered 
and recognized as participants, they also recognize that writing can alter 
the future of punk by embodying “the potential for producing inclusive 
spaces” that was sorely lacking in DIY punk scenes in the early 2000s 
despite the fact that “equality [was] often verbally promoted and sexism 
condemned” (Griffn, 2012, p. 76). Each of these authors takes responsi￾bility for stewarding the culture, and this is a particular expression of age￾ing that diverges from what Bennet (2006) describes as the practice of 
12 ENDURING ATTACHMENTS: ON THE TEMPORALITIES OF PUNK236
older punks who “positioned themselves as critical overseers of the local 
punk scene” in order to judge “the scene and those involved in it” (p. 
228). Bag, Gonzales, and Potter are not standing in judgement, as if look￾ing from a distance. They are actively shaping punk by sharing narratives 
that expose relations of power within punk culture, using their accounts of 
punk to make a case for imagining alternatives that have existed or could 
yet exist. They use personal experience to express the full emotional impact 
of dehumanizing relations of domination in punk and make the case that 
things need to change.
Their books remember the vital contributions of women and people of 
colour, something sometimes sorely lacking from recent public expres￾sions of memory. As Francis Stewart (2019) notes of the 2016 exhibition 
at the British Museum celebrating the fortieth anniversary of punk’s emer￾gence: “notable, largely by their absence in the content of the exhibit, 
were references to women, disabled people, people of colour and 
LGBTQIA individuals. Punk was never solely the domain or identity of 
white, cisgendered, able-bodied, heterosexual men” (p.  211). Leslie 
Kahn—one of the editors of the zine HeartattaCk—made a similar point 
during the 1990s:
I constantly hear about the lack of women in punk, and the lack of active 
women, but there really are a ton of active women doing so much stuff. 
There may not be a ton of women in bands (though there certainly are sev￾eral), but since when is punk supposed to be all about the bands? There are 
many women currently kicking ass doing so many things, and there have 
been many women in the past to for inspiration. (Martin, 2012, p. 193)
As Griffn (2012) notes, “women play more central roles in activities that 
are less visible when analysing the spatiality of a show” (p. 72), and this is 
especially clear in the zines that make up the “community institutions” of 
punk culture (Duncombe, 2008, p. 53). One might conclude, then, that 
it is a commitment to community and a desire for a better world that 
motivate Bag, Gonzales, and Potter.
But their books do more than just tell new stories about who matters in 
punk. More than just documentation, these books can do things. They 
can generate effects, thicken and thin out alliances, stir and prompt, and 
act upon readers in unpredictable ways. I am interested to close by specu￾lating upon one of the primary effects of these works: the idea that punk 
is being shaped and reshaped by new forms of temporality that are 
G. C. GRINNELL237
emerging in works that bring the vitality of 1977 and 1997 and 2017 into 
the present, merging all of these moments and making them simultane￾ously available to punks now. For a punk in 1988, there might have been 
some local lore about the scene and a few record labels with back cata￾logues. Now one can read memoirs about so many different experiences 
of punk!
The temporality mediated and created by these books and works like 
them is distinct, I think, from frameworks of ageing and the perspectives 
that emerge as an author grows older. That latter approach to ageing was 
evident in my earlier consideration of how these authors take stock of 
some of the failures of punk to upend the status quo. Likewise, that same 
approach to ageing was present in a special issue of HeartattaCk entitled 
“Punks Over 30” that documented and explored the presence of older 
punks in a culture once thought to be only for kids; and ageing is similarly 
front and centre for a band like Done Dying (2013) that proclaims they 
“are done with the notion that my time has passed” despite being made 
up of middle-aged punks.
The temporality of these books names another matter, even if grows 
out of the realities of ageing and punk. In this context, temporality involves 
asking when does a book affect people and with what duration? These 
books bring the past to life for punks in the present, inspiring new possi￾bilities, while also belonging to a time that has passed. There is a temporal￾ity to punk—the many ages of punk—that is not exactly the history of 
punk because it is living and changing according to new gravitational 
forces established, for example, by that photograph and its novel align￾ment of different individuals who may never have been in one another’s 
orbits when they frst entered punk. It is not just them but also me and 
their works and their substantial catalogues of music and performance that 
get pulled into some sort of alignment here. There is an organizing tem￾porality that emerges when we read these books together and that does 
not exist in the same way when they are apart. Punk temporality recog￾nizes that the narratives one tells can change what we know of the past and 
alter punk for future generations. This temporality has forcefully emerged 
as something that can dissolve or frm up distinctions between the past and 
present and future. For Bag, the temporality of punk involves one in what 
is more than punk:
In the process of writing my memoirs, I discovered that I was able to situate 
my participation in the birth of the West Coast punk scene within a much 
12 ENDURING ATTACHMENTS: ON THE TEMPORALITIES OF PUNK238
broader historical context, one that was not at all obvious to me at the time. 
What started out as a series of autobiographical blog entries ended up telling 
the story of several social movements that personally affected me: the 
Chicano movement, feminism, gay rights. My particular form of punk 
expression was also deeply affected by my childhood. I was born in East 
L.A., the daughter of Mexican immigrants and I entered the U.S. educa￾tional system as a non-English-speaking student. (2012, pp. 234–235)
The story of punk is never just the story of punk, a reality that each of 
these women documents so effectively and painfully as they confront rela￾tions of domination and inequality that do not belong to punk but which 
are nonetheless intensifed by punk culture. To speak about the temporal￾ity of punk is to abandon clean distinctions between what is and is not 
punk, as well as where it starts, ends, and restarts.
This strange temporality in which the pastness of punk is created in the 
present (and the present is shaped by the past) can change the essence of 
punk, then, now, and for the future. Temporality involves recognizing the 
continuing changes and effects wrought by the knowledge contained in 
these narratives. Directly, in this instance, this means moving “marginal￾ized groups within punk” onto the stage so that they are no longer 
“fetishized strangers” (Stewart, 2019, p.  214). I can’t underscore this 
point strongly enough. The history of punk is women’s history. The his￾tory of punk is the history of people of colour. These books do not add 
new voices; these voices have always been part of punk. It is the weird 
effect of sustained efforts to forget their contributions that makes the tem￾porality of all of this so curious. These books feel as though they are add￾ing something to the punk archive. That is what this temporality involves: 
it is a restoration that feels like an addition because the chronology of 
punk is being played out of time.
A punk temporality captures some of the complex co-existence of rela￾tions of domination in punk scenes that aspire to equality and seek to end 
dehumanizing social relations. These contradictions are visible in new 
ways, as if in the form of simultaneous punk timelines: misogyny and the 
centrality of women; the whiteness and diversity of punk; unsafe spaces 
and much needed spaces of inclusion. Punk has always included the mar￾ginalized; punk has never been safe. These contradictory realities are true, 
and they can exist at the same time and sometimes even the same place. 
Temporality is not chronology. It is not then and now. The story is not 
always linear and defnitely not always progressive. One does not want to 
G. C. GRINNELL239
forget the differences between then and now, but a punk temporality 
makes it possible to offer another insight beyond the workings of chronol￾ogy. Consider these comments from Reddington, writing on the substan￾tial role of women in punk:
Finally, for all of the women I spoke to, punk was about individual freedom 
and self-expression above anything else, and it is the importance of this fac￾tor that is lost in many of the texts written after the fact. Hindsight shows 
up many of the faws in the ideology of punk, but its protagonists were, in 
the main, sincere in their activities, and no amount of academic misinterpre￾tation can deny them this. (2016, p. 169)
Reddington offers a fair defence of the individual desires that structure 
punk. But defending punk like this may not change its future. The punk 
temporality present in works by Bag, Gonzales, and Potter offers another 
possibility in which one need not defend the past and its sincerity any 
more than one would need to attack it. These narrate their own experi￾ences as the frst step to altering what we expect, demand, and imagine 
punk could be. They remain attached to what is so promising and empow￾ering in punk even when the past says it would be foolish to continue to 
believe in such ideals.
The strange temporality of punk is evident in other ways too, such as 
the digital mediums in which recordings and zines from another time and 
place live on in all sorts of unpredictable ways, sometimes carefully curated 
and sometimes not. This may be an intensifcation of what recording and 
printing have always meant for temporality. To speak about Gonzales as an 
older punk hardly makes any sense when one can listen to her perpetually 
youthful drumming on any Spitboy record. And what does it mean to 
listen to a 2021 remastered recording of something from the 1990s? What 
kind of magical transformation of the past is this? Punk temporality does 
not even end there. Listening to that “Mi Cuerpo Es Mio” 7” now, the 
frst Spitboy recording I ever heard and one of my frst punk records, it 
sounds different. And it is different, at least for me. It is different because 
I hear different things in it now, because I know more about all of these 
musicians, and especially the drummer. It is different because I am differ￾ent too. Perhaps it is even different because my hearing has changed over 
time, the consequence of too many loud shows or not enough of them 
depending on your moral calculus. It is different because I know how 
much it meant to Gonzales to title the record in Spanish and claim her 
12 ENDURING ATTACHMENTS: ON THE TEMPORALITIES OF PUNK240
identity as a Xicana in a scene that failed to acknowledge her. And punk 
has always been punctuated by getting to know one another, at least for 
me. When I met someone or saw a band live, it changed everything about 
how I listened to their music or read their zine. What is punk if it is isn’t 
this strange experience of time travel in which past activity transforms 
present experiences and vice versa?
Finally, I will end with one last example of punk temporality, drawn 
from Bag’s account of her band Cholita, fronted by the drag queen Vaginal 
Davis, from the 1980s. Being backstage “at a Cholita performance is a bit 
like seeing a bomb explode in a drag queen’s closet” with costumes every￾where. The elaborate performance makes a simple point about punk and 
its strange temporality that makes “kids” out of us all (2011, p.  378). 
Davis insisted “that every member dress the part and adopt the persona of 
a teenage Latina, the more colorful and over the top, the better,” leading 
to chaotic performances with a “message of social and sexual equality 
behind the mascara” (378). And isn’t this a perfect representation, in part 
at least, of what punk is for anyone who ages with it, a way of being a little 
bit young—immature, even—at the same time that one grows older, still 
holding out-of-step ideals and working, always working, towards a more 
just world with all the knowledge and tactics that one picks up along 
the way?
References
Bag, A. (2011). Violence Girl: East L.A. Rage to Hollywood Stage, A Chicana Punk 
Story. Feral House.
Bag, A. (2012). Work that Hoe: Tilling the Soil of Punk Feminism. Women & 
Performance: A Journal of Feminist Theory, 22(2–3), 233–238. https://doi.
org/10.1080/0740770X.2012.721079
Bennet, A. (2006). Punk’s Not Dead: The Continuing Signifcance of Punk Rock 
for an Older Generation of Fans. Sociology, 40(2), 219–235. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0038038506062030
Davis, J. R. (2012). Punk, Ageing and the Expectations of Adult Life. In A. Bennet 
& P. Hodkinson (Eds.), Ageing and Youth Culture: Music, Style and Identity
(pp. 105–118). Routledge.
Done Dying. (2013). Anthem. Shelf Life.
Duncombe, S. (2008). Notes from the Underground: Zines and the Politics of 
Alterative Culture. Microcosm.
Gonzales, M. C. (2016). The Spitboy Rule: Tales of a Xicana in a Female Punk 
Band. PM Press.
G. C. GRINNELL241
Griffn, N. (2012). Gendered Performance and Performing Gender in the DIY 
Punk and Hardcore Music Scene. Journal of International Women’s Studies, 
13(2), 66–81.
Haenfer, R. (2012). ‘More than the Xs on My Hands’: Older Straight Edgers and 
the Meaning of Style. In A. Bennet & P. Hodkinson (Eds.), Ageing and Youth 
Culture: Music, Style and Identity (pp. 9–23). Routledge.
Lohman, K., & Raghunath, A. (2019). Notes in the Margins. Punk & Post-Punk, 
8(2), 189–192. https://doi.org/10.1386/punk.8.2.189_2
Martin, V. (2012). Simba: A Collection of Personal and Political Writings from the 
Nineties Hardcore Scene. Vitriol Records.
Nguyen, M. (2011). It’s (Not) a White World: Looking for Race in Punk. In 
S. Duncombe & M. Tremblay (Eds.), White Riot: Punk Rock and the Politics of 
Race (pp. 257–267). Verso.
Phillipov, M. (2006). Haunted by the Spirit of ’77: Punk Studies and the 
Persistence of Politics. Journal of Media and Cultural Studies, 20(3), 383–393. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10304310600814326
Potter, S. (2019). Making Spaces Safer: A Guide to Giving Harassment the Boot 
Wherever You Work, Play, and Gather. AK Press.
Reddington, H. (2016). The Lost Women of Rock Music: Female Musicians of the 
Punk Era. Routledge.
Stewart, F. (2019). ‘No more heroes anymore’: Marginalized Identities in Punk 
Memorialization and Curation. Punk & Post-Punk, 8(2), 209–226. https://
doi.org/10.1386/punk.8.2.209_1
Way, L. (2019). ‘I don’t go to the gigs to go to the gigs—I don’t give a shit about 
the gigs!’: Exploring GIG Attendance and Older Punk Women. Punk & Post￾Punk, 8(2), 257–269. https://doi.org/10.1386/punk.8.2.257_1
12 ENDURING ATTACHMENTS: ON THE TEMPORALITIES OF PUNK© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 243
Switzerland AG 2024
L. Way, M. Grimes (eds.), Punk, Ageing and Time, Palgrave Studies 
in the History of Subcultures and Popular Music, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47823-9_13
CHAPTER 13
Generation Lost: Resignation, Rupture, 
and the Infnite Realities of Post-Future Punk
Owen Morawitz
Before: “It Doesn’t Feel Like the Future…”
Consider the following. If the future is already over, what comes after? 
The sensation of time has an innate sense of presence that is both immedi￾ately familiar and strangely intimate: “Why do we remember the past and 
not the future? Do we exist in time, or does time exist in us? What does it 
really mean to say that time ‘passes’? What ties time to our nature as per￾sons, to our subjectivity?” (Rovelli, 2018, pp. 2–3). In After The Future, 
Franco ‘Bifo’ Berardi (2011) describes how the twentieth century repre￾sented the peak of a mythic temporalisation of the future, corresponding 
to a concept of progress that was necessary to orient political action 
towards progressive ends (pp. 11, 18). Regardless of their ideological con￾tours, the dominant conceptual frameworks of that century—liberalism 
and social democracy; nationalism and communism; bourgeois produc￾tion and economic expansion under modernity and capitalism—all shared 
O. Morawitz (*) 
Independent Scholar, Brisbane, QLD, Australia
e-mail: o.morawitz@library.uq.edu.au244
a common certainty that was inherently wedded to this mythic state of 
temporalisation, namely that, “notwithstanding the darkness of the pres￾ent, the future will be bright” (Berardi, 2011, p. 18). Yet it was not futu￾rity’s temporal orientation but the psychological perception of the future 
itself which was mythologised, a view which emerged within progressive 
modernity and peaked following the Second World War. However, tradi￾tional notions of futurity did not simply disappear overnight; rather, the 
sociopolitical attitudes and cultural expectations established in the latter 
half of the twentieth century worked to bring about “the slow cancellation 
of the future” (Berardi, 2011, p. 18).
For Berardi (2011), the dwindling promise of progressive modernity 
can be traced back to a specifc and curious temporal fashpoint: the 1977 
release of “God Save the Queen” by The Sex Pistols. While the track’s 
original title, “No Future,” works as “a self-fulflling prophecy that slowly 
enveloped the world,” the repetition of frontman John Lydon’s sneering 
lyrical refrain and its abrasive sense of fnality also corresponds to this 
marked shift in psychological perception:
When the punks cried “No Future,” at the turning point of 1977, it seemed 
like a paradox that couldn’t be taken too seriously. Actually, it was the 
announcement of something quite important: the perception of the future 
was changing. The future is not a natural dimension of the mind. It is a 
modality of projection and imagination, a feature of expectation and atten￾tion, and its modalities and features change with the changing of cultures. 
(Berardi, 2011, p. 17, 24–25)
Linking this shift in psychological perception to the tensions imposed 
upon cultural production and human desire, Mark Fisher (2014) argues 
that the boundless horizon of twenty-frst century potential has been 
severely dampened and limited by an increasingly “crushing sense of fni￾tude and exhaustion [where it] doesn’t feel like the future” (p. 8). Through 
this feeling, twenty-frst century culture can be defned by its pronounced 
sense of lack and absence, where “in one very important sense, there is no 
present to grasp and articulate any more” (Fisher, 2014, p. 9).
Within the realm of contemporary music, we see this loss of futurity 
manifest itself in two distinct ways: frst, as a discursive cultural product 
that eschews newness in favour of endless repetition and pastiche, that is, 
in music that no longer feels futuristic; and second, a collective lack of 
perception or awareness of the present as an ephemeral historical moment 
O. MORAWITZ245
(Fisher, 2014). Punk, like many other musical genres, is continually revis￾ited through modes of representation that serve to reinforce a compulsive 
repetition and empty nostalgia for the vitriolic glory days. Simultaneously, 
genuinely new and exciting visions for radical futures remain obscured and 
closed off as potential sites for meaningful cultural production. All of 
which brings us back to our original question, albeit slightly reframed: If 
the future is to be forever perched on that boundless horizon of a time yet 
to come, one destined to be endlessly obstructed, how, if at all, could we 
ever hope to move beyond it? What happens to punk when the culture it 
aims to counter stubbornly refuses to change? If “the end of the future” is 
to be found within the “complex constellations of the present,” how 
might punk seek to actualise its own post-future potential in this current 
decade (Berardi, 2011, p. 11)?
While many scholars would likely reject the notion of punk as a cohe￾sive social movement (and perhaps rightfully so), this chapter seeks to 
identify and explore how the genre’s contemporary forms nonetheless 
contain the foundations necessary for cultivating radical forms of authen￾ticity and subjectivity. Amidst the sociopolitical tumult of 2020, three acts 
from disparate subgenres of punk—Spanish Love Songs, Code Orange, 
and Enter Shikari—released music that sought to grasp and articulate 
themes of resignation, rupture, and infnite realities. By analysing how 
these acts engage directly with the political valences of our turbulent pres￾ent, this chapter will demonstrate how artists positioned on punk’s van￾guard actively work to resist this static temporalisation and, in turn, 
inevitably gesture towards the genre’s post-future potentiality.
Resignation: “It Gets Harder, Doesn’t It?”
While the internal politics of punk itself are inherently messy, the genre’s 
signifcation of negation as a means to agency and empowerment relate 
directly (and, in some instances, often contentiously) to “contemporane￾ous socio-political questions”:
Not only did punk engender creativity, it also forged cultures that chal￾lenged prevailing social (and socioeconomic) norms in irreverent and pro￾vocative ways. Equally, punk’s critical sensibility—and tendency to social 
commentary—allowed for deeper interpretation, fltering countercultural, 
artistic and ideological infuences through a youth cultural lens at a time of 
broader socioeconomic and political change. (Worley, 2017, p. 254)
13 GENERATION LOST: RESIGNATION, RUPTURE, AND THE INFINITE…246
However, if punk truly engenders creativity and a tendency towards social 
commentary, where are the protest songs for this current decade? 
Furthermore, one might ask why is it that punk in particular struggles to 
articulate and interpret the present?
For Deena Weinstein (2006), the answer, in many instances, is the lack 
of interpretative skills and misapprehension on the part of a wider musical 
audience. Protest songs are typically oriented towards a specifcity of injus￾tice, “whether it is power in general, some particular policy or a specifc 
instance of abuse of power” (Weinstein, 2006, p. 3). However, due to the 
cynicism and consolidation of mainstream media and corporate capitalism, 
the ability of protest songs to act as meaningful catalysts for social change 
has been considerably reduced. If the perceived cause of injustice is dif￾fuse, wide-ranging, and powerful to the point of universality and ubiquity, 
the ability of a protest song to narrow in on the specifcity of the problem 
becomes diminished.
Applying this reasoning to the scarcity of punk protest songs and 
Berardi’s thesis of slow cancellation, there is a clear link between the “psy￾cho bombs” of competition, commercialisation, and labour under capital￾ism—depression, panic, unhappiness, anxiety, fear—and the affective 
conditions of those afficted by the perversity of contemporary culture 
(Genosko & Thoburn, 2011). More specifcally, Berardi’s (2011) analysis 
of depression as a principal affective driver in younger generations narrows 
in on two crucial aspects: frst, the by-product of panic induced by the 
sensory overload of the digital age, exacerbated by the competitive and 
narcissistic structures of enterprise, in turn forcing a withdrawal from the 
psychosocial sphere; and second, at the root of it all, the glaring feebleness 
of political will to generate effective change in the everyday living condi￾tions of the capitalist underclass (Genosko & Thoburn, 2011). Coupled 
together, these aspects become symptomatic of a mood of grim resigna￾tion towards the future, a lack of belief in the ability of the status quo to 
change or improve in any meaningful way.
One such instance of poignant despair can be found on Brave Faces 
Everyone (2020), the third studio album from Californian punk rock quin￾tet Spanish Love Songs. On the opening verse of “Losers,” a melodic 
mid-tempo track and the album’s lead single, frontman and guitarist Dylan 
Slocum consciously pairs the real-world effects of neoliberal policies with 
a depressive millennial worldview:
O. MORAWITZ247
Well, we’re gonna waste the days/
Getting outpriced of our apartments.
Hoping we don’t go homeless/
We sure as shit ain’t moving home.
Watching television, we’re stealing from our parents/
So many opinions on how we live/
But there’s no option for even how to get out of bed. (2020)
Here, Slocum’s lyrics pointedly articulate the song’s core themes of pre￾carity and impotence. The fragmentation of the present has become 
“reversed in the implosion of the future,” as the once-temporary condi￾tions envisioned by the adoption of and adherence to neoliberal reforms 
have now become the dominant form of labour relations. Precarity, then, 
is no longer just a conditional feature of twenty-frst-century living but the 
“general form of the labor relation in a productive, digitalized sphere, 
reticular and recombinant” (Berardi, 2011, p. 88). Taking his parents as 
direct inspiration, who lost their house and jobs during the global fnancial 
collapse of 2008, Slocum seeks to describe how fnancial insecurity has 
now become a multi-generational affiction:
I’ve lived month-to-month since I graduated college, and even in college I 
only wasn’t because I was living off loans that I now owe. I worked my ass 
off in college, but I still had loans. Most people—everybody, maybe—are 
stressed about money. Even things you don’t always realize is money, is 
money. Healthcare is money, climate change is money, mental health is def￾nitely money. Everything comes down to money and capitalism… the bane 
of our existence. (De Freitas, 2020)
Against a background of wage stagnation, ever-rising rents, and the 
increasing threat of homelessness, this pervasive sense of economic uncer￾tainty yields paradoxical and self-contradictory strategies, perpetuating 
seemingly unending cycles of impotent struggle and immiseration. Faced 
with this harsh reality and the totalisation of a capitalist worldview that 
frames every issue as constituted by and only resolvable through the 
relentless pursuit of capital, it’s hardly surprising that, for Slocum and 
many others, depression has become “the prevailing feeling of [a] genera￾tion,” where the perception of decline is no longer explicitly tied to a 
denuded trust in mass politics, but rather to a deeper, underlying cause: “a 
scenario of social and psychic involution that [seems] to cancel every pos￾sibility of building alternatives” (Berardi, 2011, p. 87).
13 GENERATION LOST: RESIGNATION, RUPTURE, AND THE INFINITE…248
Moving into the track’s chorus, Slocum personalises this dark senti￾ment through expressions of internal struggle and suicidality:
And my bleak mind/
Says it’s cheaper just to die.
The prick inside my head’s/
Laid off and daring me to try.
My bleak mind says this is all you got/
Hoping all this time.
But all you’ll fnd is/
It gets harder, doesn’t it? (Spanish Love Songs, 2020)
By connecting blame and responsibility with the faults and failures of the 
individual, Fisher (2017) stresses how the ontology of the ruling class is 
one that purposefully denies any possible social causation for mental 
illness:
The chemico-biologisation of mental illness is of course strictly commensu￾rate with its de-politicisation.… It goes without saying that all mental ill￾nesses are neurologically instantiated, but this says nothing about their 
causation.… To a degree unprecedented in any other social system (and 
capitalism is very precisely NOT a social ‘structure’ in the way that the des￾potic state or primitive socius are), capitalism both feeds on and reproduces 
the moods of populations. (p. 436)
The juxtaposition between desire and depression works to reveal the cen￾tral tension within “Losers,” where the punk catharsis of the group’s 
uplifting instrumentals contrast against Slocum’s narrative anguish, exas￾peration, and bleak forecast for millennial potential. As a horizon of poten￾tiality, the future is viewed as a threat when “the collective imagination 
becomes incapable of seeing alternatives to trends leading to devastation, 
increased poverty, and violence” (Berardi, 2011, p.  59). Under such 
oppressive conditions, the psychopathology of the depressive is left with 
little option but to question the very foundations of being (Berardi, 2011). 
If the future conforms with Berardi’s modality of projection, the pervasive 
mood of grim resignation captured by Spanish Love Songs correlates to a 
dissipation of expectation and imagination, as increased precarity and 
impotence generates frustration and despair. Echoing Slocum’s fnal line 
(“We’re mediocre/We’re losers forever”), Berardi (2011) asserts that the 
absence of movement and degradation of the public sphere have obstructed 
O. MORAWITZ249
real pathways for multiple generations to actualise their post-future 
potential:
The so-called neoliberal reforms that are continuously imposed on an 
increasingly fragmented, defeated, impotent society, which has been crushed 
by the dominant ideologies, are directed toward the destruction of any eco￾nomic security for working people…. The essential idea is that we all should 
consider life as an economic venture, as a race where there are winners and 
losers. (p. 66)
Rupture: “It’s Even Deeper than Before…”
How then might punk push past its own grim resignation and break free 
from this epidemic of depressive psychopathology? One possible pathway, 
Berardi (2011) proposes, is to directly challenge and disrupt “the century 
with no future”:
The terms “denunciation” and “engagement” no longer have meaning 
when you are a fsh getting ready to be cooked. Artists no longer search for 
a rupture, and how could they? They seek a path that leads to a state of 
equilibrium between irony and cynicism, that allows them to delay the exe￾cution, at least for a moment. All energy has moved to the war front. 
(p. 42, 44)
On their ffth LP, Underneath (2020), Code Orange boldly strive for artis￾tic dissolution, using the atypical genre assemblages of metallic hardcore, 
harsh industrial noise, and jagged electronics to achieve a form of ideo￾logical rupture.
Across the album’s three pre-release tracks and their respective music 
videos, the Pittsburgh quintet combine vivid Gothic imagery with cyber￾punk surrealism, crafting a visual aesthetic that serves to accentuate and 
sharpen lyrical themes of violent de-personalisation, mechanised aggres￾sion, engineered schizophrenia, and the existential horror of bodies with￾out organs. Second single “Swallowing the Rabbit Whole” takes this need 
for rupture and focuses on a phenomenologically rigorous representation 
of digitality, a world dominated by competing fows of information accel￾erated along spatial and temporal dimensions. After a cacophonous build￾up and the sonic detonation of the group’s immense hardcore-infused 
fury, frontman Jami Morgan’s opening verse interpolates systems of con￾trol with themes of agency, descent, and consumption:
13 GENERATION LOST: RESIGNATION, RUPTURE, AND THE INFINITE…250
It’s even deeper than before/
The hole has swallowed us, the prey are in control.
I’ve seen the other side, it’s darker than it was/
It stretches what I love until it falls apart.
In the minutia and the nuance, there’s a cloud heavy above/
Watching it inch closer, the blackest beam to take me up.
Can’t see it, couldn’t touch it, even from the highest rung/
In this cell we call a full life, is it here I’m fnally stuck? (Code Orange, 2020)
Here, absence and negation are inverted. The body is both whole and
hole, everything and nothing at once. In this way, the embodied nature 
and confrontational mindset of Underneath embraces what Fisher (2018) 
classifes as the Gothic Flatline, “where to have agency is not necessarily to 
be alive” (p. 2). Along the radical immanence of this philosophical plane, 
life and creation are not opposed to death and destruction but are instead 
elements of the same vast ontological whole. Trapped in the liminal space 
between life and death, the human body becomes merely a processor for 
“bio-info”:
Digital and biotechnologies have turned the external machine of iron and 
steel into the internalized and recombining machine of the bio-info era. The 
bio-info machine is no longer separable from body or mind because it’s no 
longer an external tool, but an internal transformer of body and mind, a 
linguistic and cognitive enhancer. Now the nanomachine is mutating the 
human brain and the linguistic ability to produce and communicate. The 
machine is us. (Berardi, 2011, p. 23)
Where the twentieth century saw the machine of speed complete the inter￾nalisation of global space through domestic labour, globalisation, and the 
eventual triumph of liberal democracy, the twenty-frst century became 
the domain of time, fought through the domination of mind and body, of 
perception and social attention. As Berardi (2011) argues, the “collapse of 
the future is rooted in the acceleration of psychic and cognitive rhythm” 
(p. 23).
Throughout “Swallowing the Rabbit Whole,” Code Orange utilise 
aggressive tempo changes and sudden bursts of devastating heaviness to 
emphasise themes of collapse and rupture. As the track shifts into a punk￾inspired d-beat, Morgan screams of the desire for self-destruction in the 
face of sensory overload:
O. MORAWITZ251
With the soldiers and all the suffering/
All good men but the smothering of what’s undone runs like blood.
A synaesthesia-flled needle pokes through the skin/
How can I be so certain, that this was more than the sum of our urges? 
(Code Orange, 2020)
These urges—our desires—Fisher (2018) argues, support the need for 
radical immanence in our technological age: “The desire of human beings 
supposedly explains the existence of machines, but how are we to account 
for this desire? How is it produced?” (p. 116). Code Orange attempt to 
answer this question by following the hunger, the swallowing, the descent 
into the rabbit (w)hole, where it naturally leads—through darkness, 
through endless consumption, through late-capitalist manufacture, 
through death and destruction—all to be reborn anew in the blazing 
inferno of violent retribution. Against the bludgeoning breakdown that 
cleaves the rhythmic meter of the track’s midsection, the band chants in 
unison: “Down, we, go” (Code Orange, 2020).
As Worley (2017) attests, punk’s politics reside both “in its refusal and 
its practice,” where an awareness of the genre’s media manipulation, com￾mercialisation, and cultural appropriation can be directed against “con￾temporaneous sociopolitical questions” (p. 254). Affrming this position, 
Morgan’s lyrics in the track’s bridge doubles down on this confrontational 
approach, skewering the acceleration of time in an era of digitality and 
bioinformation:
It felt so good to analyze and correct/
But you never really know until the foot’s on your neck.
Where will I be when I’ve aged and I can’t connect?
With these little rat fuck kids and the pigs who sign the checks?
When buzzing noise rots your ears and the breath clogs your chest/
Or better yet what are you gonna do/
When it comes your turn to pay time’s debt? (Code Orange, 2020)
By emphasising the de-personalisation of the body as merely a processor 
of bioinformation, along with the use of aggressive compositions as distor￾tions of temporal perception, Underneath becomes a confagration of 
digital decadence transfgured as a site of revolt, the “resistance of the 
social itself to the scene of its own disintegration” (Jackson, 2006, p. 188). 
In this sense, through their mission statement of artistic dissolution, Code 
13 GENERATION LOST: RESIGNATION, RUPTURE, AND THE INFINITE…252
Orange actively work to reveal and rupture the “inability of the social 
body to escape the vicious destiny that capitalism has prepared: deactiva￾tion of the social energies that once upon a time animated democracy and 
political struggle” (Berardi, 2011, p. 138).
Infinite Realities: “I Feel It Coming in the Air…”
There is perhaps no statement more effective, pernicious, and brutally 
totalising in its view of reality than “There is no alternative”: a political 
slogan (commonly abbreviated as T.I.N.A.) attributed to the infamous 
‘Iron Lady’ of British politics, stateswoman and former prime minister of 
the United Kingdom, Margaret Thatcher. By borrowing a turn of phrase 
from Victorian philosopher Herbert Spencer, Thatcherite ideology would 
do more than simply oppose differing forms of government; instead, it 
actively performed a negation of differing possibilities (Hofstadter, 1944, 
pp. 4–6).
After her swift rise to power within the United Kingdom’s Conservative 
Party, Thatcher’s ffteen-year leadership was marked by policies advocating 
for neoliberalism, free-market ideology, a deregulated, restructured capi￾talism, excessive austerity, and the dismantling of the welfare state—a pol￾icy platform in direct confict with Labour’s established theory of social 
democracy (Berlinski, 2011, p. 115). Despite oscillating periods of unpop￾ularity, Thatcher’s reign was ultimately vindicated by the eventual collapse 
of the Soviet Union in 1989, an event which led to Francis Fukuyama’s 
famous proclamation that the worldwide ascendancy of (neo)liberal 
democracy over communism and social democracy as the dominant sys￾tem of political governance constituted “the End of History” (Hughes, 
2011, p. 35). In the decade since her death in 2013, Thatcher’s political 
legacy continues to exert considerable infuence both inside and outside 
the sphere of European politics (Albertson & Stepney, 2019).
Against this background of historical and political uncertainty, British 
outft Enter Shikari have found success and longevity through an eclectic 
fusion of electronica and punk rock. Across their back catalogue—a veri￾table cornucopia of genre soundscapes including hardcore, dubstep, met￾alcore, Brit-pop, classical, post-hardcore, and jungle—one fnds a divisive 
political core. On their sixth LP, the poignantly titled Nothing Is True and 
Everything Is Possible (2020), the St Albans quartet tackle feelings of anxi￾ety and stasis head-on with “T.I.N.A.”: a euphoric, three-minute rave 
O. MORAWITZ253
punk rager that functions as an ode to ideological struggle, infnite reali￾ties, and the spectre of possibility.
Vocalist, lyricist, and conceptual mastermind Rou Reynolds begins with 
a recitation of Thatcher’s slogan, fusing his spoken word delivery with a 
mixture of despair and hope:
There is no alternative/
Take my hand if you want to live. (Enter Shikari, 2020)
Here, Reynolds’ invitation to the listener is at once both infectious and 
euphoric. As the frontman explains, “T.I.N.A.” is “about the stunting of 
thought” and was written to evoke a sense of temporal dislocation and 
ephemeral timelessness (Nothing is True & Everything is Possible, 2020). 
Transitioning to the pre-verse refrain, Reynolds’ voice soars on hung mel￾odies, embracing the liberating jouissance of familiar dance foor anthems:
No, I feel it coming in the air/
You can enter if you dare.
It’s the essence of humanity/
To build an infnite reality. (Enter Shikari, 2020)
Themes of war, violence, and death collide, propelled along by percussive 
dance beats, as the weight of history becomes a burden on the conscious￾ness of the governed subject. Moving into the verse, daring becomes a 
physical manifestation of desire, an exertion of free will and human 
nature, where:
The present is the past that we cannot shed/
Umbilical cord that we cannot cut/
A secret trapdoor that we cannot shut. (Enter Shikari, 2020)
For Reynolds, our current condition of stasis and anachronism has led 
to a form of ideological purgatory that disavows the spectre of 
possibility:
Possibility isn’t something that’s just positive or motivating anymore. 
Normally when people hear the word ‘possibility’ they think of the future. 
“What can we design? What are we capable of?” Whereas now I think we’re 
almost like, “Oh Christ, what’s next?” [There are] so many disconcerting 
things happening in the world…. And you have to watch it because it’s very 
13 GENERATION LOST: RESIGNATION, RUPTURE, AND THE INFINITE…254
easy to get into a nihilist way of thinking—“Everything’s fucked, fuck it!”—
which is obviously never going to help anyone, then it becomes self￾defeating. (Rose, 2020)
As Fisher (2017) writes, the “immanent transformative immediacy” of 
countercultural movements represented a threat to the perverse legacy of 
Thatcherite ideology through its affrmation of collective desire:
It reinforced the feelings of despair, disaffection and rage that bourgeois 
culture ordinarily makes us distrust. As such, music functioned as a form of 
consciousness-raising, in a which a mass audience could not only experience 
its feelings being validated, it could locate the origins of those feelings in 
oppressive structures. (p. 423)
Rather than give in to resignation, Enter Shikari seize upon this desire for 
rupture and embrace the potential of a post-future world. Daring to allude 
to hope, Reynolds’ pre-chorus pierces the listener’s mental veil in an 
attempt to see both through and beyond what Thatcherite ideology has 
deliberately obstructed:
I never noticed you were in disguise/
But now I see you T.I.N.A. (T.I.N.A., T.I.N.A).
You were a barrier around my mind/
Yeah, I see through you T.I.N.A. (T.I.N.A., T.I.N.A.). (Enter Shikari, 2020)
By turning the slogan-as-object into a subject, this anthropomorphised 
“T.I.N.A.” is made to embody an allusive spectre—if only “she” could be 
convinced. For Reynolds and Enter Shikari, it is the ignorance of 
“T.I.N.A.” as a governing political worldview, and, by proxy, the steadfast 
adherents of neoliberal dogma, that provides an opportunity for 
consciousness-raising in the twenty-frst century.
The focus of social transformation, Berardi (2011) notes, rests in the 
pursuit of creative singularity as a contagious force:
The present ignorance has to be seen as the space of a possibility…. The 
force of collective intelligence is boundless. Theoretically. But it currently 
lacks any consciousness of itself. Intelligence without self-consciousness…. 
The ignorance of the general intellect is the starting point, after the 
future. (p. 163)
O. MORAWITZ255
Through an infectious hook and triumphant chorus, the track’s sonic con￾tagion moves from the phenomenological to the ontological, turning the 
act of seeing into being itself: a projection of possibility and an orientation 
towards the infnite realities of human potential. In this way, the produc￾tive power of “T.I.N.A.” resides in its ability to actualise what Worley 
(2017) describes as punk’s dialectical stimulus, the negation of a negation. 
Through his lyrical gestures, Reynolds seeks to denounce the neoliberal 
self’s denial of “impersonal and collective structures,” instead creating a 
space for a new unbound subject, a “we that is both the agent of struggle 
and what is being struggled for” (Fisher, 2017, pp. 420–21). As Enter 
Shikari’s album title makes all-too clear: everything is possible. The choice, 
then, is ours.
After: “The Promise Is Over”
In the closing chapter of After the Future, Berardi (2011) interpolates and 
reframes the work of early twentieth-century Italian art theorist Filippo 
Tommaso Marinetti, presenting a “Manifesto of Post-Futurism” (p. 165). 
Across eleven points of action, Berardi (2011) calls for a widespread social 
recomposition at the “extreme promontory of the centuries,” where 
poetry is cast as a bridge “over the abyss of nothingness to allow the shar￾ing of different imaginations and to free singularities” (p. 166). Only by 
abolishing the separation “between poetry and mass communication” and 
reclaiming “the power of media from the merchants,” can artists hope to 
turn their art into “a life-changing force,” one ready to “sing to the infn￾ity of the present and abandon the illusion of a future” (Berardi, 2011, 
p. 166).
The grand nostalgic vision of punk is one of ongoing ideological con￾testation, a sneering challenge and raised middle fnger in the face of dom￾inant ideologies, hegemonic forces, and social normalisation (Hebdige, 
1979, pp. 138–139). Yet, as Fisher (2014) notes, punk, like all forms of 
cultural production, has not been immune from the “gradual yet relentless 
way in which the future has been eroded over the last 30 years” (p. 13). 
Locked in endemic forms of paralysis, punk’s formalism has been gripped 
frmly in the stranglehold of endless repetition and hollow pastiche. 
Indeed, overcoming these historical antimonies and becoming a true com￾munity of resistance, Kelly (2006) suggests, will require the resolve to ask 
more authentic questions:
13 GENERATION LOST: RESIGNATION, RUPTURE, AND THE INFINITE…256
What might appear as humanity or universal human community if one radi￾cally reconsiders the very concept of the future? Where are there instances of 
human solidarity that explore or disclose concepts of temporality that resist 
assimilation into the sway of an historical framework determined by technol￾ogy? (p. 151)
The three acts discussed in this chapter have dared to ask such authentic 
questions, in turn providing a vital and necessary voice for the Generation 
Lost—through Spanish Love Song’s ode to millennial precarity and resig￾nation, in Code Orange’s savage cry for rupture and digital disintegration, 
and the euphoric power of Enter Shikari’s spectre of possibility. Through 
their musical expression and avid creativity, these artists seek to reclaim 
punk as a multi-valent movement for the youth subculture of the present, 
of and for the collective subjects of our ephemeral ‘now’, a movement 
with vast potential and an unknown future trajectory, a movement that 
must embrace communal solidarity and the infnite realities of lost futures.
References
Albertson, K., & Stepney, P. (2019). 1979 and All That: A 40-year Reassessment 
of Margaret Thatcher’s Legacy on Her Own Terms. Cambridge Journal of 
Economics, 44(2), 319–342. https://doi.org/10.1093/cje/bez037
Berardi, F. (2011). In G. Genosko & N. Thoburn (Eds.), After The Future. AK Press.
Berlinski, C. (2011). There Is No Alternative: Why Margaret Thatcher Matters. 
Basic Books.
Code Orange. (2020, February 8). Swallowing The Rabbit Whole [Video]. 
YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ctn14oYz0qA
De Freitas, R. (2020, February 11). Break Even Or Die Trying: Spanish 
Love Songs’ Dylan Slocum on Punk Success. The Hard Times. 
https://noise.thehardtimes.net/2020/02/11/break-even-or-die￾trying-spanish-love-songs-dylan-slocum-on-punk-success/
Enter Shikari. (2020). T.I.N.A. [Song]. On Nothing Is True & Everything Is 
Possible [Album]. SO Recordings.
Fisher, M. (2014). Ghosts of My Life: Writings on Depression, Hauntology and Lost 
Futures. Zero Books.
Fisher, M. (2017). In D. Ambrose (Ed.), K-punk: The Collected and Unpublished 
Writing of Mark Fisher (2004–2016). Repeater Books.
Fisher, M. (2018). Flatline Constructs: Gothic Materialism and Cybernetic Theory￾Fiction. Exmilitary Press. (Original Work Published 1999).
Genosko, G., & Thoburn, N. (2011). The Transversal Communism of Franco 
Berardi. In After The Future (pp. 3–8). AK Press.
O. MORAWITZ257
Hebdige, D. (1979). Subculture: The Meaning of Style. Methuen.
Hofstadter, R. (1944). Social Darwinism in American Thought  – 1860–1915. 
University of Philadelphia Press.
Hughes, C. (2011). Liberal Democracy as the End of History: Fukuyama and 
Postmodern Challenges. Routledge.
Jackson, K. (2006). Gothic Music and the Decadent Individual. In I.  Peddie 
(Ed.), The Resisting Muse: Popular Music and Social Protest (1st ed., 
pp. 177–188). Ashgate.
Kelly, S. K. (2006). Communities of Resistance: Heavy Metal as a Reinvention of 
Social Technology. In I. Peddie (Ed.), The Resisting Muse: Popular Music and 
Social Protest (1st ed., pp. 149–162). Ashgate.
Nothing Is True & Everything Is Possible. (2020, April 17). Apple Music. 
https://music.apple.com/gb/album/nothing-is-true-everything￾is-possible/1496648817
Rose, A. (2020, April 21). Enter Shikari: Making Sense of the 
Nonsensical. Hysteria Magazine. https://www.hysteriamag.com/enter￾shikari-making-sense-nonsensical/
Rovelli, C. (2018). The Order of Time (E. Segre & S. Carnell, Trans.). Penguin.
Spanish Love Songs. (2020). Losers [Song]. On Brave Faces Everyone [Album]. 
Pure Noise Records.
Weinstein, D. (2006). Rock Protest Songs: So Many and So Few. In I. Peddie 
(Ed.), The Resisting Muse: Popular Music and Social Protest (1st ed., 
pp. 3–16). Ashgate.
Worley, M. (2017). No Future: Punk, Politics and British Youth Culture, 
1976–1984. Cambridge University Press.
13 GENERATION LOST: RESIGNATION, RUPTURE, AND THE INFINITE…© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 259
Switzerland AG 2024
L. Way, M. Grimes (eds.), Punk, Ageing and Time, Palgrave Studies 
in the History of Subcultures and Popular Music, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47823-9
Index
A
Abuse, 215
See also Violence
Addiction, 40
Adolescence, 53, 56, 65–66, 121, 
122, 124
Age appropriateness, 17, 19, 26–27, 
30, 96, 97
Age convergence, 77–80
running across generations, 
81–83
Running Punks, 73, 84–87
See also Generational differences
Ageism
ageing-punk confict, 19–20
balance with punk values, 26–30
cultural expectations 
overview, 16–18
feminist toolkit, 23–25, 27
moments of conformity, 25–26
punk toolkit, 21–23, 25–26, 
28–29
Alcohol, 40–41, 46
Aldridge, Ren, 234
Alley, Sin, 143–144
Anarchism, 6, 7, 113, 
115–120, 124–129
See also British anarcho-punk
Anarchist Black Cross, 125
Anarchist Federation, 125
Anarchist Youth Federation 
(AYF), 119
Anderson, Timothy, 80
Andes, Linda, 6
Animal rights, 37, 124, 228
Anti-authoritarianism, 18–21
British anarcho-punk, 118, 
124, 127–128
Anti-consumerism, 18
Anti-Flag, 65
Anti-Pasti, 161
Appearance, 2, 18–19, 21, 
145–150
female punks, 20, 24–28260 INDEX
Archiving, 3–4, 201–203
queer punk; accounts and 
experiences, 214–215; Bent Fest
workshop, 206–210; creativity, 
210–212; space and place, 
212–213, 215
scholarship and music 
heritage, 203–205
Art, see History writing; Midlife 
creativity; Zines
Arthur, Damien, 82–83
Ashmore, Paul, 209
Authenticity, 35, 38, 80, 98–101
creative work, 170
post-future punk, 245, 255–256
psychobilly, 140–144; fashionable 
memories, 146–150; spatial 
marginalization, 150–153
Autoethnography, 73–74, 77–87
B
Bad Religion, 54
Bag, Alice, Violence Girl
(2011), 225–231
ageing and shaping 
diversity, 235–236
punk temporalities, 236–240
The Bags, 229–230
Baker, Sarah, 204, 210
Bauhaus, 167
B-Boys, 5
The Beatles, ‘When I’m Sixty-Four’ 
(1967), 76
Becker, Howard, 172–173
Bennett, Andy, 5–6, 37, 85–86, 
204, 228
challenging stereotypes, 109
collective nostalgia, 80
critical overseers, 102, 235–236
gig going, 28, 96
music heritage, 203
youthful naivety, 129
Bent Fest, 202, 206–210
Berardi, Franco, After the Future
(2011), 243–244, 246, 
248–250, 254–255
Beringer, Dan, 38–40, 42, 47
Berlin psychobillies, 135–136
fashionable memories, 145–150
memory and subculture in 
Germany, 137–138
real psychobilly, 140–144
spatial marginalization and 
embodied 
authenticity, 150–153
violent origins of, 138–140
Bérubé-Sasseville, Olivier, 3–4
Bioinformation, 250–252
Birmingham Music Archive, 202
Birth, Kevin, 153
Bishopsgate Institute Library and 
Archive (London), 216
Blaikie, Andrew, 77
Blondie, 79–80
Bodies, 46–47, 77, 151–153, 250–252
Bohemianism, 106, 107
Bolin, Göran, 66
Bourdieu, Pierre, 35
Bradbury, Hilary, 205
Bray, Ryan, 55
Bricolage, 18
British anarcho-punk, 7, 113–115
anarchism then and now, 124–129
identity, memory, and nostalgia, 
6, 121–124
relationship with 
anarchism, 115–120
British Library (London), 3, 203
British Museum (London), 236
Buxton, Darrell, 159–160, 
164–168, 173
The Byrds 'Turn! Turn! Turn!' 
(1965), 76INDEX 261
C
Cameron, Laura J., 215
Cantillon, Zelmarie, 204, 205
Capitalism, 34, 100, 119, 
227, 246–249
Career punks, 97
The Castration Squad, 229
Caswell, Michelle, 202, 208, 214
Chalmers, Tandy D., 82–83
Chaufour, Lucile, 36
Chidgey, Red, 180
Childcare, 48
Cholita, 240
The Clash, 116, 189
‘Janie Jones’ (1977), 76–77
Class War, 119
Code Orange, ‘Swallowing the Rabbit 
Whole’ (2020), 245, 249–252
Cohen, Sara, 204
Collaborative practice
archival workshops, 201–203; Bent 
Fest workshop methods, 
205–210; Bent Fest workshop 
results, 210–215
zine-making, 181, 195
Collectivity, 43, 82–83
collective memories, 49, 136, 
138, 151
collective nostalgia, 80
DIY ethos, 186–187, 195
Commercialism, 59–61, 169–170
Communism, 33–34, 36, 41–42
Community-led archiving, see
Archiving
Community, value of, 186–187
Compilation albums, see Punk-O￾Rama (1994–2005)
Concrete Blonde, 167
Conformity, 25–26
Connerton, Paul, 151
Conway, Martin A., 122
Cooper, Charlotte, 202, 207
Copper, Baba, 18, 20
Corporate incorporators, 97
Covid-19 pandemic, 182
Covid Realities, 181
Crass, 43, 115–120, 166
‘Punk Is Dead’ (1978), 114–115
‘Series of Shock Slogans and 
Mindless Token Tantrums’ 
(1982), 117
Creativity, see History writing; Midlife 
creativity; Zines
Critical overseers, 102, 236
Cross, Rich, 118–119
Cultural gerontology, 16–18, 22
Cultural injustice, 204
Cultural production, 
211–212, 244–245
Czech punk males, 33–34, 36–37
bodies, work, and family, 46–48
exploiting the past, 41–43
fnding home, 43–46
generations and masculinities, 34–35
meanings of punk, 39–41
D
Damon, William, 121
Davila, Richard Cruz, 2
Davis, Fred, 123
Davis, Joanna R., 6–7, 77, 97, 
102, 128–129
Davis, Vaginal, 240
De Boise, Sam, 35
De Cesari, Chiara, 203
Demented Are Go, 139–140
Democratic ideal, 179–180, 193–194
Denzin, Norman, 56
Depression, 246–249
Dezerter, 36
Digitality, see Technology
Digital mapping, 207, 216
Dimova, Rozita, 203262 INDEX
Dines, Mike, 115, 116
Disabled people, 16, 169, 236
DiVeglia, Angela L., 214
DIY ethos, 18, 21, 72, 76, 165
careers, 97, 103–107
female perspectives, 19, 25
zine-making, 179, 185, 186, 195
DIY Space for London, 212
Donaghey, Jim, 118
Done Dying, 237
Downes, Julia, 208–209
Drugs, 40–41
E
E!E, 38
East Punk Memories (dir. Lucile 
Chaufour, 2012), 36
Eckert, Fabian, 137
Economic insecurity, 34, 97, 104, 
247, 249
Eis, Melanie, 137
Embodied experience, 
151–153, 250–252
Employment, see Work issues
Engels, Friedrich, 46
Enter Shikari, ‘T.I.N.A.’ (2020), 
245, 252–255
Epitaph Records, see Punk-O-Rama
(1994–2005)
Eves, Alison, 215
Excavating the Reno, 204
Exhibitions, 201, 203–204
F
Fales Library (New York), 202
Family, 47–48, 106–107
Fanzines, see Zines
Fashion, 145–150
See also Appearance
Fashionbillies, 146–148
Fatherhood, 48
Fear of ageing, 76–77
Featherstone, Mike, 95
Female perspectives, 3, 7, 178
ageing-punk confict, 19–20
ageist pressures vs. punk 
values, 26–30
cultural expectations 
overview, 16–18
feminist toolkit, 23–25, 27
moments of conformity, 25–26
psychobilly fashion, 145–150
punk toolkit, 21–23, 25–26, 28–29
punk values across lifecourse, 18–19
zine-making, 182–183; fnding 
ageing, 190–191; punk values, 
184–190; refections on zines as 
creation, 192–196
Femininity, 142–144, 146–150
Feminism, 19, 77, 143, 232
feminist toolkit, 23–25, 27
queer punk, 207–208
safe spaces, 233–234
zines, 182, 190
Fife, Kirsty, 4
Fisher, Mark, 244, 248, 250, 251, 
254, 255
40th anniversary of punk, 2–3, 
203, 236
Freire, Paulo, 205
Frith, Simon, 4–5
Frontman (2013–present), 46
Fukuyama, Francis, 252
Fulbrook, Mary, 136
Future punk, see Post-future punk
G
The Garage (London), 215
Garber, Jenny, 150
Gébová, Daniela, 36–37
GenderINDEX 263
archives and exhibitions, 201–202
Berlin psychobillies, 136–138, 
142–144; fashionable 
memories, 145–150; spatial 
marginalization and embodied 
authenticity, 150–153
female music careers, 230–233
femininity, 142–144, 146–150
feminism, 19, 77, 143, 232; feminist 
toolkit, 23–25, 27; queer punk, 
207–208; safe spaces, 233–234; 
zines, 182, 190
making safer spaces, 233–234
masculinity, 34–35, 137–138, 
142–144, 146–147, 153
Punk-O-Rama, 62
punk temporalities, 227, 238–239
writing and shaping punk, 235–236
See also Czech punk males; Female 
perspectives
Generational differences, 33–34, 
77–80, 95
bodies, work, and family, 46–48
exploiting the past, 41–43
fnding home, 43–46
meanings of punk, 39–41
Portuguese punks, 98–103
punk masculinities, 34–35
running across generations, 81–83
Running Punks, 73, 84–87
studies on punk and ageing, 36–37
Geographical mapping, 207
Germany, see Berlin psychobillies
Giddens, Anthony, 95
Goffman, Erving, 167
The Golden Girls (1985–1992), 77
Gonzales, Michelle Cruz, The Spitboy 
Rule (2016), 225–229, 231–233
ageing and shaping 
diversity, 235–236
punk temporalities, 236–240
Gordon, Alastair, 141, 143
Gothic Flatline, 250
Gothic subculture, 5, 96–97
Grassroots heritage projects, see
Archiving
Gray, Emily M., 181
Green, Ben, 56–57
Green Day, 54, 59
Gregory, Julie, 25, 95
Griffn, Naomi, 236
Grimes, Matt, 6, 7, 115
Gullette, Margaret Morganroth, 18
H
Haenfer, Ross, 6–7, 25, 37, 228
Halberstam, Jack, 210, 211, 213
Hall, Mirko M., 137
Hancock, Black Hawk, 67
Hardcore punk, 39, 45, 48
Hardy, Steve, 159–160, 164–168, 173
Harry, Debbie, 80
Hart, Daniel, 121
Hawk, Tony, 55–56
Haynes, Pete, 159, 168–171, 173
HeartattaCk (1994–2006), 237
Henriksson, Helena Wahlström, 35
Hepworth, Mike, 95
Hippy counterculture, 4, 
116–117, 119
History writing, 201–203
punk women, 225–229; ageing and 
shaping diversity, 235–236; 
punk temporalities, 236–240; 
stories of three 
women, 229–234
queer punk; accounts and 
experiences, 214–215; Bent Fest
workshop, 206–210; creativity, 
210–212; space and place, 
212–213, 215
scholarship and music 
heritage, 203–205264 INDEX
Hitchings, Russell, 83
Hobbs, Dick, 120
Hodkinson, Paul, 5, 37, 96
Holland, Samantha, 29, 96
Home, 43–46, 164
Hook, Peter, 161
Hopkin, Mary, ‘Those Were the Days’ 
(1969), 76
Hosek, Petr (Sid), 36–37
Houpt, Katharine, 180, 182, 195–196
Howes, Seth, 137
Hrabovská, Eva, 38–41, 47, 48
Huber, Alison, 210
Hughes, Langston, 211–212
Hungary, 36
Hypercriticism, 102–103
I
Identity formation, 65, 80, 121–124
Identity, shared, 72–74, 82–83, 86–88
Ideological struggle
infnite realities, 252–255
resignation, 245–249
rupture, 249–252
Infnite realities, 252–255
Inglis, Chris, 71, 73–74
punk across generations, 77–80
running across generations, 81–83
Running Punks, 84–87
Internet, 62–63, 99–100, 103
J
Janssen, Susanne, 203
K
Kahn, Leslie, 236
Kelly, Sean K., 255–256
Kien, Grant, 56–57
King, John, 169
King, Nicola, 122–123
Kmeny (dir. Daniela Gébová, 
2015), 36–37
Knowledge transmission, 
102–103, 163
Kristeva, Julia, 173
Kumová, Petra, 38, 43, 48
Kurík, Bob, 36, 42, 45–46
L
Lapsed Clubber Audio Map, 207
Lashua, Brett, 207
Last Mourning, 160
Latham, Alan, 83
Lawler, Steph, 121–122
LCD Soundsystem, ‘Losing My Edge’ 
(2002), 98
Leblanc, Lauraine, 145
Legacy, 35–36, 63–67, 162
Legends, 97, 102
Leonard, Marion, 203
LGBTQ+, see Queer punk
Lorr, Michael J., 67
Los Crudos, 232
Lowis, Michael J., 56
Lupton, Deborah, 181
The Lurkers, 159, 168–169
M
MacKaye, Ian, 138
Málek, Stepán, 46–47 ̌
Manchester Digital Music 
Archive, 202
Manifesto of Post-Futurism, 255
Mannheim, Karl, 34
Marciniak, Marta, 36, 77
Masculinity, 34–35, 137–138, 
142–144, 146–147, 153
Maslow, A. H., 56
McKay, George, 117
McKemmish, Sue, 214
McRobbie, Angela, 150INDEX 265
Media representations, 4, 17, 22, 95
Mental health, 83
Merchandising companies, 105–106
The Meteors, 139–140
‘Wreckin’ Crew’ (1983), 152
Midlife creativity, 157–159
Johnny Vincent's story, 160–163
maintaining anarchy, 171–173
Pete Haynes' story, 168–171
Steve Hardy and Darrell Buxton’s 
story, 164–168
Mimicry, 152–153
The Minestompers, 151
Mod subculture, 4
Moon, Tony, 166
Morgan, Ashley, 71, 73–75
punk across generations, 77–80
running across generations, 81–83
Running Punks, 84–87
Morgan, Jami, 249–252
Morgan, Rhodri, 72, 84–85
Mosh pits, 28, 77, 96, 150–152
Muñoz, José Esteban, 214
Music
careers in, 46–47, 103–107, 
160–161, 230–233
fear of ageing, 76–77
generational differences, 78–80
genres, 95
heritage, 203–205
nostalgia, 5–6
post-future punk, 244–245; 
ideological rupture, 249–252; 
infnite realities, 252–255; 
resignation, 245–249; See also
Peak music experiences
N
Naivety, 129
Narrative construction, 
121–123, 214–215
Neoliberalism, 34, 246–247, 252, 254
Nguyen, Mimi Thi, 4
Northern Ireland, 147
Nostalgia, 5–6, 95–96, 123–124, 165
collective nostalgia, 80
female perspetives, 191
peak music experiences, 
56–57, 66–68
Portuguese punks, 100–101
Novelty, 171–173
N.V.Ú., 46–47
O
Offcial Dreamcast Magazine
(1999–2001), 60
The Offspring, 54, 59
O’Hara, Craig, 118
Older punk women, see Female 
perspectives
1-2-3-4 Go! Records (Oakland), 226
Ouijageist (dir. John R. Walker, 
2018), 167
Outsiderism, 79–80, 86, 164–165, 
168, 171–173
Ozzi, Dan, 54
P
Pacifsm, 119
Parenthood, 48, 106–107
Participatory ideal, 179–180, 193–194
Patriarchal systems, 23
Peak music experiences
commercial exposure to 
punk, 59–61
enduring impact of Punk-O-Rama 
and Pro Skater, 61–64
lasting impressions of Punk-O￾Rama and Pro Skater, 64–67
nostalgia, 56–57
rise of Punk-O-Rama and Pro 
Skater, 54–56
Persons Unknown trial (1979), 
117, 125
Peter, Beate, 207266 INDEX
The Petrol Girls, 234
Pigs For Slaughter (1981–1982), 119
Pixová, Michaela, 36, 43, 48
Pizza Hut, 59–60
Place
ageism, 28
home, 43–46, 164
queer punk, 212–213, 215
rural environments, 43–45, 164
safe spaces, 233–234
spatial marginalization, 150–153
Poland, 36, 77
Political engagement, 45–46, 
64–65, 129–130
zine-making, 188–190
Political squatting, 45
Portugal, 96
career opportunities, 103–107
generational differences, 98–103
Post-future punk, 243–245
ideological rupture, 249–252
infnite realities, 252–255
resignation, 245–249
Post-memory narrative, 123
Post-socialist space, 36
Potter, Shawna, Making Spaces Safer
(2019), 225–229, 233–234
ageing and shaping 
diversity, 235–236
punk temporalities, 236–240
Poverty, 106
Power Lunches (London), 212
Pro Skater (1999–2020), 55–56
commercial exposure to, 59–61
enduring impact of, 61–64
lasting impressions of, 64–67
Protest songs, 246
Psychobilly, see Berlin psychobillies
Ptolomey, Amanda, 179, 181
Punk & Post-Punk (2012–present), 75
Punk London (2016), 3, 203
Punk temporalities, 225–229, 
236–240, 243–245
See also Post-future punk
Punk toolkit, 21–23, 25–26, 28–29
Punk-O-Rama (1994–2005), 54–55
commercial exposure to, 59–61
enduring impact of, 61–64
lasting impressions of, 64–67
PWR BTTM, 215
Q
Queer punk, 201–205
accounts and experiences, 214–215
Bent Fest workshop, 206–210
creativity, 210–212
space and place, 212–213, 215
R
Race, 3, 16, 201–202, 232–233
punk temoporalities, 238
writing and shaping punk, 
227, 235–236
Rage Against the Machine, 65
Raha, Maria, 23
Ramones, 168
‘I Don’t Want to Grow Up’ 
(1995), 75, 76
Record shops, 60, 104–105
Reddington, Helen, 3, 23, 227, 239
Rehák, Vojtech, 38, 41–42, 45–48 ̌
Reminiscence bumps, 56
The Reno (Manchester), 204
Researchers Don’t Cry?!, 181
Resignation, 245–249
Resistance, 162, 171–172, 211
ageing-punk confict, 19–20
ageist pressures vs. punk 
values, 26–30
cultural expectations of older 
women, 16–18
feminist toolkit, 23–25, 27
post-future punk, 255–256
punk toolkit, 21–23, 25–26, 28–29
punk values across lifecourse, 18–19
Retirement, 29–30INDEX 267
Reynolds, Rou, 253–255
Rice, Anne, 167
Ricœur, Paul, 121
Rimbaud, Penny, 116–119
Riot grrrl, 150, 179, 190, 202, 231
Roberts, Les, 204
Robinson, Lucy, 3, 203
Rockers subculture, 4
Rovelli, Carlo, 243
Rowlands, Kevin, 165
The Roxy, 169
The Ruins, 160, 161
Running, 75, 81–83
See also Running Punks
Running Punks, 71–73, 75, 84–87
Rural environments, 43–45, 164
S
Savage, Jon, 18, 116
Scene identity, 4
Scene rejecters, 97
Schulkind, Matthew D., 5
Sex Pistols, 2, 116, 165
'God Save the Queen' (1977), 244
Shahan, Cyrus M., 137
Shared experiences, 67–68
See also Collectivity
Sharp, Megan, 140
Shields, Rob, 44
Sioux, Siouxie, 167
Situationist International (SI), 117
Skill sharing, 187
Skinheads, 138, 139
Slamdancing, 5, 7
The Slits, 166
Slocum, Dylan, 246–249
Smith, Laurajane, 204
Social class, 170, 246
Social injustice, 190, 246
Space
older punk women, 17–18, 20
post-socialist spaces, 36
psychobilly spaces, 137, 150–153
queer punk, 206–210, 
212–213, 215
safe spaces, 233–234
Spanish Love Songs, ‘Losers’ 
(2020), 245–249
Spitboy, 231–233, 239–240
Stagnant punks, 97
Stewart, Francis, 2–3, 236
Straight edge, 6–7, 37, 138, 147
Strong, Catherine, 5, 120
Strummer, Joe, 75, 76
Subcultural capital, 35, 38, 41–43, 
100, 102–107
Subculture concept, 35–36, 57–58
Subversion, 184–185
Successful ageing theory, 16
T
Taylor, Jodie, 85–86, 206, 211, 213
Technology, 62–63, 66, 99–100, 
103, 249–252
Teddy Boys subculture, 4
Temporalities, see Punk temporalities
Thatcher, Margaret, 252
Thornton, Sarah, 41
Thoroughbreds of Wisdom, 160
Thurnell-Read, Thomas, 101
Tiger Army, 141, 144
Timeline method workshop, 
202, 205–210
resulting source, 210–215
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater, see Pro Skater
(1999–2020)
Torkelson, Jason, 7
Tsitsos, Bill, 7, 77
Tulle, Emmanuelle, 82–83
Twigg, Julia, 17, 27, 77
U
UCLA Library Special Collections, 3
UK Subs, 161
Undercover ageism, 22268 INDEX
United States of America (USA), 
147, 229–233
Utopianism, 126, 129
V
Vanian, Dave, 167
Vincent, Johnny, 160–163, 173
Vincour, Lukás, 36–37
Violence, 135–136, 138–142, 
151–152, 214–215, 230
Vogel, Shane, 211–212
W
Wapping Autonomy Centre (The 
Anarchist Centre), 
117–118, 125–126
Ward, Jessica B., 3
War on Women, 233
Warzone Dialectogram, 207
The Watermelon Woman (dir. Cheryl 
Dunye, 1996), 207–208
Watkins, Jimmy, 72, 84, 86
Watson, Ash, 181
Way, Laura, 37, 75, 86, 148, 228
Weinstein, Deena, 5, 246
Welfare Imaginaries, 181
The Who, ‘My Generation’ (1965), 76
Williams, Raymond, 159
Wilson, Sherryl, 17
Women Against State Pension 
Inequality (WASPI), 23
Working-with process, 209
Work issues, 47, 100
female perspectives, 186
music careers, 46–47, 103–107, 
160–161, 230–233
Worley, Matthew, 35, 115, 245, 
251, 255
Wrecking, 150–152
Writing, see History writing; Midlife 
creativity; Zines
X
X-Acto, 105
Xicana women, 227, 231–233
Y
Youth culture, 4–6, 57, 75–76, 
95–98, 228
Z
Zines, 119–120, 164, 206, 211, 236
archiving, 4
history and ethos, 166, 178–182
older women's zine-making, 
182–183; fnding ageing, 
190–191; punk values, 
184–190; refections on zines as 
creation, 192–196
punk temporalities, 239–240
Zobl, Elke, 211
