QUALITY CONTROL IN
 
FRUIT AND VEGETABLE PROCESSING
 
Methods and Strategies Innovations in Agricultural and Biological Engineering 
QUALITY CONTROL IN
 
FRUIT AND VEGETABLE PROCESSING
 
Methods and Strategies 
Edited by 
Megh R. Goyal, PhD, PE
 
Faizan Ahmad, MTech
  
First edition published 2023 
Apple Academic Press Inc. 
1265 Goldenrod Circle, NE, 
Palm Bay, FL 32905 USA 
760 Laurentian Drive, Unit 19, 
Burlington, ON L7N 0A4, CANADA 
CRC Press 
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, 
Suite 300, Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742 USA 
4 Park Square, Milton Park, 
Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN UK 
© 2023 by Apple Academic Press, Inc. 
Apple Academic Press exclusively co-publishes with CRC Press, an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the authors, editors, and publisher cannot assume 
responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors, editors, and publishers have attempted 
to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to 
publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged, please write and let us know so 
we may rectify in any future reprint. 
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any 
form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and 
recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers. 
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on CCC 
please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk 
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used only for identification 
and explanation without intent to infringe. 
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication 
Title: Quality control in fruit and vegetable processing : methods and strategies / edited by Megh R. Goyal, PhD, PE, 
Faizan Ahmad, MTech. 
Names: Goyal, Megh R., editor. | Ahmad, Faizan, 1986- editor. 
Series: Innovations in agricultural and biological engineering. 
Description: First edition. | Series statement: Innovations in agricultural and biological engineering | Includes bibliographical 
references and index. 
Identifiers: Canadiana (print) 20220399875 | Canadiana (ebook) 20220399891 | ISBN 9781774911181 (hardcover) | 
ISBN 9781774911198 (softcover) | ISBN 9781003304999 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Fruit processing plants—Quality control. | LCSH: Vegetable processing plants—Quality control. 
Classification: LCC TP440 .Q35 2023 | DDC 664/.8—dc23 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
CIP data on file with US Library of Congress 
ISBN: 978-1-77491-118-1 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-77491-119-8 (pbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-00330-499-9 (ebk) ABOUT THE BOOK SERIES: 
INNOVATIONS IN AGRICULTURAL 
AND BIOLOGICAL ENGINEERING 
Under this book series, Apple Academic Press Inc. is publishing book volumes 
over a span of 8–10 years in the specialty areas defined by the American 
Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers (<asabe.org>). Apple 
Academic Press Inc. aims to be a principal source of books in agricultural and 
biological engineering. We welcome book proposals from readers in areas of 
their expertise. 
The mission of this series is to provide knowledge and techniques 
for agricultural and biological engineers (ABEs). The book series offers 
high-quality reference and academic content on agricultural and biological 
engineering (ABE) that is accessible to academicians, researchers, scientists, 
university faculty and university-level students, and professionals around the 
world. 
Agricultural and biological engineers ensure that the world has the necessities 
of life, including safe and plentiful food, clean air and water, renewable fuel 
and energy, safe working conditions, and a healthy environment by employing 
knowledge and expertise of the sciences, both pure and applied, and engineering 
principles. Biological engineering applies engineering practices to problems 
and opportunities presented by living things and the natural environment in 
agriculture. 
ABE embraces a variety of the following specialty areas (<asabe.org>): 
aquaculture engineering, biological engineering, energy, farm machinery 
and power engineering, food, and process engineering, forest engineering, 
information, and electrical technologies, soil, and water conservation engi￾neering, natural resources engineering, nursery, and greenhouse engineering, 
safety, and health, and structures and environment. 
For this book series, we welcome chapters on the following specialty 
areas (but not limited to): 
• Academia to industry to end-user loop in agricultural engineering; 
• Agricultural mechanization; 
• Aquaculture engineering; 
• Biological engineering in agriculture; vi About the Book Series 
•	 Biotechnology applications in agricultural engineering; 
•	 Energy source engineering; 
•	 Farm to fork technologies in agriculture; 
•	 Food and bioprocess engineering; 
•	 Forest engineering; 
•	 GPS and remote sensing potential in agricultural engineering; 
•	 Hill land agriculture; 
•	 Human factors in engineering; 
•	 Impact of global warming and climatic change on agriculture economy; 
•	 Information and electrical technologies; 
•	 Irrigation and drainage engineering; 
•	 Nanotechnology applications in agricultural engineering; 
•	 Natural resources engineering; 
•	 Nursery and greenhouse engineering; 
•	 Potential of phytochemicals from agricultural and wild plants for 
human health; 
•	 Power systems and machinery design; 
•	 Robot engineering and drones in agriculture; 
•	 Rural electrification; 
•	 Sanitary engineering; 
•	 Simulation and computer modeling; 
•	 Smart engineering applications in agriculture; 
•	 Soil and water engineering; 
•	 Micro-irrigation engineering; 
•	 Structures and environment engineering; 
•	 Waste management and recycling; 
•	 Any other focus areas. 
For more information on this series, readers may contact: 
Megh R. Goyal, PhD, PE 
Book Series Senior Editor-in-Chief: Innovations in Agricultural and 
Biological Engineering 
E-mail: goyalmegh@gmail.com  
OTHER BOOKS ON AGRICULTURAL 
AND BIOLOGICAL ENGINEERING BY 
APPLE ACADEMIC PRESS, INC. 
Management of Drip/Trickle or Micro Irrigation 
Megh R. Goyal, PhD, PE, Senior Editor-in-Chief 
Evapotranspiration: Principles and Applications for Water 
Management 
Megh R. Goyal, PhD, PE and Eric W. Harmsen, PhD Editors 
Book Series: Research Advances in Sustainable Micro Irrigation 
Senior Editor-in-Chief: Megh R. Goyal, PhD, PE 
•	 Volume 1: Sustainable Micro Irrigation: Principles and Practices 
•	 Volume 2: Sustainable Practices in Surface and Subsurface Micro 
Irrigation 
•	 Volume 3: Sustainable Micro Irrigation Management for Trees and 
Vines 
•	 Volume 4: Management, Performance, and Applications of Micro 
Irrigation Systems 
•	 Volume 5: Applications of Furrow and Micro Irrigation in Arid and 
Semi-Arid Regions 
•	 Volume 6: Best Management Practices for Drip Irrigated Crops 
•	 Volume 7: Closed Circuit Micro Irrigation Design: Theory and 
Applications 
•	 Volume 8: Wastewater Management for Irrigation: Principles and 
Practices 
•	 Volume 9: Water and Fertigation Management in Micro Irrigation 
• Volume 10: Innovation in Micro Irrigation Technology 
Book Series: Innovations and Challenges in Micro Irrigation 
Senior Editor-in-Chief: Megh R. Goyal, PhD, PE 
•	 Engineering Interventions in Sustainable Trickle Irrigation: Water 
Requirements, Uniformity, Fertigation, and Crop Performance 
•	 Management Strategies for Water Use Efficiency and 
Micro Irrigated Crops: Principles, Practices, and Performance viii Other Books on Agricultural and Biological Engineering 
•	 Micro Irrigation Engineering for Horticultural Crops: Policy Options, 
Scheduling, and Design 
•	 Micro Irrigation Management: Technological Advances and 
Their Applications
 
•	 Micro Irrigation Scheduling and Practices 
•	 Performance Evaluation of Micro Irrigation Management: Principles 
and Practices 
•	 Potential of Solar Energy and Emerging Technologies in Sustainable 
Micro Irrigation 
•	 Principles and Management of Clogging in Micro Irrigation 
•	 Sustainable Micro Irrigation Design Systems for Agricultural Crops: 
Methods and Practices 
Book Series: Innovations in Agricultural and Biological Engineering 
Senior Editor-in-Chief: Megh R. Goyal, PhD, PE 
•	 Advanced Research Methods in Food Processing Technologies 
•	 Advances in Food Process Engineering: Novel Processing, 
Preservation and Decontamination of Foods
 
•	 Advances in Green and Sustainable Nanomaterials: Applications in 
Energy, Biomedicine, Agriculture, and Environmental Science 
•	 Advances in Sustainable Food Packaging Technology 
•	 Analytical Methods for Milk and Milk Products, Volume 1: 
Sampling Methods, Chemical and Compositional Analysis
 
•	 Analytical Methods for Milk and Milk Products, Volume 2: 
Physicochemical Analysis of Concentrated, Coagulated and 
Fermented Products
 
•	 Biological and Chemical Hazards in Food and Food Products: 
Prevention, Practices, and Management
 
•	 Bioremediation and Phytoremediation Technologies in Sustainable 
Soil Management, Volume 1: Fundamental Aspects and 
Contaminated Sites 
•	 Bioremediation and Phytoremediation Technologies in Sustainable 
Soil Management, Volume 2: Microbial Approaches and Recent 
Trends 
•	 Bioremediation and Phytoremediation Technologies in Sustainable 
Soil Management, Volume 3: Inventive Techniques, Research 
Methods, and Case Studies 
•	 Bioremediation and Phytoremediation Technologies in Sustainable 
Soil Management, Volume 4: Degradation of Pesticides and 
Polychlorinated Biphenyls Other Books on Agricultural and Biological Engineering ix 
•	 Dairy Engineering: Advanced Technologies and Their Applications 
•	 Developing Technologies in Food Science: Status, Applications, and 
Challenges 
•	 Emerging Technologies in Agricultural Engineering 
•	 Engineering Interventions in Agricultural Processing 
•	 Engineering Interventions in Foods and Plants 
•	 Engineering Practices for Agricultural Production and Water 
Conservation: An Interdisciplinary Approach 
•	 Engineering Practices for Management of Soil Salinity: Agricultural, 
Physiological, and Adaptive Approaches 
•	 Engineering Practices for Milk Products: Dairyceuticals, Novel 
Technologies, and Quality 
•	 Enzyme Inactivation in Food Processing: Technologies, Materials, 
and Applications 
•	 Field Practices for Wastewater Use in Agriculture: Future Trends and 
Use of Biological Systems 
•	 Flood Assessment: Modeling and Parameterization 
•	 Food Engineering: Emerging Issues, Modeling, and Applications 
•	 Food Process Engineering: Emerging Trends in Research and Their 
Applications 
•	 Food Processing and Preservation Technology: Advances, Methods, 
and Applications 
•	 Food Technology: Applied Research and Production Techniques 
•	 Functional Dairy Ingredients and Nutraceuticals: Physicochemical, 
Technological, and Therapeutic Aspects 
•	 Handbook of Research on Food Processing and Preservation 
Technologies: Volume 1: Nonthermal and Innovative Food 
Processing Methods 
•	 Handbook of Research on Food Processing and Preservation 
Technologies, Volume 2: Nonthermal Food Preservation and Novel 
Processing Strategies 
•	 Handbook of Research on Food Processing and Preservation 
Technologies, Volume 3: Computer-Aided Food Processing and 
Quality Evaluation Techniques 
•	 Handbook of Research on Food Processing and Preservation 
Technologies, Volume 4: Design and Development of Specific 
Foods, Packaging Systems, and Food Safety 
•	 Handbook of Research on Food Processing and Preservation 
Technologies, Volume 5: Emerging Techniques for Food Processing, 
Quality, and Safety Assurance x Other Books on Agricultural and Biological Engineering 
•	 Modeling Methods and Practices in Soil and Water Engineering 
•	 Nanotechnology and Nanomaterial Applications in Food, Health, 
and Biomedical Sciences 
•	 Nanotechnology Applications in Agricultural and Bioprocess 
Engineering: Farm to Table
 
•	 Nanotechnology Applications in Dairy Science: Packaging, 
Processing, and Preservation
 
•	 Nanotechnology Horizons in Food Process Engineering, Volume 1: 
Food Preservation, Food Packaging, and Sustainable Agriculture 
•	 Nanotechnology Horizons in Food Process Engineering, Volume 2: 
Scope, Biomaterials, and Human Health 
•	 Nanotechnology Horizons in Food Process Engineering, Volume 3: 
Trends, Nanomaterials, and Food Delivery 
•	 Novel and Alternative Methods in Food Processing: 
Biotechnological, Physicochemical, and Mathematical Approaches 
•	 Novel Dairy Processing Technologies: Techniques, Management, 
and Energy Conservation 
•	 Novel Processing Methods for Plant-Based Health Foods: Extraction, 
Encapsulation and Health Benefits of Bioactive Compounds 
•	 Novel Strategies to Improve Shelf-Life and Quality of Foods: 
Quality, Safety, and Health Aspects
 
•	 Phytochemicals and Medicinal Plants in Food Design: Strategies and 
Technologies for Improved Healthcare 
•	 Processing of Fruits and Vegetables: From Farm to Fork 
•	 Processing Technologies for Milk and Milk Products: Methods, 
Applications, and Energy Usage 
•	 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing: Methods and 
Strategies 
•	 Scientific and Technical Terms in Bioengineering and Biological 
Engineering 
•	 Soil and Water Engineering: Principles and Applications of 
Modeling
 
•	 Soil Salinity Management in Agriculture: Technological Advances 
and Applications 
•	 State-of-the-Art Technologies in Food Science: Human Health, 
Emerging Issues and Specialty Topics 
•	 Sustainable Biological Systems for Agriculture: Emerging Issues in 
Nanotechnology, Biofertilizers, Wastewater, and Farm Machines Other Books on Agricultural and Biological Engineering xi 
•	 Sustainable Nanomaterials for Biomedical Engineering: Impacts, 
Challenges, and Future Prospects 
•	 Sustainable Nanomaterials for Biosystems Engineering: Trends in 
Renewable Energy, Environment, and Agriculture 
•	 Technological Interventions in Dairy Science: Innovative Approaches 
in Processing, Preservation, and Analysis of Milk Products 
•	 Technological Interventions in Management of Irrigated Agriculture 
•	 Technological Interventions in the Processing of Fruits and 
Vegetables 
•	 Technological Processes for Marine Foods, From Water to Fork: 
Bioactive Compounds, Industrial Applications, and Genomics 
•	 The Chemistry of Milk and Milk Products: Physicochemical 
Properties, Therapeutic Characteristics, and Processing Methods ABOUT SENIOR EDITOR-IN-CHIEF
 
Megh R. Goyal, PhD, PE 
Megh R. Goyal, PhD, PE, is, currently a retired 
professor of agricultural and biomedical engineering 
from the General Engineering Department at the 
College of Engineering at the University of Puerto 
Rico–Mayaguez Campus (UPRM); and Senior 
Acquisitions Editor and Senior Technical Editor-in￾Chief for Agricultural and Biomedical Engineering 
for Apple Academic Press Inc. 
During his long career, he has worked as a Soil Conservation Inspector; 
Research Assistant at Haryana Agricultural University and Ohio State 
University; Research Agricultural Engineer/Professor at the Department 
of Agricultural Engineering of UPRM; and Professor of Agricultural and 
Biomedical Engineering in the General Engineering Department of UPRM. 
He spent a one-year sabbatical leave in 2002–2003 at the Biomedical Engi￾neering Department of Florida International University, Miami, USA. 
Dr. Goyal was the first agricultural engineer to receive the professional 
license in agricultural engineering from the College of Engineers and 
Surveyors of Puerto Rico. In 2005, he was proclaimed the “Father of Irrigation 
Engineering in Puerto Rico for the Twentieth Century” by the American 
Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers, Puerto Rico Section, for 
his pioneering work on micro irrigation, evapotranspiration, agroclimatology, 
and soil and water engineering. 
During his professional career of 52 years, he has received many awards, 
including Scientist of the Year, Membership Grand Prize for the American 
Society of Agricultural Engineers Campaign, Felix Castro Rodriguez Academic 
Excellence Award, Man of Drip Irrigation by the Mayor of Municipalities of 
Mayaguez/Caguas/Ponce and Senate/Secretary of Agriculture of ELA, Puerto 
Rico, and many others. He has been recognized as one of the experts “who 
rendered meritorious service for the development of [the] irrigation sector in 
India” by the Water Technology Centre of Tamil Nadu Agricultural University 
in Coimbatore, India, and ASABE who bestowed on him the 2018 Netafim 
Microirrigation Award. xiv About Senior Editor-in-Chief 
Dr. Goyal has authored more than 200 journal articles and edited more than 
100 books. AAP has published many of his books, including Management 
of Drip/Trickle or Micro Irrigation; Evapotranspiration: Principles and 
Applications for Water Management; ten-volume set on Research Advances in 
Sustainable Micro Irrigation. Dr. Goyal has also developed several book series 
with AAP, including Innovations in Agricultural & Biological Engineering 
(with over 60 titles in the series to date), Innovations and Challenges in Micro 
Irrigation; and Innovations in Plant Science for Better Health: From Soil to 
Fork. 
Dr. Goyal received his BSc degree in Engineering from Punjab 
Agricultural University, Ludhiana, India, and his MSc and PhD degrees from 
the Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. He also earned a Master 
of Divinity degree from the Puerto Rico Evangelical Seminary, Hato Rey, 
Puerto Rico, USA. 
Readers may contact him at goyalmegh@gmail.com. ABOUT THE EDITOR
 
Faizan Ahmad, MTech 
Faizan Ahmad, MTech, Assistant Professor, 
Department of Post Harvest Engineering and 
Technology, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences at 
Aligarh Muslim University, Uttar Pradesh, India 
Faizan Ahmad, MTech, is Assistant Professor in 
the Department of Post Harvest Engineering and 
Technology in the Faculty of Agricultural Sciences at 
Aligarh Muslim University, in Uttar Pradesh, India. He has more than seven 
years of teaching and research experience. His major area of research includes 
food preservation, extraction of bioactive compounds from agricultural 
waste, food processing, food engineering, etc. Presently he is working in 
food preservation using ultrasound as a pre-treatment, as well as in quality 
assessment of fruits and vegetables during storage and drying. Recently he 
designed a fully automatic vacuum dryer with a data recorder for effective and 
economic drying of fruits and vegetables, and the same has been published by 
the patent office of the Government of India. 
He has published more than 10 research papers in peer-reviewed interna￾tional and national journals and more than seven book chapters with various 
publishers, such as Elsevier, Springer, CRC Press. etc. He has presented his 
work at several international and national conferences and has attended more 
than 35 seminars, conferences, workshops, short-term courses, and faculty 
development program. 
He has successfully guided five MTech students for their dissertation 
work and is presently supervising one more. He has also delivered lectures 
as a resource person at the Institute of Food Technology, Budelkhand 
University, Jhansi, India. He is a life member of the Indian Society of 
Technical Education (ISTE). 
He received his BTech degree in Chemical Engineering from Aligarh 
Muslim University, Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh, India, and his MTech degree 
in Chemical Engineering (Process Modeling and Simulation) from Depart￾ment of Chemical Engineering, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, Uttar 
Pradesh, India. 
Readers may contact him at: f4faizahmad1989@gmail.com  
Contributors........................................................................................................... xix
 
Abbreviations & Symbols.....................................................................................xxiii
 
Preface ................................................................................................................ xxvii
 
PART I: NONTHERMAL METHODS FOR QUALITY AND 
SAFETY OF FRUITS AND VEGETABLES................................................1 
1.	 Quality and Safety of Fresh Produce During Storage: 
Hurdle Technology..........................................................................................3 
Zahra H. Mohammad, Faizan Ahmad, and Salam A. Ibrahim 
2.	 Microwave Technology: Preservation of Fruits and Vegetables...............35
 
Bisma Jan, Arshied Manzoor, Rafeeya Shams, and Qurat Ul Eain Hyder Rizvi 
3.	 Role of Gamma Irradiation in the Preservation of 
Fruits and Vegetables....................................................................................57 
Rafeeya Shams, Qurat Ul Eain Hyder Rizvi, Bisma Jan, and Arshied Manzoor 
4.	 Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology: Safety and 
Shelf-Life of Minimally Processed Fruits and Vegetables.........................77 
Junaid Ahmad Pandith, Satyam Bansal, Shiv Kumar Katiyar, Arshied Manzoor, 
Pir Mohammad Junaid, and Saghir Ahmad 
5.	 Sanitizers for Decontamination of Fresh Produce: 
Alternative to Chlorine...............................................................................123 
Zahra H. Mohammad, Salam A. Ibrahim, and Faizan Ahmad 
PART II: PRESERVATION STRATEGIES FOR FRESH PRODUCE ........141
 
6.	 Preservation Strategies for Fruits and Vegetables: 
Past, Present, and Future Scope ................................................................143 
Pir Mohammad Junaid, Faizan Ahmad, Ishfaq Hamid Dar, Aabid Hussain Bhat, 
Shaziya Manzoor, Junaid Ahmad Pandith, and Faisal Khan 
7.	 Osmotic Dehydration Technology for Preservation of 
Fruits and Vegetables..................................................................................167 
Arshied Manzoor, Bisma Jan, Qurat Ul Eain Hyder Rizvi, 
Pir Mohammad Junaid, Junaid Ahmad Pandith, Ishfaq Hamid Dar, 
Shayeeb Ahmad Bhat, and Saghir Ahmad 
CONTENTS
 8.	 Scope of Ultrasound Technology for Preservation of 
Fruits and Vegetables..................................................................................185
 
Gazia Nasir, Sadaf Zaidi, and Faizan Ahmad 
9.	 Scope of Nanoemulsions for Quality and Safety of Fruits and 
Vegetables: Nanotechnology and Essential Oils.......................................209
 
Farah Naqash, Omeera Ayob, Sadaf Nazir, and B. N. Dar 
10.	 Engineered Nanomaterials for Food Preservation and Packaging: 
Focus on Antimicrobial and Antibiofilm Activities ..................................229
 
Shaibi Saleem and Shams Tabrez Khan 
PART III: ASSESSMENT OF QUALITY OF FRUITS AND 
VEGETABLES............................................................................................261
 
11.	 Nondestructive Methods for Quality Assessment of 
Fruits and Vegetables during Storage.......................................................263
 
Mohit Sharma and Kirty Pant 
12.	 Mechanical, Optical, and Acoustic Methods: Noninvasive 
Quality Assessment of Fruits and Vegetables ...........................................283
 
Tejaswi Boyapati, Payel Ghosh, and Sandeep Singh Rana 
PART IV: POTENTIAL USE OF FRUIT AND VEGETABLE WASTE.......303
 
13.	 Fruit and Vegetable Waste: A Viable Feedstock for Bioenergy ..............305
 
Ogechukwu Bose Chukwuma, Mohd Rafatullah, Mohammad Faisal Umar, 
Husnul Azan Tajarudin, and Norli Ismail
 
14.	 Potential of Fruit and Vegetable Waste: Treatment of Wastewater .......325
 
Asima Shafi, Faizan Ahmad, and Sadaf Zaidi 
Index.....................................................................................................................355
 
xviii	 Contents CONTRIBUTORS
 
Faizan Ahmad 
Department of Post Harvest Engineering and Technology, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, 
A.M.U., Aligarh 202002, UP, India; E-mail: f4faizahmad1989@gmail.com 
Saghir Ahmad 
Department of Post Harvest Engineering and Technology, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, 
A.M.U., Aligarh 202002, UP, India; E-mail: alsaghirqadri@gmail.com 
Omeera Ayob 
Department of Food Technology, Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi 110062, India; 
E-mail: umeraayob@gmail.com 
Shayeeb Ahmad Bhat 
Department of Post Harvest Engineering and Technology, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, 
A.M.U., Aligarh 202002, UP, India; E-mail: shoaibfe91@gmail.com 
Aabid Hussain Bhat 
Department of Food Science, Jamia Hamdard University 110062, New Delhi, India; 
E-mail: aabidbhat998@gmail.com 
Satyam Bansal 
Department of Food Engineering and Technology, Bundelkhand University, Jhansi 248128, UP, India; 
E-mail: bansalsatyam0909@gmail.com 
Tejaswi Boyapati 
Department of Food Technology, Vignan’s Foundation for Science, Technology and Research Institute, 
Guntur-Tenali Rd 522213, Vadlamudi, Andhra Pradesh, India; E-mail: tejaswi.tej.b@gmail.com 
Ogechukwu Bose Chukwuma 
Division of Environmental Technology, School of Industrial Technology, 
Universiti Sains Malaysia, 11800 Penang, Malaysia; E-mail: ogechukwuma@student.usm.my
 
Ishfaq Hamid Dar 
Department of Post Harvest Engineering and Technology, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, 
A.M.U., Aligarh 202002, UP, India; E-mail: ishfaqhamiddar@gmail.com 
B. N. Dar 
Department of Food Technology, IUST, Awantipora 192122, J&K, India; E-mail: darnabi@gmail.com 
Payel Ghosh 
Department of Food Technology, Vignan’s Foundation for Science, Technology and Research Institute, 
Guntur-Tenali Rd 522213, Vadlamudi, Andhra Pradesh, India; E-mail: payelghosh89@gmail.com 
Megh R. Goyal 
Agric. & Biomedical Eng., University of Puerto Rico-Mayaguez, Mayaguez—Puerto Rico; 
E-mail: goyalmegh@gmail.com 
Salam A. Ibrahim 
Department of Food Microbiology and Biotechnology, North Carolina A&T State University, 
Greensboro 27214, NC, USA; E-mail: ibrah001@ncat.edu xx Contributors 
Norli Ismail 
Division of Environmental Technology, School of Industrial Technology, 
Universiti Sains Malaysia, 11800 Penang, Malaysia; E-mail: norlii@usm.my 
Bisma Jan 
Department of Food Technology, Jamia Hamdard University 110062, New Delhi, India; 
E-mail: Bismakaloo123@gmail.com 
Pir Mohammad Junaid 
Department of Post Harvest Engineering and Technology, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, 
A.M.U., Aligarh 202002, UP, India; E-mail: junaidpir24@gmail.com 
Shiv Kumar Katiyar 
Department of Food Engineering and Technology, Bundelkhand University, Jhansi248128, UP, India; 
E-mail: skkatiyar69@gmail.com 
Faisal Khan 
Department of Post Harvest Engineering and Technology, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, 
A.M.U., Aligarh 202002, UP, India; E-mail: faisalkhan.khan059@gmail.com 
Shams Tabrez Khan 
Department of Agricultural Microbiology, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, Aligarh Muslim University, 
Aligarh 202002, UP, India; E-mail: shamsalig@yahoo.com 
Arshied Manzoor 
Department of Post Harvest Engineering and Technology, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh 202002, 
UP, India; E-mail: arshidfe12@gmail.com 
Shaziya Manzoor 
Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Kashmir, Jammu 190006, J & K, India; 
E-mail:shaziawani79@gmail.com 
Zahra H. Mohammad 
Conrad N. Hilton College of Hotel and Restaurant Management, UH, Houston 77001, TX - USA; 
E-mail: zhmohamm@central.uh.edu 
Farah Naqash 
Department of Food Technology, IUST, Awantipora 192122, J&K, India; 
E-mail: nakashfarah1@gmail.com 
Gazia Nasir 
Department of Post Harvest Engineering and Technology, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, 
A.M.U., Aligarh 202002, UP, India; E-mail: gazianasir@gmail.com 
Sadaf Nazir 
Department of Food Technology, BIET, Jhansi 284128, UP, India; E-mail: sadafnazirwani@yahoo.in 
Junaid Ahmad Pandith 
Department of Post Harvest Engineering and Technology, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, 
A.M.U., Aligarh 202002, UP, India; E-mail: junaidfe@gmail.com 
Kirty Pant 
Department of Food Engineering and Technology, Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering and 
Technology, Longowal 148106, Punjab, India; E-mail:Kirty.pant@gmail.com 
Mohd Rafatullah 
Division of Environmental Technology, School of Industrial Technology, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 
11800 Penang, Malaysia; E-mail: mrafatullah@.usm.my Contributors xxi 
Sandeep Singh Rana 
Department of Food Technology, Vignan’s Foundation for Science, Technology and Research Institute, 
Guntur-Tenali Rd 522213, Vadlamudi, Andhra Pradesh, India; E-mail: srana0505@gmail.com 
Qurat Ul Eain Hyder Rizvi 
Department of Food Technology, Eternal University, Sirmour 173025, Himachal Pradesh, India; 
E-mail: syeda15994@gmail.com 
Shaibi Saleem 
Department of Agricultural Microbiology, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, Aligarh Muslim University, 
Aligarh 202002, UP, India; E-mail: zunairasaleem18@gmail.com 
Asima Shafi 
Department of Post Harvest Engineering and Technology, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, 
A.M.U., Aligarh 202002, UP, India; E-mail: asimashafi97@gmail.com 
Rafeeya Shams 
Division of Food Science and Technology, Sher-e-Kashmir University of Agricultural Sciences & 
Technology of Jammu, Jammu 190011, J & K, India; E-mail: rafiya.shams@gmail.com 
Mohit Sharma 
Dr. S.S. Bhatnagar University, Institute of Chemical Engineering & Technology, Punjab University, 
Chandigarh 160014, India; E-mail: Mohitlomash362@gmail.com 
Husnul Azan Tajarudin 
Division of Bioprocess Technology, School of Industrial Technology, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 
11800 Penang, Malaysia; E-mail: azan@usm.my 
Mohammad Faisal Umar 
Division of Environmental Technology, School of Industrial Technology, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 
11800 Penang, Malaysia; E-mail: faisalumar@student.usm.my 
Sadaf Zaidi 
Department of Post Harvest Engineering and Technology, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, 
A.M.U., Aligarh 202002, UP, India; E-mail: smsadafzaidi@gmail.com  
ABBREVIATIONS & SYMBOLS
 
AD 
AEW 
AP 
AW 
BOD 
C/N 
CA 
CBP 
C-di-GMP 
CFU 
CH3
COOH 
Cl 
ClO2 
CO 
Co-60 
COD 
CR 
Cs-137 
CT 
CVMWUS 
CVUS 
DNA 
EC 
EFSA 
EMAP 
EO 
EOs 
EPA 
F&V 
FAO 
FAV 
FDA 
FSSAI 
FVW(S) 
anaerobic digestion 
acidic electrolyzed water 
active packaging 
water activity 
biological oxygen demand 
carbon-nitrogen 
citric acid 
consolidated bioprocessing 
cyclic diguanylate 
colony-forming unit 
acetic acid 
chlorine 
chlorine dioxide 
chemical oxidation 
Cobalt-60 
chemical oxygen demand 
chemical reduction 
Cesium-137 
computed tomography 
convective microwave ultrasound 
convective ultrasound 
deoxyribonucleic acid 
edible coating 
European Food Authority 
equilibrium modified atmospheric packaging 
essential oil 
essential oils 
Environmental Protection Agency 
fruits and vegetables 
Food and Agricultural Organization 
fruits and vegetables 
Food and Drug Administration 
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
fruits and vegetables waste(s)  
 
 
 
xxiv 
GC gas chromatography 
GHG greenhouse gas 
GRAS generally recognized as safe 
H/MSI hyperspectral/multispectral imaging 
H2O2 hydrogen peroxide 
HCB hexachlorobenzene 
HClO hypochlorous acid 
HEP high electric field pulse 
HHP high hydrostatic pressure 
HOCl hypochlorite acid 
HPP high pressure processing 
HPPL high power pulsed light 
HPU high power ultrasound 
HVED high voltage electric discharge 
ILP intense light pulse 
IR infrared radiation 
Abbreviations & Symbols 
IUPAC International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry 
kGy kiloGray 
KMS potassium metabisulfite 
LED light-emitting diode 
MA malic acid 
MeV mega electron volt 
MFD microwave freeze drying 
MIC minimum inhibitory concentration 
MRDL maximum residual disinfectant level 
MRI magnetic resonance imaging 
MS mass spectroscopy 
MSW municipal solid waste 
MT microwave technology 
MVD microwave-assisted vacuum drying 
MW microwaves 
NE nanoemulsion 
NGO non-governmental organizations 
NIRS near infrared spectroscopy 
NMR nuclear magnetic resonance 
NP’s nanoparticles 
OD osmotic dehydration 
ORP oxidation-reduction potential 
PAA peroxyacetic acid  
 
 
Abbreviations & Symbols xxv 
PAA peracetic acid 
PEF pulsed electric field 
PL pulse light 
PPO polyphenol oxidase 
PRT pretreatment 
PSMVD pulsed microwave vacuum drying 
PV pulsed vacuum 
PVC plasticized membrane electrodes 
R&D research and development 
RNA ribonucleic acid 
ROS reactive oxygen species 
RTE ready to eat 
SDG sustainable development goal 
SHF separate hydrolysis and fermentation 
SL shelf life 
SSC soluble solid content 
SSCF simultaneous saccharification and cofermentation 
SSF simultaneous saccharification and fermentation 
STEC Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli 
TBA thiobarbituric acid 
TBARS thiobarbituric acid reactive substances 
TI thermal imaging 
TS total solids 
TSS total soluble solids 
UAOD ultrasound-assisted osmotic dehydration 
UF ultrafiltration 
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund 
UP ultrasound processing 
US ultrasound 
USDA United States Department of Agriculture 
USFDA United States Food and Drug Administration 
USV ultrasonic vacuum 
UV ultraviolet 
VD vacuum drying 
VS volatile solids 
WHO World Health Organization 
WTE waste to energy 
XRI x-ray imaging 
ZnO zinc oxide 
γ gamma PREFACE
 
Food is one of the most essential components of life for human survival. 
Nowadays, people not only consume food to satiate their appetite but look 
for foods that are also rich in high nutritional value. Therefore, quality 
assessment of fruits and vegetables along with their preservation is one 
of the major concerns of food processing industries in recent years; since, 
fruits and vegetables have high moisture content and they are easily prone to 
degradation. In the last two decades, the preservation and quality assessment 
of fruits and vegetables have been done by various preservation methods 
including thermal methods and several destructive technologies. All these 
methods have their own advantages and disadvantages. Therefore, in recent 
years after the exhaustive research and experimentation, food researchers, 
scientists, and industrialists have suggested various nonthermal preserva￾tion technologies such as microwave, ultrasound, gamma irradiation, and 
pulse light technology, etc. in order to prolong the shelf life of food products 
and to reduce the textural, sensory, and nutritional losses. Other than these, 
scientists have suggested various novel nondestructive methods to assess 
the quality of fruits and vegetables. There is an urgent need for ample and 
scientifically correct literature to ensure food quality and food preservation, 
which would be helpful to students, researchers, and professional engaged 
in the processing and preservation of fruits and vegetables. This book is a 
genuine effort toward the same. 
The book attempts to portray the applications of various nonthermal 
technologies such as microwave, ultrasound, gamma irradiation, pulsed 
light, and hurdle technology for improving the quality and safety of fruits 
and vegetables. The scope of various strategies (osmotic dehydration, ultra￾sound and ultrasound-assisted osmotic dehydration, nanoemulsions, and 
engineered nanomaterial) toward the preservation of fresh produce has also 
been included with a wide range of applications. Furthermore, this book also 
emphasizes the various nondestructive techniques that have been widely used 
for the quality assessment of fruits and vegetables during storage including 
image analysis, x-ray tomography, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 
nonmagnetic resonance imaging (NMR), color vision system, near-infrared 
spectroscopy (NIRS), and computerized tomography (CT). Applications of 
other nondestructive mechanical (E-nose, E-tongue) and dynamic methods xxviii Preface 
(acoustic) for food quality and safety evaluation have also been included. At 
the end, potential use of fruits and vegetables waste as a viable feed stock for 
bioenergy and for the treatment of wastewater have also been enlightened. 
Thus, this book would have a significant scope in the preservation, safety, 
and quality evaluation of fruits and vegetables. 
This book is divided into four parts. Part I: Nonthermal Methods for 
Quality and Safety of Fruits and Vegetables discusses the microwave, 
gamma irradiation, and pulse light technology for fruits and vegetables 
preservation, hurdle technology for the quality and safety of fresh produce 
during storage, and novel methods for decontamination of fresh produce. 
Part II: Preservation Strategies for Fresh Produce elaborates upon past, 
present, and future scope of preservation strategies for fruits and vegetables, 
application of osmotic dehydration and ultrasound technology for fruits and 
vegetables preservation, scope of nanoemulsions for quality and safety of 
fruits and vegetables, and engineered nanomaterials for food preservation 
and packaging. Part III: Assessment of Quality of Fruits and Vegetables 
highlights the nondestructive technologies for the quality assessment of fruits 
and vegetables. At the end, Part IV: Potential Use of Fruit and Vegetable 
Waste emphasizes the utilization of fruits and vegetable wastes as a viable 
feedstock for bioenergy and for the treatment of wastewater. 
The book has taken its final shape due to the admirable/exceptional 
contributions by the contributing authors, who have been the soul of this 
book. We are highly thankful to the authors of each chapter for their sincere 
efforts in writing their chapters. Their names are mentioned in each chapter 
and also in the list of contributors. 
We expect that this book will serve as knowledge capsule for all those who 
are working in the area of quality assessment and preservation of fruits and 
vegetables such as students, researchers, academicians, and food engineers. 
We are also thankful to the Apple Academic Press, Inc., for giving us an 
opportunity to publish this book. 
At last but not least we also extend our sincere thanks to our family 
members for their blessings, moral support, and motivation throughout this 
assignment, our spouses, and children for their patience, understanding, and 
encouragement during this project, and our institutes: Department of PHET, 
Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, UP, India, University of Puerto Rico— 
Mayaguez Campus, for their support during the compilation of this book. 
— Editors PART I
 
NONTHERMAL METHODS FOR QUALITY
 
AND SAFETY OF FRUITS AND VEGETABLES
 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing: Methods and Strategies. Megh R. Goyal, & 
Faizan Ahmad (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
CHAPTER 1
 
QUALITY AND SAFETY OF FRESH 
PRODUCE DURING STORAGE: 
HURDLE TECHNOLOGY 
ZAHRA H. MOHAMMAD, FAIZAN AHMAD, and 
SALAM A. IBRAHIM 
ABSTRACT 
Due to the increased public awareness about the nutritional and health 
benefits, the quality requirements of fruits and vegetables have significantly 
increased. However, fruits and vegetables are highly perishable and implicated 
in many foods borne illnesses. Therefore, the produce industry is continually 
seeking effective, safe, and environmentally friendly intervention practices 
to decontaminate produce while preserving product quality and extending 
the shelf-life. However, individual chemical and nonchemical treatments 
show less efficiency in microbial reduction, and most of the time influence 
the quality and sensory attributes of produce. Hurdle technology has been 
shown to be more efficacious than individual treatments in diminishing the 
microorganisms while preserving product quality and extending shelf-life. 
Thus, hurdle technology is a favorable alternative technology for enhancing 
the quality and safety of fruits and vegetables. This chapter addresses past/ 
current/future trends of hurdle technologies in the fruits and vegetable 
industry, advantages and challenges, application of ozone and electrolyzed 
water as promising novel disinfectants when combined with other treatments, 
and exploring the combination of two chemicals or organic acids in the 
produce sector. 4 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
1.1 INTRODUCTION 
Fruits and vegetables (FAVs)89 are highly perishable foods because they 
provide the ideal environment for the growth and survival of microorganisms, 
including spoilage, pathogenic microorganisms, yeast, and molds.39,72,73,78 
Moreover, the growth of these microorganisms affects the quality, sensory, 
and safety of the FAV.39,78 As a result, these commodities require proper post￾harvest handling and storage in order to prevent deterioration and to ensure 
product safety, thus increasing the shelf-life (SL).57 Maintaining product 
quality and safety and lengthening the SL of FAV were always the major 
industry challenge.56 Consequently, various preservation and intervention 
technologies have been utilized by the FAV processing industry in order to 
increase the SL and minimize the risk of spoilage and growth of pathogenic 
microorganisms.21,57 
Most of the intervention methods are effective against microorganisms 
and have achieved the above-mentioned industry objectives.57 However, 
the methods were always associated with adverse effects on the sensory 
quality and loss of nutrient value of the products.57 Hurdle technology has, 
thus, been found to be a promising preservation method that ensures safety 
while maintaining the quality of products and increasing the SL.5,21,64 Hurdle 
technology is the method in which two or more interventions are combined 
in order to improve the product quality, extend the SL, and ensure food 
safety.18,53,64 Figure 1.1 represents the disinfection technologies for the FAV 
and the concept of hurdle technology. 
FIGURE 1.1 Disinfection technologies for fruits and vegetables. Quality and Safety of Fresh Produce During Storage 5 
The application of various successful hurdle technologies has, thus, 
been proposed as a promising alternative to individual intervention methods 
as a way to minimize the risk of food-borne illnesses and prolong the SL 
of FAV without affecting the product quality and sensory properties.21 In 
this regard, Severino et al.79 reported that the mixture of modified chitosan 
coating containing mandarin essential oils (EOs) treatment with ozonated 
water washing resulted in a higher reduction of Listeria monocytogenes on 
broccoli than the coating or ozonated water washing alone. 
Ramos-Villarroel et al.71 reported that combining plus light (PL) (180– 
1100 nm, 12 J/cm2
) and malic acid (MA, 2%) treatments was able to achieve 
up to a 5 log CFU/g reduction of L. innocua and Escherichia coli when 
applied to fresh-cut mushroom, watermelon, and avocado; and the results 
were much superior than when PL or MA acid was applied alone. Addition￾ally, Mohammad et al.49 applied combined treatments of ozonated water 
and acidic electrolyzed water (AEW) to alfalfa seeds and sprouts, which 
resulted in a greater reduction of Salmonella and Shiga toxin-producing E. 
coli (STEC) on both alfalfa seeds and sprouts than individual treatments. 
Gupta et al.31 also reported a greater reduction of microorganisms on 
French beans and a 1-week longer SL when they used the combined X-ray 
and citric acid (CA) treatments. These are some examples of findings that 
have demonstrated the efficacy of hurdle technologies as promising posthar￾vest treatments for FAV. 
In this chapter, the authors have addressed the scope of hurdle technolo￾gies, their potential applications in the FAV industries, and the most common 
technologies currently utilized along with their potential as disinfectants in 
this food sector. 
1.2 HURDLE TECHNOLOGY: PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE TRENDS 
Traditional food preservation methods have been utilized during the past 
century.80 Hurdle technologies for food preservation have emerged more 
recently. However, the original concept of hurdle technology grew out of 
the conventional preservation methods used for food preservation and the 
principles behind the effect of these methods including the adjustment of water 
activity, pH, and temperatures.50 As a result, successful hurdle technologies 
are based on temperature, relative humidity, pH, water activity, chemicals, 
and antimicrobials.80 In its early stage, hurdle technology was used in food 
preservation by combining multiple preservation methods in order to achieve 
more reliable preservation goals without full knowledge of the scientific 6 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
bases involved.44,80 Later on, it was found that hurdle technology provided 
synergistic effects by combining two or more methods to reduce the level 
of various microorganisms.71 Therefore, more attention was given to hurdle 
technology as a favorable method for enhancing product quality, increasing 
the SL, and ensuring the safety of food products using different preservation 
factors and by subjecting the products to milder applications.43,50 The first 
hurdle technology was applied to meat in order to maintain its freshness44 
and was then extended to other food products, including processed FAV,4
 and 
finally, dairy products.20 
Soliva-Fortuny et al.82 investigated the effect of combination of methods 
(Hurdle Technology) to extend the SL of avocados. In their research, the 
authors examined different combinations, including the addition of organic 
acid (sorbic acid) and modified atmosphere packaging, controlling the storage 
temperature, reducing the pH or water activity (aw), and combining vacuum 
packaging and at 4°C storage temperature. These authors reported that 
combining sorbic acid with a modified atmosphere was sufficient to control 
yeasts and molds on avocados as well as the microbiological stability during 
storage. However, the approach of reducing water activity or pH through 
the addition of sugar may affect the sensory attributes of the products and 
negatively impact the quality. However, their attempt led to the subsequent 
discovery of more successful technologies. 
Barwal et al.8
 also investigated hurdle technology using various 
combinations and different concentrations to preserve cauliflower for up 
to 180 days. Their hurdle combinations included CA (1.0%) and potas￾sium metabisulfite (KMS at 0.2%) after subjecting the cauliflower to 
blanching. Authors found that cauliflower samples treated with a salt solu￾tion at concentrations of 10 and 15% with one-fifth percent KMS were 
the highest-ranked products during the complete storage period of 180 
days. Moreover, the samples were ranked above the acceptable level by 
the sensory panel in terms of sensory attributes and quality. The hurdle 
combination in this study was an effective way to increase the SL of FAV 
and also resulted in motivating other scientists to study other options with 
different types of fruits or vegetables. 
For example, Vibhakara et al.88 began studying hurdle technology using 
chemicals, organic acids, and antimicrobials to increase the SL of grated 
carrots. The authors manipulated the water activity and pH in addition to 
antimicrobials. The experimental combinations included sodium chloride 
(3.0%), CA (0.9%) for water activity, and pH reduction, respectively, 
followed by the addition of sodium citrate (1.0%), and sodium benzoate Quality and Safety of Fresh Produce During Storage 7 
(0.2%) as antimicrobial agents. This was followed by partial dehydration of 
the carrots and storage at a temperature range of 19–33°C. The grated carrots 
were stored for more than 6 months at ambient temperature. Moreover, in 
terms of microbiological safety, the products were found to be microbiologi￾cally safe during the entire study. 
Nowadays, hurdle technologies are employed in all types of food prod￾ucts, including fresh, minimally processed, and processed foods in order to 
prolong the SL and to maintain quality and microbiological safety.21 With 
novel and intelligently applied hurdle technologies, food products are 
subjected to milder treatments that serve to retain quality while preventing 
spoilage and the growth of pathogenic microorganisms and extending the SL 
of the products.21 
Today, food industries pay more attention to nonchemical methods such 
as pulse technologies, ozone, and natural antimicrobial methods.21 However, 
these methods work better when combined with other methods (hurdle 
technology) to achieve the desired results. The food industry’s current trend 
is to provide high-quality foods while ensuring safety.57 Thus, in the future, 
there will be an increasing demand for intelligent hurdle technology as food 
preservation becomes more aligned with it.57 Selected examples of past and 
present disinfection methods for FAVs are shown in Table 1.1. 
1.3 USE OF HURDLE TECHNOLOGY IN FRUITS AND 
VEGETABLES: ADVANTAGES AND CHALLENGES 
The hurdle technology can extend the SL of FAV, minimize spoilage and the 
growth of pathogenic microorganisms, and help to retain overall product 
quality.21 However, to achieve these objectives, the technology must employ 
multitarget treatments, including postharvest handling and sanitizing proce￾dures prior to storage. For this purpose, different disinfections and sanitizers 
are used, including chemical, physical, and organic acids.21 
Some of the more common hurdle-based disinfection treatments used for 
FAV prior to storage utilize a combination of two or more of the following 
agents: chlorine (Cl), ozone, peroxyacetic acid (PAA), chlorine dioxide 
(ClO2
), hydrogen peroxide, natural antimicrobials, packaging, electrolyzed 
water, organic acids, UV light, pulse light, ultrasound (US), and high hydro￾electric pressure.44,80 In this regard, researchers are continually searching 
for newer, more effective hurdle combinations that will provide optimum 
product quality and safety.  
8 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
1.3.1 COMBINING OZONE AND ELECTROLYZED WATER TO 
INACTIVATE PATHOGENICS ON FRESH PRODUCE 
The use of a single application of ozone or AEW at standard concentration 
levels on fruits or vegetables has been shown to be ineffective in minimizing 
the growth of pathogenic microorganisms.48 Neither the ozone application 
alone nor the AEW alone at low concentrations is sufficient for adequately 
reducing the levels of pathogenic microbes in fresh produce. Moreover, higher 
concentrations of ozone alone or AEW alone have resulted in a negative impact 
on the quality of fresh FAV. However, the combination of ozone and AEW 
as hurdle technology has emerged as an alternative disinfection approach to 
help to reduce pathogenic and spoilage microorganisms, improve product 
quality and extend the SL of fresh produce.11,39 The synergistic effects that 
result from combining these two applications allow for milder doses of each 
application and more effective treatments.21 
Considering the properties of each application and little effect that each 
provides alone, the combination of both provides a powerful antimicrobial 
treatment. Ozone is a highly reactive gas that consists of three oxygen 
atoms. Moreover, it is a powerful oxidative agent and has antimicrobial 
properties against a wide range of microorganisms including bacterial, 
viruses, molds, and spores.21 Ozone has been approved by the Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) for use as an antimicrobial on foods, and it is 
recognized as generally recognized as safe (GRAS).10 Ozone is known for 
its high reactivity and destroys microorganisms via two different oxida￾tion mechanisms.11 Thus, it destroys microorganisms faster than common 
chemical disinfectants such as chlorine by targeting molecular material and 
damaging the microorganisms’ DNA structure.11 As a disinfection agent, 
ozone leaves no chemical residuals and causes irreparable damage and 
destruction to microorganisms. However, ozone is unstable and has a half￾life of about 30 min in water. In addition, higher ozone levels and longer 
treatment exposure times can result in adverse effects, such as off-flavor, 
color change, and phytochemical degradation.11,21,48 
Similarly, AEW possesses a robust bactericidal activity on a wide range 
of bacteria and has been used as an alternative disinfectant to sodium 
hypochlorite.11,32 AEW is generated by producing an acidic environment 
using sodium chloride (NaCl) or sodium hypochlorite with a pH of 2.3–2.7 
and an oxidation–reduction potential (ORP) > 1000 mV.21,32 The bactericide 
effect of AEW is through the inactivation of bacterial cells by the active 
chlorine residuals, such as Cl2
, HOCl, and OCl that break down DNA and Quality and Safety of Fresh Produce During Storage 9 
interrupt the metabolic process.46 Therefore, AEW has been broadly used as 
a disinfection agent for the fruit and vegetable industry.15,32,100 
In addition to its effectiveness as a strong bactericidal, AEW is safe, 
relatively inexpensive, easy to use, and it is eco-friendly.25 However, some 
disadvantages and limitations of the application of AEW are highly adverse 
effects on sensory attributes and product quality as a result of low pH and 
long exposure time.98 Since both ozone and AEW depend on dosing levels 
and exposure time, a single application is not sufficient to achieve the target 
goal of microbial destruction without affecting the quality of the produce. To 
this end, combining ozone with AEW may reduce the adverse effects caused 
by a single application since milder doses are used to perform the hurdle. 
In this regard, several hurdle applications of ozone and AEW have been 
conducted and found to be effective in reducing microorganisms without 
compromising product quality and sensory attributes.49,90 
Wang et al.90 investigated the application of ozonated water followed by 
AEW on fresh-cut cilantro leaves and the effect of the treatments on color, 
texture, sensory, electrolyte leakage, and microbial reduction of cilantro 
at 0°C during the storage of 14 days. They reported that a combination 
treatment using ozone and AEW was effective against total aerobic counts 
while maintaining low microbial counts on fresh-cut cilantro during storage. 
However, the overall quality of the cilantro was negatively affected. 
Mohammad et al.49 investigated the efficacy of combining ozone and 
AEW for the inactivation of Salmonella and STEC on alfalfa seeds and 
sprouts. The authors observed that the treatments using the mixture of ozone 
and AEW resulted in the reduction of both pathogens with no visual effects on 
quality, including SL, weight, and color of sprouts. Moreover, the mixture of 
ozone and AEW has been studied extensively and found to be potent against 
microorganisms including pathogenic Salmonella and E. coli. Consequently, 
this hurdle could have the potential to be used for postharvest disinfection of 
FAV over extended storage times. 
1.3.2 COMBINING OZONE WITH ORGANIC ACIDS OR CHEMICAL 
TREATMENTS 
Most of the FAVs are consumed raw or minimally processed without killing 
steps, such as cooking or processing.63,72 As a result, these food products are 
subjected to contamination and growth of different types of microorganisms 
including pathogens during postharvest, storage, and processing, which 10 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
increases the risk of food-borne illnesses.21,37 Proper postharvest handling, 
processing, and storage of FAV are thus essential to ensure safety and enhance 
the product quality.57 The FAV industries are continually looking for better 
treatments that will help to ensure product safety and satisfy consumers’ 
demands.37 
Nonthermal techniques have gained popularity recently among food 
processors and researchers.95,96 For example, ozone applications in both gas 
and aqueous forms have emerged as alternative nonthermal techniques to 
replace chemical disinfectants for FAV.21 Although ozone application has 
reduced the levels of many food-borne pathogens including Salmonella, E. 
coli, and L. monocytogenes, the level of reduction has not been sufficient.21,48 
Moreover, at higher concentrations or long exposure times, ozone applica￾tion causes significant quality issues.21 Consequently, researchers and the 
produce industry examined combining ozone application with organic acids 
along with some chemical disinfectants.63 Combining ozone with other 
disinfectants might thus enhance the efficacy of ozone application against 
microorganisms.37 
Yuk et al.95,96 studied the efficacy of ozone alone and in combination 
with organic acids (lactic, acetic, or CAs) against E. coli and LM on lettuce 
and mushrooms using different concentrations and various exposure times. 
The results highlighted that the combined treatments were more effective in 
reducing pathogens than ozone alone but were not effective at controlling 
pathogens during storage.95,96 
Garcia et al.24 investigated the effect of combinations of ozone and 
chlorine in reducing natural aerobic microflora on lettuce in order to extend 
the SL. The results showed that combining ozone (7.5 mg/L) with 150 ppm 
choline increased the SL of lettuce salads. Whang chai et al.91 also studied 
the efficacy of ozone alone or with some organic acids (citric, ascorbic, 
and oxalic acids) in reducing natural microflora, browning, and polyphenol 
oxidase (PPO) activity on longan fruit. These authors concluded that the 
treatment of fruits with ozone and oxalic or CA resulted in a significant 
reduction of natural microflora as well as less browning and less PPO 
activity. 
The findings from these studies suggest that the combination of ozone 
with some organic acids or chemical disinfectants results in better efficacy 
than ozone alone for FAV, so combining ozone with organic acids or 
chemical treatment could be a potential hurdle disinfectant for FAV. Table 1.1 
represents the work done by various authors in the past several years on the 
concept of hurdle technologies using two or multiple treatments. 11 
TABLE 1.1 Successful Hurdle Technologies using Two or Multiple Treatments.
Combination of Commodity Purpose Results Conditions References 
treatments 
CA with mild doses Processed French Shelf Stable Modified atmosphere of 18% O CA = 8.4 g/L, 0.7 kGy, at 10 °C [31] 2 
of gamma radiation beans & 4% CO & extend shelf-life (Irradiation dose) 2 
Electrolyzed water Shredded Carrots AB 3.73 Unit 1% citric & AEW at 100 part [68]
and CA YAF 3.69 Unit per million at 50°C for 3 min
L. M 3.97 Unit
E. coli O157:H7 4.0 Unit
(Unit = CFU/g)
Cabbage AB 3.98 Unit 1% citric & AEW at 100 ppm [69]
YAM 3.45 Unit at 50°C for 3 min
L. M 3.99 Unit
E. coli O157:H7 4.19 Unit
(Unit = CFU/g)
Ethanol and Acetic Lettuce Antibrowning Suppressed browning 1/4 M Acetic acid for 5 s, and [33]
acid 200 mL/L EtOH for 2 min
Ozone and chlorine Lettuce Shelf-life Extended shelf-life for up to 25 Ozone 10 g/L & Chorine 0.2 [24]
days mg/L
Ozone and organic Lettuce E. coli 2.31 CFU/g 3 ppm ozone & 1% acetic, [95]
acid LM 1.84 CFU/g citric
Enoki mushroom E. coli 2.26 CFU/g 3 ppm ozone & 1% acetic, [96]
LM 1.32 CFU/g citric
CA, citric acid; AB, aerobic bacteria; YAF, yeast and fungi; YAM, yeast and mold. 
Quality and Safety of Fresh Produce During Storage 12 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
1.3.3 COMBINING ANTIMICROBIAL SUBSTANCES WITH 
FOOD PACKAGING TO EXTEND THE SHELF-LIFE OF FRUITS AND 
VEGETABLES 
In recent years, combining antimicrobial agents with packaging has become 
popular because it can extend the SL of food products, maintain quality, 
and ensure protection from spoilage and pathogenic microorganisms.40,94 
The addition of antimicrobial agents into food packaging is called active 
antimicrobial packaging (AP) in which the packaging substances interact 
with the food products themselves.94 AP has been well-studied by the 
scientific community.40 The idea of adding antimicrobials to packaging grew 
out of the basic fact that packaging protects food. Thus, it was assumed 
that antimicrobials could be employed to help to prevent the deterioration 
caused by spoilage and pathogenic microorganisms as well as any chemical 
and physical hazards that might arise during storage or even during the 
preparation of products.40,65 Currently, there are two types of AP-emitters 
and absorbers.94 
The emitters type AP is also called an active-releasing system because it is 
designed to release substances into packaged food or the surrounding space. 
The absorbers type AP is called a scavenging system because it is designed 
to absorb or remove compounds such as oxygen, flavor, moisture, or any 
undesired compounds from the food or its surroundings.65,94 Combining 
antimicrobials with food packaging as a hurdle technology prolongs the SL, 
inhibits microbial growth, and helps to maintain product quality.65 
Some examples of antimicrobials used in active AP are chlorine dioxide, 
organic acids, plant extracts, sulfur dioxide, enzymes, bacteriocins, and 
EOs.65 These antimicrobial compounds can be added to the packaging through 
the addition of pads or sachets containing antimicrobial volatiles, or they 
can be added directly to the packaging surface through either coextrusion, 
immobilization, or adsorption techniques.94 For example, conventionally, 
active antimicrobials are added to food products, but most of the time, FAVs 
are contaminated with spoilage and pathogenic microbes during storage and 
at surfaces. Therefore, incorporating active antimicrobial agents into active 
packaging may results in a more effective treatment method because active 
packaging released antimicrobial agents directly to the surface of the food.94 
The AP system is a promising technology that could help to prolong the 
SL of food products and inhibit harmful microorganisms while retaining 
the quality. However, AP presents some challenges, including high cost 
and release and absorption rates, and food composition.40,45 For example, Quality and Safety of Fresh Produce During Storage 13 
the release or absorption rates of active antimicrobials could be affected by 
fruit or vegetable composition, and in some instances, may interact with the 
active substance and reduce its antimicrobial efficacy. Thus, overcoming 
these challenges will require additional work and research. Nevertheless, 
interest in AP continues to grow by both the food industry and researchers.94 
The application of these types of packing for the food industry, including 
FAV, is increasing as it is a promising technology for enhancing quality, 
ensuring safety, and extending the SL of produce. However, one of the 
critical remaining challenges is to develop antimicrobial active packaging 
systems that are pathogens specific, which would help by inhibiting 
specifically targeted pathogens rather than other ones.45 In addition, AP 
could be enhanced with innovative features such as systems for releasing 
flavor, aroma, and antimicrobials.45 
1.3.4 COMBINING CHLORINE DIOXIDE AND PEROXYACETIC 
ACID FOR DISINFECTION OF FRESH PRODUCE 
Postharvest FAV disinfection is critical to ensure safety and product 
quality. Chlorine is a common commercial disinfection agent used in the 
FAV industry,57 yet due to the low effectiveness of traditional chlorine and 
its chemical byproducts,74 many alternative chemical and nonchemical 
disinfection technologies are emerging.21 However, using these emerging 
methods alone at the recommended concentration levels has been shown 
to be ineffective in reducing microorganisms. Moreover, if used at higher 
concentration levels, product quality is negatively affected.39 Therefore, 
combining two or multiple disinfectants at lower concentrations in order to 
achieve synergistic effects could be an alternative to chlorine for enhancing 
safety and without compromising quality.39 This section provides detailed 
information on the combining of choline dioxide and PAA as a chlorine 
replacement for the disinfection of FAV. 
Chlorine dioxide (ClO2
) is a gas that initially emerged as a water disinfec￾tion agent.28 ClO2 has powerful antimicrobial activity and can be used as a 
disinfectant for FAV.28 It is superior to chlorine and does not leave a significant 
number of chemical residues. However, ClO2 is only suitable for washing 
unsliced and unpeeled FAV60 and is available in both gas and aqueous form. 
However, ClO2
 in its gas form is more potent as an antimicrobial than its 
aqueous form because the gas has greater penetrability.28 
Several studies investigated the effectiveness of ClO2 as a disinfectant 
for spinach, potatoes, mung bean sprouts, lettuce, onions, cabbage and other 14 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
produce, cantaloupe, and strawberries.47,55,66,85,94 Most of these studies found 
ClO2 at high concentrations to be effective in reducing initial spoilage micro￾flora, yeast, molds, and pathogens with minimal impact on visual quality due 
to high concentration.60 The primary disadvantages of using ClO2 include the 
following a short life requires on-site generation, ineffective at low concen￾tration, creates an explosion hazard, toxicity when used at high concentration, 
and negatively impacts the quality of produce at higher concentrations.21 
While a PAA is also a potent antimicrobial agent and has shown to be 
effective against spoilage and pathogenic microorganism,29 combining it with 
ClO2
 could improve the efficiency of ClO2
 by overcoming the challenges 
associated with individual treatment. In conclusion, synergistic effects 
are expected after combining ClO2
 and aerosolized PAA. Consequently, 
this hurdle technology would have the potential to be used for powerful 
antimicrobial disinfection of FAV using the combination of two chemical 
disinfectants with minimal or no adverse effects on product quality. 
1.3.5 COMBINATION OF NATURAL ANTIMICROBIALS FOR 
FRESH PRODUCE 
With increasing demand and market growth, the fresh FAV industry is also 
facing new challenges that include maintaining the quality of fresh produce, 
prolonging SL, and ensuring the safety of products in order to protect 
consumers’ health.21 Recently, the focus of research has been on developing 
treatments using natural antimicrobials for fresh produce that support 
consumer health and meet the demands for natural products.19 Natural anti￾microbials have gained attention among the scientific community and food 
industries seeking natural alternatives to substitute synthetic compounds.19 
Natural antimicrobials can be applied as natural preservatives for FAV 
to ensure safety, retain the quality, and prolong SL.6,86 Natural antimicrobial 
agents can come from the plant, animal, and microbial sources, where they 
play a role in their hosts’ natural defense systems.6,86 Some antimicrobials 
such as EOs, phenolic compounds, flavor compounds, LAB, isothiocyanates, 
chitosan, and bacteriocins have been applied to fresh and processed FAV.13 
Plant EOs and their derivative compounds have been widely investigated 
as natural antimicrobial, antifungals, and food preservatives13,19 and have also 
been used on FAV.39,51 EOs are derived from secondary metabolites in almost 
every part of plants, including the flowers, roots, leaves, seeds, buds, and 
stems.13,21 The antimicrobial mechanisms of EOs are thought to be from the 
composition of EOs and the synergistic effects between their components.62Quality and Safety of Fresh Produce During Storage 15 
In addition to their antimicrobial properties, EOs are safe, environmentally 
friendly, and approved by FDA as GRAS.13,38 However, the effectiveness 
of EOs applications depends on concentration levels, holding time, type of 
microorganisms, type of FAV, and other factors.21 For example, to achieve 
the desired microbial reduction, a higher concentration of EOs is required 
which results in the alteration of product sensory attributes.21 
1.4 HURDLE TECHNOLOGY USING ORGANIC ACIDS 
Historically, organic acids have been used as food preservatives or food addi￾tives to prolong the SL of food products21 and to disinfect FAV.21 Organic acids 
are effective in reducing microorganisms from FAVs by environmental and 
microbial cellular pH.74 However, the efficacy of organic acids is dependent 
on the type of organic acid, concentration, treatment time, targeted micro￾organism, and type of treated produce.21 Treatment with low concentration 
or short exposure time has shown little effect in reducing microorganisms.77 
Additionally, using organic acids in higher concentrations resulted in 
adverse effects on the quality of FAV, including flavor and aroma.39 There￾fore, researchers have examined the hurdle technology by combining organic 
acids with chemical or physical disinfectants that could increase the efficacy 
of organic acids and thus enhance the quality of the treated produce. This 
section addresses some of the successful applications of hurdle technologies 
using organic acids. 
1.4.1 ACETIC ACID 
Acetic acid is a monocarboxylic acid known for its antimicrobial activity 
against various microorganisms including bacteria and yeast, and some 
types of molds. This acid is recognized as GRAS35 and can thus be used as a 
sanitizer on FAV.35 In the past, researchers have investigated the efficacy of 
combining acetic acid with other compounds in reducing different microor￾ganisms on FAV.98 
For example, Zhang and Farber98 evaluated the efficacy of acetic acid 
or lactic acid combined with chlorine against L. monocytogenes on lettuce. 
The results demonstrated that both combinations were effective in reducing 
these pathogenic bacteria on lettuce. However, lactic acid was more effective 
than acetic acid in this regard.98 Recently, acetic acid was evaluated for anti￾browning to inhibit the enzymatic browning of lettuce by being combined 16 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
with ethanol.33 The results showed that the combination of acetic acid and 
ethanol was effective at reducing enzymatic browning on lettuce. Therefore, 
the combining of acetic acid with other chemicals can be used for antimi￾crobial and antibrowning purposes. To this end, combining acetic acid with 
other compounds has great potential for application in the food industry and 
food processing.32 
1.4.2 LACTIC ACID 
Lactic acid is a widely used organic acid antimicrobial that reduces microbial 
pathogens in foods.74 The inhibitory capacity of lactic acid is based on its 
pH. The pH is usually lower than bacterial pH, the pH at which the bacteria 
cannot grow.83 Lactic acid is also GRAS and is thus a suitable alternative 
to chemical or synthetic techniques for FAV disinfection as it is a natural 
compound.83 In addition, it has antimicrobial activity and has been used as a 
preservative and antioxidant.83 Therefore, the combination of lactic acid and 
other chemicals has the potential to be used for FAV as a sanitizer to ensure 
food safety.83 
In this regard, researchers have evaluated the combination of lactic acid 
with other natural antimicrobials.20,87 Venkitanarayanan et al.87 investigated 
the antimicrobial efficacy of combining lactic acid with hydrogen peroxide 
against E. coli O157: H7, Salmonella Enteritidis, and L. monocytogenes on 
oranges, apples, and tomatoes. The results showed that lactic acid effectively 
reduced the number of Salmonella, E. coli, and LM on FAV. Another study 
evaluated the efficacy of combining lactic acid with chlorine, benzalkonium 
chloride, and lactic acid against E. coli O157: H7 and Yersinia enteroco￾litica on fresh vegetables.20 The authors found the treatment to be useful in 
reducing the number of pathogens. Therefore, lactic acid could be used for 
FAV as a sanitizer to ensure protection from pathogenic microorganisms.20 
1.4.3 CITRIC ACID (CA) 
CA is another organic acid that has been used as a hurdle technology to 
disinfect FAV.59,61,69 Park et al.59 evaluated the effect of the combination of 
electrolyzed water and CA against L. monocytogenes on lettuce. The authors 
reported that the mixture of alkaline electrolyzed water and 1% CA was 
effective in reducing L. monocytogenes on lettuce compared to individual 
treatment. Quality and Safety of Fresh Produce During Storage 17 
Park et al.60,61 also evaluated the effect of electrolyzed water and CA 
against Bacillus cereus cells and spores on cereal grains. These authors 
found that combining 1% CA and electrolyzed water was effective against 
B. cereus on cereal grains. Additionally, they reported that the combination 
resulted in synergistic effects of CA and electrolyzed water that were more 
potent than what was seen with individual treatments. 
Rahman et al.69 investigated the effect of electrolyzed water and CAs 
with mild heat to reduce the growth of microorganisms on cabbage. Their 
results exhibited a significant decrease in total bacterial counts, yeast and 
mold, L. monocytogenes, and E. coli. Those same authors68 also investigated 
the efficacy of combining alkaline electrolyzed water and CA with mild 
heat on shredded carrots to extend the SL and retain the quality and ensure 
product safety. The results exhibited that the combination caused a signifi￾cant decrease in total bacterial counts, yeast, and molds. Gupta et al.31 found 
that combining CA with mild doses of gamma radiation and modified atmo￾sphere packaging as hurdles was effective in increasing the SL of French 
beans and maintaining product quality during storage. Thus, the combining 
of CA with other existing disinfection methods could be another potentially 
effective hurdle technology. 
1.5 HURDLE TECHNOLOGY (NON-THERMAL METHODS) FOR 
THE PRESERVATION OF FRUIT JUICES 
In today’s world, consumers are looking not only for food products that 
satisfy their appetite but that are also natural and GRAS status. Thus, func￾tional foods including fruit juices are of great interest because they contain 
various types of bioactive compounds, such as polyphenols. Generally, 
polyphenols are antioxidants that have anti-inflammatory activities. It has 
been approximately calculated that the consumption of functional foods 
in adequate amounts not only provides a sufficient amount of nutrition but 
also has a significant impact on human health and can even alter the risk of 
appearing various severe diseases such as cancer.67 However, in terms of 
cost, newly developed functional foods are much more costly than traditional 
foods, and it had been calculated that the global market for functional foods 
was about $304.5 billion in 2020. Moreover, in subsequent years, this market 
is projected to increase by an average annual growth of nearly 8%.54 
Therefore, in this regard, most consumers have only one affordable option 
that would serve to satisfy their daily nutrient requirements and improve 
their well-being quickly and easily, they can purchase fruit or vegetable 18 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
juices or beverages. One of the agencies in the UK has suggested that 150 
mL of pure fruit or vegetable juices is equivalent to five servings of actual 
FAV (NHS-UK. 5 A Day Portion Sizes; NHS: Les, UK, 2015). As compared 
to the consumption of whole FAV, the consumption of the juice transferred 
the bioactive compounds more effectively into the human body where the 
compounds are easily absorbed and digested. Hence, juices are an attrac￾tive alternative transport medium for necessary bioactive ingredients. For 
these reasons plus today’s busy lifestyles, people are preferring fruit juices 
instead of consuming fresh fruits. With the rapidly increasing demand for 
fruit juices, food industries are now focusing on designing and producing 
new and different fruit juice products as well as the production of functional 
fruit juices. 
In order to fulfill the nutritional requirements and increasing demand for 
juices with increasing levels of bioactive compounds, industries have begun 
adding several nutritious ingredients such as noni, acai, areola, goji berries, 
as well as probiotics, prebiotics, and omega-3 fatty acids.67 For example, in 
one study, researchers developed a functional fruit juice by adding pear juice 
with cranberry bush juice in different concentrations. Their results showed 
that most consumers preferred the combination juice that included 97.5% 
pear juice and 2.5% cranberry juice.41 
In the past several years, food industries have processed fruit juices by 
using the traditional heat treatment method (pasteurization) or by either the 
squeezing or cold pressing method with storage at a temperature of 2–5°C. 
As a result, the produced juices have very short SL (1–3) days. In addition, 
such traditional methods disrupt the stability of the thermolabile bioactive 
compounds in the juice. Today, consumers prefer fruit juices that contain a 
number of nutrients, and photochemical compounds, minimally processed, 
and have an increased SL. Therefore, the use of hurdle technology is an alter￾native and promising approach in order to fulfill the customer benchmark of 
quality, nutritional requirement, and the safety of the product.39 
Generally, hurdles themselves are the food preservation factors such 
as temperature, preservatives, pH, water activity, and microorganisms. In 
several cases, these factors are frequently integrate with different hurdles 
such as ultraviolet or pulsed light, and antimicrobial additives in order to 
attain a certain level of food quality and stability. To date, more than 60 
hurdles are known, but not all of them are used to preserve a single food 
product.42 As per the requirement, two or more hurdle technologies can be 
combined together to accomplish food quality and microbial stability. In this 
respect, these days most hurdle technology studies are conducted on pulsed Quality and Safety of Fresh Produce During Storage 19 
electric field (PEF), high-pressure processing (HPP), high-power US, cold 
plasma, and high voltage electric discharge.9 
These methods require shorter processing times and are performed 
at a lower temperature. In addition, these methods assure inactivation of 
enzymes, enhanced microbial protection, and higher stability of the bioactive 
compounds in the food. It has been noted that, compared to the traditional 
pasteurization methods, hurdle technology provide a better-extended SL of 
juices along with retention of nutritional and sensory values.39 Therefore, 
nonthermal hurdle technologies, such as HPP, UP, and PEF, are discussed in 
this section. 
1.5.1 HIGH-PRESSURE PROCESSING (HPP) 
The research studies on high-pressure processing of foods have demon￾strated that HPP technology is one of the best technologies among 
nonthermal technologies for packed foods. Packed food products such 
as solids and semisolids having low moisture content (vacuum packed), 
vacuum-packed solids, and packed liquid foods (bottled) can be easily 
processed by HPP technology. However, prior to processing food items 
using this technology, the items are initially packed in suitable packing to 
decrease the risk/possibility of post contamination. And then, the packed 
items are placed into a basket and lowered into a jar. After that, the jar 
is filled completely with water, and the food items are exposed to high 
hydrostatic pressure (400–800 MPa).3 
The products are considered to be adequately processed when the pressure 
is uniformly spread throughout the jar. The application of HPP to food prod￾ucts results in microbial inactivation and the rupturing of cell membranes, as 
well as rupturing of noncovalent bonds present in enzymes and ribosomes.76 
Sometimes this technology can integrate with high temperature in order to 
deactivate bacterial spores more efficiently as bacterial spores are slightly 
resistant to HPP. HPP technology has gained international recognition and 
has received approval from the governmental authorities of Canada, USA, 
and Europe for use in killing pathogens in juices and for increasing SL. In 
recent years, food processing industries have started to embrace HPP tech￾nology over the traditional pasteurization methods, particularly with juices. 
Moreover, various researchers have studied the implementation of HPP for 
the pasteurization of fruit juices, such as mango juice, apple juice, kiwi juice, 
pineapple, etc.1,99. 20 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
For example, one of the study’s authors compared the pasteurization 
(90°C, 5 min) of mango juice with HPP (190 MPa, 60°C) and found that HPP 
reduced the number of bacteria and yeast and increased the SL of the juice 
up to 60 days when it stored at 4°C. In addition, compared to the control 
sample, HPP treated samples have a higher concentration of total phenolic 
compounds, carotenoids, and ascorbic acid.76 
Similarly, other studies have reported the implementation of HPP for the 
preservation of different juices, some of which are represented in Table 1.2. 
Some of the process variables such as pH, temperature, time, and pressure 
affect the efficiency of HPP technology. Like other technologies, HPP 
technology also has some limitations, such as high initial investment costs 
for the equipment and batch operations. 
1.5.2 ULTRASOUND (US) PROCESSING 
Recently, the application of US processing technology has gained significant 
potential for the processing of fruit juices. This technology is also considered 
to be the best alternative option for the pasteurization of fruit juices. During 
the application of US, the released acoustic energy is rapidly transferred into 
the entire volume of juice, which generates compressions and rarefaction 
in the medium particles such as juice, which results in the increased mass 
transfer, which automatically reduces the processing/treatment time. More￾over, due to low energy consumption and probably due to the involvement of 
low costs, this technology has also been recommended for industrial usage.84 
Generally, for the processing of fruit juices, several studies have recom￾mended combinations of high power of US with ultrasonic waves of high 
intensity at low frequencies. The implementation of high-power US in juice 
processing causes several physicochemical changes, expedites biochemical 
reactions, and also results in microbial and enzymatic inactivation. When 
ultrasonic waves are passed through juice or any liquid, it causes the genera￾tion of tiny bubbles and negative pressure which can thus be defined as a 
cavitation phenomenon.36 This phenomenon of collapsing the cavitation 
bubbles inside and outside of the microbial cells increases the pressure 
around the cells, which results in mechanical damage to the cells. Several 
studies reported that the use of high-power US technology provided micro￾biologically stable fruit juices with better retention of bioactive compounds. 
In addition, it has been reported that in some cases, the application of 
US in juice provided a maximum of 5-log reduction in food-borne patho￾gens.16 The results of several studies further revealed that the high-power US Quality and Safety of Fresh Produce During Storage 21 
processing of juice enhanced physical properties such as rheological proper￾ties, cloudiness, water-soluble pectin, and color. This may be achieved due to 
the physical forces of US causing excessive injury to the cellular structures. 
For example, one of studies conducted on the implementation of high-power 
US on the juice of strawberries revealed that US increased the acidity sweet￾ness, and antioxidant capacity of the sample by 75%, and the values of these 
parameters continuously increased during the storage period. Moreover, the 
application of US did not alter the color of the juice. 
It has been reported that a higher value of phenolic compounds is present 
in treated juice as compared to untreated juice.27 Some of the parameters that 
affect the efficacy of high-power US technology in the processing of fruit 
juices are US power, frequency, amplitude, and strength, processing time 
and temperature, and the diameter of the ultrasonic probe. Table 1.2 indicates 
the results of some of the studies that have been carried out over the last few 
years on the implementation of US technology for the preservation of fruit 
juices. 
1.5.3 PULSED ELECTRIC FIELD PROCESSING (PEF) 
Several studies have determined that PEF processing technology is one 
of the best alternative processes for the pasteurization of fruit juices. PEF 
processing has shown outstanding outcomes without altering the quality 
of juice (nutritional or sensory).23 In PEF processing, the sample of the 
food is set down between two electrodes, and a voltage of about 50 kV/cm 
is applied for a shorter period of time (μs to ms). Variables such as time, 
temperature, intensity of electric field, and energy input play a key role 
during this type of processing and need to be optimized for the selected 
food.81 
During PEF processing, microbial inactivation occurs due to the potential 
differences between the outside and inside of the cells. When the potential 
difference reaches a critical value, electroporation occurs, including irrevers￾ible structural changes and it results the death of the microorganisms. The 
process of PEF depends on several parameters such as applied temperature, 
processing time, the intensity of the electric field, pulse shape, width, and 
frequency. 
The efficacy of the PEF process is also depends on several conditions, 
such as composition of foods and the electrical conductivity of the food. It 
has been suggested that food is more difficult to process with this method if 
the food conductivity is greater than 6 μs.7 22 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
Moreover, several studies have indicated that under mild processing 
conditions, the PEF is not effectively killing the spores which mean that it 
can be combined with other methods of preservation to attain the desirable 
outcome. However, various other studies have indicated that the PEF method 
is more suitable for the processing of liquid foods without bubbles because it 
contains charge molecules.23 Thus, it can be concluded that apart from juices, 
the PEF can also be applied to the dairy products processing. Various studies 
have shown that some of the physical and chemical parameters of juices such 
as total soluble solids, water activity, and pH affect the PEF process with 
regard to microbial inactivation. Moreover, these studies also confirmed 
that as compared to thermally treated juices, PEF-treated juices have a large 
amounts of minerals, polyphenols, content of free amino acids, and better 
retention of the original color.75 
For example, one of the studies on the extraction of carotenoids from the 
tomato matrix confirmed that the application of PEF technology releases 
carotenoids from the tomato matrix more readily compared to other technolo￾gies. In addition, the results of that study also revealed that the preprocessing 
application of PEF to raw tomatoes increased the concentration of individual 
carotenoids, such as β-carotene, γ-carotene, δ-carotene, and lycopene.30 
The results of the studies on the implementation of PEF technology for the 
preservation of fruit juices are shown in Table 1.2. 
1.6 SUMMARY 
FAVs are an essential source of nutrition and energy. However, they are highly 
perishable food and they have also been associated with a large number 
of food-borne outbreaks. Moreover, fresh food can become contaminated 
with pathogenic microorganisms at various points during handling, storage, 
and processing and is also subject to spoilage. The contamination of FAV 
causes deterioration and negatively affects the product quality Thus, proper 
handling, storage, and processing are critical in order to ensure safety and to 
retain quality. Postharvest cleaning and sanitizing are key to preventing such 
contamination and ensuring safety, thus improving quality. Various thermal 
and nonthermal disinfection technologies have been evaluated and applied 
to FAV. However, single disinfection technology has been shown to be insuf￾ficient in reducing microorganisms. Additionally, at higher concentrations, 
most of the applied technologies had an adverse impact on product quality 
or resulted in harmful chemical byproducts. Method Treatment conditions Type of juice Observed quality parameters Findings References 
US 600 W, 28 kHz, power Grapefruit Juice • Individual phenolic compounds • The values of total carotenoids, [2] 
radiation 70%, 20°C, 30, • Total lycopene phenolic compounds, total lycopene,
60, and 90 min and sugar content were found to be • Total carotenoids
significantly increased • Total anthocyanins • Viscosity and microbial activity • Viscosity were found to be decreased
• Sugar content • Given treatment of 90 min provides • Microbiological factors better results
25kHz, 70% amplitude Blend of apple • TPC • As compared to other treatment [1] 
(Sonication) and grape juice • TFC ultrasonication (5 and 10 min)
5 and 10 min (1:1) showed the increment in AA and AC • Total flavonoids
(ultra-sonication); 100°C, • Blanching and ultrasonication • TAA
4 min (Blanching) treatments reflect a significant effect • Viscosity, turbidity, pH, and on color parameters, turbidity, and acidity viscosity
500W, 20kHz, 19 mm Pomegranate • TPC • TPC did not change significantly [58] 
diameter probe, Less than juice • TMC • At the time of greater than 18 min
35°C, Amplitude: 50, 75, • SSC the content of anthocyanins was
and 100%, found to be decreased • pH Time: 0–30 min, 5 s on • US treatment enhances the quality
and 5 s off of pomegranate juice
100 W, 30 kHz, 10 and Apple juice • TPC • US treatment reduces the TPC [12] 
20 mm diameter probe, 3, • Total Flavan-3-ols and total flavan-3-ols content by
6, 9 min, 40 and 80% of 32.94%, and 21.66% in comparison • AA
amplitude, 7 days at 4°C to untreated samples
(storage) • Similarly values of AC decline by 
23.76% 
23 
TABLE 1.2 Application of US, PEF, HPP Methods for the Preservation of Fruit Juices.
Quality and Safety of Fresh Produce During Storage PEF Square wave pulses Mango and • Total carotenoids and • Higher value of electric field [14] 
(bipolar) of 2.5 μs, 20–40 papaya juices anthocyanins showed stevia beverages with
kV/cm, 0–2.5% (w/v) with added • Ascorbic acid content higher value of total carotenoid and
Stevie Leaf infusion Stevie infusion anthocyanins • TSS
• Higher value of electric field • Steviol glycosides showed a greater reduction in
ascorbic acid content
PEF Treatment: pulse Pomegranate • TPC • Increase in temperature decreases [22] 
applied for a 3 μs, with a juice • TAC the AA and phenolic content 
delay of 20 μs, frequency • TAA 
500 pps, flow rate: 60 mL/
min, Temperature: 5–35°C 
HPP Pressure: 200, 300, 400 Pomegranate • Ascorbic acid-mannitol • As compared to control lower value [17] 
MPa juice • TPC of mannitol was detected in HPP
Temperature: 5, 15, 25°C treated juice • TAA 
Time: 5 min • No significant decrease in TPC and 
AA was observed 
High Hydrostatic Pressure: Keitt mango • Volatile compounds • In Keitt mango juice around 35 [99] 
200–600 MPa for 15 min juice • Sensory evaluation volatile compounds were detected
• As compared to fresh juice HHP
treatment alter the aroma of treated
juice
Pressure: 200, 300, 600 Cloudy apple • TP • HPP decreased the TPC [93] 
MPa, juice • TSS
Temperature: 5, 25, 45°C, • pH
Time: 1, 5, 15 min, • sugar content and Vitamin C 
storage at 4°C for 2–12
weeks
24 TABLE 1.2 (Continued) 
Method Treatment conditions Type of juice Observed quality parameters Findings References 
Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing High-pressure thermal Mixed juice of • Physicochemical Properties • High-pressure thermal processing [34]
processing: 400–600 MPa, aloe vera and • Content of ascorbic acid minimally affected physicochemical 
30–60°C, 0–15 min litchi properties
• High pressure treatment reduces the
ascorbic acid content by up to 40%
TPC, total phenolic content; TMA, total monomeric anthocyanins; SSC, soluble solid content; TSS, total soluble solid; TP, total polyphenols; 
TAC, total anthocyanins content; AA, antioxidant activity; TP, total polyphenolic; AC, anthocyanin content; TAA, total antioxidant activity; TFC, 
total flavonoids content. 
25 
TABLE 1.2 (Continued) 
Method Treatment conditions Type of juice Observed quality parameters Findings References 
Quality and Safety of Fresh Produce During Storage 26 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
Hurdle technology was developed in order to overcome the above￾mentioned challenges, improve overall product quality, and meet the 
increasing customer demand of healthy and safer food items. Hurdle 
technologies have already been implemented to several food items and have 
demonstrated efficient disinfection and preservative approaches for the food 
industry. In addition, hurdle technologies have been shown to provide greater 
efficiency than individual treatments. For example, hurdle technologies 
minimize the intensities associated with each individual technology such as 
power, concentration, doses, or exposure times. As a result, the application 
of hurdle technology is beneficial to the food industry in that it can provide 
cost-effective technology, extend SL, and ensure safety while maintaining 
product quality. A combination of specific hurdles technologies is thus 
promising for the future of the fruit and vegetable industry. In conclusion, 
more attention should be given to this innovative technology, and additional 
research to examine thermal and nonthermal techniques in hurdle technology 
is highly warranted. 
KEYWORDS 
• combining antimicrobial 
disinfection 
fruits and vegetables 
hurdle technology 
novel disinfection 
• 
• 
• 
• 
REFERENCES 
1. Aadil, R. M.; Khalil, A. A.; Rehman, A.; Khalid, A.; Inam-ur-Raheem, M.; Karim, 
A.; Gill, A. A.; Abid, M.; Afraz, M. T. Assessing the Impact of Ultra-Sonication and 
Thermo-Ultrasound on Antioxidant Indices and Polyphenolic Profile of Apple-Grape 
Juice Blend. J. Food Process. Preserv. 2020, 44 (5), E-article 14406. 
2. Aadil, R. M.; Zeng, X. A.; Wang, M. S.; Liu, Z. W.; Han, Z.; Zhang, Z. H.; Hong, 
J.; Jabbar, S. A Potential of Ultrasound on Minerals, Micro-Organisms, Phenolic 
Compounds and Colouring Pigments of Grapefruit Juice. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 
2015, 50 (5), 1144–1150. 
3. Abera, G. Review on High-Pressure Processing of Foods. Cogent Food Agric. 2019, 5 
(1), 1568725. Quality and Safety of Fresh Produce During Storage 27 
4. Alzamora, S. M.; Guerrero, S. N.; Raffellini, S.; Ferrario, M.; Schenk, M. Hurdle 
Technology in Fruit Processing. In Fresh-Cut Fruits and Vegetables; CRC Press; 2016; 
pp 131–168. 
5. Alzamora, S. M.; Tapia, M. S.; Argaiz, A.; Welli, J. Application of Combined Methods 
Technology in Minimally Processed Fruits. Food Res. Int. 1993, 26 (2), 125–130. 
6. Ayala-Zavala, J. F.; González-Aguilar, G. A.; Del-Toro-Sánchez, L. Enhancing Safety 
and Aroma Appealing of Fresh-Cut Fruits and Vegetables Using the Antimicrobial and 
Aromatic Power of Essential Oils. J. Food Sci. 2009, 74 (7), R84–R91. 
7. Barba, F. J.; Parniakov, O.; Pereira, S. A.; Wiktor, A.; Grimi, N.; Boussetta, N.; 
Saraiva, J. A.; Raso, J.; Martin-Belloso, O.; Witrowa-Rajchert, D.; Lebovka, N. Current 
Applications and New Opportunities for the Use of Pulsed Electric Fields in Food 
Science and Industry. Food Res. Int. 2015, 77, 773–798. 
8. Barwal, V. S.; Sharma, R.; Singh, R. Preservation of Cauliflower by Hurdle Technology. 
J. Food Sci. Technol. Mysore 2005, 42 (1), 26–31. 
9. Bevilacqua, A.; Petruzzi, L.; Perricone, M.; Speranza, B.; Campaniello, D.; Sinigaglia, 
M.; Corbo, M. R. Nonthermal Technologies for Fruit and Vegetable Juices and Beverages: 
Overview and Advances. Comprehen. Rev. Food Sci. Food Safet. 2018, 17 (1), 2–62. 
10. Botondi, R.; De Sanctis, F.; Moscatelli, N.; Vettraino, A. M.; Catelli, C.; Mencarelli, F. 
Ozone Fumigation for Safety and Quality of Wine Grapes in Postharvest Dehydration. 
Food Chem. 2015, 188, 641–647. 
11.	 Brodowska, A. J.; Nowak, A.; Śmigielski, K. Ozone in the food industry: Principles of 
Ozone Treatment, Mechanisms of Action, and Applications: An Overview. Crit. Rev. 
Food Sci. Nutr. 2015, 58 (13), 2176–2201. 
12.	 BursaćKovačević, D.; Bilobrk, J.; Buntić, B.; Bosiljkov, T.; Karlović, S.; Rocchetti, G.; 
Lucini, L.; Barba, F. J.; Lorenzo, J. M., Putnik, P. High-Power Ultrasound Altered the 
Polyphenolic Content and Antioxidant Capacity in Cloudy Apple Juice During Storage. 
J. Food Process. Preserv. 2019, 43 (8), E-article 14023. 
13. Burt, S. Essential Oils: Their Antibacterial Properties and Potential Applications in 
Foods—A Review. Food Microbiol.Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2004, 94 (3), 223–253. 
14. Carbonell-Capella, J. M.; Buniowska, M.; Cortes, C.; Zulueta, A.; Frigola, A.; Esteve, M. 
J. Influence of Pulsed Electric Field Processing on the Quality of Fruit Juice Beverages 
Sweetened with Stevia Rebaudiana. Food Bioprod. Process. 2017, 101, 214–222. 
15. Chen, X.; Xue, S. J.; Shi, J.; Kostrzynska, M.; Tang, J.; Guévremont, E.; Mondor, M. 
Red Cabbage Washing with Acidic Electrolysed Water: Effects on Microbial Quality 
and Physicochemical Properties. Food Qual. Safet. 2018, 2 (4), 229–237.
16. Condón-Abanto, S.; Arroyo, C.; Álvarez, I.; Condón, S.; Lyng, J. G. Application 
of Ultrasound in Combination with Heat and Pressure for the Inactivation of Spore 
Forming Bacteria Isolated from Edible Crab (Cancer pagurus). Food Microbiol.Int. J. 
Food Microbiol. 2016, 223, 9–16. 
17. da Silveira, T. F. F.; Cristianini, M.; Kuhnle, G. G.; Ribeiro, A. B.; Teixeira Filho, J.; 
Godoy, H. T. Anthocyanins, Non-Anthocyanin Phenolics, Tocopherols and Antioxidant 
Capacity of açaí Juice (Euterpe oleracea) as Affected by High Pressure Processing and 
Thermal Pasteurization. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2019, 55, 88–96. 
18. Dabas, K.; Khan, K. A. Use of Hurdle Technology in Processing of Fruits and Vegetables; 
Apple Academic Press: New Jersey, 2019; pp 113–138. 
19. Davidson, P. M.; Critzer, F. J.; Taylor, T. M. Naturally Occurring Antimicrobials for 
Minimally Processed Foods. Annu. Rev. Food Sci. Technol. 2013, 4, 163–190. 28 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
20. del Carmen Velázquez, L.; Barbini, N. B.; Escudero, M. E.; Estrada, C. L.; de Guzmán, A. 
M. S. Evaluation of Chlorine, Benzalkonium Chloride and Lactic Acid as Sanitizers for 
Reducing Escherichia coli O157: H7 and Yersinia Enterocolitica on Fresh Vegetables. 
Food Control 2009, 20 (3), 262–268. 
21. Deng, L. Z.; Mujumdar, A. S.; Pan, Z.; Vidyarthi, S. K.; Xu, J.; Zielinska, M.; Xiao, H. W. 
Emerging Chemical and Physical Disinfection Technologies of Fruits and Vegetables: A 
Comprehensive Review. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2019, 60 (15), 2481–2508. 
22. Evrendilek, G. A. Impacts of Pulsed Electric Field and Heat Treatment on Quality and 
Sensory Properties and Microbial Inactivation of Pomegranate Juice. Food Sci. Technol. 
Int. 2017, 23 (8), 668–680. 
23.	 Gabrić, D.; Barba, F.; Roohinejad, S.; Gharibzahedi, S. M. T.; Radojčin, M.; Putnik, P.; 
BursaćKovačević, D. Pulsed Electric Fields as an Alternative to Thermal Processing for 
Preservation of Nutritive and Physicochemical Properties of Beverages: A Review. J. 
Food Process Eng. 2018, 41 (1), E-article 12638. 
24. Garcia, A.; Mount, J. R.; Davidson, P. M. Ozone and Chlorine Treatment of Minimally 
Processed Lettuce. J. Food Sci. 2003, 68 (9), 2747–2751. 
25. Gómez-López, V. M. (Ed.). Decontamination of Fresh and Minimally Processed 
Produce; John Wiley & Sons: New York, 2012; p 323. 
26. Gómez-López, V. M., Gil, M. I.; Allende, A. A Novel Electrochemical Device as a 
Disinfection System to Maintain Water Quality During Washing of Ready to Eat Fresh 
Produce. Food Control 2017, 71, 242–247. 
27. Gómez-López, V. M.; Buitrago, M. E.; Tapia, M. S.; Martínez-Yépez, A. M. A. U. R. Y. 
Effect of Ultrasonication on Microbial Quality, Colour, and Ascorbic Acid Content of 
Passion-Fruit Juice During Storage. Acta Alimentaria 2017, 46 (4), 470–480. 
28. Gómez-López, V. M.; Rajkovic, A.; Ragaert, P.; Smigic, N.; Devlieghere, F. Chlorine 
Dioxide for Minimally Processed Produce Preservation: A Review. Trend Food Sci. 
Technol., 2009, 20 (1), 17–26. 
29. González-Aguilar, G.; Ayala-Zavala, J. F.; Ruiz-Cruz, S.; Acedo-Félix, E. Effect of 
Temperature and Modified Atmosphere Packaging on Overall Quality of Fresh-Cut Bell 
Peppers. LWT-Food Sci. Technol. 2004, 37 (8), 817–826. 
30. González-Casado, S.; Martín-Belloso, O.; Elez-Martínez, P.; Soliva-Fortuny, R. 
Application of Pulsed Electric Fields to Tomato Fruit for Enhancing the Bioaccessibility 
of Carotenoids in Derived Products. Food Funct. 2018, 9 (4), 2282–2289. 
31. Gupta, S.; Chatterjee, S.; Vaishnav, J.; Kumar, V.; Variyar, P. S.; Sharma, A. Hurdle 
Technology for Shelf Stable Minimally Processed French Beans (Phaseolus vulgaris): 
A Response Surface Methodology Approach. LWT-Food Sci. Technol. 2012, 48 (2), 
182–189. 
32. Hao, J.; Wang, Q. Application of Electrolyzed Water in Fruits and Vegetables Industry. 
In Electrolyzed Water in Food: Fundamentals and Applications; Springer: Singapore, 
2019; pp 67–111. 
33. Huang, S. J.; Lin, S. Y.; Wang, T. T.; Hsu, F. C. Combining Acetic Acid and Ethanol 
as an Anti-Browning Treatment for Lettuce Butt Discoloration Through Repression of 
the Activity and Expression of Phenylalanine Ammonia Lyase. Postharv. Biol. Technol. 
2020, 164, E-article 111151. 
34. Hulle, N. R. S., Rao, P. S. Effect of High Pressure and Thermal Processing on Quality 
Changes of Aloe Vera-Litchi Mixed Beverage (ALMB) During Storage. J. Food Sci. 
Technol. 2016, 53 (1), 359–369. Quality and Safety of Fresh Produce During Storage 29 
35. In, Y. W.; Kim, J. J.; Kim, H. J.; Oh, S. W. Antimicrobial Activities of Acetic Acid, Citric 
Acid and Lactic Acid Against Shigella Species. J. Food Safet. 2013, 33 (1), 79–85. 
36. J Mason, T.; Chemat, F.; Vinatoru, M. The Extraction of Natural Products Using 
Ultrasound or Microwaves. Curr. Org. Chem. 2011, 15 (2), 237–247. 
37. Joshi, K.; Mahendran, R.; Alagusundaram, K.; Norton, T.; Tiwari, B. K. Novel 
Disinfectants for Fresh Produce. Trend Food Sci. Technol., 2013, 34 (1), 54–61. 
38. Kang, J. H.; Song, K. B. Inhibitory Effect of Plant Essential Oil Nanoemulsions Against 
Listeria monocytogenes, Escherichia coli O157: H7, and Salmonella typhimurium on 
Red Mustard Leaves. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2018, 45, 447–454. 
39. Khan, I.; Tango, C. N.; Miskeen, S.; Lee, B. H.; Oh, D. H. Hurdle Technology: A Novel 
Approach for Enhanced Food Quality and Safety–A Review. Food Control, 2017, 73, 
1426–1444. 
40. Khaneghah, A. M.; Hashemi, S. M. B.; Limbo, S. Antimicrobial Agents and Packaging 
Systems in Antimicrobial Active Food Packaging: An Overview of Approaches and 
Interactions. Food Bioprod. Process. 2018, 111, 1–19. 
41.	 Lachowicz, S.; Oszmiański, J. The Influence of Addition of Cranberrybush Juice to Pear 
Juice on Chemical Composition and Antioxidant Properties. J. Food Sci. Technol. 2018, 
55 (9), 3399–3407. 
42. Leistner, L. Basic Aspects of Food Preservation by Hurdle Technology. Food Microbiol. 
Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2000, 55 (1–3), 181–186. 
43. Leistner, L. Introduction to Hurdle Technology. Food Preservation by Combined 
Processes. FLAIR Report by European Commission. DX X; 1994, 11, 89. 
44. Leistner, L. Principles and Applications of Hurdle Technology. In New Methods of Food 
Preservation; Springer: Boston, MA, 1995; pp 1–21. 
45. Limbo, S.; Khaneghah, A. M. Active Packaging of Foods and Its Combination with 
Electron Beam Processing. In Electron Beam Pasteurization and Complementary Food 
Processing Technologies; Woodhead Publishing: London, 2015; pp 195–217. 
46. Liu, Q.; Wu, J. E.; Lim, Z. Y.; Lai, S.; Lee, N.; Yang, H. Metabolite Profiling of 
Listeriainnocua for Unraveling the Inactivation Mechanism of Electrolyzed Water by 
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy. Food Microbiol.Int. J. Food Microbiol. 
2018, 271, 24–32. 
47. Mahmoud, B. S. M.; Vaidya, N. A.; Corvalan, C. M.; Linton, R. H. Inactivation Kinetics 
of Inoculated Escherichiacoli O157: H7, Listeria Monocytogenes and Salmonella Poona 
on Whole Cantaloupe by Chlorine Dioxide Gas. Food Microbiol. 2008, 25 (7), 857–865. 
48. Mohammad, Z.; Kalbasi-Ashtari, A.; Riskowski, G.; Castillo, A. Reduction of Salmonella 
and Shiga Toxin-Producing Escherichiacoli on Alfalfa Seeds and Sprouts Using an 
Ozone Generating System. Food Microbiol.Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2019, 289, 57–63. 
49. Mohammad, Z.; Kalbasi-Ashtari, A.; Riskowski, G.; Juneja, V.; Castillo, A. Inactivation 
of Salmonella and Shiga Toxin-Producing Escherichia coli (STEC) from the Surface 
of Alfalfa Seeds and Sprouts by Combined Antimicrobial Treatments Using Ozone and 
Electrolyzed Water. Food Res. Int. 2020, 136, E-article 109488. 
50. Mohapatra, D.; Mishra, S.; Giri, S.; Kar, A. Application of Hurdles for Extending the 
Shelf-Life of Fresh Fruits. Trend Postharv. Technol. 2013, 1, 37–54. 
51. Moore-Neibel, K.; Gerber, C.; Patel, J.; Friedman, M.; Jaroni, D.; Ravishankar, S. 
Antimicrobial Activity of Oregano Oil Against Antibiotic-Resistant Salmonella Enterica 
on Organic Leafy Greens at Varying Exposure Times and Storage Temperatures. Food 
Microbiol. 2013, 34 (1), 123–129. 30 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
52. Mtaoua, H.; Sánchez-Vega, R.; Ferchichi, A.; Martín-Belloso, O. Impact of High￾Intensity Pulsed Electric Fields or Thermal Treatment on the Quality Attributes of Date 
Juice Through Storage. J. Food Process. Preserv. 2017, 41 (4), E-article 13052. 
53. Mukhopadhyay, S.; Tomasula, P. M.; Luchansky, J. B.; Porto-Fett, A. C. S. Removal of 
Salmonella Enteritidis from Commercial Unpasteurized Liquid Egg White Using Pilot 
Scale Cross Flow Tangential Microfiltration. Food Microbiol. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 
2010, 142 (668), 309–317. 
54. Musina, O.; Putnik, P.; Koubaa, M.; Barba, F. J.; Greiner, R.; Granato, D.; Roohinejad, 
S. Application of Modern Computer Algebra Systems in Food Formulations and 
Development: A Case Study. Trend Food Sci. Technol. 2017, 64, 48–59. 
55. Neal, J. A.; Marquez-Gonzalez, M.; Cabrera-Diaz, E.; Lucia, L. M.; O'Bryan, C. 
A.; Crandall, P. G. et al. Comparison of Multiple Chemical Sanitizers for Reducing 
Salmonella and Escherichia coli O157: H7 on Spinach (Spinacia oleracea) Leaves. 
Food Res. Int. 2012, 45 (2), 1123–1128. 
56. Ngnitcho, P. F. K.; Khan, I.; Tango, C. N.; Hussain, M. S.; Oh, D. H. Inactivation of 
Bacterial Pathogens on Lettuce, Sprouts, and Spinach Using Hurdle Technology. Innov. 
Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2017, 43, 68–76. 
57. Pal, M.; Shimelis, A.; Mamo, W.; Barot, A. M.; Pinto, S. V.; Prajapati, J. P. Hurdle 
Technology: A Novel Approach for Food Preservation. Bev. Food World 2017, 44 (1), 
20–26. 
58. Pala, Ç. U.; Zorba, N. N. D.; Özcan, G. Microbial Inactivation and Physicochemical 
Properties of Ultrasound Processed Pomegranate Juice. J. Food Protection 2015, 78 
(3), 531–539. 
59. Park, B. K.; Oh, M. H.; Oh, D. H. Effect of Electrolyzed Water and Organic Acids on 
the Growth Inhibition of Listeria Monocytogenes on Lettuce. Korean J. Food Preserv. 
2004, 11 (4), 530–537. 
60. Park, S. H.; Kang, D. H. Combination Treatment of Chlorine Dioxide Gas and 
Aerosolized Sanitizer for Inactivating Foodborne Pathogens on Spinach Leaves and 
Tomatoes. Food Microbiol.Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2015, 207, 103–108. 
61. Park, Y. B.; Guo, J. Y.; Rahman, S. M. E.; Ahn, J.; Oh, D. H. Synergistic Effect of 
Electrolyzed Water and Citric Acid Against Bacillus cereus Cells and Spores on Cereal 
Grains. J. Food Sci. 2009, 74 (4), M185–M189. 
62. Patrignani, F.; Siroli, L.; Serrazanetti, D. I.; Gardini, F.; Lanciotti, R. Innovative 
Strategies Based on the Use of Essential Oils and Their Components to Improve Safety, 
Shelf-Life and Quality of Minimally Processed Fruits and Vegetables. Trend Food Sci. 
Technol. 2015, 46 (2), 311–319. 
63. Petri, E.; Rodríguez, M.; García, S. Evaluation of Combined Disinfection Methods 
for Reducing Escherichia coli O157: H7 Population on Fresh-Cut Vegetables. Int. J. 
Environ. Res. Public Health 2015, 12 (8), 8678–8690. 
64.	 Piližota, V. Food Safety Management. Chapter 9; In: Fruits and Vegetables (including 
Herbs). Netherlands: Elsevier Inc., 2013. 
65. Prasad, P.; Kochhar, A. Active Packaging in Food Industry: A Review. J. Environ. Sci. 
Toxicol. Food Technol., 2014, 8 (5), 1–7. 
66. Prodduk, V.; Annous, B. A.; Liu, L.; Yam, K. L. Evaluation of Chlorine Dioxide Gas 
Treatment to Inactivate Salmonella Enterica on Mung Bean Sprouts. J. Food Protection 
2014, 77 (11), 1876–1881.  
 
 
 
 
Quality and Safety of Fresh Produce During Storage 31 
67. Putnik, P.; Pavlić, B.; Šojić, B.; Zavadlav, S.; Žuntar, I.; Kao, L.; Kitonić, D.; Kovačević, 
D. B. Innovative Hurdle Technologies for the Preservation of Functional Fruit juices. 
Foods 2020, 9 (6), 699. 
68. Rahman, S. M. E.; Jin, Y. G.; Oh, D. H. Combination Treatment of Alkaline Electrolyzed 
Water and Citric Acid with Mild Heat to Ensure Microbial Safety, Shelf-Life and 
Sensory Quality of Shredded Carrots. Food Microbiol. 2011, 28 (3), 484–491. 
69. Rahman, S. M. E.; Jin, Y. G.; Oh, D. H. Combined Effects of Alkaline Electrolyzed 
Water and Citric Acid with Mild Heat to Control Microorganisms on Cabbage. J. Food 
Sci. 2010, 75 (2), M111–M115. 
70. Rahman, S. M. E.; Khan, I.; Oh, D. H. Electrolyzed Water as a Novel Sanitizer in the 
Food Industry: Current Trends and Future Perspectives. Comprehen. Rev. Food Sci. 
Food Safet. 2016, 15 (3), 471–490. 
71. Ramos-Villarroel, A. Y.; Martín-Belloso, O.; Soliva-Fortuny, R. Combined Effects of 
Malic Acid Dip and Pulsed Light Treatments on the Inactivation of Listeriainnocua and 
Escherichiacoli on Fresh-Cut Produce. Food Control 2015, 52, 112–118. 
72. Ramos, B.; Miller, F. A.; Brandão, T. R.; Teixeira, P.; Silva, C. L. Fresh Fruits and 
Vegetables: An Overview on Applied Methodologies to Improve Its Quality and Safety. 
Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2013, 20, 1–15. 
73. Rawat, S. Food Spoilage: Microorganisms and Their Prevention. Asian J. Plant Sci. Res. 
2015, 5 (4), 47–56. 
74. Rico, D.; Martin-Diana, A. B.; Barat, J. M.; Barry-Ryan, C. Extending and Measuring 
the Quality of Fresh-Cut Fruit and Vegetables: A Review. Trend Food Sci. Technol., 
2007, 18 (7), 373–386. 
75. Rodríguez-Roque, M. J.; de Ancos, B.; Sánchez-Moreno, C.; Cano, M. P.; Elez￾Martínez, P.; Martín-Belloso, O. Impact of Food Matrix and Processing on the In Vitro 
Bioaccessibility of Vitamin C, Phenolic Compounds, and Hydrophilic Antioxidant 
Activity from Fruit Juice-Based Beverages. J. Funct. Foods 2015, 14, 33–43. 
76. Roobab, U. Aadil, R. M.; Madni, G. M.; Bekhit, A. E. D. The Impact of Nonthermal 
Technologies on the Microbiological Quality of Juices: A Review. Comprehen. Rev. 
Food Sci. Food Safet. 2018, 17 (2), 437–457. 
77. Sagong, H. G.; Lee, S. Y.; Chang, P. S.; Heu, S.; Ryu, S.; Choi, Y. J.; Kang, D. H. 
Combined Effect of Ultrasound and Organic Acids to Reduce Escherichia coli O157: 
H7, Salmonella Typhimurium, and Listeria monocytogenes on Organic Fresh Lettuce. 
Food Microbiol.Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2011, 145 (1), 287–292. 
78. Sahu, M.; Bala, S. Food Processing, Food Spoilage and Their Prevention: An Overview. 
Int. J. Life. Sci. Scienti. Res. 2017, 3 (1), 753–759. 
79. Severino, R.; Vu, K. D.; Donsì, F.; Salmieri, S.; Ferrari, G.; Lacroix, M. Antimicrobial 
Effects of Different Combined Non-Thermal Treatments Against Listeriamonocytogenes 
in Broccoli Florets. J. Food Eng. 2014, 124, 1–10. 
80. Singh, S.; Shalini, R. Effect of hurdle technology in food preservation: a review. Crit. 
Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2016, 56 (4), 641–649. 
81. Snyder, A. B.; Worobo, R. W. The Incidence and Impact of Microbial Spoilage in the 
Production of Fruit and Vegetable Juices as Reported by Juice Manufacturers. Food 
Control 2018, 85, 144–150. 
82. Soliva-Fortuny, R. C.; Elez-Martı́
nez, P.; Sebastianán-Calderó, M.; Martı́
n-Belloso, O.
Effect of Combined Methods of Preservation on the Naturally Occurring Microflora of 
Avocado Purée. Food Control 2004, 15 (1), 11–17.  
 
32 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
83.	 Stanojević-Nikolić, S.; Dimić, G.; Mojović, L.; Pejin, J.; Djukić-Vuković, A.; Kocić￾Tanackov, S. Antimicrobial Activity of Lactic Acid Against Pathogen and Spoilage 
Microorganisms. J. Food Process. Preserv. 2016, 40 (5), 990–998. 
84. Tiwari, B. K. Ultrasound: A clean, green extraction technology. TrAC Trends Analyt. 
Chem. 2015, 71, 100–109. 
85. Trinetta, V.; Linton, R. H.; Morgan, M. T. The Application of High-Concentration 
Short-Time Chlorine Dioxide Treatment for Selected Specialty Crops Including Roma 
Tomatoes (Lycopersiconesculentum), Cantaloupes (Cucumismelo ssp. melo) and 
Strawberries (Fragaria× ananassa). Food Microbiol. 2013, 34 (2), 296–302. 
86. Tzortzakis, N. G. Impact of cinnamon oil-enrichment on microbial spoilage of fresh 
produce. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2009, 10 (1), 97–102. 
87. Venkitanarayanan, K. S.; Lin, C. M.; Bailey, H.; Doyle, M. P. Inactivation of 
Escherichiacoli O157: H7, Salmonella Enteritidis, and Listeriamonocytogenes on 
Apples, Oranges, and Tomatoes by Lactic Acid with Hydrogen Peroxide. J. Food 
Protection 2002, 65 (1), 100–105. 
88. Vibhakara, H. S. J.; Gupta, D. K. D.; Jayaraman, K. S.; Mohan, M. S. Development of 
a High-Moisture Shelf-Stable Grated Carrot Product Using Hurdle Technology. J. Food 
Process. Preserv. 2006, 30 (2), 134–144. 
89. Vincente, A. R.; Manganaris, G. A.; Ortiz, C. M.; Sozzi, G. O.; Crisosto, C. H. Nutritional 
Quality of Fruits and Vegetables. In Postharvest Handling; Academic Press: New York, 
2014; pp 69–122. 
90. Wang, H.; Feng, H.; Luo, Y. Microbial Reduction and Storage Quality of Fresh-Cut 
Cilantro Washed with Acidic Electrolyzed Water and Aqueous Ozone. Food Res. Int. 
2004, 37 (10), 949–956. 
91. Whangchai, K.; Saengnil, K.; Uthaibutra, J. Effect of Ozone in Combination with Some 
Organic Acids on the Control of Postharvest Decay and Pericarp Browning of Longan 
Fruit. Crop Protection 2006, 25 (8), 821–825. 
92. Wibowo, S.; Essel, E. A.; De Man, S.; Bernaert, N.; Van Droogenbroeck, B.; Grauwet, 
T.; Van Loey, A.; Hendrickx, M. Comparing the Impact of High Pressure, Pulsed Electric 
Field and Thermal Pasteurization on Quality Attributes of Cloudy Apple Juice Using 
Targeted and Untargeted Analyses. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2019, 54, 64–77. 
93. Wu, V. C.; Rioux, A. A Simple Instrument-Free Gaseous Chlorine Dioxide Method for 
Microbial Decontamination of Potatoes During Storage. Food Microbiol. 2010, 27 (1), 
179–184. 
94. Yildirim, S.; Röcker, B.; Pettersen, M. K.; Nilsen-Nygaard, J.; Ayhan, Z.; Rutkaite, R.; 
et al. Active Packaging Applications for Food. Comprehen. Rev. Food Sci. Food Safet. 
2018, 17 (1), 165–199. 
95. Yuk, H. G.; Yoo, M. Y.; Yoon, J. W.; Marshall, D. L.; Oh, D. H. Effect of Combined 
Ozone and Organic Acid Treatment for Control of Escherichia coli O157: H7 and 
Listeria monocytogenes on enoki Mushroom. Food Control 2007, 18 (5), 548–553. 
96. Yuk, H. G.; Yoo, M. Y.; Yoon, J. W.; Moon, K. D.; Marshall, D. L.; Oh, D. H. Effect of 
Combined Ozone and Organic Acid Treatment for Control of Escherichia coli O157: H7 
and Listeria monocytogenes on Lettuce. J. Food Sci. 2006, 71 (3), M83–M87. 
97. Zhang, J.; Yang, H.; Chan, J. Z. Y. Development of Portable Flow-Through 
Electrochemical Sanitizing Unit to Generate Near Neutral Electrolyzed Water. J. Food 
Sci. 2018, 83 (3), 780–790. Quality and Safety of Fresh Produce During Storage 33 
98. Zhang, S.; Farber, J. M. The Effects of Various Disinfectants Against Listeria 
monocytogenes on Fresh-Cut Vegetables. Food Microbiol. 1996, 13 (4), 311–321. 
99. Zhang, W.; Dong, P.; Lao, F.; Liu, J.; Liao, X.; Wu, J. Characterization of the Major Aroma￾Active Compounds in Keitt Mango Juice: Comparison Among Fresh, Pasteurization and 
High Hydrostatic Pressure Processing Juices. Food Chem. 2019, 289, 215–222. 
100. Zhao, L.; Zhao, M. Y.; Phey, C. P.; Yang, H. Efficacy of Low Concentration Acidic 
Electrolyzed Water and Levulinic Acid Combination on Fresh Organic Lettuce (Lactuca 
sativa Var. Crispa L.) and Its Antimicrobial Mechanism. Food Control 2019, 101, 
241–250. Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing: Methods and Strategies. Megh R. Goyal, & 
Faizan Ahmad (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
CHAPTER 2
 
MICROWAVE TECHNOLOGY: 
PRESERVATION OF FRUITS AND 
VEGETABLES 
BISMA JAN, ARSHIED MANZOOR, RAFEEYA SHAMS, and 
QURAT UL EAIN HYDER RIZVI 
ABSTRACT 
Fruits and vegetables (FAVs) hold high water and moisture content and are 
vital sources of numerous nutrients including vitamins, minerals, fiber, and 
significant bioactive compounds. Combination methods for the microwave 
drying of FAV need to be considered to guarantee a good appearance and 
to preserve the nutritional significance of dried products. The exploitation 
of microwaves in the drying of FAVs has been growing at an alarming 
rate in recent years. The most important application of preservation lies in 
precise processing time. When compared to other drying methods, due to its 
substantial decrease in energy consumption and cooking time and energy 
consumption, microwave heating technology is most useful for product 
quality. Compared to traditional method, cooking or heating with micro￾wave technology will typically maintain elevated levels of photochemical 
constituent’s antioxidant activity and significant color in FAVs. Microwave 
sterilization effectively inactivates the enzyme activity and, compared to 
traditional pasteurization, has a negligible impact on the texture, color, and 
radical scavenging activity of FAVs. 36 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
2.1 INTRODUCTION 
The better living standard and increasing consumer income have contributed 
to the need for the modern application of food processing. The present 
advancement of science and technology has brought tremendous changes 
in human production and lifestyle. Microwave technology (MT) is one of 
the typical representatives. It refers to an electromagnetic wave within a 
frequency between 300 and 300 GHz and an electromagnetic wave with a 
wavelength between 1 mm and 1 m, and between the infrared radiation of the 
electromagnetic spectrum and the radio wave.9
 Furthermore, it is a process 
of volumetric heating, wherein heat is produced uniformly over whole food 
material. This attribute makes it quite different from conventional heating. 
This is due to the complete interaction of food ions in microwaves, polar 
water molecules, and charged ions.32 
Microwave heating technology can provide rapid heat in continuous mode.53 
The key factor promoting the recognition of microwave heating is its rapidity 
which suits the present rapid standard of living of individuals very well. 
This novel technology has come up among the foremost hopeful methods 
for food processing and production skill. Owing to its substantial importance 
over traditional heating methods, it has gained immense popularity. It has 
now been used in various industries for food production, such as blanching, 
frying, thawing, baking, sterilization, pasteurization, and drying of food 
products.23,32 It is also famous for its equipped nutrient and protection ability, 
with the least loss of heat-sensitive nutrients, such as antioxidants, phenols, 
flavonoids, Vitamin B complex, vitamins C, and some carotenoids.70 
The invention of the cavity magnetron by duo British physicists, namely, 
John T. Randall and Henry A. Boot,7
 contributed to discovering MT during 
World War II. During World War II, this technology was primarily employed 
for communication through the production of radar. MT emerged in 1946 
when a pioneer scientist, namely, Dr. Percy Le Baron Spencer Inadvertently, 
found that a candy bar in his pocket melted when subjected to microwave 
radiation while conducting laboratory tests for an innovative vacuum tube 
which he named as magnetron tube (apparatus that produces an electromag￾netic field). He improved the idea further and proved that it was possible to 
use microwaves as a heating process. This pioneer scientist is credited to 
have many patents on his name for many microwave heating applications in 
vast areas. As a result of this microwave energy has been incorporated into 
the food processing and preservation industry.16 
Microwave oven acceptance has grown significantly and today 70% of 
the household of American use microwave oven.25 In addition to household Microwave Technology: Preservation of Fruits and Vegetables 37 
use, some uses for the special heating properties of microwaves have been 
discovered by the industry, such as tempering, cooking bacon, and drying 
pasta. In countries such as Canada, United States, and several European 
countries, these microwave ovens have now turned out to be an important 
domestic device for households in the 21st century. The growing urbaniza￾tion and accessibility to electricity in developing countries have contributed 
to its raised use worldwide. Microwave ovens are presently utilized mostly 
for used for defrosting and cooking besides heating and reheating of food.74 
Moreover, high-quality, minimally processed goods are demanded by 
modern food consumers26 and have contributed to the advancement of new 
technologies for microwave processing. Because of its broad variety of 
benefits, customers have generally embraced MT, which has allowed them 
to resolve the distrust and taboos that existed in the beginning. 
The present chapter focuses on the mechanism and the principle of 
working of MT and its recent application as a preservation technique in the 
fruit and vegetable sector. 
2.2 PRINCIPLE AND MECHANISM OF MICROWAVE TECHNOLOGY 
Various food components function differently when kept in a microwave 
oven. The primary ingredient that allows microwaves to heat food is water. 
Higher water content results in a higher heating rate in food products. Water 
in food behaves like a magnet due to the presence of two oppositely charged 
ends of oxygen molecules and hydrogen atoms. Similarly, owing to two 
separate water poles, the water molecules rotate as microwaves oscillate. 
This is due to the water's negatively charged end drawn toward the positively 
charged microwave while the water's positive end is drawn toward the nega￾tively charged end of microwaves. At an exceptionally higher speed of 2450 
times/s, the microwaves rotate. This incredibly elevated rotation results in 
the collision of water molecules at a rapid rate that induces friction among 
water molecules and hence heat is created. Through conduction, convection, 
or radiation, the heat flows through the food. Food warms up, thus another 
microwave heating theory is that dipole rotation occurs under microwave 
radiation in dielectric materials comprising polar molecules having an elec￾trical dipole moment. 
Datta and Davidson, 2002, postulate that microwave heating can also 
happen owing to the oscillatory migration of food ions that produce heat 
in the occurrence of higher frequency electric field oscillation. The energy 
equation for microwave heating is given as follows: 38 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
∂T / t α[∇2 ∂ = T ] + Q /[ ρCp] (2.1)
where T = temperature, t = time, α = thermal diffusivity, ρ = density, Cp = 
specific heat of the material, and Q = the heat generated. 
2.3 FACTORS AFFECTING MICROWAVE HEATING 
Several studies have been conducted over the 30 years to examine variables 
that affect bacterial destruction and temperatures attained in food products 
heated through applied microwave energy.24 The key elements influencing 
microwave heating are penetration depth and dielectric properties. Dielectric 
properties demonstrate a material’s ability to transform microwave heat and 
control the effectiveness and consistency of the heating process.26 The real 
component of dielectrics known as a dielectric constant is its capability to 
store electricity while the theoretical component of dielectrics, known as 
dielectric loss, employs its capability to transfer electric energy into heat.10,17 
These characteristics can be split into the dielectric loss factor and dielectric 
constant meanwhile these features are responsible for storing and dissipating 
electrical energy.46 
When a polar dielectric material is displayed to the oscillating electric 
field, dipoles inside the substance effort to align themselves with the applied 
field. The depth of penetration is illustrated as the distance away from surface 
of the substance from where power drops to 1/e (about 37%)70 or depth of 
penetration, which depends on food composition, is a kind of capacity that 
passes across the interior of foods through the electromagnetic wave. 
0.5 2 0.5 −0.5 Z =[λ0 /2 π ](2ε ′′) {[ 1+ ( ε ε ′/ ) ] ′′ −1} (2.2) 
where Z = penetration depth, λ0 = wave length in free space, ε′ = dielectric 
constant, and ε״ = dielectric loss factor.
It is apparent from the above equation that the depth of penetration is 
increased with decreasing frequency. At frequencies below 100 MHz, 
penetration depth usually poses few issues, except for the high loss factors.44 
2.3.1 LOCATION AND GEOMETRY OF FOODS 
The shape is a critical factor of the food material that mainly influences the 
microwave penetration depth, heating rate, and uniformity. The difference 
in product thickness and uneven-shaped products undergo nonuniform Microwave Technology: Preservation of Fruits and Vegetables 39 
heating. The closer the size and wavelength ratio, the higher will be the 
center temperature. For example, cylindrical or spherical shape foods are 
heated more uniformly than a cubical food. The heating rate is improved by 
a greater surface-to-volume ratio.6 
2.3.2 TEMPERATURE 
Depending upon the material, dielectric properties may differ with tempera￾ture. Both moisture content and temperature can change during heating and 
therefore show joint result on dielectric loss factor, and dielectric constant, 
consequently on the heating characteristics.35 
2.3.3 MOISTURE CONTENT 
This property determines the dielectric characteristics of the food material 
and microwave penetration depth. Foods with high moisture content show 
low microwave penetration depth, and thus results in, uneven heating rate 
unlike, minimal moisture content foods that have a more even heating rate 
due to microwave penetration that is deeper.46 
2.3.4 MASS 
There is a direct correlation between the amounts of microwave power and 
mass-consumed that might be added to attain preferred heating power. In 
case of a less significant mass generally, the batch oven is used, however, 
for large capacity equipment conveyors are used. These types of equipment 
provide uniform heating by moving the product throughout the microwave 
field. 
2.4 ENZYME DEACTIVATION AND MICROBIAL DESTRUCTION 
BY MICROWAVE HEATING IN FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
Taking into consideration the rising market need for high-quality food that 
is microbiologically secure with well retained sensory and characteristics, 
efforts are taken during processing to reduce heating of food products. 
This could be achieved through, for example, reducing the heating period 40 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
by using advanced processing techniques to kill microorganisms and tissue 
enzymes or using methods other than traditional hot water or steam.38 The 
application of microwave energy is one of these new approaches. Microwave 
heating is currently utilized in various food technology processes, namely, 
freeze-drying, vacuum drying, tempering, dehydration, pasteurization, and 
sterilization.50 
In food, enzymes are inherently there and can result in the degradation of 
the food product. For that purpose, most food processing steps attempted to 
decrease the activity of enzymes. The enzymes like polyphenol oxidase (PPO) 
and peroxidase (POD) are mainly accountable for the color deterioration and 
nutritional significance of the majority of fruits and vegetables (FAVs).56,21 
An investigation was attempted to observe the enzymatic inactivation impact 
of POD, pectin methylesterase (PME), and PPO in kiwi fruit. Microwave 
heating resulted in 90% inactivation in POD whilst maintaining the overall 
antioxidant activity of kiwi fruit. In case of cloudy apple juice, microwave 
heating also results in the destruction of enzymes like POD, PME, and 
PPO.62 Likewise, the growth of spoilage-causing microorganisms, namely, 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Lactobacillus plantarum was destructed by 
the continuous flow microwave heating (CFMH) process as studied in apple 
juice.67 
Kinetics of degradation of L. plantarum and S. Cerevisiae in CFMH 
followed standard first-order reaction with a linear destruction rate versus 
times on logarithmic survivor plot. Collectively, the analysis indicated that 
the conditions of continuous microwave heating killed the microorganisms 
faster than traditional batch heating conditions by an order of magnitude. 
Microwave heating may result in 5-log 10 reduction in Escherichia coli and 
Listeria monocytogenes with power levels of 400, 600, 800, and 1000 W in 
apple juice.61 
Coconut water is safe and sterile; however, a few reactions may happen, 
mostly oxidation that is assisted by enzymes like POD and PPO that are 
physically there in coconut when exposed to air. So it is important to deac￾tivate these enzymes. A study was conducted to inactivate the enzymes in 
coconut water to render it sterile. It was observed by applying microwave 
heating the thermal tolerance of the enzymes was greater than that of market￾able ones applied to sterile coconut water. In this study, the first-order kinetic 
model satisfactorily represented the experimental results.42 
Marszałek et al.38 found applying microwave radiation at 120°C, PPO and 
POD activity on strawberry puree reduced by 98 and 100%, correspondingly. 
The beverages like lemon, guava, pineapple, and nopal, juice when treated 
with microwaves of 490 W, 2450 MHz resulted in PME at 90°C at 12 s.22Microwave Technology: Preservation of Fruits and Vegetables	 41 
Hence it may be concluded that microwave heating can destroy microor￾ganisms and efficiently inactivate the enzymatic activity. 
2.5 ADVANTAGES OF MICROWAVE HEATING 
•	 Owing to its source inside the food substance, rapid temperature rise, 
controllable heat deposition, and simple cleanup, microwave heating 
is gaining popularity for food heating. 
•	 Minimum fouling depositions are observed due to the removal of the 
hot heat transfer surfaces. 
•	 High heating efficiency in microwaves (80% or greater effectiveness 
can be attained). 
•	 For clean-in-place systems, they have ideal geometry. 
•	 Microwaves are ideal for heat-liable, high-viscous, and multiphase 
fluids as well as low maintenance costs for systems. 
•	 The influence of minimal heat conductivities and coefficient of heat 
transfer does not exhibit a vital role. As a result, in a little time and with 
a more uniform distribution of temperature, larger parts can be heated. 
Such advantages also lead to no-exhaust gas emissions, increased 
demand, and minimal harmful unwanted waste to the surroundings. 
•	 Sample heating is also carried out inside the food, since the micro￾wave penetrates. 
•	 The quality attributes of FAVs mainly color, taste, texture, and vitamin 
content are preserved better when heated quickly by microwave. 
•	 Inactivation of enzyme complexes. 
2.6 ROLE OF MICROWAVE AND COMBINED TECHNOLOGIES IN 
THE PRESERVATION OF FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
The microwave is an essential mechanism for enzyme inactivation and safe 
food storage and consumption. The effects of the inactivation of enzymes by 
oven heating and microwave on quality parameters of tea being processed 
and harvested in the autumn and spring seasons were determined in an 
investigation. The importance of microwave heating technology is given in 
Table 2.1. 
A study come up with the results that no major difference was noted 
between oven heating and microwave in autumn and spring seasons in poly￾phenol content of tea. The study concluded that characteristics of green tea Fruit name Major findings	 References 
Apple	 Microwave heat treatment resulted in improved extraction of [20] 
flavonoids and phenolics from apple juice and mash. 
Apple puree	 Heating by microwave technology could effectively reduce the [53] 
growth of pathogenic microorganisms (E. coli O157:H7) and 
shelf-life prolonged by 14 days at refrigerated conditions. 
Apple juice	 Continuous flow microwave heating resulted in the enhanced [67] 
destruction of L. plantarum and S. cerevisiae by following a 
first-order reaction. 
Apple juice	 Pasteurization of apple juice by microwave processing resulted [8] 
in the destruction of E. coli. 
Pear Intermittent microwave-vacuum drying in pears resulted in [68] 
raised mineral and protein amounts with higher drying rates. 
Microwave heating caused in increased concentration of [30] 
phenolics like 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid, gallic acid, apigenin 
7 glucoside, rutin, caffeic acid, resveratrol, etc. 
Microwave convective drying of pear resulted in increased [18] 
retention of calcium, phosphorus, and potassium than convec
tive drying and preserved sample characteristics. 
Microwave heating at 2450 MHz for 2–3 min resulted in [77] 
complete inhibition of Penicillium expansum, thereby control
ling the postharvest blue mold rot on pear fruits. 
Banana The power output of 650 w in microwave vacuum drying [45] 
resulted in rapid drying at low temperatures hence can be 
regarded as an efficient method of drying and preservation 
method.
 
This study resulted in a shortening of drying time and increased [28]
 
the maturity of banana slices. Parameters like sugar content, 
color, hardness, fracturability displayed better performance.
 
In contrast to hot air and microwave drying techniques, hot [40]
 
air followed by microwave finish drying resulted in a higher 
drying rate, decreased drying time, and had a limited impact on 
the rehydration potential and color of end products.
 
Increased microwave power caused an increased drying rate [51]
 
and reduction in the processing period. Furthermore combined 
effect of infrared and microwaves resulted in the increased rate 
of moisture removal from banana samples with a time saving of 
about 98%.
 
Microwave-assisted vacuum frying could offer a considerably [31]
 
reduced frying time over vacuum frying, from 75 min to 50
 
min, and has the ability to maintain the quality characteristics of
 
banana chips comparable to that of vacuum frying technology.
 
42 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
TABLE 2.1	 Role of Microwave Heating in Selected Fruits and Vegetables. 
­
­Microwave Technology: Preservation of Fruits and Vegetables 43 
TABLE 2.1 (Continued) 
Fruit name Major findings References 
Tomatoes Microwave heating of tomatoes resulted in higher retention of [37] 
polyphenols like lycopene, gallic acid, and some flavonoids in 
tomato slices. 
Potatoes According to the findings, as the increased power level resulted [72] 
in reduced mass load and thickness increases, and hence rate 
of dehydration increases, resulting in deceased consumption of 
drying energy. 
Cauliflower When 550 g of broccoli by-products were used, microwave [15] 
hydro-diffusion permitted a dried sample with 12% moisture 
to be obtained in 43 min while preserving proteins and 
polysaccharides. 
harvested in autumn and spring were significantly improved using micro￾wave heating.27 Microwave heating was applied to different fruits like kiwi, 
strawberries, and papaya to deactivate enzymes including oxydo reductases 
peroxidase and polyphenol oxidase. There was no significant change noted 
in the original color of fruits; however, small modifications of the qualitative 
and quantitative composition were observed.11 Microwave power was used 
to control the postharvest pathogens in peaches. Heating with MT for 2 min 
resulted in a significant reduction percentage of infected wounds caused by 
Botrytis cinerea and Penicillium expansum.
34 Similarly, the growth of Rizo￾phus stolonifer was entirely inhibited by 2450 MHz microwave heating for 
a time duration of 2 min or more.75 Recently a study observed that heating 
via MT at 1–2 min in peaches was way better over remaining existing treat￾ments and also improved the bioactive functional ingredients of beverage 
counting total phenolic compounds to 33% and antioxidants to 24% (ferric 
reducing antioxidant power) and 16% (2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl), 
respectively.57 
2.6.1 MICROWAVE BLANCHING 
In general, blanching is done by dipping food substances either in boiling or 
hot water solutions or steam-containing acids or salts for color preservation 
and enzyme inactivation. The benefits of microwave blanching comprise 
energy savings, reliable process controls, speed of operation, and rapid 
start-up as well as shut-down durations compared to traditional heating 
techniques.6
 Proctor and Goldblith54 were the first to report microwave 44 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
blanching for several green vegetables using 3000 MHz in 1948, and it was 
discovered that vegetables could retain maximum vitamin C amounts by 
microwave heating. This study, however, reported that treatment by micro￾wave blanching resulted in preserving water-soluble vitamins in vegetables 
comparatively better to traditional blanching techniques. 
Muftugil47 found that microwave-blanched green beans had better reten￾tion of vitamin C than hot water-blanched beans. For effective heat transfer 
in food, microwave blanching requires a minute or no water thus could 
comparatively decrease the quantity of nutrients and vitamins loss due to 
leaching than hot water immersion.36 Another study reported that micro￾wave blanching of peanuts was effective as comparatively to conventional 
blanching techniques in terms of time and energy. Moreover, present study 
also reported high-temperature microwave blanching of peanuts resulted in 
incidence of ashy and floral flavors.58 
Patricia et al.52 observed impact of microwave blanching on the nutritional 
attributes of broccoli and reported that the amounts of iron, phosphorus, 
ashes, and vitamin C in microwave blanched broccoli was higher than those 
processed by traditional hot water blanching; moreover, these attributes 
were much nearer to fresh broccoli. Another study reported little difference 
in sensory attributes, volatile aroma compounds, between dried and fresh 
dill which was hot water blanched at 90°C for a duration of 30 s followed by 
pretreatment with microwave for 30 s.63 
2.6.2 MICROWAVE-ASSISTED PASTEURIZATION AND 
STERILIZATION 
The main purpose of heat treatments like pasteurization and sterilization are 
to destroy or inactivate microbes to guarantee prolonged storage life and 
the protection of food products. Pasteurization is a technique wherein heat 
treatment destroys disease-causing microbes or pathogens in vegetative 
forms, such as bacteria. In general, fruit juices are not counted among food￾borne disease carriers, but recent studies indicate that three disease-causing 
bacteria, namely, E. coli, Salmonella enteric, and Crytosporidium parvum 
are linked by foodborne diseases in acidic fruit juices. 
Traditionally, pasteurization of fruit juices is performed using a plate heat 
exchanger via the high-temperature short-time heating process, accompa￾nied by precise holding time and cooling. Another study was conducted to 
examine the E. coli exposure to microwave heating in apple juice. Results 
obtained demonstrated a significant decrease in the microbial growth in Microwave Technology: Preservation of Fruits and Vegetables 45 
apple juice that was pasteurized at 720–900 W for 60–90 s than conventional 
pasteurization (83°C for 30 s).8 
Similarly, another study investigated the kinetics destruction under 
continuous-flow microwave heating conditions of S. cerevisiae and L. plan￾tarum in apple juice and measured to that of traditional batch heating in a 
circulatory water bath. The Z values for L. Plantarum and S. cerevisiae under 
microwave heating were 4.5 and 7°C, correspondingly, whereas traditional 
heating values were 15.9 and 13.4°C, respectively. Under microwave heating, 
microbial degradation was therefore highly susceptible to temperature than 
under thermal heating.19 The inactivation kinetics of S. typhimurium and E. 
coli O157:H7 have recently been investigated for microwave pasteurization 
at a temperature of 80 and 90°C which means same conditions used for 
conventional pasteurization. Results indicated that inactivation increased 
to a microbial decrease of up to seven cycles of Log10 with temperature, 
power level, and treatment time. For the food industry, the study is important 
because it provides a quantitative method for predicting pathogens' survival 
characteristics under other conditions of nonisothermal processing.43 
Different blends of acidic and nonacidic juices were made by continuous￾flow microwave system (CFMS) (2 kW) at 250 mL/min. Biochemical and 
chemical attributes like protein and vitamins and nutritional characteristics of 
microwave blend juices were similar to fresh juice upon 1 year of storage.41 
An undesired enzyme, PME causes loss of cloudiness and spoilage 
during the storage period in orange juice. Furthermore, this enzyme is highly 
resistant to heat than the spoilage microbes and therefore regarded as an 
adequacy index for pasteurization. In a study, orange CFMS was used to 
pasteurize orange juice by PME deactivation and microbial count as an 
index. As compared to traditional heating, deactivation of L. plantarum and 
PME was found to be prominent by employing microwaves.49 
2.7 RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN MICROWAVE DRYING 
TECHNOLOGY FOR THE PRESERVATION OF FRUITS AND 
VEGETABLES 
2.7.1 MICROWAVE FREEZE-DRYING 
The increased perishability of FAV leads to different deterioration 
and undesirable rapid reactions. Ohmic heating, radiofrequency, high￾pressure processing, infrared, microwave heating ultrasound are several 
novel technologies gaining attention in food processing and technology. 46 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
Microwave freeze drying (MFD) is a famous process that prevents chemical 
decomposition and promotes rapid rehydration by removing moisture from 
heat-sensitive food products, such as raspberries or tomatoes, and many more. 
Ice converts water during MFD by local overheating. It is a well-known fact 
that the capability of water to take up microwave power is quite moreover ice. 
Hence, a microwave will be concentrated at the melting point, contributing to 
inconsistent drying. This process is known as a thermal runaway in MFD.14 
Compared to traditional freeze-dried products, the primary advantage 
of MFD is its quick energy dissipation into the material, substantial brief 
processing time, effective drying in the dropping rate duration, volatile 
constituent retention, and energy-saving.29 In a vacuum environment, micro￾waves will heat the material volumetrically, thereby increasing the rate of 
freeze-drying. There are limited studies conducted on MFD among which 
most have focused on mass and heat transfer. Earlier in 1999 MFD attributes 
of unsaturated raw beef were investigated experimentally for different levels 
of vacuum pressure, sample thickness, electric field strength, and initial 
saturation. The results indicated the drying time is directly correlated to 
primary saturation and inversely correlative to strength of the electric field 
and meanwhile, the consistency of freeze-dried raw beef freeze-dried was 
superior to traditional freeze-dried beef.71 
Duan et al. investigated the MFD process and sterilization properties.12 
In their study, the thickness of material to be dried, input microwave power, 
and the impacts of pressure, on indices like several microorganisms and 
drying time were examined. In sea cucumber (Stichopus japonicus), MFD 
decreased the drying time by approximately half the traditional FD system 
and offered a comparable high-quality product.13 
Wang et al.73 researched the impact of vacuum and MFD on the quality 
attributes microstructure of potato slices and observed that during MFD, 
both blanching and calcium ion treatments were effective methods to prevent 
variations in shape. 
2.7.2 MICROWAVE DRYING 
In era of food preservation and processing technology, microwave heating 
has a wide approach like cooking, drying, pasteurization, and maintenance 
of nutrients in their original form in food materials. Microwave drying 
techniques have recently been studied as possible methods to produce dehy￾drated food products of high quality. In comparison to traditional hot air 
drying, microwave drying is energy-efficient evenly distributed, and quick, Microwave Technology: Preservation of Fruits and Vegetables 47 
as the microwaves penetrate into the food within, resulting water to heat up 
inside the food. This leads to substantially raised variation in vapor pressure 
amongst the surface and center of the food material, allowing moisture to be 
extracted rapidly from the food. 
Techniques like microwave vacuum drying and microwave convective 
have successfully been involved in drying some FAVs. One of the drawbacks 
of microwave drying is that extremely high temperatures, particularly during 
the final phases of drying, lead to the burning and production of undesirable 
off-flavors along the edges or corners of the food sample. This is because 
of the complexity of monitoring the temperature of the finished material in 
microwave drying, although the product temperature does not reach the hot 
air temperature in hot air drying.33 It is therefore essential to merge micro￾wave drying with conventional drying to increase the rate of drying and 
preserving the excellence of the food substance. Combined with other drying 
technologies, microwave energy increases the drying performance besides 
the consistency of food products, which is much greater than that which can 
only be accomplished by microwave drying or other traditional procedures.76 
2.7.3 MICROWAVE-ASSISTED AIR DRYING 
It is a technique wherein hot air drying is merged with microwave heating 
so as to increase the drying rate.77 It is difficult to dry the banana as it falls 
under the dropping rate era. In comparison to convective air drying, in kiwi￾fruits, combined impact of microwave finish and hot air drying shortened the 
drying rate by almost 64%.40 
Kiwifruits when dried by combined hot air MT also demonstrated greater 
dehydration potential than those dried by single hot air or microwave drying.39 
In the study, garlic cloves were dehydrated using both microwave and hot air 
drying methods. Parameters like drying time, color, and flavor strength were 
involved to elevate the effectiveness of both techniques. Microwave hot 
air drying was found to minimize the time of drying by 80–90% compared 
to traditional drying, and the consistency of the end product was relatively 
better.59 
Another research compared the cranberries’ microwave-convective 
and microwave-vacuum drying. The drying performance depicted that 
microwave-vacuum drying was highly energy-saving over microwave 
convective drying in case of the quantity of water vaporized per unit of 
energy applied. Nonetheless, the sensory study, on the other hand, revealed 
that microwave-convective dried cranberries (color, texture, taste, overall 48 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
appearance) were somewhat superior to the microwave-vacuum dried 
cranberries.66 
Another study was conducted to investigate dry pumpkin slices using 
different drying methods. The suitable drying technique for pumpkin slices 
was combined microwave–air-drying technology in case of color and 
consumption of energy during drying.3 
2.7.4 MICROWAVE-ASSISTED VACUUM DRYING 
Microwave-assisted vacuum drying (MVD) is a novel technique with the 
benefits of microwave heating, namely, better controllability, performance, 
and hygiene and quick heating rates. This novel technology also decreases 
the boiling point of water induced by the vacuum environment, therefore 
increasing energy efficacy and decreasing the creation of scorched stains 
on the surface of a finished product.76 Initially in the late nineteenth-century 
vacuum drying of banana slices was studied experimentally. Outcome of the 
current research depicted that microwave vacuum drying might be utilized 
to preserve perishable food foodstuffs like banana. 
Another study demonstrated that high-quality dried banana slices can be 
produced by microwave that can be achieved by varying duty cycle time 
and power density.45,48 The quality attributes like darkness, color, crystallized 
sugar, stickiness, and uniformity in microwave dried raisins were superior 
to hot dried raisins.69 In one of the studies, durian chips were developed and 
were compared with chips developed by conventional fried methods. The 
structure and hardness of the durian chips that were microwave dried were 
close to that of the durian chips that were conventionally fried. 
Furthermore, microwave vacuum drying decreased the durian chips’ fat 
content by almost 90%, as compared to conventionally deep-fried durian 
chips.5 The impact of microwave power on drying kinetics and consistency 
of tomato pieces in microwave-vacuum dryer at different applied vacuum 
pressures were explored in another study. The results showed improvement 
in conditions for microwave-vacuum drying rates and drying time from 84 
to 14 min.1 
2.7.5 MICROWAVE-ASSISTED VACUUM FRYING 
Vacuum frying is amongst important food industry’s frying technique that 
fries food products under reduced pressures probably below atmospheric  
Microwave Technology: Preservation of Fruits and Vegetables 49 
pressure thus decreasing the boiling point of frying oil and water content 
of food product. The main advantages of vacuum frying include lower 
acrylamide and oil content, reduced unfavorable consequences on oil 
consistency, and better preservation of the product’s natural color and taste 
because of minimal oxygen and temperature content during the process. The 
implementation of microwave vacuum frying (MVF) following prefrying is 
highly recommended in order to additionally improve the characteristics of 
fried food stuffs, as it raises the heating rate significantly and minimizes oil 
uptake and frying time.55 
In one of the study potato chips were subjected to two distinct frying 
methods, namely, vacuum frying and MVF. Based on the conclusion of 
the investigation, MVF can appreciably decrease oil uptake in potato chips 
from an initial content of 39.14–29.35 g oil/100 g d. Meanwhile quality 
parameters like crunchiness, crispiness was enhanced and the color was 
retained to a significant extent, mainly owing to increased moisture loss, 
than those samples developed using vacuum frying technology.64 However, 
it is essential to note that temperature is one important attribute to affect 
the consistency of microwave-vacuum fried potato chips, so manufacturer’s 
requisite to discover optimum temperature environments to produce better 
food products with excellent quality attributes.65 
Furthermore, the combination of vacuum prefrying and pulsed microwave 
vacuum drying (PSMVD) implies a new method to incorporate microwave 
irradiation into the production process to achieve premium-quality French 
fries. A comparative study produced French fries with an oil content of 
25% in combined technique PSMVD and vacuum-fried French fries with 
an oil content of 40%. However textural qualities were comparable in both 
techniques.55 Recently ultrasound combined MVF technology was employed 
to fry apple slices to improve overall frying time, crispiness, and color. 
Microwave power levels utilized were 800–1000 W with fixed ultrasound 
power of 600 W and frequency range of 28 kHz. The application of ultrasound 
combined MVF technology appreciably improved the moisture removal rate, 
enhanced crispiness and crunchiness, reduced the frying time, and yielded 
more pleasing yellow-colored apple slices compared to MVF technology.2 
2.7.6 MICROWAVE-ASSISTED INFRARED DRYING 
In a large range of agricultural products, the popularity of infrared drying 
(IRD) has improved immensely as another alternate technique for conven￾tional drying. However, its low penetrating power is the core limitation so 50 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
the combined effect of microwave energy and infrared radiation (IR) radia￾tion can overcome this difficulty. The connection between microwave–IR 
heating and dielectric properties on the drying properties of kiwifruit and 
bananas has recently been investigated. 
The combined drying technique was found to have faster drying rates 
(approximately 98% time savings) with reduced absolute moisture content 
(0.011–0.15 kg water/kg dry matter) as compared to traditional drying.51 The 
quality and drying kinetics of raspberries under microwave-vacuum IR drying 
at various vacuum pressures and microwave powers were recorded in another 
study. Bioactive chemical constituents like anthocyanins and DPPH radical￾scavenging activity were 17.5 and 21.21% higher than IRD at optimum condi￾tions, respectively. Besides, this study suggested that IR–microwave-vacuum 
drying could be recommended for usage in the drying industry because of its 
positive advantages in nutrient maintenance time saving.60 
Another study utilized eggplants to examine the influence of microwave 
IR at diverse microwave powers (30, 40, and 50%) and diverse IR powers 
(10, 20, and 30%). Microwave–IR combination offered considerably lesser 
drying duration over hot-air drying. Furthermore, microwave–IR-dried 
eggplants had low shrinkage, more porous structure, and high rehydration 
ratio as compared to conventional hot-air dried samples.4 
2.8 SUMMARY 
Currently, people are becoming more health conscious, preferring to consume 
food that contains all the necessary nutrients and fewer preservatives. Micro￾wave ovens have an ordinary place in households and are utilized these days 
as a device of day-to-day use. The microwave heating method has been effec￾tively used for the maintenance important bioactive constituents of numerous 
FAVs in food industries. In order to design microwave oven, knowledge of 
dielectric properties and penetration depth is very useful. Uneven distribu￾tion of temperature throughout microwave heating has been observed to be 
influenced by the size, shape, and location of a food substance. 
The microwave pasteurization and sterilization of various FAVs have 
claimed to successfully kill pathogenic microbes and appreciably decrease 
processing time without severe harm to the excellence of a final foodstuff 
than conventional techniques. Likewise, this premium heating technology 
used in the fruit and vegetable sector such as blanching has the significance 
of preserving and retaining original quality in terms of nutritional impor￾tance, color, taste, with better preservation than the traditional method.  
 
 
 
Microwave Technology: Preservation of Fruits and Vegetables 51 
Compared to traditional techniques, microwave heating has greatly 
decreased energy consumption during the drying of foods. The combined 
microwave heating system including infrared or freeze and vacuum drying 
supplemented with traditional methods has shown the greatest benefits. 
In the case of microwave-assisted freeze-drying, the advantages include 
lesser drying time, uniform heating of particulate foods, improved thermal 
efficacy, greater rehydration ability, and preservation of heat-sensitive food 
material components. While microwaves are commonly used in different 
food processes, there is a need for substantial research aimed at improving 
those areas. Specifically, it is important to explore methods for obtaining 
final FAVs with better nutritional and sensor qualities characteristics. 
KEYWORDS 
• bioactive constituent 
microwave technology 
perishable 
preservation 
sensory attributes 
• 
• 
• 
• 
REFERENCES 
1. Abano, E. E.; Ma, H.; Qu, W. Influence of Combined Microwave-Vacuum Drying 
on Drying Kinetics and Quality of Dried Tomato Slices. J. Food Qual. 2012, 35 (3), 
159–168. 
2. Al Faruq, A.; Zhang, M.; Adhikari, B. A. Novel Vacuum Frying Technology of Apple 
Slices Combined with Ultrasound and Microwave. Ultrasonics Sonochem. 2019, 52, 
522–529. 
3. Alibas, I. Microwave, Air and Combined Microwave–Air-Drying Parameters of 
Pumpkin Slices. LWT-Food Sci. Technol. 2007, 40 (8), 1445–1451. 
4. Aydogdu, A.; Sumnu, G.; Sahin, S. Effects of Microwave-Infrared Combination Drying 
on Quality of Eggplants. Food Bioprocess Technol. 2015, 8 (6), 1198–1210. 
5. Bai-Ngew S.; Therdthai, N.; Dhamvithee, P. Characterization of Microwave Vacuum￾Dried Durian Chips. J. Food Eng. 2011, 104 (1), 114–122. 
6. Bhatt, K.; Vaidya, D.; Kaushal, M.; Gupta, A.; Soni, P.; Arya, P.; Sharma, C. Microwaves 
and Radio Waves: In Food Processing and Preservation. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. Appl. 
Sci. 2020, 9 (9), 118–131.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
7. Brittain, J. E. The Magnetron and the Beginnings of the Microwave Age. Phys. Today 
1985, 38 (7), 60–67. 
8. Canumir, J. A.; Celis, J. E.; de Bruijn, J.; Vidal, L. V. Pasteurization of Apple Juice by 
Using Microwaves. LWT-Food Sci. Technol. 2002, 35 (5), 389–392. 
9. Chandrasekaran, S.; Ramanathan, S.; Basak, T. Microwave Food Processing—A Review. 
Food Res. Int. 2013, 52 (1), 243–261. 
10. Curet, S.; Rouaud, O.; Boillereaux, L. Estimation of Dielectric Properties of Food 
Materials During Microwave Tempering and Heating. Food Bioprocess Technol. 2014, 
7 (2), 371–384. 
11. de Ancos, B.; Cano, M. P.; Hernandez, A.; Monreal, M. Effects of Microwave Heating 
on Pigment Composition and Color of Fruit Purees. J. Sci. Food Agric. 1999, 79 (5), 
663–670. 
12. Duan, X.; Zhang, M.; Mujumdar, A. S. Studies on the Microwave Freeze-Drying 
Technique and Sterilization Characteristic of Cabbage. Dry. Technol. 2007, 25 (10), 
1725–1731. 
13. Duan, X.; Zhang, M.; Mujumdar, A. S.; Wang, S. J. Microwave Freeze Drying of Sea 
Cucumber (Stichopus japonicus). J. Food Eng. 2010, 96 (4), 491–497. 
14. Duan, X.; Zhang, M.; Mujumdar, A. S.; Wang, R. Trends in Microwave-Assisted Freeze 
Drying of Foods. Drying Technol. 2010, 28 (4), 444–453. 
15. Ferreira, S. S.; Passos, C. P.; Cardoso, S. M.; Wessel, D. F.; Coimbra, M. A. Microwave 
Assisted Dehydration of Broccoli By-Products and Simultaneous Extraction of Bioactive 
Compounds. Food Chem. 2018, 246, 386–393. 
16. Fito, P.; Chiralt, A.; Eugenia Martin, M. E. Current State of Microwave Applications 
to Food Processing. In Novel Food Processing Technologies; Barbosa-canovas, G. V., 
Tapia, M. S., Cano, M. P., Eds.; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, 2005; pp 525–537. 
17. Franco, A. P.; Yamamoto, L. Y.; Tadini, C. C.; Gut, J. A. W. Dielectric Properties of 
Green Coconut Water Relevant to Microwave Processing: Effect of Temperature and 
Field Frequency. J. Food Eng. 2015, 155, 69–78. 
18. Fumagalli, F.; Silveira, A. M. Quality Evaluation of Microwave-Dried Packham’s 
Triumph Pear. Dry. Technol. 2005, 23 (9–11), 2215–2226. 
19. Gentry, T. S.; Roberts, J. S. Design and Evaluation of a Continuous Flow Microwave 
Pasteurization System for Apple Cider. LWT-Food Sci. Technol. 2005, 38 (3), 227–238. 
20. Gerard, K. A. and Roberts, J. S. Microwave Heating of Apple Mash to Improve Juice 
Yield and Quality. LWT-Food Sci. Technol. 2004, 37 (5), 551–557. 
21. Gonçalves, E.; Pinheiro, M.; Abreu, J.; Brandao, M.; T. R. S.; Silva, C. L. M. Carrot 
(Daucuscarota L.) Peroxidase Inactivation, Phenolic Content and Physical Changes 
Kinetics Due to Blanching. J. Food Eng. 2010, 97, 574–581. 
22. González-Monroy, A. D.; Rodríguez-Hernández, G.; Ozuna, C. Sosa-Morales, M. E. 
Microwave-Assisted Pasteurization of Beverages (Tamarind and Green) and Their 
Quality During Refrigerated Storage. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2018, 49, 51–57. 
23. Gupta, M.; Wong, W. L. E. Microwaves and Metals; John Wiley & Sons (Asia) Pvt. Ltd.: 
Singapore, 2007; E-book; pp 256. 
24. Heddleson, R. A.; Doores, S. Factors Affecting Microwave Heating of Foods and 
Microwave Induced Destruction of Food Borne Pathogens–A Review. J. Food 
Protection 1994, 57 (11), 1025–1037. 
25. Hegenbart, S. Microwaveable Foods: Making Faster Better. Prepared Foods 1989, 159 
(12), 87–90.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Microwave Technology: Preservation of Fruits and Vegetables 53 
26. Hong, X.; Wang, J. Use of Electronic Nose and Tongue to Track Freshness of Cherry 
Tomatoes Squeezed for Juice Consumption: Comparison of Different Sensor Fusion 
Approaches. Food Bioprocess Technol. 2015, 8 (1), 158–170. 
27. Huang, Y.; Sheng, J.; Yang, F. Hu, Q. Effect of Enzyme Inactivation by Microwave and 
Oven Heating on Preservation Quality of Green Tea. J. Food Eng. 2007, 78 (2), 687–692. 
28. Jiang, H.; Zhang, M.; Liu, Y.; Mujumdar, A. S.; Liu, H. The Energy Consumption and 
Color Analysis of Freeze/Microwave Freeze Banana Chips. Food Byproducts Process. 
2013, 91 (4), 464–472. 
29. Jiang, N.; Liu, C., Li, D.; Zhang, Z.; Liu, C.; Wang, D.; Niu, L. Zhang, M. Evaluation of 
Freeze Drying Combined with Microwave Vacuum Drying for Functional Okra Snacks: 
Antioxidant Properties, Sensory Quality, and Energy Consumption. LWT-Food Sci. 
Technol. 2017, 82, 216–226. 
30. Juhaimi, F.; Özcan, M. M.; Uslu, N.; Ghafoor, K. Babiker, E. E. Effect of Microwave 
Heating on Phenolic Compounds of Prickly Pear (Opuntia ficus‐indica L.) Seeds. J. 
Food Process. Preserv. 2018, 42 (2), 13437. 
31. Jumras, B.; Inprasit, C.; Suwannapum, N. Effect of Microwave-Assisted Vacuum Frying 
on the Quality of Banana Chips. Songklanakarin J. Sci. Technol. 2020, 42(1). 
32. Kalla, A. M.; Devaraju, R. Microwave Energy and Its Application in Food Industry: A 
Review. Asian J. Dairy Food Res. 2017, 36 (1), 37–44. 
33. Kandasamy, P.; Varadharaju, N. Assessment of Biochemical Characteristics of Foam-Mat 
Dried Papaya Powder. Int. J. Agric. Food Sci. 2014, 4 (1), 54–58. 
34. Karabulut, O. A.; Baykal, N. Evaluation of the Use of Microwave Power for the Control 
of Postharvest Diseases of Peaches. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 2002, 26 (2), 237–240. 
35. Khattarpaul, N. Food Processing and Preservation. In Microwave Application to Food; 
Daya Publishing House: New Delhi, 2005; pp 110–120. 
36. Lin. S.; Brewer, M. S. Effect of Blanching Method on the Quality Characteristics of 
Frozen Peas. J. Food Qual. 2005, 28, 350–360. 
37. Mahieddine, B.; Amina, B.; Faouzi, S. M.; Sana, B. and Wided, D. Effects of Microwave 
Heating on the Antioxidant Activities of Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum). Anna. Agric. 
Sci. 2018, 63 (2), 135–139. 
38.	 Marszałek, K.; Mitek, M.; Skąpska, S. Effect of Continuous Flow Microwave and 
Conventional Heating on the Bioactive Compounds, Color, Enzymes Activity, 
Microbial and Sensory Quality of Strawberry Purée. Food Bioprocess Technol. 2015, 
8 (9), 1864–1876. 
39. Maskan, M. Drying, Shrinkage and Rehydration Characteristics of Kiwifruits During 
Hot Air and Microwave Drying. J. Food Eng. 2001, 48, 177–182. 
40. Maskan, M. Microwave/Air and Microwave Finish Drying of Banana. J. Food Eng. 
2000, 44, 71–78. 
41. Math, R.; Nagender, A.; Nayani, S.; Satyanarayana, A. Continuous Microwave 
Processing and Preservation of Acidic and Non Acidic Juice Blends. Int. J. Agric. Food 
Sci. 2014, 2, 81–90. 
42. Matsui, K. N.; Gut, J. A. W.; De Oliveira, P. V.; Tadini, C. C. Inactivation Kinetics of 
Polyphenol Oxidase and Peroxidase in Green Coconut Water by Microwave Processing. 
J. Food Eng. 2008, 88 (2), 169–176. 
43. Mendes-Oliveira, G.; Deering, A. J.; San Martin-Gonzalez, M. F.; Campanella, O. H. 
Microwave Pasteurization of Apple Juice: Modeling the Inactivation of Escherichia coli 
O157: H7 and Salmonella Typhimurium at 80–90 C. Food Microbiol. 2020, 87, 10338.  
 
 
 
 
54 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
44. Metaxas, A. C.; Meredith, R. J. Industrial Microwave Heating, 2nd ed.; IEEE Press 
Power Systems Engineering Series, Volume 4; London: Peter Peregrinus Ltd. (on Behalf 
of the Institution of Electrical Engineers); 1993; online. 
45. Mousa, N.; Farid, M. Microwave Vacuum Drying of Banana Slices. Dry. Technol. 2002, 
20 (10), 2055–2066. 
46. Mudgett, R. E. Electrical Properties of Foods in Microwave Processing. Food Technol., 
1982, 36, 109–115. 
47. Muftugil, N. Effect of Different Types of Blanching on the Color and the Ascorbic Acid 
and Chlorophyll Contents of Green Beans. J. Food Process. Preserv. 1986, 10, 69–76. 
48. Nemes, S. M.; Sivakumar, S. S.; Gariepy, Y.; Raghavan, G. S. V. Microwave Vacuum 
Drying of Banana Slices Under Different Power Levels. Unpublished Paper at 3rd Inter￾American Drying Conference; Montreal, Canada, 2005. 
49. Nikdel, S.; Chen, C. S.; Parish, M. E.; MacKellar, D. G.; Friedrich, L. M. Pasteurization 
of Citrus Juice with Microwave Energy in a Continuous-Flow Unit. J. Agric. Food 
Chem. 1993, 41 (11), 2116–2119. 
50. Orsat, V.; Raghavan, V.; Meda, V. Microwave Technology for Food Processing: An 
Overview. In The Microwave Processing of Foods; Schubert, H., Regier, M., Eds.; 
Taylor and Francis/CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2005; pp 105–118. 
51.	 Öztürk, S.; Şakıyan, Ö.; Özlem-Alifakı, Y. Dielectric Properties and Microwave and 
Infrared-Microwave Combination Drying Characteristics of Banana and Kiwi Fruit. J. 
Food Process Eng. 2017, 40 (3), E-article 12502. 
52. Patricia, C. M.; Bibiana, D. Y.; Jose, P. M. Evaluation of Microwave Technology in 
Blanching of Broccoli (Brassica oleraceae L.) as a Substitute for Conventional 
Blanching. Procedia Food Sci. 2011, 1, 426–432. 
53. Picouet, P. A.; Landl, A.; Abadias, M.; Castellari, M.; Viñas, I. Minimal Processing of 
a Granny Smith Apple Purée by Microwave Heating. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 
2009, 10 (4), 545–550. 
54. Proctor, B. E.; Goldblith, S. A. Radar Energy for Rapid Food Cooking and Blanching 
and Its Effect on Vitamin Content. Food Technol. 1948, 2, 95–104. 
55. Quan, X.; Zhang, M.; Fang, Z.; Liu, H.; Shen, Q.; Gao Z. Low oil French Fries Produced 
by Combined Pre-Frying and Pulsed-Spouted Microwave Vacuum Drying Method. 
Food Bioproducts Process. 2016, 99, 109–115. 
56. Queiroz C.; Mendes, M. L.; Fialho, E.; Valente-Mesquita, V. L. Polyphenol Oxidase: 
Characteristics and Mechanisms of Browning Control. Food Rev. Int. 2008, 24, 361–375. 
57. Sattar, S.; Ahmad, T.; Nisa, M. U.; Imran, M.; Holmes, M.; Maycock, J.; Nadeem, 
M.; Khan, M. K. Microwave Processing Impact on Physicochemical and Bioactive 
Attributes of Optimized Peach Functional Beverage. J. Food Process. Preserv. 2019, 
43 (7), E-article 13952. 
58. Schirack, A. V.; Sanders, T. H.; Sandeep, K. P. Effect of Processing Parameters on the 
Temperature and Moisture Content of Microwave-Blanched Peanuts. J. Food Process 
Eng. 2007, 30 (2), 225–240. 
59. Sharma, G. P.; Prasad, S. Drying of Garlic (Allium sativum) Cloves by Microwave-Hot 
Air Combination. J. Food Eng. 2001, 50, 99–105. 
60. Si, X.; Chen, Q.; Bi, J.; Yi, J.; Zhou, L.; Wu, X. Infrared Radiation and Microwave 
Vacuum Combined Drying Kinetics and Quality of Raspberry. J. Food Process Eng. 
2016, 39 (4), 377–390.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Microwave Technology: Preservation of Fruits and Vegetables 55 
61. Siguemoto, É. S.; Gut, J. A. W.; Martinez, A.; Rodrigo, D. Inactivation Kinetics of 
Escherichia coli O157: H7 and Listeria monocytogenes in Apple Juice by Microwave and 
Conventional Thermal Processing. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2018, 45, 84–91. 
62. Siguemoto, É. S.; Pereira, L. J.; Gut, J. A. W. Inactivation Kinetics of Pectin 
Methylesterase, Polyphenol Oxidase, and Peroxidase in Cloudy Apple Juice Under 
Microwave and Conventional Heating to Evaluate Non-Thermal Microwave Effects. 
Food Bioprocess Technol. 2018, 11 (7), 1359–1369. 
63. Straumite E.; Kruma, Z.; Galoburda, R.; Saulite, K. Effect of Blanching on the Quality 
of Microwave Vacuum Dried Dill (Anethumgraveolens L.). World Acad. Sci. Eng. 
Technol. 2012, 64, 756–762. 
64. Su, Y.; Zhang, M.; Zhang, W.; Adhikari, B.; Yang, Z. Application of Novel Microwave￾Assisted Vacuum Frying to Reduce the Oil Uptake and Improve the Quality of Potato 
Chips. LWT, 2016, 73, 490–497. 
65. Su, Y.; Zhang, M.; Zhang, W. Effect of Low Temperature on the Microwave-Assisted 
Vacuum Frying of Potato Chips. Dry. Technol. 2016, 34 (2), 227–234. 
66. Sunjka, P. S.; Rennie, T. J.; Beaudry, C.; Raghavan, G. S. V. Microwave-Convective and 
Microwave Vacuum Drying of Cranberries: A Comparative Study. Dry. Technol. Int. J. 
2004, 22, 1217–1231. 
67. Tajchakavit, S.; Ramaswamy, H. S.; Fustier, P. Enhanced Destruction of Spoilage 
Microorganisms in Apple Juice During Continuous Flow Microwave Heating. Food 
Res. Int. 1998, 31 (10), 713–722. 
68. Taskin, O.; Polat, A.; Izli, N.; Asik, B. B. Intermittent Microwave-Vacuum Drying 
Effects on Pears. Polish J. Food Nutr. Sci. 2019, 69 (1), 101–108. 
69. Tulasidas, T. N.; Raghavan, G. S. V.; Mujumdar, A. S. Microwave Drying of Grapes in a 
Single Mode Cavity at 2450 MHz –II: Quality and Energy Aspects. Dry. Technol. 1995, 
13 (8/9), 1973–1992. 
70. Vadivambal, R.; Jayas, D. S. Non-Uniform Temperature Distribution During Microwave 
Heating of Food Materials—A Review. Food Bioprocess Technol. 2010, 3, 161–171. 
71. Wang, Z.H, Shi, M. H. Microwave Freeze Drying Characteristics of Beef. Dry. Technol. 
1999, 17 (3), 434–447. 
72. Wang, J.; Xi, Y. S.; Yu, Y. Microwave drying characteristics of potato and the effect 
of different microwave powers on the dried quality of potato. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 
2004, 219 (5), 500–506. 
73. Wang, R.; Zhang, M.; Mujumdar, A. S. Effects of vacuum and microwave freeze drying 
on microstructure and quality of potato slices. J. Food Eng. 2010, 101, 131–139. 
74. WHO. World Health Day. Food Safety: What You should Know. http://www.searo. who. 
int/entity/world_health_day/2015/whd-what-you-should-know/en/ (accessed on July 
10, 2021). 
75. Zhang, H.; Fu, C.; Zheng, X., Xi, Y.; Jiang, W. Wang, Y. Control of Postharvest Rhizopus 
Rot of Peach by Microwave Treatment and Yeast Antagonist. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 
2004, 218 (6), 568–572. 
76. Zhang, M.; Jiang, H.; Lim, R. X. Recent Developments in Microwave-Assisted Drying 
of Vegetables, Fruits, and Aquatic Products: Drying Kinetics and Quality Considerations. 
Dry. Technol. 2010, 28 (11), 1307–1316. 
77. Zhang, M.; Tang, J.; Mujumdar, A. S.; Wang, S. Trends in Microwave-Related Drying of 
Fruits and Vegetables. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2006, 17, 524–534. Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing: Methods and Strategies. Megh R. Goyal, & 
Faizan Ahmad (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 3
 
ROLE OF GAMMA IRRADIATION IN 
THE PRESERVATION OF FRUITS AND 
VEGETABLES 
RAFEEYA SHAMS, QURAT UL EAIN HYDER RIZVI, BISMA JAN, and 
ARSHIED MANZOOR 
ABSTRACT 
Gamma irradiation from cobalt-60 or cesium-137can be used as a food 
protection and preservation method to enhance the food shelf-life, 
safety, and security devoid of changing the nutritional, toxicological, or 
biological food quality. Various food products use gamma irradiation to 
reduce microbial growth and disinfestations. This method is economically 
and technically feasible and physically a safe technique having a strong 
antimicrobial effect. These radiations are also used to treat large volumes 
of food products or sealed containers. Different varieties of irradiation 
have the potential to enhance the phenolic content and the free radical 
scavenging activity of food and food by-products. Far-infrared has been 
utilized to release antioxidant-active low-molecular-weight phenolics. 
Recommended doses of gamma radiation for inhibiting sprouts doses 
used are <0.5 kGy for hindering ripening; lower or equal than 1 kGy for 
pest disinfestations; 3–5 kGy to increase shelf-life and for pathogenic 
microbes; 5 kGy or higher if the food material supports it without deterio￾rating its properties. 58 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
A physical treatment wherein food material is exposed to a specific radiation 
dosage is known as gamma irradiation. Irradiation method is used in more 
than 80 countries according to Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC).41 
Some of the natural processes are delayed by the food irradiation depending 
upon the dosage level, like sprouting, ripening besides control of insect 
infestation, spoilage and pathogenic microbes are decreased (Aspergillus, 
Escherichia coli, Salmonella) and also for the commercial foods sterility. 
There are only three kinds of radiations approved according to CAC, which 
are used at commercial scale for irradiation of food such as accelerated 
gamma X-ray sand electrons rays.32 
Irradiation is classified into three main groups depending upon the 
dosage level, such as: radicidation (2.5–10 kGy), radappertization (30–40 
kGy), and radurization (0.75–2.5 kGy). It is effective for the removal and 
inhibition of antinutritional factors and food allergens.8
 Some of the basic 
benefits of irradiation techniques are: fast acting, minimal sample prepara￾tion, nonthermal process, no catalyst used, and high power of penetration 
(in the final package, products can be treated), no residues, samples that are 
treated can be instantly distributed with no rise in temperature (radiation 
dose of 1 kGy raises the product temperature only by 0.36°C). The label on 
the irradiated foods must withhold the international icon for irradiation, such 
as: “Treated with radiation” or “Treated by irradiation”.46 
This chapter discusses effects of various irradiation techniques on the 
shelf-life, physicochemical parameters, and other chemical and biochemical 
properties of the food produce. Further the chapter also focuses on the effect 
of gamma radiation on the quality attributes of various fruits and vegetables. 
3.2 PRINCIPLES OF FOOD IRRADIATION 
The principle of irradiation of foods identifies the process by which irradiation 
particles interacts with the food product. This may provide insights in the 
energetic electron arrangement at arbitrary throughout the material, which 
in turn may cause the energetic molecular particles arrangement. Such 
particles can be used to capture electron and segregation, and quick change 
via ion-molecule responses, or can segregate with time depending on the 
particle complexity. 
Radiations impact on material depends on the type of radiation, its level 
of energy and the physical state, composition; climatic conditions and the Role of Gamma Irradiation in the Preservation of Fruits 59 
temperature of the retaining substance. The irradiated foods can also be 
defined as the foods that are exposed to various forms of irradiations and 
these radiations depend on the cause for exposure. This process is a physical 
treatment process where food products are exposed to electrons, electromag￾netic beams so as to prolong the shelf-life of these products. During the 
process of irradiation, the source of irradiation and treated food substance 
does not come in direct contact with each other and it is inconceivable to 
attempt radioactivity within the food substance by using gamma beams or 
electron beams at a limit of 10 MeV.14 
The ionization emission is a part of the electromagnetic continuum of 
electric waves on two sides, with the heavy energy radiations with gamma 
rays on the other. There are visible light rays from all sides of ultraviolet and 
infrared waves in the middle. The microwaves, which are used in standard 
kitchen appliances or domestic, are unlike lower frequency radio waves. 
These both waves are members of the electromagnetic spectrum, and possess 
some definite issues. Both the waves have the normal frequency, wavelength, 
and certain related strength. When the wavelength is more the lesser is the 
related energy. A limited energy is associated with radio waves having long 
wavelengths of 30 cm to 3 km. 
3.3 MECHANISM OF IRRADIATION TO INHIBIT MICROBIAL 
PATHOGENS 
Ionizing radiations are used to irradiate foods and provide indirect and 
direct impact on the substance which probably becomes the target. The 
target includes the irradiated microbes and insect pathogen that destroys the 
food texture and structure. Irradiation causes the incidence of dissociation 
otherwise ionization or electron-release of hydrogen as well as excitation.3 
Irradiation also shows the immediate effects of DNA bonds in insect cells 
and microbes so as the capability of cells to multiply and survive will be 
affected. While the indirect effects of irradiation on the water, which is the 
major constituent of the cell, are affected by radiolysis where decomposition 
of water molecules and the formation of free radicals occurs.45 
Overall irradiation causes the physical, chemical changes in the cells of 
microbes. Hydrogen bonding termination and sugar phosphate chain termina￾tion from each polinukleotida of DNA termination of adjacent chains on both 
polinukleotida of DNA loss of nitrogen bases until cross-ties intramolecular 
(base damage) is formed.50 Every microorganism has differing resistance 
and sensitivity against gamma radiation; thus the success rate of irradiation 60 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
depends on the resistance of microbes. Some microorganisms are hard to kill 
or inhibit, but most of the microorganisms are sensitive and simple to destroy 
or inhibit. 
D reveals the microbial cell damage level related to the resistance 10
against irradiation. D10 is a radiation dose that is required to destroy micro￾organisms by 10- to 90-folds of the whole disease-causing microorganisms. 
Resistance of microbes against irradiation depends on various factors, such 
as composition and the microbial DNA’s size, DNA-related components, O2
, 
temperature, H2
O, and post-radiation and media.19 
3.4 SAFETY OF IRRADIATION TECHNIQUE ON FOODS 
The irradiation technique is a safer method to extend the power save food 
as stated by World Health Organization (WHO), and it also reported that 
the recommended irradiation doses to a food product do not damage the 
toxic hazards and nutritive value.12 If the recommended radiation dosage is 
extended, it can cause some undesirable effects to food product. The recom￾mended dosage of gamma irradiation is a maximum of 5 MeV. If the gamma 
irradiation dosage exceeds 5 MeV, then there will be the negative impact 
on the food material. The hazardous radioactive material is obtained if the 
radiation doses exceeded the recommended threshold. 
The substance comprises high radioactive components that are able to 
change the genetic order. There will be no radioactive residue left after irra￾diation because of the radionuclide from which the metal-coated capsules 
store radiation perfectly. Irradiation technology plays a great role in food 
preservation, where the certain dose of radiations are used in the form of rays 
and these rays penetrate through the food product so as to kill the pathogenic 
microorganisms, insects, pests, etc. These radiations are safe that do not 
reduce the nutrition quality and leaves no residue against food so the irradia￾tion technique is completely safe, clean, and environmentally friendly.40 
Nutritional value and chemical changes are estimated by the quantity of 
the radiation doses. The food substances that are irradiated with low dose 
of energy up to 1 kGy do not experience any change in its nutritional or 
chemical properties. The food substances that are irradiated with energy 
doses of 1–10 kGy) experience the loss of vitamin. Substances that are irra￾diated by higher doses (10–50 kGy) still experience vitamin depletion and 
the vitamins, such as K, A, B1, B, and E are easily lost and certain vitamins, 
such as riboflavin, calciferol, and niacin are retained.20 Furthermore, if the 
dose (high) of radiations is not appropriate to cause protein denaturation, and Role of Gamma Irradiation in the Preservation of Fruits 61 
to affect the fatty acid/ carbohydrate composition; and if radiation doses are 
given at low temperature, then chemical changes in the food product may be 
reduced.18 
3.5 STATUS AND REGULATORY ASPECTS OF FOOD IRRADIATION 
Around 60 diverse irradiated foods are available in the marketplace currently. 
Potato, meat, onion, spices, etc., are major products. The irradiated ground 
beef in the United States was sold by almost 7000 supermarkets and several 
other retail outlet stores. The latest status on irradiated foods across the globe 
is given in Table 3.1. Irradiation is used at a large scale and Asia is number 
one followed by USA and Africa. The commercial use of food irradiation is 
lagging in Europe because of its strict legislation.28 
TABLE 3.1 Global Status of Food Irradiation During 2015–2016. 
Country Food items 
Brazil Grains, spices, herbs, fruits, vegetables 
China Meat, spices, grains, garlic, onion, etc. 
France Gums, vegetables, poultry, spices, etc. 
Germany Herbs, spices 
India Fruits, potato, onion, spices, etc. 
Indonesia Spices, sea foods, cocoa, etc. 
Malaysia Vegetables, spices, etc. 
Netherland Spices, frog legs, egg white, poultry, sea foods 
Pakistan Spices, fruits, pulses, etc. 
Spain Herbs, vegetables, etc. 
USA Sea food, spices, grains, meat, fruits and vegetables 
Vietnam Fruits, vegetables, sea foods 
During 1992, the expert missions were sent to Vietnam and Pakistan 
by International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to update the guidelines 
on food irradiation based on recommendation of a “1992 (20 January–24 
January) Seminar held on Harmonization of Food Irradiation Regulations 
at Kuala Lumpur – Malaysia.” The food irradiation regulations approved by 
the government are abetted by IAEA professionals in Philippines, Sri Lanka, 
and Malaysia.21 
Several international and national regulatory authorities approved 
food irradiation and these regulatory authorities are the Institute of Food 62 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
Technologists, WHO, American Medical Association, CODEX, Food Stan￾dards Australia–New Zealand, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
(FSSAI), and Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), etc..28 
In Canada, the irradiated foods include: potatoes, wheat flour, spices, 
and onions. In 2002, an organizational offer was submitted for mangoes; 
however, it was suspended because of consumer’s refusal. Irradiation was 
permitted for onion and potato in 1965 and 1960, respectively, at 0.15 kGy 
dose. Irradiation of spices and wheat flour was permitted at a dose of 10 kGy 
and 0.75 kGy, respectively, in 1984 and 1969.28 
For ground beef, irradiation was permitted in 2013 to inactivate 
Salmonella and E. coli. Spices that are annually irradiated are approximately 
2000 tons in Canada.33 In USA, Brazil, and Canada, the total quantity of 
irradiated foods in 2014 was around 7120 tons of fruits, 9000 tons of meat, 
and 101,800 tons of spices.33 The sterilization of bacon by irradiation was 
approved by US FDA in 1963. Since then, the irradiation technology impact 
on various foods has been extensively studied.13 
The motivation for irradiation acceptance in the United States ensued 
in 1993 after 4 deaths and various victims with permanent kidney damage 
occurred due to outbreak E. coli O157:H7. It was later identified that the 
source was undercooked hamburgers and because of this outbreak, the food 
safety and quality regulations were examined for the first time in a century 
and then irradiation was approved for frozen meat and chilled meat, where 
frozen meat was irradiated up to a dose of 7 kGy and chilled meat was 
irradiated to a highest dosage of 4.5 kGy.28 
Currently, 50 commercial irradiation plants have been established in 
USA. In 2005, the US FDA approved the irradiation in shell fishes, mussels, 
oysters, and clams. Irradiation was also allowed in shrimp, lobsters, crabs, 
and RTE foods (like packed salads, deli meats, baby food, and frozen 
meals).28 During 2011–2012, radiated foods sols in USA were about 1200 
tons of other fruits, 550 tons of guava, 8000 tons of meat, and 3300 tons 
sweet potato.9
 In the USA during 2016–2017, the irradiated foods for animal 
and human consumption were more than 150,000 tons, which included pet 
treats (20,000 tons), spices (80,000 tons), vegetables and fruits (30,000 tons), 
ground beef (910 tons), and sweet potato (3800 tons). 
In 2015, more than 23 million tons of irradiated food products were 
imported from seven countries. The irradiated mango and longan were 
exported from Thailand to USA in 2007 and other fruits were included in 
2010. The total export in 2010 was 595 tons of longan, 330 tons of mangoes, 
8 tons of rambutan, and 18 tons of litchis. Pakistan exported about 152 tons Role of Gamma Irradiation in the Preservation of Fruits 63 
of mangoes to USA in 2015, whereas South Africa exported 200 tons of 
persimmons and litchi. Nearly 257 tons of irradiated guava were exported 
from Mexico to USA in 2008 as compared to 3521 tons in 2009. Moreover, 
10,318 tons of fruits were recorded (mango, guava, sweet lime, and pepper) 
in 2010 as compared to 12,000 tons in 2016. Mexico has the benefit for 
export to USA because of lower transport distance and cost compared to 
other countries.13 
Food irradiation dates back to 1967 in India, after establishing Processing 
Laboratory at Trombay; and food irradiation for treating potatoes and wheat 
with the main purpose of sprout inhibition and disinfestation. The numerous 
other studies explored the feasibility of irradiation technique in processed 
foods, cereals, vegetables, fruits, and pulses. Finally, the irradiation treat￾ment was permitted in 1994 to numerous other food products, such as onions, 
spices, and potatoes, etc. The irradiation plants in Navi Mumbai during 2000 
and in Maharashtra during 2003 were established having capacity of 30 tons 
per day and 10 tons per day, respectively. These were established for onions 
potatoes, some dry vegetables, and spices. About 2500 tons of onions, spices, 
and dried vegetables were exposed to irradiation, and approximately 730 
tons of mangoes were exported to USA.21 
In USDA-approved plants, irradiation of mangoes is only done there. 
There were 15 functional commercial irradiation plants in India during 2016. 
The Hindustan Agro Cooperation Ltd., Indian Agricultural Association, and 
United Innovation Corporation signed a bilateral agreement in 2016 for the 
expansion of 25 irradiation centers in India.21 
In 1987, the irradiation facility was started in China. There were only 
seven centers for irradiations till 2003 compared to 78 radiation centers in 
2006, 78 centers for irradiation, and 115 centers today. In the beginning, 
only hogs and potatoes were permitted for irradiation; however, in 2010, 
irradiation was extended to fruits, pork, nuts, poultry grains, spices, beef, 
vegetables, and cooked meat.21 The three largest gamma irradiators using 
Cobalt-6 were operated by Chinese Company JPY each with 0.7, 2.6, and 2 
million tons capacity of curies.13 
3.6 IMPACT OF GAMMA IRRADIATION ON PHYSICOCHEMICAL 
AND SENSORY PROPERTIES OF FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
Gamma irradiation of fruit and vegetables has been successful for preserving 
these without altering their properties and has been studied for several years. 64 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
The research studies on irradiation of fruits and vegetables (FAV) have been 
compiled by Arvanitoyannis et al.,7
 who concluded that this technology can 
extend the shelf-life of FAV at low cost, without changing organoleptic and 
physicochemical characteristics compared to other traditional preservation 
techniques. This method has been commercially approved in South Korea 
with the aim of rooting inhibition or sprouting at 0.25 kGy10 and the dose 
for disinfestations is 0.50 kGy.29 However, it is significant to estimate the 
impact of gamma radiation on antioxidant parameters, natural, nutritional, 
and physicochemical parameters. 
Najafabadi et al.38 evaluated the gamma irradiation effect at diverse doses 
(0.0, 0.5, 1.0, 2.5, and 5.0 kGy) on some physicochemical characteristics of 
jujube fruits. At these doses, the total soluble solids values did not change, 
but a slight enhancement of total acidity level at doses ≥ 2.5 kGy (p ≤ 0.05) 
was observed. The irradiation dose caused significant rise in color values of 
a* and b* values (p ≤ 0.05) with significant decline in L* value (p ≤ 0.05); 
also, color changes were slight upto the dose of 5 kGy. There was no major 
impact on the absorption of succinic citric and malic acids due to gamma 
irradiation upto 2.5 kGy, while a considerable decrease in the ascorbic acid 
level was observed at different doses of irradiation (0–5 kGy). 
The main anthocyanin (about 68% in jujube) is Cyanidin-3,5-diglucoside 
that was decreased significantly at an irradiation of 5 kGy.38 The water￾soluble vitamins in jujube fruits were vitamins B2, B1, and C. Vitamins B1 
and C content were declined at all applied doses (0–5 kGy), whereas B2 
values at a dose ≤2.5 kGy was not affected. Another investigation mentioned 
that irradiation dose at ≤2.5 kGy has been used considerably to enhance the 
quality parameters of jujube fruits. 
Kim and Yook27 observed that three pathogenic microbes (Diaportheac￾tinidiae, Botrytis cinerea, and Botryos phaeriadothidea) were inactivated by 
ionizing radiation in kiwi fruits. It was also observed that irradiated kiwi fruits 
were softer as compared to nontreated kiwi fruits. The irradiation treatment 
minimally affected the organic acid content and color of kiwi fruits. With 
increasing irradiation dose, the total soluble solids content was reduced in 
irradiated kiwi fruits. The kiwi fruits irradiated upto 3 kGy dose had harmful 
impact on antioxidant activity and vitamin C content, but had beneficial 
impact on hygienic and sensory quality by destroying the increased growth 
of harmful microorganisms. 
Jiang et al.23 concluded that Shiitake (Lentinula edodes) mushrooms were 
kept in polypropylene bags and then were allowed to expose at three irradia￾tion doses of 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 kGy and finally were stored at 4°C for 20 days. Role of Gamma Irradiation in the Preservation of Fruits 65 
The firmness was maintained at 1.0 kGy among these three doses. Products 
treated with 1.0 kGy showed a less decline in soluble protein, and lower 
malondialdehyde accumulation levels. However at 1.0 kGy, the accumulation 
of phenolic components was promoted, and high radical scavenging activity 
was exhibited during storage. At high irradiation dose of 2.0 kGy, both posi￾tive and negative impacts were observed: the higher the dose, the greater 
is the microbial reduction; and negative impact was observed on chemical, 
textural, and functional properties. All the gamma irradiations were efficient 
in retaining the sensory characteristics of mushrooms. Therefore, gamma 
irradiation with MAP can prolong the shelf-life of shiitake mushrooms upto 
20 days. 
Arjeh et al.6
 found that storage time and irradiation treatment led to 
a significant decline in a* values and increase in L* and b* values. The 
concentrations of oxalic and malic acids were increased significantly after 
irradiation at 0–6 kGy; but citric, ascorbic, succinic, and fumaric acids were 
decreased significantly. Gamma irradiations were able to enhance the shelf￾life of sour cherry juice at 3 kGy followed by a general decrease in microbial 
growth. Owing to the outcome of microbial analysis and physicochemical 
characteristics, irradiation of sour cherry juice at dose >3.0 kGy is not 
permitted. 
Maraei and Elsawy35 observed the impact of different irradiation doses 
(0, 0.3, 0.6, and 0.9 kGy) on phytochemical content and quality parameters 
of strawberry fruits during storage period at 10°C. The irradiation decreased 
the decaying and weight loss significantly compared to the control (nonirra￾diated sample) treatments; thus showing the highest contents of these quality 
attributes. Both storage period and irradiation did not show any considerable 
impact on pH and acidity of fruits. Each treatment decreased the vitamin C 
content during storage. In another study,49 the effect of radiation on fresh 
vegetable juice was observed. Due to irradiation, amino acids were stable at 
5 kGy but there was decrease in the vitamin C content. At 3 days of storage, 
the irradiated juice’s sensory quality characteristics were not deteriorated, 
while the quality was deteriorated in the nonirradiated juice.49 
3.7 EFFECTS OF GAMMA IRRADIATION ON MICROBIOLOGICAL 
ATTRIBUTES OF MINIMALLY PROCESSED FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
Minimally processed fruits and vegetables are nutrient-rich produce. Gamma 
irradiation provides a safe alternative method for decontamination of food 66 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
stuffs. Landgraf et al.30 concluded that irradiation on the minimally processed 
food products (such as iceberg lettuce, watercress, mango cubes, pineapple, 
and watermelon) was able to reduce the presence of food borne pathogens, 
such as Listeria monocytogenes and Salmonella spp. 
It was found that Listeria monocyte genisis was not recovered at dose 
equivalent to 5 and 8 D10. Also, the doses of 1, 3, and 4kGy for Salmonella 
spp. did not impair sensorial characteristics of the watercress. When cubes of 
pineapple and watermelon were exposed to irradiation dose of one kGy and 
2.5 kGy, there was no change in sensory qualities (e.g., water melon’s sweet￾ness or pineapple’s sourness). Irradiation is a low-cost method to enhance 
the hygienic conditions and it protects the minimally processed vegetables 
and fruits from microbial infestation. When blanched cherry tomatoes and 
pre-cut carrots were irradiated at doses <20 kGy, their quality parameters 
were not reduced. Also, in the case of both blanched vegetables and fresh 
pre-cut vegetables, quality parameter was maintained. There was no signifi￾cant effect on sensory quality of blanched vegetables. In both cases, irradia￾tion dose of 2 kGy ensured 5 log reductions in the population of Salmonella 
enteritidis.
47 
Yun et al.54 studied the soybean (Glycine max L. Merrill) that was 
exposed to different doses of 0.0, 1.0, 3.0, 5.0, and 10.0 kGy of gamma 
irradiation. The microorganism growth on soybeans, sensory properties and 
color, tocopherol contents, raffinose family oligosaccharides were estimated 
as a function of irradiation dose. The results showed that these radiations 
decreased the fungal and aerobic bacterial growth. The isoflavone contents 
of soybeans were not changed at these irradiation doses (p < 0.05), but 
tocopherol content was reduced. The key flatulence components in treated 
soybeans (at 10 kGy) were declined by 82.1% compared to the control 
treatment. 
Another study exhibited49 that microbiological quality of fresh vegetable 
juice was enhanced due to the radiation pasteurization process. Kale and 
carrot juices were exposed to irradiations to enhance their sensory, nutri￾tional, and microbiological characteristics. Before the irradiation, the 
contaminating microbes present in the juices varied from 106 to 107 CFU/ 
ml; but after exposure to irradiation (3 kGy), all the coliform and aerobic 
bacteria in the carrot juice were eradicated, whereas 102 CFU/mL bacteria 
endured in the kale juice that was exposed to irradiation at 5 kGy. More￾over in the kale juice, the survived bacteria from irradiation did not expand 
further, and in nontreated samples, it extended up to 109 CFU/mL after three 
days of storage at 10°C.49 Role of Gamma Irradiation in the Preservation of Fruits 67 
3.8 EFFECTS OF GAMMA IRRADIATION ON ANTIOXIDANT 
PROPERTIES 
The antioxidant activity of phenolic components in plants is mostly due to 
the redox actions, decomposing peroxides, quenching singlet and triplet 
oxygen, neutralizing free radicals, etc. Phenolic components consist of a 
group of bioactive molecules, being valued for their health benefits due to 
antiatherogenic, vasodilatory effects, antiallergic, anti-inflammatory, antimi￾crobial, cardio-protective, and antioxidant activities.36 
As an antioxidant, the mechanism of action is an essential by decreasing 
the oxidation processes by providing bio-macromolecules and cell protec￾tion; and hence, intervening against inflammatory diseases, heart disease, 
cancer, neurological degeneration, etc.1 Therefore, the most important inter￾vention of antioxidant potential of phenolic components is their capability to 
chelate metal ions and to scavenge reactive oxygen species.43 
Phenolic acids help to maintain the quality of various vegetables and 
fruits and these are widespread in nature. These acids are responsible for 
the difference in the relative astringencies of peach and also contribute 
to the bitterness, sourness, and astringency of wheat and soy flours. The 
protective effect of flavonoids is because of several mechanisms, such as 
enzymes inhibition, free-radicals trapping, and chelation of metallic ions. 
These characteristics are based on the flavonoid structure and the degree of 
saturation and substitution. Vegetables and fruits contain sufficient amounts 
of flavonoids.22 The electron-donating capacity of an antioxidant is calcu￾lated by reducing power assay. The ferric ions (Fe3+) reduction to ferrous 
ions (Fe2+) is calculated by the intensity of blue-green solution, which is 
absorbed at 700 nm and high reducing power is indicated by an enhanced 
absorbance.37 
Several biological reactions produce superoxide radical scavenging 
activity being very toxic species, although they directly cannot cause lipid per 
oxidation, the precursor of damaging oxygen species are superoxide anion 
radicals. The superoxide anion is produced by dissolved oxygen by reduction 
in NBT due to PMS/NADH-NBT coupling reaction.4
 In the reaction mixture, 
the superoxide anions are consumed when the reduction in absorbance at 
560 nm with antioxidants are shown.17 Aldehydes and malondialdehyde 
(MDA) are recognized as lipid peroxidation products, which react with TBA 
to produce a species with pink color and gets absorbed at 532 nm. 
The MDA and TBARS percentage are inversely proportional to the 
antioxidant activities, that is, the antioxidant activity of fruit will be reduced 68 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
with rise in TBARS content.11 The impact of irradiation (0.25–1.0 kGy) on 
antioxidant property of ber fruits was investigated by Kavitha et al..26 These 
fruits are rich in phenolics, vitamin C content, and flavonoids. Due to irradia￾tion, superoxide anion radical activity, flavonoid content, and DPPH radical 
activity were enhanced with slight decrease in reducing power activity and 
total phenolics. In the irradiated fruits, the total antioxidant activity (TBARS) 
was diminished from 64 to 167% compared to raw fruits at 0.25–1.0 kGy. 
Therefore, the optimum doses to maintain the natural antioxidant activity in 
ber fruits are 0.25–0.5 kGy. 
Pereira et al.42 evaluated the irradiation impact on the phenolic compo￾nents of Ginkgo biloba L. The 25 components were identified consisting of 18 
flavonoids, 5 terpene lactones, one phenolic acid, and one unknown biocom￾ponent. Flavonoids were mainly present among the quantified phenolic 
components, being two kaempferol derivatives and the main components, 
such as: kaempferol-3-O-rutinoside and kaempferol-3-O-dirhamnosylgluco￾side. The maximum dose (10 kGy) of irradiation can disinfect the product 
and microbial decontamination, and also can increase the extractability of 
phenolic components, both in water or methanol and infusion preparations. 
In jujube fruit, distinct information is lacked on the effect of irradiation 
on profile of bioactive components (such as water-soluble vitamins, organic 
acids, and anthocyanins) and their changes. Najafabadi et al.38 investigated 
the impact of irradiation at various doses of 0.0, 0.5, 1.0, 2.5, and 5.0 kGy 
on the bioactive components of jujube fruit. Irradiation up to 2.5 kGy 
significantly increased the total phenolic content and monomeric antho￾cyanin (6% and 12%, respectively); but after irradiation at 5 kGy, a rapid 
decline was observed in both parameters. Sour cherry juice was irradiated at 
dosage >3 kGy that caused antioxidant activity loss due to the ascorbic acid 
content and anthocyanins degradation. Thus for sour cherry juice, a dosage 
level of <3 kGy is recommended.6 
Maraei and Elsawy35 found that strawberry fruits irradiated at 0.6 kGy 
showed maximum antioxidant activity and total phenolics followed by 0.3 
kGy. Irradiation also triggered synthesis of certain phenolic components, 
such as gallic, pyrogallol, ellagic, chlorogenic acid, catechol, etc. 
3.9 ROLE OF GAMMA IRRADIATION ON SHELF-LIFE AND 
PRESERVATION OF FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
One of the prime focuses during the process of irradiation in fresh-cut fruits 
and vegetables is the shelf-life extension by changing the chemical and Role of Gamma Irradiation in the Preservation of Fruits 69 
microbiological properties. Majeed et al.34 concluded that an extension of 
3–8 days in shelf-life of strawberries was observed due to 0.5–1.0 kGy of 
irradiation dose. Similarly in citrus fruits and Shantag mandarin, an exposure 
to radiation dose from 0.2 to 0.6 kGy led to remarkable extension in their 
shelf-life.56 Moreover, a significant enhancement in fruit juice quality 
without altering the chemical characteristics was recorded.24 Preclimacteric 
mangoes were exposed to low irradiation dose of 0.2 kGy for 8–10 days and 
its shelf-life was significantly improved. 
Zaman et al.55 concluded the extension of shelf-life in banana using 
gamma irradiation, in which bananas were stored at dry place at ambient 
temperature after exposing them to 0.5, 0.4, and 0.3 kGy of gamma irradia￾tion doses. The authors also recorded the extension of shelf-life by 20 days 
compared to the control samples coupled with a delay in ripening. In another 
study, the shelf-life was seen to be extended significantly in pears due to 
gamma irradiation,52 where the irradiation doses were maintained at 0.8–2.0 
kGy during the storage at ambient temperature. The exposure to the irradia￾tion doses at 1.5–1.7 kGy resulted in the decay inhibition of pears up to 16 
days. It was found by Singh and Pal48 that gamma rays at a dose of 0.25 kGy 
enhanced the postharvest life of guava fruits by 3–4 days. 
The growth of spoilage microorganisms is reduced due to which the shelf￾life of fresh produce is increased. A reduction of one log cycle of pathogenic 
microbial count can be obtained by exposure of fruits to a radiation dose of 
0.2–0.8 kGy. Comparatively, fungi and pathogenic viruses displayed better 
resistance against the radiation at 1–3 kGy for obtaining one log reduction.39 
However, various investigations suggested that irradiation at low doses of 1 
kGy can help in the shelf-life enhancement of fresh vegetables by inhibiting 
ripening technique and by deactivating the spoilage microbes.53 
3.10 APPLICATIONS OF GAMMA IRRADIATION IN FRUIT AND 
VEGETABLE INDUSTRIES 
Various kinds of irradiation methods can be categorized based on the 
processing intention and the amount of dose used (Table 3.2). Although, it 
is technically conceivable that the meats and other food products can be 
disinfected using gamma irradiations31 that may render foods unacceptable 
based on organoleptic characteristics and spore formation in spices and 
herbs by heat-resistant microorganisms. A dose of 7 ± 10 kGy resulted in 
the elimination of the microbes from certain foods thereby preserving their 
quality attributes and volatile oils. Due to security issues to deal with the  
70 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
gases and the buildups in the food items, scientists in EU recommended to 
ban the use of chemical sterilization by ethylene oxide in 1991, which has 
paved the way for its substitution by irradiation, particularly in spices.2 
TABLE 3.2 Food Irradiation and Doses: Applications in Foods. 
Application Irradiation Food items 
dose (kGy) 
<1 kGy (Low dose) 
Delay in ripening 0.2–1.0 Vegetables and fresh fruits 
Disinfestation 0.15–0.5 Cocoa beans, fruits, flours, grains, dry 
foods (like meats, fruits, fish) 
Inhibiting sprout formation 0.05–0.15 Garlic, potatoes, root ginger, onions, yam 
1–10 kGy (Medium dose) 
Food sterilization 7–10 Herbs, meat, spices, sea foods, poultry 
Mold control 2.5 Fresh fruit storage gets extended 
Shelf-life extension 1–3 Fresh meat and fish at 0–4°C, 
mushrooms, strawberries. 
>10 kGy (High dose) 
Food additives; Decontamination 10–50 Natural gums, enzyme preparations 
Hospital diets Sterilization 30–50 Ready-to-eat meals 
Packaging materials Sterilization 10–25 Wine corks 
3.10.1 REDUCTION OF PATHOGENS 
A dosage of the order of 2.5±10 kGy resulted in the removal of food 
poisoning bacteria.16 Rajkowski and Fan44 concluded that the rate of food 
poisoning from numerous fresh vegetables and fruits and fruit juices can be 
controlled using irradiation, and pathogenic microbes can also be controlled 
by utilizing irradiation. According to them, irradiation can increase the 
security and safety of fresh fruits, which is a far better method compared to 
the chemical treatments. 
3.10.2 EXTENSION OF SHELF-LIFE 
Irradiation results in the elimination of foodborne diseases coupled with 
the shelf-life extension of foods to improve the health of consumers. For 
example, maturation can be delayed in fruits and vegetables using an irra￾diation dose of 1 kGy; however, yeasts, parasites, and nonspore-forming Role of Gamma Irradiation in the Preservation of Fruits 71 
microbes can be killed using low doses (Table 3.2). Also, irradiation method 
reduces the number of vegetative cells resulting in their shelf-life extension. 
Microbes are easily killed by heat and the combination of heat treatment 
with irradiation compared to either treatment alone.15 
Venugopal et al.51 showed that radurization is utilized to enhance the 
shelf-life of shellfish and fresh fish. Few vegetables and fruits (such as 
tomatoes and strawberries) could be irradiated to expand the shelf-life by 
two or three times when left at 10°C. Measurements of 2 ± 3 kGy could 
enhance twofolds shelf-life of mushrooms and can restraint of cap opening. 
A synergistic impact was obtained by combination of irradiation and MAP; 
and also low radiations gave similar results. 
3.10.3 CONTROL OF RIPENING 
Fruits and vegetables under irradiation must be checked first for the stage of 
maturity, as ripe fruits and vegetables are mostly recommended. This is due 
to the fact that it is the ability of irradiation process to restrain the generation 
of hormones coupled with the retardation of development and cell division 
that finally restrains maturing. However, irradiation does not completely 
result in the enzymatic deterioration of foods, which need to be followed by 
heat treatment for drawn-out capacity.2 
3.10.4 DISINFESTATION OF FOOD PRODUCTS 
There was ban on selected fumigants (such as: ethylene dichloride, ethylene 
oxide, and ethylene dibromide) for disinfestation of grains and tropical fruits 
and vegetables in various countries. For example in 2005, methyl bromide 
ban was followed in various industrialized countries that was expected to be 
followed in several other developing countries in 2015.5 
Irradiation provides an alternative for the pesticides and fumigants that 
could otherwise lead to the buildups on foodstuffs. For example, a dose of 
0.25±1.0 kGy in helminths was helpful in fresh fish, parasitic protozoa and to 
avoid the advancement of insects in dried fish,51 such as: the inactivation of 
Trichinella spiralis and Toxoplasma gondii at 0.3 and 0.25 kGy. The irradia￾tions at low doses <1 kGy for disinfestations are also successful to improve 
the shelf-life by delaying ageing and by enhancing growth. The irradiations 
are also used for the treatment of dried nuts and fruits.25 Irradiations have 
been used to reduce the sprouting in potatoes.2 72 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
3.11 SUMMARY 
Marketing surveys have concluded that the purchase of irradiated foods by 
consumers has increased because of its positive effects on our health. The 
USDA and WHO have also promoted this technique, because no chemical 
residues, no toxic substances and no nutrient losses were found. Food irradia￾tion is considered to be a new step in food production and food technology 
and should be made as smooth and straightforward as possible. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Arshied Manzoor acknowledges the award of ICMR-Senior Research 
Fellowship from the Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi, India. 
KEYWORDS 
• fruits and vegetables 
irradiation detection 
physicochemical 
parameters 
shelf-life 
gamma radiation 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
REFERENCES 
1. Acosta-Estrada, B. A.; Gutierrez-Uribe, J. A.; Serna-Saldivar, S. O. Bound Phenolics in 
Foods: A Review. Food Chem. 2014, 152, 46–55. 
2. Agbaka, J. I.; Ibrahim, A. N. Irradiation: Utilization, Advances, Safety, Acceptance, Future 
Trends, and a Means to Enhance Food Security. Adv. Appl. Sci. Res. 2020, 11 (3), 1–9. 
3. Ahn, D. U.; Lee, E. J. Mechanisms and Prevention of Quality Changes in Meat by 
Irradiation. Chapter 8. In Food Irradiation Research and Technology; Sommers, C. 
H., Fan, X., Eds., 2nd ed.; Blackwell Publishing: Ames–IA, 2013; online. <https://doi. 
org/10.1002/9780470277638.ch8> (accessed on July 31, 2021). 
4. Anand, P. K.; Policegoudra, R. S.; Aradhya, S. M. Chemical Composition and 
Antioxidant Activity of Sapota (Achras sapota Linn.) Fruit. J. Food Biochem. 2007, 31 
(3), 399–414.  
 
 
 
 
 
Role of Gamma Irradiation in the Preservation of Fruits 73 
5. Anonymous. Alternatives to Methyl bromide, 2004. https://www.yumpu.com/en/docu￾ment/view/8154567/alternatives-to-methyl-bromide-unep-dtie (accessed on July 31, 2021). 
6. Arjeh, E.; Barzegar, M.; Ali Sahari, M. Effects of Gamma Irradiation on Physicochemical 
Properties, Antioxidant and Microbial Activities of Sour Cherry Juice. Radiat. Phys. 
Chem. 2015, 114, 18–24. 
7. Arvanitoyannis, I. S.; Stratakos, A. C.; Tsarouhas, P. Irradiation Applications in 
Vegetables and Fruits: A Review. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2009, 49, 427–462. 
8. Bashir, K.; Aggarwal, M. Effects of Gamma Irradiation on Cereals and Pulses-a Review. 
Int. J. Recent Sci. Res. 2016, 7 (12), 14680–14686. 
9.	 Bustos-Griffin, E.; Hallman, G. J.; Griffin, R. L. Current and Potential Trade in 
Horticultural Products Irradiated for Phytosanitary Purposes. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 2012, 
81, 1203–1207. 
10. Chung, H. W.; Delincée, H.; Han, S. B.; Hong, J. H.; Kim, H. Y.; Kim, M. C.; Kwon, J. 
H. Trials to Identify Irradiated Chestnut (Castanea bungena) with Different Analytical 
Techniques. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 2004, 71, 179–182. 
11. Devasagayam, T. P. A.; Boloor, K. K.; Ramasarma, T. Methods for Estimating Lipid 
Peroxidation: An Analysis of Merits and Demerits. Indian J. Biochem. Biophys. 2003, 
40, 300–308. 
12. Dwiloka, B. Course on Food Irradiation: Class Notes; Semarang University: Semarang, 
2002. 
13. Eustice, R. F. Global Status and Commercial Applications of Food Irradiation. Food 
Irradiat. Technol. 2017, 2017, 397–424. 
14. Farkas, J. Charged Particle and Photon Interactions with Matter. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2004, 10, 785–812. 
15. Gould, G. W. Food Irradiation: Microbiological Aspects. J. Food Sci. Technol. 1986, 
19, 175–180. 
16. Guise, B. Irradiation Waits in the Wings. Food Eur. 1986, 6, 7–9. 
17. Gulcin, I.; Uguz, M. T.; Oktay, M.; Beydemirs, K. O. I. Evaluation of Antioxidant Anti￾microbial Activities of Clary Sage (salvia sclarea l.). Turkish J. Agric. 2004, 28, 25–33. 
18. Harris, R. S.; Karmas E. Evaluation of Nutrition in Food Processing. Unpublished 
Report; Bandung Institute of Technology: Bandung, 1989; p 34. 
19. Harsojo Andini, L. S. Decontamination of Some Pathogenic Bacteria on Meat and 
Gamma Irradiation with Buffalo Entrails. Proc. National Workshop Buffalo BATAN, 
Jakarta, 2010; pp 116–120. 
20. Hermana. Food Irradiation. Unpublished report; Bandung Institute of Technology: 
Bandung, 1991; p 21. 
21. Ihsanullah, I.; Rashid, A. Current Activities in Food Irradiation as a Sanitary and 
Phytosanitary Treatment in the Asia and the Pacific Region and a Comparison with 
Advanced Countries. Food Control 2017, 72, 345–359. 
22. Irina, I.; Mohamed, G. Biological Activities and Effects of Food Processing on 
Flavonoids as Phenolic Antioxidants. Adv. Appl. Biotechnol. 2012, 2012, 101–124. 
23. Jiang, T.; Luo, S.; Chen, Q.; Shen, L.; Ying, T. Effect of Integrated Application of Gamma 
Irradiation and Modified Atmosphere Packaging on Physicochemical and Microbiological 
Properties of Shiitake Mushroom (Lentinusedodes). Food Chem. 2010, 122 (3), 761–767. 
24. Jo, C.; Ahn, D. U.; Lee, K. H. Effect of Gamma Irradiation on Microbiological, 
Chemical, and Sensory Properties of Fresh Kale Juices. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 2012, 81 
(8), 1076–1078.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
25. Johnson, J.; Marcotte, M. Irradiation Control of Insect Pests of Dried Fruits and Walnuts. 
Food Technol. 1999, 53, 46–53. 
26. Kavitha, C.; Kuna, A.; Supraja, T.; Sagar, S. B.; Padmavathi, T. V. N.; Prabhakar, N. 
Effect of Gamma Irradiation on Antioxidant Properties of ber (Zizyphus mauritiana) 
fruit. J. Food Sci. Technol. 2014, 52 (5), 3123–3128. 
27. Kim, K. H.; Yook, H. S. Effect of Gamma Irradiation on Quality of Kiwifruit (Actinidia 
deliciosa). Radiat. Phys. Chem. 2009, 78 (6), 414–421. 
28. Kume, T.; Todoriki, S. Food Irradiation in Asia, the European Union and the United 
States: A Status Update. Radioisotopes 2013, 62, 291–299. 
29. Kwon, J. H.; Kwon, Y. J.; Byun, M. W.; Kim, K. S. Competitiveness of Gamma Irradiation 
with Fumigation for Chestnuts Associated with Quarantine and Quality Security. Radiat. 
Phys. Chem. 2004, 71, 41–44. 
30. Landgraf, M.; Goularte, L.; Martins, C.; Cestari, A. J. R.; Nunes, T.; Aragonalegro, 
L.; Hutzler, B. Use of Irradiation to Improve the Microbiological Safety of Minimally 
Processed Fruits and Vegetables. In Use of Irradiation to Ensure the Hygienic Quality 
of Fresh, Pre-Cut Fruits and Vegetables and Other Minimally Processed Food of Plant 
Origin; International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA): Vienna, Austria, 2006; pp 41–60. 
31. Lewis, M. J. Physical Properties of Foods and Food Processing Systems; Elsevier: New 
York, 1990; p 480. 
32. Lusk, J. L.; Roosen, J.; Bieberstein, A. Consumer Acceptance of New Food Technologies: 
Causes and Roots of Controversies. Annu. Rev. Resour. Econ. 2014, 6, 381–405. 
33. Maherani, B.; Hossain, F.; Criado, P.; Ben-Fadhel, Y.; Salmieri, S.; Lacroix, M. World 
Market Development and Consumer Acceptance of Irradiation Technology: A Review. 
Foods 2016, 5 (79), 1–21. 
34. Majeed, A., Muhammad, Z., Majid, A., Shah, A. H., & Hussain, M. Impact of Low Doses 
of Gamma Irradiation on Shelf-Life and Chemical Quality of Strawberry (Fragaria 
ananassa). J. Anim. Plant Sci. 2014, 24(5), 1531–1536. 
35. Maraei, R. W.; Elsawy, K. M. Chemical quality and nutrient composition of strawberry 
fruits treated by γ-irradiation. J. Radiat. Res. Appl. Sci. 2017, 10 (1), 80–87. 
36. Martins, S.; Mussatto, S. I.; Martínez-Avila, G.; Montanez-Saenz, J.; Aguilar, C. N.; 
Teixeira, J. A. Bioactive Phenolic Compounds: Production and Extraction by Solid￾State Fermentation. A Review. Biotechnol. Adv. 2011, 29, 365–373. 
37. Nagendran, B.; Tan, Y. A.; Ravigadevi, S.; Kalyana, S.; Samir, S. Antioxidant properties 
of palm fruit extracts. Asia Pacific J. Clin. Nutr. 2005, 4 (4), 319–324. 
38. Najafabadi, N. S., Sahari, M. A., Barzegar, M., Esfahani, Z. H. Effect of Gamma 
Irradiation on Some Physicochemical Properties and Bioactive Compounds of Jujube 
(Ziziphusjujubavar vulgaris) Fruit. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 2017, 130, 62–68. 
39. Niemira, B. A.; Fan, X. Low-Dose Irradiation of Fresh and Fresh-Cut Produce: Safety, 
Sensory and Shelf-Life. Food Irradiat. Res. Technol. 2006, 32 (5), 45–52. 
40. Nuclear Spain. Nuclear Technology Applied to Food Preservation and Sterilization. 
Nucl. Espana 1996, 316, 43–48. 
41. Parlato, A.; Giacomarra, M.; Galati, A.; Crescimanno, M. ISO-14470: 2011 and EU 
Legislative Background on Food Irradiation Technology: The Italian Attitude. Trends 
Food Sci. Technol. 2014, 38 (1), 60–74. 
42. Pereira, E.; Barros, L.; Dueñas, M.; Antonio, A. L.; Santos-Buelga, C.; Ferreira, I. C. 
Gamma Irradiation Improves the Extractability of Phenolic Compounds in Ginkgo 
biloba. Ind. Crops Prod. 2015, 74, 144–149.  
 
 
 
 
Role of Gamma Irradiation in the Preservation of Fruits 75 
43. Port’s, P. S.; Chisté, R. C.; Godoy, H. T.; Prado, M. A. The Phenolic Compounds and the 
Antioxidant Potential of Infusion of Herbs from the Brazilian Amazonian Region. Food 
Res. Int. 2013, 53, 875–881. 
44. Rajkowski, K. T.; Fan, X. Ionizing Radiation of Seeds and Sprouts: A Review. Am. 
Chem. Soc. (ACS), 2004, 875, 107–116. 
45. Ray, B. Fundamental Food Microbiology, 3rd ed.; CRC Press: Boca Raton, 2005; p 625. 
46. Sádecká, J. Irradiation of Spices. Czech J. Food Sci. 2007, 25 (5), 231–242. 
47. Shurong, L.; Meixu, G.; Chuanyao, W. Use of Irradiation to Ensure Hygienic Quality 
of Fresh Pre-Cut and Blanched Vegetables and Tofu. In Use of Irradiation to Ensure 
the Hygienic Quality of Fresh, Pre-Cut Fruits and Vegetables and Other Minimally 
Processed Food of Plant Origin; Proceedings of a final research coordination meeting 
organized by the Joint FAO/IAEA Programme of Nuclear Techniques in Food and 
Agriculture and held in Islamabad, Pakistan, 22–30 July; Vienna: International Atomic 
Energy Agency, 2005; pp 87–105. 
48. Singh, S. P.; Pal, R. K. Ionizing Radiation Treatment to Improve Postharvest Life and 
Maintain Quality of Fresh Guava Fruit. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 2009, 78 (2), 135–140. 
49. Song, H. P.; Byun, M. W.; Jo, C.; Lee, C. H.; Kim, K. S.; Kim, D. H. Effects of Gamma 
Irradiation on the Microbiological, Nutritional, and Sensory Properties of Fresh 
Vegetable Juice. Food Control 2007, 18 (1), 5–10. 
50. Tetriana, D.; Sugoro, I. Application of Nuclear Technology in the Fields of Vaccines. 
Alara J. (PTKMR–Batan, Patir Batan–the Market Friday, Jakarta), 2007, 1, 12–18. 
51. Venugopal, V.; Doke, S. N.; Thomas, P. Radiation Processing to Improve the Quality of 
Fishery Products. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 1999, 39 (5), 391–440. 
52. Wani, A. M.; Hussain, P. R.; Meena, R. S.; Dar, M. A. Effect of Gamma-Irradiation 
and Refrigerated Storage on the Improvement of Quality and Shelf-Life of Pear 
(Pyruscommunis L.). Radiat. Phys. Chem. 2008, 77 (8), 983–989. 
53. Xuetong, F. Irradiation of Fresh and Fresh Cut Fruits and Vegetables: Quality and Shelf￾Life. Food Irradiat. Res. Technol. 2012, 2012, 271–293. 
54. Yun, J.; Li, X.; Fan, X.; Tang, Y.; Xiao, Y.; Wan, S. Effect of Gamma Irradiation on 
Microbial Load, Physicochemical and Sensory Characteristics of Soybeans (Glycine 
max L.). Radiat. Phys. Chem. 2012, 81 (8), 1198–1202. 
55. Zaman, W.; Paul, D.; Alam, K.; Ibrahim, M.; Hassan, P. Shelf-Life Extension of Banana 
(Musa sapientum) by Gamma Radiation. J. Bio-Sci. 2007, 15, 47–53. 
56. Zhang, K.; Deng, Y.; Fu, H.; Weng, Q. Effects of Co-60 Gamma-Irradiation and 
Refrigerated Storage on the Quality of Shatang mandarin. Food Sci. Human Wellness 
2014, 3 (1), 9–15. Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing: Methods and Strategies. Megh R. Goyal, & 
Faizan Ahmad (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 4 
SCOPE OF NOVEL PULSED LIGHT 
TECHNOLOGY: SAFETY AND 
SHELF-LIFE OF MINIMALLY 
PROCESSED FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
JUNAID AHMAD PANDITH, SATYAM BANSAL, 
SHIV KUMAR KATIYAR, ARSHIED MANZOOR, 
PIR MOHAMMAD JUNAID, and SAGHIR AHMAD 
ABSTRACT 
Fruits and vegetables constitute a potential source of essential nutrients to 
prevent several chronic diseases such as cancers, cardiovascular diseases. 
Freshly cut fruits and vegetables are a healthy alternative to meet the require￾ments of this demand. Because of the fierce competition in the industry, 
processors have been forced to consider new nonthermal approaches for 
extending shelf-life, retaining nutrients and sensory attributes of these 
products. The utilization of pulsed light (PL) treatment represents advanced 
technology for increasing the shelf-life of freshly cut fruits and vegetables. 
Therefore, this chapter will thoroughly discuss the potential of pulsed light 
treatment as an emerging method to decontaminate minimally treated fruits 
and vegetables, extend their shelf-life, and the chief factors affecting pulsed 
light treatment. Moreover, this chapter will also focus on physiochemical 
changes (i.e., appearance, texture, firmness, retention of vitamin C content, 
total phenolic content, antioxidants potential, etc.) and the impact of PL on 
different minimally processed fruits and vegetables. Besides the present 
status of PL legislation, specifications, its consequences, and future perspec￾tive will be discussed. 78 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
4.1 INTRODUCTION 
In this modern era, everyone wants to lead a healthy lifestyle, and to achieve 
this desire, fruits and vegetables play an indispensable role. However, due 
to the unavailability of sufficient time or a busy lifestyle, intake of fruits 
and vegetables in the human diet is below the recommended intake that is 
a major factor for leading an unhealthy life. Therefore, to overcome this 
problem minimally processed fresh-cut fruits and vegetables serve the 
best.29 
The main goal of the development of fresh minimally processed 
vegetables and fruits is to supply consumers with fresh, convenient, and 
nutritious products of extended shelf-life and high-quality attributes. The 
rate of deterioration in fresh-cut produce is much higher as compared 
with the unprocessed raw material, majorly because of the injuries caused 
by minimal processing such as peeling, dicing, slicing, shredding. These 
processing procedures generally subsidize the storability of freshly cut fruits 
and vegetables and the effects can be observed by a succession of typical 
symptoms, including tissue tenderization, surface browning, nutritional 
content, reduction, the existence of undesired off-flavor, and degradation 
due to microbes during preservation periods, increase in phenolic activity, 
vitamin C loss, antioxidant reduction, and loss in texture. 
The storage life of these ready-to-eat (RTE) fresh-cut fruits and vegeta￾bles is enhanced by various methods such as the use of edible coatings and 
films, irradiation, controlled atmospheric storage and modified atmospheric 
packaging, pulsed light, etc. Among various methods, pulsed light is one 
of the potential novel techniques that extend the shelf-life of freshly cut 
fruits and vegetables. The technique works on eradicating the microbes and 
ceasing the physiochemical changes on the superficial surfaces of freshly 
cut commodities such as fruits and vegetables up to an extent and hence 
elongating the shelf-life of freshly cut articles to a considerable period within 
the constraint of maintaining the cold chain during the entire process. Pulsed 
light treatments were given to cut fruits and vegetables to enhance their shelf￾life. Some treatment has been applied on various fruits and vegetables that 
include carrot, tomato, apple, cantaloupe, avocado, green onion, cabbage, 
mango, melons, lettuce, yard-long bean, exotic aneaden fruits, etc. Table 4.2 
provides a list of pulsed light-treated fruits and vegetables and the impact on 
physiochemical changes after the treatment. 
This chapter will discuss in detail the pulsed light technology, equip￾ment and generation of pulsed light, mechanism of action of pulsed light Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology	 79 
on microbes, and microbial and physiochemical changes in various lightly 
processed fruits and vegetables. Specifically, pulsed light treatment and its 
impact on fruits and vegetables has been discussed, such as: 
• Andean fruits uvilla (Physalis peruviana L.), • mortino (Vaccinium floribundum Kunth), 
• apple (Malus domestica),	 • naranjilla (Solanum quitoense Lam.), 
• avocado (Persea americana), • raspberry (Rubus idaeus), 
• cabbage (Brassica oleracea), • Red Oak Leaf lettuce (Lactuca sativa), 
• cantaloupe (Cucumis melo L.), • Red pepper (Capsicum annuum L.), 
• carrot (Daucus carota subsp sativus), • strawberry (Fragaria ananassa), 
• green onion (Allium fistulosum), • tomato (Lycopersicum esculentum), 
• Kensington Pride mangoes • Yard-long bean (Vigna unguiculata), 
(Mangifera indica L.), 
• melon (Cucumis melo var. cantalupensis), 
4.2 FUNDAMENTALS OF PULSED LIGHT TREATMENT 
4.2.1 DEFINITION AND TERMINOLOGY 
Pulsed light is a technique employed to preserve and maintain the safety and 
qualitative attributes of food products. It involves the application of pulses 
of wide range “white light” that are extreme and brief in length. The light 
spectrum involves light of wavelength varying from UV to IR region. The 
subject is given pulses of light ranging from 1 pulse to 20 pulses per second 
for a duration of 1 µs to 0.1 s and each pulse possesses an energy density of 
range from 0.01 to 50 Joules/cm2
. In general, the wavelength distribution is 
in a manner that approximately 70% of the electromagnetic radiations fall in 
the spectrum from 170 to 2600 nm.12 
Pulsed light has got approval from US FDA for its use as the total 
aggregate therapy not exceeding 12.0 J/cm2
. In various studies it has 
been illustrated that the use of pulses of light is much more beneficial 
than continuous light as the power delivered by the pulse is more intense 
and concentrated. Thus pulse is more effective in controlling microbial 
contamination than continuous light. It can be better understood by 
correlating pulse with impulsive force as it is more damage-causing than a 
continuous force.3980 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
4.2.2 TERMINOLOGIES USED 
Fluence Rate: It can be explained as the quantity of power received by the 
sample from the lamp per differential surface area. Hence the rate of Fluence 
is calculated in Watt/meter2 (W/m2
). 
Dose/Fluence: The total energy radiations gained by the sample from the 
lamp per unit area mean while the therapy is going on are defined as Fluence/ 
dose. Its unit is Joule/meter2
 (J/m2
). The PL treatment or PL inactivation 
effectiveness depends on the delivered fluence. The parameter impacting the 
fluence (on a specific separation from the radiating lamp) is the width of the 
pulse, duration of treatment (t), number of pulses (n), the rate at which pulses 
repeat themselves (f). The fluence is obtained using a mathematical expres￾sion as the product of the energy of each pulse, the total number of pulses, 
and the pulse frequency. The governing equation is as follows39: 
Fo
 = f × t × e (4.1) 
where F o
 = fluence (J/cm2
), f = pulse frequency (Hz), t = treatment time (s), 
and, e = energy of single pulse (Joules/cm2
/pulse). 
Pulse Width is defined as the moment (fractions of second) during which 
energy is supplied by the pulse to the sample. 
Exposure Time is the period measured in seconds for which the sample 
is treated with PL. 
Peak Power is the ratio of the energy of the pulse and the duration of a 
pulse. It is measured in Watt (W). 
Pulse-Repetition-Rate (PRR) is defined as the pulses per second (Hertz 
[Hz]) or frequently indicated as PPS (pulses per second). It is also termed 
frequency.1 
4.3 TYPE AND SPECTRUM OF PULSED LIGHT 
Pulsed light technology employs intense white light to decontaminate the 
desired surfaces. The white light used is quite similar to the light of the sun 
but having much greater intensities than PL.39 The type and spectrum of 
pulsed light rely on several parameters such as the type of flash lamp used as 
different gases emit the different spectrum of light. For instance, the xenon￾light source releases a wide spectrum of flash light generally in the range of 
200–1100 nm with roughly 25% in the UV range.32 
Broad-spectrum pulses of light consist of white light, which is the 
combination of UV light, IR light, and the visible spectrum of light with  
Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology 81 
their wavelengths in the range of infrared (IR) rays (λ = 700–1100 nm), for 
visible light (λ = 400–700 nm), and UV rays (λ = 200–400 nm). Further, the 
UV light is again classified into three classes according to the wavelength as 
ultraviolet Type-A: 315–400 nm, ultraviolet Type-B: 280–315 nm, ultraviolet 
Type-C: 200–280 nm. Among these, ultraviolet-C is the most potential light 
for microbial decontamination due to its shorter wavelength.39 
In 1996, pulsed light was granted approval by the FDA for its implemen￾tation in the production, processing, and handling of food materials with 
the limitation that that maximum UV dose or fluence of 12 J cm−2 can be 
employed, whereas emission spectra are to be kept in the range of 200 and 
1100 nm and pulse duration of less than or equal to 2 milliseconds.15 
The type of pulsed light is categorized by the intensity, that is, the fluence 
rate of the pulse light. As the fluence of pulsed light changes, the intensity 
varies. High-intensity pulsed light (HIPL) is used to decontaminate the 
surfaces.38 
4.4 EQUIPMENT AND GENERATION OF PULSED LIGHT 
A typical style pulsed light system works on the principle of energy multi￾plication by concentrating electrical energy into a capacitor in less than a 
second and utilizing this stored energy in a millionth of a second. Therefore, 
the energy requirement is not very high as the energy is increased many 
folds by capacitor circuitry. After this, the pulses are generated in the pulse 
generation section by the use of high-power switches that perform the on/ 
of operations at a very rapid and in the desired fashion. Then these electrical 
pulses are converted into light flashes by flash lamps in the lamp unit where 
a variety of lamps are present to deliver the desired spectrum of pulsed light. 
4.5 THE MAJOR COMPONENTS AND EQUIPMENT USED FOR 
THE GENERATION OF PULSED LIGHT 
Power Generation Unit: In this, the generation of DC high voltage is done 
by using normal low-voltage AC from the regular power supply systems. 
Capacitor Circuitry: High-voltage capacitors are joined in parallel which 
focuses energy in the charge cycle in less than a second and releases this 
energy in the discharge cycle in a millionth of a second, thus multiplying the 
electrical energy many times. 82 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
Pulse Generation and Configuration Setup: In this section, the 
generation of pulse takes place by the use of specific high-power operating 
switches that carry out on/off cycles in a flash changing the continuous 
flow of low-electrical power into a high power pulsed light as shown in 
Figure 4.1. 
Reflector Flashlamp
Temperature 
control 
Chamber 
Shelf Sample 
FIGURE 4.1 Pulsed light generation equipment. 
Lamp Unit consists of batteries of flash lamps possessing gases that 
are excited because of high-electrical pulsed power enclosed into a glass 
tube. These gases are excited because of the strong electrical discharge 
from the pulse configuration device. In the excitation phase, atoms gain 
energy in the form of an electrical pulse, and in the de-excitation phase, 
the atom comes to the ground state releasing the energy which they have 
gained in the excitation phase in the form of light. Different gases emit a 
Level 1 
Level 3 
Level 2 21.5°C 
different wavelength of light and in this way, a desired spectrum of light 
is generated. 
4.6 PULSED LIGHT TECHNOLOGY: PRESENT STATUS AND 
REGULATIONS 
According to US FDA: 
•	 The total successive additions of treatment concerning total fluence 
cannot be more than 12 J/cm2 
•	 The time of pulses is less than or equal to 2 ms Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology	 83 
•	 Generally, frequencies of the pulse applied vary from 1 to 20 pulses 
per second 
•	 Emission spectra range should be between 200 and 1100 nm 
The application of pulsed light is a promising technology for minimal 
processing and shelf-life extension of fresh-cut commodities as it can inhibit 
microbial proliferation on account of the UV-C light. PL account for surface 
decontamination and retention of various physicochemical properties of the 
fresh-cut produce to a considerable extent. The pulsed light got its descrip￾tion as a cost-effective nonthermal technology and a method that does not 
give rise to undesirable residuals on treated surfaces of food.39,56 
4.7 PULSED LIGHT ACTIVITY ON MICROBIAL INACTIVATION 
Pulsed light technology involves the use of light pulses of intense high power. 
The main components of light used are the UV, the visible spectrum light, 
and the IR light and the combination leads to microbial inactivation. Photo￾physical, photochemical, and photothermal effects are typically responsible 
for microbial eradication. They can inactivate microorganisms separately or 
in combination with one another, and their effectiveness is directly propor￾tional to the treatment method and target microorganisms. 
In literature, it has been indicated that though photophysical and photo￾thermal effects of pulsed light might have an impact on microbial inactiva￾tion, but the chief factor that leads to the destruction of microorganisms is 
the photochemical effect of pulsed light.39 
The rich wide spectrum of UV radiations ascribes lethal power to pulsed 
light. UV light has a pivotal role in the cell inactivation of microorganisms. It 
was also discovered that the lethality of PL is affected a lot by the no-killing 
effect in case a filter is employed to eliminate UV radiations. Wavelengths 
below 320 nm are found to have maximum potential to inactivate the 
microbes. 
The UV spectrum is branched into three wave sectors: short-wave UV-C 
(200–280 nm), medium-wave UV-B (280–320 nm), long-wave UV-A (320– 
400 nm).1
 Chiefly, the dreadful impact is possessed by the photochemical 
effect where UV-C light photons of wavelength noteworthy 253.7 nm are 
absorbed by the DNA of microbes.39 Conjugated carbon–carbon present in 
proteins and nucleic acids absorb UV radiations, which bring about antimi￾crobial effect because it transforms structures of DNA and RNA, dimers of 
pyrimidine chiefly thymine dimers.23 84 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
A large number of thymine dimers, a low amount of cytosine dimers, and 
intermediate amounts of mixed dimers are typically generated through UV 
irradiation.42 
During the process of cell division, the dimmers prevent the formation of 
new DNA chains which helps to prove lethality of the UV light by chlorogenic 
death of cell.14 Through the application of UV-C light, photo products such 
as 5-thyminyl-5, 6-dihydrothymine, and cyclo-butane pyrimidine dimmers 
from bacterial spores may be formed.57 
In various studies, it has been demonstrated that the enzymatic repair 
of the DNA damaged by pulsed light is also not possible. The photo￾chemical effect is another aspect of photosensitization. Several photoactive 
compounds or photo-sensitizers are administered in the microbial cells 
targeted during the process of photosensitization and then it is followed by 
light flashes.39 
According to the research studies, the sensitivity of microbes to PL is in 
the order: fungal spores < Gram-positive bacteria < Gram-negative bacteria.55 
Another study done by a researcher stated that similar trends in microbial 
sensitivity were observed.7
 However, contrarily a researcher reported a 
different pattern of microbial sensitivity in their analysis.26 Spores are less 
susceptible than bacterial vegetative forms. 
The decontamination because of the thermal effect is effective if the 
temperature of the surface reaches the pasteurization temperature as at this 
temperature the lethality for microbes is quite high. Nonetheless, in a study, 
it was observed that when pulsed light was focused on A. niger cells and the 
molds, they instantaneously got heated and caused cell death.54 A possibility 
is also that light pulses can raise the surface temperature to destroy inhabiting 
bacteria.19 
The reason behind cell death might be the alterations in the cell struc￾ture and physiology, which could be known as photothermal stress. The 
regional overheating caused by pulsed light may lead to the explosion of 
the cell causing rupture of cellular material. The scanning electron micro￾scope (SEM) images of A. niger spores treated with PL helped in visual￾izing the release of overheated contents of spores.39,61 Moreover, Figure 
4.2 shows the L. monocytogenes under TEM: (A) Control, (B) treatment 
of 150 pulses for 30 s, (C) treatment of 900 pulses for 180 s with intense 
pulsed light (ILP) on the fluence of 1.75 Joules/cm2
/pulse, (D) treatment 
of 1000 s by UV-C at 254 nms. The bar in this figure relates to 200 nms.17 
Table 4.1 shows the impact of pulsed light treatment on various fruits and 
vegetables. Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology 85 
FIGURE 4.2 TEM depicting the action of UV light on microbes. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ref. [17]. © 2013 Elsevier. 
4.8 CRITICAL FACTORS AFFECTING EFFICACY OF PULSED LIGHT 
DECONTAMINATION 
4.8.1 DESIGN AND PROCESSING FACTOR OF PULSED LIGHT 
Each manufacturer designs and layouts their pulsed light system differently, 
but the basic components are the same. The basic elements are the source 
of energy, which provides power to the pulsed light system, the capacitor 
circuitry, which magnifies the power multiple times by using capacitors 
connected in parallel, the pulse production and synchronization system, 
which configures the pulse of the continuous current by using high power 
circuits. The pulses are then sent to the flash lamps, which transform elec￾trical energy into light, and eventually, a triggering mechanism is set up to 
start all of the operations.1 
The flash lamp is the most essential element because it emits pulsed light. 
An inert gas, like xenon or krypton, is used to fill the lamp. Xenon is chosen 
for most microbial inactivation purposes due to its greater conversion ability 
and because it is a gas of preference for most microbial inactivation applica￾tions. The key structural elements of the flash lamp are the casing, seals, Cut fruit and Treatment Microorganism Reduction in microbial References 
vegetable loads in log1010 CFU/g Fluency Time and 
temperature
Apple 11.9 J/cm2 5°C for 7 days Escherichia (ATCC 11229) −0.26 [24] 
Listeria (ATCC 33090) −1.5 
Saccharomyces (KE 162) −0.31 
Aerobic mesophilic 4 
Molds and yeasts 40 
Avocado 0.4 J/cm2 5°C for 15 days L. innocua 2.719 [53] 
30 pulses Escherichia 2.12 
Cabbage 7 J/cm2 45 sec Mesophilic aerobic counts- sample wt-11 g 1.03 [25] 
Mesophilic aerobic counts- sample wt-11 g 1.64 
Cantaloupe 254 nm 10°C for 6 days Mesophilic aerobes Aprox 3 [37] 
Lactic acid bacteria
Pseudomonas spp Aprox 1.7 
Yeast and molds Aprox 1.5
Below detection limits
Green onion (14.3 J/cm2 Escherichia coli (O157:H7) inactivation on 4.9 [62] 
for 15 sec. turned spot inoculated stems
Escherichia coli (O157:H7) inactivation on 4.5 
turned spot inoculated leaves
Mellon 1200 J/m2 6°C for 10 days Total viable count 2.16 [40] 
Enterobacteriaceae 2.61 
86 TABLE 4.1 Pulsed Light Treatment on Various Fruits and Vegetables.
Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 87 
TABLE 4.1 (Continued)
Cut fruit and Treatment Microorganism Reduction in microbial References 
vegetable loads in log1010 CFU/g Fluency Time and 
temperature
Raspberry 34.2 J/cm2 60 s E. coli (O157:H7) 2.6 [13] 
Salmonella 2.9 
Strawberry 34.2 J/cm2 60 s E. coli(O157:H7) 2 [13] 
Salmonella 2.8 
Tomato 2.2 J/cm2 20°C for 15 days S. cerevisiae 2.3 [4] 
Aerobic mesophlic bacteria mold and yeast 2.9
counts 1.9 
Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology 88 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
and electrodes, with the envelope serving as a jacket that both contains and 
covers the electrodes. 
The lamp must be transparent to the lamp’s emitted radiations, resistant 
to both the filling gas and air, capable of withstanding high temperatures 
and thermal shocks, and mechanically strong. Suprasil, transparent fused 
quartz with a thickness of around 1 mm, is used to produce the envelopes. 
Metallic electrodes hang down from the envelope’s ends and are attached 
to a capacitor powered to a high voltage. The electrodes conduct electricity 
through the gas. The cathode decides the lamp’s lifespan and is, therefore, 
an essential aspect. 
The material used to construct the electrode is determined by the operating 
criteria. Since sputtering induced by hot spots produced while peak power is 
being supplied may trigger degradation of the cathode material, the cathode’s 
purpose is to provide a dispersed and sufficient amount of electrons. As a 
result, the cathode’s lifespan will be reduced. The anode must have enough 
mass/surface area so that it can withstand the power loading induced by the 
electric arc’s electron bombardment. Flash lamp’s enclosure must be sealed. 
Solder seals, rod seals, and ribbon seals are also widely employed seals.1 
The gas inside the flash lamps is ionized as a result of the extremely high 
current released by the capacitor and pulse configuration system. When a 
molecule is ionized, the atoms move to higher transition energy, and the 
energy is consumed in the form of electrical energy. When the atom returns 
to its ground state, the absorbed energy is discharged in a mode of light 
and heat energy. Due to the possibility of overheating during this process, 
cooling systems must be provided to ensure a good lamp life and consistent 
working. Cooling fans may be employed to do this.1 
Some other pulsed light sources such as a solid-state Marx-generator are 
used for pulsing an UV lamp to inactivate microbes, static discharge lamps 
with spectral outputs just as the flash lamps and sparker technology produces 
both a light and a sonic sound pulse.52 Electricity to light conversion efficiency 
is about 50%. The 25% UV, 45% visible radiation, and 30% infrared make 
up the spectral range. The flashes occur at a rate of 1–20 flashes/s. The type 
of food preservation equipment relies on multiple factors, which include 
ozone formation, the surface area of the food component, the measurements 
of the individual therapy unit, and the optimal level of decontamination. If 
the food being treated is temperature-sensitive, a cooling unit facility might 
be needed. Depending on the use, pulsed light apparatus may be batch or 
continuous. Batch processing, for example, that produced by Xenon Corp. 
(Waltham, MA), involves placing the packets into the chamber along with 
lamps positioned as the chamber’s walls. A single lamp mounted over the Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology 89 
subject and a customizable tray to house these articles are the most basic 
prototypes.39 
More sophisticated designs can include eight lamps in a cabinet, as well 
as a quartz stand for containing the article, and provide for 360° exposure 
and therapy.52 With this configuration, an in-line treatment system is feasible, 
and continuous pulsed light tests have been carried out.1,9,49 
4.9 PRODUCT PARAMETERS AND MICROBIAL PROPERTIES 
Pulsed light is a multifaceted operation, with various modes of response 
depending on the dosage and the microbe to be inactivated. Microorganism 
shielding by a rugged apple superficial layer and microorganism inter￾nalization, for example, in pores of apple tissues, have a major effect on 
inactivation trends.24 The product’s reflection coefficient is also taken into 
account; it should be low for successful microbial inactivation. Pulsed light 
effectiveness is also influenced by optical properties and dietary quality. 
Solid foods and packaging stuff should be clear, flat, and free of defects such 
as roughness which also include pores, grooves that might protect microbes 
from the incident light. Also extremely smooth finished surfaces can reflect 
light, reducing the effectiveness of pulsed light.39 Table 4.2 shows physio￾chemical changes after pulsed light treatment on various fruits/vegetables in 
the fresh-cut state. 
4.10 PULSED LIGHT-ASSISTED MICROBIAL DECONTAMINATION 
IN MINIMALLY PROCESSED FRESH-CUT FRUITS 
4.10.1 CANTALOUPE 
The main deterioration species in freshly cut cantaloupe includes aerobic, 
mesophilic bacteria, Pseudomonas spp. and lactic acid bacteria (LAB) 
are one of the major deterioration species for fresh-cut cantaloupe. These 
microbes were chosen to see how UV-C treatments impacted the microbial 
content of freshly cut cantaloupes. Fruit handled under UV-C light has the 
minimum levels of aerobic mesophilic bacteria and lactic acid bacteria. Yeast 
and mold cultures in fresh-cut pieces of whole melon that have been exposed 
to UV light and freshly cut pieces that have been handled immediately post 
cutting, on the other hand, were below detection (less than 1 colony-forming 
unit [CFU]). Regardless of the procedure, as storage time improved, a Fruits and Pulsed light operation Physiochemical changes after pulsed light treatment References 
vegetables Fluency Storage time temp.
Apple 17.5 J/m2 6°C for 7 days During storage, the flavor profile of sliced apples degraded, weight [29] 
loss happened, and slices became dehydrated and brown.
Avocado 0.4 J/cm2 5°C for 15 days Fresh-cut avocados lost their lightness over time and were margin- [53] 
ally lighter in treated than untreated samples, despite little difference
in a* value and a small improvement in b* values. In samples treated
with 30 pulses, a decrease in firmness was observed over time.
Cabbage 7 J/cm2 7°C for 9 days Off odor increased after treatment, decrement in taste was observed, [25] 
Overall visual quality retained, slight to no change was observed in
sogginess, browning dryness was observed.
Cantaloupe 0.9 J/cm2 4°C for 28 days Lipase activity in UV-C-treated fruit declined significantly and [37, 31] 
was untraceable after 7 days of storage. Fruit sliced under UV-C 
radiation retains its firmness better. During the preparation of cut 
fruit, the procedure also decreased respiration.
Lettuce 7.11 kJ/m2 5°C for 10 days UV-C processed commodity packets depleted O faster after 7 days [6] 2
of storage at 5°C and a faster increase in CO than the control in the 2
same conditions, as well as tissue softening and browning occurred.
Mango 11.7 KJ/m2 20°C for 12 days In comparison to untreated control fruit, UV-C therapy slowed skin [51] 
degreening, decreased endogenous ethylene development, decreased
respiration rate, and reduced chlorophyll material. TPC (Absolute 
Phenolic Content) and total antioxidant activity were significantly
higher in treated fruits toward the termination of the storage period,
and their firmness was maintained.
Melon 1200 J/m2 6°C for 10 days During storage, there was no noticeable impact of UV-C light [40] 
treatment on product color or firmness. Melon leakage was reduced
when exposed to UV-C radiation, on the other hand. 
90 TABLE 4.2 Physiochemical Changes after Pulsed Light Treatment on Various Fruits/Vegetables in the Fresh-Cut State.
Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 91 
TABLE 4.2 (Continued) 
Fruits and Pulsed light operation Physiochemical changes after pulsed light treatment References 
vegetables Fluency Storage time temp.
Mortino 12.5 kJ/m2 6°C for 21 days Delay in weight loss firmness, it maintained higher antioxidant [9] 
capacity (AC) than control fruit.
Naranjilla 12.5 kJ/m2 6°C for 21 days Reduced weight loss and a significant delay in naranjilla softening. [9] 
Raspberry 29.7 J/cm2 -- Little color improvements in treated samples. [13] 
Red pepper 10 kJ/m2 0°C for 21 days The treatments did not induce significant changes in antioxidant [8] 
capability, but they did minimize chilling injury, weight loss, and 
color retention was there.
Straw berry 29.7 J/cm2 – The color of the treated sample was slightly better, but the differ- [13] 
ence was not significant.
Tomato 8 J/cm2 5°C for 20 days A slight increment in soluble solids and titrable acidity was [58] 
observed, slight decrement in pH and firmness was observed.
Uvilla 12.5 kJ/ m2 6°C for 21 days Weight loss is reduced, but there is no impact on firmness loss. [9] 
UV-C therapy has no adverse effects on the flavor of the fruit and 
improved the Soluble Solids Content (SSC) in uvilla.
Yard-long bean 9.0 J/cm2 4 ± 1ᵒC for 16 days Dehydration and textural problems were encountered; it can be [45] 
accounted for the photothermal effect of pulsed light. 
Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology 92 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
community of aerobic, mesophilic bacteria, Pseudomonas spp. including 
lactic acid bacteria were raised in almost all articles. Treatments of fresh-cut 
pieces during storage were more successful in reducing spoilage microbes 
than processing the pieces of fruit under UV light.
37 
4.10.2 STRAWBERRY 
Strawberry eating is beneficial to our health in a variety of ways, but 
fresh-cut strawberries are tough to obtain due to their gradual decline in 
consistency. Pulsed light therapy (4, 8, 12, and 16 Joules/cm2
) was applied to 
fresh-cut strawberries. At 5°C, improvements in consistency and antioxidant 
properties were observed for 14 days. Fresh-cut strawberries were analyzed 
for their phenolic content, anthocyanin content, and vitamin C content.11 
4.10.2.1 FUNGAL DECAY INCIDENCE 
By causing photochemical alterations in DNA/RNA components and/or 
localized heating, pulsed light treatment induces cell damage. PL treatments 
were found to decrease the occurrence of fungus on the whole strawberry in 
trials.18 The employment of pulsed light therapy to freshly cut strawberries, 
on the other hand, resulted in a longer-term inhibition of fungal growth.
11 This 
might be attributed to a reduced prevalence of achenes above the freshly cut 
surfaces to also be handled, which could have a defensive shadowing effect 
against pulsed UV-light in the fresh whole fruit.13,18,48 
4.10.3 RASPBERRY 
Raspberries were found concerned in a minimum of five outbursts of 
Cyclospora cayetanensis.
48 At 72 and 59.2 J/cm2
, maximum degradations of 
Escherichia coli O157:H7 and Salmonella were found as 3.9 and 3.4 log10 
colony forming units/g, respectively. At these UV doses, there was no visible 
harm to the fruits. Pulsed UV light has the ability for being implemented as a 
disinfection tool for raspberries, according to the findings of this report. On 
doses of 0.19, 0.33, and 0.40 Joules/cm2
 per pulse, which referred to 13, 8, 
and 5 cm from the quartz window, respectively, pulsed UV-light was used 
to treat samples inoculated from Escherichia coli O157:H7 and Salmonella. 
Raspberries were processed for 5, 10, 30, 45, and 60 s, resulting in 34.2, Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology 93 
59.4, and 72 Joules/cm2
 cumulative maximal wideband energy doses for 13, 
8, and 5 cm, respectively. 
At fluencies of 2.9 and 72 Joules/cm2
, Escherichia coli O157:H7 reduc￾tions of 0.4 and 3.9 log10 colony forming units/g were recorded, respectively. 
At 3 cm from the quartz window, lowering in CFU/g varied from 0.9 to 3.9 
log10 colony forming units/g after 5 and 60 s, respectively. The temperature 
of the raspberry rose dramatically post being exposed to pulsed UV light at 
all wavelengths. After the 60-s procedure, maximum temperature rises of 60, 
55, and 30°C (fruit temperatures of 80, 75, and 48°C) were noted at 3, 8, and 
13 cm, respectively. It is particularly essential to mention that, in addition to 
photochemical inactivation, pulsed UV-light inactivation of pathogens has 
a thermal aspect. The optimal treatment place was 8 cm from the quartz 
window with a 60-s therapy period, resulting in a reduction of 3.4 log10 
CFU/g.13 
4.10.3.1 DECONTAMINATION OF RASPBERRIES USING PULSED 
UV-LIGHT 
Shadowing or shielding effects are most likely to blame for variations in 
microorganism reductions on the surfaces of raspberries, as described by.33 The 
openings between raspberries’ drupelets will protect microorganisms from 
light, resulting in only incomplete disinfection. The shadowing issue could 
reduce the effectiveness of pulsed UV light for decontaminating raspberries. 
The untreated raspberries had L*
, a*
, and b*
 attributes of 29.20, +20.25, and 
+11.66, respectively, compared to 31.29, +23.16, and +12.99, respectively, 
for the processed raspberries. There were no significant variations.
13 
4.10.4 APPLE 
The impact of pulsed light doses on fresh-cut apples was studied for the 
microbiological contamination of control and the treated samples. For 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae KE162, no counts were observed after a 100-s 
PL application at 5 cm from the sample; the reduction values obtained for 
Escherichia ATCC 11229 and Listeria ATCC 33090 were found to be 2.25 
and 1.7 logs, respectively, after the treatment with pulsed light for fluency 
of (2.4 J/cm2
). Nine pulses of pulsed light having fluence of 17.5 kJ/m2 were 
imparted on the fresh-cut apple; the increment in temperature of 2°C was 
observed while the final temperature not exceeding the 26° C on the surface 94 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
of the apple was recorded. The photothermal effect of pulsed light may be 
the reason behind the same.
24 
4.10.4.1 MICROBIAL INACTIVATION 
The control sample’s microbial counts were found to be exceedingly low. A 
subsidized residence of mesophilic bacteria (2.26±0.12 log colony-forming 
unit/cm2
) was discovered in particular. The counts of yeasts, molds, and 
Enterobacteriaceae obtained were all below the traceable level (50 CFU/cm2
). 
The effect of pulsed light on inoculated microbes, such as L. brevis and L. 
monocytogenes on apple samples was investigated to confirm pulsed light’s 
inactivation effectiveness. As a symbol of spoilage and pathogenic microor￾ganisms, these microorganisms were selected. L. brevis and L. monocytogenes 
were substantially reduced by 3.0 and 2.7 log decrements, respectively, when 
exposed to low-intensity pulsed light (17.5 kJ/m2
), although more changes in 
light fluence were less efficient.24 
4.10.5 MELON 
Microbial counts, color, firmness, juice leakage, sensory properties, and 
selectiveness were all calculated in melon cubes kept at 6°C for 14 days. 
The sample exhibited to UV-C rays resulted in two-log decreases in the 
overall viable count and Enterobacteriaceae counts, which stayed two 
log units less during storage than the nontreated sample. During storage, 
there was no discernible impact of UV-C light therapy on product color or 
firmness. Exposure to UV-C radiation, on the other hand, reduced melon 
leakage, most likely because of the development of a thin dry layer above 
the sample surface. UV-C-treated articles often had a greater taste, making 
them slightly more appealing than untreated samples.40 
4.10.5.1 MICROBIAL ANALYSIS 
The magnitude for the initial microbial count quite resembles that of fresh￾cut melon.37 Total viable count and Enterobacteriaceae populations were 
(2.0±0.5) 105
 and (2.0±0.1) 103
 colonies forming unit/gram, respectively, 
whereas yeast and mold colonies were missing. After cutting operations, 
melon cubes were exposed to UV-C light, which culminated in a number of Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology 95 
logarithmic reductions greater than 2 involving both total viable count and 
Enterobacteriaceae. 
A fluence of 4100 J/m2
 was found to decrease the overall viable popu￾lation of freshly cut samples by 1.5 logs.22 Slightly fewer decrements in 
aerobic counts (1 log) were obtained by,10 irradiating watermelon samples 
to an UV-C fluence of 1600 Joules/m2
. The UV-C doses were investigated 
further to determine if increased exposure could enhance bacteria elimina￾tion without detrimental effect on fresh-cut watermelon quality. Increased 
microbial reduction was obtained by exposing cubes to UV-C for 10 min 
(13.7 kJ m−2), but this dose adversely affected pulp color. In particular, red 
color fading was noticed, and this was evidenced by higher L* and lower a*, 
b*, C* and hue angle units in the 13.7 kJ m−2 treatment than in 6.9 kJ m−2 
or lower dose. This discovery may be elaborated by the fact that UV-C light 
transmittance by fruit tissue is extremely limited. UV-C radiation can only 
have an effect on an extremely fine layer of the sample surface. 
Fruit-cutting actions are prominently associated with creating damaged 
surfaces that are anything but away from flat and smooth on a microscopic 
basis. It could clarify the phenomenon of dispersed surface roughness, 
which is thought to cast a shadow on possible microbial cells, minimizing 
the germicidal effect of UV-C radiation. In other terms, using UV-C light 
fluencies greater than those needed to subsidize the microbial community 
directly open to the light will not enhance disinfection effectiveness as the 
light will not influence shadowed microbial cells. Higher fluence therapies, 
on the other hand, are thought to cause more reliability disruption.44 
Mild processing conditions were found to be successful for microbial 
disinfection of freshly cut melon in a study. Samples were processed under 
UV-C light (20 W/m2
) and afterward exposed to 1200 Joules/m2
 UV-C rays 
for growing periods at 6°C to mimic fresh-cut fruit preservation along with 
the refrigerated chain. UV-C radiation not only disinfected freshly cut sample 
cubes post-harvest, but also impacted microbial population development 
during storage. For a 14-day storage period, gross viable and Enterobacte￾riaceae counts in light-handled articles maintained 2 log units less than in 
control samples. This duration reflects a very long storage time for this sort 
of commodity, which is important. Yeasts and molds were contained in the 
UV-C treated melon cubes at amounts just below the method’s detection 
limit and slightly lower than the control up to 7 days of the experiment, but 
at 14 days of samples storage, the control, and pulsed light-handled samples 
yielded identical counts. Eventually, all UV-C exposed and control samples 
showed a decline in the population of lactic acid bacteria during storage.40  
96 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
4.11 PULSED LIGHT ASSISTED MICROBIAL DECONTAMINATION 
IN MINIMALLY PROCESSED FRESH-CUT VEGETABLES 
4.11.1 TOMATO 
It is one of the most widely consumed vegetables and is well known for 
its remarkable sensory and nutritional properties. In their fresh-cut state, 
tomatoes are high in folates, vitamin C, vitamin E, and other natural 
antioxidants, especially carotenoids and phenolic compounds. It suffers 
huge losses in terms of microbial and physiochemical changes. To overcome 
these losses, pulsed light, a nonthermal technique is employed. Pulsed light 
at fluences of 4, 6, or 8 J/cm2
 was employed for the samples stored at 5ºC for 
20 days, and fluencies of 2.68 and 5.36 Joules/cm2
 were used, and the results 
were studied in red-ripe tomatoes kept at 20°C for 15 days. Microbial loads 
on the pulsed light treated tomatoes were 2log CFU/g lower than the control 
samples.58 
4.11.1.1 MICROBIAL ANALYSIS 
The fresh-cut state of tomato is encountered by various microbes such as 
psychrophilic bacteria, molds, yeasts, aerobic mesophilic bacteria, etc. The 
microbial infection could be managed to some degree using pulsed light 
treatment, as psychrophilic bacterial counts on control samples (3.1±0.1 log 
CFU/g) were not prominently impaired by pulsed light therapy, while initial 
yeast and mold loads on fresh-cut tomatoes (4.9±0.1 Log colony forming 
units /g) were significantly decreased only after handling at fluences of 6 and 
8 Joules/cm2 to 4.2 and 3.8 Log CFU/g, respectively.58 
Tomatoes treated with two pulses (5.36 J/cm2
) had the lowest counts 
of aerobic mesophilic bacteria (2.9 log10 CFU/g). Fluences of 0.3, 0.56, 
0.71, 1.1, 1.65, and 2.2 Joules/cm2
 were used to assess the antimicrobial 
effectiveness of PL on tomato surfaces inoculated with S. Cerevisiae. When 
S. Cerevisiae populations were inoculated on tomato sections and treated 
with PL, they were drastically decreased. At 2.2 J/cm2
, maximum reductions 
of S. Cerevisiae of 2.3 log10 were obtained in pulsed light treated tomato.58 
Psychrophilic bacteria counts on unhandled articles expanded prominently 
to 7.0 ± 0.2 log CFU/g, while those on pulse light treated articles reduced 
up to 0.7 ± 1.8 log CFU/g compared to control samples at the termination of 
storage. The yeast and mold loads on fresh-cut tomatoes, on the other hand, 
were 8.0 ± 0.2 log CFU/g, with the articles subjected to pulsed light-fluences Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology 97 
of 8 Joules/cm2 displaying the lowest changes (up to 0.5 log CFU/g) when 
compared to those on unhandled tomato samples.58 
4.11.2 LETTUCE 
The irradiation of ‘‘Red Oak Leaf” lettuce, which is minimally handled by 
UV-C treatment, was performed to prevent microbial growth and increase 
the shelf-life. UV-C resistance of 20 bacterial strains from various genera 
commonly associated with fresh produce (Enterobacter, Erwinia, Escherichia, 
Leuconostoc, Pantoea, Pseudomonas, Rahnela, Salmonella, Serratia, and 
Yersinia) was initially tested in vitro. Most bacterial strains were inhibited 
by the lowest dose (30 J m-2). The most resistant strains were Erwinia caroto￾vora, Leuconostoc carnosum, Yersinia aldovae, and Salmonella typhimurium 
which needed an UV-C dose of 85 Joules/m2
 to fully arrest development. 
Both UV-C therapies improved the product’s shelf-life. However, post 7 days 
of keeping at 5°C, the 7.11 kJoules/m2
 dosage caused tissue softening and 
browning. UV-C radiation is also useful in suppressing existing microflora, 
moreover expanding the shelf-life of ‘‘Red Oak Leaf” lettuce that has been 
minimally processed when applied at the proper dosage.6 
4.11.2.1 MICROBIAL COUNTS 
The microbial counts for “Red Oak Leaf” lettuce, which is minimally 
handled, were raised during storage and were lying in the presumed range for 
fresh-cut vegetable items, as explained by.
43 While different bacterial groups 
had different growth habits, they all reacted to UV-C radiation treatment in 
the same way. The bulk of the microorganisms studied grew slower when 
exposed to UV-C radiation. Complete aerobic and facultative aerobic meso￾philic bacteria development was shown to be smaller in radiated samples than 
in control samples. The highest growth declines were noted among two and 
six days of storage for the greater radiation levels (2.37 and 7.11 kJoules/ 
m2
). The same results were obtained when minimally handled “‘Lollo Rosso’ 
and ‘Red Oak Leaf’ lettuces were dealt with 0.4, 0.81, 2.44, 4.07, and 8.14 
kJoules/m2
 on just one side of the tissue.” The concentrations of mesophilic 
bacteria in squash slices were found to be greater in nonradiated controls 
compared to handled with 0.493 or 9.80 kJ/m2
 UV light in many studies. 
Based on overall microbial counts, UV-C radiation increased the shelf-life of 
freshly cut lettuce.20  
98 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
The shelf-life of untreated lettuce was a minimum of two days less than 
that of UV-C treated lettuce. When higher doses (2.37 and 7.11 kJoules/m2
) 
of UV-C radiation were used, they were successful in reducing lactic acid 
bacteria. Among the unhandled control and the radiated articles, (1.18 and 
7.11 kJoules/m2
) radiation fluencies, a discrepancy of around 1 log unit was 
recorded. When the growth of enteric bacteria was examined, similar findings 
were discovered. After two days of storage, all of the UV-C radiation doses 
tested were successful in reducing enteric growth. Nevertheless, no major 
variations were found between the treatments applied. Radiation treatments 
have had an impact on yeast development. On all days except the third and 
tenth, there was a substantial discrepancy among the control and radiated 
articles. Toward the end of the storage time (day 10) when yeast development 
was at its peak, no major variations between the control and radiated samples 
were discovered.6 
4.11.3 YARD-LONG BEAN 
Freshly cut yard-long beans were subjected to pulsed light treatment at , various doses (1.8 Joules /cm2
, 5.4 Joules /cm2
, 9.0 Joules /cm2
, and 12.6 
Joules /cm2
). Over 14 days, the microbial stability of freshly cut yard￾long beans processed at 4±1°C was tracked. The implementation of a PL 
dosage of 9.0 Joules/cm2 improved the shelf-life of freshly cut samples 
while preserving consistency when kept at 4±1°C, according to various 
researches.45 
4.11.3.1 MICROBIOLOGICAL SAFETY 
The research studies show that the control sample suffered huge microbio￾logical contamination compared to the pulsed light treated sample. After 7 
days of preparation, untreated samples achieved their full aerobic count 
(7 log CFU/g), while pulsed light extended the shelf-life of the freshly cut 
sample for 14 days. Aside from this, yeast and molds are contained in abun￾dance in freshly cut yard-long beans. Yeast counts surpassed 5 log CFU/g, 
microbial spoilage in fresh-cut vegetables was observed.28,27 Yeast and mold 
counts were held below 5 log CFU/g in articles handled with 9.0 Joules/cm2 
and 12.6 Joules/cm2
 for up to 14 days. As a result, microbial replication is 
prevented.45 Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology 99 
4.11.4 GREEN ONIONS 
Pulsed light-assisted microbial decontamination of fresh-cut green onion has 
been studied. Various types of microbial loads were observed on fresh-cut 
green onion; the inactivation efficacy of Escherichia coli O157:H7 by pulsed 
light (PL) was studied. To represent two separate matrixes, green onions 
were split into two regions: stems and leaves. Decontamination of stems 
was found to be more difficult. To assess decontamination levels, two sepa￾rate inoculation procedures were used. When the methods of spot and dip 
inoculation were compared, it was discovered that dipped inoculated green 
onions were more difficult to decontaminate. The findings revealed that the 
treatments included 5 s of dry pulsed light (articles were not submerged 
in water during pulsed light therapy) and 60 s of wet pulsed light (articles 
were soaked in water and shaken during pulsed light therapy); both were 
successful in inactivating the bacteria.62 
4.11.4.1 MICROBIAL INACTIVATION 
Dry PL was used to treat fresh-cut green onions for 5, 15, 30, and 60 s. 
Only 5 and 15 s were considered for further evaluation because substantial 
green onions processed for 30 and 60 s showed consistent decline, involving 
softer and shrunk tissue, darker texture, and a cooked scent, and because 
this treatment was only on the surface, samples were treated for better 
outcomes. Spot inoculation simulated contamination caused by unsanitary 
contact from workers’ hands or equipment while harvesting, packaging, or 
value-addition manufacturing; also dip inoculation simulated contamination 
during cleaning, which is typically the primary phase in the packing unit. 
The dry treatment for the spot inoculated one was found to be superior, 
with log reductions ranging from 4.1 to 5.2 log10 CFU/g. The nonsignificant 
difference was found in 5 s PL with and without switching; moreover, 5 s 
and 15 s treatments indicate that 5 s dry pulsed light therapies would be 
adequate to inactivate E. coli on stems and leaves for spot inoculated (106 
CFU/g) green onions. For dip inoculated green onions, the average log 
reduction was less than 1.2 log10 CFU/g. 15 s treated stems in both with and 
without turnings (1.1 log10 CFU/g) were considered to be the most efficient 
therapy. In the case of leaves, there were no major variations between the 
5 s and 15 s PL therapies, as well as between switching and not switching 
at each treatment. The researchers concluded that PL should be employed 
to decontaminate green onions with E. coli O157:H7. The consistency of 100 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
the wet pulsed light therapy was greater than the dry pulsed light treatment. 
For spot inoculated stems and leaves, the 5 s dry and 60 s wet pulsed light 
treatments demonstrated optimistic inactivation efficacy (N4 log10 CFU/g).62 
4.11.5 CABBAGE 
Surveilling headspace gas concentrations, microbial species, and sensory 
attributes were used to assess the effect of intense pulsed light (IPL) therapy 
on the shelf-life of cabbage, which was kept at 7°C in equilibrium modified 
atmosphere packages (EMAP).25 
4.11.5.1 MICROBIAL ANALYSIS 
For aerobic psychrotrophic count (APC), a 0.54 log reduction can be achieved 
in minimally processed (MP) white cabbage. Psychrotrophic and yeast counts 
show a consistent increase in both control and irradiated MP cabbage during 
storage. As time goes by, the value of ILP decontamination wears off; control 
and treated samples resulted in the same counts, and flashed samples had 
the highest psychrotrophic count from day 7 until the conclusion of the trial. 
Though its aerobic psychrotrophic count was reduced by 0.34–1.27 logs in 
the subsequent procedures, after 4 days at 5°C and 2 days at 15°C, the counts 
were higher in the treated samples. Some decontamination treatments can 
cause vegetable tissues to become softer, making them more susceptible to 
microbial degradation. Psychrotroph counts in treated samples surpassed the 
acceptable limit (108 CFU/g) on day 7, although controls were acceptable 
for the whole 9-day experiment; yeast counts never reached the permissible 
limits (105 CFU/g). As a response, ILP had little effect on the microbial shelf￾life of minimally processed cabbage kept at EMAP 7°C. The appearance of 
off-odors reduced the shelf-life of the processed samples to just 7 days.25 
4.12 PULSED LIGHT TREATMENT AND PHYSIOCHEMICAL 
CHANGES IN MINIMALLY PROCESSED FRESH-CUT FRUITS 
4.12.1 ANEADEN FRUITS 
Naranjilla, uvilla, and mortino were subjected to a pulsed light treatment of 
fluencies (0, 8, or 12.5 kJ/m2
) of UV-C light and evaluated weekly for the Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology 101 
best-suited fluence of pulsed light to analyze deterioration index at the storage 
cycle for 21 days at 6°C. Reduction in deterioration index and retention of 
the quality was observed by the application of high doses of pulsed UV-C 
light. Short prestorage UV-C exposure may serve as a nonchemical method 
to supplement storage at a lower temperature, quality retention, and enhance 
the after-harvest life of Aneaden fruits naranjilla, uvilla, and mortino. The 
most prominent visual attribute losses that were observed are the pits on 
the peel of uvilla, softening and peel browning were prominent losses in 
naranjilla while the reduction in moisture content and losses in weight were 
the marginal losses in mortino.9 
4.12.1.1 FIRMNESS 
The UV-C treatment showed various effects on aneaden fruits as in uvilla the 
firmness was retained, for naranjilla softening was delayed. Firmness values 
of naranjillia on the last sampling day were similar to the control sample 
stored for 7 days.9 
4.12.1.2 SOLUBLE SOLIDS CONTENT 
Soluble solids content is arranged in the increasing order from the highest 
in uvillia (ca. 13.9–14.1%) then in mortino (9.8–10%) to the lowest in 
naranjillia (7.2–7.3%). A remarkable increment in SSC during storage was 
observed for uvillia while moderate changes were seen for naranjillia and 
mortino. Higher SSC was observed for the UV-C irradiated uvillia than the 
nonirradiated fruit post 14 and 21 days’ storage.28 
4.12.1.3 TITRATABLE ACIDITY 
Acidity and ph were not prominently impacted by the application of the 
UV-C light. Roughly, it was evaluated as 328 for uvillia, 379 for naranjillia, 
and 190 for mornito in meq/kg.9 
4.12.1.4 ANTIOXIDANT CAPACITY 
The total antioxidant capacity in the control sample was found to be five 
and seven times increased in mortino (6800 mg/kg) as compared to uvilla 102 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
(1500 mg/kg) and naranjilla (870 mg/kg), respectively. Higher antioxidant 
capacity than control was observed in uvillia instantly post-treatment and 
during storage. Results suggest that UV-C treatment elicited antioxidant 
accumulation.5
 UV-C treated uvilla and mortino retained greater antioxi￾dant capacity than control during long periods of storage. The activation 
of the biosynthesis pathway of the phenolic compound as a result of UV 
radiation may account for the triggered increase in antioxidant capacity of 
uvillia.9 
4.12.1.5 QUALITY RETENTION, WEIGHT LOSS, AND SOFTENING 
By the application of UV-C treatment, the quality retention for mortino 
was lower in the extent to the uvillia and naranjillia. Application of high 
fluence pulsed light can effectively reduce the loss of weight in mortino. 
Softening was also very effectively delayed by the UV-C treatment in 
naranjillia. Maintaining the tissue integrity as observed in mortino may 
account for the remarkable improvement in anthocyanin stability for 
a longer duration of storage. Overall, the findings suggest that short 
prestorage is beneficial. UV-C exposure can be a nonchemical method 
to improve reduced temperature handling, consistency preservation, and 
fresh-cut fruit shelf-life. Fruits from the Aneaden include naranjilla, 
uvilla, and mortino.9 
4.12.2 CANTALOUPE 
4.12.2.1 POD ACTIVITY 
Fresh-cut cantaloupe melon underwent the pulsed light treatment. A signifi￾cant increment in peroxidase (POD) activity was observed for the freshly 
cut fruit under UV light than the fruit treated with UV light post-cutting 
and control. The POD activities when compared between the control and 
the postcut pulsed light treated fruits showed that there was an increment 
in treated one. During storage, similar results were marked for both the 
sets of samples whereas samples processed under UV light showed slightly 
increased POD activity. Photo-oxidation products were quickly accumulated 
by the application of UV light; a defense mechanism of plants was triggered 
against oxidation in the response to UV light.34Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology 103 
4.12.2.2 ES ACTIVITY 
Reduction in esterase (ES) activity was observed for the fruit treated 
with pulsed light post cut.35 However, the deprivation of esters and the 
simultaneous development of phytoalexin compounds showed to be 
significant in early reaction phases concerned with the loss of freshness 
of some cut fruits during storage. Treatment of cantaloupe post cut stage 
with UV light showed the reduction in ES activity in the fresh-cut treated 
fruit.36 
4.12.2.3 LIPASE ACTIVITY 
Lower lipase activity was detected in fruits treated with pulsed light compared 
to the control sample. Lipase activity, on the other hand, decreased gradually 
in fruit treated with UV-C light, and after 7 days of storage at 10 °C, no lipase 
activity was detected. 
4.12.2.4 SENSORY EVALUATION 
Sensory analysis reveals that the development of off-flavor, that is, the 
development of rancid musty off-flavors was controlled by cutting the 
cantaloupe in UV light exposure; however, improvement in retention of 
preferable flavors in melon such as sweet aromatic and fruity melon aroma 
may not be observed as for post-cut UV irradiated fruit. The judging suit 
did not determine considerable variations for acceptable flavors among 
post-cut UV light treated and fruit cut under UV light. The score obtained for 
the samples cut under UV light was considerably reduced in rancid aroma 
compared to after-cut UV-treated and untreated control.37 
4.12.2.5 HEADSPACE GAS 
Headspace gas composition shows a reduction in the rate of respiration 
of fruit handled under UV light. The reduction in analogous respiration 
rates was found to be maintained during the storage of the fresh-cut 
fruit.37 104 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
4.12.2.6 FIRMNESS 
Firmness retention for the pulsed light treated fresh-cut cantaloupe was 
observed compared to the control.37 
4.12.3 MANGO 
A tropical fruit well known for its immense nutritional and sensory char￾acteristics has the potential to provide about half of the suggested daily 
consumption of vitamin C and carotenoids, etc. These qualities attracted 
the scientific community to research fresh-cut states. Analysis performed on 
physical factors such as firmness, color, etc., and chemical factors (such as 
phenolic activity, carotenoid, ascorbic acid contents, and enzyme activities 
(Phenylalanineammonialyase, PAL and Polyphenoloxydase, PPO)) were 
observed on fresh-cut Kent mangoes. The mangoes were irradiated with 
eight lamps to provide a total fluence of 8 J/cm2
.
16 Haden mangoes were 
also subjected to UV type-C irradiation power of 2.46 and 4.93 kJoules/m2 
after 18 days at 25°C. Total flavonoids (TF), lipoxygenase (LOX) enzymatic 
activity were recorded at 0, 0.5, 1, 8, 16, and 24 h and after that every 3 days. 
The sample decay and overall appearance (OA) were tested every 2 days by 
evaluating on a hedonic scale.27 
4.12.3.1 FIRMNESS 
Studies showed that in the control sample firmness decrease of around 1.5 
N after 48 h of storage was observed and this decrement in firmness was 
continued at 6°C. In contrast, the pulsed light treated sample indicated 
positive fluctuation of firmness until 1.5 N toward the termination of 
storage for 2 to 3 days when treated with a total fluence of 8 J/cm2
. Hence, 
a cumulative fluency of 8 J/cm2 inducted firmness estimation of irradiated 
sample cubes during the 7 days of storage, whereas control samples depicted 
tenderization properties.16 
4.12.3.2 COLOR 
The color was analyzed by L* a* b* values by the conventional system 
and DE was calculated. An increment was observed in the values DE in Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology 105 
the pulsed light treated sample compared to the initial sample, DE values 
increment was observed in the control sample. Overall the color retention 
for the pulsed light treated sample showed better color retention properties 
of fresh-cut mangoes.16 
4.12.3.3 PPO ACTIVITY 
PPO activity in control samples remained largely unchanged for 7 days of 
storage. After 7 days, PPO activity in PL samples improved to 58.16 UAE/ 
min/mg proteins, reflecting a 50% improvement over the initial value. After 3 
and 7 days of storage, PPO activities in PL samples were slightly higher than 
in controls. On storage for 2 days reduction in PPO activity was recorded in 
both control and treated samples.16 
4.12.4 STRAWBERRIES 
4.12.4.1 COLOR 
Entire storage, the lightness parameter (L*) of outer segments was preserved 
in all strawberries. The a* parameter of outer areas, on the other hand, 
decreased in response to the procedure. Fresh-cut strawberries treated at low 
doses showed a small a* decrease, while slices treated at 16 J/cm2 showed a 
more dramatic decrease.11 
4.12.4.2 FIRMNESS 
Fresh-cut strawberries were determined to have no major firmness changes 
after being handled with PL. According to a study in whole strawberries using 
light and transmission electron microscopy, the tension induced by PL therapy 
is probable to trigger cell wall hardening, a significant reduction in the integrity 
of the walls of hypodermis cells, resulting in less softening of the sample.18,48 
4.12.4.3 TOTAL PHENOLIC COMPOUNDS 
PL treatments have little effect on the overall phenolic content during the 
storage time. Strawberry phenolic content was originally 1.083 g/kg. The 106 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
overall phenolic content of strawberries illuminated with UV-C for 5 min 
at a fluency of 2.1 kJ/cm2
 contained the maximum total phenolic content, 
followed by 1 and 10 min of UV-C illumination. The overall phenolic 
content of the control fruit was the lowest. During the 15-day storage cycle, 
the overall phenolic content of strawberry fruit improved for both UV-C 
illuminated and the control sample. When compared to illuminated fruit, 
however, this rise was comparatively smaller in control fruit.21 
4.12.4.4 VITAMIN C 
There was no significant difference in vitamin C content among slices 
illuminated with doses less than 16 Joules/cm2
, which matches the results 
of60 for whole strawberries. Fresh-cut strawberries treated at 4 J/cm2
, on 
the other hand, retained their vitamin C content during storage, while slices 
treated at 8 J/cm2
 were held for 6 days and then marginally reduced. Vitamin 
C levels in samples handled at 12 and 16 J/cm2
 depleted dramatically during 
storage. Temperature readings never approached 42°C, so the drop may 
be due to photochemical more willingly than thermal effects. The greater 
reduction in slices exposed to higher PL doses, on the other hand, could 
indicate oxidative injury on the tissues treatment by these doses, as ascorbic 
acid is extremely susceptible to oxidation while wounding.18,51 
4.12.5 AVOCADO 
The nutritional content of fresh avocado is very high as it contains unsaturated 
fats, which are thought potent to reduce the risk of cardiovascular and hepatic 
disease, in abundance. It is high in minerals like potassium and magnesium, 
as well as vitamins E, C, and B-complex. Avocado’s nutritious composition 
renders it a perfect medium for the growth of microbes which leads to quality 
loss and spoilage.53 
4.12.5.1 HEADSPACE GAS 
Reduction in oxygen content was observed during the preliminary days 
of storage in both the treated and unhandled samples. From the third day 
past the oxygen content in the tray was maintained near zero. The dramatic 
fluctuations in oxygen levels may be said due to the minimal processing, which Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology 107 
increased the respiration rate of the fruit and hence leads to the undesirable 
anaerobic respiration triggering the fermentative processes associated with 
the biochemical metabolism of fruits. Conversely, the rise in CO2 level was 
noted in the treated samples compared to the control. The values reached as 
high as 20 kPa until maximum. It was observed that higher CO2
 levels lead 
to anoxia conditions. The higher CO2
 concentration was a result of the higher 
uptake of O2
. The pulsed light exposure showed the impact on the ethylene 
production as the storage period and pulses no. accounted for it. This shows 
that the more the number of pulses, the lesser the ethylene concentrations. 
It is critical to control ethylene production to prevent the trigger of stress 
response of fresh-cut fruits. Negligible impact on ethanol production was 
observed; the slight formation of alcohol can be accounted for the anaerobic 
conditions.53 
4.12.5.2 pH 
There was a significant difference in pH during the treatments, suggesting a 
drop in pH at the start of the experiment, which was significantly greater in 
treated samples than in unhandled samples. Fresh-cut avocados treated by 15 
and 30 pulses yielded no major variations.50 
4.12.5.3 FIRMNESS 
In samples treated with 30 pulses, there was a reduction in firmness over 
time. The textural properties of fresh-cut avocado can be drastically altered 
by pulsed light. After 3 days of preparation, the firmness of treated fresh-cut 
avocados had significantly lowered. After 9 days of storage, it was discovered 
that both treated and untreated avocado cylinders had equal firmness values.50 
4.12.5.4 COLOR 
In both treated and untreated avocado samples, the L* (lightness), a* 
(green–red), and b* (blue–yellow) attributes are calculated. The lightness 
of fresh-cut avocados was greatly influenced by treatments. There were no 
major variations among the control and the articles treated with 15 pulses 
at the outset of the trial, and freshly cut avocados handled with 30 pulses 
showed symptoms of browning. The extremely important indicator of 108 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
avocado enzymatic browning is its lightness. Fresh-cut avocados’ lightness 
reduced over time and was found slightly reduced in handled than unhandled 
samples. According to the results, there were no discrepancies in a* attributes 
of samples implemented to varying numbers of pulses during storage, but 
b* attributes were substantially varied among treatments. The average color 
alterations of freshly cut avocados were measured, with the freshly cut 
untreated article acting as a guide. As a result, the evidence suggests that ILP 
therapies have a detrimental impact on the product’s color. The color loss 
may be explained by an increase in avocado respiratory activity following 
the treatments.53 
4.12.6 APPLE 
4.12.6.1 EFFECT ON COLOR 
The fresh delicious apple disc has the color of creamy-white, well depicted 
by L* attributes ≈70, a* ≈6.3, b* ≈22. Irradiation was done by pulsed light at 
the two sample locations from lamp viz. 5 and 10 cm from the lamp for 20 s, 
60 s, and 100 s reflecting a reduction in luminosity (greater ΔL*), moreover 
an increase in a* value in comparison to the control samples through the 
entire storage period. This effect was more enhanced in apples with exposure 
at shorter distances. Sharp differences were evident on the zero-day and with 
storage time decrease in the overall significant differences was observed. 
Moreover, initially, b* value increased with the increase in irradiation time. 
The variations in b*, on the other hand, did not follow a consistent pattern 
during storage. The changes in the b* value of apples processed at 5 cm 
were found to be close to that of the control. As compared to the control, 
the apple shown to a light pulse at 10 cm for 60 s and 100 s had a higher b* 
value during storage, while b* variants of samples irradiated for 20 s were 
lower compared to control. The b* values of the apple samples that had been 
irradiated for 2 s did not improve dramatically after 7 days of storage.24 
4.12.7 MELON 
Physicochemical consistency parameters such as color, firmness, and juice 
leakage were also assessed in UV-C handled and the control samples were kept 
at 6°C for growing periods, and no major variations in color and firmness of 
freshly cut melon were found as a result of keeping the temperature at 6°C, by Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology 109 
independent application of UV-C light. However, there were major variations 
in juice leakage. Till 3 days of storage, intracellular liquid leakage from UV-C 
irradiated articles was slightly smaller than that from control samples. Upon 
further storage, however, no variations in this parameter were found among 
the samples. The surface of sample cubes treated with UV-C proved to be 
drier than control samples. UV-C light promotes the dehydration of a thin 
superficial surface of samples without impacting their total firmness and color. 
This phenomenon can result in the creation of a thin superficial dried film 
that prevents leakage of juice within the initial days of storage. The defensive 
effect of this edible film will be lost after further storage and moisture 
equilibration among the internal tissues and the dry film. It was found that 
UV-C handled the sample as less juicy compared to freshly prepared melon. 
Terpenoids, such as geranyl acetone, β-ionone, β-cyclocitral, among others, 
could be considerably raised following their synthesis in direct reaction to UV 
light stress. On contrary, esters were observed to reduce only after thinly sliced 
laminar tissues were exposed to UV light for an extended period. Off flavor 
can result if endogenous terpenoid concentrations become extremely high.40 
4.13 PULSED LIGHT TREATMENT AND PHYSIOCHEMICAL 
CHANGES IN MINIMALLY PROCESSED FRESH-CUT VEGETABLES 
4.13.1 TOMATO 
Tomato in its fresh-cut state suffers huge physiochemical losses. The main 
enzymes involved in tomato softening are polygalacturonase (PG) and pectin 
methylesterase (PME.); these enzymes are considered the triggering enzymes 
for cell wall softening and hydrolysis in tomatoes, hence causing loss of 
turgor and crispness in tomatoes. As a result, the effects of pulsed light with 
fluencies of 4, 6, or 8 Joules/cm2
 on freshly cut conditions for 20 days of 
keeping at 5°C are investigated, and the findings for weight reduction, PME, 
and PG activities are discussed.58 
4.13.1.1 FIRMNESS 
The impact of pulsed light was not so profuse on the firmness of fresh￾cut tomatoes. Regardless of the procedure used, firmness values declined 
dramatically over the storage period. Faster firmness decrements were found 
as the fluence of pulsed light applied increased. Over 20 days of storage, 110 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
control tomato slices lost 63% of their initial firmness, while those exposed 
to fluencies of 4 and 6 Joules/cm2
 lost even more (72 and 74%, respectively). 
Freshly cut tomatoes showed fluences of 8 Joules/cm2
 and just lost 55.7% of 
their original firmness during storage.58 
4.13.1.2 WEIGHT LOSS 
The weight loss in tomato slices is proportional to the fluency of the pulsed 
light used, with slices exposed to 8 Joules/cm2
 showing the largest reduction 
in weight (1.6%); it was found to be four times and twice that of freshly 
cut tomatoes handled with 4 and 6 Joules/cm2
, respectively. Weight loss 
increment was clear during days postprocessing (ca. day 4), beyond the first 
week of storage the increment in rates was dropped considerably. Freshly 
cut tomatoes exposed to pulsed light and processed for 20 days lost 9 to 
10% of their weight, whereas untreated tomato slices lost a smaller but not 
insignificant amount of weight (7%).58 
4.13.1.3 PECTIN METHYLESTERASE (PME) ACTIVITY 
The effect of pulsed light fluencies on freshly cut tomatoes indicates that pectin 
methylesterase activity in control and pulsed light treated freshly cut tomatoes 
reduced dramatically over time. PL-treated tomato slices, on the other hand, 
maintained higher PME activity values over time than untreated samples. In 
fact, compared to those exposed to 4 and 6 J cm-2, tomato samples exposed to 
the highest PL-treatments (8 J cm-2) maintained higher PME activity.58 
4.13.1.4 POLYGALACTURONASE ACTIVITIES 
PG activity does not show the active impact of pulsed light on PG activity. It 
fell dramatically (by around 60%) in the days following processing, regard￾less of the treatment used. Beyond the initial depletion, residual PG activity 
values were maintained without significant modifications.58 
4.13.1.5 SENSORY ANALYSIS 
The sensory evaluation gave mixed results as no markable differences 
were observed until 5 days of storage; after the 5th day of storage control Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology 111 
slices were preferred over the treated samples of fluencies 6, 8, and 4 J/cm2 
until 10th day of storage, and discrepancies in acceptability attributes for 
unhandled and pulsed light handled tomato samples were barely important, 
variations in sensory results between the samples tended to be less prominent. 
At that stage, judges favored sample slices subjected to increased fluences. 
Certain unfavorable quality characteristics, such as mealiness and dryness, 
were identified by several judges in several samples at random.58 
4.13.2 CARROTS 
The color, carotene, polyacetylene, and soluble sugar values of carrot slices 
were analyzed after they were afflicted to pulsed light (PL) therapies on either 
side “(total pulsed light fluencies of 2.26, 4.52, 5.41, 9.38, and 13.15 Joules/ 
cm2
).” When carrot slices were exposed to fluences of 2.26 and 4.52 Joules/ 
cm2
, higher concentrations of carotene were observed relative to unexposed 
carrots. Carrot slices were treated with PL to improve carotene content, poly￾acetylenes, and soluble sugars. When fluencies having a range from 2.26 to 
5.41 Joules/cm2
 were added to carrot slices, the luminosity of the peripheral 
cortex improved.2 Color changes in PL-treated carrot slices and the control 
slices were measured of the central stele (vascular tissue) and peripheral cortex 
layer; the results indicated that as the slices were shown to both 9.38 and 
13.15 Joules/cm2
, the lightness for the peripheral cortical layer of carrot slices 
reduced dramatically when compared to untreated samples. The browning 
index (BI) findings in the carrot cortex are prominently higher compared to 
vascular tissue when elevated pulsed light doses are implemented. The carrot 
cortex mostly comprises parenchyma cells and it may contain carotenes and 
sugars, which has a profound impact on the color of the peripheral cortex layer. 
When processing samples at 13.15 J/cm2
, the primary a* attributes (redness) 
of the central stele of sample slices decreased significantly, although there 
were no noticeable differences in the peripheral cortex layer. As increasing 
PL doses, a normal decline in b* attributes (yellowness) was found in both the 
central stele and peripheral cortex layers.2 
4.13.2.1 β-CAROTENE RETENTION IN PL-TREATED CARROT SLICES 
Total carotenoids were 1.8±80.05 mg β-carotene equivalents/g DW in control 
carrot samples. The content of total carotenoids of sample slices prominently 
raised compared to unhandled slices, when irradiating at 2.26 (123.2%) or 112 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
4.52 (112.1%) Joules/cm2
. But no further increment in fluency above 4.52 
Joules/cm2 showed a negligible impact on the initial β-carotene content of 
carrot slices.2 
4.13.2.2 POLY ACETYLENE RETENTION IN PL-TREATED CARROT 
SLICES 
According to different researchers, the amounts of individual polyacetylenes 
were 54.02 µg/g DW for FaOH, 23.18 µg/g DW for FaDOH, and 12.10 µg/g 
DW for FaDOAc in control carrot pieces. FaOH and FaDOAc had the same 
convictions. Following the application of PL doses of 2.26 kJ/cm2
, a signifi￾cant increase in FaDOH levels of 29.50 µg/g DW (127.1%) was observed. The 
same PL fluences resulted in the highest rate of FaOH and FaDOc preserva￾tion, with 94.7% (51.2 µg/g DW) and 84.7% (10.25 µg/g DW0), respectively.2 
4.13.2.3 IMPACT OF PULSED LIGHT ON THE SOLUBLE SUGARS 
FROM CARROT SLICES 
The sugar content was measured with the aid of NMR spectroscopy. In 
control and PL-treated carrot slices, fructose, sucrose, β-glucose, and 
α-glucose were found. Sucrose (187.9 mmol/g of dried weight [DW]) was 
the most concentrated sugar in untreated carrot slices, after that β- glucose 
(44.1 mmol/g of DW), fructose (16.5 mmol/g of DW), and α-glucose (26.9 
mmol/g of DW). The primary application of pulsed light did not affect the 
sucrose and α-glucose content of carrot slices, but it did have an effect on 
β-glucose and fructose during treatment. When processing at 2.26 J/cm2 PL 
doses, β-glucose concentrations were 19% raised in pulsed light treated slices 
than in control samples. When using 5.41 J/cm2 concentrations, however, the 
maximum fructose levels (17.5 mmol/g of DW) were reported. The findings 
indicated that the increase in sugar extraction found in pulsed light-handled 
samples may be due to free sugars available to extract as an outcome of PL 
hydrolyzing more complex carbohydrates.3 
4.13.3 RED PEPPER 
Chilling injury (CI) is among the most important factors preventing 
refrigeration in subtropical and tropical horticultural commodities like  
Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology 113 
pepper. A quick UV-C treatment before storage at low temperatures was 
found to be successful against CI. Red peppers (Capsicum annuum L.) are 
subjected to UV-C radiation (10 kJoules/m2
) for 21 days before being stored 
at 0°C. Chilling injury development, ascorbic (AA) and dehydroascorbic 
acids, and DPPH radical scavenging capacity are investigated during 
storage. The activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), 
ascorbate peroxidase (APX), and guaiacol peroxidase (GPX) were 
also assessed. While the fruit was preserved for more than 14 days, the 
CI increased rapidly, but it was considerably reduced in UV-C-handled 
peppers. UV-C irradiation did not impact the color of the fruit, but it did 
minimize weight loss. While the control had lower AA and DPPH radical 
scavenging capacity, this happened at the termination of storage, when 
chilling injury was already preceded. SOD, CAT, and APX behavior, on 
the other hand, were increased in UV-C treated samples within the first 2 
weeks of storage, when indications appeared. The findings indicate that 
UV-C application inhibits chilling injury and reductions in the weight 
of red pepper and that this may be due to improved antioxidant enzyme 
activity.8 
4.13.3.1 UV-C DOSE OPTIMIZATION 
Several studies have indicated a decrease in CI in red peppers handled with 
UV-C radiation. The dosage implemented (7 kJoules/m2
) was originally 
chosen to rely on decay control of fruit contained at 10°C, but it was later found 
that therapy was also effective in lowering chilling injury. Researchers first 
looked to see if a higher dosage would be any more effective. UV-C therapy 
of 10 and 20 kJ/m2
 was applied to red peppers, which were then stored at 
0°C. The chilling injury was more common in control peppers than in fruit 
handled with 10 or 20 kJ/m2
 UV-C. Fruit showed to a UV-C dosage of 10 kJ/ 
m2
 lost the least amount of weight (1.3%). The 10 kJ/m2
 therapy had a lower 
weight loss and a shorter exposure period to gain the same CI prevention 
gain.27,51, 
4.13.3.2 IMPACT OF UV-C THERAPY ON CHILLING INJURY 
COLOR AND WEIGHT LOSS 
The fruit was given a 10 kJ/m2
 treatment and held at 0°C. After 7 days, 
the control fruit started to exhibit Cl signs. After 21 days, UV-C applied 114 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
fruit had a low-moderate chilling injury index (2.5). The UV-C therapy 
has no detrimental effects on the appearance of the fruit’s surface and 
greatly decreased weight loss. It has to do with the decreased damage 
caused by UV-C penetration. The findings show that UV-C treatments 
of 10 kJ/m2
 will reduce pepper CI.8 Ascorbic acid (AA), dehydroascorbic 
acid (DHA), and DPPH radical scavenging potential in various experi￾ments have discovered that UV-B and UV-C radiation induces an increase 
in the deposition of AA and DHA. The AA concentration in both control 
and UV-C treated peppers was close to 800 mg/g at the start of the storage 
time in this sample. 
AA content was improved marginally in both control and UV-C 
irradiated fruit during the first week of storage.41 The 5% increase noted 
over the first 7 days of containing may be due to a minor advancement 
of fruit production, because the fruit was stored at 0°C. After 21 days 
of storage, no differences in AA were seen in UV-C irradiated fruits, 
while a decrease was observed in the untreated. Since ascorbic acid is 
particularly vulnerable to oxidation when injured, the increased decrement 
in untreated fruit may be attributed to the raised injury discovered. DHA 
made up less than 0.5% of the vit. C pool and did not differ substantially 
while containing. Even though AA content in control fruit declined over 
time, there was no concurrent accumulation of DHA, implying that further 
deterioration occurred quickly. At the early stages of CI growth, UV-C 
treatments haven’t induced significant changes in AA or DPPH radical 
scavenging capability. When the disorder’s manifestation was already 
advanced, UV-C treated peppers had a marginally higher AA and DPPH 
radical scavenging potential.8 
4.13.4 LETTUCE 
4.13.4.1 GAS COMPOSITION 
The densities of oxygen and carbon dioxide in containers of less processed 
‘‘Red Oak Leaf” lettuce kept in passive modified atmosphere packaging 
(MAP) varied over time and were influenced by the various treatments. 
In contrast to the control, UV-C treated commodity packages had a faster 
depletion of O2 and a faster rise in CO2
. In addition, the gas chemistry 
changed as the radiation exposure increased. Higher UV-C radiation doses 
result in higher CO2 levels and lower O2
 levels. UV type-C irradiation Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology 115 
induces respiratory discomfort in freshly cut ‘‘Red Oak Leaf” lettuce and it 
also raises its respiration rate, as previously stated.6 
4.13.5 YARD-LONG BEAN 
The fresh-cut Batonnet yard-long bean, when subjected to pulsed light 
treatment, has shown a reduction in microbial spoilage, as discussed earlier. 
The physical changes such as color and texture changes that occurred due to 
treatment are also discussed.
45 
4.13.5.1 TEXTURE 
Texture analysis shows loss of turgor of fresh-cut pulsed light treated samples 
as the tissue tenderization of the beans occurs. Due to the photothermal effect 
of the pulsed light, the loss of moisture occurs as the surface temperature 
is increased and as a result, the loss of crispness is observed in the beans. 
Analysis shows the impact of fluency of the PL on the loss of texture as 
the fluency of the pulsed light increased the loss of texture is increased, As 
compared to untreated samples, fresh-cut samples handled by reduced doses 
(1.8, 5.4, and 9.0 Joules/cm2
) have greater texture retention.45 
4.13.5.2 COLOR 
It is a critical factor for sensory and qualitative analysis. All treatments 
resulted in a decrease in L* value. Browning is suggested by a reduction 
in the L* value.32 Physical damage and wounding during preparation 
and processing can cause this, which increases respiration and ethylene 
production, as well as related enhancements in rates of different 
biochemical reactions liable for color variations that were triggered. 
Overall the pulsed light treatment failed to preserve the color of the 
fresh-cut yard-long bean.45 
4.14 FUTURE CHALLENGES AND SCOPE 
The effectiveness of pulsed light on smooth surfaces such as packaging 
materials; another area of study is the production of pulsed light for solid 116 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
foods having rugged surfaces, as well as granular substances such as 
grains, nuts, spices, and other granular materials. Further research into the 
applicability of photosensitization-based microbial load reduction in foods 
is necessary. A continuous and great amount of effort is required for the 
engineering design of the setup of the instrument for achieving minimal 
processing. This can be accomplished using conveyor mechanisms for solid 
article handling and continuous flow-through mechanisms for liquid objects. 
Product heating issues may be addressed using PL equipment with cooling 
systems, which are accounted for by the photothermal effect of pulsed light. 
Further research work is also required for the study and analysis of the toxic 
and unwanted byproducts formation during and post-treatment which could 
not be palatable.39,56 
4.15 SUMMARY 
The novel PL technique is a nonthermal, environmentally friendly tech￾nology that is promising for decontaminating food and surfaces in contact 
with foods, and packaging materials. PL has a bright future in the food 
industry, where it will improve the consistency of food by inactivating 
microorganisms like L. monocytogenes in a matter of seconds. PL, on the 
other hand, is one such technique that can counteract the harmful effects of 
typical thermal processing and the use of hazardous chemicals. Application 
of pulsed light for the sterilization of food products is quite difficult due 
to irregularities of food surfaces. This method has shown to be effective in 
minimizing peanut allergy symptoms. It should be looked at further to see 
how it can assist with other food allergies. Since this method is still new 
and has yet to be commercialized, it should be investigated for cost savings. 
In today’s culture, almost all value-added goods have a consumer niche, so 
processing, marketing, and analysis on fresh-cut fruits and vegetables are 
growing. Researchers and industry must collaborate to address the obstacles 
that obstruct the year-round distribution of high-quality fresh-cut fruits 
across the country. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to extend special thanks to the TEQIP-III project for 
providing funding for this work. Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology 117 
KEYWORDS 
• cut-vegetables 
decontamination 
fresh-cut fruits 
nonthermal processing 
physiochemical changes 
pulsed-light 
shelf-life 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
REFERENCES 
1. Abida, J.; Rayees, B.; Masoodi, F. A. Pulsed Light Technology: A Novel Method for 
Food Preservation. Int. Food Res. J. 2014, 21 (3), 839–848. 
2. Aguiló-Aguayo, I.; Gangopadhyay, N.; Lyng, J. G.; Brunton, N.; Rai, D. K. Impact of 
Pulsed Light on Color, Carotenoid, Polyacetylene and Sugar Content of Carrot Slices. 
Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2017, 42, 49–55. 
3. Aguiló-Aguayo, I.; Hossain, M. B.; Brunton, N.; Lyng, J.; Valverde, J.; Rai, D. K. 
Pulsed Electric Fields Pre-Treatment of Carrot Purees to Enhance Their Polyacetylene 
and Sugar Contents. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2014, 23, 79–86. 
4. Aguiló-Aguayo, Ingrid, Charles, F.; Renard, C. M. G. C.; Page, D.; Carlin, F. Pulsed Light 
Effects on Surface Decontamination, Physical Qualities and Nutritional Composition of 
Tomato Fruit. Postharv. Biol. Technol. 2013, 86, 29–36. 
5. Allende, A.; Marín, A.; Buendía, B.; Tomás-Barberán, F.; Gil, M. I. Impact of Combined 
Postharvest Treatments (UV-C Light, Gaseous O3, Superatmospheric O2 and High 
CO2) on Health Promoting Compounds and Shelf-Life of Strawberries. Postharv. Biol. 
Technol. 2007, 46 (3), 201–211. 
6. Allende, A.; McEvoy, J. L.; Luo, Y.; Artes, F.; Wang, C. Y. Effectiveness of Two-Sided 
UV-C Treatments in Inhibiting Natural Microflora and Extending the Shelf-Life of 
Minimally Processed Red Oak Leaf Lettuce. Food Microbiol. 2006, 23 (3), 241–249. 
7. Anderson, J. G.; Rowan, N. J.; MacGregor, S. J.; Fouracre, R. A.; Parish, O. Inactivation 
of Food-Borne Enteropathogenic Bacteria and Spoilage Fungi Using Pulsed-Light. 
IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 2000, 28 (1), 83–88. 
8. Andrade Cuvi, M. J.; Vicente, A. R.; Concellón, A.; Chaves, A. R. Changes in Red Pepper 
Antioxidants as Affected by UV-C Treatments and Storage at Chilling Temperatures. 
LWT—Food Sci. Technol., 2011, 44 (7), 1666–1671. 
9. Andrade-Cuvi, M. J.; Moreno, C.; Zaro, M. J.; Vicente, A. R.; Concellón, A. Improvement 
of the Antioxidant Properties and Postharvest Life of Three Exotic Andean Fruits by 
UV-C Treatment. J. Food Qual. 2017, 2017. 118 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
10. Artés-Hernández, F.; Robles, P. A.; Gómez, P. A.; Tomás-Callejas, A.; Artés, F. Low 
UV-C Illumination for Keeping Overall Quality of Fresh-Cut Watermelon. Postharvest 
Biol. Technol. 2010, 55 (2), 114–120. 
11. Avalos-Llano, K. R.; Martín-Belloso, O.; Soliva-Fortuny, R. Effect of Pulsed Light 
Treatments on Quality and Antioxidant Properties of Fresh-Cut Strawberries. Food 
Chem. 2018, 264, 393–400. 
12. Barbosa-Canovas, G. V.; Schaffner, D. W.; Pierson, M. D.; Zhang, Q. H. Special 
Supplement Kinetics of Microbial Inactivation for Alternative Food Processing 
Technologies (Pulsed Light Technology). J. Food Sci. 2000, 65, 82–85. 
13. Bialka, K. L.; Demirci, A. Efficacy of Pulsed UV-Light for the Decontamination of 
Escherichia coli O157:H7 and Salmonella spp. on Raspberries and Strawberries. J. 
Food Sci. 2008, 73 (5), 201–207. 
14. Bolton, J. R.; Linden, K. G. Standardization of Methods for Fluence (UV Dose) 
Determination in Bench-Scale UV Experiments. J. Environ. Eng. 2003, 129 (3), 209–215. 
15.	 CFR (Code of Federal Regulations) Title 21. https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/ 
cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?fr=179.41; Accessed on March 14, 2021. 
16. Charles, F.; Vidal, V.; Olive, F.; Filgueiras, H.; Sallanon, H. Pulsed Light Treatment 
as New Method to Maintain Physical and Nutritional Quality of Fresh-Cut Mangoes. 
Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2013, 18, 190–195. 
17. Cheigh, C. I.; Hwang, H. J.; Chung, M. S. Intense Pulsed Light and UV-C Treatments 
for Inactivating Listeria Monocytogenes on Solid Medium and Seafoods. Food Res. Int. 
2013, 54 (1), 745–752. 
18. Duarte-Molina, F.; Gómez, P. L.; Castro, M. A.; Alzamora, S. M. Storage Quality of 
Strawberry Fruit Treated by Pulsed Light: Fungal Decay, Water Loss and Mechanical 
Properties. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2016, 34, 267–274. 
19. Dunn, I. J. E.; Costa, R. La; Clark, R. W.; Mar, D.; John, F.; Pearlman, J. S.; Painchaud, 
F.; Hofmann, G. A. United States Patent (1) U. S. Patent. 19; 1989; pp 23. 
20. Erkan, M.; Wang, C. Y.; Krizek, D. T. (2001). UV-C Irradiation Reduces Microbial 
Populations and Deterioration in Cucurbita Pepo Fruit Tissue. Environmental and 
Experimental Botany, 2001, 45 (1), 1–9. 
21. Erkan, M.; Wang, S. Y.; Wang, C. Y. Effect of UV Treatment on Antioxidant Capacity, 
Antioxidant Enzyme Activity and Decay in Strawberry Fruit. Postharv. Biol. Technol. 
2008, 48 (2), 163–171. 
22. Fonseca, J. M.; Rushing, J. W. Effect of Ultraviolet-C Light on Quality and Microbial 
Population of Fresh-Cut Watermelon. Postharv. Biol. Technol. 2006, 40 (3), 256–261. 
23. Giese, N.; Darby, J. Sensitivity of Microorganisms to Different Wavelengths of UV 
Light: Implications on Modeling of Medium Pressure UV Systems. Water Res. 2000, 
34 (16), 4007–4013. 
24. Gómez, P. L.; Salvatori, D. M.; García-Loredo, A.; Alzamora, S. M. Pulsed Light 
Treatment of Cut Apple: Dose Effect on Color, Structure, and Microbiological Stability. 
Food Bioprocess Technol. 2012, 5 (6), 2311–2322. 
25. Gómez-López, V. M.; Devlieghere, F.; Bonduelle, V.; Debevere, J. Intense Light Pulses 
Decontamination of Minimally Processed Vegetables and Their Shelf-Life. Int. J. Food 
Microbiol. 2005b, 103 (1), 79–89. 
26. Gómez-López, V. M.; Devlieghere, F.; Bonduelle, V.; Debevere, J.Factors Affecting the 
Inactivation of Micro-Organisms By Intense Light Pulses. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2005a, 
99 (3), 460–470.  
Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology 119 
27. González-Aguilar, G. A.; Zavaleta-Gatica, R.; Tiznado-Hernández, M. E. Improving 
Postharvest Quality of Mango by UV-C Treatment. Postharv. Biol. Technol. 2007, 45 
(1), 108–116. 
28. Gutierrez, M. S.; Trinchero, G. D.; Cerri, A. M.; Vilella, F.; Sozzi, G. O. Different 
Responses of Goldenberry Fruit Treated at Four Maturity Stages with the Ethylene 
Antagonist 1-Methylcyclopropene. Postharv. Biol. Technol. 2008, 48 (2), 199–205. 
29. Ignat, A.; Manzocco, L.; Maifreni, M.; Bartolomeoli, I.; Nicoli, M. C. Surface 
Decontamination of Fresh-Cut Apple by Pulsed Light: Effects on Structure, Color and 
Sensory Properties. Postharv. Biol. Technol. 2014, 91, 122–127. 
30. Jacxsens, L.; Devlieghere, F.; Falcato, P.; Debevere, J. Behavior of Listeria Monocyto￾genes and Aeromonas spp. on Fresh-Cut Produce Packaged Under Equilibrium-Modified 
Atmosphere. J. Food Protection 1999, 62 (10), 1128–1135. 
31. Koh, P. C.; Noranizan, M. A.; Nur Hanani, Z. A.; Karim, R.; Rosli, S. Z. Application 
of Edible Coatings and Repetitive Pulsed Light for Shelf-Life Extension of Fresh-Cut 
Cantaloupe (Cucumis melo L.). Postharv. Biol. Technol. 2017, 129, 64–78. 
32. Kramer, B.; Muranyi, P. Effect of Pulsed Light on Structural and Physiological Properties 
of Listeria Innocua and Escherichia Coli. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2014, 116 (3), 596–611. 
33. Lagunas-Solar, M. C.; Piña, C.; MacDonald, J. D.; Bolkan, L. Development of Pulsed 
UV Light Processes for Surface Fungal Disinfection of Fresh Fruits. J. Food Protection 
2006, 69 (2), 376–384. 
34. Lamikanra, O.; Watson, M. A. Effects of Ascorbic Acid on Peroxidase and Polypheno￾loxidase Activities in Fresh-Cut Cantaloupe Melon. J. Food Sci. 2001, 66 (9), 1283–1286. 
35. Lamikanra, O.; Watson, M. A. Storage Effects on Lipase Activity in Fresh-Cut Cantaloupe 
Melon. J. Food Sci. 2004, 69 (2), 126–130. 
36. Lamikanra, O.; Watson, M. A. Temperature and Storage Duration Effects on Esterase 
Activity in Fresh-Cut Cantaloupe Melon. J. Food Sci. 2003, 68 (3), 790–793. 
37. Lamikanra, O.; Kueneman, D.; Ukuku, D.; Bett-Garber, K. L. Effect of Processing 
Under Ultraviolet Light on the Shelf-Life of Fresh-Cut Cantaloupe Melon. J. Food Sci. 
2005, 70 (9), 110–114. 
38. Luksiene, Z.; Buchovec, I.; Kairyte, K.; Paskeviciute, E.; Viskelis, P. High-Power Pulsed 
Light for Microbial Decontamination of Some Fruits and Vegetables with Different 
Surfaces. J. Food Agric. Environ. 2012, 10 (3–4), 162–167. 
39. Mandal, R.; Mohammadi, X.; Wiktor, A.; Singh, A.; Singh, A. P. Applications of Pulsed 
Light Decontamination Technology in Food Processing: An Overview. Appl. Sci. 
(Switzerland), 2020, 10 (10). 
40. Manzocco, L.; Da Pieve, S.; Maifreni, M. Impact of UV-C Light On Safety and Quality 
of Fresh-Cut Melon. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2011, 12 (1), 13–17. 
41. Martínez, S.; López, M.; González-Raurich, M.; Alvarez, A. B. The Effects of Ripening 
Stage and Processing Systems on Vitamin C Content in Sweet Peppers (Capsicum 
annuum L.). Int. J. Food Sci. Nutr. 2005, 56 (1), 45–51. 
42. Moseley, B. E. B. The Repair of Damaged DNA in Irradiated Bacteria. Adv. Microb. 
Physiol. 1968, 2 (C), 173–194. 
43. Nguyen-the, C.; Carlin, F. The Microbiology of Minimally Processed Fresh Fruits and 
Vegetables. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 1994, 34 (4), 25–30. 
44. Nigro, F.; Ippolito, A.; Lima, G. Use of UV-C Light To Reduce Botrytis Storage Rot of 
Table Grapes. Postharv. Biol. Technol. 1998, 13 (3), 171–181. 120 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
45. Nor-Hasni, H.; Noranizan, M. A.; Roselina, K. Pulsed Light Treatment as an Alternative 
Technology To Extend Shelf-Life Of Fresh-Cut Yardlong bean (Vigna unguiculata). Int. 
Food Res. J. 2016, 23 (6), 2588–2593. 
46. Oms-Oliu, G.; Aguiló-Aguayo, I.; Martín-Belloso, O.; Soliva-Fortuny, R. Effects of 
Pulsed Light Treatments on Quality and Antioxidant Properties of Fresh-Cut Mushrooms 
(Agaricus bisporus). Postharv. Biol. Technol. 2010, 56 (3), 216–222. 
47. Oms-Oliu, G.; Martín-Belloso, O.; Soliva-Fortuny, R. Pulsed Light Treatments for Food 
Preservation: A Review. Food Bioprocess Technol. 2010, 3 (1), 13–23. 
48.	 Outbreak of Cyclosporiasis—Northern Virginia; Washington, DC; Baltimore, MD: 
Metropolitan Area, 1997. (n.d.). https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ 
00048551.htm (accessed on Mar 14, 2021). 
49. Pataro, G.; Muñoz, A.; Palgan, I.; Noci, F.; Ferrari, G.; Lyng, J. G. Bacterial Inactivation 
in Fruit Juices Using a Continuous Flow Pulsed Light (PL) System. Food Res. Int. 2011, 
44 (6), 1642–1648. 
50. Pintó, E.; Lentheric, I.; Vendrell, M.; Larrigaudière, C. Role of Fermentative and 
Antioxidant Metabolisms in the Induction of Core Browning in Controlled-Atmosphere 
Stored Pears. J. Sci. Food Agric. 2001, 81 (3), 364–370. 
51. Pristijono, P.; Golding, J. B.; Bowyer, M. C. Postharvest UV-C Treatment, Followed by 
Storage in a Continuous Low-Level Ethylene Atmosphere, Maintains The Quality of 
Mango Fruit Stored at 20°C. Horticulturae 2019, 5 (1), 1–12. 
52. Proctor, A. Alternatives to Conventional Food...—Google Scholar (n.d.), 2011. https:// 
scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&as_sdt=0%2C5&q=Proctor%2C+A.+2011.+Altern 
atives+to+Conventional+Food+Processing.+In+Proctor&btnG= (accessed on Mar 14, 
2021). 
53. Ramos-Villarroel, A. Y.; Martín-Belloso, O.; Soliva-Fortuny, R. Bacterial Inactivation 
and Quality Changes in Fresh-Cut Avocado Treated with Intense Light Pulses. Eur. 
Food Res. Technol. 2011, 233 (3), 395–402. 
54. Richman, P. E. S. United States Patent (19), 1984. 
55. Rowan, N. J.; Gregor, S. J. M. A. C.; Anderson, J. G.; Fouracre, R. A.; Ilvaney, L. M. 
Pulsed-Light Inactivation of Food-Related Microorganisms. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 
J. 1999, 65 (3), 1312–1315. 
56. Rowan, Neil J. Pulsed Light as an Emerging Technology to Cause Disruption for 
Food and Adjacent Industries—Quo vadis? Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2019, 88 (Nov), 
316–332. 
57. Slieman, T. A.; Nicholson, W. L. Artificial and Solar UV Radiation Induces Strand 
Breaks and Cyclobutane Pyrimidine Dimers in Bacillus Subtilis Spore DNA. Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol. 2000, 66 (1), 199–205. 
58. Valdivia-Nájar, C. G.; Martín-Belloso, O.; Soliva-Fortuny, R. Impact of Pulsed Light 
Treatments and Storage Time on the Texture Quality of Fresh-Cut Tomatoes. Innov. 
Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2018, 45, 29–35. 
59. Vicente, A. R.; Pineda, C.; Lemoine, L.; Civello, P. M.; Martinez, G. A.; Chaves, A. R. 
UV-C Treatments Reduce Decay, Retain Quality and Alleviate Chilling Injury in Pepper. 
Postharv. Biol. Technol. 2005, 35 (1), 69–78. 
60. Viskelis, P.; Luksiene, Z.; Buchovec, I. Impact of High-Power Pulsed Light on Microbial 
Contamination, Health Promoting Components and Shelf-Life of Strawberries. Food 
Biotechnol. 2013, 51 (2), 284–292. Scope of Novel Pulsed Light Technology 121 
61. Wekhof, A.; Trompeter, F.-J.; Franken, O. Pulsed UV Disintegration (PUVD): A New 
Sterilisation Mechanism for Packaging and Broad Medical-Hospital Applications. First 
Int. Conf. Ultraviolet Technol. 2001, Table 1, 1–15. 
62. Xu, W.; Chen, H.; Huang, Y.; Wu, C. Decontamination of Escherichia coli O157: H7 on 
Green Onions Using Pulsed Light (PL) and PL-Surfactant-Sanitizer Combinations. Int. 
J. Food Microbiol. 2013, 166 (1), 102–108. Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing: Methods and Strategies. Megh R. Goyal, & 
Faizan Ahmad (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
CHAPTER 5
 
SANITIZERS FOR DECONTAMINATION 
OF FRESH PRODUCE: ALTERNATIVE 
TO CHLORINE 
ZAHRA H. MOHAMMAD, SALAM A. IBRAHIM, and 
FAIZAN AHMAD 
ABSTRACT 
Postharvest washing and disinfection of fruits and vegetables is the most 
critical step in minimizing the risk of microbial contamination and enhancing 
the quality of produce. A common commercial disinfectant is chlorine. 
However, chlorine leaves chemical residues on the surface of produce. 
Consequently, chemical and organic acids (OAs) are being used for alterna￾tive postharvest disinfection. Most of these methods are recognized as safe 
(GRAS) by the FDA and result in no harmful byproducts. Additionally, some 
of these disinfection methods have been more effective than the chlorine 
while enhancing the quality and extending the shelf life of produce. 
5.1 INTRODUCTION 
With increasing consumer awareness of healthy foods and their benefits, the 
demand for fresh fruits and vegetables (FAV) has increased dramatically.12,39 
However, FAV are highly perishable and deteriorate rapidly due to spoilage 
and pathogenic microorganisms. FAV provide ideal conditions for the 
growth of natural micro flora, yeast, and molds, including moisture, pH, and 
nutrient that play a vital role in accelerating microbial growth. In addition, 
inadequate storage and handling also encourage microbial growth.37124 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
FAV typically become contaminated with pathogenic microorganisms 
at various points during harvesting, postharvesting, storage, and handling18 
and can thus become vehicles for transmitting pathogenic microorganisms 
to cause foodborne illnesses. For example, FAV have been associated with 
many foodborne outbreaks12, such as, those related to pathogenic E. coli, 
Salmonella, L. monocytogens, and norovirus. The products mostly linked to 
those outbreaks were from leafy greens that had been consumed raw or are 
minimally processed.12 
Postharvest washing and sanitizing have been useful in reducing the 
spoilage and pathogens from FAV, extending the shelf life and retaining the 
quality. The most common commercial sanitizing agent for FAV is chlorine 
applied in concentrations ranging from 50 to 200 ppm for ~5 min. Chlorine 
is a popular sanitizer because it is easy to use, inexpensive, available in 
three forms (powder, liquid, gas), and effective against certain microorgan￾isms.6,10,13,39 However, its effectiveness can be greatly diminished by the 
presence of organic materials, concentration, the application time limits, and 
harmful chemical byproducts, such as (HCL, H).6,39 Therefore, the application 
of alternative chemical or nonchemical sanitizers is vital for the food industry 
to ensure safety, extend the shelf life, enhance affordability, and avoid poten￾tially harmful chemical byproducts. 
This chapter explores the effectiveness of chemical disinfectants and 
organic acids (OAs) that are currently used or that could be used as an alter￾native treatment to chlorine. In addition, authors have explored the antimi￾crobial mechanisms of these alternative applications to ensure the safety and 
quality of fresh FAV and at the same time remove harmful pesticide residues. 
5.2 CHEMICAL DISINFECTANTS FOR FRUITS AND VEGETABLES: 
AN OVERVIEW 
Due to the increasing consumer attention toward the nutritional and health 
benefits of fresh produce, the demand for this food commodity has increased 
dramatically in recent years. However, cases of foodborne illnesses continue 
to be connected with consumption of fresh produce, particularly leafy greens.5 
The common commercial technique for postharvest washing of produce 
employs chlorine solutions.5,6 However, in commercial practice, chlorine has 
been associated with a number of byproducts and chemical residues, some 
of which are related to the possible formation of carcinogenic chlorinated 
compounds in water.5 Sanitizers for Decontamination of Fresh Produce 125 
Consequently, the produce industry is continually seeking effective alter￾native disinfection methods that are safer and more environment friendly. 
Such alternative disinfection methods for FAV may reduce the risk of food￾borne illnesses from food and food contact at commercial levels with no 
concern regarding harmful chemical byproducts. 
In addition, the new techniques should retain the product quality and 
prolong the shelf life while inhibiting spoilage and pathogenic microbial 
growth in all production and distribution chain steps. Chemical disinfection 
with calcium-based compounds, chlorine dioxide, hydrogen peroxide, and 
peroxidic acid are examples of chlorine alternative disinfectants. OAs, such 
as, lactic acid, acetic acid, and citric acid are being used as an alternative 
to chlorine. Some of these alternative antimicrobial agents have shown to 
be more effective than chlorine, and their applications are increasing as 
postharvest and handling sanitizers.8 
For example, calcium lactate has been proven to maintain the quality of 
products and has also been tested as a disinfection agent and found to be 
effective in reducing natural microbial levels without leaving chemical resi￾dues.6,30,40 Previously, calcium lactate (0.5–2%) has been used as a firming 
agent for the produce. It has also shown that calcium lactate reduced coliform, 
aerobic bacteria, yeast, and mold populations in fresh cut jackfruit.6
 Calcium 
lactate could therefore be an excellent alternative to chlorine because it does 
not leave chemical byproducts. 
Another chemical that could replace chlorine for washing FAV is chlorine 
dioxide (CIO2
), a stable dissolved gas used as an alternative to chlorine for 
water treatment.4 Chlorine dioxide has high water solubility and higher 
oxidant capacity, and lower reactivity with organic matter, making it a good 
option for decontamination of produce.4
 However, it is unstable, and explo￾sive, with a concentration of over 10%. Therefore, it should be used with 
extreme caution. 
Other alternative chemical agents that have been shown to effectively 
reduce different microorganisms on various produce include: hydrogen 
peroxide and peroxidic acid. Additionally, OA (such as lactic acid, acetic 
acid, and citric acid) are widely used as antimicrobials against numerous 
microorganisms. However, the antimicrobial efficacy of both chemical 
disinfectants and OA depends on many parameters, including susceptibility 
to specific microorganisms, fruit or vegetable topography, their chemical 
composition, and concentration and contact time. More detailed informa￾tion about each chemical or OA treatment is discussed separately in this 
section. Figure 5.1 shows the antimicrobial activities of chemical and OA on 
microbial cells. 126 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
FIGURE 5.1 Mode of antimicrobial action of chemical and OA against bacterial cell. 
5.3 ALTERNATIVE CHEMICAL DISINFECTANTS FOR FRESH FRUITS 
AND VEGETABLES 
Chlorine is a common disinfectant for FAV and is used in different 
forms.6,10,13,39 The mechanism of its germicidal or antimicrobial effects is 
by producing active hypochlorous (HOCl) acid, and increasing the level of 
solution pH. However, (HOCl) is the most active antimicrobial compound, 
and it is formed after chlorine (Cl) reacts with water. HOCl is a weak acid 
that can be further disassociated to hypochlorite ions. 
Therefore, the primary mechanism of action begins, when HOCl pene
trates the microbial cell wall and membrane and oxidizes various cellular 
compounds of microbial cell. This process causes the internal cellular pH 
to decrease, resulting in the inactivation of the cell function. Finally, the 
­
process leads the cell to pump H+
 ions out of the cell. After disassociation 
of HOCl, the resulting product OCl with a negative charge oxidizes the cell 
wall components. Overall, chlorine can create significant damage to the cell 
and inactivates the cell functions.12 The following reaction describes the 
mechanism of chlorine: 
Cl + H O → HOCl + H+ + Cl 2 2 
HOCl → H+ + OCl − (5.1) 
However, the effectiveness of chlorine highly depends on pH. For 
example, at high pH, HOCl dissociates into OCl–
 ions, but OCl–
 is ineffective Sanitizers for Decontamination of Fresh Produce 127 
against pathogens. Additionally, byproducts and chemical residues are usually 
formed in the presence of natural organic substances.6,39 Such chemical 
byproducts are formed during chlorination due to the reactions that occur 
with organic substances. 
Therefore, the formation, amount, and type of chemical byproducts are 
highly dependent on the concentration of chlorine, reaction time, tempera￾ture, and pH.6
 Some of these byproducts and chemical residues are harmful 
to human health and may form carcinogenic chlorinated compounds in 
water.5 Therefore, some chemical and OA are discussed, including calcium 
lactate, CIO2
, hydrogen peroxide, peroxidic acid, lactic acid, acetic acid, and 
citric acid. 
5.3.1 CHLORINE DIOXIDE 
Chlorine dioxide (ClO2
) is another alternative sanitizing agent for FAV. 
ClO2 is a stable dissolved gas that has high water solubility and oxidant 
capacity for water treatment.4
 It can be a good sanitizing agent for fruits and 
vegetables decontamination because of its low sensitivity to organic matter.4 
However, careful attention should be given when using ClO2
 as a disinfectant 
as it is unstable and explosive with a concentration of >10%. Therefore, the 
concentration of using ClO2
 must not exceed 3 ppm; and after treatment with 
ClO2
, the produce should be rinsed with water.35 
ClO2 is a powerful oxidizing agent and is 2.5-folds more efficient than 
the chlorine as an antimicrobial.33 The mechanism of antimicrobial activity 
of ClO2
 is based on its ability to destabilize cell membranes by reacting with 
amino acids, which cause the interruption of protein synthesis, oxidation of 
DNA, and damage to critical elements.43 However, like any other chemical 
disinfectants, the microbial decontamination efficiency of ClO2
 depends on 
antimicrobial susceptibility of particular species, the composition of produce, 
concentration, holding time, and facility storage conditions.12 
The use of ClO2
 (e.g., chloramines) can reduce the formation of chlorinated 
byproducts during primary disinfection. However, the production of chlorine 
dioxide, its decomposition, and reaction with nonorganic matters (NOM) 
can lead to the formation of byproducts. One of the byproducts is chlorite 
(ClO2
–
), a compound that is of health concern. Currently, the maximum 
allowable concentration of residual ClO2
 as established by the FDA is 3 
ppm for postharvest washing of produce. This level of ClO2
 concentration 
ensures no production of harmful byproducts. However, a concentration 
of 5 ppm can be employed commercially since the concentration of ClO2  
128 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
decreases when it comes in contact with organic material.12 On the other 
hand, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has set a different standard 
for ClO2
 effluent returning to the watershed. Currently, the EPA standard for 
ClO2
 maximum residual disinfectant level (MRDL) is 0.8 ppm. 
Overall, ClO2
 confers more advantages for the disinfection of produce 
than does chlorine alone. For example, ClO2 is not as affected by organic 
matter as chlorine; it is more selective at inactivation, does not generate 
chlorinated byproducts (such as trihalomethanes), is less corrosive 
compared to chlorine, and is not impacted by pH. However, there are still 
some limitations that make ClO2
 not the ideal alternative options to chlorine 
including an increase in salinity in soil due to the generation of byproduct 
that is sodium based and the limited concentration of effluent residual 0.8 
ppm to control chlorate and chlorite disinfection byproducts in the field. In 
addition, the application of ClO2
 requires storage of two separate compounds 
that must be mixed prior to application (it has to be generated on site), and 
finally the cost.32 
The production of ClO2
 gas is a result of the reaction of sodium chlorite 
with an acid. Depending on the manufacturing process, ClO2
 may have 
residual sodium, which can negatively impact fruits or vegetables by changing 
the sensorial and visual qualities. The formula below shows the production of 
ClO2
 without residual sodium: 
NaClO + H+ ↔ HClO ↔ ClO (5.2) 2 2 2 
Sodium Chlorite acid Chlorous acid Chlorine Dioxide 
5.3.2 CALCIUM-BASED COMPOUNDS 
Solutions containing calcium-based compounds are mainly used to control 
firmness and to extend the shelf life of fresh produce, especially delicate 
fruits.6,39 Calcium lactate is one of the most important calcium-based 
compounds that have antimicrobial properties.30 The antimicrobial proper￾ties of this compound are because of its capability to interrupt microbial 
transport phenomena.40 
Calcium lactate Ca [(CH)CHOHCOO]2
 has two lactate anions and two 
calcium cations (Ca+
). It has been recognized as safe (GRAS) by the FDA and 
has been used as a firming agent.30 Calcium lactate has shown to maintain the 
quality of products and has also been tested as a disinfection agent and found 
to be effective in reducing natural microbial levels without leaving chemical 
residues.6,30,40  
 
Sanitizers for Decontamination of Fresh Produce 129 
Calcium lactate with the concentration of (0.5–2%) has been used as 
a firming agent for produce (such as strawberries, cantaloupes, and other 
fruits).29 It has been observed that calcium lactate reduced the aerobic 
bacteria, coliform, yeast, and mold populations by approximately 85% to 
99.6% from fresh cut jackfruit for up to 5 days of storage.6
 It has also been 
shown that calcium lactate possesses the same effectiveness as chlorine in 
reducing microbial counts on fresh cut lettuce and carrots.39 
It has been suggested that the mechanism of the antimicrobial action of 
calcium lactate is based on the concentration of calcium oxide (alkaline pH 
from 12 to 13) in the solution.6
 It was also suggested that the production of 
oxygen species such as superoxide anions could be responsible for the anti￾microbial activity.6 Thus, calcium lactate or other calcium-based compounds 
could be a promising alternative to chlorine. 
5.3.3 HYDROGEN PEROXIDE 
Hydrogen peroxide (H2
O2
, also called hydrogen dioxide) is a colorless gas 
at room temperature and is generally recognized as safe (GRAS) for the 
application in foods.13 H2
O2
 has bacteriostatic and bactericidal activity due to 
its high oxidation potential.23 In addition, it has a broad spectrum of antimi￾crobial activity against many microorganisms including protozoal cysts and 
bacterial endospores, which give H2
O2
 an advantage over other disinfectant 
agents.27,31 Therefore, H2
O2
 is widely used for FAV as disinfection and sani￾tizing agent to reduce microbial loads.1,10 Another advantage of H2
O2
 is that 
in the presence of water, it decomposes to water and oxygen, making H2
O2 
eco-friendly with no toxic effects or harmful compounds.10 
2H O 2 2 → 2H O2 + O2 (5.3) 
Hydrogen Peroxide Water Oxygen 
Moreover, H2
O2 does not react with organic matter, does not release 
harmful byproducts, and any chemical residue that remains after treatment is 
easily removed by rinsing with water.1,13,23 Additionally, H2
O2
 can be used as 
a liquid or as a gas to disinfect or sanitize FAV.31 However, the effectiveness 
of H2
O2
 is highly influenced by its level of concentration. A concentration 
ranging from 1 to 5% has been used to disinfect and sanitize food and 
packaging materials.10 For example, a concentration of 5% has shown to 
be effective and has resulted in 3 or more log reduction of microorganisms 
when used for washing apples at a temperature range from 50 to 60°C or at 
a temperature range of 70–80°C for cantaloupe.23  
130 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
H2
O2
 also effectively reduced pathogenic microorganisms on a large 
variety of FAV including tomatoes, oranges, whole grapes, mushrooms, 
prunes, melons, bell peppers, and zucchini.40 However, a concentration of 1% 
has been shown to be ineffective against some pathogenic microorganisms, 
depending on exposure time and temperature, and type of FAV.23 
The mechanism of H2
O2
 antimicrobial activity against pathogens and 
spoilage microorganisms is based on its strong oxidizing ability and capacity 
to produce other cytotoxic oxidative species such as singlet oxygen species, 
hydroxyl radicals, and to damage membrane lipids and DNA.13,27 As a result, 
H2
O2
 could be an affordable and environment friendly alternative disinfection 
agent for postharvest washing of produce due to its high antimicrobial capacity 
against a wide spectrum of spoilage and pathogenic microorganisms.1,23 
The only limitation is that the higher concentration of H2
O2
 causes 
browning in some FAV, especially when the dipping method is used to wash 
the products.23 Overall, H2
O2
 is an effective alternative to chlorine when 
combined with other treatment. 
5.3.4 PERACETIC ACID (PAA) 
Peracetic acid (PAA, also known as peroxyacetic acid) is produced by 
mixing hydrogen peroxide and acetic acid. PAA is widely used in postharvest 
washing. PAA was first used in 1950 as a disinfection agent for washing fruit 
and vegetable surfaces in the field and postharvest activity.21 The FDA has 
approved the application of PAA as a sanitizer for food contact surfaces and 
washing of FAV, poultry, seafood, and meat.14–16 
PAA has also been used as a disinfectant on food equipments, such as, 
dairy and cheese processing facilities.23 Therefore, PAA is a promising 
alternative to chlorine for the food industry because it has strong oxidizing 
abilities and does not generate chemical residues or harmful by-products.48 
PAA could thus be an ideal alternative to chlorine.22 
The mechanism of action of PAA is identical to that of chlorine. PAA and 
acetic acid are generated instead of hypochlorous acid, with the added benefit 
of hydrogen peroxide as an additional oxidizing compound, which decreases 
the pH of water as more PAA is added. Moreover, a concentration ranging 
from 0.03 to 2% solution is normally acceptable for PAA to produce a strong 
oxidation activity when used as an antimicrobial agent and disinfectant for 
FAV. PAA is stronger than hydrogen peroxide because PAA is not affected by 
catalase and peroxidase, the enzymes that break down hydrogen peroxide.17 
Moreover, the antimicrobial activity of PAA is not affected by the presence  
 
Sanitizers for Decontamination of Fresh Produce 131 
of organic matter or food residue when the solution retains the same acidic 
pH level.23 
The mechanism of disinfectant activity of PAA is based on oxidation by 
the generation of reactive oxygen species.28 The oxidation targets the bacterial 
cell membranes consisting of fatty, lipid-type chemistry for peroxides. Once 
inside the cell, PAA causes destruction of cell functionality by oxidizing 
proteins, DNA, enzymes, and metabolites, finally causing rapid death of the 
bacterium.48 
The resultant products of the PAA antimicrobial action are acetic acid and 
peroxide, which are typically not harmful to humans. However, the antimi￾crobial efficiency of PAA depends on exposure time, concentration, and type 
of microorganisms.48 The generation of PAA is shown below: 
2 2 + CH CO H H O 3 2 ↔ CH CO H 3 + H O 3 2 (5.4) 
Hydrogen Peroxide Acetic Acid. Peracetic Acid Water 
The primary advantage of PAA as an alternative disinfectant to chlorine 
is that PAA is more resistant to organic matter than chlorine, yet still loses its 
effectiveness in the presence of high levels of organic matter. Other advantage 
of PAA over chlorine is that PAA effectiveness does not depend on pH; thus, 
the application does not need pH control, and usually retains its activity at 
temperatures from 0 to 40°C and pH from 1 to 8. For these reasons, PAA has 
been widely used in food industry from the past several years. 
5.3.5 ORGANIC ACIDS AND MODE OF ACTION AS 
DISINFECTANT: AN OVERVIEW 
OAs (such as acetic acid, lactic acid, citric acid, and others) are natural 
products and do not produce toxic or harmful compounds.5,9 As a result, 
OA are approved as generally recognized as safe (GRAS) by FDA.26 The 
antimicrobial activity of each OA is different and is highly dependent on 
the acidity of each one.6,9 The antimicrobial activities of OA are primarily 
biostatic but not biocidal, and relatively high concentrations are needed in 
order for them to be effective.6 
OA are short chain OA that include one or more carboxyl groups. They 
are called OA because they include organic components that have acidic 
characteristics including aliphatic and aromatic compounds.9 The acidity of 
OA is related to their carboxylic group –COOH.26 Therefore, some OA that 
contain strong acids are not applicable for food matrices.13 132 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
OA possess strong antimicrobial activities against a broad spectrum of 
microorganisms.21,41 Therefore, OA (such as lactic, acetic, and citric acids) 
can be used as antimicrobial agent to prevent food spoilage. They have been 
used as a food additive and preservative by being added to food products to 
prolong the shelf life. OA can also be used as an antioxidant to prevent visual 
changes (such as color and texture), or chemical changes (such as, flavor).13 
In recent years, the interest in using OA as antimicrobial agents for FAV has 
increased. 
The mechanism of antimicrobial activity of OA is based on reducing the 
pH levels both outside and inside bacterial cells, which lead to acidification 
of the cells and disturbs membrane transport.38 Briefly, the undissociated OA 
molecules can easily penetrate the microbial cell membrane and reduce the 
pH of the cell’s interior, resulting in an acidic pH instead of a neutral pH. 
This process results in the inactivation of intracellular enzymes and dysfunc￾tion of cells’ metabolic reactions, and ultimately, cell death.47,21 
However, the use of OA as antimicrobial agents has some limitations, 
including low antimicrobial activity because the application of OA for FAV 
requires low concentrations and short exposure time. Otherwise, OA can 
adversely affect the color, flavor, and odor of food products at high concen￾trations or with long exposure time.25,41 Thus, OA could be used as an alter￾native to chlorine if used in combination with other disinfection methods.12 
5.4 SELECTED ORGANIC ACIDS AS AN ALTERNATIVE TO 
CHLORINE TO DISINFECT FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
5.4.1 ACETIC ACID 
Acetic acid (CH3COOH) is an OA that has been widely used as a food 
preservative for decades.25 Researchers have investigated the possible use of 
acetic acid as an antimicrobial agent against many pathogenic microorgan￾isms, including Salmonella and E. coli. In addition, acetic acid has been used 
in the poultry industry as an antimicrobial against spoilage and pathogenic 
bacteria in order to improve the quality of poultry meat.25 
Many research studies have shown the potential antimicrobial activity of 
acetic acid against pathogens in FAV through empirical experiments. Kang et 
al.24 observed that the addition 3g/L of acetic acid into culture media resulted 
in the complete inhibition of the growth of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides. 
These authors also noticed that this fungus was able to grow again, when 
acetic acid was removed from the media.24 Sanitizers for Decontamination of Fresh Produce 133 
In the past two decades, the application of acidic acid and its effectiveness 
for controlling spoilage in fruits and vegetables has been investigated, and 
most of the reported results have been encouraging.13 For example, acetic 
acid was effective against spoilage microorganisms on tomato when treated 
via dipping in a 4% acetic acid solution or exposed to vapor acetic acid at 40 
µL/L.2
 In another study, acetic acid with a concentration of 4–6% was effec￾tive against different kinds of fungus, including B. cinerea, M. fructicola, 
and P. expansum that cause spoilage on some fruits, such as strawberries 
and apples.42 However, acidic acid at high concentration resulted in adverse 
effects on the quality and sensory characteristics of fruits; and at low concen￾tration may be ineffective at completely controlling decay microorganisms.13 
The acetic acid at 10% concentration for washing cabbage for 20 min 
reduced about 65 to 79% of different pesticides, such as, chlorpyrifos, chlo￾rothalonil, p,p-DDT, and cypermethrin.46 
Radwan et al.38 also observed that washing sweet pepper, hot pepper, 
and eggplant with 2% acetic acid for 1 min reduced 60–100% profenofos 
residues from these vegetables. These are some examples of useful studies 
that have demonstrated the effectiveness of acetic acid and its potential use 
as an alternative disinfectant to chlorine. However, product quality must still 
be considered as high concentrations always result in adverse effects. Thus, 
combining acetic acid with other disinfection methods could provide more 
effective and promising alternative disinfection for FAV. 
5.4.2 LACTIC ACID 
Lactic acid is a weak OA that has been commonly used in the food industry 
for food preservation and for sanitizing meat.25 The efficacy of the antimi￾crobial activity of lactic acid is highly dependent on the pH of the washing 
solution. Studies have shown the potential of lactic acid as an antimicrobial 
agent to control spoilage and pathogenic microorganisms on FAV. 
Neal et al.34 investigated the efficacy of different disinfection methods 
in reducing E. coli O157:H7 and Salmonella typhimurium on fresh spinach 
leaves. These authors treated spinach leaves with calcium hypochlorite (200 
mg/L), PAA (80 mg/L), ozonated water (1 mg/L), ClO2
 gas (2.1 mg/L), and 
2% lactic acid and they found that lactic acid (2%) spraying for 15s at 55°C 
was the most effective treatment for reducing both pathogens compared to 
other approaches. 
Another study reported a reduction range from 1.5 to 2.3 log CFU/g for E. 
coli O157: H7, Salmonella Typhimurium, and L. monocytogenes on sprouts 134 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
dipped in lactic acid solution at a concentration of 0.5 to 2.0%.45 Similarly, 
other researchers showed that lactic acid with a concentration of only 0.2% 
for 1 min reduced the population of Y. enterocolitica and E. coli O157: H7 
on tomatoes by 5.2 and 2.5 log CFU/g, respectively.11 
Therefore, it is evident that lactic acid could be an alternative disinfectant 
to chlorine as the results from the tomato study were comparable to those in 
which a chlorine concentration of 200 ppm reduced E. coli O157:H7 and Y. 
enterocolitica on tomatoes by 2.6 and 5.13 log CFU/g.6
 Moreover, another 
study demonstrated that lactic acid treatment for 15 s reduced pathogenic 
bacteria up to 3 log CFU/ cm2
 on cantaloupes and 3.6 log CFU/cm2
 on bell 
peppers.3 
However, lactic acid was only able to reduce aerobic bacteria by 0.77 log 
CFU/g on broccoli sprouts treated with 2% for 2 min.7 Thus, the concentration 
of 2% was not effective to reduce microorganisms on the sprouts. In addition, 
increasing the exposure time to 20 min did not solve the issue as such a 
high concentration significantly affected the quality of treated products, 
including color and visual appearance.41 To this end, lactic acid could be an 
alternative replacement for chlorine, but the resultant product quality should 
be considered. The efficacy of lactic acid as a disinfectant for FAV could 
be enhanced, when it is used in combination with other treatments at low 
concentrations. 
For example, one study showed that combining ascorbic acid at different 
concentrations and 0.2% lactic acid prohibited the growth of E. coli O157:H7 
in growth media and carrot juice.44 Similarly, the mixture of copper and 
lactic acid resulted in a significant reduction of E. coli O157:H7 up to 3.93 
and 3.39 log on the surface of lettuce and tomato, respectively.20,44 
5.4.3 CITRIC ACID 
Citric acid is widely used as a preservative and flavoring agent in the food 
industry.32 It is also used as an antimicrobial agent against spoilage and 
pathogenic microorganisms. The mechanism of the antimicrobial activity of 
citric acid is based on the reduction of pH outside and inside microbial cells. 
For example, the pH of internal microbial cells is typically maintained close 
to neutral. 
Citric acid or other OA change the external pH; consequently, the internal 
pH is also dropped and lead to the alteration of microbial cell membrane 
structure, such as proteins and phospholipids. Ultimately, the permeability of 
the membrane and cell metabolites are affected, leading to microbial death.12 Sanitizers for Decontamination of Fresh Produce 135 
Park et al.36 investigated the effects of different OA against pathogenic 
E. coli O157:H7, Salmonella Typhimurium, and L. monocytogenes on apples 
and lettuce, and on the quality of the produce. Among the different OA used, 
lactic acid and citric acid at a concentration of 2% for 10 min were most 
effective against pathogens, E. coli O157:H7, Salmonella Typhimurium, and 
L. monocytogenes that were reduced by 2.56 and 3.42 log CFU/fruit.36 
The results from another study indicated that pathogenic Staphylococcus 
aureus was reduced by 2.7 to 3.9 log CFU/g on tabbouleh salad treated with 
citric acid and acetic acid at a concentration of 03–1.4% after 7 days of 
storage at 21°C.12 Hence, citric acid can be used to reduce microorganism 
load on FAV,41 and could be a potential alternative to chlorine as a disinfection 
agent. However, there are still some limitations that need to be considered 
when using citric acid as an antimicrobial agent at higher concentrations, as 
its application can negatively impact the color and sensory characteristics, 
and overall product appearance. 
5.5 SUMMARY 
Disinfection of FAV after harvest and during handling and storage is essential 
for controlling spoilage and pathogenic microorganisms and extending 
shelf life of the product. Chlorine is a typical disinfectant that is used for 
sanitizing FAV. However, there is continuous health and environmental 
concern on using chlorine to disinfect FAV due to its capability to produce 
unhealthy byproducts and possible carcinogenic compounds. A variety of 
alternative disinfection methods have been investigated or have already been 
applied. Some of these approaches and their applicability as alternatives to 
chlorine have been described in this chapter. In addition, authors addressed 
the advantages and limitations of chemical and OA techniques as potential 
alternatives to chlorine. 
The chemical disinfection agents included: chlorine dioxide (ClO2
), 
calcium-based compounds, hydrogen peroxide, peroxidic acid, and OA 
(such as: lactic acid, acetic acid, and citric acid). Most of these agents are 
recognized as GRAS as they generally have a lower tendency to react with 
organic matter, do not produce harmful byproducts, and are cost-effective. 
However, such products are less effective at low concentrations; therefore, 
higher concentrations are typically needed to effectively control the growth 
of microorganisms on FAV. 
Moreover, the application of these chemical agents at higher concentra￾tions can negatively affect color, sensory, and the general appearance of FAV.  
 
 
 
 
 
136 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
Although some of these disinfection methods have proven to be as effective 
and could thus be an excellent replacement, yet the efficacy of these methods 
is highly affected by concentration, exposure time, temperature, pH, the 
structure of the fruits or vegetables, and the presence of organic matter. Thus, 
the selection of a suitable disinfection method ultimately depends on the type 
of FAV, the targeted microorganisms, and facility condition conditions. 
KEYWORDS 
• antimicrobial 
chemical disinfectant 
chlorine 
disinfestations 
fruit and vegetables 
novel disinfection 
organic acids 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
REFERENCES 
1. Abadias, M.; Alegre, I.; Usall, J.; Torres, R.; Viñas, I. Evaluation of Alternative 
Sanitizers to Chlorine Disinfection for Reducing Foodborne Pathogens in Fresh-Cut 
Apple. Postharv. Bio. Technol. 2011, 59 (3), 289–297. 
2. Alawlaqi, M. M.; Alharbi, A. A. Impact of Acetic Acid on Controlling Tomato Fruit 
Decay. Life Sci. J. 2014, 11, 114–119. 
3. Alvarado-Casillas, S.; Ibarra-Sánchez, S.; Rodríguez-García, O.; Martínez-Gonzáles, 
N.; Castillo, A. Comparison of Rinsing and Sanitizing Procedures for Reducing Bacterial 
Pathogens on Fresh Cantaloupe and Bell Peppers. J. Food Prot. 2007, 70 (3), 655–660. 
4. Artés-Hernández, F.; Gómez, P.; Aguayo, E. Technological Innovations to Preserve 
Quality and Safety of Fresh-Cut Horticultural Products. Environ. Friend. Safe Technol. 
Qual. Fruit Veg. 2010, 2010, 190–198. 
5. Artés-Hernández, F.; Martínez-Hernández, G. B.; Aguayo, E.; Gómez, P. A.; Artés, F. 
Fresh-Cut Fruit and Vegetables: Emerging Eco-Friendly Techniques for Sanitation and 
Preserving Safety. Postharv. Handl. 2017, 2017, 7–45. 
6. Bhilwadikar, T.; Pounraj, S.; Manivannan, S.; Rastogi, N. K.; Negi, P. S. Decontamination 
of Microorganisms and Pesticides from Fresh Fruits and Vegetables: A Comprehensive 
Review from Common Household Processes to Modern Techniques. Comprehensive 
Rev. Food Sci. Food Safet. 2019, 18 (4), 1003–1038. Sanitizers for Decontamination of Fresh Produce 137 
7. Chen, L.; Zhang, H.; Liu, Q.; Pang, X.; Zhao, X.; Yang, H. Sanitizing Efficacy of Lactic 
Acid Combined with Low-Concentration Sodium Hypochlorite on Listeriainnocua in 
Organic Broccoli Sprouts. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2019, 295, 41–48. 
8. Chhetri, R. K; Thornberg, D.; Berner, J.; Gramstad, R.; Ojstedt, U.; Sharma, A. K.; 
Anderson, H. R. Chemical Disinfection of Combined Sewer Overflow Waters Using 
Performic Acid or Peracetic Acids. Sci. Total Environ. 2014, 490, 1065–1072. 
9. Coban, H. B. Organic Acids as Antimicrobial Food Agents: Applications and Microbial 
Productions. Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng. 2020, 43 (4), 569-591. 
10. De Siqueira Oliveira, L.; Eça, K. S.; de Aquino, A. C.; Vasconcelos, L. B. Hydrogen 
Peroxide (H2
O2
) for Postharvest Fruit and Vegetable Disinfection. In Postharvest 
Disinfection of Fruits and Vegetables; Siddiqui, M. W., Ed.; Academic Press: London, 
2018; pp 91–99. 
11. del Carmen Velázquez, L.; Barbini, N. B.; Escudero, M. E.; Estrada, C. L.; de Guzmán, 
A. M. S. Evaluation of Chlorine, Benzalkonium Chloride and Lactic Acid as Sanitizers 
for Reducing Escherichiacoli O157: H7 and Yersiniaenterocolitica on Fresh Vegetables. 
Food Control 2009, 20 (3), 262–268. 
12. Deng, L. Z.; Mujumdar, A. S.; Pan, Z.; Vidyarthi, S. K.; Xu, J.; Zielinska, M.; Xiao, H. W. 
Emerging Chemical and Physical Disinfection Technologies of Fruits and Vegetables: A 
Comprehensive Review. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2020, 60 (15), 2481–2508. 
13. Feliziani, E.; Lichter, A.; Smilanick, J. L.; Ippolito, A. Disinfecting Agents for Controlling 
Fruit and Vegetable Diseases After Harvest. Postharv. Biol. Technol. 2016, 122, 53–69. 
14. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Peroxyacids. In Food and Drug Administration 
Code of Federal Regulations: 21 CFR Part 173; 2020; Section A. 173.370. https://www. 
accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?fr=173.370 (accessed Feb 
17, 2021). 
15. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Sanitizing solutions. In Food and Drug 
Administration Code of Federal Regulations: 21 CFR Part 178.1010; 2020; Section B. 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?fr=178.1010 
(accessed Feb 15, 2021). 
16. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Chemicals Used in Washing or to Assist in the 
Peeling of Fruits and Vegetables. In Food and Drug Administration Code of Federal 
Regulations: 21 CFR Part 173.315; 2020; Section C. https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/ 
scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?fr=173.315 (accessed Feb 17, 2021). 
17. Gad, S. C. Peracetic Acid A2. In Encyclopedia of Toxicology; Wexler, P., Ed., 3rd ed.; 
Academic Press: Oxford, 2014; pp 788–790. 
18. García, S.; Heredia, N. Microbiological Safety of Fruit and Vegetables in the Field, 
During Harvest, and Packaging: A Global Issue. In Global Food Security and Wellness; 
Springer: New York, 2017; pp 27–48. 
19. Greenspan, F. P.; Margulies, P. H. Treatment of Raw Plant Tissue. US Patent 2512-640, 
Buffalo Electro-Chemical Co., 1950; p 19. 
20. Gyawali, R.; Ibrahim, S. A.; Abu Hasfa, S. H.; Smqadri, S. Q.; Haik, Y. Antimicrobial 
Activity of Copper Alone and in Combination with Lactic Acid Against Escherichiacoli 
O157: H7 in Laboratory Medium and on the Surface of Lettuce and Tomatoes. J. Pathog. 
2011, 2011 (October 23), E-pub ID:650968. DOI: 10.4061/2011/650968. 
21. Gyawali, R.; Ibrahim, S. A. Synergistic Effect of Copper and Lactic Acid Against 
Salmonella and Escherichia coli O157:H7: A Review. Emirates J. Food Agric. 2012, 
2012, 1–11. 138 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
22. Ho, K. L. G.; Luzuriaga, D. A.; Rodde, K. M.; Tang, S.; Phan, C. Efficacy of a Novel 
Sanitizer Composed of Lactic Acid and Peroxyacetic Acid Against Single Strains of 
Nonpathogenic Escherichia coli K-12, Listeriainnocua, and Lactobacillus plantarum in 
Aqueous Solution and on Surfaces of Romaine Lettuce and Spinach. J. Food Protect. 
2011, 74, 1468–1474. 
23. Joshi, K.; Mahendran, R.; Alagundaram, K.; Norton, T.; Tiwari, B. K. Novel Disinfectants 
for Fresh Produce. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2013, 34 (1), 54–61. 
24. Kang, H. C.; Park, Y. H.; Go, S. J. Growth Inhibition of a Phytopathogenic Fungus, 
Colletotrichum Species by Acetic Acid. Microbiol. Res. 2003, 158 (4), 321–326. 
25. Khan, I.; Tango, C. N.; Miskeen, S.; Lee, B. H.; Oh, D. H. Hurdle Technology: A Novel 
Approach for Enhanced Food Quality and Safety–a Review. Food Control 2017, 73, 
1426–1444. 
26. Lianou, A.; Koutsoumanis, K. P.; Sofos, J. N. Organic Acids and Other Chemical 
Treatments for Microbial Decontamination of Food. In Microbial Decontamination in 
the Food Industry; Demirci, A., Ngadi, M. O., Eds.; Woodhead Publishing: Cambridge, 
2012; pp 592–664. 
27. Linley, E.; Denyer, S. P.; McDonnell, G.; Simons, C.; Maillard, J. Y. Use of Hydrogen 
Peroxide as Bio-Side: New Consideration of Its Mechanisms of Biocidal Action. J. 
Antimicrob. Chemother. 2012, 67, 1589–1596. 
28. Luukkonen, T.; Pehkonen, S. O. Peracids in Water Treatment: A Critical Review. Crit. 
Rev. Environ. Sci. 2017, 47, 1–39. 
29. Main, G. L.; Morris, J. R.; Wehunt, E. J. Effect of Preprocessing Treatments on the 
Firmness and Quality Characteristics of Whole and Sliced Strawberries After Freezing 
and Thermal Processing. J. Food Sci. 1986, 51 (2), 391–394. 
30. Martin-Diana, A. B.; Rico, D.; Barry-Ryan, C.; Frias, J. M.; Mulcahy, J.; Henehan, G. T. 
M. Comparison of Calcium Lactate with Chlorine as a Washing Treatment for Fresh-Cut 
Lettuce and Carrots; Quality and Nutritional Parameters. J. Sci. Food Agric. 2005, 85 
(13), 2260–2268. 
31. McDonnell, G. The Use of Hydrogen Peroxide for Disinfection and Sterilization 
Application. Patai’s Chem. Funct. Groups 2009, 2009, 1–34. 
32. Meireles, A.; Giaouris, E.; Simões, M. Alternative Disinfection Methods to Chlorine for 
Use in the Fresh-Cut Industry. Food Res. Int. 2016, 82, 71–85. 
33. Nam, H.; Seo, H. S.; Bang, J.; Kim, H.; Beuchat, L. R.; Ryu, J. H. Efficacy of Gaseous 
Chlorine Dioxide in Inactivating Bacilluscereus Spores Attached to and in a Biofilm on 
Stainless Steel. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2014, 188, 122–127. 
34. Neal, J. A.; Marquez-Gonzalez, M.; Cabrera-Diaz, E.; Lucia, L. M.; O'Bryan, C. A.; 
Crandall, P. G.; Ricke, S. C.; Castillo, A. Comparison of Multiple Chemical Sanitizers 
for Reducing Salmonella and Escherichiacoli O157: H7 on Spinach (Spinacia oleracea) 
leaves. Food Res. Int. 2012, 45 (2), 1123–1128.
35. Ölmez, H.; Kretzschmar, U. Potential Alternative Disinfection Methods for Organic 
Fresh-Cut Industry for Minimizing Water Consumption and Environmental Impact. 
LWT-Food Sci. Technol. 2009, 42 (3), 686–693. 
36. Park, S. H.; Choi, M. R.; Park, J. W.; Park, K. H.; Chung, M. S.; Ryu, S.; Kang, D. H. 
Use of Organic Acids to Inactivate Escherichiacoli O157: H7, Salmonellatyphimurium, 
and Listeriamonocytogenes on Organic Fresh Apples and Lettuce. J. Food Sci. 2011, 76 
(6), M293–M298.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sanitizers for Decontamination of Fresh Produce 139 
37. Qadri, O. S.; Yousuf, B; Srivastava, A. K. Fresh-Cut Fruits and Vegetables: Critical 
Factors Influencing Microbiology and Novel Approaches to Prevent Microbial Risks—A 
Review. Cogent Food Agric. 2015, 1 (1), E-article 1121606, 11. 
38. Radwan, M. A.; Abu-Elamayem, M. M.; Shiboob, M. H.; Abdel-Aal, A. Residual 
Behavior of Profenofos on Some Field-Grown Vegetables and its Removal Using 
Various Washing Solutions and Household Processing. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2005, 43 
(4), 553–557. 
39. Ramos, B.; Miller, F. A.; Brandão, T. R.; Teixeira, P.; Silva, C. L. Fresh Fruits and 
Vegetables: An Overview on Applied Methodologies to Improve Its Quality and Safety. 
Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2013, 20, 1–15. 
40. Rico, D.; Martin-Diana, A. B.; Barat, J. M.; Barry-Ryan, C. Extending and Measuring 
the Quality of Fresh-Cut Fruit and Vegetables: A Review. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 
2007, 18 (7), 373–386. 
41. Sagong, H. G.; Lee, S. Y.; Chang, P. S.; Heu, S.; Ryu, S.; Choi, Y. J.; Kang, D. H. 
Combined Effect of Ultrasound and Organic Acids to Reduce Escherichia coli O157: 
H7, Salmonella Typhimurium, and Listeria Monocytogenes on Organic Fresh Lettuce. 
Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2011, 145 (1), 287–292. 
42. Sholberg, P.; Haag, P.; Hocking, R.; Bedford, K. The Use of Vinegar Vapor to Reduce 
Postharvest Decay of Harvested Fruit. Hort. Sci. 2000, 35 (5), 898–903. 
43. Sun, X.; Baldwin, E.; Bai, J. Applications of Gaseous Chlorine Dioxide on Postharvest 
Handling and Storage of Fruits and Vegetables–a Review. Food Control 2019, 95, 18–26. 
44. Tajkarimi, M.; Ibrahim, S. A. Antimicrobial Activity of Ascorbic Acid Alone or in 
Combination with Lactic Acid on Escherichiacoli O157: H7 in Laboratory Medium and 
Carrot Juice. Food Control 2011, 22 (6), 801–804. 
45. Wang, C.; Wang, S.; Chang, T.; Shi, L.; Yang, H.; Shao, Y.; Feng, W.; Cui, M. Efficacy of 
Lactic Acid in Reducing Foodborne Pathogens in Minimally Processed Lotus Sprouts. 
Food Control 2013, 30 (2), 721–726. 
46. Zhang, Z. Y.; Liu, X. J.; Hong, X. Y. Effects of Home Preparation on Pesticide Residues 
in Cabbage. Food Control 2007, 18 (12), 1484–1487. 
47. Zhou, G. H.; Xu, X. L.; Liu, Y. Preservation Technologies for Fresh Meat—A Review. 
Meat Sci. 2010, 86 (1), 119–28. 
48. Zoellner, C.; Aguayo-Acosta, A.; Siddiqui, M. W.; Dávila, J. E. Peracetic Acid in 
Disinfection of Fruits and Vegetables. In Postharvest Disinfection of Fruits and 
Vegetables; Siddiqui, M. W., Ed.; Academic Press: London, 2018; pp 53–66. PART II
 
PRESERVATION STRATEGIES
 
FOR FRESH PRODUCE
 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing: Methods and Strategies. Megh R. Goyal, & 
Faizan Ahmad (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
CHAPTER 6
 
PRESERVATION STRATEGIES FOR 
FRUITS AND VEGETABLES: PAST, 
PRESENT, AND FUTURE SCOPE 
PIR MOHAMMAD JUNAID, FAIZAN AHMAD, 

ISHFAQ HAMID DAR, AABID HUSSAIN BHAT, 

SHAZIYA MANZOOR, JUNAID AHMAD PANDITH, and
 
FAISAL KHAN
 
ABSTRACT 
To ensure year-round availability with special concern to perishability and 
to reserve the surplus harvest, various preservation methods have emerged. 
Mankind, from very beginning, has exploited various preservation techniques 
starting from sun drying and cellar storage to pickling. The advancement in 
science and technology has directed this art of preservation to new heights 
with precise advancements. Techniques such as inhibition of microbial growth 
preservation by specific chemicals, lowering of water activity, restricted use 
of the amounts of atmospheric gases and use of heat, and so on, are employed 
in the preservation of fruits and vegetables. The use of ultrasound, high￾pressure processing, pulsed electric field, irradiation methods, non-thermal 
plasma, controlled atmospheric storage, freeze drying, vacuum packing, and 
hurdle technology are some remarkable breakthroughs in the preservation of 
fruits and vegetables. The reduction in the postharvest loss, the selection and 
use of preservation techniques, and the trends in the preservation of the fruits 
and vegetables will be discussed in this chapter. 144 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
6.1 INTRODUCTION 
The core motto of food preservation is the utilization of the surplus and 
highly perishable food for the future procurement with the desired quality. 
The process of food preservation is diverse and involves mandatory unit 
operations. Food preservation techniques differ with the availability of the 
food, nature of the food, and the value of the food that is to be preserved. 
The advancement in technology had profound domination in the food 
preservation technology. The use of cellar storage systems to the modern 
modified atmospheric systems had shifted the outlook of food availability 
and quality. Among the food diversities available, the most important, but 
at the same time, the most vulnerable to postharvest loss are fruits and 
vegetables (FAV). 
It is estimated that the postharvest loss of fruits and vegetable in India 
has reached almost 40% of its total production. The World Food Conference 
held in Rome (1974) drew attention to the concept of postharvest food loss 
reduction as a significant means to increase food availability. The expansion 
and the progression in the agriculture is no doubt blooming because of the 
introduction of new techniques and hybrid varieties; however, at the same 
time, the number in postharvest losses is also a grave concern. 
The rise in the loss of agricultural produce affects lives, economy, social 
wellbeing, and environmental interests. To curb the postharvest losses in 
fruits and vegetables, researchers have been designing novel methods.51 
In the ancient days, the methods of food preservation were either based on 
the fruit or vegetable type or on the environmental conditions of that area. 
Although the techniques were not so much sophisticated, they were efficient 
in achieving the goal. Scientific progression in agriculture and food sector 
has now introduced up-to-date technologies in the preservation of fruits and 
vegetables. 
The incorporation of food preservation techniques such as active pack￾aging, modified packaging, high-pressure processing (HPP), PEF, micro￾ware, edible coatings, low-temperature preservation, and advance drying 
methods have taken the preservation of fruits and vegetables to the next 
level.7,33 
This chapter will focus on (1) the perspective of preservation of fruits 
and vegetables with different approaches; (2) preservation methods; (3) the 
evolution of preservation; and (4) understanding the landmarks accomplished 
and the targets, which are still to be achieved in the preservation methods of 
fruits and vegetables. Preservation Strategies for Fruits and Vegetables 145 
6.2 WHY FRUITS AND VEGETABLES? 
The technology of fruit and vegetables has made a widespread interest in 
the field of food, health, and allied sectors. The exact definition of fruits and 
vegetables is quite impossible to understand although we had a botanical 
definition for fruit. The classification based on the botanical system and on 
the basis of food composition doesn’t provide adequate satisfaction. For 
a layman, farmers, and the health professionals, the definition is however 
greatly influenced by cultural norms based on food preparation and 
selection.40 
The use of fruits and vegetables as the prime source in the diet has been 
recommended by numerous organizations, such as the Food and Agricultural 
Organization (FAO), World Health Organization (WHO), European Food 
Authority (EFSA), and United States Department of Agriculture (USDA).51,57 
Therefore, it is necessary that the fruits and vegetables are handled, prepared, 
and stored in suitable conditions so as to take full benefit of their nutrients. 
To reduce the bacterial load and to make them free from contaminants, it 
is necessary to subject them to primary unit operations followed by proper 
preservation means.28,58 The fruits and vegetables can reduce the chances of 
non-communicable diseases like stroke, cardiovascular diseases, clean the 
free radical accumulation in body, and help in gradual nutrient absorption 
and less chances of constipation. 
6.3 PRESERVATION OF FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
Generally, fruits, vegetables, and seasonal perishable agricultural commodities 
are highly susceptible to spoilage. For their year-round availability, it is 
essential to preserve them in suitable conditions. The preservation of fruits 
and vegetables is a day-old technique for the procurement of the surplus 
produce during the needy hours. The preservation of fruits and vegetables 
has modified from time to time with advancements in knowledge, available 
fruits and vegetables, type, and the climatic conditions. 
The preservation of fruits and vegetables is done either by lowering 
the water activity or by increasing the antimicrobial medium or sometimes 
modifying the environment or the produce or sometime restricting the 
microbial growth. Based on these, we can have a range of preservation 
methods from drying, dehydration, curing, modified atmospheric packaging, 
and low temperature preservation.27,49,63 Therefore, the preservation of fruits 
and vegetables is a technique of handling or treating of F&V to control its 146 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
spoilage by either restricting the growth of microorganisms, decrease the 
respiration rate and to maintain its shelf life, nutritive value, and flavor or its 
conversion to the valuable food products like jam, jelly, etc. 
6.4 IMPORTANCE OF FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
Fruits and vegetables are rich sources of carbohydrate, poor source of protein 
and fats, and have a neutral to high acidic value, with highest amount of 
water activity, which makes them suitable for microbial activity, thus making 
them a perishable commodity. Fruits and vegetables are one of the important 
sources of dietary nutrients for body metabolism to help in the muscle build￾up and required energy yield. 
The fruits and vegetables take an important position among all the avail￾able food varieties due to their beneficial aspects.5,63 The presence of profu￾sion quantity of vitamins, minerals, essential dietary fiber, and other bioactive 
compounds makes them essential portion of balanced diet for healthy well￾being and disease-fighting properties. The most important feature of most 
fruits and vegetables is that they can be consumed, unprocessed, and don’t 
require food processing unit operations, and thus are cost-effective. This use 
of unprocessed food has triggered a trend in the food sector as consump￾tion of unprocessed or minimally processed foods for the health-promoting 
benefits.51 
One of the best examples of minimally processed foods are fresh-cut fruits 
and vegetables, which are suitably peeled and cut into pieces before packaging 
and are said to be highly nutritious with a pleasant flavor.44 Unfortunately, the 
producers are not aware about the importance and functional aspects of the 
fruit and vegetable sector. The manual and day-old techniques of handling such 
kind of commodity increase the chances of contamination, loss of nutritional 
value, and decreased shelf life. To overcome such problems, the postharvest 
handing of fruits and vegetables should be proper and well-suitable. The 
shift of preservation methods from the conventional to the modern scientific 
moods should be a priority. 
6.5 POSTHARVEST OF FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
Fruits and vegetables are more susceptible to postharvest damage due to 
physiological, microbial, and physical factors. The inadequate handling, 
cultural practice, unfavorable climate, and poor storage conditions result in Preservation Strategies for Fruits and Vegetables 147 
the delay and decay of the product quality and life. The natural biochemical 
reactions in the fruits and vegetables naturally deteriorate the eating, nutri￾tional, and keeping quality and thus add up to the physiological loss. The 
biological loss generally happens due to the presence of insects, yeasts, molds, 
rodents, birds, and animals either by direct or by cross-contamination of the 
infected ones. These types of infections are much susceptible to spreading 
during storage or transportation. The microbial infection may be of water 
origin or soil or sometimes airborne, which includes coliforms, micrococci, 
coryniforms, lactic acid bacteria, and pseudomonas.40 
Other types of losses during harvesting, transportation, handling, and 
packaging are due to fragile tissue damage of fruits and vegetables leading 
to bruising, abrasion, cuts, and breakage. These types of damages either 
give rise to microbial spoilage or damage to entire structure of produce 
with time. It is estimated that nearly 50–80% of the particular commodity 
reaches to the consumers and the rest is discarded and damaged during the 
entire postharvest processing.15 These postharvest losses affect directly the 
producers and indirectly the economic conditions of the country. Therefore, 
postharvest losses adversely influence the socio-economic conditions and 
lead to unemployment, economic breakdown, famer suicide, and other social 
and cultural issues.24 The inadequate and improper food supply chain and 
government policies need to be revived to minimize the postharvest loss at 
the producer end.15 
6.6 PRESERVATION METHODS 
Preservation of the food especially fruits and vegetables is the art to make the 
food or perishable fruits and vegetables available throughout the year and in 
the needy time. Increasing of shelf life of the fruits and vegetables requires 
some processing parameters and vary with the nature of fruit and vegetable. 
The fruits and vegetables are produced in abundance during a particular time 
in year and needs to be immediately consumed or preserved due to their 
susceptible nature. 
The process of delaying the rotten process or the quality degradation is 
done by means of different techniques. As the fruits and vegetables are rich 
source of essential nutrients and the quality gets decreased upon inadequate 
long storage, the preservation systems are designed as such to increase the 
shelf stability and maintain the quality of the produce.24 In order to preserve 
the fruits and vegetables, it is required to prevent microbial growth by 
lowering of enzymatic and physiological changes. Improved postharvest 148 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
value envelops the adequate visual, favor, textural, and nutritive nature 
of food. This chapter will discuss the various techniques and methods for 
preservation and quality maintenance of fruits and vegetables. 
6.7 TRADITIONAL METHODS OF PRESERVATION 
Man from the very beginning had not only been a food hunter but also a food 
gatherer as well as the farmer. This art of farming has led him to reserve 
the surplus commodity for the future needs. For the preservation of surplus 
commodity, that is, fruits and vegetables, he established various preservation 
techniques and methods with prosperous results. This art of preservation was 
not scientifically advanced and was based on the naturally available methods 
like sun drying.1,49 The preservation of fruits and vegetables started from sun 
drying, curing, smoking, cellar storage, and low-temperature preservation. 
6.7.1 SUN DRYING 
Drying is a prehistoric method of preservation available to mankind. In our 
day-to-day life, we come across a vast variety of dried fruits and vegetables. 
The drying technique generally accompanies the decrease in the water 
percentage of the produce to restrict or hinder the microbial and enzymatic 
spoilage of fruits and vegetables. The term dehydration is sometimes used 
for drying which is but the advanced and efficient form of drying. 
In the early days of food preservation, this technique was widely used and 
in the developing countries like India this technique is still in practice. The 
sun drying of fruits and vegetables is easy, cost free, and available almost 
throughout the year. The cold or hilly areas where the intensity of sunlight is 
least, the produce is dried in the fixed time periods in a year. In this technique, 
the fruit or vegetable is either sliced or kept as such depending on the type of 
commodity and spread on the sheets of cloth, wood, flour, or in trays directed 
to the sun light.1,40,45 The fruits and vegetables to be dried are then turned in 
regular intervals for even drying. 
This technique is time consuming and sometimes inefficient. In the 
times when there were no alternate methods of preservation, this was the 
only and popular means of preservation. By this technique, not only fruits 
and vegetables were dried but the food like meat, fish, and vinegar (dried 
in cotton) were used. This technique has been modernized nowadays and 
many other assemblies have been adopted for its modification. The forced Preservation Strategies for Fruits and Vegetables 149 
convective air dryers have been used for the purpose of quick and efficient 
drying by the solar dryers. 
6.7.2 CELLAR STORAGE 
The cellar storage technique also known as root cellar or earth cellar is the 
preservation of fruits and vegetables accomplish by storing them underground 
or partially underground for weeks to months depending on the produce and 
its harvest conditions. In the earlier times, it had gained much importance in 
the procurement of crops during winter conditions. Although in the present 
times, with the advancement of storage systems, this technology seems to be 
useless, but it has significantly served the humankind through decades as the 
chief means of preservation. 
This method is still in practice in the underdeveloped countries in the rural 
areas where the means of technology is little or absent. Generally, potatoes, 
carrots, turnips, beets, onions, cabbage, apples, pears, apricots, etc., were 
preserved for few months through this technology.27,49 The foods like fresh 
meat, jam, milk, and cream are also preserved by this technique. The crops 
subjected to cellar storage remain cool during the summer time and during 
winters they are in unfrozen state. The controlled temperature and the steady 
humidity keep fruits and vegetables fresh and in preserved state. 
6.7.3 SALTING 
The method of preservation food especially fruits and vegetables by the use 
of edible salt dates back to the ancient times. The use of this method was 
generally employed to the meat, fish, and vegetables. This method of salting 
sometimes known as curing is significant till nowadays for its wide appli￾cation in the preservation technology.3,27,55 Vegetables like beans, cabbage, 
etc. are covered with the salt and preserved by this method. The salting 
method develops the concentration gradient across the food material, and 
the osmosis the water is squeezed out of the food material which helps in the 
lowering of water activity. This lowering of water percentage inside the body 
of food material results in decreased enzymatic and microbial actions. The 
development of hypertonic environment across the food material restricts the 
growth of pathogenic microorganisms, commonly bacteria and fungi. This 
phenomenon by the addition of salt finally helps in the shellfire extension of 
the food material (vegetables). 150 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
6.7.4 PICKLING 
Pickling is one among the oldest methods of food preservation especially 
fruits and vegetables. In the process of pickling, a new product formation 
takes place by the anaerobic fermentation in brine or vinegar. The product 
so formed is known as pickle having salty, sour taste. In the ancient times, 
the surplus vegetables were mixed with the spices and put it the jars and 
earthen vessels for couple of months to facilitate the fermentation process. 
This results in the production of organic acids (preservative agents) by 
bacteria like lacto bacillales to produce lactic acid which decreases the pH 
considerably.49,60 
Some of the notable pickles are kimchi sauerkraut, surstromming, and 
nukazuke. Fruits like mango, amla, peaches, plums, etc., are also used for 
pickle making. The use of edible oil in addition to vinegar is used in pickle 
making in various south Asian countries. For the pickle making, different 
recipes are used depending upon the nature of crop and type of pickle making. 
Herbs, species, mixed varieties of fruits, and vegetables are sometimes used in 
the pickle formation. The flavor and the nature of pickle depend on the nature 
of food used in pickling process, temperature of fermentation, salinity or 
acidity of solution, and oxygen elimination. The Leuconostocmes enteroides 
bacteria dominate the pickle formation with release of alcohol, acid mixes, 
and aromatic compounds upon the low temperature and salt concentration. 
But, on higher salt concentration and temperature, the production of lactic 
acids occurs due to presence of bacteria Lactobacillus plantarum. 
6.8 ADVANCED PRESERVATION METHODS 
As the people are well aware of the health benefits of fruits and vegetables, 
their consumption has considerably increased, so as their farming. The micro￾level evaluation of fruits and vegetables has enabled the present generation 
to look and demand for the specific type of nutrients. This health-conscious 
consumption of food has paved the way forward for new varieties, preserva￾tion methods, and amount of consumption. 
The WHO has therefore recommended the consumable amounts of fruits 
and vegetables of around 400 g for an adult per day. As per the dietary guide￾lines for Americans, it is recommended to consume seven to 10 portions of 
fruits and vegetables equal to half plate of fruits and vegetables per day.6 
Therefore, the need of hour is to make the year-round availability of fruits 
and vegetables for the maintenance of heath and habit. The ongoing research Preservation Strategies for Fruits and Vegetables 151 
in food science has thus combined the modern technologies and exploited 
them in food preservation technology, which are been discussed here. 
6.8.1 USE OF HEAT 
The use of heat is the most and prime technique of food preservation. The 
microorganisms which are responsible for growth and spoilage of fruits and 
vegetables are inactivated by the application of heat. The use of mild heat in 
fruits and vegetables also lower the enzymatic activity of the produce thus 
helping in the extended shelf life. Heat can also destroy the anti-nutritional 
compounds in some foods (e.g., trypsin inhibitors in legumes) and gelatinize 
the starch improvement of proteins. The use of heat in case of modern controlled 
drying process makes fruits and vegetables fit for consumption for years. 
Some of the techniques used are solar drying, oven drying, freeze drying, 
and osmotic dehydration.62 Solar drying is actually the traditional sun drying 
but in an improved form having a compact chamber called as dehydrator. 
The fruits and vegetables are dried in this chamber and consisting of foil 
surface that increases the temperature in addition to the ventilation. Another 
method for preservation of fruits and vegetables is the material is subjected 
to freeze drying and is the suitable method for perishables.25,43,49 This process 
involves the material to be frozen first and then the surrounding pressure of 
that material is significantly reduced, which facilitates the sublimation of 
frozen water from solid to gaseous phase. In the commercial scale of drying 
of fruits and vegetables, ovens are used. These are dehydrators consisting of 
heating chamber with air flow, low humidity, etc., although it does not have 
built-in fan system like in that of modern dehydrators. 
6.8.2 OSMOTIC DEHYDRATION 
This is one of the common methods of fruit and vegetable preservation and 
has nowadays appearing as a trending technique. It is basically a pre-treatment 
process that employs the diffusion phenomena of water from food substance 
when immersed in a hypertonic solution.27,40,50 The solute substance such as 
glucose, sodium chloride, corn syrup, fructose, and other osmotic agents are 
used in osmotic dehydration. 
Other methods are air drying and freeze drying. In this process, the solute 
substances migrate inside the food material and the moisture gets drained 
out by compensating the solute gradient outside the food. This process is 152 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
generally slow in nature. The water removal is facilitated by the creation 
of osmotic pressure gradient across the fruit or vegetable surface. Osmotic 
dehydration makes a little processing in fruits and vegetables due to their 
much similarity between the natural and dehydrated products. 
6.8.3 MODIFIED ATMOSPHERE PRESERVATION (MAP) 
The preservation of fruits and vegetables with consequent increase in the 
shelf life has been a concern because of the fact that continuing respiration 
and other biochemical processes going on in the tissues. Therefore, it is 
necessary to control these processes in order to ascertain the quality and 
nutritional value of the product with a long shelf life. 
Modified and controlled atmosphere technologies utilize this principle 
for the preservation of fruits and vegetables. In case of modified atmosphere 
technologies, the gas composition around the fruits and vegetables is 
modified or replaced with some inert gas. This results in the decrease in 
the rate of respiration and other biochemical processes within the product 
matrix, thereby increasing the shelf life of the fruits and vegetables.37,67 There 
may occur changes in the composition of gas surrounding the product due 
to the respiration process. This is overcome in the controlled atmosphere 
technologies where the composition of gases is changed and continuously 
monitored so as to keep it invariable at the desired level.66 
6.8.3.1 MODIFIED ATMOSPHERE TECHNOLOGIES 
The modified atmosphere technologies have been successfully used in storage 
and packaging systems for vegetables and fruits. The shelf life and quality 
of fruits and vegetables is attributed to the different physicochemical and 
sensory characteristics along with other safety aspects. Primarily, changes 
in such properties which may include browning, moisture loss and firmness, 
softening of tissues, etc., have a significant contribution to the quality loss 
in fruits and vegetables, and hence rendering them unsuitable or harmful for 
consumption.14 
These deteriorative and undesirable changes in the fruits and vegetables 
are as a result of different biochemical processes which include oxidation 
of phenols, degradation of enzymes and other volatile chemicals, loss of 
nutritional components, or contamination by spoilage microorganisms. 
This is accompanied by changes in the physicochemical characteristics Preservation Strategies for Fruits and Vegetables 153 
like browning, loss of flavor and texture, etc. and can be seen in a number 
of fruits and vegetables like mango, apple, peach, plum, onion, eggplant, 
potato, etc.4,12 Among different preservation technologies used in fruits and 
vegetables, modified atmosphere technology is classified under physical 
methods. The preservation is achieved by alteration in the gas composition, 
which is replaced with an inert gas inside the package or storage structure.38 
The selection of gas and its concentration depends upon the various factors 
like characteristics of the food product, condition of surrounding air and also 
the type of packaging along with other factors. The combined effect of these 
factors helps in determining the optimum gas composition which can extend 
the shelf life of fruits and vegetables for considerable time periods.47 The 
other parameters taken into consideration while designing the appropriate 
modified atmosphere preservation system include rate of respiration and 
transpiration, permeability, environmental and storage conditions, rate of 
heat and mass transfer, etc.11 
The most commonly used gas mixture for preservation of fresh-cut 
fruits includes CO2
, O2
, and N2
 because of the fact that these gases help in 
preserving the quality and are also directly involved in the general metabolism 
of fruits and vegetables. These impact the metabolism rates in fruits and 
vegetables thereby hampering the growth of spoilage microorganisms and 
also preserving the quality by retarding the ripening in climacteric fruits.61 
O2 when present in low concentration (<5%) retards the growth of aerobic 
microbes while as when present in higher concentration hampers the growth 
of anaerobes. Determination of optimum concentration to be used is therefore 
given good thought and analysis needs to be done in order to achieve the 
desired preservation.26 High concentration of O2 has also been shown to 
be very helpful in controlling the enzymatic activity and growth of some 
microorganisms.26,36 
To preserve high quality in fruits and vegetables, other gas compositions 
can be used depending on the nature of the food product like nitrogen for 
preserving the physical structure and appearance, CO2
 for preserving the 
flavor and aroma etc..49 Nitrogen is used to replace the O2
 thereby decreasing 
the rate of respiration and also with high levels of O2
 to prevent the growth of 
microbes. In case of vegetables, with respiration rate an important parameter 
in determining the self-life, low levels of O2
, and high levels of CO2
 are effec￾tively used to extend the shelf life [12, 59].12,59 CO2
 is highly beneficial in the 
retarding the growth of bacteria and fungi. Its use in modified atmosphere 
technologies for preservation of fruits and vegetables has been demonstrated 
to inhibit the growth of bacteria such as Erwinia and Xanthomonas, and  
154 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
fungi, such as: Alternaria, Botrytis, Fusarium, Aspergillus, Penicillium, 
Rhizopus, etc..34 
Recently, there has been increased focus on use of unconventional 
atmospheres in the modified atmosphere technologies for the preservation 
of fruits and vegetables. The different gases used include noble gases like 
helium, argon and other compounds like nitrous oxide, N2
O. In comparison to 
conventional modified atmosphere technologies, these provide better-quality 
preservation along with longer shelf life. They also help in minimizing the 
postharvest losses in fruits and preservation of different bioactive compounds 
present without any undesirable changes in the sensory attributes.47 
The preservation mechanism of some unconventional gases has not been 
fully explored yet. Argon, which is used in the modified atmosphere pack￾aging, has been proposed to act on receptor sites of enzymes, thereby resulting 
in their deactivation and reduction of microbial growth.10 N2
O assists in the 
reduction in rate of respiration in fruits and the subsequent retardation in 
maturation.16 The preservation technologies using modified atmosphere are 
used in extending the shelf life of different fresh-cut vegetables and fruits. 
However, there is a need of extensive research in order to commercialize the 
different gas combinations and consequent possibility to increase shelf life 
of various agricultural products. 
6.8.3.2 CONTROLLED ATMOSPHERE TECHNOLOGIES 
The controlled atmosphere technology for preservation is similar to the 
modified atmosphere technology except that there is precise control of the 
concentration of gases in the storage space. There is continuous monitoring 
and rectification in the concentration of gases. Such a system essentially 
comprises of air tight storage containers with O2 and CO2 analyzers 
along with suitable systems for removal and addition of gases. The O2 
to CO2
 ratio is very significant and is determined specific to different 
food products.13 There has been a considerable development of controlled 
atmosphere technology over the years. Earlier, it consisted of an airtight 
system with a provision of constant temperature maintained by mechanical 
refrigeration along with control of atmosphere by the products respira￾tion which increased the CO2
 concentration while reducing the O2
 level. 
Afterwards, it was further improved by the addition of injection systems 
and catalytic generators to have an active control on the control of gas 
concentrations. Now, it has been modernized by the use of dynamic control 
systems and bio-sensing of the physiology of fruits and vegetables to set Preservation Strategies for Fruits and Vegetables 155 
the concentration of air according to the metabolic condition of the stored 
fruit or vegetable.13 
The controlled atmosphere storage is one of the most important and 
effective preservation methods for fruits and vegetables. It decreases the rate 
of respiration in the fruits and vegetables, inhibits the growth of spoilage 
microorganisms and also slows down the enzymatic degradation.18,20 The 
controlled atmosphere has minimal effects on the nutritional characteristics 
of fruits and vegetables. It has been revealed that there was significant 
reduction in the loss of bioactive compounds including vitamin E, vitamin 
C, etc. from fresh-cut fruits.64 There may be development of some unwanted 
changes in the texture and off-flavors due to accumulation of some volatile 
compounds.53 
6.8.4 PRESERVATION BY HIGH-PRESSURE PROCESSING (HPP) 
The demand for more convenient and minimally processed foods has 
increased significantly over the time. This has further necessitated the need 
for achieving optimum food preservation with minimum changes in the 
nutritional and organoleptic properties of food products. In this line, many 
emerging preservation technologies have been devised as alternative to the 
conventional preservation methods which involved thermal treatment and 
resulted in the loss of nutritional value of food products. 
High-pressure processing (HPP) is considered as a promising technology 
for ensuring safety along with minimizing the effects on quality and nutri￾tional parameters. HPP treatment when compared to the thermal methods 
of preservation prevents the loss of quality. Application of high-pressure 
technology yields no untreated parts as they pressure is distributed uniformly 
in the food product. It is also very beneficial in the modification of various 
physicochemical properties in foods and enhancement of different processes 
like extraction, thawing, etc..42,48 
There has been comprehensive research in the application of high-pressure 
technology since long. Its capability to reduce the microbial activity and 
deactivation of enzymes while preserving the nutritional quality has increased 
the prospects of this technology in preservation systems. High-pressure 
processing for preservation has been successfully used in many food products 
including fruits, vegetables, meat, beverages, etc. HPP has been successfully 
demonstrated to result in inhibiting the growth of microorganisms while 
preserving the quality. It also brings in the modification of bioactives and 
development of novel foods with different functional properties.53 156 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
The two major principles governing the HPP preservation technology 
are: Le Chatelier’s Principle and the Isostatic Law. The former explains the 
changes in molecular configurations, pH, phase changes and other chemical 
reactions, which are affected by the increase in pressure. The latter principle 
explains the instant and uniform transmission of pressure throughout the food 
matrix.42 The process of HPP preservation is carried out in a high pressure 
equipment, which essentially consists of a pressure chamber, high pressure 
pumps, temperature and pressure monitoring, and controlling devices and a 
product handling system. 
The products are subjected to HPP in the pressure chamber, which is 
previously filled with food product and any suitable pressure-transmitting 
medium. The pressure is generated either by filling the chamber with the 
pressure-transmitting medium or by reducing the volume of the pressure 
chamber using piston system. The pressure-transmitting media commonly 
used include water and other food-grade liquids like glycol, ethanol, castor 
oil, etc. The selection of suitable pressure-transmitting medium is done after 
considering its viscosity, corrosive nature, and also the temperature and 
pressure ranges for the process.52,65 
For most preservation purposes, the working pressure is generally 
between 50 and 1000 MPa. No additional energies are required to keep 
the food product at the given pressure. However, there is an increase in 
the temperature with the increase in pressure due to adiabatic heating. This 
increase in temperature, also referred as compression heating is significant 
in case foods with high moisture like fruits, milk, etc..9
 In case of foods 
with high fat content, compression heating is also higher, which depends 
upon the pressurizing rate along with other factors.52 The application of HPP 
technology to improve the stability and safety of food products, which is 
evaluated primarily on the basis of its effect on inhibition of the spoilage 
and pathogenic microbes, has been extensively studied. The HPP treatment 
has been shown to cause sub-lethal injuries to the microbes which have a 
considerable effect on the preservation.39 
This technology has been effective in inactivation of microorganisms 
due to varying degree of damage caused to the cell constituents mainly cell 
membrane. The high-pressure results in the disruption of cell transport due 
to changes in the membrane transport proteins and also the phospholipid 
bilayer.53 However, the complete destruction of bacterial spores presents a 
challenge as they are highly resistant to extremes of temperature, pressure, 
radiation, etc..35 The efficacy of HPP for preservation in fruits and vegetables 
is mainly due to change in pH induced by the changes in pressure.56 The Preservation Strategies for Fruits and Vegetables 157 
effect of HPP on inactivation of microorganisms varies with the type of 
strain, processing conditions, among other factors. 
6.8.5 PULSED ELECTRIC FIELD 
The use of PEF has emerged as an alternative technology to the traditional 
thermal methods of preservation. The delaying of the microbial proliferation 
and the reduction in biochemical reaction of fruits and vegetables facilitated 
by drying on account of Pulse electric field is one of the evolving approaches 
on the way to the preservation technology. The conversion of raw agricultural 
commodity to a dried solid form by dehydration is an effective method in 
the preservation and transportation of the produce. The development of high 
electric field of the order of 10–80 KV/cm between the two electrodes by the 
application of high-intensity electric pulses ensures the microbial destruction 
at relatively low temperatures. 
The use of PEF for rapid electric breakdown of the cell membrane and 
intensification of pores has led to the extraction, dehydration, tenderiza￾tion, sterilization, aging, and byproduct valorization approaches in food 
processing. PEF technology is used to completely inactivate the enzymes, 
to preserve the harvested fruits and vegetables. Various studies suggest the 
role of PEF drying in the extension and preservation of bioactive compounds 
(polyphenols, carotenoids) of different fruits such as apples and carrots.23 
The PEF technology can be successfully used for the biosynthesis stimula￾tion of bioactive compounds from various fruits and vegetables to promote 
the preservation and health benefits. 
6.8.6 USE OF LIGHT EMITTING DIODES 
The application of ultraviolet (UV) light as food-processing method carries on 
growing widely because of its dry, non-chemically intrusive and non-thermal 
nature. Ultraviolet light method is still utilized in commercial processing of 
numerous solid, liquids food items, various meats items, as well as bakery 
items.17 UV light of 200–400 nm splits in germicidal UV three zones A: B: 
C lights (320–400 nm, 280–320 nm, and 200–280 nm).17 Traditional types 
of prolonged monochrome UV light tend to be high-voltage arc-discharge 
mercury and mercury-amalgam lamps, usually known as low pressure (LP) 
lamps, which discharge UV-C light at 253.7 nm. 158 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
Presently, an improvement in light-emitting diode (LED) method has 
permitted the advancement of UV light sources that will outwit various 
drawbacks while providing several other benefits. Light-emitting diode 
(semiconductor) creates illumination by electroluminescence with a p-side 
and an n-side, forming a p–n junction by electronic overlap. The flowing 
of electrons and holes from one side to other in diode is facilitated by the 
electric Potential across the ends. The interaction of electron–hole to create 
electroluminescence takes triggers the electrons to slide to a lesser energy 
state, thus discharging a photon leading to the discharge of light of a unique 
frequency19 giving rise to the generation of monochrome illumination, 
having fine bandwidth of wavelengths exactly like distinctive shades to a 
person’s eye. 
Light of different wavelengths (red and IR light from Gallium arsenide, 
blue lights from gallium nitride and yellow, green, red and orange from 
indium gallium aluminum phosphide) is obtained from different semicon￾ducting materials.19 All kinds of sugars, amino acids, multivitamins, as 
well as organic acids within fruit and veggies have always been valuable 
compounds when it comes to human health. Lower standard will impact the 
content of Vitamin C inside plants by governing the function of Vitamin C 
synthesis and breakdown enzymes, and it also governs carbohydrate build￾up as well as amino acids metabolism in plants. 
The Red light boosts the build-up of carbohydrate, and the blue light 
stimulates the development of protein. Flavonoids, phenolic compounds, 
anthocyanins, and other compounds present in fruit and veggies not merely 
have a crucial effect on the flavor, hues, as well as economical worth of 
veggies and fruits, but additionally own natural free radical cleansing 
activity, which enable it to considerably suppress free radicals in human. 
The use of blue LED light can assist the increase in anthocyanin content, and 
the mixture of blue and red light helps in the flavonoids content build-up. 
Therefore, the LED illumination can be effectively used for the enhancement 
in the nutritional quality of vegetables and fruits. The strategy to cultivate 
the food products in closed domain (control of water, atmosphere nutrients, 
and light) by the use of Upright farming allows the development of pesticide 
free crops. Also, the use of different type LED lighting plans (red/blue or red/ 
white both with and without far red) in such business ranches with the main 
focus to minimize postharvest losses. 
Generally, the temperature, relative humidity, and gaseous control are the 
main conditions to control postharvest quality.30 Also, the succinct dose of 
specific light can be helpful in the keeping quality of fruits and vegetables Preservation Strategies for Fruits and Vegetables 159 
then when put in darkness. However, sufficient literature is still underway 
to see the exact influence of light on postharvest behavior of vegetables and 
fruits.8 Accordingly, the better comprehension of the connection among light 
and postharvest quality might bring about helpful postharvest applications. 
The various studies demonstrate that some attributes such as nutrient 
content, appearance can be profoundly increased by the application of pre￾harvest continuous-light strategy.41 The LEDs can act as triggers and modi￾fiers in enzymatic and stilbene synthesis in some fruits2
 and can enhance the 
creation of supplementary metabolites, could be an impulse to these stresses 
or an effect due to sun-screening to shield plants from ionizing radiations.46 
LEDs can be developed as a milestone in the crop protection, increasing 
various health benefits, deactivating the enzymes, food pathogens, and in the 
shelf-life increase in fruits and vegetables by exploitation of comparable and 
compatible LED wavelengths combination. 
6.8.7 EDIBLE PACKAGING 
The aspect of the shelf-life increase in the fruit and vegetable sector is their 
proper packaging. Different types of food packaging are available in the food 
sector ranging from cardboard, glass to polymeric packaging, yet the pack￾aging of fruits and vegetables needs to be well perceived considering their 
delicate and perishable nature. The abundance of natural renewable sources 
used as biodegradable packaging reshaped the packaging technology and 
ensured the safe and appropriate utilization of biological resources. 
The use of natural materials like cotton, wool, and leather, silk for 
packaging due to their structural and functional properties has inspired in 
creating new forms of packaging systems. The development and utiliza￾tion of edible films and coatings as eco-friendly packaging technology has 
offered the extensive increase in the shelf life of various food products. The 
use of natural biopolymers such as polysaccharides, proteins, and lipids or 
the combination of these has potential of development and effective utiliza￾tion as edible packaging.22 
The use of polysaccharides in the development of edible packaging has 
shown to be effective due to their functional and unique structural prop￾erties. These polymers are mostly derived from plant, animal and marine 
sources. The increased quality by decreasing the desiccation of the fruits 
and vegetables to the prevention of oxidation of various food products 
edible coatings and films is the promising breakthrough. The use of edible 160 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
coating and films although seems to be a new technology but its usage has 
been found very early in the Chinese traditional way of preserving fruits by 
coating methods.21 
In the early 1900s, the dry fruits and nuts were coated with sucrose for 
prevention of oxidative rancidity, but with the concerns of appearance (gloss, 
color), delaying in ripening, delaying pf dehydration, the emulsion-based 
waxes were introduced. With the advancement and compatibility of the 
products, various biopolymers are now introduced to reduce the posthar￾vest shrinkage and other factors in the produce. The attention toward the 
edible packaging sectors is increasing due to its biodegradable, environment 
friendly, and, simply, availability. 
In fruits and vegetables, the delaying of ripening, increasing shelf life, 
facilitated by the decrease in the respiration rate have manifold scope. One 
of the major benefits of edible coating and films is their edibility, increase in 
the sensory attributes, and their extra nutritional benefits. The edible coating 
and films can be added with the bioactive substances (antimicrobials, 
antioxidants, and nutraceuticals) to increase the functionality in fruits and 
vegetables. The goals like improvement in barrier, nutritional, sensory, and 
carrier properties are to some extent improved by the use of edible films and 
coating in the field of fruit and vegetable preservation.33,46,54 
6.8.8 ULTRASOUND TECHNOLOGY 
The use of novel techniques such as ultrasound is gaining popularity in the 
food sectors due to its application in the extraction, processing, and food 
preservation. The various frequencies range of the ultrasound makes it suit￾able to different functions. The use of frequency more than 100 kHz with 
intensity less than 1 Wcm2 is used for quality analysis and is known as low 
energy ultrasound. The use of frequency in the range of 20 and 500 kHz 
with more than 1 W-cm2
 intensity causes food disintegration and is known 
as high-energy ultrasound.32,61 The power, frequency, treatment temperature, 
and time of ultrasound exposure assist in the effectiveness of the ultrasound. 
This non-thermal method is able to reduce the microbial concentration 
through the process of cavitation.51 This ultrasound technique is also used 
for the destruction of various pathogenic microbes like E. coli, Listeria 
monocytogenes in different fruit juices. 
The various comparative studies suggest that the use of ultrasound can 
maintain the various physiological parameters (Vitamin C, pH, acidity, and 
TSS) of fruits in comparison with the untreated fruits with 40 Hz frequency Preservation Strategies for Fruits and Vegetables 161 
at constant power of 350 W.31,61 Therefore, the ultrasound is the one of the 
emerging non-thermal method of decontamination of microbial load from 
fruits and vegetables to increase the shelf life and quality parameters.29 The 
ultrasound can also be used in bringing the structural change of various 
enzymes such as pectin-methyl esterase and other enzymes present in fruits 
and vegetables. The change in secondary and tertiary protein structure by the 
breakage of intermolecular bonds within the molecule by cavitation helps 
in the restriction of enzyme activity. This restriction of enzymatic activity 
ceases the metabolic processes by enzyme inactivation and restriction, and 
thus help in the increase of postharvest storage. 
This technology being environment friendly, energy saving is efficient 
in the increases of produce shelf life with reduction in cost compared to 
other processing methods. The fruit and vegetable surfaces can be cleaned 
to enable the removal of pesticide residues and chemical contaminants for 
ensuring good quality and shelf life. Some studies suggest the application of 
ultrasound is helpful in improving the mechanical characteristics of the fruit 
and vegetables by the cell wall polysaccharide stabilization. 
6.9 SUMMARY 
Food preservation has been pivotal to our society since the beginning. 
Preservation has come from simple processes such as salting to more complex 
preserving methods, such as, irradiation and chemical additives. While the 
most-occupied preservation technologies have a long history of use, there 
is currently a real need for improved techniques, to meet the developing 
needs of consumers. Some improvements are being derived from the use 
of established techniques in new combinations or under improved control 
and other improvements are being derived essentially from the development 
of new techniques. These are finding, at first, new and attractive, but 
niche, markets. It is expected that these will expand as experience in the 
new techniques is gained. If the resistance of bacterial spores to some of 
the new techniques could be overcome, and in manner that was widely 
proven and accepted to be safe, then the potentially markets could be 
immeasurably larger. Particular attraction of the new techniques is that they 
act by inactivation rather than by inhibition. With respect to the reduction of 
the incidences of food poisoning, the introduction of effective inactivation 
techniques that lead to the elimination of the pathogens must be the ultimate 
target of the primary food producers, processors, distributors, and retailers. 
Looking into the future, high-pressure preservation seems to be the next  
 
162 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
logical step. In an increasingly health-conscious world, an uncontaminated 
world, well-preserved food source is the ultimate goal, and hopefully the 
costs of production will decrease for all of us to enjoy HPP foods. 
KEYWORDS 
• chemical additives 
food producers 
fruits 
hygiene 
irradiation 
preservation strategies 
vegetables 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
REFERENCES 
1. Ahmed, N.; Singh, J.; Chauhan, H.; Anjum, P. G. A.; Kour, H. Different Drying Methods: 
Their Applications and Recent Advances. Int. J. Food Nutr. Safet. 2013, 4 (1), 34–42. 
2. Ahn, S. Y.; Kim, S. A.; Choi, S. J.; Yun, H. K. Comparison of Accumulation of Stilbene 
Compounds and Stilbene Related Gene Expression in Two Grape Berries Irradiated with 
Different Light Sources. Hort. Environ. Biotechnol. 2015, 56 (1), 36–43. 
3. Alzamora, S. M.; Guerrero, S. N.; López-Malo, A.; Welti-Chanes, J.; Palou, E.; Argaiz, 
A.; Tapia, M. S. Combined Preservation Techniques for Fresh Fruit. In Improving the 
Safety of Fresh Fruit and Vegetables; Woodhead Publishing: London, 2005; pp 599–630. 
4. Amaro, A. L.; Almeida, D. P. F.; Malcata, F. X.; Beaulieu, J. C.; Stein, R. E. Volatile 
Composition and Quality of Fresh-Cut Cucumis melo as Affected by Modified and 
Controlled Atmospheres. VI Int. Postharv. Symp. 2009, 877, 603–609. 
5. Baert, L.; Mattison, K.; Loisy-Hamon, F.; Harlow, J.; Martyres, A.; Lebeau, B.; Stals, 
A.; Van Coillie, E.; Herman, L.; Uyttendaele, M. Norovirus Prevalence in Belgian, 
Canadian and French Fresh Produce: A Threat to Human Health? Int. J. Food Microbiol. 
2011, 151 (3), 261–269. 
6. Barrett, D. M.; Lloyd, B. Advanced Preservation Methods and Nutrient Retention in 
Fruits and Vegetables. J. Sci. Food Agric. 2012, 92 (1), 7–22. 
7. Bibi, N.; Khattak, A. B.; Mehmood, Z. Quality Improvement and Shelf-Life Extension 
of Persimmon Fruit (Diospyros kaki). J. Food Eng. 2007, 79 (4), 1359–1363. 
8. Braidot, E.; Petrussa, E.; Peresson, C.; Patui, S.; Bertolini, A.; Tubaro, F.; Wählby, U.; 
Coan, M.; Vianello, A.; Zancani, M. Low-Intensity Light Cycles Improve the Quality of 
Lamb’s Lettuce (Valerian ellaolitoria L.) During Storage at Low Temperature. Postharv. 
Biol. Technol. 2014, 90, 15–23. Preservation Strategies for Fruits and Vegetables 163 
9. Buzrul, S.; Alpas, H.; Largeteau, A.; Bozoglu, F.; Demazeau, G. Compression Heating 
of Selected Pressure Transmitting Fluids and Liquid Foods During High Hydrostatic 
Pressure Treatment. J. Food Eng. 2008, 85 (3), 466–472. 
10. Char, C.; Silveira, A. C.; Inestroza-Lizardo, C.; Hinojosa, A.; Machuca, A.; Escalona, V. 
H. Effect of Noble Gas-Enriched Atmospheres on the Overall Quality of Ready-to-Eat 
Arugula Salads. Postharv. Biol. Technol. 2012, 73, 50–55. 
11. Chitravathi, K.; Chauhan, O. P.; Raju, P. S.; Madhukar, N. Efficacy of Aqueous Ozone 
and Chlorine in Combination with Passive Modified Atmosphere Packaging on the 
Postharvest Shelf-Life Extension of Green Chillies (Capsicum annuum L.). Food 
Bioprocess Technol. 2015, 8 (6), 386–1392. 
12. Costa, C.; Lucera, A.; Conte, A.; Mastromatteo, M.; Speranza, B.; Antonacci, A.; Del 
Nobile, M. A. Effects of Passive and Active Modified Atmosphere Packaging Conditions 
on Ready-to-Eat Table Grape. J. Food Eng. 2011, 102 (2), 115–121. 
13. de Siqueira Oliveira, L.; Eça, K. S.; de Aquino, A. C.; da Silva, L. M. R. Modified 
and Controlled Atmosphere Packaging. In Fresh-Cut Fruits and Vegetables; Academic 
Press: New York, 2020; pp 151–164. 
14. Finnegan, E.; O’Beirne, D. Characterizing Deterioration Patterns in Fresh-Cut Fruit 
Using Principal Component Analysis, Part II: Effects of Ripeness Stage, Seasonality, 
Processing and Packaging. Postharv. Biol. Technol. 2015, 100, 91–98. 
15. Goleman, A.; Boyatzis, D.; Mckee, R. Postharvest Losses in Selected Fruits and 
Vegetables in India. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2019, 53 (9), 1689–1699. 
16. Gouble, B.; Fath, D.; Soudain, P. Nitrous Oxide Inhibition of Ethylene Production in 
Ripening and Senescing Climacteric Fruits. Postharv. Biol. Technol. 1995, 5 (4), 311–321. 
17. Green, A. UV Light-Based Interventions to Inactivate Pathogens on Fresh Produce 
Through the Use of UV-LEDs and Water-Assisted Processing. PhD Dissertation; 
Department of Food Science at University of Guelph, Toronto, 2018; p 231. 
18. Guerreiro, A. C.; Gago, C. M.; Faleiro, M. L.; Miguel, M. G.; Antunes, M. D. The Effect 
of Edible Coatings on the Nutritional Quality of Fresh-Cut Apple Through Shelf-Life. 
LWT, 2017, 75, 210–219. 
19. Gupta, S. D.; Jatothu, B. Fundamentals and Applications of Light-Emitting Diodes (LEDs) 
in In Vitro Plant Growth and Morphogenesis. Plant Biotechnol. Rep. 2013, 7 (3), 211–220. 
20. Gutiérrez, T. J., Ed. Polymers for Agri-Food Applications; Springer International 
Publishing: Switzerland, 2019; p 622. 
21. Han, J. H. Edible Films and Coatings: A Review. Innov. Food Packaging 2014, 2014, 
213–255. 
22. Hassan, B.; Chatha, S. A. S.; Hussain, A. I.; Zia, K. M.; Akhtar, N. Recent Advances on 
Polysaccharides, Lipids and Protein Based Edible Films and Coatings: A Review. Int. J. 
Biol. Macromol. 2018, 109, 1095–1107. 
23. Hazervazifeh, A.; Nikbakht, A. M.; Moghaddam, P. A. Novel Hybridized Drying 
Methods for Processing of Apple Fruit: Energy Conservation Approach. Energy 2016, 
103, 679–687. 
24. Hegazy, R. Postharvest Situation and Losses in India: Figshare. Journal Contribution. 
https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.3206851.v1. (accessed Aug 1, 2021). 
25. Hsieh, C. F.; Liu, W.; Whaley, J. K.; Shi, Y. C. Structure, Properties, and Potential 
Applications of Waxy Tapioca Starches–A Review. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2019, 
83, 225–234. 164 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
26. Jacxsens, L.; Devlieghere, F.; Van der Steen, C.; Debevere, J. Effect of High Oxygen 
Modified Atmosphere Packaging on Microbial Growth and Sensorial Qualities of 
Fresh-Cut Produce. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2001, 71 (2–3), 197–210. 
27. James, I. F. Preservation of Fruit and Vegetables. Agrodok Series 3; Wageningen: 
Agromisa Foundation; 2003, Series 3; p 87. 
28. Jeddi, M. Z.; Yunesian, M.; Gorji, M. E. H.; Noori, N.; Pourmand, M. R.; Khaniki, G. R. 
J. Microbial Evaluation of Fresh, Minimally-Processed Vegetables and Bagged Sprouts 
from Chain Supermarkets. J. Health Population Nutr. 2014, 32 (3), 391–399. 
29. Jiang, Q.; Zhang, M.; Xu, B. Application of Ultrasonic Technology in Post Harvested 
Fruits and Vegetables Storage: A Review. Ultrasonics Sonochem. 2020,105261. 
30. Kader, A. A. Increasing Food Availability by Reducing Postharvest Losses of Fresh 
Produce. In V International Postharvest Symposium 682; Acta Horticulture; 2004 
(June); pp 2169–2176. 
31. Khademi, O.; Ashtari, M.; Razavi, F. Effects of Salicylic Acid and Ultrasound 
Treatments on Chilling Injury Control and Quality Preservation in Banana Fruit During 
Cold Storage. Sci. Hort. 2019, 249, 334–339. 
32. Khandpur, P.; Gogate, P. R. Effect of Novel Ultrasound—Based Processing on the 
Nutrition Quality of Different Fruit and Vegetable Juices. Ultrasonics Sonochem. 2015, 
27, 125–136. 
33. Kore, V. T.; Tawade, S. S.; Kabir, J. Application of Edible Coatings on Fruits and 
Vegetables Application of Edible Coatings on Fruits and Vegetables. Imperial J. 
Interdiscipl. Res. (Online), 2016, 3 (1), 591–603. 
34. Latou, E.; Mexis, S. F.; Badeka, A. V.; Kontakos, S.; Kontominas, M. G. Combined 
Effect of Chitosan and Modified Atmosphere Packaging for Shelf-Life Extension of 
Chicken Breast Fillets. LWT-Food Sci. Technol. 2014, 55 (1), 263–268. 
35. Liu, F.; Wang, Y.; Li, R.; Bi, X.; Liao, X. Effects of High Hydrostatic Pressure and High 
Temperature Short Time on Antioxidant Activity, Antioxidant Compounds and Color of 
Mango Nectars. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2014, 21, 35–43. 
36. López-Gálvez, F.; Ragaert, P.; Haque, M. A.; Eriksson, M.; van Labeke, M. C.; 
Devlieghere, F. High Oxygen Atmospheres Can Induce Russet Spotting Development 
in Minimally Processed Iceberg Lettuce. Postharv. Biol. Technol. 2015, 100, 168–175. 
37. Ma, L.; Zhang, M.; Bhandari, B.; Gao, Z. Recent Developments in Novel Shelf-Life 
Extension Technologies of Fresh-Cut Fruits and Vegetables. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 
2017, 64, 23–38. 
38. Mangaraj, S.; Goswami, T. K.; Mahajan, P. V. Applications of Plastic Films for Modified 
Atmosphere Packaging of Fruits and Vegetables: A Review. Food Eng. Rev. 2009, 1 (2), 
133–158. 
39. McClements, J. M. J.; Patterson, M. F.; Linton, M. The Effect of Growth Stage and 
Growth Temperature on High Hydrostatic Pressure Inactivation of Some Psychotropic 
Bacteria in Milk. J. Food Protection 2001, 64 (4), 514–522. 
40. 40. Mrema, G. C.; Kienzle, J. and Mpagalile, J. Current Status and Future Prospects 
of Agricultural Mechanization in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). Agric. Mech. Asia Africa 
Latin Am. 2018, 49 (2), 13–30. 
41. Nicole, C. C. S.; Mooren, J.; Pereira Terra, A. T.; Larsen, D. H.; Woltering, E. J.; Marcelis, 
L. F. M.; Verdonk, J.; Schouten, R.; Troost, F. Effects of LED Lighting Recipes on 
Postharvest Quality of Leafy Vegetables Grown in a Vertical Farm. In VI International 
Conference Postharvest Unlimited #1256; Acta Horticulture, 2019, 2019 (Nov.), 481–488. Preservation Strategies for Fruits and Vegetables 165 
42. Norton, T.; Delgado, A.; Hogan, E.; Grace, P.; Sun, D. W. Simulation of High-Pressure 
Freezing Processes by Enthalpy Method. J. Food Eng. 2009, 91 (2), 260–268. 
43. Oladipupo, S. O.; Osunyemi, O. S.; Jayi, O. M. Synergistic Effect of Packaging Materials 
and Methanolic Extract of Myrianthus arboreus on the Control of Callosobruchus 
maculatus. J. Food Technol. Pres. 2018, 2, 6–10. 
44. Oliveira, M.; Abadias, M.; Usall, J.; Torres, R.; Teixidó, N.; Viñas, I. Application 
of Modified Atmosphere Packaging as a Safety Approach to Fresh-Cut Fruits and 
Vegetables–A Review. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2015, 46 (1), 13–26. 
45. Onwude, D. I.; Hashim, N.; Janius, R.; Abdan, K.; Chen, G.; Oladejo, A. O. Non-Thermal 
Hybrid Drying of Fruits and Vegetables: A Review of Current Technologies. Innov. 
Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2017, 43, 223–238. 
46. Park, S. U.; Ahn, D. J.; Jeon, H. J.; Kwon, T. R.; Lim, H. S.; Choi, B. S.; Baek, K. H.; 
Bae, H. Increase in the Contents of Ginsenosides in Raw Ginseng Roots in Response to 
Exposure to 450 and 470 nm Light from Light-Emitting Diodes. J. Ginseng Res. 2012, 
36 (2), 198–203. 
47. Pinela, J.; Barreira, J. C.; Barros, L.; Antonio, A. L.; Carvalho, A. M.; Oliveira, M. B. 
P.; Ferreira, I. C. Postharvest Quality Changes in Fresh-Cut Watercress Stored Under 
Conventional and Inert Gas-Enriched Modified Atmosphere Packaging. Postharv. Biol. 
Technol. 2016, 112, 55–63. 
48. Prasad, N. K.; Yang, B.; Zhao, M.; Wang, B. S.; Chen, F.; Jiang, Y. Effects of High￾Pressure Treatment on the Extraction Yield, Phenolic Content and Antioxidant Activity 
of Litchi (Litchi chinensis Sonn.) Fruit Pericarp. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 2009, 44 (5), 
960–966. 
49. Rahman, M. S., Ed. Handbook of Food Preservation; CRC Press, 2007. 
50. Ramaswamy, H. S. Postharvest Technologies of Fruits and Vegetables; DEStech 
Publications, Inc.: Lancaster, Pennsylvania, 2014; p 364. 
51. Ramos, B.; Miller, F. A.; Brandão, T. R. S.; Teixeira, P.; Silva, C. L. M. Fresh Fruits 
and Vegetables—An Overview on Applied Methodologies to Improve Its Quality and 
Safety. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2013, 20, 1. 
52. Rastogi, N. K.; Raghavarao, K. S. M. S.; Balasubramaniam, V. M.; Niranjan, K.; Knorr, 
D. Opportunities and Challenges in High Pressure Processing of Foods. Crit. Rev. Food 
Sci. Nutr. 2007, 47 (1), 69–112. 
53. Rivalain, N.; Roquain, J.; Demazeau, G. Development of High Hydrostatic Pressure 
in Biosciences: Pressure Effect on Biological Structures and Potential Applications in 
Biotechnologies. Biotechnol. Adv. 2010, 28 (6), 659–672. 
54. Rojas-Graü, M. A.; Soliva-Fortuny, R.; Martín-Belloso, O. Edible Coatings to 
Incorporate Active Ingredients to Fresh-Cut Fruits: A Review. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 
2009, 20 (10), 438–447. 
55. Rosenthal, A.; Torrezan, R.; Schmidt, F. L.; Narain, N. Preservation and Processing of 
Tropical and Subtropical Fruits. In: Postharvest Biology and Technology of Tropical 
and Subtropical Fruits: Cocona to Mango; Woodhead Publishing: London, 2011; pp 
419–485. 
56. Samaranayake, C. P.; Sastry, S. K. In Situ Measurement of pH Under High Pressure. J. 
Phys. Chem. B 2010, 114 (42), 13326–13332. 
57. Sandhu, P. P. Status and Recent Trends in Fresh-Cut Fruits and Vegetables. In: Fresh-Cut 
Fruits and Vegetables: Technologies and Mechanisms for Safety Control, Vol. 17; 
Academic Press: New York, 2019; pp 17–49. 166 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
58. Schuh, V.; Schuh, J.; Fronza, N.; Foralosso, F. B.; Verruck, S.; Vargas Junior, A.; Silveira, 
S. M. D. Evaluation of the Microbiological Quality of Minimally Processed Vegetables. 
Food Sci. Technol. 2020, 40 (2), 290–295. 
59. Sen, C.; Mishra, H. N.; Srivastav, P. P. Modified Atmosphere Packaging and Active 
Packaging of Banana: A Review on Control of Ripening and Extension of Shelf-Life. J. 
Stored Prod. Postharv. Res. 2012, 3 (9), 122–132. 
60. Sharif, Z. I. M.; Mustapha, F. A.; Jai, J.; Yusof, N. M.; Zaki, N. A. M. Review on 
Methods for Preservation and Natural Preservatives for Extending the Food Longevity. 
Chem. Eng. Res. Bull. 2017, 2017, 145–153. 
61. Sousa-Gallagher, M. J.; Tank, A.; Sousa, R. Emerging Technologies to Extend the Shelf￾Life and Stability of Fruits and Vegetables. Stab. Shelf-Life Food 2016, 2016, 399–430. 
62. Stitt, Maud E. Preservation of Fruits and Vegetables by Drying; 1943; SDSU Extension 
Leaflets 76; pp 5. https://openprairie.sdstate.edu/extension_leaflets/76 (accessed Aug 1, 
2021). 
63. Thompson, F. E.; Willis, G. B.; Thompson, O. M.; Yaroch, A. L. The Meaning of Fruits 
and Vegetables. Public Health Nutr. 2011, 11 (7), 1222–1228. 
64. Wright, K. P.; Kader, A. A. Effect of Slicing and Controlled-Atmosphere Storage on 
the Ascorbate Content and Quality of Strawberries and Persimmons. Postharv. Biol. 
Technol. 1997, 10 (1), 39–48. 
65. Yaldagard, M.; Mortazavi, S. A.; Tabatabaie, F. The principles of Ultra-High Pressure 
Technology and Its Application in Food Processing/Preservation: A Review of 
Microbiological and Quality Aspects. Afr. J. Biotechnol. 2008, 7 (16), 2739–2767. 
66. Yang, Q.; Zhang, X.; Wang, F.; Zhao, Q. Effect of Pressurized Argon Combined with 
Controlled Atmosphere on the Postharvest Quality and Browning of Sweet Cherries. 
Postharv. Biol. Technol. 2019, 147, 59–67. 
67. Yousuf, B.; Qadri, O. S.; Srivastava, A. K. Recent Developments in Shelf-Life Extension 
of Fresh-Cut Fruits and Vegetables by Application of Different Edible Coatings: A 
Review. LWT, 2018, 89, 198–209. Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing: Methods and Strategies. Megh R. Goyal, & 
Faizan Ahmad (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
CHAPTER 7 
OSMOTIC DEHYDRATION 
TECHNOLOGY FOR PRESERVATION 
OF FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
ARSHIED MANZOOR, BISMA JAN, QURAT UL EAIN HYDER RIZVI, 

PIR MOHAMMAD JUNAID, JUNAID AHMAD PANDITH, 

ISHFAQ HAMID DAR, SHAYEEB AHMAD BHAT, and
 
SAGHIR AHMAD
 
ABSTRACT 
Dehydration is the earliest form of conventional preservation method to 
provide long-lasting durability of foods. Preserving the freshness of fruits 
and vegetables (FAV) through the process of osmotic dehydration (OD) has 
led to several research studies in recent years, and this method consists of 
impregnation of vegetables or fruits in hypertonic solutions (mostly sugar and 
salt solution), thereby developing intermediate moisture products through 
moisture content reduction and solute gain. This technique is commonly 
applied before the actual drying process. Also, the OD can extend the shelf 
life of food products by slowing down the deteriorating physicochemical and 
biological activities. It operates at ambient temperature thus preventing the 
phase change and consumes less energy than other drying processes, besides 
improving the sensory and nutritional characteristics of foods. This process 
also helps in the retention of natural color, inhibition of enzymatic browning, 
and retention of volatile compounds in foods. 168 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
7.1 INTRODUCTION 
Fruits and vegetables (FAV) are source of natural antioxidants and dietary 
fiber that have attracted researchers for their exploration and preservation.29 
In India, fresh produce contributes to about 30% of its gross domestic product 
(GDP) and it is also the second-largest producer of horticultural produce. 
However, almost 40% of the total production is wasted due to inadequate 
storage and proper retailing potentials. This has paved the way for the food 
industries and food technologists to search for strategies that can cater to 
these issues and help to extend the shelf life, while maintaining their quality 
in the safest possible way. 
The osmotic dehydration (OD) process is the difference in osmotic 
pressure to direct the transfer of water from food to the solution at low 
temperature and low-energy consumption. It signifies that the water is 
moved to a higher concentration of solute from a lower solute concentration 
through complex cellular structure acting as a semipermeable membrane.49,54 
OD is also a preferred pretreatment due to its inability to remove moisture to 
a level necessary to arrest the microbial growth. In this process of OD, the 
food material in different forms (peeled, cut or even sliced) are placed within 
the medium containing sugars (sucrose, glucose, etc.) with a concentration 
on the higher side. 
Fruit slices or cubes are dehydrated osmotically in the sugar syrup while 
brine/sodium chloride is preferred for the vegetables. The process of osmosis 
has been practiced for a long for the water removal from food materials 
thereby preserving them. However, in the last few decades, researchers have 
paid attention to this “dewatering-impregnation” process, which has brought 
an immense improvement and upgradation in techniques on osmotic dehydra￾tion.9
 OD has proved as an important tool in the minimal processing of FAV. 
OD finds its applications in horticultural products highlighting FAV 
for water removal and soluble solid content increment.21 The process is 
accompanied by loss of weight in the food material causing shrinkage due 
to the exchange of water and natural substances in the food–water system. 
Moreover, OD is devoid of significant damage to color, texture or flavor 
of FAV, where the water activity is reduced to 0.9, thereby maintaining its 
sensorial and textural integrity.39 
Retention of color and flavor is also favored due to mild temperature in the 
OD process, mostly below 50°C. Also, enzymatic and oxidative discoloration 
have not been reported in OD as the product needs to be immersed in an 
osmotic solution that makes the process oxygen-free, hence it avoids blanching Osmotic Dehydration Technology for Preservation 169 
of the food product or use of SO2
. Longer duration of the process favors the 
bulk intake of solute into food material that was low initially, conferring its 
dependence on time duration. These positive impacts have made OD as an 
energy-efficient alternative besides widening its applications to many FAV 
(apricot, banana, mango, potato, apple guava, grapes, cherry, etc.). 
This chapter highlights (1) the mechanism of osmatic dehydration (OD), 
(2) the factors influencing OD, and (3) the various processes in combination 
with OD to enhance the process of OD coupled with improving the quality 
of FAV during storage. Moreover, this chapter will emphasize on the applica￾tions of OD in food processing with recent advances in the process. 
7.2 MECHANISM OF OSMOTIC DEHYDRATION (OD) 
The OD process is carried out by the immersion of a fruit or a vegetable 
(whole or sliced) in hypertonic (with high osmotic pressure) osmotic 
solutions containing salt or sugars, such as sucrose, glucose, thus resulting 
in nutritious, safe, economical, and also concentrated food products with 
increased shelf life (Figure 7.1). The principle of operation for this process 
is a concentration gradient between the intracellular fluid in the food and 
the solution containing the food, and the process continues till equilibrium 
is established through the semipermeable membrane.9 The complex internal 
structure of the food system does not allow the semipermeable membrane 
to be perfect. Therefore, allowing movement of solids into the food system 
portrays OD as the process of water and solute diffusion simultaneously.33 
FIGURE 7.1 Different transfer processes in the osmotic dehydration technology. Advantages Disadvantages 
Minimizing the color and flavor loss After OD process, the food product needs to be 
credited to the low-temperature treatment
 rinsed quickly to remove the coating of sugar 
adhered to it 
Energy-efficiency is due to the absence of When used in combination with other 
phase change.
 techniques, OD proves out to be more expensive 
A minimum load on the dryer used is It takes a long time to result in the minimum 
credited to the partial removal of water.
 water activity 
Efficient flavor retention is credited to the Water activity in the food products after 
use of sugar or sugar syrup as the osmotic dehydrating osmotically consists of higher 
solution.
 water activity 
No need to use CO or undergo blanching 2 OD results in the alteration of food products 
due to the full immersion of fruit/
 concerned to its taste credited to the acidity 
vegetable pieces into the osmotic solution
 level reduction 
Leads to a better texture of the food OD fails to minimize the moisture up to a level 
product when reconstituted
 necessary to arrest the microbial growth, hence 
preferred as a pretreatment only 
Food product quality is improved credited – 
to the solid density increment due to solid 
uptake 
The food products can be stored for – 
longer durations
 
Cost (packaging and distribution costs) – 
reduction
 
170 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
During the osmotic dehydration process, water diffuses initially at a 
faster rate followed by a slow movement out of the food material, and solute 
present in the osmotic solution diffuses initially at a slower rate followed 
by faster rate into the immersed food product. At this point occurs a third 
process comprising of loss or leaching of sugars, acids, minerals, vitamins 
into the immersion medium side by side that is responsible for the alteration 
of the product’s organoleptic and nutritional characteristics. Advantages 
and disadvantages of OD process are listed in Table 7.1.16,18,36 Figure 7.2 
describes the osmotic dehydration process. 
TABLE 7.1 Advantages and Disadvantages of Osmotic Dehydration Process. 
7.3 OSMOTIC DEHYDRATION: APPLICATIONS IN PROCESSING 
AND PRESERVATION OF FOOD ITEMS 
In foods, fruits, and vegetables, it is a well-established fact that several tech￾niques for the OD process will decide their acceptance by consumer based Osmotic Dehydration Technology for Preservation 171 
on the extent of alternation in properties (both sensory and nutrition based) 
of foods.22,34,50 OD helps to produce food products quite similar to natural 
or dehydrated products in terms of sensory aspects, hence, it is considered 
a simple and gentle method of processing for quality enhancement. OD of 
apple slices in 60–70° Brix sugar solution resulted in a 50% reduction in 
weight with superior quality and eliminated the need to use sulfur dioxide for 
color retention. The credit of determination of various activities (physical/ 
chemical/biological) in foods is due to the OD process causing partial 
removal of water thereby forming intermediate moisture foods with the least 
water activity, which possibly reduces the chances of food deterioration.35 
OD is used to develop new and high-quality products through the 
incorporation of various techniques resulting in the stabilization of texture 
and pigments by maximizing the sugar to acid ratio. It reduces enzymatic 
browning and prevents any damage to the color and flavor of food materials. 
Azoubell and Francinaide6 suggested that the optimum conditions for 25% of 
maximum water removal and 6% of minimum solid uptake in mango fruits 
used 44% w/w osmotic solution at a temperature 38°C after an immersion 
time of 80 min. A combination of different osmotic agents can help in the 
evolution of flavor and sensory enhancement. 
Osorio et al.32 observed that ascorbic acid and lycopene content were 
significantly influenced in addition to anthocyanin and flavor elution into the 
osmotic solution coupled with decreased water activity using a combination 
of 70% sucrose, 70% sucrose + 65% glucose and ethanol for the OD of 
Tamarillo and Andes berry. Similarly, using a combination of sucrose and 
salt (1:1.5) solution significantly reduced the weight of tomato rings that 
avoided the need for sulfur dioxide for color retention compared with the 
OD of banana in 100% sucrose solution.3
 For removing the water to a level 
guaranteeing food safety, the food needs to be further dried as the OD does 
not provide the bone-dry products. However, high-temperature usage is not 
preferred for the OD process, as it renders the alteration of tissue structure 
and impregnation phenomenon. 
7.4 FACTORS AFFECTING THE OSMOTIC DEHYDRATION 
7.4.1 PRETREATMENTS 
To prevent the food/biological materials from the detrimental effects caused 
through various drying techniques, researchers have incorporated different 
treatments before the OD process. Some of these prominent pretreatments 172 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
include blanching, alkaline dipping, high hydrostatic pressure (HHP), 
sulfating, and freezing.1 These pretreatments help to enhance the sensorial 
and nutritional quality according to Tadesse et al.46 through the combination 
of blanching and osmotic pretreatments in the sliced carrots. Color, a primary 
attribute which decides the consumer acceptance of FAV, can be preserved 
through pretreatments with SO2
 or blanching to reduce their discoloration. 
FIGURE 7.2 Flowchart of osmotic dehydration of FAV. Osmotic Dehydration Technology for Preservation 173 
Another pretreatment method to prevent enzymatic browning includes 
immersion of FAV in citric acid solution (1%) followed by drying or osmotic 
dehydration. Dipping in ascorbic acid (0.4%) for 30 min helped to obtain 
high acceptability in papaya and mango slices before osmosis. Dipping food 
materials in 1% citric acid prior to OD also helps to postpone the enzymatic 
browning.45 
7.4.2 CONCENTRATION AND TYPES OF OSMOTIC AGENTS 
Various properties of osmotic agents (molecular weight, state of existence, 
solubility, and other physicochemical properties) can influence the process 
of OD.23 Water removal kinetics along with equilibrium water content and 
solid gain is influenced by the osmotic solution concentration and character￾istics for the sample immersion during OD process. Moreover, the osmotic 
solute and their concentration create a gradient resulting in the development 
of driving force necessary for the transfer of solute and water counter across 
the semipermeable membrane and determines the final product acceptability. 
Hence, the compatibility of the various osmotic solutes (glucose, sodium 
chloride, sucrose, glycerol, sorbitol, corn syrup, glucose syrup, and fructo￾oligosaccharide) with the food material is an important aspect to be focused.50 
Moreover, the osmotic agents in the process of OD must have an acceptable 
taste coupled with harmless behavior. The molecular weight of the osmotic 
agent is the function of the solute penetration; for example, low molecular 
weight solutes can penetrate at a faster rate into the cells/ tissues of FAV.34 
For this challenge, the effective diffusion and mass flow rate was highest in 
apricot when immersed in the solution containing sucrose while the diffusion 
was lowest in sorbitol containing osmotic solution,17 such as glucose, 
fructose, maltodextrin, sucrose, and sorbitol. The authors also reported the 
occurrence of highest solid gains in the solution containing fructose and 
lowest in that containing maltodextrin. Osmotic agents in combination can 
increase the water removal efficiency of the OD process, according to Lenart 
and Flink,25 who observed an enormous increase in water loss from potato by 
immersing it in a solution containing salt and sucrose together. However, the 
use of a combination of various osmotic solutions seems to be more complex 
and may have negative impact on the sensorial perception hence affecting 
their consumer acceptance. 
Apart from the type of solvent, the rate of mass transfer in OD depends 
on the concentration of the solvents in use, based on the fact that water loss 174 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
and solute intake in FAV are enhanced by increasing the osmotic solution 
concentration until equilibrium has reached.24,34,50 For example, studies on 
OD of watermelon slabs, apricot, and pomegranate arils in sucrose solution 
of 40, 50, and 60°Brix reported that the highest transfer of water was from 
the sample to the solution and solids in the reverse direction in the samples 
immersed in 60°Brix solutions.13,17,30 After a longer duration of OD process, 
there occurs formation of a hard outer surface of the food samples due to a 
phenomenon called “case hardening” that reduces the mass flow rate to a 
larger extent.34 
7.4.3 DURATION OF THE OD PROCESS 
The process duration also affects the osmotic dehydration related to water 
loss and solid gain parameters. Generally, greater is the time of immersion of 
the product, the higher is the moisture loss and vice versa up to a certain limit 
called equilibrium, after which both occur at the same rate.17,30,34 However, a 
significant reduction in water loss and solid gain occurs after 2 h of product 
immersion, during which the highest transfer rate occurs. The transfers are 
at a faster rate during the initial time of product immersion that determines 
the fate of the OD process significantly afterward. This fact labels the initial 
period of immersion as a crucial one. 
7.4.4 THE TEMPERATURE OF THE OSMOTIC SOLUTION 
Heating represents an important step in food processing and enzymatic 
deactivation produced externally followed by passing into the food product.19 
OD kinetics has been affected by the temperature markedly, which is a prime 
factor in the OD process.50 Both the solid gain as well as water loss are 
increased upto 50°C, after which it decreases sharply near 60°C and remain 
nearly constant afterward. A temperature rise decreases the osmotic solution 
viscosity coupled with the plasticizing effect on the cell membranes that 
have been reported as the main factors responsible for the increase in the 
water loss during OD. 
However, a less significant effect is evident on the solid uptake by 
increasing the temperature.22 This is reported within a 30–60°C temperature 
range for FAV. However, Lazarides23 witnessed >50% increase in solid gain 
during the process of OD of apples at a temperature of 30–50°C due to Osmotic Dehydration Technology for Preservation 175 
the increase in cell permeability caused by the plasticizing effect. FAV are 
affected adversely, when they are processed osmotically above a temperature 
range of 50°C, for example, blue berries can be damaged if the temperature is 
above 60°C during OD.37 An increase in temperature during the OD process 
can significantly affect the chlorophyll and ascorbic acid retention. 
7.4.5 AGITATION DURING THE OD PROCESS 
Agitation reduces the mass transfer resistance resulting in increment in the 
osmotic dehydration rate. The role of agitation is quite beneficial due to the 
fact that it minimizes the mass transfer rates during OD due to the prevention 
of osmotic solution and food product contact by high concentrated solutions.34 
In general, agitation does not affect the solid gain directly during the OD 
process because of the limitless nature of the external transfer of osmotic 
solutes. Nevertheless, higher agitation rates for a longer duration can result 
in the reduction of the solid gain rate due to the creation of a thin subsurface 
layer by the slow solute diffusion rate and the change in solute concentration 
gradient.50 
Agitation reduces the chances for the formation of dilute solution film 
on the sample surface.2
 However, agitation helps the process of water loss 
during OD during the beginning of the process and mostly at low temperature. 
Agitation is reported to have the least or no effect on the solids gain if the OD 
occurs for a shorter period. However, a drastic or steep decrease in the solute 
gain has been reported for the longer duration of OD process. Vigorous 
agitation may render the FAV to be damaged leading to reduced consumer 
acceptance. Agitation can be performed by the use of a simple centrifugal 
pump that causes syrup circulation inside the solution. Gupta et al.15 reported 
that the water loss and solid gain rates were increased to a large extent by 
increasing the agitation coupled with an increase in temperature and immer￾sion time during the Osmo-convective dehydration of honey-ginger candy.15 
Therefore, agitation helps to decrease the contact time between food material 
and the osmotic solution thereby increasing the rate of mass transfer in OD. 
7.4.6 SAMPLE/SOLUTION RATIO 
The ratio of sample-to-solution results in an increase in the water and solute 
transfer rates during the OD process, which is decreased afterward.36 In FAV, 176 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
the sample/solution ratio is an important determining factor for the extent 
of the osmotic dehydration process. Several researchers have worked on the 
OD of FAV using different sample/solution ratio ranging from 1:1 to 1:5.15 
However, larger ratios (1:60, 1:30) have been used to prevent the 
possibility of significant dilution of the medium that can cause a reduction 
in the driving force necessary for OD.8 The most common combinations in 
practical applications are 1:2 or 1:3.49 Hence, it is suggested that one should 
select the sample-to-solution ratio wisely keeping in mind the dependence of 
water removal on the driving force created by this ratio. 
7.4.7 PRODUCT-RELATED FACTORS 
The shape of the food material undergoing the process of OD also affects the 
water loss and solid gain. For example, the rate of moisture loss and solid 
gain is increased due to the increased surface area coming in contact with the 
immersion medium.50 Moreover, the involved diffusion length of water and 
solutes depends on the sample geometry that will finally determine the rate 
of osmotic dehydration. For example, a bigger sized sample under consider￾ation has an enlarged path compared with its surface area responsible for the 
exchange of solids. 
Therefore, type of geometry restricts the entry of the solids into the 
sample and the rate of OD is decreased.41 Also, the change in the permeability 
of the semipermeable membrane to full permeable from an initial partial 
nature is responsible for the tissue architecture change. The pore size and 
their distribution along the material surface determine the water removal 
rate along with the material interaction with the surrounding liquid. Cell 
shrinkage due to water loss can cause cell damage as the contact of the cell 
wall with the cell membrane gets reduced. However, the cell shrinkage is 
affected by the product porosity, the rate of mass transfer, and rehydration 
ratio of the dehydrated material.7 
7.5 RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN OSMOTIC DEHYDRATION 
TECHNOLOGY 
Exposure of food materials to prominent techniques (nonthermal), such as 
ultrasound, vacuum, pulsed electric field, gamma-irradiation before under￾going OD can increase the mass flow rate, which is otherwise reduced by the 
resistance offered by cell membranes. Osmotic Dehydration Technology for Preservation 177 
7.5.1 MICROWAVE (MW)-ASSISTED OD 
Microwave heating is linked to various food applications in the food processing 
industries among which cooking, drying, baking, sterilization, pasteurization, 
and preservation are prominent ones. Microwaves ((electromagnetic waves) 
possess the frequency in the range of 300 MHz to 300 GHz. In the field of food 
applications, only two frequencies such as 915 and 2450 MHz are allowed 
for microwave heating. Microwave heating can achieve high and uniform 
heating rates, thereby reducing the cooking time, and is easy to operate with 
safe-handling. 
Compared with the conventional methods, microwave heating causes least 
alteration of flavor and sensory qualities and has therefore been practiced for 
decades. Cooking spaghetti using microwaves resulted in enhanced softer and 
gelatinized product.10 Moreover, the products were observed to show higher 
gel degrees and better color retention with less thermal effects compared with 
the spaghetti cooked by traditional methods. 
Microwave cooking prevents the loss of B-vitamins (riboflavin, 
thiamin, niacin, and pyridoxine) compared with the traditional boiling and 
autoclaving and also reduced the cooking time of chickpea. It plays a vital 
role in omega-3 fatty acid retention and cholesterol containment up to an 
optimum level in tuna fish.44 Also, there are reports of promotion of starch 
gelatinization and phenolic compounds retainment in potato samples that 
were processed using microwaves thus helping in the shelf-life improvement 
due to the antioxidant activity of phenolic compounds. 
Microwave heating source results in products with improved quality and 
can meet the current consumer choice compared with the OD process alone. 
A different mechanism of internal heat generation by the microwave field 
is followed in the food materials undergoing microwave-assisted osmotic 
dehydration process. Heat generation is actually through water ionic polar￾ization, dipole rotation coupled with other dielectric properties in microwave 
field that results in the water transfer to the surface by creating internal pres￾sure gradient.12 Water molecules present in the food materials absorb the 
energy of microwaves and undergo rotation at a high speed, which ultimately 
results in heat generation. 
The process of heat generation is quite complex because of various 
factors related to the microwave field. There are numerous advantages of 
using microwaves for the osmotic dehydration of food materials, such as 
selective heating, energy-efficient, faster heating, and lesser time for the 
start-up and more precise control. Microwaves have been used for a long 
time in Europe for food pasteurization of products, such as potato chips and 178 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
pasta.26 Moreover, the drying time is reduced with an increase in the micro￾wave power. However, higher power may affect the food quality. 
7.5.2 PULSED VACUUM (PV)-ASSISTED OD 
Sometimes the OD process is assisted with vacuum pulse for shorter periods 
at the beginning to improve the solid gain and water removal through the 
hydrodynamics mechanism imposed due to capillary flow and pressure 
changes.14 A pulsed vacuum application resulted in better water loss when 
applied to guava slices and solid gain was also reduced to an appreciable 
level.11 
An important application of pulsed vacuum is the production of 
semidehydrated food products through osmotic dehydration, for example, 
osmotic dehydration of pumpkin previously blanched. The pumpkin samples 
were improved based on water loss, solid gain, water activity and color 
characteristics. Using pulsed vacuum in combination with OD can reduce the 
drying cost by decreasing the drying periods to an appreciable level. Also, 
it leads to minimum alteration in the sensory properties of FAV other than 
flavor. Moreover, applying a pulsed vacuum decreases the fruit hardness, the 
retention of vitamin C and volume ratio were increased in cherry tomatoes 
exposed to the pulsed vacuum before undergoing osmotic dehydration.5 
Pulsed vacuum OD represents the widely used technique for improving 
elasticity, shrinkage and maximum stress in biological products. Carotenoids 
are handsomely preserved by vacuum application.28 However, it leads to the 
loss of phenolic acid and betalain in eggplant and carrot. Besides, higher 
temperature usage during pulsed vacuum resulted in the color deterioration 
and skin browning of fruits. Hence, the higher temperature must be avoided 
as in the case of lemon slices.52 The procedure followed in the pulsed vacuum 
osmotic dehydration of food materials involves the immersion of food 
material in osmotic solution first followed by the application of working 
pressure and maintaining that pressure for an extended period. Finally, 
the process ends by holding the food material under normal atmospheric 
pressure again. 
7.5.3 HIGH HYDROSTATIC PRESSURE (HHP)-ASSISTED OD 
High hydrostatic pressure (HHP) is introduced to assist the osmotic dehydra￾tion of food materials in comprehensive water removal, thereby producing Osmotic Dehydration Technology for Preservation 179 
the final product with improved quality as in banana, strawberry, pineapple, 
etc. It also reduces the processing time by increasing the rate of dehydration, 
hence avoiding negative impacts in FAV due to longer immersion time in 
osmotic solution. 
Cell disruption along with enhancement in permeabilization and change 
in cell wall structure occurs in a high-pressure treatment at 100 to 800 MPa, 
which has proven be beneficial in increasing the rate of mass transfer during 
the osmotic OD process.31 The high-pressure application at 100, 300 and 
500 MPa for 10 min causes a reduction in both the diffusion coefficients 
for solute diffusing out of the tissue and in the rehydration ratio, at different 
temperatures of 5, 25, and 35°C.40 
Using HPP in combination with osmotic dehydration results in the 
enhancement of mass transfer rate in banana, strawberries, pineapple, and 
potato.38,48,51 Up to 400 MPa of HPP is acceptable in biological materials, after 
which hindrance to water diffusion along with other substances is evident 
due to starch gelation. HHP above 500 MPa results in the enhancement of 
nonenzymatic browning, quality impairment, and alteration in nutritional 
composition in FAV.31 HHP also enhances the volatile profile of Candied 
Wumei fruit (Prunus mume).27 The significant retention of antioxidant 
compounds was observed under HHP treatment at 5 MPa for 1 min. 
7.5.4 ULTRASOUND (US)-ASSISTED OD 
Ultrasound-assisted osmotic dehydration (USOD) is used to enhance safety 
in food materials besides helping in food processing and food analysis. 
Using lower temperature during USOD is appreciable if higher power 
ultrasonic waves at low frequencies are applied for the moisture removal.20 
Small channels are formed by US waves in the intercellular spaces that direct 
the outflow of osmotic solution forming partially dried food products. The 
pressure and frequency are prominent factors creating internal turbulence by 
intense cavitation in the food materials. This leads to the enhancement in the 
water transfer rate in food products due to the application of high-frequency 
US waves for longer period and applied after dipping the food material 
(fruits/vegetables) in a hypertonic solution. Combining other treatments with 
US waves have some beneficial effects on food materials, for example, high 
sugar concentration minimizes the time of OD process by increasing the 
diffusion rate of water out of the foods. 
This method also helps in the complete and rapid removal of gases thus 
minimizing food degradation.43 The US waves result in the reduction of 180 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
time required for the OD of FAV, for example, a 30 min time supported the 
complete OD of broccoli in addition to retention of L-ascorbic acid up to 
80% by using US waves compared with OD alone. Moreover, exposure of 
kiwi fruits for about 30 min resulted in 50% of mass gain using US waves 
at 35 kHz.The application of US waves at low frequency helps in the color 
retention of FAV.42 However, US waves at high frequency may cause damage 
to tissues of FAV due to the heat released during sonication. 
7.5.5 HIGH ELECTRIC FIELD PULSE (HEP)-ASSISTED OD 
In this technique, high voltage amplitude electric waves are used to cause 
breakage and to form minute pores in cell membranes. This method involves 
several mechanisms, such as membrane compression, critical transmem￾brane potential, viscoelastic properties, and cell membrane defects based on 
structural aspects. These lead to perforation in the cell membrane to boost 
the process of water and solute diffusivity.247,53 
This method is energy efficient as the time of exposure is reduced to 
microseconds. An improvement in tenderness and reduction in shear force 
was observed in beef muscles processed with this technique. 
Moreover, biocompounds are retained in dried samples that were 
dehydrated using pulsed electric waves. High electric pulse (HEP) reduces the 
loss of nutrients coupled with color and flavor, thereby preserves the nutritional, 
sensory, and freshness of the minimally processed foods. For best performance, 
pulse shape, field strength, pulse count, and duration of the pulse must be 
optimized. For example, enhanced solid gain and water loss were recorded in 
strawberry halves when exposed to high-intensity electric field pulse for a short 
period as a pretreatment for their preservation in the OD process.48 
An increase in the number of electric field strength during the food mate￾rial exposure to HEP coupled with the pulse rate increment also increases the 
water loss along with solid gain in apples.4
 HEP also helps in the retention 
of ascorbic acid by using HEP as a pretreatment before OD process in red 
peppers. It is suggested to use a pulse rate of 10 along with 5 kV/cm of 
electric field intensity. 
7.6 SUMMARY 
The OD is a potential process for food preservation through the removal 
of contained water partially that needs further treatments. Moreover,  
 
 
Osmotic Dehydration Technology for Preservation 181 
nutritional, organoleptic, textural, and functional properties are improved to 
an appreciable profile due to the food constituents leaching along with the 
solid uptake during the process of OD. It helps in maintaining the freshness of 
minimally processed FAV. The concentration, temperature, type of osmotic 
solution, and different pretreatments can affect the rate of mass transfer 
during OD. Based on the fact of the slow nature of OD, some promising 
pretreatments are carried out to improve the rate of water transfer. These 
include HHP, HEP, pulsed vacuum, microwave, and ultrasound which are 
used in combination with osmotic dehydration. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support from the Department of 
Postharvest Engineering and Technology, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, 
Aligarh Muslim University, India. The first author (Arshied Manzoor) also 
acknowledges the award of ICMR-Senior Research Fellowship from the 
Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi, India. 
KEYWORDS 
• food preservation 
food processing 
fruits and vegetables 
osmotic dehydration 
shelf life 
water activity 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
REFERENCES 
1. Ade-Omowaye, B. I. O.; Angersbach, A.; Taiwo, K. A.; Knorr, D. Use of Pulsed Electric 
Field Pre-Treatment to Improve Dehydration Characteristics of Plant-Based Foods. 
Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2001, 12 (8), 285–295. 
2. Akbarian, M.; Ghasemkhani, N.; Moayedi, F. Osmotic dehydration of Fruits in Food 
Industrial: A Review. Int. J. Biosci. 2014, 4 (1), 42–57. 
3. Ali, H. S.; Moharram, H. A.; Ramadan, M. T.; Ragab, G. H. Osmotic Dehydration of 
Banana Rings and Tomato Halves. J. Am. Sci. 2010, 6 (9), 384–390.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
182 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
4. Amami, E.; Vorobiev, E. Effect of pulsed electric field on the osmotic dehydration and 
mass transfer kinetics of apple tissue. Dry. Technol. 2005, 23 (3), 581–595. 
5. An, K.; Li, H.; Zhao, D.; Ding, S.; Tao, H.; Wang, Z. Effect of Osmotic Dehydration 
With Pulsed Vacuum on Hot-Air Drying Kinetics and Quality Attributes of Cherry 
Tomatoes. Dry. Technol. 2013, 31 (6), 698–706. 
6. Azoubel, P. M.; Da Silva, F. O. Optimization of Osmotic Dehydration of ‘Tommy 
Atkins’ Mango Fruit. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 2008, 43 (7), 1276–1280. 
7. Bekele, Y.; Ramaswamy, H. Going Beyond Conventional Osmotic Dehydration for 
Quality Advantage and Energy Savings. Ethiopian J. Appl. Sci. Technol. 2010, 1 (1), 
1–15. 
8. Chabbouh, M.; Hajji, W.; Hadj Ahmed, S. B.; Farhat, A.; Bellagha, S.; Sahli, A. Combined 
Effects of Osmotic Dehydration and Convective Air Drying on Meats: Kinetics and 
Quality. Dry. Technol. 2011, 29 (13), 1571–1579. 
9. Chandra, S.; Kumari, D. Recent Development in Osmotic Dehydration of Fruit and 
Vegetables: A Review. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2015, 55 (4), 552–561. 
10. Cocci, E.; Sacchetti, G.; Vallicelli, M.; Angioloni, A.; Dalla, R. M. Spaghetti Cooking 
by Microwave Oven: Cooking Kinetics and Product Quality. J. Food Eng. 2008, 85 (4), 
537–546. 
11. Corrêa, J. L.; Pereira, L. M.; Vieira, G. S.; Hubinger, M. D. Mass Transfer Kinetics of 
Pulsed Vacuum Osmotic Dehydration of Guavas. J. Food Eng. 2010, 96 (4), 498–504. 
12. Drouzas, A. E.; Schubert, H. Microwave Application in Vacuum Drying of Fruits. J. 
Food Eng. 1996, 28, 203–209. 
13. Falade, K. O.; Igbeka, J. C.; Ayanwuyi, F. A. Kinetics of Mass Transfer and Colour 
Changes During Osmotic Dehydration of Watermelon. J. Food Eng. 2007, 80, 979–985. 
14. Giraldo, G.; Talens, P.; Fito, P.; Chiralt, A. Influence of Sucrose Solution Concentration 
on Kinetics and Yield During Osmotic Dehydration of Mango. J. Food Eng. 2003, 58 
(1), 33–43. 
15. Gupta, R.; Singh, B.; Shivhare, U. S. Optimization of Osmo-Convective Dehydration 
Process for the Development of Honey-Ginger Candy Using Response Surface 
Methodology. Dry. Technol. 2012, 30 (7), 750–759. 
16. Islam, M. N.; Flink, J. N. Dehydration of Potato: II. Osmotic Concentration and Its 
Effect on Air Drying Behavior. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 1982, 17 (3), 387–403. 
17.	 Ispir, A.; Toğrul, Đ. T. Osmotic dehydration of apricot: Kinetics and the Effect of Process 
Parameters. Chem. Eng. Res. Design 2009, 87, 166–180. 
18. Jackson, T. H.; Mohammed, B. B. The Shambat Process: New Development Arising 
from the Osmotic Dehydration of Fruits and Vegetables. Sudan J. Food Sci. Technol. 
1971, 3, 18–22. 
19. Jan, B.; Shams, R.; Rizvi, Q. E. H.; Manzoor, A. Ohmic Heating Technology for Food 
Processing: A Review of Recent Developments. J. Postharvest Technol. 2021, 9 (1), 
20–34. 
20.	 Kapturowska, A.; Stolarzewicz, I.; Chmielewska, I.; Białecka-Florjańczyk, E. Ultra￾sounds a Tool to Inactivate Yeast and to Extract Intracellular Protein. Żywnosc Nauka 
Technology Jakość 2011, 4 (77), 160–171. 
21.	 Kaymak-Ertekin, F.; Sultanoğlu, M. Modelling of Mass Transfer During Osmotic 
Dehydration of Apples. J. Food Eng. 2000, 46 (4), 243–250. 
22. Khan, M. R. Osmotic Dehydration Technique for Fruits Preservation—A Review. Pak. 
J. Food Sci. 2012, 22 (2), 71–85.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Osmotic Dehydration Technology for Preservation 183 
23. Lazarides, H. N. Osmotic Pre-Concentration: Developments and Prospects. In Minimal 
Processing of Foods and Process Optimization: An Interface; Singh, R. P., Oliveira, F. 
A. R., Eds.; CRC Press: Boca Raton, 1994; pp 17–33. 
24. Lenart, A. Mathematical Modelling of Osmotic Dehydration of Apple and Carrot. Polish 
J. Food Nutr. Sci. 1992, 1, 1–33. 
25. Lenart, A.; Flink, J. M. Osmotic Concentration of Potato. Criteria for the End Point of 
the Osmotic Process. J. Food Sci. Technol. 1984, 19, 45–63. 
26. Li, H.; Ramaswamy, H. S. Osmotic Dehydration of Apple Cylinders: III. Continuous 
Medium Flow Microwave Heating Conditions. Dry. Technol. 2006, 24 (5), 643–651. 
27. Luo, W.; Tappi, S.; Wang, C.; Yu, Y.; Zhu, S.; Dalla, R. M.; Rocculi, P. Effect of High 
Hydrostatic Pressure (HHP) on the Antioxidant and Volatile Properties of Candied 
Wumei Fruit (Prunus mume) During Osmotic Dehydration. Food Bioprocess Technol. 
2019, 12 (1), 98–109. 
28. Manzoor, A.; Dar, I. H.; Bhat, S. A.; Ahmad, S. Flavonoids: Health Benefits and Their 
Potential Use in Food Systems. In Functional Food Products and Sustainable Health; 
Springer: Singapore, 2020; pp 235–256. 
29. Mohanty, S.; Cock, I. E. Bioactivity of Syzygium jambos methanolic Extracts: 
Antibacterial Activity and Toxicity. Pharmacognosy Res. 2010, 2 (1), 4–9. 
30. Mundada, M.; Hathan, B. S.; Maske, S. Mass Transfer Kinetics During Osmotic 
Dehydration of Pomegranate Arils. J. Food Sci. 2011, 75, 31–39. 
31. Núñez-Mancilla, Y.; Vega-Gálvez, A.; Pérez-Won, M.; Zura, L.; García-Segovia, 
P.; Di Scala, K. Effect of Osmotic Dehydration Under High Hydrostatic Pressure 
on Microstructure, Functional Properties and Bioactive Compounds of Strawberry 
(FragariaVesca). Food Bioprocess Technol. 2014, 7 (2), 516–524. 
32. Osorio, C.; Franco, M. S.; Castaño, M. P.; González-Miret, M. L.; Heredia, F. J.; 
Morales, A. L. Colour and Flavour Changes During Osmotic Dehydration of Fruits. 
Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2007, 3 (8), 353–359. 
33. Peiró-Mena, R.; Camacho, M. M.; Martínez-Navarrete, N. Compositional and 
Physicochemical Changes Associated to Successive Osmo-Dehydration Cycles of 
Pineapple (Ananas comosus). J. Food Eng. 2007, 79 (3), 842–849. 
34. Phisut, N. Factors Affecting Mass Transfer During Osmotic Dehydration of Fruits. Int. 
Food Res. J. 2012, 19 (1), 7–18. 
35. Piasecka, E.; Uczciwek, M.; Klewicki, R.; Konopacka, D., Mieszczakowska-Frac, M.; 
Szulc, M.; Bonazzi, C. Effect of Long-Time Storage on the Content of Polyphenols and 
Ascorbic Acid in Osmo-Convectively Dried and Osmo-Freeze-Dried Fruits. J. Food 
Process. Preserv. 2013, 37 (3), 198–209. 
36. Ponting, J. D. Osmotic Dehydration of Fruits. Food Technol. 1966, 20, 125–128. 
37. Ramaswamy, H. S. Osmotic Drying. Unpublished Paper Presentation at Workshop 
on Drying of Food and Pharmaceuticals. Kolkata, India: Fourth Asia Pacific Drying 
Conference, 12 December 2005; p 8. 
38. Rastogi, N. K.; Niranjan, K. Enhanced Mass Transfer During Osmotic Dehydration of 
High Pressure Treated Pineapple. J. Food Sci. 1998, 63 (3), 508–511. 
39. Rastogi, N. K.; Raghavarao, K. S. M. S. Water and Solute Diffusion Coefficients of 
Carrot as a Function of Temperature and Concentration During Osmotic Dehydration. J. 
Food Eng. 1997, 34 (4), 429–440. 
40. Rastogi, N. K.; Angersbach, A.; Niranjan, K.; Knorr, D. Rehydration Kinetics of High 
Pressure Pretreated and Osmotically Dehydrated Pineapple. J. Food Sci. 2000, 65 (5), 
838–841.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
184 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
41. Rastogi, N. K.; Raghavarao, K. S. M. S.; Niranjan, K.; Knorr, D. Recent Developments 
in Osmotic Dehydration: Methods to Enhance Mass Transfer. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 
2002, 13 (2), 48–59. 
42. Shamaei, S.; Emam-Djomeh, Z.; Moini, S. Ultrasound Assisted Osmotic Dehydration 
of Cranberries: Effect of Finish Drying Methods and Ultrasonic Frequency on Textural 
Properties. J. Textural Stud. 2011, 43, 133–141. 
43. Silva, J. L.; Stojanovic, J. Influence of Osmotic Concentration, Continuous High 
Frequency Ultrasound and Dehydration on Antioxidants, Colour and Chemical 
Properties of Rabbiteye Blueberries. Food Chem. 2007, 101, 898–906. 
44. Stephen, N. M.; Shakila, J. R.; Jeyasekaran, G.; Sukumar, D. Effect of Different Types of 
Heat Processing on Chemical Changes of Tuna. J. Food Sci. Technol. 2010, 47, 174–181. 
45. Sunjka, P. S.; Raghavan, G. S. V. Assessment of Pretreatment Methods and Osmotic 
Dehydration for Cranberries. Can. Biosyst. Eng. 2004, 46 (1), 45–48. 
46. Tadesse, T. F.; Abera, S.; Worku, S. Nutritional and Sensory Properties of Solar Dried 
Carrot Slices as Affected by Blanching and Osmotic Pre-Treatments. Int. J. Food Sci. 
Nutr. Eng. 2015, 5 (1), 24–32. 
47. Taiwo, K. A.; Angersbach, A.; Knorr, D. Effects of Pulsed Electric Field on Quality 
Factors and Mass Transfer During Osmotic Dehydration of Apples. J. Food Process 
Eng. 2003, 26 (1), 31–48. 
48. Taiwo, K. A.; Eshtiaghi, M. N.; Ade-Omowaye, B. I.; Knorr, D. Osmotic Dehydration 
of Strawberry Halves: Influence of Osmotic Agents and Pretreatment Methods on Mass 
Transfer and Product Characteristics. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 2003, 38 (6), 693–707. 
49. Tiwari, R. B. Application of Osmo-Air-Dehydration for Processing of Tropical Fruits in 
Rural Areas. Indian Food Ind. 2005, 24 (6), 62–69. 
50. Tortoe, C. A Review of Osmo-Dehydration for Food Industry. Afr. J. Food Sci. 2010, 4 
(6), 303–324. 
51. Verma, D.; Kaushik, N.; Rao, P. S. Application of High Hydrostatic Pressure as a 
Pretreatment for Osmotic Dehydration of Banana Slices (Musa cavendishii) Finish 
Dried by Dehumidified Air Drying. Food Bioprocess Technol. 2014, 7, 1281–1297. 
52. Wang, J.; Law, C. L.; Nema, P. K.; Zhao, J. H.; Liu, Z. L.; Deng, L. Z.; Xiao, H. W. 
Pulsed Vacuum Drying Enhances Drying Kinetics and Quality of Lemon Slices. J. Food 
Eng. 2018, 224, 129–138. 
53. Wiktor, A.; Witrowa-Rajchert, D. Applying Pulsed Electric Field to Enhance Plant 
Tissue Dehydration Process. Żywnosc Nauka Technology Jakość 2012, 19 (2), 22–32. 
54. Yadav, A. K.; Singh, S. V. Osmotic Dehydration of Fruits and Vegetables: A Review. J. 
Food Sci. Technol. 2014, 51 (9), 1654–1673. Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing: Methods and Strategies. Megh R. Goyal, & 
Faizan Ahmad (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 8 
SCOPE OF ULTRASOUND 
TECHNOLOGY FOR PRESERVATION 
OF FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
GAZIA NASIR, SADAF ZAIDI, and FAIZAN AHMAD 
ABSTRACT 
The ultrasound technology has enumerated for minimizing processing, 
ensuring safety and enhancing the quality of food products. This chapter 
sheds some light on the mechanisms of ultrasound and its applications in 
decontamination, drying and freezing of fruits and vegetables (FAV). The 
chapter also discusses the influence of ultrasound pretreatment and ultrasound￾assisted drying on the drying of FAV. The applications of ultrasound on 
initiation of ice nucleation, improving rate of freezing and controlling the 
size and shape of crystals has also been discussed in detail. Apart from this, 
the impact of ultrasound-assisted freezing on the food quality has been 
highlighted. In addition, the negative impacts of power ultrasound on FAV 
preservation has been presented. 
8.1 INTRODUCTION 
Currently, interest has been growing in the food sector concerning novel 
methods to preserve food depriving of additives, maintenance of sensory and 
nutritional attributes with decreased consumption of energy, at a reasonable 
price and making use of eco-friendly products with its safety.78 
The ultrasound (US) methods have been introduced to reduce the time of 
processing, ensure safety, and improve the food quality. Ultrasonic technology 186 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
is an important field of research and development and it is based on mechanical 
waves operating at a frequency greater than 16 kHz and can be grouped into 
two frequency ranges: high and low.52 
Ultrasonic waves with operating frequency >16 kHz are not perceived by 
the human ear. High-power ultrasonic waves are used by marine species to 
strike their prey while dolphins and bats make use of low-power ultrasonic 
waves. High- and low-power US have had certain implementations in 
the food preservation and processing sectors. High-power US may cause 
physical destruction of tissues, form emulsions, decontaminate instruments, 
and augment chemical reactions. Low-power US is a nondestructive 
technique to analyze the structure and composition of food substances. The 
various properties of sound waves (interference, scattering, reflection, and 
absorption) are observed in US. Also, US can propagate in all three media, 
such as solid, liquid, and gas.61 
It has been confirmed by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) that US has been efficient against microorganisms in fruit juices 
(for instance, Escherichia coli) and can fulfill the prerequisite of a 5-log 
reduction of certain pathogens.110 Fruits and vegetables (FAV) have high 
level of moisture, which provides a favorable environment for the growth 
of microorganisms, causing immutable damage to the produce. Therefore, 
it is vital to minimize the moisture levels and loss of nutrients by applying 
efficient methods of preservation like drying. Thus, moisture removed in the 
drying process not only reduces the growth of microbes but also minimizes 
the packaging space requirement along with a reduction in total weight of the 
food material and shortening the transportation and packaging cost.28 
The quality of the dried products can be improved by employing the 
process of pretreatment prior to drying.25,53,64,71 Numerous methods have 
been established for the application of pretreatment before drying, as it is a 
widely researched area. To improve the effectiveness of drying technology, 
various pretreatment techniques have been evolved to draw the attention of 
the researchers.55 
Wiktor et al.92 investigated the synergistic influence of US pretreatment 
and pulsed electric field (PEF) on the drying properties of carrots. They 
found that the US pretreatments reduced the time of drying upto 40% with 
increased retention of carotenoids. Tao et al.86 determined the influence 
of US pretreatment on the drying of mulberry leaves. A significant reduc￾tion was found in the time of drying, which in turn decreased the energy 
consumption.28 
Freezing is a widely accepted technique for food product preservation to 
retain the nutritional and sensory properties.100 During the storage of frozen Scope of Ultrasound Technology for Preservation 187 
foods, the physicochemical and biochemical reactions are slowed down that 
lead to nutritional loss, unappealing changes of texture, color, and formation 
of off-flavor.11 The efficiency of freezing and the quality of frozen food prod￾ucts (FFP) are determined by ice crystallization. The original characteristics 
of frozen foods can be preserved by applying quick-freezing technique to 
form uniformly distributed fine ice crystals both inside and outside the cells 
and causing no damage to the food tissues.5 
The freezing can be accelerated by intensifying ice crystals nucleation 
and enhancing the degree of heat and mass transfer in the case of US-assisted 
freezing method.19 Additionally, the development of fine crystals in FFP 
in US-assisted freezing can enable efficient retention of food quality as 
compared with the traditional methods of freezing.19 
This chapter highlights the applications of US technology in decontami￾nation, drying, and freezing of FAV. The chapter also discusses the impact 
of US pretreatment (PRT) on drying and US-assisted drying. Furthermore, 
the impact of US-assisted freezing on the quality characteristics of foods 
have been discussed. In addition, the negative impacts of power US on the 
preservation of FAV have also been included in brief. 
8.2 ULTRASOUND MECHANISM 
The two phenomena that are associated with the US ability for the inactiva￾tion of microbes and in turn causing decontamination of food include acoustic 
cavitation and acoustic streaming. 
In acoustic cavitation, areas of fluctuating compression and rarefaction 
are caused as a result of the generation of longitudinal waves. During the 
rarefaction phase, small bubbles in the liquid get enlarged as a result of 
reduced pressure in the local region, below the vapor pressure of the liquid, 
thus causing a change in intensities. In the compression cycle, the surface 
area of the bubble gets reduced. While there is an increase in the size of the 
bubble and the surface area becomes large, the liquid medium fails to absorb 
all the gases present in the bubbles thus resulting in further enlargement of 
the bubble. Thus, when the energy provided by US gets in line with the oscil￾lation of the bubble wall, there is loss of stability and implosion, initiating 
the areas of high pressure (up to 1000 atmospheres) and high temperature 
(up to 5000°C).56,62 
Acoustic streaming produces a dispersion in the acoustic energy causing 
an inclination in momentum, thus the fluid currents.50 The velocity attained 
by the fluid enables a greater convection heat transfer coefficient near the 188 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
boundaries of solid, occasionally resulting in turbulence and stimulating 
rate of heat transfer. This effect permits improved medium heating due to 
the dispersion in the mechanical energy.47 All these cases lead to bacterial 
disturbances.77 Enhancing pressure and temperature can lead to diverse 
chemical changes in both the surrounding fluid as well as in the vapor phase 
interior of the cavitation bubble.37 Also, turbulence-located microcirculation 
is produced as a result of this phenomenon. The implosions generated are 
asymmetric nearer to a surface of the solid, producing a microjet that strikes 
the solid,8
 and these alterations give rise to the mechanism necessary in 
cleaning surfaces. The amount of energy liberated by the cavitation process 
depends upon the collapse and kinetics of expansion of the bubbles. Certainly, 
these microjets can remove the clinged bacteria on the surface of FAV.78 
US produces and disseminates implosions of cavitation in a liquid medium. 
The energy liberated in the cavitation process enables the cleaning of those 
surfaces that are usually harder to reach by other methods.24 Sometimes, 
chemical sanitizers are inefficient against microbes that are either tightly 
clinged on surfaces or found on biofilms. Under these situations, physical 
methods are preferred. US is a stable and steady method for the effective 
removal of contaminants. The application of ultrasonic technology in the 
food industrial sector is reassuring due to the presence of microbial biofilm 
on the exterior of FAV. US has several benefits, such as cost-effectiveness, 
improved processing time, minimized chemical damage and physical risks, 
selectivity and productivity, and enhanced quality. Nowadays, applications 
of US technology have gained popularity for their key role in causing a 
damage-free sustainable environment and therefore apply to the notion of 
green technology.9 
8.3 APPLICATION OF POWER ULTRASOUND METHOD IN 
DECONTAMINATION OF FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
Ultrasound (US) technology is highly efficient in reducing the spoilage and 
pathogenic microbes present in FAV. In general, microbes are directly killed 
or removed by cavitation due to the combination of the following effects35: (1) 
Mechanical: involves the formation of turbulence, shear stresses, and liquid 
circulation currents. (2) Chemical: the formation of free radicals (H· and OH·) 
during cavitation held in an aqueous medium strike the chemical composi￾tion of the microbial cell wall and erode the cell wall till it disintegrates. (3) 
Physical: generation of acute local pressure and temperature. Scope of Ultrasound Technology for Preservation 189 
Therefore, treating fresh FAV before storage using ultrasonic waves 
has been studied by several researchers. The research studies have been 
conducted on various FAV, such as green asparagus, plum fruit, spinach, 
strawberry, cherry tomatoes, apples, broccoli seeds, peach, lettuce, carrots, 
and organic lettuces 7,10,29,41,75,76,79,91,102,107 as given in Table 8.1. These findings 
confirm that the US treatment was very effective in reducing the amount 
of spoilage causing microbes, such as, bacteria, molds, and yeasts in fresh 
produce, and as a result, minimized the incidences of decay and prolonged 
the time of storage of FAV.101 
Although treatment with US causes a reduction in the microbial count 
to a certain extent, yet it is not much effective for industrial application due 
to its low ability to sterilize.76 To attain a satisfactory inactivation effect, an 
increased level of acoustic energy and prolonged time of treatment is needed. 
But this in turn leads to the deterioration of the tissues of fresh product and 
results in inflation in the susceptibility of the infestation of spoilage causing 
microbes.76,81 
Additionally, the microbes that detach from FAV can be emancipated 
into the water used for washing them and thus have the possibility to cause 
cross-contamination.81 It has been investigated that the ultrasonic technique 
along with other techniques might be advantageous in causing surface 
decontamination. US can be combined with ultraviolet radiation, high 
pressure, heat, or chemical methods for cleaning and sanitization. Heat and 
pressure are not endorsed in fruits/vegetables, as they can drastically alter 
the structure of plant tissues.78 To overcome these limitations and to enhance 
sterilization efficiency, US is frequently combined with other techniques. The 
synergistic effect of US with sanitizers finds more applications as compared 
with other sterilization techniques. 
Apart from the direct killing of microbial cells, US also enhances antimi￾crobial response by degrading the cell wall, which in turn causes the creeping 
of sanitizing agents. Moreover, apart from causing inactivation, US is an 
efficient technique for removing microbes on the surface of fruits/vegetables 
due to the nonsymmetric collapse of cavitation bubbles nearer to solid and 
forms a powerful microjet that dislodges the microbial cells. In particular, 
US cleaning is beneficial as it can easily reach crevices that are not often 
accessible by using other conventional techniques of cleaning.54 
Thus, ultrasonic waves can loosen microbes from fresh commodities into 
sanitizer fluids, which evokes the exposure of microbes that are located in 
crevices. Hence, the combined effect of US and sanitizer proves effective 
synergy. In the year 2002, Seymour et al. 81demonstrated the synergistic 190 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
influence of US (25–70 kHz) and chlorinated water for their efficiency to 
decontaminate microbes. Consequently, many additional research studies 
were carried out involving the effect of various sanitizers on FAV.1,29 These 
sanitizers may include artificial chemicals, such as chloric disinfectants 
(NaClO, aqueous ClO2
, and chlorinated water, etc.), ethanol, H2
O2
, and 
natural antimicrobials (few organic acids: acetic acid, citric acid, peracetic 
acid, lactic acid, and malic acid) have been frequently used (Table 8.1). 
Recently, several research studies were conducted on the use of possibility 
and applicability of this postharvest technology and it has gained immense 
popularity.10,69,76,81,107 These studies have confirmed that the synergistic treat￾ment effectively removed the different microbial species and US method 
enhanced the antimicrobial efficiency of sanitizers. Moreover, this synergistic 
method was frequently used to decontaminate pathogenic bacteria, namely, 
E. coli O157:H7, Listeria monocytogenes, and Salmonella typhimurium for 
the sake of increased sterilization efficiency.29,76,81,107 
8.4 POTENTIAL APPLICATION OF ULTRASOUND METHOD IN 
DRYING 
8.4.1 INFLUENCE OF US PRETREATMENT ON DRYING 
The hurdles in drying namely poorer quality of the product and prolonged 
time of drying can be overcome by involving pretreatments (PRTs) before 
drying of food produce. Numerous studies have documented the influence 
of different PRTs on the drying rate of fruits and their quality.42,64 Mani￾fold effects have been exhibited by various PRTs on final commodities. 
PRTs are frequently used to minimize the initial moisture content and to 
hasten the process of drying, leading to enhanced quality of the finished 
dried commodities with reduced cost. This can be attained by altering the 
structure of the substance to be dried so that there is an increase in the water 
diffusivity as well as hindering enzymatic activity or killing microbes and 
enzymes.55 US-PRT before the drying process has gained a lot of attention 
recently and has exhibited the possibility of decreasing the time of drying 
significantly. 
Wiktor et al.92 investigated the collaborative effect of US-PRTs and PEF 
on the drying properties of carrots. They confirmed that the drying time 
was reduced up to 40% with greater retention of carotenoids. Tao et al.86 
also examined the influence of US-PRTs on drying of mulberry leaves. It Fruits and vegetables Microorganism species Conditions Log reduction Reference 
Apple E. coli O157: H7 US (170 kHz, 10 min) + 20 mg L-1 ClO 3.54 unit [29] 2 
Salmonella 4 unit
Broccoli E. coli O157:H7 US (40 kHz, 30 min, 23°C) 1.04 unit [41]
US (40 kHz, 5 min, 55°C) 1.44 unit 
Cherry tomatoes Salmonella Typhimurium US (40 kHz, 10 min, 24°C) + 40 mg 4 log unit [79]
L–1 Peracetic acid
Green asparagus Bacteria, mold US 40 KHz, 350W, 250 g, 10 min, RT - [91]
Lettuce Bacillus cereus spores US (40 kHz, 5 min, 20 ºC) + 0.1% Tween 20 2.49 unit [75]
Carrots 2.22 unit 
Organic lettuce E. coli O157: H7 US (40 kHz, 5 min, 20°C) + lactic acid (2%) 2.75 unit [76]
Salmonella typhimurium 2.71 unit
L. monocytogenes 2.50 unit 
Peach fruit Penicillium expansum US 40 kHz, 10 min, 20°C + salicylic acid Reduce blue mold [102]
(0.05 mM) in peach fruit
Plum fruit Total aerobic mesophilic bacteria; US 40 kHz, 100W, 1 kg/5 L, 2.0 to 3.0 [10]
total aerobic psychrotrophic 10 min + 40 mg/L bClO2
bacteria; yeasts and mold
Spinach E. coli O157:H7 US 21.1 kHz, 200 W/L, 25 g/500 mL, 2 min, 0.7–1.1 addition [107]
RTa+ ASC (10% NaCl solution/5% citric acid); (compared with AEWc (80 mg/L); POAAd (80 mg/L); Chlorine sanitizer alone) solution (200 mg/L)
Strawberry Mold and yeast US (40 kHz, 10 min, 20°C) 1.73 unit [7] 
Mesophilic aerobic 1.49 unit
191 
TABLE 8.1 Applications of US in Fruit and Vegetable Decontamination
aRT: Room temperature; bClO2: Chlorine dioxide; unit = log CFU per g 
Scope of Ultrasound Technology for Preservation  
192 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
was found that PRTs resulted in reduced drying time and thus decreased the 
energy consumption significantly. 
8.4.1.1 PARAMETRIC EFFECTS OF US-PRT 
The drying properties and the quality of food substances during US-PRTs 
are significantly affected by the amplitude, frequency, time of sonication, 
and ultrasonic power of the sonicator probe. For instance, Nowacka et al.60 
examined the influence of US-PRT on convective drying (CD) of apples 
for a varying duration (10, 20, 30 min) in an ultrasonic bath. It was found 
that the time of drying was increased with sonication time at first, but then 
it was decreased, that is, amidst three pretreated samples, the apple treated 
with 20 min US-PRT showed the longest time of drying. The time of sonica￾tion presents diversified effects on food quality, water loss, and drying rate. 
Substantially, the employment of osmotic solution resulted in a loss of water 
in food products on pretreating with US. 
As confirmed by Rodrigues et al.,70 loss of water in the osmotic fluid 
in papaya was enhanced with an increase in the time of sonication. Similar 
findings were observed in guava, pineapple, melon, strawberry, and pome￾granate.2,3,16,20,21,36 A positive loss of water was shown in all these fruits and 
it was also observed that loss in water was intensified with the extension of 
the sonication time. 
The time of sonication affects the quality of food and the rate of drying. 
Nowacka et al.60 found that the rate of drying was slowest at 20 min in 
the case of pretreatment of apple cubes with US (10, 20 and 30 min). On 
increasing the time of sonication, a significant increase in the color change 
was observed for food materials.3,36,66 And there was a decrease in antioxidant 
activity.66,71 The effect of frequency, ultrasonic power, and amplitude was 
low in comparison to the influence of time of sonication. 
Kek et al.36 examined the impact of US-PRT on the guava slices in osmotic 
fluid and observed the loss of water. As the amplitude was increased, the 
loss of water was also increased. However, there was a significant reduction 
in the retention of antioxidants and the time of drying whereas the color 
change was increased with amplitude. Also, with the decrease in the level of 
frequency and an increase in the level of ultrasonic power, an increase in the 
weight loss and color change were observed. Therefore, food substances may 
either gain or lose moisture during US-PRT. However, these results are due 
to the synergistic influence of US-PRT and difference in the concentration  
Scope of Ultrasound Technology for Preservation 193 
between food substances and the liquefied media (osmotic fluid or distilled 
water). 
8.4.1.2 INFLUENCE OF US-PRT ON DRYING KINETICS 
There is always a rise in the drying kinetics of food materials on the applica￾tion of US before drying. Fernandes et al.21 applied ultrasonic-PRT on the CD 
of pineapple. They observed that there was an increase in the effective water 
diffusivity by 64%. Romero et al.71 studied the influence of ultrasonic-PRT 
on the CD of Andean blackberry. They observed the enhanced rate of drying 
by five times when US-PRT was given to blackberries for 20 min and then 
further drying at 60°C. Even at low temperatures, the effective diffusivity 
was increased by 210%. 
Ricce et al.68 evaluated ultrasonic-PRT before the hot-air drying. It was 
determined that the rate of drying with US-PRT for 30 min and further 
drying at 40°C was low as compared with the control sample. The increment 
or uniform depletion of the drying phenomena with the ultrasonic-PRT may 
be the inclusive influence of the conditions of drying, the structure of food, 
and increase or decrease in water during the ultrasonic-PRT. As discussed 
before, the ultrasonic-PRT application led to cell damage and the occurrence 
of microscopic channels that make the movement of water easier. As there is 
a decrease in the resistance in the migration of water, the drying phenomena 
hastens.28 
8.4.1.3 INFLUENCE OF US-PRT ON FOOD QUALITY 
The quality of food materials gets influenced by ultrasonic-PRT. A major 
concern is involved in physical characteristics such as water activity. 
Kowalski et al.46 observed that ultrasonic-PRT resulted in a remarkable 
reduction (66% for UDODIT) in the level of water activity in carrot. These 
results were analogous with the results of Kowalski and Szadzińska45 in the 
drying of cherry using convective-intermittent method. They observed a major 
reduction of 18% in water activity of cherry. Similar findings were reported in 
the CD of mushroom (notable reduction of 19%) and cherry (slight reduction 
of 4–7%), 6,83 and microwave-assisted hot-air drying of cranberry.82 
Varying results were obtained on the impact of ultrasonic-PRT on 
the water activity for drying of apples by convection with US at 35 kHz 
frequency and a major increase of 10–13% was observed.22 The color change 194 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
is also a vital parameter in the case of the dried food products that must be 
considered for evaluation of food quality. Dehsheikh et al.17 demonstrated 
a major reduction of 33.6% in color change of the convective-dried banana 
slices in conjunction with ultrasonic-PRT. Nowacka et al.60 determined that 
the rehydration ability of apple under US treatment was low in level as 
compared with the untreated sample. 
8.4.2 US-ASSISTED DRYING (USAD) OF FOODS 
8.4.2.1 INFLUENCE OF VARIOUS PARAMETERS ON US-ASSISTED 
DRYING 
The quality of food products and the drying properties are affected mainly 
by the ultrasonic power, the type of application, and the distance of ultra￾sonic radiation. For instance, Schossler et al.80 determined the intermittent 
and continuous USAD of bell pepper and apple. They found that the rate 
of drying was significantly enhanced even though the sonication time was 
reduced to half. Although, on reduction of net sonication time by 10%, there 
was no augmentation of the drying kinetics. The quality of food products 
was also affected by the US power. 
Tao et al.87 dried garlic slices by convection using contact US technology. 
They observed that color change was enhanced with an increase in the US 
power intensity as compared with the pure convective drying. It confirmed 
that the modern power by US is very effective in preserving the native white 
color of the garlic. 
8.4.2.2 INFLUENCE OF US-ASSISTED DRYING ON DRYING 
KINETICS 
On application of ultrasonic technology during drying, an increase in the 
drying kinetics of food materials has been observed. For instance, Baslar 
et al.4
 performed a comparative study of VD, OD, and USV drying of 
fish fillets. They observed the reduced time of drying in Salmon fillets by 
performing USV drying. The time of drying was reduced by 44 to 67% in 
comparison with OD drying, while 7.4–25.7% in comparison with VD. Also 
for trout fillets, the drying time was decreased by 52.5–75.8% in comparison 
with OD drying, while 21.9–27.4% in comparison with VD. The ultrasonic 
technology also finds application in reducing the consumption of energy. Scope of Ultrasound Technology for Preservation 195 
In a study by Kowalski et al.,43 there was 10% reduction in energy consump￾tion. Sabarez et al.72 studied the CD of apple by US-assisted technology. A 
decrease in the level of drying time by 46–57% and 42–54% decrease in 
energy consumption was observed while using the US technology. 
8.4.2.3 EFFECT OF US-ASSISTED DRYING ON FOOD QUALITY 
The chemical and physical properties of food materials is also influenced 
by US-assisted drying. One of the crucial physical characteristics is water 
activity. Szadzinska et al.85 observed that CD of strawberries was improved 
with US and microwave combined and separated. The water activity was 
reduced (34% for CVMWUS) as compared with the CV drying. The color 
change is also a vital parameter while taking in to account the quality of 
dried food products. 
8.5 CHARACTERISTICS OF US POWER-ASSISTED FREEZING 
Three facets of US can be described as the mechanism of freezing stimula￾tion. At first, the acoustic cavitation leads to the formation of microstreaming 
that results in a rigorous collision among microparticles of the medium, 
producing very thin solid–liquid linkage.27,94 In the second place, the 
formation of cavitation bubbles in the medium of transport along with 
the disintegration of the bubbles gives rise to the generation of ultrahigh 
pressure (100 MPa). The rapidly increased pressure generates an increased 
degree of supercooling that contributes in the rapid nucleation.26 In the third 
place, primary nucleation is persuaded by cavitation bubbles of definite size 
while secondary nucleation is perceived by the tiny sections from massive 
dendritic ice crystals.14 There have been many investigations regarding the 
quality criterion of food materials, namely, color, texture, and nutritional 
profile which are nearly linked with the rate of heat transfer during the 
freezing.11,105 
Ultrasonication is a highly efficient treatment in forming small ice 
crystals by causing acceleration in the heat transfer, thereby preserving the 
original quality characteristics of the FFP.33,51 There are innumerable studies 
on the effect of US-assisted freezing on the changes in chemical, physical, 
and microstructure, depicting the quality attributes of food items. 
Diverse facets of US applications in food freezing have been suggested 
that involve the control of size and shape of ice crystals,40,73 initiation of 196 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
ice nucleation,97,38 enhancement in quality of FFP,31,95 and rapid increase in 
freezing rate.27,49 
8.5.1 ICE NUCLEATION 
Nucleation is determined as the development of new crystals and it is a 
crucial element in optimization of the process of freezing and transmittance 
of enhanced quality of foods.58 Though nucleation is unconstrained and 
probabilistic, yet the temperature of the emergence of nucleation cannot be 
anticipated with assurance. US treatment can instigate nucleation in both 
moist solutions and in solid food products.15,30,39,103 Inada et al.30 determined 
the control of phase change from supercooled water to the ice under US 
treatment. The findings confirmed that US treatment is effective in increasing 
the chances of nucleation in supercooled water tremendously. Although to 
obtain efficient results, the selection of intensity of US plays a vital role. 
However, diverse facets of occurrence of nucleation incited by US have 
been widely explored, yet the mechanism of nucleation incited by US is 
not understood satisfactorily.14,15,30,38,39,103 Several research studies have 
suggested to define the mechanism of nucleation incited by US treatment, 
amidst which the theory proposed by Hickling26 is widely cited. This theory 
states that disintegration of cavitation bubbles violently, generated by 
ultrasonic treatment, produces huge localized pressure within small fractions 
of time. Therefore, this disintegration produces a high level of supercooling 
and supports spontaneous ice nucleation. Moreover, it has also been stated 
that there is an immediate occurrence of nucleation as soon as there is 
disintegration of cavitation bubbles.14,38,98 
8.5.2 SHAPE AND SIZE OF ICE CRYSTALS 
The size and distribution of size in ice crystals are a crucial criterion in FFP 
(FFP) according to several research studies on these facets.40,58,73 The quality 
of FFP is enhanced generally in the case of small-sized ice crystals and their 
uniform distribution.18 On the other side in the process of freeze-drying, 
comparatively larger and vertical crystals are favored because larger ice 
crystals contribute to rapid sublimation.67 US treatment can induce nucleation 
at high temperatures during the process of freezing. Therefore, the size and 
distribution of crystals in frozen food produce can be controlled by utilizing 
this response of US. The process of freezing comprises of nucleation along Scope of Ultrasound Technology for Preservation 197 
with the growth of ice crystals, and both are dependent on the level of super￾cooling. Although, both nucleation and rate of crystal growth differ in their 
behavior on increasing the level of supercooling.106 
8.5.3 FREEZING RATE 
The freezing rate influences the quality of frozen food produce because it 
governs the level of dehydration in cells, the size of ice crystals and destruc￾tion in the structure of tissues. In general, quick-freezing can effectively 
control the quality of FFP as compared with slow freezing. However, its 
mechanism remains unexplored. US exhibits its ability to stimulate the 
process of freezing of various food substances.18,27,94 
Hu et al.27 examined the influence of US on the rate of freezing during 
freezing under dough cylinders. The findings demonstrated a significant 
improved rate of freezing and shorter time of freezing by the application of 
US treatment. It was deduced that freezing time was decreased by 11% when 
the level of power of US was 288W and 360W. In the process of freezing, the 
rate of heat transfer is closely linked to the efficacy of freezing and the end 
quality of FFP. It has been confirmed that an increased rate of heat transfer 
can preferably sustain the quality of FFP because of the development of 
small ice crystals.84 Thus, US treatment has been validated to be a vital tool 
in enhancing the efficiency of heat transfer in the process of freezing.49 
8.5.4 EFFECT OF US-ASSISTED FREEZING ON THE QUALITY OF 
FOODS 
8.5.4.1 MICROSTRUCTURE 
The microstructure firmly depicts the nutritional and sensory characteristics 
of food materials. Besides, the process of crystallization is an important 
process influencing the microstructure. US aids in both by improving the 
nucleation rate and the crystal growth.38 The initial quality characteristics 
and cell structure can be better retained by US for the development of small 
and uniformly dispersed ice crystals. Numerous studies have been performed 
to study the variation in microstructure because of distinction in freezing of 
food materials. For example, Islam et al.31 determined the effect of freezing 
assisted by US on the microstructure of both raw and freeze-thaw samples 
of mushrooms. The production of small-sized ice crystals in the tissues with 198 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
improved cell structure was the key benefit of applying US irradiation during 
immersion freezing of mushrooms. Similar studies were performed by Islam 
et al.32 in US-assisted contact freezing of mushrooms. 
Xin et al.96 studied the microstructural changes in broccoli (Brassica 
oleracea) as influenced by varying power levels in immersion freezing. The 
findings showed that the broccoli frozen by US-assisted immersion freezing 
has minimum shrinkage and disintegration in the tissues because of the 
formation of large amount of small-sized ice crystals in both the inner and 
outer portion of the cells. The quality attributes of frozen tissues are the key 
functions of the size and evenness of the ice crystals. 
8.5.4.2 DRIP LOSS PARAMETER 
Drip loss is a major parameter for determining the quality characteristics of 
thawed food items. The quality of FFP can be significantly enhanced by the 
reduction in the level of drip loss.93 Tu et al.89 determined the drip loss in 
lotus (Nelumbo nucifera) root by immersion freezing assisted by US. The 
findings showed that US treatment during immersion freezing significantly 
enhanced the rate of freezing, forming very small ice crystals, resulting in 
the declined value of drip loss of food products subsequent to thawing. 
8.5.4.3 TEXTURE AND COLOR PROPERTIES 
Texture and color are two important indices that significantly influence the 
acceptability of food products by consumers.12 Color is a notable parameter 
for the estimation of the visual quality of food products which directly affects 
their appearance, acceptability, and presentation.13 Xu et al.97 determined the 
US-assisted osmotic dehydration freezing of radish and they observed that 
ultrasonic treatment was efficient in retaining the firmness of radish. Texture 
also plays an important role in influencing the consumer acceptability of 
food products. 
Xin et al.95 also examined the US-assisted osmotic dehydration of frozen 
broccoli (Brassica oleracea) and observed that there was better retention of 
firmness as compared with that without US-assisted osmotic dehydration. 
It has been confirmed that the textural characteristics are associated closely 
with the pectic composition and structure of the cell88 due to the decrease in 
the amount of freezable water by osmotic dehydration assisted by US.65Scope of Ultrasound Technology for Preservation 199 
8.5.4.4 CHEMICAL CHARACTERISTICS 
Numerous research studies have focused on measuring vitamins, nutrients, 
and antioxidants along with their retention postthawing of food materials. 
Zhu et al.109 studied the effect of US on the phenolic contents of potatoes, 
apples, and radishes postfreezing. With the aid of US, the decrease in phenolic 
contents in potatoes was reduced by 31.69% than the frozen potatoes without 
ultrasonic treatment (43.81%). This can be ascribed to the low value of drip 
loss as a result of US-assisted freezing. Although there was no remarkable 
reduction in the loss of phenolic contents in samples of radishes (54.41%) 
and apples (66.92%), which concludes that the retention of nutrients by US 
treatment depends on the type of food materials. 
Xu et al.99 demonstrated that the retention of vitamin C and total 
anthocyanin content of red radish was improved notably (p <0.05) under 
US treatment during freezing as compared with slow immersion freezing 
without US. The radish frozen at a power level of 0.26 W/cm2
 recorded 
the increased retention of phenolic content (83.06 mg GAE/100 g FW). 
This may be due to the reduced value of drip loss in the case of red radish, 
frozen with the aid of US. The influence of drip loss in the reduction in 
anthocyanin content was higher than the degradation of anthocyanin caused 
by ultrasonic cavitation. 
The quality of FFP can be firmly linked to the total amount and the size of 
ice crystals created in the interior of food items. The increase in the number 
of total ice crystals and decrease in the size of crystals contribute to the 
enhancement in the quality of frozen food items. 
The selection of power and duration of US and the degree of super￾cooling and the ice bubble concentration in the mixture should be made 
strictly for improving the ice nucleation process in freezing of distinct food 
items. Initially, the higher concentration of gas bubbles is appreciable for ice 
crystals formation. Although the higher concentration of gas bubbles may 
lead to a delay in time amidst the inception of the ice nucleation process and 
treatment by US. Furthermore, an increased level of supercooling is prefer￾able for the initiation of the ice nucleation process. 
Moreover, higher power intensity of US at an adequate range is desirable 
for the process of ice nucleation, whereas at low-power/intensity of US, 
there is a delay in the initiation of ice nucleation. In the case of duration of 
US, increased duration is not preferred for the nucleation process due to the 
generation of heat, whereas the inception of the process of nucleation cannot 
happen by a shorter duration of US.65200 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
8.6 NEGATIVE INFLUENCE OF US ON PRESERVATION OF FRUITS 
AND VEGETABLES 
The fresh FAV contain high amount of moisture and are crispier in texture 
due to which ultrasonic waves may often lead to deterioration of cells and 
tissues of FAV. Zhu et al.108 confirmed the eradication of pesticide residues 
from pakchoi leaves under US, but studies also confirmed the decrease in 
vitamin C levels and physical deterioration of the treated sample. Moreover, 
the proportion of spoiled leaves can be minimized by modifying the ultrasonic 
frequency, and no spoilage in the leaf was observed with an ultrasonic 
frequency of 135 kHz. However, a reduction in the levels of vitamin C was 
still observed with these treatments, signifying that spoilage in the leaf was 
not the sole cause for reduced vitamin C levels. 
Neto et al.59 observed the negative impact of US on the sensory 
properties of lettuce. Muzaffar et al.57 determined that on increasing the 
ultrasonic treatment by 20 min, the firmness of the cherry was decreased 
significantly. Pieczywek et al.63 demonstrated that ultrasonic waves 
increased the solubilization of total pectin in the cell walls of the apple, 
and led to the formation of intercellular spaces in its tissues. Large-sized 
cavitation bubbles are formed at a low frequency of US which therefore 
lead to increased pressure and higher energy, thereby increasing the 
temperature remarkably in some cases,48 which is nonconducive during 
storage. 
Neto et al.59 observed that on increasing the temperature, there is a rapid 
increase in the number of microbes in the samples, and there is a decrease in 
the bactericidal effect of ultrasonic treatment. Zhang et al.104 investigated that 
the structure of the cell wall in cherry tomatoes was loosened on increasing 
the temperature of US. Researchers confirmed that due to higher resistance 
by most enzymes to ultrasonic treatment, prolonged time is required for 
higher intensity treatment, which has a negative influence on the quality 
characteristics of processed foods and it decreased the sensory characteristics 
of the food products. The short-pulse US breaks large molecules, thereby 
creating ease for the enzymes to be in reaction with substrates, probably 
improving their activity.61,90 Moreover, in few cases, the US processes 
necessitate the need for the high level of sound wave frequencies that can 
result in the operator’s hearing loss if safety measures are neglected. Seldom, 
in industries, the effective generation of acoustic fields of adequate intensity 
may pose a problem.34,55 Scope of Ultrasound Technology for Preservation 201 
8.7 SUMMARY 
US treatment is a profitable application in the preservation of FAV, such as 
decontamination, drying, and freezing of FAV. This chapter summarizes the 
explanatory literature on different techniques of preservation of various FAV. 
The competence of ultrasonic cavitation in the preservation of horticultural 
commodities is fortuitous. In ultrasonic treatment, the acoustic cavitation and 
streaming results in the implosion of the bubbles. The turbulence induced by 
streaming causes an increase in temperature and pressure, thus generating 
a massive amount of heat. This leads to the formation of microjets, which 
assists in decontaminating the surface of FAV. The US-PRT prior to drying 
and US-assisted drying have resulted in enhanced synergy with other food 
processing techniques. US contribution in adding value to the freezing of 
FAV is well acknowledged. 
KEYWORDS 
• cavitation 
decontamination 
drying 
freezing 
preservation 
ultrasound 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
REFERENCES 
1. Ajlouni, S.; Sibrani, H.; Premier, R.; Tomkins, B. Ultrasonication and Fresh Produce 
(Lettuce) Preservation. J. Food Sci. 2006, 71 (2), 62–68. 
2. Allahdad, Z.; Nasiri, M.; Varidi, M.; Varidi, M. J. Effect of Sonication on Osmotic De￾Hydration and Subsequent Air-Drying of Pomegranate Arils. J. Food Eng. 2019, 244, 
202–211. 
3. Amami, E.; Khezami, W.; Mezrigui, S.; Badwaik, L. S.; Bejar, A. K.; Perez, C. T.; 
Kechaou, N. Effect of Ultrasound-Assisted Osmotic Dehydration Pretreatment on the 
Convective Drying of strawberry. Ultrasonic Sonochem. 2017, 36, 286–300. 
4. Baslar, M.; Kilicli, M.; Yalinkilic, B. Dehydration Kinetics of Salmon and Trout Fillets 
Using Ultrasonic Vacuum Drying as a Novel Technique. Ultrasonic Sonochem. 2015, 
27, 495–502. 202 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
5. Cai, L.; Cao, M.; Regenstein, J.; Cao, A. Recent Advances in Food Thawing Technologies. 
Comprehens. Rev. Food Sci. Food Safet. 2019, 18, 953–970. 
6.	 Çakmak, R. S.; Tekeoğlu, O.; Bozkır, H.; Ergün, A. R.; Baysal, T. Effects of Electrical 
and Sonication Pretreatments on the Drying Rate and Quality of Mushrooms. LWT— 
Food Sci. Technol. 2016, 69, 197–202. 
7. Cao, S. F.; Hu, Z. C.; Pang, B.; Wang, H. O.; Xie, H. X.; Wu, F. Effect of Ultrasound 
Treatment on Fruit Decay and Quality Maintenance in Strawberry After Harvest. Food 
Control 2010, 21 (4), 529–532. 
8. Cárcel, J. A.; García-Pérez, J. V.; Benedito, J.; Mulet, A. Food Process Inno- Vation 
Through New Technologies: Use of Ultrasound. J. Food Eng. 2012, 110 (2), 200–207. 
9. Chemat, F.; Zill-e-huma; Khan, M. K. Applications of Ultrasound in Food Technology: 
Processing, Preservation and Extraction. Ultrasonic Sonochem. 2011, 18 (4), 813–835. 
10. Chen, Z.; Zhu, C. H. Combined Effects of Aqueous Chlorine Dioxide and Ultrasonic 
Treatments on Postharvest Storage Quality of Plum Fruit (Prunus salicina L.). Postharv. 
Biol. Technol. 2011, 61 (2–3), 117–123. 
11. Cheng, X.;Zhang, M.; Xu, B.; Adhikari, B.; Sun, J. The Principles of Ultrasound and 
its Application in Freezing Related Processes of Food Materials: a Review. Ultrasonic 
Sonochem. 2015, 27, 576–585. 
12. Chiang, P. Y.; Luo, Y. Y. Effects of Pressurized Cooking on the Relationship Between 
the Chemical Compositions and Texture Changes of Lotus Root (Nelumbo nucifera 
Gaertn.). Food Chem. 2007, 105, 480–484. 
13. Choi, E. J.; Park, H. W.; Chung, Y. B.; Park, S. H.; Kim, J. S.; Chun, H. H. Effect of Tem￾Pering Methods on Quality Changes of Pork Loin Frozen by Cryogenic Immersion. 
Meat Sci. 2017, 124, 69–76. 
14. Chow, R.; Blindt, R.; Chivers, R.; Povey, M. A Study on the Primary and Secondary 
Nucleation of Ice by Power Ultrasound. Ultrasonic Sonochem. 2005, 43, 227–230. 
15. Chow, R.; Blindt, R.; Chivers, R.; Povey, M. The Sonocrystallisation of Ice in Sucrose 
Solutions: Primary and Secondary Nucleation. Ultrasonics 2003, 41, 595–604. 
16. Corrêa, J. L. G.; Rasia, M. C.; Mulet, A.; Cárcel, J. A. Influence of Ultrasound 
Application on both the Osmotic Pretreatment and Subsequent Convective Drying of 
Pineapple (Ananas comosus). Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2017, 41, 284–291. 
17. Dehsheikh, F. N.; Dinani, S. T. Coating Pretreatment of Banana Slices Using 
Carboxymethyl Cellulose in an Ultrasonic System Before Convective Drying. 
Ultrasonics Sonochem. 2019, 52, 401–413. 
18. Delgado, A. E.; Zheng, L. Y.; Sun, D. W. Influence of Ultrasound on Freezing Rate of 
Immersion-Frozen Apples. Food Bioprocess Technol. 2009, 2, 263–270. 
19. Deora, N. S.; Misra, N. N.; Deswal, A.; Mishra, H. N.; Cullen, P. J.; Tiwari, B. K. 
Ultrasound for Improved Crystallization In Food Processing. Food Eng. Rev. 2013, 5, 
36–44. 
20. Dias da Silva, G.; Barros, Z. M. P.; de Medeiros, R. A. B.; de Carvalho, C. B. O.; 
Brandão, S. C. R.; Azoubel, P. M. Pretreatments for Melon Drying Implementing 
Ultrasound And Vacuum. LWT—Food Sci. Technol. 2016, 74, 114–119. 
21. Fernandes, F. A. N.; Gallão, M. I.; Rodrigues, S. Effect of Osmosis and Ultrasound on 
Pineapple Cell Tissue Structure During Dehydration. J. Food Eng. 2009, 90, 186–190. 
22. Fijalkowska, A.; Nowacka, M.; Wiktor, A.; Sledz, M.; Witrowa-Rajchert, D. Ultrasound 
as A Pretreatment Method to Improve Drying Kinetics and Sensory Properties Of Dried 
Apple. J. Food Process Eng. 2016, 39, 256–265. Scope of Ultrasound Technology for Preservation 203 
23. Galanakis, C. M. Recovery of High Added-Value Components from Food Wastes: 
Conventional, Emerging Technologies and Commercialized Applications. Trends Food 
Sci. Technol. 2012, 26 (2), 68–87. 
24. Gao, S.; Lewis, G. D.; Ashokkumar, M.; Hemar, Y. Inactivation of Microorganisms by 
Low-Frequency High-Power Ultrasound, Part 1: Effect of Growth Phase and Capsule 
Properties of the Bacteria. Ultrasonics Sonochem. 2014, 21, 446–453. 
25. Harris, G. A.; Torgovnikov, G.; Vinden, P.; Brodie, G. I.; Shaginov, A. Microwave 
Pretreatment of Backsawn Messmate Boards to Improve Drying Quality. Dry. Technol. 
2008, 26 (5), 579–584. 
26. Hickling, R. Nucleation of Freezing by Cavity Collapse and its Relation to Cavitation 
Damage. Nature, 1965, 206, 915–917. 
27. Hu, S. Q.; Liu, G.; Li, L.; Li, Z. X.; Hou, Y. An Improvement in the Immersion Freezing 
Process for Frozen Dough via Ultrasound Irradiation. J. Food Eng. 2013, 114, 22–28. 
28. Huang, D.; Men, K.; Li, D.; Wen, T.; Gong, Z.; Sunden, B.; Wu, Z. Application of 
Ultrasound Technology in the Drying of Food Products. Ultrasonics Sonochem. 2020, 
63, E-article 104950; p 8. 
29. Huang, T. S.; Xu, C. L.; Walker, K.; West, P.; Zhang, S. P.; Weese, J. Decontamination 
Efficacy of Combined Chlorine Dioxide with Ultrasonication on Apples and Lettuce. J. 
Food Sci. 2006, 71 (4), M134–M139. 
30. Inada, T.; Zhang, X.; Yabe, A.; Kozawa, Y. Active Control of Phase Change from 
Supercooled Water to ice by Ultrasonic Vibration, Part 1: Control of Freezing 
Temperature. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 2001, 44, 4523–4531. 
31. Islam, M. N.; Zhang, M.; Adhikari, B.; Xinfeng, C.; Xu, B.-G. The Effect of Ultrasound￾Assisted Immersion Freezing on Selected Physicochemical Properties of Mushrooms. 
Int. J. Refrigeration 2014, 42, 121–133. 
32. Islam, M. N.; Zhang, M.; Fang, Z.; Sun, J. Direct Contact Ultrasound Assisted Freezing 
of Mushroom (Agaricus bisporus): Growth and Size Distribution of Ice Crystals. Int. J. 
Refrigeration 2015, 57, 46–53. 
33. James,C.; Purnell, G.; James, S. J. A Review of Novel and Innovative Food Freezing 
Technologies. Food Bioprocess Technol. 2015, 8, 1616–1634. 
34. Jiang, Q.; Zhang, M.; Xu, B. (2020). Application of Ultrasonic Technology in 
Postharvested Fruits and Vegetables Storage: A Review. Ultrasonics Sonochem. 2020, 
69, E-article 105261, p 9. 
35. Joyce, E.; Phull, S. S.; Lorimer, J. P.; Mason, T. J. The Development and Evaluation of 
Ultrasound for the Treatment of Bacterial Suspensions: A Study of Frequency, Power 
and Sonication Time on Cultured Bacillus Species. Ultrasonics Sonochem. 2003, 10 (6), 
315–318. 
36. Kek, S. P.; Chin, N. L.; Yusof, Y. A. Direct and Indirect Power Ultrasound Assisted Pre￾Osmotic Treatments in Convective Drying of Guava Slices. Food Bioproducts Process. 
2013, 91, 495–506. 
37. Kentish, S.; Ashokkumar, M. The Physical and Chemical Effects of Ultrasound. In 
Ultrasound Technologies for Food and Bioprocessing; Feng, H., Barbosa-Cánovas, G. 
V., Weiss, J., Eds.; Springer: New York, 2011; pp 1–12 
38. Kiani, H.; Sun, D. W.; Delgado, A.; Zhang, Z. Investigation of the Effect of Power 
Ultrasound on the Nucleation of Water During Freezing of Agar Gel Samples in Tubing 
Vials. Ultrasonics Sonochem. 2012, 19, 576–581. 204 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
39. Kiani, H.; Zhang, Z.; Delgado, A.; Sun, D. W. Ultrasound Assisted Nucleation of Some 
Liquid and Solid Model Foods During Freezing. Food Res. Int. 2011, 44, 2915–2921. 
40. Kiani, H.; Zhang, Z.; Sun, D. W. Effect of Ultrasound Irradiation on Ice Crystal Size 
Distribution in Frozen Agar Gel Samples. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2013, 18, 
126–131. 
41. Kim, H. J.; Feng, H.; Kushad, M. M.; Fan, X. Effects of Ultrasound, Irradiation 
and Acidic Electrolyzed Water on Germination of Alfalfa and Broccoli Seeds and 
Escherichia coli O157:H7. J. Food Sci. 2006, 71 (6), 168–173. 
42. Kingsly, R. P.; Goyal, R. K.; Manikantan, M. R.; Ilyas, S. M. Effects of Pretreatments 
and Drying Air Temperature on Drying Behavior of Peach Slice. Int. J. Food Sci. 
Technol. 2007, 42, 65–69. 
43. Kowalski, S. J.; Mierzwa, D. US-Assisted Convective Drying of Biological Materials. 
Dry. Technol. 2015, 33, 1601–1613. 
44.	 Kowalski, S. J.; Pawłowski, A.; Szadzińska, J.; Łechtańska, J.; Stasiak, M. High Power 
Airborne Ultrasound Assist in Combined Drying of Raspberries. Innov. Food Sci. 
Emerg. Technol. 2016, 34, 225–233. 
45.	 Kowalski, S. J.; Szadzińska, J. Convective-Intermittent Drying of Cherries Preceded by 
Ultrasonic Assisted Osmotic Dehydration. Chem. Eng. Process. 2014, 82, 65–70. 
46.	 Kowalski, S. J.; Szadzińska, J.; Pawłowski, A. Ultrasonic-Assisted Osmotic Dehydration 
of Carrot Followed by Convective Drying with Continuous and Intermittent Heating. 
Dry. Technol. 2015, 33, 1570–1580. 
47. Legay, M.; Gondrexon, N.; Le Person, S.; Boldo, P.; Bontemps, A. Enhancement of 
Heat Transfer by Ultrasound: Review and Recent Advances. Int. J. Chem. Eng. 2011, 
2011, 1–17. 
48. Leong, T.; Juliano, P.; Knoerzer, K. Advances in Ultrasonic and Megasonic Processing 
of Foods. Food Eng. Rev. 2017, 9, 237–256. 
49. Li, B.; Sun, D. W. Effect of Power Ultrasound on Freezing Rate During Immersion 
Freezing of Potatoes. J. Food Eng. 2002, 55, 277–282. 
50. Lighthill, S. J. Acoustic Streaming. J. Sound Vibration 1978, 61, 391–418. 
51. Mahato, S.; Zhu, Z.; Sun, D. W. Glass Transitions as Affected by Food Compositions 
and by Conventional and Novel Freezing Technologies: A Review. Trends Food Sci. 
Technol. 2019, 94, 1–11. 
52. Majid, I.; Nayik, G. A.; Nanda, V. Ultrasonication and Food Technology: A Review. 
Cogent Food Agric. 2015, 1 (1), 1071022. 
53.	 Martınez-Soto, G.; Ocanna-Camacho, R.; Paredes-Lopez, O. Effect of Pretreatment and 
Drying on the Quality of Oyster Mushrooms (Pleurotus ostreatus). Dry. Technol. 2001, 
19 (3–4), 661–672. 
54. Mason, T. J.; Lorimer, J. P. Introduction to Applied Ultrasonics. In Applied Sonochemistry: 
Uses of Power Ultrasound in Chemistry and Processing; Weinheim: Wiley-VCH Verlag, 
2002; pp 1–24. 
55. Mothibe, K. J.; Zhang, M.; Nsor-atindana, J.; Wang, Y. Use of Ultrasound Pretreatment 
in Drying of Fruits: Drying Rates, Quality Attributes, and Shelf-Life Extension. Dry. 
Technol. 2011, 29 (14), 1611–1621. 
56. Mukhopadhyay, S.; Ramaswamy, R. Application of Emerging Technologies to Control 
Salmonella in Foods: A Review. Food Res. Int. 2012, 45, 666–677. 
57. Muzaffar, S.; Ahmad, M.; Wani, S. M.; Gani, A.; Baba, W. N.; Shah, U.; Khan, A. A.; 
Masoodi, F. A.; Gani, A.; Wani, T. A. Ultrasound Treatment: Effect on Physicochemical, Scope of Ultrasound Technology for Preservation 205 
Microbial and Antioxidant Properties of Cherry (Prunus avium). J. Food Sci. Technol. 
2016, 53, 2752–2759. 
58. Nakagawa, K.; Hottot, A.; Vessot, S.; Andrieu, J. Influence of Controlled Nucleation by 
Ultrasounds on Ice Morphology of Frozen Formulations for Pharmaceutical Proteins 
Freeze Drying. Chem. Eng. Process. 2006, 45 (9), 783–791. 
59. Neto,L.; Millan-Sango, D.; Brincat, J.; Cunha, L. M.; Valdramidis, V. P. Impact of 
Ultrasound Decontamination on the Microbial and Sensory Quality of Fresh Produce. 
Food Control 2019, 104, 262–268. 
60.	 Nowacka, M.;Wiktor, A.; Śledź, M.; Jurek, N.; Witrowa-Rajchert, D. Drying of 
Ultrasound Pretreated Apple and Its Selected Physical Properties. J. Food Eng. 2012, 
113, 427–433. 
61. Ortega-Rivas, E. Ultrasound in Food Preservation. In Non-thermal Food Engineering 
Operations; Springer Science + Business Media: New York, 2012; pp 251–262. 
62. Patist, A.; Bates, D. Ultrasonic Innovations in the Food Industry: From the Laboratory to 
Commercial Production. Innov. Food Sci Emerg. Technol. 2008, 9, 147–154. 
63. Pieczywek, P. M.; Kozio, A.; Konopacka, D.; Cybulska, J.; Zdunek, A. Changes of cell 
wall stiffness and microstructure in ultrasonically treated apple. J. Food Eng. 2017, 197, 
1–8. 
64. Prajapati, V. K.; Nema, P. K.; Rathore, S. S. Effect of Pretreatment and Drying Methods 
on Quality of Value-Added Dried Anola (Emblica officinalis) Shreds. J. Food Sci. 
Technol. 2010, 48 (1), 45–52. 
65. Qiu, L.; Zhang, M.; Chitrakar, B.; Bhandari, B. Application of Power Ultrasound in 
Freezing and Thawing Processes: Effect on Process Efficiency and Product Quality. 
Ultrasonics Sonochem. 2020, 68, E-article 105230, p 7. 
66. Ren, F.; Perussello, C. A.; Zhang, Z.; Kerry, J. P.; Tiwari, B. K. Impact of Ultrasound 
and Blanching on Functional Properties of Hot-Air Dried and Freeze Dried Onions. 
LWT—Food Sci. Technol. 2017, 87, 102–111. 
67. Rhim, J. W.; Koh, S.; Kim, J. M. Effect of Freezing Temperature on Rehydration and 
Water Vapor Adsorption Characteristics of Freeze-Dried Rice Porridge. J. Food Eng. 
2011, 104, 484–491. 
68. Ricce, C.; Rojas, M. L.; Miano, A. C.; Siche, R.; Augusto, P. E. D. Ultrasound 
Pre-Treatment Enhances the Carrot Drying and Rehydration. Food Res. Int. 2016, 89, 
701–708. 
69. Rivera, C. S.; Venturini, M. E.; Oria, R.; Blanco, D. Selection of a Decontamination 
Treatment for Fresh Tuber aestivum and Tuber melanosporum Truffles Packaged in 
Modified Atmospheres. Food Control 2011, 22 (3–4), 626–632. 
70. Rodrigues, S.; Oliveira, F. I. P.; Gallão, M. I.; Fernandes, F. A. N. Effect of Immersion 
Time in Osmosis and Ultrasound on Papaya Cell Structure During Dehydration. Dry. 
Technol. 2009, 27, 220–225. 
71. Romero, J. C.; Yepez, V. B. Ultrasound as Pretreatment to Convective Drying of Andean 
Black Berry (Rubus glaucus). Ultrasonics Sonochem. 2015, 22, 205–210. 
72. Sabarez, H. T.; Gallego-Juarez, J. A.; Riera, E. Ultrasonic-Assisted Convective Drying 
of Apple Slices. Dry. Technol. 2012, 30, 989–997. 
73. Saclier, M.; Peczalski, R.; Andrieu, J. Effect of Ultrasonically Induced Nucleation on Ice 
Crystals’ Size and Shape During Freezing in Vials. Chem. Eng. Sci. 2010, 65, 3064–3071. 
74. Sagar, V. R.; Suresh, K. P. Recent Advances in Drying and Dehydration of Fruits and 
Vegetables: A Review. J. Food Sci. Technol. 2010, 47 (1), 15–20. 206 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
75. Sagong, H. G.; Cheon, H. L.; Kim, S. O.; Lee, S. Y.; Park, K. H.; Chung, M. S.; Choi, 
Y. J.; Kang, D. H. Combined Effects of Ultrasound and Surfactants to Reduce Bacillus 
Cereus Spores on Lettuce and Carrots. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2013, 160 (3), 367–372. 
76. Sagong, H. G.; Lee, S. Y.; Chang, P. S.; Heu, S.; Ryu, S.; Choi, Y. J. Combined Effect 
of Ultrasound and Organic Acids to Reduce Escherichia coli O157:H7, Salmonella 
typhimurium, and Listeria monocytogenes on Organic Fresh Lettuce. Int. J. Food 
Microbiol. 2011, 145 (1), 287–292. 
77. Sango, D. M.; Abela, D.; Mcelhatton, A.; Valdramidis, V. P. Assisted Ultrasound Appli￾cations for the Production of Safe Foods. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2014, 116 (5), 1067–1083. 
78. São José, J. F. B. de; Andrade, N. J. de; Ramos, A. M.; Vanetti, M. C. D.; Stringheta, 
P. C.; Chaves, J. B. P. Decontamination by Ultrasound Application in Fresh Fruits and 
Vegetables. Food Control 2014, 45, 36–50. 
79. São José, J. F. B.; Vanetti, M. C. D. Effect of Ultrasound and Commercial Sanitizers 
in Removing Natural Contaminants and Salmonella enterica typhimurium on Cherry 
Tomatoes. Food Control 2012, 24 (1–2), 95–99. 
80. Schössler, K.; Jäger, H.; Knorr, D. Effect of Continuous and Intermittent Ultrasound 
on Drying Time and Effective Diffusivity During Convective Drying of Apple and Red 
Bell Pepper. J. Food Eng. 2012, 108, 103–110. 
81. Seymour, I. J.; Burfoot, D.; Smith, R. L.; Cox, L. A.; Lockwood, A. Ultrasound Decon￾tamination of Minimally Processed Fruits and Vegetables. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 
2002, 37 (5), 547–557. 
82. Shamaei, S.; Emam-Djomeh, Z.; Moini, S. Ultrasound-Assisted Osmotic Dehydration 
of Cranberries: Effect of Finish Drying Methods and Ultrasonic Frequency on Textural 
Properties. J. Texture Stud. 2012, 43, 133–141. 
83.	 Siucińska, K.; Konopacka, D.; Mieszczakowska-Frąc, M.; Połubok, A. The Effects of 
Ultrasound on Quality and Nutritional Aspects of Dried Sour Cherries During Shelf￾Life. LWT—Food Sci. Technol. 2016, 68, 168–173. 
84. Sun, D. W.; Li, B. Microstructural Change of Potato Tissues Frozen by Ultrasound￾Assisted Immersion Freezing. J. Food Eng. 2003, 57, 337–345. 
85.	 Szadzińska, J.; Kowalski, S. J.; Stasiak, M. Microwave and Ultrasound Enhancement of 
Convective Drying of Strawberries: Experimental and Modeling Efficiency. Int. J. Heat 
Mass Transf. 2016, 103, 1065–1074. 
86. Tao, Y.; Wang, P.; Wang, Y.; Kadam, S. U.; Han, Y.; Wang, J.; Zhou, J. Power Ultrasound 
as a Pretreatment to Convective Drying of Mulberry (Morus alba L.) Leaves: Impact 
on Drying Kinetics and Selected Quality Properties. Ultrasonics Sonochem. 2016, 31, 
310–318. 
87. Tao, Y.; Zhang, J.; Sirui, J.; Xu, Y.; Show, P. L.; Han, Y.; Ye, X.; Ye, M. Contacting 
Ultrasound Enhanced Hot-Air Convective Drying of Garlic Slices: Mass Transfer 
Modeling and Quality Evaluation. J. Food Eng. 2018, 235, 79–88. 
88. Torreggiani, D.; Bertolo, G. Osmotic Pre-Treatments in Fruit Processing: Chemical, 
Physical and Structural Effects. J. Food Eng. 2001, 49, 247–253. 
89. Tu, J.; Zhang, M.; Xu, B.; Liu, H. Effects of Different Freezing Methods on the Quality 
and Microstructure of Lotus (Nelumbo nucifera) root. Int. J. Refrigeration 2015, 52, 
59–65. 
90. Wang, D.; Yan, L.; Ma, X.; Wang, W.; Zou, M.; Zhong, J.; Ding, T.; Ye, X.; Liu, D. 
Ultrasound Promotes Enzymatic Reactions by Acting on Different Targets: Enzymes, 
Substrates and Enzymatic Reaction Systems. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2018, 119, 453–461. Scope of Ultrasound Technology for Preservation 207 
91. Wei, Y. X. Effect of Postharvest Handling on Quality, Antioxidant Activity and 
Polyamines of Green Asparagus. PhD thesis; Zhejiang University – China, 2010; p 231. 
92. Wiktor, A.; Dadan, M.; Nowacka, M.; Rybak, K.; Witrowa-Rajchert, D. The Impact of 
Combination of Pulsed Electric Field and Ultrasound Treatment on Air Drying Kinetics 
and Quality of Carrot Tissue. LWT—Food Sci. Technol. 2019, 110, 71–79. 
93. Xia, X.; Kong, B.; Liu, Q.; Liu, J. Physicochemical Change and Protein Oxidation in 
Porcine Longissimus Dorsi as Influenced by Different Freeze–Thaw Cycles. Meat Sci. 
2009, 83, 239–245. 
94. Xin, Y.; Zhang, M.; Adhikari, B. The Effects of Ultrasound-Assisted Freezing on the 
Freezing Time and Quality of Broccoli (Brassica oleracea) During Immersion Freezing. 
Int. J. Refrigeration 2014, 41, 82–91. 
95. Xin, Y.; Zhang, M.; Adhikari, B. Freezing Characteristics and Storage Stability of 
Broccoli (Brassica oleracea) Under Osmodehydrofreezing and Ultrasound-Assisted 
Osmodehydrofreezing Treatments. Food Bioprocess Technol. 2014, 7, 1736–1744. 
96. Xin, Y.; Zhang, M.; Adhikari, B. Ultrasound Assisted Immersion Freezing of Broccoli 
(Brassica oleracea). Ultrasonics Sonochem. 2014, 21, 1728–1735. 
97. Xu, B. G.; Zhang, M.; Bhandari, B.; Cheng, X. Influence of Ultrasound-Assisted 
Osmotic Dehydration and Freezing on the Water State, Cell Structure, and Quality of 
(Raphanus sativus L.) Cylinders. Dry. Technol. 2014, 32, 1803–1811. 
98. Xu, B. G.; Zhang, M.; Bhandari, B.; Cheng, X. F. Influence of Power Ultrasound on Ice 
Nucleation of Radish Cylinders During Ultrasound-Assisted Immersion Freezing. Int. 
J. Refrigeration 2014, 46, 1–8. 
99. Xu, B. G.; Zhang, M.; Bhandari, B.; Cheng, X. F.; Islam, M. N. Effect of Ultrasound￾Assisted Freezing on the Physico-Chemical Properties and Volatile Compounds of Red 
Radish. Ultrasonics Sonochem. 2015, 27, 316–324. 
100. Xu, Y.; Sismour, E.; Pao, S.; Rutto, L.; Grizzard, C.; Ren, S. X. Textural and 
Microbiological Qualities of Vegetable Soybean (Edamame) Affected by Blanching and 
Storage Conditions. J. Food Process Technol. 2012, 3, 2–6. 
101. Xu, Y. T.; Zhang, L. F.; Zhong, J. J.; Shu, J.; Ye, X. Q.; Liu, D. H. Power Ultrasound for 
the Preservation of Postharvest Fruits and Vegetables. Int. J. Agric. Biol. Eng. 2013, 6 
(2), 116–125. 
102. Yang, Z.; Cao, S.; Cai, Y.; Zheng, Y. Combination of Salicylic Acid and Ultrasound to 
Control Postharvest Blue Mould Caused by Penicillium expansum in Peach Fruit. Innov. 
Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2011, 12 (3), 310–314. 
103. Yu, D.; Liu, B.; Wang, B. The Effect of Ultrasonic Waves on the Nucleation of Pure 
Water and Degassed Water. Ultrasonics Sonochem. 2012, 19, 459–463. 
104. Zhang, L.; Wang, P.; Sun, X.; Chen, F.; Lai, S.; Yang, H. Calcium Permeation Property 
and Firmness Change of Cherry Tomatoes Under Ultrasound Combined with Calcium 
Lactate Treatment. Ultrasonics Sonochem. 2020, 60, E-article 104784, p 9. 
105. Zhang, P.; Zhu, Z.; Sun, D.-W. Using Power Ultrasound to Accelerate Food Freezing 
Processes: Effects on Freezing Efficiency and Food Microstructure. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. 
Nutr. 2018, 58, 2842–2853. 
106. Zheng, L.; Sun, D. W. Ultrasonic Assistance of Food Freezing. In Emerging Technologies 
for Food Processing; Sun, D. W., Ed.; Elsevier Ltd.: London, 2005; pp 603–626. 
107. Zhou, B.; Feng, H.; Luo, Y. G. Ultrasound Enhanced Sanitizer Efficiency in Reduction 
of Escherichia coli O157:H7 Population on Spinach Leaves. J. Food Sci. 2009, 74 (6), 
308–313. 208 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
108. Zhu, Y.; Zhang, T.; Xu, D.; Wang, S.; Yuan, Y.; He, S.; Cao, Y. The Removal of Pesticide 
Residues from Pakchoi (Brassica rape) by Ultrasonic Treatment. Food Control 2019, 
95, 176–180. 
109. Zhu, Z.; Chen, Z.; Zhou, Q.; Sun, D.-W.; Chen, H.; Zhao, Y.; Zhou, W.; Li, X.; Pan, 
H. Freezing Efficiency and Quality Attributes as Affected by Voids in Plant Tissues 
During Ultrasound-Assisted Immersion Freezing. Food Bioprocess Technol. 2018, 11, 
1615–1626. 
110.	 Zinoviadou, K. G.; Galanakis, C. M.; Brnčić, M.; Grimi, N.; Boussetta, N.; Mota, M. J.; 
Barba, F. J. Fruit Juice Sonication: Implications on Food Safety and Physicochemical 
and Nutritional Properties. Food Res. Int. 2015, 77, 743–752. Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing: Methods and Strategies. Megh R. Goyal, & 
Faizan Ahmad (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 9 
SCOPE OF NANOEMULSIONS 
FOR QUALITY AND SAFETY 
OF FRUITS AND VEGETABLES: 
NANOTECHNOLOGY AND 
ESSENTIAL OILS 
FARAH NAQASH, OMEERA AYOB, SADAF NAZIR, and B. N. DAR 
ABSTRACT 
Fruits and vegetables act as abundant reserves of bioactive compounds with 
positive health outcomes. However, a vast majority of fruits and vegetables 
are lost to the waste bins in the absence of adequate protection against factors 
causing quality defects in these commodities. Postharvest and during storage, 
fruits and vegetables undergo certain physical, biochemical, and biological 
processes that cause a loss in texture, color, sensory appeal, and nutritional 
value along with harboring a plethora of micro-organisms that can cause 
spoilage and be pathogenic as well, requiring novel preservation technolo￾gies. Among the emerging technologies, the application of nanoemulsions to 
extend shelf-life and preserve the quality of fruits and vegetables has taken 
up successfully in recent decades. It involves the application of antimicro￾bials and antioxidants, where the nanoemulsions act as their carriers. Various 
bioactive compounds encapsulated in nanoemulsions include antimicrobial 
and antioxidant essential oils and plant extracts. The nanoreduction of 
these active ingredients is known to enhance their stability, solubility, and 
activity attributed to their reach over an increased surface area. Nanoemul￾sions are applied as an edible coating on horticultural produce creating a 210 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
microenvironment around them and consequently arresting the stimuli 
antagonistic to their quality. 
9.1 INTRODUCTION 
Fruits and vegetables (FAVs) are consumed principally due to their positive 
health benefits. These are rich sources of antioxidants, phenols, flavonoids, 
pigments, and so on, providing antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antidiabetic, 
and anticarcinogenic properties.86 The quality of fresh produce should, 
however, be acceptable at the time of purchase to derive maximum benefits. 
On the contrary, it is known that horticultural produce after harvesting and 
minimal processing operations undergoes severe alterations in terms of 
integrity causing adverse changes in texture, color, nutritional and flavor 
loss, weight loss, and ultimately deterioration.55 Microbial proliferation 
becomes another challenge as the fresh produce is rich in nutrients.6
 All these 
factors can reduce the shelf-life, reducing consumer acceptance, and causing 
wastage. It is estimated that about one-third of the agricultural production is 
wasted annually, in which FAV comprises the largest portion.3 
According to estimates of Food and Agricultural Organization, about half 
of all the FAV produced is wasted [<www.fao.org>]. These losses can be 
due to physical or biological factors during postharvest handling, storage, 
and transportation, and therefore there is a need to put proper preservation 
technologies. In addition to these losses, FAV subjected to minimal 
processing also undergo severe losses due to cutting-induced changes and an 
exposed surface. For these commodities, effective measures must be adopted 
to ensure the availability of these convenience foods to consumers without 
compromising in quality. Methods, such as applying chemical fungicides, 
controlled atmospheric storage, modified atmospheric packaging is being 
used; however, owing to drawbacks like residual hazards, tolerant pathogens, 
anaerobiosis, and off-flavor, alternatives to overcome these issues are 
needed.58 
Among various technologies available, application of edible coatings 
(ECs) has been found to be successful in enhancing shelf-life of fresh 
produce along with preserving their quality.71 ECs are mostly elaborated from 
biopolymers including proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, and/or their mixtures, 
applied onto the product surface by dipping or spraying. These provide a 
barrier to the produce from gases and water vapor, act as texture enhancers 
by providing structural protection, and prevent chemical and microbial 
changes to avoid quality deterioration. ECs also function to improve the Scope of Nanoemulsions for Quality and Safety 211 
characteristics of product by incorporation of bioactive compounds of 
functional importance, such as antioxidants, antimicrobials, flavors, texture 
enhancers, and those providing mechanical and barrier properties.19 
ECs are consumed with the food product itself and do not require disposal 
and thus mitigate the environmental burden, which is generally encountered 
by synthetic packaging. Along with the same concerns, mostly renewable 
and biodegradable materials are used to formulate ECs, which are not only 
abundantly available but also biocompatible.73 Most commonly, alginates, 
starch, pectin, chitosan, gelatin, whey protein, collagen, lipids, and aliphatic 
polyesters are generally employed.21 
To enhance the functionality of ECs, certain substances are added in 
their formulation, such as antimicrobials, antioxidants, nanoparticles, etc. 
Preferably, these components are of natural origin considering their safety, 
consumer acceptance, and better efficiency than the synthetic counterparts.17 
Among such functional components, essential oils (EOs) are added to 
coatings to confer antimicrobial properties to these, along with regulating 
respiration and metabolism.73 
ECs carrying EOs are processed as emulsions that can encapsulate 
these oils, and aid in the distribution of such partially or fully hydrophobic 
compounds in hydrophilic matrices.2
 However, emulsions show pronounced 
instability against creaming, flocculation, and coalescence. To counter this, 
emulsion droplets are reduced to nanometer (nm) range producing a nano￾emulsion (NE). NEs are metastable thermodynamically but show high kinetic 
stability because in these no gravitational separation and droplet aggregation 
are encountered.44 Also, owing to their subcellular size, NEs confer stability 
to active compounds, enhanced bioactivity due to diffusion, and reduced 
effect on the organoleptic properties of a food product.2 These are formulated 
by homogenizing two immiscible liquids, namely, oil and water, which are 
stabilized by an interfacial film supported by adding surfactant molecules. 
NEs can be water-in-oil (w/o) and oil-in-water (o/w), suitable for delivery of 
hydrophilic and hydrophobic agents, respectively.31,73 
An increased application of NEs in food industries is being observed for 
various food processing and packaging systems. In food systems, NEs aid 
in encapsulating functional bioactive compounds, enable their controlled 
release, increase their solubility, and absorption in gastrointestinal tract.1 
NE-based ECs are widely used for maintaining the quality of various food 
products, such as meats, dairy, fresh, and fresh-cut products including FAV. 
These are found instrumental in regulating the metabolism during posthar￾vest phase and, therefore, ensure desirable quality.16,18,71 212 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
This chapter focuses on the application of NEs for enhancing the safety 
and quality of FAVs, along with their formulation, stability, and mechanism 
of action. Their safety and sensory aspects are also discussed. 
9.2 POSTHARVEST LOSSES OF FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
9.2.1 PHYSICOCHEMICAL LOSSES 
FAVs are living systems that undergo deterioration in quality. The respira￾tion is elevated in fresh-cut products as a result of cutting and wounding, 
reducing shelf-life. Ethylene accumulation in the product surroundings as a 
result of respiration is also detrimental to product quality. Fresh produce also 
encounters water loss through transpiration, reducing the product quality. 
This problem is more pronounced in the case of fresh-cut fruits, as the 
surface is readily exposed to the external environment. As a consequence, 
significant weight loss has been observed, which also affects the overall 
quality.27 Loss in texture is also one of the problems in horticultural produce 
and has serious consequences for acceptability. Similar textural loss is seen 
in fresh-cut fruits more significantly, in addition to the browning of exposed 
flesh. Browning is mainly caused by the action of polyphenol oxidase and 
peroxidase on the plant phenolics, causing their oxidation and production of 
brown or black-colored compounds. In addition to these, severe nutritional 
losses, such as, that of sugars, ascorbic acid, and other bioactive compounds 
have been seen.93 
9.2.2 LOSSES DUE TO MICROBIAL GROWTH 
FAV after harvesting are subjected to losses due to spoilage caused by micro￾bial growth. The presence of microbes not only spoils the fresh produce but 
also renders the products unsafe for consumption.49 Consequently, foodborne 
diseases associated with FAV have also increased. Growth of human patho￾gens is favored in FAV with increase in pH. Damaged parts of plants and 
lesions on surfaces also promote the growth of pathogens, due to supporting 
the nutrients in the secretions from damaged tissues. Most of the microflora 
on FAV surfaces is actually present in soil. Pathogenic contamination of FAV 
is encountered during postharvest processing and transportation. 
Common microbes commonly in fresh FAV include fungi (such as from 
genus Aspergillus, Penicillium, Rhizopus, and Wallemia); yeasts of genus  
Scope of Nanoemulsions for Quality and Safety 213 
Pichia, Candida, Zygo saccharomyces; and Gram-negative bacteria, such as 
Erwinina.56 Vegetable pathogens associated with disease outbreaks include 
Salmonella, E. coli, Shigella, and Norovirus.82 E. coli O157: H7, Salmonella, 
and Listeria monocytogenes have been documented to cause diseases 
associated with the consumption of lettuce, Fenugreek, fresh-cut salads, 
apples, celery, lettuce, oranges, and watermelon.37,50 The reader is referred 
to the review by Mostafidi et al.49 for a better understanding of sources of 
microbial contamination of FAV. All these threats point toward the need 
for addressing the safety issues associated with FAV, and their minimally 
processed counterparts. 
9.3 NANOEMULSIONS 
NEs are emulsions with droplet size <100 nm and characterized by kinetic 
stability, attributed to their resistance to deformation owing to smaller size.92 
Their droplet size is characterized by colloidal interactions that enable the 
existence of long-order forces between droplets. This explains the potential 
viscoelastic and solid-like behavior of their phases and existence of ordered 
structures.42 
9.3.1 FORMULATION METHODS 
The formation of droplets in nanoscale is subservient to the creation of a huge 
interface requiring enormous energy inputs.28 A minimum energy require￾ment needed to bring droplet size reduction is always a function of interfacial 
tension and volume fraction of the dispersed phase; and regardless of the 
emulsification method, this requirement remains the same. The administra￾tion of energy is carried out either by working on the fluid, or by changing 
the equilibrium state. The former method is referred to as “high-energy” and 
the latter is “low-energy” method.89 High-energy methods include energy 
dissipation aided by high-pressure homogenization, microfluidization, and 
ultrasonication.45 
Droplet size in such processes is limited by the efficiency in which 
energy is provided and the stresses deform the interface of fluid–fluid emul￾sion into smaller droplets. In case of methods based on thermodynamics of 
the components, the homogenous system of fluid and surfactant is trans￾formed into a metastable region of two phases in which droplets undergo 
nucleation, growth, and ultimately saturation. Such methods are referred to 214 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
as phase inversion methods and can be brought about by phase inversion 
composition involving dilution with one or another fluid or phase inversion 
temperature with well-controlled temperature change. Work-based methods 
produce NEs with more poly-dispersibility compared to that thermodynamic 
methods.68 
9.3.2 STABILITY AND EFFICACY 
NEs are destabilized by increasing the droplet size thus causing phase 
separation. The coalescence is a mechanism of instability that involves fusion 
of droplets due to collision, requiring the droplets to approach and drain the 
film between them causing interfacial fusion. The drainage of interfacial film 
leads to lubrication on droplet surfaces that can deform them even before 
contacting, causing contacting surfaces to increase in area.4
 Depending on 
the magnitude of relative attractive and repulsive forces existing between 
droplets, an increased surface area can either cause or oppose surfaces to 
contact.42 For nanodroplets, the pressure that resists deformation is higher 
than that for micron-scale droplets; and therefore, lesser coalescence, 
consequently higher stability of NEs is expected.28 
Another prime mechanism causing droplet instability is Ostwald ripening 
(OR), wherein a molecular transfer between droplets ensues owing to less 
soluble nature of dispersed phase in the dispersion medium. Due to polydisperse 
nature of NEs, the energy between droplets varies due to varying interfacial 
energy; therefore, a driving force is created to cause the flux of dispersed phase 
to pass into larger droplets at the cost of smaller ones.84 However, nanodroplets 
have OR growth rates well-below those of larger droplets. 
The third mechanism of instability is contact ripening which involves 
fluid–fluid interface fluctuations to enhance the transfer of molecules 
between them; however, it requires more insights into the exact mechanism.69 
9.4 FUNCTIONAL COMPONENTS OF NANOEMULSIONS 
NEs are functionalized by the incorporation of various compounds with 
antimicrobial, antioxidant, and other bioactivities to extend the shelf-life of 
food products. Earlier, these compounds were mostly of synthetic nature; 
however nowadays, synthetic compounds are being largely replaced by 
natural compounds owing to their safety toward health. Scope of Nanoemulsions for Quality and Safety 215 
9.4.1 ANTIOXIDANTS AND PLANT EXTRACTS 
The NEs act as effective delivery vehicles protecting their antioxidant activity 
and enabling their usage in food systems.88 NEs constituted by corn oil were 
formulated to encapsulate Brazilian propolis extract with antiseptic, antioxidant, 
antibacterial, and antioxidant properties. The NEs could be used to mask the off￾flavor of propolis, prevent its degradation and are used as a food preservative.76 
Soybean oil was used to encapsulate olive leaf extract in NEs constituted by 
whey-protein concentrate and whey-protein concentrate–pectin complexes.47 
The NEs were found to possess high antioxidant activity in olive leaf extract 
as identified by peroxide formation. Acai berry anthocyanins encapsulated 
in water-in-oil NEs were found to retain antioxidant activity after storage for 
30 days and a half-life of 385 days, indicating that such NEs could have food 
and pharmaceutical applications.63 Polyphenolic extracts from grape marc 
were encapsulated in sunflower oil NEs. The NEs possessed high cellular 
antioxidant activity than the free extracts.77 
NEs carrying jaboticaba extract (Plinia peruviana) were found to 
possess strong antioxidant activity as identified by the high concentration 
of flavonoids, phenolics, and its marked ability to scavenge free radicals.43 
Similarly, extracts obtained from leaves and stems of Vellozia squamata 
Pohl possessed high antioxidant activity and were encapsulated in NEs.63 
Extracts obtained from Physalis peruviana calyx phenols (e.g., rutin) 
were encapsulated in NEs, stored at room temperature for 120 days, and 
were characterized by high antioxidant and reducing capacity compared to 
free extracts.5 Achyrocline satureioides extracts exhibited high antioxidant 
and bioactive potential due to phenolic compounds, such as quercetin. The 
application of plant extract through NE has enhanced its solubility in aqueous 
systems and increased antioxidant activity.94 Extracts obtained from Phyllan￾thus emblica were encapsulated in NEs and were characterized by presence 
of epigallocatechin, vanillic acid, ellagic acid, and gallic acid. The NE was 
stable at 4°C for 90 days and could act as a potential carrier for antioxidants.9 
Vitamin E was encapsulated in corn oil NEs and inhibited lipase activity in 
the small intestine.39 These research studies demonstrate the success of NEs 
to enable the application of antioxidants in food systems. 
9.4.2 ANTIMICROBIALS 
The antimicrobials are encapsulated in suitable carrier systems, such 
as NEs.60 Also, nanoencapsulation of EOs enhances their solubility and 216 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
dispersion in aqueous media, which overcomes the barriers to their inter￾action with bacteria in such environments.40 EOs are hydrophobic liquids 
synthesized as part of a defense mechanism against various pathogens, 
insects, and UV light. 
Chemically, EOs are composed of terpenes (such as limonene), terpe￾noids (such as linalool and thymol), phenylpropanoids (e.g., eugenol), 
and cinnamaldehyde.29 EOs have proven to be potent antimicrobial agents 
in-vitro and in many food systems, replacing the chemical sanitizers.48 When 
encapsulated in NEs, EOs show enhanced bioactivity and minimal impact on 
the organoleptic properties of food products.23 This was exemplified in the 
antibacterial activity of Thymus saenensis EO that was enhanced 10-folds 
by delivering through NEs.43 The antimicrobial feature of EOs is attributed 
to their potency to penetrate bacterial membranes toward cell-interior and 
inhibit its functional properties. Phenolic compounds present in EOs elicit 
antimicrobial response against pathogens by disrupting cell-membrane 
and leaking cellular-constituents. These phenolic compounds actually are 
capable of damaging cytoplasmic membranes, disrupt proton motive force, 
alter cell permeability, and modify energy generation in cells, thus causing 
cell death mediated by one or more of the causes synergistically.8 
Interaction of EOs with cells cause inhibition of Gram-positive bacteria 
(such as L. monocytogenes, Bacillus cereus, and Staphylococcus aureus) 
due to the interaction of membrane constituents with EO components 
directly, more pronouncedly than the Gram-negative bacteria (such as 
Salmonella Enteritidis and Escherichia coli).12 Strong antimicrobial activity 
was reported20 for (1) jasmine, celery seeds, carrot seeds, and orange oils 
against Campylobacter jejuni; (2) clove bud, cinnamon, oregano, and thyme 
EO against E. coli O157:H7; (3) oregano, cinnamon, clove bud, thyme, 
allspice, and marjoram EO against L. monocytogenes; and (4) thyme, clove 
bud, cinnamon, and oregano EO against S. enteric. Similarly, EO obtained 
from Laurus nobilis and Myrtus communis exhibited antagonism toward 
foodborne pathogens, with the former having the strongest activity and later 
showing moderate activity.11 
EOs derived from Cinnamonum cassia showed potential antimicrobial 
activity against most dominant non-O157 Shiga toxin-producing E. coli 
O26, O45, O103, O111, O121, O145, mostly contributed by cinnamal￾dehyde (59.96%).80 Citrus EOs rich in limonene and citrullene possess 
antimicrobial properties against foodborne pathogens, such as Salmonella, 
Campylobacter, Arcobacter, and Cinnamomum coli.51,52 Anise oil NE was 
investigated for potential antimicrobial effects against L. monocytogenes Scope of Nanoemulsions for Quality and Safety 217 
and E. coli O157:H7 by identifying the minimum inhibitory concentration 
(MIC). The NE more effectively reduced the counts of pathogenic bacteria 
over bulk anise oil.85 
Clove oil NEs stabilized with purity gum ultra-exhibited antimicrobial 
activity toward Gram-positive bacteria (such as S. aureus and L. monocyto￾genes), attributed to the presence of alpha-humelene, eugenyl acetate, and 
beta-caryophyllene.40 Nanoemulsified basil oil possessed high antimicrobial 
activity against Penicillium chrysogenum and Aspergillus flavus, which are 
implicated in causing food spoilage. The fungicidal activity of NE at 1000 
ppm was about 64–67% compared to Carbendazim (a standard fungicide).26 
9.5 APPLICATION OF NANOEMULSIONS AS EDIBLE COATINGS 
NE-based ECs have documented promising results with fresh produce 
enhancing their shelf-life and improving quality.2,10 
9.5.1 FOR WHOLE FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
In fresh-cut Fuji apple, NE carrying lemongrass EO inhibited the growth 
of E. coli O157: H7 and L. monocytogenes during storage for 5 months. It 
was also effective in reducing undesirable color changes in the cut fruit.30 In 
plums, lemongrass oil NE caused a decrease of >2.8 log CFU/g of E. coli 
O157:H7 and Salmonella typhimurium. Glossiness and fracturability also 
were not affected by applying this coating.35 
Strawberries coated with pullulan-cinnamon EO and NE exhibited firm￾ness retention, reduced weight loss, and pronounced antagonism toward 
molds and bacteria, compared to the control group and that without NE.13 In 
another study,67 strawberries coated with thymol NE increased their shelf￾life by 4 days, and weight loss was also prevented as compared to control, 
during storage at 5°C for 16 days. Cinnamon EO NE applied on strawberries 
considerably reduced the fungal cartilage.53 
Mango fruits coated with hydroxypropyl methylcellulose EO NE also 
retained weight, firmness, and color deterioration was also prevented.36 
Chitosan coatings, incorporated with thyme EO when applied on avocado, 
were found to maintain their quality, prevent weight loss, retain firmness 
and color, along with inhibiting microbial growth.14 In tomatoes treated 
with alginate-based coating carrying Citrus sinensis EO NE, populations 
of mesophilic bacteria, Salmonella and Listeria were considerably reduced, 218 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
firmness was enhanced, and weight loss was decreased 3-fold lower than 
the control.15 Melons coated with cinnamon oil NE exhibited 7.7 and 5.5 log 
reductions in the counts of L. monocytogenes and Salmonella spp. inoculated 
artificially, respectively.57 
In case of rucola leaf, the shelf-life was extended by 1 week as compared 
to control, by the application of chitosan NE.77 Okra coated with alginate 
carrying nanoemulsified basil oil maintained texture, color, and overall 
acceptability better than uncoated samples.26 Coating Agaricus bisporus with 
chitosan-cumin EO NE reduced PPO activity and microbial proliferation 
during storage.32 Green beans coated with chitosan-mandarin EO NE caused 
microbial load reduction, delayed firming, maintenance of color, texture, and 
extension of shelf-life.79 
9.5.2 FRESH CUT FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
NEs carrying active compounds have been applied for enabling the market￾ability and safety of fresh-cut FAV.27,72 The effects of NE-based ECs carrying 
lemongrass EO (0.1, 0.5, 1% v/v) were found to completely inhibit the 
growth of natural microflora in fresh-cut apple during 2-week storage, along 
with lowering the browning index.71 
Fresh-cut apple coated with chitosan-cinnamon EO NE exhibited reduced 
microbial counts and preservation of quality during storage.90 NE carrying 
0.5% orange peel EO was found to confer microbial stability to coated orange 
slices over that of uncoated ones and prevent discoloration due to the oxygen 
barrier properties of coating.64 Similarly, promising results were observed in 
grape berries coated with carnauba wax NE carrying lemongrass EO, which 
significantly reduced the counts of S. typhimurium and E. coli during storage 
at 4 and 25°C for 28 days, compared to the control with zero inhibition.34 
Lemongrass oil/chitosan NE was more effective than the emulsion of the 
same composition in ensuring microbial safety against S. typhimurium in 
grape berries.54 
NE containing xanthan gum, nopal mucilage, and α-tocopherol was 
found to maintain quality of fresh-cut apple by reducing polyphenol oxidase 
and pectin methylesterase activity by modifying the degradation metabolism 
of cell-wall.22 In fresh-cut pineapples, citral NE (0.1–1%) incorporation in 
sodium alginate coatings enabled the retention of color, reduced respiration, 
and microbial growth along with storage. Artificially inoculated Salmonella 
enterica and L. monocytogenes was reduced by 2.52 and 2.23 log CFU/g 
when coated with 0.5% NE.60 The efficacy of alginate-based coating Scope of Nanoemulsions for Quality and Safety 219 
carrying thyme oil NE effectively inhibited the growth of L. monocytogenes, 
S. typhimurium, E. coli O157:H7, and S. aureus; and improved the quality of 
fresh-cut cantaloupe along with extended shelf-life by reducing weight loss 
and respiration rate.74 
In fresh-cut cucumber and carrot slices, carvacrol-loaded nanocoatings 
were effective in arresting the microbial proliferation during storage.41,83 
Similarly, lettuce coated with 0.1% oregano oil NE exhibited improved 
quality and microbial safety by inhibiting E. coli O157:H7, S. Typhimurium, 
and L. monocytogenes than the control.7
 Likewise, spinach leaves washed 
with carvacrol or eugenol NE exhibited considerable reduction of 4.5 log 
CFU/g in the counts of inoculated E. coli and S. enterica.70 In minimally 
processed alfalfa, broccoli, mung bean, and radish and soaking in 4000 ppm 
carvacrol NE inactivated E. coli and S. Enteritidis.38 
9.6 SENSORY AND SAFETY ASPECTS OF NANOEMULSIONS 
Incorporating EOs in NEs may alter the sensory profile of FAV as EOs 
have a characteristic strong flavor easily perceived by the consumers.27 For 
instance, in fresh-cut melon coated with cinnamon oil-based coatings, the 
sensory preference was recorded lower due to strong flavor.66 
Radi et al.64 observed higher sensory rating in orange slices coated with 
orange peel EO NE. In another study,35 lemongrass oil concentration in NE 
applied onto grape berries did not affect flavor of berries, possibly due to 
the nanosize of oil droplets. Tomatoes coated with NE carrying C. sinensis 
EO were found to be acceptable despite a distinct odor.15 The sensory effects 
of NEs, therefore, depend on the type of EO and its concentration. Thus, 
optimization studies for ensuring sensory acceptability of NE coated FAV 
are of prime importance. 
The safety of NEs is defined by the manner in which they interact with 
humans. Numerous studies document the cytotoxicity of NEs at particular 
concentrations; however, some studies do show their safety toward biolog￾ical systems. NEs carrying olmesartan at subchronic toxicity doses revealed 
less toxic behavior as identified by biochemical and hematologic analysis.24 
Resveratrol NEs on the other hand did not exhibit any kind of antiangiogenic 
activity in chick embryos.61 Similarly, curcumin-loaded NEs did not show 
any toxicity during intranasal transit to brain.81 
NEs based on α-tocopherol and lemon oil were found to be nontoxic 
to HepG2 cells.33 The toxicity of garlic oil NEs at 18.63 mL/kg caused 
immediate death in female rats; however, at 0.46 mL/kg, no such effects 220 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
were seen.65 Curcumin NEs were cyto-compatible in that no detrimental 
effects on fibroblasts were seen.87 Most of the NEs are safe to administer 
at low concentrations. At excessively high loading concentrations, potential 
toxicity is induced.91 In the preservation of FAV, low concentrations of EOs 
are always preferred and could, therefore, be assumed not to pose health 
concerns. However, deeper insights into the safety of NEs carrying EOs to 
be applied on FAVs should be carried out. 
9.7 SUMMARY 
NEs effectively carry natural antimicrobials (such as EOs) and preserve 
the quality of FAV during storage. Owing to an increased surface area, 
EOs produce more promising outcomes at lower concentrations compared 
to large droplet-sized emulsions. Increased area also enhances their solu￾bility, stability, and acceptability from organoleptic perspective. Since 
NEs produce desirable effects at lower concentration of EOs, these are 
generally safe for human consumption. Therefore, an amalgamation of 
nanotechnology and EOs is instrumental in up keeping the safety and 
quality of fresh FAVs. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors thank NPIU-MHRD, Government of India, for providing oppor￾tunity to work under World Bank-MHRD funded TEQIP Project. 
KEYWORDS 
• antimicrobials 
antioxidants 
fruits and vegetables (FAV) 
nanoemulsions 
pathogens 
spoilage 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• Scope of Nanoemulsions for Quality and Safety 221 
REFERENCES 
1. Acevedo-Fani, A.; Soliva-Fortuny, R.; Martín-Belloso, O. Nanostructured Emulsions 
and Nanolaminates for Delivery of Active Ingredients: Improving Food Safety and 
Functionality. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2017, 60, 12–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
tifs.2016.10.027. 
2. Al-Tayyar, N. A.; Youssef, A. M.; Al-Hindi, R. R. Edible Coatings and Antimicrobial 
Nanoemulsions for Enhancing Shelf-life and Reducing Foodborne Pathogens of Fruits 
and Vegetables: A Review. Sustain. Mater. Technol. 2020, 26, E-article 00215, p 6. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.susmat.2020.e00215. 
3. Augustin, M. A.; Sanguansri, L.; Fox, E. M.; Cobiac, L.; Cole, M. B. Recovery of 
Wasted Fruit and Vegetables for Improving Sustainable Diets. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 
2020, 95 (April), 75–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2019.11.010. 
4. Baldessari, F.; Leal, L. G. Effect of Overall Drop Deformation on Flow-Induced 
Coalescence at Low Capillary Numbers. Phys. Fluids 2006, 18 (1), 1–21. https://doi. 
org/10.1063/1.2158427. 
5. Bazana, M. T.; da Silva, S. S.; Codevilla, C. F.; de Deus, C.; Lucas, B. N.; Ugalde, 
G. A.; Mazutti, M. A.; Moraes Flores, E. M.; Barin, J. S.; de Bona da Silva, C.; et al. 
Development of Nanoemulsions Containing Physalis Peruviana Calyx Extract: A Study 
on Stability and Antioxidant Capacity. Food Res. Int. 2019, 125 (August), E-article 
108645; p 7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2019.108645. 
6. Berger, C. N.; Sodha, S. V.; Shaw, R. K.; Griffin, P. M.; Pink, D.; Hand, P.; Frankel, G. 
Fresh Fruit and Vegetables as Vehicles for the Transmission of Human Pathogens. Environ. 
Microbiol. 2010, 12 (9), 2385–2397. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-2920.2010.02297.x. 
7. Bhargava, K.; Conti, D. S.; da Rocha, S. R. P.; Zhang, Y. Application of an Oregano Oil 
Nanoemulsion to the Control of Foodborne Bacteria on Fresh Lettuce. Food Microbiol. 
2015, 47, 69–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fm.2014.11.007. 
8. Calo, J. R.; Crandall, P. G.; O’Bryan, C. A.; Ricke, S. C. Essential Oils as Antimicrobials 
in Food Systems—A Review. Food Control 2015, 54, 111–119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
foodcont.2014.12.040. 
9. Chaiittianan, R.; Sripanidkulchai, B. Development of a Nanoemulsion of Phyllanthus 
Emblica L. Branch Extract. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 2014, 40 (12), 1597–1606. https:// 
doi.org/10.3109/03639045.2013.838580. 
10. Chaudhary, S.; Kumar, S.; Kumar, V.; Sharma, R. Chitosan Nanoemulsions as Advanced 
Edible Coatings for Fruits and Vegetables: Composition, Fabrication and Developments 
in Last Decade. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2020, 152, 154–170. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijbiomac.2020.02.276. 
11. Cherrat, L.; Espina, L.; Bakkali, M.; García-Gonzalo, D.; Pagán, R.; Laglaoui, A. 
Chemical Composition and Antioxidant Properties of Laurus Nobilis L. and Myrtus 
Communis L. Essential Oils from Morocco and Evaluation of Antimicrobial Activity 
Acting Alone or in Combined Processes for Food Preservation. J. Sci. Food Agric. 2014, 
94 (6), 1197–1204. https://doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.6397. 
12. Chorianopoulos, N.; Kalpoutzakis, E.; Aligiannis, N.; Mitaku, S.; Nychas, G. J.; 
Haroutounian, S. A. Essential Oils of Satureja, Origanum, and Thymus Species: 
Chemical Composition and Antibacterial Activities against Foodborne Pathogens. J. 
Agric. Food Chem. 2004, 52 (26), 8261–8267. https://doi.org/10.1021/jf049113i. 222 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
13. Chu, Y.; Gao, C. C.; Liu, X.; Zhang, N.; Xu, T.; Feng, X.; Yang, Y.; Shen, X.; Tang, X. 
Improvement of Storage Quality of Strawberries by Pullulan Coatings Incorporated with 
Cinnamon Essential Oil Nanoemulsion. LWT 2020, 122 (January), E-article 109054; p 
5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.LWT.2020.109054.
14. Correa-Pacheco, Z. N.; Bautista-Baños, S.; Valle-Marquina, M. Á.; Hernández-López, 
M. The Effect of Nanostructured Chitosan and Chitosan-Thyme Essential Oil Coatings 
on Colletotrichum Gloeosporioides Growth in Vitro and on Avocado and Fruit Quality. 
J. Phytopathol. 2017, 165 (5), 297–305. https://doi.org/10.1111/jph.12562. 
15. Das, S.; Vishakha, K.; Banerjee, S.; Mondal, S.; Ganguli, A. Sodium Alginate-Based 
Edible Coating Containing Nanoemulsion of Citrus Sinensis Essential Oil Eradicates 
Planktonic and Sessile Cells of Food-Borne Pathogens and Increased Quality Attributes 
of Tomatoes. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2020, 162, 1770–1779. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijbiomac.2020.08.086. 
16. Davidson, P. M.; Critzer, F. J.; Matthew Taylor, T. Naturally Occurring Antimicrobials 
for Minimally Processed Foods. Annu. Rev. Food Sci. Technol. 2013, 4 (1), 163–190. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-food-030212-182535. 
17. Divya, K.; Smitha, V.; Jisha, M. S. Antifungal, Antioxidant and Cytotoxic Activities 
of Chitosan Nanoparticles and Its Use as an Edible Coating on Vegetables. Int. J. Biol. 
Macromol. 2018, 114 (2017), 572–577. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2018.03.130. 
18. Donsì, F.; Annunziata, M.; Vincensi, M.; Ferrari, G. Design of Nanoemulsion-Based 
Delivery Systems of Natural Antimicrobials: Effect of the Emulsifier. J. Biotechnol. 
2012, 159 (4), 342–350. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2011.07.001. 
19. Falguera, V.; Quintero, J. P.; Jiménez, A.; Muñoz, J. A.; Ibarz, A. Edible Films and 
Coatings: Structures, Active Functions and Trends in Their Use. Trends Food Sci. 
Technol. 2011, 22 (6), 292–303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2011.02.004. 
20. Friedman, M.; Henika, P. R.; Mandrell, R. E. Bactericidal Activities of Plant Essential 
Oils and Some of Their Isolated Constituents against Campylobacter Jejuni, Escherichia 
Coli, Listeria Monocytogenes, and Salmonella Enterica. J. Food Prot. 2002, 65 (10), 
1545–1560. https://doi.org/10.4315/0362-028X-65.10.1545. 
21. Gago, M. L.; Faleiro, M. L.; Miguel, M. G. C.; Guerreiro, A. C.; Antunes, M. D. C. The 
Effect of Edible Coatings on the Nutritional Quality of Fresh-Cut Apple through Shelf-Life. 
LWT—Food Sci. Technol. 2017, 75, 210–219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.LWT.2016.08.052. 
22. García-Betanzos, C. I.; Hernández-Sánchez, H.; Bernal-Couoh, T. F.; Quintanar￾Guerrero, D.; Zambrano-Zaragoza, M. de la L. Physicochemical, Total Phenols and Pectin 
Methylesterase Changes on Quality Maintenance on Guava Fruit (Psidium Guajava L.) 
Coated with Candeuba Wax Solid Lipid Nanoparticles-Xanthan Gum. Food Res. Int. 
2017, 101, 218–227. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2017.08.065. 
23. Ghosh, V.; Mukherjee, A.; Chandrasekaran, N. Eugenol-Loaded Antimicrobial 
Nanoemulsion Preserves Fruit Juice Against, Microbial Spoilage. Colloids Surf. B 
Biointerf. 2014, 114, 392–397. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2013.10.034. 
24. Gorain, B.; Choudhury, H.; Tekade, R. K.; Karan, S.; Jaisankar, P.; Pal, T. K. Comparative 
Biodistribution and Safety Profiling of Olmesartan Medoxomil Oil-in-Water Oral 
Nanoemulsion. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2016, 82, 20–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
yrtph.2016.10.020. 
25. Gundewadi, G.; Rudra, S. G.; Sarkar, D. J.; Singh, D. Nanoemulsion Based Alginate 
Organic Coating for Shelf-life Extension of Okra. Food Packag. Shelf Life 2018, 18 
(August), 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fpsl.2018.08.002. Scope of Nanoemulsions for Quality and Safety 223 
26. Gundewadi, G.; Sarkar, D. J.; Rudra, S. G.; Singh, D. Preparation of Basil Oil 
Nanoemulsion Using Sapindus Mukorossi Pericarp Extract: Physicochemical Properties 
and Antifungal Activity against Food Spoilage Pathogens. Ind. Crops Prod. 2018, 125 
(June), 95–104. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2018.08.076. 
27. Hasan, S. M. K.; Ferrentino, G.; Scampicchio, M. Nanoemulsion as Advanced Edible 
Coatings to Preserve the Quality of Fresh-Cut Fruits and Vegetables: A Review. Int. J. 
Food Sci. Technol. 2020, 55 (1), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijfs.14273. 
28. Helgeson, M. E. Colloidal Behavior of Nanoemulsions: Interactions, Structure, and 
Rheology. Curr. Opin. Colloid Interf. Sci. 2016, 25, 39–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
cocis.2016.06.006. 
29. Hyldgaard, M.; Mygind, T.; Meyer, R. L. Essential Oils in Food Preservation: Mode of 
Action, Synergies, and Interactions with Food Matrix Components. Front. Microbiol. 
2012, 3 (Jan), 1–24. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2012.00012. 
30. Jo, W. S.; Song, H. Y.; Song, N. B.; Lee, J. H.; Min, S. C.; Song, K. Bin. Quality and Microbial 
Safety of Apples Coated with Carnauba-Shellac Wax Containing Lemongrass Oil. LWT— 
Food Sci. Technol. 2014, 55 (2), 490–497. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.LWT.2013.10.034. 
31. Ju, J.; Xie, Y.; Guo, Y.; Cheng, Y.; Qian, H.; Yao, W. Application of Edible Coating with 
Essential Oil in Food Preservation. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2019, 59 (15), 2467–2480. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2018.1456402. 
32. Karimirad, R.; Behnamian, M.; Dezhsetan, S. Application of Chitosan Nanoparticles 
Containing Cuminum Cyminum Oil as a Delivery System for Shelf-life Extension of Agaricus 
Bisporus. LWT 2019, 106 (Feb), 218–228. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.LWT.2019.02.062. 
33. Kaur, K.; Kumar, R.; Arpita; Goel, S.; Uppal, S.; Bhatia, A.; Mehta, S. K. Physiochemical 
and Cytotoxicity Study of TPGS Stabilized Nanoemulsion Designed by Ultrasonication 
Method; 2017, 34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ultsonch.2016.05.037. 
34. Kim, I. H.; Lee, H.; Kim, J. E.; Song, K. Bin; Lee, Y. S.; Chung, D. S.; Min, S. C. Plum 
Coatings of Lemongrass Oil-Incorporating Carnauba Wax-Based Nanoemulsion. J. 
Food Sci. 2013, 78 (10), E-article 12244; p 9. https://doi.org/10.1111/1750-3841.12244. 
35. Kim, I. H.; Oh, Y. A.; Lee, H.; Song, K. Bin; Min, S. C. Grape Berry Coatings of 
Lemongrass Oil-Incorporating Nanoemulsion. LWT—Food Sci. Technol. 2014, 58 (1), 
1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.LWT.2014.03.018. 
36. Klangmuang, P.; Sothornvit, R. Active Coating from Hydroxypropyl Methylcellulose￾Based Nanocomposite Incorporated with Thai Essential Oils on Mango. Food Biosci. 
2018, 23, 9–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fbio.2018.02.012. 
37. Kwak, T. Y.; Kim, N. H.; Rhee, M. S. Response Surface Methodology-Based 
Optimization of Decontamination Conditions for Escherichia Coli O157:H7 and 
Salmonella Typhimurium on Fresh-Cut Celery Using Thermo ultrasound and Calcium 
Propionate. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2011, 150 (2–3), 128–135. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijfoodmicro.2011.07.025. 
38. Landry, K. S.; Komaiko, J.; Wong, D. E.; Xu, T.; McClements, D. J.; McLandsborough, 
L. Inactivation of Salmonella on Sprouting Seeds Using a Spontaneous Carvacrol 
Nanoemulsion Acidified with Organic Acids. J. Food Prot. 2016, 79 (7), 1115–1126. 
https://doi.org/10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-15-397. 
39. Lv, S.; Gu, J.; Zhang, R.; Zhang, Y.; Tan, H.; McClements, D. J. Vitamin E Encapsulation 
in Plant-Based Nanoemulsions Fabricated Using Dual-Channel Microfluidization: 
Formation, Stability, and Bioaccessibility. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2018, 66 (40), 10532– 
10542. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.8b03077. 224 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
40. Majeed, H.; Liu, F.; Hategekimana, J.; Sharif, H. R.; Qi, J.; Ali, B.; Bian, Y. Y.; Ma, 
J.; Yokoyama, W.; Zhong, F. Bactericidal Action Mechanism of Negatively Charged 
Food Grade Clove Oil Nanoemulsions. Food Chem. 2016, 197, 75–83. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2015.10.015. 
41. Martínez-Hernández, G. B.; Amodio, M. L.; Colelli, G. Carvacrol-Loaded Chitosan 
Nanoparticles Maintain Quality of Fresh-Cut Carrots. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 
2017, 41, 56–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifset.2017.02.005. 
42. Mason, T. G.; Wilking, J. N.; Meleson, K.; Chang, C. B.; Graves, S. M. Nanoemulsions: 
Formation, Structure, and Physical Properties. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 2006, 18 (41), 
E-article 1088; p 7; https://doi.org/10.1088/0953-8984/18/41/R01. 
43. Mazzarino, L.; da Silva Pitz, H.; Lorenzen Voytena, A. P.; Dias Trevisan, A. C.; Ribeiro￾Do-Valle, R. M.; Maraschin, M. Jaboticaba (Plinia Peruviana) Extract Nanoemulsions: 
Development, Stability, and in Vitro Antioxidant Activity. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 2018, 
44 (4), 643–651. https://doi.org/10.1080/03639045.2017.1405976. 
44. McClements, D. J. Recent Developments in Encapsulation and Release of Functional 
Food Ingredients: Delivery by Design. Curr. Opin. Food Sci. 2018, 23, 80–84. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.cofs.2018.06.008. 
45. Meleson, K.; Graves, S.; Mason, T. G. Formation of Concentrated Nanoemulsions 
by Extreme Shear. Soft Matter. 2004, 2 (2–3), 109–123. https://doi.org/10.1081/ 
SMTS-200056102. 
46. Moghimi, R.; Ghaderi, L.; Rafati, H.; Aliahmadi, A.; Mcclements, D. J. Superior 
Antibacterial Activity of Nanoemulsion of Thymus Daenensis Essential Oil against E. 
Coli. Food Chem. 2016, 194, 410–415. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2015.07.139. 
47. Mohammadi, A.; Jafari, S. M.; Assadpour, E.; FaridiEsfanjani, A. Nano Encapsulation 
of Olive Leaf Phenolic Compounds through WPC-Pectin Complexes and Evaluating 
Their Release Rate. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2016, 82, 816–822. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijbiomac.2015.10.025. 
48. Moore-Neibel, K.; Gerber, C.; Patel, J.; Friedman, M.; Ravishankar, S. Antimicrobial 
Activity of Lemongrass Oil against Salmonella Enterica on Organic Leafy Greens. J. Appl. 
Microbiol. 2012, 112 (3), 485–492. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.2011.05222.x. 
49. Mostafidi, M.; Sanjabi, M. R.; Shirkhan, F.; Zahedi, M. T. A Review of Recent Trends 
in the Development of the Microbial Safety of Fruits and Vegetables. Trends Food Sci. 
Technol. 2020, 103 (July), 321–332. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2020.07.009. 
50. Mritunjay, S. K.; Kumar, V. Fresh Farm Produce as a Source of Pathogens: A Review. 
Research Journal of Environmental Toxicology 2015, 2015, 59–70. https://doi.org/10.3923/ 
rjet.2015.59.70. 
51. Muthaiyan, A.; Martin, E. M.; Natesan, S.; Crandall, P. G.; Wilkinson, B. J.; Ricke, S. C. 
Antimicrobial Effect and Mode of Action of Terpeneless Cold-Pressed Valencia Orange 
Essential Oil on Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus Aureus. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2012, 
112 (5), 1020–1033. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.2012.05270.x. 
52. Nannapaneni, R.; Chalova, V. I.; Crandall, P. G.; Ricke, S. C.; Johnson, M. G.; O’Bryan, 
C. A. Campylobacter and Arcobacter Species Sensitivity to Commercial Orange Oil 
Fractions. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2009, 129 (1), 43–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijfoodmicro.2008.11.008. 
53. Naserzadeh, Y.; Mahmoudi, N.; Pakina, E. Antipathogenic Effects of Emulsion and 
Nanoemulsion of Cinnamon Essential Oil against Rhizopus Rot and Grey Mold on 
Strawberry Fruits. Foods Raw Mater. 2019, 7 (1), 210–216. https://doi.org/10.21603/ 
2308-4057-2019-1-210-216. Scope of Nanoemulsions for Quality and Safety 225 
54. Oh, Y. A.; Oh, Y. J.; Song, A. Y.; Won, J. S.; Song, K. Bin; Min, S. C. Comparison 
of Effectiveness of Edible Coatings Using Emulsions Containing Lemongrass Oil 
of Different Size Droplets on Grape Berry Safety and Preservation. LWT 2017, 75, 
742–750. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.LWT.2016.10.033. 
55. Oms-Oliu, G.; Rojas-Graü, M. A.; González, L. A.; Varela, P.; Soliva-Fortuny, R.; 
Hernando, M. I. H.; Munuera, I. P.; Fiszman, S.; Martín-Belloso, O. Recent Approaches 
Using Chemical Treatments to Preserve Quality of Fresh-Cut Fruit: A Review. Postharvest 
Biol. Technol. 2010, 57 (3), 139–148. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.postharvbio.2010.04.001. 
56. Paramithiotis, S.; Drosinos, E. H.; Skandamis, P. N. Microbial Ecology of Fruits and 
Fruit-Based Products. Model. Microb. Ecol. Foods Quant. Microbiol. Food Process. 
2016, 2016, 358–381. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118823071.ch18. 
57. Paudel, S. K.; Bhargava, K.; Kotturi, H. Antimicrobial Activity of Cinnamon Oil 
Nanoemulsion against Listeria Monocytogenes and Salmonella Spp. on Melons. LWT 
2019, 111 (October 2018), 682–687. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.LWT.2019.05.087. 
58. Paul, S. K. (Ed.) Edible Films and Coatings for Fruits and Vegetables; Elsevier Ltd.: 
New York, 2020; Online; p 10. https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-803581-8.11509-7. 
59. Prakash, A.; Baskaran, R.; Paramasivam, N.; Vadivel, V. Department of Fruit and 
Vegetable Technology, Central Food Technological Research Institute. Food Res. Int. 
2018; online. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2018.05.066. 
60. Prakash, A.; Baskaran, R.; Vadivel, V. Citral Nanoemulsion Incorporated Edible Coating 
to Extend the Shelf-life of Fresh Cut Pineapples. LWT 2020, 118 (Nov), E-article 
108851; p 8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.LWT.2019.108851. 
61. Pund, S.; Thakur, R.; More, U.; Joshi, A. Lipid Based Nanoemulsifying Resveratrol 
for Improved Physicochemical Characteristics, in Vitro Cytotoxicity and in Vivo 
Antiangiogenic Efficacy. Colloids Surf. B Biointerf. 2014, 120, 110–117. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2014.05.016. 
62. Quintão, F. J. O.; Tavares, R. S. N.; Vieira-Filho, S. A.; Souza, G. H. B.; Santos, O. 
D. H. Hydroalcoholic Extracts of Vellozia Squamata: Study of Its Nanoemulsions for 
Pharmaceutical or Cosmetic Applications. Brazilian J. Pharmacogn. 2013, 23 (1), 
101–107. https://doi.org/10.1590/S0102-695X2013005000001. 
63. Rabelo, C. A. S.; Taarji, N.; Khalid, N.; Kobayashi, I.; Nakajima, M.; Neves, M. A. 
Formulation and Characterization of Water-in-Oil Nanoemulsions Loaded with Açaí 
Berry Anthocyanins: Insights of Degradation Kinetics and Stability Evaluation of 
Anthocyanins and Nanoemulsions. Food Res. Int. 2018, 106 (2017), 542–548. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2018.01.017. 
64. Radi, M.; Akhavan-Darabi, S.; Akhavan, H. R.; Amiri, S. The Use of Orange Peel 
Essential Oil Microemulsion and Nanoemulsion in Pectin-Based Coating to Extend the 
Shelf-life of Fresh-Cut Orange. J. Food Process. Preserv. 2018, 42 (2), 1–9. https://doi. 
org/10.1111/jfpp.13441. 
65. Ragavan, G.; Muralidaran, Y.; Sridharan, B.; Nachiappa Ganesh, R.; Viswanathan, P. 
Evaluation of Garlic Oil in Nano-Emulsified Form: Optimization and Its Efficacy in 
High-Fat Diet Induced Dyslipidemia in Wistar Rats. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2017, 105, 
203–213. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2017.04.019. 
66. Raybaudi-Massilia, R. M.; Rojas-Graü, M. A.; Mosqueda-Melgar, J.; Martín-Belloso, 
O. Comparative Study on Essential Oils Incorporated into an Alginate-Based Edible 
Coating to Assure the Safety and Quality of Fresh-Cut Fuji Apples. J. Food Prot. 2008, 
71 (6), 1150–1161. https://doi.org/10.4315/0362-028X-71.6.1150. 226 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
67. Robledo, N.; López, L.; Bunger, A.; Tapia, C.; Abugoch, L. Effects of Antimicrobial 
Edible Coating of Thymol Nanoemulsion/Quinoa Protein/Chitosan on the Safety, 
Sensorial Properties, and Quality of Refrigerated Strawberries under Commercial 
Storage Environment. Food Bioprocess Technol. 2018, 11 (8), 1566–1574. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s11947-018-2124-3. 
68. Roger, K.; Cabane, B.; Olsson, U. Formation of 10-100Nm Size-Controlled Emulsions 
through a Sub-PIT Cycle. Langmuir 2010, 26 (6), 3860–3867. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
la903401g. 
69. Roger, K.; Olsson, U.; Schweins, R.; Cabane, B. Emulsion Ripening through Molecular 
Exchange at Droplet Contacts. Angew. Chemie 2015, 127 (5), 1472–1475. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/ange.201407858. 
70. Ruengvisesh, S.; Loquercio, A.; Castell-Perez, E.; Taylor, T. M. Inhibition of Bacterial 
Pathogens in Medium and on Spinach Leaf Surfaces Using Plant-DerivedAntimicrobials 
Loaded in Surfactant Micelles. J. Food Sci. 2015, 80 (11), M2522–M2529. https://doi. 
org/10.1111/1750-3841.13085. 
71. Salvia-trujillo, L.; Rojas-graü, M. A.; Soliva-fortuny, R.; Martín-belloso, O. Postharvest 
Biology and Technology Use of Antimicrobial Nanoemulsions as Edible Coatings: 
Impact on Safety and Quality Attributes of Fresh-Cut Fuji Apples. Postharvest Biol. 
Technol. 2015, 105, 8–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.postharvbio.2015.03.009. 
72. Salvia-Trujillo, L.; Soliva-Fortuny, R.; Rojas-Graü, M. A.; McClements, D. J.; 
Martín-Belloso, O. Edible Nanoemulsions as Carriers of Active Ingredients: A Review. 
Annu. Rev. Food Sci. Technol. 2017, 8 (December), 439–466; https://doi.org/10.1146/ 
annurev-food-030216-025908. 
73. Sanchita, M.; Mishra, H. N. Engineering evaluation of thickness and type of packaging 
materials based on the modified atmosphere packaging requirements of guava. LWT— 
Food Sci. Technol. 2017, 78 (May), 273-280; online; doi:10.1016/j.lwt.2016.12.043 
74. Sarengaowa; Hu, W.; Feng, K.; Xiu, Z.; Jiang, A.; Lao, Y. Thyme Oil Alginate-Based 
Edible Coatings Inhibit Growth of Pathogenic Microorganisms Spoiling Fresh-Cut 
Cantaloupe. Food Biosci. 2019, 32 (Sept), E-article 100467; p 6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
fbio.2019.100467. 
75. Saxena, A.; Sharma, L.; Maity, T. Enrichment of Edible Coatings and Films with Plant 
Extracts or Essential Oils for the Preservation of Fruits and Vegetables. Chapter 34; In: 
Biopolymer-Based Formulations: Biomedical & Food Applications; Elsevier Inc.: San 
Diego, 2020; pp 859–880. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-816897-4.00034-5. 
76. Seibert, J. B.; Bautista-Silva, J. P.; Amparo, T. R.; Petit, A.; Pervier, P.; dos Santos 
Almeida, J. C.; Azevedo, M. C.; Silveira, B. M.; Brandão, G. C.; de Souza, G. H. B.; et 
al. Development of Propolis Nanoemulsion with Antioxidant and Antimicrobial Activity 
for Use as a Potential Natural Preservative. Food Chem. 2019, 287 (February), 61–67. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2019.02.078. 
77. Sessa, M.; Casazza, A. A.; Perego, P.; Tsao, R.; Ferrari, G.; Donsì, F. Exploitation of 
Polyphenolic Extracts from Grape Marc as Natural Antioxidants by Encapsulation in 
Lipid-Based Nano delivery Systems. Food Bioprocess Technol. 2013, 6 (10), 2609– 
2620. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11947-012-0911-9. 
78. Sessa, M.; Ferrari, G.; Donsì, F. Novel Edible Coating Containing Essential Oil 
Nanoemulsions to Prolong the Shelf-life of Vegetable Products. Chem. Eng. Trans. 2015, 
43, 55–60. https://doi.org/10.3303/CET1543010. Scope of Nanoemulsions for Quality and Safety 227 
79. Severino, R.; Vu, K. D.; Donsì, F.; Salmieri, S.; Ferrari, G.; Lacroix, M. Antibacterial 
and Physical Effects of Modified Chitosan Based-Coating Containing Nanoemulsion 
of Mandarin Essential Oil and Three Non-Thermal Treatments against Listeria Innocua 
in Green Beans. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2014, 191, 82–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijfoodmicro.2014.09.007. 
80. Sheng, L.; Zhu, M. J. Inhibitory Effect of Cinnamomum Cassia Oil on Non-O157 
Shiga Toxin-Producing Escherichia Coli. Food Control 2014, 46, 374–381. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2014.05.050. 
81. Sood, S.; Jain, K.; Gowthamarajan, K. Optimization of Curcumin Nanoemulsion for 
Intranasal Delivery Using Design of Experiment and Its Toxicity Assessment. Colloids 
Surf. B Biointerf. 2014, 113, 330–337. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2013.09.030. 
82. Ssemanda, J. N.; Reij, M.; Bagabe, M. C.; Muvunyi, C. M.; Joosten, H.; Zwietering, M. 
H. Indicator Microorganisms in Fresh Vegetables from Farm to Fork in Rwanda. Food 
Control 2017, 75, 126–133. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2016.12.031. 
83.	 Taştan, Ö.; Pataro, G.; Donsì, F.; Ferrari, G.; Baysal, T. Decontamination of Fresh-Cut 
Cucumber Slices by a Combination of a Modified Chitosan Coating Containing 
Carvacrol Nanoemulsions and Pulsed Light. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2017, 260, 75–80. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2017.08.011. 
84. Taylor, P. Ostwald Ripening in Emulsions. Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 1998, 75 (2), 
107–163. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0001-8686(98)00035-9.
85. Topuz, O. K.; Özvural, E. B.; Zhao, Q.; Huang, Q.; Chikindas, M.; Gölükçü, M. Physical 
and Antimicrobial Properties of Anise Oil Loaded Nanoemulsions on the Survival of 
Foodborne Pathogens. Food Chem. 2016, 203, 117–123. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
foodchem.2016.02.051. 
86. Vasco, C.; Ruales, J.; Kamal-Eldin, A. Total Phenolic Compounds and Antioxidant 
Capacities of Major Fruits from Ecuador. Food Chem. 2008, 111 (4), 816–823. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2008.04.054. 
87. Vecchione, R.; Quagliariello, V.; Calabria, D.; Calcagno, V.; De Luca, E.; Iaffaioli, R. 
V.; Netti, P. A. Curcumin Bioavailability from Oil in Water Nano-Emulsions: In Vitro 
and in Vivo Study on the Dimensional, Compositional and Interactional Dependence. 
J. Control. Release 2016, 233, 88–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2016.05.004. 
88. Villalva, M.; Jaime, L.; Arranz, E.; Zhao, Z.; Corredig, M.; Reglero, G.; Santoyo, S. 
Nanoemulsions and Acidified Milk Gels as a Strategy for Improving Stability and 
Antioxidant Activity of Yarrow Phenolic Compounds after Gastrointestinal Digestion. 
Food Res. Int. 2020, 130 (Dec), E-article 108922; p 5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
foodres.2019.108922. 
89. Vitale, S. A.; Katz, J. L. Liquid Droplet Dispersions Formed by Homogeneous Liquid￾Liquid Nucleation: The Ouzo Effect. Langmuir 2003, 19 (10), 4105–4110; https://doi. 
org/10.1021/la026842o. 
90. Wang, W.; Zhang, Y.; Yang, Z.; He, Q. Effects of Incorporation with Clove (Eugenia 
Caryophyllata) Essential Oil (CEO) on Overall Performance of Chitosan as Active 
Coating. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2020, 166:578-586. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac. 
2020.10.215. 
91. Wani, T. A.; Masoodi, F. A.; Jafari, S. M.; McClements, D. J. Safety of Nanoemulsions and 
Their Regulatory Status; Chapter 19; In: Nanoemulsions: Formulations, Applications & 
Characterization; Elsevier Inc.: San Diego, 2018; pp 613–626. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
B978-0-12-811838-2.00019-9. 228 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
92. Wooster, T. J.; Golding, M.; Sanguansri, P. Impact of Oil Type on Nanoemulsion 
Formation and Ostwald Ripening Stability. Langmuir 2008, 24 (22), 12758–12765. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/la801685v. 
93. Yousuf, B.; Qadri, O. S. Preservation of Fresh-Cut Fruits and Vegetables by Edible 
Coatings; Chapter 11; In: Technologies & Mechanisms for Safety Control: Fresh-Cut 
Fruits & Vegetables; Elsevier Inc.: San Diego, 2019; pp 225–242. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/B978-0-12-816184-5.00011-2. 
94. Zorzi, G. K.; Caregnato, F.; Moreira, J. C. F.; Teixeira, H. F.; Carvalho, E. L. S. Antioxidant 
Effect of Nanoemulsions Containing Extract of Achyrocline Satureioides (L.). AAPS 
PharmSciTech 2016, 17 (4), 844–850. https://doi.org/10.1208/s12249-015-0408-8. Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing: Methods and Strategies. Megh R. Goyal, & 
Faizan Ahmad (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 10 
ENGINEERED NANOMATERIALS 
FOR FOOD PRESERVATION 
AND PACKAGING: FOCUS ON 
ANTIMICROBIAL AND ANTIBIOFILM 
ACTIVITIES 
SHAIBI SALEEM and SHAMS TABREZ KHAN 
ABSTRACT 
Nanomaterials (NMs)-based technologies are being used for food 
packaging, storage, transportation, and food functionality. Organic and 
inorganic and simple NMs or nanocomposites with bioactive agents are 
in use in the food industry. The nano-zinc dioxide NPs are most widely 
used followed by silver nanoparticles. These NMs can alter the oxygen 
availability, humidity, and freshness of food. However, this chapter focuses 
only on the antimicrobial activity of NMs. As foods are not only prone 
to microbial spoilage but can also serve as the carrier for pathogens. The 
biofilm formation by micro-organisms is also an issue especially associated 
with food packaging. Packaging films containing NMs coatings can protect 
foods from microbial spoilage, growth, and biofilm formation. However, the 
use of these NMs should be carefully evaluated, monitored, and regulated 
through research-based regulatory policies. Health and safety concerns 
should also be carefully addressed for ensuring the sustainable use of NMs 
in the food industry. 230 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
10.1 INTRODUCTION 
The food packaging must be done properly to protect it from physical, chem￾ical, or biological damage.164 In this regard, human health is the first priority; 
therefore, it becomes necessary to provide the food with great hygienic 
value and in safe conditions because the contamination/spoilage of food can 
happen at any level in the supply chain, from output to consumption.28 Food 
consists of essential nutrients, such as carbohydrates, proteins, fats, vitamins, 
minerals, etc. The pathogenic micro-organisms (spore-forming bacteria, 
fungi, aerobic psychrotrophic Gram-negative bacteria, molds, etc.) are 
responsible for spoilage and poisoning of food (Clostridium perfringens and 
Staphylococcus aureus),17,187 which further reduces the quality and texture 
of the food; hence, the food becomes undesirable for human consumption. 
Certain bacteria enter in the food chain during manufacturing and their 
persistence in food (toxins and spores) further leads to poisoning.187 These 
micro-organisms can tolerate varying degrees of temperature (i.e., they are 
active at low and high temperatures), these micro-organisms further divide 
and form biofilm on the surfaces of food that deteriorates the complete 
food.20 The food poisoning results in serious illness and various diseases; 
43% of the diseases occur due to contaminated food basically in youngsters 
under the age of 5.127 
The use of antimicrobial agents in food packaging is an adequate method 
to reduce the growth of micro-organisms in food controlling both microbial 
spoilage and the growth of pathogenic bacteria. A number of antimicrobial 
agents can be used for the advancement of such antimicrobial foodstuff 
packaging, such as organic acids, enzymes, bacteriocins, and other natural 
edible extracts. These have been successfully used for packaging shredded 
cheese, beef, Ham, fish, and many other foods. These packaging were shown 
to minimize and protect the food against micro-organisms, such as L. mono￾cytogens, S. aureus, S. typhimurium, etc.
8 
Commonly used engineered nanomaterials (NMs) in foodstuff packaging 
include nano-zinc oxide (nano-ZnO), nano-titanium dioxide (nano-TiO2
), 
silver NPs (Ag NPs), nanoclay, titanium nitride NPs (nano-TiN), etc.38 These 
NMs impart mechanical barriers, gas barriers, thermal and antimicrobial 
properties. In spite of the fact that the mechanisms of nanoantimicrobials are 
unknown, some of them have been linked to structural damage caused by 
nanoparticles (NPs), the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), or the 
discharge of toxic ions from NPs.13,61 NPs also have antibiofilm properties 
as they avoid bacterial adhesion to avoid biofilm arrangement/formation, Engineered Nanomaterials for Food Preservation 231 
eradicating existing biofilm, or destroying bacteria without making antimi￾crobial resistance.3
 In addition to this, NMs also enhance nutrient availability 
and increase shelf-life of foods.38,164 
Various antibiofilm nanocoatings are being developed for preventing infec￾tions on the basis of antimicrobial activities, which help to kill and disrupt the 
growth mechanisms of pathogens. The antibiofilm nanocoatings can respond 
to minute changes in the microenvironment and are known to hinder the 
biofilm of S. mutans, Escherichia coli, and S. aureus.
13,95 Nanocoatings can 
also work as antibiofilm as specialized coatings with quorum sensing inhibi￾tory activity targeting the c-di-GMP-dependent signal transduction pathway.13 
As the food is always at the risk of microbial spoilage and poisoning, resulting 
in the food losses and health-related problems, the use of nanotechnology is 
providing new and better possibilities than conventional packaging for mini￾mizing contamination as they enhance flavors, color, and quality and help in 
informing the consumers about the food quality and status.200 
Incorporation of nanosensors along with antimicrobials in food packaging 
is being developed to keep the food safe. The nanosensors are also widely 
used in packaging to detect the changed conditions of food. Food gases can be 
detected using nanosensors in plastic packaging, alarming consumers about 
the food spoilage.13 It is also utilized for toxin and deterioration detection. 
It is necessary to develop NP-based packaging with minimum cost for its 
extensive use. 
This chapter describes the details of the food preservation and food safety 
strategies with the help of engineered NMs. The chapter also discusses the 
use of nanotechnology to revolutionize the food industry and its possible 
risks and safety assessments of exposure of NMs to human health. 
10.2 FOOD SHORTAGE AND MALNUTRITION 
The increased population is resulting in drastic alterations in the food 
production and consumption level including rise in grains, meat, and cereal 
production.152,185 Proper nutrition is important for human health. The state 
of food security (SOFI) and nutrition in the world in 2020 indicated that 
India had the highest population of food-insecure persons. India needs more 
improvements in the nutritional and security level of food. 
India is positioned 94th among 107 nations within the current Global 
Hunger Index (GHI).145 GHI highlights the areas and countries, which 
require necessary actions and where there is an urgent need to give attention 232 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
to global hunger and undernutrition. India has seen few advances in which 
the frequency of extreme undernutrition among children and the frequency 
of certain nutritional-deficiency infections (such as kwashiorkor, marasmus, 
and pellagra) have been significantly decreased.14 
However, there is an issue of malnutrition as India is one of 88 nations 
on the verge of failing to meet global nutrition goals by 2025 as suggested 
by the World Health Organization (WHO).145 Hence, for any country, it is 
not possible to achieve economic growth, and social development without 
eliminating the problem of malnutrition. Undernutrition (deficiencies) and 
overnutrition are both considered as malnutrition.105 Food shortage, food 
insecurity, and nutritional-related diseases are threat to developing and 
underdeveloped countries.218 These conditions usually occur due to low 
quality of food, high prices of good quality food and poverty.110 
There are two types of undernutrition: protein-energy malnutrition and 
dietary deficiencies. Protein-energy malnutrition has two forms: kwashiorkor 
(deficiency of protein) and marasmus (deficiency of protein and calories).11 
Lack of zinc, iodine, iron, vitamin A, and vitamin B2 are all common micro￾nutrient deficiencies.24,60,103,175,252,255 On the other hand, overnutrition can 
result in obesity, which raises the risk of heart disease, hypertension, cancer, 
and type-2 diabetes.11 
It has been observed that India is the world’s second-largest food producer, 
still home to 37.9% stunted children. India is included among world’s three 
worst countries counting Nigeria and Indonesia.145 Obesity is also on the rise, 
affecting one-fifth of the population (21.6% of women and 17.8% of men).145 
Malnutrition is a large and common issue that affects individuals of all ages, 
income levels, and genders. Malnutrition kills about 45% of youngsters 
under the age of 5 in low-income nations every year
25 (Table 10.1). 
10.2.1 FOOD CRISES DUE TO COVID-19 
In order to avoid the spread of COVID-19 [2019], many local governments 
imposed national lockdowns and international travel restrictions.240 Various 
food-insecure countries suffered from food crises as there is no transport 
or manufacturing of food and other essential goods, expanding conveyance 
period, and decreasing accessibility of indeed the foremost essential food 
items during lockdown.70,159 Nutrition assistance was most vulnerable because 
of the pandemic during 2019. People are facing problems to cope with the 
health requirements or economic consequences; as in the worst cases they are 
saving life from the corona virus to die from hunger. 233 
TABLE 10.1 Some of the Prevalent Micronutrient Deficiencies and the Consequences on Human Health.
Micronutrient Effects No. of people effected (2020) References 
deficiency
Iodine
Iron
Vitamin A 
Zinc 
Goitre, weight gain, problems during pregnancy, 
brain damage in childhood, reduced work
productivity in adults
Anemia, cognitive impairment, Extreme fatigue
in adults, repeat infections and loss of appetite in
children, premature births
Infertility, delayed growth and respiratory 
infections, liver disorders, Xerophthalmia, inflamed
skin, night blindness
Diarrhea, loss of appetite, hair loss, drowsiness,
and a diminished sense of taste and smell are all
symptoms 
>1.9 billion people have insufficient iodine 
nourishment, of which 285 million are school￾aged children
It affects 614 million women and 280 million 
children worldwide
Vitamin A deficiency causes between 250,000 
and 500,000 youngsters to go blind each year
Every year, 800,000 people die from zinc 
deficiency, with 450,000 of them being children 
under the age of 5 
[54, 144, 224,
253, 254]
[72, 144, 146,
235]
[156, 206, 211, 
223]
[55, 101, 116, 
176, 177] 
Engineered Nanomaterials for Food Preservation 234 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
Unemployment or underemployment is also one of the reasons, as these 
problems are reducing the purchasing power, regulations on social distancing, 
and government controls to limit transmission placed daily wage earners 
in the informal economy and service sector workers at risk of losing their 
income sources.151,239 After comparing 50 countries (2019 and 2020 reports), 
the population in crisis rose from 112 to 123 million.170 Approximately 183 
million people in 47 countries were rated as depressed, putting them at risk 
of entering a crisis, or worsening their situation.170 Around one in every 
two children under the age of five endured from “hidden” starvation due to 
micronutrient insufficiencies.51,243,244 These youngsters lack adequate dietary 
energy, nutritionally diversified meals, clean drinking water, cleanliness, 
and health services, compromising their health and sustenance, with serious 
effects on long-term efficiency and progress. Africa had the greatest number 
of people, who were severely food insecure and in need of assistance. 
Furthermore, Africa, Central America, and Pakistan also faced the difficulty 
in nutritional supply due to climatic events.81 
To build nutrition capability, governments and multilateral organizations 
must finance in and improve people health and financial resources, expand 
cooperation, and make consistent observation and evaluation. Govern￾ments must also establish a regulatory framework that prioritizes healthy 
eating.34,217,236 Private companies should be ordered to grow more nutritious 
seeds or food to overcome nutrient deficiency and erase the hunger. A number 
of community nutritional programs and NGOs are in place in India to fight 
against malnutrition. 
10.2.2 FOOD WASTAGE 
According to the UN data, the world’s population would rise to 9.3 billion by 
2050, and the increased population will require additional food generation 
of around 70% along with land and resources. The growing food wastage at 
a different level of food production has put the pressure over urban areas to 
manage food wastage in different countries.41,140 Agriculture, forestry, and 
fisheries are likely industries with the greatest cumulative effect on social 
well-being and the environment.199 Producing food, fiber, fuel and a growing 
number of other bioproducts are critical to our survival. More than one-third 
of the world’s labor force work in agribusiness, which produces almost 23.7 
million tons of food per day.50 Still nearly, 11% of the global population lives 
under food insecurity. Engineered Nanomaterials for Food Preservation 	 235 
On the contrary, food wastage continues to be one of the contributing 
reasons for global food insecurity. Food waste includes the use of food meant 
for human consumption for nonhuman purposes, the diversion of food to 
feed animals, and the discarding of healthy food. According to Dhir et al.,58 
food waste can be grouped into three different types: 
•	 avoidable waste, this is food that was once edible but has now become 
inedible by the time it meets its expiration date, 
•	 unavoidable waste, which refers to food or food parts that are not 
edible, such as eggshells, and 
•	 potentially avoidable food waste, which refers to specific wastes that 
are eaten sometimes, such as potato skins. 
According to Thyberg et al.,222 the wasted food is divided into two types: 
•	 Food loss: Any food that goes uneaten at any point is considered food 
loss. Some food is lost at almost every stage of the food processing 
from production to consumption level. 
•	 Food waste includes food discarded by retailers due to a change of 
color or appearance, as well as food wasted by customers. In the 
United States, food waste is discarded at a rate of over 0.6 pounds per 
person per day. 
According to the United Nations, more than 40% of India’s food produc￾tion is wasted, discarded, destroyed, or lost each year, costing the country 
more than 105
 crore rupees.97 Every year, about 21 million tons of wheat is 
rotten in India which is equal to or sometimes larger than Australia’s total 
annual production.228 FAO estimated that around one-third of the world’s food 
is lost or wasted each year. We must watch the food supply chain to avoid 
future food crises. Proper care must be taken to prevent the food wastage to 
save the resources.89,222 There is a need for appropriate transportation as a part 
of resource management, with the correct environmental and hygiene condi￾tions during this time. Processing waste, the requirement for cold storage 
facilities, process deterioration, inappropriate packing, transportation delays, 
and higher inventory owing to poor forecasting all contribute to food waste 
in the supply chain.166 
10.3 RECENT ADVANCES IN FOOD PRESERVATION 
The food deterioration progresses during packaging and storage resulting in 
public health concerns.74,173 The various factors resulting in the deterioration 236 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
of food are enzymatic changes (pH, temperature, chemicals),19 chemical 
changes (lipid oxidation, nonenzymatic browning, color change, flavor 
change),129 physical changes, biological changes (microbiological and 
macrobiological),242 etc. Several food experts have been working to develop 
safe and hygienic food processing practices to prevent diseases caused by 
biological changes and to ensure that physical changes do not occur.132,229 
The FoodNet identified 25,866 cases of infections, 6164 hospitalizations, 
and 122 deaths in the United States. Compared with 2016–2018 data, the 
incidence in 2019 was increased significantly for Cyclospora (1209%), 
Yersinia (153%), Vibrio (79%), Shiga Toxin producing E. Coli (34%), and 
Campylobacter (13%). According to these findings, the targets for food￾borne illness reduction goals will not be fulfilled.229 Microbial quality and 
other food processes (such as chemical reactions, enzymatic reactions) are 
frequently linked to food safety, shelf-life, and also have indirect impact on 
consumer perception of food quality.160,237 Various methods have been used 
earlier to protect food naturally.1,40 The bottling, canning, drying, curing, 
pickling, chilling, freezing, salting, brining, and jam-making are all used to 
keep food safe from micro-organisms.76,102,179,203 
One way of protecting the food is through the use of proper packaging. 
Plastic packaging is one of the most popular methods today. However, due to 
its nonbiodegradable nature, the growing use of plastic packaging is causing 
increased environmental problems.75 Several food degradation reactions 
(such as lipid oxidation and enzymatic browning) are triggered by ROS.134 
Various amended materials for food packaging are being developed for 
food protection. Antioxidant compounds incorporated into food packaging 
materials can control the negative oxidative effect of oxygen.27 Films are 
formed freely and then applied to the surface of food.163 The edible film 
made from vegetables and fruits is healthy, cost-effective, and is used as 
carriers of common bioactive compounds (such as antioxidants).163 
Carica papaya L. fruit has a short shelf-life, and it helps to develop edible 
films using papaya and papaya processing waste with low water activity 
and longer shelf-life.138 According to Rodriguez et al.,190 ascorbic acid 
(vitamin C) has been incorporated into whey-protein films, alginate, and in 
Aloe vera coating gel for food preservation.87 The use of high hydrostatic 
pressure (HPP) is also one of the methods in food processing.195 HPP helps 
to preserve the various fruits and vegetables (such as dried strawberry, 
aloe vera gel, orange and pomegranate juice, fruit smoothies) at different 
pressure conditions.78,119,231,234 HPP also helps to preserve sea foods,178 and 
dairy products.186,56 Engineered Nanomaterials for Food Preservation 237 
The use of essential oil (EO) of lemongrass in food preservation is considered 
as a better alternative in comparison to synthetic preservatives.64 The C. 
citratus (CC) has antibacterial,155 antibiofilm,221 and antifungal properties.191 
Ekpenyong et al.64 reported that CC–EO exhibits antifungal activity and it was 
effective against many yeast species (e.g., Candida oleophila, C. albicans, 
Saccharomyces uvarum, S. cerevisiae, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, and 
Metschnikowia fructicola) and fungi (e.g., Aspergillus spp., Fusarium 
oxysporum, Alternaria alternata, Penicillium roqueforti, Phytophthora 
infestans, Phaeoramularia angolensis, Phoma sorghina, etc.) responsible for 
spoilage of food. The C. citratus extract and CC–EO components have free 
radical scavenging activity, implying that they can be used in both domestic 
and industrial food preservation.64 
For the effective preservation of food, hurdle technology is also used 
in developing countries.209 The hurdle technology includes various hurdles 
or factors, such as temperature, pH, water activity, acidity, redox potential, 
preservatives, etc., that are important for microbial stability.209 
10.4 USE OF BIOFILMS IN FOOD CONTAMINATION 
Various health-related diseases are associated with biofilms.44,150,198 Micro￾organisms on wet surfaces can aggregate, form microcolonies, and produce 
biofilms.47,82,128 Biofilms are primarily made up of viable and nonviable 
micro-organisms embedded in extracellular polymeric substances that help 
in attachment with different abiotic and biotic surfaces.131,235,241 Extracellular 
polymeric substances can be composed of phospholipids, polysaccharides, 
teichoic, proteins, and nucleic acids, and other polymeric substances hydrated 
with 85–95% water.162,193 Various factors influence biofilm formation and 
growth, such as bacterial strain, material surface properties, and environ￾mental parameters, such as nutrient levels, pH, and temperature.59,213,230 
Antimicrobials, environmental stress, and immune responses from hosts 
discourage biofilm formation.57,85,189 
Polymeric substances and multicellular nature of the biofilm provide 
protection to its inhabitants by concentrating nutrients, preventing biocides 
from entering the biofilm, sequestering metals and contaminants, and 
preventing desiccation.80,91 Biofilms can infect food, drinking water, and are 
responsible for various infections due to their antibiotic resistance.83,135 In 
food processing conditions, the growth of pathogenic biofilms lead to micro￾bial contamination and increase food safety risk,42,87,143] because it decreases 
shelf-life, quality, and facilitates disease transmission.91,154 238 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
The contaminated food collected from market results in the economic 
loss to the food industry.149 The food processing unit must follow the proper 
sanitation of food contact equipment and surfaces because there is high risk 
of disease outbreaks from food processing environments. Food spoilage 
bacteria (such as Listeria monocytogenes, Pseudomonas spp., Bacillus 
spp., and Salmonella spp.) is commonly found on food substrates and in 
food processing plants.92,184,214 L. monocytogenes surviving in Pseudomonas 
biofilms is an example of pathogenic bacteria coexisting with environmental 
microflora inside a biofilm.42 
A variety of micro-organisms is able to grow on food matrixes; hence, 
they give rise to biofilms, which contaminate the diverse food products and 
result in diseases. Because of these bacterial characteristics that contribute 
to antibiotic resistance, as well as the negative effects on humans, there is 
an urgent need for new strategies to overcome the bacterial formation of 
biofilms and to inhibit their activities.46,48 
Disease caused by polluted food continues to be a significant challenge to 
public health and a major impediment to global socioeconomic growth. The 
use of antimicrobial EOs in the treatment of biofilms is one of the effective 
procedures.119 The antibiofilm activity of CC–EO against biofilms of L. 
monocytogenes, S. aureus, and Candida albicans has been reported in the 
literature.6,64,183,232 Different EOs (such as marjoram, lemon, and basil) can 
prevent biofilm formation and quorum sensing in a wide range of foodborne 
micro-organisms.5 
10.5 GENERAL PROPERTIES OF NANOMATERIALS 
NMs have nanoscale dimensions. Molecules interact (Vander Waals interac￾tions) to form a molecular architecture that exist on a nm scale.21,35,45,134 The 
NMs are unique because of their novel physicochemical properties. Nobel 
Laureate Richard P. Feynman first introduced the term “nanotechnology” in 
his lecture, “there’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom”.79 These NMs are divided 
into 0-dimensional (e.g., NPs: quantum dots, nanoclusters, and fullerenes), 
1-dimensional (e.g., nanotubes and nanorods), 2-dimensional (e.g., thin 
films), or 3-dimensional (e.g., nanocomposites and nanofibers).158 
NPs have small size, which leads to an exponential increase in surface 
area. They are chemically reactive having low levels of agglomeration and 
high dispersibility and thermal conductivity.249 In the case of noble metal– 
NPs due to their size and shape have interesting optical properties.37 They 
possess strong UV–visible extinction band in their spectrum that is lacking Engineered Nanomaterials for Food Preservation 239 
in the spectrum of bulk metal.26 Their mechanical parameters include elastic 
modulus, hardness, stress and strain, adhesion, surface coating, coagulation, 
lubrication, etc..94 Owing to such properties, NMs are widely used in research 
and innovation. Industrial and consumer nanoproducts continue to grow, and 
the global market size of nanotechnology is projected to reach $90.5 billion 
in 2021.7 
Paints, filters, insulation, lubricant additives, and healthcare are only a 
few of the items that use NMs. In healthcare, they are used as nanozymes 
(artificial enzyme).90], which have wide range of applications in biosensing, 
bioimaging, tumor diagnosis, etc. NM-based therapeutics are widely used 
to lower the antibiotic resistance and target the biofilm-based bacterial 
infections that are hard to cure.65,96,141 Biofilm-related infections are resulting 
in serious illness in humans, for example, persistent lung infections of cystic 
fibrosis patients, chronic rhinosinusitis, chronic osteomyelitis, chronic otitis 
media, chronic prostatitis, periodontitis, dental caries, etc.43,53,165 NMs have 
been documented to improve food protection, food quality, fortification, 
shelf-life, and biosensors for tainted or spoiled food products due to their 
applications in several areas, such as medical drugs, food-preservatives, and 
packaging materials like nanosized fibers or plates.194 
The NM databases are being generated to provide the information about 
the NMs through published data and are also used for modeling studies. The 
database, which can be accessed at http://www.pubvinas.com/, consists of 
705 unique NMs covering 11 different material types.248 
Nanotechnology in agriculture offers new agrochemical agents and 
delivery mechanisms to raise crop productivity while also reducing pesticide 
use.201 Nanosensors are being developed for use in crop defense to detect 
diseases and agrochemical residues.125 Nanodevices are also used for the 
genetic engineering of plants and plant disease diagnostics, animal health, 
animal breeding, poultry production, and postharvest management.120 
NP-mediated gene or DNA transfer in plants for the growth of insect-resistant 
varieties is one of nanotechnology’s applications.181 
10.6 ENGINEERING NANOMATERIALS FOR FOOD 
PRESERVATION AND PACKAGING 
NMs have a variety of properties, such as mechanical, catalytic, optical, and 
antimicrobial properties, and recycling and barrier properties, which make 
them a viable option for food packaging.61,121,122,250 As we know the food￾borne diseases caused by bacteria, virus, and fungi affect human health.130,136 240 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
According to the WHO, 600 million people were infected with foodborne 
illnesses in 2015, with 420,000 cases of death reported every year.66 The 
purpose of food packaging is to overcome all these issues.204,207 
The main aim of food packaging includes food safety, longer shelf-life, 
better food quality, protection from spoilage by micro-organisms, and 
contamination by extended exposure of environmental sources like pollution, 
atmospheric gases, moisture, light, temperature, etc..3,187 
The use of NMs in food packaging helps to fulfill all the necessary 
requirements including mechanical (carbon nanotubes), barrier (nanoclay), 
antimicrobial (silver NPs), biodegradable and nontoxic properties (nanoclay), 
active (iron NPs) and intelligent packaging (cellulosic NMs), and detection of 
foodborne pathogens (E. coli, Salmonella typhimurium, Salmonella enterica, 
Cronobacter Sakazakiiis).12,32,33,107,139,226 NMs can be used as biosensors to 
trace and monitor the food condition during storage and transport, additives, 
antimicrobial agents, and nutrient carriers while their mechanical strength 
and durability can help to improve packaging quality.3,151,207,210 
Food packaging includes NMs, such as silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs), 
nanoclay, zinc oxide (nano-ZnO), titanium dioxide (nano-TiO2
), titanium 
nitride (nano-TiN), silicon dioxide (nano- SiO2
), copper oxide (nano-CuO), and 
magnesium oxide (nano-MgO), nanosized fibers or plates, nanocomposites, 
assembled NMs or shell structures, etc.32,38,188,207 
Ag NPs are widely used as antimicrobial agent in food pack￾aging.36,52,109,121,197,244,250 Ag NPs are widely used for sterilization and have anti￾microbial, antiyeast, antifungal, and antiviral properties as they have a greater 
surface area per mass compared to microscale silver particles or bulk silver.37 
During ancient times, silver vessels were used to preserve beverages, such as 
milk or water. There are 16 bacterial strains against which silver has shown 
antimicrobial activity, such as E. coli, S. aureus, Staphylococcus epidermis, 
Klebsiella pneumonia, Leuconostocmes enteroides, Klebsiella mobilis, and 
Bacillus subtilis.180 
In another study, AgNPs have been demonstrated to kill about 650 
disease-causing pathogens.208 Different mechanisms of this antimicrobial 
effect of silver NPs are already known.63 Ag NPs may attach to surface of 
cells and degrade lipopolysaccharides, thus result in the disruption of the cell 
membrane; Ag NPs allow silver ions to enter inside the bacteria and cause 
DNA damage.251 Ag NPs can be easily introduced in the plastic polymers for 
packaging using porous substrate, such as zeolite.33 
Nanoclay is used to improve the physical properties of plastic packaging, 
and gas and moisture barriers.10 In the 1990s, nanoclay was first used in Engineered Nanomaterials for Food Preservation 241 
food processing.33 Montmorillonite is a nanoclay made up of two layers 
of tetrahedral silica sandwiched within an octahedral edge-shaped sheet of 
aluminum hydroxide.71,95 It is readily accessible and made from volcanic 
ash and rocks. It has been widely used in polymer composites due to its 
high cation exchange performance, large surface area, and good swelling 
behavior.228 Durethan® KU2-2601 (a nanoclay engineered polyamide film 
produced by Bayer Co.) is commercialized under the Lanxess Deutschland 
brand.38 
Nano-zinc oxides (ZnO NPs) are used in medical devices, cosmetics, 
drug delivery, and atmospheric processed packaging because of its excellent 
antimicrobial and UV protection activities.122 ZnO nanostructures have been 
more effective against E. coli, Bacillus atrophaeus, and Salmonella aureus 
than the other metal oxides and it inhibits the growth of bacteria rather 
than killing the bacteria. The effect of ZnO is concentration-dependent, if 
the concentration is increased it will act as bactericidal. Zinc NPs are used 
nowadays in food packaging in comparison to Ag NPs due to its less toxic 
nature. The bacterial cellulose film with polypyrrole-ZnO nanocomposite 
(BC–PPy–ZnO) as a smart and active food kit can control microbial growth 
and regulate the pH increment in chicken thighs increasing its shelf-life.174 
Emamifar et al.69 observed the effect of LDPE-ZnO nanocomposite pack￾aging on inhibition of Lactobacillus plantarum for orange juice. The growth 
rate of L. plantarum at 4°C was significantly decreased in a ZnO nanocom￾posite packaging. 
Nano-titanium dioxide: The US FDA approved the use of nano-TiO2 
as a food additive and food contact medium in 1996.115,122 TiO2
 NPs have 
a number of benefits, such as inexpensive, nontoxic, and photostable.220 It 
is gaining attention as a superior photocatalyst material for applications in 
energy and atmosphere, including air and water purification.124 
The TiO2 NPs are used in food packaging as antimicrobial agents,108,117,250 
for example, it acts as protective covering and help to preserve choco￾lates for longer duration and provide protection from micro-organisms.123 
(Figure 10.1). Because of its strong UV-blocking strength and ability to 
absorb short-wavelength light with considerable photostability, TiO2
 is a 
widely studied semiconductor.2 Incorporating TiO2
 NPs into polymeric films 
for food processing can protect food components.216 TiO2 integration into 
chitosan and ethylene–vinyl alcohol yields nanocomposite materials.88 
Nano-silicon dioxide (SiO2
) was used to create Durethan which is a light, 
durable, heat-resistant plastic with gas barrier properties that prevent food 
spoilage and extend its shelf-life.15 242 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
FIGURE 10.1 Titanium dioxide (TiO2
) nanoparticle obtained from chocolate (gems) (A); in 
powder (B); or in aqueous form (C). 
The European Food Safety Authority has authorized three NMs for use in 
food packaging: titanium nitride NPs (TiN NPs) to deter CO2 leakage from 
carbonated beverages in PET bottles, carbon black, and SiO2
 NPs.203 ZnO 
and MgO NPs offer affordable, antimicrobial, and healthy food packaging 
solutions in the future than nanosilver NPs.67 Starch-based nanocomposite 
films are also prepared for food packaging applications by using a single or 
combination of Ag, CuO, and ZnO NPs and have higher tensile strength and 
Young’s modulus and antimicrobial activity.169 
10.6.1 NANOSENSORS 
Nanobiosensors are sensors that incorporate knowledge of biology, chemistry, 
and nanotechnology to analyze food.39 The quality control of the food product 
is related to its production technology, microbiological protection, physical 
properties, chemical composition, and nutritional value.73,225 
The inspection of developed food is very important at every step of 
its production. Berekaa18 described how nanotechnology was used in the 
design of smart or intelligent packaging to improve the contact aspect of 
the package. Hence, food safety requires smart and active packaging for the 
successful transport of required food in market.171,247 
In the food industry, nanotechnology plays an important role in food 
manufacturing, food storage, preservation, and pathogen identification.62 
The use of NM-based sensors to check the quality of food during transport, Engineered Nanomaterials for Food Preservation 243 
technology for the detection of common food pathogens like Salmonella, E. 
coli, and listeria will enable consumers to select fresh and healthy foods.61 
These devices exhibit high sensitivity, quick response, and recovery. Nano￾sensors have been designed for food analysis, flavor or color analysis,149 
drinking water analysis,121 and clinical diagnostics.9 
Nanosensors are being widely used for the detection of mycotoxins and 
pathogens in the food.245 Guillermo et al.84 estimated that the global demand 
for active and intelligent packaging will double in 2021, rising at an annual 
rate of 7% in 2021, will be reaching the US $24.65 billion.84,215 In the next 10 
years, worldwide demand for electronic smart packaging will exceed $1.45 
billion.215 Many countries have built intelligent systems to assist customers 
in selecting suitable food, storing it, and evaluating its true conditions using 
nanosensors, tags, and stickers.159 Internal and external metrics provided 
by intelligent packaging technology can track interactions between food, 
packaging, and the atmosphere.22 
Since various food packaging are opaque, customers are unaware of the 
quality and condition of the food package and must rely on expiration dates 
issued by manufacturers. If the quality of the food deteriorates at some stage, 
the customer would be unaware. Because of their unusual chemical and 
electro-optical properties, nanosensors can help to detect such changes.204 
Gases, aromas, organic toxins, bacteria, and even variations in environments 
can be detected by nanosensors.114 Food protection can be improved by using 
nanosensors, to ensure that customers use fresh food products, and also help 
to reduce the incidence of food-borne illnesses.161 
For example, an intelligent packaging containing nanobiosensor (which 
fluoresces in different colors when in contact with food pathogens) and 
AgroMicron developed the nanobioluminescence detection spray that 
contains a luminescent protein designed to bind to the surface of salmonella 
and E. coli.
84 Foodborne contaminants and toxins can also be detected using 
nanosensors.205 For detection of E. coli O157:H7, Salmonella sp., and L. 
monocytogenes in foods, researchers developed a universal G-liposomal 
nanovesicles-based immune-magnetic bead sandwich assay.18 The use of 
a magnetic nano-glo-dimmuno sensor could detect aflatoxins generated by 
Aspergillus flavus and Aspergillus parasiticus that contaminate food items.147 
10.7 HEALTH RISKS AND OTHER CONCERNS 
The use of NMs is increasing in the food industry.49,106 Despite benefits of 
NMs, the toxicity and environmental issues affecting human life remain to be 244 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
discussed.123,192 The NPs used in food will increase human exposure through 
its potential migration into the food matrix and soft drinks.212 NPs have a 
small size, enhanced toxicity, and high chemical reactivity due to which its 
exposure can cause various health-related problems.113 
The study of total and precise migration to decide whether any 
unnecessary or even harmful compounds migrate to the packed product is 
important step during manufacturing of new contact materials.212 Modern 
techniques have shown that NPs with increased reactivity and ability 
to cross membrane barriers and capillaries can result in a wide range of 
toxic-kinetic and toxic-dynamic properties.30 Following NP administration, 
certain NPs can interfere with proteins and enzymes, inducing oxidative 
stress and the generation of ROS, resulting in mitochondrial degradation 
and apoptosis.126,142 
For production of efficient NMs-based food packaging, it is essential to 
study the nature and mechanism of action of NMs in biological systems. 
Various studies have demonstrated the toxicity of NMs, such as TiO2 in-vitro 
on cell lines.29 NPs are also responsible for the oxidative damage in cells; 
particles smaller than 70 nm in size will reach the cell nuclei and can disrupt 
DNA replication and transcription.137 Hence, it is necessary to regulate the 
use of NMs in food, and all countries must establish regulatory systems to 
regulate NPs exposure to humans and to protect consumers from the risks 
associated with the use NMs in food items.111 
10.8 SUMMARY 
NMs in the food industry provide barrier properties, antimicrobial activity, 
reduced water vapor permeability, UV blocking, gas scavenging, and biode￾gradability; and these advantages of NMs have improved spoilage control in 
food products. NMs have also increased the shelf-life of foods. The antimi￾crobial activity of NMs also helps to control the disease-causing pathogenic 
micro-organisms thus decreasing the microbial load. Nanotechnology offers 
a variety cost-effective, eco-friendly, degradable, and renewable packaging 
materials, which are gaining popularity to address the issues of food security. 
Since nanosensors and nanoelectronic technologies can be used to detect 
changes in food, the presence of pathogens or its composition, they can be 
considered as important devices for the food safety. In the United States 
and Asia, NMs-based food packaging has been adopted at the industrial 
level. However, NM migration from packaging into the food matrix, its 
consequent toxicity, and other environment issues are a matter of concern  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Engineered Nanomaterials for Food Preservation 245 
requiring detailed investigations and strict regulations for the use of NMs in 
food industry. 
KEYWORDS 
• antibiofilm activity 
• antimicrobial activity 
food loss 
food packaging 
food spoilage 
malnutrition 
nanomaterials 
nanosensor 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
REFERENCES 
1. Abdulmumeen, H. A.; Risikat, A. N.; Sururah, A. R. Food: Its Preservatives, Additives 
and Applications. Int. J. Chem. Biochem. Sci. 2012, 1, 36–47. 
2. Alebeid, O. K.; Zhao, T. Review on: Developing UV Protection for Cotton Fabric. J. 
Textile Inst. 2017, 108 (12), 2027–2039. 
3. Alfadul, S. M.; Elneshwy, A. A. Use of Nanotechnology in Food Processing, Packaging 
and Safety: A Review. Afr. J. Food Agric. Nutr. Dev. 2010, 10 (6), online. DOI:10.4314/ 
ajfand.v10i6.58068 
4. Ali, A.; Ovais, M.; Cui, X.; Rui, Y.; Chen, C. Safety Assessment of Nanomaterials for 
Antimicrobial Applications. Chem. Res. Toxicol. 2020, 33 (5), 1082–1109. 
5. Alibi, S.; Selma, W. B.; Ramos-Vivas, J.; Smach, M. A.; Touati, R.; Boukadida, J.; 
Mansour, H. B. Anti-Oxidant, Antibacterial, Anti-Biofilm, and Anti-Quorum Sensing 
Activities of Four Essential Oils Against Multidrug-Resistant Bacterial Clinical Isolates. 
Curr. Res. Transl. Med. 2020, 68 (2), 59–66. 
6. Altaf, M.; Manoharadas, S.; Zeyad, M. T. Green Synthesis of Cerium Oxide Nanoparticles 
Using Acorus calamus Extract and Their Antibiofilm Activity Against Bacterial Patho￾gens. Microsc. Res. Techn. 2021, 84 (8), 1638–1648. 
7. Al-Tayyar, N. A.; Youssef; A. M.; Al-Hindi, R. Antimicrobial Food Packaging Based on 
Sustainable Bio-Based Materials for Reducing Foodborne Pathogens: A Review. Food 
Chem. 2020, 310, E-article 125915; p 8. 
8. Appendini, P.; Hotchkiss, J. H. Review of Antimicrobial Food Packaging. Innov. Food 
Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2002, 3 (2), 113–126. 
9. Arndt, N.; Tran, H. D.; Zhang, R.; Xu, Z. P.; Ta, H. T. Different Approaches to Develop 
Nanosensors for Diagnosis of Diseases. Adv. Sci. 2020, 7 (24), E-article 2001476, p 8. 246 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
10. Arora, A.; Padua, G. W. Nanocomposites in Food Packaging. J. Food Sci. 2010, 75 (1), 
R43–R49. 
11. Awuchi, C. G.; Igwe, V. S.; Amagwula, I. O. Ready-to-Use Therapeutic Foods for 
Remedying Malnutrition and Preventable Nutritional Diseases. Int. J. Adv. Acad. Res. 
2020, 6 (1), 47–81. 
12. Bajpai, V. K..; Kamle, M.; Shukla, S.; Mahato, D. K.; Chandra, P.; Hwang, S. K.; Han, 
Y. K. Prospects of Using Nanotechnology for Food Preservation, Safety, and Security. J. 
Food Drug Analys. 2018, 26 (4), 1201–1214. 
13. Balaure, P. C.; Grumezescu, A. M. Recent Advances in Surface Nanoengineering for 
Biofilm Prevention and Control, Part II: Active, Combined Active and Passive, and Smart 
Bacteria—Responsive Antibiofilm Nanocoatings. Nanomater. 2020, 10 (8), 1527–1532. 
14. Banik, D. Starvation and India’s Democracy, Vol. 8; Routledge: London, 2007; E-book; 
p 244. 
15. Basavegowda, N.; Mandal, T. K.; Baek, K. H. Bimetallic and Trimetallic Nanoparticles 
for Active Food Packaging Applications: A Review. Food Bioprocess Technol. 2020, 13 
(1), 30–44. 
16. Belas, R. Biofilms, Flagella, and Mechano-Sensing of Surfaces by Bacteria. Trends 
Microbiol. 2014, 22 (9), 517–527. 
17. Bennett, S. D.; Walsh, K. A.; Gould, L. H. Foodborne Disease Outbreaks Caused by 
Bacillus cereus, Clostridium perfringens, and Staphylococcus aureus: United States, 
1998–2008. Clin. Infect. Dis. 2013, 57 (3), 425–433. 
18. Berekaa, M. M. Nanotechnology in Food Industry; Advances in Food Processing, 
Packaging and Food Safety. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. App. Sci. 2015, 4 (5), 345–357. 
19. Bharate, S. S., Bharate, S. B. Non-Enzymatic Browning in Citrus Juice: Chemical 
Markers, Their Detection and Ways to Improve Product Quality. J. Food Sci. Technol. 
2014, 51 (10), 2271–2288. 
20. Bhunia, A. K. Foodborne Microbial Pathogens: Mechanisms and Pathogenesis, 2nd 
ed.; Springer: New York, 2018; p 365. 
21. Bianco, A.; Cheng, H. M.; Enoki, T.; Gogotsi, Y.; Hurt, R. H.; Koratkar, N.; Zhang, J. All 
in the Graphene Family: A Recommended Nomenclature for Two-Dimensional Carbon 
Materials. Carbon 2013, 65 (6), 1–6. 
22. Biji, K. B.; Ravishankar, C. N.; Mohan, C. O.; Gopal, T. S. Smart Packaging Systems for 
Food Applications: A Review. J. Food Sci. Technol. 2015, 52 (10), 6125–6135. 
23. Bjarnsholt, T. The Role of Bacterial Biofilms in Chronic Infections. APMIS 2013, 121, 
1–58. 
24. Black, M. M. Micronutrient Deficiencies and Cognitive Functioning. J. Nutr. 2003, 133 
(11), 3927S–3931S. 
25. Black, R. E.; Victora, C. G.; Walker, S. P.; Bhutta, Z. A.; Christian, P.; de-Onis, M. 
Maternal and Child Nutrition Study Group Maternal and Child Undernutrition and 
Overweight in Low-Income and Middle-Income Countries. Lancet, 2013, 382 (9890), 
427–451. 
26. Blemker, M. A.; Gibbs, S. L.; Raulerson, E. K.; Milliron, D. J.; Roberts, S. T. Modulation 
of the Visible Absorption and Reflection Profiles of ITO Nanocrystal Thin Films by 
Plasmon Excitation. ACS Photon. 2020, 7 (5), 1188–1196. 
27. Bonilla, J.; Atarés, L.; Vargas, M.; Chiralt, A. Edible Films and Coatings to Prevent the 
Detrimental Effect of Oxygen on Food Quality: Possibilities and Limitations. J. Food 
Eng. 2012, 110 (2), 208–213.Engineered Nanomaterials for Food Preservation 247 
28. Bouwmeester, H.; Dekkers, S.; Noordam, M. Y.; Hagens, W. I.; Bulder, A. S.; De 
Heer, C.; Sips, A. J. Review Of Health Safety Aspects of Nanotechnologies in Food 
Production. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2009, 53 (1), 52–61. 
29. Brandão, F.; Fernández-Bertólez, N.; Rosario, F.; Bessa, M. J.; Fraga, S.; Pásaro, E.; 
Costa, C. Genotoxicity of TiO2
 Nanoparticles in Four Different Human Cell Lines 
(A549, HEPG2, A172 and SH-SY5Y). Nanomaterials 2020, 10 (3), 412–416. 
30. Bratovcic, A. Nanomaterials in Food Processing and Packaging, Its Toxicity and Food 
Labeling. Acta Sci. Nutr. Health 2020, 4, 7–13. 
31. Bridier, A.; Briandet, R.; Thomas, V.; Dubois-Brissonnet, F. Resistance of Bacterial 
Biofilms to Disinfectants: A Review. Biofouling 2011, 27 (9), 1017–1032. 
32. Bumbudsanpharoke, N.; Ko, S. Nano-Food Packaging: An Overview of Market, 
Migration Research, and Safety Regulations. J. Food Sci. 2015, 80 (5), R910–R913. 
33. Bumbudsanpharoke, N.; Choi, J.; Ko, S. Applications of Nanomaterials in Food 
Packaging. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 2015, 15 (9), 6357–6372. 
34. Burchi, F.; Fanzo, J.; Frison, E. The Role of Food and Nutrition System Approaches in 
Tackling Hidden Hunger. Int. J. Environ. Res Public Health 2011, 8 (2), 358–373. 
35. Calandra, P.; Caschera, D.; Liveri, V. T.; Lombardo, D. How Self-Assembly of 
Amphiphilic Molecules Can Generate Complexity in the Nanoscale. Colloids Surf. A: 
Physicochem. Eng. Aspects 2015, 484, 164–183. 
36. Carbone, M.; Donia, D. T.; Sabbatella, G.; Antiochia, R. Silver Nanoparticles in 
Polymeric Matrices for Fresh Food Packaging. J. King Saud University-Sci. 2016, 28 
(4), 273–279. 
37. Chakraborty, I.; Parak, W. J. Protein-Induced Shape Control of Noble Metal Nanopar
ticles. Adv. Mater. Interf. 2019, 6 (6), E-article 1801407; p 5. 
38. Chaudhary, P.; Fatima, F.; Kumar, A. Relevance of nanomaterials in Food Packaging 
and Its Advanced Future Prospects. J. Inorg. Organometallic Polym. Mater. 2020, 30 
(12), 5180–5192. 
39. Chaudhry, Q.; Scotter, M.; Blackburn, J.; Ross, B.; Boxall, A.; Castle, L.; Watkins, R. 
Applications and Implications of Nanotechnologies for the Food Sector. Food Add. 
Contam. 2008, 25 (3), 241–258. 
40. Chemat, F.; Khan, M. K. Applications of Ultrasound in Food Technology: Processing, 
Preservation and Extraction. Ultrasonics Sonochem. 2011, 18 (4), 813–835. 
41. Chen, P.; Xie, Q.; Addy, M.; Zhou, W.; Liu, Y.; Wang, Y.; Ruan, R. Utilization of 
Municipal Solid and Liquid Wastes for Bioenergy and Bioproducts Production. 
Bioresour. Technol. 2016, 215, 163–172. 
42. Chmielewski, R. A. N.; Frank, J. F. Biofilm Formation and Control in Food Processing 
Facilities. Compreh. Rev. Food Sci. Food Safet. 2003, 2, 22–32. 
43. Ciofu, O.; Tolker-Nielsen, T.; Jensen, P. O.; Wang, H.; Hoiby, N. Antimicrobial Resistance, 
Respiratory Tract Infections and Role of Biofilms in Lung Infections in Cystic Fibrosis 
Patients. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 2015, 85, 7–23. 
44. Colombo, A. P. V.; Magalhães, C. B.; Hartenbach, F. A. R. R.; do Souto, R. M.; da Silva￾Boghossian, C. M. Periodontal Disease Associated Biofilm: A Reservoir for Pathogens 
of Medical Importance. Microb. Pathogen. 2016, 94, 27–34. 
45. Comandella, D.; Gottardo, S.; Rio-Echevarria, I. M.; Rauscher, H. Quality of Physico
chemical Data on Nanomaterials: An Assessment of Data Completeness and Variability. 
Nanoscale 2020, 12 (7), 4695–4708. 
­
­248 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
46. Cortés, M. E.; Bonilla, J. C.; Sinisterra, R. D. Biofilm Formation, Control and Novel 
Strategies for Eradication. Sci. Against Microbial. Pathog. Commun. Curr. Res. Technol. 
Adv. 2011, 2, 896–905. 
47. Costerton, W.; Veeh, R.; Shirtliff, M.; Pasmore, M.; Post, C.; Ehrlich, G. The Application 
of Biofilm Science to the Study and Control of Chronic Bacterial Infections. J. Clin. 
Investig. 2003, 112 (10), 1466–1477. 
48. Coughlan, L. M.; Cotter, P. D.; Hill, C.; Alvarez-Ordóñez, A. New Weapons to Fight Old 
Enemies: Novel Strategies for the Biocontrol of Bacterial Biofilms in the Food Industry. 
Front. Microbiol. 2016, 7, 1641–1647. 
49. Cushen, M.; Kerry, J.; Morris, M.; Cruz-Romero, M.; Cummins, E. Nanotechnologies 
in the Food Industry: Recent Developments, Risks and Regulation. Trends Food Sci. 
Technol. 2012, 24 (1), 30–46. 
50. Dastagiri, M. B.; Chand, R.; Immanuelraj, T. K.; Hanumanthaiah, C. V.; Paramsivam, P.; 
Sidhu, R. S.; Kumar, B. G. Indian Vegetables: Production Trends, Marketing Efficiency 
and Export Competitiveness. Am. J. Agric. Forest. 2013, 1 (1), 1–11. 
51. De Moura, M. R.; Mattoso, L. H.; Zucolotto, V. Development of Cellulose-Based 
Bactericidal Nanocomposites Containing Silver Nanoparticles and Their Use as Active 
Food Packaging. J. Food Eng. 2012, 109 (3), 520–524. 
52. de Onis, M.; Borghi, E.; Blössner, M. Trends in Child Malnutrition Malnutrition 
(UNICEF-WHO): The World Bank Joint Child Malnutrition Estimates; Rome: UNICEF; 
2021; online. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240025257] 
53. Del-Pozo, J. L. Biofilm-Related Disease. Expert Rev.Anti-infect. Therap. 2018, 16 (1), 
51–65. 
54. Delange, F. Iodine Deficiency as a Cause of Brain Damage. Postgraduate Med. J. 2001, 
77 (906), 217–220. 
55. Deshpande, J. D.; Joshi, M. M.; Giri, P. A. Zinc: The Trace Element of Major Importance 
in Human Nutrition and Health. Int. J. Med. Sci. Public Health 2013, 2, 1–6. 
56. Devi, A. F.; Buckow, R.; Hemar, Y.; Kasapis, S. Structuring Dairy Systems Through 
High Pressure Processing. J. Food Eng. 2013, 114 (1), 106–122. 
57. D'Haeze, W.; Holsters, M. Surface Polysaccharides Enable Bacteria to Evade Plant 
Immunity. Trends Microbiol. 2004, 12 (12), 555–561. 
58. Dhir, A.; Talwar, S.; Kaur, P.; Malibari, A. Food Waste in Hospitality and Food Services: 
A Systematic Literature Review and Framework Development Approach. J. Clean. 
Prod. 2020, 270, E-article 122861; p 8. 
59. Donlan, R. M. Biofilms: Microbial Life on Surfaces. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 2002, 8 (9), 
881–890. 
60. Dowling, J. E.; Wald, G. Vitamin A Deficiency and Night Blindness. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA 1958, 44 (7), 648–652. 
61. Duncan, T. V. Applications of Nanotechnology in Food Packaging and Food Safety: 
Barrier Materials, Antimicrobials and Sensors. J. Coll. Interf. Sci. 2011, 363 (1), 1–24. 
62. Durán, N.; Marcato, P. D. Nanobiotechnology Perspectives. Role of Nanotechnology in 
the Food Industry: A Review. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 2013, 48 (6), 1127–1134. 
63. Durán, N.; Durán, M.; De Jesus, M. B.; Seabra, A. B.; Fávaro, W. J.; Nakazato, G. 
Silver Nanoparticles: A New View on Mechanistic Aspects on Antimicrobial Activity. 
Nanomed. Nanotechnol. Biol. Med. 2016, 12 (3), 789–799. 
64. Ekpenyong, C. E.; Akpan, E. E. Use of Cymbopogon citratus Essential Oil in Food 
Preservation: Recent Advances and Future Perspectives. Cri. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2017, 
57 (12), 2541–2559. Engineered Nanomaterials for Food Preservation 249 
65. Eleraky, N. E.; Allam, A.; Hassan, S. B.; Omar, M. M. Nanomedicine Fight Against 
Antibacterial Resistance: An Overview of the Recent Pharmaceutical Innovations. 
Pharmaceutics 2020, 12 (2), 142–148. 
66. Emamhadi, M. A.; Sarafraz, M.; Akbari, M.; Fakhri, Y.; Linh, N. T.; Khaneghah, A. M. 
Nanomaterials for Food Packaging Applications: A Systematic Review. Food Chem. 
Toxicol. 2020, E-article 111825, p 7. 
67. Emamifar, A. Applications of Antimicrobial Polymer Nanocomposites in Food 
Packaging. Chapter 13. In Advances in Nanocomposite Technology; Hashim, A., Ed.; 
IntechOpen Online; 2011; pp 299–308. 
68. Emamifar, A.; Kadivar, M.; Shahedi, M.; Soleimanian-Zad, S. Evaluation of Nanocom
posite Packaging Containing Ag and ZnO on Shelf-Life of Fresh Orange Juice. Innov. 
Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2010, 11 (4), 742–748. 
69. Emamifar, A.; Kadivar, M.; Shahedi, M.; Soleimanian-Zad, S. Effect of Nanocomposite 
Packaging Containing Ag and ZnO on Inactivation of Lactobacillus Plantarum in 
Orange Juice. Food Control 2011, 22 (3), 408–413. 
70. Erokhin, V.; Gao, T. Impacts of COVID-19 on Trade and Economic Aspects of Food 
Security: Evidence from 45 Developing Countries. Int. J. Environ. Res Public Health 
2020, 17 (16), E-article 5775, p 5. 
71. Erol, M.; Hum, J.; Boccaccini, A. R. Bioactive Nanocomposites Containing Silicate 
Phases for Bone Replacement and Regeneration. Biomimetic Approach. Biomater. Dev. 
2012, 18, 19–23. 
72. Estrada, J. A.; Contreras, I.; Pliego-Rivero, F. B.; Otero, G. A. Molecular Mechanisms 
of Cognitive Impairment in Iron Deficiency: Alterations in Brain-Derived Neurotrophic 
Factor and Insulin-Like Growth Factor Expression and Function in the Central Nervous 
System. Nutr. Neurosci. 2014, 17 (5), 193–206. 
73. Falasconi, M.; Concina, I.; Gobbi, E.; Sberveglieri, V.; Pulvirenti, A.; Sberveglieri, 
G. Electronic Nose for Microbiological Quality Control of Food Products. Int. J. 
Electrochem. 2012, 2012 (Feb), E-article 715763; https://doi.org/10.1155/2012/715763; 
accessed on August 2, 2021. 
74. Farber, J. M. Microbiological Aspects of Modified-Atmosphere Packaging Technology-A 
Review. J. Food Protect. 1991, 54 (1), 58–70. 
75. Farhan, A.; Hani, N. M. Characterization of Edible Packaging Films Based on Semi￾Refined Kappa-Carrageenan Plasticized with Glycerol and Sorbitol. Food Hydrocoll. 
2017, 64, 48–58. 
76. Farrer, K. T. H. The Thermal Destruction of Vitamin B1 in Foods. Adv. Food Res. 
(Academic Press), 1955, 6, 257–311. 
77. Fernández, A.; Picouet, P.; Lloret, E. Cellulose-Silver Nanoparticle Hybrid Materials to 
Control Spoilage-Related Microflora in Absorbent Pads Located in Trays of Fresh-Cut 
Melon. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2010, 142 (1), 222–228. 
78. Fernandez, M. V.; Denoya, G. I.; Agüero, M. V.; Jagus, R. J.; Vaudagna, S. R. 
Optimization of HPP Parameters to Preserve Quality Attributes of a Mixed Fruit and 
Vegetable Smoothie. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2018, 47, 170–179. 
79. Feynman, R. P. There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom. Calif. Inst. Technol.—Eng. Sci. 
Magaz. 1960, 23 (5), 22–36. 
80. Flemming, H. C.; Wingender, J. The Biofilm Matrix. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2010, 8 (9), 
623–633. 
­250 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
81. Food Security Information Network. Global Report on Food Crises: Technical Report. 
Rome: World Food Programs—United Nations (FAO), 2020. https://www.wfp.org/ 
publications/2020-global-report-food-crises (accessed August 02, 2021). 
82. Frank, J. F. Microbial Attachment to Food and Food Contact Surfaces. Adv. Food Nutr. 
Res. 2001, 43, 319–370. 
83. Frieri, M.; Kumar, K.; Boutin, A. Antibiotic resistance. J. Infect. Public Health 2017, 
10 (4), 369–378. 
84. Fuertes, G.; Soto, I.; Carrasco, R.; Vargas, M.; Sabattin, J.; Lagos, C. Intelligent 
Packaging Systems: Sensors and Nanosensors to Monitor Food Quality and Safety. J. 
Sens. 2016, 2016 (2), 1–8. 
85. Fux, C. A.; Costerton, J. W.; Stewart, P. S.; Stoodley, P. Survival Strategies of Infectious 
Biofilms. Trends Microbiol. 2005, 13 (1), 34–40. 
86. Fysun, O.; Kern, H.; Wilke, B.; Langowski, H. C. Evaluation of Factors Influencing 
Dairy Biofilm Formation in Filling Hoses of Food-Processing Equipment. Food 
Bioprod. Process. 2019, 113, 39–48. 
87. Gao, H.; Zhang, Z. K.; Chai, H. K.; Cheng, N.; Yang, Y.; Wang, D. N.; Cao, W. 
Melatonin Treatment Delays Postharvest Senescence and Regulates Reactive 
Oxygen Species Metabolism in Peach Fruit. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 2016, 118, 
103–110. 
88.	 Ghosal, K.; Agatemor, C.; Špitálsky, Z.; Thomas, S.; Kny, E. Electrospinning 
Tissue Engineering and Wound Dressing Scaffolds from Polymer-Titanium Dioxide 
Nanocomposites. Chem. Eng. J. 2019, 358, 1262–1278. 
89. Girotto, F.; Alibardi, L.; Cossu, R. Food Waste Generation and industrial Uses: A 
Review. Waste Manage. 2015, 45, 32–41. 
90. Golchin, J.; Golchin, K.; Alidadian, N.; Ghaderi, S.; Eslamkhah, S.; Eslamkhah, M.; 
Akbarzadeh, A. Nanozyme Applications in Biology and Medicine: An Overview. Artif. 
Cells Nanomed. Biotechnol. 2017, 45 (6), 1069–1076. 
91. González-Rivas, F.; Ripolles-Avila, C.; Fontecha-Umaña, F.; Ríos-Castillo, A. G.; 
Rodríguez-Jerez, J. J. Biofilms in the Spotlight: Detection, Quantification, and Removal 
Methods. Compreh. Rev. Food Sci. Food Safet. 2018, 17 (5), 1261–1276. 
92. Gram, L.; Ravn, L.; Rasch, M.; Bruhn, J. B.; Christensen, A. B.; Givskov, M. Food 
Spoilage: Interactions Between Food Spoilage Bacteria. Int. J Food Microbiol. 2002, 78 
(1–2), 79–97. 
93.	 Grumezescu, V.; Socol, G.; Grumezescu, A. M.; Holban, A. M.; Ficai, A.; Truşcǎ, 
R.; Chifiriuc, M. C. Functionalized Antibiofilm Thin Coatings Based on PLA–PVA 
Microspheres Loaded with Usnic Acid Natural Compounds Fabricated by MAPLE. 
Appl. Surf. Sci. 2014, 302, 262–267. 
94. Guo, D.; Xie, G.; Luo, J. Mechanical Properties of Nanoparticles: Basics and 
Applications. J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 2013, 47 (1), E-article 013001, p 7. 
95. Guo, G.; Park, C. B.; Lee, Y. H.; Kim, Y. S.; Sain, M. Flame Retarding Effects of 
Nanoclay on Wood–Fiber Composites. Polym. Eng. Sci. 2007, 47 (3), 330–336. 
96. Gupta, A.; Mumtaz, S.; Li, C. H.; Hussain, I.;Rotello, V. M. Combatting Antibiotic￾Resistant Bacteria Using Nanomaterials. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2019, 48 (2), 415–427. 
97. Gustavsson, J.; Cederberg, C.; Sonesson, U.; Van Otterdijk, R.; Meybeck, A. Global 
Food Losses and Food Waste: Extend, Causes and Prevention. Presented at InterPack 
2011 Dusseldorf, Germany; Rome Food & Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations, 2011; p 37. Engineered Nanomaterials for Food Preservation 251 
98. Haes, A. J.; Duyne, R. P. V. Preliminary Studies and Potential Applications of localized 
Surface Plasmon Resonance Spectroscopy in Medical Diagnostics. Expert Rev. Mol. 
Diagnost. 2004, 4 (4), 527–537. 
99.	 Haes, A. J.; Van Duyne, R. P. A Nanoscale Optical Biosensor: Sensitivity and Selectivity 
of an Approach Based on the Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance Spectroscopy of 
Triangular Silver Nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2002, 124 (35), 10596–10604. 
100. Hagens, W. I.; Oomen, A. G.; de Jong, W. H.; Cassee, F. R.; Sips, A. J. What Do We 
(Need to) Know About The Kinetic Properties of Nanoparticles in the Body? Regul. 
Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2007, 49 (3), 217–229. 
101. Hagmeyer, S.; Haderspeck, J. C.; Grabrucker, A. M. Behavioral Impairments in Animal 
Models for Zinc Deficiency. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 2015, 8, 443–448. 
102. Hamad, S. H. Twenty Factors Affecting the Growth of Microorganisms in Food. 
Progress Food Preserv. 2012, 2012, 405–410. 
103. Hambidge, M. Human zinc deficiency. J. Nutr. 2000, 130 (5), 1344S-1349S. 
104. Handford, C. E.; Dean, M.; Henchion, M.; Spence, M.; Elliott, C. T.; Campbell, K. 
Implications of Nanotechnology for the Agri-Food Industry: Opportunities, Benefits and 
Risks. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2014, 40 (2), 226–241. 
105. Hanson, M. A.; Bardsley, A.; De-Regil, L. M.; Moore, S. E.; Oken, E.; Poston, L.; 
Morris, J. L. The International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) 
Recommendations on Adolescent, Preconception, and Maternal Nutrition: Think 
Nutrition First. Int. J. Gynecol. Obstetr. 2015, 131, S213–S253. 
106. Higashisaka, K.; Yoshioka, Y.; Tsutsumi, Y. Applications and Safety of Nanomaterials 
Used in the Food Industry. Food Safet. 2015, 3 (2), 39–47. 
107. Huang, Y.; Mei, L.; Chen, X.; Wang, Q. Recent Developments in Food Packaging Based 
on Nanomaterials. Nanomaterials 2018, 8 (10), 830–836. 
108. Ibrahim, S.; El-Naggar, M. E.; Youssef, A. M.; Abdel-Aziz, M. S. Functionalization 
of Polystyrene Nanocomposite with Excellent Antimicrobial Efficiency for Food 
Packaging Application. J. Cluster Sci. 2019, 2019, 1–12. 
109. Istiqola, A.; Syafiuddin, A. A Review of Silver Nanoparticles in Food Packaging 
Technologies: Regulation, Methods, Properties, Migration, and Future Challenges. J. 
Chinese Chem. Soc. 2020, 67 (11), 1942–1956. 
110. Ivanic, M.; Martin, W. Implications of Higher Global Food Prices for Poverty in 
Low-Income Countries. Agric. Econ. 2008, 39 (1), 405–416. 
111.	 Jain, A.; Ranjan, S.; Dasgupta, N.; Ramalingam, C. Nanomaterials in Food and 
Agriculture: An Overview on Their Safety Concerns and Regulatory Issues. Crit. Rev. 
Food Sci. Nutr. 2018, 58 (2), 297–317. 
112. Jamal, M.; Ahmad, W.; Andleeb, S.; Jalil, F.; Imran, M.; Nawaz, M. A.; Kamil, M. A. 
Bacterial Biofilm and Associated Infections. J. Chinese Med. Assoc. 2018, 81 (1), 7–11. 
113. Jeevanandam, J.; Barhoum, A.; Chan, Y. S.; Dufresne, A.; Danquah, M. K. Review on 
Nanoparticles and Nanostructured Materials: History, Sources, Toxicity and Regulations. 
Beilstein J. Nanotechnol. 2018, 9 (1), 1050–1074. 
114. Joyner, J. J.; Kumar, D. V. Nanosensors and Their Applications in Food Analysis: A 
Review. Int. J Sci. Technol. 2015, 3 (4), 80–88. 
115. Kamat, P. V. Graphene-Based Nano Assemblies for Energy Conversion. J. Phys. Chem. 
Lett. 2011, 2 (3), 242–251. 
116. Kambe, T.;Fukue, K., Ishida, R.; Miyazaki, S. Overview of Inherited Zinc Deficiency in 
Infants and Children. J. Nutr. Sci. Vitaminol. 2015, 61 (Supplement), S44–S46. 252 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
117. Kanmani, P.; Rhim, J. W. Nano and Nanocomposite Antimicrobial Materials for Food 
Packaging Applications. Future Science Book Series: Progress in Nanomaterials for 
Food Packaging, 2014. https://www.futuremedicine.com/doi/abs/10.4155/ebo.13.303. 
Online. https://doi.org/10.4155/ebo.13.303. (accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
118. Kavanaugh, N. L.; Ribbeck, K. Selected Antimicrobial Essential Oils Eradicate Pseudo￾monas spp. and Staphylococcus aureus Biofilms. Appli. Environ. Microbiol. 2012, 78 (11), 
4057–4061. 
119. Keenan, D. F.; Rößle, C.; Gormley, R.; Butler, F.; Brunton, N. P. Effect of High Hydrostatic 
Pressure and Thermal Processing on the Nutritional Quality and Enzyme Activity of Fruit 
Smoothies. LWT—Food Sci. Technol. 2012, 45 (1), 50–57. 
120. Kerry, R. G.; Gouda, S.; Das, G.; Vishnuprasad, C. N.; Patra, J. K. Agricultural Nano
technologies: Current Applications and Future Prospects. In Microbial Biotechnology; 
Springer: Singapore, 2017; pp 3–28. 
121. Khan, S. T.; Malik, A. Engineered Nanomaterials for Water Decontamination and 
Purification: From Lab to Products. J. Hazard. Mater. 2019, 363, 295–308. 
122. Khan, S. T.; Musarrat, J.; Al-Khedhairy, A. A. Countering Drug Resistance, Infectious 
Diseases, and Sepsis Using Metal and Metal Oxides Nanoparticles: Current Status. Coll. 
Surf. B: Biointerf. 2016, 146, 70–83. 
123. Khan, S. T.; Saleem, S.; Ahamed, M.; Ahmad, J. Survival of Probiotic Bacteria in the 
Presence of Food Grade Nanoparticles from Chocolates: An In Vitro and In Vivo Study. 
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2019, 103 (16), 6689–6700. 
124. Khataee, A.; Mansoori, G. A. Nanostructured Titanium Dioxide Materials: Properties, 
Preparation and Applications; World Scientific Publishing Co. Ltd.: Singapore, 2011 
(Nov.); p 204. https://doi.org/10.1142/8325 
125. Khot, L. R.; Sankaran, S.; Maja, J. M.; Ehsani, R.; Schuster, E. W. Applications of 
Nanomaterials in Agricultural Production and Crop Protection: A Review. Crop Protect. 
2012, 35, 64–70. 
126. Kim, S.; Ryu, D. Y. Silver Nanoparticle-Induced Oxidative Stress, Genotoxicity and 
Apoptosis in Cultured Cells and Animal Tissues. J. Appl. Toxicol. 2013, 33 (2), 78–89. 
127. Kirk, M. D.; Pires, S. M.; Black, R. E.; Caipo, M.; Crump, J. A.; Devleesschauwer, B.; 
Angulo, F. J. World Health Organization Estimates of the Global and Regional Disease 
Burden of 22 Foodborne Bacterial, Protozoal, and Viral Diseases, 2010 Data Synthesis. 
PLoS Med. 2015, 12 (11), E-article 1001921, p 15. 
128. Kokare, C. R., Chakraborty, S., Khopade, A. N., Mahadik, K. R. Biofilm: Importance 
and Applications. Indian J. Biotechnol. 2009, 8 (April), 159–168. 
129. Kong, F.; Singh, R. P. Chemical Deterioration and Physical Instability of Foods and 
Beverages. In The Stability and Shelf-life of Food; Woodhead Publishing: London, 
2016; pp 43–76. 
130. Kumar, P.; Mahato, D. K.; Kamle, M.; Mohanta, T. K.; Kang, S. G. Aflatoxins: A Global 
Concern for Food Safety, Human Health and Their Management. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 
7, 2170–2177. 
131. Kurzbaum, E.; Iliasafov, L.; Kolik, L.; Starosvetsky, J.; Bilanovic, D.; Butnariu, M.; 
Armon, R. From the Titanic and Other Shipwrecks to Biofilm Prevention: The Interesting 
Role of Polyphenol-Protein Complexes in Biofilm Inhibition. Sci. Total Environ. 2019, 
658, 1098–1105. 
132. Langiano, E.; Ferrara, M.; Lanni, L.; Viscardi, V.; Abbatecola, A. M.; De Vito, E. Food Safety 
at Home: Knowledge and Practices of Consumers. J. Public Health, 2012, 20 (1), 47–57. 
­Engineered Nanomaterials for Food Preservation 253 
133. Lead, J. R.; Wilkinson, K. J. Aquatic Colloids and Nanoparticles: Current Knowledge 
and Future Trends. Environ. Chem. 2006, 3 (3), 159–171. 
134. Lee, J. S.; Chang, Y.; Lee, E. S.; Song, H. G.; Chang, P. S.; Han, J. Ascorbic Acid-Based 
Oxygen Scavenger in Active Food Packaging System for Raw Meat-Loaf. J. Food Sci. 
2018, 83 (3), 682–688. 
135. Li, B.; Webster, T. J. Bacteria Antibiotic Resistance: New Challenges and Opportunities 
for Implant-Associated Orthopedic Infections. J. Orthopedic Res. 2018, 36 (1), 22–32. 
136. Liew, W. P. P.; Mohd-Redzwan, S. Mycotoxin: Its Impact on Gut Health and Microbiota. 
Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2018, 8, 60–67. 
137. Magdolenova, Z.; Collins, A.; Kumar, A.; Dhawan, A.; Stone, V.; Dusinska, M. 
Mechanisms of Genotoxicity. A Review of In Vitro and In Vivo Studies with Engineered 
Nanoparticles. Nanotoxicology 2014, 8 (3), 233–278. 
138. Mahajan, B. C.; Tandon, R.; Kapoor, S.; Sidhu, M. K. Natural Coatings for Shelf-Life 
Enhancement and Quality Maintenance of Fresh Fruits and Vegetables: A Review. J. 
Postharvest Technol, 2018, 6 (1), 12–26. 
139. Mahalik, N. P.; Nambiar, A. N. Trends in Food Packaging and Manufacturing Systems 
and Technology. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2010, 21 (3), 117–128. 
140. Maina, S.; Kachrimanidou, V.; Koutinas, A. A roadmap towards a Circular and 
Sustainable Bioeconomy Through Waste Valorization. Curr. Opin. Green Sustain. Chem. 
2017, 8, 18–23. 
141. Makabenta, J. M. V.; Nabawy, A., Li, C. H.; Schmidt-Malan, S.; Patel, R.; Rotello, V. 
M. Nanomaterial-Based Therapeutics for Antibiotic-Resistant Bacterial Infections. Nat. 
Rev. Microbiol. 2020, 2020, 1–14. 
142. Manke, A.; Wang, L.; Rojanasakul, Y. Mechanisms of Nanoparticle-Induced Oxidative 
Stress and Toxicity. BioMed Res. Int. 2013, 2013 (August), E-article 942916; Online. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/942916. (accessed August 2, 2021). 
143. Marchand, S.; De Block, J.; De Jonghe, V.; Coorevits, A.; Heyndrickx, M.; Herman, L. 
Biofilm Formation in Milk Production and Processing Environments; Influence on Milk 
Quality and Safety. Compreh. Rev. Food Sci. Food Safet. 2012, 11 (2), 133–147. 
144. Mathews, D. M.; Johnson, N. P.; Sim, R. G.; O'Sullivan, S.; Peart, J. M.; Hofman, P. 
L. Iodine and Fertility: Do We Know Enough. Human Reprod. 2021, 36 (2), 265–274; 
online. DOI: 10.1093/humrep/deaa312 (accessed August 2, 2021). 
145. Micha, R.; Mannar, V.; Afshin, A.; Allemandi, L.; Baker, P.; Battersby, J.; Grummer-Strawn, 
L. Global Nutrition Report: Action on Equity to End Malnutrition. Online, 2020. https:// 
reliefweb.int/report/world/2020-global-nutrition-report-action-equity-end-malnutrition 
(accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
146. Miller, J. L. Iron Deficiency Anemia: A Common and Curable Disease. Cold Spring 
Harbor Perspect. Med. 2013, 3 (7), E-article 011866, p 7. 
147. Mishra, V.; Dubey, N.; Kumar, S.; Singh, N. Nano-Enabled Packing of Food Products. 
Innov. Packag. Fruits Veg: Strategies Safet. Qual. Mainten. 2018, 2018, 315–320. 
148. Mitchell, N. J.; Bowers, E.; Hurburgh, C.; Wu, F. Potential Economic Losses to the 
US Corn Industry from Aflatoxin Contamination. Food Add. Contam. A, 2016, 33 (3), 
540–550. 
149. Momin, J. K.; Jayakumar, C.; Prajapati, J. B. Potential of Nanotechnology in Functional 
Foods. Emirates J. Food Agric. (EJFA), 2013, 25 (1), 10–19. 
150. Motta, J. P.; Wallace, J. L.; Buret, A. G.; Deraison, C.; Vergnolle, N. Gastrointestinal 
Biofilms in Health and Disease. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2021, 2021, 1–21. 254 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
151. Mottaleb, K. A.; Mainuddin, M.; Sonobe, T. COVID-19 Induced Economic Loss and 
Ensuring Food Security for Vulnerable Groups: Policy Implications from Bangladesh. 
PloS One 2020, 15 (10), E-article 0240709, p 8. 
152. Müller, A.;Schmidhuber, J.; Hoogeveen, J.; Steduto, P. Some Insights in the Effect of 
Growing Bio-Energy Demand on Global Food Security and natural resources. Water 
Policy, 2008, 10 (S1), 83–94. 
153. Mustafa, F.; Andreescu, S. Nanotechnology-Based Approaches for Food Sensing and 
Packaging Applications. RSC Adv. 2020, 10 (33), 19309–19336. 
154. Myszka, K.; Czaczyk, K. Bacterial Biofilms on Food Contact Surfaces-A Review. 
Polish J. Food Nutr. Sci. 2011, 61 (3), 173–181. 
155. Naik, M. I.; Fomda, B. A.; Jaykumar, E.; Bhat, J. A. Antibacterial Activity of Lemongrass 
(Cymbopogon citratus) Oil Against Some Selected Pathogenic Bacteria. Asian Pacific J. 
Trop. Med. 2010, 3 (7), 535–538. 
156. Nazrana, N.; Jain, T.; Verma, S. Role of Nutrition in Maintaining Normal Eyesight: A 
Review. Int. J. Med. Biomed. Stud. 2020, 4 (3); online. https://www.ijmbs.info/index.php/ 
ijmbs/article/view/1068. (accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
157. Nemes, S. A.; Szabo, K.; Vodnar, D. C. Applicability of Agro-Industrial By-Products in 
Intelligent Food Packaging. Coatings 2020, 10 (6), 550–556. 
158. Nersisyan, H. H.; Lee, J. H.; Ding, J. R.; Kim, K. S.; Manukyan, K. V.; Mukasyan, A. 
S. Combustion Synthesis of zero-, One-, Two-and Three-Dimensional Nanostructures: 
Current Trends and Future Perspectives. Progress Energy Combustion Sci. 2017, 63, 
79–118. 
159. Nicola, M.; Alsafi, Z.; Sohrabi, C.; Kerwan, A.; Al-Jabir, A.; Iosifidis, C.; Agha, R. The 
Socio-Economic Implications of the Coronavirus Pandemic (Covid-19): A Review. Int. 
J. Surg. (London, England) 2020, 78, 185. 
160. Olatunde, O. O.; Benjakul, S. Nonthermal Processes for Shelf-Life Extension of 
Seafoods: A Revisit. Compreh. Rev. Food Sci. Food Safet. 2018, 17 (4), 892–904. 
161.	 Omanović-Mikličanina, E.; Maksimović, M. Nanosensors Applications in Agriculture 
and Food Industry. Bull Chem Technol Bosnia Herzegovina 2016, 47, 59–70. 
162. Omoike, A.; Chorover, J. Spectroscopic Study of Extracellular Polymeric Substances 
from Bacillus subtilis: Aqueous Chemistry and Adsorption Effects. Biomacromolecules 
2004, 5 (4), 1219–1230. 
163. Otoni, C. G.; Avena-Bustillos, R. J.; Azeredo, H. M.; Lorevice, M. V.; Moura, M. R.; 
Mattoso, L. H.; McHugh, T. H. Recent advances on Edible Films Based on Fruits and 
Vegetables: A Review. Compreh. Rev. Food Sci. Food Safet. 2017, 16 (5), 1151–1169. 
164. Pal, M.; Devrani, M.; Hadush, A. Recent Developments in Food Packaging Technologies. 
Bever. Food World 2019, 46 (1), 21–25. 
165. Palmer, J. N. Bacterial Biofilms: Do They Play a Role in Chronic Sinusitis? 
Otolaryngologic Clin. North Am. 2005, 38 (6), 1193–1201. 
166. Papargyropoulou, E.; Lozano, R.; Steinberger, J. K.; Wright, N.; Bin Ujang, Z. The Food 
Waste Hierarchy as a Framework for the Management of Food Surplus and Food Waste. 
J. Clean. Prod. 2014, 76, 106–115. 
167. Parfitt, J.; Barthel, M.; Macnaughton, S. Food Waste Within Food Supply Chains: 
Quantification and Potential for Change to 2050. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 2010, 
365 (1554), 3065–3081. 
168. Parsek, M. R.; Singh, P. K. Bacterial Biofilms: An Emerging Link to Disease Pathogenesis. 
Annu.Reviews in Microbiology, 2003, 57 (1), 677–701. Engineered Nanomaterials for Food Preservation 255 
169. Peighambardoust, S. J;Peighambardoust, S. H.; Pournasir, N.; Pakdel, P. M. Properties 
of Active Starch-Based Films Incorporating a Combination of Ag, ZnO and CuO 
Nanoparticles for Potential Use in Food Packaging Applications. Food Packag. Shelf￾Life 2019, 22, E-article 100420, p 7. 
170. Pellegrini, M. COVID-19 Pandemic: A Brief Review on How Computer Science 
and Information Technology Can Help Shape the Future of Food Safety. COVID-19 
Pandemic: Case Studies Opin. 01(05), 2020, 2020 (October), 94–98. 
171. Pereira de Abreu, D. A.; Cruz, J. M.; Paseiro-Losada, P. Active and Intelligent Packaging 
for the Food Industry. Food Rev. Int. 2012, 28 (2), 146–187. 
172. Pfalzgraff, A.; Brandenburg, K.; Weindl, G. Antimicrobial Peptides and Their 
Therapeutic Potential for Bacterial Skin Infections and Wounds. Front. Pharmacol. 
2018, 9, 281–288. 
173. Phillips, C. A. Modified atmosphere packaging and its effects on the microbiological 
quality and safety of produce. International Journal of Food Science Technology, 1996, 
31 (6), 463–479. 
174. Pirsa, S.; Shamusi, T. Intelligent and Active Packaging of Chicken Thigh Meat by 
Conducting Nano Structure Cellulose—Polypyrrole—ZnO Film. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 
2019, 102, 798–809. 
175. Powers, H. J. Riboflavin (Vitamin B-2) and Health. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2003, 77 (6), 
1352–1360. 
176. Prasad, A. S. Impact of the Discovery of Human Zinc Deficiency on Health—Part I. J. 
Am. College Nutr. 2009, 28 (3), 257–265. 
177. Prasad, A. S. Impact of the Discovery of Human Zinc Deficiency on Health – Part II. J. 
Trace Elements Med. Biol. 2014, 28 (4), 357–363. 
178. Puértolas, E.; Lavilla, M. HPP in Seafood Products: Impact on Quality and Applications. In 
Present and Future of High-Pressure Processing; Elsevier: San Diego, 2020; pp 201–220. 
179. Qiu, L.; Zhang, M.; Tang, J.; Adhikari, B.; Cao, P. Innovative Technologies for Producing 
and Preserving Intermediate Moisture Foods: A Review. Food Res. Int. 2019, 116, 90–102. 
180. Rahimi, G.; Alizadeh, F.; Khodavandi, A. Mycosynthesis of Silver Nanoparticles 
from Candida Albicans and Its Antibacterial Activity Against Escherichia coli and 
Staphylococcus aureus. Trop. J. Pharm. Res. 2016, 15 (2), 371–375. 
181. Rai, M.; Ingle, A. Role of Nanotechnology in Agriculture with Special Reference to 
Management of Insect Pests. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2012, 94 (2), 287–293. 
182. Rai, M.; Ingle, A. P.; Gupta, I.; Pandit, R.; Paralikar, P.; Gade, A.; dos-Santos, C. A. 
Smart Nanopackaging for the Enhancement of Food Shelf-Life. Environ. Chem. Lett. 
2019, 17 (1), 277–290. 
183. Ramasamy, M.; Lee, J. Recent Nanotechnology Approaches for Prevention and 
Treatment of Biofilm-Associated Infections on Medical Devices. BioMed Res. Int. 
2016, 2016 (October), online. https://www.hindawi.com/journals/bmri/2016/1851242/ 
(accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
184. Raposo, A.; Pérez, E.; de Faria, C. T.; Ferrús, M. A.; Carrascosa, C. Food Spoilage by 
pseudomonas spp.: An Overview. Food Borne Pathogens Antibiotic Resistance 2017, 
2017, 41–58. 
185. Rask, K. J.; Rask, N. Economic Development and Food Production–Consumption 
Balance: A Growing Global Challenge. Food Policy 2011, 36 (2), 186–196. 
186. Ravash, N.; Peighambardoust, S. H.; Soltanzadeh, M.; Pateiro, M.; Lorenzo, J. M. 
Impact of High-Pressure Treatment on Casein Micelles, Whey Proteins, Fat Globules 256 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
and Enzymes Activity in Dairy Products: A Review. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2020, 
2020, 1–21. 
187. Rawat, S. Food Spoilage: Microorganisms and Their Prevention. Asian J. Plant Sci. Res. 
2015, 5 (4), 47–56. 
188. Reig, C. S.; Lopez, A. D.; Ramos, M. H.; Ballester, V. A. C. Nanomaterials: A Map for 
Their Selection in Food Packaging Applications. Packag. Technol. Sci. 2014, 27 (11), 
839–866. 
189. Ricciardi, B. F.; Muthukrishnan, G.; Masters, E.; Ninomiya, M.; Lee, C. C.; Schwarz, E. 
M. Staphylococcus aureus Evasion of Host Immunity in the Setting of Prosthetic Joint 
Infection: Biofilm and Beyond. Curr. Rev. Musculoskeletal Med. 2018, 11 (3), 389–400. 
190. Rodríguez, G. M.; Sibaja, J. C.; Espitia, P. J.; Otoni, C. G. Antioxidant Active Packaging 
Based on Papaya Edible Films Incorporated with Moringa oleifera and Ascorbic Acid 
for Food Preservation. Food Hydrocoll. 2020, 103, E-article 105630, p 7. 
191. Sahal, G.; Woerdenbag, H. J.; Hinrichs, W. L.; Visser, A.; Tepper, P. G.; Quax, W. 
J.; Bilkay, I. S. Antifungal and Biofilm Inhibitory Effect of Cymbopogon citratus 
(Lemongrass) Essential Oil on Biofilm Forming by Candida tropicalis Isolates; an in 
Vitro Study. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2020, 246, E-article 112188, p 8. 
192. Sajid, M.; Ilyas, M.; Basheer, C.; Tariq, M.; Daud, M.; Baig, N.; Shehzad, F. Impact of 
Nanoparticles on Human and Environment: Review of Toxicity Factors, Exposures, Control 
Strategies, and Future Prospects. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2015, 22(6), 4122–4143. 
193. Salama, Y.; Chennaoui, M.; Sylla, A.; Mountadar, M.; Rihani, M.; Assobhei, O. 
Characterization, Structure, and Function of Extracellular Polymeric Substances 
(EPS) of Microbial Biofilm in Biological Wastewater Treatment Systems: A Review. 
Desalination Water Treatment 2016, 57 (35), 16220–16237. 
194. Samal, D. Use of Nanotechnology in Food Industry: A Review. Int. J. Environ. Agric. 
Biotechnol. 2017, 2 (4), E-article 238902, p 9. 
195. San Martin, M. F.; Barbosa-Canovas, G. V.; Swanson, B. G. Food Processing by High 
Hydrostatic Pressure. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2002, 42 (6), 627–645. 
196. Sangkhae, V.; Fisher, A. L.; Wong, S.; Koenig, M. D.; Tussing-Humphreys, L.; Chu, A.; 
Nemeth, E. Effects of Maternal Iron Status on Placental and Fetal Iron Homeostasis. J. 
Clin. Investig. 2020, 130 (2), 625–640. 
197. Sarwar, M. S.; Niazi, M. B. K.; Jahan, Z.; Ahmad, T.; Hussain, A. Preparation and 
Characterization of PVA/Nanocellulose/Ag Nanocomposite Films for Antimicrobial 
Food Packaging. Carbohydr. Polym. 2018, 184, 453–464. 
198. Sbordone, L.; Bortolaia, C. Oral Microbial Biofilms and Plaque-Related Diseases: 
Microbial Communities and Their Role in the Shift from Oral Health to Disease. Clin. 
Oral Investig. 2003, 7 (4), 181–188. 
199. Scialabba, N. (Ed.). Integrated Coastal Area Management and Agriculture, Forestry 
and Fisheries; Food & Agricultural Organization: Rome, 1998, online. http://www.fao. 
org/3/w8440e/w8440e00.htm. (accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
200. Sekhon, B. S. Food Nanotechnology–An Overview. Nanotechnol. Sci. Appl. 2010, 3, 1–9. 
201. Sekhon, B. S. Nanotechnology in Agri-Food Production: An Overview. Nanotechnol. 
Sci. Appl. 2014, 7, 31–38. 
202. Sen, S.; Pathak, Y., Eds. Nanotechnology in Nutraceuticals: Production to Consumption; 
CRC Press: Boca Raton, 2016; p 487. 
203. Shajil, S.; Mary, A.; Juneius, C. E. R. Recent Food Preservation Techniques Employed 
in the Food Industry. In Microbial Biotechnology; Springer: Singapore, 2018; pp 3–21. Engineered Nanomaterials for Food Preservation 257 
204. Sharma, C.; Dhiman, R.; Rokana, N.; Panwar, H. Nanotechnology: An Untapped 
Resource for Food Packaging. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 1735–1741. 
205. Sharma, H.; Mutharasan, R. Review of Biosensors for Foodborne Pathogens and Toxins. 
Sens. Actuat B: Chem. 2013, 183, 535–549. 
206. Sherwin, J. C.; Reacher, M. H.; Dean, W. H.; Ngondi, J. Epidemiology of Vitamin A 
Deficiency and Xerophthalmia in at-Risk Populations. Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hygiene. 
2012, 106 (4), 205–214. 
207. Silvestre, C.; Duraccio, D.; Cimmino, S. Food Packaging Based on Polymer Nanomate
rials. Progress Polym Sci. 2011, 36 (12), 1766–1782. 
208. Singh, M.; Singh, S.; Prasad, S.; Gambhir, I. S. Nanotechnology in Medicine and 
Antibacterial Effect of Silver Nanoparticles. Digest J. Nanomater. Biostruct. 2008, 3 
(3), 115–122. 
209. Singh, S.; Shalini, R. Effect of Hurdle Technology in Food Preservation: A Review. Crit. 
Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2016, 56 (4), 641–649. 
210. Singh, T.; Shukla, S.; Kumar, P.; Wahla, V.; Bajpai, V. K.; Rather, I. A. Application of 
Nanotechnology in Food Science: Perception and Overview. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 
1501–1510. 
211. Sommer, A. Vitamin A Deficiency and Clinical Disease: An Historical Overview. J. 
Nutr. 2008, 138 (10), 1835–1839. 
212. Souza, V. G. L.; Fernando, A. L. Nanoparticles in Food Packaging: Biodegradability 
and Potential Migration to Food—A Review. Food Packag. Shelf-Life, 2016, 8, 63–70. 
213. Speranza, B.; Corbo, M. R.; Sinigaglia, M. Effects of Nutritional and Environmental 
Conditions on Salmonella sp. Biofilm Formation. J. Food Sci. 2011, 76 (1), M12–M16. 
214.	 Stepanović, S.; Ćirković, I.; Ranin, L.; S.vabić-Vlahović, M. Biofilm Formation by 
Salmonella spp. and Listeria monocytogenes on Plastic Surface. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 
2004, 38 (5), 428–432. 
215. Sundramoorthy, A. K.; Kumar, T. H. V.; Gunasekaran, S. Graphene-Based Nanosensors 
and Smart Food Packaging Systems for Food Safety and Quality Monitoring. In 
Graphene Bioelectronics; Elsevier: New York, 2018; pp 267–306. 
216. Sung, S. Y.; Sin, L. T.; Tee, T. T.; Bee, S. T.; Rahmat, A. R.; Rahman, W. A.; Vikhraman, 
M. Antimicrobial Agents for Food Packaging Applications. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 
2013, 33 (2), 110–123. 
217. Swinburn, B.; Kraak, V.; Rutter, H.; Vandevijvere, S.; Lobstein, T.; Sacks, G.; Magnusson, 
R. Strengthening of Accountability Systems to Create Healthy Food Environments and 
Reduce Global Obesity. Lancet, 2015, 385 (9986), 2534–2545. 
218. Szabo, S. Urbanisation and Food Insecurity Risks: Assessing the Role of Human 
Development. Oxford Dev. Stud. 2016, 44 (1), 28–48. 
219. Tack, D. M.; Ray, L.; Griffin, P. M.; Cieslak, P. R.; Dunn, J.; Rissman, T.; Payne, 
D. C. Preliminary Incidence and Trends of Infections with Pathogens Transmitted 
Commonly Through Food: Foodborne Diseases. Active Surveillance Netw. (10 US Sites, 
2016–2019)—Morbidity Mortality Weekly Rep., 2020, 69 (17), 509–516. 
220. Tahir, M.; Tahir, B.; Amin, N. A. S.; Zakaria, Z. Y. Photo-Induced Reduction of CO2 
to CO with Hydrogen Over Plasmonic Ag-NPs/TiO2 NWs Core/Shell Hetero-Junction 
under UV and Visible Light. J. CO2
 Utilization, 2017, 18, 250–260. 
221. Taweechaisupapong, S.; Ngaonee, P.; Patsuk, P.; Pitiphat, W.; Khunkitti, W. Antibiofilm 
Activity and Post Antifungal Effect of Lemongrass Oil on Clinical Candida dubliniensis 
Isolate. SA J. Bot. 2012, 78, 37–43. 
­258 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
222. Thyberg, K. L.; Tonjes, D. J. Drivers of Food Waste and Their Implications for 
Sustainable Policy Development. Resour. Conserv. Recycling, 2016, 106, 110–123. 
223. Timoneda, J.; Rodríguez-Fernández, L.; Zaragozá, R.; Marín, M. P.; Cabezuelo, M. T.; 
Torres, L.; Barber, T. Vitamin A Deficiency and the Lung. Nutrients 2018, 10 (9), 1132–1136. 
224. Toloza, F. J. K.; Motahari, H.; Maraka, S. Consequences of Severe Iodine Deficiency 
in Pregnancy: Evidence in Humans. Frontiers in Endocrinology, 2020, 11, 409–415. 
225. Trienekens, J.; Zuurbier, P. Quality and Safety Standards in the Food Industry, 
Developments and Challenges. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 2008, 113 (1), 107–122. 
226. Tsagkaris, A. S.; Tzegkas, S. G.; Danezis, G. P. Nanomaterials in Food Packaging: State 
of the Art and Analysis. J. Food Sci. Technol. 2018, 55 (8), 2862–2870. 
227. Uddin, F. Clays, Nanoclays, and Montmorillonite Minerals. Metallurgical Mater. Trans 
A 2008, 39 (12), 2804–2814. 
228. Uttamchandani, I. False Shortage: Food Wastage in India and the Need for Resource 
Management Reforms. Int. J. Soc. Sci. Econ. Res. 2019, 4 (7), 4898–4903. <ijsser.org/ 
more2019.php?id=372>. (accessed Aug. 2, 2021). 
229. Van Boekel, M.; Fogliano, V.; Pellegrini, N.; Stanton, C.; Scholz, G.; Lalljie, S.; 
Eisenbrand, G. A Review on the Beneficial Aspects of Food Processing. Mol. Nutr. Food 
Res. 2010, 54 (9), 1215–1247. 
230. Van Houdt, R.; Michiels, C. W. Biofilm Formation and the Food Industry, a Focus on the 
Bacterial Outer Surface. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2010, 109 (4), 1117–1131. 
231. Varela-Santos, E.; Ochoa-Martinez, A.; Tabilo-Munizaga, G.; Reyes, J. E.; Pérez-Won, 
M.; Briones-Labarca, V.; Morales-Castro, J. Effect of High Hydrostatic Pressure (HHP) 
Processing on Physicochemical Properties, Bioactive Compounds and Shelf-Life of 
Pomegranate Juice. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2012, 13, 13–22. 
232. Vasile, C.; Sivertsvik, M.; Miteluţ, A. C.; Brebu, M. A.; Stoleru, E.; Rosnes, J. T.; Popa, 
M. E. Comparative Analysis of the Composition and Active Property Evaluation of 
Certain Essential Oils to Assess Their Potential Applications in Active Food Packaging. 
Materials 2017, 10 (1), 45–50. 
233. Vazquez-Armenta, F. J.; Bernal-Mercado, A. T.; Tapia-Rodriguez, M. R.; Gonzalez￾Aguilar, G. A.; Lopez-Zavala, A. A.; Martinez-Tellez, M. A.; Ayala-Zavala, J. F. Quercetin 
Reduces Adhesion and Inhibits Biofilm Development by Listeria Monocytogenes by 
Reducing the Amounts of Extracellular Proteins. Food Control 2018, 90, 266–273. 
234. Vega-Gálvez, A.; Giovagnoli, C.; Pérez-Won, M.; Reyes, J. E.; Vergara, J.; Miranda, 
M.; Di-Scala, K. Application of High Hydrostatic Pressure to Aloe Vera Gel: Microbial 
Inactivation and Evaluation of Quality Parameters. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 
2012, 13, 57–63. 
235. Vetrano, D. L.; Zucchelli, A.; Marconi, E.; Levi, M.; Pegoraro, V.; Cataldo, N.; Lapi, 
F. Predictors of Iron-Deficiency Anemia in Primary Care Older Adults: A Real-World 
European Multi-Country Longitudinal Study. Aging Clin. Exp. Res. 2020, 2020, 1–6. 
236. Von Grebmer, K.; Saltzman, A.; Birol, E.; Wiesman, D.; Prasai, N.; Yin, S.; Sonntag, 
A. Global Hunger Index: The Challenge of Hidden Hunger. IFPRI Books, 2014; p 56. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2499/9780896299580. (accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
237. Wang, C. Y.; Huang, H. W.; Hsu, C. P.; Yang, B. B. Recent Advances in Food Processing 
Using High Hydrostatic Pressure Technology. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2016, 56 (4), 
527–540. 
238. Warner, M. J.; Kamran, M. T. Anemia, iron deficiency. Stat Pearls [online update], 
2020. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK448065/ (accessed Aug 2, 2021). Engineered Nanomaterials for Food Preservation 259 
239. Webb, A.; McQuaid, R.; Rand, S. Employment in the Informal Economy: Implications 
of the COVID-19 Pandemic. Int. J. Sociol. Soc. Policy 2020 (Dec); online. https://www. 
emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/IJSSP-08-2020-0371/full/html (accessed Aug 
2, 2021). 
240. Wells, C. R.; Sah, P.; Moghadas, S. M.; Pandey, A.; Shoukat, A.; Wang, Y.; Galvani, A. P. 
Impact of International Travel and Border Control Measures on the Global Spread of the 
Novel 2019 Coronavirus Outbreak. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2020, 117 (13), 7504–7509. 
241. Wilson, M. Bacterial Biofilms and Human Disease. Sci. Progress 2001, 84 (3), 235–254. 
242. Wójciak, K. M.; Dolatowski, Z. J. Oxidative Stability of Fermented Meat Products. Acta 
Scientiarum Polonorum Technologia Alimentaria (Food Sciences Technology) 2012, 11 
(2), 99–109.<food.actapol.net> 
243. World Health Organization (WHO). UNICEF/WHO/The World Bank Group Joint Child 
Malnutrition Estimates: Levels and Trends in Child Malnutrition: Key Findings, 2016. 
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240025257 (accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
244. World Health Organization (WHO). UNICEF/WHO/The World Bank Group Joint Child 
Malnutrition Estimates: Levels and Trends in Child Malnutrition: Key Findings, 2020. 
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240025257 (accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
245. Wu, Y.; Zhou, Y.; Huang, H.; Chen, X.; Leng, Y.; Lai, W.; Xiong, Y. Engineered Gold 
Nanoparticles as Multicolor Labels for Simultaneous Multi-Mycotoxin Detection on 
the Immunochromatographic Test Strip Nanosensor. Sens. Actuat. B: Chem. 2020, 316, 
E-article 128107, p 8. 
246. Wu, Z.; Huang, X.; Li, Y. C.; Xiao, H.; Wang, X. Novel Chitosan Films with Laponite 
Immobilized Ag Nanoparticles for Active Food Packaging. Carbohydr. Polym. 2018, 
199, 210–218. 
247. Wyrwa, J.; Barska, A. Innovations in the Food Packaging Market: Active Packaging. 
Eur. Food Res. Technol. 2017, 243 (10), 1681–1692. 
248. Yan, X.; Sedykh, A.; Wang, W.; Yan, B.; Zhu, H. Construction of a Web-Based 
Nanomaterial Database by Big Data Curation and Modeling Friendly Nanostructure 
Annotations. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11 (1), 1–10. 
249. Yetter, R. A.; Risha, G. A.; Son, S. F. Metal Particle Combustion and Nanotechnology. 
Proc. Combustion Inst. 2009, 32 (2), 1819–1838. 
250. Youssef, A. M.; El-Sayed, S. M. Bionanocomposites Materials for Food Packaging 
Applications: Concepts and Future Outlook. Carbohydr. Polym. 2018, 193, 19–27. 
251. Zaidi, S.; Misba, L.; Khan, A. U. Nano-Therapeutics: A Revolution in Infection Control 
in Post Antibiotic Era. Nanomed. Nanotechnol. Biol. Med. 2017, 13 (7), 2281–2301. 
252. Zimmermann, M. B. Iodine Deficiency. Endocrine Rev. 2009, 30 (4), 376–408. 
253. Zimmermann, M. B. The Role of Iodine in Human Growth and Development. Semin. 
Cell Dev. Biol. 2011, 22 (6), 645–652. 
254. Zimmermann, M. B.; Boelaert, K. Iodine Deficiency and Thyroid Disorders. Lancet 
Diab. Endocrinol. 2015, 3 (4), 286–295. 
255. Zimmermann, M. B.; Hurrell, R. F. Nutritional Iron Deficiency. Lancet, 2007, 370 
(9586), 511–520. PART III
 
ASSESSMENT OF QUALITY OF
 
FRUITS AND VEGETABLES
 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing: Methods and Strategies. Megh R. Goyal, & 
Faizan Ahmad (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 11
 
NONDESTRUCTIVE METHODS FOR 
QUALITY ASSESSMENT OF FRUITS 
AND VEGETABLES DURING STORAGE 
MOHIT SHARMA and KIRTY PANT 
ABSTRACT 
Quality of fruits and vegetables (FAVs) is the primary fundamental parameter 
for consumer acceptability. Globally different foodborne illnesses have been 
identified in several whole and fresh-cut FAVs. These outbreaks have raised 
the concern to reassess the quality of these FAVs to investigate all critical 
hazards that arise during handling, processing, production, and storage, 
which ultimately endure the burden on the expense and value of the food. 
With the surge of expectations concerning the quality of food commodities, 
the demand for authentic, active, fast techniques is also progressing. 
Recently, numerous nondestructive approaches have been investigated to 
evaluate the quality and characteristics of FAVs. This chapter summarizes 
several nondestructive techniques to determine the quality aspects of FAVs. 
11.1 INTRODUCTION 
The representation of food quality (Figure 11.1) is constituted of all the 
characteristics, properties, likely attributes, perception, psychological, and 
notational value of food.45 To some extent, it also includes convenience, 
safety and authenticity and safety of food. This food quality phenomenon 
requires dedicated techniques to explore the micro- and macro-investigation 
of food quality in a nondestructive way. 264 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
FIGURE 11.1 Various features of food quality. 
FAVs are valuable reservoir of antioxidants, vitamins, minerals, and 
numerous bioactive compounds in our daily diet. The storage and trans
portation of food are considered a crucial food quality factors for selling, 
purchasing, and retailing FAV. Consequently, it is necessary to assure the 
quality of FAV before conveying them to the market. 
The quality of both FAV can be assessed based on many external deter
minants, such as color intensity, size dimension, shape characteristics, odor, 
surface attributes, etc., whereas internal constituents such as total soluble 
solids, total carotenoid content, total phenolic content, pH, titrable acidity, 
reducing sugars, total sugars, DPPH assay, microbiological value, gas trans
mission rates, water repellence, and permeability designate the quality of 
various FAV.35 
Mostly all of FAV pass through ripening and spoilage process by the natural 
­
­
­
means of biochemical and enzymatic reactions that take place internally 
in the metabolism system of fruits and vegetables (FAVs), which leads to 
weight loss, skin changes, and color changes. However, early ripening and Nondestructive Methods for Quality Assessment of Fruits 	 265 
spoilage are not desirable in both fresh and cut FAVs. Nowadays, consumers 
demand food that is sensorial and nutritional sound without compromising 
any food safety risks. 
Fruits (such as apples, grapes, citrus, etc.) are mostly prone to mold 
attack, which leads to different defects, such as blue rot, brown rot, Rhizopus 
soft rot, green mold rot, grey rot, and pink rot. Unusual bacteria- and virus￾related spoilage also takes place in FAV, which can provoke defects, such as 
specks, vascular rings, off-taste, off-odor, and spots on the surface or skin 
of FAV.28 Due to the lack of information, cost factors and limited resources 
available to farmers and researchers have raised uncertainties of deteriora￾tion and inadequate quality of FAVs. 
The food quality evolves during postharvesting and storage to entail 
innovative techniques for exploring the food quality. Until now, scientists 
have discovered different nondestructive methods, which are compact, cost￾effective, flexible, and well-defined devices to assess the quality of FAVs 
during storage. 
This chapter focuses on image analysis, near-infrared spectroscopy 
(NIRS), NMR, MRI, X-ray tomography, and computerized tomography. 
Further, the chapter also highlights future perspectives and limitations of 
nondestructive techniques. 
11.2 NONDESTRUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY: AN OVERVIEW 
Nondestructive technology comes under those techniques, which can be 
used to assess the quality of food with the aid of nondestructive devices by 
manifesting the data in both qualitative and quantitative ways and without 
causing any injury or damage to the attributes of the food. Nondestructive 
technology is not merely limited to detect the internal and external defects 
of food and food materials but also can predict the future probabilities and 
possibilities of shelf-life and characteristic behavior evaluation of various FAVs 
(such as microstructure analysis, thermal properties, moisture entrapment, and 
variation in structure of various fruits during drying and freezing, etc.).1
 Based 
on the food quality, nondestructive devices are of the following types: 
•	 Nondestructive instruments are uniquely designed for research and 
development activities. These are usually costly and are used for high 
accuracy and repeatability measurement of food products. 
•	 Nondestructive instruments are usually developed for sort analysis, 
ranking, and rating purposes of FAV in industries. 266	 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
•	 Compact devices, which are commonly less costly, are available in 
hand plied designs. These devices are created for quality controllers 
and food processors. New manageable tools are also available for 
consumers. 
11.3 SIGNIFICANCE OF NONDESTRUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY FOR 
QUALITY ASSESSMENT 
•	 Nondestructive technologies can be utilized for both quantitative and 
qualitative investigations of FAVs. 
•	 These techniques can be used for the exposure of unwanted blemishes 
and discontinuities in both the FAV without destroying the internal 
attributes. 
•	 These can also be used for the disclosure of any extraneous foreign 
substances. 
•	 These techniques can be used for the revealing of any irregularity 
in the shape and size dimensions, such as length, thickness, depth, 
width, and diameter. 
•	 Nondestructive technology can be used for the measurement of 
different properties of FAV, such as optical, dynamic, electromagnetic, 
chemical properties, etc. 
•	 Nowadays, these can also be adopted for the safety and quality assurance 
of FAV and detection of unwanted bacteria and pathogens, such as 
Escherichia coli, pseudomonas spp., coliforms, Cladosporium spp, etc.27 
•	 These techniques are beneficial in the investigation of ripening and 
maturity stages of FAV.57 
•	 These techniques can also be used to measure the freshness index and 
decay index of FAV during storage.48 
11.4 NONDESTRUCTIVE SYSTEMS AND THEIR APPLICATION FOR 
QUALITY ASSESSMENT OF FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
11.4.1 OPTICAL METHODS 
11.4.1.1 IMAGE ANALYSIS 
Image analysis of any sample comprises of image acquisition, segmentation, 
object selection, measurement analysis, statistical analysis, and stereological Nondestructive Methods for Quality Assessment of Fruits 267 
interpretation (Figure 11.2). Image acquisition relies on an image obtained 
from the equipment in use and the imaging technique. The image can either 
be in analogue form or digital form. The image can be attained from magnetic 
resonance imagers, scanners, monochrome cameras, or digital cameras, 
which are sometimes used along with different color and grayscale filters to 
eliminate the unwanted noise and artefacts. 
FIGURE 11.2 Applications of nondestructive systems for quality assessment of fruits and 
vegetables. 
The collected images can be segmented based on structural dimensions, 
color, brightness, sharpness, temperature, and elemental attributes. Several 
types of algorithms and software are also employed for the segmentation of 
area of specific interest. Threshold, edge-based, and origin-based methods 
are generally used for object selection. Threshold, edge-based, and origin￾based methods rely on intensity control and pixel separation, respectively. 
After segmentation, measurement analysis could be done based on size 
(perimeter, length, area, curl ratio, roundness ratio, and extent ratio), shape 
(compaction and elongation), boundaries (curvatures and descriptors), 
distance between objects and object count, etc. Particle size analysis of 
the particles can be done based on measuring the surface diameter, volume 
diameter, free-falling diameter, perimeter diameter, martin, and projected 
area.2 Various types of imaging methods along with their benefits and 
limitations are listed in Table 11.1. 
11.4.1.2 NEAR INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY (NIRS) 
NIRS is a highly stable, harmless analytical technique in which usually 
no specimen preparation is needed. NIRS operates on the phenomenon 
of absorption of waves at a specific wavelength. Generally for NIRS, the 
wavelength spectrum lies between 780 and 2500 nm.12 When the specimen 
interacts with a near-infrared light source, the sample absorbs, transmits, and 
reflects radiation; and electrons of lower orbital excites to a higher orbital Fluorescence • Top-quality images due to limited noise • Lack of linear intensity ratios
• Fluorophore labeled images • Issue of autofluorescence
Hyperspectral • Advantageous for spatial and spectral differentiation of • High-cost instrument setup 
various similar resembling objects
• Beneficial for characterizing the attributes of objects • Limited information yield
Laser backscattering • Reasonable technique • Limited resolution of images
• Simple to operate • Risk of loss of quality of images is high due to
observation errors
Thermal • Able to collect data of moving objects • Viable environment impact on thermal images
• Able to collect data from hard to reach areas, which are not • Challenging image interpretation due to variable
attainable in other methods temperatures 
X-ray • In-depth analysis • Impact of X-ray radiations to the specimen and
surrounding is still questionable • High penetration ability
268 
TABLE 11.1 Benefits and Limitations of Different Imaging Methods.
Imaging method Benefits Limitations 
Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing Nondestructive Methods for Quality Assessment of Fruits 269 
state. Due to the excitation of electrons, varied types of stretching, rotation, 
and bending appear in the specimen at different wavelength values, such as 
O–H stretching, C–H stretching, N–H stretching, etc. Various stretching and 
bending inference combinations justify the changes in the composition of 
FAVs. The O–H stretching and bending combinations imply the moisture 
content changes in FAVs. Whereas C–H bonds indicate the changes in 
the proportion of oils, carbohydrates, and fats in FA, and N–H stretching 
represents changes in protein compositions.3 
The detector usually is adjusted according to the requirement of data 
observation. Tungsten and halogen lamps are normally adopted for the light 
source. When detectors are adjusted in reflectance mode, the reflected light 
or radiations are frequently captured and result in information about the 
external structure, such as texture, size, shape, color values, and blemishes. 
The detectors are generally attached to computers to convert radiations 
to electric signals for data processing. Due to the advancement in the 
information technology; several image analysis data analysis and statistical 
software systems have emerged to remove noise by employing various filters 
and data preprocessors models. Sometimes detectors are also adjusted in 
trans-reflectance and transmittance mode to detect the deeper information on 
the surface of FAVs. The main disadvantage of the NIRS system is the lack 
of spatial arrangement.3
 Mango, pear, peach, melons, grapes, strawberry, 
and blueberry samples were analyzed for ripening stages, maturity index, 
dry matter analysis, chlorophyll content, titrable acidity, sugar content, 
anthocyanin content, and firmness with the help of the NIRS technique.5,70,71 
11.4.2 ELECTROMAGNETIC METHODS 
11.4.2.1 NUCLEAR MAGNETIC RESONANCE 
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is an exclusive technique, which 
determines the magnetic characteristics of spinning associated with the 
physical and chemical characteristics of matter.53 During this process, the 
nucleus evolves in the magnetic moment, which significantly engrosses 
radiations of particular frequencies under an external magnetic field.18 A 
nucleus comprising an odd number of nucleons (e.g., 1H and 13C) is essential 
to attain a net magnetization moment.39 However, the 1H produces the highest 
NMR signal and provides outstanding contrast among diverse structures; 
thus, most of the researches have been using 1H NMR for solid food quality 
assessment, due to the existence of ample hydrogen atoms in the product.20,39,41 270 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
During the process, NMR signals are carried as electromagnetic energy, 
which is perceived and received by the detectors; further these signals are 
directed to the processer (CPU) and transformed in the form of an illustra￾tion via data computation.18 NMR images possess individual pixel value 
to demonstrate the signal intensity in the evaluated matter, this further is 
linked with the resonance density and relaxation time, that is, T1 and T2.18 
NMR parameters (such as, relaxation time and proton density, various food 
properties) can be measured, such as chemical composition and structural 
quantifications.50 Whereas several food features (such as chemical compo￾sition, cell structure and cell-size, cellular content viscosity, and magnetic 
exposure) affect the proton relaxation.20,65 
Consequently, alteration in the interior qualities (such as firmness, 
browning, ripeness, decaying of tissues, bruising, mealiness, water core), 
woolly categorization, or circulation of water within the cellular structure 
and chemical composition (such as water, sugar, oil, pectin, starch, etc.) 
of fresh produce could be effortlessly observed through NMR.4,9,11,17,36,49,75 
While the defected and damaged structures inside the FAVs are identified by 
the darker region because of their low proton density.20,42,65,75 
The operation of the NMR system in the food sector primarily is utilized to 
inspect various quality features, such as moisture, oil, carbohydrate, protein, 
etc. Utilizing the variations in the dispersal of NMR water-proton transverse 
relaxation times, apples under freeze-drying possessed lower water content 
in tissues as compared to fluidized-bed drying. However, NMR results 
indicated its damaged membrane integrity that leads to breakdown of cell￾wall.18 As compared to monochrome camera images, NMR images provide 
various benefits, such as 3D analysis of samples, clarity, particularly among 
fat and connective tissue.6 
11.4.2.2 MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a nonintrusive and nondestruc￾tive spectroscopic method.59 This significantly depends on the interaction 
between electromagnetic radiation and atomic particles (electrons and the 
nucleus) of matter.53 Protons (chiefly 1H nuclei) are targeted, especially those 
which are existing in the water of FAVs. During this process, protons spin 
within the body and allied themselves under influence of powerful magnetic 
field conditions. Through regulating the proton dynamics subsequently, data 
can be attained related to the spatial distribution of proton density, relaxation 
parameters values, and self-diffusion factors of the specimen. Particular Nondestructive Methods for Quality Assessment of Fruits 271 
self-diffusional including relaxation characteristics give complimentary 
information, and improved contrast is also associated with proton mobility.74 
Food commodity exhibits a huge variety of compositional complexity, 
skeletal complications, heterogeneity, and divergence, which describe its 
quality excellence and safety perspectives. Noninvasive methods comprise 
of products to get quantitative data evidence related to the spatial arrange￾ment.50 MRI technique is being already established technologically and 
commercially in the medical field, laboratory testing, and now recently in 
the food processing industries.18 
MRI is considered appropriate for biological materials, primarily in 
water but similarly in oil, fat, or salt also, and is capable to differentiate 
these compounds. Moreover, MRI is profound toward various quality 
aspects, which possibly affect the product and selectively those parameters 
that influence the mobility or water concentration, for example, internal 
browning. However, a nondestructive feature of MRI makes it fascinating 
for scanning the FAV but also for regulating product quality over time.20,24 
MRI process has relatively low image acquisition speed in comparison 
to other techniques, such as X-ray imaging. MRI mechanism possesses high 
sensitivity toward water molecules; however, it is predominantly employed 
to examine relative transformations or alterations occurrences in water 
concentration rather than quantification51,78; subsequently, the process is 
not straightforward due to other factors, such as temperature variations and 
proton containing compounds. 
MRI technique has been successfully established to determine numerous 
quality characteristics of fresh FAV and the disclosure of internal checks, such 
as voids/pits,68 worm destruction/holes,16 wounding,54 water core ailment in 
apples,19 interior browning in apples,19,24 browning of apples or peaches,52 
core crackup in pears,42,43 freezing injury in citrus berry, or zucchini squash33 
to check tissue structure and water status of interior properties or fungal 
inhibition.18 It is being utilized to check physical properties (such as shape, 
size, volume), which are interrelated with soluble solids, firmness, or acid 
content.20,46 
MRI facilitates easy differentiation between immature and ripe FAV, for 
example, by determining oil content in avocado16 or free moisture content 
in pineapple or tomatoes.16 Additionally, the detection of pathogen infection 
has also been achieved successfully.31 Due to the high cost and relatively low 
acquisition speed of MRI equipment as compared to the base cost, of large 
volume of FAVs, industrial implementation of MRI is in a nascent stage.67 
Several types of research aimed to develop economical, precise, and quick 
processing equipment that is able to attain pragmatic outcomes. The primary 272 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
aim of research studies is on the hardware systems, namely, to develop or use 
cheaper, quick, low-field, wide-bore MRI scanners34,56 with smaller mobile 
(1D or 2D) systems,22,23 and faster pulse sequences. These developments can 
enhance previous system potentials so that MRI is comparatively worthwhile 
tool for nondestructive quality assessment of raw agricultural products. 
11.4.3 DYNAMIC METHODS 
11.4.3.1 X-RAYS IMAGING 
The nondestructive and instinctive quality assessment of agricultural 
commodities has considerably become the paramount solution to improve 
quality standards and reduce production expenses.79 X-rays imaging is 
one of the highly significant and imminent technologies used in medical 
diagnostics and other perspectives of inspections. Besides that, the purpose 
of the X-ray imaging technique for characteristic inspection of farming 
products has proposed significant advantages. It also complements current 
evaluation techniques.14 
However, the usage of X-rays imaging for quality assessment of agricul￾tural products is not yet exploited to a full extent and it is still in a nascent 
stage. The application of X-ray imaging technology is for inspection of 
interior qualities parameters, such as nutrition, texture (crispiness, juiciness, 
firmness), and an internal cavity, rotten, pest infestation, water core, spongy 
tissues that are hard to determine by normal visual appearance. X-ray imaging 
is a well-recognized technique to access high attenuation and delicate kinds 
of stuff; therefore, it has been utilized for various inspection purposes within 
the agronomical and food industries. 
X-rays are electromagnetic emissions with a wavelength of 0.01–10 nm, 
and with relative energies from 0.12 to 12 keV. The energy and penetra￾tion capacity of an X-ray significantly depends on its wavelength, where 
the shorter wavelength possesses higher energy and penetration potential 
and visa-versa. Soft X-rays are being recognized for their lower penetra￾tion potential and capability to disclose the internal density alteration in 
farming commodities. Neethirajan et al. 58 stated that these simple X-rays 
technique processing takes about 3–5 s to build an X-ray picture. Hence, 
X-ray imaging-based systems are operated as nondestructive techniques. 
Therefore, it is extensively utilized for research purposes to evaluate quality 
classification, quality components in FAV, and to detect interior defects in 
agricultural commodities. Nondestructive Methods for Quality Assessment of Fruits 273 
The X-rays are released and reach within the fruit or vegetable and 
eventually fall on an X-ray scintillator (having a light coat of luminescent 
substance) to captivate the X-ray picture after processing. Yang et al.82 
checked the various prospects of using X-ray to determine internal defects 
and injuries of various fruits. Njorge et al.61 have found internal defects, such 
as rind puffing in oranges by X-ray method. The results revealed that this 
technique is a valuable tool for the nondestructive examination of interior 
damages of fruits, which cannot be detected by visual appearance. 
Cristiane et al. 21 developed digital images of a product via X-ray spectrum 
ranging from 18 to 20 keV, where the initial images were examined by using 
a digital image processing system for differentiation of speed, peel, pulp, and 
damaged region in mangoes. The X-ray processing accompanies the Law 
of Absorption: the strength of the estimated light subsequently advancing 
through each specimen remains mainly reliant on the primary penetration 
power, density, stiffness of the absorbent material and its immersion 
coefficient. FAVs have tremendous amount of water content, which causes 
the maximum portion of X-rays absorption. Various interior disorders with 
adverse impact on quality (such as astringent pit, water nucleus, cork spot, 
and brown nucleus for apple, seed germination, black rot, membranous 
stain, bruises, hollow heart, and reasonably black core for potato and freeze 
damage for citrus) would be demonstrable by X-ray technique.79 This process 
is mainly reliant on the tissue density but not on the chemical composition of 
the material, which makes its application limited.77 
Three main techniques are used for quality control: the two-dimensional 
radiography; the line scanning process generates a picture meanwhile the 
X-rays pass by the material; and Roentgen computed tomography (CT). This 
technique creates a three-dimensional image, which enables to compute the 
information from the two-dimensional image. Commercial practices with 
X-ray imaging help to detect the hollow heart in potato tubers,62 the moisture 
content in apples,76 density alteration throughout the ripening of tomatoes,10 
and insect infestation of pistachio nuts.38 
Reyes et al.66 analyzed the mango fruit seed and weevil in mango 
fruit via estimation of distinct characteristic of weevil-infested seeds. The 
prospective and potential of utilizing X-rays imaging is to identify internal 
damages due to pests or physical impingement in qualitative evaluation of 
FAVs. Yacob et al.81 compared X-ray imaging technique with MRI systems 
applied on agricultural products for postharvest nondestructive inspection. 
Their study concluded that the X-ray is a conceivable technique to execute 
nondestructive investigation, since it is more acceptable and less expensive 
as compared to the MRI process.79 274 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
11.4.3.2 X-RAY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY 
X-ray CT system primarily depends on a scientific algorithm to produce 
a tomogram (3-D illustration) of numerous radiographs of an object taken 
at various locations and angles.69 It is also known as a highly impressive 
method due to its nondestructive visualization abilities and interior quality 
assessment of an object.40 CT scanner has a 1 mm pixel resolution59 and 
can produce 2D and 3D pictures (tomograms) from the acquired information 
for the evaluation of atomic and physiological details.64,75 However, X-ray 
reckoned tomography technology is a well-recognized for cross-sectional 
evaluation of an object by combining a portable X-ray reservoir with an 
indicator equipment to accumulate information of a thin projected section 
of a specimen. Every attribute identification manner of an object is manual, 
though the image processing algorithm system has been testified as an image 
enhancer to facilitate better readability. The approach of X-ray tomography 
has additionally been searched for the measurement of the specific chemical 
composition of agricultural products.40 
Initially, X-ray CT research studies were aimed to evaluate mellowness 
and ripeness-associated parameters of the fruit,76 but a decent relationship was 
only observed between X-ray absorption and moisture content, or density as 
a derivation therefrom. Also, effective applications of X-ray CT can inscribe 
the detection of interior damages.59 Lammertyn et al.42,43 have used X-ray 
tomography to explore significant growth of core disruption defects in pears, 
perceiving both cavity formation and browning of tissue at high-resolution 
power. Hansen et al.32 have observed that apples and cherries were able to 
identify codling moth causing feeding tunnels with the help of X-ray CT. 
Ogawa et al.63 detected particular nonmetallic substances around various 
liquids and food materials via processing of medical X-ray CT. In this study, 
authors evaluated the detection constraints for extraneous substances; and 
inferred the size of external materials was lesser than the physical resolution 
of the X-ray CT scanner, where tiny fragments might be recognized as extra 
particles but were not able to properly predict the characteristics of the 
materials. 
Donis-Gonzalez et al.26 used a CT at the initial stage from the inline 
sorting system to checkout defected chestnuts with holes and spoiled tissues. 
Moreover, the development must be based on the improvement in hardware 
system for better rebuilding of image, and picture processing models to 
attain appropriate, quick, and reasonable inline CT operations for quality 
appraisal25 of goods. Lammertyn et al.42 applied X-ray CT system to differ￾entiate among wholesome and affected brownish segment of pears. Authors Nondestructive Methods for Quality Assessment of Fruits 275 
observed that the most despicable pixel intensity value for wholesome tissue 
was more powerful than the highest pixel intensity value of the brown tissue; 
and they stated that one threshold power was adequate to distinct both types 
of tissues. 
Lim and Barigou47 studied the applications of CT as a nondestructive 
system to assess the quality parameters of agricultural products by defining 
images, visualization, and examination of the 3D cellular microstructure 
by various CT scans. Ogawa et al.63 mentioned that food substances own 
different CT numbers depending on the food type because of their inhomo￾geneity; when the CT value of extraneous substances fell inside the range 
than that particle was not noticeable even after possessing a size greater as 
compared to the physical interpretation of the X-ray CT scanner. 
Barcelon et al.8
 studied CT processing of peaches and developed a 
histogram of the peach image, which demonstrated the rate of the CT value 
of peach slice under observation, where histogram depicting a fresh peach 
possessed lower attenuation frequency ranging from −300 to −1000 CT 
numbers. In contrast, a significant increase in attenuation rate of mentioned 
CT number range was observed in peaches under 2 weeks of ripening phase. 
This assured the drier region and existence of voids that were perhaps 
occurred due to moisture loss toward the peripheral layer of the fruit. Several 
researchers have further established the correlation between physicochemical 
contents and CT numbers. 
Barcelon et al.7,8 applied the X-ray CT method to examine the interior 
variations related to the maturation stages of mangoes. They appraised 
mangoes on various parameters such as X-ray penetration, moisture 
measurement, density, pH, and acidity values. The authors stated that the 
X-ray CT image displayed noticeable characteristics of the interior structural 
variations among ripened and fresh mangoes.40 
11.5 MEASUREMENT OF EXTERIOR AND INTERIOR QUALITY 
PARAMETERS OF FAV DURING STORAGE 
Excellence can be determined by the assessment of exterior and interior 
quality attributes of fresh agricultural commodities. Whereas the nondestruc￾tive techniques signify a crucial function to check the specific quality as well 
as safety of food material optimize postharvest processes by eliminating inter￾product variability; the exterior quality parameters of FAV (such as texture, 
shape, measurements) are very crucial in terms of acceptance by consumers, 
as well as also indirectly influence the postharvesting processing and storage 276 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
operation. Evaluation of the interior quality attributes of fresh farming goods 
focuses on total carotenoids, total phenolic content, pH, reducing sugars, 
total sugars, gas transmission rates, water repellence, permeability, TSS, 
moisture, nutritional composition, and other defects/damages. 
Hernandez-Sanchez et al.35 observed that it is essential to develop quality 
and safe product after processing, as it directly affects the postharvesting 
processing and the shelf-life of FAV. 
Measurement of firmness is one of the most common practices to check 
the degree of ripeness and maturity, and to know the best time for harvesting, 
transportation, marketing, and consumption.15 Riped fruits are delicate and 
susceptible to microbial decay, physiological deterioration, and mechanical 
damage; and ultrasonic13 and electromagnetic4,49 techniques are commonly 
applied to evaluate these parameters. 
Shumin et al.72 used X-ray and machine scan to observe the CT value 
of apples dropped from various heights. They found the destructive apples 
to possess a decrease in CT estimation with an increase in shelf-life. NIR 
spectroscopy must utilized effectively to evaluate the soluble solids from 
numerous fruits, for example, kiwifruit,55 mandarin,37 apple,44 peach,73 cherry49 
and melon and pineapple.29 The application of hyperspectral imaging was 
evaluated in fresh FAV to inspect defects in cherries,30 bitter pit, and bruises in 
apples.60,80 However, MRI has huge potential for online processing operations, 
such as: sorting, grading or quality assessment of fresh agricultural produce.67 
However, more research is needed to exploit these techniques for the better￾ment of the postharvest processing and storage systems to improve the quality 
and safety of agricultural products by reducing postharvesting losses. 
11.6 FUTURE PERSPECTIVES AND CHALLENGES 
We must analyze the current scenario of the several nondestructive imaging 
technologies to evaluate food quality and safety aspects. In previous 
decades, various nondestructive imaging methods were evolved and have 
become appreciated tools for the investigation of quality and assurance 
of food. However, these present trends designate significant utilization of 
nondestructive methods to regulate production-cost and product quality and 
safety in several aspects. In this chapter, the authors discussed some technical 
challenges and future scope for these technologies in the food industries. 
Primarily, nondestructive techniques are capable of online application in 
the food sector. However, many of these methods are in their initial stage 
due to high initial equipment cost. Therefore, numerous studies have been Nondestructive Methods for Quality Assessment of Fruits 277 
focused to develop economical, low-cost, and quick processing equipment 
to attain of logical outcomes. The principal focus is particularly on the 
device systems (i.e., cheaper and fast) and automation of the process for 
rapid detection of huge amounts of products successfully. Although to meet 
other essential requirements (such as overcome the food safety challenges, 
meet the consumer expectations, and improved equipment performance), all 
these approaches would reduce the complications in these practices. Besides, 
improvement in algorithms processing speed and improvement in image 
processing features is necessary to acquire real-time-based results. Several 
techniques, for example, soft X-ray technique, MRI, and NMR are yet under 
their experiment phases for fruit analysis, which may be considered on 
a huge level for quality detection of fruit and vegetable industries in the 
upcoming future; and therefore further efforts in investigation and growth in 
these methods are the demand of an era. 
11.7 SUMMARY 
The optical imaging, spectroscopic methods, X-ray computer tomog￾raphy, etc., are being used for the quality assessment of fresh agricultural 
commodities, such as FAVs. These techniques provide real-time, online, 
in-field information and precise, accurate, inexpensive, rapid, reproducible 
measuring method to achieve the correct classification of a food material. 
Nondestructive methods are applied to assess both external and internal 
quality attributes, such as shape, size, color, texture, degree of ripeness, firm￾ness, maturity, presence of any defect, etc. The detection of interior quality 
characteristics critically relies on the accuracy of an instrument to imitate the 
perception of humans. 
KEYWORDS 
• color measurement system 
food quality 
NMR 
shelf-life 
X-ray tomography 
• 
• 
• 
•  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
278 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
REFERENCES 
1. Abasi, S.; Minaei, S.; Jamshidi, B.; Fathi, D. Dedicated Non-Destructive Devices for 
Food Quality Measurement: A Review. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2018, 78, 197–205. 
2. Aguilera, J. M.; Stanley, D. W., Eds. Microstructural Principles of Food Processing and 
Engineering, 2nd ed.; Springer Science and Business Media: Gaithersburg, MD, 1999; 
p 432. 
3. Amodio, M. L.; Chaudhry, M. M. A.; Colelli, G. The Use of Non-Destructive Techniques 
to Assess the Nutritional Content of Fruits and Vegetables. In: Fruit and Vegetable 
Phytochemicals; Yahia, E. M., Ed.; John Wiley and Sons, Ltd: New York, 2017; pp 
763–780. 
4. Arendse, E.; Fawole, O. A.; Magwaza, L. S.; Opara, U. L. Non-Destructive Prediction 
of Internal and External Quality Attributes of Fruit with Thick Rind: A Review. J. Food 
Eng. 2018, 217, 11–23. 
5. Bai, W.; Yoshimura, N.; Takayanagi, M. Quantitative Analysis of Ingredients of 
Blueberry Fruits by Near Infrared Spectroscopy. J. Near Infrared Spectrosc. 2014, 22, 
357–365. 
6. Ballerini, L.; Hogberg, A.; Borgefors, G.; Bylund, A. C.; Lindgard, A.; Lundstrom, K.; 
Rakotonirainy, O.; Soussi, B. Segmentation Technique to Determine Fat Content in 
NMR Images of Beef Meat. IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 2002, 49, 195–199. 
7. Barcelon, E. G.; Tojo, S.; Watanabe, K. Nondestructive Ripening Assessment of Mango 
Using an X-Ray Computed Tomography. Agric. Eng. J. 2000, 9, 73–80. 
8. Barcelon, E. G.; Tojo, S.; Watanabe, K. X-Ray Computed Tomography for Internal 
Quality Evaluation of Peaches. J. Agric. Eng. Res. 1999, 73, 323–330. 
9. Bizzani, M.; Flores, D. W. M.; Colnago, L. A.; Ferreira, M. D. Non-Invasive 
Spectroscopic Methods to Estimate Orange Firmness, Peel Thickness, and Total Pectin 
Content. Microchem. J. 2017, 133, 168–174. 
10. Brecht, J. K.; Shewfelt, R. L.; Garner, J. C.; Tollner, E. W. Using X-Ray-Computed 
Tomography to Nondestructively Determine Maturity of Green Tomatoes. HortScience 
1991, 26, 45–47. 
11. Butz, P., Hofmann, C.; Tauscher, B. Recent Developments in Noninvasive Techniques for 
Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Internal Quality Analysis. J. Food Sci. 2005, 70, R131–R141. 
12. Cakmak, H. Assessment of Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Quality with Non-Destructive 
Methods. In Food Quality and Shelf-life; Galanakis, C. M., Ed.; Apple Academic Press: 
London, 2019; pp 303–331. 
13. Cao, S.; Hu, Z.; Pang, B.; Wang, H.; Xie, H.; Wu, F. Effect of Ultrasound Treatment on 
Fruit Decay and Quality Maintenance in Strawberry After Harvest. Food Control 2010, 
21, 529–532. 
14. Casasent, D. A.; Sipe, M. A.; Schatzki, T. F.; Keagy, P. M.; Lee, L. C. Neural Net 
Classification of X-Ray Pistachio Nut Data. LWT-Food Sci. Technol. 1998, 31, 122–128. 
15. Chauhan, O. P.; Lakshmi, S.; Pandey, A. K.; Ravi, N.; Gopalan, N.; Sharma R. K. 
Non-Destructive Quality Monitoring of Fresh Fruits and Vegetables. Defense Life Sci. 
J. 2017, 20, 103–110. 
16. Chen, P.; McCarthy, M. J.; Kauten, R. NMR for Internal Quality Evaluation of Fruits 
and Vegetables. Trans. ASABE 1989, 32, 1747–1753. 
17. Chen, P.; Sun, Z. A Review of Non-Destructive Methods for Quality Evaluation and 
Sorting of Agricultural Products. J. Agric. Eng. Res. 1991, 49, 85–98.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nondestructive Methods for Quality Assessment of Fruits 279 
18. Chen, Q.; Zhang, C.; Zhao, J.; Ouyang, Q. Recent Advances in Emerging Imaging 
Techniques for Non-Destructive Detection of Food Quality and Safety. TrAC: Trends 
Analy. Chem. 2013, 52, 261–274. 
19. Cho, B. K.; Chayaprasert, W.; Stroshine, R. L. Effects of Internal Browning and 
Watercore on Low Field (5.4 MHz) Proton Magnetic Resonance Measurements of T2 
Values of Whole Apples. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 2008, 47, 81–89. 
20. Clark, C. J.; Hockings, P. D.; Joyce, D. C.; Mazucco, R. A. Application of Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging to Pre- and Post-Harvest Studies of Fruits and Vegetables. 
Postharvest Biol. Technol. 1997, 11, 1–21. 
21. Cristiane de Queiroz, O.; Rubemar, S. F.; Estrada, J. Digital Image Processing Applied 
to Inspection of Internal Disorders in Mangoes CV Tommy Atkins. Unpublished Paper 
at International Nuclear Atlantic Conference (INAC) 2005 Santos, SP, Brazil, August 
28 to September 2, 2005, 2005; p 8. 
22. Danieli, E.; Berdel, K.; Perlo, J.; Michaeli, W.; Masberg, U.; Blumich, B.; Casanova, F. 
Determining Object Boundaries from MR Images with Sub-Pixel Resolution: Towards 
In-Line Inspection with a Mobile Tomograph. J. Magnet. Resonance 2010, 207, 53–58. 
23. Danieli, E.; Mauler, J.; Perlo, J.; Blümich, B.; Casanova, F. Mobile Sensor for High 
Resolution NMR Spectroscopy and Imaging. J. Magnetic Resonance 2009, 198, 80–87. 
24. Defraeye, T.; Lehmann, V.; Gross, D.; Holat, C.; Herremans, E.; Verboven, P.; Verlinden, 
B. E.; Nicolai, B. M. Application of MRI for Tissue Characterization of Apple. 
Postharvest Biol. Technol. 2013, 75, 96–105. 
25. Donis-Gonzalez, I. R.; Guyer, D. E.; Pease, A. Application of Response Surface 
Methodology to Systematically Optimize Image Quality in Computer Tomography: A 
Case Study Using Fresh Chestnuts. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2012, 87, 94–107. 
26. Donis-Gonzalez, I. R.; Guyer, D. E.; Pease, A.; Fulbright, D. W. Relation of 
Computerized Tomography Hounsfield Unit Measurements and Internal Components 
of Fresh Chestnuts. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 2012, 87, 74–82. 
27. El-Mesery, H. S.; Mao, H.; Abomohra, A. E. F. Applications of Non-Destructive 
Technologies for Agricultural and Food Products Quality Inspection. Sensors 2019, 19, 
846. 
28. Erkmen, O.; Bozoglu, T. F. Spoilage of Vegetables and Fruits. In Food Microbology 
Principles and Practice; Erkmen, O., Bozoglu, T. F., Eds.; John Wiley and Sons, Ltd.: 
West Sussex, U. K., 2016; pp 337–363. 
29. Guthrie, J. A.; Walsh, K. B. Non-Invasive Assessment of Pineapple and Mango Fruit 
Quality Using Near Infra-Red Spectroscopy. Aust. J. Exp. Agric. 1997, 37, 253–263. 
30. Guyer, D.; Yang, X. K. Use of Genetic Artificial Neural Networks and Spectral Imaging 
for Defect Detection on Cherries. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2000, 29, 179–194. 
31. Hall, L. D.; Evans, S. D.; Nott, K. P. Measurement of Textural Changes of Food by MRI 
Relaxometry. Magnet. Resonance Imag. 1998, 16, 485–492. 
32. Hansen, J. D.; Schlaman, D. W.; Haff, R. P.; Yee W. L. Potential Postharvest Use of 
Radiography to Detect Internal Pests in Deciduous Tree Fruits. J. Entomol. Sci. 2005, 
40, 255–262. 
33. Hernández-Sánchez, N.; Barreiro, P.; Ruiz-Altisent, M.; Ruiz-Cabello, J.; Fernandez￾Valle, M. E. Detection of Freeze Injury in Oranges by Magnetic Resonance Imaging of 
Moving Samples. Appl. Magnet Resonance 2004, 26, 431–445. 
34. Hernández-Sánchez, N.; Hills, B. P.; Barreiro, P.; Marigheto, N. An NMR Study on 
Internal Browning in Pears. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 2007, 44, 260–270.  
 
 
 
 
 
280 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
35. Hernandez-Sanchez, N.; Moreda, G. P.; Herrero-Langreo, A.; Melado-Herreros, A. 
Assessment of Internal and External Quality of Fruits and Vegetables. In Imaging 
Technologies and Data processing for Food Engineers: Food Engineering Series; 
Sozer, N., Ed.; Springer: Switzerland, 2016; pp 269–309. 
36. Hills, B. P. Applications of Low-Field NMR to Food Science. In Annual Reports on 
NMR Spectroscopy; Webb, G. A., Ed.; Academic Press: Norwich, 2006; pp 177–230. 
37. Kawano, S.; Fujiwara, T.; Iwamoto, M. Nondestructive Determination of Sugar Content 
in Satsuma Mandarin Using Near-Infrared (NIR) Transmittance. J. Japanese Soc. Hort. 
Sci. 1993, 62, 465–470. 
38. Keagy, P. M.; Parvin, B.; Schatzki, T. F. Machine Recognition of Navel Orange Worm 
Damage in X-Ray Images of Pistachio Nuts. LWT-Food Sci. Technol. 1996, 29, 140–145. 
39. Kirtil, E.; Oztop, M. H. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Relaxometry and Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging and Applications in Food Science and Processing. Food Eng. Rev. 
2016, 8, 1–22. 
40. Kotwaliwale, N.; Singh, K.; Kalne, A.; Jha, S. N.; Seth, N.; Kar, A. X-Ray Imaging 
Methods for Internal Quality Evaluation of Agricultural Produce. J. Food Sci. Technol. 
2014, 51, 1–15. 
41. Kuperman, V., Ed., Magnetic Resonance Imaging: Physical Principles and Applications, 
3rd ed.; Academic Press: San Diego, 2000; p 182. 
42. Lammertyn, J, Dresselaers, T.; Van-Hecke, P.; Jancsók, P.; Wevers, M.; Nicolai, B. M. 
Analysis of the Time Course of Core Breakdown in pears by Means of MRI and X-Ray 
CT. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 2003, 29, 19–28. 
43. Lammertyn, J.; Dresselaers, T.; Van-Hecke, P.; Jancsók, P.; Wevers, M.; Nicolai, B. M. 
MRI and X-Ray CT Study of Spatial Distribution of Core Breakdown in Pears. Magnet. 
Resonance Imag. 2003, 21, 805–815. 
44. Lammertyn, J.; Nicolai, B.; Ooms, K.; DeSmedt, V.; De Baerdemaeker, J. Non-Destructive 
Measurement of Acidity, Soluble Solids, and Firmness of Jonagold Apples Using NIR 
Spectroscopy. Trans. ASAE, 1998, 41, 1089–1094. 
45. Leitzmaan, C. Food Quality: Definition and Holistic View. In Safeguarding Food 
Quality; Sommer, H., Petersen B., Wittke P. V., Eds.; Springer: Berlin- Heidelberg, 
1993; pp 3–15. 
46. Létal, J.; Jirák, D.; Suderlová, L.; Hájek, M. MRI Texture Analysis of MR Images of 
Apples During Ripening and Storage. LWT-Food Sci. Technol. 2003, 36, 719–727. 
47. Lim, K. S.; Barigou, M. X-Ray Micro-Computed Tomography of Cellular Food 
Products. Food Res. Int. 2004, 37, 1001–1012. 
48. Lorente, D.; Blasco, J.; Serrano, A. J.; Soria-Olivas, E.; Aleixos, N.; Gomez-Sanchis, J. 
Comparison of ROC Feature Selection Method for Detection of Decay in Citrus Fruit 
Using Hyperspectral Images. Food Bioprocess Technol. 2012, 6, 3613–3619. 
49. Lu, Y.; Lu, R. Non-Destructive Defect Detection of Apples by Spectroscopic and 
Imaging Technologies: A Review. Trans. ASABE 2017, 60, 1765–1790. 
50. Mariette, F. Relaxation RMN: un couplage indispensable pour l’etude des produits 
alimentaires (Relaxation RMN: An Essential Coupling for the Study of Food Products). 
Comptes Rendus Chimie (Chem. Rep.) 2004, 7, 221–232. 
51. Mariette, F.; Collewet, G.; Davenel, A.; Lucas, T.; Musse, M. Quantitative MRI in Food 
Science and Food Engineering. eMag Res. 2012, 1, 205–214. 
52. Marigheto, N.; Venturi, L.; Hills, B. Two-Dimensional NMR Relaxation Studies of 
Apple Quality. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 2008, 48, 331–340.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nondestructive Methods for Quality Assessment of Fruits 281 
53. McCarthy, M. J., Ed. Magnetic Resonance Imaging in Foods; Springer: New York, 
2012; p 110. 
54. McCarthy, M. J.; Zion, B.; Chen, P.; Ablett, S.; Darke, A. H.; Lillford, P. J. Diamagnetic 
Susceptibility Changes in Apple Tissue After Bruising. J. Sci. Food Agric. 1995, 67, 
13–20. 
55. McGlone, V. A.; Kawano, S. Firmness, Dry-Matter and Soluble-Solids Assessment of 
Postharvest Kiwifruit by NIR Spectroscopy. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 1998, 13, 131–141. 
56. Milczarek, R. R.; McCarthy, M. J. Low-Field MR Sensors for Fruit Inspection. In 
Magnetic Resonance Microscopy, Spatially Resolved NMR Techniques and Applications; 
Codd, S., Seymour, J., Eds.; Wiley-VCH: Weinheim-Germany, 2009; pp 289–299. 
57. Naderi-Boldaji, M.; Fazeliyan-Dehkordi, M.; Ahmad, M. S.; Ghasemi-Varnamkhasti, 
M. Dielectric Power Spectroscopy as a Potential Technique for the Non-Destructive 
Measurement of Sugar Concentration in Sugarcane. Biosyst. Eng. 2015, 140, 1–10. 
58. Neethirajan, S.; Jayas, D. S.; Karunakaran, C. Dual Energy X-Ray Image Analysis for 
Classifying Vitreousness in Durum Wheat. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 2007, 45, 381–384. 
59. Nicolaï, B. M.; Defraeye, T.; De-Ketelaere, B.; Herremans, E.; Hertog, M. L.; Saeys, W.; 
Torricelli, A.; Vandendriessche, T.; Verboven, P. Nondestructive Measurement of Fruit 
and Vegetable Quality. Annu. Rev. Food Sci. Technol. 2014, 5, 285–312. 
60. Nicolaï, B. M.; Lotze, E.; Peirs, A.; Scheerlinck, N.; Theron, K. I. Non-Destructive 
Measurement of Bitter Pit in Apple Fruit Using NIR Hyperspectral Imaging. Postharvest 
Biol. Technol. 2006, 40, 1–6. 
61. Njorje, J. B.; Ninomiya, K.; Kondo, N.; Toita, H. Automated Fruit Grading System Using 
Image Processing. 2002 Proc. 41st SICE Annu. Conf. Osaka–Japan, 2002, 2, 1346–1351. 
62. Nylund, R. E.; Lutz, J. M. Separation of Hollow Heart Potato Tubers by Means of Size 
Grading, Specific Gravity, and X-Ray Examination. Am. Potato J. 1950, 27, 214–222. 
63. Ogawa, Y.; Morita, K.; Tanaka, S.; Setoguchi, M.; Thai, C. N. Application of X-ray CT 
for Detection of Physical Foreign Materials in Foods. Trans. ASAE 1998, 41, 157–162. 
64. Okochi, T.; Hoshino, Y.; Fujii, H.; Mitsutani, T. Non-Destructive Measurements for 
Japanese Oak and Japanese Beech Using Micro-Focus X-Ray Computed Tomography. 
Dendro Cronologia (Tree Chronol.), 2007, 24, 155–164. 
65. Patel, K. K.; Khan, M. A.; Kar, A. Recent Developments in Applications of MRI 
Techniques for Foods and Agricultural Produce—An Overview. J. Food Sci. Technol. 
2015, 52, 1–26. 
66. Reyes, M. U.; Paull, R. E.; Gautz, L. D.; Armstrong, J. W.; Follett, P. A. Non-Destructive 
Inspection of Mango (Mangifera indica L.) Fruit with Soft X-Ray Imaging. Acta Hort. 
2000, 509, 787–792. 
67. Ruiz-Altisent, M.; Ruiz-Garcia, L.; Moreda, G. P.; Renfu, L.; Hernandez-Sanchez, 
N, Correa, E. C.; Diezma, B.; Ramos, J. G. Sensors for Product Characterization and 
Quality of Specialty Crops: Review. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2010, 74, 176–194. 
68. Saito, K.; Miki, T.; Hayashi, S.; Kajikawa, H.; Shimada, M.; kawate, Y.; Nishizawa, 
T.; Ikegaya, D.; Kimura, N.; Takabatake, K.; Sugiura, N.; Suzuki, M. Application of 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging to Non-Destructive Void Detection in Watermelon. 
Cryogenics 1996, 36, 1027–1031. 
69. Salvo, L.; Cloetens, P.; Maire, E.; Zabler, S.; Blandin, J. J.; Buffere, J. Y.; Ludwig, 
W.; Boller, E.; Bellet, D.; Josserond, C. X-Ray Micro-Tomography an Attractive 
Characterization Technique in Materials Science. Nucl. Instr. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. 
B: Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms 2003, 200, 273–286.  
 
 
 
 
 
282 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
70. Shah, S. A. S; Zeb, A.; Qureshi, W. S.; Arslan M.; Malik A. U.; Alasmary, W.; Alanazi, 
E. Towards Fruit Maturity Estimation Using NIR Spectroscopy. Infrared Phys. Technol. 
2020, 111, 103479. 
71. Shen, F.; Zhang, B.; Cao, C.; Jiang, X. On-Line Discrimination of Storage Shelf-Life 
and Prediction of Post-Harvest Quality for Strawberry Fruit by Visible and Near Infrared 
Spectroscopy. J. Food Process Eng. 2018, 41, E-article 12866, pp 7. 
72. Shumin, X.; Yong, Y.; Jun, W. Study on CT Value of Damaged Apple. Trans. Chinese 
Soc. Agric. Mach. 2006, 37, 83–85. 
73. Slaughter, S. Non-Destructive Determination of Internal Quality in Peaches and 
Nectarines. Trans. ASAE 1995, 38, 617–623. 
74. Smith, N. B.; Webb, A., Eds. Introduction to Medical Imaging: Physics, Engineering 
and Clinical Applications; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 2010; p 296. 
75. Sonego, L.; Ben-Arie, R.; Raynal, J.; Pech, J. C. Biochemical and Physical Evaluation 
of Textural Characteristics of Nectarines Exhibiting Woolly Breakdown: NMR Imaging, 
X-Ray Computed Tomography and Pectin Composition. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 
1995, 5, 187–198. 
76. Tollner, E. W., Hung, Y. C., Upchurch, B. L., Prussia, S. E. Relating X-ray absorption 
to density and water content in apples. Transactions of the ASAE, 1992, 35, 1921–1928. 
77. Tollner, E. W.; Ramseur, E. L.; Murphy, C. Techniques and Approaches for Documenting 
Plant Root Development with X-Ray Computed Tomography. Tomography Soil‐Water‐
Root Processes 1994, 36, 115–133. 
78. VanAs, H.; van Duynhoven, J. MRI of Plants and Foods. J. Magnetic Resonance 2013, 
229, 25–34. 
79. Veena, T.; Chidanand, D. V.; Alagusundaram, K. Soft X-Ray Imaging System for 
Improving Quality Classification of Fruits and Vegetables: A Review. Int. J. Agric. Sci. 
Res. 2015, 5, 25–36. 
80. Xing, J.; Saeys, W.; De Baerdemaeker, J. Combination of Chemometric Tools and Image 
Processing for Bruise Detection on Apples. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2007, 56, 1–13. 
81. Yacob, Y.; Ahmad, H.; Saad, P.; Aliana, R.; Raof, A.; Ismail, S. A Comparison Between 
X-ray and MRI in Postharvest Non-Destructive Detection Method. Unpublished Paper 
at International Conference on Information Technology and Multimedia at UNITEN 
(ICIMU’05), Malaysia; 2005; p 9. 
82. Yang, E. C.; Yang, M. M.; Liao, L. H.; Wu, W. Y.; Chen, T. W.; Chen, T. M.; Lin. T.T.; 
Jiang, J. A. Non-Destructive Quarantine Technique-Potential Application of Using X-Ray 
Images to Detect Early Infestations Caused by Oriental Fruit Fly (Bactroceradorsalis) 
in Fruit. Formosan Entomol. 2006, 26, 171–186. Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing: Methods and Strategies. Megh R. Goyal, & 
Faizan Ahmad (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 12 
MECHANICAL, OPTICAL, AND 
ACOUSTIC METHODS: NONINVASIVE 
QUALITY ASSESSMENT OF FRUITS 
AND VEGETABLES 
TEJASWI BOYAPATI, PAYEL GHOSH, and SANDEEP SINGH RANA 
ABSTRACT 
Fresh fruits and vegetables (FAVs) provide essential micronutrients in 
developed and developing countries. Most of the FAVs are seasonal and 
perishable in nature. A huge loss is being observed for this food sector 
irrespective of the production. FAVs are mainly deteriorated due to biological 
and mechanical damages. For consumer safety and quality assurance, several 
nondestructive techniques have gained popularity to check the quality of the 
fresh FAV, such as mechanical methods (e-nose, e-tongue), optical methods 
(image analysis, thermal imaging), and dynamic methods (acoustic). 
12.1 INTRODUCTION 
These days, the safety and quality of agro-food products are an increasing 
concern among the consumers.1 The 90% of total horticultural production 
accounts for fresh fruits and vegetable (FAV).2
 In order to determine the 
consistency and sort of agricultural produce and products, researchers 
have developed several methods. However, for agricultural products, 
there is no established quality standard and various researchers interpret 
quality differently.3 The quality concept represents high quality, a superior  
284 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
degree. The concept of quality can be defined as the acceptance of product 
characteristics by the user.4 
Agricultural institutions are looking for advanced methods for detecting 
defects, freshness, grading based on color, shape, scale, etc., to understand 
the quality and in turn create a better value-added product from the product 
for commercializing the fresh produce.2 The consistency of the commodity 
depends on chemical qualities, food makeup, external deficiencies, or 
physical parameters. There is a higher market value for delicious and 
nutritious FAV.2 
Products are tested to determine quality on the basis of their physi￾cochemical properties.2 The physical properties of the product are used 
to determine the consistency of the product. It is also important that the 
consistency of FAVs should be measured using nondestructive techniques, 
and it is dependent on physical properties.4 
This has contributed to a need for production and research in product 
quality determination after harvest.1 A brief definition is referred to as nonde￾structive monitoring for the qualitative and quantitative steps of agricultural 
products and refined foods that have been tested without any process injury, 
including physical, chemical, temperature, and mechanical damage.1 
Nondestructive measurement devices are commonly used in engineering 
study, which include the monitoring of raw materials at the time of receipt 
in the factory, the production of new goods and the shelf-life testing of the 
product sample, the rapid examination of intermediate or final items in the 
field of quality management or quality control.4 
The understanding of postharvest loss through nondestructive assessment 
is more important in reducing postharvest losses for a food technologist.1 
Advances in science, infrastructure, computer systems, and their deploy￾ment are witnessing a decline in postharvest losses and in new approaches 
for nondestructive identification of goods. The use of these strategies for 
agriculture and food processing is also on the rise.4 
Nondestructive approaches should have no physical or chemical effects 
on the product and the product that has undergone this analysis should satisfy 
the consumer.1
 Compared to these advanced technologies, the conventional 
methods for product analysis were too costly, ineffective, complex, time￾consuming, and stressful. These are not readily measured by the human eye 
and cannot be detected with regard to consistency detection factors, such 
as flavor, chemical aspects, nutrient number, cloth, and physical injuries by 
the narrow band that raises the electromagnetic spectrum errors.1
 Several 
nondestructive techniques are indicated in Table 12.1. Mechanical, Optical, and Acoustic Methods 285 
TABLE 12.1 Nondestructive Techniques for Determining Consistency Characteristics of 
Agriculture and Food Products. 
Technique Measurable components References 
CT and X-ray Maturity, damaged internal tissues, core depth, and volume [1] 
imaging 
E-nose Smell or aroma [1] 
E-tongue Acidity/ sour, sweet, salt, umami, bitterness [1] 
Sound waves Maturity, damaged internal tissues, core depth, texture, [2] 
firmness, and volume 
Ultrasound and Stiffness, viscosity and elasticity, cavity, density, sweetness [1] 
Sound 
Vibrational Firmness, viscosity and elasticity, the degree of maturity [1] 
excitation 
This chapter highlights the basic principle of mechanical (E-nose, 
E-tongue), optical (image analysis, thermal imaging (TI)), and dynamic 
methods (acoustic) methods. This chapter also explores the application 
of these methods to identify the quality of fresh FAV in a nondestructive 
way. 
12.2 QUALITY ANALYSIS OF FAV 
Consistency testing of fruit and vegetables using an image processing 
technique requires five steps, namely, imaging preprocessing, image 
segmentation, extraction, and attribute classification.5 
There are plenty of important vitamins and vegetables in FAV. The 
economic value of foods extracted from plants depends on their value. The 
quality covers a variety of aspects, including exterior appearance, nutritional 
aspects, health-related compound presence, safety, and protection.6 
Quality-related characteristics must be measured to evaluate and vali￾date accuracy. Sensory characteristics, nutrient values, chemical elements, 
mechanical properties, physical properties, and defects include product 
consistency. Instrumental tests are often preferred to sensory measures in 
analysis and market scenarios because they minimize decision dispari￾ties between persons and may give researchers, industry, and consumers 
a common language. Basically, electromagnetic properties (often optical) 
refer to shape, texture mechanical, and flavor properties (taste and aroma). 286 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
Instruments can bring human decisions in direct contact with the way in 
which people evaluate and mathematically integrate the substance to 
understand the fundamental characteristics. Quality may only be assessed 
by humans but measures that quantify quality are important for research and 
evaluation.7 
12.3 MECHANICAL NONDESTRUCTIVE METHODS FOR 
ANALYSIS 
12.3.1 E-NOSE 
The E-nose method is used to calculate characteristics, such as sugar, acidity, 
etc.1
 It is an electronic sensing system to detect flavors and odors. This 
was developed to detect and identify odor, vapors, and gases.4
 This helps 
to activate the human olfactory system to work and consists of a chemical 
sensor and an olfactory system. 
12.3.1.1 WORKING PRINCIPLE 
An electronic nose system includes a detector, a database management unit, 
a digital pattern recognition, and an index library software.2 
The distribution of samples makes it possible to generate the headspace 
of a sample (volatile compounds), which is the fraction to be analyzed. This 
headspace is then pumped into the nose detection system by the computer. 
To guarantee constant operating conditions.8
 the sample delivery system 
is important. The “reactive” component of the instrument is the detection 
device, which consists of a sensor collection. The sensors respond when are 
in contact with volatile compounds, which implies that they experience a 
change in electrical properties.8
 In most E-noses, each sensor is sensitive to 
various chemical substances. To assess the maturity of the fruit, the storage 
shelf-life, and the freshness prediction, an electronic nose has been used. By 
inducing chemical or physical changes, the sensor detects the components, 
which in turn senses the generated signal. 
E-sensor arrays are known for use in gas sensing. Organic polymers, 
metal oxides, quartz crystal microbalance, and gas chromatography (GC) 
are the sensors in use. GC is often used with mass spectroscopy to detect 
different compounds.2
 along with MS. Mechanical, Optical, and Acoustic Methods 287 
12.3.1.2 APPLICATIONS OF E-NOSE METHOD 
Different industries and R&D laboratories use E-Nose (both in quality 
control laboratories and in In-process and in production departments). This 
involves verifying raw materials consistency, medium- and final-goods, 
batch-wise examination, storage control, contamination detection, spoilage, 
adulteration, meat and meat products freshness, and so on. The identifica￾tion of harmful microbes in foods and many more could also be a potential 
application (Table 12.2). 
TABLE 12.2 E-Nose Applications in Different Agro-Food Produce. 
Fruit/vegetable Details References 
Citrus fruits • Aromatic volatile substances are identified [9] 
Melon • Aromatic compounds, volatile esters, etc., are identified [9] 
Peaches • On the basis of TSS and firmness, freshness is predicted [9] 
Pineapple • Aromatic flavor compounds [11] 
• Shelf-life [12] 
Tomato • Analysis of shelf-life [9] 
• Effects of harvesting and postharvest handling procedures [10] 
12.3.1.3 FUTURE SCOPE 
E-nose method has been used to predict shelf-life, volatile compounds of 
many FAV. There is also a future scope for work on the detection of pesticide 
residues, the postharvest detection of spoilage, and the detection of other 
gasses released during the storage of the product. 
12.3.2 E- TONGUE 
Taste is a vital organoleptic property referring to oral administration accept￾ability.13 The sense of taste comprises of five fundamental tastes: sour, salt 
content/salt, umami, bitter, and sweet.14 Human panel members are the key 
tool for assessing the flavor profile of food items and new formulations. 
The use of sensory people on the panel is difficult and controversial due 
to nutrient toxicity or contaminants. E-tongue is a nondestructive technique 
used to measure characteristics, such as sugar and acidity. A taste-sensing 288 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
system is an analytical sensory array capable of detecting specific substances 
using different artificial membranes and electrochemical techniques.13 This 
has been developed for automatic taste and flavor detection. 
According to IUPAC, “An electronic tongue is a multisensory system 
consisting of several low-selective sensors and cross-sensitivity in solution 
to different species and an appropriate pattern recognition and/or multivariate 
calibration method for data processing”.15 To enable olfactory systems to 
work, e-tongue consists of a sensor, a data processing device, a program for 
the detection of digital patterns and a repository. 
12.3.2.1 WORKING PRINCIPLE 
The core elements inside the electronic taste sensing device connected to the 
arm, the sample board, the amplification unit, and the data analysis unit are a 
variety of different sensor types.13 Many of the chemical sensor options reported 
in e-tongue work include voltammetry (rare metal electrodes16), composite 
sensors,17 and polymer conductors,18 potentiometric sensors19 (lipid membrane 
electrodes14 chalcogenide glass electrodes15 and PVC plasticized membrane 
electrodes20). Among all the above is the easiest and most natural calculation. 
Due to their availability, Chalcogenide glass sensors were selected. 
12.3.2.2 APPLICATIONS 
The aim of E-tongue is to be used in R&D to develop new products and detect 
wine spoilage by odors, detect fraud, and adulteration,21 for the analysis of 
flavor, aging in beverages or wine,13 to distinguish between multiple levels 
of hardness in mineral water,22 identifying the spoilage of milk,23 to distin￾guish coffee brands on the basis of their origin,24 and quantify the taste and 
organic substances in food materials13 and much more. E-tongue application 
in different agro-food produce is mentioned in Table 12.3. 
12.3.2.3 FUTURE SCOPE 
The E-tongue can be used for tasting other agricultural products and processed 
foods. This can be applied in the wine industry, for the detection of traces of 
organic substances in foods.13 This reduces the risk of exposure of the human 
panel to contaminants and toxins if present in the product being tastes tested. Mechanical, Optical, and Acoustic Methods 289 
TABLE 12.3 E-Tongue Applications in Different Agro-Food Produce. 
Fruit/vegetable Observations References 
Black tea The acceptance was assessed [14] 
Grapes The degree of fermentation in barrels [21] 
Honeydew The experiment gave a conclusion that on ripening the [19] 
sourness is suppressed. This is sweeter 
Pineapple juice The experiment gave a conclusion that on ripening the [19] 
sourness is suppressed 
Wine The development of off-flavors and odors during aging [21] 
12.4 OPTICAL NONDESTRUCTIVE METHODS FOR ANALYSIS 
An electro-optic technique that uses optical and electronic properties is one of 
the effective and productive methods for estimating the quality and handling 
of agro-food commodities.3 The fruit has different absorption qualities and 
reflective properties under light with different rays because of the variations 
in internal components.4 The fruit’s optical properties are dependent on 
reflection, transmission, absorption, fluorescence, or light scattering.2
 By 
integrating these properties with the optical detection devices, nondestructive 
measurement of fruit content can be achieved.4 
Image analysis is a fairly large spectrum of nondestructive quality 
analysis. Traditional computer vision has been used to provide limited 
information. However, there are currently several imaging systems that can 
be used for detailed quality analysis. Various studies describe the amount 
of contusions and their effect by many criteria, such as postharvesting and 
pre-have variables including variety, state of maturity and temperature, and 
atmospheric storage conditions.25 
There are currently a number of imaging techniques, including biospeckle 
tomography, fluorescence imaging, structural illumination reflectance 
imaging, hyperspectral/multispectral imaging (H/MSI), X-ray imaging 
(XRI), magnetic resonance imaging, and TI.26 Optical imaging techniques 
application in different agro-food produce is given in Table 12.4. 
TABLE 12.4 Application of Optical Imaging Techniques in Different Agro-Food Produce. 
Fruit/vegetable Technology used References 
Apples and pears Temporal history of speckle patterns [28] 
Papaya Light intensity [27] 
Potatoes Bio speckle activity [29] 290 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
Fluorescence imaging is a particular imaging technique that works 
on the principle when any organic body emits particular fluorescence 
excited by electromagnetic radiation.30 Brightness of the images changes 
due to the change in chlorophyll content. The wavelength varies from 
685 to 730 nm.31 
12.4.1 X-RAY TOMOGRAPHY 
The X-ray imagery is based on the rate difference of X-ray penetration 
of multiple tissues.32 We may obtain a grayscale strength picture due 
to the penetration capability difference.32 Using several images taken 
from various angles, a three-dimensional representation of the object 
can be obtained through reconstruction. By using the difference in the 
penetration of X-rays into normal product tissues, known as X-ray 
computed tomography, swelling and physical damage to the product can 
be detected.33 The application of XRI in different agro-food produce is 
given in Table 12.5. 
TABLE 12.5 Application of X-Ray Imaging in Different Agro-Food Produce. 
Fruit/vegetable Remarks References 
Apple Tissues inside the apple were analyzed for bruise detection [37] 
Eggplant Browning or chemical reactions and tissue distribution/ [32] 
porosity is studied 
Pear Browning or chemical reactions and cavities in the fruit [32] 
Pomegranate Physical and chemical properties of fruits are evaluated [36] 
Turnip The evenness of the tissues is studied [32] 
By measuring the bruise volume based on the difference in the penetra￾tion of X-rays,34 CT was used to determine the consistency of FAV. The 
drawbacks of using this X-ray image are that the subject must be rotated 
to achieve the complete image of the product and the imaging must be 
performed from all sides.35 
12.4.2 HYPERSPECTRAL IMAGING/ MULTISPECTRAL IMAGING 
This technique combines both imaging and spectroscopy for noninvasive 
quality analysis of horticultural produce.38 Hyperspectral imaging (HSI) is  
Mechanical, Optical, and Acoustic Methods 291 
being used as a reliable source for analyzing both the internal and external 
characteristics of the produce.39 This system for imaging is based on the 
working principle of spectroscopy.40 
The wavelength typically ranges from 400 to 1000 nm or wider in.40 
However, MSI only includes fixed wavelengths.41 Then photographs of this 
area can be used to process the inspection with main component analysis.41 Key 
components of the hyperspectral imagery system are presented in Figure 12.1. 
FIGURE 12.1 Key components of the hyperspectral imagery system. 
This imaging can be used in apples, pears, and potatoes not only to detect 
wounds but also to inspect insect infestation, fungal infestation, surface area 
residues of pesticide. This imaging system also detects these infections and 
chemical properties, such as TSS, titratable acidity, etc.42 
In HSI, detailed information on the classification and segmentation 
spectral space models is given, including precise and simultaneous study of 
various chemicals and potential for diseases and defects in farm produce.43 
The application of HSI/multispectral imaging in different agro-food produce 
is given in Table 12.6. 
12.4.3 THERMAL IMAGING 
Every material emits the infrared radiation that is measured in the TI, the 
infrared for a particular subject of interest.45 The physical and chemical 
properties are particular to different materials and have differences in 
thermal diffusivities based on which the thermo-grams are generated.49 
Unlike other spectral imaging techniques, this TI does not require any 292 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
external source of light, but, it needs an environment to support prolonged 
heating or cooling of the produce.50 Primary elements of the TI system are 
given in Figure 12.2. 
TABLE 12.6 Application of Hyperspectral Imaging/Multispectral Imaging in Different 
Agro-Food Produce. 
Fruit/vegetable Remarks References 
Apple Bruise detection, soil contamination, and fungal infection [44] 
Kiwi Bruise and insect infestation [46] 
Mangoes Firmness [47] 
Mushrooms Damage detection [46] 
Spinach Bacterial infestation [45] 
Tomatoes Sweetness evaluation [48] 
FIGURE 12.2 Primary components of the thermal imaging system. 
TI is of two types: active thermography and passive thermography.51 The 
difference in the thermal diffusivity is used to differentiate the bruised tissue 
from the healthy tissue of the produce.37 The major advantage of this TI is 
that even the minute defect can be detected and can be used for dark fruits.52 
Furthermore, applications of TI in different agro-food produce are given in 
Table 12.7. Mechanical, Optical, and Acoustic Methods 293 
TABLE 12.7 Application of Thermal Imaging in Different Agro-Food Produce. 
Fruit/vegetable Remarks References 
Apple Temperature of the surface and texture of the tissue [53] 
Guava Assessment of texture, color, and TSS [53] 
Mango Evaluated maturity index [53] 
Palm The maturity and ripening are evaluated [53] 
12.5 DYNAMIC NONINVASIVE METHODS FOR ANALYSIS OF FAV 
12.5.1 ACOUSTIC ANALYSIS 
Acoustic analysis is an intriguing method for determining the consistency of 
the food and fruit. It is a quick, effective, economical, and nondestructive.54 
The device for assessing food consistency and structure diagram is given in 
Figure 12.3. 
FIGURE 12.3 Device for assessing food consistency and structure diagram. 
The implementation of acoustic analyses is simply a dispersion and 
projection of sound waves. Acoustic signals are sent from the transducer to 
the target and then dispersed, scattered, or mirrored from the target.54 Sound 294 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
measurement by food can be calculated destructively and without destruc￾tion (passive and active method). Sound generation, reflection, and other 
phase oscillation techniques are classified as acoustic approaches.55 This is 
a new approach based on the mechanical and acoustic reactions of its pulp, 
and a structure analyzer coupled with an ultrasound instrument is used.56 
During the postharvest season, parts of the process shifts were evaluated for 
the elasticity index and structure indices of two mulberry cultivars.57 
Applications of this method include fruit ripening estimation, processing, 
classification, and separation of agricultural products, where the physical 
properties of the crop are calculated.54,58 Applications of acoustic method in 
different agro-food produce are given in Table 12.8. 
TABLE 12.8 Application of Acoustic in Different Agro-Food Produce. 
Fruit Remarks References 
Apple An acoustically evaluated disintegration index for tissue [59] 
characterization of the true level of damage 
Grapes The textures of the flesh are classified as crisp, noncrystal, or [59] 
medium depending on the energy strength from 10 Hz to 32 kHz 
Mango The best method to evaluate variations during mango ripening is [61] 
its durability with the penetrometer 
Pea Establish a nondestructive strength sensing methodology for [62] 
nonspherical fruit based on acoustic response volume 
Potato A hollow heart in potato has been done to identify (Spunta [60] 
variety) 
12.6 APPLICATIONS OF NONINVASIVE METHODS IN FOOD 
PROCESSING 
a. In the field of reception 
•	 Management of raw materials. 
•	 Eliminates loss of product. 
•	 Increases the consistency of the commodity viewed by the 
customer. 
b. Regulation of the method 
•	 On-line and off-line measurements are possible. 
•	 Standard instrument configuration shall be used in the off-line 
framework. Mechanical, Optical, and Acoustic Methods	 295 
c. Analysis of intermediate and final products 
•	 Screening a large range of samples. 
d. Material production and testing of storage 
•	 Over time, follow the properties of a single product for shelf-life 
extension. 
e. Research studies 
•	 For making any changes in the process of quality control or quality 
analysis. 
12.7 BENEFITS OF NONINVASIVE ANALYSIS 
Sensitivity and selectivity have been increased because human error can 
be reduced to a minimum.63 Low concentrations of toxic substances can be 
easily detected if they are present in the product. As the aromas of fruits 
reflect the nature of the fragrance of the fruit, the quality of the fruit can 
be detected without damaging the product.11 The E-nose can be used in the 
manufacturing industry and by suppliers for quality management.12 
This method is able to carry out multicomponent quantitative analyses 
of the formulated products and can also discriminated between near-liquid 
forms, that is, integral qualitative analysis.64 There is also an important appli￾cation for electronic nose systems to monitor polluted water and air pollu￾tion early in urban and rural areas that can avoid detrimental environmental 
impacts, such as smog formation or elimination.20 These nondestructive 
approaches are potential solutions to time-consuming and costly compu￾tational procedures that require precise and rapid research and it does not 
require skilled staff.20 It is less time-consuming and the requirement of the 
sample is small. 
12.8 FUTURE SCOPE OF NONINVASIVE ANALYSIS 
The goal of this chapter was to study the nondestructive approaches for 
the scientific detection of the quality of agricultural products and foods. 
Compared to other instrumental research and chemical analytical methods, 
the nondestructive detection of food content offers a distinctive advantage. 
Conventional chemical analysis techniques have several drawbacks, such as 
lengthy, complex, and high cost. The conclusions of this study indicate that 
the use of nondestructive approaches is of greater interest to the food industry. 296 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
In the future, the E-tongue method can be used for tasting other agricul￾tural products and processed foods. This can be applied in the wine industry 
for the detection of traces of organic substances in foods.13 This reduces the 
risk of exposure of the human panel to contaminants and toxins, if present in 
the product being tested. 
Through designing more effective and reliable systems (such as vision 
techniques for machines, the future uses nondestructive technology for food 
and farm quality assessment) would improve the estimation of the inner 
quality of fruits. Although the expense of purchasing these instruments is 
currently high, yet it is possible to buy through research funds by numerous 
laboratories and gather them as a single research point for multiple researchers 
in a particular area. It is often done by actively seeking means of designing 
small systems that were equally effective but cost-efficient; therefore, 
conveniently available. In comparison to other contemporary approaches, 
the acoustic approach offers knowledge on the essence of the mechanisms of 
destruction and helps the onset of these phenomena to be observed before the 
full material stress occurs. The advantages of nondestructive acoustic systems 
include fast analysis in the food and agricultural sector. Researchers from 
different disciplines must take part in this since the scientific problems vary 
from science to information technology, food, and farming science. Through 
these joint measures, devices can be made available that are better tailored 
to the identification of food and agricultural items. Most manufacturers are 
currently producing machines for various research areas, but essentially with 
the same system setup. 
12.9 SUMMARY 
This chapter focuses on machinery and the identification of images, the 
technological future of the food and agro-industry. Scale, color, form, texture, 
and defects are the most important consistency attributes of an agricultural 
product. Image processing solutions for authentic, fair, and nondestructive 
tests are used to supplement manual food assessments. The quality inspection 
focused on machines consists of four main steps: detection, classification, 
isolation of components, and classification. It also lowers the human panel’s 
likelihood of exposure to contaminants and toxins. 
The future use of nondestructive technology in food and farm quality 
assessment would improve the evaluation of the internal quality of the fruit 
by designing systems that are more efficient and reliable, such as vision 
techniques for machines. The cooperative efforts should bring in place Mechanical, Optical, and Acoustic Methods 297 
resources that are specifically intended to recognize food and agricultural 
goods. 
KEYWORDS 
• acoustic 
fruits and vegetables 
image analysis 
nondestructive techniques 
quality analysis 
X-ray 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
REFERENCES 
1. Abbott, J. A. Quality Measurement of Fruits and Vegetables. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 
1999, 15, 207–25. 
2. Abdul Aziz, A. H.; Ali, A. Y.; Farook, R.; Adom, A. H.; Ahmad, M. N.; Mahat, N. I. 
Simple Implementation of an Electronic Tongue for Taste Assessments of Food and 
Beverage Products. Sens. Transducers 2011, 132, 136–150. 
3. Aboonajmi M; Faridi H. Non-Destructive Quality Assessment of Agro-Food Products. 
Unpublished Paper Presentation at 3rd Iranian International NDT Conference, Olympic 
Hotel, Tehran, Iran; 21–22 February 2016; pages 9. 
4. Aboonajmi, M.; Jahangiri, M.; Hassan-Beygi, S. R. Review on Application of Acoustic 
Analysis in Quality Evaluation of Agro-Food Products. J. Food Process Preserv. 2015, 
39, 3175–3188. 
5. Adamiak, A.; Zdunek, A.; Kurenda, A.; Rutkowski, K. Application of the Biospeckle 
Method for Monitoring Bull’s Eye Rot Development and Quality Changes of Apples 
Subjected to Various Storage Methods-Preliminary Studies. Sensors 2012, 12, 
3215–3227. 
6. Arendse, E.; Fawole, O. A.; Magwaza, L. S.; Opara, U. L. Non-Destructive Prediction 
of Internal and External Quality Attributes of Fruit with Thick Rind: A review. J Food 
Eng. Elsevier B.V. 2018, 217, 11–23. 
7. Baietto, M.; Wilson, A. D. Electronic-Nose Applications for fruit Identification, Ripeness 
and Quality Grading. Sensors (Switzerland) 2015, 15(1), 899–931. 
8. Bhargava, A.; Bansal, A. FAV Quality Evaluation Using Computer Vision: A review. 
J King Saud Univ-Comput Inf Science; 2018; online;https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jksuci. 
2018.06.002 (accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
9. Chauhan, O. P.; Lakshmi, S.; Pandey, A. K.; Ravi, N.; Gopalan, N.; Sharma, R. K. 
Non-Destructive Quality Monitoring of Fresh FAV. Def. Life Sci. J. 2017, 2, 103–110. 298 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
10. Che, W.; Sun, L.; Zhang, Q.; Tan, W.; Ye, D.; Zhang, D. Pixel Based Bruise Region 
Extraction of Apple Using Vis-NIR Hyperspectral imaging. Comput Electron Agric. 
2018, 146, 12–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2018.01.013 (accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
11. Chen, P.; Sun, Z. A Review of Non-Destructive Methods for Quality Evaluation and 
Sorting of Agricultural Products. J. Agric. Eng. Res. 1991, 49, 85–98. 
12. Chen, Q.; Zhang, C.; Zhao, J.; Ouyang, Q. Recent Advances in Emerging Imaging 
Techniques for Non-Destructive Detection of Food Quality and Safety. TrAC—Trends 
Anal. Chem. 2013, 52, 261–274;http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trac.2013.09.007 (accessed 
Aug 2, 2021). 
13. Chiu, Y. C.; Chou, X. L.; Grift, T. E.; Chen, M. T. Automated Detection of Mechanically 
Induced Bruise Areas in Golden Delicious Apples Using Fluorescence Imagery. Trans. 
ASABE 2015, 58, 215–225. 
14. Costa, F.; Cappellin, L.; Longhi, S.; Guerra, W.; Magnago, P.; Porro, D. Assessment of 
Apple Fruit Texture by a Combined Acoustic-Mechanical Profiling Strategy. Postharvest 
Biol. Technol. 2011, 61, 21–28. 
15. Darras, B. T.; Ryan, M. M.; De Vivo, D. C. Food Texture and Viscosity: Concept and 
Measurement-Preface. New York: Elsevier Science & Technology Books;2015; pages 
421. 
16. Dian, R.; Li, S. Fang, L.; Wei, Q. Multispectral and Hyperspectral Image Fusion with 
Spatial-Spectral Sparse Representation. Inf. Fusion 2019, 49, 262–270; online;https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2018.11.012 (accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
17. Diels, E.; van Dael, M.; Keresztes, J.; Vanmaercke, S.; Verboven, P.; Nicolai, B. Assess
ment Of Bruise Volumes in Apples Using X-Ray Computed Tomography. Postharvest 
BiolTechnol. 2017, 128, 24–32; online;http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.postharvbio.2017.01.013 
(accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
18. Doosti-Irani, O.; Golzarian, M. R.; Aghkhani, M. H.; Sadrnia, H.; Doosti-Irani, M. 
Development of Multiple Regression Model to Estimate the Apple’s Bruise Depth 
Using Thermal Maps. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 2016, 116, 75–79; online;http://dx.doi. 
org/10.1016/j.postharvbio.2015.12.024 (accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
19. Du, Z.; Zeng, X.; Li, X.; Ding, X.; Cao, J.; Jiang, W. Recent Advances in Imaging 
Techniques for Bruise Detection in FAV. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2020, 99, 133–141. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2020.02.024 (accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
20. El Hadi, M. A. M.; Zhang, F. J.; Wu, F. F.; Zhou, C. H.; Tao, J. Advances in Fruit Aroma 
Volatile Research. Molecules 2013, 18, 8200–8229. 
21. El-Mesery, H. S.; Mao, H.; Abomohra, A. E. F. Applications of Non-Destructive 
Technologies for Agricultural and Food Products Quality Inspection. Sensors (Switzerland), 
2019, 19, 1–23. 
22. Elbatawi, I. E. An Acoustic Impact Method to Detect Hollow Heart of Potato Tubers. 
Biosyst. Eng. 2008, 100, 206–213. 
23. Fukunaga, T.; Toko, K.; Mori, S.; Nakabayashi, Y.; Kanda, M. Quantification of Taste of 
Coffee Using Sensor with Global Selectivity. Sens. Mater. 1996, 8, 47–56. 
24. Gao, H.; Zhu, F.; Cai, J. Review of Non-Destructive Detection for Fruit Quality. IFIP 
Adv. Inf. Commun. Technol. 2010, 317, 133–140. 
25. Gardner, J. W. Review of Conventional Electronic Noses and Their Possible Application 
to the Detection of Explosives. Electron. Noses Sens. Detect. Explos. 2004, 13(8), 1–28. 
26. Gowen, A. A.; Tiwari, B. K.; Cullen, P. J.; McDonnell, K.; O’Donnell, C. P. Applications 
of Thermal Imaging in Food Quality and Safety Assessment. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 
2010, 21, 190–200. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2009.12.002 (accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
­Mechanical, Optical, and Acoustic Methods 299 
27. Grimi, N.; Mamouni, F.; Lebovka, N.; Vorobiev, E.; Vaxelaire, J. Acoustic Impulse 
Response in Apple Tissues Treated by Pulsed Electric Field. Biosyst. Eng. 2010, 105, 
266–272. 
28. Haff, R. P.; Toyofuku, N. X-Ray Detection of Defects and Contaminants in the Food 
Industry. Sens. Instrum. Food Qual. Saf. 2008, 2, 262–73. 
29. Hussain, A.; Pu, H.; Sun, D. W. Innovative Non-Destructive Imaging Techniques for 
Ripening and Maturity of Fruits: Review of Recent Applications. Trends Food Sci 
Technol. 2018, 72, 144–152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2017.12.010 (accessed Aug 
2, 2021). 
30. Hussein, Z. Bruise Damage Susceptibility of Pomegranates. Int. J. Fruit Sci. 2020, 20 
(Suppl. 2), online. https://doi.org/10.1080/15538362.2019.1709602 (accessed Feb 20, 
2021). 
31. Latha, R. S.; Lakshmi, P. K. Electronic Tongue: An Analytical Gustatory Tool. J Adv. 
Pharm. Technol. Res. 2012, 3, 3–8. 
32. Lawo, D.; Neifer, T.; Esau, M.; Vonholdt, S.; Stevens, G. From Farms to Fridges: A 
Consumer-Oriented Design Approach to Sustainable Food Traceability. Sustain Prod 
Consum. 2021, 27, 282–297. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2020.11.007 (accessed Aug 
2, 2021). 
33. Li, J.; Chen, L.; Huang, W. Detection of Early Bruises on Peaches (Amygdalus persica) 
Using Hyperspectral Imaging Coupled with Improved Watershed Segmentation 
Algorithm. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 2018, 135, 104–113. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j. 
postharvbio.2017.09.007 (accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
34. Li, J.; Luo, W.; Wang, Z.; Fan, S. Early Detection of Decay on Apples Using 
Hyperspectral Reflectance Imaging Combining Both Principal Component Analysis 
and Improved Watershed Segmentation Method. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 2019, 149, 
235–246. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.postharvbio.2018.12.007 (accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
35. Lu, Y.; Lu, R. Development of a Multispectral Structured Illumination Reflectance 
Imaging System and its Application to Bruise Detection of Apples. Trans ASABE 2017, 
60, 1379–1389. 
36. Lü, Q.; Tang, M. J.; Cai, J. R.; Zhao, J. W.; Vittayapadung, S. Vis/NIR Hyperspectral 
Imaging for Detection of Hidden Bruises on Kiwifruits. Czech J. Food Sci. 2011, 29, 
595–602. 
37. Mahesh S.; Jayas D.S.; Paliwal J.; White N.D.G. Hyperspectral Imaging to Classify and 
Monitor Quality of Agricultural Materials. J. Stored Prod. Res. 2015, 61, 17–26. http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jspr.2015.01.006 (accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
38. Maldague, X.; Galmiche, F.; Ziadi, A. Advances in Pulsed Phase Thermography. 
Infrared Phys. Technol. 2002, 43, 175–181. 
39. Maul, F.; Sargent, S.; Huber, D.; Balaban, M.; Luzuriaga, D.; Baldwin, E. Non-Destructive 
Quality Screening of Tomato Fruit Using E-Nose Technology. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 
1997, 110, 188–194. 
40. Nugraha, B.; Verboven, P.; Janssen, S.; Wang, Z.; Nicolaï, B. M. Non-Destructive Porosity 
Mapping of Fruit and Vegetables Using X-Ray CT. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 2019, 150, 
80–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.postharvbio.2018.12.016 (accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
41. Padda, M. S.; do Amarante, C. V. T.; Garcia, R. M.; Slaughter, D. C.; Mitcham, E. J. 
Methods to Analyze Physicochemical Changes During Mango Ripening: A Multivariate 
Approach. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 2011, 62, 267–274. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j. 
postharvbio.2011.06.002 (accessed Aug 2, 2021). 300 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
42. Passoni, I.; Dai Pra, A.; Rabal, H.; Trivi, M.; Arizaga, R. Dynamic Speckle Processing 
Using Wavelets-Based Entropy. Opt. Commun. 2005, 246, 219–228. 
43. Pioggia, G.; Di Francesco, F.; Marchetti, A.; Ferro, M.; Leardi, R.; Ahluwalia, A. 
Composite Sensor Array Impedentiometric Electronic Tongue. Part II. Discrimination 
of Basic Tastes. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2007, 22, 2624–2628. 
44.	 Podrazka, M.; Báczyńska, E.; Kundys, M.; Jeleń, P. S.; Nery, E. W. Electronic Tongue: 
A Tool for All Tastes. Biosensors 2017, 8, 1–24. 
45. Riul, A.; Dos Santos, D. S.; Wohnrath, K.; Di Tommazo, R.; Carvalho, A. C. P.L.F.; 
Fonseca, F. J. Artificial Taste Sensor: Efficient Combination of Sensors Made from 
Langmuir-Blodgett films of Conducting Polymers and a Ruthenium Complex and Self￾Assembled Films of an Azobenzene-Containing Polymer. Langmuir 2002, 18, 239–245. 
46. Rodríguez-Méndez, M. L.; De Saja, J. A.; González-Antón, R.; García-Hernández, C.; 
Medina-Plaza C.; García-Cabezón, C. Electronic Nose and E-Tongue in Wine Industry. 
Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2016, 4, 1–12. 
47. Röck, F.; Barsan, N.; Weimar, U. Electronic Nose: Current Status and Future Trends. 
Chem. Rev. 2008, 108, 705–725. 
48. Sanz, T.; Primo-Martín, C.; van Vliet, T. Characterization of Crispness of French Fries 
by Fracture and Acoustic Measurements, Effect of Pre-Frying and Final Frying Times. 
Food Res. Int. 2007, 40, 63–70. 
49. Scharwies, J. D.; Grimm, E.; Knoche, M. Russeting and Relative Growth Rate Are 
Positively Related in Pears. Hort. Sci. 2014, 49, 746–749. 
50. Shah, R.; Gujarathi, P.; Unadkat, P.; Mulik, R.; Bandal, A. N. Quality Analysis of FAV 
Using Machine Learning Techniques. Int. J. Res. Eng. Sci. Manage. (IJRESM) 2018, 1 
(4), 91–95. 
51. Sim, M. Y. M.; Shya, T. J.; Ahmad, M. N.; Shakaff, A. Y. M.; Othman, A. R.; Hitam, M. 
S. Monitoring of Milk Quality with Disposable Taste Sensor. Sensors 2003, 3, 340–349. 
52. Siripatrawan, U.; Makino, Y.; Kawagoe, Y.; Oshita, S. Rapid Detection of Escherichia Coli 
Contamination in Packaged Fresh Spinach Using Hyperspectral Imaging. Talanta 2011, 
85, 276–281. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.talanta.2011.03.061 (accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
53. Payel, G.; Sunil, E. C. K. Quality Analysis of Pomegranate by Non-Destructive Soft 
X-Ray Method. J. Food Process Technol. 2014, 5(1), 341–346. 
54. Tahara, Y.; Toko, K. Electronic Tongues-a Review. IEEE Sens. J. 2013, 13, 3001–3011. 
55. Taniwaki, M.; Hanada, T.; Sakurai, N. Postharvest Quality Evaluation of Fuyu And 
Taishuu Persimmons Using a Nondestructive Vibrational Method and an Acoustic 
Vibration Technique. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 2009, 51, 80–85. 
56. Toko, K. Taste Sensor. Meas. Sci. Technol. 1998, 9, 1919–1936. 
57. Torri, L.; Sinelli, N.; Limbo, S. Shelf-life Evaluation of Fresh-Cut Pineapple by Using 
an Electronic Nose. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 2010, 56, 239–245. http://dx.doi. 
org/10.1016/j.postharvbio.2010.01.012 (accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
58. Varith, J.; Hyde, G. M.; Baritelle, A. L.; Fellman, J. K.; Sattabongkot, T. Non-Contact 
Bruise Detection in Apples by Thermal Imaging. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 
2003, 4, 211–218. 
59. Varith, J.; Noochuay, C.; Netsawang, P.; Hirunstitporn, B.; Janin, S.; Krairiksh, M. 
Design of Multimode-Circular Microwave Cavity for Agri-Food Processing. In Asia￾Pacific Microwave Conf (APMC) Proc. 2007; pp 20–23. 
60. Vega, F.; Torres, M. C. Automatic Detection of Bruises in Fruit Using Biospeckle 
Techniques. Symp. Signals Images Artif. Vis—2013 (IEEE), 2013, 2013, 1–5. Mechanical, Optical, and Acoustic Methods 301 
61. Vlasov, Y.; Legin, A.; Rudnitskaya, A.; Di Natale, C.; D’Amico, A. Nonspecific Sensor 
Arrays (Electronic Tongue) for Chemical Analysis of Liquids (IUPAC Technical 
Report). Pure Appl. Chem. 2005, 77, 1965–1983. 
62. Vlasov, Y. G.; Legin, A. V.; Rudnitskaya, A. M.; D’Amico, A.; Di Natale, C. Electronic 
Tongue—New Analytical Tool for Liquid Analysis on the Basis of Non-Specific Sensors 
and Methods of Pattern Recognition. Sens. Actuat. B Chem. 2000, 65, 235–236. 
63. Yang, Z.; Wang, Z.; Yuan, W.; Li, C.; Jing, X.; Han, H. Classification of Wolfberry 
from Different Geographical Origins by Using Electronic Tongue and Deep Learning 
Algorithm. IFAC Papers OnLine 2019, 52, 397–402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol. 
2019.12.592 (accessed Aug 2, 2021). 
64. Zhang, L.; McCarthy, M. J. Measurement and Evaluation of Tomato Maturity Using 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 2012, 67, 37–43. http://dx.doi. 
org/10.1016/j.postharvbio.2011.12.004 (accessed Aug 2, 2021). PART IV
 
POTENTIAL USE OF FRUIT
 
AND VEGETABLE WASTE
 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing: Methods and Strategies. Megh R. Goyal, & 
Faizan Ahmad (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 13
 
FRUIT AND VEGETABLE WASTE: A 
VIABLE FEEDSTOCK FOR BIOENERGY 
OGECHUKWU BOSE CHUKWUMA, MOHD RAFATULLAH, 
MOHAMMAD FAISAL UMAR, HUSNUL AZAN TAJARUDIN, and 
NORLI ISMAIL 
ABSTRACT 
Fruits and vegetables waste (FVW) is a significant contributor to the 
composition of compostable organic materials in municipal solid wastes 
(MSW). Organic waste makes up around half of the total MSW generated. 
FVWs are produced throughout the production process, from harvesting 
to fork. As bioenergy gains prominence as a green replacement to fossils, 
viable, renewable feedstock for its production is still challenging issue. With 
their high organic and moisture content, FVW is a cheap and renewable 
source for several streams of biorefinery. First-generation biofuels come 
from food crops, starch, and sugar. With the global population on a steady 
rise, food production will need to be increased by over 50% to meet the 
demands. This calls into question of its sustainability as the possible food 
competition that will put further pressure on food demand. FVW falls under 
second-generation feedstocks as they are rich lignocellulosic biomass with 
potential for biorefinery. However, their use in the waste-to-energy approach 
has several challenges, including the recalcitrant nature of the biomass and 
the high-cost of pretreatment. However, this group of biomass requires 
further characterization and evaluation to maximize its utilization to yield 
value-added products and to aid in overcoming the cost and technological 
challenges in their wide spread adoption. Research to help ensure all parts of 306 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
the biomass are used in the biorefinery process to help improve the cost of 
biorefinery process suitability driven by this class of feedstock. 
13.1 INTRODUCTION 
Energy is an indicator of social and economic development of a country 
or a community. Despite being in a technologically advanced times, over 
two billion people of the world’s population cannot access advanced energy 
sources and still use traditional methods, such as, burning wood and coal to 
meet their daily energy needs. These continue to pose environmental and 
health problems, and hence, need more sustainable and greener alterna￾tives.73 Because fossil resources are finite, therefore, the issue of them being 
exhaustible is no longer as distant as humanity would prefer. This realization 
has led to find alternatives to secure the future of our energy needs.44 
Bioenergy is an emerging and feasible energy source tasked with meeting 
emerging and pressing energy demands that have come about as a result of 
fossil fuels’ damaging effects and their imminent scarcity.71 With the steady 
incline of the global population20,60 leading to enormous demands for fuels, 
the scientific community is pressed to find solutions to meet these demands.21] 
Interestingly, bioenergy is fed by a diverse range of readily available feed￾stocks, most of which are wastes, thus increasing their appeal.71 
Lignocellulosic biomass largely made up of crop residues, energy crops, 
animal manures, and municipal solid wastes (MSW) can be converted and 
then utilized for bioenergy.20 Fruits and vegetables wastes (FVWs) are very 
prominent part of lignocellulosic biomasses that are used for biofuel produc￾tion.62 FVWs are also vital source of raw materials for producing natural 
and synthetic products and chemicals.25 FVW generated from any part of the 
food supply chain (production, distribution, transportation, processing, and 
retailing) can either be solid or semisolid except for waste effluents from 
processing plants. 
Vegetable waste refers to biodegradable biomass available in huge 
quantities across the entire food production line from harvesting, 
transportation, and storage to marketing and processing to fork.58 It is a 
carbohydrate-rich biomass, highly degradable with high moisture content, 
and thus holds great appeal for sustainable bioenergy production. On the 
other hand, fruit waste refers to the pulp, seeds, and peels, and they likely 
form up to half (50%) of the total harvest/product of fruits. They contain 
high amounts of cellulose and hemicellulose, but their lignin and protein 
contents are quite low.77Fruit and Vegetable Waste 307 
Fruits and vegetables are significant part of our diet. Thus, as the popula￾tion increases, their demand is also expected to increase. Losses of FVW in 
the supply chain have been estimated to be 60%, making it the highest among 
all food types.63 The useful part, after they have been processed, may be less 
than the waste by-product thus leaving adverse effects on the economics 
of growing fruits. FVW disposal further adds cost to processors; and when 
improperly disposed of, it leads to major environmental problems.66 The 
vast amounts of FVW being generated globally cause severe issues as the 
existing conventional disposal methods (landfills, incineration, composting) 
leave much to be desired. Landfills result in methane being released into the 
atmosphere, which is more than 20 times more potent than carbon dioxide 
as a greenhouse gas (GHG).44 They also cause pollution as they are usually 
disposed of and discarded in water bodies and on land/soil, where they pose 
environmental and health concerns and emit huge amounts of greenhouse 
gases.52 
Managing this group of solid organic waste is a huge problem for waste 
management and government agencies as they are linked with the spread of 
diseases, bad smells in communities, contamination of water sources, and 
rodent infestation, etc. Asides from affecting the environment and health, the 
real cost of managing this waste will begin to impact the standard of living 
of the people in the communities, where these are generated.15 Sustainable 
waste management practices are necessary to manage the useful organic 
fraction in FVW to successfully mitigate the existing problems, from GHG 
emissions to soil and water pollutions.73 
FVWs are particularly high in organic content, which makes them attrac￾tive in the biological employment of microorganisms to both manage waste 
and produce bioenergy. This has become very desirable as their high organic 
and water content produces bad odors and lots of leachate in the course of 
their collection, transportation, and disposal at the MSW landfills23,41 This 
option is being preferred because the other options come with pitfalls, the 
highest being they do not produce energy as output. Incineration of FVW is 
discouraged by its high moisture feature, while disposal by landfill produces 
GHG and leachate, both environmental issues.51 
FVWs are the largest contributors to the kitchen waste. The processing 
of fruits and vegetables produces peels, which can be used to feed livestock 
or as fertilizer. FVWs are also used to produce essential oils, food additives, 
enzymes, biofuels, bioplastics, and other products.10 Using FVW to produce 
renewable energies like biohydrogen is a welcome sustainable solution to the 
economic and environmental problems, and the production and disposal of 
this group of MSW pose issues on daily basis.37308 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
In a study in 2014, FVW was used to produce energy from anaerobic 
digestion ensuring that FVW was the only substrate used, and the findings 
revealed savings in terms of cost.65 While FVW for two-stage anaerobic 
degradation.14 was used to produce biogas and it was observed that the 
process was more stable and it produced higher amounts of biogas. 
This chapter focuses on (1) how FVW can be harnessed to produce useful 
products and (2) existing challenges and future prospective of this biomass 
in the biorefinery. 
13.2 CHARACTERIZATION OF FRUIT AND VEGETABLE WASTE 
FVW belongs to a group of biomasses that characterization is required to use 
it as a raw material and utilize it maximally. Waste is characterized based on 
its physical, chemical, and biological attributes and these attributes affect the 
performance of the biomass in the digestion process. They also determine the 
recovery strategy and processing method used in the waste to energy (WTE) 
conversion process. 
The physical characterization of FVW refers to moisture, ash, total 
solid, volatile solid, color, odor, pH, and temperature. When waste has high 
moisture content levels, it degrades rapidly in comparison to those with low 
moisture content. Moisture loss is linked to a waste biomass’s suitability 
to be converted and then used as a solid fuel. A material’s ability to lose 
moisture will determine how combustible it will be and will be used as a 
fuel.15 FVWs with pH around 5.5–6.5 degrades easily, as putrefaction starts 
early and continues without any restrictions. However, when FVWs have pH 
6–7, decomposition is at a much slower rate than those with lower pH values. 
Reducing the biomass size to finer particles and optimizing temperature to 
higher temperatures have been used in studies to overcome the challenges of 
this increased pH. 
FVW can be degraded in either the psychrophilic range (15–25°C), 
mesophilic range (35–37°C), or thermophilic range (50–60°C). Studies have 
reported that thermophilic and mesophilic ranges are more favorable, with 
the thermophilic conditions being able to degrade various kinds of FVWs as 
it has high metabolic rates and is less specific when it comes to substrates.15 
Chemical characterization refers to carbon, nitrogen, total organic carbon, 
starch, cellulose, hemicellulose, phosphorus, and protein. Carbon–Nitrogen 
(C/N) ratio is the interaction of nitrogen and carbon and a low value means 
that the biomass is rich in protein while a high value means the biomass is 
amino deficient. The 25:1 is the optimal value for high biogas yields with a Fruit and Vegetable Waste 309 
higher ratio indicating nitrogen will be rapidly depleted, and yields will be 
low.35 These chemical characteristics of FVW affect the conversion of the 
biomass via anaerobic digestion.51 
Biological characterization includes chemical oxygen demand (COD) 
and biological oxygen demand (BOD), commonly used as pollution indi￾cators.71 and as indicators of how much hydrolyzable content is present in 
FVW biomass. Together, they show how putrescible FVW is as the lesser the 
BOD and COD ratio, the lesser the degradation potential of the waste and 
vice versa. COD indicates the potential of FVW for biogas production, while 
BOD determines the availability of oxygen, which microorganisms need to 
break down organic matter in FVW.35 
There must be a balance between the microorganisms and organic 
biomass used in anaerobic digestion (AD), as the slightest imbalance will 
lead to the entire digestion being ineffective and having low yields.51 
13.2.1 COMPONENTS OF THE FRUIT AND VEGETABLE WASTE 
FVW comprises peels and twigs, which are mostly the nonedible parts of 
fruits and vegetables. The pomace comprises pulp, skin, seeds, and stem 
from fruits and vegetables.8
 FVW can also contain leaves, rinds cores, pits, 
twigs, and spoiled fruits and vegetables in addition to the aforementioned 
components.80 The group of fruits and vegetables usually determines the 
nutrients and bioactive components it contains. Fruits and vegetables in 
the same group also share growing conditions, and this information can be 
useful in terms of handling and logistics in the supply chain. 
The highest amount of FVW comes mostly from the pre-consumer stage 
of the supply chain and includes residues from harvest as well as peels and 
pomace. There is a whooping drop from 48% of FVW in the processing stage 
to 21% in the consumer stage.80 
13.2.2 LIGNOCELLULOSE COMPOSITION IN FRUIT AND 
VEGETABLE WASTE 
Lignocellulosic composition in feed stocks (animal manure and crop residues) 
is known to be higher than that in FVWs.55 FVWs are rich in cellulose, 
hemicellulose, pectin, and minerals but have very low concentrations of 
lignin compared with other crop residues. FVW is characterized by low lipid 
and high cellulose content. They also have higher pH and C/N ratio than the 310 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
other food wastes, but their lignocellulosic materials are more resistant to 
microbial attacks and impede acidification.12 FVWs are known to be low in 
total solids (TS) and high in volatile solids (VS).68 Fruit wastes have a higher 
TS, VS, and C/N ratio than the vegetable wastes. The TS of fruits is usually 
around 7.5–23% (wet weight basis), while TS for vegetables are between 
3–11%. VS of fruits at 5–12% exceed that of vegetables at 2–9%. Then C/N 
ratio of fruit wastes is 19–53% higher than that of vegetables which is at 
10–21%.25 
FVW residue after processing contains pulp, peel, seeds, and stem. The 
main constituents of this waste are pectin that accounts for 1–13%, cellulose 
accounts for 7–44%, hemicellulose for 4–34%, lignin for 15–69%, and trace 
amounts of gums.74 These components affect the value that any particular 
FVW can produce. They are the major factors that make up the cell wall 
saccharification potential of a lignocellulosic biomass feedstock, which 
drives its suitability in the biorefinery process. This in turn t affects the extent 
and efficiency of hydrolysis and other steps in the degradation process.74 
FVWs have high moisture content, which alongside high VS (>90%) 
makes them very suitable choice for anaerobic digestion (AD) to produce 
organic products.15 These properties also affect how the FVW is handled and 
processed, as the high VS may pose challenging issue for the AD process if 
monodigestion is used. FVW with a high percentage of VS and TS < 10% is 
processed via wet AD, while semidry AD is employed for FVW with 10–20% 
TS and dry AD is utilized for FVW with TS>20%. Temperature also plays a 
role in AD, as mesophilic temperature (30–39°C) encourages methanogenic 
activity that is a vital step in breaking down FVW. In contrast, breakdown 
under thermophilic conditions results in the production of various fatty acids 
that inhibit methanogenic activities by reducing the pH in the processing 
tanks. 
13.3 FRUIT AND VEGETABLE WASTE AS FEEDSTOCK FOR 
BIOENERGY PRODUCTION 
Miscanthus, switch grass, blue stem, yellow sweet clover, and alfalfa are some 
of the vegetable feedstocks that have been previously studied for bioenergy 
production. Switch grasses and miscanthus have garnered the most attention and 
have shown better prospects in terms of their yields and reduced production and 
cost requirements. Switchgrass is also drought tolerant as it adapts to different 
soil and climate.3
 Mango endocarp, banana peel, orange peel, and watermelon 
peels were studied for their potential usefulness in producing biochar, biooil, Fruit and Vegetable Waste 311 
and biogas, and the results showed huge promise in producing useful products.39 
Mango, banana, lemon, orange, pineapple, tomato, pomegranate, grape vine, 
onion, potato, cabbage, coriander, cauliflower, turnip, radish, carrot, sugar beet, 
garden pea, sorghum, and Napier grass were used as feedstock for methane 
production. High methane yield was observed after fermentation.32 
Globally, environmental issues, such as global warming, depletion of 
natural fossils, and other natural resources have fueled sustainable solu￾tions to the energy challenges. Hence, producing bioenergy from biomass 
is gaining popularity as it has various positive environmental and economic 
implications.38,72 Biofuels are fuels from lignocellulosic solid biomass that 
have gone through various chemical and biological processes to yield 
useful products. Biofuels are grouped into four generations based on their 
raw materials/biomass type and technology, such as first-, second-, third-, 
and fourth-generation biofuels.43 They include solid fuels, liquid fuels, and 
various biogas products. They are also grouped as conventional biofuels, 
which refer to only first-generation biofuels and advanced biofuels which 
explore the second, the third, and the fourth-generations of biofuel.34 
13.3.1 FIRST-GENERATION FUEL 
First-generation biofuels are produced using food-based crops, such as sugar 
cane, wheat, cassava, and corn, etc. Bioethanol and biodiesel are the most 
common products of first-generation biofuels. They account for 96% of the 
global worldwide production of biofuels.61 They represent the initial shift from 
the use of fossils to a more eco-friendly option in meeting energy demands.28 
While the first-generation biofuels are already seeing global commer￾cialization and have mature markets and technologies, their sustainability is 
still a major issue because the source of its feedstock competes directly with 
food crops for land, which places more pressure on land use and has more 
negative effects on the climate and the environment at large.33 It also causes 
upsurge in food prices worldwide, which has seen cereal and sugar prices 
continue to grow at an alarming rate.49 
13.3.2 SECOND-GENERATION FUEL 
The second generation biofuel inculcates lignocellulosic waste and biomass, 
which are generally nonfood and nonedible biomasses.4
 FVW form part of 
agricultural wastes that is used in producing second-generation biofuels. 312 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
The biochemical routes of this production process produce bioethanol, 
natural gas, biohydrogen, biodiesel, biogas, and biooils. All biofuels are capable 
of supplementing or acting as replacements for fossils in a green way.33,55 
Using lignocellulosic biomass for bioenergy production is encouraged, as it 
does not compete with food production.17 Lignin residue thus generated can 
be used for power generation and fuel additives. In the second-generation 
process, a reuse design exists and encourages the conversion of the entire 
biomass to useful products.79 
The third- and fourth-generation biofuels use microorganisms as their 
feedstocks. However, the fourth-generation fuels use genetically modified 
algae with high lipid content as its feedstock.61 
13.4 BIOENERGY PRODUCTS 
Lignocellulosic waste represents a cheap, highly available, renewable 
resource that is used for bioenergy production. The use of these wastes is a 
means of conservation of resources and a sustainable, environmentally safe 
alternative in the energy production.5
 Bioenergy is a key consideration in the 
search for short- and medium-term solutions to lower greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions and find replacements for fossil fuels. It is gaining in popularity 
and acceptability everyday.26 The main biofuel products that are derived from 
lignocellulosic biomass include biogas, bioethanol, and biodiesel. However, 
electricity and heat are also by-products of biorefineries.31 
13.4.1 BIOETHANOL 
Bioethanol from lignocellulosic biomass accounts for 10–14% of the global 
energy supply and is a welcome effort in mitigating global pollution and 
energy crisis. FVWs are rich in high sugars and are thus suitable raw mate￾rials for producing bioethanol, which can be used as an industrial solvent and 
as a fuel supplement.48 FVWs are chosen for bioethanol production because 
they are cheap and readily available. Bioethanol is obtained by the microbial 
action on FVW via fermentation in controlled and specific conditions. These 
conditions include separate enzymatic hydrolysis and fermentation (SHF), 
simultaneous saccharification and co-fermentation (SSCF), and simulta￾neous saccharification and fermentation (SSF). The SSF is the fermentation 
of solid biomass by microorganisms growing and acting on these biomasses 
in the absence of moisture. SSF method is preferred than other methods as  
Fruit and Vegetable Waste 313 
its affinity for little or no moisture means that no foam is produced when 
fermentation is carried out, and this helps to keep other parameters (aera￾tion, temperature, and pH) under control. SSF is also known to show higher 
ethanol yields than other fermentation methods.50 Microorganisms that have 
been successfully used in bioethanol production include Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae,
24 microalgae,30 Saccharomyces cerevisiae acting on potato peel,6 
and Trichoderma reesei and Trichoderma viride on MSW.40 Bioethanol is 
presently the most common biofuel with wide acceptance in USA, Brazil, 
European Union, China, and India being the fore front producer.38 
13.4.2 BIOMETHANE 
Biomethane represents the gas produced by the biodegradation of FVW in 
a series of reactions. Biogas is a significant contributor to the global energy 
market.35 and is a gas mixture that contains methane and carbon dioxide, 
and is a clean, renewable source of energy used to power homes and indus￾tries, as it supplies heat and electricity. It can also be used for transportation 
energy needs.73 Biogas generally contains 50–75% of methane, 25–50% 
of carbon dioxide, and trace elements (water vapor, hydrogen sulfide, and 
ammonia). These fractions are dependent on the condition of processing 
and biomass feedstock. COD of the biomass affects the amount of methane 
produced.13 
AD is biologically converting organic biomass to biogas in the absence 
of oxygen by a consortium of microbes in several metabolic steps. Treating 
FVW anaerobically results in high biomethane yields and involves three 
steps: hydrolysis, acidogenesis, and methanogenesis. All three stages 
involve bacteria to break down FVW biomass in the presence of little or no 
oxygen.47,71 These three stages are the following: 
•	 Hydrolysis involves the conversion of complex, insoluble polymers 
into simple sugars, amino acids. It is a result of hydrolytic enzymes 
produced by cellulolytic bacteria.17 Temperature is a major factor in 
determining the effect of hydrolysis. While thermophilic treatment 
produces more in a shorter time, it is however less stable and requires 
more energy than to complete the process. It is observed that hydro￾lysis rate is more than double when compared to mesophilic rates.13 
•	 Acidogenesis involves acetogenic bacteria (acid-formers) converting 
the by-products of hydrolysis into organic acids, carbon dioxide, and 
hydrogen. 314 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
•	 Methanogenesis takes place by the action of methanogens by either 
causing cleavage to the organic acid molecules to produce CO2 
and methane or by reducing CO2
 using hydrogen. The latter action 
produces higher yields of methane and is preferred when high 
hydrogen concentrations can be arranged.48 
Anaerobic digestion can either be executed in a single-stage AD system 
or in a two-stage AD system. The latter is usually simple, while the former is 
used to produce multiple products simultaneously in a shorter time frame.51 
The two-stage AD system is more stable but is more expensive and requires 
a certain level of expertise and knowledge to operate.65 
13.4.3 BIODIESEL 
The interest in biodiesel is on the rise as it represents a greener option and 
supplement for fossil derived gasoline, and diesel. This environmental advan￾tage, its higher energy density, and ease of handling have led to biodiesel 
being an attractive investment option globally.11,75 Biodiesel is a yellowish 
liquid biofuel used in “home heating system” and power heavy duty auto￾mobiles, such as tractors, military carriers/trucks, and mining equipment.67 
Biodiesel is basically alkyl ester that contains low aliphatic alcohols and 
high fatty acids, formed through transesterification (triglyceride reacts with 
alcohol forming esters and glycerol).54,81. Biodiesel production is maximized 
when biomass used contains high lipid content such as vegetable wastes. 
The biomass feedstock makes up over 70% of the production cost and subse￾quently the final biodiesel cost.71 Biodiesel does not produce any output of 
carbon and is thus carbon neutral.81 
Some microorganisms have been used to produce biodiesel, such as 
Rhodotorula glutinis,59 Cryptococcus curvatus MTCC 2698,16 members of 
Mogibacteriaceae and Ruminococcaceae,
19 Rhodosporidium sp., Lipomyces 
sp., and recombinant bacteria.45 Major biodiesel producers are the European 
Union and United States, Brazil, Argentina, Malaysia, Indonesia, India, 
and China. Some Sub-Saharan and Southeast Asia countries are starting to 
increase their biodiesel production.28 
13.4.4 BIOHYDROGEN 
Hydrogen in many quarters is being seen as potential clean energy carrier 
that can be applied to replace existing fossils, giving full benefits in an Fruit and Vegetable Waste 315 
environmentally sustainable system. Biohydrogen comes from microbial 
communities due to breaking down of organic matter from biomass, such 
as FVW.76 Use of FVW can lower the production costs and thus make 
biohydrogen more affordable and acceptable. Feedstock for biohydrogen 
production must be carbohydrate-rich waste and must be deficient in 
nitrogen.2 Vegetable waste is a good example. Microorganisms that produce 
biohydrogen are either bacteria (anaerobic, aerobic, or photosynthetic) or 
algae, and the use of cultures increases the yield of biohydrogen. Entero￾bacter, Bacillus, Clostridium,53 Thermotoga maritima,64 Bifidobacterium, 
and Lactobacillus,1
 green algae, cyanobacteria, purple nonsulfur bacteria 
have been used to produce biohydrogen successfully using FVW.78 
Biohydrogen can be produced through several means, but dark fermenta￾tion is the most widely accepted method, because it has the flexibility of 
substrates and takes place in the absence of light, and does not require sterile 
conditions or oxygen.36,64 FVWs have a higher yield when compared with 
other biomasses for the production of biohydrogen.18,19 Biohydrogen output 
is predicted to grow 10% annually and accounts for over 8% of the total 
energy globally by 2025 due to rising industrial and chemical demands for 
clean energy.64 
13.4.5 BIOCHAR 
Biochar is a black.70 carbonaceous by-product of pyrolysis of lignocellulosic 
biomass that is now being used in anaerobic digestion, among other applica￾tions.42 FVW (peels) can be converted into biochar, a solid carbon product of 
thermal pyrolysis (heating in the absence of oxygen at 350–700°C). Biochar 
has been an effective application that includes21,69 improved crop growth and 
soil amendment, heavy metal/contamination treatment, developing biocom￾posite, cancel out negative effects of waste, improve soil fertility, and reduce 
gas emissions. 
Vegetable waste has been confirmed to be suitable for producing biochar 
with good agricultural properties.57 Biochar can also be obtained through 
gasification, hydrothermal carbonization, and torrefaction. It contains lignin, 
hemicellulose and cellulose, and trace quantities of extractives, protein, 
pectin, and ash.42 The use of biochar for soil fertility, plant growth, and agri￾cultural purposes is gaining prominence, and biochar from FVW is already 
being applied as biofertilizer.7 316 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
13.5 CHALLENGES FOR ADOPTION OF FRUIT AND VEGETABLE 
WASTE IN BIOENERGY PRODUCTION 
Despite the promise of using FVW for bioenergy production, the major chal￾lenge is the recalcitrant nature of the lignocellulosic biomass making pretreat￾ment a necessity. Pretreatment is necessary for increased biodegradation of 
FVW biomass prior to hydrolysis. Pretreatment increases the digestibility 
of the FVW feedstock as the lignin barrier is broken, releasing cellulose for 
hydrolysis.22 Pretreatment requires a huge amount of energy and chemicals and 
thus is an expensive part of the biorefinery process. However, it is unavoid￾able if one must reach the second-generation bioenergy goal.55 In a bid to 
overcome the drawbacks of the first-generation fuels, second-generation fuels 
have several added steps (thermal, biological, enzymatic, or chemical), which 
raise the overall cost of second-generation biorefineries. They are thus more 
difficult to scale up from small-scale level to a more commercial scale.4
 At 
times, anaerobic digestion is plagued by low biodegradability as the microbial 
consortia may show a preference for a specific feedstock.9 
Commercialization of biofuels has only been successful for first-genera￾tion as the others require improvement to make them more cost-effective on 
a large scale.56 The infrastructural and technological demands may also be 
challenges to the use of such biomass in bioenergy. Bioenergy can at times 
be marred by low yields and slow production rates.22 Also, the supply chain 
for sustainable bioenergy is still scanty and in its infancy in most developing 
countries. It is yet to be fully embraced as a business model and there is still 
room for growth and wider adoption.29 It also has logistics and operational 
challenges (preprocessing, processing, storage, and transportation), making 
it less desirable for large-scale adoption. In addition, it still has issues with 
supply due to its seasonal nature, spatial distribution, and annual variation.33 
The challenges of biomass’ supply chain are very complex, and most 
of the times vary from biomass to biomass. Some quarters have proposed 
a uniform protocol along the entire supply chain to reduce cost and ensure 
more effective use of produced biomass. However, fruits are harvested and 
collected in a different way than the vegetables, they also have different 
processing methods making the proposed uniformed protocol not feasible and 
practicable.46 Biorefinery technology also requires high implementation and 
high maintenance costs as well as huge expertise. Unlike the traditional forms 
of energy, adopting these more sustainable forms of energy production costs 
several times more, which most households cannot afford.73 It also needs 
specialized expertise for its construction and maintenance, which is difficult Fruit and Vegetable Waste 317 
to find. Especially in regions with huge poverty, which is matched with high 
illiteracy levels, making them unattractive for professionals with such skills. 
13.6 FUTURE PROSPECTS 
There is a projection that bioenergy’s contribution to the global energy 
pile will increase from 20 to 30% by 2035. This has led to more countries 
embracing biomass from agricultural and forestry activities, which includes 
FVW. The FVW and its subsequent use in second-generation fuels is being 
hailed as a more preferred option, where land use and food supply concerns 
are almost nonexistent. First-generation biorefineries may look to replace 
their key substrates with lignocellulosic wastes, to help reduce environmental 
and food concerns and lower the cost, because the existing infrastructures 
can be used for biofuel production as opposed to purchasing new set-ups. 
FVWs represent a cheap renewable raw material, whose entire biomass 
components can be used to produce economically viable end products. 
Bioenergy is geared to contribute to social and economic development in 
communities globally.27 
Construction of biorefineries should take into account logistic issues of 
using FVW to reduce the cost of moving these wastes and maximize profits 
and benefits. They should also be constructed with operations that allow 
different use beyond the original purpose.56 The implementation of separating 
waste from source will help to improve the quality of FVW that is obtained 
from waste streams for AD purposes. This will wean out plastics and metals 
and reduce sorting costs and waste-handling costs for AD purposes.51 
Consolidated bioprocessing (CBP) involves directly introducing micro￾organisms into the biorefinery system to ferment cellulose after it has broken 
down the lignocellulosic raw material. This process can lower the cost as 
no enzymes are added as the production of cellulosic ethanol and other 
useful by-products are dependent on the action of one microorganism.50 
Co-digestion, which means the processing of FVW with other kinds of waste 
like sludge and effluents, is being encouraged as it overcomes instability and 
loading challenges experiences with pure substrates of FVW. These other 
waste streams provide alkaline conditions and allow for more efficient use 
of the biorefinery equipment, and the cost for processing of multiple waste 
streams is shared and lowered.80 
FVWs are pivotal in achieving a zero-waste economy, as their use by 
microorganisms yields various valuable end products. Recent advances 
in microbiology and biotechnology are already utilizing FVW to produce 318 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
enzymes and other high-end products. Genetic engineering and recombinant 
DNA technology has some success in research to improve the quality and 
quantity of biological products. Commercially, genetically modified micro￾organisms and recombinant DNA technology has produced products that led 
to improved yields of 100-folds when applied in production. These research 
results have helped to overcome the existing challenges in the use of FVW 
as feedstock for bioenergy production.52 Increased efforts from govern￾ments and private sector to consciously raise awareness on environmental 
challenges traditional energy production will go a long way in closing the 
knowledge and skill gaps. They also need to provide subsidies and programs 
for bioenergy companies and citizens to support and encourage the imple￾mentation of bioenergy technologies up to the rural communities. 
13.7 SUMMARY 
The use of FVW to produce energy has allowed for more focus on sustainable 
energy solutions, preferably those that tackle more than one environmental 
issue. These benefits include reducing aesthetic problems arising from land￾fills, indiscriminate dumping of FVW, waste handling and management costs, 
and other environmental and health issues that may arise from these wastes. 
Advances in technology and social education are required to see significant, 
improved adoption in the ways FVWs are handled as we try to shift from 
burning and landfilling to more sustainable options like biorefinery. Despite 
the challenges in their adoption in terms of the lignocellulose hurdle, the 
pros definitely outweigh the cons as their use can be linked to responsible 
consumption and production. Successfully adopting this group of waste will 
be a sustainable process that means fruits and vegetables produced are put to 
the most efficient use with less amounts being wasted. It will create jobs and 
spur economic growth, as economies will see alternative streams of energy 
and income. They are thus a welcome green, cost-effective approach with 
barely tapped into potentials for the future. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors express their appreciation to Universiti Sains Malaysia RUI 
grant (1001/PTEKIND/8011044) for the financial support and research 
facilities in this study. Fruit and Vegetable Waste 319 
KEYWORDS 
• anaerobic digestion 
bioenergy 
biofuels 
biomass 
biorefinery 
feedstock 
lignocellulose 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
REFERENCES 
1.	 Abubackar, H. N.; Keskin, T.; Arslan, K.; Vural, C.; Aksu, D.; Yavuzyılmaz, D. K.; 
Ozdemir, G.; Azbar, N. Effects of Size and Autoclavation of Fruit and Vegetable 
Wastes on Biohydrogen Production by Dark Dry Anaerobic Fermentation Under 
Mesophilic Condition. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2019, 44, 17767–17780. DOI:10.1016/j. 
ijhydene.2019.05.106. 
2. Abubackar, H. N.; Keskin, T.; Yazgin, O.; Gunay, B.; Arslan, K.; Azbar, N. Biohydrogen 
Production from Autoclaved Fruit and Vegetable Wastes by Dry Fermentation Under 
Thermophilic Condition. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2019, 44, 18776–18784. DOI:10.1016/j. 
ijhydene.2018.12.068. 
3. Ahorsu, R.; Medina, F.; Constantí, M. Significance and Challenges of Biomass as a 
Suitable Feedstock for Bioenergy and Biochemical Production: A Review. Energies 
2018, 11, E-article 3366. DOI:10.3390/en11123366. 
4. Alalwan, H. A.; Alminshid, A. H.; Aljaafari, H. A. S. Promising Evolution of Biofuel 
Generations. Subject Review. Renew. Energy Focus 2019, 28, 127–139. DOI:10.1016/j. 
ref.2018.12.006. 
5. Anwar, Z.; Gulfraz, M.; Irshad, M. Agro-Industrial Lignocellulosic Biomass a Key 
to Unlock the Future Bio-Energy: A Brief Review. J. Radiat. Res. Appl. Sci. 2014, 7, 
163–173. DOI:10.1016/j.jrras.2014.02.003. 
6. Arapoglou, D.; Varzakas, T.; Vlyssides, A.; Israilides, C. Ethanol Production from Potato Peel 
Waste (PPW). Waste Manage. 2010, 30, 1898–1902. DOI:10.1016/j.wasman.2010.04.017. 
7. Aziz, S.; Yaseen, L.; Jamal, A.; Farooq, U.; Qureshi, Z.; Tauseef, I.; Haleem, S.; Ali, M. 
Fabrication of Biochar from Organic Wastes and Its Effect on Wheat Growth and Soil 
Microflora. Polish J. Environ. Stud. 2020, 29, 1069–1076. DOI:10.15244/pjoes/99825. 
8. Ben-Othman, S.; Jõudu, I.; Bhat, R. Bioactives from Agri-Food Wastes: Present 
Insights and Future Challenges. Molecules, 2020, 25, E-article 510. DOI:10.3390/ 
molecules25030510. 
9. Bhatia, S. K.; Mehariya, S.; Bhatia, R. K.; Kumar, M.; Pugazhendhi, A.; Awasthi, 
M. K.; Atabani, A. E.; Kumar, G.; Kim, W.; Seo, S. O. Wastewater Based Microalgal 320 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
Biorefinery for Bioenergy Production: Progress and Challenges. Sci. Total Environ. 
2021, 751, E-article 141599. DOI:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.141599. 
10. Bhatnagar, A.; Sillanpää, M.; Witek-Krowiak, A. Agricultural Waste Peels as Versatile 
Biomass for Water Purification—A Review. Chem. Eng. J. 2015, 270, 244–271. 
DOI:10.1016/j.cej.2015.01.135. 
11. Bhuvaneswari, M.; Sivakumar, N. Bioethanol Production from Fruit and Vegetable 
Wastes. In Bioprocessing for Biomolecules Production; John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.: 
Chichester, UK, 2019; pp 417–427. 
12. Bong, C. P. C.; Lim, L. Y.; Lee, C. T.; Klemeš, J. J.; Ho, C. S.; Ho, W. S. The 
Characterisation and Treatment of Food Waste for Improvement of Biogas Production 
During Anaerobic Digestion—A Review. J. Clean. Prod. 2018, 172, 1545–1558. 
DOI:10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.10.199. 
13. Bouallagui, H.; Haouari, O.; Touhami, Y.; Ben Cheikh, R.; Marouani, L.; Hamdi, M. 
Effect of Temperature on the Performance of an Anaerobic Tubular Reactor Treating 
Fruit and Vegetable Waste. Process Biochem. 2004, 39, 2143–2148. DOI:10.1016/j. 
procbio.2003.11.022. 
14. Bouallagui, H.; Torrijos, M.; Godon, J. J.; Moletta, R.; Ben Cheikh, R.; Touhami, Y.; 
Delgenes, J. P.; Hamdi, M. Two-Phases Anaerobic Digestion of Fruit and Vegetable 
Wastes: Bioreactors Performance. Biochem. Eng. J. 2004, 21, 193–197. DOI:10.1016/j. 
bej.2004.05.001. 
15. Chatterjee, B.; Mazumder, D. New Approach of Characterizing Fruit and Vegetable 
Waste (FVW) to Ascertain Its Biological Stabilization via Two-Stage Anaerobic 
Digestion (AD). Biomass Bioenergy 2020, 139, E-article 105594. DOI:10.1016/j. 
biombioe.2020.105594 
16. Chatterjee, S.; Mohan, S. V. Microbial Lipid Production by Cryptococcus Curvatus from 
Vegetable Waste Hydrolysate. Bioresour. Technol. 2018, 254, 284–289. DOI:10.1016/j. 
biortech.2018.01.079. 
17. Chukwuma, O. B.; Rafatullah, M.; Tajarudin, H. A.; Ismail, N. Lignocellulolytic 
Enzymes in Biotechnological and Industrial Processes: A Review. Sustainability 2020, 
12, E-article 7282. DOI:10.3390/su12187282. 
18.	 Cieciura-Włoch, W.; Borowski, S. Biohydrogen Production From Wastes Of Plant and 
Animal Origin via Dark Fermentation. J. Environ. Eng. Landsc. Manage. 2019, 27, 
101–113. DOI:10.3846/jeelm.2019.9806. 
19.	 Cieciura-Włoch, W.; Borowski, S.; Otlewska, A. Biohydrogen Production from Fruit 
and Vegetable Waste, Sugar Beet Pulp and Corn Silage via Dark Fermentation. Renew. 
Energy 2020, 153, 1226–1237. DOI:10.1016/j.renene.2020.02.085. 
20. Dar, R. A.; Parmar, M.; Dar, E. A.; Sani, R. K.; Phutela, U. G. Biomethanation of 
Agricultural Residues: Potential, Limitations and Possible Solutions. Renew. Sustain. 
Energy Rev. 2021, 135, E-article 110217. DOI:10.1016/j.rser.2020.110217. 
21. De Bhowmick, G.; Sarmah, A. K.; Sen, R. Zero-Waste Algal Biorefinery for Bioenergy 
and Biochar: AGreen Leap Towards Achieving Energy and Environmental Sustainability. 
Sci. Total Environ. 2019, 650, 2467–2482. DOI:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.10.002. 
22. Dhanya, B. S.; Mishra, A.; Chandel, A. K.; Verma, M. L. Development of Sustainable 
Approaches for Converting the Organic Waste to Bioenergy. Sci. Total Environ. 2020, 
723, E-article 138109. DOI:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.138109. 
23. Edwiges, T.; Frare, L.; Mayer, B.; Lins, L.; Mi Triolo, J.; Flotats, X.; de Mendonça 
Costa, M. S. S. Influence of Chemical Composition on Biochemical Methane Potential Fruit and Vegetable Waste 321 
of Fruit and Vegetable Waste. Waste Manag. 2018, 71, 618–625. DOI:10.1016/j. 
wasman.2017.05.030. 
24. Elemike, E. E.; Oseghale, O. C.; Okoye, A. C. Utilization of Cellulosic Cassava Waste 
for Bio-Ethanol Production. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 2015, 3, 2797–2800. DOI:10.1016/j. 
jece.2015.10.021. 
25. Esparza, I.; Jiménez-Moreno, N.; Bimbela, F.; Ancín-Azpilicueta, C.; Gandía, L. M. 
Fruit and Vegetable Waste Management: Conventional and Emerging Approaches. J. 
Environ. Manage. 2020, 265, E-article 110510. DOI:10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.110510. 
26. Faaij, A. P. C. Bio-Energy in Europe: Changing Technology Choices. Energy Policy 
2006, 34, 322–342. DOI:10.1016/j.enpol.2004.03.026. 
27. Fazio, S.; Barbanti, L. Energy and Economic Assessments of Bio-Energy Systems 
Based on Annual and Perennial Crops for Temperate and Tropical Areas. Renew. Energy 
2014, 69, 233–241. DOI:10.1016/j.renene.2014.03.045. 
28. Gasparatos, A.; Stromberg, P.; Takeuchi, K. Sustainability Impacts of First-Generation 
Biofuels. Anim. Front. 2013, 3, 12–26. DOI:10.2527/af.2013-0011. 
29. Ghosh, S. K. Biomass & Bio-Waste Supply Chain Sustainability for Bio-Energy and 
Bio-Fuel Production. Procedia Environ. Sci. 2016, 31, 31–39. DOI:10.1016/j.proenv. 
2016.02.005. 
30. Gohain, M.; Hasin, M.; Eldiehy, K. S. H.; Bardhan, P.; Laskar, K.; Phukon, H.; Mandal, 
M.; Kalita, D.; Deka, D. Bio-Ethanol Production: A Route to Sustainability of Fuels 
Using Bio-Based Heterogeneous Catalyst Derived from Waste. Process Saf. Environ. 
Prot. 2021, 146, 190–200. DOI:10.1016/j.psep.2020.08.046. 
31. González-García, S.; Bacenetti, J. Exploring the Production of Bio-Energy from Wood 
Biomass. Italian Case Study. Sci. Total Environ. 2019, 647, 158–168. DOI:10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2018.07.295. 
32. Gunaseelan, V. N. Biochemical Methane Potential of Fruits and Vegetable Solid Waste 
Feedstocks. Biomass Bioenergy 2004, 26, 389–399. DOI:10.1016/j.biombioe.2003.08.006. 
33. Ho, D. P.; Ngo, H. H.; Guo, W. A Mini Review on Renewable Sources for Biofuel. 
Bioresour. Technol. 2014, 169, 742–749. DOI:10.1016/j.biortech.2014.07.022. 
34. Janda, K.; Kristoufek, L.; Zilberman, D. Biofuels: Policies and Impacts. Agric. Econ. 
2012, 58, 372–386. DOI:10.17221/124/2011-AGRICECON. 
35. Jingura, R. M.; Kamusoko, R. Methods for Determination of Biomethane Potential of 
Feedstocks: A Review. Biofuel Res. J. 2017, 4, 573–586. DOI:10.18331/BRJ2017.4.2.3. 
36. Keskin, T.; Abubackar, H. N.; Yazgin, O.; Gunay, B.; Azbar, N. Effect of Percolation 
Frequency on Biohydrogen Production from Fruit and Vegetable Wastes by Dry 
Fermentation. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2019, 44, 18767–18775. DOI:10.1016/j. 
ijhydene.2018.12.099. 
37. Keskin, T.; Arslan, K.; NalakthAbubackar, H.; Vural, C.; Eroglu, D.; Karaalp, D.; Yanik, 
J.; Ozdemir, G.; Azbar, N. Determining the Effect of Trace Elements on Biohydrogen 
Production from Fruit and Vegetable Wastes. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2018, 43, 
10666–10677. DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.01.028. 
38. Kumar, A.; Kumar, N.; Baredar, P.; Shukla, A. A Review on Biomass Energy Resources, 
Potential, Conversion and Policy in India. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2015, 45, 
530–539. DOI:10.1016/j.rser.2015.02.007. 
39. Lam, S. S.; Liew, R. K.; Lim, X. Y.; Ani, F. N.; Jusoh, A. Fruit Waste as Feedstock 
for Recovery by Pyrolysis Technique. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegr. 2016, 113, 325–333. 
DOI:10.1016/j.ibiod.2016.02.021. 322 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
40. Li, A.; Antizar-Ladislao, B.; Khraisheh, M. Bioconversion of Municipal Solid Waste 
to Glucose for Bio-Ethanol Production. Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng. 2007, 30, 189–196. 
DOI:10.1007/s00449-007-0114-3. 
41. Lin, J.; Zuo, J.; Gan, L.; Li, P.; Liu, F.; Wang, K.; Chen, L.; Gan, H. Effects of Mixture 
Ratio on Anaerobic Co-Digestion with Fruit and Vegetable Waste and Food Waste of 
China. J. Environ. Sci. 2011, 23, 1403–1408. DOI:10.1016/S1001-0742(10)60572-4. 
42. Masebinu, S. O.; Akinlabi, E. T.; Muzenda, E.; Aboyade, A. O. A Review of Biochar 
Properties and Their Roles in Mitigating Challenges with Anaerobic Digestion. Renew. 
Sustain. Energy Rev. 2019, 103, 291–307. DOI:10.1016/j.rser.2018.12.048. 
43. Mat Aron, N. S.; Khoo, K. S.; Chew, K. W.; Show, P. L.; Chen, W.; Nguyen, T. H. P. 
Sustainability of the Four Generations of Biofuels—A Review. Int. J. Energy Res. 2020, 
44, 9266–9282. DOI:10.1002/er.5557. 
44. Matsakas, L.; Gao, Q.; Jansson, S.; Rova, U.; Christakopoulos, P. Green Conversion of 
Municipal Solid Wastes Into Fuels and Chemicals. Electron. J. Biotechnol. 2017, 26, 
69–83. DOI:10.1016/j.ejbt.2017.01.004. 
45. Meng, X.; Yang, J.; Xu, X.; Zhang, L.; Nie, Q.; Xian, M. Biodiesel Production 
from Oleaginous Microorganisms. Renew. Energy 2009, 34, 1–5. DOI:10.1016/j. 
renene.2008.04.014. 
46. Mohanty, A. K.; Vivekanandhan, S.; Pin, J.-M.; Misra, M. Composites from Renewable 
and Sustainable Resources: Challenges and Innovations. Science 2018, 362, 536–542. 
DOI:10.1126/science.aat9072. 
47. Molino, A.; Nanna, F.; Ding, Y.; Bikson, B.; Braccio, G. Biomethane Production by 
Anaerobic Digestion of Organic Waste. Fuel 2013, 103, 1003–1009. DOI:10.1016/j. 
fuel.2012.07.070. 
48. Moneruzzaman Khandaker, M.; Aliyu Abdullahi, U.; Dogara Abdulrahman, M.; Afiza 
Badaluddin, N.; Suryati Mohd, K. Bio-Ethanol Production from Fruit and Vegetable 
Waste by Using Saccharomyces Cerevisiae. In Bioethanol; IntechOpen; online, 2020. 
49. Müller, A.; Schmidhuber, J.; Hoogeveen, J.; Steduto, P. Some Insights in the Effect of 
Growing Bio-Energy Demand on Global Food Security and Natural Resources. Water 
Policy 2008, 10, 83–94. DOI:10.2166/wp.2008.053. 
50. Mupondwa, E.; Li, X.; Tabil, L.; Sokhansanj, S.; Adapa, P. Status of Canada’s 
Lignocellulosic Ethanol: Part II: Hydrolysis and Fermentation Technologies. Renew. 
Sustain. Energy Rev. 2017, 79, 1535–1555 
51. Negri, C.; Ricci, M.; Zilio, M.; D’Imporzano, G.; Qiao, W.; Dong, R.; Adani, F. Anaerobic 
Digestion of Food Waste for Bio-Energy Production in China and Southeast Asia: A Review. 
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2020, 133, E-article 110138. DOI:10.1016/j.rser.2020.110138. 
52. Panda, S. K.; Mishra, S. S.; Kayitesi, E.; Ray, R. C. Microbial-Processing of Fruit and 
Vegetable Wastes for Production of Vital Enzymes and Organic Acids: Biotechnology 
and Scopes. Environ. Res. 2016, 146, 161–172. DOI:10.1016/j.envres.2015.12.035. 
53. Pascualone, M. J.; Gómez Costa, M. B.; Dalmasso, P. R. Fermentative Biohydrogen 
Production from a Novel Combination of Vermicompost as Inoculum and Mild Heat￾Pretreated Fruit and Vegetable Waste. Biofuel Res. J. 2019, 6, 1046–1053. DOI:10.18331/ 
BRJ2019.6.3.5. 
54. Pattanaik, L.; Pattnaik, F.; Saxena, D. K.; Naik, S. N. Biofuels from Agricultural Wastes. 
In Second and Third Generation of Feedstocks; Elsevier: New York, 2019; pp 103–142. 
55. Paudel, S. R.; Banjara, S. P.; Choi, O. K.; Park, K. Y.; Kim, Y. M.; Lee, J. W. Pretreatment 
of Agricultural Biomass for Anaerobic Digestion: Current State and Challenges. 
Bioresour. Technol. 2017, 245, 1194–1205. DOI:10.1016/j.biortech.2017.08.182. Fruit and Vegetable Waste 323 
56. Porqueras, E. M.; Rittmann, S.; Herwig, C. Biofuels and CO2
 Neutrality: An Opportunity. 
Biofuels 2012, 3, 413–426. DOI:10.4155/bfs.12.25. 
57. Pradhan, S.; Abdelaal, A. H.; Mroue, K.; Al-Ansari, T.; Mackey, H. R.; McKay, G. 
Biochar from Vegetable Wastes: Agro-Environmental Characterization. Biochar 2020, 
2, 439–453. DOI:10.1007/s42773-020-00069-9. 
58. Ramanujam, B. V.; Kepadatan, R. A. Population in Pemalang Regency Year 2014. Int. 
J. Emerg. Sci. 2015, 1, 478–486. 
59. Razaghi, A.; Karthikeyan, O. P.; Hao, H. T. N.; Heimann, K. Hydrolysis Treatments of 
Fruit and Vegetable Waste for Production of Biofuel Precursors. Bioresour. Technol. 
2016, 217, 100–103. DOI:10.1016/j.biortech.2016.03.041. 
60. Rena; Mohammed Bin Zacharia, K.; Yadav, S.; Machhirake, N. P.; Kim, S.-H.; Lee, 
B.-D.; Jeong, H.; Singh, L.; Kumar, S.; Kumar, R. Bio-Hydrogen and Bio-Methane 
Potential Analysis for Production of Bio-Hythane Using Various Agricultural Residues. 
Bioresour. Technol. 2020, 309, E-article 123297. DOI:10.1016/j.biortech.2020.123297. 
61. Robak, K.; Balcerek, M. Current State-of-the-Art in Ethanol Production from Ligno
cellulosic Feedstocks. Microbiol. Res. 2020, 240, E-article 126534. DOI:10.1016/j. 
micres.2020.126534. 
62. Rodríguez-Valderrama, S.; Escamilla-Alvarado, C.; Magnin, J.-P.; Rivas-García, P.; 
Valdez-Vazquez, I.; Ríos-Leal, E. Batch Biohydrogen Production from Dilute Acid 
Hydrolyzates of Fruits-and-Vegetables Wastes and Corn Stover as Co-Substrates. 
Biomass Bioenergy 2020, 140, E-article 105666. DOI:10.1016/j.biombioe.2020.105666. 
63. Sagar, N. A.; Pareek, S.; Sharma, S.; Yahia, E. M.; Lobo, M. G. Fruit and Vegetable 
Waste: Bioactive Compounds, Their Extraction, and Possible Utilization. Compr. Rev. 
Food Sci. Food Safety, 2018, 17, 512–531. DOI:10.1111/1541-4337.12330. 
64. Saidi, R.; Liebgott, P. P.; Gannoun, H.; Ben Gaida, L.; Miladi, B.; Hamdi, M.; 
Bouallagui, H.; Auria, R. Biohydrogen Production from Hyperthermophilic Anaerobic 
Digestion of Fruit and Vegetable Wastes in Seawater: Simplification of the Culture 
Medium of Thermotoga Maritima. Waste Manag. 2018, 71, 474–484. DOI:10.1016/j. 
wasman.2017.09.042. 
65. Scano, E. A.; Asquer, C.; Pistis, A.; Ortu, L.; Demontis, V.; Cocco, D. Biogas from 
Anaerobic Digestion of Fruit and Vegetable Wastes: Experimental Results on Pilot-Scale 
and Preliminary Performance Evaluation of a Full-Scale Power Plant. Energy Convers. 
Manag. 2014, 77, 22–30. DOI:10.1016/j.enconman.2013.09.004. 
66. Sharma, R.; Oberoi, H. S.; Dhillon, G. S. Fruit and Vegetable Processing Waste. In 
Agro-Industrial Wastes as Feedstock for Enzyme Production; Elsevier: New York, 2016; 
pp 23–59. 
67. Shehu, I.; Akanbi, T. O.; Wyatt, V.; Aryee, A. N. A. Fruit, Nut, Cereal, and Vegetable 
Waste Valorization to Produce Biofuel. In Byproducts from Agriculture and Fisheries; 
John Wiley & Sons: New York, 2019; pp 665–684. 
68. Shen, F.; Yuan, H.; Pang, Y.; Chen, S.; Zhu, B.; Zou, D.; Liu, Y.; Ma, J.; Yu, L.; Li, 
X. Performances of Anaerobic Co-Digestion of Fruit & Vegetable Waste (FVW) and 
Food Waste (FW): Single-Phase vs. Two-Phase. Bioresour. Technol. 2013, 144, 80–85. 
DOI:10.1016/j.biortech.2013.06.099. 
69. Sial, T. A.; Khan, M. N.; Lan, Z.; Kumbhar, F.; Ying, Z.; Zhang, J.; Sun, D.; Li, X. 
Contrasting Effects of Banana Peels Waste and Its Biochar on Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions and Soil Biochemical Properties. Process Saf. Environ. Prot. 2019, 122, 
366–377. DOI:10.1016/j.psep.2018.10.030. 
­324 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
70. Sial, T. A.; Lan, Z.; Khan, M. N.; Zhao, Y.; Kumbhar, F.; Liu, J.; Zhang, A.; Hill, R. 
L.; Lahori, A. H.; Memon, M. Evaluation of Orange Peel Waste and Its Biochar on 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Soil Biochemical Properties within a Loess Soil. Waste 
Manag. 2019, 87, 125–134. DOI:10.1016/j.wasman.2019.01.042. 
71. Singh, A.; Kuila, A.; Adak, S.; Bishai, M.; Banerjee, R. Utilization of Vegetable Wastes for 
Bioenergy Generation. Agric. Res. 2012, 1, 213–222. DOI:10.1007/s40003-012-0030-x. 
72. Soltanian, S.; Aghbashlo, M.; Almasi, F.; Hosseinzadeh-Bandbafha, H.; Nizami, A.-S.; 
Ok, Y. S.; Lam, S. S.; Tabatabaei, M. A Critical Review of the Effects of Pretreatment 
Methods on the Exergetic Aspects of Lignocellulosic Biofuels. Energy Convers. Manag. 
2020, 212, E-article 112792. DOI:10.1016/j.enconman.2020.112792. 
73. Surendra, K. C.; Takara, D.; Hashimoto, A. G.; Khanal, S. K. Biogas as a Sustainable 
Energy Source for Developing Countries: Opportunities and Challenges. Renew. 
Sustain. Energy Rev. 2014, 31, 846–859;doi:10.1016/j.rser.2013.12.015. 
74.	 Szymańska-Chargot, M.; Chylińska, M.; Gdula, K.; Kozioł, A.; Zdunek, A. Isolation and 
Characterization of Cellulose from Different Fruit and Vegetable Pomaces. Polymers 
2017, 9, E-article 495. DOI:10.3390/polym9100495. 
75. Taghizadeh-Alisaraei, A.; Hosseini, S. H.; Ghobadian, B.; Motevali, A. Biofuel 
Production from Citrus Wastes: A Feasibility Study in Iran. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 
2017, 69, 1100–1112. DOI:10.1016/j.rser.2016.09.102. 
76. Tenca, A.; Schievano, A.; Perazzolo, F.; Adani, F.; Oberti, R. Biohydrogen from 
Thermophilic Co-Fermentation of Swine Manure with Fruit and Vegetable Waste: 
Maximizing Stable Production Without pH Control. Bioresour. Technol. 2011, 102, 
8582–8588. DOI:10.1016/j.biortech.2011.03.102. 
77. Ugwuanyi, J. O.; McNeil, B.; Harvey, L. M. Production of Protein-Enriched Feed Using 
Agro-Industrial Residues as Substrates. In Biotechnology for Agro-Industrial Residues 
Utilisation: Utilisation of Agro-Residues; nee’ Nigam, P., Pandey, A., Eds.; Springer: 
Netherlands—Dordrecht, 2009; pp 77–103. 
78. Vendruscolo, F. Starch: A Potential Substrate for Biohydrogen Production. Int. J. Energy 
Res. 2015, 39, 293–302. DOI:10.1002/er.3224. 
79. Wijaya, Y. P.; Putra, R. D. D.; Widyaya, V. T.; Ha, J.-M.; Suh, D. J.; Kim, C. S. 
Comparative Study on Two-Step Concentrated Acid Hydrolysis for the Extraction 
of Sugars from Lignocellulosic Biomass. Bioresour. Technol. 2014, 164, 221–231. 
DOI:10.1016/j.biortech.2014.04.084. 
80. Xu, F.; Li, Y.; Ge, X.; Yang, L.; Li, Y. Anaerobic Digestion of Food Waste—Challenges 
and Opportunities. Bioresour. Technol. 2018, 247, 1047–1058. DOI:10.1016/j.biortech. 
2017.09.020. 
81. Zhang, Z.; O’Hara, I. M.; Mundree, S.; Gao, B.; Ball, A. S.; Zhu, N.; Bai, Z.; Jin, B. 
Biofuels from Food Processing Wastes. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2016, 38, 97–105. 
DOI:10.1016/j.copbio.2016.01.010. Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing: Methods and Strategies. Megh R. Goyal, & 
Faizan Ahmad (Eds.)
© 2023 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 14 
POTENTIAL OF FRUIT AND 
VEGETABLE WASTE: TREATMENT OF 
WASTEWATER 
ASIMA SHAFI, FAIZAN AHMAD, and SADAF ZAIDI 
ABSTRACT 
The increase in the number of industries worldwide has greatly 
contaminated the water bodies due to the release of various pollutants in 
the form of toxic metals, which negatively affect living systems. There are 
a number of methods and techniques to remove toxic metals from water 
bodies, for example, precipitation, chemical oxidation and reduction, 
ultrafiltration, etc. However, these methods are not economically sound. 
Adsorption is yet another technique, which uses carbon to adsorb different 
kinds of pollution substances from wastewater. However, its use is also 
not common because of its high cost. Therefore, there is an urgent need 
of agro-based inexpensive commodities, which can fruitfully adsorb 
heavy metals or metal ions. Fruit and vegetable processing industries and 
households generate waste (e.g., peel and pomace in large quantity). They 
contain large number of cellulose content and other vital components, such 
as hemicelluloses, lipids, lignin, simple sugars, proteins, water, starch, 
and hydrocarbon. As a result, these agrowastes are potentially utilized 
in the treatment of highly polluted water. Fruit and vegetable wastes are 
endowed with high adsorption capacities and therefore are eco-friendly 
alternatives to the costly methods and are generally used methodologies 
in the wastewater remediation. 326 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
14.1 INTRODUCTION 
Since last few decades, the water quality has been adversely affected and 
deteriorated worldwide due to various factors, such as lack of maintenance 
of water resources, unplanned urbanization, rapid industrialization, etc. The 
main sources include sanitary discharges, toxic wastes from industries and 
their dumping, agricultural field runoff leading to the deterioration of water, 
and severe health issues. The toxicity of heavy metal/metal ions present in 
water is hazardous to living beings. Different types of industrial sectors, such 
as tanneries, mining sectors, storage battery, alloy produce toxic and heavy 
metals.32 Therefore, there is an urgent need of introducing eco-friendly 
methods to ensure the safety of our ecological system. 
Various conventional technologies, including exchange of ions, chemical￾based precipitation, chemical oxidation (CO) and chemical reduction (CR), and 
ultrafiltration (UF) are available to control or alleviate water pollution. Since, 
these methods possess complex procedures in the wastewater remediation. 
They are also highly costly and generate toxic sludge in the solution. On the 
other hand, adsorption is comparatively an effective and significant alternating 
method in treating the wastewater, because it is easy to operate, design simplicity, 
and it is highly convenient technique.12 This method can also remove multitude 
of pollutants, thus, it is widely applicable in the treatment of wastewater. 
Carbon in activated form is commonly used in eliminating various heavy 
and toxic metals from water and is considered as universal adsorbent in the 
treatment of effluents. However, due to its high cost, its widespread use in 
effluent-treatment is limited. Several low-cost adsorbents have been observed 
and their potential to remove toxic pollutants from various effluents have been 
examined. Agricultural (fruit and vegetable) wastes, due to their inimitable 
chemical composition, are economically feasible and eco-friendly. Their 
abundant availability, low-cost, and renewable nature makes them usable for 
redressing toxic metallic pollutants. 
Hemicellulose, lipids, simple sugars, proteins, starch, water, and hydro￾carbons are basic units of fruit and vegetable waste biomass. These contain 
a number of functional groups that lead to metal complexation to remove 
heavy metal or metal ions.80 Fruit and vegetable peels and pomace are of 
significant importance among various agricultural wastes for wastewater 
treatment, since most of them are discarded. 
This chapter highlights the global production of fruits and vegetable 
wastes. Further, this chapter focuses on the potential role of different fruits 
and vegetable wastes (peel and pomace) in the removal of heavy metals from Potential of Fruit and Vegetable Waste 327 
wastewater. The chapter also includes discussions on the adsorption capacity 
of various fruit and vegetable wastes and their procedure in removing heavy 
toxic metals from the wastewater. 
14.2 PRESENT STATUS OF WASTEWATER GENERATION: INDIA 
AND WORLDWIDE 
The noticeable increment in water is predicted for industrial sector and energy￾producing sector along with the agricultural sector, which globally abstracts 
70% of water. The economy of a country generally depends on the treatment 
of its municipal and industrial effluents. In developing countries, only 8% 
of the effluent undergoes such treatment. It is estimated that around 80% of 
wastewater is discharged worldwide without undergoing any treatment. 
Wastewater consists of domestic effluents, sanitary effluents, industrial 
effluents, municipal effluents, runoff from agriculture, horticulture, and fish￾farming sectors.69 In the developing countries, the generation of wastewater 
is one of the major challenges for informal growth and settlements of slums. 
The toxicity of pollutants, discharged from industries in water has negative 
impacts on human health as well as aquatic life. 
FAO estimates 3928 km³/year of worldwide freshwater withdrawal in its 
AQUASTAT database. Agricultural sector consumes 1716 km3
/year (44%) 
of this freshwater. The remaining 56%, that is, 2212 km3
/year is released as 
effluents that is discharged from municipal as well as industrial sectors and 
agricultural drainage (Figure 14.1). 
FIGURE 14.1 Worldwide wastewater production and consumption by major sectors.49 328 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
The constant increase in the volume of wastewater and sewage expan￾sion pressurizes the available treatment facilities, and can also lead to poor 
performance. After collecting and treating wastewater, the final quality may 
be negatively influenced by poor maintenance and operation. Thus, much of 
the wastewater is not adequately treated, which eventually affects the quality 
and availability of water. 
Domestic, commercial, industrial, and institutional sectors generate munic￾ipal wastewater in correspondence with existing community. Urban wastewater 
encompasses municipal wastewater and urban runoff. Throughout the world, 
urban areas are dealing with unusual challenges. Migration in conflicted areas, 
climatic change, and extreme and sudden events alter the urbanization patterns 
leading to unjust acts, as in some developed regions, poor community faces the 
same challenges similar to those belonging to developing regions. According 
to UN [2016], the demand for energy will increase to 40%; and for water it will 
increase to 50% worldwide in the year 2030. 
Wastewater generated by domestic holds is usually devoid of health dete￾riorating and toxic components. However, commonly used medications may 
have long-term impacts even at low concentrations and thereby are highly 
concerned. In developing regions, hospitals and other sanitary establish￾ments discharge untreated medical waste. The excessive use of antibiotics 
in animal husbandry and intensive farming techniques has resulted in high 
concentrations in municipal wastewater. It can lead to the additional peril of 
antimicrobial drug resistance. 
14.3 GENERATION AND TREATMENT OF MUNICIPAL 
WASTEWATER IN METROPOLITAN CITIES OF INDIA 
Around 15,644 million liter/day (ML/D) of sewage is generated from 35 
metropolitan cities in India, out of which, only 51% of cities has treatment 
capacity, that means only 8040 ML/D of sewage is treated. Delhi has 30% of 
the total treatment capacity, which covers 2330 ML/D. Mumbai has 26% of 
total capacity, that is, 2130 ML/D. Therefore, combined treatment capacity of 
Delhi and Mumbai is 55% of the total treatment capacity of the metropolitan 
cities. The treatment capacity of various cities, such as Vadodara, Hyderabad, 
Ludhiana, Chennai, and Ahmadabad encounters the volume of generation. 
Cities such as Dhanbad and Delhi have more than 50% of the treatment 
capacity, while rest of the cities have less than 50% of the treatment capacity. 
In India, water is provided by the Government Agencies that have become 
politically sensitive to overcome elections, that is why wastewater projects are Industries generating Total number of units Quantity of wastewater 
wastewater generation (ML/D) 
Chemical 27 97.79 
Distillery 35 37 
Food, Dairy and Beverage 22 6.5 
Pulp and Paper 67 201.39 
Sugar 67 96.69 
Tannery 442 22.1 
Textile, Bleaching, and Dyeing 63 11.39 
Other 41 28.59 
Total 764 Units 501.45 ML/D 
Potential of Fruit and Vegetable Waste 329 
not integrated with the projects of water supply. Also, wastewater projects are 
only employed as disposal units. Parallel increment in technologies and water 
crisis make people understand that wastewater treatment leads to recycle and 
reuse of water in various sectors, including agriculture, horticulture and can 
also be utilized in sludge compost to generate power.71 Table 14.1 depicts the 
present status of generated, treated, and untreated sewage in India. A large 
number of industries also generate about 500 ML/D of effluents.71 Table 14.2 
shows the industry-wise generation of wastewater. 
TABLE 14.1 Present Status of Sewage in India. 
Sewage status Quantity, ML/D 
Generation of sewage 61,754 
Sewage which is untreated 38,791 
Treatment capacity of sewage 22,963 
TABLE 14.2 Amount of Effluents Generated from Various Industries. 
14.4 TOXICITY OF HEAVY METALS 
Heavy metal contamination in water is a global concern, particularly in 
countries having substandard economy. Constant growth of industrial 
sector and different activities of humans are the main causes that lead to the 
heavy metal contamination in water body. Nonbiodegradable nature of such 
toxic metals and their presence (beyond the permissible value) in the efflu￾ents, discharged from various industries, can deteriorate the whole living 
community (Table 14.3).18 The most common toxic metals are phosphate, 
arsenic, fluoride, cadmium, iron, etc. Cadmium leads to toxicity in lungs, 330 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
cardiovascular vessels, and kidney and lowers the count of red blood cells 
(anemia). Nickel can cause gastrointestinal cancer, brain and heart disease. 
Toxicity of iron in humans may cause sickness, cardiovascular collapse, and 
diarrhea. Main emphasis is on contamination caused by arsenic, because of 
its toxic and poisonous nature. Arsenic cannot be easily degraded but is only 
changed into different forms.76 
14.5 PRODUCTION OF FRUIT AND VEGETABLE PROCESSING 
WASTES: GLOBAL SCENARIO 
With the increasing worldwide population and changes in the human diets, the 
demand for various agricultural commodities has increased simultaneously. 
Among the agricultural materials, fruits and vegetables have major role in 
the diet of a human being.74,83 Fruits are globally produced in significant 
amounts, for example, production of citrus fruits is about 124.729 million 
metric tons, banana production is about 114.079 million metric tons, apple 
production is about 84.629 million metric tons, grapes production is about 
74.5 million metric tons, and pineapple production is about 25.429 million 
metric tons.22 Similarly, vegetables also cover the myriad number of tons, 
such as potatoes production is 3820 million metric tons, tomatoes produc￾tion is 171 million metric tons, brassicas production is 71.769 million metric 
tons, turnips and carrots production is 38.8 million metric tons, and peas 
production is 17.419 million metric tons.22 
The term “fruit and vegetable waste” relates to the indigestible 
substances, which are removed or eliminated during collection, managing, 
and transporting and processing of fruits and vegetables.19 Therefore, fruit 
and vegetable wastes can be considered as loss of fruits and vegetables. This 
waste can be generated at different food chain stages, that is, from farm to end 
user, which involves pre-consumer and postconsumer sites.55 Horticulture 
sector also generates some fruit and vegetable waste. However, presently it 
is not of high concern. Since, they contain the materials to facilitate health￾related problems and environmental problems, only if they are not used in an 
appropriate manner.72 
In the world, one-third of the total food produced goes waste annually, 
which is about 1.3 billion metric tons,23 among which, fruit and vegetable 
loss touches the maximum level, that is, 60%.31 
During postharvest processes, about one-third of total worldwide produc￾tion of fruits and vegetables is reduced and is not available to consumers. On 
the contrary, waste generated during postharvest processes is significant for Toxic Permissible limit of effluent discharged Permissible value given at Impacts 
metal from industries (mg/L) international level (lg/L)
Inland surface To sewage disposal/ To irrigating water WHO USEPA 
water, IS:2490 drainage pipeIS:3306 supply IS:3307
As 0.2 0.2 0.2 10 50 Leads to cancer.
Cd 2 1 Nil 3 5 Causes cancer, lung disease, breath
lessness, etc. 
Cr 0.1 2 Nil 50 100 Neoplasm in lungs, dermatitis, etc.
Cu 3 3 Nil Nil 1300 Irritation of nose, mouth, headache,
stomach ache, dizziness, diarrhea.
Hg 0.01 0.01 Nil 1 2 Causes damage to kidneys and causes
various skin diseases
Ni 3 3 Nil Nil Nil Chronic bronchitis, reducing lung
function, etc. 
Pb 0.1 1 Nil 10 5 Anemia, muscle pain, joint pain,
infertility, etc. 
Zn 5 15 Nil Nil nil Nausea, dizziness, chills, fidgetiness. 
331 
TABLE 14.3 Permissible Value of Toxic Metals and Their Negative Impacts on Living community.80 
­
Potential of Fruit and Vegetable Waste 332 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
the consumer in developed countries. Postharvest loss ranges from 2 to 23% 
in the USA40 compared with 9% in the United Kingdom.25 
Buzby et al.17 assessed $42.8 billion ($141/person) loss in fruits and 
vegetables in the US (2008). During fruits and vegetable processing, approxi￾mately, 55 MMT waste is generated in economically sophisticated regions of 
China, Philippines, India, and US.23 Globally, losses in the agriculture sectors 
can be lowered by 47% and waste consumption by 86%, which implies that 
the worldwide amelioration is enormous in such regions.44 
Along with household wastes, fruit and vegetable processing releases 
highest amount of waste in the world.27 Approximately, 89 million tons of 
waste is generated by food processing sectors in European countries and it 
will increase by 40 times in the upcoming years. According to FAO, around 
40% of total food is discarded as waste in India.52,61 Indian Food Corporation 
(IFC) has also estimated that the amount of waste of the total production 
ranges from 10% to 15%, which amounts to about $4.39 billion and $10.6 
billion of the total value of the produced food waste.52 The Indian Ministry of 
Food Processing has suggested that fruit and vegetable loss ranges from 12 to 
21 million tons. Figure 14.2 indicates the production of fruits and vegetables, 
their waste generation during processing. 
FIGURE 14.2 Fruit and vegetable commodities: their generation, their processing amount 
and generation of wasted quantity in million metric tons (MMT).72 
In India, apple juice processing industry pomace production ranges from 
35 to 40% by weight of reused apples. Although the processing volume can 
be more than 8 tons of dried bagasse per annum during the production of 
apple juice, yet most of the pomace is not presently utilized.43 Potential of Fruit and Vegetable Waste 333 
During slicing of apples around 10.9% of pulp/seeds and 89.1% of finished 
products are produced. Around 8.49% of peels, 6.49% of seed residues, 32% 
of pulp residues and about 53% of the final product are generated during 
dicing of papaya. Similarly, 16% of peels and 84% of the final product are 
produced during the peeling of mandarins. Processing of pineapple generates 
about 9% of core, 14% of peels, 15% of pulp and 48% of the finished product. 
Mango processing industries generate 11% of peels, 13% of seed residues, 
18% of pulp residues, and 58% of the finished product.39 Furthermore, fruit 
and vegetable juice processing yields about 5.49 MMT of waste containing 
pomace also. Globally, grape and wine processing industries produce around 
5–9 MMT annually of solid waste that consists of processed materials in the 
range of 20–30%.72 
Fruits and vegetables during canning and freezing processes produce 
approximately 6 million metric tons of solid waste (comprising around 
20–30% of stalk, leaves, and stems) yearly.57 Characteristics of fruit and 
vegetable wastes are summarized in Table 14.4. 
TABLE 14.4 Characteristics of Potential Fruit and Vegetable Waste. 
Product Waste characteristic Amount of waste Reference 
Apples Peels, Seeds, and Pomace - [30] 
Bananas Peel 35% [30] 
Citrus fruits Peel, Seeds, etc. 50% [30] 
Dragon fruits Seeds (30–45) % [20] 
Durian Seed and Skin. (60–70) % [79] 
Grapes Stem, Skin, and Seed 20% [30] 
Guava fruit Core, Peels, and Seeds 10% [30] 
Jackfruit Seeds, Rind (50–70) % [73] 
Mango fruit Stone and Peel 45% [50] 
Onions Surrounded leaf – [30] 
Potatoes Peel 15% [30] 
Tomato Core, Skin 20% [30] 
14.6 UTILIZATION OF PEELS AND POMACE AS ADSORBENTS: 
FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
Households produce large amount of fruit and vegetable wastes in the form 
of peels and pomace. Moreover, fruit and vegetable processing industries 
produce different types of waste in a significant amount during various 334 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
processing operations, including peels and pomace, which are commonly 
discarded or used as feed for the farm animals. This negatively affects the 
environment and can lead to severe issues due to which there arises an essential 
management and better utilization of such wastes. Fruit and vegetable peels 
and pomace are organic, sustainable, and economic adsorbent sources and 
can fairly be utilized in removing several toxic metals and thereby can 
alleviate the water pollution. Moreover, they are renewable in nature, thus 
they can be employed as effective approach in the wastewater treatment.12 
14.6.1 CITRUS FRUIT WASTE 
The global yield and utilization of citrus fruits has increased tremendously 
during the past several years. A huge quantity of citrus waste is produced 
that comprises around 50% of the total fruit weight. However, they pollute 
the environment, as large amount of citrus fruit wastes is being burned for 
deposition. They are also used in the manufacture of feed for animals and 
in extracting various active biosubstances. To overcome this problem, they 
need to be managed and utilized properly to produce economic and effective 
products, which can be usable in different sectors without affecting the envi￾ronment. Since, fruit and vegetable wastes have high adsorption capacity, 
therefore, much of the citrus fruit wastes can be used as bioadsorbents in the 
treatment of wastewater. 
14.6.2 ORANGE FRUIT PEEL WASTE 
Orange juice processing industries generate stacks of orange waste, which 
results in the environmental pollution due to the release of phenolic 
compounds. On the other hand, orange waste including peels can be used 
as a best approach for adsorbing various toxic polluting materials from the 
effluents as it consists of pectins, cellulosic and hemicellulosic compounds, 
lignin, chlorophyll pigments, and several hydrocarbons of low molecular 
weight. The orange peel waste from orange juice processing industries is 
also free of cost and its ability as an adsorbent in removing various toxic 
metal and metal ions from water has been studied by various researchers. 
For example, Ajmal et al.3
 have observed the adsorption capacity of 
orange peel waste for the removal of metals (e.g., zinc, nickel, copper, lead, 
and chromium) from wastewater. The maximum sequestering of nickel was 
observed (pH = 6) followed by copper, lead, zinc, and chromium. Potential of Fruit and Vegetable Waste 335 
14.6.3 POMELO FRUIT PEEL WASTE 
The adsorbing capacity of pomelo peel waste for lead removal from waste￾water has been practically observed by the use of activated ZnCl2
 method.46 
through optimization of various adsorbing conditions, such as 5.29–6.49 of 
pH of wastewater at the time of starting the experiment, 10 g/L of dosage 
of adsorbent, 1.49 h of exposure time and concentration of 100 mg/L (t = 
0) in the effluent at 30°C. This resulted in the removal of more amount of 
lead >90%. The adsorption of copper on the pomelo peel waste (pectinated 
as well as depectinated forms) has also been observed.81 and it has been 
reported that the pectinated pomelo peel adsorbs around 19.69 mg/g of 
copper compared with 21.09 mg/g of depectinated form at various optimal 
provisions (concentration of 125 mg/L initially, 25°C of temperature, pH of 
4 and equilibrium time of 60 min). 
14.6.4 GRAPE FRUIT PEEL WASTE 
Around 3.99 million metric tons of grapes are produced annually in both 
tropical and subtropical segments all over the globe, which implies abundant 
waste including peels and pomace. Grape peel wastes are composed of 
monomers and polymers, which are soluble and insoluble in water. The 
water-dissolved parts consist of various units, fructose, glucose, xylose, and 
sucrose. On the other hand, the insoluble parts consist of cellulose, pectin, 
lignin, and hemicellulose units, which can fairly adsorb aquatic pollutants, 
because they contain carboxyl and hydroxyl functional groups.12 Grape peels 
possess good adsorption capacity for removing uranium from water,85 which 
is done by ion-exchange phenomenon, where anionic groups present in 
grape peel cell wall interchange with cations of uranium. The batch method 
has been employed for observing the adsorption of nickel and cadmium 
ions on grape peel wastes,82 and it has been reported that grape peel waste 
adsorbs 46.1 mg/g of nickel and 42.1 mg/g of cadmium, respectively from 
wastewater. 
14.6.5 BANANA PEEL WASTE 
Approximately, 30–40% by weight of banana peel waste is generated, which 
is commonly utilized for feeding the animals, composting, and in producing 
several enzymes, pectins methane, proteins, etc.77 Banana peel waste mainly 336 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
consists of cellulosic and hemicellulosic units, chlorophyll pigments and 
other substances of low molecular weight. Since, carboxylic group and 
hydroxyl groups are present in the banana peels, they can adsorb toxic metals 
and other polluting organic compounds in large quantity from wastewater. 
Cadmium and lead adsorption on the banana peels has been observed by 
using batch method.9
 It has been reported with the Langmuir method that 5.7 
mg of cadmium and 2.2 mg of lead were absorbed by using 1 gram of banana 
peels. The removal of metals from the solution, synthesized in laboratory, 
by using chemically treated banana peels has also been observed.8
 It was 
found that the adsorption capacity of chemically treated banana peels for 
lead, nickel, zinc, copper, and cobalt removal is approximately 8, 6.9, 5.8, 
4.8, and 2.5 mg/g, respectively. The banana peels also adsorb significant 
number of phenolic substances from water.1
 Physicochemical characteristics 
of banana peels are summarized in Table 14.5. 
TABLE 14.5 Physicochemical Characteristics of Banana Peels. 
Contents Value 
Aluminum (%) 1.049 
Ash (%) 3.849 
Carbon (%) 31.789 
Chlorine (%) 3.219 
Moisture (%) 13.549 
Oxygen (%) 42.869 
Potassium (%) 14.859 
Silicon (%) 1.479 
Sodium (%) 1.329 
Volatile substance (%) 86.439 
pH 6.6 
Size of particle <1 
14.6.6 POMEGRANATE PEEL WASTE 
The peel waste from pomegranate juice processing industries ranges from 
5 to 15% of the net weight. Pomegranate peel consists of polyphenols, 
ellagitannin, gallic acids, etc. Pomegranate peels are utilized as cost-effective 
and sustainable adsorbents. Raw pomegranate peel, carbon-activated peels of 
pomegranate and chemically modified carbon-activated peels of pomegranate 
have been utilized in removing lead and copper from wastewater.21 Potential of Fruit and Vegetable Waste 337 
The maximum adsorption of lead and copper on the peels has been 
reported at the optimum pH 5.59 and 5.79, respectively. Equilibrium time 
of 2 h has also been reported. The higher sorption capability of pomegranate 
peels has been reported for removing nickel, which is about 52 mg/g.13 
Similarly, the adsorption capacity of pomegranate peels has been 
observed for various other metal ions, for example, copper, nickel, cadmium, 
zinc, where copper ions are adsorbed in abundant quantity and chromium 
ions are adsorbed in least quantity, while as zinc, cadmium and nickel ions 
are adsorbed in moderate quantity. 
The ability of carbon-activated pomegranate peels has also been observed 
for adsorbing iron (Fe) ions from solutions.51 The maximum adsorption 
capacity of carbon-activated pomegranate peels for removing iron ions was 
18.5 mg/g at pH 5.99 and 1 g/L concentration of adsorbent at 29°C. 
14.6.7 GARLIC PEEL WASTE 
Garlic peel waste can be used as a better option in the remediation of 
wastewater. The availability of garlic peels as adsorbent for removing lead, 
copper, and nickel has been evaluated.45 Garlic peel waste has remarkably 
higher adsorption capability for lead, that is, 209 mg/g than the copper and 
nickel. The chelation mechanism occurs between lead and oxygen atoms 
present on the garlic peel surface due to which lead is eventually adsorbed 
on the garlic peels. 
14.6.8 APPLE POMACE WASTE 
Apple pomace consists of polyphenolic compounds, which contain hydroxyl 
groups.16 The adsorption capacity of apple pomace waste can be efficiently 
increased by replacing hydroxyl groups with chelating groups, such as esters, 
xanthate, sulfur-containing groups. 
Furthermore, apple pomace is also composed of pectins, cellulose, hemi￾cellulose, polysaccharides and lignin, which are comprised of carboxylic, 
ketonic, amino and hydroxyl groups. These functional groups get easily 
bound with the metals present in wastewater. The apple pomace also chelates 
the metals up to a certain limit. However, it needs to be chemically modified 
or treated for having the better adsorbing affinity for metal removal from 
wastewater. Apple waste particularly its pomace has an inimitable chemical 
composition and it can be utilized as a strong adsorbent if it undergoes 338 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
chemical modifications. The utilization of chemically modified apple 
pomace as the better adsorbent for removing toxic metals from wastewater 
has also been reported by Chand et al.18 
14.6.9 CUCUMBER WASTE 
Cucumber wastes particularly peels are utilized in the wastewater treatment. A 
negatively charged polysaccharide produced from seaweed (brown in color), 
known as alginic acid, is used to immobilize cucumber peel components 
in the form of globules or beads,11 so that the toxic metals would be easily 
removed from wastewater. Alginic acid has been employed as the source for 
beads. It has been reported that cucumber peel beads remove all contami￾nating substances from the wastewater. However, the adsorption capacity 
of cucumber peel beads for cadmium, copper, lead, and nickel removal has 
been found in low percentage in comparison to nonionized contaminating 
synthesized wastewater. It was observed that the immobilization of cucumber 
peels on sodium alginate/alginic acid bead makes the peel potentially efficient 
adsorbent for removing toxic contaminants from the drinking water.70 
Figure 14.3 shows that cucumber beaded peels adsorbed more than 50% 
of cadmium, mercury, leads, nickel and copper, while they adsorb <3% of 
chromium and arsenic. The cucumber beaded peels are effectively usable 
compared with other fruit and vegetable beaded peels, such as, apple peel, 
potato peel, banana peel, and orange-peel beads prepared and utilized by 
optimizing the conditions at the same level both chemically and physically. 
FIGURE 14.3 Adsorption of heavy metal ions by cucumber peel bead. Potential of Fruit and Vegetable Waste 339 
14.6.10 TOMATO PEEL WASTE 
Tomato is the second most consumed agricultural commodity around the 
globe and approximately 30% of its processed form is commonly consumed. 
In various tomato processing industries, economically 90% of tomato peel is 
generated as waste. To overcome the problem of deposition of tomato waste, 
much of the tomato peel waste is utilized for wastewater treatment and thus 
becomes an alternative biotechnology method for water purification. Tomato 
peel waste contains pectins, carotenes, and phenolic components consisting 
of various functional groups, for example, amino, hydroxyl, and carboxylic 
functional groups, which potentially bind various toxic contaminants. The 
cost-effective and efficient availability and character of tomato peel waste￾based adsorbent has been completely evaluated.66 
The tomato peel waste-based adsorbent can be utilized for the extraction 
of multitude of contaminants from wastewater (Figure 14.4). The extraction 
of heavy metal ions (Pb2+, Ni2+, As3+ and Cr6+) from wastewater has been 
investigated and analyzed to acknowledge the sorption technique. 
FIGURE 14.4 Extraction of heavy metals using tomato peel. 
14.6.11 MISCELLANEOUS PEELS AS ADSORBENTS 
The adsorption character of mandarin peel wastes for removing mercury (Hg 
in ionic form) from wastewater has been investigated. The investigation was 
done on three kinds of peels of mandarin: raw mandarin peels, pretreated 
mandarin peels with sodium hydroxide, and mandarin peels treated with 
carbon. The three types of mandarin peels exhibited different adsorption 340 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
capacities for the removal of mercury ions from wastewater. For example, 
raw peels of mandarin exhibited approximately 19 mg/g of adsorption 
capacity, sodium hydroxide-treated mandarin peels exhibited 23.3 mg/g 
adsorption capacity and carbon-treated mandarin peels exhibited 34.8 mg/g 
adsorption capacity for the removal of mercury ions from water.37 
It has been reported that the adsorption capacity of charcoal-treated potato 
peel for removing the copper ions from wastewater was approximately 0.39 
mg/g.7 The monolayer adsorption capability of melon peels for removing 
cadmium ions from water has been estimated as 82 mg/g.33 Chemically 
treated watermelon peel adsorbent has been utilized for lead ions removal. 
Iqbal et al.38 have reported that mango peels can be potentially utilized 
as adsorbent for adsorbing nickel, copper, and zinc ions from wastewater 
discharged from electroplating industries. The maximum adsorption occurs 
at pH of 5–6. Litchi fruit peel also showed efficient adsorption capacity 
for chromium ions removal, while the maximum adsorption of chromium 
occurred at pH of 2 and the adsorption capability of litchi fruit peels for 
eliminating chromium ions was estimated as 101.1 mg/g. The viability and 
cost-effectiveness of peels of lemon, banana, and orange have been examined 
for the removal of toxic metals in their ionic forms, for example, copper, 
nickel, zinc, cadmium, and lead ions. Table 14.6 illustrates the adsorption 
capacities of peels and pomace of various fruits and vegetables. 
14.7 FACTORS AFFECTING THE ADSORPTION OF PEELS AND 
POMACE OF VARIOUS FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 
14.7.1 DOSAGE OF ADSORBENT 
It is an important factor to estimate the adsorption capacity of fruit and vege￾table peels and pomace adsorbents. The dosage of adsorbent determines the 
effectiveness of existing active sites present on the surfaces for the process of 
adsorption. Therefore, the withdrawal of adsorbate from wastewater linearly 
increases with the dosage of adsorbent.42 The amount of adsorbent has a 
great impact on the adsorption of heavy metal ions from wastewater. Chand 
et al.18 have studied the effect of apple pomace and chemically modified 
apple pomace doses for adsorbing cadmium at a concentration of ions 0.1 
and 2.49 g per 50 mL, 0.01 and 0.1 g per 50 mL at optimal provisions, 
respectively. It was found that the adsorption capacity increases with the 
amount of adsorbent. Potential of Fruit and Vegetable Waste 341 
TABLE 14.6 Adsorbing Capacity of Different Peels and Pomace-Based Adsorbents of 
Fruits and Vegetables for Removing Toxic Metals. 
Types of adsorbents Toxic metal Amount of metal adsorbed References 
(mg/g) 
Ni2+ Tomato peel 8.71 [66] 
Cd Apple pomace 2+ 4.45 [18] 
Cd Banana peels 2+ 5.7 [9] 
Pb Cabbage waste 2+ 60.57 [35] 
Cassava peels Cu2+ and Cd2+ 127.29 & 119.59, respectively [34] 
Pb Cauliflower wastes 2+ 47.63 [35] 
Cd Cauliflower wastes 2+ 21.32 [35] 
Cu Chemically treated orange peels 2+ 289 [24] 
Cu Depectinated Pomelo peels 2+ 21.09 [81] 
Pb Garlic waste 2+ 209 [45] 
Cu Gooseberries 2+ 24.0 [67] 
Grape pomace Pb2+, Cd2+ 312.5 & 135.2, respectively [53] 
Grapefruit peels U(VI) 140.8 [85] 
Pb KCl treated orange peels 2+ 141.8 [29] 
Zn KCl treated orange peels 2+ 45.3 [29] 
Ni KCl treated orange peels 2+ 49.14 [29] 
Cd KCl treated orange peels 2+ 125.629 [29] 
Lemon peels Cobalt 22 [14] 
Litchi peels Chromium 101.1 [68] 
Cu Mango peels 2+ 46.1 [38] 
Pb Mercerized garlic peels 2+ 109 [47] 
Cd Modified cucumber peels 2+ 58.2 [56] 
Pb Muskmelon peels 2+ 0.8 mol/kg [36] 
Ni Olive pomace waste 2+ 14.8 [84] 
Orange peels As (III) 1.18 [41] 
Peels of carrots Cr3+, Cr6+ 86.6 & 88.29, respectively [15] 
Ni2+ Pomegranate peels 51.99 [13] 
Cu2+ Pomelo peels 19.69 [81] 
Cu2+ Potato peel waste 0.39 [7] 
Cu2+ Pulp of sugar beet 28.49 [4] 
Thermally activated potato peels Cu2+ 84.7 [28] 
- Zirconium-treated apple peel AsO2 15.6 [48] 
wastes 342 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
14.7.2 TIME OF CONTACT 
The heterogeneous mixture of solids and gases often completes various stages 
of transfer of mass, out of which few stages are sluggish in a comparative 
manner. Hence, to ensure the attainment of equilibrium, it is mandatory to 
determine the time of contact. Adsorption of toxic metallic contaminants on 
fruit and vegetable peel and pomace-based adsorbents can be increased with 
increasing the time of contact. It can be attributed to the significant amount 
of metal removal from water by the adsorbent activities with the increasing 
time of contact.54,60,64 
Nayak et al.53 have depicted the effect of contact time on the adsorbing 
capacity of grape pomace. Results have revealed that in spite of the initial 
concentration of metallic ions, around 75–90% of metal was adsorbed within 
the first 120 min, followed by a slow falling rate and eventually the equilib￾rium at 270 min. 
14.7.3 pH 
It affects the adsorption of toxic metals by fruit and vegetable waste-based 
adsorbents. It influences the composition of homogenous mixture, usability 
of functional groups on the surface of fruit and vegetable peel and pomace 
and the adsorbate composition. With the variation of pH from acidic state 
to basic state, it facilitates the adsorption of positively charged metals. For 
positively charged metals, the low adsorption occurs at pH <7, because of 
excess protons competing with the cationic metals for the sites of adsorp￾tion. For instance, the functional groups on the tomato peels get ionized at 
high pH, which leads to the maximum adsorption of cations via electrostatic 
mechanism.66 In the case of anionic pollutants, the low pH results in a higher 
adsorption since positive sites of peels can react with anionic pollutants. The 
removal of Cr (VI) and As (III) is maximum at pH less than 7, owing to 
electrostatic mechanism between the peel having cationic sites and the nega￾tively charged ions.66 The metal ions removal in percentage with variation of 
pH is shown in Figure 14.5. 
14.7.4 INITIAL CONCENTRATION OF THE METAL 
The adsorbing capability of fruit and vegetable peels and pomace-based 
adsorbent increases with the increase of initial concentration of toxic metals. Potential of Fruit and Vegetable Waste 343 
The analyzing materials in wastewater generate the propulsion due to which 
metals can be adsorbed by fruit and vegetable waste adsorbents. In the multi￾component system, there is an efficient chemical reaction between lead and 
adsorbent material active sites. Moreover, the adsorption of garlic and onion 
wastes for metal is in the order65: Pb2+> Sn2+> Fe2+> Hg2+> As3+> Cd2+. 
FIGURE 14.5 Effect of pH on the metal ion adsorption. 
Diffusion of metals of more atomic weight generates more amounts of 
momentum energy that facilitates the adsorption of metals with the incre￾ment uncertainty of collision between metal and solid surface. Therefore, 
metals of more atomic weights are significantly and effectively adsorbed. 
14.7.5 TEMPERATURE 
Since temperature brings the change in the adsorption capacity of a particular 
adsorbent, therefore, it highly affects the adsorption of fruit and vegetable 
waste-based adsorbents. The extent of sorption increases with increasing 
temperature, since higher temperature increases the mobile nature in adsor￾bates and causes the decrement in the viscous nature of the homogenous 
mixture. For example, the maximum adsorbing capability of grape pomace 
for lead and cadmium ions is 312.5 and 135.2 mg/g, respectively at 25°C.53 
The adsorption of metal ions increases with the increasing temperature. This 
indicates that at higher temperature effective adsorption occurs, which is 
remarkable for adsorbing different types of pollutants from the wastewater. 344 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
14.7.6 PARTICLE SIZE/SURFACE AREA 
Adsorption linearly increases with the increasing surface area. Surface area is 
indirectly proportional to size of particle, which generates a greater number 
of adsorption binding sites. It plays an effective role in the adsorption of 
toxic metals on fruit and vegetable peel and pomace-based adsorbents. The 
surface of fruit and vegetable wastes contain porous surface. Volume and 
diameter of pores determine the degree of diffusion of pollutants into the 
porous surface. If the pore diameter is larger than the adsorbate molecule 
diameter, then the molecule diffuses deeply into pores.63 
Chand et al.18 estimated that the surface area of untreated apple pomace 
and chemically treated apple pomace was 0.7129 m2
/g and 0.8690 m2
/g, 
respectively. Thus, 18% of the surface area of adsorbent has been enhanced 
after the chemical treatment. The particle size of untreated apple pomace 
and chemically treated apple pomace was 219.99 and 232.99 deci-nm, 
respectively. 
14.8 MODIFICATION OF FRUIT AND VEGETABLE PEELS 
The fruit and vegetable peels and pomace adsorbents need a modification 
before being used in heavy metal remediation, because they release soluble 
organic substances, which lead to the generation of more BOD as well as 
COD level thus decreasing the adsorption process that eventually depletes 
the oxygen level in water; and aquatic habitants are thus endangered. The 
proper selection of additives for modifying peels and pomace of fruits and 
vegetables ensures their efficient usability and re-usability. The effectiveness 
and efficiency of such adsorbents are enhanced by the application of available 
physicochemical treatment methods.59 
To modify the size of the adsorbents, several physical methods are used, 
such as chopping, grinding, treatment by steam, microwave treatment, 
irradiation, drying (sublimation), and high pressure by using an autoclave. 
Similarly, in chemical modifications, adsorbents are treated with a myriad 
of chemicals for cleansing, enhancing the binding groups, eliminating the 
hampering groups, and graft copolymerization.58 
Graft polymerization is done by applying the elevated energy radiation 
grafting, chemical initiation, and photochemical grafting. The circumstances 
for generating cost-effective adsorbents are required to be optimized after 
the surface modification. The treatment of banana peels with highly critical 
carbon dioxide brought noticeable variations in the lignocellulosic tissues. Potential of Fruit and Vegetable Waste 345 
However, any kind of considerable increment is not manifested by its capa￾bility for adsorption of metal/metal ions.5 
Ali and Saeed6
 used un-treated banana peel wastes, banana peels 
hydrolyzed with alkaline solution, acid-hydrolyzed banana peel wastes, and 
banana peel wastes treated with bleach as adsorbents separately for washing 
off chromium (VI) and manganese (II) from wastewater. For chromium, 
untreated banana peel wastes exhibited 45% adsorption capacity, alkali and 
acidic-hydrolyzed banana peel wastes exhibited 87% and 67% adsorption 
capacities, respectively, while bleach-treated banana peel wastes exhibited 
adsorption capacity of 40%. Likewise for manganese, the final adsorption 
capacities of UT, Al, Ac, and B-banana peel wastes were 51%, 90%,74%, 
and 67%, respectively at optimum conditions. 
It has also been reported that metal ion adsorbing capability of alkali￾hydrolyzed banana peel is greatest, followed by acid-hydrolyzed and 
untreated banana peel, whereas bleach-treated banana peel had the lowest 
adsorption capacity for metal/metal ion removal from water, which indicates 
that the adsorption of metals is enhanced while chemically treated with 
banana peel wastes. Another example of modification is the application of 
apple pomace wastes, which are modified by using succinic anhydride and 
the phenomenon using simple-ring opening method. The chemically modi￾fied apple pomace wastes provide sufficient surface area for adsorbing Cd. 
Surface area of chemically treated apple pomace increases up to 18% and 
it is 50 times less quantity than the untreated apple pomace for removing 
cadmium from wastewater.18 
In the same manner, HCl-treated cucumber peel waste exhibited the 
adsorption capacity of 85% for cadmium (II) at a metal concentration of 20 
mg/L and pH of 5.56 
14.9 REGENERATION OF PEEL-BASED ADSORBENTS 
Regeneration of an adsorbent is an important step for lowering the cost of 
processing and metal/metal ion recovery at the end of adsorption. Regeneration 
is a phenomenon, in which fruits and vegetables wastes are washed off 
by treating with a specific solvent that leads to a concentrated metallic 
contaminant recovery. At industrial level, the most considerable application 
of adsorption is to sequester the heavy and toxic metals by utilizing specific 
adsorbents and regenerating such adsorbents simultaneously so that they can 
be used in further wastewater treatment operations. 346 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
The applicability of adsorbents depends on various factors and functional 
groups (active). There are many chemical compounds, which are used in 
different concentrations in desorbing toxic metals from fruit and vegetable 
peels, such as HNO3
, H2
SO4
, HCl. For example, alkaline solutions of sodium 
hydroxide, potassium hydroxide, and acidic solution of phosphoric acid are 
suitably employed in the desorption of As (arsenic) from agricultural waste￾based adsorbents.42 
Negi et al.65 observed metal recovery, using 2% of HNO3
 in 100 mL 
concentrated solution in the sequence: iron (70.99%) > tin (66.19%) > lead 
(59.59%) > cadmium (59.19%) > arsenic (57.59%) > mercury (57.19%). 
When the metallic pollutants are retrieved, the biomaterials do not cause any 
degeneracy in the natural ecosystem as they are not degraded in the earth’s 
crust and these materials can also be used in fertilizing and conditioning of 
the soil. Thus, the agricultural (fruit and vegetable) wastes can be utilized 
to purify the ecosystem as well as sewage, discharged from various sectors, 
from toxic metals. Therefore, recycled adsorbents can be efficiently used 
and their usefulness results in an affordable and economical devolution 
phenomenon. 
14.10 FUTURE PERSPECTIVES 
Since, adsorption is a physical and chemical process, which merely depends 
upon different parameters and its mechanisms. Thorough understanding of 
fruit and vegetable waste adsorption mechanisms remains a challenge. Fruit 
and vegetable peels and pomace waste adsorption requires further research 
to make it easier for understanding and applying in various effluent discharge 
sectors to sequester toxic metals from the effluents. Fruit and vegetable peels 
and pomace are observed for their utility in removing toxic metals, some 
organic compounds, and dyes from wastewater. 
Exploration of utilization of fruit and vegetable peels and pomace for 
the removal of more organic and inorganic polluting materials is highly 
concerned and further needed. They are also required to be utilized for 
adsorbing contaminants (NH3
, CH4
, NOX, CO2
, etc.).26 To promote the 
utilization of adsorbents at large-scale level, further investigation is needed 
for characterizing fruit and vegetable peels and pomace-based adsorbents 
with maximum adsorption capacities for toxic metals. During the treatment 
process, fruit and vegetable peels release soluble organic compounds into 
water, which restrict their employment in high-level applications. Therefore, 
further study is required in this field. Potential of Fruit and Vegetable Waste 347 
Moreover, adsorbents can be altered by applying sustainable chemical 
materials to cease more deterioration of water bodies. This type of modifica￾tion can lead to the increment in multitude of active sites, for binding metals, 
in the substance, thus improves the properties of exchange of ions and new 
active groups are formed, which favor the uptake of polluting materials. 
Studies are further needed to understand the adsorption mechanism at the 
adsorbent–water boundary. The idea of utilizing fruit and vegetable peels 
and pomace-based adsorbents might be favorable in developing a sustain￾able (green) filtration technology for purifying toxic metal-contaminated 
water that may facilitate the communities having low economy to utilize 
this water for drinking purposes and to keep them from health ailments.42 
Preparing, optimizing and employing new technology of fruit and vegetable 
waste-based adsorbent for wastewater treatment at pilot as well as commer￾cial stage by applying column adsorption method needs further research. It 
seems to be glistening future for new such adsorbents, which can be effective 
and economically feasible. 
14.11 SUMMARY 
In developing countries, wastewater treatment is not up to the mark, because 
of lacking an economy to facilitate and alleviate the pollution of water 
bodies. Economic level in developing countries is also not parallel with 
the increasing population and volume of wastewater. which consequently 
increases. This results in the generation of untreated wastewater and signifi￾cant amount of this untreated wastewater is usually used for irrigating the 
fields by less-skilled farmers to improve the quality of the wastewater. 
The utilization of waste peel-based adsorbents for eluting various metals 
from effluents offers various alluring capabilities, like the noticeable adsorp￾tion capacity for different polluting materials and these waste peel-based 
adsorbent also possesses low-cost. These are nontoxic and biologically more 
preferable. Metals having cationic nature are more effectively adsorbed on 
fruit and vegetable wastes. Moreover, different methods of surface modifica￾tion, utilized by researchers are of beneficial use for enhancing the capacity 
of adsorption. 
Treated or modified fruit and vegetable wastes show better adsorption 
capacity in comparison to the wastes, which are not treated or modified by 
any means. Heavy metallic polluting materials are efficiently removed by 
cellulose extracted and polyacrylic acid grafted fruit and vegetable wastes. 
Overall, fruit and vegetable waste-based adsorbents are collectively a better 348 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
alternative for controlling water pollution over presently activated carbon 
technique, which is expensive. In addition to this, they can also contribute in 
minimizing whole waste production. 
KEYWORDS 
• adsorbent 
fruit and vegetable waste 
heavy toxic metals 
peel and pomace 
regeneration 
• 
wastewater treatment 
wastewater 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
REFERENCES 
1. Achak, M.; Hafidi, A.; Ouazzani, N.; Sayadi, S.; Mandi, L. Low-Cost Biosorbent 
(Banana Peel) for the Removal of Phenolic Compounds from Olive Mill Wastewater: 
Kinetic and Equilibrium Studies. J. Hazard. Mater. 2009, 166, 117–125. 
2. Ahmad, T.; Danish, M. Prospects of Banana Waste Utilization in Wastewater Treatment: 
A Review. J. Environ. Manage. 2018, 206, 330–348. 
3. Ajmal, M.; Rao, R. A. K.; Ahmad, R.; Ahmad, J. Adsorption Studies on Citrus 
Reticulata (Fruit Peel of Orange): Removal and Recovery of Ni (II) from Electroplating 
Wastewater. J. Hazard. Mater. 2000, 79, 117–131. 
4.	 Aksu, Z.; İşoğlu, I. A. Removal of Copper (II) Ions from Aqueous Solution by Biosorption 
Onto Agricultural Waste Sugar Beet Pulp. Process Biochem. 2005, 40, 3031–3044. 
5. Albarelli, J. Q.; Rabelo, R. B.; Santos, D. T.; Beppu, M. M.; Meireles, M. A. A. Effects 
of Supercritical Carbon Dioxide on Waste Banana Peels for Heavy Metal Removal. J. 
Superscript Fluids 2011, 58, 343–351. 
6. Ashraf, A.; Khalid, S. Decontamination of Cr (VI) and Mn (II) from Aqueous Media 
by Untreated and Chemically Treated Banana Peel: A Comparative Study. Desalination 
Water Treatment 2015, 53 (13), 3586–3591. 
7. Aman, T. et al. Potato Peels as Solid Waste for the Removal of Heavy Metal Copper (II) 
from Wastewater/Industrial Effluent. Colloids Surf. B: Bio Interf. 2008, 63, 116–121. 
8. Annadurai, G.; Juang, R. S.; Lee, D. J. Adsorption of Heavy Metals from Water Using 
Banana and Orange Peels. Water Sci. Technol. 2003, 47, 185–190. 
9. Anwar, J.; Shafique, U.; Waheed, Z.; Salman, M.; Dar, A.; Anwar, S. Removal of Pb (II) 
and Cd (II) from Water by Adsorption on Peels of Banana. Bioresour. Technol. 2010, 
101, 1752–1755.  
Potential of Fruit and Vegetable Waste 349 
10. Ayala-Zavala, J F.; Rosas-Domínguez C.; Vega-Vega V.; Gonzalez-Aguilar GA. 
Antioxidant Enrichment and Antimicrobial Protection of Fresh-Cut Fruits Using Their 
Own by Products: Looking for Integral Exploitation. J. Food Sci. 2010, 75, 175–81. 
11. Banerjee, S.; Banerjee, A.; Sarkar, P. Statistical Optimization of Arsenic Biosorption by 
Microbial Enzyme via Ca Alginate Beads. J. Environ. Sci. Health 2018, 53 (5), 436–442. 
12. Bhatnagar, A.; Sillanpää, M.; Witek-Krowiak, A. Agricultural Waste Peels as Versatile 
Biomass for Water Purification: A Review. Chem. Eng. J. 2015, 270, 244–271. 
13. Bhatnagar, A.; Minocha, A. K. Biosorption Optimization of Nickel Removal from Water 
Using Pomegranate Peel Waste. Colloids Surfaces B 2010, 76, 544–548. 
14. Bhatnagar, A.; Minocha, A. K.; Sillanpaa, M. Adsorptive Removal of Cobalt from 
Aqueous Solution by Utilizing Lemon Peel as Biosorbent. BioChem. Eng. J. 2010, 48, 
181–186. 
15. Bhatti, H. N.; Nasir, A. W.; Hanif, M. A. Efficacy of Daucus Carrot Waste Biomass for 
the Removal of Chromium from Aqueous Solutions. Desalination 2010, 253, 78–87. 
16. Bhushan, S.; Kalia, K.; Sharma, M.; Singh, B.; Ahuja, P. S. Processing of Apple Pomace 
for Bioactive Molecules. Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. 2008, 28, 285–296. 
17. Buzby, J. C.; Hyman, J.; Stewart, H.; Wells, H. F. The Value of Retail- and Consumer￾Level Fruit and Vegetable Losses in the United States. J. Consum. Affairs Fall 2015, 45, 
492–515. 
18. Chand, P.; Shil, A. K.; Sharma, M.; Pakade, Y. B. Improved Adsorption of Cadmium 
Ions from Aqueous Solution Using Chemically Modified Apple Pomace: Mechanism, 
Kinetics, and Thermodynamics. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad. 2014, 90, 8–16. 
19. Chang, J. I.; Tsai, J. J.; Wu, K. H. Composting of Vegetable Waste. Waste Manage. 
Resour. 2006, 24, 354–362. 
20. Cheok, C. Y.; Adzahan, N. M.; Rahman, R. A.; Abedin, N. H. Z.; Hussain, N.; Sulaiman, 
R.; Chong, G. H. Current Trends of Tropical Fruit Waste Utilization. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. 
Nutr. 2018, 58 (3), 335–61. 
21. El-Ashtoukhy, E. S. Z.; Amin, N. K.; Abdelwahab, O. Removal of Lead (II) and Copper 
(II) from Aqueous Solution Using Pomegranate Peel as a New Adsorbent. Desalination 
2008, 223, 162–173. 
22. FAO Statistics Data. 2014. www.fao.org/faostat/en data; Accessed on April 26, 2021. 
23. FAO. Definitional Framework of Food Losses and Waste; FAO: Rome, Italy, 2014. 
http://www.alimentosargentinos.gob.ar/HomeAlimentos/ValoremoslosAlimentos/ 
documentos/FLW_Definition_and_Scope_2014.pdf (accessed April 26, 2021). 
24. Feng, N.; Guo, X.; Liang, S. Adsorption Study of Copper (II) by Chemically Treated 
Orange Peel. J. Hazard. Mater. 2009, 164, 1286–1292. 
25. Garnett, T. Fruit and Vegetables and UK Greenhouse Emissions: Exploring the 
Relationship; Food and Climate Research Network, University of Surrey, 2006. 
26. Giraldo, L.; Bastidas-Barranco, M.; Moreno-Pirajan, J. C. Preparation of Carbon 
Monoliths from Orange Peel for NOx Retention. Orient. J. Chem. 2014, 30, 1517–1528. 
27. Gowe, C. Review on Potential Use of Fruit and Vegetables by-Products as a Valuable 
Source of Natural Food Additives. Food Sci. Qual. Manage. 2015, 45, 47–61. 
28. Guechi, E. K.; Hamdaoui, O. Evaluation of Potato Peel as a Novel Adsorbent for the 
Removal of Cu (II) from Aqueous Solutions: Equilibrium, Kinetic, and Thermodynamic 
Studies. Desalination Water Treatment 2015, 57 (23), 10677–10688. 
29. Guo, X. Y.; Liang, S.; Tian, Q. H. Removal of Heavy Metal Ions from Aqueous Solutions 
by Adsorption Using Modified Orange Peel as Adsorbent. Adv. Mater. Res. 2011, 236–240. 350 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
30. Gupta, K.; Joshi, V. K. (Eds.) Postharvest Technology of Fruits and Vegetables: 
Handling, Processing, Fermentation and Waste Management, 2nd ed.; Indus Publishing 
Company: New Delhi, 2002; p 1240. 
31. Gustavsson, J.; Cederberg, C.; Sonesson, U.; van Otterdijk, R.; Meybeck, A. Global Food 
Losses and Waste: Extent, Causes and Prevention; Food and Agriculture Organization 
(FAO) of the United Nations: Rome, Italy, 2011. http://www.fao.org/3/i2697e/i2697e. 
pdf (accessed April 27, 2021). 
32. Hala-Ahmed, H. Removal of Heavy Metals from Wastewater Using Agricultural and 
Industrial Wastes as Adsorbents. HBRC J. 2013, 9, 276–282. 
33. Hamdaoui, O.; Saoudi, F.; Chiha, M. Utilization of an Agricultural Waste Material, 
Melon (Cucumis melo L.) Peel, as a Sorbent for the Removal of Cadmium from Aqueous 
Phase. Desalination Water Treatment 2010, 21, 228–237. 
34. Horsfall M.; Spiff, A. I.; Abia, A. A. Studies on the Influence of Mercapto Acetic Acid 
(MAA) Modification of Cassava Waste Biomass on the Adsorption of Cu2+ and Cd2+ 
from Aqueous Solution. Bull. Korean Chem. Soc. 2004, 25, 969–976. 
35. Hossain, M. A.; Ngo, H. H.; Guo, W. S.; Nguyen, T. V.; Vigneswaran, S. Performance 
of Cabbage and Cauliflower Wastes for Heavy Metals Removal. Desalination Water 
Treatment 2013, 52 (4–6), 844–860. 
36. Huang, K.; Zhu, H. Removal of Pb2+ from Aqueous Solution by Adsorption on 
Chemically Modified Muskmelon Peel. Environ. Sci. Pollut.. Res. 2013, 20, 4424–4434. 
37. Husein, D. Z. Adsorption and Removal of Mercury Ions from Aqueous Solution Using 
Raw and Chemically Modified Egyptian Mandarin Peel. Desalination Water Treatment 
2013, 51, 6761–6769. 
38. Iqbal, M.; Saeed, A.; Kalim, I. Characterization of Adsorptive Capacity and Investigation 
of Mechanism of Cu2+, Ni2+ and Zn2+ Adsorption on Mango Peel Waste from Constituted 
Metal Solution and Genuine Electroplating Effluent. Sep. Sci. Technol. 2009, 44, 
3770–3791. 
39. Joshi, V. K.; Kumar, A.; Kumar, V. Antimicrobial, Antioxidant and Phyto-Chemicals 
from Fruit and Vegetable Wastes: A Review. Int. Food Farm Technol. 2012, 2, 123–136. 
40. Kader, A. A. Increasing Food Availability by Reducing Postharvest Losses of Fresh 
Produce. Acta Hort. 2005, 682, 2169–2175. 
41. Kamsonlain, S.; Balomajumder, C.; Chand, S. Studies on Surface Characterization and 
Isotherm Modelling: Biosorption of Arsenic (III) Onto Low-Cost Biosorbent Derived 
from Orange Peel. J. Sci. Ind. Res. 2012, 71, 810–816. 
42. Klump, S. Food Manufacturer Perspective on Food Packaging Safety. Unpublished 
Paper Presentation at Quality & Safety Food Packaging Forum Workshop, Zurich; 8 
October 2015; p 13. 
43. Kummu, M.; de Moel, H.; Porkka, M.; Siebert, S.; Varis, O.; Ward, P. J. Lost Food, 
Wasted Resources: Global Food Supply Chain Losses and Their Impacts on Freshwater, 
Cropland, and Fertilizer Use. Sci. Total Environ. 2012, 438, 477–489. 
44. Kuswandi, B.; Wicaksono, Y.; Abdullah, A.; Heng, L. Y.; Ahmad, M. Smart Packaging: 
Sensors for Monitoring of Food Quality and Safety. Sens. Instr. Food Qual. Safet. 2011, 
5 (3–4), 137–146. 
45. Liang, S.; Guo, X.; Tian, Q. Adsorption of Pb2+, Cu2+ and Ni2+ from Aqueous 
Solutions by Novel Garlic Peel Adsorbent. Desalination Water Treatment, 2013, 51, 
7166–7171. Potential of Fruit and Vegetable Waste 351 
46. Liu, J. Y.; Huang, G. H.; Deng, J. Q.; Liu, K.; Xie, Y. B. Adsorbent Prepared from Waste 
Pomelo Peel and Its Adsorption of Pb2+ in Wastewater. J. Ecol. Rural Environ. 2012, 
28, 187–191. 
47. Liu, W.; Liu, Y.; Tao, Y.; Yu, Y.; Jiang, H.; Lian, H. Comparative Study of Adsorption 
of Pb (II) on Native Garlic Peel and Mercerized Garlic Peel. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 
2014, 21, 2054–2063. 
48. Mallampati, R.; Valiyaveettil, S. Apple Peels: AVersatile Biomass for Water Purification. 
ACS Apple Mater. Interf. 2013, 5, 4443–4449. 
49. Mateo-Sagasta, J.; Raschid-Sally, L.; Thebo, A. Global Wastewater and Sludge 
Production, Treatment and Use. Wastewater 2015, 2015, 15–38. 
50. Mitra, S. K.; Pathak, P. K.; Devi, H. L.; Chakraborty, Part I: Utilization of Seed and Peel 
of Mango. Acta Hort. 2013, 992, 593–596. 
51. Moghadam, M.; Nasirizadeh, N.; Dashti, Z.; Babanezhad, E. Removal of Fe (II) from 
Aqueous Solution Using Pomegranate Peel Carbon: Equilibrium and Kinetic Studies. 
Int. J. Ind. Chem. 2013, 4, 1–6. 
52. National Academy of Agricultural Science (NAAS). Saving the Harvest: Reducing the 
Food Loss and Waste; National Academy of Agricultural Sciences; New Delhi, India, 
2019; p 5. http://naasindia.org/documents/Saving%20the%20Harvest.pdf (accessed March 
19, 2021). 
53. Okafor, P. C.; Okon, P. U.; Daniel, E. F.; Ebenso, E. E. Adsorption Capacity of 
Coconut Shell for Lead, Copper, Cadmium and Arsenic from Aqueous Solutions. Int. J. 
Electrochem. Sci. 2012, 7, 12354–12369. 
54. Orunima, N.; Brij, B.; Vinod, K. G.; Laura, R. T. Development of a Green and Sustainable 
Clean Up System from Grape Pomace for Heavy Metal Remediation. J. Environ. Chem. 
Eng. 2016, 4, 4342–4353. 
55. Panda, S. K.; Mishra, S. S.; Kayitesi, E.; Ray, R. C. Microbial-Processing of Fruit and 
Vegetable Wastes for Production of Vital Enzymes and Organic Acids: Biotechnology 
and Scopes. Environ. Res. 2016, 146, 161–172. 
56. Pandey, R.; Ansari, N. G.; Prasad, R. L.; Murthy, R. C. Removal of Cd (II) Ions from 
Simulated Wastewater by HCl Modified Cucumis sativus Peel: Equilibrium and Kinetic 
Study. Air Soil Water Res. 2014, 7, 93–101. 
57. Panouille, M.; Ralet, M. C.; Bonnin, E.; Thibault, J. F. Recovery and Reuse of Trimmings 
and Pulps from Fruit and Vegetable Processing. In Waste Management and Co-product 
Recovery in Food Processing; Waldron, K. W., Ed.; Woodhead Publishing Limited: 
Cambridge, 2007; pp 417–447. 
58. Park, D.; Yun, Y. S.; Park, J. M. The Past, Present, and Future Trends of Biosorption. 
Biotechnol. Bioprocess Eng. 2010, 15, 86–102. 
59. Patel, S. Potential of Fruit and Vegetable Wastes as Novel Biosorbents: Summarizing the 
Recent Studies. Rev. Environ. Sci. Biotechnol. 2012, 11, 365–380. 
60. Pehlivan, E.; Altun, T.; Parlayici, S. Modified Barley Straw as a Potential Biosorbent 
for Removal of Copper Ions from Aqueous Solution. Food Chem. 2012, 135, 
2229–2234. 
61. Plazzotta, S.; Manzocco, L.; Nicoli, M. C. Fruit and Vegetable Waste Management and 
the Challenge of Fresh-Cut Salad. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2017, 63, 51–59. 
62. Pranav, D. P. Characterizing Fruit and Vegetable Peels as Bioadsorbents. Science, 2016, 
110 (11), Online; E-article 18520; DOI: 10.18520/cs/v110/i11/2114–2123 352 Quality Control in Fruit and Vegetable Processing 
63. Pranav, D. P.; Sachin, A.; Mandavgane, B.; Kulkarni, D. Fruit Peel Waste as a Novel 
Low-Cost Bioadsorbent. Rev. Chem. Eng. 2014, 31 (4), 361–381. 
64. Rahaman, M. S.; Basu, A.; Islam, M. R. The Removal of As (III) and As (V) from 
Aqueous Solutions by Waste Materials. Bioresour. Technol. 2008, 99, 2815–2823. 
65. Rahul, N.; Gouri, S.; Yogesh, K. T.; Rajinder, K. G. Biosorption of Heavy Metals by 
Utilizing Onion and Garlic Wastes. Int. J. Environ. Pollut. 2012, 49 (3–4). 
66. Ramakrishna, M.; Suresh, V. Application of Tomato Peel as an Efficient Adsorbent for 
Water Purification-Alternative Biotechnology. R. Soc. Chem. 2012, 2, 9914–9920. 
67. Rao, R. A. K.; Ikram, S. Sorption Studies of Cu (II) on Gooseberry Fruit and Its Removal 
from Electroplating Wastewater. Desalination 2011, 277, 390–398. 
68. Rao, R. A. K.; Rehman, F.; Kashif U. M. Removal of Cr (VI) from Electroplating 
Wastewater Using Fruit Peel of Litchi. Desalination Water Treatment 2012, 49, 
136–146. 
69. Risha, J. S.; Candace, E. M. Immobilized Apple Peel Bead Biosorbent for the 
Simultaneous Removal of Heavy Metals from Cocktail Solution. Cogent Environ. Sci. 
2019, 5 (1), E-article 1673116; p 9; https://doi.org/10.1080/23311843.2019.1673116 
70. Risha, J. S.; Candace, E. M.; Dave, B.; Rhonda, J. R. Cucumber Peel Bead Biosorbent 
for Multi-Ion Decontamination of Drinking Water Collected from a Mine Region in 
New Zealand. Environ. Technol. 2019, 42 (16), 2461–2477 
71. Sabarna R. Wastewater Generation and Treatment – Present Status in India; 2020. 
http://indianinfrastructure.com (accessed April 24, 2021). 
72. Sagar, N. A.; Pareek, S.; Sharma, S.; Yahia, E. M.; Lobo, M. G. Fruit and Vegetable 
Waste: Bioactive Compounds, Their Extraction, and Possible Utilization. Compreh. Rev. 
Food Sci. Food Safet. 2018, 17, 512–531. 
73. Saxena, A.; Bawa, A. S.; Raju, P. S. Jackfruit (Artocarpus heterophyllus Lam.) In 
Postharvest Biology and Technology of Tropical and Subtropical Fruits; Yahia, E. M., 
Ed.; Woodhead Publishing Ltd.: Cambridge, 2011; pp 275–298. 
74. Schieber, A.; Stintzing, F. C.; Carle, R. By-Products of Plant Food Processing as a Source 
of Functional Compounds - Recent Developments. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2001, 12, 
401–413. 
75. Seema, P. Potential of Fruit and Vegetable Wastes as Novel Biosorbents: Summarizing 
the Recent Studies. Rev. Environ. Sci. Biotechnol. 2012, 11, 365–380. 
76. Seema, P.; Goyal, A. Recent Developments in Mushrooms as Anti-Cancer Therapeutics: 
A Review. Biotech 2012, 2, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13205–011–0036–2 
77. Silva, C. L.; Gomes, T. F.; G. C. R. M.; Andrade, S. H.; Monteiro, A. C. R.; Dias, E. A. 
G.; Zagatto, V. L. Banana Peel as Bioadsorbent for Removing Atrazine and Ametryne 
from Waters. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2013, 61, 2358–2363. 
78. Singh, R.; Dwivedi, U. N. Effect of Ethrel and 1-Methylcyclopropene (1-MCP) on 
Antioxidants in Mango (Mangifera indica) During Fruit Ripening. Food Chem. 2008, 
111, 951−956. 
79. Sivakumar, D.; Jiang, Y. Maintaining Mango (Mangifera indica L.) Fruit Quality During 
the Export Chain. Fruits Res. Int. 2011, 44 (5), 1254–1263. 
80. Sivapalasingam, S.; Barrett, E.; Kimura, A.; Van Duyne, S.; De, U. I. T.; Ying, M. 
Salmonella Enteric Serotype Newport Infection Linked to Mango Consumption: Impact 
of Water-Dip Disinfection Technology. Clin. Infect. Dis. 2003, 37, 1585−1590. 
81. Tasaso, P. Adsorption of Copper Using Pomelo Peel. J. Clean Energy Technol. 2014, 2, 
154–157.  
 
Potential of Fruit and Vegetable Waste 353 
82. Torab-Mostaedi, M.; Asadollahzadeh, M.; Hemmati, A.; Khosravi, A. Equilibrium, 
Kinetic, and Thermodynamic Studies for Biosorption of Cadmium and Nickel on 
Grapefruit Peel. J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng. 2013, 44, 295–302. 
83. Vilarino, M. V.; Franco, C.; Quarrington, C. Food Loss and Waste Reduction as an 
Integral Part of a Circular Economy. Front. Environ. Sci. 2017, 5, 1–5. 
84. Yasar, N.; Emine, M. Thermodynamic and Kinetic Studies for Environmentally Friendly 
Ni (II) Biosorption Using Waste Pomace of Olive Oil Factory. Bioresour. Technol. 2009, 
100 (8), 2375–2380. 
85. Zou, W.; Zhao, L.; Zhu, L. Adsorption of Uranium (VI) by Grapefruit Peel in a Fixed-Bed 
Column: Experiments and Prediction of Breakthrough Curves. J. Radioanalyt. Nucl. 
Chem. 2013, 295, 717–727. INDEX
 
A
Acetic acid, 15–16
 
Antimicrobial packaging (AP), 12–13
 
Antimicrobials, 215–217
 
Antioxidants and plant extracts, 215
 
Apple pomace waste, 337–338
 
AQUASTAT database, 327
 
B 
Banana peel, 345
 
Banana peel waste, 335–336
 
Bioenergy, 306
 
Bioenergy production, 310
 
biochar, 315
 
biodiesel, 314
 
bioethanol, 312–313
 
biohydrogen, 314–315
 
biomethane, 313–314
 
first-generation biofuels, 311
 
second generation biofuel, 311–312
 
Biofuel, commercialization, 316
 
C 
Citrus fruit waste, 334
 
Codex Alimentarius Commission (CAC), 58
 
Cucumber wastes, 338
 
E 
Edible coatings (ECs), 210
 
nanoemulsions
 
antimicrobials, 215–217
 
antioxidants and plant extracts, 215
 
formulation methods, 213–214
 
fresh cut fruits and vegetables, 218–219
 
sensory and safety aspects, 219–220
 
stability and efficacy, 214
 
whole fruits and vegetables, 217–218
 
postharvest losses of
 
losses, 212–213
 
physicochemical losses, 212
 
F
 
Fresh produce during storage 
fruits and vegetables (FAVs) 
advantages and challenges, 5–7 
hurdle technology, 5–7 
antimicrobial packaging (AP), 12–13 
chlorine dioxide (ClO2
), 13–14 
organic acids or chemical treatments, 
9–10 
ozone and electrolyzed water, 8–9 
peroxyacetic acid (PAA), 13–14 
non-thermal methods, 17–18 
high-pressure processing (HPP), 19–20 
pulsed electric field processing (PEF), 
21–22 
ultrasound (US) processing, 20–21 
organic acids
 
acetic acid, 15–16
 
citric acid (CA), 16–17
 
lactic acid, 16
 
Fruits and vegetables (FAVs), 4
 
disinfection technologies, 5
 
Fruits and vegetables waste (FVW)
 
bioenergy, 306
 
bioenergy production, 310
 
first-generation biofuels, 311
 
second generation biofuel, 311–312
 
bioenergy products
 
biochar, 315
 
biodiesel, 314
 
bioethanol, 312–313
 
biohydrogen, 314–315
 
biomethane, 313–314
 
challenges for
 
biofuel, commercialization, 316
 
characterization of
 
biological characterization, 309
 
chemical characterization, 308–309
 
physical characterization, 308
 
components, 309
 
factors affecting
 
adsorption capacity, 340–341
 356 
metal, 342–343
 
particle size/surface area, 344
 
pH, 342
 
temperature, 343
 
time of contact, 342
 
future prospects
 
consolidated bioprocessing (CBP), 317
 
genetic engineering, 318
 
generation and treatment 
India, 328–329 
heavy metal contamination, 329–330 
India and Worldwide 
AQUASTAT database, 327
 
urban wastewater, 328
 
lignocellulosic biomass, 306
 
lignocellulosic composition, 309–310
 
modification
 
banana peel, 345
 
graft polymerization, 344
 
peels and pomace, utilization, 333
 
apple pomace waste, 337–338
 
banana peel waste, 335–336
 
citrus fruit waste, 334
 
cucumber wastes, 338
 
garlic peel waste, 337
 
grape fruit, 335
 
mandarin peel wastes, 339–340
 
orange juice processing, 334
 
pomegranate peel waste, 336–337
 
pomelo peel waste, 335
 
tomato peel waste, 339
 
production of, 330–332
 
regeneration of, 345
 
adsorbents, applicability of, 346
 
G 
Gamma irradiation 
antioxidant properties 
effect, 67–68 
applications of, 69
 
food products, disinfestation, 71
 
reduction of pathogens, 70
 
ripening, 71
 
shelf-life, extension of, 70–71
 
food irradiation 
status and regulatory aspects of, 61–63 
fruits and vegetables, impact on 
minimally processed, microbiological 
attributes of, 65–66 
Index 
physicochemical and sensory 
properties, 63–65 
shelf-life and preservation of, 68–69 
inhibit microbial pathogens, mechanism
 
DNA termination, 59
 
microbial cell damage level, 60
 
irradiation technique on foods
 
safety of, 60–61
 
principle of
 
ionization emission, 59
 
radiations impact, 58
 
Global Hunger Index (GHI), 231
 
M 
Mechanical, Optical and Acoustic Methods 
dynamic noninvasive methods 
acoustic analysis, 293–294 
E tongue method, 287
 
applications, 288
 
future scope, 288
 
working principle, 288
 
electro-optic technique
 
application, 289
 
fluorescence imaging, 290
 
hyperspectral imaging (HSI), 290–291
 
image analysis, 289
 
thermal imaging (TI), 291–292
 
X-ray imagery, 290
 
E-nose method
 
applications of, 287
 
future scope, 287
 
working principle, 286
 
food processing, applications, 294–295 
fruits and vegetable (FAV)
 
agricultural institutions, 284
 
nondestructive approaches, 284
 
nondestructive measurement devices, 284
 
postharvest loss, 284
 
products, 284
 
quality analysis, 285–286
 
noninvasive analysis
 
benefits of, 295
 
Microwave heating technology, 36
 
advantages, 41
 
drying technology
 
infrared drying (IRD), 50
 
microwave drying, 46–47
 
microwave freeze drying (MFD), 45–46
 Index 357 
microwave-assisted air drying, 47–48 
microwave-assisted infrared drying, 
49–50 
microwave-assisted vacuum drying 
(MVD), 48 
microwave-assisted vacuum frying 
(MVF), 48–49 
pulsed microwave vacuum drying 
(PSMVD), 49 
factors affecting 
foods, location and geometry of, 38–39 
mass, 39 
moisture content, 39 
temperature, 39 
fruits and vegetables (FAVs) 
enzyme deactivation and microbial 
destruction, 39–41
 
principle and mechanism, 37–38
 
role of, 41–42
 
microwave blanching, 43–44 
microwave-assisted pasteurization, 
44–45 
and sterilization, 44–45 
N 
Nanomaterials (NMs), 230 
engineering nanomaterials, 239 
European Food Safety Authority, 242 
nanobiosensors, 242–243 
nanoclay, 240–241 
nano-silicon dioxide (SiO2
), 241 
nano-titanium dioxide, 241 
nano-zinc oxides (ZnO), 241 
food contamination, 237–238 
food preservation, recent advances in, 235 
Carica papaya L., 236 
essential oil (EO), 237 
FoodNet, 236 
food shortage and malnutrition 
food wastage, 234–235 
Global Hunger Index (GHI), 231 
protein-energy malnutrition, 232 
state of food security (SOFI), 231 
unemployment or underemployment, 233 
general properties of, 238–239
 
health risks, 243
 
production, 244
 
O 
Osmotic dehydration (OD), 168 
applications in, 170–171 
factors affecting 
agitation, 175
 
osmotic agents, 173–174
 
pretreatments, 171–173
 
process duration, 174
 
product-related factors, 176
 
sample-to-solution, 175–176
 
temperature, 174–175
 
mechanism of, 169–170 
recent developments, 176 
high electric field pulse (HEP), 180 
high hydrostatic pressure (HHP), 
178–179
 
microwave heating, 177–178
 
pulsed vacuum (PV), 178
 
ultrasound-assisted osmotic 
dehydration (USOD), 179–180 
P 
Preservation strategies, 144 
advanced preservation methods, 150
 
heat, use, 151
 
osmotic dehydration, 151–152
 
fruits and vegetables, 145–146
 
importance of, 146
 
postharvest damage, 146–147
 
methods, 147–148 
modified atmosphere preservation (MAP) 
controlled atmosphere technologies 
(CAT), 154–155 
edible packaging, 159–160 
high-pressure processing (HPP), 155–157 
light emitting diodes (LED), 157–159 
pulsed electric field (PEF), 157 
technologies, 152–154 
ultrasound technology, 160–161 
traditional methods
 
cellar storage, 149
 
pickling, 150
 
salting, 149
 
sun drying, 148–149
 
Pulsed electric field (PEF), 186 
Pulsed light (PL) treatment, 77 
carrots 
β-carotene, 111–112 358 
poly acetylene retention, 112
 
sugar content, 112
 
components and equipment, used
 
capacitor circuitry, 81
 
configuration setup, 82
 
lamp unit, 82
 
power generation unit, 81
 
pulse generation and, 82
 
equipment and generation, 80
 
factors affecting efficacy
 
design and processing, 85–89
 
fundamentals of
 
definition and terminology, 79
 
dose/fluence, 80
 
exposure time, 80
 
fluence rate, 80
 
peak power, 80
 
pulse width, 80
 
pulse-repetition-rate (PRR), 80
 
lettuce
 
gas composition, 114–115
 
microbial decontamination
 
apple, 93–94
 
cabbage, 100
 
cantaloupe, 89–92
 
fungal decay incidence, 92
 
green onion, 99–100
 
lettuce, 97–98
 
melon, 94–95
 
raspberries, 92–93
 
strawberry eating, 92
 
tomato, 96–97
 
yard-long beans, 98
 
microbial inactivation, 83–84
 
product parameters and microbial 
properties, 89
 
red pepper
 
chilling injury (CI), 112–113
 
color and weight loss, 113–114
 
UV-C dose optimization, 113
 
regulations
 
US FDA, 82–83
 
tomato
 
firmness, 109–110
 
pectin methylesterase (PME), 110
 
polygalacturonase (PG), 110
 
sensory evaluation, 110–111
 
weight loss, 110
 
Index 
type and spectrum of, 80–81 
yard-long bean
 
color, 115
 
texture analysis, 115
 
Pulsed light (PL) treatment0 
aneaden fruits, 100
 
antioxidant capacity, 101–102
 
firmness, 101
 
quality retention, 102
 
and softening, 102
 
soluble solids content, 101
 
titratable acidity, 101
 
weight loss, 102
 
apple
 
color, effect, 108
 
avocado
 
color, 107–108
 
firmness, 107
 
headspace gas, 106–107
 
pH, 107
 
cantaloupe
 
esterase (ES) activity, 103
 
firmness retention, 104
 
headspace gas composition, 103
 
lipase activity, 103
 
peroxidase (POD) activity, 102
 
sensory analysis, 103
 
mango
 
color, 104–105
 
firmness, 104
 
PPO activity, 105
 
melon, 108–109 
strawberries
 
color, 105
 
firmness, 105
 
total phenolic compounds, 105–106
 
vitamin C, 106
 
Q 
Quality assessment 
dynamic methods
 
techniques, 273
 
X-ray CT system, 274–275
 
X-ray imaging technique, 272–273
 
electromagnetic methods 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 
271–272 
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), 
269–270 Index 359 
exterior and interior, assessment of, 275–276
 
food quality, 264
 
fruits, 265
 
nondestructive technology
 
significance of, 266
 
types, 265–266
 
optical methods 
image analysis, 266–267 
near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS), 
268–269 
R 
Ready-to-eat (RTE), 78
 
S 
Sanitizers 
alternative chemical disinfectants
 
calcium-based compounds, 128–129
 
chlorine dioxide (ClO2
), 127–128
 
hydrogen peroxide (H2
O2
), 129–130
 
hypochlorous (HOCl) acid, 126
 
organic acids, 131–132
 
peracetic acid (PAA), 130–131
 
chemical disinfectants, 125
 
organic acids
 
acetic acid (CH3COOH), 132–133
 
citric acid, 134–135
 
lactic acid, 133–134
 
Shelf-life (SL), 4
 
U 
Ultrasonic waves, 189
 
Ultrasound mechanism
 
acoustic cavitation, 187
 
enhancing pressure and temperature, 188
 
Ultrasound (US) methods, 185
 
freezing, 186
 
frozen food products (FFP), 187
 
negative influence, 200
 
potential application, 190
 
power ultrasound method
 
chloric disinfectants, 190
 
effects, 188
 
microbes, 189
 
ultrasonic waves, 189
 
pulsed electric field (PEF), 186
 
ultrasound mechanism
 
acoustic cavitation, 187
 
enhancing pressure and temperature, 
188
 
US power-assisted freezing, 195
 
freezing rate, 197
 
ICE nucleation, 196
 
size and distribution, 196–197
 
US pretreatments (US-PRTs), 191
 
drying kinetics, 193
 
food quality, 193–194
 
parametric effects, 192–193
 
US-assisted drying (USAD) of foods
 
chemical and physical properties, 195
 
drying kinetics, 194–195
 
food products, quality of, 194
 
US-assisted freezing
 
chemical characteristics, 199
 
drip loss parameter, 198
 
microstructure, 197–198
 
texture and color properties, 198
 
Urban wastewater, 328
 
US pretreatments (US-PRTs), 191
 
drying kinetics, 193
 
food quality, 193–194
 
parametric effects, 192–193
 
US-assisted drying (USAD) of foods
 
chemical and physical properties, 195
 
drying kinetics, 194–195
 
quality of, 194
 
US-assisted freezing
 
chemical characteristics, 199
 
drip loss parameter, 198
 
microstructure, 197–198
 
texture and color properties, 198
 
