Radio Frequency Identification Engineering
Radio frequency identification (RFID) has become an undeniable aspect of modern
living, being used from logistics, access control, and electronic payment systems to
artificial intelligence, and as a key building block of the internet of things. Presenting a
unique coverage of RFID reader design and engineering, this is a valuable resource for
engineers and researchers, aiding in their mission of fulfilling current and future
demands in the RFID space.
Providing a cohesive compilation of technical resources for full-stack engineering of
RFID readers, the book includes step-by-step techniques, algorithms, and source code
that can be incorporated in custom designs. Readers are invited to explore the design of
RFID interrogators based on software-defined radio for flexible, upgradeable solutions as
well as low-complexity techniques for engineering low-cost RFID readers. Additionally,
the authors provide insight into related topics such as waveform design optimization for
improved reading range and novel quadrature backscatter modulation techniques.
Alírio Soares Boaventura is a senior research scientist at Maybell Quantum Industries
in Denver, Colorado, and worked previously as a research scientist for over five years
at the National Institute of Standards and Technology in Boulder, Colorado. He is the
recipient of an IEEE MTT-S graduate fellowship award, co-recipient of the 2011
URSI-Portugal/ANACOM Prize, and was featured in the publication University of
Aveiro, 40 Years, 40 Inventors, 40 Entrepreneurs.
Nuno Borges Carvalho is currently a full professor and a senior research scientist with the
Institute of Telecommunications, University of Aveiro, and an IEEE Fellow.
He coauthored Intermodulation Distortion in Microwave and Wireless Circuits (Artech
House, 2003), Microwave and Wireless Measurement Techniques (Cambridge University
Press, 2013), White Space Communication Technologies (Cambridge University Press,
2014), and Wireless Power Transmission for Sustainable Electronics (2020). He is
a distinguished lecturer for the RFID Council and was the 2023 President of the
IEEE-MTT Society.“This book is a must-have reference handbook for researchers aspiring to design and build a
versatile functional software-defined RFID reader. It is also one of the best resources for
anyone looking to learn more about the world of RAIN RFID. This highly recommended book
covers a wide range of topics, starting from spectrum, standards, backscatter technology
definitions, and all the way to reader architecture choices and RFID signal processing,
including encoding, modulation, and filtering. With sections on advanced research concepts
such as multicarrier systems or adaptive self-jamming suppression, as well as many exercises
and practical Matlab code examples, it can be used as a great textbook for students.”
Pavel Nikitin, University of Washington
“This book provides a comprehensive and thorough coverage of existing Radio Frequency
Identification (RFID) technology and current and future areas of research and
development. The book presents the wide variety of concepts foundational to RFID in an
accessible manner, providing in-depth information about each concept.”
Peter Hawrylak, The University of TulsaRadio Frequency Identification
Engineering
How to Engineer an RFID Reader
ALÍRIO SOARES BOAVENTURA
University of Aveiro, Portugal
NUNO BORGES CARVALHO
University of Aveiro, PortugalShaftesbury Road, Cambridge CB2 8EA, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre, New Delhi – 110025, India
103 Penang Road, #05-06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467
Cambridge University Press is part of Cambridge University Press & Assessment,
a department of the University of Cambridge.
We share the University’s mission to contribute to society through the pursuit of
education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781108489713
DOI: 10.1017/9781108779265
© Cambridge University Press & Assessment 2025
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provisions
of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take
place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press & Assessment.
When citing this work, please include a reference to the DOI 10.1017/9781108779265
First published 2025
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
A Cataloging-in-Publication data record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
ISBN 978-1-108-48971-3 Hardback
Additional resources for this publication at www.cambridge.org/9781108489713
Cambridge University Press & Assessment has no responsibility for the persistence
or accuracy of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this
publication and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will
remain, accurate or appropriate.Alírio: “Dedico este livro aos meus pais Alfredo e Maria Boaventura e aos meus
irmãos Luiza, Rosa e José.”
Nuno Borges: “Dedico este livro à minha esposa Raquel Madureira e aos meus
filhos Rebeca, Tomás e Sara.”Contents
Foreword
Smail Tedjini
page x
Acknowledgments xii
1 Introduction 1
1.1 Background and Scope of the Book 1
1.2 History of RFID Technology – From Early Radios to Today’s IoT 2
1.3 The Role of RFID in the Connected Future 9
References 11
2 An Introduction to Radio Frequency Identification 14
2.1 Basic Concepts and Definitions 14
2.2 RFID Applications 18
2.3 RFID Standards and Regulations 20
2.4 RFID Transponders and their Operating Principles 26
2.5 UHF RFID Readers 34
References 37
3 Backscatter Communications: Fundamentals and Recent Advances 42
3.1 Antenna Thévenin-Equivalent Model 42
3.2 Effective Aperture 44
3.3 Scattering Antenna Aperture 45
3.4 Quadrature Backscatter Demodulation 50
3.5 Advanced Backscatter Communication Techniques 52
3.6 Backscatter Power Budget Analysis 63
3.7 Wireless Power Transfer in Backscatter Systems 65
References 71
4 An Overview of the ISO 18000-63 Standard 77
4.1 Reader-to-Transponder Encoding and Modulation 77
4.2 Transponder-to-Reader Encoding and Modulation 78
4.3 New ISO 18000-63 Memory and Security Features 81
4.4 Transponder Singulation and Memory Access 83
4.5 The ISO 18000-63 Command Set 884.6 Reader–Transponder Transactions 90
References 92
5 Digital Signal Processing for RFID Applications 93
5.1 Introduction 93
5.2 Transmitter Signal Processing 93
5.3 Transponder Waveform Synthesis 105
5.4 Receiver Signal Processing 108
5.5 Performance Evaluation 124
5.6 MATLAB Code 127
5.7 Exercises 127
5.8 Complementary Reading 129
References 129
6 A Simple Low-Cost RFID Reader Implementation 131
6.1 Introduction 131
6.2 Proposed RFID Reader Architecture 131
6.3 Receive Data Integrity 140
6.4 Experimental Testbed and Results 140
6.5 Source Code 145
6.6 Conclusions 145
6.7 Exercises 145
References 147
7 A Software-Defined RFID Reader Design 148
7.1 Brief Introduction to Software-Defined Radio 148
7.2 Reader Hardware Design 149
7.3 Software Implementation 156
7.4 Measurement Apparatus 166
7.5 Conclusions 172
References 172
8 Self-Jamming in Backscatter Radio Systems 175
8.1 Introduction 175
8.2 Self-Jamming in Direct Conversion Receivers 176
8.3 Passive Transmitter-to-Receiver Isolation 176
8.4 Active RF Self-Jamming Suppression 177
8.5 Adaptive Self-Jamming Suppression 183
8.6 Baseband Offset Removal 191
8.7 Conclusions 193
References 195
9 Wake-Up Radios for IoT Applications 198
9.1 Introduction 198
viii Contents9.2 Literature Review 198
9.3 Wake-Up Radio Design Requirements 199
9.4 A Wake-Up Radio Protocol 200
9.5 Classical MAC versus Wake-up Protocol 202
9.6 Conclusions 206
9.7 Exercise 208
References 210
10 Unconventional Wireless Power Transmission 212
10.1 Introduction 212
10.2 Multicarrier Waveform Design 212
10.3 Wired Experiments 216
10.4 Passive Wireless Sensor Experiments 216
10.5 Multicarrier Spatial Power Combining 220
10.6 Conclusions 227
10.7 Exercises 228
References 229
11 A Battery-less Backscatter Remote Control System 232
11.1 Introduction 232
11.2 The Proposed System 233
11.3 Battery-Less RFID RC Design 237
11.4 Full Prototype 244
11.5 Conclusions 247
11.6 Alternative Battery-less Controller Configurations 247
References 249
Index 251
Contents ixForeword
Passive wireless systems are in high demand today because they allow for the
implementation of inexpensive, low-complexity, and high-performance solutions for
ubiquitous remote sensing and communication perfectly adapted to the environment.
Such systems are made possible by exploiting two capabilities of electromagnetic
waves, namely wireless communication as first demonstrated by Guglielmo Marconi,
and wireless power transfer as first proposed by Nikola Tesla. The exploitation of
these capabilities during the first decades of the twentieth century gave rise to many
applications, the most popular ones being the broadcasting of radio and television
shows. Also, World War II worked as a catalyst for several military applications, the
most emblematic of which being radar and IFF (identify friend or foe), which are
based on communication by means of reflected waves.
During the same period, some pioneering works were dedicated to coupling infor￾mation and power in the same signal, opening the door to passive wireless systems.
An early application of this concept consisted of an ingenious device developed by
Leon Theremin, which was used as a spying microphone, and became known as “the
thing.” “The thing” is certainly the ancestor of modern RFID tags. The effective
combination of wireless power and information, and adoption of the passive wireless
concept, were enabled by the development of electronics and the birth of microelec￾tronics following the invention of transistors around 1947. Among practical applica￾tions of this concept, Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) is probably the most
relevant. Today, there is a growing effort in the research community to expand the
passive RFID concept beyond identification to include environmental sensing, data
logging, and advanced processing capabilities. By turning RFID tags into RFID
sensors, augmented RFID provides more than identification and enables advanced
concepts such as the internet of things (IoT) and artificial intelligence assisted RFID.
In recent decades, RFID users have grown significantly from a relatively small
circle of engineers and electronics researchers to industry, commerce, and services.
This evolution has been made possible thanks to the development of regulation and
standardization rules, which allow for the interoperability of devices and subsystems
from different manufacturers. Such standards concern both signal characteristics and
communication protocols as well as their informational content. The progress made in
UHF CMOS RFID chip technology, in particular the large scale of digital and RF co￾integration, has allowed a huge reduction in the cost of RFID tags, making them cost
effective for item-level tagging. Indeed, the number of deployed tags went from4 billion in 2015 to 20 billion in 2020 and continues to grow at a compound annual
growth rate of 10%.
To meet current demand and allow for effective implementations, the use of
standardized and reconfigurable radio solutions is to be preferred. The software￾defined radio paradigm, introduced by Joseph Mitola in the 1990s and applied in this
book, is well suited to this purpose.
While there is an abundant literature on UHF RFID tags and their operation, the
same cannot be said for the UHF RFID reader or interrogator which is a key element
of ubiquitous IoT. The authors of this book have set themselves a two-fold objective:
(i) meet literature needs for UHF RFID reader design by providing a compilation of
technical resources, and (ii) provide practical implementations of UHF RFID readers
using software-defined radio platforms. The authors detail diagrams, propose algo￾rithms, and provide source code to implement ISO 18000-63 functions. The book
presents a rich collection of experiments and practical implementations. It also covers
other IoT-relevant topics such as wireless low-power wake-up radios and novel
backscatter modulation schemes.
This book is authored by two well-known scientists with several years of experi￾ence and expertise in RFID and SDR technologies. It is an excellent resource for the
application of RFID and SDR solutions.
Smail Tedjini
Emeritus Professor, Grenoble-INP, Université Grenoble Alpes (UGA)
Life Fellow, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
Fellow, International Union of Radio Science (URSI)
Foreword xiAcknowledgments
To all those who directly or indirectly contributed to this work, including our families,
friends, and colleagues who supported us and the authors whose works have
inspired us.
Special thanks to Smail Tedjini, Ricardo Gonçalves, Edward Keehr, André Prata,
Joao De Deus Luz, Ricardo Fernandes, Renato Graça, Apostolos Georgiadis, Anna
Collado, and Gustavo Avolio.
Thanks to the Department of Electronics and Telecommunications at the University
of Aveiro and its faculty, and the Portuguese Science and Technology Foundation and
the Institute of Telecommunications for the institutional and financial support.1 Introduction
1.1 Background and Scope of the Book
The development of 5G and the internet of things (IoT) has enabled a connected
environment with tens of billions of devices worldwide. This number is likely to
amount to one trillion or more in the not-too-distant future where conventional devices
like smartphones and laptops are expected to be outnumbered by non-electronic and
non-cellular connected objects. Effective deployment and connectivity to these objects
in ubiquitous IoT networks will require inexpensive, low-complexity, and low￾maintenance radio technologies.
Radio frequency identification (RFID) and related technologies like backscatter
and wireless power transfer are strong candidates for meeting these requirements.
Even though the RFID concept has been around for several decades, it has
only recently gained increased attention with the development of IoT, and while there
is an abundant literature on the fundamentals and applications of RFID, there are
fewer technical resources focused on a key element of RFID systems – the
RFID reader.
This book helps to close this gap by providing a compilation of resources for full￾stack RFID reader design and engineering spanning basic concepts, simulations,
measurements, hardware, and software, and contains a rich collection of experiments
and exercises. The book can be helpful for students, practitioners, and researchers
looking to gain insight into the operating principles and engineering of UHF RFID
readers and other similar systems. For entry-level readers, we provide the foundations
for engineering functional systems. For experienced practitioners and researchers, we
offer many resources to help overcome engineering problems and jump-start more
advanced designs and research. The reader of this book should be familiar with signal
processing concepts, digital modulation techniques, communication protocols, and
radio system architectures.
There are 11 chapters, organized as follows: Chapter 1 walks the reader through the
evolution of RFID technologies from the early days of radio transmissions in the
nineteenth century to the internet of things. Chapter 2 introduces the fundamental
concepts, applications, standards, and operating principles of RFID and offers a glimpse
into design considerations and architectures of modern UHF RFID readers. Chapter 3
discusses the fundamentals of backscatter radio communications and presents recent
developments, including novel quadrature backscatter modulation techniques forIoT-RFID. Chapter 4 gives an overview of the ISO 18000-63 communication protocol,
including data encoding, modulation, and storage, and presents real examples of reader￾to-transponder transactions. Chapter 5 discusses the implementation of ISO 18000-63
downlink and uplink communication chains and provides practical algorithms and code
for evaluating RFID signal processing chains. Chapter 6 explores low-complexity tech￾niques for the design of a low-cost ISO 18000-63 RFID reader and presents a full-stack
implementation to validate the proposed concepts. Chapter 7 presents an RFID reader
design based on software-defined radio (SDR), including hardware and software
implementations, and a demonstration of ISO 18000-63 operation in continuous￾wave mode and a novel multicarrier mode. Chapter 8 provides a comprehensive discus￾sion of self-jamming in passive-backscatter systems through the study of various
self-jamming mitigation and suppression approaches, including some used in commercial
off-the-shelf and integrated readers. Chapter 9 addresses wake-up radios for IoT applica￾tions and describes a custom implementation for wireless sensor networks. Chapter 10
evaluates the application of multicarrier signals to improve the efficiency of
wireless power transfer systems and proposes efficient wireless power transmitter
architectures, including a mode-locked active antenna array. Chapter 11 concludes the
book with an elegant demonstration of wireless power transfer and backscatter applied to
home automation through the design and prototyping of a battery-free remote control
system and its integration into a TV receiver. In summary, this book covers the following
topics:
▪ Basic concepts and applications of RFID
▪ Fundamentals and recent advances in backscatter communications
▪ Novel quadrature backscatter modulation techniques
▪ Practical digital signal processing for RFID applications
▪ Simple, low-cost UHF RFID reader implementation
▪ Software-defined radio UHF RFID reader design
▪ Self-jamming suppression in backscatter systems
▪ Low-power wake-up radios
▪ Unconventional wireless power transmission
▪ An RFID-based battery-less remote control system.
The concepts discussed in this book have received multiple recognitions, including an
IEEE MTT-S microwave engineering graduate fellowship award, two nominations for
the IEEE IMS best student paper, a best paper at the WPT conference, and an URSI
Portuguese section and Portuguese ANACOM prize.
1.2 History of RFID Technology – From Early Radios to Today’s IoT
This section gives a historical perspective of the evolution of RFID technology, from
its inception with early radio experiments for information and power transmission
to remote object detection and identification and its present-day maturity and role in
the IoT.
2 Introduction1.2.1 Early Radio Experiments
Radio frequency identification shares a common history with radio-frequency com￾munications, a journey that for many began in the nineteenth century with an
important discovery made by the self-educated British scientist Michael Faraday.
In 1831, Faraday reasoned that the movement of a magnet next to a conductor induces
an electric current in the circuit, and established the law of electromagnetic induction
[1]. Faraday also envisaged the existence of “lines of force” around electric charges
and magnetic poles, and predicted the existence of electromagnetic (EM) waves [2].
These discoveries laid the foundations for the modern theory of electromagnetism.
A few decades later (in 1864), James Clerk Maxwell, a Scottish mathematician and
scientist, validated Faraday’s hypothesis on the existence of electromagnetic waves.
In a volume entitled A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field, Maxwell not
only summarized the concepts of electricity known at that time, but also provided a
unified theory describing electricity, magnetism, and light as manifestations of the
same phenomenon [3]. He postulated that EM waves had the same characteristics as
light, including propagation speed, and that light itself was a manifestation of the
electromagnetic phenomenon.
In response to a contest launched by the Academy of Science in Berlin to experi￾mentally validate aspects of the Faraday–Maxwell theory, Heinrich Hertz provided the
ultimate proof of the existence of EM waves and their similarities with light, and
became the first scientist to ever generate, transmit, and detect EM waves [2]. Hertz’s
experimental setup consisted of a tuned spark-gap transmitter and a tuned spark-gap
receiver [4]. The transmitting oscillator comprised an induction coil, a Leyden jar used
as a “condenser,” and several accumulators. Oscillations were produced by dischar￾ging an electric condenser through an air gap, which produced a spark over the gap
and originated an oscillatory phenomenon. The oscillatory wave was then radiated
using metal plates and detected some meters away from the transmitter by means of a
second coil with an air gap, where sparks were induced when the transmitter circuit
was operated. The tiny sparks at the receiver were visually detected in a dark room.
Hertz also used parabolic-shaped metal reflectors as mirrors to focus the electromag￾netic beam. Despite his great findings, Hertz did not get interested in any practical
application of EM waves. In the 1900s, Guglielmo Marconi, a visionary engineer and
entrepreneur, introduced wireless telegraphy and made it a big commercial success.
1.2.2 Power Transfer via Radio Waves
Wireless power transfer is the key enabling technology of passive RFID, where
transponders have no onboard battery and are powered remotely via radio waves.
The first experiments with EM waves for wireless energy transfer are attributed to
Nikola Tesla and date back to the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries [5–8].
In 1893, Tesla demonstrated wireless lamps at the world’s Columbian exposition in
Chicago [9]. Tesla also worked on high-frequency and high-voltage transformers, and
began to build the Wardenclyffe tower, a radiation station intended for wireless
History of RFID Technology 3transmission of electricity [2]. Even though his early experiments on wireless electri￾city were hindered by technological limitations [10] and wireless power transfer
activities were suspended for decades, the pioneer work of Tesla [11] played a key
role in the twentieth-century technology revolution.
Leveraging technological advances that occurred during World War II, principally
on high-power devices (e.g., magnetron microwave tubes), William C. Brown and
others resumed wireless power transfer experiments in the 1960s. Brown proposed the
concept of microwave power transmission [7, 12], introduced the rectenna, a rectify￾ing antenna for receiving and rectifying microwaves [12], and carried out many
microwave experiments in the 2.45 GHz band [8]. In 1964, he demonstrated the
microwave power transmission concept by powering a subscale helicopter from the
ground using a microwave beam at 2.45 GHz [13]. Following Brown’s work, several
other concepts and experiments were reported, including solar power satellites [14–
16], microwave-powered airplanes [17], wireless vehicle charging, and inductive
resonant coupling [18, 19].
As new consortiums, startups, and companies dedicated to wireless power transfer
have emerged in recent years, this technology has increasingly become part of many
consumer electronic products [20–24]. Some of the most successful applications of the
wireless power transfer concept today include passive RFID and inductive charging of
consumer electronic devices. Figure 1.1 shows a timeline of the concurrent history of
radio communications, wireless power transfer, and RFID.
1.2.3 Remote Object Identification Using Radio Waves
One of the first uses of radio waves for remote sensing is attributed to John Baird, who
received one of the earliest patents on radio object detection in 1926 [25]. Baird’s
concept consisted of remotely illuminating an object with a directional beam of radio
waves and capturing the reflected signal to form an image of the target object. In 1935,
Robert Watson-Watt developed the first practical radio detection and ranging (radar)
system [26], which played a decisive role in World War II. By transmitting radio
pulses and measuring their echoes, the system was able to remotely detect the
presence of distant aircraft and ships.
A major limitation in early radar systems relates to their inability to distinguish
between allied and adversary aircraft. This was overcome with the introduction of the
identify friend or foe (IFF) system, where allied aircraft were equipped with transpon￾der or responder devices that replied to the ground interrogation station with “friendly
signatures.” This can be regarded as the first system of true identification via
radio frequency.
During the Cold War, Russian inventor Leon Theremin developed a device based
on radio-frequency backscatter that allowed eavesdropping on conversations at remote
locations [27–29]. This device comprised a monopole antenna attached to a resonant
cavity with a sound-sensitive membrane (see Figure 1.2). Deformations on the
membrane induced by acoustic waves caused the resonant frequency of the cavity
and impedance presented to the antenna to change. When illuminated with a remotely
4 Introductiongenerated radio signal, the antenna retransmitted part of that signal modulated by the
sound waves picked up by the membrane. This ingenious system was well ahead of its
time when compared to early one-bit RFID electronic surveillance systems (EAS)
developed in the 1960s, or even some N-bit transponder systems developed in the
next decade.
In a paper entitled “Communications by Means of Reflected Power” published in
1948 [30], Henry Stockman theorized on the use of acoustic and electromagnetic
wave reflection for passive communications, which forms the basis for modern back￾scatter RFID systems. Since the early days of radio technology, researchers have
explored approaches to enable battery-free operation of radio transceivers. In 1960,
Donald B. Harris proposed a battery-free backscatter system for voice communication
[31] in one the first attempts to combine wireless power transfer and electromagnetic
wave backscatter, leading to the conception of modern passive RFID.
In the 1960s there was significant progress in RFID; the technology was for the first
time used in commercial applications with counter-theft one-bit electronic surveillance
systems becoming the first large-scale commercial success [32]. In 1966, Sensormatic
Figure 1.1 Concurrent history of radio communications, wireless power transfer, and RFID.
Adapted from [10].
History of RFID Technology 5Figure 1.2 (a) Copy of the great seal of the United States with a hidden passive-listening device.
(b) Diagram of the passive-backscatter listening device. Reprinted from [29].
6 Introductionand Checkpoint emerged as the first RFID companies. Reportedly, the first RFID
patent [33] was granted to Mario W. Cardullo in 1973 for a passive RFID transponder
with rewritable memory and processing capability (Figure 1.3), originally meant for
electronic toll collection. For the first time, the RFID transponder was proposed as a
data carrier that could be remotely accessed by an interrogator. Following Cardullo’s
patent, many others were granted on similar concepts.
In the 1990s, the RFID transponder concept gained traction, primarily because of
the large-scale deployment of electronic toll collection systems in several countries.
During this decade, there was an effort on standardization to provide interoperability
between systems and vendors, which was lacking in the earlier implementations. One
of the first RFID standards to emerge was automatic equipment identification (AEI),
approved by the Association of American Railroads (AAR) in 1991 to replace a
previous optical barcode identification system [34]. In the following years, the AAR
mandated the adoption of RFID transponders under the AEI standard to identify and
track railcars.
In 1999, the MIT Auto-ID Center (funded by the Uniform Code Council and a
consortium of global consumer product manufacturers) was founded and tasked with
development of the electronic product code (EPC), a global RFID-based identification
system intended to replace barcodes. The first EPC version was released in 2004, and one
year later the International Standards Organization (ISO) incorporated the EPCglobal
Gen 2 standard [35] into the ISO/IEC 18000-6 standard. Today, ISO 18000-63 is the most
prevalent standard for passive radio frequency identification in the UHF band. Key
aspects of this standard are summarized in Chapter 4 and further discussed in
Chapter 5. Other key milestones in the development of RFID technology include the
historic mandate by Walmart to all its suppliers to use RFID in their pallets and cases. The
major milestones in the history of RFID technology are summarized in Figure 1.4.
Figure 1.3 Drawing of the first patented passive RFID transponder with readable and
rewritable memory. Reprinted from [33].
History of RFID Technology 71.2.4 A Turning Point
As with many emerging technologies, following an initial period of excitement and
hyped expectations, progress in RFID stagnated, and the technology eventually went
through a “trough of disillusionment” (Figure 1.5). In 2003, Walmart, then the world’s
largest retailer, mandated that all suppliers should tag their pallets and cases by 2005,
which acted as a major “innovation trigger” and accelerated the introduction of RFID
to replace barcodes; between 2005 and 2007 the technology reached its “peak of
inflated expectations.”
Given the limited success of item-level tracking trials in 2008, and after Walmart
dropped its mandate a year later, developments in RFID technology stagnated.
Figure 1.4 A timeline of RFID technology evolution.
Figure 1.5 Simplified Gartner’s RFID hype cycle.
8 IntroductionBetween 2013 and 2015, intellectual property (IP) challenges and overstretched roll￾outs led RFID technology to its trough of disillusionment. But subsequent reductions
in production costs, increasingly stable standards, and increasing maturity and per￾formance eventually led the technology out of this stagnation phase. Today, RFID is
an undeniable part of our personal and business lives and stands as a strong enabling
technology candidate for the internet of things.
1.3 The Role of RFID in the Connected Future
The internet of things holds the promise of connecting people, machines, and every￾day objects anywhere and anytime at an unprecedented scale. More than 50 billion
connected devices are expected to be deployed worldwide by 2020 [36, 37], and
beyond a trillion will be deployed in the not-too-distant future [38]. While most of
today’s connected devices are smartphones, tablets, laptops, and the like, they will
soon be outnumbered by non-cellular and non-electronic everyday connected objects,
which are expected to account for more than half of all internet-connected things by
2020 [39].
While it is still not entirely clear what the future internet of things will look like,
the diverse range of potential applications and requirements makes it difficult, if
not impossible, to conceive a one-size-fits-all radio technology to support
the internet of things. But based on data throughput, cost, complexity, and
power consumption criteria, one can currently identify two distinct internet
segments: the internet of powered devices and the internet of everyday things (see
Figure 1.6).
1.3.1 The Internet of Battery-Powered Devices
Besides personal mobile and portable wireless communications, potential applications
in this segment of the internet include smart transportation, smart homes and smart
cities, wearables, fleet management, smart luggage, security and surveillance, smart
grids, facility management, and so on. These applications typically use battery￾powered wireless devices of high complexity, high power consumption, and large
bandwidths, capable of supporting data-intensive services (e.g., video streaming). IoT￾powered devices are expected to amount to tens or hundreds of millions and will rely
on short-range technologies like Wi-Fi (IEEE 802.11 wireless local area network
(WLAN)), ZigBee (IEEE 802.15.4), and Bluetooth or wide-area cellular technologies
such as 5G/6G.
These technologies typically exhibit high power consumption and there has been an
effort to devise lower-power alternatives that can meet the requirements of IoT.
Examples include Bluetooth low-energy, wakeup-based Wi-Fi (IEEE 802.11ba
[39]), Sigfox, LoRa, and Ingenu. While wireless-powered devices will form the core
of the future internet of things, they most likely will not be suitable for applications
where cost, complexity, footprint, and consumption are critical.
RFID in the Connected Future 91.3.2 The Internet of Everyday Objects
This segment of the internet encompasses applications like retail apparel and footwear,
logistics, conveyances, pharmaceutical and healthcare, air baggage and cargo, asset
management, inventory and tracking, retail and wholesale, supply chain management,
and customer order and delivery tracking. In these applications, electronic identifica￾tion and sensing devices are attached to low-cost non-electronic everyday objects and
wireless gateways are used to connect them to the internet cloud. In the future, non￾electronic everyday connected objects are expected to amount to tens or even hun￾dreds of billions and largely outnumber powered devices.
This internet segment requires pervasive wireless identification and sensing tech￾nologies of low complexity, low cost, reduced footprint, and low power consumption
(ideally battery-free). For example, retail item-level tagging can only be effective if
the electronic radio identification device costs a small fraction of the tagged item.
On the other hand, pervasive environmental sensing in remote locations may not
tolerate frequent battery maintenance. Conventional radio technologies like those
mentioned previously are prohibitive in this segment. Here, the adoption of techniques
like backscatter, wireless power transfer, energy harvesting, and RFID-enabled
sensing is vital [40–44].
Passive UHF RFID technology stands as a strong candidate for pervasive identifi￾cation and sensing on the internet of things. Recent progress made in UHF CMOS
Figure 1.6 Illustration of the internet of things encompassing battery-powered devices and
everyday connected objects.
10 Introductiontransponder technology, specifically the high level of digital and RF integration
achieved, has enabled a dramatic reduction in the price of transponders, making them
affordable for item-level tagging. The current number of deployed RFID devices
clearly evidences this progress. While there were less than 500 million RFID units
sold in 2009, this number amounted to almost 4 billion in 2015 and was projected to
be 20 billion in 2020 [45].
Currently, there is a growing effort in the research community to expand the
passive RFID concept beyond mere identification to include environmental sensing,
data logging, and advanced processing capabilities [46–49]. These concepts are of
utmost interest for the internet of things and can open a range of new possibilities.
References
[1] R. G. Carter, Electromagnetism for Electronic Engineers, 3rd ed. Richard G. Carter &
Ventus Publishing ApS, Copenhagen, 2010.
[2] A. A. Huurdeman, The Worldwide History of Telecommunications. John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., Hoboken, NJ, 2003.
[3] J. C. Maxwell, “A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field,” Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 155:459–512, 1865.
[4] E. Fenn, “The Transmitter,” EBU Technical Review 263. European Broadcasting Union,
Geneva, 1995.
[5] N. Tesla, “The Transmission of Electric Energy Without Wires,” Electrical World and
Engineer, March 5, 1904.
[6] N. Tesla, “Apparatus for Transmitting Electrical Energy,” U.S. patent number 1119732,
issued December 1914.
[7] W. C. Brown, “The History of Power Transmission by Radio Waves,” IEEE Transactions
on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 32:1230–1242, 1984.
[8] Z. Popovic et al., “Lunar Wireless Power Transfer Feasibility Study,” Technical Report
DOE/NV/25946-488, 2008.
[9] S. S. Mohammed, K. Ramasamy, and T. Shanmuganantham, “Wireless Power
Transmission – A Next Generation Power Transmission System,” International Journal of
Computer Applications, 1(13):100–103, 2010.
[10] N. Shinohara, “Power Without Wires,” IEEE Microwave Magazine, 12(7):S64–S73, 2011.
[11] J. Glenn, The Complete Patents of Nikola Tesla. Barnes and Noble Books, New York,
1994, pp. 346–360.
[12] W. C. Brown, “The History of the Development of the Rectenna,” in Proc. SPS
Microwave Systems Workshop at JSC-NASA, 1980, pp. 271–280.
[13] W. C. Brown, J. R. Mims, and N. I. Heenan, “An Experimental Microwave-Powered
Helicopter,” IEEE International Convention Record, 13(5):225–235, 1965.
[14] P. E. Glaser, “Power from the Sun; Its Future,” Science, 162(3856):857–886, 1968.
[15] US Department of Energy / NASA. Satellite Power System, Concept Development and
Evaluation Program: Reference System Report, Technical Report DOE/ER-0023. US
Department of Energy, 1979.
[16] H. Matsumoto, “Research on Solar Power Station and Microwave Power Transmission in
Japan,” IEEE Microwave Magazine, 3(4):36–45, 2002.
References 11[17] J. J. Schelesak, A. Alden, and T. Ohno, “A Microwave Powered High Altitude Platform,”
in IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium Digest, 1988, pp. 283–286.
[18] A. Kurs, et al., “Wireless Power Transfer via Strongly Coupled Magnetic Resonances,”
Science, 317(5834):83–86, 2007.
[19] C.-C. Lo, et al., “Novel Wireless Impulsive Power Transmission to Enhance the
Conversion Efficiency for Low Input Power,” in IEEE MTT-S International Microwave
Workshop Series on Innovative Wireless Power Transmission, 2011, pp. 55–58.
[20] Wireless Power Consortium, “Qi WPT Standard: System Description Wireless Power
Transfer, Volume I: Low Power, Part 1: Interface Definition, Version 1.1.2,” 2013.
Available at: www.wirelesspowerconsortium.com/downloads/wireless-power￾specification-part-1.html
[21] Powercast, “Wireless Power Innovations.” [Online], available at: www.powercastco.com
[22] Wikipedia, “eCoupled.” [Online], available at: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ECoupled
[23] Wikipedia, “WiPower, The Alliance For Wireless Power.” [Online], available at: https://en
.wikipedia.org/wiki/WiPower
[24] Powermat, “Wireless Power Solutions.” [Online], available at: http://powermat.com
[25] J. L. Baird, “Improvements in or Relating to Apparatus for Transmitting Views or Images
to a Distance,” patent number GB292185, 1928.
[26] S. A. Weis, “RFID (Radio Frequency Identification): Principles and Applications,”
System, 2(3):1–23, 2007.
[27] H. Davis, “Eavesdropping Using Microwaves – Addendum,” EE Times. [Online],
available at: www.eetimes.com/eavesdropping-using-microwaves-addendum
[28] P. V. Nikitin, “Leon Theremin (Lev Termen),” IEEE Antennas and Propagation
Magazine, 54(5):252–257, 2012.
[29] G. Brooker and J. Gomez, “Lev Termen’s Great Seal Bug Analyzed,” IEEE Aerospace
and Electronic Systems Magazine, 28(11): 4–11, 2013.
[30] H. Stockman, “Communication by Means of Reflected Power,” Proceedings of the
Institute of Radio Engineers, 36(10):1196–1204, 1948.
[31] D. B. Harris, “Radio Transmission Systems with Modulatable Passive Responder,” U.S.
patent number 2927321, 1960.
[32] K. Finkenzeller, “RFID Handbook,” 2nd ed. Wiley, Chichester.
[33] M. W. Cardullo, “Transponder Apparatus and System,” U.S. patent number 3713148A,
1973.
[34] J. I. Aguirre, “EPCglobal: A Universal Standard,” MSc thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 2007.
[35] EPCglobal Inc., “EPC Class-1 Generation-2 UHF RFID, Protocol for Communications at
860 MHz–960 MHz, Version 1.2.0.”
[36] H. Yue, et al., “DataClouds: Enabling Community-Based Data-Centric Services Over the
Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 1(5):472–482, 2014.
[37] Ericsson, “More than 50 Billion Connected Devices,” Ericsson White Paper 284 23-3149
Uen, 2011.
[38] J. A. Stankovic, “Research Directions for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, 1(1):3–9, 2014.
[39] D. K. McCormick, “Preview,” in IEEE Technology Report on Wake-Up Radio, 2017,
pp. 1–11.
[40] S. Amendola, et al., “RFID Technology for IoT-Based Personal Healthcare in Smart
Spaces,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 1(2):144–152, 2014.
12 Introduction[41] M. S. Khan, M. S. Islam, and H. Deng, “Design of a Reconfigurable RFID Sensing Tag as
a Generic Sensing Platform Toward the Future Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, 1(4):300–310, 2014.
[42] H. Hammad, “New Technique for IoT Indoor Localization by Employing Segmented UHF
RFID Bandwith Using Bandpass Filters and Circulators,” in 2018 18th International
Symposium on Antenna Technology and Applied Electromagnetics, 2018, pp. 1–4.
[43] B. S. Çiftler, A. Kadri, and ˙I. Güvenc, “IoT Localization for Bistatic Passive UHF RFID
Systems With 3-D Radiation Pattern,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 4(4):905–916,
2017.
[44] I. Farris, et al., “6lo-RFID: A Framework for Full Integration of Smart UHF RFID Tags
into the Internet of Things,” IEEE Network, 31(5):66–73, 2017.
[45] M. Hetrick, “The Role of RFID in the Identification of Things,” ProMat, Chicago, 2017.
[46] G. Zhang et al., “Architecture Characteristics and Technical Trends of UHF RFID
Temperature Sensor Chip,” Active and Passive Electronic Components, 2018:9343241,
2018.
[47] J. Gao, et al, “Printed Humidity Sensor with Memory Functionality for Passive RFID
Tags,” IEEE Sensors Journal, 13(5):1824–1834, 2013.
[48] D. J. Yeager, A. P. Sample, and J. R. Smith, “WISP: A Passively Powered UHF RFID Tag
with Sensing and Computation,” in RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security,
and Privacy,” S. A. Ahson and M. Ilyas, CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2008.
[49] S. Kim, et al., “Low-Cost Inkjet-Printed Fully Passive RFID Tags for Calibration-Free
Capacitive/Haptic Sensor Applications,” IEEE Sensors Journal, 15(6):3135–3145, 2015.
References 132 An Introduction to Radio
Frequency Identification
RFID has become an undeniable part of our personal and business lives, with
applications spanning from access control and logistics to healthcare and aircraft
maintenance. But with the recent development of the internet of things, RFID
technology has gained even more importance. The ubiquitous connection of every￾day objects anywhere, anytime in the IoT requires low-cost, low-complexity, and
low-power hardware, and RFID and its underlying concepts like backscatter com￾munication and wireless power transmission have the potential to meet these
requirements. With a total market size of 10 billion USD in 2017, the total RFID
market (including transponders, readers, software, and services) is expected to be
worth over 13 billion in 2022 [1]. This fast-growing field will certainly continue to
present new opportunities for engineers and researchers. In this chapter, we intro￾duce the key concepts, applications, standards, and architectures of modern RFID
technology.
2.1 Basic Concepts and Definitions
Radio frequency identification is an automatic wireless data capture technique used to
identify objects by means of electronic devices called transponders or tags. The
transponder typically comprises a memory containing a unique serial number associ￾ated to the object to be identified, and a radio-frequency circuit and antenna to
communicate wirelessly. A radio device called an interrogator or reader is used to
wirelessly access the transponder memory. Figure 2.1 illustrates a basic RFID system
including RFID transponder, reader, and antennas.
RFID systems can be categorized according to the method used to power and
communicate with the transponder (Section 2.1.1), transponder memory capacity
(Section 2.1.2), the coupling between the reader and transponder (Section 2.1.3),
system architecture, and so on. Depending on the type of power supply and communi￾cation method, transponders can be passive, semi-passive, or active. Passive transpon￾ders present minimal cost and complexity as they do not require onboard power
sources, local oscillators, or other complex components. This makes them ideal for
high-volume item-level identification.
Regarding the coupling between the reader and transponder, RFID systems fall into
two main categories: long-range electromagnetically coupled systems typicallyoperating in the ultra-high frequency (UHF) and microwave bands [2], and short￾range inductively coupled systems typically operating in low-frequency (LF) and
high-frequency (HF) bands [3]. Proximity smart cards operating in the 13.56 MHz
band are the most widespread application of the inductive coupling technique,
whereas passive UHF inlays are the most popular application of the electromagnetic
coupling method.
The development of passive UHF RFID has traditionally been driven by the need to
replace optical barcodes with an enhanced identification method, and RFID can offer a
faster, longer-range, and more robust alternative. Despite these potential benefits, cost
has traditionally been a major roadblock to the adoption of RFID as a replacement for
barcodes. But recent progress made in CMOS transponder technology has allowed
dramatic reductions in the cost of UHF RFID inlays and transponders, and has taken
the technology closer to mainstream adoption.
Although RFID is traditionally used for mere identification, there has been an effort
to expand the concept of passive transponder beyond identification to feature sensing,
data logging, and advanced processing capabilities. This emerging concept, known as
passive RFID-enabled sensor or passive wireless sensor [4, 5], has gained traction in
the internet of things where the energy autonomy of wireless nodes is vital.
2.1.1 Passive, Active, and Semi-Passive Systems
Depending on their power supply method, RFID transponders can be classified as
passive or active. Active transponders use onboard power supplies / batteries and
standard RF components found in conventional wireless radio transceivers such as a
local oscillator, transmitter, and receiver (see Figure 2.2(a)). These kinds of transpon￾ders can usually communicate over long distances and are limited primarily by their
transmit power and receive sensitivity. Active transponders usually have large
Figure 2.1 Basic illustration of UHF radio frequency identification system.
Basic Concepts and Definitions 15memory capacity, can perform relatively complex computations, and do certain tasks
“offline.” For example, an active transponder could collect data from a temperature
sensor offline, store that data in memory, and transfer it to the network when interro￾gated by a reader. The downsides of active transponders, which make them unsuitable
for high-volume item-level tagging, include increased complexity, cost, size,
and maintenance.
Passive transponders require no batteries and instead harvest energy to power up their
electronics from the reader magnetic or electromagnetic field (see Figure 2.2(b)). These
kinds of transponders have no local oscillator and reflect the signal received from the
reader with a given signature to communicate their message. In electromagnetically
Figure 2.2 Illustration of RFID transponder power supply and communication methods. (a)
Active RFID system. (b) Passive RFID system. (c) Semi-passive RFID system. Adapted
from [2].
16 Introduction to Radio Frequency Identificationcoupled systems, this method is known as backscatter modulation and consists of
modulating the radar cross section of the transponder antenna (see Figure 2.2(b) and
(c)). In inductively coupled systems, transponders modulate the mutual coupling
between the reader and transponder coil antennas. Compared to their active counter￾parts, passive transponders are simpler, smaller, cheaper, and require no maintenance.
But they present shorter communication ranges and are computationally limited.
Semi-passive or semi-active (sometimes referred to as battery-assisted) transponders
employ batteries to power up their digital electronics as in active transponders, but do
not require a local oscillator and instead reflect the reader signal to convey their message
just like passive transponders. These systems present a tradeoff offering longer commu￾nication distance than passive systems and longer battery lifetime than active systems.
Table 2.1 relates the main features of the different types of transponders.
2.1.2 One-Bit versus N-Bit Transponder Systems
Regarding their information capacity, RFID transponders can be classified as 1-bit or
N-bit. One-bit systems can only inform about the presence or absence of transponders in
the field of the reader and are typically used in counter-theft applications in supermar￾kets and retail and apparel stores. N-bit transponders, on the other hand, can store
identifiers with up to 100 or more bits that enable unique identification of millions or
billions of objects. For example, the 96-bit EPC system can accommodate up to
268 million unique company IDs (28 bits), each with 16 million object classes (24 bits)
and 68 billion serial numbers per class (36 bits). This is more than enough to cover all
products manufactured worldwide for years to come. Modern N-bit transponders can
also offer advanced features like writable memory space for storing user data.
2.1.3 Near-Field and Far-Field Coupling
The main coupling mechanisms used in modern RFID involve near-field inductive
coupling and far-field electromagnetic coupling. The former mechanism is used for
short-range applications at low and high frequencies (typically at 13.56 MHz and below
135 kHz), and the latter mechanism is used for long-range applications at UHF and
microwave frequencies (typically, 433 MHz, 860–960 MHz, 2.45 GHz, and 5.8 GHz).
Table 2.1 Passive, semi-passive and active transponders.
Passive Semi-passive Active
Onboard power supply No Yes Yes
Onboard RF oscillator No Typically, no Yes
Communication method Energy reflection Energy reflection Self-generated signal
Coverage range Short (up to 10 m) Medium (up to 30 m) Long (> 100 m)
Cost and complexity Low Medium High
Type of memory Mostly read-only Read-write Read-write
Basic Concepts and Definitions 17Figure 2.3 illustrates typical frequency bands, methods, and communication ranges for
each type of coupling. The near-field and far-field limits (rnear-field, rfar-field) can be
estimated from the signal wavelength and antenna geometry (see Chapter 2 of [6]).
2.2 RFID Applications
Here, we discuss the most emblematic traditional applications of RFID technology
including retail supply chain, healthcare, logistics, access control, and biometric
identification. We present specific examples and highlight key benefits offered by
the technology in these segments.
2.2.1 Retail Supply Chain
The retail supply chain has traditionally been the main target segment for the applica￾tion of UHF RFID [2, 8]. The potential benefits of RFID in this segment include
streamlining of business processes, improved inventory visibility, more efficient and
faster shipping, and savings in operational and labor costs. The mandate from
Walmart to its suppliers to tag their pallets and cases [2] and the adoption of RFID
by the U.K.’s Tesco Corporation for tagging of cases in distribution centers [9] are two
of the most historically relevant examples in this segment. Other major retailers that
have used item-level RFID tagging to improve operations and consumer experience
include Target, Macy’s, and Levi Strauss [10].
In the supply chain, RFID can help organizations overcome the main difficulties
faced in the process of delivering goods such as incorrect shipment, late delivery,
Figure 2.3 Illustration of antenna near- and far-field operating regions. Courtesy of Texas
Instruments [7].
18 Introduction to Radio Frequency Identificationdifficulty locating goods, difficulty reconciling customer orders and returns, misplaced
goods, and inaccuracies in forecasts. Besides the obvious gains for the retail supply
chain segment in terms of inventory visibility and operational cost savings, RFID also
offers a pathway to thwarting counterfeiting, theft, and product diversion.
2.2.2 Pharmaceutics and Healthcare
RFID technology has proven very attractive to the pharmaceutical and healthcare
sectors [11–14]. The technology has been used in hospitals to efficiently identify
patients and label and track assets with potentially fewer human errors and reduced
costs [11, 12]. Future applications in this sector promise to go beyond logistics – for
example, RFID-enabled health sensors embedded in body prostheses can allow
healthcare professionals to monitor the improvement of their patients [13]. The
potential of these approaches for the healthcare sector can be increased significantly
when combining RFID with modern mobile computing [14]. In the pharmaceutical
segment, RFID tagging can also help to combat counterfeit medicines [12].
2.2.3 Aircraft Maintenance and Airline Operations
In the airline industry, RFID is potentially beneficial for applications like baggage
handling, catering, cargo handling, passenger ticketing, employee badging, security
processes, and management of critical aircraft parts. Airbus and Boeing Aerospace, the
world’s two major commercial airplane manufacturers, have successfully deployed RFID
to improve efficiency and efficacy in their processes. For example, Airbus used RFID for
the identification, management, and traceability of critical airplane parts through manu￾facturing and maintenance [15], and Boeing employed RFID to manage emergency
equipment like life vests, oxygen generators, and other essential cabin items [16].
Baggage handling is perhaps the most prominent area of application of RFID in the
airline sector. Given the proven benefits of RFID for baggage identification and
tracking, which include reduction of operational costs and baggage mishandling, the
airline industry has embraced RFID on a global scale [17]. After several studies and
recommendations, this global adoption has been consolidated with the International
Air Transport Association (IATA) unanimously voting in their 2019 annual general
meeting to support the global deployment of RFID for airline baggage tracking [18].
IATA’s resolution also considers the implementation of baggage messaging standards
for more accurate tracking of baggage in real time at key points of their itinerary.
2.2.4 Biometric Identification
Contactless RFID has been used to improve the level of security of digital or biometric
passports [19]. Storing the passport holder’s biometric information (digital imaging
and fingerprint scan) in an RFID chip embedded in the passport provides an unparal￾leled level of security, making it harder to forge the document. Currently, more than
100 countries issue RFID-based biometric passports.
RFID Applications 192.2.5 Other Applications
Other popular RFID applications include access control, library management, animal
identification, passive keyless entry, electronic toll collection, container identification,
railcar identification, and electronic banking and payment.
2.3 RFID Standards and Regulations
Standards and regulations play a key role in the global adoption of RFID. An RFID
standard or protocol establishes the set of rules and guidelines of the “language” to be
used in a conversation between compliant RFID readers and transponders to ensure
interoperability between systems from different manufacturers. A standard defines, for
example, the bit rate, timing, modulation, and encoding schemes to be used in the
communication between a reader and transponder.
Regulations enforced by local agencies lay down the laws and rules for efficient and
safe use of technology. Regulations define, for example, radio channels and maximum
radiated power levels. Radio spectrum regulations have a twofold purpose – ensure that
the spectrum is shared by multiple users in an effective and efficient manner, and
guarantee safe operation for humans and animals. In this section, we give an overview
of some aspects of UHF RFID standardization and regulation. In Chapter 4, we discuss
the ISO 18000-63 standard in more detail. For further information on RFID standards
and regulations, the interested reader is referred to [2] and [3].
2.3.1 RFID Regulations
Radio frequency identification regulations ensure that electromagnetic radiation from
RFID systems do not disrupt the operation of other radio systems and is safe for human
exposure. Regulations typically vary from country to country and are established by
various agencies including the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), US
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), European Telecommunications
Standards Institute (ETSI), and European Radiocommunications Committee (ERC).
The ITU deals with technical and administrative aspects of telecommunications and is
responsible for the standardization, allocation, and coordination of the radio spectrum.
In Europe, the ERC provides recommendations that serve as a basis for legislation and
licensing of radio systems at the national level. The main aspects of regulations include:
▪ channel allocation and channel spacing
▪ duty cycle of the transmitted frame
▪ effective isotropic radiated power (EIRP)
▪ signal bandwidth
▪ transmit spectral mask.
Sharing the radio spectrum among several users effectively and efficiently is challenging –
the radio spectrum is limited, and as the number of deployed radio systems increases,
20 Introduction to Radio Frequency Identificationthe spectrum becomes more congested and greater efficiency is required in the way it
is used.
On the other hand, finding common free spectrum slots across multiple regions for
new systems is a difficult task. For example, while UHF RFID systems can operate in
the 902–928 MHz band in the US, this is not possible in Europe because that portion
of the spectrum has already been allocated for other applications. For operation in
multiple regions, multi-band RFID designs are typically required. The EPC Gen2 and
ISO 18000-63 standards enable interoperability worldwide in the UHF band.
Figure 2.4 presents the overall spectrum allocation worldwide and Table 2.2 summar￾izes the main aspects of UHF RFID regulations in several regions. Refer to [20] for
further details and spectrum allocations in other regions.
2.3.2 Regulation in the US – FCC Part 15
In the US, RFID devices can operate in the unlicensed industrial, scientific, and
medical (ISM) bands 902–928 MHz, 2400.0–2483.5 MHz, and 5725–5850 MHz
under conditions specified in the FCC Part 15 rules section 15.247 [21]. This regula￾tion is part of Title 47 of the US Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) that covers
electromagnetic compliance and is regulated by the FCC. RFID systems compliant
with FCC Part 15 use frequency-hopping spread-spectrum modulation and UHF
readers can radiate a maximum power of 1 W, or up to 4 W with a directional antenna
if they randomly hop among a minimum of 50 channels. For the default 500 kHz
channel spacing, RFID interrogators can use the spectrum from 902.75 MHz to 927.25
Figure 2.4 Radio spectrum allocation. Reprinted from [3].
RFID Standards and Regulations 21MHz, covering a frequency range of 24.5 MHz allowing for a 750 kHz guard band at
the band edges. For further details about RFID regulations in the US, refer to [2].
2.3.3 Regulation in Europe – ETSI EN 302 208
The first standard to regulate RFID use in Europe was ETSI EN 300-220 [22]. This
regulation broadly applies to short-range devices (SRD) operating in the 25–1000
MHz frequency range, including RFID devices. The operation of UHF RFID in
Europe specified within this regulation was initially limited to a single 250 kHz
channel from 869.4 MHz to 869.65 MHz at a maximum transmitted power of 0.5
W ERP. This restrictive regulation was later ratified by the ETSI EN 302 208 standard,
which introduced key improvements, principally an extended frequency band from
865 MHz to 868 MHz, shared RFID operation in 15 channels of 200 kHz, transmit
power levels up to 2 W ERP, and mandatory “listen before talk” capability [23]. These
improvements enabled UHF RFID reader performance in the EU comparable to those
achieved under FCC rules in the US.
ETSI EN 302 208 later introduced an additional band from 915 MHz to 921 MHz
with power levels up to 4 W [24]. The frequency usage conditions for RFID operation
in the EU are currently harmonized in the lower band (865–868 MHz) according to
[25] and in the upper band (915–921 MHz) according to [26]. Figure 2.5 shows the
channel plan of the lower band according to ETSI 302 208. The upper band, which
only permits three channels, currently has a limited implementation status within the
EU and participating CEPT (European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications
Administrations) countries [27].
Table 2.2 UHF RFID regulators, and reference frequencies and powers in different regions.
Region/Country Regulator Frequency [MHz] Channel spacing [kHz] Power limit [W]
Europe* ETSI 865–868
915–921
200
400
2 ERP
4 ERP
USA FCC 902–928 500 4 EIRP
Japan MIAC 916.7–920.9
916.7–923.5
— 4 EIRP
0.5 EIRP
Australia ACMA 920–926
918–926
— 4 EIRP
1 EIRP
India DOT 865–867 200 4 EIRP
Singapore IDA 866–869
920–925
0.5 ERP
2 ERP
MIAC – Japanese Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications
DOT – Indian Department of Telecommunications
IDA – Infocomm Development Authority of Singapore
ACMA – Australian Communications and Media Authority
* Specific regional restrictions apply (see [20]). Currently, interrogator transmissions in the 4 W ERP upper
band are only permitted at center frequencies 916.3 MHz, 917.5 MHz, and 918.7 MHz.
22 Introduction to Radio Frequency IdentificationLocal RFID regulations also define transmit spectrum masks to limit excessive
radiation outside the allowed bandwidth and minimize out-of-channel and out-of-band
interference. Figure 2.6 depicts the spectrum mask requirement for systems operating
under the ETSI 302 208 regulation. In addition to meeting local regulations, UHF
Figure 2.5 Channel plan for the lower UHF band under ETSI 302 208. Reprinted from [24].
Figure 2.6 Spectrum mask for the lower UHF band under ETSI 302 208. Reprinted from [24].
RFID Standards and Regulations 23RFID readers certified for operation according to the ISO 18000-63 standard shall also
meet spectrum masks defined in that standard. Chapter 5 discusses filtering and
coding/modulation schemes for efficient spectrum efficiency and transmit mask
compliance.
2.3.4 The ISO 18000 Family of Standards
ISO/IEC 18000 covers an international family of standards, developed and maintained by
the joint technical committee of the ISO and the International Electrotechnical
Commission (IEC), that describes various RFID technologies, each using a unique
frequency range. Table 2.3 presents the various parts of ISO/IEC 18000 under the general
title Information Technology – Radio Frequency Identification for Item Management.
2.3.5 ISO/IEC 18000-63 and EPC Gen2V2
Part 6 of ISO/IEC 18000 describes the parameters for air interface communications
utilizing electromagnetic propagation at 860–960 MHz and comprises Types A, B, C,
and D (see Table 2.4). The ISO/IEC 18000-63 standard, which defines communi￾cations of Type C, resulted from an effort to replace barcodes with a more robust and
reliable identification method based on RFID. This standard has become the most
widely used RFID standard in the UHF band. The ISO/IEC 18000–63 evolution since
the barcode technique was introduced in 1973 is summarized below.
• 1973: GS1’s barcode is the first single standard for product identification.
• 1999: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Auto-ID Center founded to develop
the electronic product code (EPC).
• 2003: GS1 launches EPCglobal to facilitate the development and adoption of EPC/
RFID standards.
• 2004: GS1 publishes the first version of the EPC Gen2 Air Interface standard.
• 2005: ISO/IEC incorporates the EPC Gen2 standard into ISO/IEC 18000-6C.
• 2008: GS1 releases new EPC version to improve RFID performance for item￾level tagging.
• 2009: GS1 releases guidelines for EPC-based Electronic Article Surveillance (EAS).
• 2010: Industry working group launched to enhance the Gen2 standard for UHF,
based on requests for additional functionalities from EPC user community.
Table 2.3 Parts of the ISO/IEC 18000 standard.
Part 1 Reference architecture and definition of parameters to be standardized
Part 2 Parameters for air interface communications below 135 kHz
Part 3 Parameters for air interface communications at 13.56 MHz
Part 4 Parameters for air interface communications at 2.45 GHz
Part 6 Parameters for air interface communications at 860 MHz to 960 MHz
Part 7 Parameters for active air interface communications at 433 MHz
24 Introduction to Radio Frequency Identification• 2013: First major update since 2008.
• 2014: ISO incorporates EPC Gen2v2 into the ISO/IEC 18000-63 standard.
Although EPC Gen2v2 and ISO/IEC 18000-63 are not necessarily the same, they
share the same air interface parameters and are used interchangeably throughout
this book.
2.3.6 Other RFID Standards
ISO and IEC maintain several inductive contactless standards for close-coupling smart
cards (e.g., ISO/IEC 10536), proximity-coupling smart cards (e.g., ISO/IEC 18000-3,
ISO/IEC 14443 Types A and B, and ISO/IEC 18092) and vicinity-coupling smart
cards (e.g., ISO/IEC 15693). Other popular inductive contactless standards include
MIFARE from NXP, FeliCa from Sony, and Near Field Communication (NFC)
maintained by the NFC forum.
1 The ISO and IEEE also maintain standards for
long-range active RFID and sensor applications, including ISO/IEC 18000-7 and
IEEE 802.15.4f.
Table 2.4 Summary of air interface characteristics of ISO/IEC 18000 Part 6.
ISO 18000-61
(Type A)
ISO 18000-62
(Type B)
ISO 18000-63
(Type C)
ISO 18000-64
(Type D)
Release date (first
version)
2004 2004 2008 2010
Frequency band* 860–960 MHz
Reader encoding PIE Manchester PIE
Reader bit rate 33 kbps 10 or 40 kbps up to 128 kbps
Reader modulation ASK ASK ASK/PR-ASK
Transponder
encoding
FM0 FM0 FM0 or Miller Pulse position
encoding / Miller
Transponder bit
rate
40 or 160 kbps 40 or 160 kbps up to 640 kbps
Transponder
modulation
ASK ASK ASK or PSK
Anti-collision
algorithm
ALOHA Binary tree Random slotted
(Q-Algorithm)
Tag only talks
after listening
(TOTAL)
* The specific frequency band is region-dependent (see Table 2.2).
1 The NFC forum was created by Nokia, Sony, and Philips and was later joined by several other
manufacturers, applications developers, and financial services institutions like Apple, Google, Samsung,
and Visa.
RFID Standards and Regulations 252.4 RFID Transponders and their Operating Principles
In this section, we describe the most popular types of RFID transponders with the
focus on their operating principles. For better understanding, we also include a
description of the reader when necessary.
2.4.1 Inductive 1-Bit Transponders
Inductively coupled 1-bit systems are the simplest RFID detection systems. These
systems allow the detection of the presence of transponders inductively coupled to the
reader coil antenna at a certain resonance frequency. Figure 2.7 illustrates a 1-bit LC
transponder system, where a capacitor is connected in parallel with the transponder
coil antenna to form a resonant LC circuit tuned to a particular frequency and the
reader uses a sweep or chirp transceiver to scan the interrogation field. When the
reader swept frequency matches the transponder’s resonance frequency, the reader coil
antenna gets loaded which causes a voltage drop across its terminals. By sensing this
voltage drop, the reader can detect the presence of the transponder in its field.
One-bit transponders can also be made of magnetically sensitive metal strips
mechanically resonant at certain frequencies [2]. This kind of transponder, which
was first introduced in the 1960s to thwart shoplifting, is still in use today. Inductively
coupled 1-bit systems are compact and inexpensive, and since they operate at very low
frequencies (tens of kilohertz to a few megahertz) they have a straightforward design
and construction.
2.4.2 Inductive N-Bit Transponders
Inductively coupled N-bit transponders collect the energy required to operate their
electronics from the reader’s magnetic field and load-modulate their coil antennas to
transfer information to the reader (Figure 2.8). In these systems, the reader-to-tran￾sponder energy transfer happens in the same way as in a voltage transformer, with the
Figure 2.7 Inductively coupled 1-bit RFID system [U.S. Patent 3752960].
26 Introduction to Radio Frequency Identificationreader antenna acting as the transformer’s primary coil and the transponder antenna
acting as the secondary coil (coupled to the primary via a mutual inductance M).
By applying an alternating (AC) current to the reader coil antenna, one creates an AC
magnetic field that yields an AC voltage on the transponder coil.
The AC energy induced in the transponder coil antenna is converted to DC power
by an RF to DC converter circuit, and the collected DC power is used to supply the
digital electronics of the transponder. To boost energy transfer efficiency, a frequency￾tuned impedance-matching circuit is typically used at each coil antenna [3], and over￾voltage protection, voltage regulation, and power management circuitry is used to
stabilize the collected DC power.
To communicate information to the reader, the transponder load-modulates its coil
antenna according to the information bits to be transmitted. This is typically done by
modulating the gate of a transistor which is connected across the transponder coil
antenna (see Figure 2.8). Switching this transistor on and off modulates the load
impedance presented to the transponder coil antenna which, in turn, induces changes
across the reader coil antenna. The reader retrieves the transponder information by
demodulating and decoding the voltage changes induced on its coil antenna. Refer to
[3] for more information on the operation and design of inductive systems.
The most popular N-bit transponder systems using inductive coupling are proxim￾ity smart cards [28] and NFC devices [29] with coverage ranges of several centi￾meters, and vicinity smart cards [30] with coverage ranges up to 1 meter. These
systems typically operate at LF (100–135 kHz) and HF (10–15 MHz) bands.
2.4.3 Harmonic 1-Bit Transponders
Harmonic 1-bit transponder systems typically use electromagnetic propagation in the
microwave range and exploit the harmonic distortion mechanism of a non-linear
device, typically a radio-frequency diode. The right side of Figure 2.9 shows a
harmonic 1-bit transponder consisting of an RF diode attached to a dipole antenna.
Figure 2.8 Near-field inductively coupled passive RFID system. Adapted from [3].
RFID Transponder Operating Principles 27When the transponder is illuminated with a microwave interrogation signal (e.g., at
2.45 GHz), it produces and re-radiates harmonics of that signal (at 4.9 GHz, 7.35 GHz,
9.8 GHz, ...).
To detect transponders in the interrogation field, the reader (left side of Figure 2.9)
examines one of the harmonics radiated by the transponder (usually the second har￾monic) by homodyning the received signal using a local oscillator signal at the harmonic
frequency. To enhance detectability, the interrogation signal in the transmitter is com￾monly modulated using a subcarrier, and the homodyned signal is bandpass filtered to
eliminate out-of-channel interference (see Figure 2.9). Other advanced approaches
based on non-linear intermodulation distortion have also been proposed [31].
2.4.4 Backscatter N-Bit Transponders
Figure 2.10 illustrates an electromagnetically coupled N-bit passive-backscatter
system. The reader broadcasts an unmodulated carrier that is used to wirelessly power
the transponder and serves as a remote carrier for the transponder-to-reader communi￾cation. By reflecting a portion of the carrier signal received from the reader with a
specific signature, the transponder can communicate information to the reader without
having to locally generate a radio signal. Conceptually, this procedure looks like that
used in inductive N-bit systems, with the exception that here the reader-to-transponder
coupling is achieved via electromagnetic propagation. Like in inductive systems, a
transistor is used to modulate the antenna (see Figure 2.10).
The simplest backscatter system uses two modulation states, absorptive and reflect￾ive. In the absorptive state, the modulating transistor is turned off and the impedance
of the RFID chip is matched to the transponder antenna to minimize the power the
transponder reflects to the medium while maximizing the power it collects from the
incoming signal. The reflective state is achieved by turning on the transistor and short￾Figure 2.9 Microwave harmonic 1-bit system. Adapted from [3].
28 Introduction to Radio Frequency Identificationcircuiting the transponder antenna. Commercial UHF RFID transponders typically
produce binary amplitude-shift keying (ASK) modulation by alternating the termin￾ation presented to the antenna between a matched load that promotes maximum power
transference to the chip and a mismatched resistive load that increases the amplitude
of the reflected signal without altering its phase. Binary phase-shift keying (PSK)
modulation can be produced by switching a capacitor across the transponder antenna
to create a phase shift [2, 32].
Highly reflective states can impair transponder operation due to low power avail￾ability to the RFID chip. On the other hand, minimally reflective states penalize the
backscatter radio communication link. Therefore, a tradeoff between backscattered
signal and power available to the chip is required in the design of backscatter
transponders [2]. As UHF RFID transponders are typically forward-link-limited (see
Chapter 3), it may be useful to trade backscattered signal for power available to
the chip.
Backscatter readers typically share the same local oscillator for transmitting and
receiving and can use two separate antennas (bistatic configuration) or a shared
antenna (monostatic configuration) to transmit and receive. The latter configuration,
illustrated in Figure 2.10, requires a circulator or directional coupler to separate the
transponder-backscattered signal from the reader-transmitted carrier. In both configur￾ations, the total signal received by the reader is a combination of transponder￾backscattered signals plus undesired, unavoidable signal components due to clutter
reflections and transmitter-to-receiver leakage.
Since these unwanted signal components can be much larger than the backscatter
signal of interest and have unpredictable amplitudes and phases, the effect of the
often-weak transponder modulation on the total received signal is unpredictable and
uncontrollable. The only certainty is that a change in the transponder modulation state
changes something about the phase and/or amplitude of the received signal. For an
effective backscatter link, the transponder information must be encoded on these
changes and not on the amplitude, phase, or direction of the modulation states [2].
Practical transponder encoding schemes are usually variations of frequency-shift
Figure 2.10 Passive-backscatter system. Adapted from [3].
RFID Transponder Operating Principles 29keying (FSK) and rely on counting and timing the number of state transitions in the
received signal. This approach is used, for example, in the FM0 and Miller subcarrier
encoding specified by the ISO/IEC 18000-63 standard (see Chapter 4).
The example above considers only two transponder modulation states, but a
transponder can generally produce an arbitrary number of states. Higher-order back￾scatter modulation schemes capable of generating more than two states have recently
been proposed to increase the data rate in backscatter systems. We will have more to
say on this topic when we discuss quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) back￾scatter in Chapter 3.
2.4.5 RFID-Enabled Sensors
Passive-backscatter transponders are unique wireless communication systems in that
they require no local power source, radio-frequency oscillator, or other complex
components like mixers or amplifiers. They present, therefore, minimal power con￾sumption, complexity, size, and cost, which makes them ideal for pervasive item-level
tagging. In addition to identification functions, ideal passive-backscatter transponders
would feature environmental sensing, data logging, and advanced computation cap￾abilities at minimal complexity and negligible power consumption.
While some of these requirements are conflicting, significant progress has been
made toward expanding the passive transponder concept beyond mere identification to
include functionalities like sensing. This concept is known as a passive RFID-enabled
sensor, passive wireless sensor, or wirelessly powered sensor [4, 5]. An example of a
commercial RFID device offering sensing capabilities is the SL900A transponder
[33], which incorporates a temperature sensor and an analog-to-digital converter
(ADC) interface for sampling external sensors. This chip also features a digital serial
peripheral interface (SPI) for communicating with external devices. Figure 2.11 shows
a generic architecture for a passive UHF RFID transponder with sensing capability
comprising the following building blocks [4, 34, 35]:
1. Energy harvesting circuit – key part of a passive transponder, responsible for
converting the radio-frequency power collected by the transponder antenna into
DC power to supply the transponder electronics. Voltage multiplier or charge pump
circuits are typically used to boost the rectified voltage to a level high enough to
supply the digital electronics of the transponder. To promote maximum power
transfer to the transponder chip, the antenna impedance should be conjugate￾matched to the input impedance of the chip. Transponder impedance matching is
typically performed at the high-impedance (absorptive) state of the chip in which
the backscatter modulation transistor is off (see Figure 2.11).
2. Power management unit – follows the energy harvesting circuit and typically
comprises voltage limiting, energy storage, voltage regulation, voltage supervision,
and power-on-reset circuitry to deliver a continuous, regulated DC power supply to
the transponder electronics. The power management unit counteracts power supply
fluctuations caused by variations in the load current due to transients in the
30 Introduction to Radio Frequency Identificationtransponder digital circuitry, varying operating distance, and changes in the radio
channel, including momentaneous drop or interruption of the reader￾powering signal.
3. Clock oscillator – provides the clock required for operating the digital control logic
and timing the baseband data. To minimize transponder consumption, the oscillator
usually runs at a low frequency. In some implementations, the clock required for
transponder operation is encoded in the reader signal, eliminating the need for a
local clock generator in the transponder [4]. This can significantly lower the power
consumption requirement in the transponder while reducing its complexity and
enabling scalability to various data rates for different power and distance
constraints [35].
4. Demodulator – encompasses envelope detection, data demodulation, and clock
recovery functions. The modulation and encoding schemes for passive systems
should be selected carefully to reduce complexity while maintaining acceptable
performance and stable power transfer to the transponder chip. ASK modulation is
usually preferred for reader-to-transponder communications as it reduces the
complexity of the transponder – a simple envelope detector circuit can be used to
demodulate the incoming ASK-modulated signal in the transponder. To provide
the transponder with enough power during reader-to-transponder data
transmissions, the encoding scheme should avoid long periods of low RF signal.
The pulse-interval encoding (PIE) scheme specified by ISO/IEC 18000-63
achieves this by using long RF carrier transmissions followed by short periods of
low RF carrier transmissions. Another way to improve the energy transfer during
reader-to-transponder data transmissions is by optimizing the reader modulation
Figure 2.11 Architecture of a passive UHF RFID transponder with sensing capabilities.
RFID Transponder Operating Principles 31index. Some protocols like ISO 14443-B allow the user to select the modulation
index to best suit specific applications.
5. Backscatter modulator – uses a transistor switch to modulate the radar cross section
of the transponder antenna by modulating the impedance presented to the antenna
by the chip.
6. Memory – used to store transponder information, including the unique
identification number (ID) and user data. Electrically erasable programmable read
only memories (EEPROMs) are typically used and some devices allow parts of the
memory (e.g., the transponder ID) to be programmed on the fly by the reader.
7. Digital control logic – performs vital tasks including baseband data encoding/
decoding, communication protocol handling, and memory access. In low-cost
transponders, digital control logic is implemented using simple finite state￾machines, while advanced systems may use general-purpose microcontrollers
(MCUs) [36], or more sophisticated resources such as field programmable gate
arrays (FPGAs) and complex programmable logic devices (CPLDs) [37]. In RFID￾enabled or passive wireless sensors, this section is also responsible for interfacing
with internal and external sensors. Advanced devices may also include ADCs and
digital input/output interfaces. For example, some devices incorporate an SPI
interface to interact with an external MCU [33].
2.4.6 Chipless Transponders
Despite the numerous benefits of RFID such as long communication distance, no line￾of-sight communication, ability to inventory multiple transponders automatically, and
large transponder memory capacities, the deployment of the technology has been
hindered by cost (mainly the unit cost of transponders).
Since the cost of RFID transponders is dominated by the cost of the integrated
circuits, getting rid of the integrated circuits altogether has been proposed as a path
toward lowering the cost of RFID. Chipless transponders or transponders that do not
require integrated circuits has become an important emerging area of RFID technol￾ogy [38–40]. Chipless transponders are usually built with low-cost discrete compon￾ents or magnetic and electromagnetic reflective or absorptive materials. These
transponders are simple and inexpensive and can be printed directly on products
and packaging, benefiting from ubiquitous inkjet printing techniques in a similar
way to barcodes. This technology has, however, two major drawbacks relating to
the low data storage capacity of transponders and increased complexity of readers.
To encode and transfer data, chipless RFID systems use either time-domain
reflectometry or frequency signature. In time-domain reflectometry, the reader broad￾casts a pulse and listens for echoes from the transponder. In this method, the
transponder data (usually a serial number) is encoded in the timing of pulse arrivals
at the reader. In frequency signature, the reader sends a signal that spans a broad
frequency range (a broadband pulse or a chirp signal) and monitors echoes in the
frequency domain. Typically, the transponder data is encoded in the presence or
absence of resonance peaks at predetermined frequencies of the echoed signal.
32 Introduction to Radio Frequency IdentificationTo attenuate or absorb energy at specific frequencies, transponders may use magnetic
materials, chemicals, or resonant circuits.
An example of a 1-bit inductive chipless system using frequency signature has
already been discussed in Section 2.4.1 (see Figure 2.7). A multi-bit system based on
that scheme could be implemented by using multiple LC resonators tuned to different
frequencies. The architecture of a chipless RFID transponder using frequency signa￾ture and electromagnetic coupling is presented in Figure 2.12, where several reson￾ators are used to encode information bits. To detect the transponder resonances, a
broadband pulse or a chirp signal is typically used.
2.4.7 Surface Acoustic Wave Transponders
A surface acoustic wave (SAW) transponder is a type of chipless transponder that uses
time-domain reflectometry [41]. The key component of a SAW transponder is an
interdigital transducer (IDT) consisting of two interlocking arrays of metallic elec￾trodes deposited on the surface of a piezoelectric substrate (see Figure 2.13).
By applying an AC electrical signal across the IDT electrodes, periodically distributed
Figure 2.12 Chipless RFID system using frequency signature. In this scheme, the interrogation
and echoed signals are separated by using different antenna polarizations. Reprinted from [38].
Figure 2.13 SAW-based RFID transponder. Reprinted from [41].
RFID Transponder Operating Principles 33mechanical forces due to the piezoelectric effect create acoustic waves that propagate
along the surface of the substrate. The same principle applies to the conversion of
surface acoustic waves back to the electrical domain.
An IDT device, directly attached to the transponder antenna, converts an electrical
interrogation pulse received from the RFID reader into a propagating surface acoustic
wave. Narrow aluminum strips are disposed along the substrate to reflect the acoustic
wave. By properly placing these reflectors, one can create a specific reflection pattern
that encodes the desired transponder information. When the reflected acoustic waves
hit the IDT device, they are reconverted to electrical signals that are retransmitted by
the transponder antenna and detected and decoded by the reader.
2.5 UHF RFID Readers
In this section, we briefly discuss key transmitter and receiver design requirements,
architectures, approaches, and tradeoffs involved in the design of passive-backscatter
UHF RFID readers. Practical reader designs including hardware and software imple￾mentations are given in Chapters 5 to 8.
2.5.1 Transmitter Design Considerations
The RFID reader transmitter architecture is typically determined by the requirements
of modulation type, modulation depth, and transmit mask for the reader-to-transpon￾der transmissions. To comply with different modern protocols, UHF RFID reader
transmitters should support single-sideband ASK (SSB-ASK), double-sideband ASK
(DSB-ASK), and phase-reversal ASK (PR-ASK). To limit the transmit spectrum
occupancy and comply with regulated spectrum masks, baseband pulse-shaping filters
are typically required. In addition, the transmitter linearity should be optimized to
minimize signal distortion and spectrum regrowth. Other key requirements of the
transmitter design include linearity and efficiency, which are typically dominated by
the transmit power amplifier stage. Another key aspect of the RFID transmitter design
is the phase noise of the local oscillator; transmitter phase noise can leak into the
receiver and be down-converted to baseband, degrading the reader sensitivity to the
often-small transponder-backscattered signal, which usually is spectrally close to the
reader-transmitted carrier (a few tens to a few hundred kilohertz).
2.5.2 Receiver Design Considerations
The RFID reader receiver architecture is determined by the data rate and the type of
encoding and modulation of the transponder. Since passive UHF RFID transponders
backscatter the carrier radiated by the reader to communicate their information, it is
convenient to use the same local oscillator used in the transmitter to homodyne the
signal backscattered from the transponders. In the next chapter we will have more to
say about this type of receiver architecture.
34 Introduction to Radio Frequency IdentificationDue to multipath propagation and the arbitrary distance between the reader and
transponder, the reader local oscillator and the intercepted transponder signal gener￾ally present an arbitrary phase difference. Therefore, non-quadrature detection can
yield null output when the local oscillator and received signal are out of phase.
To prevent blind spots, readers commonly use quadrature direct conversion detection
where the incoming transponder signal is cross-correlated with an in-phase and a
quadrature component of the local oscillator signal. Hence, if the transponder signal is
fully uncorrelated with one component of the local oscillator (i.e., phase-shifted by 90
degrees), it will be maximally correlated with the other component. This makes the
detection of the transponder information insensitive to the relative phase of the
transponder backscatter signal.
The direct conversion receiver architecture is prone to amplitude and phase imbal￾ances and DC offsets due to transmitter-to-receiver leakage; in some cases DC offsets
can be much bigger than the transponder baseband signal. This aggravates the
dynamic range requirements of baseband circuitry. Fortunately, UHF RFID standards
typically define encoding schemes with minimal DC components (e.g., FM0 and
Miller coding, see Chapter 4), allowing the use of baseband filtering to eliminate
unwanted DC offsets. DC offsets can also be mitigated by applying self-jamming
suppression in the RF domain (see Chapter 8 for a comprehensive discussion on self￾jamming). Other important design requirements include receiver sensitivity, noise
figure, and dynamic range.
2.5.3 Typical UHF RFID Reader Architecture
Figure 2.14 depicts a simplified diagram of a typical UHF RFID reader based on a
commercial application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC). The transmitter uses quad￾rature modulation to support various modulation schemes and the receiver employs
quadrature demodulation to prevent blind reading spots that can occur due to the phase
Figure 2.14 Simplified diagram of a typical ASIC-based UHF RFID reader.
UHF RFID Readers 35uncorrelation mechanism described above. The complex baseband signal generated by
the transmit digital signal processor is converted to the analog domain via two digital￾to-analog converters (DACs) and then translated to RF via quadrature direct conver￾sion modulation. The transponder RF signal intercepted by the reader is converted to
baseband via quadrature direct conversion demodulation and the resulting complex
baseband signal is then digitized by two ADCs and further processed to retrieve the
transponder message.
In Figure 2.14, a circulator is used to share the antenna between transmitter and
receiver, but a directional coupler could also be used for that purpose. To limit out-of￾band emissions, the transmit power amplifier is usually followed by a bandpass filter
centered at the RF carrier frequency. A bandpass filter can also be used to improve
frequency selectivity in the receiver. UHF RFID readers may also employ low-noise
amplifiers (LNAs) (omitted in Figure 2.14) for enhanced sensitivity, but this approach
requires careful design as the LNA can be driven into saturation by self-jamming
(more about self-jamming in Chapter 8).
In addition to the ASIC approach illustrated in Figure 2.14 [42–46], UHF RFID
readers can be based on original equipment manufacturer (OEM) modules [47–49],
discrete components [50–53], custom integrated circuits (ICs) [54–57], and software￾defined radio (SDR) [58–65]. The choice of design approach depends on the desired
flexibility, cost, and time to market. Chapters 5 through 8 discuss key aspects of UHF
RFID reader engineering.
2.5.4 ASIC-Based Reader Design
Off-the-shelf ASIC readers integrate the main building blocks for radio-frequency
synthesis, analog baseband processing, analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog conver￾sion, digital baseband processing, and microcontroller interfacing. Therefore, ASICs
require minimal external parts to assemble a UHF RFID reader – typically, a low-cost
MCU, power supply circuitry, and a few discrete components are required. Moreover,
manufacturers usually provide designers with reference development material includ￾ing schematics, printed circuit board (PCB) layouts, and firmware source code. This
can dramatically reduce the development time and effort for integrators and
developers.
The most popular UHF ASIC reader families available today include the R500/
R1000/2000 from Impinj Inc. [42], ST25RU399x from STMicroelectronics (formerly,
AS399x from Austria Microsystems) [43], and PR9200 from Phychips Inc. [44].
These ASICs integrate the main UHF RFID reader functional blocks and have built￾in RF power capabilities for low to medium coverage range. ASICs generally offer
good cost–performance tradeoffs but have poor flexibility as they are typically tied to
specific standards. The latter represents a major limitation as RFID standards have
been evolving rapidly to accommodate new applications and address new security and
privacy concerns. To remedy this shortcoming, some ASICs offer the possibility to
bypass their protocol-specific baseband circuitry and allow the combination of their
analog RF front end with external DSPs for custom baseband processing [43].
36 Introduction to Radio Frequency Identification2.5.5 SDR-Based Reader Design
In SDR RFID reader implementations, some or all physical layer tasks (e.g., channel
selection, tuning, modulation, and encoding), which are typically implemented in
hardware, are performed in software. In this approach, the digital functions of the
reader in Figure 2.14 would be implemented on a DSP or FPGA. The SDR design
approach typically offers higher flexibility and performance compared to the
ASIC approach.
The major benefit of SDR-based reader systems is their ability to accommodate
new standards through software upgrade, without the need for hardware redesign.
Flexibility is also what makes SDR implementations ideal for RFID research, charac￾terization, measurement, and protocol evaluation [58, 59, 63, 64]. But the improved
SDR flexibility comes at the expense of increased complexity, cost, and time to
market compared to commercial ASIC-based designs.
Commercially available SDR-based reader solutions include the Speedway reader
from Impinj Inc. [66] and the Enterprise ALR-F800 reader from Alien Technology
[67]. Table 2.5 summarizes the main UHF RFID reader design approaches and the
tradeoffs involved. In Chapter 7, we report on the full-stack design of a cost-effective
SDR RFID reader.
References
[1] R. Das, “RFID Forecasts, Players and Opportunities 2019–2029: The Complete Analysis
of the Global RFID Industry,” IDTechEx research report, 2019.
[2] D. M. Dobkin, The RF in RFID: Passive UHF in Practice, 2nd ed. Newnes, Oxford, 2012.
[3] K. Finkenzeller, RFID Handbook: Fundamentals and Applications in Contactless Smart
Cards, Radio Frequency Identification and Near-Field Communication, 3rd ed. Wiley,
Chichester, 2010.
[4] P. Pursula, et al., “Wirelessly Powered Sensor Transponder for UHF RFID,” in
Proceedings of Transducers ’07 & Eurosensors XXI Conference, 2007, pp. 73–76.
[5] J. R. Smith, Wirelessly Powered Sensor Networks and Computational RFID, Springer,
New York, 2013.
[6] C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory: Analysis Design, 3rd ed. John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken,
NJ, 2005.
Table 2.5 UHF RFID reader design approaches and tradeoffs.
Design approach Off-the-shelf ASIC Custom IC SDR
Development effort Reduced Involved Involved
Required design skills Reduced Specialized Specialized
Time to market Short — Medium to long
Cost Low to medium — Medium to high
Overall performance Medium Medium Highest
Flexibility/upgradability Limited Reduced Best
References 37[7] K. Sattlegger and U. Denk, “Navigating Your Way Through the RFID Jungle.” White
paper SLYY056, Texas Instruments, Dallas, TX, 2014.
[8] M. Ilyas and S. A. Ahson, “RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and
Privacy.” CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2008.
[9] IEEE-USA, “The State of RFID Implementation and Its Policy Implications: An IEEE￾USA White Paper,” 2009.
[10] RFIDWorld, “Levi Strauss & Co. Teams Up with Intel to Test RFID in Stores.” [Online],
available at: https://rfidworld.ca/levi-strauss-co-teams-up-with-intel-to-test-rfid-in-stores/
2429
[11] C.-J. Li, L. Liu, S.-Z. Chen, C. C. Wu, C.-H. Huang, and X.-M. Chen, “Mobile Healthcare
Service System Using RFID,” in IEEE International Conference on Networking, Sensing
and Control, vol. 2, 2004, pp. 1014–1019.
[12] C. Seckman, A. Bauer, T. Moser, and S. Paaske, “The Benefits and Barriers to RFID
Technology in Healthcare,” Online Journal of Nursing Informatics, 21(2), 2017.
[13] D. Dixit, A. Kalbande, and K. M. Bhurchandi, “RFID-Based Health Assistance &
Monitoring System Through a Handmounted Embedded Device,” in 2013 Fourth
International Conference on Computing, Communications and Networking Technologies
(ICCCNT), 2013, pp. 1–9.
[14] A.P. Hridhya, C. Periasamy, and I.R Rahul, “Patient Monitoring and Abnormality
Detection Along with an Android Application,” International Journal of Computer
Communication and Informatics, 1(1):52–57, 2019.
[15] Airbus Aerospace Company, “Airbus Selects Fujitsu RFID Integrated Label Technology
for Management, Traceability of Aircraft Parts,” May 2014. [Online], available at: www
.intelligent-aerospace.com/commercial/article/16541615/airbus-selects-fujitsu-rfid￾integrated-label-technology-for-management-traceability-of-aircraft-parts
[16] Boeing Aerospace Company, “RFID Integrated Solutions System Optimizes Maintenance
Efficiency.” [Online], available at: www.boeing.com/commercial/aeromagazine/articles/
2012_q1/2/
[17] M. Roberti, “Airline Industry Embraces RFID Baggage Tracking,” RFID Journal, June
2018. [Online], available at: www.rfidjournal.com/airline-industry-embraces-rfid￾baggage-tracking
[18] International Air Transport Association, “Resolution: RFID Baggage Tracking Set for
Global Deployment,” June 2019. [Online], available at: www.iata.org/en/pressroom/
pressroom-archive/2019-press-releases/2019-06-02-05/
[19] Wikipedia, “Biometric Passport.” [Online], available at: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Biometric_passport
[20] GS1, “Regulatory Status for Using RFID in the EPC Gen2 (860 to 960 MHz) Band of the
UHF Spectrum,” February 11, 2020. [Online], available at: www.gs1.org/docs/epc/uhf_
regulations.pdf
[21] U.S. Federal Communications Commission, “Part 15.247.” [Online], available at: www
.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CFR-2013-title47-vol1/pdf/CFR-2013-title47-vol1-sec15-247
.pdf https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/47/15.247
[22] ETSI, “Short Range Devices (SRD) Operating in the Frequency Fange 25 MHz to 1000
MHz; Part 2: Harmonised Standard Covering the Essential Requirements of Article 3.2 of
Directive 2014/53/EU for Non Specific Radio Equipment,” EN 300 220-2, V3.1.1, 2017.
[Online], available at: www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_en/300200_300299/30022002/03.01.01_
60/en_30022002v030101p.pdf
38 Introduction to Radio Frequency Identification[23] RFID4U, “RFID Basics – RFID Regulations.” [Online], available at: https://rfid4u.com/
rfid-regulations/
[24] ETSI, “Radio Frequency Identification Equipment Operating in the Band 865 MHz to
868 MHz with Power Levels up to 2 W and in the Band 915 MHz to 921 MHz with Power
Levels up to 4 W; Harmonised Standard for Access to Radio Spectrum,” EN 302 208
C3.3.0, 2020. [Online], available at: www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_en/302200_302299/
302208/03.03.00_20/en_302208v030300a.pdf
[25] European Commission, “Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2017/1483 of
8 August 2017.” [Online], available at: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/
PDF/?uri=CELEX:32017D1483&from=en
[26] European Commission, “Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2018/1538 of
11 October 2018.” [Online], available at: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/
PDF/?uri=CELEX:32018D1538&from=EN
[27] M. Lenehan, “EU Upper Band Country List,” Impinj. [Online], available at: https://support
.impinj.com/hc/en-us/articles/360006823440-EU-Upper-Band-Country-List
[28] International Standards Organization, “ISO/IEC 14443-2:2010, Identification Cards –
Contactless Integrated Circuit Cards – Proximity Cards – Part 2: Radio Frequency Power
and Signal Interface.” [Online], available at: www.iso.org/standard/50941.html
[29] Ecma International, “ECMA-352: Near Field Communication Interface and Protocol – 2
(NFCIP-2),” 4th ed., 2021. [Online], available at: https://ecma-international.org/
publications-and-standards/standards/ecma-352/
[30] International Standards Organization, “ISO/IEC 15693-2:2006, Identification Cards –
Contactless Integrated Circuit Cards – Vicinity Cards – Part 2: Air Interface and
Initialization.” [Online], available at: www.iso.org/standard/39695.html
[31] H. Cravo Gomes and N. Borges Carvalho, “The Use of Intermodulation Distortion for the
Design of Passive RFID,” in Proceedings of the 37th European Microwave Conference,
pp. 377–380, 2007.
[32] S. J. Thomas, et al., “Quadrature Amplitude Modulated Backscatter in Passive and
Semipassive UHF RFID Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and
Techniques, 60(4):1175–1182, 2012.
[33] AMS, “SL900A EPC Gen2 Sensor Tag.” [Online], available at: www.ams.com/SL900A.
[34] Y. Wang, et al., “Design of a Passive UHF RFID Tag for the ISO18000–6C Protocol,”
Journal of Semiconductors, 32(5):055009, 2011.
[35] M. Baghaei-Nejad, et. al., “A Remote-Powered RFID Tag with 10Mb/s UWB Uplink
and 18.5dBm Sensitivity UHF Downlink in 0.18µm CMOS,” in 2009 IEEE
International Solid-State Circuits Conference – Digest of Technical Papers, 2009,
pp. 198–199a.
[36] J. R. Smith, et al., “A Wirelessly-Powered Platform for Sensing and Computation,” in 8th
International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (Ubicomp), 2006, pp. 495–506.
[37] S. Roy, et al., “RFID: From Supply Chains to Sensor Nets,” Proceedings of the IEEE, 98
(9):1583–1592, 2010.
[38] C. Herrojo, et al., “Chipless-RFID: A Review and Recent Developments,” Sensors, 19
(15):3385, 2019.
[39] S. Preradovic and N. C. Karmakar, “Chipless RFID: Bar Code of the Future,” IEEE
Microwave Magazine, 11(7):87–97, 2010.
[40] N. C. Karmakar, E. M. Amin, and J. K. Saha, Chipless RFID Sensors. John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., Hoboken, NJ, 2016.
References 39[41] V. P. Plessky and L. M. Reindl, “Review on SAW RFID Tags,” IEEE Transactions on
Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control, 57(3):654–668, 2010.
[42] Impinj, "Indy R2000 UHF Gen 2 RFID Reader Chip.” [Online], available at: www.impinj
.com
[43] STMicroelectronics, “ST25RU3993, UHF RFID Single Chip Reader EPC Class1 Gen2
Compatible.” [Online], available at: www.st.com
[44] PHYCHIPS, “PR9200, UHF RFID Reader SoC.” [Online], available at: www.phychips
.com
[45] M. Koller and R. Küng, “Adaptive Carrier Suppression for UHF RFID Using Digitally
Tunable Capacitors,” in 2013 European Microwave Conference, 2013, pp. 943–946.
[46] O. Bostan, H. U. Aydogmu¸ ˘ s, and S. Topaloglu, ˘ “Design of a Low-Power, Low-Cost UHF
RFID Reader Module,” Turkish Journal of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Sciences, 24(4):2747–2755, 2016.
[47] JADAK, “M6E-NANO, Mercury6e UHF RFID Module Family Performance, Efficiency,
and Flexibility, ThingMagic Technology.” [Online], available at: www.jadaktech.com
[48] Sanray, “M2210 UHF RFID module.” [Online], available at: www.sanrayrfid.com
[49] Impinj, “RS500/RS1000/RS2000 RAIN RFID Reader Module Family.” [Online],
available at: www.impinj.com
[50] P. Pursula, M. Kiviranti, and H. Seppa, “UHF RFID Reader with Reflected Power
Canceller,” IEEE Microwave and Wireless Components Letters, 19(1):48–50, 2009.
[51] B. You, B. Yang, X. Wen, and L. Qu, “Implementation of Low-Cost UHF RFID Reader
Front-Ends with Carrier Leakage Suppression Circuit,” International Journal of Antennas
and Propagation, 2013:135203, 2013.
[52] P. Nikitin, S. Ramamurthy, and R. Martinez, “Simple Low Cost UHF RFID Reader,” in
Proc. 2013 IEEE International Conference on RFID, 2013.
[53] A. Povalac, “Experimental Front End for UHF RFID Reader,” Elektro Revue, 2(1):55–59.
[54] S. Chiu et al., “A 900 MHz UHF RFID Reader Transceiver IC,” IEEE Journal of Solid￾State Circuits, 42(12):2822–2833, 2007.
[55] R. Zhang et al., “A Single-Chip CMOS UHF RFID Reader Transceiver,” in 2010 IEEE
Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits Symposium, 2010, pp. 101–104.
[56] L. Ye et al., “A Single-Chip CMOS UHF RFID Reader Transceiver for Mobile
Applications,” in 2009 Proceedings of ESSCIRC, 2009, pp. 228–231.
[57] N. Usachev et al., “System Design Considerations of Universal UHF RFID Reader
Transceiver ICs,” Facta Universitatis, Electronics and Energetics, 28(2):297–307, 2015.
[58] N. Kargas, F. Mavromatis, and A. Bletsas, “Fully-Coherent Reader with Commodity SDR
for Gen2 FM0 and Computational RFID,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, 4
(6):617–620, 2015.
[59] L. Catarinucci et al., “A Cost-Effective SDR Platform for Performance Characterization of
RFID Tags,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, 1(4):903–911,
2012.
[60] W. Yuechun et al., “A Flexible Software Defined Radio-Based UHF RFID Reader Based
on the USRP and LabView,” in 2016 International SoC Design Conference (ISOCC),
2016, pp. 217–218.
[61] V. Yang, E. Zhang, and A. He, “Developing a UHF RFID Reader RF Front End with an
Analog Devices’ Solution,” Analog Devices, Inc. technical article, 2019.
[62] A. Oliveira et al., “All-Digital RFID Readers: An RFID Reader Implemented on an FPGA
Chip and/or Embedded Processor,” IEEE Microwave Magazine, 22(3):18–24, 2021.
40 Introduction to Radio Frequency Identification[63] M. Buettner and D. Wetherall, “A Software Radio-Based UHF RFID Reader for PHY/
MAC Experimentation,” in IEEE International RFID Conference, 2011, pp. 134–141.
[64] A. Povalac, “Spatial Identification Methods and Systems for RFID Tags,” Ph.D. thesis,
Brno University of Technology, 2012.
[65] E. A. Keehr, “A Low-Cost Software-Defined UHF RFID Reader with Active Transmit
Leakage Cancellation,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on RFID, 2018, pp. 1–8.
[66] Impinj, “Speedway Reader.” [Online], available at: www.impinj.com
[67] Alien Technology, “Enterprise ALR-F800 UHF RFID Reader.” [Online], available at:
www.alientechnology.com
References 413 Backscatter Communications:
Fundamentals and Recent Advances
Scattering of electromagnetic waves from objects was first explored during World
War II for aircraft detection, and deliberate reflection of radio waves as a means of
communicating information was proposed for the first time by H. Stockman in 1948
[1]. In radar theory, an object can be characterized by its radar cross section, a measure
of how reflective the object is to electromagnetic waves. In modern RFID, cooperative
radar or deliberate wave reflection is combined with wireless power transmission to
remotely retrieve data from passive transponders.
Backscatter transponders have no local RF oscillators and instead modulate their
antenna radar cross section to reflect radio signals from an RFID interrogator with a
specific signature that encodes the message to be transmitted to the reader (see
Figure 3.1). Besides not requiring a local radio oscillator, passive-backscatter devices
have no onboard power supply and harvest DC power to supply their electronics from
the signal radiated by the reader. One of the first attempts to combine backscatter
and wireless power transmission dates to 1960 and is credited to D. B. Harris
who proposed a voice transmission system that required no batteries in the mobile
device [2].
In this chapter we (i) discuss underlying concepts of backscatter communications,
including transponder effective antenna aperture and radar cross section modulation;
(ii) perform a power budget analysis for a typical passive-backscatter system, derive
the backscatter power, and determine major backscatter range limiting factors;
(iii) describe backscatter demodulation methods used in passive UHF RFID systems;
(iv) discuss recent advances in backscatter communications such as quadrature ampli￾tude (QAM) modulation and multicarrier backscatter modulation; and (v) review
state-of-the-art techniques used to enhance wireless power transfer, communication
range, and the overall performance of passive-backscatter systems.
3.1 Antenna Thévenin-Equivalent Model
A typical passive backscatter transponder consists of an RFID integrated circuit / chip
attached to a half-wavelength dipole antenna (Figure 3.2(a)). The transponder circuit
can be modeled by the Thévenin-equivalent circuit of the antenna in series with the
load impedance of the chip (Figure 3.2(a)). The antenna impedance (3.1) comprises a
radiation resistance Rrad, which models the radio power radiated by the antenna, a lossresistance Rant, which accounts for losses in the antenna, and a reactance Xant, which
describes the reactive component of the antenna [3]. The RFID chip can be modeled
by its complex input impedance (3.2):
Zant ¼ Rrad þ Rant þ jXant, (3.1)
ZL ¼ RL þ jXL, (3.2)
where j denotes the imaginary unit. At resonance, the antenna presents minimal
(ideally zero) reactance, and for low-loss antennas the impedance can be approxi￾mated by the radiation resistance Rrad. To maximize the power transferred to the RFID
chip, the antenna impedance should match the complex conjugate impedance of the
chip. In passive transponders, conjugate impedance matching is performed for the
high-impedance (or absorptive) state of the chip. A survey of the design and matching
Figure 3.1 Illustration of backscatter communication. Left: Interrogator transceiver front end.
Right: Transponder backscatter front end.
Figure 3.2 (a) Passive backscatter transponder comprising RFID chip and dipole antenna.
(b) Corresponding model consisting of Thévenin equivalent of the antenna cascaded with
equivalent impedance of the chip.
Antenna Thévenin-Equivalent Model 43of UHF RFID antennas is presented in [4], and an approach to antenna design and
integration with RFID chips is described in [5].
Since RFID chips typically present a power- and frequency-dependent response
[6], impedance-matching design should account for the operating conditions that
transponders will encounter in real scenarios as these can significantly affect perform￾ance. To maximize communication range, conjugate impedance matching is usually
performed at the minimum input power level required to activate the chip [7]. This
typically occurs for large separation between reader and transponder, or due to line-of￾sight blockage and degraded transponder antenna gain caused by object attachment.
For stronger excitations closer to the reader, transponders will generally work even
under mismatch conditions. But big variations in antenna impedance under high
power levels can render transponders powerless even within the operational read
range [6].
3.2 Effective Aperture
To study the effective aperture and radar cross section of the transponder
antenna, we use the model of Figure 3.2(b) and follow a derivation similar to
[3]. The model in Figure 3.2(b) has some important limitations [8–11] but can be
applied to the minimum-scattering antennas used in passive UHF RFID transpon￾ders [12–14]. For optimal polarization alignment of a receiving antenna with an
incoming electromagnetic plane wave, the maximum power that can be delivered
by the antenna to a complex conjugate matched load or available power is given
by [3]
Pav ¼ SAe, (3.3)
where S is the power flux density describing the amount of power per unit of area
carried by the incoming electromagnetic field, and Ae is the effective aperture of the
antenna representing the functional area through which the available power Pav passes
when the antenna is exposed to the power flux density S perpendicular to the direction
of propagation.
The incoming electromagnetic field induces a root-mean-square voltage across the
terminals of the transponder antenna, Vant, and a root-mean-square current through the
circuit, I, such that
I ¼ Vant
j Zant þ ZL j
¼ Vant ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
ð Þ Rrad þ Rant þ RL
2 þ ð Þ Xant þ XL
2
q : (3.4)
Substituting (3.4) into the definition of the power delivered to the load Pav ¼ I2RL
 
leads to
Pav ¼ V2
antRL
ð Þ Rrad þ Rant þ RL
2 þ ð Þ Xant þ XL
2 : (3.5)
44 Backscatter CommunicationsCombining (3.3) and (3.5) yields the antenna effective aperture,
Ae ¼ Pav
S ¼ V2
antRL
ð Þ Rrad þ Rant þ RL
2 þ ð Þ Xant þ XL
2 h iS
: (3.6)
Assuming a lossless transponder antenna ð Þ Rant ¼ 0 and conjugate impedance match￾ing (Rrad ¼ RL and Xant ¼ XL), (3.6) simplifies to
Ae ¼ Aemax ¼ V2
ant
4SRrad
: (3.7)
Equation (3.7) represents the total area through which power is collected from the
incoming electromagnetic field and delivered to the load. The previous derivation
assumes the common configuration found in off-the-shelf transponders where the
antenna is directly connected to the load, but if the antenna and load are intercon￾nected via a transmission line, then ZL must be replaced with the input impedance
looking into the transmission line at the antenna location.
3.3 Scattering Antenna Aperture
Another important characteristic of an antenna is the radar cross section, σ, which
determines the power scattered from the antenna. The radar cross section can be defined
in a similar way to above by realizing that: (i) the current I induced by the incoming
electromagnetic field in the circuit in Figure 3.2(b) flows through the radiation resistance
Rrad, and (ii) this current has the same effect as a current created by a transmit generator
connected to the antenna. Thus, the power “dissipated” in the radiation resistance, due to
the current I, corresponds to the re-radiated power Pscat given by
Pscat ¼ I
2
Rrad: (3.8)
As previously done for (3.6), we define the scattering aperture or radar cross
section as
σ ¼ Pscat
S ¼ I2Rrad
S ¼ V2
antRrad
ð Þ Rrad þ Rant þ RL
2 þ ð Þ Xant þ XL
2 h iS
: (3.9)
Assuming again a lossless antenna and conjugate impedance matching, (3.9) simpli￾fies to
σ ¼ V2
ant
4SRrad
: (3.10)
This result indicates that, under conjugate matching, the antenna re-radiates as much
power as it delivers to the load (i.e., σ ¼ Aemax). Figure 3.3 presents the effective
aperture (3.6) and radar cross section (3.9) relative to the maximum effective aperture
(3.7) as a function of normalized load resistance ð Þ rL ¼ RL=Rrad [3, 15].
Scattering Antenna Aperture 45From the previous analysis, we can identify the following special regimes.
1. Conjugate-matched antenna (RL ¼ Rrad and XL ¼ Xant): The radar cross section
equals the maximum effective aperture ð Þ σ ¼ Aemax , and the antenna scatters the
same amount of power that is delivered to the load.
2. Resonant short-circuited antenna (RL ¼ 0 and XL ¼ Xant): Four times as much
power is re-radiated as under the previous conjugate matched condition ð Þ σ ¼ 4Aemax :
3. Open-circuited antenna ð Þ ZL ¼ ∞ : No current flows through the circuit and the
system presents null effective aperture and radar cross section ð Þ σ ¼ Ae ¼ 0 .
Ideally no power gets re-radiated, but in practice residual re-radiation occurs due to
parasitic components [12–14].
The results above suggest that the resonant short-circuit regime should be preferred to
maximize backscatter, but this regime does not provide maximum re-radiated power.
In fact, if the antenna impedance is sufficiently reactive, the conjugate-matched
antenna can scatter more power than the short-circuited antenna (see Figure 3.4)
[14]. Note that the analysis presented here only considers relative power.
Expressions for the absolute power scattered from and collected by the transponder
antenna are given in Section 3.6.
Figure 3.3 Relative effective aperture and radar cross section as a function of normalized load
resistance for Rant ¼ Xant ¼ XL ¼ 0. The intersection between the aperture and radar cross
section curves corresponds to the conjugate matched condition.
46 Backscatter Communications3.3.1 Modulating the Scattered Electromagnetic Field
The loaded antenna properties discussed above are used in backscatter RFID systems to
convey information from the transponder to the reader. By placing a switch device
(typically a transistor) across the antenna in Figure 3.2(b), one can create a backscatter
front end with two modulation states that can be used to communicate binary information.
In modulation state 1, with the switch open as in Figure 3.5(a), the antenna is
conjugate matched to the chip, allowing maximum power absorption while some
background power is scattered by the antenna. In modulation state 2 we close the
switch, short-circuiting the antenna as illustrated in Figure 3.5(b). The power scattered
from the antenna in this state is increased compared to the background state (see
Figure 3.5(c)). The following derivations use an approach similar to [16].
During modulation state 1, a current I1 ¼ Vant=ð Þ 2Rrad flows through the circuit
(Figure 3.5(a)) and power Pscat is scattered by the antenna for a purely real chip
impedance ð Þ RL ¼ Rant ,
Pscat1 ¼ PL1 ¼ V2
ant
4Rrad
: (3.11)
Equation (3.11) gives the maximum power delivered to the chip, Pav, which equals the
transponder background scattered power. During modulation state 2, a current
I2 ¼ Vant=Rrad flows through the circuit (Figure 3.5(b)), and four times as much power
as the background power is scattered,
Pscat2 ¼ V2
ant
Rrad
¼ 4Pav: (3.12)
Figure 3.4 Power re-radiated by conjugate-matched antenna relative to short-circuited antenna as
a function of normalized antenna reactance. Reprinted from [14].
Scattering Antenna Aperture 47During modulation state 2, no power is delivered to the chip because the voltage drop
across the chip is zero, PL2 ¼ 0. For an encoding scheme that switches symmetrically
between two modulation states with equal probabilities (e.g., FM0 or Miller subcar￾rier), the average power delivered to the chip is
PL ¼ PL1 þ PL2
2 ¼ Pav
2 : (3.13)
Based on the difference current flowing in the circuit in the two modulation states,
Idiff ¼ j I1  I2 j ¼ Vant=ð Þ 2Rrad , one can determine the differential power scattered by
the transponder:
Pdiff ¼ I
2
diffRrad ¼ V2
ant
4Rrad
¼ Pav: (3.14)
Considering again symmetrical encoding and equally likely modulation states, the
average scattered power is
Pdiff ¼ Pav
2 : (3.15)
A similar analysis can be done for different load impedance combinations (e.g.,
matched/open or short/open) [16]. Results for different modulation schemes are
Figure 3.5 (a) Modulation state 1 with switch open and transponder antenna conjugate matched
to the RFID chip. (b) Modulation state 2 with switch closed and no power delivered to the chip.
(c) Illustration of waveform for FM0 transponder encoding. Adapted from [16].
48 Backscatter Communicationssummarized in Table 3.1 and the modulation scheme choice tradeoff is illustrated in
Figure 3.6. While modulation scheme 3 in Figure 3.6 maximizes the scattered power,
it is not suitable for a fully passive transponder as it provides no power to the chip. But
this scheme could well be used in a battery-assisted or semi-passive transponder with
an ancillary power supply. The reflection coefficient presented in Table 3.1 for an
antenna directly attached to a load is given by the Kurokawa reflection coefficient
(3.16). For antennas with purely real impedance, the Kurokawa reflection coefficient
reduces to the standard reflection coefficient definition [3],
ΓL ¼ ZL  Z∗
ant
ZL þ Zant
: (3.16)
Table 3.1 Power budget for elementary modulation schemes.
Modulation scheme ZL1 ZL2 Γ L1 Γ L2 Pscat ð Þ mean PL ð Þ mean
Scheme 1 (matched/short) Zant∗ 0 0 1 Pav=2 Pav=2
Scheme 2 (open/matched) ∞ Zant∗ 1 0 Pav=2 Pav=2
Scheme 3 (short/open) 0 ∞ 1 12Pav 0
Figure 3.6 Illustration of the tradeoff between transponder scattered and absorbed power.
Scattering Antenna Aperture 493.4 Quadrature Backscatter Demodulation
For the description of the demodulation method typically used in backscatter systems,
observe the basic system of Figure 3.1, where we neglect the effect of noise, assume
unitary amplitude scaling factors in the communication channel, and refer to electric
fields and circuit voltages interchangeably as signals, S(t). In addition, all signals are
phase-referenced to the phase of the reader local oscillator, and the communication
channel is assumed to be stationary, that is, it remains unchanged during each reader–
transponder transaction.
The reader broadcasts a carrier signal that serves both as remote power supply and
oscillator for the transponder. By modulating its antenna radar cross section, the
transponder imprints a signature in the reflected signal to communicate its infor￾mation. Passive UHF RFID readers typically employ quadrature direct conversion
to demodulate the transponder backscattered signal. The carrier broadcast by the
reader and received by the transponder can be written as
ScarrierðÞ¼ t Re Acarriere jωtþϕcarrier ð Þ n o, (3.17)
where Re{·} represents the real part of a complex variable, ω is the operating
frequency, and Acarrier and Φcarrier are the amplitude and phase of the reader carrier
at the transponder location, respectively. The transponder modulates its antenna radar
cross section by loading the antenna with an impedance Zm that is varied over time to
encode information in the re-radiated carrier. The scattering from a transponder
antenna has some subtleties [3, 4], but for the purpose of explaining the basic back￾scatter demodulation method, it can be characterized by a complex reflection coeffi￾cient Γm. The transponder backscatters the reader carrier (3.17) yielding the
backscattered signals at the transponder location (3.18) and reader location (3.19):
S0
mðÞ¼ t Re ρmAcarriereð Þ jωtþϕcarrierþϕm
n o, (3.18)
SmðÞ¼ t Re ρmAcarriereð Þ jωtþ2ϕcarrierþϕm
n o, (3.19)
where ρm and Φm are the amplitude and phase of the transponder-modulated reflec￾tion, respectively, and Φcarrier is a one-way modulation-independent phase introduced
by the radio channel. The reader transmitter-to-receiver leakage due to self-jamming
in the reader and environment clutter reflections can be expressed as
SJamðÞ¼ t Re AJameð Þ jωtþϕJam n o, (3.20)
SClutðÞ¼ t Re X
N
n¼1
ρnAcarriere jωtþϕn ð Þ ( ), (3.21)
where AJam and ΦJam are the amplitude and phase of the reader self-jamming signal,
respectively, and ρn and Φn are the amplitudes and phases of the clutter reflection
50 Backscatter Communicationscomponents, respectively. For simplicity, and assuming linearity, we process the
signals (3.19) to (3.21) separately in the quadrature demodulator of Figure 3.1 and
then combine the resulting baseband signals. By correlating the incoming signal (3.19)
with the reader in-phase and quadrature local oscillator over one baseband symbol
Tsymbol, we obtain the complex baseband envelope corresponding to the modulation
state m:
S
fm ¼ SI
m þ jSQ
m
¼ 1
Tsymbol ð
Tsymbol=2
Tsymbol=2
Re ρmAcarriereð Þ jωtþ2ϕcarrierþϕm
n oAcarrier cosð Þ ωt dt
þj
1
Tsymbol ð
Tsymbol=2
Tsymbol=2
Re ρmAcarriereð Þ jωtþ2ϕcarrierþϕm
n oAcarrier sin ð Þ ωt dt
¼ ρmA2
carrier
2
cos ϕm þ 2ϕcarrier ð Þþ j
ρmA2
carrier
2
sin ϕm þ 2ϕcarrier ð Þ:
(3.22)
This operation corresponds to a Fourier transform with an integration window of one
transponder symbol period with fixed baseband modulation state. The resulting
complex baseband envelope of the reader-intercepted signal can be written using
more compact notation:
S
fm ¼ ρmA2
carrier
2 e jð Þ 2ϕcarrierþϕm : (3.23)
Using a similar approach, one can obtain the complex baseband components due to
self-jamming and clutter:
S
gJam ¼ AJamAcarrier
2 ejϕJam , (3.24)
S
gClut ¼ A2
carrier
2
X
N
n¼1
ρnejϕn : (3.25)
The combined baseband signal for the modulation state m becomes
S
fT
m ¼ S
fm þ S
gJam þ S
gClut
¼ ρmA2
carrier
2 ej ϕmþ2ϕcarrier ð Þ þ
AJamAcarrier
2 ejð Þ ϕJam þ
A2
carrier
2
X
N
n¼1
ρnej ϕn ð Þ: (3.26)
3.4.1 Impact of Self-Jamming and Clutter
The first term in (3.26) contains the transponder baseband information, and the last
two terms are complex DC offset components that depend on self-jamming and clutter
signals. The model described above is simplified to facilitate understanding of the
Quadrature Backscatter Demodulation 51basic backscatter communication mechanism. In practice, there are important non￾idealities that make backscatter communication challenging. For example, typical
RFID channels are not stationary and as a result direct conversion receivers can
produce time-varying DC offsets. In Chapter 8, we discuss techniques to deal with
self-jamming and DC offsets, including adaptive suppression algorithms that can track
changes in the RFID channel. This model also assumes a noiseless communication
channel. In real applications, white noise in the channel and phase noise from the
transmitter can find their way into the receiver. The latter does so through self￾jamming and clutter reflections. Clutter phase noise is especially problematic in that
it cannot be cancelled satisfactorily by a first-order cancelling network due to poten￾tially large delays between the clutter scatterer and the reader receiver.
3.4.2 BPSK Backscatter Demodulation
In binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) backscatter modulation, the reflection coefficient
amplitude remains constant ρ1 ¼ ρ2 ð Þ while the phase is flipped by 180 between the
two modulation states Φ2 ¼ Φ1 þ 180  
. Figures 3.7(b)–(d) illustrate instances of
(3.26) for BPSK modulation.
A trivial example of a BPSK constellation produced at a transponder antenna is
shown in Figure 3.7(a) and the corresponding baseband constellation received by the
reader is illustrated in Figures 3.7(b)–(d). The backscattered signal undergoes arbitrary
phase rotations induced by the radio channel, and the down-converted baseband signal
generally has a DC offset due to self-jamming. By eliminating the complex DC offset
in the received baseband signal, the received constellation is centered about the origin
of the complex plane (Figure 3.7(c)).
The resulting constellation after DC removal corresponds to a BPSK modulation
(Figure 3.7(c)) and can be demodulated as such (demodulation algorithms are detailed
in Chapters 5–7). BPSK symbol mapping is illustrated in Figure 3.7(d), where a binary
decision is made by comparing the BPSK symbol phase to a decision threshold. Note
that in practice transponders present impedance modulation states with resistive and
capacitive characteristics, which leads to mixed ASK/PSK modulation (see Figure 3.8)
[17]. But by centering the received constellation, the signal can be demodulated as a
BPSK signal. In reality, noise and other non-idealities in the channel lead to signal
constellations resembling clouds of points rather than just localized points as illustrated
here. In Chapter 5, we provide scripts for evaluating these effects more realistically.
3.5 Advanced Backscatter Communication Techniques
This section discusses advances in backscatter communications geared toward
increasing data rate and performance at reduced energy consumption and complexity.
The techniques discussed here include quadrature backscatter modulation, spread￾spectrum backscatter modulation, multicarrier backscatter modulation, and ambient
backscatter modulation.
52 Backscatter Communications3.5.1 Quadrature Backscatter Modulation
The analysis presented in the previous section for two backscatter modulation states
can be generalized to an arbitrary number of modulation states (M) described by
reflection coefficients Γm, m ¼ 1, 2, ..., M. Each scattered vector generated by these
modulation states can be detected at the reader using a quadrature demodulation
receiver like that in Figure 3.1, which is available in most modern RFID readers.
This allows us to perform backscatter data transmissions using quadrature amplitude
modulation (QAM) techniques like those used in conventional wireless systems.
QAM backscatter [18, 19] enables multi-bit-per-symbol backscatter communications
Figure 3.7 (a) Example of PSK modulation at the transponder. (b) Received baseband
constellation with arbitrary phase rotation and DC offset. (c) Centered baseband constellation
after DC offset removal. (c) BPSK demodulation and symbol mapping.
Advanced Techniques 53with significantly larger data rates, lower power consumption, and increased efficiency
compared to conventional single-bit-per-symbol backscatter schemes. Similar
approaches have also been proposed for near-field applications [20].
In [19], we proposed a new quadrature backscatter modulation scheme that can
produce high-order M-QAM and achieve data rates greater than 100 Mb/s. The core
idea behind this approach consists of presenting the incoming carrier with two
orthogonal reflection coefficients to simultaneously reflect its in-phase and quadrature
components. Figure 3.9(a) shows a QAM-backscatter front end designed to evaluate
this approach. The central component of this system is a Wilkinson power combiner
whose combining ports are terminated with two varying resistances (RI and RQ) that
are used to encode the baseband data. To realize orthogonal backscatter modulation, a
45 phase shift is introduced between the two combining ports, which produces an
effective phase shift of 90 in the scattered signal.
The in-phase and quadrature backward-propagating waves at the outputs of the
combiner circuit are given as in (3.27) for a given incoming wave at the antenna. The
reflection coefficient at the antenna port (3.29) can be obtained from the total back￾ward propagating wave at the antenna port (3.28). Note that the in-phase and quadra￾ture components of the reflection coefficient in (3.29) can be controlled independently
via two termination impedances, allowing two degrees of freedom for the generation
of arbitrary scattering constellations:
V
I ¼ Vþ
ant
ffiffiffi
2
p ΓI, V
Q ¼ Vþ
antejπ=2
ffiffiffi
2
p ΓQ, (3.27)
Figure 3.8 Constellation example of mixed amplitude and phase modulation.
54 Backscatter CommunicationsV
ant ¼ V
I þ V
Q ffiffiffi
2
p ¼ Vþ
ant
ffiffiffi
2
p ΓI þ
Vþ
antejπ=2
ffiffiffi
2
p ΓQ, (3.28)
Γant ¼ V
ant
Vþ
ant
¼ ΓI
2 þ j
ΓQ
2 , (3.29)
Figure 3.9 (a) Diagram of the proposed QAM backscatter circuit. The key component of this
system is a Wilkinson power combiner with 45 degree phase shift between the combining arms,
which allows for independent modulation of the in-phase and quadrature components of the
backscattered signal. (b) Simulated results of a 16-QAM backscatter constellation produced by
the proposed front end.
Advanced Techniques 55where the in-phase and quadrature components are given by ΓI ¼ ð Þ RI  Z0 =ð Þ RI þ Z0
and ΓQ ¼ ð Þ RQ  Z0 =ð Þ RQ þ Z0 , respectively. For example, a 4-QAM constellation
can be produced by loading the backscatter front end using a combination of open and
short terminations as in Table 3.2.
Figure 3.9(b) presents simulation results of a 16-QAM backscatter front end.
A backscatter modulator front end operating at 2.45 GHz has also been designed
and prototyped (see Figure 3.10(a)). In this implementation, each combining arm of
the Wilkinson power combiner was terminated with a MOSFET transistor providing a
path to ground with an impedance that can be modulated via a bias voltage applied to
the MOSFET gate. The backscatter modulator front end was driven with a 2.45 GHz
carrier created by an RF signal generator, and an arbitrary waveform generator was
used to generate the baseband data to modulate the gates of the in-phase and
quadrature MOSFETs.
The 16-QAM signal created by the backscatter modulator was sampled via a
directional coupler (used to separate the generated QAM signal from the 2.45 GHz
carrier signal) and was then demodulated using a vector signal analyzer. The system
performance was evaluated for different data rates and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
values. Figure 3.10(c) shows the constellation of a 16-QAM signal demodulated by
the signal analyzer. In this experiment, an error vector magnitude (EVM) of 8.19%
was obtained for a 4 Mb/s data rate and 21.74 dB SNR. For further details, the
interested reader is referred to [19].
3.5.2 Spread-Spectrum Backscatter Modulation
The chirp spread spectrum (CSS) modulation technique, originally proposed for radar
applications, has recently been applied to digital communications because of its out￾standing coverage range and reliability [21–23]. To achieve reliable long-range com￾munications while maintaining reduced power, complexity, and cost of the hardware,
backscatter-based CSS modulation approaches have been proposed [22–24].
CSS modulation requires continuously varying the frequency of a sinusoidal signal
as a function of time. As the instantaneous frequency corresponds to the rate of change
of phase, a CSS chirp signal can be created by modulating the signal phase.
A quadrature backscatter modulator system like the one introduced in the previous
section (Figure 3.10(a)) was used to produce chirp signals compliant with the LoRa
protocol [21] via backscatter modulation [24].
Table 3.2 Parameters of 4-QAM backscatter.
RI RQ ΓI ΓQ Γant
0 0 1 1 (1  j)/2
0 ∞ 1 1(1 + j)/2
∞ 0 1 1 (1  j)/2
∞ ∞ 1 1 (1 + j)/2
56 Backscatter CommunicationsFigure 3.10 (a) Photograph of QAM backscatter front end prototype. (b) Measurement testbed.
(c) Measured 16-QAM constellation. Reprinted from [19].
Advanced Techniques 57Figure 3.11 illustrates a chirp signal synthesis performed in [24]. The backscatter
constellation in Figure 3.11(a) was obtained by varying the phase of the reflection
coefficient while keeping its magnitude constant. This resembles traditional quadra￾ture phase-shift keying (QPSK) modulation. Algorithms and MATLAB code for
implementing these modulations are given in Chapter 5.
3.5.3 Multicarrier Backscatter Modulation
Recent work has shown that signals like chaotic, ultra-wide band (UWB), and multi￾carrier waveforms can improve the efficiency of wireless power transfer systems when
compared to continuous-wave (CW) signals [25–30]. In Chapter 10, we review the
literature on multicarrier wireless power transfer and discuss its application for
enhancing performance of UHF RFID transponders.
Figure 3.11 (a) Measured reflection coefficient constellation at the output of the quadrature
backscatter modulator for various modulation states (gray area) and constant-voltage standing
wave ratio (black line). (b) IQ modulating waveforms applied to the in-phase and quadrature
inputs of the backscatter modulator. (c) Chirp signal produced by the backscatter modulator.
Reprinted from [24].
58 Backscatter CommunicationsIn addition to its potential benefit in terms of energy transfer efficiency, the multi￾carrier approach can enable the implementation of enhanced backscatter communi￾cation schemes. For example, frequency diversity in backscattered multicarrier signals
can be used to counteract multipath fading [26] and correct demodulation errors [33].
Similar concepts propose the use of ancillary power carrier transmitters [31, 32].
Multicarriers can also enable improved medium access control (MAC) schemes for
backscatter systems, for example, using frequency division multiple access (FDMA)
[33–36].
Figure 3.12 illustrates the multicarrier backscatter communication scheme
described in the following sections. In Chapter 7, we experimentally evaluate a similar
approach and assess the gain obtained in off-the-shelf UHF RFID transponders using a
custom-designed SDR RFID reader with multicarrier capability.
3.5.3.1 Generating a Downlink Modulated Multicarrier
During reader-to-transponder data transmissions, RFID readers modulate a CW carrier
signal like that in (3.30) with a baseband message signal m tð Þ. A convenient way to
create an RFID modulated multicarrier waveform is to mix this modulated CW signal
with a complex baseband multisine envelope like the one in (3.31) having spectral
components at ωn ¼ nΔω with n ¼ 0, 1, ..., N to yield a transmit bandpass
multicarrier like that in (3.32), which has frequency components at
ωm ¼  ωcarrier  mΔω with m ¼ 0, 1, ..., 2N +1:
ScarrierðÞ¼ t Re Acarrierejωcarriert  , (3.30)
SenvðÞ¼ t Re X
N
n¼0
Anej nΔωtþφn ð Þ ( ), (3.31)
StxðÞ¼ t Re m tð Þ X
N
n¼N
AnAcarrierej ð Þ ωcarrierþnΔω tþφn ½  ( ), (3.32)
where N is the number of baseband subcarriers, Acarrier and ωcarrier are the amplitude
and frequency of the reader carrier, respectively, An ð Þ An and φn φn ð Þ are the
amplitude and phase of the nth baseband subcarrier, respectively, and Δω is the
frequency spacing between them. The DC component (n ¼ 0) in the baseband
multisine (3.31) yields a spectral component in the bandpass signal (3.32) at the
carrier frequency. As shown later, this component is important if the multicarrier
signal backscattered by a transponder is to be demodulated by a conventional
reader receiver.
For example, a two-tone baseband multisine (N ¼ 2) with a DC component yields a five￾tone bandpass multicarrier like the one illustrated in Figure 3.12(b), which has spectral
components at ð Þ ωcarrier  2Δω , ð Þ ωcarrier  Δω , ωcarrier, ð Þ ωcarrier þ Δω ,
ð Þ ωcarrier þ 2Δω , ð Þ ωcarrier  2Δω , ð Þ ωcarrier  Δω , ωcarrier, ð Þ ωcarrier þ Δω , and
ð Þ ωcarrier þ 2Δω . To maximize peak-to-average power ratio (PAPR) in the multicarrier
signal and improve its effectiveness in driving transponder energy-harvesting circuits, a
Advanced Techniques 59constant phase progression should be used among the subcarriers[26, 29]. Additionally, to
avoid aliasing between the reader-modulated subcarriers and allow a conventional ASK
demodulator to retrieve the reader message in the transponder, the frequency spacing
between the subcarriers should be at least twice the bandwidth of the reader baseband
message, that is, Δω  2ωbb (see Figure 3.12(b)).
Figure 3.12 (a) Example of multicarrier RFID backscatter scheme. (b) Illustration of transmit￾modulated multicarrier resulting from mixing a modulated RFID signal at frequency ωcarrier and
bandwidth ωbb with a multisine baseband envelope with subcarrier frequency spacing of Δω. (c)
Illustration of time–frequency dependence of modulated backscatter multicarrier.
60 Backscatter Communications3.5.3.2 Downlink: Joint Power and Data Transfer via Multicarriers
In the proposed approach, both power and information are transferred from the reader
to the transponder via a multicarrier waveform. Multicarrier wireless power transfer is
discussed in Chapter 10. To analyze the multicarrier downlink data transmission,
assume a noiseless, lossless channel with direct line of sight, and consider that the
rectifying circuit of the transponder demodulator is represented by a simple second￾order nonlinearity. The demodulator baseband output in response to the multicarrier
(3.32) results from the mixture of the symmetric frequency components
ð Þ ωcarrier  nΔω and ð Þ ωcarrier  nΔω with n ¼ 0, 1, 2, ..., N. For the five-tone
multicarrier example (N ¼ 2), the baseband signal retrieved by the transponder
demodulator is [26]
SbbðÞ¼ t
KA2
carrier
8 ½  m tð Þ 2 A2
0 þ 2A2
1 þ 2A2
2
 , (3.33)
where K is the second-order coefficient of the transponder demodulator nonlinearity.
As can be seen, the transponder demodulator output is proportional to the square of
the reader message signal (for binary ASK modulation, m tð Þ and ½m tð Þ
2 carry the
same information). Therefore, for proper multicarrier design (e.g., as in Figure 3.12), a
conventional transponder ASK demodulator can retrieve the reader message without
requiring any modification to the transponder hardware. Transponder architectures
optimized for multicarrier operation have also been proposed in the literature [37–39].
3.5.3.3 Uplink: Multicarrier Backscatter
Backscatter communications are typically implemented in a sequential manner where
the reader illuminates the transponder with an unmodulated carrier, and the transpon￾der reflects a portion of this carrier by presenting a modulated complex reflection
coefficient to the incoming signal that encodes its message. To study the multicarrier
backscatter mechanism, we assume that the reader illuminates the transponder with a
multicarrier of the form (3.32) with the modulating baseband signal m tð Þ held
constant. The reflection coefficient presented to the multicarrier by the transponder
antenna is a function of frequency and time,
Γ ωk ð Þ¼ , t ρ ωk ð Þ , t ejθ ωð Þ k ,t , (3.34)
where ρ ωð Þ k, t and θ ωð Þ k, t are the frequency- and time-dependent amplitude and
phase of the reflection coefficient presented to the kth subcarrier at frequency ωk,
respectively. The complex reflection coefficient at each frequency also depends on the
unmodulated frequency response of the transponder antenna and modulator.
Assuming the reader radiates an unmodulated multicarrier like that in (3.32) with
m tðÞ¼ 1 through a fading channel, the transponder backscattered signal intercepted
by the reader is given by
SbackðÞ¼ t Re X
N
n¼N
M
X1
m¼0
Γð Þ ωn, t AnAcarrierαn,mej nð Þ Δωtþφn,m ejωnτn,m ejωcarriert
( ), (3.35)
Advanced Techniques 61where αn,m, φn,m, and τn,m are the roundtrip attenuation, phase shift, and delay of the nth
subcarrier received through the mth path, respectively, and M is the number of signal
paths. For simplicity, here we assume that the transponder produces symmetrical
modulation around the reader carrier. But in practice asymmetric modulation of the
sideband subcarriers may introduce distortion in the transponder baseband message
signal (see Chapter 7 for more details). The first step in demodulating the transponder
message backscattered on the multicarrier is to correlate the received signal (3.35) with
the reader local oscillator carrier, which yields the complex baseband envelope,
S
gBBðÞ¼ t SI
BBðÞþt jSQ
BBðÞ¼ t X
N
n¼0
M
X1
m¼0
Γð Þ ωn; t AnAcarrierαn,mej nð Þ Δωtþφn,m , (3.36)
where ϕn,m ¼ φn,m  ωnτn,m is the round-trip phase shift of the nth subcarrier at the mth
path. The in-phase and quadrature components of the baseband envelope are given by
SI
BBðÞ¼ t X
N
n¼0
M
X1
m¼0
ρ ωð Þ n, t cos½  θ ωð Þ n, t AnAcarrierαn,m cos nΔωt þ φn,m
  
 ρ ωð Þ n, t sin½  θ ωð Þ n, t AnAcarrierαn,m sin nΔωt þ φn,m
 ,
SQ
BBðÞ¼ t X
N
n¼0
M
X1
m¼0
ρ ωð Þ n, t cos½  θ ωð Þ n, t AnAcarrierαn,m sin nΔωt þ φn,m
  
 ρ ωð Þ n, t sin½  θ ωð Þ n, t AnAcarrierαn,m cos nΔωt þ φn,m
 :
Assuming that there is a single line-of-sight path between the reader and transponder
with unitary response (M ¼ 1, αn,m ¼ 1, ϕn,m ¼ 0) and that a low-pass filter with cut-off
frequency below Δω is used to isolate the baseband component at DC (N ¼ 0), then the
transponder baseband component modulated on the center subcarrier simplifies to
S
gBBðÞ¼ t SI
BBðÞþt jSQ
BBðÞ¼ t ρ ωð Þ 0; t AnAcarrierf g cos½ þ θ ωð Þ n; t jsin ½  θ ωð Þ n; t :
(3.37)
This approach presents minimal complexity and makes it possible for conventional
reader receivers to demodulate the multicarrier message without any hardware modi￾fication [26]. In Chapter 7, we discuss improved approaches based on matched filters
and fast Fourier transform (FFT) that can be used to leverage multicarrier
frequency diversity.
3.5.4 Ambient Backscatter Modulation
Communication via ambient electromagnetic backscatter has recently been explored
in the literature [40–44]. In this technique, an “opportunistic” backscatter radio
leverages radio transmissions from existing wireless systems by reflecting their signals
to convey information. This approach, which requires no dedicated radio transmitters,
has been demonstrated in the TV and FM [40, 41], Wi-Fi [42], and Bluetooth and
ZigBee [43, 44] bands.
62 Backscatter Communications3.6 Backscatter Power Budget Analysis
To perform a power budget analysis for a typical backscatter UHF RFID system, we consider
the scenario presented in Figure 3.13, for which we make the following assumptions:
 The reader employs co-located transmit and receive antennas with gains Gtx,
Grx respectively.
 The receiver has sensitivity Sreader and the transmitter delivers power Ptx to the
antenna at wavelength λ (frequency f ¼ c/λ, where c is the speed of light in
free space).
 The reader and transponder are in direct line of sight of one another and are
separated by a distance d (with d  λ for far-field operation).
The effective aperture of the antenna along with the Friis formula determines the RF
power transferred to the transponder antenna (3.38), and the antenna radar cross
section combined with the radar equation determines the power scattered by the
transponder and received by the reader (3.39) [3]:
Ptag ¼ Ae
PtxGtx
4πd2 , (3.38)
Prx ¼ σ PtxGtxGrxλ2
ð Þ 4π 3
d4 : (3.39)
The aperture and radar cross section of an antenna loaded with an impedance ZL are
given by (3.40) and (3.41), respectively [45, 46]:
Ae ¼ Gtagλ2
4π 1  j j ΓL
2  , (3.40)
σ ¼ G2
tagλ2
4π j j Γ0  ΓL
2
, (3.41)
where Gtag is the gain of the transponder antenna, ΓL is the reflection coefficient as
given by (3.16), and Γ0 accounts for the antenna structural mode scattering [14]. The
Figure 3.13 Typical backscatter UHF RFID power budget scenario. Note: images of reader and
transponder are used for illustration purposes only.
Power Budget Analysis 63term 1  j j ΓL
2   in (3.40) accounts for the mismatch between the transponder
antenna and its load impedance. For a total mismatch ð Þ ΓL ¼ 1 no power is delivered
to the transponder chip, and under conjugate impedance matching ð Þ ΓL ¼ 0 Ae takes
the usual form given by the Friis formula.
3.6.1 Average Aperture and Differential Cross Section
Considering again an encoding scheme that switches symmetrically between two
modulation states with equal probabilities and reflection coefficients ΓL1 and ΓL2
leads to an average effective aperture (3.42) and differential radar cross section
(3.43) [45] of
ΔAe ¼ Gtagλ2
4π 1  1
2 j j ΓL1
2 þ j j ΓL2
2
	 
   ¼ Gtagλ2
4π ð Þ 1  β , (3.42)
Δσ ¼ G2
tagλ2
16π j j ΓL1  ΓL2
2 ¼ G2
tagλ2
4π ρ, (3.43)
where we have defined
β ¼ 1
2 j j ΓL1
2 þ j j ΓL2
2  , ρ ¼ 1
4
j j ΓL1  ΓL2
2
,
For improved accuracy, transponder gain degradation due to attachment to objects and
line-of-sight blockage should also be considered. Note that the common-mode term Γ0
in the radar cross section of the individual modulation states (3.41) does not contain
information and cancels out in the differential case (3.43).
3.6.2 Communication Range Limitations
Replacing the antenna aperture in (3.38) and radar cross section in (3.39) with (3.42)
and (3.43), respectively, and considering polarization mismatch and multipath fading,
yields the power collected by the transponder (3.44) and the power received by the
reader (3.45):
Ptag½ ¼ dBm Ptx þ Gtx þ Gtag þ 20 log 10
λ
4πd
	 
 þ 10 log 10ð Þþ 1  β θf  Ff,
(3.44)
Prx½ ¼ dBm Ptx þ Gtx þ Grx þ 2Gtag þ 40 log 10
λ
4πd
	 
 þ 10 log 10ð Þþ ρ θf þ θb  Ff,
(3.45)
where θf and θb describe the polarization mismatch between the transponder antenna
and the reader transmit and receive antennas, respectively, and Ff is the forward fade
margin, required in a faded channel to achieve the same transponder read rate that
64 Backscatter Communicationswould be achieved in a flat channel. The results of (3.44) and (3.45) are presented in
Figure 3.14 as a function of the distance between the reader and transponder for the
typical parameters given in Table 3.3.
The main conclusions from this analysis are twofold. First, in particular, while a
reader receiver sensitivity of 80 dBm would allow a coverage range of about 20 m,
the maximum coverage range is cut short at 6 m because of the transponder’s large
minimum activation power level (15 dBm). Second, typically, the most stringent
limitation in the communication range of passive backscatter systems is imposed by
the forward wireless power transfer link rather than the reader receiver sensitivity.
This result, which contrasts with conventional wireless communication systems (pri￾marily limited by noise and receiver sensitivity) holds true for state-of-the-art tran￾sponders with activation power levels as low as 20 dBm. This has motivated the
investigation of several techniques to improve the forward link in passive-backscatter
systems, including those discussed in Section 3.7 and Chapter 10.
3.7 Wireless Power Transfer in Backscatter Systems
The total wireless power transfer efficiency of a passive-backscatter system relates
the DC power delivered to the transponder load to the DC power consumed by the
reader transmitter (Figure 3.15). This efficiency has three contributions: transmitter DC
to RF efficiency, RF channel beam efficiency, and transponder RF to DC efficiency:
ηend-to-end ¼ PDCload
Psupply
¼ ηDC-RFηBeamηRF-DC ¼ PRFtx
Psupply
PRFrx
PRFtx
PDCload
PRFrx
(3.46)
Table 3.3 Typical parameters used in the model of Figure 3.14.
Parameter Description Value
Ptx Reader transmitted power 30 dBm
Gtx Reader transmitter antenna gain 6 dBi (circular)
Grx Reader receiver antenna gain 6 dBi (circular)
Sreader Reader receiver sensitivity 80 dBm
Ptag min Transponder activation power level 15 dBm
Gtag Transponder antenna gain 2 dBi (linear)
θf Reader to transponder polarization mismatch 3 dB (circular to linear)
θb Transponder to reader polarization mismatch 3 dB (linear to circular)
Ff Forward fade margin 0 dB (no multipath)
f c RF carrier frequency 866 MHz
λ Wavelength 0.35 m
Γ1 Transponder reflection state 1 0 (absorptive state)
Γ2 Transponder reflection state 2 1 (reflective state)
d Reader to transponder distance 1 to 100 m
Wireless Power Transfer 65We review various approaches reported in the literature for enhancing RF beam
efficiency and RF to DC efficiency (a summary is presented in Table 3.4). DC to
RF efficiency is typically dominated by transmit power amplifier efficiency and is
outside the scope of this discussion.
Figure 3.14 Typical passive-backscatter power budget.
Figure 3.15 Overall wireless power transmission efficiency.
66 Backscatter Communications3.7.1 Improving RF Beam Efficiency
The RF beam efficiency, which relates the RF power at the transponder antenna to the
RF power injected into the reader transmit antenna, depends on various factors
including the polarization mismatch between transmitter and receiver antennas, line￾of-sight blockage, path loss, transponder detuning, and multipath fading. This com￾ponent [the first logarithmic term in (3.44)] is the major bottleneck in non-directive
wireless power transfer approaches like those typically used in passive-backscatter
RFID. For example, an 866 MHz carrier signal undergoes a path loss in free space of
at least 50 dB over a 10 m distance.
3.7.1.1 Antenna Beamforming and Beam-Steering
Point-to-point microwave wireless power transmission links usually employ highly
directive antennas with very narrow beams and gains as high as 20 dBi [47, 48]. RFID
Table 3.4 Summary of techniques used to improve wireless power transfer efficiency in passive-backscatter systems.
Approach Comment References
Waveform
design
Multicarrier waveforms
UWB pulses
Chaotic signals
White noise
Pulsed-CW signals
Waveform design optimization for
improved efficiency in energy harvesting
circuits.
[25–30]
Beam
efficiency
improvement
Antenna beamforming and
beam-steering
Achieving high gain and wide coverage
areas simultaneously.
[47–52]
Antenna polarization diversity Using circularly and multi-polarized reader
antennas to improve sensitivity to
misalignment between reader and
transponder antennas.
[53, 56]
Multi-receiving antennas Collecting power from vertical and
horizontal incoming fields using
orthogonal transponder antennas.
[57–61]
Frequency, space, and
antenna diversity
Use of diversity schemes like frequency￾hopping spread spectrum in the reader to
combat multipath fading.
[62–65]
Conversion
efficiency
improvement
Rectifier topology
optimization
Optimizing the efficiency of energy
harvesters at the circuit and system levels.
[66–73]
Device threshold
compensation
Improving the sensitivity of CMOS-based
harvesting circuits to small power levels
via built-in threshold compensation.
[74–76]
Other
approaches
Ancillary transponder DC
power supply
Ancillary RF power supply
Synergistic energy harvesting
Use of ancillary DC power supply and
energy harvesting mechanisms (e.g., solar,
thermal) in the transponder, and ancillary
wireless power transmitters to boost the
power available to transponders.
[17, 31, 32,
59, 81–83]
Wireless Power Transfer 67reader systems, on the other hand, use low- to medium-gain antennas (typically
5–7 dBi) as they are required to scan wide areas. Some techniques used in conven￾tional wireless systems such as antenna beamforming and beam-steering have been
proposed to achieve high gain and wide coverage areas in passive RFID applications
[49–52]. Besides providing increased antenna gain over wide areas, these techniques
enable advanced applications such as high-resolution RFID localization [52]. Notably,
antenna beamforming/beam-steering is a cornerstone of 5G and the next generations
of wireless communications systems, which promise unprecedented communication
bandwidths and a new plethora of applications and services.
3.7.1.2 Antenna Polarization Diversity
Another way to enhance beam efficiency is to use antenna polarization diversity
[53–56]. Passive RFID transponders typically employ linearly polarized antennas to
lower their cost and complexity and are usually attached to objects that can appear in
the interrogation field of the reader in arbitrary orientations. To mitigate polarization
misalignment, RFID readers are usually equipped with circularly polarized antennas.
Circular-to-linear polarization arrangements are less sensitive to the transponder
antenna orientation and are more robust in harsh communication environments such
as vehicular communications compared to linear-to-linear polarization arrangements
[53, 54]. This is achieved at the expense of reduced gain.
To leverage the benefits of linear and circular polarizations, multi-linear polariza￾tion schemes have been explored. For instance, the Speedway reader portal from
Impinj Inc. uses a dual-linear phased array antenna scheme to deliver the power and
coverage range of a linear antenna with the ability to read transponders with arbitrary
orientations.
3.7.1.3 Multi-Receiving Antennas
By orthogonally arranging two linearly polarized receiving antennas, one can collect
power from both the vertical and horizontal components of an incoming electrical field
and improve the system sensitivity to the polarization angle. Multi-antenna schemes
have been proposed to mitigate polarization misalignment in wireless power trans￾mission and passive RFID applications [57–61].
3.7.1.4 Multipath Fading Mitigation
Due to multipath fading in UHF RFID channels [62], transponders can be rendered
powerless at locations where the incoming scattered waves combine destructively, that
is, at null field locations or fades. Based on the observation that a subtle change in the
radio communication channel can dramatically alter the multipath fading pattern and
cancel a fade, several techniques based on frequency, space, and antenna diversity
have been proposed to mitigate multipath fading. Off-the-shelf UHF RFID readers
commonly use a frequency diversity technique called frequency-hopping spread
spectrum [63]. Antenna polarization diversity has also been proposed to combat
multipath fading in RFID applications [64, 65].
68 Backscatter Communications3.7.2 Improving RF–DC Conversion Efficiency
Schottky- and CMOS-based rectifying devices used in passive transponders typically
present poor conversion efficiency at the low-input-power regimes where transpon￾ders often operate when far away from the reader. Optimizing the efficiency of energy
harvesting circuits is therefore key to improving the communication range and overall
performance of passive-backscatter systems.
The research on this topic spans multiple areas, including the study of new rectifying
devices and topologies [66–70], harmonic rectenna design [71–73], and rectifying
threshold compensation techniques [74–76]. Figure 3.16 summarizes the results of
reported energy harvesting efficiencies in several ISM bands [55, 56, 77–80]. The
following conclusions can be drawn from this survey:
 In general, the conversion efficiency increases with the power level applied to the
energy harvesting circuit and decreases with the operating frequency. The latter
trend is due to increased parasitic losses at higher frequencies while the former is
because of the non-zero turn-on voltage of the rectifying devices.
Figure 3.16 Survey of energy harvesting efficiency at 900 MHz, 2.4 GHz, 5.8 GHz, and beyond.
Wireless Power Transfer 69 Most energy harvesting circuits used in passive UHF RFID are based on CMOS
diode-connected transistor technology, operate at relatively low power levels
(typically below 0 dBm), and present, in general, low power conversion efficiencies.
 Energy harvesting circuits for directed microwave wireless power transmission
(typically at 2.4 GHz, 5.8 GHz, and beyond) are mostly based on discrete Schottky
diodes, operate at significantly higher input power levels, and present high
efficiencies (for example, one of the most efficient energy harvesting circuits ever
reported was a GaAs-Pt Schottky diode rectenna, which recorded 90.6% efficiency
at 2.45 GHz for an input power of 39 dBm [80]).
 Ambient electromagnetic energy harvesting circuits typically operate at very low
power regimes (below 30 dBm) and present poor power conversion efficiencies
in those regimes.
3.7.2.1 CMOS Threshold Compensation
CMOS diode-connected devices are widely used in rectifying circuits for passive UHF
RFID transponders because of their compatibility with standard fabrication processes.
But CMOS-based rectifiers typically present limited efficiencies due to increased
transistor turn-on voltages. This is especially important at the low power regimes in
which passive transponders often operate. Several approaches have been proposed to
mitigate this issue, including improved rectifying topologies, physical device param￾eter optimization, and device threshold voltage compensation [74–76].
The authors of [74] proposed an approach where the DC voltage collected by the
rectifier itself is used to compensate the threshold voltage of the rectifying transistors
(see Figure 3.17(a)). In [75], the authors inserted photovoltaic cells between the gates
and sources or drains of nMOS and pMOS transistors operating as diode-connected
transistors. The voltage generated by these cells allowed the circuit to compensate for
the threshold voltages of the MOSFET devices and significantly improve their
rectification efficiency at low power levels (Figure 3.17(b) and (c)).
A similar concept presented in [76] made use of thermal energy harvesting to
compensate for the threshold of a Schottky diode and therefore improve its conversion
efficiency at low input power levels. The authors utilized a thermo-electric generator
to harvest thermal energy and used the collected DC voltage as an external bias source
for their Schottky junction.
3.7.3 Other Approaches
The communication range of passive RFID systems can also be enhanced by using
ancillary power sources. In [31, 32], the authors doubled the communication range of
passive transponders by using an auxiliary CW wireless power transmitter. A similar
strategy has been proposed in the industry – the STAR 3000 system from Mojix Inc.
can use ancillary wireless power transmission nodes to boost the power available to
transponders and therefore increase the system’s operational range [81].
In [82], the authors proposed the use of solar energy harvesting to improve the
operation of a passive RFID transponder. They used a solar cell to power an external
RF oscillator and then combined the generated signal with the signal received from the
70 Backscatter Communicationsreader at the transponder’s antenna port. Under sufficient light incidence, this scheme
can allow for substantially improved transponder operational range.
Some off-the-shelf transponder devices incorporate ancillary DC and antenna ports
that enable the implementation of improved antenna diversity [59] and battery-assisted
[17, 83] schemes. For example, the UCODE G2iL chip from NXP provides an input
DC port that allows the implementation of a battery-assisted transponder. According
to the manufacturer, a minimum transponder activation power as low as 27 dBm can
be achieved with this device when using an external 1.85 V battery [17].
References
[1] H. Stockman, “Communication by Means of Reflected Power,” Proceedings of the
Institute of Radio Engineers, 36(10):1196–1204, 1948.
[2] D. B. Harris, “Radio Transmission Systems with Modulatable Passive Responder,” U.S.
patent number 2927321, 1960.
Figure 3.17 CMOS threshold-compensation. (a) Self-threshold cancellation. (b) Photovoltaic￾assisted rectifier. (c) Detail of photovoltaic rectifier shown in (b). These voltage doubler circuits
use diode-connected nMOS and pMOS transistors. Reprinted from [74, 75].
References 71[3] J. D. Kraus, Antennas, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1988.
[4] G. Marrocco, “The Art of UHF RFID Antenna Design: Impedance-Matching and Size￾Reduction Techniques,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, 50(1):66–79, 2008.
[5] K. V. S. Rao, P. V. Nikitin, and S. F. Lam, “Antenna Design for UHF RFID Tags:
A Review and a Practical Application,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation,
53(12):3870–3876, 2005.
[6] P. V. Nikitin, K. V. S. Rao, R. Martinez, and S. F. Lam, “Sensitivity and Impedance
Measurements of UHF RFID Chips,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and
Techniques, 57(5):1297–1302, 2009.
[7] R. Kronberger, A. Geissler, and B. Friedmann, “New Methods to Determine the
Impedance of UHF RFID Chips,” in IEEE International Conference on RFID, 2010.
[8] R. E. Collin, “Limitations of the Thevenin and Norton Equivalent Circuits for a Receiving
Antenna,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, 45(2):119–124, 2003.
[9] J. B. Andersen and R. G. Vaughan, “Transmitting, Receiving, and Scattering Properties of
Antennas,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, 45(4):93-98, 2003.
[10] A. W. Love, “Comment on ‘Limitations of the Thevenin and Norton Equivalent Circuits
for a Receiving Antenna’,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, 45(4):98–99,
2003.
[11] D. Pozar, “Scattered and Absorbed Powers in Receiving Antennas,” IEEE Antennas and
Propagation Magazine, 46(1):144–145, 2004.
[12] W. K. Kahn and H. Kurss, “Minimum-Scattering Antennas,” IEEE Transactions on
Antennas and Propagation, 13(5):671–675, 1965.
[13] P. Rogers, “Application of the Minimum Scattering Antenna Theory to Mismatched
Antennas,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, 34(10):1223–1228, 1986.
[14] P. V. Nikitin and K. V. S. Rao, “Theory and Measurement of Backscattering from RFID
Tags,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, 48(6):212–218, 2006.
[15] K. Finkenzeller, RFID Handbook: Fundamentals and Applications in Contactless Smart
Cards, Radio Frequency Identification and Near-Field Communication, 3rd ed. Wiley,
Chichester, 2010.
[16] D. M. Dobkin, The RF in RFID: Passive UHF in Practice, 2nd ed. Newnes, Oxford, 2012.
[17] NXP, “UCODE G2iL and G2iL+ Product Ddatasheets.” [Online], available at:
www.nxp.com
[18] S. J. Thomas, E. Wheeler, J. Teizer, and M. S. Reynolds, “Quadrature Amplitude
Modulated Backscatter in Passive and Semipassive UHF RFID Systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 60(4):1175–1182, 2012.
[19] R. Correia, A. Soares Boaventura, and N. Borges Carvalho, “Quadrature Amplitude
Backscatter Modulator for Passive Wireless Sensors in IoT Applications,” IEEE
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 65(4):1103–1110, 2017.
[20] J. Besnoff, M. Abbasi, and D. S. Ricketts, “High Data-Rate Communication in Near-Field
RFID and Wireless Power Using Higher Order Modulation,” IEEE Transactions on
Microwave Theory and Techniques, 64(2):401–413, 2016.
[21] Semtech, “LoRa Modulation Basics.” [Online], available at: https://semtech.my.salesforce
.com/sfc/p/#E0000000JelG/a/2R0000001OJu/xvKUc5w9yjG1q5Pb2IIkpolW54YYqGb
.frOZ7HQBcRc
[22] V. Talla et al., “LoRa Backscatter: Enabling The Vision of Ubiquitous Connectivity,”
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies,
1(3):105, 2017.
72 Backscatter Communications[23] Y. Peng et al., “PLoRa: A Passive Long-Range Data Network from Ambient LoRa
Transmissions,” in Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the ACM Special Interest
Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM ’18). ACM Press, New York, 2018,
pp. 147–160.
[24] R. Correia et al., “Chirp Based Backscatter Modulation,” in 2019 IEEE MTT-S
International Microwave Symposium (IMS), 2019, pp. 279–282.
[25] M. S. Trotter and G. D. Durgin, “Survey of Range Improvement of Commercial RFID
Tags with Power Optimized Waveforms,” in 2010 IEEE International Conference on
RFID, 2010, pp. 195–202.
[26] A. J. Soares Boaventura and N. Borges Carvalho, “Extending Reading Range of
Commercial RFID Readers,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques,
61(1):633–640, 2013.
[27] A. Collado and A. Georgiadis, “Improving Wireless Power Transmission Efficiency Using
Chaotic Waveforms,” in International Microwave Symposium, 2012.
[28] C.-C. Lo, et al., “Novel Wireless Impulsive Power Transmission to Enhance the
Conversion Efficiency for Low Input Power,” in IEEE MTT-S International Microwave
Workshop Series on Innovative Wireless Power Transmission, 2011, pp. 55–58.
[29] A. J. Soares Boaventura, A. Collado, A. Georgiadis, and N. Borges Carvalho, “Spatial
Power Combining of Multi-Sine Signals for Wireless Power Transmission Applications,”
IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 62(4):1022–1030, 2014.
[30] N. Pan, et al., “Multi-Sine Wireless Power Transfer with a Realistic Channel and Rectifier
Model,” in 2017 IEEE Wireless Power Transfer Conference (WPTC), 2017, pp. 1–4.
[31] J. S. Park et al., “Extending the Interrogation Range of a Passive UHF RFID System with
an External Continuous Wave Transmitter,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and
Measurement, 58(8):2191–1297, 2010.
[32] H.-c. Liu, Y.-t. Chen, and W.-s. Tzeng, “A Multi-Carrier UHF Passive RFID System,”
in Proceedings of the International Symposium on Applications and Internet Workshops
(SAINTW), 2007, p. 21.
[33] M. Fischer et al., “An Experimental Study on the Feasibility of a Frequency Diverse UHF
RFID System,” IEEE Access, 7:132311–132323, 2019.
[34] A. Bletsas, S. Siachalou, and J. N. Sahalos, “Anti-Collision Backscatter Sensor
Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 8(10):5018–5029, 2009.
[35] N. Rajoria et al., “Multi-Carrier Backscatter Communication System for Concurrent
Wireless and Batteryless Sensing,” in 2017 International Conference on Wireless
Communications, Signal Processing and Networking (WiSPNET), 2017, pp. 1078–1082.
[36] D. Belo et al., “A Selective, Tracking, and Power Adaptive Far-Field Wireless Power
Transfer System,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 67
(9):3856–3866, 2019.
[37] H.-C. Liu and C.-R. Kuo, “Reader Coverage Analysis for Multi-Carrier Passive UHF
RFID Systems,” Wireless Personal Communications, 59(1):123–133, 2011.
[38] M.-H. Lee, C.-Y. Yao, and H.-C. Liu, “Passive Tag for Multi-Carrier RFID Systems,”
in 2011 IEEE International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 2011,
pp. 872–876.
[39] M.-H. Lee et al., “Demodulator for Multi-Carrier UHF RFID Tags,” in 2013 IEEE
International Symposium on Consumer Electronics (ISCE), 2013, pp. 5–6.
[40] V. Liu et al., “Ambient Backscatter: Wireless Communication Out of Thin Air,” in
Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM Conference, 2013, pp. 39–50.
References 73[41] S. N. Daskalakis et al., “Ambient Backscatterers Using FM Broadcasting for Low Cost
and Low Power Wireless Applications,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and
Techniques, 65(12):5251–5262, 2017.
[42] B. Kellogg et al., “Wi-Fi Backscatter: Internet Connectivity for RF-Powered Devices,”
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, 44(4): 607–618, 2014.
[43] J. F. Ensworth and M. S. Reynolds, “Every Smart Phone Is a Backscatter Reader:
Modulated Backscatter Compatibility with Bluetooth 4.0 Low Energy (BLE) Devices,” in
2015 IEEE International Conference on RFID, 2015, pp. 78–85.
[44] V. Iyer et al., “Inter-Technology Backscatter: Towards Internet Connectivity for Implanted
Devices,” in Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGCOMM Conference (SIGCOMM’16).
ACM, New York, pp. 356–369.
[45] P. Pursula, “Analysis and Design of UHF and Millimetre Wave Radio Frequency
Identification,” Ph.D. thesis, Faculty of Information and Natural Sciences, Helsinki
University of Technology, Finland, 2009.
[46] J. D. Griffin and G. D. Durgin, “Complete Link Budgets for Backscatter-Radio and RFID
Systems,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, 51(2):11–25, 2009.
[47] Z. Popovic et al., “Lunar Wireless Power Transfer Feasibility Study,” Technical Report
DOE/NV/25946-488, 2008.
[48] N. Shinohara, “Beam Control Technologies With a High-Efficiency Phased Array for
Microwave Power Transmission in Japan,” Proceedings of the IEEE, 101(6):1448–1463,
2013.
[49] M. Abbak and I. Tekin, “RFID Coverage Extension Using Microstrip-Patch Antenna
Array,” IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine, 51(1):185–191, 2009.
[50] A. M. Ndifon et al., “Performance Improvements of Multicast RFID Systems Using
Phased Array Antennas and Phase Diversity,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on
RFID Technology & Application (RFID-TA), 2017, pp. 51–56.
[51] R. Sadr, “RFID Beam Forming System,” U.S. patent 8768248, 2014.
[52] G. P. Eloy, “Steerable Phase Array Antenna RFID Tag Locater and Tracking System and
Methods,” U.S. patent 8742896B2, 2014.
[53] D. Megnet and H. Mathis, “Circular Polarized Patch Antenna for 5.8 GHz Dedicated
Short-Range Communication,” in Proceedings of the 39th European Microwave
Conference, 2009, pp. 638–641.
[54] B. Lua and P. Li, “Design of Circular Polarization Microstrip Antenna in RFID Reader for
5.8 GHz Electronic Toll Collection Application,” in International Conference on
Microwave Technology and Computational Electromagnetics, 2009, pp. 84–87.
[55] J. O. McSpadden and K. Chang, “A Dual Polarized Circular Patch Rectifying Antenna at
2.45 GHz for Microwave Power Conversion and Detection,” in IEEE MTT-S International
Microwave Symposium Digest, vol. 3, 1994, pp. 1749–1752.
[56] T. Paing et al., “Wirelessly-Powered Wireless Sensor Platform,” in European Conference
on Wireless Technologies, 2007, pp. 241–244.
[57] D. W. Duan and D. J. Friedman, “Cascaded DC Voltages of Multiple Antenna RF Tag
Front-End Circuits,” U.S. patent 6243013, 2001.
[58] J. Hyde, O. Onen, and R. A. Oliver, “RFID Tags Combining Signals Received from
Multiple RF Ports,” U.S. patent 20060049917, 2006.
[59] Impinj, “Monza X-2K Dura Datasheet.” [Online], available at: www.impinj.com
[60] P. V. Nikitin and K. V. S. Rao, “Performance of RFID Tags with Multiple RF Ports,” in
IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International Symposium, 2007, pp. 5459–5462.
74 Backscatter Communications[61] J. D. Griffin, “High-Frequency Modulated-Backscatter Communication Using Multiple
Antennas,” Ph.D. thesis, Georgia Institute of Technology, 2009.
[62] J. Mitsubi, “UHF Band RFID Readability and Fading Measurements in Practical
Propagation Environment,” Auto-ID Lab Japan, White Paper Series, Edition 1.
[63] Alien Technology, “Reader Interface Guide,” 2018. [Online], available at: www
.alientechnology.com
[64] J. D. Griffin and G. D. Durgin, “Multipath Fading Measurements for Multi-Antenna
Backscatter RFID at 5.8 GHz,” in IEEE International Conference on RFID, 2009,
pp. 322–329.
[65] D. H. Ha, J.-S. Ahn, and Y.-W. Choe, “A Multi-Polarized Antenna System for Combating
Multipath Fading in UHF/RFID Frequency Band in Moving Vehicles,” in 2010
International Conference on Communications and Mobile Computing (CMC), 2010,
pp. 63–67.
[66] C.-Y. Liou et al., “High-Power and High-Efficiency RF Rectifiers Using Series and Parallel
Power-Dividing Networks and Their Applications to Wirelessly Powered Devices,” IEEE
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 61(1):616–624, 2013.
[67] C. Gómez, J. A. García, A. Mediavilla, and A. Tazón, “A High Efficiency Rectenna
Element using E-pHEMT Technology,” 12th GaAs Applications Symposium, 2004.
[68] Q. Li, J. Wang, Y. Han, and H. Min, “Design and Fabrication of Schottky Diode in
Standard CMOS Process,” Chinese Journal of Semiconductors, 26(2):238–242, 2005.
[69] W. C. Brown, “Rectenna Technology Program: Ultra Light 2.45 GHz Rectenna and
20 GHz Rectenna,” Raytheon Company Technical Report, 1987.
[70] H. Sun, Z. Zhong, and Y.-X. Guo, “An Adaptive Reconfigurable Rectifier for Wireless
Power Transmission,” IEEE Microwave and Wireless Components Letters, 23
(9):492–494, 2013.
[71] Z. Harouni, L. Osman, and A. Gharsallah, “Efficient 2.45 GHz Rectenna Design with High
Harmonic Rejection for Wireless Power Transmission,” International Journal of
Computer Science Issues, 7(5):424–427, 2010.
[72] S. Imai et al., “Efficiency and Harmonics Generation in Microwave to DC Conversion
Circuits of Half-Wave and Full-Wave Rectifier Types,” in 2011 IEEE MTT-S
International Microwave Workshop Series on Innovative Wireless Power Transmission:
Technologies, Systems, and Applications, 2011, pp. 15–18.
[73] K. Hatano et al., “Development of Class-F Load Rectennas,” 2011 IEEE MTT-S
International Microwave Workshop Series on Innovative Wireless Power Transmission:
Technologies, Systems, and Applications, 2011, pp. 251–254.
[74] K. Kotani and T. Ito, “High Efficiency CMOS Rectifier Circuit with Self-Vth-Cancellation
and Power Regulation Functions for UHF RFIDs,” in 2007 IEEE Asian Solid-State
Circuits Conference, 2007, pp. 119–122.
[75] K. Kotani, “Highly Efficient CMOS Rectifier Assisted by Symmetric and Voltage-Boost
PV-Cell Structures for Synergistic Ambient Energy Harvesting,” in IEEE Custom
Integrated Circuits Conference, 2013, pp. 1–4.
[76] M. Virili et al., “Performance Improvement of Rectifiers for WPT Exploiting Thermal
Energy Harvesting,” Wireless Power Transfer, 2(1):22–31, 2015.
[77] Y.-J. Ren, M.-Y. Li, and K. Chang, “35 GHz Rectifying Antenna for Wireless Power
Transmission,” Electronics Letters, 43(11): 602–603, 2007.
[78] E. Falkenstein, M. Roberg, and Z. Popovic, “Low-Power Wireless Power Delivery,” IEEE
Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 60(7):2277–2286, 2012.
References 75[79] C. R. Valenta and G. D. Durgin, “Harvesting Wireless Power: Survey of Energy-Harvester
Conversion Efficiency in Far-Field, Wireless Power Transfer Systems,” IEEE Microwave
Magazine, 15(4):108–120, 2014.
[80] J. O. McSpadden, L. Fan, and K. Chang, “Design and Experiments of a High-Conversion￾Efficiency 5.8-GHz Rectenna,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and
Techniques, 46(12):2053–2060, 1998.
[81] Mojix, “STAR 3000 System.” [Online], available at: www.mojix.com
[82] A. Georgiadis and A. Collado, “Improving Range of Passive RFID Tags Utilizing Energy
Harvesting and High Efficiency Class-E Oscillators,” Sixth European Conference on
Antennas and Propagation, 2012, pp. 3455–3458.
[83] A.P. Sample et al., “Photovoltaic Enhanced UHF RFID Tag Antennas for Dual Purpose
Energy Harvesting,” in 2011 IEEE International Conference on RFID, 2011, pp. 146–153.
76 Backscatter Communications4 An Overview of the ISO 18000-63
Standard
For the experiments conducted in this book we selected ISO 18000-63/EPC Gen2V2
[1, 2], which is currently the most prevalent standard for RFID in the UHF band. This
chapter gives an overview of key aspects of this standard relating to coding and
modulation, protocol timing, data security, transponder singulation, and memory
access. This discussion is not intended to be exhaustive, and the reader is referred to
[1, 2] for further details.
4.1 Reader-to-Transponder Encoding and Modulation
Reader-to-transponder communications under ISO 18000-63 use pulse interval
encoding (PIE). This encoding scheme is designed to provide transponders with
uninterrupted wireless power transfer during reader data transmissions. In PIE, each
binary data symbol is encoded with a power-off pulse following a full-power interval
of at least the same duration as the power-off interval (see Figure 4.1(a)). This
prevents the interruption of energy transfer to the transponder for certain combinations
of transmitted symbols, for example long strings of on–off-keying-modulated ‘0’
symbols. In ISO 18000-63, each reader Query command is preceded by a preamble
frame (Figure 4.1(b)) which also indicates the beginning of an inventory round, and all
other commands begin with a Frame sync sequence (Figure 4.1(c)).
ISO 18000-63 defines three modulation formats for reader-to-transponder commu￾nications: double-sideband amplitude-shift keying (DSB-ASK), single-sideband
amplitude-shift keying (SSB-ASK), and phase-reversal amplitude-shift keying (PR￾ASK). SSB-ASK and PR-ASK provide superior bandwidth efficiency compared to
DSB-ASK. A low-cost and low-complexity approach for implementing PR-ASK
modulation is presented in Chapter 6.
Figure 4.2(a) shows the ISO 18000-63 transmit mask for a dense-interrogator
environment. The standard also specifies a mask for a multiple-interrogator environ￾ment [1, 2]. ISO 18000-63 also specifies the transmit RF envelope, which determines
the characteristics of the transmit spectrum (see Figure 4.2(b)). To limit transmit
spectrum occupancy and comply with regulated transmit masks, baseband pulse
shaping is typically required in the transmitter (this is detailed in Chapter 5).
In addition to the ISO 18000-63 requirements, readers must comply with mask
specifications imposed by ETSI in Europe [3] and the FCC in the USA [4].4.2 Transponder-to-Reader Encoding and Modulation
ISO 18000-63 specifies two encoding and modulation schemes for transponder-to￾reader communications. Transponders can encode data using FM0 (Figure 4.3(a)) or
Miller-modulated subcarrier codes and can modulate the RF carrier using either ASK
or PSK. The modulation method is selected by the transponder whereas the encoding
scheme is chosen by the reader through the Query command that initiates each
inventory round. Both the modulation and encoding types must remain unchanged
for the entire inventory round. For the experiments in this book, we used FM0
encoding. For information on Miller-modulated subcarrier encoding, refer to [1, 2].
The FM0 encoding scheme possesses key features that simplify the design of the
RFID reader. First, by encoding information in the signal transitions, this scheme
allows for more robust backscatter communication and easier synchronization, clock
recovery, and data decoding at the reader. FM0 inverts its phase at the boundaries of
Figure 4.1 Reader-to-transponder signaling. (a) PIE code. (b) PIE Preamble. (c) PIE
Frame synchronization.
78 Overview of the ISO 18000-63 StandardFigure 4.2 (a) ISO 18000-63 transmit mask for dense-interrogator environment. Channels are
defined with respect to the Tari parameter defined in Figure 4.1. (b) Time-domain RF envelope
specifications (see Table 4.1).
Table 4.1 RF envelope parameters.
Tari Parameter Symbol Min. Nom. Max. Units
6.25 µs
to
25 µs
Modulation depth (A  B)/A 80 90 100 %
RF envelope ripple Mh ¼ MI 0 0.05(A  B) V/m, A/m
RF envelope rise time tr,1090% 0 0.33Tari µs
RF envelope fall time tf,1090% 0 0.33Tari µs
RF pulse width PW max (0.265Tari, 2) 0.525Tari µs
Transponder-to-Reader Encoding and Modulation 79symbols 0 and 1, and in the middle of symbol 0 (see Figure 4.3(a) and (b)).
In Chapter 6, we leverage this feature to implement a simple yet robust FM0 decoder
using standard built-in peripherals of our MCU. Furthermore, we exploit the FM0
memory feature to detect errors in the message received from the transponder even
before cyclic redundancy check (CRC) verification.
Figure 4.3 Transponder-to-reader signaling. (a) FM0 basis functions and generator state diagram.
(b) FM0 symbols. (c) Example of FM0 sequences. (d) Regular FM0 preamble. (e) Extended
FM0 preamble.
80 Overview of the ISO 18000-63 StandardSecond, FM0 and Miller-modulated subcarrier codes present minimal DC compon￾ents (see Figure 4.4). This helps to mitigate self-jamming and DC offset problems
encountered in direct-conversion receiver (DCR) architectures commonly used in
passive UHF RFID readers (this aspect is discussed in detail in Chapter 8). Another
key feature of the FM0 encoding scheme is the use of orthogonal basis functions (see
Figure 4.3(b)), which enables the implementation of enhanced correlation-based
decoders. This feature is further explored in the next chapter.
Depending on the reader instruction, the transponder can begin its transmission
with either a regular FM0 preamble (Figure 4.3(d)) or an extended FM0 preamble
(Figure 4.3(e)). The extended FM0 preamble prepends a pilot tone composed of 12
FM0 zeros to the message. The pilot tone is used to assist in clock recovery and can
help to mitigate baseband transients in DCR receivers (see Chapter 8), but it intro￾duces communication overhead and suppressing it can allow a speed-up in processing.
To improve preamble uniqueness, a symbol (V) that violates the FM0 boundary
transition rule is introduced in the preamble pattern (Figure 4.3(d) and (e)).
4.3 New ISO 18000-63 Memory and Security Features
In this section, we give an overview of security and memory enhancements introduced
by the ISO 18000-63 standard and its counterpart, EPC Gen2V2, the ratified versions
of ISO 18000-6C and EPC Gen2. Traditionally, ISO 18000-6C and Gen2 support
Figure 4.4 Spectrum of FM0 and Miller-modulated subcarrier codes (reprinted from [5]).
New Memory and Security Features 81basic data integrity mechanics such as transponder 16-bit pseudorandom number
generation, 5-bit and 16-bit cyclic redundancy check (CRC), and bitwise XOR.
Optionally, a 32-bit access password to prevent unauthorized transponder memory
writing and a 32-bit kill password to deactivate the transponder are also available.
To address new security/privacy concerns and enable new applications, ISO 18000-63
and EPC Gen2v2 have introduced new security and memory management features,
made available through a set of 12 additional (optional) commands [1, 2].
4.3.1 Security
To allow for the implementation of cryptographic suites, ISO 18000-63 introduced six
new security commands: Challenge, Authenticate, SecureComm, AuthComm,
ReadBuffer, and KeyUpdate [2]. The Challenge command allows the reader to instruct
a transponder population to precompute and store a cryptographic value or values
according to a specific cryptographic suite for use in a subsequent authentication.
The Authenticate command allows secure data transactions between the reader and
transponder, while the AuthComm and SecureComm commands allow authenticated
and encrypted data transactions, respectively, and typically encapsulate other pro￾tected reader commands in their message fields.
The KeyUpdate command allows a reader to write or overwrite a cryptographic key
in a transponder after an authentication has been performed. The ReadBuffer com￾mand allows the reader to access results of cryptographic operations stored in the
transponder’s response buffer. For more information on these security features, the
interested reader is referred to [6, 7].
4.3.2 Privacy
ISO 18000-63 also introduces a privacy command, Untraceable, which allows access
to the transponder to be restricted. For instance, this command allows a reader with an
asserted Untraceable privilege to instruct the transponder to deny memory access to
readers without appropriate privileges. A convenient feature implemented by the
Untraceable command makes it possible to restrict access to the transponder at the
physical level by instructing it to reduce its operating range. The new features also
make it possible to temporarily hide parts of the transponder memory, including words
of the EPC.
4.3.3 Memory
The ISO 18000-63 update introduced a file system for the transponder user memory
bank and four new commands for managing that file system: FileOpen, FileList,
FileSetup, and FilePrivilege. Like its preceding version, ISO 18000-63 divides the
transponder memory into four banks (Bank00, reserved memory; Bank01, EPC
memory; Bank10, tag identifier (TID) memory; and Bank11, user memory). But
ISO 18000-63 adds file partitioning to the user memory Bank11 and allows the user
82 Overview of the ISO 18000-63 Standardto customize the type, size, and access privileges of each file (see Figure 4.5). This
opens new possibilities such as the storage of data owned by different parties on the
same transponder with different access privileges, or the storage of product lifecycle
and maintenance information.
4.4 Transponder Singulation and Memory Access
This section presents an overview of transponder identification and memory access,
including aspects of transponder population selection, collision resolution, and singu￾lation, according to ISO 18000-63.
4.4.1 Transponder Population Selection
Upon entering the field of an RFID reader, transponders power up, enter their ready
state, and wait for instructions from the reader. The reader must singulate a transpon￾der in the transponder population for further transactions. This process starts with the
reader broadcasting a Select command whose parameters define the selection criteria
Figure 4.5 Configuration of an ISO 18000-63 transponder memory.
Transponder Singulation and Memory Access 83for the sub-population of transponders for the subsequent inventory round. If a single
transponder enters the interrogation field of the reader, as exemplified in Section 4.6, it
automatically matches the selection criteria (see [1, 2] for details).
During the selection phase, the reader may issue an (optional) Challenge command to
cryptographically challenge the transponder population. Upon receiving a Challenge, the
transponder pre-computes and stores a cryptographic value or values in its buffer according
to a specific cryptographic suite for use in a subsequent authentication. Transponders can
execute a Challenge command from any state except killed (deactivated).
4.4.2 Transponder Singulation and Access
The transponder singulation process under ISO 18000-63 is based on a random-slotted
collision arbitration algorithm (Q-algorithm). Upon receiving a Query command from
the reader, each transponder,
1) randomly picks a time slot to communicate with the reader;
2) loads the selected slot number into its slot counter;
3) decrements its slot counter per the reader’s request;
4) replies to the reader once its slot counter expires (reaches zero).
Transponder singulation is typically implemented using the commands Query,
QueryRep, QueryAdjust, Ack, and NAK. The reader starts the singulation process by
issuing a Query command containing the Q parameter. This parameter, which ranges
from 0 to 15, specifies the available number of slots N ¼ 2Q  . Upon receiving a
Query command, each transponder randomly chooses a slot number in the range
[0, 2Q  1]. Transponders that select slot number zero immediately backscatter a
random 16-bit number, RN16, in the interval [0, 216  1].
If a single transponder picks slot 0 (no collision), then the reader issues an Ack
command containing the received RN16 to acknowledge that transponder (if two or
more transponders pick slot 0, a collision will occur). Upon reception of an Ack with a
matching RN16, the transponder replies with its EPC data.
The inventory round continues with the reader issuing one or more QueryAdjust or
QueryRep commands. Each QueryRep command causes the transponders participat￾ing in the inventory round to decrement their slot counter by 1. To readjust the Q
parameter without changing other round parameters, the reader uses the QueryAdjust
command. This command may instruct the transponders to increment, decrement, or
keep their Q. Upon receiving a QueryAdjust command, a transponder first updates its
Q then chooses a slot number. If a transponder reaches zero because of a QueryAdjust
or QueryRep, the singulation process continues similarly to the initial Query.
After finishing inventorying the transponder population, the reader may initiate a
singulated transponder into the access state by issuing a Req_RN command that
contains that transponder’s RN16. Upon receiving a Req_RN with a matching
RN16, the transponder responds with a new 16-bit random number or Handle. This
Handle is to be used by the reader in subsequent memory accesses. Figure 4.6 depicts
a simplified diagram of the transponder singulation and access after ISO 18000-63.
84 Overview of the ISO 18000-63 Standard4.4.3 Colliding Transponder Responses
If two or more transponders choose slot number zero at the same time, then a collision
will occur as they reply simultaneously to the reader with their RN16. In this case, the
reader may try to detect the collision at the waveform level and resolve an RN16 from
one of the transponders, or not resolve the collision and issue a QueryAdjust,
QueryRep, or NAK.
4.4.4 Optimal Q-Slot Selection
While a small Q value may lead to faster inventory time for small transponder
populations, it can increase the collision probability for large transponder populations.
Conversely, a large Q unnecessarily increases the inventory time for small transponder
populations and renders the singulation process inefficient. For optimal performance,
Q should be adjusted dynamically based on the number of transponders in the
interrogation zone, which can be estimated based, for instance, on the number of
empty slots, collided slots, and single response slots. A dynamic algorithm for setting
Q is presented in [2].
Figure 4.6 Simplified diagram of transponder singulation, inventory, and access.
Transponder Singulation and Memory Access 85For the experiments conducted in this book, we considered a single transponder in
the reader interrogation field; by setting Q to zero (single slot), we caused the first
transponder entering the interrogation field to be immediately singulated.
4.4.5 Communication Timing
Because cryptographic algorithms require significant computation time, ISO 18000-
63 introduces flexible protocol timing. In addition to the conventional immediate
transponder reply (Figure 4.7(a)), the standard specifies a delayed reply (Figure 4.7
(b)) and an in-process reply (Figure 4.7(c)) for transponders that require a significant
amount of time to complete their operations. Here, we outline the main ISO 18000-63
timing parameters.
The time between a transponder response and the next reader command is defined
by T2 (Figure 4.7(a)). If a transponder in the reply or acknowledged state does not hear
from the reader before a maximum period T2 max , it times out. The reader response
timing T2 max becomes more restrictive as the backscatter link frequency (BLF)
1
1 BLF denotes either the FM0 symbol rate or the Miller subcarrier frequency.
Figure 4.7 Protocol timing (see Table 4.2 for parameter details). (a) Immediate reply. (b) Delayed
reply. (c) In-process reply.
86 Overview of the ISO 18000-63 StandardTable 4.2 Timing for the examples of Figure 4.7. Refer to [1, 2] for more details.
Parameter Minimum Maximum Description
T1 max RTcal, 10Tpri    ð1 jFrTjÞ  2 μs max RTcal, 10Tpri    ð1þ jFrTjÞ þ 2 μs Immediate reply time from reader command to
transponder reply
T2 3:0Tpri 20:0Tpri Interrogator reply time if a transponder is to
demodulate the reader signal
T4 2.0RTcal Minimum time between reader commands
T5 max RTcal, 10Tpri    ð1 jFrTjÞ  2 μs 20 ms Delayed reply time from reader command to
transponder reply
T6 max RTcal, 10Tpri    ð1 jFrTjÞ  2 μs 20 ms In-process reply time from reader command to the
first transponder reply
T7 max 250 ð Þ μs, T2 max 20 ms In-process reply time between transponder replies
Notes:
1. Tpri denotes either the commanded period of an FM0 symbol or the commanded period of a single Miller subcarrier cycle, as appropriate.
2. The maximum value for T2 applies only to transponders in the reply or acknowledged states. In all other states, T2 is unrestricted. A transponder is allowed a
tolerance of 20:0Tpri  T2 max  32Tpri in determining whether T2 has expired.
3. A reader may transmit a new command prior to interval T2 (i.e., during a transponder response). In this case, the transponder may ignore the new command.
4. FrT is the frequency tolerance [1, 2].increases. This can be problematic for readers with limited processing speed.
In Chapter 7, we discuss some approaches to mitigate this problem.
The time between a reader command and the transponder response depends on the
type of transponder response being used. This time is denoted T1 for immediate
replies (Figure 4.7(a)), T5 for delayed replies (Figure 4.7(b)), and T6 or T7 for in￾process replies (Figure 4.7(c)).
The minimum amount of time the reader should wait before issuing a new
command after receiving the transponder reply is defined by T2 min ¼ 3Tpri, and the
minimum time between consecutive reader commands is defined by T4 ¼ 2RTcal (see
Figure 4.7(a)).
A transponder using a delayed reply can spend up to 20 ms processing a command
(Figure 4.7(b)), while a transponder using an in-process reply can spend longer than
that but is required to beacon a busy signal at least once every 20 ms to notify the
reader that the command is still being processed (Figure 4.7(c)).
4.5 The ISO 18000-63 Command Set
Table 4.3 lists the main commands specified by ISO 18000-63. The standard also
reserves command codes for the implementation of custom and battery-assisted tag
(BAP) operations. See Tables 4.4–4.17 for typical examples of reader-to-transponder
transactions. Note that the examples presented are for illustration purposes only;
different settings may be required for specific cases. The CRC checksums are com￾puted according to Table 4.18.
Table 4.3 ISO 18000-63 main command set.
Command Binary code Length
(bits)
Group Mandatory
(Yes/No)
Protection
mechanism
Select 1010 > 44 Select Yes CRC-16
Challenge 11010100 > 48 Select No CRC-16
Query 1000 22 Inventory Yes CRC-5
QueryAdjust 1001 9 Inventory Yes Unique
length
QueryRep 00 4 Inventory Yes Unique
length
ACK 01 18 Inventory Yes Unique
length
NAK 11000000 8 Inventory Yes Unique
length
Req_RN 11000001 40 Access
memory
Yes CRC-16
88 Overview of the ISO 18000-63 StandardTable 4.3 (cont.)
Command Binary code Length
(bits)
Group Mandatory
(Yes/No)
Protection
mechanism
Read 11000010 > 57 Access
memory
Yes CRC-16
Write 11000011 > 58 Access
memory
Yes CRC-16
Kill 11000100 59 Access
memory
Yes CRC-16
Lock 11000101 60 Access
memory
Yes CRC-16
Access 11000110 56 Access
memory
No CRC-16
BlockWrite 11000111 > 57 Access
memory
No CRC-16
BlockErase 11001000 > 57 Access
memory
No CRC-16
BlockPermalock 11001001 > 66 Access
memory
No CRC-16
Authenticate 11010101 > 64 Access
security
No CRC-16
AuthComm 11010111 > 42 Access
security
No CRC-16
SecureComm 11010110 > 56 Access
security
No CRC-16
KeyUpdate 11100010
00000010
> 72 Access
security
No CRC-16
TagPrivilege 11100010
00000011
78 Access
memory
No CRC-16
ReadBuffer 11010010 67 Access
security
No CRC-16
FileOpen 11010011 52 Access file No CRC-16
FileList 11100010
00000001
71 Access file No CRC-16
FilePrivilege 11100010
00000100
68 Access file No CRC-16
FileSetup 11100010
00000101
71 Access file No CRC-16
Untraceable 11100010
00000000
62 Access
privacy
No CRC-16
ISO 18000-63 Command Set 894.6 Reader–Transponder Transactions
Table 4.4 Reader Select command.
Parameter Command Target Action MemBank Pointer Length Mask Truncate CRC-16
Example 1010 100 000 01 00100000 00000000 00000000 0 1010001000000110
Description Select Target:
SL
Assert
matching,
deassert non￾matching
EPC
memory
bank (01)
EPC
starting
address
0-length
mask – tag
automatically
matches
Mask
value
Disable
truncation
16-bit CRC
Table 4.5 Reader Query command.
Parameter Command DR M TRext Sel Session Target Q CRC-5
Example 1000 0 00 1 00 00 0 0000 10011
Description Query Divide
ratio=8
FM0
coding
(M = 1)
Use
pilot
tone
All tags
respond
Ignore
SL flag
Session
(S0)
Inventory
flag (A)
Q = 0,
immediate
reply
5-bit
CRC
Table 4.7 Transponder RN16 response (singulated).
Parameter RN16*
Example 0011000011000111
Description 16-bit random number
Table 4.6 Reader QueryRep command (if no transponder answered
a Query, one or more QueryRep commands are issued).
Parameter Command Session
Example 00 00
Description QueryRep Session (S0)
Table 4.8 Reader Ack command.
Parameter Command RN16
Example 01 0011000011000111
Description Ack 16-bit random number (previously received from transponder)
Table 4.9 Transponder EPC response.
Parameter PC EPC* CRC-16
Example 0011000000000000 E2003411B802011111365086
(hexadecimal)
0110000101011101
Description 16-bit PC 96-bit EPC data 16-bit CRC
* Transponder data collected with the reader presented in Chapter 6.
90 Overview of the ISO 18000-63 StandardTable 4.10 Reader NAK command.
Parameter Command
Example 11000000
Description NAK
Table 4.11 Reader Req_RN command.
Parameter Command RN16 CRC-16
Example 11000001 0011000011000111 1000111010011010
Description Req_RN Prior 16-bit random number received from
transponder
16-bit CRC
Table 4.12 Transponder RN16 response (Handle).
Parameter RN16 (new RN16 called Handle) CRC-16
Example 0000011110000111 1001101000001000
Description New 16-bit random number (Handle) 16-bit CRC
Table 4.13 Reader Read command (using Handle as parameter).
Parameter Command MemBank WordPtr WordCount RN16 CRC-16
Example 11000010 01 00000010 00000001 0000011110000111 0111111111110011
Description Read Mem bank
(01-EPC)
Starting
address
pointer (PC
word)
Number of
words to be
read (1)
Prior 16-bit Handle 16-bit CRC
Table 4.14 Transponder response.
Parameter Header Memory Words RN16 CRC-16
Example 0 0011000000000000 0000011110000111 1011001001001111
Description Header bit
(0 – Success)
Read data Handle 16-bit CRC
Table 4.15 Reader Write command (using Handle as parameter).
Parameter Command MemBank WordPtr Data RN16 CRC-16
Example 11000011 01 00000010 0011000000000000 0000011110000111 0100000111101100
Description Write Mem bank
(01-EPC)
Starting
address
pointer
(PC word)
RN16 XORed with
word to be written
Prior 16-bit Handle 16-bit CRC
Reader–Transponder Transactions 91References
[1] ISO/IEC “18000-63:2013 Information Technology – Radio Frequency Identification for
Item Management – Part 63: Parameters for Air Interface Communications at 860 MHz to
960 MHz Type C,” 2013.
[2] EPCglobal Inc. “EPC Radio-Frequency Identity Protocols Generation-2 UHF RFID
Specification for RFID Air Interface Protocol for Communications at 860 MHz–960 MHz
(version 2.0.0 ratified),” 2013.
[3] ETSI “EN 302 208 V3.2.0, Radio Frequency Identification Equipment Operating in the
Band 865 MHz to 868 MHz with Power Levels up to 2 W and in the Band 915 MHz to
921 MHz with Power Levels up to 4 W; Harmonised Standard for Access to Radio
Spectrum,” 2018.
[4] FCC “Title 47, Part 15, Operation within the Bands 902–928 MHz, 2435–2465 MHz,
5785–5815 MHz, 10500–10550 MHz, and 24075–24175 MHz,” 2024.
[5] J. Wang, et al., “System Design Considerations of Highly-Integrated UHF RFID Reader
Transceiver RF Front-End,” in Ninth International Conference on Solid-State and
Integrated-Circuit Technology, 2008, pp. 1560–1563.
[6] D.W. Engels et al., “On Security with the New Gen2 RFID Security Framework,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on RFID, 2013.
[7] H.-Y. Chien, “Efficient Authentication Scheme with Tag-Identity Protection for EPC Class
2 Generation 2 Version 2 Standards,” International Journal of Distributed Sensor
Networks, 13(3), 2017.
Table 4.16 Transponder response.
Parameter Header RN16 CRC-16
Example 0 0000011110000111 1011110100011001
Description Header bit (0 – Success) Handle 16-bit CRC
Table 4.17 Reader Challenge command.
Parameter Command Reserved IncRepLen Immed CSI Length Message CRC-16
Example 11010100 00 1 1 00000000 —— —
Description Challenge Should
be set to
00
Include
length in
reply
Transmit
result with
EPC
First ISO/
IEC
29167
suite
Length
of
message
Depends
on CSI
16-bit
CRC
Table 4.18 CRC-16 and CRC-5 definitions.
CRC-16
CRC Type Length Polynomial Preset Residue
ISO/IEC 13239 16 bits x16 þ x12 þ x5 þ 1 FFFFh 1D0Fh
CRC-5
CRC Type Length Polynomial Preset Residue
— 5 bits x5 þ x3 þ 1 010012 000002
92 Overview of the ISO 18000-63 Standard5 Digital Signal Processing for
RFID Applications
5.1 Introduction
In this chapter, we study key aspects of RFID communication under ISO 18000-63
[1, 2]. To evaluate the reader downlink and uplink digital signal processing blocks in
Figure 5.1, we used a combination of custom and native MATLAB functions. To test
the implemented scripts and algorithms, we synthesized various custom transponder
waveforms.
In this discussion, we focus on the digital baseband processing; we assume that the
transponder signal intercepted by the reader has been down-converted to baseband and
is available for processing after digitization, and the reader baseband data is up￾converted to the desired RF carrier frequency after being converted to the analog
domain. Implementations of the RF/analog part are discussed in the following
chapters.
The key functions used here are provided in the main text, and evaluation
script examples are available online (files EvaluateReader2TagDownlink.m,
EvaluateTag2ReaderUplink.m). The scripts provided were tested in MATLAB
R2021a with the communications toolbox. Even though our discussion considers
the ISO 18000-63 standard, the scripts and algorithms can be tailored as needed for
other protocols and custom designs.
5.2 Transmitter Signal Processing
Here, we discuss the ISO 18000-63 RFID reader transmit chain (top of Figure 5.1) and
provide code to evaluate typical reader baseband transmissions with variable param￾eters. By properly selecting the transmit parameters, the generated waveform can be
optimized to meet transmission specifications such as the transmit spectrum mask
analyzed at the end of this section. The transmit waveform data produced here can be
used in a real RFID reader to implement a lookup table–based waveform generator.
This approach, which has been used in commercial RFID reader application-specific
integrated circuits (ASICs) [3], was adopted in the SDR reader design presented in
Chapter 7. The waveform pre-synthesis approach can also be helpful for research
experiments; for example, by simply uploading waveforms into an arbitrary waveformgenerator or vector signal generator, one can query transponders without needing a
dedicated RFID reader.
5.2.1 Data Encoding
ISO 18000-63 reader-to-transponder data transmissions are encoded using PIE.
As mentioned before, this encoding scheme is designed to enable stable
wireless power delivery to the transponder during data transmissions, but it
presents poor spectral efficiency compared to standard on–off keying (OOK)
modulation due to the additional encoding transitions introduced in the signal
(see previous chapter). Fortunately, the ISO 18000-63 standard offers efficient
modulation schemes, namely single-sideband modulation (Section 5.2.4) and
phase-reversal modulation (Section 5.2.5), which allow the overall transmit
spectrum efficiency to improve.
In the implementation provided in function EncodeModulateInterpolate(), each
PIE symbol ‘0’ is encoded using a binary symbol ‘1’ followed by a binary symbol
‘0’, and each PIE symbol ‘1’ contains three consecutive binary ‘1’s followed by a
binary ‘0’. The binary ‘0’ and ‘1’ represent the low and high portions of the PIE
symbol, respectively (see Figure 5.2). The resulting encoded binary sequence is then
interpolated to the appropriate sampling rate (see next section).
5.2.2 Interpolation and Pulse Shaping
Rectangular pulse shaping (the square-shaped signal in Figure 5.2) is the simplest
interpolation method used in communications. Each symbol is confined to one symbol
period and does not interfere with neighboring symbols. Assuming no dispersion or
Figure 5.1 Simplified diagram of RFID communication chain including reader transmitter and
receiver, RFID transponder, and communication channel. D/A: digital to analog converter; A/D:
analog to digital converter.
94 Digital Signal Processing for RFID Applicationsreflections in the channel, symbols will not interfere with each other at the receiver
either. But a rectangular pulse requires a large transmit bandwidth.
Proper baseband pulse shaping is thus required to band-limit the transmit spectrum
to fit the available channel, minimize out-of-band interference, and improve transmit
spectrum efficiency. Besides band-limiting the transmit spectrum, pulse shaping plays
a key role in signal detection in digital communications: by combining the transmit
pulse-shape filter with a matched filter at the receiver, we can average down channel
noise and dramatically improve signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in the receiver. This
technique is known as matched filtering. For zero inter-symbol interference (ISI), a
matched filter must satisfy the Nyquist ISI criterion, that is, its impulse response must
be zero at all sampling instants except its own where it peaks [4].
A Nyquist pulse-shape filter commonly used in digital communication systems is
the raised cosine filter [5]. Assuming a flat channel response and white noise, the
response of a Nyquist pulse-shaping function can be split equally between the
transmitter and receiver [6]. The raised cosine matched filter is typically implemented
by using a square root raised cosine (SRRC) filter at the transmitter and an SRRC
filter at the receiver. Although each SRRC filter separately does not satisfy the Nyquist
ISI criterion, the combination of two SRRC filters does. Later in this chapter we will
Figure 5.2 Illustration of PIE encoding and interpolation. (a) Time-domain depiction of PIE data
interpolated with a rectangular pulse filter and raised cosine (RC) filters with various roll-off
values (beta). (b) Magnification around a few symbols. The raised cosine filter is normalized for
a maximum filter coefficient of 1.
Transmitter Signal Processing 95have more to say about matched filtering as applied to maximum likelihood RFID
reader receivers.
Pulse shaping and matched filtering are often combined with interpolation and
decimation, respectively. We accomplish that here by interpolating the baseband data
using pulse-shape FIR filters. Figure 5.2 shows a reader PIE sequence containing a
message header followed by arbitrary data interpolated with a rectangular pulse filter
and raised cosine filters with variable roll-off factors. In this example, the PIE symbols
‘0’ and ‘1’ are coded with two and four bits, respectively, and then interpolated with
an up-sampling factor equal to 8, resulting in a duration of 16 samples (Tari) for the
PIE symbol ‘0’ and 32 samples (2Tari) for the PIE symbol ‘1’.
5.2.3 Double-Sideband Amplitude Modulation
Double-sideband amplitude-shift keying (DSB-ASK) modulation is an implementa￾tion of amplitude modulation (AM) where the baseband-to-RF conversion produces
two frequency-shifted copies of the baseband message signal on either side of the
desired RF carrier. In DSB suppressed carrier modulation, the modulated RF signal
can be represented in the discrete domain as
s n½ ¼ m n½  cos 2πf ð Þ cn=Fs , (5.1)
where m n½  is the baseband message signal sampled at discrete instants n at a sampling
rate equal to Fs, and f c is the RF carrier frequency. In the digital DSB-ASK defined in
ISO 18000-63, the (unfiltered) message signal m n½  can have two levels (see the PIE￾encoded data in Figure 5.2). The Fourier representation of s n½  is given by
S f ð Þ ¼ 1
2 M f  f c ð Þ þ M f þ f c ½  ð Þ , (5.2)
where M fð Þ is the discrete-time Fourier transform of m n½ . In DSB modulation, a
baseband bandwidth BW yields an RF bandpass bandwidth of 2BW. For increased
spectrum efficiency, the ISO 18000-63 standard specifies two additional modulation
formats (see next sections).
5.2.4 Single-Sideband Amplitude Modulation
The ISO 18000-63 standard specifies SSB-ASK modulation, in which the lower or
upper sideband of the transmit spectrum is eliminated to improve spectral efficiency.
Two approaches can be used to eliminate one of the sidebands, one based on explicit
bandpass filtering of the signal, and the other based on signal phasing. Selectively
filtering the upper or lower sideband is challenging because of the stringent filter
requirements to precisely remove the unwanted sideband while preserving the side￾band of interest.
In the second method (signal phasing), the message signal is shifted to the carrier
frequency ( f o) without creating the pair of frequency components that are usually
96 Digital Signal Processing for RFID Applicationspresent in DSB modulation, avoiding the need for explicit filtering of the lower or
upper sideband. This can be achieved by using a Hilbert transform. The ideal Hilbert
transform phase-advances the negative frequency components by 90 degrees while
phase-delaying the positive frequency components by the same amount [7, 8].
By applying an additional phase shift of 90 degrees (þj) to the output of the Hilbert
transformer, the negative frequencies are advanced by 180 degrees relative to the
original signal while the initial 90 degree phase-delay in the positive frequencies is
reversed. Adding the resulting signal to the original signal (Figure 5.3(a)) cancels out
the negative frequency components while adding up the positive frequency compon￾ents yielding the complex signal (5.3), known as the analytic signal,
manalytic½ ¼ n mreal½ þ n jmimag½  n : (5.3)
The analytic signal has the following key features: (i) it only exists in the positive
Nyquist interval, that is, it has no negative frequency components; (ii) it has half the
bandwidth of the original signal; and (iii) it presents twice the amplitude of the
original signal.
Figure 5.3 (a) Diagram of Hilbert transform. (b) Practical Hilbert transform implementation for
generating frequency-shifted SSB modulation. The delay of N/2 samples in the upper branch is
used to compensate for the delay introduced by the Nth-order FIR Hilbert filter.
Transmitter Signal Processing 97A common application of this result to achieve sideband spectrum suppression and
frequency shifting is shown in Figure 5.3(b), where the real part of the analytic signal
is multiplied by a cosine signal and the imaginary part is multiplied by a sine signal at
the desired shifting frequency. In practice, this can be done by using an in-phase and
quadrature (IQ) modulator [7]. Typically, a DSB-ASK digital baseband signal is first
filtered with a Hilbert filter to create a complex IQ (SSB) signal with suppressed
negative frequencies. The resulting SSB-ASK signal is frequency offset to center its
spectrum in the middle of the desired channel and then converted to the analog domain
to drive an IQ modulator [3].
The MATLAB function hilbert can be used to compute the exact analytic signal
(5.3), but an ideal Hilbert transform implementation is impractical. The imaginary part
of the analytic signal can be approximated using an FIR Hilbert transform filter.
Figure 5.4(a) shows the complex waveform of a PIE-encoded SSB-modulated
signal, and Figure 5.4(b) compares the spectrum of this signal to that of the
same PIE sequence modulated with DSB-ASK. Notice the smaller bandwidth of the
SSB-ASK-modulated signal compared to the DSB-ASK-modulated for the same data
rate. In both cases, we used a pulse-shaping raised cosine filter with a 0.9 roll￾off factor.
Figure 5.4 PIE-encoded data modulated with DSB-ASK and SSB-ASK. The sequence starts with
an ISO 80006-63 PIE header followed by arbitrary data representing a reader command. (a)
Time-domain waveforms. (b) Spectral power densities.
98 Digital Signal Processing for RFID Applications5.2.5 Phase-Reversal Amplitude Modulation
To reduce the bandwidth of the transmit signal, the ISO 18000-63 PR-ASK modula￾tion forces a phase inversion in the RF carrier at the beginning of every other baseband
symbol (see previous chapter). This leads to an average bandwidth reduction of 50%
for the same bit rate compared to the DSB-ASK modulation. To implement the PR￾ASK phase inversion, an antipodal baseband signal is required.
Since PR-ASK conveys information in amplitude, PR-ASK-modulated signals
produce similar outputs in envelope detectors to standard ASK signals. Therefore,
conventional transponder envelope detectors can process PR-ASK-modulated signals
without requiring any modification. Figure 5.5 presents the time-domain waveform
and spectrum of a PIE-encoded data sequence. As can be seen, a smaller bandwidth
can be achieved with PR-ASK modulation compared to DSB-ASK modulation for the
same data rate. Here, we used the same filter parameters as in the previous example,
but these parameters, which are entered as input to the MATLAB Code 5.1, can be
adjusted to meet specific spectrum/mask requirements (see next section).
Figure 5.5 PIE-encoded data sequence modulated with DSB-ASK and PR-ASK. (a) Time￾domain waveforms. (b) Spectral power densities. The side lobes in the PR-ASK spectrum can be
minimized by adjusting transmit parameters, principally the pulse-shaping filter parameters.
Transmitter Signal Processing 99Code 5.1 Encoding, modulation, interpolation, and pulse-shape filtering of ISO 18000-63
transmit reader frames (continues on the next page).
function [s_tx] =
EncodeModulateInterpolate(data,mod_type,command_type,beta,tari,tx_filter,span,
shape,norm)
% This function encodes, modulates and interpolates reader command data
% The data are encoded using pulse interval encoding (PIE) and modulated
% using ASK, SSB-ASK or PR-ASK. Interpolation and pulse-shaping are
% performed in a signle step using a rectangular or raised cosine filter
% Inputs:
% data - binary payload data of the reader command to be transmitted
% mod_type - modulation type (0: DSB-ASK, 1: PR-ASK, 2: SSB-ASK)
% command_type - command type (1: Query, 0: all other commands)
% beta - filter roll-off (raised cosine only)
% tari - duration of PIE symbol '0'
% tx_filter - defines transmit filter (0: rectangular pulse, 1: raised cosine)
% span - filter span in symbols (raised cosine only)
% shape - filter shape (raised cosine only)
% norm - nomalize filter gain (raised cosine only)
% Output:
% s_tx - reader transmit baseband waveform
% Author: Alirio Boaventura
if(mod_type == 2 && tx_filter == 0)
error('SSB modulation not allowed with rectangular pulse shape');
end
d_0 = tari; % Duration of PIE symbol '0'
d_pw = tari/2; % Duration of PIE pulse (PW)
d_1 = 2*tari; % Duration of PIE symbol '1'
d_av = (d_0+d_1)/2; % Average transmit symbol duration
tx_dr = 1/d_av; % Average transmit data rate
Fs = 2.56e6; % Sampling rate (2.56 Megasample/s)
Ts = 1/Fs; % Sampling period
n_0 = round(d_0/Ts); % Number of samples of symbol '0'
n_1 = round(d_1/Ts); % Number of samples of symbol '1'
n_pw = round(d_pw/Ts); % Number of samples of PIE pulse
upfac = n_pw; % Upsampling factor
s_re = 0; % Real part of the signal
s_im = 0; % Imaginary part of the signal
% PIE encoding
% Symbol '0' and '1' contain 2 and 3 pulses of duration tari/2,
% respectively. Each symbol will be upsampled by a factor of upfac = 8
s0 = [1 0]; % Symbol '0' (duration of tari)
s1 = [1 1 1 0]; % Symbol '1' (duration of 2*Tari)
% Define Preamble and FrameSync
d_delim = 12.5e-6; % Duration of delimiter symbol
d_RTcal = d_0+d_1; % Duration of reader-to-tag calibration symbol (d_0+d_1)
d_TRcal = 37.5e-6; % Duration of tag-to-reader calibration symbol
% The d_TRcal and the DR parameter in the query command
% define the transponder's BLF (see ISO 18000-63, table 6.9)
% (e.g., DR = 64/8 and d_TRcal = 33.3e-6 -> max BLF = 640kHz)
100 Digital Signal Processing for RFID ApplicationsCode 5.1 (cont.)
n_delim = round(d_delim/Ts); % Number of (low) samples of the delimiter
n_RTcal = round(d_RTcal/Ts); % Number of (high) samples of RTcal
n_TRcal = round(d_TRcal/Ts); % Number of (high) samples of TRcal
preamb_dsb_ask = [zeros(1,n_delim/n_pw), s0, ones(1,n_RTcal/n_pw), ...
zeros(1,n_pw/n_pw), ones(1,n_TRcal/n_pw), zeros(1,n_pw/n_pw)]; % Preamble DSB￾ASK
preamb_pr_ask = [zeros(1,n_delim/n_pw), s0, -ones(1,n_RTcal/n_pw), ...
zeros(1,n_pw/n_pw), ones(1,n_TRcal/n_pw), zeros(1,n_pw/n_pw)]; % Preamble PR￾ASK
% DSB-ASK FrameSync
frameSync_dsb_ask = [zeros(1,n_delim/n_pw), s0, ones(1,n_RTcal/n_pw),
zeros(1,n_pw/n_pw)];
% PR-ASK Frame-sync
frameSync_pr_ask = [zeros(1,n_delim/n_pw), s0, -ones(1,n_RTcal/n_pw),
zeros(1,n_pw/n_pw)];
% Symbol mapping/Modulation (DSB-ASK, SSB-ASK or PR-ASK)
invert_next = 1;
if(mod_type == 0 || mod_type == 2) % DSB-ASK or SSB-ASK
if(command_type == 1) % Start with Preamble
s_re = [preamb_dsb_ask];
else % Start with FrameSync
s_re = [frameSync_dsb_ask];
end
for n = 1:length(data)
if (data(n) == 1) % Add symbol '1'
s_re = [s_re,s1];
else % Add symbol '0'
s_re = [s_re,s0];
end
end
elseif(mod_type == 1) % PR-ASK
if (command_type == 1)
s_re = [preamb_pr_ask]; % Start with Preamble
invert_next = 1;
else % Start with FrameSync
s_re = [frameSync_pr_ask];
invert_next = 0;
end
for n = 1:length(data)
if (data(n) == 1) % Add symbol '1'
if(invert_next == 1)
s_re = [s_re,-s1];
invert_next = 0;
else
s_re = [s_re,s1];
invert_next = 1;
end
else % Add symbol '0'
if (invert_next == 1) % Invert next symbol
s_re = [s_re,-s0];
invert_next = 0;
else % No symbol inversion
s_re = [s_re,s0];
Transmitter Signal Processing 1015.2.6 Transmit Spectrum Mask
Unlicensed UHF RFID readers typically employ frequency-hopping spread-spectrum
(FHSS) schemes where the transmit frequency is randomly switched among several
channels in a designated band. In the US, the FCC defines channels of 500 kHz in the
902–928 MHz band. In Europe, ETSI has traditionally specified channels of 200 kHz
in the band 865–868 MHz and has recently introduced additional channels of 400 kHz
in an upper 915–921 MHz band. Readers certified for operation in these regions
should confine their transmissions to the assigned channels and shall meet local
regulations for spread-spectrum channelization [1, 2].
Out-of-channel emissions can disrupt the operation of other RFID readers in
adjacent channels and corrupt signals from transponders that are located even tens
of meters away [9]. Out-of-band emissions can also interfere with other wireless
systems, including users of licensed spectrum. Therefore, RFID readers are required
Code 5.1 (cont.)
invert_next = 1;
end
end
end
end
% Interpolation (up-sampling and pulse-shape filtering)
if(tx_filter == 0) % Rectangular pulse shape
s_re = rectpulse(s_re,upfac);
elseif(tx_filter == 1) % Raised cosine filter
txfilter = comm.RaisedCosineTransmitFilter(...
'OutputSamplesPerSymbol',upfac,...
'Shape',shape,'RolloffFactor',beta,...
'FilterSpanInSymbols',span);
if(norm == 1)
% Normalize filter to obtain maximum filter tap value of 1
coef = coeffs(txfilter);
txfilter.Gain = 1/max(coef.Numerator);
end
s_re = txfilter(s_re.');
delay = mean(grpdelay(txfilter)); % Compensate for filter delay
s_re(1:delay) = [];
end
if (mod_type == 2) % Create complex SSB-ASK signal using Hilbert transform
N = 40; % Filter order
delay = N/2; % Filter delay
trans_band = 400e3; % Transition bandwidth
Hilbert = designfilt('hilbertfir','FilterOrder',N, ...
'TransitionWidth',trans_band,'SampleRate',Fs,'DesignMethod''equiripple');
s_im = filter(Hilbert,s_re);
% compensate for the filter delay
s_tx = complex(s_re(1:end-delay),s_im(delay+1:end));
else % Generate complex DSB-ASK or PR-ASK signal
s_tx = complex(s_re,s_im);
end
end
102 Digital Signal Processing for RFID Applicationsto be tested to ensure they meet emission specifications. The ISO 18000-63 standard
specifies transmit spectrum masks for multiple- and dense-interrogator environments
in terms of adjacent channel power ratios (ACPR). Readers certified for operation
according to this standard shall also meet local regulations for out-of-channel and out￾of-band emissions (e.g., those imposed by the FCC and ETSI).
Out-of-band and out-of-channel interference pose an important limitation on the
type of encoding, modulation, and maximum data rate allowed to an RFID reader as
these parameters determine the bandwidth of the resulting signal. DSB-ASK, SSB￾ASK, and PR-ASK modulations can require channel bandwidths that are up to four
times, three times, and two times wider than their signal bandwidths, respectively [10].
To meet transmit masks while maximizing spectrum efficiency, adequate baseband
pulse-shape filtering and efficient modulation schemes like those discussed in the
previous sections are usually required.
Here, we analyze the ISO 18000-63 spectrum mask for multiple interrogator environ￾ments for the modulation formats discussed previously. Figure 5.6 depicts the power
spectrum density (PSD) of a 160 kHz (Tari = 6.25 µs) PIE-encoded DSB-ASK-modulated
signal interpolated with a rectangular pulse filter as implemented in the function
EncodeModulate(). Figure 5.6 also shows the dense-interrogator spectrum mask for a
500 kHz channel (dashed lines). Not surprisingly, the unfiltered ACPR performance of this
unfiltered signal does not comply with the ISO 18000-63 spectrum mask (see Table 5.1).
To meet the ACPR requirements of the previous baseband signal in a 500 kHz
channel, we filtered the signal with a raised cosine pulse-shaping filter having a roll-off
of 0.53 truncated to the duration of eight symbols (see Figure 5.7). This filter is
implemented in the function provided in Code 5.1. Figure 5.8 presents the spectrum
Table 5.1 Adjacent channel power ratio performance.
Signal
Parameters
PIE-encoded, DSB￾ASK-modulated
PIE-encoded, DSB￾ASK-modulated
PIE-encoded, PR￾ASK-modulated
Signal bandwidth
(kHz)
160 160 160
Filter Rectangular pulse Raised cosine Raised cosine
Filter roll-off — 0.53 0.20
Filter truncation
(number of symbols)
— 8 16
Channel bandwidth
(kHz)
500 500 250
ACPR 1 (dBc) 18.5 56.1 33.6
ACPR 2 (dBc) 21.9 65.4 63.5
ACPR 3 (dBc) 27.1 68.6 67.1
Note: MATLAB code for computing ACPR and performing spectrum mask analysis is provided at
www.cambridge.org/9781108489713.
Transmitter Signal Processing 103Figure 5.6 PSD of 160 kHz PIE-encoded DSB-ASK-modulated signal with no pulse-shape
filtering applied to the signal. The dashed lines correspond to the ISO 18000-63 multiple
interrogator spectrum mask and the power is integrated in a 500 kHz channel bandwidth.
Figure 5.7 PSD of 160 kHz PIE-encoded DSB-ASK-modulated signal filtered using a raised
cosine filter with 0.53 roll-off truncated to eight symbols. The dashed lines correspond to the
ISO 18000-63 multiple interrogator spectrum mask and the power is integrated in a 500
kHz channel.
104 Digital Signal Processing for RFID Applicationsmask analysis for a 160 kHz PIE-encoded PR-ASK-modulated signal. By using a raised
cosine filter with a roll-off of 0.2 truncated to the duration of 16 symbols, we achieved
spectrum mask compliance for a 250 kHz channel. This translates into an improved
spectrum efficiency compared to DSB-ASK. Note that:
◾ The results in Figures 5.6–5.8 do not account for potential non-linearities in the
reader transmit power amplifier, which can introduce both in-band and out-of-band
distortions. To mitigate spectrum regrowth and other spurious emissions, bandpass
filtering should be used at the output of the transmitter.
◾ Besides meeting spectral mask requirements, transmit waveforms shall also
comply with time domain specifications. For example, ISO 18000-63 specifies RF
envelope ripple, modulation depth, and so on.
◾ The examples provided here are for illustration purposes only. For real
implementations, the reader should refer to local regulations and other relevant
specs. See Chapter 6 for an example of spectrum mask analysis applied to a real
RFID reader.
5.3 Transponder Waveform Synthesis
To synthesize transponder waveforms for testing the reader receiver algorithms imple￾mented in the following sections, we implemented the MATLAB function
Figure 5.8 PSD of 160 kHz PIE-encoded PR-ASK-modulated signal filtered using a raised cosine
filter with 0.2 roll-off truncated to 16 symbols. The dashed lines correspond to the ISO 18000-63
multiple interrogator spectrum mask and the power is integrated in a 250 kHz channel.
Transponder Waveform Synthesis 105Code 5.2 Random FM0 data generator
function [bin_data,s_tag,s_cod] =
GenRandFM0Frame(sps,nSymb,snrdB,tx_filter,dc_offset,phase_shift,beta,span,
shape)
% This function generates a BPSK-modulated waveform containing random FM0-encoded
transponder data
% Input:
% sps - number of samples per FM0 symbol
% nSymb - number of FM0 symbols
% snrdB - signal-to-noise ratio in dB (Note: for BPSK, SNR=EbN0=EsN0)
% tx_filter - transmit filter (0: rectangular 1: raised cosine)
% dc_offset - complex baseband DC offset
% phase_shift - constellation phase rotation
% beta - filter roll-off (raised cosine only)
% span - filter span in symbols (raised cosine only)
% shape - filter shape (raised cosine only)
% Outputs:
% data - random binary transponder data
% s_tag - transponder FM0 waveform
% Author: Alirio Boaventura
% Generate random binary data
bin_data = randi([0 1],1,nSymb);
bin_data(1) = 0; % force first bit to zero
% FM0 symbol 0 basis pulse
s0 = [1 -1];
% FM0 symbol 1 basis pulse
s1 = [1 1];
% Pilot tone
pilot = s0;
for n = 1:11
pilot = [pilot,s0];
end
% Preamble pattern
preamb = [s1 -s0 -s1 s0 -s1 s1];
% FM0 header
s_cod = [pilot,preamb,-s0];
% FM0 biorthogonal encoding
last_was_pos = 1;
for n = 2:nSymb
if (last_was_pos == 1)
if (bin_data(n) == 0)
s_cod = [s_cod,-s0];
else
s_cod = [s_cod,-s1];
last_was_pos = 0;
end
else
if(bin_data(n) == 0)
s_cod = [s_cod,s0];
else
106 Digital Signal Processing for RFID ApplicationsGenRandFM0Frame() [Code 5.2], which can be used to generate waveforms with
random FM0 data and variable parameters. In addition, QPSK-modulated signals can
be generated using our custom function GenRandQPSKFrame(). This transponder
waveform model accounts for channel non-idealities including arbitrary white
Gaussian noise (AWGN), constellation phase rotation, and down-conversion baseband
DC offset generation. A baseband FM0 waveform with zero DC offset centered about
the origin produces a constellation similar to a standard BPSK-modulated signal and can
be demodulated in a similar way (transponder signal demodulation is discussed later).
The provided code allows for either rectangular or raised cosine pulse shaping of
the generated transponder waveforms. For simplicity, passive-backscatter transpon￾ders typically employ on–off modulation and rectangular pulse shaping, but transpon￾der signals are naturally filtered as they go through the communication channel
Code 5.2 (cont.)
s_cod = [s_cod,s1];
last_was_pos = 1;
end
end
end
% Force a final transition with a symbol '1'
s_cod = [s_cod -s_cod(end) -s_cod(end)];
% Termination sequence to compansate for transmit-receive filer delay
s_cod = [s_cod, s_cod(end)*ones(1,4*span)];
% Interpolation (up-sampling followed by pulse-shape filtering)
% The signal is upsampled at half the desired oversampling because
% each FM0 symbol has been pre-coded with two binary symbols
% (i.e., it is already upsampled by a factor of 2)
if(tx_filter == 1) % interpolation using raised cosine filter
% Note that other raised cosine filter design tools could be used to
% implement this filter (in case the communications toolbox unavailable
txfilter = comm.RaisedCosineTransmitFilter(...
'OutputSamplesPerSymbol',sps/2,...
'RolloffFactor',beta,'Shape',shape,...
'FilterSpanInSymbols',span');
s_shaped = txfilter(s_cod.');
else % interpolation using rectangular pulse shape
s_shaped = [];
for n = 1:length(s_cod)
s_shaped = [s_shaped ones(1,sps/2)*s_cod(n)];
end
end
% Create complex baseband signal
s_mod = complex(s_shaped,0).';
% Pass signal through AWGN channel with prescribed SNR
s_awgn = awgn(s_mod,snrdB,'measured');
% Apply phase rotation and complex DC offset
s_tag = s_awgn*exp(j*deg2rad(phase_shift))+dc_offset;
end
Transponder Waveform Synthesis 107including the reader receiver circuitry, but deliberate transponder baseband pulse
shaping has recently been explored to improve the spectrum efficiency of transponder
transmissions [11].
Figure 5.9 depicts the constellations of FM0 (BPSK) and QPSK waveforms
generated with Code 5.2. Figure 5.9(a) corresponds to on–off rectangular pulse
shaping and Figure 5.9(b) corresponds to typical transponder FM0. Figures 5.9(c)
and (d) present a 4-QPSK and a 128-QPSK signal, respectively. Although transpon￾ders conventionally produce two-state modulation, quadrature backscatter modulation
has recently been proposed in the literature. For example, the QPSK signals presented
in Figures 5.9(c) and (d) could be generated in practice by using a quadrature back￾scatter modulator like the one we proposed in Chapter 3. The 128-QPSK signal in
Figure 5.9(d) resembles the backscatter chirp spread-spectrum modulation presented
in [12].
For the examples in the following sections, we only display the in-phase compon￾ent of the transponder waveforms but in general the intercepted transponder signal is
demodulated using an IQ demodulator and the resulting complex baseband signal
contains both in-phase and quadrature components.
5.4 Receiver Signal Processing
In this section, we evaluate the ISO 18000-63 receive protocol using custom
MATLAB code. To evaluate the receiver baseband algorithms discussed here, we
synthesize FM0 waveforms with variable parameters using the code provided in the
previous section. In addition, we tested these algorithms using experimental baseband
data acquired from real transponders either with our custom RFID reader discussed in
the next section or with standard RF test equipment. These algorithms can be easily
extended to Miller encoding and can be reused for custom designs. Applications of
some of the approaches discussed here in real RFID readers can be found in the
following chapters.
5.4.1 Maximum Likelihood Detection
Maximum likelihood estimation is central to radar and digital communications and
can be applied in RFID readers for optimum detection of transponder information. The
signal intercepted by an RFID reader receiver contains the transponder message plus
AWGN and other distortions introduced by the communication channel, including the
reader receiver hardware itself. Thus, the fundamental challenge of the receiver is to
recover the transponder message that was transmitted after the signal that carries that
message has been corrupted.
Given that the channel-induced noise is a random entity, and the transmitted
message contains deterministic symbols, this message can be detected in an optimum
manner by evaluating the similarity between the received signal and the transmission
symbols [4, 13] (see Figure 5.10). In maximum likelihood estimation, the decision on
108 Digital Signal Processing for RFID ApplicationsFigure 5.9 Synthesized baseband waveforms. (a) Constellation of centered, aligned BPSK signal.
(b) Constellation of BPSK signal containing random DC offset and phase rotation. (c)
Constellation of 4-QPSK signal. (d) Constellation of 128-QPSK signal. (e) Time-domain
portion of the 4-QPSK signal. The first example uses rectangular pulse shaping (pure on–off
modulation) while the other examples apply transmit raised cosine (RC) pulse shaping with 0.5
roll-off.
Receiver Signal Processing 109the transmitted symbol is made by comparing each received symbol with local copies/
templates of all possible symbols and selecting the one that most closely resembles the
received symbol.
The maximum likelihood receiver, also known as minimum Euclidean distance
receiver, maximizes the likelihood that a certain symbol was transmitted by minimiz￾ing its Euclidean distance to all possible symbol vectors in the alphabet. This requires
a priori knowledge of all transmission symbols. Fortunately, the ISO 18000-63
transponder transmission pulses are partially known to the reader receiver (the format
of the symbols and their nominal durations are known a priori). In addition, the
Figure 5.10 (a) Matched filtering realization of maximum likelihood detection for alphabet of M
transmission symbols. (b) Correlation realization of maximum likelihood detection. The
received signal is compared to all the M alphabet symbols to determine the most likely
transmitted symbol. r tð Þ and smð Þt are the received signal and local template symbol
corresponding to the mth alphabet symbol, respectively, hsmð Þt and Esm are the mth filter impulse
response and symbol energy, respectively, and ba tð Þ is the decimated estimate of the
transmitted symbol.
110 Digital Signal Processing for RFID Applicationstransponder binary data are encoded using biorthogonal basis waveforms (see
Chapter 4). Figure 5.10 shows the structure of typical maximum likelihood receivers
based on matched filtering and cross-correlation.
By matching the receive filter to the transmit pulse-shape filter, that is, making its
impulse response equal to the time-reversed and time-shifted version of the impulse
response of the transmit filter, one can minimize ISI and maximize SNR [4]. The
benefits of matched filtering can be more intuitively understood by observing that: (i)
each matched filter pulse has a low-pass frequency response that filters out high￾frequency noise; (ii) the matched filter integrates the signal over the symbol period,
which effectively averages down zero-mean AWGN; (iii) as a result of (i) and (ii), the
subsequent blocks in the receiver chain experience a stronger signal at the optimum
sampling instant compared to directly sampling the original signal; and (iv) the use of
orthogonal pulses minimizes the likelihood of false detection.
Another way of evaluating the similarity between two signals is through cross￾correlation [4]. As opposed to the matched filtering implementation (Figure 5.10(a)),
which uses linear filtering, the cross-correlation method uses non-linear operations,
namely multiplication followed by integration (see Figure 5.10(b)). This method is
simpler to implement and produces the same output as matched filtering at the optimum
sampling points but may differ elsewhere depending on the matched filtering pulse
format. Throughout this book, we will refer to correlation and matched filtering inter￾changeably, but the reader should keep in mind that they are not necessarily the same.
Figure 5.11 presents eye diagrams of a rectangular filter and a raised cosine
matched filter consisting of a transmit and receive SRRC filter. Notice the greater
opening in the eye diagrams at the matched filter output and much better-defined
sampling instants compared to the original signal. This translates into improved SNR
delivered to the subsequent blocks in the receiver chain.
So far, we have assumed that the sampling clock is perfectly synchronized with the
received signal. But the signal intercepted by the reader usually presents frequency
and phase deviations due to imperfections like clock jitter, phase noise, and channel
dispersion. To maximize SNR at the matched filter’s output and minimize bit error rate
(BER), it is crucial that each symbol be sampled at the optimum sampling instant; sub￾optimal sampling can lead to significant degradation in SNR and defeat the purpose of
using a matched filter. This is the motivation for the inclusion of a timing recovery
feedback loop that tracks and corrects frequency and phase deviations in the received
signal. In the following sections, we present a comprehensive discussion of timing
recovery suitable for RFID applications.
5.4.2 Symbol Synchronization
In digital communications systems, proper synchronization between the transmitter
and receiver is key to retrieving the transmitted message. Conventional wireless
systems typically employ several levels of synchronization, including at the symbol,
carrier, and frame level. Some systems may use dedicated synchronization channels in
addition to the main data transmission channel, but this approach leads to increased
Receiver Signal Processing 111system complexity and poor energy and spectrum efficiency. In many modern
systems, including RFID systems, the synchronization information is transmitted
along with the data signal.
Carrier synchronization is intended to frequency- and phase-align the receiver to
the transmitter RF carrier [14]. This level of synchronization is usually not required in
backscatter RFID readers based on direct conversion, as the transmitter and receiver
share the same local oscillator. But frequency deviations between transmitted and
backscattered signals can still occur in applications like vehicular identification due to
doppler shift [15]. These deviations are usually small and do not significantly affect
the receiver operation. Frame synchronization, which aims to estimate the starting
position of a frame in the received signal, is discussed later in this chapter.
A key challenge in recovering the transponder message in the receiver is to find the
optimal instant to sample the received signal to maximize the channel SNR and
minimize the ISI and BER. This can be accomplished by using symbol synchroniza￾tion, also referred to as symbol recovery, timing recovery, or clock recovery.
Figure 5.11 Eye diagram analysis of FM0 waveforms oversampled at 100 samples per symbol in
an AWGN channel with 6 dB SNR using a rectangular and SRRC matched filter with a duration
of half the FM0 symbol period. (a) Rectangular matched filter input. (b) Rectangular matched
filter output. (c) SRRC matched filter input. (d) SRRC matched filter output for a filter roll-off
of 0.7.
112 Digital Signal Processing for RFID ApplicationsA simple approach to estimating the timing of FM0- or Miller-encoded signals
consists of using a zero-crossing detection scheme like the one shown in Figure 5.12
[16]. In this approach, the transponder data are decoded by detecting transitions (zero￾crossings) in the incoming baseband signal and comparing the time elapsed between
these transitions to a predefined threshold (see Code 5.3). This approach presents sub￾optimal performance as it is very sensitive to amplitude noise (see Section 5.5), but it
is simple and requires minimal computation and no explicit symbol synchronization.
For optimum performance in systems with self-timing (i.e., with no dedicated
channel for synchronization), the receiver must be able to accurately estimate the
correct symbol rate and sampling instant within each symbol period and to dynamic￾ally update these parameters to compensate for frequency and phase fluctuations
during transmissions. This process typically involves estimating the clock phase error
and correcting the clock phase based on the estimated error. In the following sections,
we discuss optimum clock recovery techniques based on phase-locked loops (PLLs).
5.4.3 Phase-Locked Loop Clock Recovery
Phase-locked loops are used in a variety of applications in wireless communications
systems, including frequency synthesis and carrier and clock synchronization. Here,
we discuss the digital PLL (DPLL) technique for timing and symbol recovery in RFID
reader receivers. DPLL symbol synchronization uses a feedback loop to track and
correct timing error in the received signal at the output of a matched filter (see
Figure 5.13). As mentioned before, optimizing the sampling instants is key to maxi￾mizing channel SNR and improving reception BER performance.
A typical DPLL system (the dashed region in Figure 5.13(a)) comprises three main
components: timing error detector (TED), interpolator (and interpolation controller),
and loop filter. Based on some criterion that may depend on present and past symbol
decisions (in the case of decision-directed schemes), the TED block estimates an
unknown error offset e kð Þ and applies a scaled version of this error to compute a
timing error offset ^τk that is used to update the interpolation instant. The offset error
estimate can be obtained using different algorithms [17–20].
Since the incoming signal is discretized and the symbol rate is typically not
synchronized with the ADC sampling rate, the desired optimum sampling instant is
generally not aligned with an available sample. The role of the interpolator is to
resample the output of the matched filter at an arbitrary instant t ¼ kTsymb þ ^τk based
on the available samples (see Figure 5.14). In this sense, the interpolator effectively
causes a fractional delay to the symbol sampling. The desired sample r kTsymb þ ^τk
 
Figure 5.12 FM0 symbol demodulation based on a simple zero-crossing detection scheme.
Receiver Signal Processing 113Code 5.3 Implementation of the FM0 zero-crossing demodulation scheme shown in
Figure 5.12
function [data] = ZCrossFM0Demod(s_rx,sps,nSymbs)
% This function demodulates an FM0 signal using zero crossing detection.
% The signal timing is first recovered by counting the number of samples between
% consecutive signal transitions and the data is then decoded by evaluating the
% stored lengths using a pre-defined threshold.
%
% Input:
% s_rx - received FM0 signal
% sps - number of samples per symbol
% nSymb - expected number of symbols
% Output:
% data - decoded binary data
% Author: Alirio Boaventura
N = length(s_rx);
data = zeros(1,nSymbs); % Initialize output data vector
tol = 0.2; % Allowed phase deviation relative to nominal
sps (20%)
last_was_pos = 0; % Sign of last processed sample
nCrosses = 0; % Number of zero crossings
nSamps = 0; % Number of samples processed since last zero
crossing
MaxIters = 100; % Max number of iterations searching for
preamble
d_v_max = 1.5*sps*(1 + tol); % Max duration of FM0 symbol 'V'
d_v_min = 1.5*sps*(1 - tol); % Min duration of FM0 symbol 'V'
d_1_max = sps*(1 + tol); % Max duration of FM0 symbol '1'
d_1_min = sps*(1 - tol); % Min duration of FM0 symbol '1'
d_half0_max = sps*(1 + tol)/2; % Max duration of half FM0 symbol '0'
d_half0_min = sps*(1 - tol)/2; % Min duration of half FM0 symbol '0'
clk = [];
%% Zero-crossing detection and length storage (timing recovery)
for n = 1:N
nSamps = nSamps+1;
% Negative and positive going zero crossings are detected when x(n)*x(n+1) < 0
if((last_was_pos && ~IsPositive(s_rx(n))) || (~last_was_pos && IsPositive
(s_rx(n))))
nCrosses = nCrosses+1; % Increment number of zero crossings detected
clk(nCrosses) = nSamps; % Save distance between consecutive zero crossings
nSamps = 0; % Reset number of samples since last zero crossing
end
last_was_pos = IsPositive(s_rx(n));
end
%% Preamble detection
M = length(clk);
n = 1;
while(n < MaxIters)
if(n+6 > M)
break
end
P1 = ((clk(n) > d_1_min) && (clk(n) < d_1_max)); % Symbol '1'
P2 = ((clk(n+1) > d_half0_min) && (clk(n+1) < d_half0_max)); % Half symbol '0'
114 Digital Signal Processing for RFID Applicationsis then passed to the decision block. Linear interpolation is used here for simplicity,
but for improved performance more advanced approaches (e.g., a piecewise parabolic
interpolator filter [21]) should be considered.
The control signal for the interpolator is obtained by filtering the error signal e kð Þ with
a proportional integrator (PI) loop filter having a proportional gain Gp and integral gain
Gi. The PI loop filter tracks both the phase and accumulated phase errors, and governs the
dynamics of the feedback loop, determining the characteristics of the correction including
locking time, responsiveness, and damping [4]. Proper selection of the filter parameters is
key for achieving optimum performance. For example, excessive overshooting or under￾shooting of the desired correction can lead to sub-optimal performance. When the
correction is implemented properly, the timing error is effectively driven to zero in a
timely fashion, causing the DPLL to lock and the received eye diagram to open.
The interpolation controller controls the interpolation instants by providing the
interpolator with the basepoint, which corresponds to the nearest sample to the
interpolant, and the fractional interval (see Figure 5.13(b)). In Code 5.4, we present
a simplified implementation of DPLL symbol recovery based on the Mueller and
Muller timing estimation method. For optimal loop filter and interpolation control
design, see [4, 14, 21].
Code 5.3 (cont.)
P3 = ((clk(n+2) > d_half0_min) && (clk(n+2) < d_half0_max)); % Half symbol '0'
P4 = ((clk(n+3) > d_1_min) && (clk(n+3) < d_1_max)); % Symbol '1'
P5 = ((clk(n+4) > d_half0_min) && (clk(n+4) < d_half0_max)); % Half symbol '0'
P6 = ((clk(n+5) > d_v_min) && (clk(n+5) < d_v_max)); % Symbol 'V'
P7 = ((clk(n+6) > d_1_min) && (clk(n+6) < d_1_max)); % Symbol '1'
if(P1 && P2 && P3 && P4 && P5 && P6 && P7) % Check for occurrence of preamble
pattern
n = n+7; % Starting position of payload passed to the following loop
break;
end
n = n+1;
end
%% Threshold decision and symbol demapping
for m = 1:nSymbs
if(n > M)
break;
end
% Symbol '1' is detected if (1-tol)*sps < clk(n) < (1+tol)*sps
if((clk(n) > sps*(1-tol)) && (clk(n) < sps*(1+tol)))
data(m) = 1;
n = n+1;
% Symbol '0' is detected otherwise
else
data(m) = 0;
n = n+2; % Increment twice as symbol '0' has two transitions
end
end
end
Receiver Signal Processing 1155.4.4 Timing Error Estimation
The timing error e kð Þ can be estimated using different techniques, including early–late
gate [14, 17], zero-crossing detection [4, 16], Gardner [18], and Mueller and Muller
[19, 20]. Depending on whether knowledge of the transmitted signal or channel
estimation is used to produce the timing error estimate, these techniques are classified
as decision-directed (zero-crossing and Mueller and Muller) or non-data-aided
(Gardner and early–late gate). Here, we apply the Mueller and Muller method [21],
which requires only one sample per symbol and knowledge of the previous symbol to
estimate the timing error (see Figure 5.13). The timing error estimate for a complex
signal according to the Mueller and Muller method [21] is
e kð Þ¼ baIð Þ k  1 rI kTsymb þbτk
   baIð Þk rI ð Þ k  1 Tsymb þbτk
 
þbaQð Þ k  1 rQ kTsymb þbτk
   baQð Þk rQ ð Þ k  1 Tsymb þbτk
 , (5.4)
Figure 5.13 (a) DPLL timing recovery. (b) Illustration of interpolation. The interpolation process
involves two distinct sampling spaces, one at instant n at the oversampling rate (1=Tsymb) and
the other at instant k at the symbol rate (1=Tsamp). In general, these frequencies are not
synchronous and do not need to be commensurate (i.e., the sampling rate does not need to be a
multiple of the symbol rate).
116 Digital Signal Processing for RFID ApplicationsCode 5.4 DPLL clock recovery loop based on Mueller and Muller error estimation.
function [s_clk,s_match] =
DPLLMnMClockRecovery(s_rx,sps,Gp,Gi,rx_filter,span,shape,beta)
% This function recovers the clock/timing of an FM0 signal using
% a digital phase-locked loop (DPLL). The timing error is estimated
% using the Mueller & Muller method. For details on this method refer to:
% K. Mueller and M. Muller, "Timing Recovery in Digital Synchronous Data Receivers,"
% in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 516-531, May 1976.
% and G. Danesfahani and T. Jeans, "Optimisation of modified Mueller and Muller
algorithm",
% in Electron. Lett., vol. 31, no. 13, pp. 1032–1033, Jun. 1995.
% Inputs:
% s_rx - transponder FM0 signal to be demodulated
% sps - nominal number of samples per FM0 symbol
% Gp - proportional gain of PLL loop filter
% Gi - integral gain of PLL loop filter
% rx_filter - receiver matched filter (0: rectangular pulse, 1: raised cosine)
% span - filter span in symbols (raised cosine only)
% shape - filter shape (raised cosine only)
% beta - filter roll-off (raised cosine only)
% Outputs:
% s_matched - matched filter output
% s_clk - decimated clock signal containing two BPSK pulses per FM0 symbol
% Author: Alirio Boaventura
s_match = []; % Initialize matched filter output
s_clk = []; % Initialize clock signal
Tsymb = sps/2; % Nominal symbol interpolation interval assuming each FM0 symbol
% contains two BPSK symbols with duration sps/2
rPrev = 0; % Matched filter output at previous interpolation instant r(k-1)
rCurrent = 0; % Matched filter output at current interpolation instant r(k)
aPrev = 0; % Decision on matched filter output at previous instant k-1
aCurrent = 0; % Decision on matched filter output at current interpolation instant k
cumulError = 0; % Cumulative error cum_e(k)
error = 0; % Timing error e(k)
tau = 0; % Timing offset t(k)
Tinterp = 0; % Symbol interpolation instant
% Design receiver matched filter
% The receiver matched impulse response typically is a time-reversed
% version of the impulse response of the transmit pulse-shape filter, but
% since the transmit pulse is symmetric, time flipping is not required
if (rx_filter == 0) % Rectangular pulse shape
b_match = ones(1,Tsymb);
elseif (rx_filter == 1) % Raised cosine filter
% Any raised cosine filter design function
% can be used to implement this filter
rxfilter = comm.RaisedCosineReceiveFilter(...
'Shape',shape,'RolloffFactor',beta,...
'FilterSpanInSymbols',span,...
'InputSamplesPerSymbol',sps/2,...
'DecimationFactor',1); % We do not decimate the received signal here
% Decimation is performed in the clock recovery loop
b_match = coeffs(rxfilter).Numerator;
end
% Compute matched filter output
if(rx_filter == 0 || rx_filter == 1)
Receiver Signal Processing 117Where rI kTsymb þbτk
  and rQ kTsymb þbτk
  are the in-phase and quadrature compon￾ents of the input signal to the TED, Tsymb is the nominal symbol rate, bτk is the
estimated timing error at instant k, and baIð Þk and baQð Þk are the estimates of
rI kTsymb þbτk
  and rQ kTsymb þbτk
 , respectively. Figure 5.14 illustrates the error
estimation for different situations: the timing error estimation algorithm returns e = 0
when no timing adjustment is required for the next symbol, e > 0 if a timing advance
is required, or e < 0 if a timing delay is required.
Code 5.4 (cont.)
s_match = filter(b_match,1,s_rx);
else
s_match = s_rx;
end
s_match = s_match./max(s_match); % normalize
% Clock recovery loop
for k = 1:round(length(s_rx)/Tsymb)
% Interpolation controller
Tinterp = k*Tsymb+tau; % Update interpolation sampling time
tBase = floor(Tinterp); % Compute interpolation basepoint
tFrac = Tinterp-tBase; % Compute interpolation fractional interval
% Interpolate matched filter output
if(tBase>0 && tBase<length(s_match)-1) % Boundary check
rCurrent = Interpolate(s_match(tBase),s_match(tBase+1),tFrac); % Linear
interpolation
else
rCurrent = 0;
end
% Apply hard decision to interpolated matched filter output
s_clk(k) = 2*(rCurrent > 0)-1;
% Save decimated sample
aCurrent = s_clk(k);
% Estimate timing error using Mueller and Muller method
error = (3*Tsymb/16)*(rCurrent*aPrev-rPrev*aCurrent);
% Compute timing offset
tau = (tau+Gp*error+Gi*cumulError)*1e-3;
% Save current matched filter output and interpolated decision
rPrev = rCurrent;
aPrev = aCurrent;
% Update cumulative error
cumulError = cumulError+error;
end
end
118 Digital Signal Processing for RFID Applications5.4.5 Frame Synchronization
Frame synchronization serves multiple purposes in wireless communications, princi￾pally signal detection, channel estimation, and time and frequency offset estimation
[22]. Here, we discuss time offset estimation, which is of most interest in typical
backscatter RFID systems. The received data frame is generally offset by an unknown
delay in the signal intercepted by the receiver (see Figure 5.15(a)). The primary goal
of frame synchronization is to estimate this delay and the starting position of the data
frame in the received signal. This can be done by prepending a known pattern to the
transmitted signal, called the preamble, that can be used in the receiver to estimate the
start of the frame.
To improve frame synchronization accuracy, preamble sequences have unique
correlation properties. For example, narrowband communication systems commonly
employ Baker codes, which have minimal off-peak correlation [4]. In ISO 18000-63,
FM0 frame synchronization relies on the use of the preamble sequence ‘1010V1’
leading the transponder payload transmissions, where the symbol ‘V’ is a code
violation that is deliberately introduced to lower the probability of incorrect preamble
detection. FM0 preamble detection is illustrated in Figure 5.15.
One way to detect the preamble at the receiver is to perform a cross-correlation
between the received waveform and a local copy of the preamble pattern waveform for
a variable correlation time lag. In this approach, the starting position of the frame is
estimated by finding the time lag that maximizes the cross-correlation between the two
signals (see Figure 5.15). Another approach used in wireless communications consists
of using a specific sequence of bits to mark the start of a frame and performing frame
synchronization after symbol demodulation. But this technique can only be applied if
the preamble and payload data use the same modulation format [4].
Figure 5.14 Examples of Mueller and Muller error estimation for several cases.
Receiver Signal Processing 119Cross-correlation can be performed either in the sampling space (i.e., in the over￾sampled signal) or in the symbol space (i.e., after the received signal has been
decimated to the symbol rate). The former approach can be efficiently implemented
in software like MATLAB but can become impractical in custom hardware for large
oversampling rates, therefore down-sampling of the received signal is often required
to reduce the computation burden. In the examples presented in Figure 5.15, we down￾sampled the signal to four samples per symbol.
For optimum performance in the calculation of cross-correlations of large
sequences, MATLAB’s xcorr() function uses FFT to exploit the relationship between
cross-correlation and convolution and the fact that the latter corresponds to a simple
multiplication in the frequency domain [4]. However, since this approach requires the
shorter signal to be padded with zeros to match the length of the other signal, the size
Figure 5.15 Illustration of frame synchronization. (a) Estimated starting position of payload data
in the received waveform. (b) Estimated cross-correlation peak. (c) Preamble detection
probability for different preamble lengths. Longer preamble patterns improve detection
probability and frame synchronization accuracy.
120 Digital Signal Processing for RFID Applicationsof the problem increases unnecessarily for sequences with significantly different
lengths, as is the case in the preamble detection problem.
A more efficient way of implementing the frame synchronization cross-correlation is
to apply a filter to the received signal with an impulse response that is the time-reversed
version of the preamble pattern, as in the function SampleRateFM0FrameSync() that we
provide in Code 5.5. By using a proper oversampling rate, this function can be used for
frame synchronization in both the sample and symbol space. For instance, BPSK frame
synchronization in the symbol space can be achieved using this function with the
number of samples per symbol parameter (sps) set to 1. For the FM0 signal, frame
synchronization in the symbol space can be done by using an oversampling of two
samples per symbol, assuming that each FM0 symbol is coded with two BPSK pulses
(more detail is given later).
In Code 5.6, we present an elegant implementation of FM0 frame synchronization
in the symbol space that does not involve cross-correlation and is instead based on an
efficient recursive examination of the clock signal.
Besides the preamble, the ISO 18000-63 standard specifies an optional pilot tone
with 12 FM0 zero symbols leading the transponder transmissions (see Chapter 4).
This pilot tone can be used to implement an ancillary frame synchronization
Code 5.5 FM0 frame synchronizer in the sample space.
function [pay_start,s_corr] = SampleRateFM0FrameSync(s_rx,sps)
% This function locates the FM0 preamble pattern in the received signal in the
% sampling rate domain and returns the start position of the payload data
% Inputs:
% s_rx - received signal
% sps - number of samples per symbol
% Outputs:
% pay_start - starting position of payload data
% s_corr - cross-correlation score
% Author: Alirio Boaventura
s1 = ones(1,sps); % FM0 symbol ’1’
if(mod(sps,2)== 0) % Even sps
s0 = [ones(1, sps/2), -ones(1, sps/2)]; % FM0 symbol ’0’
else % Odd sps
s0 = [ones(1, floor(sps/2)), ...
0, -ones(1, floor(sps/2))]; % FM0 symbol ’0’
end
fm0_preamb = [s1 -s0 -s1 s0 -s1 s1]; % FM0 preamble pattern
% Perform cross-correlation efficiently by using filter whose impulse
% response corresponds to the time-reversed preamble pattern
s_corr = conv(s_rx,flip(fm0_preamb));
s_corr = s_corr./max(s_corr); % Normalize
pay_start = (find(s_corr == max(s_corr))) + 1; % Return starting position of
payload data
end
Receiver Signal Processing 121mechanism, but it adds communication overhead. At the beginning of each inventory
round, the reader can command the transponder to not use a pilot tone in
its transmissions.
5.4.6 The Full System
ISO 18000-63 Miller and FM0 use a biorthogonal encoding scheme where each
binary symbol is associated with a pair of antipodal basis functions (see the previous
chapter and [1, 2]). This leads to a receiver structure like the one in Figure 5.10 having
four branches (M = 4) where each branch is matched to one of the four transponder
symbols and the decision is based on the maximum likelihood criterion discussed
previously (an implementation of this technique can be found in [23]).
A simpler implementation of the FM0 signal demodulation, which is used in this
chapter, is to treat the incoming signal as a BPSK-modulated signal. In this approach,
Code 5.6 Efficient recursive FM0 frame synchronizer at the symbol level.
function [payload_start] = SymbolRateFM0FrameSync(s_clk,stop,k)
% This function searches for the FM0 preamble pattern in the clock signal using
an efficient
% recursive approach and returns the start position of the payload data in the
received signal
% Inputs:
% s_clk - previously recovered clock signal
% stop - recursive control variable
% k - sample index
% Outputs:
% payload_start - start of payload data
% Author: Alirio Boaventura
MaxIters = 100; % Maximum iterations searching for preamble
if nargin == 1, k = 1; stop = 0; end
if ~stop % Search for preamble symbols
P(1) = (s_clk(k)>0 && s_clk(k+1)>0) || (s_clk(k)<0 && s_clk(k+1)<0);
% Symbol ’1’
P(2) = (s_clk(k+2)>0 && s_clk(k+3)<0) || (s_clk(k+2)<0 && s_clk(k+3)>0);
% Symbol ’0’
P(3) = (s_clk(k+4)>0 && s_clk(k+5)>0) || (s_clk(k+4)<0 && s_clk(k+5)<0);
% Symbol ’1’
P(4) = (s_clk(k+6)>0 && s_clk(k+7)<0) || (s_clk(k+6)<0 && s_clk(k+7)>0);
% Symbol ’0’
P(5) = (s_clk(k+8)>0 && s_clk(k+9)>0) || (s_clk(k+8)<0 && s_clk(k+9)<0);
% Symbol ’V’
P(6) = (s_clk(k+10)>0 && s_clk(k+11)>0) || (s_clk(k+10)<0 && s_clk(k+11)<0);
% Symbol ’1’
stop = ((sum(P) == length(P)) || (k > MaxIters) || (k+11 > length(s_clk)));
payload_start = SymbolRateFM0FrameSync(s_clk,stop,k+1);
else % Return start of payload data
payload_start = k + 11;
end
end
122 Digital Signal Processing for RFID Applicationswe filter the received signal using a single matched filter with a duration equal to half
the FM0 symbol period, then we demodulate the matched filter output using the DPLL
clock recovery method discussed previously (Code 5.4), and we demap the resulting
clock signal assuming that each FM0 symbol contains two BPSK symbols with half
the FM0 symbol duration (Code 5.7). Figure 5.16 presents the waveforms of the
DPLL scheme of Figure 5.13 for an AWGN channel and different transmitter–receiver
filter configurations, and Figure 5.17 presents typical signal constellations.
The method just described does not perform as well as the maximum likelihood
receiver of Figure 5.10 as implemented, for example, in [23], but it is much faster and
requires fewer resources. Moreover, this approach does not suffer from the systematic
asymmetric error incidence between symbols ‘0’ and ‘1’ previously reported in the
literature [24].
In most of the examples presented in this chapter, we have considered only the
in-phase component of the transponder baseband signal for simplicity. But as
stated earlier, the transponder baseband signal retrieved by the reader IQ demodulator
is typically complex, having in-phase and quadrature components. After centering
the received signal about the origin and aligning it with the in-phase axis, we
obtain a constellation of a BPSK signal (see Figure 5.17). One way to align the
constellation is to combine the in-phase and quadrature components, converting the
complex signal into a real signal. This approach is followed in the RFID reader design
presented in the next chapter, where the complex signal is combined in the analog
domain.
Code 5.7 FM0 symbol demapper considering two BPSK pulses per FM0 symbol.
function [data] = FM0SymbolDemap(s_clk,pay_start,nSymbs)
% This function demaps the data symbols in the recovered BPSK clock signal
% Inputs:
% s_clk - previously recovered clock signal
% pay_start - starting position of payload data
% nSymbs - expected number of symbols
% Outputs:
% data - decoded binary data
% Author: Alirio Boaventura
N = length(s_clk);
m = 1;
data = zeros(1,nSymbs);
for n = pay_start:2:pay_start+2*(nSymbs-1)
if(n >= N)
break;
end
data(m) = ~((IsPositive(s_clk(n)) && ~IsPositive(s_clk(n+1)))...
|| (~IsPositive(s_clk(n)) && IsPositive(s_clk(n+1))));
m = m+1;
end
end
Receiver Signal Processing 1235.5 Performance Evaluation
To evaluate the performance of the demodulation methods discussed in this chapter,
we synthesize transponder FM0 waveforms with prescribed channel SNR, demodulate
them using the zero-crossing detection and DPLL Mueller and Muller algorithms, and
compare the obtained BER and transponder reception success rate (RSR). We define
the RSR as
RSR ð Þ¼ % Number of successfully demodulated frames
Total number of received frames
 100: (5.5)
For baseline comparison, we use BPSK demodulation with ideal sampling and hard
decision, and we define the SNR per bit (Eb/N0) for the oversampled signals as [25]
Figure 5.16 FM0 demodulation using the DPLL Mueller and Muller clock recovery
implementation presented in Code 5.4. The FM0 frame containing 10 symbols oversampled at
100 samples per symbol is passed through an AWGN channel with a 4 dB SNR. (a)
Rectangular matched filter. (b) Square root raised matched filter. (c) No filter used at the
receiver. This scenario results in a recovered clock with several symbols in error for the same
SNR used in (a) and (b).
124 Digital Signal Processing for RFID ApplicationsEb
N0
¼ SNR þ 10 log 10ð Þ k 10 log 10
Tsymb
Tsamp  , (5.6)
where Tsymb is the BPSK symbol period, Tsamp is the sampling interval, and k is the
number of bits per symbol. The FM0 modulation can be viewed as a BPSK modula￾tion with a code rate of 0.5. Thus, k is set to 1 for the BPSK case and 0.5 for the FM0
case. For the RSR computation, we consider 1e4 frames each containing an FM0 pilot
tone and preamble followed by 200 FM0 payload data symbols, which are over￾sampled at 12 samples per symbol. A frame is successfully received if its preamble
and payload data are correctly detected and demodulated. The BER computation is
based only on the payload data and is completed when either 200 errors occur or 1e7
bits are received. From the BER and RSR performance results presented in
Figures 5.18 and 5.19, the following observations can be made:
Figure 5.17 Typical constellations involved in the clock recovery scheme illustrated in
Figure 5.13. The received signal, containing 1e4 FM0 symbols oversampled at 100 samples per
symbol, was passed through an AWGN channel with a 6 dB SNR. In this case, we performed
the clock recovery using the Mueller and Muller implementation of MATLAB’s
communications toolbox.
Performance Evaluation 125Figure 5.18 Simulated BER as a function of SNR per bit for different demodulation schemes.
Figure 5.19 Simulated reception success rate as a function of SNR per bit for different
demodulation schemes.
126 Digital Signal Processing for RFID Applications Not surprisingly, Mueller and Muller DPLL demodulation outperforms zero￾crossing detection demodulation, given its ability to correct timing error and track
optimal sampling instants. Moreover, matched filtering can dramatically improve
channel SNR in DPLL receivers, enabling the detection of information signals that
are even below the noise floor.
 While zero-crossing detection requires an Eb/N0 of 18.3 dB (SNR = 7.5 dB) for a
50% reception success rate, the Mueller and Muller DPLL with matched filtering
can achieve the same performance at an Eb/N0 of only 9.6 dB (SNR = 1.2 dB).
 Due to their zero-ISI nature, the rectangular and SRRC matched filters give similar
results and largely outperform the other filter topologies. Even though rectangular
pulse-shape filters are not practical, they are helpful for benchmarking
performance. For simplicity, commercial backscatter transponders typically do not
use pulse shaping, but recent work has explored this possibility to improve the
spectrum efficiency of transponder transmissions [11].
In low-power and low-complexity applications, zero-crossing detection is preferred
over DPLL at the expense of performance. Note that the zero-crossing demodulator
used in these experiments used no filter and that low-pass filtering the received signal
prior to zero-crossing detection can improve performance. Other symbol synchroniza￾tion schemes like polyphase filter banks [24, 26] can achieve superior performance
compared to the Mueller and Muller method at the expense of increased complexity
and computation resources. Here, we focus on FM0 encoding, but other schemes like
Miller encoding can outperform FM0 in terms of BER performance (typically, BER
improves with the number of Miller subcarrier cycles [27]).
5.6 MATLAB Code
Table 5.2 summarizes the main MATLAB code provided in this chapter for the reader
transmit and receive digital signal processing chains, as well as transponder
waveform synthesis.
5.7 Exercises
The following exercises relate to transmit spectrum masks and clock recovery previ￾ously discussed in this chapter.
5.7.1 Transmit Spectrum Mask
1. Use the provided function EncodeModulateInterpolate() with proper input
parameters to generate a PIE-encoded SSB-ASK-modulated signal and perform the
spectrum mask analysis of this signal for the dense-reader environment
requirements specified by the ISO 18000–63 standard as previously done for
Exercises 127DSB-ASK and PR-ASK (Figures 5.6–5.8). Note that the SSB-ASK-modulated
spectrum is not centered around the carrier and a frequency offset must be applied
to the spectrum integration to recenter the spectrum mask (see the example in
Figure 12 of [10]).
2. Adapt the provided code to perform spectrum mask analysis for the ETSI masks
defined in [28] for UHF RFID readers. Refer to [29] for an example of ETSI mask
analysis for a WLAN system.
3. To account for spectrum regrowth introduced by the transmit power amplifier,
include the necessary code to model the non-linearity of the power amplifier (for
details on how to use MATLAB to model non-linearities, refer to [29] and [30]).
5.7.2 Mueller and Muller DPLL Algorithm for Quadrature Reception
Make the required modifications to the code provided in DPLLMnMClockRecovery()
to handle symbol synchronization of complex transponder baseband signals. Use
(5.4) to compute the Mueller and Muller timing error and the function
GenRandFM0Frame() to generate complex transponder baseband waveforms for
testing your implementation.
Table 5.2 Summary of the main MATLAB code provided in this chapter.
Function Description
EncodeModulateInterpolate() Performs reader transmit encoding, modulation,
interpolation, and pulse-shape filtering according to ISO
18000-63.
EvaluateReaderTransmitChain() Evaluates several aspects of the ISO 18000–63 transmit
baseband logic and exemplifies transmit spectrum mask
analysis.
GenRandFM0Frame() Generates transponder FM0 waveforms containing the pilot
tone and preamble followed by random data with prescribed
SNR.
GenRandQPSKFrame() Generates QPSK waveforms with random data and
prescribed SNR.
ZCrossFM0Demod() Performs FM0 signal demodulation using a simple zero￾crossing detection algorithm.
DPLLMnMClockRecovery() Recovers FM0 clock using DPLL and Mueller and Muller
timing error estimation.
SampleRateFM0FrameSync() Detects FM0 preamble in the sample space using cross￾correlation.
SymbolRateFM0FrameSync() Detects FM0 preamble in the symbol space using an efficient
recursive algorithm.
FM0SymbolDemap() Demaps FM0 symbols and retrieves the transponder binary
data stream.
EvaluateTransponder2ReaderUplinkChain() Evaluates ISO 18000–63 transponder to reader uplink
baseband logic.
128 Digital Signal Processing for RFID Applications5.8 Complementary Reading
1. T. F. Collins, R. Getz, D. Pu, and A. M. Wyglinski, Software-Defined Radio for
Engineers, Artech House, 2018.
2. F. Zheng and T. Kaiser, Digital Signal Processing for RFID, 1st edition,
Wiley, 2016.
References
[1] ISO/IEC “18000-63:2013 Information Technology – Radio Frequency Identification for
Item Management – Part 63: Parameters for Air Interface Communications at 860 MHz to
960 MHz Type C,” 2013.
[2] EPCglobal Inc. “EPC Radio-Frequency Identity Protocols Generation-2 UHF RFID
Specification for RFID Air Interface Protocol for Communications at 860 MHz–960 MHz
(version 2.0.0 ratified),” 2013.
[3] Impinj, “Indy R2000 UHF Gen 2 RFID Reader Chip.” [Online], available at: www
.impinj.com
[4] T. F. Collins, R. Getz, D. Pu, and A. M. Wyglinski, Software-Defined Radio for
Engineers. Artech House, London, 2018.
[5] National Instruments, “Pulse-Shape Filtering in Communications Systems.” [Online],
available at: www.ni.com/en-us/innovations/white-papers/06/pulse-shape-filtering-in￾communications-systems.html
[6] M. Viswanathan, Wireless Communication Systems in Matlab, 2nd ed. 2020.
[7] MathWorks, “Single Sideband Modulation via Hilbert Transform.” [Online], available at:
www.mathworks.com/help/signal/examples/single-sideband-modulation-via-the-hilbert￾transform.html
[8] R. Kuc, Introduction to Digital Signal Processing. BS Publications, Hyderabad, 2008.
[9] D. M. Dobkin, The RF in RFID: Passive UHF in Practice, 2nd ed. Newnes, Oxford, 2012.
[10] Z. Wang et al., “Anti-Collision Scheme Analysis of RFID System,” Auto-ID Labs White
Paper WP-HARDWARE-045, 2007.
[11] J. Kimionis and M. M. Tentzeris, “Pulse Shaping: The Missing Piece of Backscatter Radio
and RFID,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 64
(12):4774–4788, 2016.
[12] R. Correia et al., “Chirp Based Backscatter Modulation,” in 2019 IEEE MTT-S
International Microwave Symposium (IMS), 2019, pp. 279–282.
[13] F. Zheng and T. Kaiser, Digital Signal Processing for RFID, 1st ed. Wiley, Chichester, 2016.
[14] B. B. Purkayastha and K. K. Sarma, A Digital Phase Locked Loop based Signal and
Symbol Recovery System for Wireless Channel. Springer, New York, 2014.
[15] X. Zhang and M. Tentzeris, “Applications of Fast-Moving RFID Tags in High-Speed
Railway Systems,” International Journal of Engineering Business Management, 3(1), 2011.
[16] C. Huang and H. Min, “A New Method of Synchronization for RFID Digital Receivers,”
in Eighth International Conference on Solid-State and Integrated Circuit Technology
Proceedings, 2006, pp. 1595–1597.
[17] B. Sklar, Digital Communications: Fundamentals and Applications. Prentice-Hall,
Hoboken, NJ, 1988.
References 129[18] F. Gardner, “A BPSK/QPSK Timing Error Detector for Sampled Receivers,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications 34(5):423429, 1986.
[19] K. Mueller and M. Muller, “Timing Recovery in Digital Synchronous Data Receivers,”
IEEE Transactions on Communications, 24(5):516–531, 1976.
[20] G. R. Danesfahani and T. G. Jeans, “Optimisation of Modified Mueller and Muller
Algorithm,” Electronics Letters, 31(13):1032–1033, 1995.
[21] MathWorks, “ Symbol Synchronization Overview.” [Online], available at: www
.mathworks.com/help/comm/ref/comm.symbolsynchronizer-system-object
.html#bumv1zd
[22] K. C. Howland, “Signal Detection and Frame Synchronization of Multiple Wireless
Networking Waveforms.” Master’s thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, CA, 2007.
[23] L. Xi and S. H. Cho, “A RFID Decoder Using a Matched Filter for Compensation of the
Frequency Variation,” in Fifth International Conference on Wireless Communications,
Networking and Mobile Computing, 2009, pp. 1–5.
[24] D. De Donno, F. Ricciato, and L. Tarricone, “Listening to Tags: Uplink RFID
Measurements with an Open-Source Software-Defined Radio Tool,” IEEE Transactions
on Instrumentation and Measurement, 62(1):109–118, 2013.
[25] MathWorks, “AWGN Channel Documentation.” [Online], available at: www.mathworks
.com/help/comm/ug/awgn-channel.html
[26] F. J. Harris and M. Rice, “Multirate Digital Filters for Symbol Timing Synchronization in
Software-Defined Radios,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 19
(12):2346–2357, 2001.
[27] Y. Li, H. Wu, and Y. Zeng, “Signal Coding in Physical Layer Separation for RFID Tag
Collision,” in International Conference on Wireless Communication, Network and
Multimedia Engineering, 2019, pp. 8–13.
[28] ETSI, “Radio Frequency Identification Equipment Operating in the Band 865 MHz to
868 MHz with Power Levels up to 2 W and in the Band 915 MHz to 921 MHz with Power
Levels up to 4 W; Harmonised Standard for Access to Radio Spectrum,” EN 302 208
C3.3.0, 2020. [Online], available at: www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_en/302200_302299/
302208/03.03.00_20/en_302208v030300a.pdf
[29] MathWorks, “802.11ad Transmitter Spectral Emission Mask Testing.” [Online], available
at: www.mathworks.com/help/wlan/examples/802-11ad-transmitter-spectral-emission￾mask-testing.html
[30] Y. Han and H. Min, “System Modeling and Simulation of RFID,” Auto-ID WP￾HARDWARE-010, 2004.
130 Digital Signal Processing for RFID Applications6 A Simple Low-Cost RFID
Reader Implementation
6.1 Introduction
In this chapter, we explore low-cost and low-complexity techniques for the design of a
UHF RFID reader compliant with ISO 18000-63 [1, 2]. These techniques are suitable
for applications where flexibility and performance are not major requirements. The
proposed receiver implementation is based on a quadrature (IQ) data slicing demodu￾lator and leverages special features of the FM0 encoding defined in the ISO 18000-63
standard and built-in hardware capabilities of a standard microcontroller to implement
a simple yet robust FM0 decoder. We also explore a new approach to detecting errors
in the received transponder data even prior to applying CRC by exploiting the memory
properties of the FM0 encoding scheme.
For the transmitter, we propose a simplified implementation of the PR-ASK modu￾lation defined in ISO 18000-63 to reduce the reader transmit bandwidth by 50% while
keeping the same bit rate. Compliance with the transmit spectral mask is achieved by
using an analog filter at the MCU transmit baseband output port. To demonstrate and
validate the proposed concepts, we assemble an experimental RFID reader, discuss its
hardware and algorithmic implementation, and present simulation and measurement
results. We also provide source code in the C language and sample data to evaluate the
proposed algorithms (see www.cambridge.org/9781108489713).
6.2 Proposed RFID Reader Architecture
A simplified block diagram of the proposed RFID reader is depicted in Figure 6.1. The
receiver comprises an IQ down-converter mixer followed by an IQ data-slicing
demodulator, an IQ combiner, and an event capture unit (part of the MCU).
To further reduce complexity (at the expense of performance), the IQ mixer could
be replaced with a simple envelope detector. For the transmitter, we propose a simple
implementation of phase-reversal ASK modulation that uses a differential up￾converter mixer driven with a three-level two-bit baseband code generated by the
MCU. This scheme, detailed in Section 6.2.2, allows us to implement ISO 18000-63
phase-reversal ASK modulation without the need for a high-resolution DAC. In thisdesign, we use a monostatic antenna configuration where the transmitting and receiv￾ing signal paths are isolated via a directional coupler/circulator. To further improve
transmitter-to-receiver isolation, the isolated port of the coupler is terminated with a
variable-load impedance that can be adjusted for optimal self-jamming suppression
(refer to Chapter 8 for a detailed discussion about self-jamming suppression in back￾scatter radio systems).
6.2.1 Transmit Baseband Encoding
Figure 6.2 presents a flowchart of the proposed ISO 18000-63 PIE encoder. In this
implementation, a two-level PIE baseband signal is generated through a digital output
pin of the MCU and clocked by an MCU timer. After low-pass-filtering, this signal is
used to drive the IF input of an up-converter mixer to produce ASK modulation. With
minor changes, the algorithm presented in Figure 6.2 can be used to generate a two-bit
code to drive the phase-reversal ASK modulator proposed in the next section. In this
case, two digital I/O channels/pins of the MCU are required to output a phase-reversal
ASK code (see Figure 6.3).
As discussed in the previous chapter, transmit pulse-shaping is needed to comply
with spectrum masks imposed by regulations. This typically requires expensive high￾resolution DACs. Here, we used a simple low-pass LC circuit to filter the two-level
signal generated by a digital output pin of the MCU for compliance with transmit
masks at a reduced design complexity. To properly drive the up-converter mixer IF
input, we use a unit-gain operational amplifier buffer to enhance the MCU output
current drive.
Figure 6.1. Simplified diagram of the proposed RFID reader.
132 Simple Low-Cost RFID Reader ImplementationFigure 6.2 Flowchart of the proposed ISO 18000-63 PIE encoder. The parameters PW and Tari
are as defined in the previous chapter.
Proposed Reader Architecture 1336.2.2 A Simple PR-ASK Modulator
To reduce the spectrum content of the transmit RF signal, the PR-ASK modulation
defined under the ISO 18000-63 standard imposes a phase inversion in the RF carrier
at the beginning of every other baseband symbol (see previous chapter). This leads to
an average bandwidth reduction of 50% while maintaining the same bit rate compared
to standard DSB-ASK modulation. To implement the PR-ASK phase inversion, a
multi-level baseband signal generated by a high-resolution n-bit DAC is typically
required. Here, we propose a simple new approach to implement the phase inversion
in the RF carrier using two single-bit DACs to create a two-bit three-level differential
code to drive a differential mixer.
A minimum of three amplitude levels (negative, zero, and positive) are needed to
generate PR-ASK modulation. To produce a three-level signal at the RF output of the
mixer, we drive its differential IF input with a differential signal generated from a two￾bit code derived from the original PIE data stream such that: (i) the IF input code ‘01’
produces a negative baseband envelope that phase-reverses the RF output; (ii) the IF
input code ‘00’ produces a null RF output; and (iii) the IF input code ‘10’ creates a
Figure 6.3 (a) Illustration of the proposed PR-ASK modulation scheme. (b) PR-ASK
modulator waveforms.
134 Simple Low-Cost RFID Reader Implementationpositive baseband envelope for a non-reversed RF output (see Figure 6.3). The IFP
and IFN sub-streams at the output of the demuxer in Figure 6.3 used to drive
differential IF ports of the mixer have an average frequency equal to half the original
PIE symbol rate.
To demonstrate the proposed scheme, we used Keysight’s Advanced Design
System (ADS) to simulate the circuit shown in Figure 6.4, where the mixer is a
heterojunction bipolar transistor (HBT)-based Gilbert cell differential mixer from the
ADS RFIC examples library. For illustration, we considered a baseband sequence of
PIE-encoded zeros obtained by cycling the binary pattern ‘1010’ (the dash-dotted line
in Figure 6.5(a)). From this pattern, we produce the sub-stream ‘1000’ to drive the
mixer positive IF input (the solid line in Figure 6.5(a)) and the sub-stream ‘0010’ to
drive the mixer negative IF input (the dashed line in Figure 6.5(a)). The dash-dotted
line in Figure 6.5(b) depicts the generated PR-ASK-modulated signal, and Figure 6.5
(c) shows the detail of the phase inversion in the generated PR-ASK RF waveform.
For comparison, we also show the ASK-modulated signal (the solid line in Figure 6.5
(b)). Figure 6.6 presents the spectra of the ASK- and PR-ASK-modulated signals for a
sequence of PIE zeros (square wave). Notice a 50% reduction (from 50 MHz to 25
MHz) in the PR-ASK bandwidth compared to ASK.
Figure 6.4 Schematic in ADS of proposed PR-ASK modulator.
Proposed Reader Architecture 1356.2.3 Quadrature Data-Slicing Demodulation
The proposed receiver is based on the quadrature
1 data-slicing demodulator depicted
in Figure 6.7(a), which is an advanced version of the ASK data-slicing demodulator
discussed in [3, 4]. This receiver employs two comparator circuits that operate as one￾bit ADCs and are used to digitize the complex baseband signal at the output of the IQ
down-converter mixer (see Figure 6.1).
A low-pass filter is used at the input of each comparator to filter out noise in the
incoming IQ baseband signal, and integrator filters extract the complex average of the
IQ baseband for the decision threshold in the comparator. Compared to conventional
data-slicing demodulation, the proposed IQ scheme offers improved performance and
prevents transponder detection blind spots that can occur when the intercepted back￾scattered signal and the reader local oscillator are orthogonal / out of phase. After
being digitized, the complex IQ signal is converted into a real signal by the IQ
Figure 6.5 (a) Original PIE baseband and split PIE signals used to drive the differential mixer.
The split signals have an amplitude offset for clarity. (b) Mixer RF output produced by ASK and
PR-ASK modulation. (c) Detail of the phase inversion produced by the proposed PR￾ASK modulator.
1 For the experiments conducted in this chapter, we implemented only in-phase demodulation but in general,
IQ demodulation is required to prevent blind spots in transponder detection (see Chapter 8).
136 Simple Low-Cost RFID Reader Implementationcombiner (implemented with an OR gate), and then delivered to an MCU event
capture unit for further processing.
6.2.4 A Simple FM0 Decoder
Event capture is typically used in embedded systems for timing external events. Here,
we use the event capture hardware resource (eCAP) of the TMS320F28335 MCU to
detect transitions in the FM0 signal at the output of the one-bit digitizer and record the
time elapsed between these transitions. The eCAP is based on a 32-bit counter that
provides a time resolution of 6.67 ns for a 150 MHz clock frequency. The eCAP
operation is illustrated in Figure 6.7(b). We set the event capture unit for continuous
mode operation and store the time elapsed between transitions (t1, t2, t3, ...) in its
circular buffer. Once the buffer is full (which is signaled by a hardware interrupt), we
collect the eCAP buffer data and save it in a software buffer. To decode the transpon￾der message from the array of elapsed times (t1, t2, t3, ...), we use the following
procedure:
1. We defined the nominal duration of
◦ half the FM0 symbol ‘0’ as T0Nominal,
◦ the full FM0 symbol ‘1’ as T1Nominal,
◦ the full FM0 violation symbol ‘V’ as TVNominal.
Figure 6.6 Spectra of the signals in Figure 6.5(b) showing a 50% bandwidth reduction when
using PR-ASK modulation. For demonstration purposes, a periodic square wave signal is
used here.
Proposed Reader Architecture 137Figure 6.7 (a) IQ data-slicing demodulator, where two comparators digitize the IQ signal
producing ASK modulation and an IQ combiner (OR gate) converts the digitized IQ signal into
a real signal for the event capture unit. (b) Illustration of the TMS320F28335 event capture
operation. (c) State machine of the proposed FM0 data decoder with code error
detection capability.
138 Simple Low-Cost RFID Reader Implementation2. We define the duration range of
◦ half the FM0 symbol ‘0’ as T0 in the interval T½  0Nominal  tol, T0Nominal þ tol ,
with the parameter tol accounting for deviations in the nominal value of the
backscatter link frequency (BLF), which can be as large as 22% [1, 2],
◦ the full FM0 symbol ‘1’ as T1 in the interval T½  1Nominal  tol, T1Nominal þ tol ,
◦ the full FM0 violation symbol ‘V’ as TV in the interval T½ VNominal  tol,
TVNominal þ tol.
3. In evaluating the elements of the array of elapsed times between transitions
(t1, t2, t3, ...):
◦ if two consecutive elements of duration T0 are found, we assign a logic symbol ‘0’;
◦ if an element of duration T1 is detected, we assign a logic symbol ‘1’;
◦ if an element of duration TV is found, we assign an FM0 preamble violation
symbol ‘V’.
In addition, we leverage the memory feature of the FM0 encoding scheme to detect
FM0 encoding errors even prior to CRC verification. This can save processing time
since the CRC verification can be skipped if errors are detected during the decoding
phase. An FM0 encoding error could be, for instance, the appearance of an odd
number of transitions of duration T0 followed by a transition of duration T1 or
transitions not complying with T0 or T1. The state diagram of the proposed FM0
decoder with error detection capability is depicted in Figure 6.7(c). Code in the
Figure 6.7 (cont.)
Proposed Reader Architecture 139C language to implement this algorithm is provided at www.cambridge.org/
9781108489713.
6.3 Receive Data Integrity
Checksum generation and verification are important parts of the RFID communication
protocol. Messages received from the transponder should be checked to ensure that
there were no errors during the communication. On the other hand, CRC-protected
reader commands must have the correct CRC appended to them or will otherwise be
ignored by the transponder. Both the AppendCRC5() and ComputeCRC16() functions
are based on the following bitwise CRC algorithm [5–7]:
1. Initialize the 16-bit CRC register with the 16-bit CRC preset value.
2. Shift the CRC register left by one bit while shifting in the next message bit.
3. If the bit just shifted out is 1, XOR the CRC register with the CRC polynomial.
4. Repeat steps 2 and 3 until there are no message bits left.
5. XOR the CRC register with the final XOR value. For a final XOR value equal to
0xFFFF, this operation corresponds to applying a 1’s complement to the CRC.
The bitwise implementation can become inefficient, especially for long messages. The
function ComputeCRC16TableMethod() offers an efficient alternative to compute the
CRC-16 based on the following bytewise table-based CRC algorithm from [5, 6]:
1. Compute 256 CRC words and store in a table.
2. Initialize the 16-bit CRC register with the 16-bit CRC preset value.
3. XOR the CRC most significant byte with the incoming message byte.
4. Use this byte to index into the pre-computed 256-entry table.
5. Shift the CRC register to the left by one byte.
6. XOR the CRC register with the value indexed into the table.
7. Repeat steps 3 to 6 until no more message bytes are left.
8. XOR the CRC register with the final XOR value.
The CRC-16 table can be pre-computed by the function CRC16BuildTable() and
stored in the FLASH memory of the reader CPU to minimize processing time.
6.4 Experimental Testbed and Results
This section describes the testbed used to study the concepts proposed in this chapter and
presents experimental results, including reader waveforms and transponder EPC IDs.
6.4.1 Experimental Testbed
Figure 6.8 shows a simplified diagram of the RFID reader and experimental testbed
used in this work. The reader local oscillator was implemented using Analog Devices’
140 Simple Low-Cost RFID Reader Implementationfrequency synthesizer ADF4351. Its evaluation board EVAL-ADF4351EB1Z incorp￾orates a fractional-N PLL, voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), temperature￾compensated crystal oscillator (TCXO) phase reference, and PLL loop filter.
The EVAL-ADF4351EB1Z can be interfaced using its software interface
ADF435xPLL via a universal serial bus (USB), but for the experiments conducted
in this chapter we used a dedicated MCU to control the synthesizer via the serial
peripheral interface (SPI). To drive the LO inputs of our single-ended up-converter
and down-converter mixers, we used the differential outputs of the ADF4351 RF port.
Figure 6.8 (a) Simplified diagram of the RFID reader hardware used in this work. (b) Photograph
of the experimental testbed. Self-jamming suppression is described in detail in Chapter 8.
Experimental Testbed and Results 141The IQ data-slicing demodulator, filters, and bidirectional coupler were custom made
in-house, and the other components were based on evaluation boards from Mini-Circuits
and TI. For the digital baseband processing, we used the TI TMDSDOCK28335
experimenter kit featuring the TMS320F28335 Delfino MCU, which combines DSP
and microcontroller functions and various peripherals including the SPI, I/O port,
Interrupt, Timer, and eCAP modules used in this work.
6.4.2 Experimental Results
Figure 6.9 shows the time-domain waveforms and spectra of PIE-encoded, DSB￾ASK-modulated signals at the output of the power amplifier (block N). The baseband
PIE signal was created using an encoding algorithm like the one in Figure 6.2 and
generated via a digital output pin of the MCU.
To shape the transmit baseband pulses for compliance with transmit masks, a
simple second-order LC low-pass filter can be used at the digital output pin of the
MCU. For the experiments conducted in this chapter, we used a center carrier
frequency of 866 MHz and a Tari of 6.25 µs.
Figure 6.10 shows the input and output of the data-slicing demodulator/digitizer.
The analog input signal is an amplified version of the incoming baseband signal at the
output of the down-converter mixer. After low-pass filtering, this signal was digitized
Figure 6.8 (cont.)
142 Simple Low-Cost RFID Reader Implementationand fed into the MCU event capture unit for further processing. Figure 6.11 shows
elapsed times (in CPU clock cycles) measured by the event capture scheme of
Figure 6.7(a) and (b) for typical transponder RN16 and EPC responses. The transpon￾der transmission began with a 12 FM0 zero pilot tone followed by an FM0 preamble
and transponder payload data.
From Figure 6.11, we can see that a half-period of symbol ‘0’ (T0/2), one period of
symbol ‘1’ (T1), and one period of the FM0 violation symbol (TV) spanned 506, 934,
and 1452 CPU clock cycles, respectively, which corresponds to T0=2  3:37 μs,
T1  6:23 μs, and TV  9:68 μs for a CPU clock frequency of 150 MHz. Symbol
‘0’ presents roughly the same period as symbol ‘1’, and the violation symbol has
approximately 3/2 the duration of symbols ‘0’ and ‘1’, which complies with FM0
encoding. The average BLF of the three symbols (154 kbps) approximates the target
BLF of 160 kbps commanded to the transponder by the Query command. The
transponder RN16 and EPC were decoded as 0011000011000111 (binary) and
E2003411B802011111365086 (hexadecimal) with a corresponding CRC-16 of
615D (hexadecimal), respectively.
Figure 6.9 PIE-encoded, DSB-ASK-modulated signal at the output of the PA on a 866 MHz
carrier and Tari of 6.25 µs. (a) and (b): Unfiltered transmit waveform and spectrum. (c) and (d):
Filtered transmit waveform and spectrum. The applied filter was effective in meeting the
multiple interrogator mask in the first and second adjacent channels, but further optimization is
needed for the third and fourth channels.
Experimental Testbed and Results 143Figure 6.10 In-phase input and output of the digitizer/data-slicing demodulator.
Figure 6.11 Elapsed time between FM0 transitions measured by the MCU event capture unit. (a)
Transponder RN16 response. (b) Transponder EPC response. Elapsed times are given in CPU
clock cycles for a CPU clock frequency of 150 MHz.
144 Simple Low-Cost RFID Reader Implementation6.5 Source Code
High-level source code in the C language for generating reader commands
and decoding transponder responses, including CRC checksum generation and
verification and sample data for evaluating the provided code, are available at
www.cambridge.org/9781108489713. The provided code can be seamlessly inte￾grated into custom designs.
For compiling and debugging the source code provided with this book, we used the
integrated development environment (IDE) from Texas Instruments (TI), Code
Composer Studio version 5 (CCSv5.5.0) in simulation mode.
2 The code provided in
this chapter is summarized in Table 6.1.
6.6 Conclusions
In this chapter, we explored simple and low-cost techniques for the design of a UHF
RFID reader compliant with ISO 18000–63. Getting rid of ADCs and DACs substan￾tially lowers the design cost and complexity at the expense of performance and
flexibility. Cost and complexity could be further lowered at the expense of perform￾ance, for instance by using a low-cost transmitter (e.g., the TH72035 [8]) and MCU
(e.g., the MSP430). To determine the maximum achievable communication range, we
used gain amplifiers and an external power amplifier [9]. Depending on the desired
coverage range, some of these components may not be required.
Despite its simplicity, the proposed receiver (IQ data-slicing demodulator and FM0
decoder) proved very robust at very low signal-to-noise ratio. The constructed reader
achieved a coverage range of up to 9 m for an average transmitted power level of 31.5
dBm, a reader-to-transponder Tari of 6.25 µs, and a transponder-to-reader data rate
(BLF) of 160 kbps. The FM0 demodulation could alternatively be implemented using
a general timer/interrupt of the MCU (see Section 6.7.2), and these techniques can also
be applied to decode Miller-encoded signals. For advanced demodulation techniques
involving, for example, matched filtering and maximum likelihood detection, refer to
Chapters 5 and 7.
6.7 Exercises
This section proposes experiments relating to the techniques previously discussed in
this chapter involving PR-ASK modulation, FM0 decoding, and CRC check.
2 Note: At the time this book was written, TI CCS IDE versions newer than 5 did not support
simulation mode.
Exercises 1456.7.1 PR-ASK Modulation
Implement the modifications needed in the algorithm presented in Figure 6.2 to
generate a two-bit differential code for driving the PR-ASK differential mixer scheme
proposed in Figure 6.3. Experimentally evaluate the proposed PR-ASK modulation
scheme using your two-bit code and a differential mixer.
6.7.2 Alternative FM0 Demodulation Scheme
An alternative method for detecting FM0 or Miller transitions based on a general￾purpose MCU timer and interrupt can be implemented as follows:
1. Define the maximum number of transitions allowed, M, and initialize the number
of detected transitions, m = 0.
2. Configure your MCU to detect external rising and falling edge interrupts on the
input pin that your FM0 or Miller-encoded baseband signal is connected to.
3. Configure your MCU timer for countdown mode.
4. Enable the external pin interrupt and start the timer countdown from its maximum
period, Tinit (e.g., for a 32-bit counter timer, Tinit ¼ 0xFFFFFFFF).
5. If an interrupt is detected, proceed to 6. Otherwise, keep waiting for an interrupt.
6. Disable external interrupt, stop timer, retrieve final timer counter value, Tfinal.
Table 6.1 Summary of signal processing functions implemented in this chapter.
Function Description
ComposeReaderCommand() This function composes the reader command binary sequence. The CRC is
calculated and appended to the command binary sequence later.
DetectFM0PilotTone1() This function detects the transponder FM0 pilot tone.
DetectFM0Preamble1() This function searches for the FM0 preamble pattern and returns the initial
transponder data index in the array.
DecodeFM0Data1() This function implements the FM0 decoder illustrated in Figure 6.7(c).
By exploiting the memory feature of the ISO 18000-63 FM0 encoding,
this decoder can detect encoding errors prior to CRC verification.
AppendCRC5() This function computes the ISO 18000–63 5-bit CRC checksum of a
message and appends it to the message.
ComputeCRC16() This function computes the ISO 18000–63 16-bit CRC checksum of a
message.
CheckCRC16() Using the function ComputeCRC16(), this function verifies the validity of
a message against its appended 16-bit CRC checksum.
AppendCRC16() Using the function ComputeCRC16(), this function computes the 16-bit
CRC checksum of a message and appends it to the message.
ComputeCRC16TableMethod() This function performs a 16-bit CRC computation based on the bytewise
table-based CRC algorithm discussed in [5, 6].
Main() This script exemplifies the use of the provided source code. Sample data
for code evaluation are provided in the header file SampleData.h.
146 Simple Low-Cost RFID Reader Implementation7. Save elapsed time, Telapsed½ ¼ m Tinit  Tfinal, and increment number of detected
transitions, m = m +1.
8. Repeat steps 4 to 7 while m < M.
9. Use the functions provided in Section 6.5 to further process the data stored in
Telapsed½ and decode the transponder message.
6.7.3 Efficient CRC Computation
The table-based bytewise CRC algorithm used in this chapter (see the code provided)
is generally more efficient than the bitwise algorithm, but it only works for messages
containing whole bytes. To improve the efficiency for an arbitrary number of bits
NDataBits, implement the following hybrid algorithm based on the functions
ComputeCRC16TableMethod() and ComputeCRC16():
1. Determine the number of full bytes in the message: NBytes = NDataBits/8.
2. Determine the remainder number of bits in the message: NBits = NDataBits%8.
3. Use the function ComputeCRC16TableMethod() with the initial CRC preset to
compute the CRC for the first NBytes full bytes of the message.
4. XOR the 16-bit CRC value obtained in step 3 with 0xFFFF (one’s complement).
5. Use function ComputeCRC16() with the 16-bit value obtained in step 4 as the new
CRC preset to compute the CRC for the remaining NBits bits of the message. This
gives the final CRC for the full message.
[/ – Integer division; % – Remainder of division]
References
[1] ISO/IEC “18000-63:2013 Information Technology – Radio Frequency Identification for
Item Management – Part 63: Parameters for Air Interface Communications at 860 MHz to
960 MHz Type C,” 2013.
[2] EPCglobal Inc. “EPC Radio-Frequency Identity Protocols Generation-2 UHF RFID
Specification for RFID Air Interface Protocol for Communications at 860 MHz–960 MHz
(version 2.0.0 ratified),” 2013.
[3] P. Nikitin, S. Ramamurthy, and R. Martinez, “Simple Low Cost UHF RFID Reader,” in
Proc. 2013 IEEE International Conference on RFID, 2013.
[4] Maxim, “Data Slicing Techniques for UHF ASK Receivers,” application note. [Online],
available at: www.maximintegrated.com/app-notes/index.mvp/id/3671
[5] R. N. Williams, “A Painless Guide to CRC Error Detection Algorithms,” 1993.
[6] Texas instruments, “CRC Implementation with MSP430,” application report SLAA221,
2018.
[7] L. Bies, “30 Years Experience in One Website.” [Online], available at: www.lammertbies.nl
[8] Melexis, “TH72035 Transmitter IC – 868/915 MHz, FSK/ASK.” [Online], available at:
www.melexis.com
[9] Mini-Circuits, “ZHL-30W-252+ Power Amplifier.” [Online], available at: www
.minicircuits.com
References 1477 A Software-Defined RFID
Reader Design
7.1 Brief Introduction to Software-Defined Radio
Software-defined radios (SDRs) use reconfigurable hardware and adaptable software
to implement some or all radio physical layer functions to achieve multi-band, multi￾modulation, and multi-standard operation [1, 2]. This radio paradigm, first introduced
by Joseph Mitola [3] and initially used in the military to allow backward compatibility
and interoperability, has become commonplace in modern civilian and commercial
radio systems [4].
A typical SDR comprises an RF front end (including up- and down-converters) and a
digital processing unit interfaced via digital-to-analog and analog-to-digital converters
(see Figure 7.1). Digital processing can be implemented on a general-purpose processor
(GPP), a digital signal processor (DSP), or a field-programmable gate array (FPGA).
The more functions of the radio implemented via reconfigurable hardware or software,
the more efficient, flexible, and versatile the SDR will be. The ideal SDR would be
based on the direct RF conversion approach where RF signals are digitized directly at
the antenna. This is a challenging proposition that requires fast, expensive, and energy￾demanding signal conversion and processing hardware, but there has been significant
progress toward a practical implementation of this concept, with the some of the most
promising approaches being based on sub-sampling [1] and single-bit converters [5].
In RFID, SDR enables flexible, multi-standard, and upgradable reader designs [5–
10]. A popular SDR research hardware platform is the Universal Software Radio
Peripheral (USRP) developed by Ettus Research [11]. This platform is commonly
paired with open-source GNU Radio software [12] or LabView [13] for RFID
applications [6–8]. In [5], an all-digital SDR design based on high-speed single-bit
conversion and FPGA was proposed for a multi-standard reconfigurable RFID reader.
In [10], the authors tested cost-effective UHF front ends based on off-the-shelf devices
for SDR RFID vehicular applications.
In the remainder of this chapter, we report on the design of an SDR-based UHF
RFID reader compliant with the ISO 18000-63 standard. The analog front end is built
around the AD9010 IC discussed in [10], and the baseband signal processing is
implemented on a multi-core DSP. A key SDR-enabled feature of this design is its
ability to generate non-conventional powering waveforms that can potentially drive
RFID transponders more efficiently and increase their operational range [14, 15].7.2 Reader Hardware Design
In this section we describe our hardware implementation, including analog/RF front
end, signal converters and digital signal processor, and multicarrier wireless power
transmitter.
7.2.1 Analog/RF Front End
The RFID reader design proposed here is based on a homodyne or direct conversion
architecture (Figure 7.2) featuring a monostatic configuration where the transmitter
and receiver share an antenna through a directional coupler. The transmit complex (I/
Q) baseband signal, generated in a DSP, is converted to the analog domain by two
DACs and translated to the desired RF carrier frequency in the UHF frequency range
by an I/Q modulator (I/Q up-converter mixer). The modulator RF output signal is then
amplified and applied to the antenna. To minimize out-of-band emissions, a bandpass
filter can be applied to the output of the power amplifier (PA). Additional signal
conditioning circuitry (not shown here) is required to properly drive the intermediate
frequency (IF) ports of the modulator.
In the receiver, the transponder backscattered signal is sampled at the transmitter–
receiver isolator and translated to baseband by the I/Q demodulator (I/Q down￾converter mixer). A low-noise amplifier (LNA) can be used prior to the demodulator
to improve reception performance, but this approach requires sufficient RF self￾jamming suppression to prevent distortion in the LNA caused by transmitter-to￾receiver leakage. A detailed discussion on leakage and self-jamming in passive￾backscatter systems, including algorithm implementations, is presented in Chapter 8.
If no self-jamming suppression is employed, then the ability to properly handle large
RF transmitter-to-receiver leakage becomes more important than achieving excep￾tional noise performance, in which case the use of an LNA is not recommended.
An (optional) bandpass filter can be used at the input of the demodulator to improve
the receiver’s frequency selectivity.
To remove noise and high-frequency signal components produced during down￾conversion, the IF outputs of the IQ demodulator are low-pass filtered. The resulting
Figure 7.1 Simplified diagram of a typical SDR.
Reader Hardware Design 149complex signal then goes through DC blocking filters (not shown in Figure 7.2) to
remove DC offsets created by self-jamming. Careful design of the DC blocking filter is
required to prevent transients that can distort the transponder baseband signal, especially
at high transponder data rates. This problem and its mitigation, including advanced filter
techniques with transient compensation, are discussed in Chapter 8. The RF front end
used in this chapter incorporates built-in circuitry for implementing one such technique.
The filtered and transient-compensated complex baseband signal is then amplified
by built-in variable gain amplifiers (VGAs) in the IC front end and converted to the
digital domain by two ADCs. The digitized signal is then processed in the DSP to
decode the transponder message as described in Sections 7.3.3 and 7.3.4.
Figure 7.2 Simplified diagram of the implemented front end with transmitter and receiver sharing
the same local oscillator and antenna.
150 Software-Defined RFID Reader DesignThe analog front-end was built around the Analog Devices ADF9010 IC trans￾ceiver [16], which integrates analog receive baseband circuitry and an RF transmitter
modulator operating in the 840–960 MHz frequency range. The I/Q receive chain
incorporates baseband programmable gain amplification (PGA), baseband filtering,
and signal conditioning for the ADC interface. The receiver baseband gain ranges
from 3 dB to 24 dB, programmable in steps of 3 dB, and the receive low-pass filter can
be programmed with a cut-off frequency of 330 kHz, 880 kHz, or 1.76 MHz; a bypass
mode is also available. The transmit chain consists of an I/Q modulator followed by an
output amplifier driver.
The ADF9010 also includes an on-chip integer-N frequency synthesizer and voltage￾controlled oscillator (VCO), which was used in this project to generate the LO signal for
the reader transmitter and receiver. But this transceiver does not offer demodulation
capabilities. For I/Q demodulation, we used the ADL5382 down-conversion mixer [17]
(which is rated for a frequency range from 700 MHz to 2.7 GHz) and drove it using the
LO signal of the ADF9010 available externally. Configuration of the ADF9010 internal
register bank was done by the DSP via the SPI.
7.2.2 DA and AD Converters
We used the AD9709 [18] and DAC5662 [19] dual-channel differential DACs for
generating the baseband I/Q data and multicarrier waveforms, respectively (see
Figure 7.3 and Section 7.2.5). The AD9709, which has a resolution of 8 bits and
maximum sampling rate of 125 MSPS, was operated at 2 MSPS at its full resolution;
the DAC5662, which has a 12-bit resolution and can support up to 275 MSPS
sampling rate, was operated at 100 MSPS with only 8 bits of resolution. The
AD9709 circuitry was custom integrated into our main front-end board design,
whereas the DAC5662 was integrated using its evaluation board [20].
For digitizing the received baseband signal, we used the12-bit built-in ADCs of the
DSP. These ADCs have a modest sampling speed but worked relatively well for our
prototype. Faster standalone ADC devices are presented in Table 7.1.
7.2.3 Digital Signal Processor
For baseband signal processing, we selected the 32-bit dual-core TMS320F28377D
processor from Texas Instruments Inc. [21]. This device, which is primarily intended
for sensing and control, offers an excellent cost–benefit tradeoff by combining DSP
capabilities with a rich set of peripherals and built-in memory; it includes:
 12/16-bit multi-channel ADC
 direct memory access (DMA)
 pulse-width modulation (PWM)
 universal serial bus (USB)
 8-bit universal parallel port (UPP)
Reader Hardware Design 151 serial peripheral interface (SPI)
 1 MB on-chip flash memory
 204 KB on-chip RAM memory.
The main limitation for our application was the relatively low sampling rate of the
built-in ADC system (3.5 MSPS maximum sampling rate per channel and up to
14 MSPS throughput when combining multiple channels). But the ability to imple￾ment analog-to-digital conversion, signal processing, and network connectivity within
a single device was a major advantage as it substantially reduced the design complex￾ity, part count, and cost. In this work, we used the TMS320F28377D DSP through its
TMDSDOCK28379D experimenter board [22]. For comparable low-cost processor
alternatives suitable for this application, see Table 7.2.
Figure 7.3 Diagram portion of the reader transmitter, including the proposed multicarrier
generator. Multicarrier RFID interrogation signals are generated by mixing the usual modulated
RFID signal with baseband multisine envelopes generated using a lookup-table approach
(described later) via a dedicated DAC (DAC M).
152 Software-Defined RFID Reader Design7.2.4 Other Components
Other key components used in our design include the RCP890Q10 directional coupler
from RN2 Technologies [23] and the SKY6511 power amplifier from Skyworks
Solutions [24]. The RCP890Q10 directional coupler features a compact design with
a 10 dB coupling factor and is rated for the 815–960 MHz frequency range. The
selected power amplifier covers the 800 MHz to 1000 MHz band and features an
output power of 33 dBm and 1 dB compression point of 27 dBm. The bill of material
also includes baluns ETC1-1-13TR and 0900BL18B100 used for differential to
single-ended conversion, temperature-compensated crystal oscillator FOX924 used
as phase reference for the ADF9010, and low-pass filter LFCN-1000D+ used in the
transmitter and voltage regulator ADP3334ARZ. Tables 7.1 and 7.2 list alternative
Table 7.1 Alternative components suitable for SDR UHF RFID reader design.
Analog front end
Part number Description
AD9361, AD9363, AD9364 High-performance transceivers with full transmit
and receive RF and analog baseband circuitry, and
ADCs/DACs. These ICs could replace the analog
front end, demodulator, and ADCs/DACs used
here.
ADALM-PLUTO SDR Low-cost integrated SDR learning module based
on the AD9363.
ST25RU3991/2/3 Family of UHF RFID reader transceivers, primarily
intended to work as standalone readers but offer the
option to bypass protocol-specific baseband
circuitry and work as analog front ends for custom
SDR.
ADF4351, ADF4360-7 Frequency synthesizers with integrated VCO
suitable for RFID UHF LO generation. The RFID
reader design presented in Chapter 6 uses
ADF4351.
Modulation and demodulation
LT5568-2, TRF37A32 Modulator and demodulator suitable for UHF
RFID applications.
AD and DA conversion
AD9709, MAX5864, MAX5188,
MAX5191, DAC5662, AD9963,
AD9861
Dual-channel DACs and ADCs suitable for I/Q
signal conversion in UHF SDR RFID readers. The
AD9963 has been evaluated in [10] in conjunction
with the AD9361 transceiver for UHF RFID
applications.
Baseband DSP
See Table 7.2 for low-cost processors that can suit
UHF SDR RFID reader designs and be used as
alternatives to the TMS320F28377D.
Reader Hardware Design 153Table 7.2 Low-cost DSP solutions.
TMS320
F28377D
(Used here)
TMS320
F28335
(Chapter 6)
TMS320
C28346
TMS320V
C5410A
TMS320C6748 OMAP-L138 LPC4370 ADSP-BF537
Manufacturer TI TI TI TI TI TI NXP AD
Register length 32-bit 32-bit 32-bit 16-bit 32-bit 32-bit 32-bit 32-bit
Floating point Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes
CPU cores 2 1 1 1 1 2 2 1
CPU clock 200 MHz 150 MHz 300 MHz 160 MHz 456 MHz 456 MHz 204 MHz 600 MHz
Total processing power 800 MIPS 150 MIPS 300 MIPS 160 MIPS 3648 MIPS 3648 MIPS 204 MIPS
Co-processors 2 CLAs 1 ARM 2 Cortex-M0
On-chip FLASH 1 MB 512 KB No No No No No No
On-chip RAM 204 KB 64 KB 510 KB 128 KB 256 KB 256 KB 282 KB 132 KB
ADC 3.5 MSPS 12.5 MSPS No No No No 80 MSPS No
DMA Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
USB Yes No No No Yes Yes Yes No
Ethernet No No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes
MSPS – Megasamples per second
MIPS – Million instructions per second
Note: This table is for informational purposes only. Depending on the specific application requirements, the reader may need to select newer and/or higher￾performance devices.parts suitable for this project, but depending on your specific application requirements
you may need to select newer and/or higher-performance devices.
7.2.5 SDR-Based Multicarrier Transmitter
It has recently been shown that non-conventional signals featuring high peak-to￾average power ratio (PAPR) like chaotic, ultra-wideband, and multicarrier signals
can potentially improve the energy transfer efficiency of wireless power transmission
systems when compared to continuous-wave (CW) signals with equivalent average
power [14, 15, 25–27]. The RFID reader design presented in this chapter features
multicarrier capability. In Chapter 10, we evaluate the use of multicarrier waveforms
on energy-harvesting circuits, including charge pump circuits like those used in
passive UHF RFID transponders.
One way of generating an RF-modulated multicarrier waveform is to multiply an
RFID baseband signal by a baseband multisine signal prior to RF up-conversion. But
doing such multiplication in the digital domain can inflate the required computation
resources as each baseband message symbol contains many baseband multisine
pulses. For the experiments conducted in this chapter, we performed the multiplication
in the analog/hardware domain as illustrated in Figure 7.3 by mixing the reader￾modulated RF signal generated by the main IQ DAC with a multisine baseband
waveform created by a dedicated high-speed DAC (DAC M in Figure 7.3).
Desirably, the transmitted multicarrier signal should feature high PAPR at the
transponder location [14, 15]. This can be achieved by imposing a constant phase
progression between the multisine subcarriers as in [27]. Multicarrier backscatter
modulation was introduced in Chapter 3, and an approach for retrieving transponder
baseband information backscattered on a multicarrier signal will be discussed later in
this chapter.
7.2.6 Multicarrier SDR Reader Prototype
Figure 7.4 depicts the proposed SDR multicarrier RFID reader annotated with the
references of the main hardware component parts, and Figure 7.5 shows the partially
assembled reader. Schematics and the bill of material of our custom-built analog front
end (Figure 7.5(a)) are provided at www.cambridge.org/9781108489713. For the DSP
and multisine DAC, we used evaluation boards from Texas Instruments Inc. The
schematic and layout of the RF power amplifier (PA) are available from the manufac￾turer website [24]. The PA was connected between the transmit output of the analog
front end (RF port J7 in Figure 5.7(a)) and the input of the reader transmit filter (RF
port J3 in Figure 5.7(a)). For the multicarrier experiments conducted later in this
chapter, we used a higher-power off-the-shelf PA module for efficient amplification of
the transmit high-PAPR waveforms. Figure 7.5(c) depicts a custom multi-polarization
antenna developed for the SDR reader. This antenna scheme comprises a suspended
microstrip patch with three feed points at 0, 45, and 90 degrees, which are driven by a
PIN diode-based SP3T microstrip switch (see Figure 7.5(c)). By cycling the reader
Reader Hardware Design 155transmit signal through the different polarizations, one can improve the sensitivity to
polarization mismatch and multipath fading, and improve transponder reliability and
coverage range.
7.3 Software Implementation
This section addresses the software for generating and transmitting reader data and
power, and receiving and processing transponder data. The discussion covers CPU
Figure 7.4 Diagram of the proposed SDR RFID reader, including analog front end with
multicarrier capability and digital back end. Digital signal processing is discussed in the
following sections.
156 Software-Defined RFID Reader DesignFigure 7.5 Developed hardware. (a) Custom-built analog front end. The I/Q baseband DAC (on
the left side of the board) is connected to parallel ports of the DSP (left flat cable) and the analog
front end IC is wired to the DSP control board via SPI and other control lines (bottom flat
cables). (b) Partially assembled reader prototype comprising the custom-built analog front
end (A), external PA (C), DSP (B), and multisine DAC (D). The complete reader prototype
integrated with test and measurement apparatus is discussed in Section 7.4. (c) Custom UHF
multi-polarized antenna scheme comprising a suspended microstrip patch antenna and a PIN
diode-based SP3T microstrip switch.
Software Implementation 157firmware and resources, RFID protocol logic, transponder information decoding, and
signal processing optimization.
7.3.1 CPU and Firmware
The digital signal processing device used in this project (the 32-bit dual-core DSP
TMS320F28377D) features two processors (CPU1, CPU2) and two co-processors
(CLA1, CLA2). Each CPU/CLA runs at 200 MHz, allowing a maximum parallel
processing speed of up to 800 MIPS. In this implementation, we used CPU1 for
generating the multicarrier baseband envelope and allocated CPU2 to RFID baseband
processing and protocol logic.
A simplified flowchart of the implemented multi-processor firmware running on
CPU1 and CPU2 is depicted in Figure 7.6. Besides generating the baseband multisine
envelope, CPU1, which acts as the master CPU, is responsible for booting CPU2 and
initializing and allocating peripherals (e.g., input–output ports, ADC, DMA, memory,
interrupts, etc.) to each CPU. Upon reset, CPU1 allocates a UPP module and a DMA
channel to itself for interfacing the multisine DAC and associates two ADC channels
and one PWM module to the CPU2 for digitizing the incoming RFID baseband signal
and interfacing with the transmit I/Q DACs.
Figure 7.5 (cont.)
158 Software-Defined RFID Reader DesignOnce CPU2 receives the boot command from CPU1, it first configures the RFID
transmit and receive parameters (e.g., transmit frequency/power, and receive baseband
gain/bandwidth) of the AD9010 RF IC front end via the SPI interface. CPU2 then
processes the baseband data and implements the RFID protocol logic needed to
singulate an RFID transponder, read its EPC, and access its memory (see the details
in the following sections). The retrieved transponder data is then communicated to the
host computer via the RS232 interface. To improve processing efficiency, both CPUs
were configured to load time-critical user code from FLASH memory to RAM at boot
time. A more detailed discussion of code and data processing optimization is given in
Section 7.3.5.
7.3.2 Baseband Waveform Generation
To generate oversampled baseband waveforms, we used a lookup-table approach in
which the desired waveform samples are synthesized in MATLAB, stored in the DSP
FLASH memory, and then used in real time to update the transmit DAC (see the
Figure 7.6 Simplified flowchart of the implemented multi-processor firmware. The baseband
signal processing and ISO 18000-63 protocol logic implementation (gray rectangle) is detailed
in the following sections.
Software Implementation 159simplified flowchart in Figure 7.7). This approach dramatically simplifies the compu￾tation required in the reader to generate transmit baseband waveforms.
To latch baseband waveform samples into the transmit DAC, we used a PWM
module of the DSP and its associated interrupt service routine (ISR): the PWM
module was configured to generate a square-wave signal through an output port of
the DSP to clock the DAC. In addition, the PWM module was instructed to generate
one interruption request per clock cycle, providing the timing needed to update the
DAC transmit register (Figure 7.7). In our implementation, the clock frequency was
set to match the desired sampling frequency of 2 MHz. The DAC eight-bit codeword
for each waveform sample was obtained by normalizing and quantizing the desired
analog amplitude as follows:
D ¼ round 255
2
A
AMAX
þ 1
    , (7.1)
Figure 7.7 Simplified flowchart of the baseband waveform generator. The baseband bitstream is
interpolated/oversampled using pre-stored data to form the transmit baseband waveform, and a
PWM module and its ISR handler are used to latch the waveform samples into the
transmit DAC.
160 Software-Defined RFID Reader Designwhere A is the desired analog amplitude and AMAX is the peak amplitude of the analog
signal. An 8-bit DAC resolution allows 256 amplitude codewords or quantization
levels, with code 0 corresponding to the smallest amplitude and code 255 the
largest amplitude.
A similar lookup-table approach was used to generate the multisine baseband
waveform. Since the multisine signal is periodic, only one period of the baseband
waveform needs to be stored in memory. But the PWM method described above for
generating the RFID baseband waveform was not fast enough for the multisine DAC.
For the multisine generation, we used a high-speed UPP peripheral of the DSP with
dedicated DMA and RAM to transfer 8-bit data to the DAC at a sampling rate of
100 MHz. Refer to [21] for details on the UPP/DMA operation.
Table 7.3 presents examples of oversampled baseband waveforms that were stored
in the DSP memory for a multisine pulse and PIE ‘0’, ‘1’, delimiter, reader-to￾transponder calibration (RTCal), and transponder-to-reader calibration (TRCal) sym￾bols. This lookup table method can be used to generate arbitrary signals, and several
Table 7.3 Lookup table examples for PIE symbols oversampled at 2 MSPS and a baseband multisine waveform
oversampled at 100 MSPS. The data provided are for example purposes only; transmit pulse shapes may need to be
optimized.
PIE symbol 0:
[192,235,250,255,255,250,235,192,148,133,128,133,148]
PIE symbol 1: [192,235,250,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,250,235,192,148,133,128,133,148]
PIE start delimiter symbol:
[255,250,235,192,148,133,128,128,128,128,128,128,128,128,128,128,128,128,128,128,128,128,128,133,
148]
PIE RTCal symbol:
[192,235,250,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,
255,250,235,192,148,133,128,133,148]
PIE TRCal symbol:
[192,235,250,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,
255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,
255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,
255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,255,250,235,192,148,
133,128,133,148]
Baseband multisine:
[255,249,231,205,175,145,121,105,99,101,110,123,134,143,146,144,137,128,120,114,112,115,121,129,
136,141,141,138,131,123,117,113,113,118,126,135,142,146,144,137,126,114,103,99,102,116,138,166,196,
224,245,254,252,237,213,183,153,127,109,100,100,107,119,131,141,146,145,139,131,122,115,112,114,
119,127,134,140,142,139,133,126,118,113,113,116,123,132,140,145,145,140,130,117,106,99,100,111,131,
158,188,217,240,253,254,242,220,192,161,134,113,101,99,105,116,128,139,145,146,141,133,124,117,113,
113,118,125,132,139,142,140,135,128,120,114,112,115,121,130,138,144,146,142,133,121,109,100,99,107,
124,149,179,209,234,250,255,247,227,200,170,141,118,103,99,102,112,125,136,144,146,143,136,127,119,
114,113,116,123,130,137,141,141,137,130,122,116,113,114,119,127,136,143,146,144,136,124,112,102,99,
104,118,142,171,201,228,247,255,250,234,208,178,149,124,107,99,101,109,121,133,142,146,144,138,130,
121,115,112,115,120,128,135,140,142,139,132,124,117,113,113,117,125,134,142,146,145,138,128,115,
104, 99,101,113,134, 162,193,221,243]
Software Implementation 161baseband waveforms can be stored in memory and selected in real time. For these
experiments, we generated multisine waveforms with various pulse repetition rates
and different numbers of tones.
7.3.3 Digital Signal Processing
Figure 7.8 presents a simplified flowchart of the implemented reader software for the
transmit and receive digital baseband processing and the ISO 18000-63 protocol logic.
After issuing a transponder command, the reader begins converting the incoming IQ
baseband signal through the built-in DSP 12-bit ADCs and then transfers the digitized
data to a program data buffer via the DSP DMA channels. Once enough samples are
buffered (determined by a user-defined threshold), the DSP starts to implement the
baseband signal processing and ISO 18000-63 protocol logic.
Figure 7.8 Flowchart of the implemented reader software.
162 Software-Defined RFID Reader DesignFor two-state BPSK transponder modulation schemes (as discussed in Chapter 5),
one can drop the phase of the received complex signal by aligning the received
constellation with the in-phase axis. This can be done by combining the received in￾phase and quadrature components to produce a real signal as in Figure 7.4.
An alternative approach consists of decoding the in-phase and quadrature data streams
sequentially as in [28]. In this approach, illustrated in Figure 7.8, we first process one
component of the received complex baseband signal (I or Q). If the transponder EPC/
data is detected in the selected data stream, we simply skip the second data stream.
If neither the preamble nor checksum is detected in the selected data stream, we
process the second data stream (Q or I). For a successful in-phase or quadrature
decoding, the decoded transponder EPC/data is communicated to the host computer.
Otherwise, the process is terminated, and a decoding error is reported to the host
computer. ISO 18000-63 RFID transponder data demodulation was discussed in
Chapter 5, and a specific FM0 data demodulation procedure is described later in
this chapter.
For the experiments conducted in this chapter, we used PIE and ASK modulation at
the maximum bit rate of 128 kbps for reader transmissions, and we instructed
transponders in the field to reply with FM0 encoding and pilot tone at data rates from
40 to 160 kbps. The singulation parameter Q-slot was set to zero so that the first
transponder to enter the reader’s interrogation field was immediately selected for
subsequent transactions with the reader. You can find details of ISO 18000-63
transponder singulation and memory access in Chapter 4, and for additional reading
on digital signal processing for RFID applications refer to [29–32].
7.3.4 Transponder Data Demodulation
The FM0 transponder data demodulation (the gray area in Figure 7.8) comprises two
main steps: FM0 preamble detection and FM0 data decoding. Once the FM0 preamble
is detected in the received transponder frame, the starting position of the payload is
used for decoding the payload frame and demapping the FM0 signal into binary data.
Algorithms for FM0 preamble detection and FM0 data demodulation based on zero￾crossing and maximum likelihood detection, and implementation examples in
MATLAB, are discussed in Chapter 5. Here, we use the zero-crossing detection
method discussed in Chapter 5 for decoding transponder FM0 data. Sample code in
C for an FM0 decoder based on zero-crossing detection is presented in Code 7.1.
7.3.5 Optimization
Modern RFID protocols impose stringent timing requirements for communication
with transponders. For example, ISO 18000-63 defines a maximum reader reply time
after which transponders will time out if they do not receive a valid reader response.
Higher transponder data rates typically require faster reader processing speeds to meet
these timing requirements. While this does not represent a problem for high￾performance processor devices, low-cost devices with limited processing capabilities
Software Implementation 163Code 7.1 Simple FM0 demodulator based on zero-crossing detection
typedef unsigned int Uint16;
#define OK 0
int16 FM0ZCDecode(Uint16 *DmaBuffer, Uint16 payStartPos, Uint16 EndPos, \
Uint16 WaveMean, Uint16 DwnSamp, Uint16 sps, Uint16 nSymbs, Uint16
*decData)
{
/* This function demodulates an FM0 signal using zero crossing detection.
* The signal clock is first recovered by measuring the time (in samples)
between
* consecutive signal transitions and the data is then decoded by
evaluating the
* stored time durations using a predefined threshold.
* Input:
* DmaBuffer - pointer to input waveform buffer
* payStartPos - starting position of payload data
* EndPos - final position in received waveform
* WaveMean - average amplitude of received waveform (zero, if waveform
has no DC component)
* DwnSamp - downsampling factor
* sps - number of samples per FM0 symbol
* nSymbs - expected number of FM0 symbols
* Output:
* decData - pointer to output binary data buffer
* Author: Alirio Boaventura
*/
Uint16 i = 0, m = 0, k = 0; // Control loop variables
Uint16 PrevSampSign = 0; // Previous sample sign
Uint16 CurrSampSign; // Current sample sign
Uint16 ElapsedTimeArray[400]; // Time elapsed between zero crossings
(given in samples)
Uint16 ElapsedTime = 0; // Time elapsed since last zero crossing
(given in samples)
Uint16 nZCross = 0; // Number of zero crossings
sps = sps/DwnSamp; // Decimation
Uint16 spsTol = 0.2*sps; // sps tolerance (20%)
// Detect zero crossings
PrevSampSign = (DmaBuffer[payStartPos] > WaveMean);
for(i = payStartPos; i < EndPos; i = i + DwnSamp)
{
ElapsedTime++;
CurrSampSign=(DmaBuffer[i] > WaveMean);
if((!PrevSampSign && CurrSampSign) || (PrevSampSign &&
!CurrSampSign)) // Detect zero crossing
{
ElapsedTimeArray[nZCross]=ElapsedTime;
nZCross++;
ElapsedTime = 0;
}
PrevSampSign = CurrSampSign;
}
// Decode data
m = 0;
k = 0;
while(m < nSymbs)
164 Software-Defined RFID Reader Designrequire a more efficient/optimized use of resources. Below we describe some
approaches for speeding up code execution and improving the overall efficiency of
the RFID reader.
◾ Efficient code execution. Firmware user code in embedded systems is typically
stored in non-volatile FLASH memory. But code execution directly from FLASH
memory can lead to sub-optimal performance. Modern GPPs and DSPs provide
mechanisms for executing user code from RAM, allowing a significant speed-up in
code execution. The DSP used in this work offers one such mechanism, where the
CPU can load specific user code from FLASH to RAM at boot/power-up time and
then execute the code from the RAM. We used this approach here to optimize the
execution of time-critical code, for example the code used to demodulate
transponder data.
◾ Assembly-level optimization. CPU-specific assembly language enables inherently
more efficient coding structures that can optimize performance. This can be
combined with the RAM code execution approach described above to dramatically
improve execution of time-critical code.
◾ Concurrent transfer and processing. If a dedicated data transfer mechanism is
available to interface with ADCs and manage the transfer of incoming transponder
data, then one can use the main CPU to process the incoming data concurrently
with data transfer. Here, we used the dedicated DMA channels of the DSP for
transferring digitized incoming data to the DSP memory concurrently with data
processing (see Figure 7.8). This approach requires a synchronization mechanism
to ensure that (i) enough data are buffered before the data processing begins, and
Code 7.1 (cont.)
{
// If elapsed time is within the interval [sps-spsTol, sps+spsTol],
assert binary symbol ’1’
if( (ElapsedTimeArray[k] > (sps-spsTol)) && (ElapsedTimeArray[k] <
(sps+spsTol)))
{
decData[m] = 1;
m++;
k++;
}
// Otherwise assert binary symbol ’0’
else
{
decData[m] = 0;
m++;
k++; k++; // increment twice because symbol ’0’ has two
transitions
}
}
return OK;
}
Software Implementation 165(ii) the DMA data transfer is not overrun by the processing. Refer to [33] for
further details.
◾ Multitasking. Sequential single-threaded programming can be inefficient when
busy-waiting loops like those in Figures 7.7 and 7.8 are used, as valuable CPU
time is wasted on useless activity. Moreover, the CPU can get stuck in infinite
loops. A better alternative to single-threaded programming is to use concurrent
multitasking for improved performance and efficiency.
◾ Parallel processing. When available, parallel processing can provide massive
speed-ups. In this work, we used the two main CPUs of the DSP to independently
implement the reader baseband processing and synthesize multicarrier baseband
waveforms. For even more parallel processing power, we could also utilize the two
CLAs available in this DSP.
◾ Dedicated data transfer. In this work, we used the built-in DMA and UPP
modules of the DSP to interface high-speed data to the DSP memory and
data converters.
◾ Lookup waveform synthesis. In this approach, we used pre-stored baseband
pulses to simplify and speed up the generation of transmit baseband waveforms for
both RFID reader signals and multisine envelopes (see Section 7.3.2).
7.4 Measurement Apparatus
Figure 7.9 illustrates the measurement testbed used to evaluate the RFID reader
prototype in CW and multisine modes. In addition to displaying the singulated
transponder EPC on a computer user interface (see Figure 7.10), we also sampled
and stored waveforms at critical points of the reader transmit and receive chains to
Figure 7.9 Simplified diagram of the measurement testbed used to evaluate the RFID
reader prototype.
166 Software-Defined RFID Reader Designevaluate the reader performance. For the wired experiments performed in this section,
the reader transmit output (output of coupler 2) was directly attached to a bare RFID
test chip mounted on a PCB board via an SMA connector, and for the over-the-air
experiments performed in [33], the transmit output was routed to a transmit antenna.
To adjust the power delivered to the antenna or the RFID test chip, we inserted a
variable attenuator in the transmit path. The available power delivered to the antenna
or the test chip was measured via a power meter connected to the coupler arm of
coupler 2. In addition, we used an oscilloscope to measure the transponder baseband
signal at the output of the receiver down-converter stage. In these experiments, self￾jamming was suppressed by manually adjusting a load impedance tuner attached to
the isolated port of the reader’s directional coupler (coupler 1 in Figure 7.9) and
monitoring the transmitter-to-receiver leakage on a vector signal analyzer (VSA); refer
to Chapter 8 for details.
Figure 7.10. Termite RS232 terminal displaying multiple readings with indication of the reader
(I or Q) branch where each transponder was singulated.
Measurement Apparatus 167The reader communicated with a host computer via an RS232 interface. To display
data from the reader (e.g., transponder EPC), we used the Termite RS232 terminal
application. Figure 7.10 presents a screenshot of Termite for an over-the-air experi￾ment with the reader in CW mode. In addition to the EPCs of transponders in the
reader interrogation zone, the user interface indicates the reader branch (in-phase/
quadrature) where each transponder was detected. The prevalence of quadrature
branch (Q-branch) readings in the example of Figure 7.10 is because the transponder
quadrature data was processed first in the algorithm of Figure 7.8. Failure to decode
the quadrature data was primarily due to full dephasing between the quadrature local
oscillator signal and the intercepted transponder signal, which occurs infrequently
[33]. In the over-the-air experiments, this prototype achieved a communication dis￾tance of several meters.
7.4.1 Multicarrier Operation
To evaluate the RFID multicarrier backscatter scheme described in Chapter 3, we set
the reader to generate multisine waveforms as described earlier in this chapter.
Figure 7.11 illustrates the multicarrier generation. The bandpass nine-tone multisine
at the reader transmitter output (Figure 7.11(b)) results from up-converting a four-tone
baseband multisine (plus a DC component) generated by the multisine DAC (see
Figure 7.11(a)) with an RF-modulated CW carrier [33]. The bandpass multicarrier was
then amplified and radiated. Figure 7.11(c) compares a PIE-encoded, ASK-modulated
signal using a CW carrier and multicarrier with the same average power. Notice the
larger time-domain peaks (and larger PAPR) in the multicarrier case, which can
improve the conversion efficiency at the transponder [14, 15].
7.4.2 Multicarrier Backscatter Demodulation
When illuminated with a multicarrier signal, a transponder will backscatter its infor￾mation on all the subcarriers within its modulating bandwidth. As mentioned in
Chapter 3, the first step in demodulating the transponder message backscattered on
a multicarrier is to down-convert the signal using the same local oscillator that was
used to generate the transmit multicarrier. Figure 7.12(a) shows the spectrum of the
transponder baseband signal at the output of the in-phase down-converter mixer of our
reader prototype when radiating a multicarrier waveform like the one in Figure 7.11
(c). This corresponds to an FM0-encoded transponder response at a backscatter link
frequency (BLK) of 160 kHz modulated on all the illuminating subcarriers. We used
an oscilloscope to digitize the transponder baseband response at 50 MSPS (see
Figure 7.9) and we then processed the stored waveform offline in MATLAB.
As stated in Chapter 3, if the illuminating multicarrier is symmetrical and has a
frequency component at the local oscillator frequency, then the easiest (but not
optimal) way to retrieve the backscattered transponder message is to simply low￾pass filter the down-converted signal with a cut-off frequency less than the subcarrier
spacing Δω. Applying a low-pass filter to the signal in Figure 7.12(a) produced the
168 Software-Defined RFID Reader Designsignal in Figure 7.12(b). In the presence of noise, the transponder message on the
center subcarrier can be recovered optimally by applying a matched filter with a
constant amplitude template pulse, n = 0 in (7.2).
To retrieve the transponder information modulated on a side subcarrier (n > 0), we can
use a matched filter whose template pulse corresponds to the subcarrier we wish to
demodulate. Template pulse examples are defined as in (7.2) and illustrated in
Figure 7.13. In our example, subcarriers 1, 2, 3, and 4 in Figure 7.12(a) should be filtered
using the 2 MHz, 4 MHz, 6 MHz and 8 MHz pulses in Figure 7.13, respectively.
To recover the information on all the subcarriers at once, we can use a baseband multisine
pulse identical to the one used in the transmitter (7.3) as the template for the matched filter.
The multicarrier matched filtering could be implemented efficiently using an FFT.
While FFT computation overhead is generally not a problem for offline postproces￾sing using, for example, MATLAB, it can be a problem for real-time applications in
Figure 7.11 Transmit waveforms. (a) Four-tone baseband multisine at the output of the multisine
DAC (DAC M in Figures 7.3 and 7.4). (b) Resulting bandpass-modulated multicarrier pulse.
(c) RFID PIE-encoded, ASK-modulated symbols using a CW carrier (solid black signal) and
multicarrier (pulsed signal) with the same average power.
Measurement Apparatus 169Figure 7.12 (a) Power spectral density of transponder backscatter multicarrier. (b) Magnification
of transponder response on the center subcarrier (at 0 Hz). (c) Magnification of transponder
response on the first side subcarrier (at 2 MHz). Note the spectrum asymmetry, which was
alluded to in Chapter 3. (d) Retrieved baseband time-domain waveforms for the signals of
Figures 7.11(b) and (c).
Sn
pulseðÞ¼ t
An cos 2ð Þ nΔωt , 0  t 
Tsymbol
2 ,
0, otherwise,
8
<
:
(7.2)
Smultisineð Þt ¼
PN
n¼0
An cos 2ð Þ nΔωt , 0  t 
Tsymbol
2 ,
0, otherwise,
8
<
:
(7.3)
where n = 0, 1, 2, ..., Δω is the subcarrier spacing (2 MHz), N is the number of baseband
subcarriers, and Tsymbol is the transponder FM0 symbol period.
170 Software-Defined RFID Reader Designembedded systems. Similar multicarrier techniques have been proposed for back￾scatter frequency division multiple access (FDMA) for use in the internet of things
(IoT) [34].
7.4.3 Transponder Sensitivity Measurements
To evaluate the transponder sensitivity enhancement provided by multicarrier signals
relative to the conventional CW signal, we wired our reader to an RFID transponder
chip (the G2XM RFID chip from NXP) and interrogated it with a conventional CW
and several multisine waveforms. The minimum power required to activate the
transponder was obtained by adjusting the transmit attenuator (Figure 7.9) – we first
adjusted the attenuator so that the transponder received enough power to activate, and
we then gradually increased the attenuation (decreasing the available power to the
transponder) until the transponder stopped responding to the reader. At that point, we
registered the available power measured by a power meter through coupler 2.
This procedure was done while the reader interrogated the transponder with a
Query command in both CW and multisine mode. The gain/loss in transponder
sensitivity of the multisine mode relative to the CW mode GP was given by the
Figure 7.13 Subcarrier template pulses. Here we use a display window equal to one period of the
transmit baseband multisine envelope, but for the FM0 matched filter scheme presented in
Chapter 5, the duration of the template pulse should be equal to half the period of the
transponder FM0 symbol, Tsymbol:
Measurement Apparatus 171difference between the minimum activation power levels obtained in the two cases
ð Þ GP ¼ PCWmin  PMSmin . To determine whether the transponder responded to the
reader query, we used the oscilloscope to monitor the transponder baseband waveform
and check for an RN16 response (see Figure 7.9). The measurement results for various
multicarrier waveforms are presented in Table 7.4. The nine-tone multicarrier pro￾vided a maximum sensitivity gain of 3.3 dB, suggesting that half of the power would
be required to achieve the same coverage range for the tested transponder compared to
the conventional CW operation. Assuming ideal conditions, where maximum PAPR is
delivered to the transponder, a maximum relative multicarrier coverage range gain can
be obtained as r ¼ sqrt Gp
   1 [33].
The activation power for the matched RFID chip was estimated from the measured
activation power and reflection coefficient of the bare (unmatched) RFID chip [(11.3)
in Chapter 11].
7.5 Conclusions
We have described the design, prototyping, and testing of a full-stack software-defined￾radio-based RFID reader compliant with ISO 18000-63. This work highlights some of
the key advantages of the SDR approach, including the flexibility to generate custom
RFID powering waveforms, and provides a foundation for other custom designs and
experiments. We used the developed reader platform to explore unconventional tech￾niques like high-PAPR multicarrier wireless power for RFID, which can improve
energy conversion efficiency in passive RFID transponders and potentially extend their
coverage range. In addition to its potential for improving wireless power transfer in
passive RFID systems [14, 15], the multicarrier approach enables a range of interesting
new applications for backscatter medium access [34], medical devices [35, 36], wake-up
radios [37], precision localization [38], and encoding and modulation schemes [39–41].
References
[1] P. Cruz, N. Borges Carvalho, and K. A. Remley, “Designing and Testing Software￾Defined Radios,” IEEE Microwave Magazine, 11(4):83–94, 2010.
Table 7.4 Transponder sensitivity measurements.
Bare RFID chip Matched RFID chip
Waveform PAPR (dB)
Pmin
(dBm)
GP
(dB)
r
(%)
Pmin
(dBm)
GP
(dB)
r
(%)
CW 3.0 4.45 — — 13.0 — —
Three-tone 7.8 6.0 1.55 19.5 14.5 1.5 18.9
Five-tone 10.0 7.10 2.65 35.7 15.6 2.6 34.9
Nine-tone 12.6 7.75 3.3 46.2 16.3 3.3 46.2
172 Software-Defined RFID Reader Design[2] D. Sinha, A. K. Verma, and S. Kumar, “Software Defined Radio: Operation, Challenges
and Possible Solutions,” in Tenth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and
Control (ISCO), 2016, pp. 1–5.
[3] J. Mitola, “The Software Radio Architecture,” IEEE Communications Magazine, 33
(5):26–38, 1995.
[4] T. F. Collins, R. Getz, D. Pu, and A. M. Wyglinski, Software-Defined Radio for
Engineers. Artech House, London, 2018.
[5] A. Oliveira et al., “All-Digital RFID Readers: An RFID Reader Implemented on an
FPGA Chip and/or Embedded Processor,” IEEE Microwave Magazine, 22(3):18–24, 2021.
[6] M. Buettner and D. Wetherall, “A ‘Gen 2’ RFID Monitor Based on the USRP,” ACM
SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, 40(3):41–47, 2010.
[7] N. Kargas, F. Mavromatis, and A. Bletsas, “Fully-Coherent Reader with Commodity SDR
for Gen2 FM0 and Computational RFID,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, 4
(6):617–620, 2015.
[8] W. Yuechun et al., “A Flexible Software Defined Radio-Based UHF RFID Reader Based
on the USRP and LabView,” in 2016 International SoC Design Conference (ISOCC),
2016, pp. 217–218.
[9] A. Povalac, “Spatial Identification Methods and Systems for RFID Tags,” Ph.D. thesis,
Brno University of Technology, 2012.
[10] V. Yang, E. Zhang, and A. He, “Developing a UHF RFID Reader RF Front End with an
Analog Devices’ Solution,” Analog Devices, Inc. technical article, 2019.
[11] Ettus Research. [Online], available at: www.ettus.com/
[12] GNU Radio. [Online], available at: www.gnuradio.org/
[13] National Instruments, “LabVIEW.” [Online], available at: www.ni.com/en-us/shop/
labview.html
[14] M. S. Trotter and G. D. Durgin, “Survey of Range Improvement of Commercial RFID
Tags with Power Optimized Waveforms,” in 2010 IEEE International Conference on
RFID, 2010, pp. 195–202.
[15] A. J. Soares Boaventura and N. Borges Carvalho, “Extending Reading Range of
Commercial RFID Readers,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques,
61(1):633–640, 2013.
[16] Analog Devices, “900 MHz ISM Band Analog RF Front End.” [Online], available at:
www.analog.com/en/products/adf9010.html#product-overview
[17] A. J. Soares Boaventura, A. Collado, A. Georgiadis, and N. Borges Carvalho, “Spatial
Power Combining of Multi-Sine Signals for Wireless Power Transmission Applications,”
IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 62(4):1022–1030, 2014.
[18] Analog Devices, “8-Bit, 125 MSPS Dual TxDAC+ Digital-to-Analog Converter.”
[Online], available at: www.analog.com/en/products/ad9709.html#product-overview
[19] Texas Instruments, “Dual-Channel, 12-Bit, 275-MSPS Digital-to-Analog Converter.”
[Online], available at: www.ti.com/product/DAC5662
[20] Texas Instruments, “DAC5662 Dual-Channel, 12-Bit, 275-MSPS Digital-to-Analog
Converter (DAC) Evaluation Module.” [Online], available at: www.ti.com/tool/
DAC5662EVM
[21] Texas Instruments, “C2000, 32-bit MCU with 800 MIPS, 2CPU, 2CLA, FPU, TMU,
1024 KB flash, EMIF, 16b ADC.” [Online], available at: www.ti.com/product/
TMS320F28377D
[22] Texas Instruments, “F28379D Delfino Experimenter Kit.” [Online], available at: www.ti
.com/tool/TMDSDOCK28379D
References 173[23] RN2 Technologies. [Online], available at: www.rfmw.com/manufacturer/rn2
[24] Skyworks, “SKY65111–348LF, 2 Watt InGaP HBT Power Amplifier ISM
800–1000 MHz Band.” [Online], available at: www.skyworksinc.com/-/media/SkyWorks/
Documents/Products/101-200/200428E.pdf
[25] Analog Devices, “700 MHz to 2700 MHz Quadrature Demodulator.” [Online], available
at: www.analog.com/en/products/adl5382.html
[26] A. Collado and A. Georgiadis, “Improving Wireless Power Transmission Efficiency Using
Chaotic Waveforms,” in International Microwave Symposium, 2012.
[27] C.-C. Lo, et al., “Novel Wireless Impulsive Power Transmission to Enhance the
Conversion Efficiency for Low Input Power,” in IEEE MTT-S International Microwave
Workshop Series on Innovative Wireless Power Transmission, 2011, pp. 55–58.
[28] M. Reynolds et al., “Multi-Band, Low-Cost EPC Tag Reader,” Auto-ID Center White
Paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2002.
[29] J.-H. Bae et al., “Study on the Demodulation Structure of Reader Receiver in a Passive
RFID Environment.” Progress in Electromagnetics Research, 91:243–258, 2009.
[30] C. Jin and S. H. Cho, “A Robust Baseband Demodulator for ISO 18000-6C RFID Reader
Systems,” International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, 8(9):406710, 2012.
[31] C. Huang and H. Min, “A New Method of Synchronization for RFID Digital Receivers,”
in Eighth International Conference on Solid-State and Integrated Circuit Technology
Proceedings, 2006, pp. 1595–1597.
[32] F. Zheng and T. Kaiser, Digital Signal Processing for RFID, 1st ed. Wiley, Chichester,
2016.
[33] A. Soares Boaventura and N. Borges Carvalho, “The Design of a High-Performance
Multisine RFID Reader,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 65
(9):3389–3400, 2017.
[34] W., Liu, K., Huang, X. Zhou, and S. Durrani, “Next Generation Backscatter
Communication: Systems, Techniques, and Applications.” Journal on Wireless
Communications and Networking, 2019:69, 2019.
[35] H. Zhang et al., “Wireless Power Transfer Antenna Alignment Using Intermodulation for
Two-Tone Powered Implantable Medical Devices,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave
Theory and Techniques, 67(5):1708–1716, 2019.
[36] B. Wang and H. Zhang, “Ultra-Wide Dynamic Range Rectifier Topology for Multi-Sine
Wireless Powered Endoscopic Capsules,” in 2018 IEEE MTT-S International Wireless
Symposium, 2018, pp. 1–4.
[37] F. Hutu and G. Villemaud, “On the Use of the FBMC Modulation to Increase the
Performance of a Wake-Up Radio,” in IEEE Radio and Wireless Symposium (RWS), 2018,
pp. 139–142.
[38] N. Decarli et al., “High-Accuracy Localization of Passive Tags with Multisine
Excitations,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 66
(12):5894–5908, 2018.
[39] D. I. Kim, J. H. Moon, and J. J. Park, “New SWIPT Using PAPR: How it Works,” IEEE
Wireless Communications Letters, 5(6):672–675, 2016.
[40] M. Rajabi et al., “Modulation Techniques for Simultaneous Wireless Information and
Power Transfer with an Integrated Rectifier–Receiver,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave
Theory and Techniques, 66(5):2373–2385, 2018.
[41] S. Claessens, N. Pan, D. Schreurs, and S. Pollin, “Multitone FSK Modulation for
SWIPT,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 67(5):1665–1674,
2019.
174 Software-Defined RFID Reader Design8 Self-Jamming in Backscatter
Radio Systems
8.1 Introduction
In passive-backscatter RFID systems, the reader broadcasts a CW signal to wirelessly
power transponders while simultaneously receiving information signals reflected by
the transponders in the same frequency band. To isolate transmit and receive signals,
RFID readers can use either a bistatic or a monostatic antenna scheme. The former
scheme uses separate antennas for transmitting and receiving, whereas the latter shares
an antenna between the transmitter and receiver through a directional coupler
or circulator.
Due to imperfect isolation and clutter reflections, a large portion of the transmitted
CW signal can couple into the receiver. This transmitter-to-receiver leakage or self￾jamming can degrade the receiver sensitivity to the often faint signals backscattered by
the transponders and is one of the main performance-limiting factors of passive￾backscatter systems.
Three main mechanisms can affect reception performance in passive RFID readers.
One limiting factor relates to transmitter-to-receiver leakage. Strong self-jamming can
drive receivers into saturation, and this becomes more problematic if the receiver
employs an RF low-noise amplifier. To be able to effectively detect weak transponder
signals in the presence of strong self-jamming interference, receivers should feature a
large dynamic range [1]. Another performance degradation factor relates to the direct
conversion receiver architecture typically used in these systems, which can generate
unwanted DC offsets at baseband in the presence of self-jamming. In this architecture,
the incoming RF signal is directly converted to baseband by mixing it with a local
oscillator signal at the same frequency [2]. Large self-jamming can produce DC
components that are much bigger than the transponder down-converted signal at
baseband. As these DC offsets are unpredictable and vary randomly over time,
adaptive self-jamming cancellation is typically required. Fortunately, transponder
encoding schemes such as FM0 and Miller-modulated subcarrier present minimal
DC components and allow the use of high-pass filtering to remove DC offsets in direct
conversion receivers.
The third major performance-limiting factor is phase noise of the reader local
oscillator. The transmitted phase noise intercepted by the receiver is down-converted
to baseband and can corrupt the transponder baseband response. Thus, the local
oscillator phase noise is a key parameter of the RFID reader design [3].To enhance transmitter-to-receiver isolation and improve overall system perform￾ance, high-performance passive RFID readers employ sophisticated self-jamming
suppression schemes [4–16]. Self-jamming suppression is also critical in chipless
RFID systems [17, 18], full-duplex wireless communication systems [19–21], and
radar systems [22–25]. The remainder of this chapter presents a comprehensive
discussion of self-jamming in passive-backscatter RFID systems.
8.2 Self-Jamming in Direct Conversion Receivers
In addition to the signal of interest backscattered by the transponder, RFID readers
intercept unwanted signals due to channel noise, self-jamming, clutter reflections, and
in-band interference,
Sreceived ¼ Sbackscatter þ Snoise þXSself-jamming þXSinterferer: (8.1)
As illustrated in Figure 8.1(a), self-jamming or transmitter-to-receiver leakage can be
caused by various mechanisms, including:
◾ crosstalk between the transmitter and receiver antennas in bistatic configurations;
◾ antenna mismatch and imperfect circulator isolation in monostatic configurations;
◾ clutter reflections from the surroundings;
◾ unmodulated reflections from the transponder antenna.
Moreover, the transponder-backscattered signal is typically spectrally close (tens to a few
hundred kiloHertz) to the reader carrier, which makes it susceptible to the reader local
oscillator phase noise. In-band interferers can also frequency-shift the reader local
oscillator phase noise to baseband. Figure 8.1(b) illustrates typical phase-noise leakage
mechanisms in passive-backscatter RFID systems. Self-jamming and phase-noise leak￾age can severely degrade the performance of RFID readers and thus proper isolation
between the transmitter and receiver is critical. In Section 8.3, we review basic transmit￾ter-to-receiver isolation methods. In Section 8.4, we discuss more advanced techniques
for suppressing self-jamming in the RF domain. Due to changes in the RF channel, the
jamming signal is generally unpredictable. Therefore, the suppression mechanism should
be adaptive. Adaptive self-jamming suppression algorithms are studied in Section 8.5,
and strategies for mitigating DC offsets are discussed in Section 8.6.
8.3 Passive Transmitter-to-Receiver Isolation
Passive-backscatter RFID readers typically use a bistatic or monostatic antenna
scheme to isolate the transmitting and receiving paths. In bistatic architectures
(Figure 8.2(a)), self-jamming results mainly from crosstalk between the transmit and
receive antennas. In monostatic architectures (Figure 8.2(b) and (c)), self-jamming is
principally caused by antenna impedance mismatch and imperfect circulator isolation.
In both cases, clutter reflections from the surroundings can aggravate the self-jamming
176 Self-Jamming in Backscatter Radio Systemsproblem. In general, bistatic readers offer better isolation, but the monostatic imple￾mentation is preferable in some applications for its reduced footprint.
A bistatic antenna experiment using two linear antennas arranged as in Figure 8.2
(a) presented an isolation of 37 dB. Figures 8.2(b) and (c) show typical parameters of
two bistatic arrangements with isolations of 30 dB and 20 dB respectively for a
directional coupler and circulator scheme. The jamming signal coupled into the
receiver can overpower weak backscattered signals of interest (as low as 75 dBm
[1] for passive transponders).
8.4 Active RF Self-Jamming Suppression
Basic isolation schemes like those above are not enough for applications requiring the
highest performance. To achieve long coverage ranges and high transponder reading
Figure 8.1 (a) Self-jamming mechanisms in a monostatic antenna configuration. (b) Illustration of
local oscillator phase-noise leakage.
Active RF Self-Jamming Suppression 177rates, the self-jamming signal component should be actively suppressed.
In narrowband applications, self-jamming suppression has been shown to yield
isolations of up to 80 dB [8].
Self-jamming suppression in the RF domain allows us to (i) suppress the noise
associated with the jammer intercepted by the receiver, (ii) prevent saturation of the
RF front end due to strong self-jamming, (iii) alleviate dynamic range requirements on
the baseband circuitry and ADCs.
The basic idea behind self-jamming suppression consists of adding a signal com￾ponent (the canceller signal) to the received signal to cancel the self-jamming com￾ponent contained in that signal. The canceller signal is typically tapped from
somewhere along the transmit chain and manipulated to get an inverted copy of the
self-jamming signal. Here, we describe two common self-jamming suppression
approaches used in passive-backscatter readers. In the first approach, we manipulate
the canceller signal by directly adjusting its amplitude and phase (Figure 8.3), while in
the second approach we do it by reflecting a replica of the transmitted signal in a
controlled way (Figure 8.4).
Figure 8.2 (a) Bistatic antenna scheme. (b) Monostatic antenna scheme using directional coupler
as circulator. (c) Circulator-based monostatic antenna isolation scheme.
178 Self-Jamming in Backscatter Radio Systems8.4.1 Classical Self-Jamming Suppression
A typical self-jamming suppression scheme based on active amplitude and phase
control [4–11, 14] is depicted in Figure 8.3(a). In this scheme, the canceller signal is
sampled from the transmit signal through a directional coupler and combined with the
received signal using a power combiner or directional coupler. A variable phase
Figure 8.3 (a) Monostatic front end incorporating self-jamming suppression module based on
active amplitude and phase control. The control algorithm receives its input from a power
detector via an ADC and outputs control signals for the amplitude and phase of the canceller
signal via DACs. See Figure 8.9 for adaptive algorithms. (b) Implementation of vector
modulation for controlling the amplitude and phase of the canceller signal.
Active RF Self-Jamming Suppression 179shifter and an amplifier/attenuator are used to actively control the canceller signal [9].
To achieve optimal suppression, the canceller signal must be an exact replica of the
self-jamming signal except for a relative phase inversion of 180, in which case the
remaining signal will contain only the transponder signal of interest.
The combiner output is sampled by a directional coupler and RF power detector to
get a received signal strength indication (RSSI). As the transponder baseband signal
typically has minimal DC component, the measured RSSI is dominated by self￾jamming. Based on the measured RSSI, the suppression engine acts on the canceller
signal to achieve optimal suppression of the self-jammer. Alternatively, the RSSI
could be obtained from the complex DC offset at the output of the receiver’s
quadrature down-conversion mixer. This approach does not require a dedicated power
detector and enables faster self-jamming suppression algorithms [26].
To generate a canceller signal for the method presented in Figure 8.3(a), one could
alternatively use a vector modulation technique like the one illustrated in Figure 8.3
(b). In this technique, a vector-modulated signal is created by splitting an incoming
signal into in-phase (I) and quadrature (Q) components, which are scaled independ￾ently by variable amplifiers or attenuators and then combined to form the vector￾modulated signal.
Figure 8.4 Monostatic reader front end with passive self-jamming suppression based on reflective
power cancellation.
180 Self-Jamming in Backscatter Radio SystemsBy independently scaling the I and Q branches, one can achieve arbitrary magni￾tude and phase of the vector-modulated signal. The Indy R2000 RFID reader from
Impinj Inc. [15] features a built-in vector modulator for implementing a self-jamming
suppression mechanism like that illustrated in Figure 8.3(a). Standalone vector modu￾lators and interference cancellers are commercially available as well (e.g.,
QHX220, AD8340).
8.4.2 Reflective Power Cancellation
The reflective power cancellation method (illustrated in Figure 8.4) uses a directional
coupler arranged as a circulator where the isolated port (P3), which is usually matched
to 50 Ω, is terminated with a variable load impedance [12, 13, 16]. This allows a copy
of the transmitted signal to be reflected and combined with the received signal at
port P4.
The optimal canceller signal needed to suppress the self-jamming at Port P4 is
achieved by adjusting the load impedance presented to port P3. Assuming1 that the
self-jamming is solely due to antenna mismatch, the incoming wave at the receiving
port P4 can be written as in (8.2). Considering a symmetrical, reciprocal coupler
(S21 ¼ S12 ¼ S34 ¼ S43 ¼ T, S42 ¼ S31 ¼ C, and S41 ¼ S32 ¼ I), then (8.2) simplifies
to (8.3). If the return loss presented to the isolated port is made symmetrical to that of
the antenna (ΓLoad ¼ ΓAnt) then the leakage signal is cancelled out, and the
remaining incoming wave at port P4 will consist of a scaled version of the transponder
response (8.4):
b4 ¼ aTagS42 þ a1ð Þ S21ΓAntS42 þ S31ΓLoadS43 , (8.2)
b4 ¼ aTagS42 þ a1TCð Þ ΓAnt þ ΓLoad , (8.3)
b4 ¼ aTagS42: (8.4)
Besides isolating the transmitting and receiving signal paths, the directional coupler is
used to sample the transmit signal and combine the canceller and received signals.
Compared to the previous method, reflective power cancellation can offer improved
linearity and noise performance at lower complexity. To evaluate this technique, we
assembled a self-jamming suppression module consisting of a custom directional
coupler attached to a load impedance tuner terminated on a 50 Ω load (see
Figure 8.5). This module was integrated with a custom ISO 18000-63-compliant
UHF RFID reader similar to the one described in Chapter 6. The directional coupler
was designed on FR4 for the 900 MHz band and presented a transmission loss,
coupling, and directivity of 0.5 dB, 12 dB, and 20 dB at 860 MHz, respectively.
The coupler isolation with and without active carrier suppression was characterized
using a vector network analyzer (VNA). For this experiment, an antenna with a return
1 Imperfect coupler directivity and clutter reflections also contribute to self-jamming.
Active RF Self-Jamming Suppression 181loss better than 14 dB in the 900 MHz band was connected to the coupler port 2 and the
coupler ports 1 and 4 were measured with the VNA. The coupler’s isolated port was first
terminated with a 50 Ω load (no active suppression) and then with the impedance tuner.
In the first case, the overall isolation is set by the coupler directivity and coupling factor,
and the antenna mismatch. For the second case, we achieved an isolation of up to 50 dB
at 860 MHz for an optimal tuner impedance of 19.6 + 13.5j (see Figure 8.6).
We then used our custom RFID reader to evaluate the carrier suppression with a
power of about 31 dBm at the reader PA output. The signal coupled into the receiving
port P4 was measured by using both an oscilloscope and a power meter. Experimental
results (see Table 8.1) showed an isolation of about 40 dB. Due to changes in the
surrounding environment, the optimal impedance presented to the coupler isolating
port differs from the experiment previously performed using the VNA. The load
Figure 8.5 Experimental setup used to evaluate the reflective power cancellation method. (a)
Block diagram of the measurement setup. (b) Photograph of the self-jamming suppression setup
consisting of a directional coupler and impedance tuner terminated on a 50 Ω load.
182 Self-Jamming in Backscatter Radio Systemsimpedance tuner was used in this experiment for evaluation purposes only. In real
applications, the termination impedance can be implemented, for example, using PIN
diodes or digitally tunable capacitors [13, 16] and controlled electronically, rather
than manually.
8.5 Adaptive Self-Jamming Suppression
In the previous example we considered a static scenario, but in practice self-jamming
interference varies randomly over time. Therefore, the suppression mechanism should
be able to dynamically track changes and automatically update the cancellation
Figure 8.6 Experimental evaluation of carrier suppression. The isolation at 860 MHz was
improved by about 25 dB compared to no active carrier suppression. The isolation could be
further optimized by doing a fine load impedance adjustment.
Table 8.1 Evaluation of carrier suppression scheme using a custom RFID reader.
Tuner impedance ZLoad at
port 3 (Ω)
PIN at port 1
(dBm)
PCPL at port 4
(dBm)
ISO ¼ S41 ¼ PIN  PCPL
(dB)
50 30.8 11.0 20.8
24+14j 30.8 10.0 40.8
Adaptive Self-Jamming Suppression 183parameters. Here, we discuss the most common adaptive algorithms used in passive
RFID readers including off-the-shelf ASIC readers [15], namely full search and
gradient descent search algorithms.
For adaptive self-jamming suppression, the residual signal after self-jamming
cancellation (the output of the combiner in Figure 8.3(a)) is monitored to determine
the optimal cancellation parameters that minimize this signal. In this approach, two
control parameters are required to independently control the amplitude and phase of
the canceller signal.
In the example of Figure 8.3(a), the control parameters correspond to the gain/
attenuation and phase shift of the canceller signal. These parameters are directly accessed
through the amplifier/attenuator and phase-shifter [9, 14]. In Figure 8.3(b), the control
parameters are accessed via the in-phase and quadrature gains of the vector modulator [7,
10, 19]. In the reflective power cancellation approach (Figure 8.4), the control parameters
are the real and imaginary parts of the impedance presented to the isolated port of the
coupler and can be manipulated via electronically tunable capacitors [13].
For the subsequent discussion, consider the example of Figure 8.3(a). Figure 8.7(a)
and (b) present the theoretical RSSI at the output of the combiner after carrier
Figure 8.7 (a) Theoretical residual RSSI of received signal after suppression. (b) Heatmap of the
plot in (a). The optimal phase-shift and attenuation for this example are π rad and 20 dB,
respectively. (c) Theoretical suppression as a function of amplitude and phase mismatch.
184 Self-Jamming in Backscatter Radio SystemsFigure 8.7 (cont.)
Adaptive Self-Jamming Suppression 185suppression, as a function of the attenuation (α) and phase shift (ϕ) applied to the
canceller signal. As the RSSI landscape presents a convex shape with a global
minimum, the optimal setpoint αoptimal, ϕoptimal   can be found via a minimization
method like the one described in the next section. A similar curve can be drawn for the
vector modulation scheme of Figure 8.4 [19].
The impact of phase and amplitude mismatch in carrier suppression is evaluated in
Figure 8.7(b). As can be seen, to achieve suppression figures below 60 dB, very
precise phase and amplitude control is required. While this is not a problem for
narrowband applications (isolations up 80 dB have been demonstrated [8]), it is a
major challenge for broadband applications, where the suppression must happen for
all frequencies inside the bandwidth [27]. Fortunately, most UHF RFID applications
typically do not require broadband operation. Table 8.2 presents isolation figures
reported in the literature for several applications ranging from passive RFID to radar.
8.5.1 Full Search Algorithm
As its name suggests, the full search algorithm evaluates the transmitter-to-receiver
isolation for all combinations of the control parameters to select the optimal setpoint.
For large search spaces, this approach becomes slow and may fail to track changes in
the medium and converge in a timely manner [28]. An N-point control parameter
system requires a search space of N2 points.
A more efficient approach to the search algorithm consists of performing a coarse
grid search followed by a fine search in a sub-space of the original grid. This leads to
only a small fraction of the N2 points being evaluated. The first step of the search
identifies the best coarse (sub-optimal) point and the second step refines the solution
around that sub-optimal point. This approach dramatically reduces the time required to
converge to the optimal solution compared to the brute force search over the full N 
N grid. Additional levels of refinement can be performed to achieve better resolutions
at the expense of computation time. To avoid overlapping and blind spots, the search
grid should be carefully planned. This algorithm can be very effective and has been
applied in commercial ASICs [15].
Table 8.2 Self-jamming suppression reported in the literature.
Isolation System Comment Ref.
40 dB UHF RFID Broadband, 82 MHz bandwidth [10]
Better than 30 dB FMCW RADAR 26 GHz, wide bandwidth (1.7 GHz) [22]
Up to 50 dB UHF RFID Static reflective power cancellation This work
70 to 80 dB UHF RFID Single frequency, 919 MHz [8]
45 dB Full-duplex Wi-Fi 40 MHz OFDM transmit signal [19]
Up to 73 dB UHF RFID Multi-antenna operation [11]
50 to 65 dB UHF RFID Broadband, 20 MHz bandwidth [9]
27 dB Chipless RFID Relative suppression improvement [17]
OFDM – Orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing
186 Self-Jamming in Backscatter Radio SystemsExamples of constellations for the full search algorithm based on amplitude and
phase control and in-phase and quadrature control are shown in Figure 8.8. An optimal
search based on a coarse search followed by a fine search like that used in [15] is
illustrated in Figure 8.8(b), where the in-phase and quadrature gains of a vector
modulator are used to control the canceller signal. In this example, a 7  7 coarse
grid (dark dots) is first searched for a sub-optimal point, followed by a refined search
in a 5  5 grid (gray dots) around the sub-optimal point. This reduces the search space
from 961 down to only 74 points.
8.5.2 Gradient Descent Algorithm
The gradient descent search algorithm iteratively approximates the minimum of a
function based on its gradient [7, 20]. In Figure 8.9(a), we propose an implementation
of this algorithm that can be used in conjunction with the self-jamming suppression
scheme previously presented in Figure 8.3(a). This algorithm starts by computing the
local gradient of the RSSI function to determine the decreasing direction of the
function. Based on this information, the algorithm determines the values of the control
parameters for the next iteration.
To compute the local gradient, three points are sampled for RSSI. First, the
current point is sampled, (α, ϕ). Then, by separately changing the two control
parameters (α and ϕ) by small amounts (δα and δϕ), two additional points are sampled:
ð Þ α þ δα, ϕ and α, ϕ þ δϕ
 : The gradient of the RSSI curve with respect to the control
parameters, rα, rϕ
 , is given by (8.5), and the values of the control parameters
for the next iteration of the algorithm are given by the gradient descent equation
(8.6). The control parameters are updated in the descendant direction of the RSSI
function:
rRSSIð Þ¼ r α, ϕ α, rϕ
  ¼ ∂RSSIð Þ α, ϕ
∂α ,
∂RSSIð Þ α, ϕ
∂ϕ
 	
 RSSIð Þ α þ δα, ϕ RSSIð Þ α, ϕ
δα
,
RSSI α, ϕ þ δϕ
   RSSIð Þ α, ϕ
δϕ
 	,
(8.5)
α ¼ α  μαrα,
ϕ ¼ ϕ  μϕrϕ,
(
(8.6)
where the step size parameters μα and μϕ are positive real numbers. After updating the
control parameters according to (8.5) and (8.6), the new RSSI value RSSI(α, ϕ) is
sampled. If it is less than the current RSSI value, the process is repeated. If the
algorithm converges, then each new sampled RSSI gets closer and closer to the
minimum of the RSSI function. If the new RSSI is greater than the previous RSSI,
it means that the algorithm is approaching the minimum. In that case, the algorithm
decreases its step sizes (both the derivation step sizes δα and δϕ and the algorithm step
sizes μα and μϕ), reverses the direction, and continues attempting to converge to the
Adaptive Self-Jamming Suppression 187Figure 8.8 Illustration of the full search algorithm. (a) Polar amplitude–phase constellation. (b)
In-phase and quadrature constellation (similar to [15]). The gray circles correspond to the fine
search grid and the black dots correspond to the coarse search grid.
188 Self-Jamming in Backscatter Radio SystemsFigure 8.9 (a) Adaptive gradient descent algorithm. (b) Alternative implementation.
Adaptive Self-Jamming Suppression 189Figure 8.9 (cont.)
190 Self-Jamming in Backscatter Radio Systemsoptimal setpoint. The optimal setpoint is found when the algorithm reaches its
minimum step size.
Using variable step sizes improves the algorithm’s performance. The step size is
initialized with a relatively large value and gradually decreased as we approach
the minimum. Once a global minimum is found, the optimal control parameters
remain constant and the RSSI is continually monitored and compared to the
optimal point. If a change is detected and the difference exceeds a predefined
threshold, the step size is updated based on the difference and the search is
restarted. Factoring in the deviation from the optimal setpoint significantly
improves the algorithm’s performance – small deviations do not require a large
step size that would otherwise increase the convergence time unnecessarily.
To prevent false alarms caused by noisy local minima, minimum values above a
certain threshold are ignored.
An alternative implementation of the algorithm just described is presented in
Figure 8.9(b). Note that these algorithms can also be applied to self-jamming suppres￾sion based on vector modulation or reflective power cancellation. For further reading
on adaptive self-jamming suppression algorithms, refer to [26, 28].
8.6 Baseband Offset Removal
If no RF self-jamming suppression is employed, large DC offsets can appear at the
baseband circuitry, posing stringent dynamic range requirements on the baseband
circuitry, including amplifiers and ADCs. For systems with enough dynamic range,
DC offsets can be handled in the digital domain. In [29], we used a finite impulse
response (FIR) filter implemented in an FPGA to eliminate DC offsets in the digital
domain. But DC offset removal in the analog domain can loosen the dynamic range
requirements of the baseband electronics and is preferable for designs with limited
baseband processing resources.
As mentioned before, transponder encoding schemes like FM0 or Miller￾modulated subcarrier code present minimal DC components, which allows the
use of high-pass filtering to suppress DC offsets in direct conversion receivers.
But simple DC blocking filters may introduce transients that can distort the
transponder baseband response. This can be mitigated by using switched non￾linear high-pass filtering (described next), which allows the removal of DC offsets
while compensating for transients.
8.6.1 Baseband Transients
DC blocking filters are typically used at the output of down-conversion mixers in
direct conversion receivers to suppress DC offsets. The filter capacitor is
Baseband Offset Removal 191designed to account for the time constant and attenuation of the filter and
transponder data rate. For the data rates used in our experiments (40 kbps to
640 kbps), a 100 nF DC blocking capacitor was used. To show the distortion
introduced by the DC blocking filter in the signal of interest, we interrogated an
ISO 18000-63 transponder using a custom RFID reader and examined the
transponder baseband response waveform. The transponder was commanded to
reply with FM0 encoding at 320 kbps and to prepend a pilot tone to its
message. Figure 8.10 shows the signal at the output of the DC blocking filter,
where the distortion introduced by the filter is evident in the inset. Small to
moderate distortion can be mitigated by discarding the pilot data and processing
only the transponder payload data. Larger distortions require more processing as
discussed in the next sections and in [30].
8.6.2 Digital Transient Compensation
A simple approach to compensate for the transient response of the DC blocking filter
in the digital domain is to subtract the moving average of the transient-distorted signal
from the signal,
Figure 8.10 Down-converted reader command followed by transponder response at the output of
the DC blocking filter. The inset shows a close-up of the distorted transponder response.
192 Self-Jamming in Backscatter Radio SystemsSCorrectedð Þ¼ n SBasebandð Þ n 1
ω SBaseband n  ω  1
2

  þ SBasebandð Þ n  1

þSBasebandð Þþ n SBasebandð Þþ n þ 1 SBaseband n þ ω  1
2

 ,
(8.7)
where n is the sample index, the subtracting term is the moving average of the
transient-distorted signal, and w is the window of the average, which determines the
cut-off frequency of the low-pass filtering operation performed by this filter.
Increasing the filter window provides a smoother average curve but increases the
computation time. This filter requires that at least w/2 samples be stored in memory.
We used MATLAB to post-process transponder baseband data collected with our
custom RFID reader and apply transient correction. Figure 8.11(a) shows the tran￾sponder response signal that results from applying the correction in (8.7) to the
distorted signal in Figure 8.10, and Figure 8.11(b) shows typical transponder constel￾lations before and after transient correction. After correction, the constellation is
recentered about the origin.
8.6.3 Non-Linear Filtering
A switched high-pass filter can be used to compensate for the DC blocking filter
transient in the analog domain by pre-charging the capacitor to the correct value
during the reader CW transmission. For that, we use two NMOS transistor switches,
which are driven by the reader’s digital signal processor, to control the isolation and
initial state of the filter. The operation of this filter is illustrated in Figure 8.12.
A series and a shunt switch (S1 and S2) are used to isolate the receiver during the reader
transmission and control the charging of the DC blocking capacitor. During the reader
transmission, S1 is open and S2 is closed to isolate the receiver baseband circuit.
Immediately after the reader transmission, both S1 and S2 are closed so that the coupling
capacitoris grounded and pre-charged withthe DC offset generated bythe readerCWleakage.
During the transponder response, S1 remains closed and S2 is open, allowing the
pre-charged DC offset to be subtracted from the incoming signal at the beginning of
the transponder response. This removes the transient and centers the output signal.
The RF front end [31] used in Chapter 7 employs a similar mechanism.
8.7 Conclusions
This chapter provided a comprehensive discussion on self-jamming in passive￾backscatter systems. We described common self-jamming and interference mechan￾isms, transmitter-to-receiver isolation approaches, RF self-jamming suppression, DC
offset removal, and baseband transient compensation. We also discussed techniques
used in commercial ASIC RFID readers and experimentally demonstrated self￾jamming suppression up to 50 dB.
Conclusions 193Figure 8.11 (a) Transient corrected waveform. (b) Constellations before and after
transient correction
194 Self-Jamming in Backscatter Radio SystemsReferences
[1] J. Wang, et al., “System Design Considerations of Highly-Integrated UHF RFID Reader
Transceiver RF Front-End,” in Ninth International Conference on Solid-State and
Integrated-Circuit Technology, 2008, pp. 1560–1563.
[2] P. Cruz, H. Gomes, and N. Carvalho, "Receiver Front-End Architectures – Analysis and
Evaluation,” in Advanced Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technologies: Semiconductor
Devices Circuits and Systems, ed. M. Mukherjee. Intech, Rijeka, Croatia, 2012,
pp. 495–520.
Figure 8.12 (a) Baseband stage incorporating switched high-pass filter. (b) Illustration of
switched high-pass filter operation.
References 195[3] N. Usachev et al., “System Design Considerations of Universal UHF RFID Reader
Transceiver ICs,” Facta Universitatis, Electronics and Energetics, 28(2):297–307, 2015.
[4] R. Langwieser, et al., “A Modular UHF Reader Frontend for a Flexible RFID Testbed,” in
Proceedings of the International EURASIP Workshop on RFID Technologies, 2008,
pp. 1–12.
[5] J. Posamentier, “Radio Frequency Identification Apparatus, System and Method Adapted
for Self-Jammer Cancellation,” U.S. patent number 7684751 B2, 2010.
[6] S. Chiu, M. Sajid, and I. Kipnis, “Cancelling Self-Jammer Signals in an RFID System,”
U.S. patent 8013715 B2, 2011.
[7] I. Mayordomo and J. Bernhard, “Implementation of an Adaptive Leakage Cancellation
Control for Passive UHF RFID Readers,” in IEEE International Conference on RFID,
2011, pp. 121–127.
[8] D. P. Villame and J. S. Marciano, “Carrier Suppression Locked Loop Mechanism for UHF
RFID Readers,” in IEEE International Conference on RFID 2010, 2010, pp. 141–145.
[9] B. You, B. Yang, X. Wen, and L. Qu, “Implementation of Low-Cost UHF RFID Reader
Front-Ends with Carrier Leakage Suppression Circuit,” International Journal of Antennas
and Propagation, 2013:135203, 2013.
[10] G. Lasser, R. Langwieser, and A. L. Scholtz, “Broadband Suppression Properties of
Active Leaking Carrier Cancellers,” in IEEE International Conference on RFID, 2009,
pp. 208–212.
[11] R. Langwieser et al., “Active Carrier Compensation for a Multi-Antenna RFID Reader
Frontend,” in IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium, 2010, pp. 1532–1535.
[12] T. Brauner and X. Zhao, “A Novel Carrier Suppression Method for RFID,” IEEE
Microwave and Wireless Components Letters, 19(3):128–130, 2009.
[13] M. Koller and R. Küng, “Adaptive Carrier Suppression for UHF RFID Using Digitally
Tunable Capacitors,” in 2013 European Microwave Conference, 2013, pp. 943–946.
[14] J. Lee et al., “A UHF Mobile RFID Reader IC with Self-Leakage Canceller,” in IEEE
Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits Symposium, 2007, pp. 273–276.
[15] Impinj, "Indy R2000 UHF Gen 2 RFID Reader Chip.” [Online], available at: www.impinj
.com
[16] E. A. Keehr, “A Low-Cost Software-Defined UHF RFID Reader with Active
Transmit Leakage Cancellation,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on RFID, 2018,
pp. 1–8.
[17] R. R. Antayhua, C. R. Rambo, and F. R. de Sousa, “Self-Interference Cancellation in
Chipless RFID Readers for Reading Range Enhancement,” in IEEE International
Instrumentation and Measurement Technology Conference, 2018, pp. 1–6.l
[18] M. Forouzandeh and N. Karmakar, “Self-Interference Cancelation in Frequency-Domain
Chipless RFID Readers,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 67
(5):1994–2009, 2019.
[19] M. Jain et. al., “Practical, Real-Time, Full Duplex Wireless,” in Proc. MobiCom ’11, 2011,
301–312,
[20] M. Jain, “Single Channel Full-Duplex Radios.” Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University, 2011.
[21] D. Bharadia, E. McMilin, and S. Katti, “Full Duplex Radios,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer
Communication Review, 43(4):375–386, 2013.
[22] K. Lin, Y. E. Wang, C.-K. Pao, and Y.-C. Shih, “A Ka-Band FMCW Radar Front-End
With Adaptive Leakage Cancellation,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and
Techniques, 54(12):4041–4048, 2006.
196 Self-Jamming in Backscatter Radio Systems[23] C. Will et. al., “A 24 GHz Waveguide Based Radar System Using an Advanced Algorithm
for I/Q Offset Cancelation,” Advances in Radio Science, 15:249–258, 2017.
[24] S. Mann et. al., “High-Precision Interferometric Radar for Sheet Thickness Monitoring,”
IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 66(6):3153–3166, 2018.
[25] M. Pehlivan and K. Yegin, “Self-Jamming and Interference Cancellation Techniques for
Continuous Wave Bi-static Radar Systems,” in 22nd International Microwave and Radar
Conference (MIKON), 2018, pp. 255–257.
[26] G. Lasser, R. Langwieser, and C. F. Mecklenbräuker, “Automatic Leaking Carrier
Canceller Adjustment Techniques,” EURASIP Journal on Embedded Systems, 2013:8,
2013.
[27] Y. Deng, Active Interference Cancellation, Technologies Comparisons. White paper,
Bascom Hunter, 2015.
[28] G. Lasser et. al., “Fast Algorithm for Leaking Carrier Canceller Adjustment,” in Fourth
International EURASIP Workshop on RFID Technology, 2012, pp. 46–51.
[29] A. Soares Boaventura et al., “Perfect Isolation: Dealing with Self-Jamming in Passive
RFID Systems,” IEEE Microwave Magazine, 17(11):20–39, 2016.
[30] J.-H. Bae et al., “Study on the Demodulation Structure of Reader Receiver in a Passive
RFID Environment.” Progress in Electromagnetics Research, 91:243–258, 2009.
[31] Analog Devices, “900 MHz ISM Band Analog RF Front End.” [Online], available at:
www.analog.com/en/products/adf9010.html#product-overview
References 1979 Wake-Up Radios for IoT Applications
9.1 Introduction
Conventional radios typically use power-hungry transceivers, which makes them
not ideal for battery-powered low-maintenance IoT applications. To extend the
battery lifespan in these applications, medium access control (MAC) schemes [1]
and energy scavenging [2] have been investigated. In duty cycle MAC protocols,
commonly used in wireless sensor networks (WSNs), the radio transceiver is period￾ically turned on and off to conserve energy [1]. The more the radio stays off, the more
energy is saved, but the higher the communication latency. Low energy consumption
and low communication latency are therefore conflicting requirements in duty cycle
MAC protocols.
To simultaneously reduce power consumption and latency in low data traffic
applications, the concept of wake-up radio has been proposed where a companion
low-power, low-data-rate wake-up radio receiver is used to asynchronously wake up
the main radio only when necessary (see Figure 9.1). Although the wake-up radio
concept has been fairly well investigated in the past decade [3–13], it has recently
gained renewed interest in the context of the IoT [14, 15] and the Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) has recently begun efforts on the standardization of
wake-up receivers for Wi-Fi devices [15, 16].
In this chapter, we present a discussion of wake-up radios, including a literature
review, and we give a glance at the new IEEE Wi-Fi wake-up radio standard. We then
describe the implementation of a custom wake-up radio receiver with addressing
capabilities operating in the 900 MHz ISM band, and we discuss its integration into
a wireless sensor network system.
9.2 Literature Review
Most commercially available wake-up radio solutions operate in the 125 kHz ISM
band and are typically devoted to short- to medium-range passive keyless entry and
access control applications. Examples of fully integrated solutions in the 125 kHz
band include the AS3931 IC [3] (used in [7]), ATA5282 IC, MCP2030 IC [4], and
EM4083 IC [5]. Some solutions provide baseband capabilities to be integrated with
external RF circuitry [6].Even though some RFID manufacturers have recently incorporated wake-up radio
features in UHF transponders [8], most of the work on wake-up radio in the 900 MHz
and 2.4 GHz bands has been limited to research and academia [9–12]. Proposed wake￾up radio concepts in these bands feature addressing capabilities, communication
distances of several meters, power consumption as low as few microwatts and fast
wake-up times.
9.2.1 The IEEE 802.11ba Standard for IoT Wi-Fi
IEEE 802.11 Wi-Fi is a compelling choice for many IoT application segments for
various reasons: it is a widely adopted standard, 802.11-compliant devices can be
seamlessly integrated with the IEEE 802 ecosystem (including Ethernet), and most
of the required infrastructure is already deployed. However, being originally
designed for high-speed communications in personal computers and portable
devices where energy consumption is typically not a major concern, the conven￾tional Wi-Fi standard overlooks the energy consumption aspect. To remedy this
shortcoming and make Wi-Fi a stronger candidate for low-power low-maintenance
IoT applications, IEEE established the 802.11ba Wake-Up Radio Task Group in
2016 to develop the low-power wake-up radio (LP-WUR) standard for Wi-Fi
networks [15, 16].
9.3 Wake-Up Radio Design Requirements
Power consumption is the most important requirement of a wake-up radio receiver.
To be effective, the wake-up radio must consume several orders of magnitude less
than the main radio. For example, the IEEE 802.11ba standard recommends a
wake-up radio consumption of less than 100 µW in the active state, which contrasts
with the consumption of legacy Wi-Fi devices in the range of tens to hundreds of
milliwatts [17].
Figure 9.1 Wake-up radio concept.
Wake-Up Radio Design Requirements 199In addition, the wake-up range should be comparable to the main radio, and the
wake-up operation should be performed quickly to avoid overhead in the primary
radio connectivity. This is especially important when the wake-up radio is activated
very frequently.
Since the wake-up receiver is always on, it may receive out-of-band and in-band
interference, including from its own network. The latter type of interference poses the
biggest challenge. To avoid false in-band alarms, addressing mechanisms are typically
required to ensure that only the addressed node or group of nodes is woken up.
Finally, the size, cost, and complexity of the companion wake-up radio should be
as low as possible to allow seamless integration into existing systems. For instance,
the IEEE 802.11ba standard specifies a simple wake-up protocol and signaling based
on on–off keying modulation and envelope detection.
9.4 A Wake-Up Radio Protocol
We have developed a custom wake-up radio system operating in the 900 MHz ISM
band for use in a wireless sensor network system. The proposed wake-up radio
architecture is depicted in Figure 9.2. The companion wake-up radio comprises an
antenna, impedance-matching circuit, envelope detector, low-power comparator
(MAX9021 [18]), and microcontroller unit (MCU; ATmega16 [19]). In addition to
boosting the energy transference between the antenna and the envelope detector, the
impedance-matching circuit provides frequency selectivity that helps to suppress out￾of-band interference. Therefore, a high-quality factor bandpass characteristic is desir￾able for the impedance-matching network.
We use an envelope detector circuit based on a two-stage (four-diode) Dickson
charge pump using HSMS2852 diode pairs [20] to demodulate the incoming OOK￾Figure 9.2 Block diagram of the proposed wake-up radio system including the main radio
transceiver (CC2430 from Texas Instruments). The envelope detector demodulator uses a two￾stage charge pump circuit.
200 Wake-Up Radios for IoT Applicationsmodulated RF signal and extract the wake-up baseband envelope. The envelope
detector output is then digitized by the comparator and fed into the MCU through
an interrupt line (for waking up the MCU) and an I/O line (for processing the wake-up
baseband data).
The minimum RF power required to wake up the MCU depends primarily on the
sensitivity of the envelope detector circuit, and in our prototype the threshold level of the
comparator circuit is adjusted via a potentiometer. Improved performance can be achieved
by using a data-slicing demodulation technique like the one described in Chapter 6. After
waking up, the MCU implements the wake-up radio protocol (described next).
9.4.1 Wake-Up Protocol
The proposed wake-up radio protocol is illustrated in Figure 9.3. By default, the wake￾up radio receiver is in standby mode with minimal power consumption, the main radio
Figure 9.3 Simplified flowchart of the proposed wake-up radio protocol.
Wake-Up Radio Protocol 201transceiver is turned off, and the MCU is in a low-energy power-down mode from
which it can be woken via an external interrupt. Upon detecting in-band RF power, the
wake-up receiver generates a positive transition that wakes up the MCU. The MCU
then processes the subsequent incoming signal received through the I/O line to detect
the wake-up message. The wake-up message (Figure 9.4) comprises a one-byte
preamble, a four-byte wake-up command, and a two-byte CRC word. The preamble
(a 0xFF code) is intended to create an RF carrier signal to wake up the MCU. The
wake-up command field can carry either a wake-up address or a custom command.
To encode/decode the wake-up baseband signal, we use the bult-in universal
asynchronous receiver/transmitter (UART) peripheral of the MCU. On the transmitter
side, we configure the UART transmitter with the desired wake-up data rate (e.g.,
9.6 kbps) and transmit the seven-byte wake-up message via UART with each byte
encapsulated in a standard RS232 frame (Figure 9.4). To generate the RF wake-up
signal, we use the UART Tx output to modulate an RF carrier at 860 MHz.
On the receiver side, we use a similar UART, set at the same data rate as the
transmitting UART, to decode the incoming wake-up baseband signal connected to
the UART Rx input. After decoding the incoming baseband data, the MCU processes
the CRC and wake-up command fields of the received wake-up radio message. If a valid
CRC and wake-up address are detected, the main radio transceiver is turned on for high￾speed data communication. Otherwise, the MCU returns to the low-power sleep mode.
9.5 Classical MAC versus Wake-up Protocol
In [21], the authors applied a duty cycle MAC protocol to minimize power consump￾tion and extend the battery lifespan of WSN nodes for wireless localization. Here, we
consider the integration of our wake-up radio scheme into the radio transceiver
CC2430 [22] used in [21, 23]. To show the effectiveness of this approach, we
estimated the battery lifetime of that system for the conventional MAC protocol and
our wake-up radio scheme, and compare the results.
9.5.1 MAC Battery Lifespan
Equation (9.1) models the average current consumption of the duty cycle MAC
protocol used in [22]:
Figure 9.4 Wake-up radio message. Each message byte is encapsulated in a standard
RS232 frame.
202 Wake-Up Radios for IoT ApplicationsIav ¼ X
N
i¼1
IiDi þ Isleep 1 X
N
i¼1
Di
 !, (9.1)
with Di ¼ Δti=Tcycle, where Tcycle is the total duration of each consumption cycle, N is
the number of consumption sub-phases per cycle, Isleep is the total current consump￾tion of the system in sleep mode, and Ii and Δti are the current consumption and
duration of each consumption sub-phase, respectively. The battery lifetime is given by
Tbat ¼ σIRCbat=Iav, where Cbat is the battery capacity given in ampere-hours, Iav is the
average current given in amperes (9.1), and σIR accounts for battery capacity degrad￾ation [24]. We consider a simple scenario where the radio transceiver wakes up every
Tcycle, performs a reception of duration TRX and consumption IRX followed by a
transmission of duration TTX and consumption ITX, and then returns to sleep mode for
a time Tsleep with consumption Isleep.
For TRX ¼ TRX ¼ TON and IRX ¼ IRX ¼ ION the average current consumption is
Iav ¼ IONDON þ Isleepð Þ 1  DON . The duty cycle DON ¼ TON=Tcycle represents the
fraction of time the main radio is on within a cycle period Tcycle, with 1 corresponding
to always on and 0 corresponding to always off. See Table 9.1 at the end of this
chapter for typical values used in the duty cycle MAC protocol of [22].
9.5.2 Wake-Up Protocol Battery Lifespan
Equation (9.2) gives an estimate of the power consumption and battery lifetime of the
wake-up radio scheme proposed in this work as a function of the number of effective
wake-ups N (wake-up address successfully decoded) and false alarms M (MCU
unintendedly woken up, wake-up address not successfully decoded). Figure 9.5
illustrates a 24-hour consumption cycle with three effective wake-ups of the main
radio transceiver and two unintended wake-ups of the wake-up MCU. In the latter
case, the main radio remains asleep. This situation is accounted for by the parameter M
in (9.2),
Tbat ¼ σIRCbat
Idec
Δtdec
Tcycle
ð Þþ N þ M IlinkRx
ΔtlinkRx
Tcycle
N þ IlinkTx
ΔtlinkTx
Tcycle
N
þ Isleep 1  Δtdec
Tcycle
ð Þ N þ M
ΔtlinkRx
Tcycle
N  ΔtlinkTx
Tcycle
N
 
0
BBB@
1
CCCA
1
, (9.2)
Table 9.1 Consumption parameters of the duty cycle MAC protocol used in [22].
Description Consumption (mA) Time interval (ms)
MCU active 12.5 4.16
Radio in Rx mode 31 1.6
Radio in Tx mode 29 1.12
Sleep mode 0.0005 5000
Classical MAC vs Wake-Up Protocol 203where Cbat is the battery capacity, Isleep is the sleep mode current consumption (phase 4
in Figure 9.3), Idec and Δtdec are respectively the current consumption and duration of
the MCU address decoding (phase 1 in Figure 9.3), IlinkRX and ΔtlinkRX are the current
consumption and duration of the main radio reception, respectively (phase 2 in
Figure 9.3), and IlinkTX and ΔtlinkTX are the current consumption and duration of the
main radio transmission, respectively (phase 3 in Figure 9.3). The parameters N and M
account for the total number of effective wake-ups and false alarms per day, respect￾ively. See Table 9.2 at the end of this chapter for typical values used in this analysis.
9.5.3 MAC versus Wake-Up Radio
Figure 9.6(a) compares the power consumption and latency of the MAC and wake-up
radio protocols as a function of the duty cycle, as given by (9.1) and (9.2). In this
example, it is assumed that a single access to the wireless sensor is expected per day
and only the sleep, transmission, reception, and wake-up decoding times are con￾sidered in the calculation of the latency (this analysis does not consider additional
processing or networking times).
From Figure 9.6(a) we see that (i) the extra power consumption introduced by the
wake-up radio MCU and front end leads to higher consumption at very low duty
cycles for the wake-up radio protocol, with the turning point at 0.06 % duty cycle, but
at very low duty cycles information latency in the MAC protocol can be excessively
large; (ii) for large duty cycles, the MAC protocol presents considerably larger
consumptions. Moreover, it produces unnecessarily large amounts of traffic for the
sporadic sensor access scenario considered here.
Figure 9.6(a) presents the optimal operation region for the wake-up protocol for this
example, corresponding to simultaneous low power consumption and latency. The
optimal region can be extended by reducing the wake-up power consumption and time
(reduced latency). Note that lower power consumption parts like the ATtiny85 MCU
and MAX9119 comparator could be used to further improve the wake-up radio gain.
Figure 9.6(b) presents the battery lifetime as a function of the total number of wake￾ups and false alarms (i.e., only MCU awake) per day. For a small number of accesses
Figure 9.5 Example of 24-hour cycle with five wake-up requests and two false alarms.
204 Wake-Up Radios for IoT Applicationsper day, the wake-up radio allows for a maximum lifetime of up 14 years
1 under the
conditions specified in Table 9.2. (The lifetime under real conditions may be shorter
due to non-ideal conditions not accounted for here.) The number of false alarms, M,
seems to have little impact in our example.
Figure 9.6(c) compares the battery lifetime of the wake-up radio protocol and the
duty cycle MAC protocol for 5-second, 20-second, and 60-second sleep times and
considering five main radio messages per cycle. The crossover points between the two
Table 9.2 Parameters of the proposed wake-up radio protocol.
Parameter Value Description
Cbat 620 mAh Battery capacity
σIR 0.65 Accounts for the battery capacity degradation due to, for
example, internal battery resistance and self-discharge
Iref 0.55 μA Consumption of the comparator voltage reference
Icompquiesc 2 μA Comparator quiescent power consumption
Icompactive 4 μA Comparator active power consumption
IWURquiesc 2.55 μA Wake-up front end quiescent consumption, Iref þ Icompquiesc
IWURactive 4.45 μA Wake-up front end active consumption, Iref þ Icompactive
ITxRxSleep 0.5 μA Sleep mode consumption of the main transceiver
IuCSleep 0.3 μA ATmega16 power-down consumption with watchdog
timer disabled [20]
Isleep 3.85 μA Sleep mode power consumption
IuCActive 3 mA ATmega16 active mode consumption VDD ¼ 3 V and
4 MHz clock [20]
IRxActive 31 mA Main transceiver Rx consumption
ITxActive 29 mA Main transceiver Tx consumption
Tcycle 24 hours Cycle period
WURBitRate 9.6 kbps Data rate of wake-up pattern
WURPatternLength 6 bytes Wake-up pattern length
Tdec 5.3 ms Total duration of the wake-up pattern processing
including RS232 data reception, CRC check, and address
decoding
TlinkRx 1.6 ms Duration of the main link packet reception
TlinkTx 1.12 ms Duration of the main link packet transmission
The consumptions of the various phases defined in Figure 9.3 are as follows:
Phase 1: Idec ¼ ITxRxSleep þ IWURactive þ IuCActive
Phase 2: IlinkRX ¼ IRxActive þ IWURquiesc þ IuCActive
Phase 3: IlinkTX ¼ ITxActive þ IWURquiesc þ IuCActive
Phase 4: Isleep ¼ ITxRxSleep þ IWURquiesc þ IuCSleep
where ITxRxSleep, IRxActive, and ITxActive are the current consumptions of the main transceiver in
sleep, receiving, and transmitting modes, respectively, IWURactive and IWURquiesc are the active and
quiescent consumptions of the wake-up radio front end, respectively, and IuCSleep and IuCActive
are the consumptions of the MCU in sleep and active modes, respectively.
1 The system may present a shorter battery lifetime due to other non-idealities not captured by the model.
Classical MAC vs Wake-Up Protocol 205protocols occur at a very large number of wake-ups or very large MAC sleep time
(corresponding to low duty cycle and high latency, respectively). This clearly shows
the benefits of the wake-up radio protocol for low-traffic applications.
9.6 Conclusions
To validate the described wake-up radio concept, we designed and prototyped a wake￾up radio receiver operating at 860 MHz and integrated it into a wireless sensor node as
in Figure 9.2. Our wake-up radio was powered by a 650 mAh lithium battery,
exhibited a power consumption of about 10 μW, sensitivity of 35 dBm, and
communication range of about 4 m for a transmitted EIRP of 20 dBm. The prototype
featured adjustable wake-up sensitivity via a variable voltage reference, an MCU
JTAG programming interface, and an 860 MHz dipole antenna (see Figure 9.2).
The proposed addressing scheme proved effective in suppressing in-band interference
that can trigger false alarms on the main radio, and it can be combined with a preamble
Figure 9.6 (a) Power consumption and latency as a function of duty cycle for the wake-up radio
and MAC protocols. The shaded area corresponds to the optimum operation regime for this
WUR scheme. (b) Estimated battery lifespan as a function of the number of actual wakeups (N)
and false alarms (M). (c) Proposed wake-up protocol versus duty cycle MAC protocol used in
[22] for a CR2450 battery (620 mAh capacity). For this example, we assume no false alarms
(M = 0). The peak battery lifetime estimates obtained here represent best-case scenarios; certain
performance degradation mechanisms not accounted for here may reduce these figures.
206 Wake-Up Radios for IoT ApplicationsFigure 9.6 (cont.)
Conclusions 207validation scheme like the one discussed in [25] to further suppress unintended MCU
wake-ups. The total power consumption (and battery lifetime) in a low data traffic
application is typically dominated by the consumption of the wake-up receiver. In the
proposed implementation, this consumption could be further improved by replacing
the comparator and MCU with lower-power parts (some examples include AS1976,
MAX9119, LPV7215, TLV3691, ATtiny85, MSP430).
9.7 Exercise
Here, we invite you to explore an enhanced interference suppression scheme based on
subcarrier modulation (Figure 9.7) that can achieve improved performance compared to
conventional implementations. In this approach, the baseband wake-up signal is first
used to modulate an intermediate frequency (IF) sub-carrier at frequency ωsubcarrier (first
mixing stage in Figure 9.7(a)) and the resulting signal is then used to modulate the main
RF carrier at frequency ωRF (second mixing stage). The incoming signal at the receiver
(Figure 9.7(b)) is down-converted by a first stage RF envelope detector and then
digitized through a comparator, yielding an IF signal centered at ωsubcarrier. This signal
goes through a resonant filter tuned to ωsubcarrier whose output then goes into a second
envelope detector that further down-converts the received IF wake-up signal to base￾band. In its simplest implementation, this scheme can be used to awaken the MCU of
Figure 9.7 Improved wake-up scheme with sub-carrier modulation. (a) Transmitter. (b) Receiver.
208 Wake-Up Radios for IoT Applicationsthe wake-up radio by modulating the transmitted sub-carrier with a constant amplitude
that creates a positive transition at the output of the second envelope detector. Using a
narrowband bandpass filter tuned to the RF carrier frequency at the first stage detector
and tuning the resonant filter to the sub-carrier frequency can dramatically improve
immunity to interference. In more advanced implementations, this method can be
combined with the addressing scheme described previously and can also enable the
implementation of multiple wake-up channels by using N sub-carriers (centered at
ωsubcarrier1, ωsubcarrier2, ..., ωsubcarrierN) and N resonators tuned to these frequencies.
The goal of this exercise is to implement and validate this wake-up radio scheme.
A key element of the proposed system is the resonant filter between the comparator
and the second stage detector (see Figure 9.7). Start by simulating the circuit using a
square-wave voltage source to mimic the output of the first stage detector (IF wake-up
signal), a high-gain operational amplifier as the comparator, and a high quality factor
LC resonant circuit. For the second stage detector, use a voltage doubler circuit. Start
by plotting the output of the voltage doubler circuit over frequency (Venv_detect_2 in
Figure 9.8). To evaluate the frequency selectivity of the circuit, keep the IF resonance
frequency fixed and vary the frequency of the sub-carrier applied to the comparator.
Figure 9.8 Schematic of basic wake-up receiver circuit.
Exercise 209For example, using a 0.253 nF capacitor and 100 μH inductor, a prominent resonance
should be seen around 1 MHz. To evaluate the sensitivity of the circuit, plot the time￾domain signal of the voltage doubler for a 1 MHz sub-carrier. Lab experiments
include evaluating the immunity to interference of this technique and comparing it
to the conventional wake-up radio approach.
References
[1] A. Förster, Emerging Communications for Wireless Sensor Networks. InTech, Rijeka,
Croatia, 2010.
[2] H. Rashidzadeh et al., “Energy Harvesting for IoT Sensors Utilizing MEMS Technology,”
in IEEE Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2016, pp. 1–4.
[3] Austria Microsystems, “AS3931 IC.” [Online], available at: https://ams.com
[4] Microchip, “ATA5282 IC, MCP2030 IC.” [Online], available at: www.microchip.com
[5] EM Microelectronic, “EM4083 IC.” [Online], available at: www.emmicroelectronic.com
[6] M. Tomasz, “A Unique, Ultra-low Power Analog IC Enables RF Wakeup Applications,”
Touchstone Semiconductor, Inc.
[7] D. Benoît et al., “Asynchronous Wake-Up Scheme for Wireless Light Curtains,” in
Wireless Congress: Systems and Applications, 2008.
[8] Impinj. [Online], available at: www.impinj.com
[9] J. Ansari, D. Pankin, and P. Mahonen, “Radio-Triggered Wake-Ups with Addressing
Capabilities for Extremely Low Power Sensor Network Applications,” in IEEE 19th
International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, 2008.
[10] B. Van der Doorn, W. Kavelaars, and K. Langendoen, “A Prototype Low-Cost Wakeup
Radio for the 868 MHz Band,” International Journal of Sensor Networks, 5(1):22–32,
2009.
[11] P. Le-Huy and S. Roy, “Low-Power 2.4 GHz Wake-Up Radio for Wireless Sensor
Networks,” in IEEE International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing,
Networking and Communications, 2008, pp. 13–18.
[12] J. M. Lebreton et al., “An Energy-Efficient Duty-Cycled Wake-Up Radio Protocol for
Avoiding Overhearing in Wireless Sensor Networks,” Wireless Sensor Network, 8
(8):176–190, 2016.
[13] I. Haratcherev, M. Fiorito, and C. Balageas, “Low-Power Sleep Mode and Out-Of-Band
Wake-Up for Indoor Access Points,” in IEEE Globecom Workshops, 2009, pp. 1–6.
[14] H. Hong, Y. Kim, and R. Kim, “A Low-Power WLAN Communication Scheme for IoT
WLAN Devices Using Wake-Up Receivers,” Appl. Sci. 8(1):72, 2018.
[15] M. Park et al., “Proposal for Wake-Up Receiver (WUR) Study Group.” IEEE 802.11-16/
0722r1, 2016.
[16] D. K. McCormick, “Preview,” in IEEE Technology Report on Wake-Up Radio, 2017,
pp. 1–11.
[17] U. A. Perez, “Low Power WiFi: A Study on Power Consumption for Internet of Things,”
Thesis, Facultat d’Informàtica de Barcelona (FIB) Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
(UPC), 2015.
[18] Maxim Integrated, "MAX9021 Comparator.” [Online], available at: www
.maximintegrated.com
[19] Microchip, “ATmega16 MCU.” [Online], available at: www.microchip.com
210 Wake-Up Radios for IoT Applications[20] Broadcom. [Online], available at: www.broadcom.com
[21] L. Bras, M. Oliveira, N. Borges Carvalho, and P. Pinho, “Low Power Location Protocol
based on ZigBee Wireless Sensor Networks,” in International Conference on Indoor
Positioning and Indoor Navigation, 2010, pp. 1–7.
[22] Texas Instruments, “CC2430 System-on-Chip Solution for 2.4 GHz IEEE 802.15.4 /
ZigBee.” [Online], available at: www.ti.com
[23] K. Aamodt “CC2431 Location Engine,” Texas Instruments Application Note AN042,
2006.
[24] Energizer, “Lithium Coin Handbook and Application Manual.” [Online], available at:
www.energizer.com
[25] M. Magno, V. Jelicic, B. Srbinovski, V. Bilas, E. Popovici, and L. Benini, “Design,
Implementation, and Performance Evaluation of a Flexible Low-Latency Nanowatt Wake￾Up Radio Receiver,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 12(2):633–644, 2016.
References 21110 Unconventional Wireless Power
Transmission
10.1 Introduction
Wireless power transfer has traditionally been implemented using CW signals,
and energy-harvesting circuits have typically been optimized at the circuit level. But
recent work [1–6] has investigated an alternative approach for improving the effi￾ciency of wireless power transfer systems through the optimization of wireless power
waveforms. This work has shown that signals with high PAPR such as multisine
signals can potentially drive energy-harvesting circuits more efficiently than
CW signals.
Researchers have explored various alternative waveforms for wireless power
transmission, including chaotic signals, ultra-wideband signals, multisine
signals, harmonic signals, modulated signals, and white noise [1–16]. The use
of multisines gained the most traction and has become the most prominent
approach being applied to RFID interrogators [2, 6], medical devices [17, 18],
wake-up radios [19], localization systems [20], and novel encoding and modulation
schemes [21–23].
In this chapter, we report on various experiments exploiting high-PAPR multisine
waveforms to improve wireless power transfer efficiency. The first set of experiments
evaluates high-PAPR multisine signal transmission in conducted media, where the
energy-harvesting circuit is directly wired to the signal source. The second set of
experiments evaluates (over-the-air) wireless power transfer using high-PAPR multi￾sine signals and explores spatial power-combining techniques to efficiently generate
and radiate these signals.
10.2 Multicarrier Waveform Design
A multisine signal consists of a sum of N harmonically related subcarriers
(10.1), which may interfere constructively or destructively depending on their relative
phases:
SmsðÞ¼ t Re X
N
n¼1
Vnej ð Þ ωminþð Þ n1 Δω tþφn ½  ( ), (10.1)Where Vn, ωn ¼ ωmin þ ð Þ n  1 Δω, and φn are the amplitude, frequency, and phase
of the nth subcarrier, respectively, N is the number of subcarriers, and Δω is the
subcarrier frequency spacing. Table 10.1 presents the main parameters of a multisine
signal. Maximum PAPR is achieved when subcarriers with a constant phase progres￾sion interfere constructively (this will be covered in more detail later).
Figure 10.1(a) shows the time-domain waveforms of a CW signal and a four-tone
multisine signal with a random phase distribution and the same average power as the
CW. Figure 10.1(b) corresponds to phase-aligned subcarriers, which yields maximum
PAPR. The corresponding frequency spectra are illustrated in Figure 10.1(c).
10.2.1 Waveform Optimization
In multicarrier wireless power transfer, we are particularly interested in optimizing the
signal’s bandwidth, subcarrier spacing, and PAPR. In wired experiments, the PAPR
produced by the source can be effectively delivered to the energy-harvesting circuit
wired to the source. However, in real applications the transmitted PAPR may be
altered due to multipath fading and frequency selectivity in the radio channel.
To assure conservation of the transmitted PAPR, the bandwidth of the multisine signal
should be limited to the channel coherence bandwidth [12].
On the other hand, the subcarrier spacing determines the multisine time-domain
peak repetition rate, and excessively low peak repetition rates can degrade the power
transfer efficiency. Therefore, optimal subcarrier spacing and bandwidth that provide
sufficiently fast peak repetition rate without exceeding the channel coherence band￾width should be sought [12].
10.2.2 Optimal Phase Distribution
To determine the optimal phase distribution that yields the maximum DC output in an
energy-harvesting circuit, consider a rectifying diode whose non-linear conductance
can be approximated by a simple polynomial expansion,
id ¼ k0 þ k1vd þ k2v2
d þ k3v3
d þþ knvn
d, (10.2)
where vd is the voltage across the diode and k0, k1, ... , kn are the coefficients of the
expansion. Consider a four-tone multisine signal with subcarrier amplitudes
Table 10.1 Multisine parameters.
Parameter Definition Description
Bω (Hz) ð Þ N  1 Δω Total signal bandwidth
Vpeak (V) NVn Peak amplitude
Ppeak (Watt) N2Vn
2=RL Peak power
PAV (Watt) NVn
2=2RL Average power
PAPRMAX (dB) 10 log 10ð Þ 2N Peak to average power ratio
Multicarrier Waveform Design 213V1 ¼ V2 ¼ V3 ¼ V4 ¼ Vms, phases φ1, φ2, φ3, and φ4, and evenly spaced frequencies
ω1,ω2 ¼ ω1 þ Δω,ω3 ¼ ω1 þ 2Δω, and ω4 ¼ ω1 þ 3Δω:
vdð Þ¼t Vms cos ω1tþφ1 ð ÞþVms cos ω2tþφ2 ð ÞþVms cos ω3tþφ3 ð ÞþVms cos ω4tþφ4 ð Þ:
(10.3)
Exciting the system in (10.2) truncated to order four with the input signal (10.3) yields
the following output DC component:
Figure 10.1 (a) Time-domain waveform of a four-tone multisine with random phase arrangement.
(b) Four-tone multisine with 0º phase arrangement (black signal) overlaid with CW signal with
same average power (gray signal). (c) Illustration of the frequency spectra of the CW
and multisine.
214 Unconventional Wireless Power TransmissionIDC φ1, φ2, φ3, φ4 ð Þ¼ Δω
2πN
ð πN=Δω
πN=Δω
idð Þt dt
 k0 þ
4V2
msk2 þ 21V4
msk4 þ 3V4
msk4 cos 2φ3  φ2  φ4 ð Þ
þ3V4
msk4 cos 2φ2 þ φ1 þ φ3 ð Þ þ 6V4
msk4 cos φ1  φ2  φ3 þ φ4 ð Þ " #
2,
(10.4)
where the integral operator represents an ideal low-pass filter used to eliminate high￾frequency components produced by the rectifier non-linearity. The phase-dependent
term in (10.4) can be maximized by using a constant phase progression of the form
φiþ1  φi ¼ Δφ, with Δφ being a constant phase shift between consecutive subcar￾riers. By phase-normalizing the second, third, and fourth subcarriers to the first, the
optimal phase progression becomes φ2 ¼ φ1 þ Δφ, φ3 ¼ φ1 þ 2Δφ, and
φ4 ¼ φ1 þ 3Δφ, which effectively nulls the arguments of the cosines in (10.4) and
maximizes the DC component,
2ð Þ φ1 þ 2Δφ ð Þ φ1 þ Δφ ð Þ¼ φ1 þ 3Δφ 0,
2ð Þþ φ1 þ Δφ φ1  ð Þ¼ φ1 þ 2Δφ 0,
φ1  ð Þ φ1 þ Δφ ð Þþ φ1 þ 2Δφ ð Þ¼ φ1 þ 3Δφ 0:
8
><
>:
(10.5)
Note that this is the same condition that yields maximum PAPR in the multisine
waveform (10.1) and leads to phase mode-locking in active antenna arrays (more on
this in Section 10.5.3). The most trivial optimal phase progression corresponds to
having all subcarriers with 0 relative phase. Besides the phases, the amplitudes of the
subcarriers can also be optimized [3].
10.2.3 Multisine Gain
To evaluate the multisine efficiency gain in the experiments presented in this chapter,
we introduce the following figure of merit:
Gηð Þ¼ dB 10 log 10
ηms
ηcw   ¼ 10 log 10
Pdcms=Prfms
Pdccw =Prfcw  , (10.6)
where Prfcw and Prfms are the CW and multisine average input power levels, respect￾ively, Pdccw and Pdcms are the DC power levels collected under CW and multisine
excitations, respectively, and ηcw and ηms are the efficiencies obtained under CW and
multisine excitations, respectively.
Specifically, if the input power and output DC load are the same for the CW and
multisine excitation (RLcw ¼ RLms and Prfcw ¼ Prfms ), then Gη can be given in terms of
the collected DC voltages, Vdccw and Vdcms ,
Gηð Þ¼ dB 10 log 10
Pdcms
Pdccw   ¼ 10 log 10
V2
dcms
V2
dccw !: (10.7)
Multicarrier Waveform Design 215A more general definition of RF-to-DC efficiency is given by
η ¼ Pout
Pin
¼
ð
T=2
T=2
voutð Þt ioutð Þt dt
ð
T=2
T=2
vinð Þt iinð Þt dt
, (10.8)
where vinð Þt and iinð Þt are the input time-domain voltage and current, respectively,
voutð Þt and ioutð Þt are the time-domain voltage and current at the output DC load,
respectively, and T is the period of the CW carrier or multisine envelope.
10.3 Wired Experiments
In this section, we evaluate the multisine efficiency gain of two energy-harvesting
circuits directly wired to an RF signal generator. We tested a single HSMS2850 diode
rectifier, which was optimized to operate at 2.3 GHz [4, 24], and a five-stage charge
pump based on HSMS2852 diode pairs, which was optimized to work at 866.6 MHz
[25, 26]. The charge pump is part of the RF front end of a passive wireless sensor
developed in [25]. This front end, whose schematic is depicted in Figure 10.2, also
comprises backscatter modulation circuitry (bottom left of Figure 10.2), storage
capacitor, over-voltage protection, and power management circuitry. For further
details on the design and implementation of this passive wireless sensor node, refer
to [25].
The two energy-harvesting circuits under test were excited with a CW signal and
various multisine signals with power levels ranging from 30 dBm to 0 dBm. For
maximum PAPR, the relative phase of each multisine subcarrier was set to 0. For this
experiment, the DC output of the charge pump in Figure 10.2 was isolated from the
rest of the passive wireless sensor circuit and was loaded with a 510 kΩ resistor.
Figures 10.3 and 10.4 present the measured results showing multisine efficiency
gains of up to 6 dB and 2.7 dB for the 2.4 GHz rectifier and 866.6 MHz charge pump
circuits, respectively. The efficiency gain increased with increasing number of tones
(and PAPR), except for the 64-tone multisine signal. The efficiency drop in the 64-
tone case is believed to be due to saturation of the signal generator at high PAPR and
power loss resulting from the limited bandwidth of the rectifier circuit.
10.4 Passive Wireless Sensor Experiments
In this experiment, the charge pump circuit was connected to the input DC supply of
the passive wireless sensor and was first driven with a CW signal at 866.6 MHz and
then with a four-tone multisine signal with subcarriers at 865.7 MHz, 866.3 MHz,
216 Unconventional Wireless Power Transmission866.9 MHz, and 867.6 MHz. We varied the average power level from 15 dBm to
1 dBm and then back to 15 dBm.
As seen from Figure 10.5, the four-tone multisine provides a higher DC voltage and
lower turn-off threshold compared to the CW signal (the sensor’s turn-on and turn-off
power thresholds are represented by the vertical solid lines in Figure 10.5). These
results also suggest that this passive wireless sensor has hysteretic behavior.
10.4.1 Communication Range Gain
To evaluate the potential communication range gains that can be achieved with
multisine signals, the passive wireless sensor of [25] was first illuminated with a
CW signal and then with a four-tone multisine signal with the same average power.
Both signals were created with a signal generator, amplified using an external power
amplifier, then radiated through a circularly polarized antenna.
The radiated signal was harvested by the passive wireless sensor several meters
away from the transmit antenna using a half-wavelength dipole antenna. A light￾emitting diode (LED) in the passive wireless sensor node was used to detect the
maximum operating range under CW and multisine excitations – the sensor’s
Figure 10.2 Passive wireless sensor front end tested under multisine excitations. The dash-dotted
line encloses the energy-harvesting circuit used in these experiments. Figure reprinted
from [25].
Passive Wireless Sensor Experiments 217Figure 10.3 DC voltage and efficiency gain under CW and multisine excitations for 2.4 GHz
single-diode energy-harvesting circuit.
Figure 10.4 DC voltage and efficiency gain under CW and multisine excitations for 866.6 MHz
five-stage energy-harvesting circuit.
218 Unconventional Wireless Power Transmissionmicrocontroller was programmed to flash the LED when the harvested power was
enough to activate the sensor. By moving the passive wireless sensor away from and
towards the wireless power transmission antenna, the maximum distance was found to
be 4.1 m for the CW signal and 5.3 m for the multisine signal, suggesting an
improvement of about 30%.
Figure 10.5 Voltages collected at the storage capacitor of the passive wireless sensor as a function
of increasing and decreasing input power levels (filled and empty circles, respectively).
(a) Wireless sensor illuminated with a CW signal. (b) Wireless sensor illuminated with a four￾tone multisine signal. Results from [26].
Passive Wireless Sensor Experiments 21910.5 Multicarrier Spatial Power Combining
High-PAPR waveforms can improve the efficiency of energy-harvesting circuits at the
receiver end of a wireless power transfer system, but high-PAPR waveform amplifi￾cation at the transmitter is challenging and can lead to efficiency and linearity
problems. In particular, transmitter saturation can clip the transmit waveform, redu￾cing its PAPR, which would defeat the purpose of the multicarrier approach. The
transmit power amplifier should feature a high compression point.
In [27], we proposed an approach based on spatial power combining [28, 29] for
efficient generation and radiation of high-PAPR multisine waveforms, where the
subcarriers are individually amplified and radiated, and passively combine in free
space to form a high-PAPR EM field. This approach requires a dedicated generator,
amplifier, and antenna for each subcarrier, but each amplification stage operates in the
CW mode with significantly relaxed requirements.
We explored two schemes to generate spatially combined high-PAPR multisine
fields. In the first scheme, we used multiple signal generators locked to an external
10 MHz phase reference to generate the individual subcarriers (Figure 10.6(a)). In the
second scheme, we used an active antenna array operating in a mode-locked regime
that requires no external phase reference to create phase-locked multisine subcarriers
(Figure 10.6(b)).
Figure 10.6 (a) Externally synchronized transmitter. (b) Mode-locked transmitter.
220 Unconventional Wireless Power Transmission10.5.1 Over-the-Air Subcarrier Combining
Spatial power combining has been applied at millimeter-wave frequencies to achieve
high output power by combining the outputs of several low-power amplifiers over the
air [28, 29]. Assuming far-field observation [30], small separation between adjacent
transmit antenna elements, and flat channel frequency response, the combined elec￾trical field of multiple antenna elements at a distance r and angle θ can be approxi￾mated by
Eðθ,rÞ ¼ X
N
n¼1
EnGnðθÞej½ωntþγrþϕn
, (10.9)
where En,ωn, ϕn, and Gnð Þθ are the field amplitude, frequency, phase, and angle￾dependent gain of each transmit antenna element n, respectively, and γ is the
propagation constant.
To maximize the PAPR of the spatially combined electrical field, an evenly spaced
subcarrier frequency grid (ωnþ1  ωn ¼ Δω with Δω constant) and a constant sub￾carrier phase progression (ϕnþ1  ϕn ¼ Δϕ with Δϕ constant) are required [29]. Note
that these are the same conditions that yielded maximum DC current in (10.4).
10.5.2 Spatially Combined Multisine Transmitter
We used three signal generators locked to an external 10 MHz phase reference to
generate three subcarriers in the UHF band, which were radiated through three
separate antennas to produce a spatially combined three-tone multisine field
(Figure 10.7). To harvest the spatially combined multisine, we used a five-stage
Figure 10.7 Diagram of the measurement setup to evaluate spatial power combining.
Left: Spatially combined multisine transmitter with external phase reference. Right: Energy￾harvesting receiver circuit. d = 9 cm, r = 70 cm.
Multicarrier Spatial Power Combining 221charge pump circuit like the one described in Section 10.3 attached to a dipole antenna
and placed 70 cm away from the transmit antennas.
One of the signal generators was used as the phase reference to which the other two
were locked via its 10 MHz output clock signal. To guarantee stable phase-locking,
we used short identical cables for distributing the 10 MHz phase reference signal.
In addition, we monitored the signal at the input of the energy-harvesting circuit to
ensure the sources stayed locked during the experiment. This was achieved by
measuring the PAPR of the received signal using a directional coupler and an
oscilloscope, as in Figure 10.7.
The frequencies of the three subcarriers were set to f 1 ¼ 876 MHz, f 2 ¼ 877 MHz,
and f 3 ¼ 878 MHz. For comparison, we also illuminated the energy-harvesting circuit
with a CW signal at f CW ¼ 877 MHz. The CW and multisine average power levels at
the input of the energy-harvesting circuit were set to the same value by adjusting the
attenuator at the input of the circuit. The average power level was measured using a
directional coupler and a spectrum analyzer (see Figure 10.7).
To evaluate the gain provided by the spatially combined multisine, we used the
efficiency gain figure of merit defined in (10.5). Figure 10.8 shows the results obtained
in the experiment of Figure 10.7 for locked and unlocked subcarrier phases. To unlock
Figure 10.8 Multicarrier RF-to-DC conversion efficiency as a function of average input power for
synchronized and unsynchronized subcarriers. The average input power was measured at the
input of the energy-harvesting circuit using a coupler and a spectrum analyzer.
222 Unconventional Wireless Power Transmissionthe subcarriers, we disconnected the 10 MHz phase reference signal and let the signal
generators run freely. As expected, unlocking the subcarriers significantly reduced the
gain. For the phase-locked case, which provided the highest PAPR, we obtained a
maximum gain of 1.72 dB, corresponding to a DC power increase of 49%.
10.5.3 Mode-Locked Active Antenna Array
Here, we use an active antenna array to efficiently generate spatially combined high￾PAPR multisine waveforms [27]. In this scheme, the constant phase progression
required for maximum PAPR is achieved via a mode-locking phenomenon occurring
in oscillators that are electromagnetically coupled via antennas [31–33]. This phenom￾enon allows the oscillators to self-lock to each other, and therefore no external phase
reference is required.
By controlling the free-running frequencies of each oscillator, one can select the
phase distribution of the generated multisine subcarriers. The subcarriers’ phase
distribution range and the type of signals that can be generated are determined by
the complex coupling between the elements of the antenna array.
A 41 array of mode-locked antenna oscillators was designed to operate in the C-band
[27]. The core element of this is an active antenna oscillator consisting of a patch antenna
aperture-coupled to a voltage-controlled oscillator element (see Figure 10.9). The antenna
patches were fabricated on 0.5 mm Arlon A25N substrate with dielectric constant 3.38
and loss tangent 0.0025. The active circuitry and coupling slots layer were fabricated in
Rogers 4003C (0.5 mm thickness) with dielectric constant 3.38 and loss tangent 0.0027.
The two substrates were separated by a 3 mm Rohacell foam layer and the three layers
bonded using a 3M spray adhesive. The selected VCO was the commercial Z-COMM
6200L-LF with an output power of approximately 3 dBm.
10.5.3.1 Mode-Locked Multisine Signal Synthesis
To synthesize a mode-locked multisine signal using the 41 array, the subcarrier
frequency spacing of the four oscillator elements must be large enough that the free￾running frequencies of the subcarriers do not synchronize to a common frequency.
Initially, only two oscillator elements were turned on, and their frequencies were set to
6.18 GHz and 6.23 GHz. A spacing of 50 MHz was selected to prevent the two
oscillators from synchronizing to a common frequency. Because of the two frequency
components, mixing products appear at 6.13 GHz and 6.28 GHz.
Afterward, the other two oscillators were turned on one at a time. Setting these
oscillators’ frequencies close enough to the frequencies of the mixing products at
6.13 GHz and 6.28 GHz causes them to lock to those frequencies, creating a four-tone
multisine signal with equally spaced subcarriers. Due to the mode-locking phenom￾enon, the generated subcarriers have a constant phase progression between them (refer
to [27] for more details).
Once the mode-locked state is reached, the free-running frequencies of the oscilla￾tor elements of the array can be varied within a certain frequency range to establish
different subcarrier phase distributions. Additionally, selecting free-running
Multicarrier Spatial Power Combining 223frequencies that are closer or farther away from each other allows the synthesis of
multisine signals with smaller or larger subcarrier spacings.
The minimum subcarrier spacing is limited by the synchronization bandwidth of the
oscillators. This synchronization bandwidth depends on the coupling between the
antenna elements. In this experiment, the synchronization bandwidth of the oscillators
was measured to be approximately 90 MHz, which means that a subcarrier spacing less
Figure 10.9 (a) Layer scheme of the 41 array of active antenna oscillators. (b) Implemented
41 antenna array. Reprinted from [27].
224 Unconventional Wireless Power Transmissionthan 45 MHz would cause the oscillators to lock to a common frequency and multisine
mode-locking would not be achieved. If a smaller subcarrier frequency spacing is
desired, the active antenna oscillator array should be designed to have smaller synchron￾ization bandwidth, which can be done by reducing the coupling between the antenna
elements. However, the smaller the synchronization bandwidth, the more sensitive the
system is to interference that may affect the mode-locked operation.
Using the 41 array, two mode-locked four-tone multisine signals with subcarrier
frequency spacing of 75 MHz and 45 MHz were generated. The free-running frequen￾cies of the four oscillators were selected to achieve the desired subcarrier spacing and
the constant phase progression that produces maximum PAPR. A PAPR of approxi￾mately 8.9 dB was obtained for the signals in Figures 10.10 and 10.11.
10.5.3.2 CW Signal Synthesis
The same 41 array was used to synthesize a CW signal for comparison purposes.
Unlike the multisine case, to synthesize a CW signal, all the oscillators must syn￾chronize to a common frequency. This was achieved by setting all the oscillators to the
same free-running frequency (6.2 GHz). Figure 10.12 depicts the generated
CW signal.
Figure 10.10 Measured mode-locked multisine signal with subcarrier frequency spacing of
75 MHz. (a) Frequency spectrum. (b) Time-domain waveform. Reprinted from [27].
Multicarrier Spatial Power Combining 22510.5.3.3 Performance Evaluation
Figure 10.13 illustrates the measurement setup used to evaluate the mode-locked
active antenna array and determine the multisine gain on the energy-harvesting circuit.
The transmitter consisted of the 41 active antenna oscillator array of Figure 10.9,
and the receiver comprised a horn antenna and a rectifier circuit based on the
MACOM MA2502L Schottky diode. The rectifier circuit, employing an LC input￾matching network and an output load (10 kΩ), was optimized for maximum RF-to-DC
conversion efficiency at 6.2 GHz. The transmitter and the receiver were spaced apart
by approximately 30 cm. To simulate the effect of larger distances between the
transmitter and receiver, two variable attenuators, α1 and α2, with 1 dB and 10 dB
steps were used in the receiver between the receiving horn antenna and the rectifier.
During the experiment, the attenuation values α1 and α2 were varied and the
harvested DC voltage (VDC) was measured using a multimeter. The available power
level at the input of the rectifier was measured using a 10 dB directional coupler and
an oscilloscope. The power level at the input of the rectifier was averaged across the
frequency band that covers the four dominant multisine subcarriers (between the two
vertical dashed lines in Figure 10.10).
Figure 10.11 Measured mode-locked multisine with subcarrier frequency spacing of 45 MHz.
(a) Frequency spectrum. (b) Time-domain waveform. Reprinted from [27].
226 Unconventional Wireless Power TransmissionA similar procedure was used for the CW signal and the results were compared to
the mode-locked four-tone case to determine the multisine efficiency gain. The
attenuation values were adjusted to set the power of the CW signal to the same level
as the four-tone mode-locked multisine signal. Figure 10.14 depicts the multisine
efficiency gain as a function of the average input power level for a mode-locked four￾tone multisine with 45 MHz and 75 MHz subcarrier frequency spacings.
10.6 Conclusions
In this chapter, we discussed wireless power transfer using unconventional signals
with a focus on multicarriers, provided guidelines for multicarrier waveform optimiza￾tion, and reported on various experiments including wired circuit-level experiments
and over-the-air experiments.
The wired experiments showed gains of up to 6 dB and 2.7 dB for a single-diode
rectifier and a five-stage charge pump circuit, respectively. We showed a 30%
coverage range improvement in a custom passive wireless sensor node illuminated
with a four-tone multisine signal. We also proposed an approach for efficient
Figure 10.12 Measured CW signal. (a) Frequency spectrum. (b) Time-domain waveform.
Reprinted from [27].
Conclusions 227generation and transmission of high-PAPR multicarrier signals and showed an effi￾ciency gain of up to 15 dB for a 41 mode-locked active antenna array.
The main drawbacks of multicarrier wireless power transmission include increased
transmitter complexity, increased bandwidths (not currently regulated for wireless
power transfer application), and challenging high-PAPR amplification. The latter can
be overcome with the space power-combining techniques proposed here.
10.7 Exercises
1. Rewrite the equation for the RF power collected by a transponder [(3.36) in
Chapter 3, reproduced below for convenience] to account for the multisine
efficiency gain (Gη).
Ptag½ ¼ dBm Ptx þ Gtx þ Gtag þ 20 log 10
λ
4πd
  þ 10 log 10ð Þþ 1  β θf  Ff
(10.10)
2. Determine the DC power that would be delivered to a transponder via a
multicarrier. Hint: Use the equation obtained in Exercise 1 and consider the RF-to￾DC conversion efficiency under CW excitation.
Figure 10.13 Diagram of the measurement setup used to evaluate the multisine gain. The energy￾harvesting circuit is illuminated with a spatially combined multisine signal generated by the
active antenna array of Figure 10.9. Reprinted from [27].
228 Unconventional Wireless Power TransmissionReferences
[1] H. Matsumoto and K. Takei, “An Experimental Study of Passive UHF RFID System with
Longer Communication Range,” in Proceedings of the Asia-Pacific Microwave
Conference, 2007.
[2] M. S. Trotter, J. D. Griffin, and G. D. Durgin, “Power-Optimized Waveforms for
Improving the Range and Reliability of RFID Systems,” in IEEE International Conference
on RFID, 2009, pp. 80–87.
[3] M. S. Trotter and G. D. Durgin, “Survey of Range Improvement of Commercial RFID
Tags with Power Optimized Waveforms,” in 2010 IEEE International Conference on
RFID, 2010, pp. 195–202.
[4] A. S. Soares Boaventura and N. B. Borges Carvalho, “Maximizing DC Power in Energy
Harvesting Circuits Using Multisine Excitation,” 2011 IEEE MTT-S International
Microwave Symposium, 2011, pp. 1–4.
[5] C.-C. Lo, et al., “Novel Wireless Impulsive Power Transmission to Enhance the
Conversion Efficiency for Low Input Power,” in IEEE MTT-S International
Microwave Workshop Series on Innovative Wireless Power Transmission, 2011,
pp. 55–58.
Figure 10.14 Measured RF-to-DC efficiency gain as a function of the average power at the input
of the rectifier circuit. Reprinted from [27].
References 229[6] A. J. Soares Boaventura and N. Borges Carvalho, “Extending Reading Range of
Commercial RFID Readers,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques,
61(1):633–640, 2013.
[7] A. Collado and A. Georgiadis, “Improving Wireless Power Transmission Efficiency Using
Chaotic Waveforms,” in International Microwave Symposium, 2012.
[8] A. Collado and A. Georgiadis, “Optimal Waveforms for Efficient Wireless Power
Transmission,” IEEE Microwave and Wireless Components Letters, 24(5):354–356, 2014.
[9] C. R. Valenta and G. D. Durgin, “Rectenna Performance Under Power-Optimized
Waveform Excitation,” in IEEE International Conference on RFID, 2013, pp. 237–244.
[10] C. R. Valenta, “Microwave-Energy Harvesting at 5.8 GHz for Passive Devices.” Ph.D.
Thesis, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology,
2014.
[11] A. Litvinenko, J. Eidaks, and A. Aboltins, “Usage of Signals with a High PAPR Level for
Efficient Wireless Power Transfer,” in IEEE Sixth Workshop on Advances in Information,
Electronic and Electrical Engineering, 2018, pp. 1–5.
[12] N. Pan, et al., “Multi-Sine Wireless Power Transfer with a Realistic Channel and Rectifier
Model,” in 2017 IEEE Wireless Power Transfer Conference (WPTC), 2017, pp. 1–4.
[13] B. Clerckx and E. Bayguzina, “Low-Complexity Adaptive Multisine Waveform Design
for Wireless Power Transfer,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters,
16:2207–2210, 2017.
[14] B. Clerckx and E. Bayguzina, “Waveform Design for Wireless Power Transfer,” IEEE
Transactions on Signal Processing, 64(23):6313–6328, 2016.
[15] A. Soares Boaventura et al., “Boosting the Efficiency: Unconventional Waveform Design
for Efficient Wireless Power Transfer,” IEEE Microwave Magazine, 16(3):87–96, 2015.
[16] A. Soares Boaventura et al., “Optimum Behavior: Wireless Power Transmission System
Design through Behavioral Models and Efficient Synthesis Techniques,” IEEE Microwave
Magazine, 14(2):26–35, 2013.
[17] H. Zhang et al., “Wireless Power Transfer Antenna Alignment Using Intermodulation for
Two-Tone Powered Implantable Medical Devices,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave
Theory and Techniques, 67(5):1708–1716, 2019.
[18] B. Wang and H. Zhang, “Ultra-Wide Dynamic Range Rectifier Topology for Multi-Sine
Wireless Powered Endoscopic Capsules,” in 2018 IEEE MTT-S International Wireless
Symposium, 2018, pp. 1–4.
[19] F. Hutu and G. Villemaud, “On the Use of the FBMC Modulation to Increase the
Performance of a Wake-Up Radio,” in IEEE Radio and Wireless Symposium (RWS), 2018,
pp. 139–142.
[20] N. Decarli et al., “High-Accuracy Localization of Passive Tags with Multisine
Excitations,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 66
(12):5894–5908, 2018.
[21] D. I. Kim, J. H. Moon, and J. J. Park, “New SWIPT Using PAPR: How it Works,” IEEE
Wireless Communications Letters, 5(6):672–675, 2016.
[22] M. Rajabi et al., “Modulation Techniques for Simultaneous Wireless Information and
Power Transfer with an Integrated Rectifier–Receiver,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave
Theory and Techniques, 66(5):2373–2385, 2018.
[23] S. Claessens, N. Pan, D. Schreurs, and S. Pollin, “Multitone FSK Modulation for
SWIPT,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 67(5):1665–1674,
2019.
230 Unconventional Wireless Power Transmission[24] Avago Technologies, “DEMO-HSMS285–0, Demonstration Circuit Board for HSMS￾2850, HSMS-2852 and HSMS-2855.”
[25] R. D. Fernandes, “Design of a Battery-Free Wireless Sensor Node.” M.Sc. thesis,
University of Aveiro, 2010. [Online], available at: https://ria.ua.pt/bitstream/10773/5616/
1/MSC_RDF.pdf
[26] R. D. Fernandes et al., “Increasing the Range of Wireless Passive Sensor Nodes Using
Multisines,” in IEEE International Conference on RFID – Technologies and Applications,
2011, pp. 549–553.
[27] A. J. Soares Boaventura, A. Collado, A. Georgiadis, and N. Borges Carvalho, “Spatial
Power Combining of Multi-Sine Signals for Wireless Power Transmission Applications,”
IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 62(4):1022–1030, 2014.
[28] J. Harvey, E. R. Brown, D. B. Rutledge, and R. A. York, “Spatial Power Combining for
High-Power Transmitters,” IEEE Microwave Magazine, 1(4):48–59, 2000.
[29] R. A. York and R. Compton, “Coupled-Oscillator Arrays for Millimeter-Wave Power￾Combining and Mode-Locking,” in IEEE International Microwave Symposium Digest,
Vol. 1, 1992, pp. 429–432.
[30] C. A. Balanis, Antenna Theory: Analysis Design, 3rd ed. John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken,
NJ, 2005.
[31] R. A. York and R. C. Compton, “Experimental Observation and Simulation of Mode￾Locking Phenomena in Coupled-Oscillator Arrays,” Journal of Applied Physics, 71
(6):2959–2965, 1992.
[32] R. A. York and R. C. Compton, “Mode-Locked Oscillator Arrays,” IEEE Microwave and
Guided Wave Letters, 1(8):215–218, 1991.
[33] R. A. York and R. C. Compton, “Measurement and Modelling of Radiative Coupling in
Oscillator Arrays,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 41
(3):438–444, 1993.
References 23111 A Battery-less Backscatter Remote
Control System
11.1 Introduction
The remote control (RC) is perhaps one of the most widespread convenience features
ever invented [1]. But there are major drawbacks relating to their typical source of
power, disposable batteries. Besides their limited lifespan and maintenance cost,
batteries can produce toxic waste, which translates not only into costs associated with
hazardous waste treatment but also environmental costs. In the US alone, the global
annual production of alkaline batteries exceeds 10 billion units [2], and in the
European economic area, around 10.5 billion portable batteries were placed on the
market in 2015 [3]. Moreover, the recent international COVID-19 pandemic has
exposed a new problem in large supply chains, including those for non-rechargeable
alkaline batteries.
To extend battery lifetime, RC devices typically use efficient wake-up schemes
that minimize their overall power consumption. Low-cost RC applications com￾monly use infrared (IR) wavelengths for data communication. For applications
requiring long-range, two-way, non-line-of-sight communication, RF-based RC
technology is typically used. To provide a uniform RC wireless standard that
enables interoperability between different devices and vendors, the ZigBee alliance
has recently introduced the Radio Frequency for Consumer Electronics (RF4CE)
standard [4].
Various energy-harvesting approaches, including mechanical energy harvesting [5,
6], have recently been proposed to mitigate the drawbacks of disposable batteries in
RCs. In [7], the authors presented a self-powered RC incorporating a piezoelectric
push button that can produce enough energy to power up a digital encoder and a low￾power RF transmitter when pressed by the user. This kind of approach could enable
controls and interfaces to be introduced into interactive environments without requir￾ing wires or batteries.
In this chapter, we describe a new method that eliminates the need for batteries in
RC devices. This method uses dedicated wireless power transmission to remotely
supply the RC device via an RF power transmitter installed in the controlled device
(e.g., a TV receiver). To communicate with the controlled device, the RC reflects the
received RF signal with a specific signature to encode messages that can be inter￾cepted and decoded by the controlled device (see the illustration in Figure 11.1).
We used off-the-shelf devices to implement an RFID-inspired battery-less RCprototype and we then incorporated this prototype into a commercial TV receiver to
showcase a practical eco-friendly application of the wireless power transmission and
backscatter concepts to a real home automation scenario.
11.2 The Proposed System
The following describes the architecture of the proposed system and details of its
implementation, including the RFID chip control mechanism, custom single-pole,
multiple-throw switch, and antenna multiplexing system.
11.2.1 System Architecture
In the proposed system of Figure 11.1, the device being controlled has a built-in
RF transceiver to wirelessly power the RC and decode its backscattered signal.
Another approach, detailed later in this chapter, consists of using an external RFID
interrogator and an interfacing module to link the interrogator to the controlled device
via IR.
One way to implement the battery-less RC is to combine button decoding
circuitry with a backscatter front end like those found in passive RFID transponders
as illustrated in Figure 11.2(a). An alternative approach, illustrated in Figure 11.2
(b), consists of pairing each RC button with an individual RFID chip. In our
prototype, we used off-the-shelf RFID chips and a custom single-pole, multiple￾throw (SPnT) switch for sharing an antenna between these chips (see Figure 11.2
(b)). Signal routing in the SPnT switch is achieved via user-actuated tactile push￾button switches.
Figure 11.1 Illustration of the proposed battery-less backscatter RC approach. In the prototype
presented in this chapter, the controlled device incorporates an RFID interrogator to wirelessly
power the RC and decode RF backscattered data. Note: The pictures used here are not from the
actual devices and are used for illustration purposes only (for details of the actual
implementation, see the following sections).
Proposed System 23311.2.2 RFID Chip Control
For the multi-RFID approach in Figure 11.2(b), we require a control mechanism that
allows us to activate and deactivate the individual RFID chips at will. One way to
implement this is by using a normally closed switch connected in parallel with each
RFID chip. In their default position, the switches shunt the terminals of the RFID
chips, rendering them inactive and unable to respond to the RFID reader. As the user
presses the desired button the switch opens, and the corresponding RFID chip is
routed to the RC antenna and can be interrogated by the RFID reader. For this
implementation, we used off-the-shelf UHF RFID chips and tactile push￾button switches.
To impose a frequency-tuned short-circuit across the terminals of each RFID chip,
we connect a capacitor ð Þ Cres in series with the switch. This capacitor and the switch’s
Figure 11.2 (a) RFID-inspired battery-less backscatter RC. (b) Battery-less RC based on multi￾RFID scheme incorporating a user-controllable SPnT switch.
234 Battery-less Backscatter Remote Control Systemintrinsic inductance ð Þ Lres form an LC resonator tuned to the RFID operating fre￾quency. We will refer to the circuit formed of the switch and capacitor as the “resonant
switch.” Figure 11.3 shows the RFID chip control circuitry consisting of the RFID
chip, impedance matching circuit, and resonant switch. The equivalent input imped￾ance of this circuit can take two values as in (11.1), and by connecting this circuit to an
antenna one could build a simple one-button battery-less RC.
Zi¼k ¼ 50 Ω, for button k actuated by the user,
Zi6¼k ¼ 0 Ω, for all the other buttons not actuated by the user: (11.1)
11.2.3 Custom Switch and Multiplexing Mechanism
In addition to controlling the individual RFID chips, we require a mechanism to share
the antenna of the RC device between multiple RFID chips. This was achieved by using
a custom-designed SPnT switching network, which routes the RFID chip associated
with the button being pressed by the user at each moment to the antenna while keeping
all the other chips inactive. Figure 11.4(a) shows a diagram of the proposed switching
network containing N access ports for the RFID chips and a shared port for the RC
antenna. The termination impedance Zi (i = 1, 2, ..., N) attached to each vertical
transmission line resonator replicates the circuit in Figure 11.3. By observing (11.1)
and selecting proper phase shift values for the vertical and horizontal transmission lines,
φ1 and φ2, respectively, we can guarantee that:
◾ By default, all RFID chips are short-circuited and unreadable, and their
transmission line resonators are terminated with a 0 Ω impedance. We refer to
these chips as inactive chips.
Figure 11.3 RFID chip control circuitry consisting of RFID chip, impedance matching circuit,
and resonant switch.
Proposed System 235◾ As the user presses button k, the associated transmission line resonator gets
matched to the characteristic impedance of the SPnT switch ð Þ Zk ¼ Z0 ¼ 50 Ω and
the corresponding RFID chip is routed to the RC antenna allowing the RFID reader
to access its ID. An RFID chip in this state is referred to as an active chip.
◾ Inactive RFID chips are “invisible” to the RC antenna and do not interfere with the
active chip.
Figure 11.4 (a) Proposed SPNT switching network for N RFID chips and push-button switches,
and a shared antenna. (b) Illustration of routing mechanism where the user presses switch 4 and
the corresponding RFID chip gets routed to the RC antenna while all other chips remain inactive
and “invisible” to the antenna.
236 Battery-less Backscatter Remote Control SystemAssuming lossless transmission lines, if the phase shift introduced by the
horizontal transmission lines, φ2, is equal to n  180 (n = 0, 1, 2, ...),
then the impedance seen into the shared SPnT antenna port equals the parallel associ￾ation of all the impedances seen into the vertical transmission line resonators,
Zin ¼ 1=Z0
1 þ 1=Z0
2 þþ 1=Z0
N
 1
. Using Z0
i ¼ Z0 Zi þ jZ0 tan β1 ½  ð Þ l1 = Z0 þ jZi ½
tan β1 ð Þ l1 leads to the equivalent impedance seen into the antenna port:
Zin ¼ 1
Z0 þ jZ1 tan φ1 ð Þ
Z0 Z1 þ jZ0 tan φ1 ð Þ ð Þ þ
Z0 þ jZ2 tan φ1 ð Þ
Z0 Z2 þ jZ0 tan φ1 ð Þ ð Þ þþ
Z0 þ jZN tan φ1 ð Þ
Z0 ZN þ jZ0 tan φ1 ð Þ ð Þ   :
(11.2)
Finally, if we select the phase shift of the transmission line resonators φ1 to be 90 +
n  180 (n = 0, 1, 2, ...) and assume a single active RFID chip k with matched
impedance ð Þ Zk ¼ Z0 and inactive chips with 0 Ω impedances Zi6¼k ¼ 0 Ω  , then the
equivalent impedance at the SPnT antenna port simplifies to Zin ¼ Zk ¼ Z0.
Figure 11.4(b) illustrates the operation of the SPnT network. Assume that the user
pressed button number 4, causing the switch to open and the corresponding transmission
line resonator to be terminated by the 50 Ω impedance of the matched RFID chip 4. In this
situation, chips 1, 2, 3, and 5 to N, which are shunted by closed resonant switches, remain
inactive, presenting a 0 Ω impedance to their quarter-wavelength transmission line
resonators, which then transform the 0 Ω termination impedances into open circuits.
This way, only RFID chip 4 is routed to the antenna port while all the other chips remain
inactive and do not interfere with the active chip as anticipated in (11.2).
The crosses in Figure 11.4(b) represent open circuits resulting from short circuits
across the terminals of the RFID chips and lossless transmission lines. In practice,
neither the short circuits nor the transmission lines are perfect. The SPnT circuit
should present minimal insertion loss between the antenna port and the active port,
good isolation between the antenna port and the inactive ports, and reduced crosstalk
between the active port and the inactive ports.
The horizontal transmission lines in the SPnT switch configuration of Figure 11.4
are only used for the purpose of increasing the freedom in the circuit layout design and
have minimal impact for low-loss substrates. We designed our prototypes using
microstrip technology for operation at UHF frequencies and fabricated them on low￾cost FR4 substrate. The approach illustrated in Figures 11.3 and 11.4 is just one
possible way of implementing the multi-RFID RC scheme. Alternative configurations
are presented in Section 11.6 at the end of this chapter. For literature on conventional
microwave SPnT switches, we direct the interested reader to [8–10].
11.3 Battery-Less RFID RC Design
This section details the design and characterization of the RFID circuitry, push switch,
custom SPnT switch, and battery-less remote control prototype. The prototype is
integrated into the demonstration system discussed in the next section.
Battery-less RFID RC Design 23711.3.1 RFID and Switch Circuitry Characterization
For our battery-less RC prototype, we used off-the-shelf ISO 18000-6-compliant
RFID chips from NXP Semiconductors [11] and standard tactile push-button
switches. We first characterized the RFID chips and impedance-matched them to the
50 Ω characteristic impedance of the microstrip transmission line system used in the
SPnT circuit (see [12] for details on RFID impedance characterization and matching).
We also characterized the RF response of the tactile push-button switches and found
that even though they are not originally designed for RF, they presented satisfactory
performance and repeatability for our application at UHF frequencies.
To perform scattering-parameter measurements on our chip/switch devices under
test (DUTs), we used a vector network analyzer (VNA). For in-fixture calibrated
measurements of our DUTs, we mounted them on SMA connectors and used custom
calibration standards on similar connectors (see inset of Figure 11.5). Our custom one￾port short-open-load (SOL) calibration kit comprised a short standard obtained by
shunting the inner and outer conductors of an SMA connector, an open standard
implemented simply with an open SMA connector, plus a load standard made of a
high-precision 50 Ω resistor [13]. These custom calibration standards were modeled
and specified in the VNA user interface software [14]. The calibrated scattering￾Figure 11.5 Calibrated measured impedance of unmatched RFID chip. The inflection in the real
part of the impedance around 5 dBm corresponds to the minimum activation power level of
the chip. The inset shows the DUTs and custom calibration standards mounted on
SMA connectors.
238 Battery-less Backscatter Remote Control Systemparameter measurements of the DUTs were imported into the advanced design system
(ADS) software for further analysis and design.
Figure 11.5 depicts the calibrated measured power-dependent input impedance of the
RFID chip used in this work. Since commercial RFID chips typically present non-linear
impedance, impedance matching should be performed at their minimum activation
power, which is characterized by an inflection in the real part of the input impedance
[15] (see Figure 11.5). Based on the minimum activation power level of the unmatched
chip ð Þ Punmatched  5 dBm and reflection coefficient j j Punmatched
2 ¼ 0:86  	, we can
use (11.3) to estimate the minimum activation power of the matched chip
ð Þ Pmatched  13 dBm :
Pmatched ¼ Punmatched 1  j j Γunmatched
2  	: (11.3)
The measurements of the standalone push-button switch, resonant switch, and
matched RFID chip in parallel with the resonant switch are presented in
Figure 11.6. For the standalone switch, point A in the Smith chart corresponds to
Figure 11.6 Typical measurements of the standalone push button switch (A and B), resonant
closed switch (C), and matched RFID chip in parallel the with resonant open switch (D). These
measurements were made in the 800 MHz to 900 MHz bandwidth. A simple L-matching
network was used to match the RFID chip to 50 Ω [12].
Battery-less RFID RC Design 239the default closed position where the switch has a predominant inductive behavior,
while point B corresponds to the open switch position where the switch behaves as a
capacitor. In the closed position, the resonant switch presents low impedance at 866.6
MHz (point C), shunting the RFID chip and forcing it to the inactive state.
Conversely, the resonant switch has high impedance in the open position and the
equivalent circuit formed of the matched RFID chip plus the resonator switch is well
matched to 50 Ω at 866.6 MHz (point D). In this state, the RFID chip can be accessed
by the RFID reader. The series capacitance Cres is selected to form, in conjunction
with the intrinsic series inductance of the switch Lres, an LC resonant circuit at the
operating frequency f c such that
Cres ¼ 1
Lres 2πf c ð Þ2 : (11.4)
11.3.2 Switch Design and Characterization
We used Keysight’s ADS to design microstrip SPnT switches, fabricated them in FR4
substrate, and measured them using a VNA. Here we present results for a custom
SP4T switch (Figure 11.7(a)) and SP10T switch (Figure 11.8(a)). The side and center
microstrip transmission lines in this design have electrical lengths of a quarter
wavelength and half wavelength, respectively, at 866.6 MHz. For a more compact
design, the transmission lines were meandered.
In Figure 11.7(a), ports 1, 3, and 4 were shunted to ground to mimic closed
resonant switches. Port 2 (corresponding to an active RFID chip port) and the antenna
port are connectorized with SMA connectors for VNA S-parameter characterization.
We compared simulations and measurements of the return loss of the antenna port
(S11) and the active port 2 (S22), and the insertion loss between these two ports (S21).
The results presented in Figure 11.7(b) display good agreement between simulations
and measurements, and present good performance in the bandwidth of interest.
We also designed and fabricated a 10-channel switch (Figure 11.8(a)) that had half of
its ports shunted to ground to mimic inactive ports and the other half attached to resonant
switches that allowed us to activate these ports at will during test. The switch ports were
connectorized with SMA connectors for VNA S-parameter characterization. To achieve
the impedance-matching condition (11.1), the shared antenna port and active port k were
terminated with a 50 Ω impedance either through the VNA test port or an external load.
We characterized the return loss of the antenna port ð Þ S11 and active port k Sð Þ kk ,
insertion loss between the antenna port and active port ð Þ S1k , crosstalk between the
active port and the nearest-neighbor inactive port ð Þ Sk,kþ1 , and crosstalk between the
antenna port and the nearest-neighbor inactive port ð Þ S1,kþ1 . The measurement results
are presented in Figure 11.8(b) and summarized in Table 11.1 for a carrier frequency
of 884 MHz.
The SP10T switch shows acceptable return loss, insertion loss, and crosstalk
performance across a 40 MHz bandwidth (see Figure 11.8 and Table 11.1). Even
240 Battery-less Backscatter Remote Control SystemFigure 11.7 (a) SP4T switch prototype fabricated using microstrip transmission lines on FR4.
(b) Simulation and measurement comparison.
Battery-less RFID RC Design 241Figure 11.8 (a) SP10T microstrip switch prototype fabricated on FR4. (b) Measured return loss at
the antenna port (middle), insertion loss between the antenna port and the active port k (top), and
crosstalk between the antenna port and an adjacent inactive port k + 1 (bottom) as a function of
the button k pressed by the user.
242 Battery-less Backscatter Remote Control Systemthough there is room for improving crosstalk (e.g., by using a better substrate and by
optimizing the design), the performance obtained is sufficient for preventing unin￾tended RFID chip activation due to leakage.
11.3.3 Battery-Less Remote-Control Prototype
Figure 11.9 shows a photograph of a four-button RC prototype that can perform four
operations on a TV receiver, namely channel up and down and volume up and down.
A simple dipole antenna designed for a center frequency of 866.6 MHz was attached
to the shared port of the RC for interfacing with an RFID interrogator. Table 11.2
presents experimental communication ranges of the RC system as a function of RFID
reader transmitted power. We achieved an operation range of 3.5 m for an
Table 11.1 SP10T switch performance at 884 MHz as a function of the active port k.
k
Return loss
S11 (dB)
Return loss
Sk,k (dB)
Insertion loss
S1,k (dB)
Crosstalk
S1,kþ1 (dB)
Crosstalk
Sk,kþ1 (dB)
2 14.6 18.3 1.8 31.0 31.1
3 15.6 21.5 1.9 23.5 23.8
4 16.6 25.1 2.0 29.2 29.3
5 18.7 22.5 2.2 28.5 20.2
6 19.2 22.9 2.3 28.4 28.3
Figure 11.9 Four-button battery-less RC prototype with channel up and down and volume up and
down functions.
Battery-less RFID RC Design 243interrogation power of 27 dBm and circularly polarized interrogator transmit and
receive antennas with 5.5 dBi gain.
11.4 Full Prototype
To demonstrate the proposed battery-less control approach, we implemented a full
demo where the RC prototype described in the previous section was integrated with a
TV receiver (see Figure 11.10). For that, we used an off-the-shelf commercial RFID
reader [16, 17] to interrogate the battery-less RC and a custom RFID-to-infrared
interface module that acts as a bridge between the RFID reader and the TV receiver.
The custom RFID-to-infrared interface consisted of a universal infrared remote
control whose buttons are operated via relay switches that are wired to a digital output
port of the RFID reader. This approach allowed us to readily engineer a system
prototype that could be adjusted to different TV receivers. An alternative to this
approach could be to directly wire the reader digital output port to the terminals of the
photodiode in the TV receiver and modulate the signal at this port appropriately. In a
real application, the RFID reader system should be incorporated into the controlled
device. To establish communication between the battery-less RC and the TV receiver,
the RFID reader interrogates the battery-less RC to identify the button pressed by the
user and then conveys this information to the TV via the RFID-to-infrared interface
module in direct line of sight with the TV receiver (see Figure 11.10(a)).
The RFID reader was controlled via a Java application programing interface (API)
provided with the reader [17]. A simplified flowchart of the developed application,
which communicated with the RFID reader via TCP/IP, is shown in Figure 11.11(a).
The RFID reader continually scans its interrogation field and when it detects a valid
transponder ID, it sends a digital signal to the RFID-to-infrared interface to activate the
Table 11.2 Communication range as a function of
the reader transmit power level.
Reader power (dBm) Reading range (m)
17 1.05
18 1.22
19 1.39
20 1.90
21 2.24
22 2.43
23 2.53
24 2.61
25 2.98
26 3.22
27 3.50
244 Battery-less Backscatter Remote Control SystemFigure 11.10 (a) Diagram of the demonstration system. (b) Photograph of the prototype (control
PC not shown). 1: TV. 2: RFID-to-infrared interface. 3: RFID reader. 4: Transmitting
antenna. 5: Receiving antenna. 6: Remote control prototypes. Note: For this proof of concept,
we used a commercial TV receiver and off-the-shelf RFID reader but the battery-less remote
control prototype and interface was fully developed in-house.
Full Prototype 245Figure 11.11 (a) Simplified flowchart of the RFID reader software application developed in Java.
(b) User interface of the developed Java software application that controls the RFID reader.
246 Battery-less Backscatter Remote Control Systemcorresponding button on the universal remote control. The developed application also
provides a user interface (Figure 11.11(b)) for customizing various parameters of the
reader and displaying the transponder ID, user control action, and other information.
11.5 Conclusions
We proposed a battery-less backscatter RC system where the RC device is wirelessly
powered by the controlled device and backscatters the received RF signal to commu￾nicate data to the controlled device. In this chapter, we reported on the design
and prototype of a battery-less RC system based on a multi-RFID scheme. Our
prototype used off-the-shelf RFID chips and a custom SPnT microstrip switch with
an activation mechanism to control the individual chips and share the RC antenna
between them.
We built a four-button RC prototype capable of performing four basic operations,
namely channel up and down and volume up and down, and we used an off-the-shelf
RFID reader and a custom RFID-to-infrared interface module to integrate the battery￾less control system into a standard TV receiver. Our prototype achieved a communi￾cation range of 3.5 m for a reader transmit power level of 27 dBm. Even though we
demonstrated the concept on a TV receiver, it can be applied to other scenarios.
Alternative and improved circuit configurations for the battery-less RC are presented
in Section 11.6.
11.6 Alternative Battery-less Controller Configurations
Figure 11.12 Parallel RFID chip activation mechanism based on normally closed switch. Left:
RFID chip activation circuitry. Middle: Equivalent impedance. Right: Single-button controller.
Alternative Battery-less Controller Configurations 247Figure 11.13 Series RFID chip activation mechanism based on normally open switch. Left: RFID
chip activation circuitry. Middle: Equivalent impedance. Right: Single-button controller.
Figure 11.14 Two-button controller using the parallel RFID chip activation mechanism of
Figure 11.13.
Figure 11.15 Two-button controller using the series RFID chip activation mechanism of
Figure 11.14.
248 Battery-less Backscatter Remote Control SystemReferences
[1] Engineering and Technology History Wiki, “Biography of Eugene J. Polley.” [Online],
available at: https://ethw.org/Eugene_J._Polley
[2] E. Olivetti, J. Gregory, and R. Kirchain, “Life Cycle Impacts of Alkaline Batteries With a
Focus On End-of-Life.” Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2011.
[3] European Portable Battery Association, “The Collection of Waste Portable Batteries in
Europe in View of the Achievability of the Collection Targets Set by Batteries Directive
2006/66/EC,” 2016.
[4] S. Dong-Feng et al., “Research of New Wireless Sensor Network Protocol: ZigBee
RF4CE,” in International Conference on Electrical and Control Engineering, 2010,
pp. 2921–2924.
[5] A. Nechibvute, A. Chawanda, and P. Luhanga, “Piezoelectric Energy Harvesting Devices:
An Alternative Energy Source for Wireless Sensors,” Smart Materials Research,
2012:853481, 2012.
Figure 11.16 N-button controller in star configuration using the parallel activation mechanism.
Figure 11.17 N-button controller in cascade configuration using the series activation mechanism.
References 249[6] P. Glynne-Jones, S. P. Beeby, and N. M. White, “Toward a Piezoelectric Vibration￾Powered Microgenerator,” IEE Proceedings – Science, Measurement and Technology,
148:68–72, 2001.
[7] J. A. Paradiso and T. Starner, “Energy Scavenging for Mobile and Wireless Electronics,”
IEEE Pervasive Computing, 4(1):18–27, 2005.
[8] J. Galejs, “Multidiode Switches (Correspondence),” IRE Transactions on Microwave
Theory and Techniques, 8(5):566–569, 1960.
[9] J. F. White and K. E. Mortenson, “Diode SPDT Switching at High Power with Octave
Microwave Bandwidth,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques, 16
(1):30–36, 1968.
[10] D. J. Kim et al., “Switched Microstrip Array Antenna for RFID Systems,” Proceedings of
the 38th European Microwave Conference, 2008, pp. 1254–1257.
[11] NXP Semiconductors, “SL3S1002 RFID chip, UCODE G2XM and G2XL, Product Data
Sheet.” [Online], available at: www.nxp.com/docs/en/data-sheet/SL3ICS1002_1202.pdf
[12] P. V. Nikitin, K. V. S. Rao, R. Martinez, and S. F. Lam, “Sensitivity and Impedance
Measurements of UHF RFID Chips,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and
Techniques, 57(5):1297–1302, 2009.
[13] Bourns Resistive Products, “CHF1206CNT resistor.” [Online], available at: www.bourns
.com/docs/products-general/Bourns_Resistive_Products_Overview_White_Paper.pdf
[14] M. Hiebel, Fundamentals of Vector Network Analysis, 1st edition. Rohde & Schwarz, 2007.
[15] R. Kronberger, A. Geissler, and B. Friedmann, “New Methods to Determine the
Impedance of UHF RFID Chips,” in IEEE International Conference on RFID, 2010.
[16] Alien Technology, “Hardware Setup Guide ALR-9800,” 2008.
[17] Alien Technology, “Reader Interface Guide, All Fixed Readers,” 2016.
Figure 11.18 N-button controller in a hybrid configuration using both parallel and series
activation mechanisms. Here, the previous configurations of Figure 11.14, Figure 11.17, and
Figure 11.18 are combined for increased button density.
250 Battery-less Backscatter Remote Control SystemIndex
18000-63 command codeword, 88
5G, 1, 9, 11, 68
aircraft maintenance, 19
Auto-ID center, 7
average effective aperture, 64
backscatter radios, 1
battery-less remote control, 232
beam efficiency, 67
beamforming, 67–8
beam-steering. See beamforming
biometric identification, 19
BPSK. See binary phase-shift keying
chipless RFID, 33
clock recovery, 113
timing error estimation, 116–18
data integrity, 140
CRC computation, 147
CRC functions, 146
CRC-16, 92
CRC-5, 92
cyclic redundancy check, 82
differential radar cross section, 64
direct conversion receiver, 34–5
DC offset, 175
DC offset removal, 191
leakage, 175. See self-jamming
phase noise, 175
transient compensation, 193
DPLL. See phase-locked loop
DSB-ASK. See double-sideband amplitude-shift
keying
EAS. See electronic surveillance systems
effective aperture, 44–5
electronic surveillance systems, 5
encoding, 77
FM0, 78–81
FM0 decoder, 137–40
interrupt-based FM0 decoder, 146–7
PIE encoder, 133
pulse interval encoding, 77
eye diagram, 112
firmware, 159, 165
frame synchronization, 119
history, 2
Heinrich Hertz, 3
Leon Theremin, 4
Mario Cardullo, 7
Michael Faraday, 3
Nikola Tesla, 3
object identification, 4–8
radio transmission, 3
Wardenclyffe tower, 3
wireless power transfer, 3–4
internet of things, x, 1, 9–10, 14–15, 199
interpolation, 94
IoT. See internet of things
ISO/EIC 18000-63, 25
lookup table waveform, 159, 161
low-cost RFID reader, 131
MAC battery lifetime. See wake-up radio:battery
lifetime
matched filtering, 96, 111
maximum likelihood detection, 108, 110
medium access control, 202
mode-locked antenna, 223–5
modulation, 77
4-QPSK, 108
binary phase-shift keying, 52
data slicing demodulation, 136–7
double-sideband amplitude-shift keying, 96
PR-ASK modulator, 99, 134–5
QAM backscatter, 53–6
spread-spectrum backscatter modulation, 56–8
multicarrier matched filtering, 168–71
multicarrier wireless power, 212–13
multicarrier wireless power transfer, 58, 61
multipath fading. See polarization diversityN-bit transponder, 17, 26, 28
one-bit transponder, 17, 26–7
passive versus active RFID, 15
pharmaceutics, 19
phase-locked loop, 113
PIE. See pulse interval encoding
PLL. See phase-locked loop
polarization diversity, 67–8
power budget, 64–5
Q-algorithm, 84
radar cross section, 45, 63
reader firmware, 158–9
reception success rate, 124
SAW RFID, 33
self-jamming, 176
adaptive self-jamming suppression, 183–6
full search algorithm, 186–7
gradient descent algorithm, 187–9
self-jamming suppression, 178–9, 181
software-defined radio, 148
spatial power combining, 220–3
standards, 20–6
EPC Gen2. See ISO/IEC 18000-63
ISO/IEC 18000, 24
ISO/IEC 18000 Part 6, 25
ISO/IEC 18000-63, 24
regulations, 21–4
smart cards, 25
supply chain, 18
symbol recovery. See clock recovery
timing recovery. See clock recovery
transponder architecture, 30
transponder collision, 85
transponder singulation, 84
unconventional wireless power, 212
wake-up radio, 198
battery lifetime, 203
wireless power transfer, x, 1, 3, 5, 42, 58, 65, 67,
213
252 Index
